THE
H I STORY

OF
AM ER IC A.

VOL. II.

^.~~~ ~~~ ~~~ ~~~ ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
1

_rIs B

I 0 -2V9 do C
-

T e g u
& s 6 ea sllaceza c

a hhi;
rs% 411oparlhrrc · r C5aa1

s~~~~~'a -3.~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~?i C '

_E~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ \
LP~~~~~~~i~~~~(~~~~C~~~~~i~~~~a:~3t C)·-··

~~parbes~~~~~s~~~s;/~~~b~~'s'/livurr n...... .. ..

l~~bh conetos .

..
...L~

Cf the EnvirouI
csME . h" u

7.,~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~1' -p.,I

be/,~~~~~~~~~~~~

PCl>, or ,tl

· . 7 d / s
~~~~~~~g ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ -7~~~~~~~/,7,,57

T 141 E

I S T OR Y
A N I E R I C A.

By 'W'ILLI AM3 RQDIP n'1'SO ,D.D.
retrCIPAr. of the Univcrfity of EnzNVRC;i; IóiTRO.

GiALYI(FR to his M.~j 5 su v for L;COF1.AN , alld

MIssECI E R of Lhlt RCYAI C AL1Ok.2Y Ub

V OL. II.
THL ouRI EDITION,

. oN D 0 'N
1'4rctOd for W. STRt T . in the Strrindl

an J A, B A . UR, a
C ..1burl)i.

V. -V .1rTu

£ -- r _ _

__di

A
3o R -v II SE 4

'00~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~#

r N

zita~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Panamaiouaiawntisra F
2~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

O~~~~~~~~~~a re
* .1~~~~

ar
TIP~

-td. ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~
~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~~~~~~~*

kt~

/3~c,
o M&n/rA'3I'/ d/s.~4'1.~i' A~ ~ ~ ~ , A a j~i.."4".lr ~ej'.'1 .

COUNTRIESY "~~~~~~~~~a

Gulf of' Guerca. U
pso~iJutact

# BOOK IV.

THE

HIST ORY
H I S T O R Y

F
A M E R I C A.

BOOK IV.
Tr WENTY-SI X years had now elapsed since B o o K

Columbus conducted the people of Europe i.
to the New World. During that period the Spa- wht eits

. of Amcricat

niards had made great progress in exploring its were tihe.
various regions. They had visited all the islands o.
scattered in different clulters through that part of
the ocean which flows in between North and
South America. They had failed along the eastern
coast of the continent from the river De la Plata
to the bottom of the Mexican gulf, and had found
that it stretched without interruption through this
vast portion of the globe. They had discovered
the great Southern Ocean, which opened new
profpets in that quarter. They had acquired
some knowledge of the coast of Florida, which
led them to observe the continent as it extended
in an opposite direction; and though they puflled
their discoveries no farther towards the north,
other nations had visited those parts which thcy

VOL. II. B nclc(Ilc,.

B °V ° negleted. The Englifi, in a voyage, the mo-
t-v tives and success of which shall be related in an-

other part of this History, had failed along the
coast of America from Labrador to the confines
of Florida, and the Portuguese, in quest of a
shorter passage to the East Indies, had ventured
into the northern seas, and viewed the fame re-
gions'. Thus, at the period where I have chosen
to take a view of the state of the New World, its
extent was known almost from its northern ex-
tremity to thirty-five degrees touth of the equator.
The countries which tretch from thence to the
southern boundary of America, the great empire
of Peru, and the interior state of the extensive
dominions subjet to the sovereigns of Mexico,
were fill undiscovered.

TheftaLx- WHEN we contemplate the New World, the
tent of :he
N'wWotld. first circumstance that strikes us is its immense

extent. It was not a small portion of the earth,
so inconsiderable that it might have escaped the
observation or research of former ages, which
Columbus discovered. He made known a new
hemisphere, larger than either Europe, or Asia,
or Africa, the three noted divisions of the ancient
continent, and not much inferior in dimenflons to
a third part of the habitable globe.

AMERICA is remarkable not only for its mag-
nitude, but for its position. It stretches from the

a Herrera, dec, i. lib. vi. c. 16.

·-,^?g4i,', northern
·s'jli

northern polar circle to a high southern latitude, B o o K
above fifteen hundred miles beyond the farthest . .
extremity of the old continent on that fide of the
line. A country of such extent pages through all
the climates capable of becoming the habitation
of man, and fit for yielding the various produc-
tions peculiar either to the temperate or to the
torrid regions of the earth.

NEXT to the extent of the New World, the Grand ob-

jr~. it pri-

grandeur of the cbjecqs which it presents to view its'to'"'
is moR apt to Rtrike the eye of an observer. Na- Vie..
ture seems here to have carried on her operations
with a bolder hand, and to have distinguishcd the
features of this country by a peculiar magnifi-
cence. The mountains of America are much fu- Irsmotnl
perior in height to those in the other divisions of ti'"*
the globe. Even the plain of Quito, which may
be copfidered as the bare of the Andes, is elevated
farther above the sea than the top of the Pyrenees.
This flupendous ridge of the Andes, no less re-
markable for extent than elevation, rifes in dif-
ferent places more than one third above the Pike
of Teneriffe, the highest land in the ancient he.
mifphere. The Andes may literally be said to
hide their heads in the clouds; the forms often
roll, and the thunder bursts below their summits,
which, though exposed to the rays of the fun in
the center of the torrid zone, are covered with
everlasting snows '.

See NOTE I.

B 2 Ft.OM

B o0 K FROM those lofty mountains descend rivers pro-

IV.
, .. portionally large, with which the streams in the
IIVCe. ancient continent are not to be compared, either

for length of course, or the vati body of water
which they roll towards the ocean. The Marag-
non, the Orinoco, the Plata in South America,
the Miffifppi and St. Laurence in North America,
flow in such spacious channels, that, long before
they feel the influence of the tide, they resemble
arms of the sea rather than rivers of fresh water'.
lakes. TTHE lakes of the New WVorld are no less con-

fpicuous for grandeur than its mountains and ri-
vers. There is nothing in other parts of the globe
which resembles the prodigious chain of lakes in
North America. Th(y may properly be termed
inland seas of fresh water; and even those of the
second or third class in magnitude, are of larger
circuit (the Caspian sea excepted) than the greateit
lake of the ancient continent.

it . rn si- THE New World is of a form extremely fa-
v,.ulable to
ccn r.er.. vourable to commercial intercourse. When a con-

tinent, like Africa, is composed of one valt solid
mats, unbroken by arms of the fia penetrating
into its interior parts, with few large rivers, and
those at a considerable ditance fronu each other,
the greater part of it seems dcllinicd to remain for
ever uncivilized, and to be debarred from any ac-
tive or enlarged communication with the reft of

c Sec NOTE 1I.

mankind.

mankind. When, like Europe, a continent is B o o K
opened by inlets of the ocean of vast extent, such ._ _j
as the Mediterranean and Baltic; or when, like
Asia, its coast is brcken by deep bays advancing
far into the country, such as the Black Sea, the
gulfs of Arabia, of Persia, of Bengal, of Siam,
and of Leotang; when the surrounding seas are
filled with large and fertile illands, and the conti-
nent itself watered with a variety of navigable
rivers, thole regions may be said to possess what-
ever can facilitate the progress of their inhabitants
in commerce and improvement. In all there re-
specs America may bear a comparison with the
other quarters of the globe. The gulf of Mexico,
which flows in between North and South America,
may be confidered as a Mediterranean tea, which
opens a maritime commerce with all the fertile
countries by which it is encircled. The illands
scattered in it are inferior only to those in the In-
dian Archipelago, in number, in magnitude, and
in value. As we stretch along the northern di-
vision of the American hemisphere, the Bay of
Chcfapeak presents a fplcious inlet, which con-
ducts the navigator far into the interior parts of
provinces no less fertile than extenlive; and if ever
the progress of culture and population fhlall mi-
tigate the extreme rigour o' the climate in the
more northern clilltrifs of America, I-Iudfon'., Bay
may become as subservient to coinnicrcial inter-
courfle in that quarter of the globe, as the 1.iltic
is in Europe. The other great portion cf the

I 3 New

B 0 0 K New World is encompassed on every fide by the

IV.

Le- ea, except one narrow neck, which separates the

Atlantic from the Pacific Ocean; and though it
be not opened by spacious bays or arms of the sea,
its interior parts are rendered accessible by a num-
ber of large rivers, fed by so many auxiliary
itreams, flowing in fich various directions, that,
without any aid from the hand of industry and art,
an inland navigation may be carried on through
all the provinces from the river De la Plata to the
gulf of Paria. Nor is this bounty of Nature con-
fined to the southern division of America; its
northern continent abounds no less in rivers which
are navigable almost to their sources, and by its
immense chain of lakes provision is made for an
inland communication, more extensive and com-
modious than in any quarter of the globe. The
countries stretching from the gulf of Darien on
one fide, to that of California on the other, which
form the chain that binds the two parts of the
American continent together, are not destitute of
peculiar advantages. Their coast on one fide is
waffed by the Atlantic Ocean, on the other by
the Pacific. Some of their rivers flow into the
former, rome into the latter, and secure to them
all the commercial benefits that may result from a
communication with both.

rc-rat. - BuT what most diflinguifnes America from other
Ill.t.t." parts of the earth, is the peculiar temperature of

its climate, and the difTLrcnt laws to which it is

fubljcct

fubje& with refpet to the distribution of heat and B °o K
cold. We cannot determine with precision the '-
portion of heat felt in any part of the globe, merely
by measuring its distance from the equator. The
climate of a country is affected, in some degree,
by its elevation above the sea, by the extent of
continent, by the nature of the foil, the height of
adjacent mountains, and many other circum-
stances. The influence of there, however, is, from
various causes, less considerable in the greater part
of the ancient continent; and from knowing the
position of any country there, we can pronounce
with more certainty, what will be the warmth of
its climate, and the nature of its productions.

THE ma::ims which are founded upon obferva- Predomi-

tion of our hemisphere will not apply to the other. coid.
There, cold predominates. The rigour of the
frigid zone extends over half of that which fliould
be temperate by its porition. Countries where
the grape and the fig Ihould ripen, are buried un-
der snow one half of the year; and lands situated
in the fame parallel with the most fertile and best
cultivated provinces in Europe, are chilled with
perpetual frosts, which almost defiroy the power
of vegetation''. As we advance to those parts of
America which lie in the fame parallel with the
provinces of Asia and Afiica, blieed with an
uniform enjoyment of such genial warmth as is
most friendly to life and vegetation, the dominion

d See NOTE II1.

B 4 of

B 0 0 K of cold continues to be felt, and winter, though
t_ - * during a short period, often reigns with extreme

severity. If we proceed along the American con-
tinent into the torrid zone, we shall find the cold
prevalent in the New World extending itself also
to this region of the globe, and mitigating the
excess of its fervour. While the negro on the
coast of Africa is scorched with unremitting heat,
the inhabitant of Peru breathes an air equally mild
and temperate, and is perpetually shaded under a
canopy of grey clouds, which intercepts the fierce
beams of the fun, without obftrusting his friendly
influence '- Along the eastern coast of America,
the climate, though more similar to that of the
torrid zone in other parts of the earth, is never-
thelefs considerably milder than in those countries
of Asia and Africa which lie in the fame latitude.
If from the southern tropic we continue our pro-
grefs to the extremity of the American continent,
we meet with frozen seas, and countries horrid,
barren, and scarcely habitable for cold, sooner
than in the north '.
CfJres of VARIOUS causes combine in rendering the cli-

mate of America so extremely different from that
of the ancient continent. Though the utmost

' Voyage de Ul'oi, tom. i. p. 453. Anfoi's Voyage,
F. 18.

f Anson's Voyage, p. 74; and Voyage de Qiirns, ihc,;

Iill Gcn. des Voya.ges, tom. :.iv. p. 8j. RcharJ Hlill. Natur.
dc l'Air, ii. 30 ,; &c.

extent

extent of America towards the north be not yet B o° c
discovered, we know that it advances much nearer ,
to the pole than either Europe or Asia. The latter
have large seas to the north, which are open dur-
ing part of the year; and even when covered with
ice, the wind that blows over them is less intensely
cold than that which blows over land in the fame
high latitudes. But in America the land stretches
from the river St. Lawrence towards the pole,
and spreads out immenflly to the weft. A chain
of enormous mountains, covered with snow and
ice, runs through all this dreary region. The
wind, in pasing over such an extent of high and
frozen land, becomes so impregnated with cold,
that it acquires a piercing keenness, which it re-
tains in its progress through warmer climates, and
is not entirely mitigated until it reach the Gulf of
Mexico. Over all the continent of North Ame-
rica, a north-weflerly wind and excefive cold are
synonymous terms. Even in the most sultry
weather, the moment that the wind veers to that
quarter, its penetrating influence is felt in a tran-
fition from heat to cold, no less violent than fud-
den. To this powerful cause we may alcribe the
extraordinary dominion of cold, and its violent
inroads into the southern provinces in that part of
the globe :.

OTH-lER causes, no less remarkable, cdlinmifli
the atlive power of heat in thole parts of the

n Cliailcvoix lHil. de Nov. Fr. iii. 165. Hifl. generale
Voyagec, tom. xv. 215, &c.

A merican

B0 0o K American continent which lie between the tropics.

v_, In all that portion of the globe, the wind blows

in an invariable direction from eaf to weft. As
this wind holds its course acrols the ancient
continent, it arrives at the countries which stretch
along the western shore of Africa, inflamed with
all the fierv particles which it hath collected from
the sultry plains of Asia, and the burning sands
in the African deserts. The coafi of Africa is,
accordingly, the region of the earth which feels
the most fervent heat, and is exposed to the un-
mitigated ardour of the torrid zone. But this fame
wind which brings such an accession of warmth to
the countries lying between the river of Senegal
and Cafraria, traverses the Atlantic Ocean, before
it reaches the American shore. It is cooled in its
passage over this vast body of water, and is felt as
a refrefling gale along the 'coast of Brasil h, and
Guiana, rendering these countries, though among
the warmest in America, temperate, when com-
pared with tho'e which lie opposite to them in
Africa . As this wind advances in its course
acrols America, it meets with immense plains,
covered with impenetrable forests, or occupied by
large rivers, marihes, and Ltagnating waters, where
it can recover no considerable degree of heat. At
length it arrives at the Andes, which run from
north to bluth through the whole continent. In
palling over their elevated and frozen summits, it
is lb thoroughly cooled, that the greater part of

h See NOT1E IV. ' Sec NOTE V.

S the

the countries beyond them hardly feel the ardour C K
to which they seem exposcd by their situation k.
In the other provinces of America, from Terra
Fermc westward to the Mexican empire, the heat
of the climate is tempered, in tome places, by the
elevation of the land above the sea, in others, by
their extraordinary humidity, and in all, by the
enormous mountains scattered over this tra&. The
islands of America in the Torrid Zone are either
fmrall or mountainous, and are fanned alternately
bv refreshing sea and land breezes.

THE causes of the extraordinary cold towards

the southern limits of America, and in the seas be-
yond ir, cannot be ascertained in a manner equally
satisfying. It was long supposed that a vast con-
tinent, diftinguiflled by the name of Terra Aujtira-
lis Incognita, lay between the southern extremity
of America and the Antartic pole. The fame
principles which account for the extraordinary de-
gree of cold in the northern regions of America,
were employed in order to explain that which is
felt at Cape Horn and the adjacent countries.
The immense extent of the southern continent,
and the large rivers which it poured into the
ocean, were mentioned and admitted by philofo-
phers as causes sufficient to occasion the unusual

k Acofta Hifi. Novi Orbis, lib. ii. c. I . Duflbn Hifl. Na-

turelle, &c. tom. ii. 512, &c. ix. 1 7, &c. (lborn'a Collctl.
of Voyages, ii. p. 868.

sensation

B o o K sensation of cold, and the fill more uncommon

Iv.

a. appearances of frozen seas in that region of the

globe. But the imaginary continent to which such
influence was ascribed, having been searched for
in vain, and the space which it was supposed to
occupy having been found to be an open lea, new
conjetures must be formed with relpet to the
causes of a temperature of climate, so extremely
different from that which we experience in coun-
tries removed at the lame distance from the oppo-
site pole'.

Condit;on AFTER contemplating those permanent and cha-
when fits
icovcrcd. raaeriftic qualities of the American continent,

which arifl from the peculiarity of its situation, and
the disposition of its parts, the next objec that
merits attention is its condition when first disco-
vered, as far as that depended upon the industry
and operations of man. The effects of human in-
genuity and labour are more extensive and confi-
fiderable, than even our own vanity is apt at first
to imagine. When we survey the face of the ha-
bitable globe, no small part of that fertility and
beauty, which we ascribe to the hand of nature,
is the work of man. His efforts, when continued
through a fucceflion of ages, change the appear-
ance and improve the qualities of the earth. As a
great part of the ancient continent has long been
occupied by nations far advanced in arts and in-
dultry, our eye is accustomed to view the earth in

Sec NOTE VI.

that

that form which it aflumes when rendered fit to be B o0 K

Iv.

the residence of a numerous race of men, and to -
supply them with nourishment.

BUT in the New World, the state of mankind Rude and

was ruder, and the aspec of Nature extremely v',t''
different. Throughout all its vast regions, there
were'only two monarchies remarkable for extent of
territory, or distinguished by any progress in im-
provement. The reft of this continent was pof-
sessed by finall independent tribes, destitute of arts
and indutfry, and neither capable to correct the
defe&ts, nor desirous to meliorate the condition of
that part of the earth allotted to them for their
habitation. Countries, occupied by such people,
were almost in the fame fate as if they had been
without inhabitants. Immense forests covered a
great part of the uncultivated earth; and as the
hand of industry had not taught the rivers to run
in a proper channel, or drained off the flagnating
water, many of the most fertile plains were over-
flowed with inundations, or converted into marshes.
In the southern provinces, where the warmth of
the fun, the moiflure of the climate, and the ser-
tility of the foil, combine in calling forth the
most vigorous powers of vegetation, the woods are
so choked with its rank luxuriance, as to be almost
impervious, and the surface of the ground is hid
from the eye under a thick covering of ihrubs and
herbs and weeds. In ti;is fare of wild unafliftcd
nature, a great part of the large provinces in

South

B °0 K South America, which extend from the bottom of

'V.
I -- the Andes to the sea, still remain. The Euro-

pean colonies have cleared and cultivated a few
spots along the coast, but the original inhabitants,
as rude and indolent as ever, have done nothing
to open or improve a country, pofleffing almost
every advantage of situation and climate. As we
advance towards the northern provinces of Ame-
rica, Nature continues to wear the fame unculti-
vated aspec&, and in proportion as the rigour of
the climate increases, appears more delolate and
horrid. There the forests, though not encumbered
with the lame exuberance of vegetation, are of
equal extent; prodigious marshes overspread the
plains, and few marks appear of human activity
in any attempt to cultivate or embellish the earth.
No wonder that the colonies sent from Europe
were astonished at their first entrance into the New
World. It appeared to them waste, solitary, and
uninviting. When the English began to fettle in
America, they termed the countries of which they
took poffiefion, The f''iidernefs. Nothing but their
eager expectation of finding mines of gold, could
have induced the Spaniards to penetrate through
the woods and rnarfhes of America, where, at
every ftep, they observed the extreme difference
between the uncultivated face of Nature, and that
which it acquires under the forming hand of in-
dultry and art m.

Sec NOTE VIr.

THE

THE labour and operations of man not only B ° ° K

improve and embellish the earth, but render it -_
more wholesome, and friendly to life. When any fomck.
region lies negle&ted and deffitute of cultivation,
the air fagnates in the woods, putrid exhalations
arise from the waters; the surface of the earth,
loaded with rank vegetation, teels not the purify-
ing influence of the fun; the malignity of the dif-
tempers natural to the climate increases, and new
maladies no lets noxious are engendered. Accord-
ingly, all the provinces of America, when first
discovered, were found to be remarkably un-
healthy. This the Spaniards experienced in every
expedition into the New World, whether destined
for conquest or settlement. Though by the na-
tural conltitution of their bodies, their habitual
temperance, and the persevering vigour of their
minds, they were as much formed as any people
in Europe for active service in a sultry climate,
they felt severely the fatal and pernicious qualities
of those uncultivated regions through which they
marched, or where they endeavoured to plant co-
lonies. Great numbers were cut off by the un-
known and violent clileafes with which they were
infeced. Such as survived the destructive rage of
those maladies, were not exempted from the
noxious effeEts cf the climate. They returned to
Europe, according to the description of the early
Spanish hillorians, feeble, emaciated, with lan-
guid looks, and complexions of f.ich a sickly yel-
low colour, as indicated the unwholesome tem-

perature

B v K perature of the countries where they had re-

fidcd".
Ite almAils. THE uncuitivated Rtate of the New World al-

seced not only the temperature of the air, but the
qualities of its productions. The principle of life
seems to have been less aAive and vigorous there,
than in the ancient continent. Notwithstanding
the vast extent of America, and the variety of its
climates, the different species of animals peculiar
to it are much fewer in proportion, than those of
the other hemisphere. In the islands, there were
only four kinds of quadrupeds known, the largest
of which did not exceed the size of a rabbit. On
the continent, the variety was greater; and though
the individuals of each kind could not fail of mul-
tiplying exceedingly, when almost unmolelted by
men, who were neither so numerous, nor so united
in focicty, as to be formidable enemies to the ani-
mal creation, the number of diftin6t species mult
still be considered as extremely small. Of two
hundred different kinds of animnals spread over the
face of the earth, only about one third existed in
America, at the time of its dilcovery °. Nature
was not only less prolific in the New World, but
she appears likewise to have been lets vigorous
in her produ&tions. The animals originally be
longing this quarter of the globe appear to be of

Gomara HiR. c. c2. 22. Oviedo Hist. lib. ii. c. 13.
lib. v. c. to. P. Mart. E.iil. 54g. D ccad. p. ti6.

o Buffon 1Hilt. Naturelle, torn. ix. p. 86.

an

an inferior race, neither To robust, nor so fierce; as B o°° K
those of the other continent. America gives birth to -
no creature of such bulk asto be compared with the
elephant or rhinoceros, or that equals the lionr and
tyger in ftrepgth and ferocity P. The Tapyr of Bra-
fil, the largest quadruped of the ravenous tribe in
the New World, is not larger than a calf of fix
months old. The Puma and Jaguar, its fiercelt
bears of prey, which the Europeans have inaccu-
rately denominated lions and tygers, possess neither
the undaunted courage of the former, nor the ra-
venous cruelty of the latter '. They are inactive
and timid, hardly formidable to man, and often
turn their backs upon the least appearance of re-
fiftance'. The fame qualities in the climate of
America which sinted the growth, and enfeebled
the spirit, of its native animals, have proved per-
nicious to such as have migrated into it volunta,
rily from the other continent, or have been tranf-
ported thither by the Europeans'. The bears,
the wolves, the deer of America, are not equal in
size to those of the Old World'. Most of the

P See NOTE VIII.
t Buffon Hilt. Natur. tom. ix. p. 87. Mar&ravii Hill. Nat.
Brasil, p. 229.

' Buffon Hilt. Natur. ix. 13. sO3. Acoflt His. lib. iv.

c. 34. Pifonis Hilt. p. 6. Herrera, dec. 4 lib. iv. c. I.
lib. x. c. 13.

* Churchill, v. p. 691. Ovalle felat. ofChili. Church. iii.

p. to. Sommario de Oviedo, c. X4-". Voyage da Deb
Marchaia, iii. 299.

t Buffon Hilt. Natur. ix. -103. Katg's Travel*, 1. ia.
Biet. Voy. de France Equinox. p. 339*

VOL. .
1. C domeRc

B °° K domeflic animals, with which the Europeans stored

the provinces wherein they fettled, have degene-
rated with reledt either to bulk or quality, in a
country whose temperature and foil seem to be
less favourable to the Itrength and perfetlion of
the animal creation %

lnr;.t and THE fame causes, which checked the growth
repti,cl.

and the vigour of the more noble animals, were
friendly to the propagation and increase of reptiles
and infects. Though this is not peculiar to the
New World, and those odious tribes, the offspring
of heat, moisture, and corruption, infest every
part of the torrid zone ; they multiply faster, per-
haps, in America, and grow to a more monstrous
bulk. As this country is, on the whole, iefs cul-
tivated, and less peopled, than the other quarters
of the earth, the active principle of life waftes its
force in produtions of this inferior form. The
air is often darkened with clouds of insets, and
the ground covered with ihocking and noxious
reptiles. The country around Porto-Bello swarms
with toads in such multitudes, as hide the surface
of the earth. At Guyaquil, snakes and vipers
are hardly less numerous. Carthagena is infested
with numerous flocks of bats, which annoy nor
only the cattle.-but inhabitants . In the islands,
legions of ants have, at dhiferent times, consumed

See NOT'E I'Y.
Voyage de Ullo , tom. i. p, 8.). Id. p. 147. lcrrera,
dec. ir. lib. iii. c. 3. 9.

every
4 *..

every vegetable production Y, and left the earth B o K
entirely bare, as if it had been burnt with fire. .--
The damp forests, and rank foil of the countries
on the banks of the Orinoco and Maragnon, teem
with. almft every ofecnfive and poisonous crea-
ture, which the power of a sultry fun can quicken
into life z

THe birds of the New World are not diftin- Bird,,

cuifled by qualities so conspicuous and charader-
iftical, as thole which we have observed in its
quadrupeds. Birds are more independent of man,
and less affteed by the changes which his industry
and labour make upon the state of the earth.
They have a greater propenrity to migrate from
one country to another, and can gratify this in-
ftinat of their nature without difficulty or danger.
Hance the number of birds common to both con-
tinents is much greater than that of quadrupeds;
and even such as are peculiar to America nearly
refeinble those with which mankind were acquaint-
ed in similar regions of the ancient hemisphere.
The American birds of the tortid zone, like those
of the fame climate in Alia and Africa, are deck-
ed in plumage, which dazzles the eye with the
vivid beauty of its colours; but nature, satisfied
with clothing them in this gay drefsi has denied

Y See NOTE X.
2 Voyage de Condamine, p. 167. G(umilla, iii. 120, &c.

Hilt. gener. des Voyages, xiv. 317. DLumont Mrnioires lur 1a
Louiliart, i. o. o. iommario de Oviedo, c. 52-6.,

C a molt

B 0 0 K mo[l of them that melody of found, and variety

-- of notes, which catch and delight the ear. The

birds of the temperate climates there, in the fame
manner as in our continent, are less splendid in
their appearance; but, in compensation for that
defect, have all the power and sweetness of music
in their voice. In tome diftrias of America, the
unwholesome temperature of the air seems to be
unfavourable even to this part of the creation.
The number of birds is ess than in other coun-
tries, and the traveller is struck with the amazing
solitude and silence of its forests . It is remark-
able, however, that America, where the quadru-
peds are so dwarfi(h and dastardly, should pro-
duce the Condor, which is intitled to pre-eminence
over all the flying tribe, in bulk, in strength, and
in courageb.
so;l. THE foil, in a continent so extensive as Ame.

rica, muff of course be extremely various. In
each of its provinces, we shall find some diftin-
guifhing peculiarity, the description of which be-
longs to those who write their particular history.
In general, we may observe, that the moisture and

a Bouguer Voy. au Pcrou¢ r7. Chanvalon, Voyage i la

Martinique, p. 96. Warien Defcript. Surinam. Osborn's
Collet. ii. 9z4. Lettres :dif. xxiv. p. 339. Charlev. Hist.
de la Nouv. Prance, lii. 155.

b Voyage de Ulloa, i. 363. Voyage de Condamine, 175.

BufFon -lift. Nat. xvi. 18.. Voyage du Des Marchais, iii.
,z0.

cold,

cold, which predominate so remarkably in all B o o s
parts of America, must have great influence upon · '.
the nature of its foil; countries lying in the fame
parallel with those regions, which never feel the
extreme rigour of the winter in the ancient con-
tinent, are frozen over in America during a great
part of the year. Chilled by this intense cold, the
ground never acquires warmth sufficient to ripen
the fruits, which are found in the corresponding
parts of the other continent. If we would rear in
America the productions which abound in any
particular diftri& of the ancient world, we must
advance several degrees nearer to the line than in
the other hemirphere, as it requires such an in-
crease of heat to counterbalance the natural fri-
gidity of the foil and climate'. At the Cape of
Good Hope, several of the plants, and fruits pe-
culiar to the countries within the tropics, are cul-
tivated with success; whereas, at St. Augufline
in Florida, and Charles-Town in South-Carolina,
though considerably nearer the line, they cannot
be brought to thrive with equal certainty". But,
if allowance be made for this diversity, the foil of
America is naturally as rich and fertile as in any
part of the earth. As the country was thinly in-
habited, and by a people of little indufRry, who
had none of th'e domeRtic animals, which civilized
nations rear in such vast numbers, the earth was
not exhausted by their consumption. The vege-
table productions, to which the fertility of the foil

Sec NOTE Xl. "' Sec NOTE XII.

C 3 gave

B o°V K gave birth, often remained untouched, and being

IV. ,--- suffered to corrupt on its surface, returned with

increase into its bosom ". As trees and plants de-
rive a great part of their nourishment from air and
water, if they were not defiroyed by man and
other animals, they would render to the earth
more, perhaps, than they take from it, and feed
rather than impoverish it. Thus the unoccupied
fuil of Amr.erica might go on enriching for many
ages. The vast number as well as enormous size
of the trees in America, indicate the extraordinary
vigour of the foil in its native llate. When the
Europeans firit began to cultivate the New World,
they were aftonilhed at the luxuriant power of ve-
getation in its virgin mould and in leveral places
the ingenuity of the planter is till employed in
diminishing and wafting its superfluous fertility,
in order to bring it down to a ifare fit for useful
culture F.

How, was , HAVING thus surveyed the state of the New
cp;icd? World at the time of its discovery, and confidered

the peculiar features and qualities which diflin-
guifh and characterise it, the next inquiry that
merits attention is, H-ow was America peopled ?
By what coulrfe did mankind migrate from the
one continent to the other ? and in what quarter

c Bffon Hilf. Natur. i. 242. Kalm, i. I5 .

Charlevoix, Hilt. de Nouv. Fran. iii. 405. Voyage da

Des Marchais, iii. z29. Lery ap. de Bry, part iii. 174. See
NOTE Xlll,

it

is it most probable thar a communication was B o o K
opened between them? ?

WE know, with infallible certainty, that all Notradtion

the human race spring from the lame source, and i anmoCng
that the descendants of one man, under the pro- th""l
te&ion, as well as in obedience to the command
of Heaven, multiplied and replenished the earth.
But neither the annals nor the traditions of nations
reach hack to those remote ages, in which they
took poffcflion of the different countries, where
they are now fettled. We cannot trace the
branches of this sirss family, or point out with
certainty the time and manner in which they di-
vided and spread over the face of the globe. Even
among the modl enlightened people, the period of
authentic history is extremely Ihort, and every
thing prior to that is fabulous or obscure. It is
not surprising, then, that the unlettered inhabit-
ants of America, who have no solicitude about
futurity, and little curiosity concerning what^
past, should be altogether unacquainted with their
own original. l'he Californians and Efkimaux,
in particular, who occupy those countries in
America which approach nearest to the ancient
continent, are so remarkably rude, that it is al-
together vain to search among them for such in-
formation as might difcovcr the place from whence
they came, or the anceltors of whom they are de-
icended . Whatever light has been thrown on

' Vencga's Hid. of California, i. 6o.

C 4 thit

B OI0 K this fubje&, is derived, not from the natives of

IV.. ...
.-- .-^ America, but from the inquisitive genius of theiri

conquerors.
tVeic.u WHEi the people of Europe unexpectedly dif-

covered a New World, removed as a vaftdiltancc
from every part of the ancient continent which
was then known, and filled. with inhabitants whose
appearance and manners differed remarkably from
the reft of the human species, the question con-
cerning their original became naturally an object
of curioity and attention. The theories and fpe-
culations of ingenious men with reftpch to this
subjet, would fill many volnimes; but are often
so wild and chimerical, that I Should offer an in-
fult to the understanding of my readers, if I at-
tempted either to enumerate or to refute them.
Some have presumptuously imagined, that the
people of America were not tie offspring of the
fame common parent with the reft of mankind.
but that they formed a separate race of men, dif-
tinguilhable by peculiar features in the conftitu-
tion of their bodies, as well as in the chara&eriftic
qualities of their minds. Others contend, that
they are descended from rome remnant of the an-
tediluvian inhabitants of the earth, who survived
the deluge, which swept away the greatest part of
the human species in the days of Noah; and pre-
poaeroufy suppose rude, uncivilized tribes, scat-
tered over an uncultivated continent, to be the
nmot ancient race of people on the earth. There
As hardly any nation, from the north to the foiuth

pole,

pole, to which Come antiquary, in the extrava- B 0 0 rI
gance of conjeture, has not afribed the honour =-..
of peopling America. The Jews, the Canaanites,
the Pbhenicians, the Carthaginians, the Greeks,
the Scythians, in ancient times, are supposed to have
fettled in this western world. The Chinese, the
Swedes, the Norwegians, the Wellh, the Spaniards,
are said to have sent colonies thither in later
ages, at different periods, and on various occasions.
Zealous advocates stand forth to support the re-
fpetive claims of those people; and though they
reft upon no better foundation than the casual re-
semblance of some culloms, or the supposed affi-
nity between a few words in their different lan-
guages, much erudition and more zeal have been
employed, to little purpose, in defence of the op-
pofite fyRems. Those regions of conjecture and
controversy belong not to the historian. His is a
more limited province, confined to what is efta-
blifled by certain or highly probable evidence.
Beyond this I Shall not venture -in offering a few
observations, which may contribute to throw some
light upon this curious and much agitated question.

i. THERE are authors who have endeavoured Ought n" t

to be found-
by mere conjectures to account for the peopling of ed on mer.

conjcaure

America. Some have supposed that it was origi-
ginally united to the ancient continent, and djf-
jnined 'from it by the shock of an earthquake, or
the irruption of a deluge. Others have imagined,
that some vefel being forced from its course by

the

0 0 KI the violence of a westerly wind, might be'driven
_ - - _ by accident towards the American coast, and have

given a beginning to population in that desolate
continent%. But with refpe& to all those systems,
it is vain either to reason or inquire, because it is
impofible to come to any decision. Such events
as they suppose are barely possible, and may have
happened. That they ever did happen, we have
no evidence, either from the clear testimony of
hiftory,or from the.obfcure intimations of tradition.

bronrerm- 2. NOTHING can be more frivolusor uncertain
ablnnerf than the attempts to discover the original of the

Americans; merely by tracing the resemblance
between their manners and those .of any particular
people in the ancient continent. If we suppose
two bodies of men, though in the most remote
regions of the globe, to be placed in a state of
society, similar in its degree of improvement, they
muff feel the fame wants, and exert the fame en-
deavours to supply them. The fame objects will
allure, the fame paflions will animate them, and
the fame ideas and fentimen:s will arifc in their
minds. The character and occupations of the
hunter in America muff be little different from
those of an Asiatic, who depends for subsistence
on the chace. A tribe of savages on the banks
of the Danube, mufft nearly resemble one upon the
plains warhed by the Mififippi. Inflead then of

* Parson's Remains of Japhet, p. 240. Ancient Univerf.

I-ifl. vol. xx. p. 164. P. Fcyjoo Tcatro Critico, tom. v.
p. 304, &c. Acolta Hist. Moral. Novi Orbis, lib. i. c. 16. i9.

prcfuming

presuming from this similarity, that there is any B °° 'C
affinity between them, we should only conclude,
that the disposition and manners of men are form.
ed by their situation, and arise from the state of
society in which they live. The moment thac
begins to vary, the character of a people must
change. In proportion as it advances in imiprove-
menr, their manners refine, their powers and 'ta-
lents are call-d forth. In every part of the earth
the progress of man hath been nearly the fame,
and we can trace him in his career from the rude
simplicity of Iavage life, until he attains the in-
du!lry, the arts, and the elegance of polishd so-
ciety. There is nothing wonderful then in the
similitude between the Americans and the barba-
rous nations of our continent. Had Lafirau,
Garcia, and many other authors, attended to this,
they would not have perplexed a subject which
they pretend to illustrate, by their fruitless endea-
vours to eftablilh an affinity between various races
of people in the old and new continents, upon
no other evidence than such a reiemblance in their
manners as necefarily arises from the similarity of
their condition. There are, it is true, among
every people some customs, which, as they do nor
flow from any natural want or desire peculiar to
their situation, may be denominated usages of ar-
bitrary inflitution. If between two nations set-
tled in remote parts of the earth, a perfec agree-
rment with relpect to any of these should be dif-
covered, one might be led to suspect that they

were

B 0V° 0 were connected by some affinity. If a nation were
X--.- - found in America that consecrated the seventh day

to religious reft, if in another the first appearance
of the new moon was celebrated with festivity, we
might jufily suppose that the former had derived
'its knowledge of this usage of arbitrary institution
from the Jews, while the monthly festival of the
latter might be confidered as nothing more than
an expreIfion of joy natural to man on the return
of the planet which guides and cheers him in the
night. The instances of customs, merely arbitra-
ry, common to the inhabitants of both hemi-
spheres, are, indeed, so few and so equivocal,
that no theory concerning the population of the
New World ought to be founded upon them.

rC.g.. 3. THE theories which have been formed with
eu ritcs. respect to the original of the Americans, from ob-

servation of their religious rites and practices, are
no less fanciful, and destitute of solid foundation.
When the religious opinions of any people are
neither the result of rational inquiry, nor derived
from the inftrutions of revelation, they must
needs be wild and extravagant. Barbarous nations
are incapable of the former, and have not been
blessed with the advantages arising from the latter.
Still, however, the human mind, even where its
operations appear most wild and capricious, holds
a course so regular, that in every age and country
the dominion of particular pafions will be attend-
Sd with similar effects. The savage of Europe or

4 America,

America, when filled with fuperitiious dread ofB o o K
invisible beings, or with inquisitive solicitude to .
penetrate into the events of futurity, trembles
alike with fear, or glows with impatience. He
has recourse to rites and pra&ices of the fame
kind, in order to avert the vengeance which he
supposes to be impending over him, or to divine
the secret which is the object of his curiosity. Ac-
cordingly, the ritual of superstition, in one con-
tinent, seems, in many particulars, to be a tran-
script of that eftablilhed in the other, and both
authorise similar institutions, sometimes so frivo-
lous as to excite pity, sometimes so bloody and
barbarous as to create horror. But without sup-
posing any consanguinity between such dilant na-
tions, or imagining that their religious ceremonies
were conveyed by tradition from the one to the
other, we may ascribe this uniformity, which in
many instances seems very amazing, to the natural
operation of superstition and enchufiafm upon the
weakness of the human mind.

4. WE may lay it down as a certain principle Not peoplk

in this inquiry, that America was not peopled by tioa ignh;
any nation of the ancient continent, which had citiliscd
made considerable progress in civilization. The
inhabitants of the New World were in a state of
society so extremely rude, as to be unacquainted
with those arts which are the first essays of hu-
man ingenuity in its advance towards improvement.
Even the moit cultivated nations of America were

ftrangery

BOO . frangers to many of those fimpl .inventionsi

-,_. Which were almost coeval with society in other

parts of the world, and were known in the earliest
periods of civil life. From this it is mamrifeft, that
the tribes which originally migrated to America,
came off from naticons which mult have been no
less barbarous than their potlerity, at the time
when they were first difrovrc-ed by the Europeans.
For, although the elegant and refined arts may
decline or perilh, amidst the violent shocks of
chose revolutions and difaflers to which nations are
exposed, the necessary arts of life, when once they
have been introduced among any people, are
never loft. None of the vicissitudes in human
affairs assec these, and they continue to be prac-
tifed as long as the race of men exists. If ever
the uie of iron had been known to the savages of
America, or to their progenitors, if ever they
had employed a plough, a loom, or a forge,
the utility of thole inventions would have pre-
served them, and it is impossible that they
should have been abandoned or forgotten. We
may conclude then, that the Americans sprung
from some people, who were themselves in such
an early and unimproved fIage of society, as to be
unacquainted with all the necessary arts, which re-
mained unknown among their poLterity.

nor from 5. IT appears no less evident, that America
the fouhewern

ion'" of was not peopled by any colony from the more
.urtqpi- southern nations of the ancient continent. None

nt.of

of

of the rude tribes fettled in that part of our B o° XK
hemisphere can be supposed to have visited a
country so remote. They poffflcd neither enter-
prise nor ingenuity, nor power, that could
prompt them to undertake, or enable them to
perform, such a diftanr voyage. That the more
civilized nations in Asia or Africa are not the pro-
genitors of the Ancericans is manifef, not only
from the oblervations which I have already made
concerning thrir ignorance of the mon simple and
necessary arts, but from an additional circum-
fiance. Whenever any people have experienced
the advantages which men enjoy, by their do-
minion over the inferior animals, they can neither
fubrift without the nourishment which these afford,
nor carry on any considerable operation independ-
ent of their ministry and labour: Accordingly,
the firfl care of the Spaniards, when they fettled
in America, was to stock it with all the domeflic
animals of Europe; and if, prior to them, the
Tyrians, the Carthaginians, the Chinese, or any
other polished people, had taken pofefTion of that
continent, we should have found there the animals
peculiar to those regions of the globe where they
were originally feated. In all America, however,
there is not one animal, tame or wild, which pro-
perly belongs to the warm, or even the more
temperate, countries of the ancient continent. The
camel, the dromedary, the horse, the cow, were
as much unknown in America as the elephant or
the lion. From which it is obvious, that the
people who firlt fettled in the weltern world did

3 not

B ° 0 K not iflue from the countries where those animals
i ,. _abound, and where men, from having been long

accustomed to their aid, would naturally confider
it, not only as beneficial, but as indispensably ne-
ceffary to the improvement, and even the pre-
servation, of civil society.

The two 6. FROM confidering the animals with which
co ntinent*
tfem to p. America is stored, we may conclude that the
proach near.
eft to each nearest point of contat between the old and new
othbe to-

rardsthe continents is towards the northern extremity of
r"th both, and that there the communication was

opened, and the intercourse carried on between
them. All the extensive countries in America
which lie within the tropics, or approach near to
them, are filled with indigenous animals of va-
rious kinds, entirely different from those in the
corresponding regions of the ancient continent.
But the northern provinces of the New World
abound with many of the wild animals which are
common in such parts of our hemisphere as lie in
a inmilar situation. The bear, the wolf, the fox,
the hare, the deer, the roebuck, the elk, and fe-
veral other species, frequent the forests of North
America, no less than those in the north of Europe
and Aia b. It seems to be evident then, that the
two continents approach each other in this qoar-
ter, and are either united, or so nearly adjacent,
that thefi animals might pass from the one tothe
other.

Buffon Hist. Nat. ix. p. 97, &c.

7. THa

7. THE acual vicinity of the two continents is B °0 K

so clearly established by modern discoveries, that -
the chief difficulty with relpe6 to the peopling of TIih;'i.'.
America is removed. While those immense re- di(co,;r.
gions, which firetch caftward from the river Oby
to the sea of Kamchatka were unknown, or im-
perfetly explored, the north.east extremities of
our hemiiphere were luppolcei to be so far difRant
from any part of the New \Vorld, that it was nor
easy to conceive how any communication Ihould
have been carried on between them. But the
Ruffians, having fubjelted the western part of Si-
beria to their empire, gradually extended their
knovwcdge o' that vast country, by advancing to-
wards the eafr into unknown provinces. These
were discovered by hunters in thei'r excuriions
after game, or by bfldiers employed in levying
the taxes; nnd the court of Mo!coxv eflimated the
importance of those countries only by the linall
addition which they made to its revenue. At
length, Peter the Great alcended the Ruffian
throne. His enlightened, comprehensive mind,
intent upon every circunltancc that could ag-
grandizr his empire, or rendecr his reign illuftri-
ous, discerned consequences of those dilcoveries,
which had escaped the observation of his ignorant
predeccffors. He perceived, that in proportion
as the regions of Asia extended towards the east,
they mutl approach nearer to America; (liat the
communication between the two continents, which
had long bt,:n lfearched for in vain, would pro-
bably be foind1 in this quarter, and (hat by open-

VOL. 11. 1D ing

B °V King this intercourse, some part of the wealth
^- and commerce of the western world might be

made to flow into his dominions by a new chan-
nel. Such an object suited a genius that de-
lighted in grand schemes. Peter drew up in-
ftru&ions with his own hand for prosecuting this
design, and gave orders for carrying it into exe-
cution '.

His successors adopted his ideas, and pursued

his plan. The officers whom the Ruffian court
employed in this service, had to firuggle with so
many difficulties, that their progress was extremely
low. Encouraged by some faint traditions among
the people of Siberia, concerning a successful
voyage in the year one thousand fix hundred and
and forty-eight, round the north-east promontory
of Asia, they attempted to follow the fame course.
Veflels were fitted out, with this view, at different
times, from the rivers Lena and Kolyma; but in
a frozen ocean, which nature seems not to have
destined for navigation, they were exposed to
many difalters, without being able to accomplifl
their purpose. No veffcl fitted out by the Ruffian
court ever doubled this formnidable Capek; we
are indebted for what is known of tlofe extreme
regions of Asia, to the discoveries made in excur-
sions by land. In all those provinces, an opinion
prevails, that countries of great extent and ferti-

i Muller Voyages ct Dccouvcrtcs par les Ruffi, tom. i.
p. 4. 5. 141.

See NOT XIV.

lity

lity lie at no considerable difsance from their own fs 0 K
coasts. These the Rufflans imagined to be part of I
America; and several circumstances concurred
not only in confirming them in this belief, but in
persuading them that tome portion of that conti-
nent could not be very remote. Trees of various
kinds, unknown in those naked regions of Asia,
are driven upon the coast by an easterly wind. By
the fame wind, floating ice is brought thither in a
few days; flights of birds arrive annually from
the fame quarter; and a tradition obtains among
the inhabitants of an intercourse formerly carried
on with tome countries fituaced to the east.

AFTER weighing all there particulars, and com.

paring the position of the countries in Aria which
had been discovered, with such parts in the north-
weft of America as were already known, the Ruf-
fian court formed a plan, which would have
hardly occurred to any nation less accustomed to
engage in arduous undertakings, and to contend
with great difficulties. Orders were ilfued to
build two velels at Ochotz, in the sea of Kam-
chatka, to fail on a voyage of discovery. Though
that dreary uncultivated region furnished nothing
that could be of use in conftru&ting them, but
some larch trees; though nor only the iron, the
cordage, the fails, and all the numerous articles
requisite for their equipment, but the provisions
for vicualling them, were to be carried through
the immense deserts of Siberia, along rivers of dif-

D 2 ficult

B °0 K ficult navigation, and roads almost impassable,

IV.
- the mandate of the lovereign, and the perfeve-

rance of the people, at last surmounted every ob-
?'4,. flacle. Two velels were finished, and, under the

command of the captains Behring and Tfchirikow,
failed from Kamchatka in quest or the New
World, in a quarter where it had never been ap-
proached. They shaped their course towards the
east; and though a storm soon separated the vef-
fels, which never rejoined, and many disasters be-
fel them, the expectations from the voyage were
not altogether frustrated. Each of the command-
ers discovered land, which to them appeared to
be part of the American continent; and, accord-
ing to their oblervations, it seems to be situated
within a few degrees of the north-west coast of
California. Each set iome of his people ahfore;
but in one place the inhabitants fled as the Ruf-
sians approached; in another, they carried off
those who landed, and destroyed their boats. The
violence of the weather, and the distress of their
crews, obliged boh to quit this inhospitable coast.
In their return they touched at several islands,
which stretch in a chain from eall to weft between
the country which they had discovered and the
coast of Asia. They had some intercourse with
the natives, who seemcd to them to resemble the
.North Americans. They p:elcnted to the Ruf-
sians the calumet, or pipe of peace, which is a
symbol of friendlhil) univerial among the people

of
7

of North America, and an usage of arbitrary in- B o°° K
flitution, peculiar to them.

THE islands of this new Archipelago have been

'frequented by the Ruffian hunters since that time;
but the court feemied to have relinquished its
scheme of profccuting difcovcJies in this quarter.
It was unexpeted ly relumed in the year one
thousand fevcn hundred and fixty-eighr, and cap-
tain Krenitzin had the command of iwo small
veiTels fitted out for that purpole. In his voyage
outward he held nearly the lame courle with the
former navigators, he touched at the fame islands,
obfcrved their situation and productions more
carefully, and discovered several new islands with
which they had not fallen in. Though he did not
proceed lo far tu the east as to revisit the country
which Behring and Tflihirikow supposed to be part
of the American continent, yet, by returning in a
courts confidcrably to the north of theirs, he cor-
reacd some capital miflakes into which they had
fallen, and has contributed to facilitate the pr9.
grcfs of future navigatou;s in those seas'.

THUS the poflibility of a communication be-

tween the continents in this quarter refs no longer
upon mere conjecture, but is elfablifhed by un-
doubted evidence". Some tribe, or Some families
,f wandering Tartars, from the refllcfs lpirit pe.

I See NOTE XV.
' Muiler'.s Voyages, tom. i. 48, &c. 267. 2z6.

D 3 culiar

B 0° Ko culiar to their race, might migrate to the nearest

- e. islands, and, rude as their knowledge of naviga-

tion was, might, by palirng from one to the
other, reach at length the coast of America, and
give a beginning to population in that continent.
The distance between the Marian or Ladrone
islands and the nearest land in Aria, is greater
than that between the part of America which the
Ruffians discovered, and the coast of Kamchatka ;
and yet the inhabitants of those islands are mani-
feftly of Asiatic extract. If, notwithstanding their
remote situation, we admit that the Marian islands
were peopled from our continent, distance alone is
no reason why we should hesitate about admitting,
that the original of the Americans may be from
the fame source. It is probable that future navi-
gators in those seas, by fleering farther to the
north, may find that the continent of America
approaches still nearer to Asia. According to the
information of the barbarous people, who inhabit
the country about the north-east promontory of
Asia, there lies, off the coast, a fmrall island, to
which they fail in less than a day. From that,
they can descry a large continent, which, accord-
ing to their description, is covered with forests,
and possessed by people whose language they do
not underltand ". By them they are supplied with
the skins of martens, an animal unknown in the
northern parts of Siberia, and which is never
found but in countries abounding with trees. If

" Mullei's Voyages ct Dccouv. i. 166.

we

we could rely on this account, we might conclude, B o°° K
that the American continent is separated from ours v__u
only by a narrow strait, and all the difficulties with
refpec6 to the communication between them would
vanish. Perhaps the merit of ascertaining this is
reserved for the sovereign now feated on the throne
of Peter the Great, who, by perfeting his plan,
may add this splendid event to those which already
distinguish her reign.

IT is likewise evident from recent discoveries, Ano:ier

that an intercourse between our continent and cationb'y
America might be carried on with no lets facility thetor°th-
from the north-west extremities of Europe. As
early as the ninth century, the Norwegians disco- A. D. S3o.
vered Greenland, and planted colonies there.
The communication with that country, after a
long interruption, was renewed in the last centu-
ry. Some Lutheran and Moravian mifionaries,
prompted by zeal for propagating the Christian
faith, have ventured to fettle in this frozen and
uncultivated region °. To them we are indebted
for much curious information with respect to its
nature and inhabitants. We learn, that the north-
weft coast of Greenland is separated from America
by a very narrow strait; that, at the bottom of
the bay into which this itrait conducts, it is high-
)y probable that they are united P; that the inha-

0 Crantz' Hilt. ofGreenl. i. 242. 244. Prcvot llilt. Gen.
des Voyages, tom. xv. 152, not. (96).

P Eggedce p. z. 3.

D 4 bitants

OP

B °0 K bitants of the two countries have Come intercourfo

I V.
h --y i with one another; that the Efquimaux of America

perfectly resemble the Greenlanders in their aspet,
dress, and mode of living; that omre I1ilors, who
had acquired the knowledge of few word- in the
Greenlandi(h laiguage, reported that there were
underltood by the Llciquimaux; that, at length, a
Moravian mifionary, ell acquainted wiih the
language of Greenland, having vifired the country
of the Efquimaux, found, to li:s aloniflmrnt, that
they spoke the fame language with til Grct-n-
landers, and were in every refpe('t the tamepecp':c
and he was accordingly received and entertained
by them as a friend and a brother q.

By there decisive fa&s,not only the consanguinity

of the Efquimaux and Greenlanders is eflablifhed,
but the pofibility of peopling America from the
north of Europe is deronltrated. If the Nor-
wegians, in a barbarous age, when lIience had
not begun to dawn in the tior;h of Europe, pof-
sessed luch naval skill as to open a commrunication
with Greenland, their anceltfbrs, as much addiLced
to roving by sea, as the Tartars are to wandering
by land, might, at some more remote period, ac-
complifh the lame voy;,ge, nn(id Itlc a colony
there, whose deccndt-nts mithr, in lrogrefs of
time, migrate into Ancrica. But it, infltcid of
venturing to fail directly from their own coalt to

1 Crantz' Hilt. of Crrcinl, . 2'. , z'z2.

Greenland,

Greenland, we suppose that the Norwegians held B 00 K
a more cautious course, and advanced from Shet--
land to the Feroe Inands, and from them to Ice-
land, in all which they had planted colonies, their
progress may have been so gradual, that this navi-
gation cannot be confidered as either longer or
more hazardous, t'an thole voyages which that
hardy and enterprizing race of men is known to
have performed in every age.

8. THOUGH it be ponible that America may Probablv

have received its firti inhabitants from our conti- ,h Co,..
nent, either by the north-west of Europe or the "Ctt
north-east of Asia, there seems to be good reason
for supposing that the progenitors of all the
American nations, from Cape Horn to the south-
ern confines of Labrador, migrated from the latter
rather than the former. The Efquimaux are the
only people in America, who, in their aCpet or
character, bear any resemblance to the northern
Europeans. They are manifestly a separate species
of men, diftinEt from all the nations of the Ame-
rican continent, in language, in disposition, and
in habits of life. Their original, then, may war-
rantably be traced up to that source, which I have
pointed out. But, among all the other inhabitants
of America, there is fich a striking similitude in
the form of their bodies, and the qualities of their
minds, that, notwithlitanding the divcrfities occa-
sioned by the influence of climate, or unequal
,progress in improvement, we niuft pronounce

themn

B o o K them to be descended from one source. There

rv.
X , _ may be a variety in the shades, but we can every

where trace the fame original colour. Each tribe
has something peculiar which distinguishes it; but
in all of them we discern certain features common
to the whole race. It is remarkable, that in every
peculiarity, whether in their persons or dispositions,
which chara&terife the Americans, they have fonme
resemblance to the rude tribes scattered over the
north-east of Asia, but almolt none to the nations
fettled in the northern extremities of Europe. We
may, therefore, refer them to the former origin,
and conclude that their Asiatic progenitors, hav-
ing fettled in those parts of America, where the
Ruffians have dilcovered the proximity of the two
continents, spread gradually over its various re-
gions. This account of the progress of population
in America, coincides with the traditions of the
Mexicans concerning their own origin, which,
imperfect as they are, were preserved with more
accuracy, and merit greater credit, than those of
any people in the New World. According to
them, their ancestors came from a remote country,
situated to the north-west of Mexico. The Mexi-
cans point out their various nations as they ad-
vanced from this, into the interior provinces, and
it is precisely the fame route which they must have
held, if they had been emigrants from Asia. The
Mexicans, in describing the appearance of their
progenitors, their manners, and habits of life at
that period, exacily delineate tl;ole of the rude

8 Tartars,

Tartars, from whom I suppose them to have B o°° K
sprung'.

THUS have I finished a disquisition which has

been deemed of so much importance, that it would
have been improper to omit it in writing the hlf-
tory of America. I have ventured to inquire, but
without presuming to decide. Satisfied with of-
fering conjectures, I pretend not to establish any
iyftem. When an investigation is, from its nature,
so intricate and obscure, that it is impossible to ar-
rive at conclusions which are certain, there may
be some merit in pointing out such as are pro-
bable '.

THE condition and character of the American co,'iion

nations, at the time when they became known to tnd .oth"'
the Europeans, deserve more attentive confidera- Amncrcans.
tion, than the inquiry concerning their origi-
nal. The latter is merely an objec of curiosity,
the former is one of the mofi important as well as
inftrutive researches, which can occupy the phi-
lofopher or historian. In order to complete the
history of the human mind, and attain to a perfect
knowledge of its nature and operations, we mus:
contemplate man in all those various situations
wherein he has been placed. We mtul follow

r Acofa His. Nat. & Mor. lib. vii. c. 2, &c. G.;rcia O) iLen

de los Indios, lib. v. c. 3. T'orquenilda Mlii;.r. l it. lib. i.
c. 2, &c. Boturini Benaduci Idea de una Hllt. dc la Amncr.
Septentr. § xvii. r. 127.

leinoilcs fur la Louifianc, par Duniont, tom. i. p. i I).

him

B ov K him in his progress through the different stages of

- r ilfociety, as he gradually advances from the infant

liate of civil life towards its maturity and decline.
We must oblcrve, at each period, how the facul-
ties of his underllanding unfold, we must attend
to the efforts of his active powers, watch the mo-
tions of affeEtion as they rile in his breast, and
mark whither they tend, and in what ardour they
are exerted. The phiiofophers and historians of
ancient Greece and Rome, our guides in this as
well as every other difquilition, had only a limited
view of this subje&t, as they had hardly any op-
portunity of surveying man in his rudest and most
early slate. in all those regions of the earth with
which they were well acquiinted, civil society had
made considerable advances, and nations had
finished a good part of their career before they
began to observe them. The Scythians and Ger-
mans, the rudest people of whom any ancient
author has transmitted to us an authentic account,
poifeffed flocks and herds, had acquired property
of various kinds, and, when compared with man-
kind in their primitive (late, may be reclkoned to
have attained to a great degree cf civilization.

Less im- BUT the discovery of the New World enlarged
irn . y1;,lt the sphere of contemplation, and p're-cnted natioos
o0 lucidrth. to our view, in ftlales of their progirls, muich lqls

advanced than thole wherein they have been ob-
served in our continent. In America, man ap-
pears unidcr the Iudcer form in which we can con-

ceive

ceive him to subsist. We behold communities B o o

/0

jult beginning to unite, and may examine the fen- -
timents and actions of human beings in the infancy
of locial life, while they feel but imperfectly the
force of its ties, and have fcarccly relinquished
their native liberty. The late of primaeval fim-
plicity, which was known in our continent only'
by the fanciful description of poets, really existed
in the other. The greater part of its inhabitants
were frangers to industry and labour, ignorant of
arts, and almost unacquainted with property, en-
joying in common the blessings which flowed fpon-
rancoutly from the bounty of nature. There were
only two nations in this vast continent which had
emerged from this rude slate, and had made any
considerable progress in acquiring the ideas, and
adopting the institutions, which belong to polished
fbcieties. Their government and manners will fall
naturally under our review in relating the discovery
and conquest of the Mexican and Peruvian em-
pires; and we shall have there an opportunity of
contemplating the Americans in the state of highest
improvement to which they ever attained.

AT present, our attention and researches fiall Tunis rui.

ry co ,fined

be turned to the finall independent tribes which r..,t.c.Lh it
occupied every other part of Amecica. Among
these, though with some diversity in their cha-
ra6ter, their manners and inflirutions, the stare of
society was nearly similar, and so extremely rude,
that the dcetomination of Savage may be applied

to

I o o
K to them all. In a general history of America, it

* would be highly improper to describe the condi-

tion of each petty community, or to investigate
every minute circumstance which contributes to
form the character of its members. Such an in-
quiry would lead to details of immeasurable and
tiresome extent. The qualities belonging to the
people of all the different tribes have such a near
resemblance, that they may be painted with the
fame features. Where any circumstances seem to
constitute a diversity in their charater and man-
ners worthy of attention, it will be sufficient to
point these out as they occur, and to inquire into
the causes of such peculiarities.

D:ffCultyof IT is extremely difficult to procure satisfying
i,,bfo'r6 and authentic information concerning nations while
tlOn, they remain uncivilized. To discover their true

character under this rude form, and to collect the
features by which they are distinguished, requires
an observer possesTd of no less impartiality than
discernment. For, in every stage of society, the
faculties, the sentiments and desires of men are so
accommodated to their own (tate, that they be-
come standards of excellence to themselves, they
affix the idea of perfection and happiness to those
attainments which resemble their own, and where.
ever the objets and enjoyments to which they
have been accunomed are wanting, confidently
pronounce a people barbarous and milerable.
Hence the mutual contempt with which the mem-

bers

bers of communities, unequal in their degrees of B o0 K
improvement, regard each other. Polilhed na-
Lions, conscious of the advantages which they de-
rive from their knowledge and arts, are apt to
view rude nations with peculiar scorn, and, in the
pride of superiority, will hardly allow either their
occupations, their feelings, or their pleasures, to
be worthy of men. It has seldom been the lot of
communities, in their early and unpolifhed state,
to fall under the observation of persons endowed
with force of mind superior to vulgar prejudices,
and capable of contemplating man, under what-
ever afpe& he appears, with a candid and discern-
ing eye.

THE Spaniards, who firft.vifited America, and frrm .he

who had opportunity of beholding its various ofthe fit
tribes, while entire and unfubdued, were far from ob"","te
possessing the qualities requisite for observing the
striking spectacle presented to their view. Neither
the age in which they lived, nor the nation to
which they belonged, had made such progress in
true science, as inspires enlarged and liberal senti-
ments. The conquerors of the New World were
mostly illiterate adventurers, destitute of all the
ideas which (hould have directed them in contem-
plating objects so extremely different from thole
with which they were acquainted. Surrounded
continually with danger, or struggling with hard-
Ihips, they had little leisure, and leIs capacity bor
any speculative inquiry. Eager to take poifflfon

of

B o0 K of a country of such vast extent and opulence, and

,- 1 happy in finding it occupied by inhabitants so in-

capable to defend it, they hastily pronounced them
to be a wretched order of men, formed merely so
servitude; and were more employed in computing
the profits of their labour, than in inquiring into
the operations of their minds, or the reasons of
their customs and institutions. The persons who
penetrated at subsequent periods into the interior
provinces, to which the knowledge and devafta-
tions of the first conquerors did not reach, were
generally of a similar chara6ter; brave and enter-
prifing in an high degree; but so uninformed, as
to be little qualified either for oblsrving or de-
scribing what they beheld.

and their NOT only the incapacity, but the prejudices of
y.judice,; the Spaniards, render their accounts of the people

of America extremely defective. Soon after they
planted colonies in. their new conquests, a differ-
ence in opinion arose with respec't to the treatment
of the natives. One party, solicitous to render
their servitude perpetual, rcprefented them as a
brutish, obstinate race, incap bie either of ac-
quiring religious knowledge, or of being trained
to the functions of itcial life. The other, full of
pious concern for their convcrfion, contended that,
though rude and ignorant, they were gentle, as-
fetionate, docile, and by proper inftrudtions and
regulations might be formed gradually into good
Christians and ufcful citizens. This controversy,

as I have already related, was carried on with all B °0 K
the warmth which is natural, when attention to '--,i
interest on the one hand, and religious zeal on the
other, animate the disputants. Most of the laity
espoused the former opinion; all the ecclesiastics
were advocates for the latter; and we shall uni-
formly find that, accordingly as an author be-
longed to either of there parties, he is apt to magnify
the virtues or aggravate the defcdAs of the Ame-
ricans beyond measure. Those repugnant ac-
counts increase the difficulty of attaining a perfcet
knowledge of their chara&er, and render it necef-
fary to peruse all the descriptions of them by
Spanilh writers with diltruft, and to receive their
information with some allowance.

ALMOST two centuries elapsed after the disco- "dro

the fyfieni

very of America, before the manners of its inha- of phiofo.
bitants attra&ed, in any considerable degree, the
attention of philosophers. At length, they disco.
vered that the knowledge of the condition and
charater of the Americans might enable them to
fill up a considerable charm in the history of the
human species, and lead to speculations no less
curious than important. They entered upon this
new field of study with great ardour; but, instead
of throwing light upon the fubje&, they have con-
tributed, in some degree, tb involve it in addi-
tional obscurity. Too impatient to inquire, they
hastened to decide; and began to ereCt systems,
when they should have been searching for fa&s on

VOL. II. E which

B 1 o which to establish their foundations. Struck with

IV.
Lr,_ .the appearance of degeneracy in the human fpe-

cies throughout the New World, and aftonilfed
at beholing a vast continent occupied by a naked,
feeble, and ignorant race of men, tome authors of
great name have maintained, that this part of the
globe had but lately emerged from the sea, and
become fit for the residence of man; that every
thing in it bore marks of a recent original and
that its inhabitants, lately called into exifence, and
still at the beginning of their career, were un-
worthy to be compared with the people of a more
ancient and improved continent'. Others have
imagined, that, under the influence of an un-
kindly climate, which checks and enervates the
principle of life, man never attained in America
the perfeltion which belongs to his nature, but re-
mained an animal of an inferior order, defeflive in
the vigour of his bodily frame, and destitute of
sensibility, as well as of force, in the operations of
his mind". In opposition to both these, other
philosophers have supposed that man arrives at
his highest dignity and excellencr long before he
reaches a state of refinement; and, in the rude
simplicity of lavage life, displays an elevation of
sentiment, an independence of mind, and a warmth
of attachment, for which it is vain to search
among the members of pulilhed societies ". They

* M. de Buffon H:il. Nat. iii. 44., &c. ix. 103. 114.
u M. de P, Recherchcs fur Icr Ancric. palitn.
X M. Roufl.a0u.

seem

feern to confider that & the molt perfect slate of B ° ° K
man which is the least civilized. They decrribe '--
the manners of the rude Americans with such rap-
ture, as if they proposed them for models to the
reft of the species. These contradictory theories
have been proposed with equal confidence, and
uncommon powers of genius and eloquence have
been exerted in order to clothe them with an ap-
pearance of truth.

As all those circumstances concur in rendering

an inquiry into the state of the rude nations in
America intricate and obscure, it is necessary to
carry it on with caution. When guided in our
researches by the intelligent observations of the
few philosophers who have visited this part of the
globe, we may venture to decide. When obliged
to have recourse to the superficial remarks of vul-
gar travellers, of tailors, traders, buccaneers, and
miflionaries, we must often pause, and comparing
detached fads, endeavour to discover what they
wanted sagacity to observe. Without indulging
conjeture, or betraying a propensity to either
system, we must study with equal care to avoid
the extremes of extravagant admiration, or of fu-
percilious contempt for those manners which we
describe.

IN order to condua this inquiry with greater Meltoda b.

accuracy, it should be rendered as simple as poll the iu.ry
bible. Man existed as an individual before he be-

E 2 came

B 0 0 K came the member of a community ; and the qua.
a · lities which belong to him under his former capa-

city should be known, before we proceed to exa-
mine those which arise from the latter relation.
This is peculiarly necessary in investigating the
manners of rude nations. Their political union
is so incomplete, their civil institutions and regu-
lations so few, so simple, and of such small autho-
rity, that men in this state ought to be viewed ra-
ther as independent agents, than as members of a
regular society. The characer of a savage results
almost entirely from his sentiments or feelings as
an individual, and is but little influenced by his
imperfect fubje&tion to government and order. I
lhall conduc my researches concerning the man-
ners of the Americans in this natural order, pro-
ceeding gradually from what is simple to what is
more complicated.

I SHALL confider, I. The bodily constitution of

the Americans in those regions now under review.
II. The qualities of their minds. Ill. Their do-
meltic state. 1V. Their political fate and inftitu-
tions. V. Their system of war, and public fecu-
rity. VI. The arts with which they were ac-
quainted. VII. Their religious ideas and inftitu-
tions. VIII. Such singular detached customs as
are not reducible to any of the former heads.
IX. I shall conclude with a general review and
fetimate of their virtues and defets.

I. THz

I. THE bodily constitution of the Americans.- B 0o K

The human body is less affected by climate than --
that of any other animal. Some animals are con- tuio o
fined to a particular region of the globe, and thcirbodies.
cannot exifl beyond it; others, though they may
be brought to bear the injuries of a climate foreign
to them, cease to multiply when carried out of
that diftri& which Nature destined to be their
mansion. Even such as seem capabable of being
naturalized in various climates, feel the effect of
every remove from their proper flation, and gra-
dually dwindle and degenerate from the vigour
and perfection peculiar to their species. Man is
the only living creature whose frame is at once so
hardy and so flexible, that he can spread over the
whole earth, become the inhabitant of every re-
gion, and thrive and multiply under every climate.
Subje&, however, to the general law of Nature,
the human body is not entirely exempt from the
operation of climate, and when exposed to the ex-
tremes either of heat or cold, its size or vigour
diminishes.

THE first appearance of the inhabitants of the Complexi.

New World, filled the discoverers with such alto-
nifhment, that they were apt to imagine theni a
race of men different from those of the other he-
mifphere. Their complexion is of a reddilh brown,
nearly resembling the colour of copper r. The
hair of their heads is always black, long, coarse,

r Oviedo Somario, p. 46, D. Life of Columbus, c. a4.

E 3 and

B 0 V K aRd lank. They have no beard, and every part

lV.
At-i / of their body is perfecly smooth. Their persons

are of a full size, extremely strait, and well pro-
portioned . Their features are regular, though
often difsorted by absurd endeavours to improve
the beauty of their natural form, or to render
feblC. their afpe6 more dreadful to their enemies. In

the islands, where four footed animals were both
few and small, and the earth yielded her produc-
tions almost spontaneously, the constitution of the
natives, neither braced by the active exercises of
the chace, nor invigorated by the labour of culti-
vation, was extemely feeble and languid. On the
continent, where the tbrefts abound with game of
various kinds, and the chief occupation of many
tribes was to pursue it, the human frame acquired
greater firmness. Still, however, the Americans
were more remarkable for agility than strength.
They refermbed beasts of prey, rather than ani-
mals formed for labours. They were not only
averse to toil, but incapable of it; and when
rouzed by force from their native indolence, and
compelled to work, they funk under tasks which
the people of the other continent would have per-
formed with cafe '. This feeblences of conflitu-
tion was universal among the inhabitants of those
regions in America which we are surveying, and

See NOTE XVI.
See NOTE xvir.

b Oviedo Som. p. 5 1, C. Voy. de Corrcal, ii. 2j8. Wa-
fr'* D)cfcription, p. 13 h

4 may

may be confidered as charaaeriltic of the species B °,°
ihete .:; ,-

THE beardless countenance and smooth skin of

the American seems to indicate a defec of vigour,
occasioned by some vice in his frame. He is def-
titute of one sign of manhood and of ftrengch.
This peculiarity, by which the inhabitants of the
New World are diflinguifhed from the people of
all other nations, cannot be attributed, as some
travellers have supposed, to their mode of fubiflt-
ence d. For though the food of many Americans
be extremely insipid, as they are altogether unac-
quainted with the use of salt, rude tribes in other
parts of the earth have fubfited on aliments
equally firple without this mark of degradation,
or any apparent symptom of a diminution in their
vigour.

As the external form of the Americans leads us ter appe.

to suspect that there is tome natural debility in t''c
their frame, the smallness of their appetite for
food has been mentioned by many authors as a
confirmation of this suspicion. The quantity of
food which men consume varies according to the
temperature of the climate in which they Jive, the
degree of acqivity which they exert, and the natu-

c B. Las Casas Brev. Rclac. p. 4. Torquem. Monar. i. 580.

Oviedo Somario, p. 41. Hiftor. lib, iii. c. 6. Herrera, dec. i.
lib. ix. c. 5. Simon, p. 41.

d Charlev. Iiif. de Nouv. Fr. iii. 310.

E ral

B o°I K ral vigour of their constitutions. Under the
.--- , enervating heat of the torrid zone, and when men

pass their days in indolence and ease, they require
less nouriflhment than the a&ive inhabitants of
temperate or cold countries. But neither the
warmth of their climate, nor their extreme lazi-
ness, will account for the uncommon dcfect of
appetite among the Americans. The Spaniards
were astonished with obfcrving this, not only in
the islands, but in several parts of the continent.
The constitutional temperance of the natives far
exceeded, in their opinion, the abstinence of the
molf mortified hermits ; while, on the other
hand, the appetite es the Spaniards appeared to
the Americans insatiably voracious; and they as-
firmed, that one Spaniard devoured more food in
a day than was sufficient for ten Americans r.

Les, vehe- A PROOF of some fecblenefs in their frame still
mence of
detirc. more striking, is the insensibility of the Americans

to the charms of beauty, and the power of love.
That passion which was destined to perpetuate
life, to be the bond of social union, and the source
of tenderness and joy, is the most ardent in the
human breast. Though the perils and hardships
of the savage state, though excessive fatigue, on
some occasions, and the difficulty at all times of
procuring subsistence, may seem to be adverse to

e Ramulin, iii. 30ot, F. 306, A. Simon Conquifia, &c.
p. 39. Hakluyt, iii. 468. so8.

Hlerrera, dec. i. lib. ii. c. 16.

this

this palion, and to have a tendency to abate its B o°, K
vigour, yet the rudest nations in every other part y-.
of the globe leem to feel its influence more power-
fully than the inhabitants of the New World. The
negro glows with all the warmth of desire natural
to his climate; and the most uncultivated Asiatics
discover that sensibility, which, from their fitua-
tion on the globe, we Ihould expect them to have
felt. But the Americans are, in an amazing de-
gree, firangers to the force of this first inftin& of
nature. In every part of the New World the na-
tives treat their women with coldness and indif-
ference. They are neither the objects of that ten-
der attachment which takes place in civilized so-
ciety, nor of that ardent desire conspicuous among
rude nations. Even in climates where this paflion
usually acquires its greatest vigour, the savage of
America views his female with disdain, as an ani-
mal of a less noble species. He is at no pains to
win her favour by the afliduity of courtship, and
still less solicitous to preserve it by indulgence and
gentleness . Miflionarics themselves, not.ithltand-
ing the austerity of monaflic ideas, cannot refrain
from exprefling their astonishment at the difpaf.
fionate coldness of the American young men in
their intercourse with the other sex h. Nor is this

r Hcnnepin M\oeur( des Sauvages, 32, &c. Rochefort Ilia.

des Isles Antilles, p. 461. Voyage de Corcal, ii. 141. Ra-
mufio, iii. 309. F. Lozano Defcr. del Gran. Chaco, 71.
Falkner's Dclcr. of Patagon. p. 125. Lettere di P. C(atano ap.
Murato'i II Chrillian. Felice, i. 30;.

h Chanva'on. p. 5 r. L .

ct. Edif. tom. xxiv. 318. Tcrtre,
ii. 377. Vcnegas, i. 81. Ribas Hill. de los Triumf; p. i r.

reserve

B 0 d K reserve to be ascribed to any opinion which they

IV.
_ i entertain with refpe& to the merit of female

chafity. That is an idea too refined for a savage,
and suggested by a delicacy of sentiment and as-
fetion to which he is a stranger.

Refla;on, BUT in inquiries concerning either the bodily
withtr or mental qualities of particular races of men,
to tbchc. or mental qualities of particular races of men,

there is not a more common or more seducing
error, than that of ascribing to a single cause,
those charateriltic peculiarities, which are the es-
sect of the combined operation of many causes.
The climate and foil of America differ, in so
many respects, from those of the other hemisphere,
and this difference is so obvious and striking, that
philosophers of great eminence have laid hold on
this as sufficient to account for what is peculiar in
the constitution of its inhabitants. They reft on
physical caufis alone, and confider the feeble frame
and languid desire of the Americans, as confe-
quences of the temperament of that portion of the
globe which they occupy. But the influences of
political and moral causes ought not to have been
overlooked. There operate with no less effect
than that on which many philosophers reft, as a
full explanation of the singular appearances which
have been mentioned. Wherever the state of so-
cicty is such as to create many wants and de-
fires, which cannot be satisfied without regular
exertions of industry, the body accustomed to la-
bour becomes robust and patient of fatigue. In a

more

more simple Riate, where the demands of men are B 0

o t

so few and so moderate, that they may be gra- u .J
tidfed, almost without any effort, by the fp6nta-
neous productions of nature, the powers of the
body are not called forth, nor can they attain their
proper strength. The 'natives of Chili and of
North America, the two temperate regions in the
New World, who live by hunting, may be deemed
an afive and vigoroos race, when compared with
the inhabitants of the isles, or of those parts of the
continent where hardly any labour is requisite to
procure subsistence. The exertions of a hunter
are not, however, so regular, or so continued, as
those of persons employed in the culture of the
earth, or in the various arts of civilized life, and
though his agility may be greater than theirs, h;s
strength is on the whole inferior. If another di-
retion were given to the acive powers of man in
the New World, and his force augmented by
exercise, he might acquire a degree of vigour
which he does not in his present slate poflefs. The
truth of this is confirmed by experience. Where-
ever the Americans have been gradually accuf-
tomed to hard labour, their constitutions become
robust, and they have been found capable of per-
forming such talks, as seemed not only to exceed
the powers of such a feeble frame as has been
deemed peculiar to their country, but to equal any
effort of the natives, either of Africa or of Europe'.

Sec NOTE XVIII.

THE

BO K
T THe fame reasoning will apply to what has been

IV.
.* . ' observed concerning their slender demand for food.

As a proof that this ihould be ascribed, as much
to their extreme indolence, and often total want of
occupation, as to any thing peculiar in the phyfi-
cal ftru&ure of their bodies, it has been observed,
that in those diftriAs, where the people of Ame-
rica are obliged to exert any unusual effort of acti-
vity, in order to procure fubfitence, or wherever
they are employed in severe labour, their appetite
is not inferior to that of other men, and, in some
places, it has struck observers as remarkably vora-
cious k.

TIE operation of political and moral causes is

fill more conspicuous, in modifying the degree of
attachment between the sexes. In a fRate of high
civilization, this paflion, inflamed by reltraint, re-
fined by delicacy, and cherished by fashion, occu-
pies and engrosses the heart. It is no longer a
simple inftin& of nature; sentiment heightens the
ardour of desire, and the most tender emotions of
which our frame is fufceprible, soothe and agitate
the foul. This description, however, applies only
to those, who, by their situation, are exempted
from the cares and labours of life. Among per-
sons of inferior order, who are doomed by their
condition to incessant toil, the dominion of this
paflion is less violent; their solicitude to procure

k Gumilla, ii. 12. 70. 237. Lafitau, i. 515. Ovalle Church.
liz. 81. Muratori, i. 295.

3 fubfiltencec

subsistence, and to provide for the first demand of B °° K
nature, leaves little leisure for attending to its fe- --v--
cond call. But if the nature of the intercourse
between the sexes varies so much in persons of dif-
ferent rank in polished societies, the condition of
man, while he remains uncivilized, mull occasion
a variation Rill more apparent. We may well lup-
pose, that amidst the hardships, the dangers, and
the simplicity of savage life, where fubfillence is
always precarious, and often scanty, where men
are almost continually engaged in the pursuit of
their enemies, or in guarding against their attacks,
and where neither dress nor reserve are employed
as arts of female allurement, that the attention of
the Americans to their women would be extremely
feeble, without imputing this solely to any phyfi-
cal defect or degradation in their frame.

IT is accordingly observed, that in those coun-

tries of America, where, from the fertility of the
Ibil, the mildness of the climate, or Ibme farther
advances which the natives have made in improve-
ment, the means of fubliflence are more abund-
ant, and the hardships of savage life are less le-
verely felt, the animal pallion of the sexes becomes
more ardent. Striking examples of this occur
among rome tribes feared on the banks of great
rivers well stored with food, among others who are
masters of hunting-grounds abounding so much
with game, that they have a regular and plentiful
supply of nourihmnent with little labour, The fu-

perior

· o o K perior degree of security and affluence which there
-=--- . tribes enjoy, is followed by their natural effets.

The pafiuns implanted in the human frame by the
hand of nature acquire additional force; new
taRes and desires are formed; the women, as they
are more valued and admired, become more at-
tentive to dress and ornament; the men, begin-
piog to feel how much of their own happiness de-
pends upon them, no longer disdain the arts of
winning their favour and affection. The inter-
course of the sexes becomes very different from
that which takes place among their ruder country-
men, and as hardly any restraint is imposed on
the gratification of delfre, either by religion, or
laws, or decency, the dissolution of their manners
is exceflive i.

-one of NOTWITHSTANDING the feeble make of the
2hem de-
iorne.l Americans, hardly any of them are deformed, or

mutilated, or defeCtive in any of their senses. All
travellers have been struck with this circumstance,
and have celebrated the uniform symmetry and
perfetion of their external figure. Some authors
search for the cause of this appearance in their
physical condition. As the parents are not ex-
haulted or over-fatigued with hard labour, they
fuppofl that their children are born vigorous and
found. They imagine, that in the liberty of fa-
vage life, the human body, naked and unconfined

I Biet. 389. Charkv. iii. 423. Dumont Mem. fur Loui.
fianc, i. 15 5

from

from its carlieft age, preserves its natural form B ° v°
and that all its limbs and niembers acquire a jufleer
proportion, than when fettered with artificial rei
ftraints, which flint its growth, and distort its
fiape . Something, without doubt, may be
ascribed to the operation of thef causes ; but the
true reasons of this apparent advantage, which is
common to all savage nations, lie deeper, and are
clotely interwoven-with the nature and genius of
that state. The infancy of man is so long and so
helpless, that it is extremely difficult to rear chil-
dren among rude nations. Their means of sub-
fiflence are not only scanty, but precarious. Such
as live by hunting must range over extensive coun-
tries, and Ihift often from place to place. The
care of children, as well as every other laborious
task, is devolved upon the women. The diftrel'es
and hardships of the savage life, which are often
such as can hardly be supported by persons in full
vigour, must be fatal to those of more tender age.
Afraid of undertaking a talk so laborious, and of
such long duration, as that of rearing their off-
spring, the women, in some parts of America,
procure frequent abortions by the use of certain
herbs, and extinguiih the first sparks of that life
which they are unable to cherish , Senible that
only flout and well formed children have force of
constitution to struggle through luch an hard in-

> Pio, p. 6.
"Ellis's Voyage to Hudfon'a Bay, g19. Herrcra, dec. 7.
lib. ix. c. 4.

fancyq

B o 0 K fancy, other nations abandon or destroy such of

'v.

,*
* their progeny as appear feeble or defective, as un-

worthy of attention *. Even when they endeavour
to rear all their children without diftintion, so
great a proportion of the whole number perishes
under the rigorous treatment which muf be their
lot in the savage state, that few of those who la-
boured under any original frailty attain the age of
manhood P. Thus, in polished societies, where
the means of fubfitence are secured with certainty,
and acquired with ease; where the talents of the
mind are often of more importance than the
powers of the body, children are preserved not-
withstanding their defects or deformity, and grow
up to be useful citizens. In rude nations, such
persons are either cut off as soon as they are born,
or becoming a burden to themselves and to the
community, cannot long protract their lives. But
in those provinces of the New World where, by
the establishment of the Europeans, more regular
provision has been made for the subsistence of its
inhabitants, and they are restrained from laying
violent hands on their children, the Americans are
so far from being eminent for any superior per-
feftion in their form, that one should rather sus-
pe& some peculiar imbecillity in the race, from the
extraordinary number of individuals who are de-
formed, dwarfifh, mutilated, blind, or deaf1.

o Gumilla Hit. ii. 234. Tccho's Hil. of Paraguay, &c.
Churchill's Colltc. vi. o18.

r Creuxii His. Canad. p. 57.
S Voyage de Ulloa, i. 332.

H-ow

How feeble soever the constitution of the Ame- B 0 K

ricans may be, it is remarkable, that there is less t--
variety in the human form throughout the New of hir ,p.
World, than in the ancient continent. When P-alncc.
Columbus and the other dircoverers first visited
the different countries of America which lie within
the torrid zone, they naturally expeted to find
people of the fame complexion with those in the
corresponding regions of the other hemisphere.
To their amazement, however, they discovered
that America contained no negroes r; and the
cause of this singular appearance became as much
the object of curiosity, as the sac itself was of
wonder. In what part or membrane of the body
that humour resides which tinges the complexion
of the negro with a deep black, it is the business
of anatomiets to inquire and describe. The power-
ful operaton of heat appears manifeitly to be the
cause which produces this striking variety in the
human species. All Europe, almost the whole of
Asia, and the temperate parts of Africa, are occu-
pied by men of a fair complexion. All the torrid
zone in Africa, some of the warmer regions adja-
cent to it, and a few countries in Asia, are filled
with people of a deep black colour. If we trace
the nations of our continent, making our progress
from cold and temperate countries towards those
parts which are exposed to the influence of vehe-
ment and unremitting heat, we hhall find, that

v P. Martyr. dec. p. 71.
VOL. II. F the

B 0 0 K the extreme whiteness of their skin soon begins to
.L diminilh; that its colour deepens gradually as we

advance; and after palling through all the fuccef-
five gradations of shade, terminates in an uniform
unvarying black. But in Atherica, where the
agency of heat is checked and abated by various
causes, which I have already explained, the cli-
mate seems to be destitute of that force which pro-
duces such wonderful effcts on the human frame.
The colour of the natives of the torrid zone, in
America, is hardly of a deeper hue than that of
the people in the more temperate parts of their
continent. Accurate observers, who had an op-
portunity of viewing the Americans in very differ-
ent climates, and in countries far removed from
each other, have been struck with the amazing
similarity of their figure and afpe '.

BriT though the hand of Nature has deviated so

little from one standard in fashioning the human
form in America, the creation of fancy hath been
various and extravagant. The fame fables that
were current in the ancient continent, have been
revived with refpet to the New World, and
America too has been peopled with human beings
.of monstrous and fantastic appearance. The in-
habitants of certain provinces were described to be
pigmies of three feet high; those of others to be
giants of an enormous size. Some travellers pub-

See N 0 T XIX.

, !lifed

lithed accounts of people with only one eye, others B °o° K
pretended to have discovered men without heads, <_- -
whose eyes and mouths were planted in their
breasts. The variety of Nature in her productions
is, indeed, so great, that it is presumptuous to lec
bounds to her fertility, and to reject indilcrimi-
nately every relation that does not perfectly accord
with our own limited observation and experience.
But the other extreme, of yielding a hasty assent,
on the slightest evidence, to whatever has the ap-
pearance of being strange and marvellous, is no
less unbecoming a philosophical inquirer, as, in
every period, men are more apt to be betrayed
Into error, by their weakness in believing too
much, than by their arrogance in believing too
little. In proportion as science extends, and na-
ture is examined with a discerning eye, the won-
ders which amused ages of ignorance disappear.
The tales of credulous travellers concerning Ame-
rica are forgotten; the monflers which they de-
scribe have been searched for in vain; and those
provinces where they pretend to have found inha-
bitants of singular forms, are now known to be
possessed by people no wife different from the other
Americans '.

TiHouo;- those relations may, witloutl discus-

sion, be rejected as fabulous, there are other ac-
counts of varieties in the huin.in (pecics in tome

See NOTE X.'.

1F _. parts

B °V° K parts of the New World, which reft upon better
- v--_ evidence, and merit more attentive examination.

This variety has been particularly observed in
three different diftri&ts. The first of these is
situated in the iflhmus of Darien, near the centre
of America. Lionel Wafer, a traveller poltefled
of more curiosity and intelligence than we should
have expeced to find in an affociace of Bucca-
neers, discovered there a small, but singular race
of men. They are of low stature, according to
his description, of a feeble make, incapable of en-
during fatigue. Their colour is a dead milk
White; not resembling that of fair people among
Europeans, but without any tincure of a blush or
sanguine complexion. Their skin is covered with
a fine hairy down of a chalky white, the hair
of their heads, their eye-brows, and eye-lashes, are
of the fame hue. Their eyes are of a singular
form, and so weak, that they can hardly bear the
light of the fun; but they fee clearly by moon-
light, and are molt active and gay in the night u.
No race similar to this has been discovered in any
other part of America. Cortes, indeed, 2ound
some persons exactly resembling the white people
of Darien, among the rare and monstrous animals
which Montezumna had colleced". But as the
power of the Mexican empire extended to the pro-
vinces bordering on the isthmus of Darien, they

u Wafer Dcfcript. of lfh. ap. Dampier, iii, p. 346.
w Cortes ap. Ramus. iii. p. 24z, E.

4 ~were

were probably brought from thence. Singular as B o°o° K
the appearance of those people may be, they can- -.
nocbe considered as conflituting a diftint species.
Among the negroes of Africa, as well as the na-
tives of the Indian islands, nature sometimes pro-
duces a small number of individuals, with all the
charafteriftic features and qualities of the white
people of Darien. The former are called Albinos
by the Portuguese, the latter Kackerlakes by the
Dutch. In Darien the parents of those W/ites are
of the fame colour with the other natives of the
country; and this observation applies equally to
the anomalous progeny of the negroes and Indians.
The fame mother who produces some children of
a colour that does not belong to the race, brings
forth the reit of the complexion peculiar to her
country ". One conclusion may then be formed
with respect to the people described by Wafer, the
Albinos and the Kackerlakes; they are a degene-
rated breed, not a separate class of men; and
from some disease or defect of their parents, the
peculiar colour and debility which mark their de-
gradation are transmitted to them. As a decisive
proof of this, it has been observed, that neither
the white people of Darien, nor the Albinos of
Africa, propagate their race: their children are
of the colour and temperament peculiar to the na-
tives of their refpedive countries r.

' Margrav. Hilt. Rer. Nat. Bras. lib. viii. c. 4.
v Wafer, p. 348. Demanct. Hilt. de l'Afrique, ii. 234.
Recherch. Philof. fur les Awmer. ii. I, &c;

F 3 TiU

B o o Q THE second diltri& that is occupied by inhabit-

Iv.
_-- ants differing in appearance from the other people

of America, is situated in a high northern lati-
tude, extending from the coast of Labrador to-
wards the pole, as far as the country is habitable.
The people scattered over those dreary regions, are
known to the Europeans by the name of Efqui-
mnaux. They themselves, with that idea of their
own superiority which consoles the rudest and
loft wretched nations, alfume the name of Kera-
lit, or Men. They are of a middle size and ro-
bust, with heads of a disproportioned bulk, and
feet as remarkably small. Their complexion,
though swarthy, by bcinc continually exposed to
the rigour of a cold climnac, inclines to the Euro-
pean white, rather than to the copper colour of
America, and the men have beards, which are
sometimes bushy and long Z. From there marks ot
diltinction, as well as from one still less equivocal,
the affinity of their language to that of the Green-
landers, which I have already mentioned, we may
conclude, with some degree of confidence, that
the Efquinaux are a race different from the reft
of the Americans.

\V' cannot decide with equal certainty concern-

ing the inhabitants of the third diltrit, situated at
the fluthern extremlity of America. Theft are

' 'lis Voy. to H-udf. 1y, p. 13 . 139. De la Pother:e,

ti) .. I- ').

|. ' ,'
\ J'u iourn. us a Voy. to Chuichill River.

pIi'hi l. I . vol.
Ix. 1o).th

the

the famous Patagonians, who, during two centu- B o°, K
ries and a half, have afforded a fibje&t of contro- ' -o-r
verly to the learned, and an object of wonder to
the vulgar. They are supposed to be one of the
wandering tribes, which occupy that vafl, but
least known region of America, which extends
from the river De la Plata to the Straits of Ma-
gellan. Their proper flation is in that part of the
interior country, which lies on the banks of the
river Negro; but in the hunting season they often
roam as far as the ftrais which separate Tierra del
Fuego from the main-land. The firfl accounts of
this people vere brought to Europe by the com-
panions of Magellan ', who described them as a
gigantic race, above eigh set

f high, and of

strength in proportion to their enormous size.
Among several tribes of animals, a d;fparity in
bulk, as considerable, may be observed. Some
large breeds of hories and dogs exceed the more
diminutive races in flature and strength, as far as
the Patagonian is s!upposed to rife above the ufuial
standard of the human body. But animals attain
the highest percttion of their species, only in mild
climates, or where they find the monl nutritive
food in greatclt abundance. It is not then in tile
uncultivated waste of the Mld.ilg!i.rlic reifion, and
among a tribe of iinproviJicnt favaLg¥, thi.it we
should expeCt to find man, poflcingi Lhi hijihcltl
honours of his race, and dli:iinguiflhd lby a fUl)lio-

' Fil:c:iCr's D.f£c;piinn or '.jt.r ioni

. ,
p .

A' 4 ~i'y

B v 0K rity of size and vigour, far beyond what he hag
*,- ,. reached in any other part of the earth. The mod

explicit and unexceptionable evidence is requisite,
in order to establish a fa&, repugnant to those ge-
neral principles and laws, which seem to affect the
human frame in every other instance, and to de-
cide with refpet to its nature and qualities. Such
evidence has not hitherto been produced. Though
several persons, to whose testimony great respect
is due, have visited this part of America since the
time of Magellan, and have had interviews with
the natives; though some have affirmed, that such
as they saw were of gigantic stature, and others
have formed the fame conclusion from measuring
their footsteps, or from viewing the ikeletons of
their dead; yet their accounts vary from each
other in so many essential points, and are mingled
with so many circumstances manifestly false or fa-
bulous, as detra& much from their credit. On
the other hand, some navigators, and those among
the most eminent of their order for discernment
and accuracy, have asserted that the natives of Pa-
tagonia, with whom they had intercourse, though
sout and well-made, are not of such extraordinary
size as to be distinguished from the reft of the hu-
man species b. The existence of this gigantic race
of men seems, then, to be one of those points in
natural history, with rerpe& to which a cautious
inquirer will hesitate, and will chufe to suspend his
agffnt until more complete evidence shall decide,

b Sec NOTE XXI.

whether

whether he ought to admit a fad, seemingly in- 8 0 0 K
consistent with what realon and experience have .* .

' ^

discovered concerning the ftrudure and condition
of man, in all the various situations in which he
has been observed.

IN order to form a complete idea with refpea to Their ft

the constitution of the inhabitants of this and the
other hemisphere, we should attend not only to the
make and vigour of their bodies, but confider
what degree of health they enjoy, and to what pe-
riod of longevity they usually arrive. In the fim-
plicity of the savage slate, when man is not op-
prelfed with labour, or enervated by luxury, or
disquieted with care, we are apt to imagine that his
life will flow on almost untroubled by disease or
suffering, until his days be terminated, in extreme
old age, by the gradual decays of nature. We
find, accordingly, among the Americans, as well
as among other rude people, persons, whose de-
crepit and Ihrivelled form seems to indicate an ex-
traordinary length of life. But as most of them
are unacquainted with the art of numbering, and
all of them as forgetful of what is pals, as they
are improvident for what is to come, it is impof-
fible to ascertain their age with any degree of pre-
cifion'. It is evident, that the period of their
longevity muff vary considerably, according to
the diversity of climates, and their different modes

c Ulloa Notic. Americ. 323. Bancroft Nat. Llif. o Gui-
ana, 334+

of

B °0 K of subsistence. They seem, howevever, to be'

IV. .
. ,. every where exempt from many of the distempers

which afflict polified nations. None of the mala-
dies, which are the immediate offspring of luxury,
ever visited them; and they have no names in their
languages by which to distinguish this numerous
train of adventitious evils.
Djfeafee. BUT, whatever be the situation in which man is

placed, he is born to susser; and his d;feafcs, in
the savage fate, though fewer in number, are,
like those of the animals whom he nearly reiembles
in his mode of life, more violent, and more fatal.
If luxury engenders and nourishes distempers of
one species, the rigour and diltreffes of savage life
bring on those of another. As men, in this itate,
are wonderfully improvident, and their means of
subsistence precarious, they often pass from ex-
treme want to exuberant plenty, according to the
viciflitudes of fortune in the chace, or to the va-
riety in the productions of the seasons. Their in-
considerate gluttony in the one situation, and their
revere abstinence in the other, are equally perni-
cious. For, though the human conflitution may
be accustomed by habit, like that of animals of
prey, to tolerate long famine, and then to gorge
'voraciously, it is not a little asseted by such fud-
den and violent transitions. The strength and vi-
gour of savages are, at tome seasons, impaired by
what they susser from scarcity of food ; at others,
they are afllited with disorders alifing from incti-

gerlion

geftion and a superfluity of gross aliment. These B , Q K
are so common, that they may be confidered as , -
the unavoidable conliquence of their mode of sub-
sifting, and cut off considerable numbers in the
prime of life. They are likewise extremely sub-
ject to consumptions, to pleuretic, asthmatic, and
paralytic diolrders d, brought on by the immode-
rate hardihips and fatigue which they endure in
hlunting and in war; or owing to the inclemency
of the seasons to which they are continually ex-
posed. In the savage fate, hardthips and fatigue
violently assault the constitution. In polished so-
cicties, intemperance undermines it. It is not
easy to determine which of them operates with
most fatal effect, or tends most to abridge human
life. The influence of the former is certainly most
extensive. TIhe pernicious conefquences of luxury
reach only a few members in any community, the
distresses of savage life are felt by all. As far as I
can judge, after very minute inquiry, the general
p:iced of human life is shorter among savages,
than in well-regulated and industrious societies.

ON E dreadful malady, the severest scourge with

which, in this lile, offended Heaven chastens the
indulgence of criminal desire, seems to have been
peculiar to the Americans. RBy communicating it
to their conquerors, they have not only amply
avenged their own wrongs, but by adding this ca-

' Chlrlev. N. Fr. iii. 364. Lafitau, ii. 360. Dc la Pothcrie,
,; 37.

lamity

so o 0 lamity to thoie which formerly embittered human
_,_ 'life, they have, perhaps, more than counterba-

lanced all the benefits which Europe has derived
from the discovery of the New World. This dif-
temper, from the country in which it first raged,
or from the people by whom it was supposed to
have been Ipread over Europe, has been some-
times called the Neapolitan, and sometimes the
French disease. At its first appearance, the in-
fedion was so malignant, its symptoms so violent,
its operation so rapid and fatal, as to baffle all the
efforts of medical lkill. Astonishment and terror
accompanied this unknown afflicion in its pro-
grefs, and men began to dread the extincRion of
the human race by such a cruel visitation. Expe-
rience, and the ingenuity of physicians, gradually
discovered remedies of such virtue as to cure or
mitigate the evil. During the course of two cen-
turies and a half, its virulence seems to have abated
considerably. At length, in the fame manner with
the leprosy, which raged in Europe for some cen-
turies, it may waste its force and disappear; and
in rome happier age, this western infection, like
that from the East, may be known only by de-
scription '.

Power ind II. AFTER confidering what appears to be pe-
qualities of
tbeirminda. culiar in the bodily constitution of the Americans,

our attention is naturally turned towards the

See NOTE XXII.

powers

powers and qualities of their minds. As the indi- °,° K
vidual advances from the ignorance and imbecil- e
lity of the infant liate, to vigour and maturity of
undertanding, something similar to this may be
obServed in the progress of the species. With re-
fpet to it, too, there is a period of infancy, dur-
ing which several powers of the mind are not un-
folded, and all are feeble and defective in their
operation. In the early ages of society, while
the condition of man is simple and rude, his rea-
son is but little exercised, and his desires move
within a very narrow sphere. Hence arise two re-
markable characteristics of the human mind, in
this Rate. Its intellectual powers are extremely
limited ; its emotions and efforts are few and lan-
guid. Both these diftintions are conspicuous
among the rudef and molf unimproved of the
American tribes, and conltitute a triking part of
their description.

WHAT, among polished nations, is called fpe- Intelledcal

culative reasoning or research, is altogether un- ""'Ji
known in the rude slate of society, and never be- mnt.
comes the occupation or amusement of the human
faculties, until man be so far improved as to have
secured, with certainty, the means of fubfi(tence,
as well as the pofleflion of leisure and tranquillity.
The thoughts and attention of a savage are con-
fined within the small circle of objects, imme-
diately conducive to his preservation or enjoyment.
Every thing beyond that escapes his oblirvation,

or

f o0o 0or is perfecly indifferent to him. Like a mere ani-
id ~ mal, what is before his eyes interests anrt affects

him; what is out of fight, or at a distance, makes
no impreflionr. There are several people in Ame-
rica whose limited underfiandings seem not to be
capable of forming an arrangement for futurity;
neither their solicitude nor their foresight extend
so far. They follow blindly the impulle of the
appetite which they feel, but are entirely regard-
less of distant consequences, and even of those re-
moved in the least degree from immediate appre-
henfion. While they highly prize such things as
serve present use; or minister to present enjoyment,
they set no value upon those which are not the
object of some immediate want . When, on the
approach of the evening, a Caribbee feels himself
disposed to go to reft, no consideration will tempt
him to fell his hammoc. But, in the morning,
when he is rallying out to the business or pastime
of the day, he will part with it for the fighteft toy
that catches his fancy '. At the close of winter,
while the impreflion of what he has fuffcred from
the rigour of the climate is frclh in the mind of
the North American, he sets himself with vigour
to prepare materials for ereting a comfortable hut
to protect him against the inclemency of the fuc-
ceeding season ; but as soon as the weather becomes

' Ulloa Noticias Americ. az2.

Venega3 Ilift. of Calif. i. 66. Suprp Church. Coll. v. 693.

Borde Defer. des Caraibes, p. 16. Ellis Voy. 194.
< t Labat Voyages, ii. 114, 115. Tertrc, ii.
' j.

:6 mild,

mild, he forgets what is past, abandons his work, -B o° K
and never thinks of it more, until the return of i
cold compels him, when too late, to resume it u

IF in concerns the mots interelting, and seem-

ingly the most timple, the reason of man, while
rude and destitute of culture, differs so little front
the thoughtless levity of children, or the improvi-
dent inltinct of animals, its exertions in other di-
rections cannot be very considerable. The objets
towards which reason turns, and the disquisitions
in which it engages, must depend upon the itate
in which man is 'placed, and are suggested by his
necessities and desires. Disquisitions, which appear
the most necessary and imrportant to men in one
ltate of society, never occur to those in another.
Among civilized nations, arithmetic, or the art of
numbering, is deemed an essential and elementary
science, and in our continent, the invention and
use of it reaches back to a period so remote as is
beyond the knowledge of history. But among fa-
vages, who have no property to estimate, no
hoarded treasures to count, no variety of obje&ts
or multiplicity of ideas to enumerate, arithmetic if
a superfluous and useless art. Accordingly, among
tome tribes in America it seems to be quite un-
known. There are many who cannot reckon far-
ther than three; and have no denomination to

Adair's Hilt. of Ancr. Indians, 417.

diflinguili

3B oo K diftinguilh any number above itx. Several can
i'..~ proceed as far as ten, others to twenty. When

they would convey an idea of any number beyond
these, they point to the hair of their head, inti-
mating that it is equal to them, or with wonder
declare it to be so great that it cannot be reckon-
ed r. Not only the Americans, but all nations,
while extremely rude, seem to be unacquainted
with the art of computation '. As soon, however,
as they acquire such acquaintance or connection
with a variety of objeas, that there is frequent
occasion to combine or divide them, their know-
ledge of numbers increases, so that the state of
this art among any people may be confidered as
one standard, by which to estimate the degree of
their improvement. The Iroquois, in North Ame-
rica, as they are much more civilized than the
rude inhabitants of Brasil, Paraguay, or Guiana,
have likewise made greater advances in this re-
fpet; though even their arithmetic does not ex-
tend beyond a thousand, as in their petty :ranfac-
'tions they have no occasion for any higher num.
bera. The Cherokee, a less considerable nation
on the fame continent, can reckon only as far as

X Condam. p. 67. Stadius ap. de Bry, ix, 128. Lery,
ibid. 251. Biet. 362. Lettr. Edif, 23. 314.

y Dumont Louis. i. 187. Herrera, dec. I. lib. iii. c. 3.
Biet. 39'). Borde, 6.

s This is the cafe with the Greenlanders, Crantz. i. 2z5. and
with Kamchatkadalcs, M. l'Abb6 Chappi, iii. 17.

* Chartev. Nouv. Francei iii. 402.

a hun.

a hundred, and to that extent have names for the B ° ° K
several numbers; the finaller tribes in their neigh- -,
bourhood can rife no higher than ten b

1w other refpe&s, the exercise of the under- No :nblrIa

Hfanding among rude nations is still more limited.
The first ideas of every human being must be such
as he receives by the senses. But, in the mind of
man, while in the savage state, there seem to be
hardly any ideas but what enter by this avenue.
The objecs around him are presented to his eye.
Such as may be subservient to his use, or can gra-
tify any of his appetites, attrac his notice; he
views the reft without curiosity or attention. Sa-
tisfied with confidering them under that simple
mode, in which they appear to him as separate
and detached, he neither combines them so as to
form general classes, nor contemplates their quali-
ties apart from the fubjeat in which they inhere,
nor bellows a thought upon the operations of his
own mind concerning them. Thus, he is unac-
quainted with all the ideas which have been deno-
minated universal, or abfjrasi, or of reflelion. The
range of his understanding mult, or course, be
very confined, and his reasoning powers be em-
ployed merely on what is sensible. This is so r--
markably the cafe with the ruder nations of Ame-
rica, that their languages (as we (hall afterwards
find) have not a word to exnrefs any thing but
what is material or corporeal. 'Ti'e, space, sub-

b Adair's Hild. of Amer. Indians, 77. See NO r E XXIII.
VOL. If. G flance,

B O°a K flance, and a thousand other terms which represent
A -_ abfraft and universal ideas, are altogether un-

known to him . A naked savage, cowering near
the fire in his miserable cabin, or stretched under
a few branches which afford him a temporary fhel-
ter, has as little inclination as capacity for useless
speculation. His thoughts extend not beyond
what relates to animal life; and when they are
not directed towards tome of its concerns, his
mind is totally inaTfive. In situations where no
extraordinary effort either of ingenuity or labour
is requilire, in order to satisfy the simple demands
of nature, the powers of the mind are so seldom
routed to any exertion, that the rational faculties
continue almolt dormant and unexercifed. The
numerous tribes scattered over the rich plains of
South America, the inhabitants of some of the
islands, and of several fertile regions on the conti-
nent, come under this description. Their vacant
countenance, their Ltaring unexpressive eye, their
lifeless inattention, and total ignorance of fubjeAs,
which seem to be the first which Ihould occupy the
thoughts of rational beings, made such inmprelion
upon the Spaniards, when they first beheld those
rude people, that they confidered them as animals
of an inferior order, and could not believe that
they belonged to the human species d. It required
the authority of a papal bull to counteract this
opinion, and to convince them that the Americans
were capable of the functions, and intitled to the

Condam. p. 54, Hetrrert, dec. 2. lib ii c. .1.

privileges

privileges of humanity e. Since that time, persons B °0 K
more enlightened and impartial than the discover- _
ers or conquerors of America, have had an oppor-
tunity of contemplating the moR savage of its
inhabitants, and they have been aflonifhed and
humbled, with observing how nearly man, in this
condition, approaches to the brute creation. But
in feverer climates, where fubfiflence cannot be
procured with the flme cafe, where men mufi
unite more closely, and act with greater concert,
necessity calls forth their talents, andl sharpens
their invention, so that the intelligent powers are
more exercised and improved. The North Ame-
ricans and natives of Chili, who inhabit the tem-
pt-.at regions in the two great diftri1ds of Ame-
rica, are people of cultivated and enlarged under.
Ltandings, when viewed in comparison with some
of those feated in the illands, or on the banks
of the Maragnon and Orinoco. Their occupations
are more various, their system of policy, as well
as of war, more complex, their arts more numer-
ous. But even among them the intelletual powers
are extremely limited in their operations, and un-
less when turned direCtly to those objects which
interest a savage, are held in no estimation. Both
the North Americans and Chilefe, when not en-
gaged in some of the functions belonging to a
warrior or hunter, loiter away their :iine in
thoughtless indolence, unacquainted witti any other
subjet worthy of their attention, or capable of

n Torqucm. Mon. Ind. iii. 198.

G 2 occupying

B o 0 K occupying their minds'. .If even among ther

- y reason is so much circumscribed in its exertions,

and never arrives, in its higherf attainments, at
the knowledge of those general principles and
maxims, which serve as the foundation of science,
we may conclude, that the intellectual powers of
man in the savage state are destitute of their pro-
per obje&, and cannot acquire any considerable de-
gree of vigour and enlargement.

A1i.ve f- FROM the fame causes, the ative efforts of the
soirt s Of the
mind few mind are few, and on most occasions, languid. If
andlanguid. we examine into the motives which rouze men to

activity in civilized life, and prompt them to per-
severe in fatiguing exertions of their ingenuity or
firength, we ihall find that they arise chiefly from
acquired wants and appetites. These are numer-
ous and importunate, they keep the mind in per-
petual agitation, and, in order to gratify them, in-
vention must be always on the stretch, and indus-
try nimui be inceflantly employed. But the desires
of simple nature are few, and where a favourable
climate yields almost spontaneously what suffices
them, they scarcely fir the foul, or excite any
violent emotion. -Hence the people of several
tribes in Anerica waite their life in a lifLlefs indo-
lence. To be fr-ee from occupation,. eems to be
all the enjoyment towards which they aspire.
They will continue whole days flrctched out in

f Lafitau, ii. I.

their

their hammocs, or feated on the earth, in perfect B o° K
idleness, without changing their poflure, or raif- -
ing their eyes from the ground, or uttering a tingle
word g.

SUCH is their aversion to labour, that neither Improvi.

the hope of future good, nor the apprehension of d'ut
future evil, can surmount it. They appear equally
indifferent to both, discovering little solicitude,
and taking no precautions to avoid the one, or to
secure the other. The cravings of hunger nay
route them; but as they devour, with little dif-
tinEtion, whatever will appease its inflindlive der
mands, the exertions which these occasion are of
short duration. Destitute of ardour, as well as va-
riety of desire, they feel not the force of those
powerful springs which give vigour to the move-
ments of the mind, and urge the patient hand of
industry to persevere in its efforts. Man, in some
parts of America, appears in a form so rude, that
we can discover no effcts of his activity, and the
principle of underitanding, which flould direCt it,
seems hardly to be unfolded. Like the other ani-
mals, he has no fixed residence; he has erected no
habitation to shelter him from the inclemency of
the weather; he has taken no measures for fe-
curing a certain fubfitence; he neither sows nor
reaps; but roams about as led in search of the
plants and fruits which the earth brings forth in
fucceflion ; and in quelt of the game which he kills

X Bougucr Voy. au Pcrou, Ioz. Borde, i[.

G 3 in

B
v K in the forelfs, or of the fish which he catches in

IV.

,  the rivers.

Som v. THIS description, however, applies only to

rlcty with
rc,, ir tu some tribes. Man cannot continue long in this

slate of feeble and uninformed infancy. He was
made for industry and action, and the powers of
his nature, as well as the necetfiry of his condition,
urge him to fulfil his destiny. Accordingly,
among most of the American nations, especially
thol:e teated in rigorous climates, some efforts are
employed, and some previous precautions are
taken, for Iccuring fubfiltence. '1 he career of re-
gular indulLry is begun, and the laborious arm
has made the lirll efays of its power. Still, how-
ever, the inmprovident and slothful genius of the
savage slate predominates. Even among those
more improved tribes, labour is deemed ignomi-
nious and degrading. It is only to work of a cer-
tain kind that a man will deign to put his hand.
The greater part is devolved entirely upon the
women. One half of the community remains in-
actve, while the ozher is opprefled with the mul-
ticuLd- and variety of its occupations. Thus their
induitry is partial, and the foresight which regu-
lates it, is no leIs limited. A remarkable instance
of this occurs in the chief arrangement with re-
fpee to their manner of living. They depend for
their lubrfiftnce, during one part of the year, on
h!htlll:; during another, on hunting; during a
tliird, on the produce of their agriculture. Though

8 experience

experience has taught them to foresee the return B 0o0 K
of those various fealbns, and to make some pro-
vision for the refpecdive exigencies of each, they
either want sagacity to proportion this provision to
their consumption, or are so incapable of any
command over their appetites, that, from their
inconsiderate waste, they often feel the calamities
of famine as fevcrely as tle rudest of the savage
tribes. What they fuftcr one year does not aug-
ment their indullry, or render tlemr more provi-
dent to prevent similar difirefTesh. This inconfi-
derate thoughtlcfliets about futurity, the eriTc of
ignorance and the caultf of iloth, accompanies and
charaaterizes man in every stage of iavage life ;
and by a capricious singularity in his operations,
he is then least solicitous a'-out supplying his
wants, when the means of latisfying them are mos,
precarious, and procured with the greatelt diffi-
culty k.

III. AFTER viewing the bodily confitution of the Tlir, ro-

Americans, and contemplating the powers of their '*i"' t*'.
minds, we are led, in the natural order of inquiry,
to confider them as united together in lociety.
Hitherto our researches have been confined to the
operations of underlianding refpcting themrflvcs,
as individuals, now they will extend to the decrce

h Charlev. N. Fr. ii. 3 ,8. I.ettr, E.dlif. 2. -.,8 Dercript.
of N. France. Ct)bLnri's Collet. ii. D8c:. LDC i 'oiliric, ii. (,3.

I Bancroft's Nat. IITl. of G uiana, 3z6. 3 3.
k Sec NOTL XXIV.

G 4 of

B °o ° of their sensibility and affction towards their

IV.

-~-/' fspecies.
Donmenic THE domestic itate is the first and moll simple

form of human association. The union of the sexes
among different animals, is of longer or shorter
duration in proportion to the ease or difficulty of
rearing their offspring. Among those tribes where
the season of infancy is short, and the young soon
acquire vigour or agility, no permanent union is
formed. Nature commits the care of training up
the offspring to the mother alone, and her tender-
ness, without any other affiitance, is equal to the
talk. But where the state of infancy is long and
helpless, and the joint afliduity of both parents is
requisite ir. tending their feeble progeny, there
a more intimate connection takes place, and con-
tinues until the purpose of nature be accompli(hed,
and the new race grow up to full maturity. As
the infancy of man is more feeble and helpless
than that of any other animal, and he is depend-
ent, during a much longer period, on the care
and foresight of his parents, the union between
husband and wife came early to be confidered, not
only as a solemn, but as a permanent contrat. A
general state of promiScuous intercourse between
the sexes never exiftert but in the imagination
of poets. In the infancy of society, when men,
deftiite of arts and industry, lead a hard preca-
rious life, the rearing of their progeny demands
the attention and efforts of both parents; and if

their

their union had not been formed and continued °3 °

0

with this view, the race could not have been pre- _
served. Accordingly, in America, even among
the rudest tribes, a regular union between husband
and wife was universal, and the rights of marriage
were understood and recognized. In those diftrits
where subsistence was scanty, and the difficulty of
maintaining a family was great, the man confined
himself to one wife. In warmer and more fertile
provinces, the facility of procuring food concurred
with the influence of climate, in inducing the in-
habitants to increase the number of their wives'.
In some countries the marriage union fubfifled
during life ; in others, the impatience of the Ame-
ricans under restraint of any species, together with
their natural levity and caprice, prompted them
to dissolve it on very flight pretexts, and often
without afligning any cause'.

BUT in whatever light the Americans confidered condition

the obligation of this contract, either as perpetual, fwomen.
or only as temporary, the condition of women was
equally humiliating and miserable. Whether man
has been improved by the progress of arts and ci-
vilization in society, is a question, which, in the
wantonness ofdifputation, has been agitated among
philosophers. That women are indebted to the

I Lettr. EdiF. 23. 318. Lafitau Moeurs, i. L54. Lery ap. de
Bry, iii. 234. Journal de Grillet et Bechamel, p. 88.

m" Lafitau, i. 5So. Joutel Journ. Hiflor. 315. Lozano

Dc'cr. del Gran Chac, 70. Hcnnepin !joeurs des Sauvages,
P. 30. 33.

refinements

B o0 K refinements of polilhed manners for a happy change

T..y in their state, is a point which can admit of no

doubt. To defpilc and to degrade the female sex,
is the charaAeriftic of the savage slate in every
part of the globe. Man, proud of excelling in
itrength and in courage, the chief marks of pre.
eminence among rude people, treats woman, as an
inferior, with disdain. The Americans, perhaps
from that coldness and insensibility which has been
confidered as peculiar to their conflitution, add
neglcEt and harshness to contempt. The most in-
telligent travellers have been itruck with this inat-
tention of the Americans to their women. It is
not, as I have already observed, by a tfudied
display of tenderness and attachment, that the
American endeavours to gain the heart of the wo-
man whom he wishes to marry. Marriage itself,
instead of being an union of affection and interests
between equals, becomes, among them, the un-
natural conjunfion of a master with his slave. It is
the observation of an author, whose opinions are
deservedly of great weight, that wherever wives
are purchased, their condition is extremely de-
?reffedn. They become the property and the
slaves of those who buy them. In whatever part
of the globe this cuflom prevails, the observation
holds. In countries where refinement has made
some progress, women when purchased are excluded
from society, shut up in fequeflered apartments,
and kept under the vigilant guard of their ma-

" Skctchcs of Hill. of Man. i. A?4.

fiters.

tiers. In ruder nations, they are degraded to the B °° o
meanest funcions. Among many people of Ame- A
rica the marriage contract is properly a purchase.
The man buys his wife of her parents. Though
unacquainted with the use of money, or with iuch
commercial tranfadions as take place in more im-
proved society, he knows how to give an equiva-
lent for any object which he desires to pofrefs. In
some places the suitor devotes his service for a cer-
tain time to the parents of the maid whom he
courts; in others, he hunts obr them occarfonally,
or assists in cultivating their fields, and formbing
their canoes; i:n others, he offers presents of such
things as are deemed most valuable on account of
their usefulness or rarity 0. In return for thele, lie
receives his wife; and this circumstance, added
to the low estimation of women among savages,
leads him to confider her as a female servant
whom he has acquired, and whom he has a title
to treat as an interior. In all unpolifhed nations,
it is true, the functions in domeflic cconomy,
which fall naturally to the share of women, are so
many, that they are fubjetled to hard labour, and
inuft bear more than their full portion of the com-
mon burden. But in America, their condition is
so peculiarly grievous, and their depreflion it
complete, that servitude is a name too mild to de.
firibe their wretched stare. A wile, among molt
tribes, is no better than a beast of burden, dcftined

o Lafirau Mocurs, &c. . . 50, &c. Chal cv. iii. 285, &c.
Ilcrrcra, dcc. A, lib. iv. . 7. L) nont, ii., 15.

tO

B 0 0 K to every office of labour and fatigue. While the

i, men loiter out the day in sloth, or spend it in

amusement, the women are condemned to incef.
sant toil. Talks are imposed upon them without
pity, and services are received without compla-
cence or gratitude P. Every circumstance reminds
women of this mortifying inferiority. They muff
approach their lords with reverence; they must
regard them as more exalted beings, and are not
permitted to eat in their prefence.q There are
diftrias in America where this dominion is so
grievous, and so sensibly felt, that rome women,
in a wild emotion of maternal tenderness, have de-
stroyed their female children in their infancy, in
order to deliver them from that intolerable bond-
age to which they knew they were doomed'. Thus
the first inflitution of social life is perverted. That
state of domestic union towards which nature leads
the human species, in order to soften the heart to
gentleness and humanity, is rendered so unequal,
as to establish a cruel diftinftion between the sexes,
which forms the one to be harlh and unfeeling,
and humbles the other to servility and fubjetion.

Their wo- IT is owing, perhaps, in some measure, to this
proific. state of deprefflon) that women in rude nations are

P Tertre, ii. 382. Borde Relat. des Moeurs des Caraibes,
p. 21. Biet. 357. Condamine, p. lo. Fermin. i. 79.

i Gumilla, i. 1 3. Barrrec, 164. Labat. Voy. ii. 78.
Chanvalon, 51. Tcrtre, ii. 300.

r Gumilla, ii. 233. 238. Herrera, dec. 7. lib. ix. c. 4.

far

far from being prolific i. The vigour of their con- B °o° o
ftitution is exhausted by excessive fatigue, and the -
wants and diftrcfles of savage life are so numerous,
as to force them to take various precautions in or-
der to prevent too rapid an increase of their pro-
geny. Among wandering tribes, or such as de-
pend chiefly upon hunting for subsistence, the
mother cannot attempt to rear a second child, un-
til the first has attained such a degree of vigour as
to be in some measure independent of her care.
From this motive, it is the universal practice of
the American women to suckle their children
during leveral years '; and as they fcldom marry
early, the period of their fertility is over, before
they can finilh the long but necefTary . ttendance
upon two or three fuccelfive children". Amon-
some of the leaf polished tribes, whose induflry
and foresight do not extend so far as to make any
regular provision for their own fubfiltence, it is a
maxim not to burden themselves with rearing more
than two children -; and no such numerous fami-
lies, as are frequent in civilised societies, are to be
found among men in the savage Itate . When
twins are born, one of them commonly is aban-

Lafitau, i. 590. Charlevoix, iii. 304.
Herrera, dcc. 6. lib. i. c. 4.
Charlev. iii. 303. Dumont Mem. far Louiiane, ii. 270.

Denys Hild. Natur. de 1'Amerique, &c. ii. 365. Charlev. Hiilt.
de Parag. ii. 422.

x Techo's Account of Paraguay, &c. Church. Collcet. vi.
1o8. Lett. Edif. z4. zoo. Lozano Defcr. 92.
' Macclcur's Journal, 63.

4 doned,

B o°° K doned, because the mother is not equal to the task

y,--- of educating both . When a mother dies while

Ahe is nursing a child, all hope of preserving its life
fails, and it is buried together with her in the
fame grave . As the parents are frequently ex.
pored to want by their own improvident indolence,
the difficulty of sustaining their children becomes
so great, that it is not uncommon to abandon
or destroy them b. Thus their experience of
the difficulty of training up an infant to matu.
rity, amidst the hardships of savage life, often
flifles the voice of nature among the Americans,
and suppresses the strong emotions of parental ten-
dernefs.

paent l,- BUT, though necessity compels the inhabitants
fer&ion and
ilialduty. of America thus to set bounds to the increase of

their families, they are not deficient in affe&ion
and attachment to their offspring. They feel the
power of this inqtinct in its full force, and as long
as their progeny continue feeble and helpless, no
people exceed them in tenderness and care . But
in rude nations, the dependence of children upon
their parents is of shorter continuance than in po.
lifhed societies. When men mutl be trained to the
various funtions of civil life by previous dif

» Let. Edif. x. zco. See NOTE XX'V.
· Charlev. iii. 368. Lett. Edif. x. 200. P. Melch. Hernan.
dcz Menor. de Cheriqui. Colbert, Collcf Orig. Pap. i.

b Venegas HiWl. of Californ. i. 8a,
' Gumilla, i. 211. Bic;. 390.

riplinc,

cipline and education, when the knowledge of ab.- B O o K
ftrufe sciences must be taught, and dexterity in in- - '
tricate arts must be acquired, before a young man
is prepared to begin his career of ation, the at-
tentive feelings of a parent are not confined to the
years of infancy, but extend to what is more re-
mote, the eftablihrnent of his child in the world.
Even then, his solicitude does not terminate. His
proteAion may still be requisite, and his wifdoni
and experience Rill prove useful guides. Thus a
permanent connection is formed; parental tender-
ness is exercised, and filial respect returned,
throughout the whole course of life. But in the
fimplicicy of the savage slate, the affecAion of pa-
rents, like the inftinftive fondness of animals,
ceafis almost entirely as loon as their offspring at-
tain maturity. L.ittle instruction fits them for that
mode of life to which they are destined. The pa-
rents, as if their duty were accomplished, when
they have conducted their children through the
helpless year; of infancy, leave them afterwards at
entire liberty. They seldom adviCe or admonish,
they never chide or chatilfe them. They susser
them to be ablolute mailers ( f their own actions
In an American hut, a father, a mother, and their
posterity, live together like persons a(lernbled by
accident, without lfeeiing to fecl the obligation
of the duties mutually arising from this connec-

d Chailev, iii. 272. Bier.3. .G.nmil'a, i. ziz. Lafiau,

i. 602. Creuxii Hiii. CanaJ. p. ; i. Fcrniandcz, Kclac. Hist.
de los Chcquit. 3j.

tion.

B °0 0 tio *. .A filial love is not chefifhed by the con.

,,-. tinuance of ttention or good ofitcs, the recol-

kltion of,.benefits received in early infanr4y i^ too
faint to excite it. Conscious of their owni,liberty,
and impatient of rctraint, thq youth of America
are accultomnd to a& as if they were totally inde-
pendent. Their parents are not objeCts of greater
regard than other persons. They.treat them al-
ways with neglect, and often with such harshness
and insolence, as to fill those who have been wit-
neffes of their condua with horror . Thus the
ideas which seem to be natural to man in his fa.
vage fiate, as they result from his circumstances
and condition in that period of his progress, asses
the two capital relations in domestic life. They
render the union between husband and wife un.
equal. They shorten the duration, and weaken the
force, of the conneCtion between parents and chil-
dren.

Political in IV. FRoM the domeltic state of the Americans,
initltutionl.

the transition to the consideration of their civil go-
vernment and political inftitut:ons is natural. In
-very inquiry concerning the operations of men,
when united together in Icciety, the first objcct of
attention should be their mode of lubfiftence. Ac-

' Charley. Hist. N. Fr. iii. z73.
f Gamilla, i. ztz. Tcrtre, ii. 376. Charlev. Hist. de N.

Fraoce, iii. 309. Charlev. HiLl. de Parag. i. 15. Lozano De.
frip. del GranChaco, p. 68. too, tot. Fernand. Relac. liillLr.
de lor Chequit. 4,6.

cordingly

cdrdingly as that varies, their laws and policy B °o ° K
must be different. The institutions suited to the *.----
ideas and exigencies of tribes, which subsist chiefly
by fishing or hunting, and which have hardly
formed a conception of any species of property,
will be much more simple than those which mutt
take place when the earth is cultivated with regu-
lar industry, and a right of property not only in
its productions, but in the foil itself, is completely
afcercained.

ALL the people of America, now under review, Mob, of

fubfificnce.

belong to the former class. But though they may
all be comprehended under the general denomina-
tion of savage, the advances which they had made
in the art of'procuring to themselves a cedrtain and
plentiful subsistence, were very ufequal. On. the
vast plains of South America, man appears in one
of the rudest fiates in which he has been evdr ob-
served, or, perhaps, can exist. Several tribes de-
pend entirely upon the bounty of nature for sub-
fiftence. They discover no folicituei they em-
ploy little foresight, they scarcely exeirt any indus-
try, to secure what is necessary for their fupporr.
The Topayers of Brasil, the Guaxeros of- Tierra-
Firmn, the Caiguas, the Moxos, and frveral other
people of Paraguay, are unacquainted with every
species of cultivation. They neither sow nor plant.
Even the culture of the manioc, of which calfda
bread is made, is an art too intricate for their in-
genuity, or too fatiguing to their'indolence. ' he

VOL. 11. 11 roots

a °0 K roots which the earth produces spontaneously, the

IV.
vy ,_fruits, the berries, and the feeds, which they ga-

ther in the woods, together with lizards and other
reptiles, which multiply amazingly with the heat
of the climate in a fat foil, moistened by frequent
rains, ftupply them with food during obme part of
Syilhing. the yearg. At other times they subsist by fifling;

and nature seems to have indulged the lazinels of
those, by the liberality with which she ministers,
in this way, to their wants. The valt rivers of
South America abound with an infinite variety of
the most delicate fish. The lakes and marshes,
formed by the annual overflowing of the waters,
are filled with all the different species, where they
remain shut up, as in natural reservoirs, for the
use of the inhabitants. They \varm in such shoals,
that in rome places they are catched without art
or industry h. In others, the natives have disco-
vered a method of infecting the water with the
juice of certain plants, by which the fish are so in-
toxicated, that they float on the surface, and are
taken with the hand'. Some tribes bAve ingenuity
enough to preserve them without salt, by drying or
smoking them upon hurdles over a sow fire k. T'he

r NieuhofF. His. of Brasil. Church. Coll. i;. 134. S;mon,

Conquifta de Tierra Firm&, p. 166. Techo, Account of Para-
guay, &c. Church. vi. 78. Lettr. Edif. 23. 384. so. I(o.
Lozano, Dcfcrip. del Gran Chaco, p. 81. Ribas, Hlltor. dc
los Triumfos, &c. p. 7.

h See NO I'E XXVr. i See NOTE XXVII.
k Condam. 159. Cuinilla, ii. 3-. Lettr. Edf .. ij9.
23. 328. Acugna, Rclat. de la Riv. des Amaz. 13'3.

3 prolific

prolific quality of the rivers in South America in- B °0 K
duces many of the natives to resort to their banks, A
and to depend almpft entirely for nourishment on
what their waters supply with such profusion '. In
this part of the globe, hunting seems not to have
been the first employment of men, or the first es-
fort of their invention and labour to obtain food.
They were fishers before they became hunters; and
as the occupations of the former do not call for
equal exertions of activity, or talents, with those
of the latter, people in that state appear to poffels
neither the fame degree of enterprise nor of inge-
nuity. The petty nations, adjacent to the Ma-
ragnon and Orinoco, are manifestly the moil in-
aftive and least intelligent of all the Americans.

NONE but tribes contiguous to great rivers can Byhunting.

sustain themselves in this manner. The greater
part of the American nations, dispersed over the
forests with which their country is covered, do not
procure subsistence with the fame facility. For al-
though these forests, especially in the southern conti-
nent of America, are Rored plentifully with game m
considerable efforts of adivity and ingenuity are
requisite in pursuit of it. Necessity incited the
natives to the one, and taught them the other.
Hunting became their principal occupation; and
as it called forth flrenuious exertions of courage,

I Barrcre Rclar. d, Fr. Equin. p. 155.
m P. M iryr,, Decad. p. 374. Gu:mila, ii. 4, &c. Acugna,
i. 156.

H 2 of,

B 0o K of force, and of invention, it was deemed a func-

iV.
,* tion no less honourable than necessary. This was

peculiar to the men. They were trained to it from
their earliest youth. A bold and dexterous hunter
ranked next in fame to the distinguished warrior,
and an alliance with the former is often courted
in preference to one with the latter ". Hardly any
device, which the ingenuity of man has dilcovered
for ensnaring or destroying wild animals, was un-
known to the Americans. While engaged in this
favourite exercise, they shake off the indolence
peculiar to their nature, the latent powers and vi-
gour of their minds are roused, and they become
active, persevering, and indefatigable. Their fa-
gacity in finding their prey, and their address
in killing it, are equal. Their reason and their
senses being constantly directed towards this one
object, the former displays such fertility of inven-
tion, and the latter acquire such a degree of acute-
ness, as appear almost incredible. They discern
the footiteps of a wild beast, which escape every
other eye, and can follow them with certainty
through the pathleis forest. If they attack their
game openly, their arrow feldomr ess from the
mark °; if they endeavour to circumvent it' by
art, it is almnoft impoqlible to avoid their toils.
Among fiveral tribes, their young men were nor
permitted to marry, until they Quad givew such

n Clihr'ev. Ilillific de la N. France, iii. 15.
o Iiet. Vov. de Frince Equil: 3;-,. Datict' Difcov. oft';e

Ri tr of Am... loP.;; iv... ofz
7

t- proofs

proofs of their skill in hunting, as put it beyond B °I° K
doubt that they were capable of providing for a- - ~
family. Their ingenuity always on the itretch,
and (harpened by emulation, as well as necessity,
has struck out many inventions, which greatly fa-
cilitate fuccels in the chafe. The most singular of
there is the dilcovery of a poison in which they
dip the arrows employed in hunting. The slightest
wound with those envenomed shafts is mortal. If
they only pierce the skin, the blood fixes and con-
geals in a moment, and the fIrongelt animal falls
motionless to the ground. Nor does this poison,
notwithstanding its violence and subtlety, infect
the flesh of the animal which it kills. That may
be eaten with perfedt fatcty, and retains its native
relish and qualities. All the nations along the
Maragnon and Orinoco are acquainted with this
composition, the chief ingredient in which is the
juice extracted from the root of the curare, a fpe-
cies of withe P. In other parts of Am erica, they
employ the juice of the mancbezniile fr the fame
purpose, and it operates with no lel; fLt l a.civity.
To people poffeiled of thole iccrets, the bow is a
more de!iru'tivc weapon tiian the muil;et, and, in
their flilful hands, does great execution among
the birds and bealts which abound in the forelts of
America.

BUT the life of a hunter gradually leads man to nly aricul-
a fiate more advanced. lThe chlal;, even where

P C !um l'ua, ii. 1. &c. Coill-l i. 2 8 IR.'ciictich. IJiilf.
ii. z3j. Bancroft Nat. I .Il. no (I;liani;a, 2DI, &C.

11 3 prey

B °v° K prey is abundant, and the dexterity of the hunter

-^_ much improved, affords but an uncertain main-

tehance, and at some seasons it must be suspended
altogether. If a savage trurls to his bow alone for
food, he and his family will be often reduced to
extreme distress q. Hardly any region of the earth
furnishes man spontaneously with what his wants
require. In the mildest climates, and most fertile
foils, his own industry and foresight must be
exerted, in some degree, to secure a regular sup-
ply of food. Their experience of this surmounts
the abhorrence of labour natural to savage na-
tions, and compels them to have recourse to cul-
ture, as subsidiary to hunting. In particular fitua-
tipns, some small tribes may subsist by filhing, in-
dependent of any production of the earth, raised
by their own industry. But throughout all Ame-
rica, we scarcely meet with any nation of hunters,
which does not pradtife some species of culti-
vation.

The vaious THEIR agriculture, however, is neither extensive
fruits of
their cul- nor laborious. As game and fish are their prin-

cipal food, all they aim at by cultivation, is to
supply any occasional defec of there. In the
southern continent of America, the natives con-
fined their industry to rearing a few plants, which,
in a rich foil, and warm climate, were easily trained
to maturity. The chief of these is Maize, well
Jnown in Europe by the name of Turkey or In-

' See NOTE XXVIII.

dion

dian wheat, a grain extremely prolific, of simple B o° K
culture, agreeable to the taste, and affording a iv- .
strong hearty nourifhmenr. The second is the
Manioc, which grows to the size of a large shrub,
or frmall tree, and produces roots somewhat re-
fembling parsnips. After carefully squeezing out
the juice, there roots are grated down to a fine
powder, and formed into thin cakes, called Caf-
fada bread, which, though insipid to the tafle,
proves no contemptible food '. As the juice of
the manioc is a deadly poison, some authors have
celebrated the ingenuity of the Americans, in con-
verting a noxious plant into wholesome nourish-
ment. But it Ihould rather be confidered one of
the desperate expedients for procuring l'ubfiftence,
to which necessity reduces rude nations; or, per-
haps, men were led to the use of it by a progress,
in which there is nothing marvellous. One fpe-
cies of manioc is altogether free of any poisonous
quality, and may be eaten without any prepara-
tion but that of roaf;ng it in the embers. 'This,
it is probable, was first used by the Americans as
food; and necessity having gradually tatught them
the art of separating its pernicious juice from the
other species, they have by experience found it to
be the molt prolific, as well as the molt n,:urifhing,
plant of the two'. The third is the plantain,

r Soane lill. of Jam. Intrd. p. 8. Labat. i. 394. Acof'a

Hill. InJ. (cc(d Natur. lib. ib . c. 7. Ulloa, i. 62. A:blet
Merm. fur le l'lagnioc. HIilt. des Plantes, tom. ii. p. 65, &c.

* M ' yr Decad. 31o . Iabat. I. 4.1 I. (;uLi .i,1 iil. 192.
MIachucha Milic. Indian, 1(04. Sec NOTE XXIX

H 4 which

B o a K which, though it rires to the height of a tree, is

of such quick growth, that in less than a year it
rewards the industry of the cultivator with its
fruit. This, when roasted, supplies the place of
bread, and is both palatable and nourilhingt.
The fourth is the potatoe, whose culture and qua-
lities are too well known to need any description.
The fifth is pimento, a small tree, yielding a Itrong
aromatic spice. The Americans, who, like other
inhabitants of warm climates, delight in whatever
is hot and of poignant flavour, deem this season-
ing a necessary of life, and mingle it copiously
with every kind of food they take u.

SUCH are the various productions, which were

the chief object of culture among the hunting
tribes on the coritinent of America, and with a
moderate exertion of ative and provident indus-
try, these might have yielded a full flpply to the
wants of a numerous people. But men, accuf-
tonmed to the free and vagrant life of hunters, are
incapable of regular application to labour; and
confider agriculture as a secondary and inferior oc-
cupation. Accordingly, the provision for fubfilt-
ence, arising from cultivation, was so limited and
fzanty among the Americans, that, upon any ac-
cidental failure of their usual success in hunting,
they were'orften reduced to extreme diltrefs.

' See NOTE XXX.

Gumilla, iii, 171. Acofla, lib. iv. c 0o.

IN

IN the islands, the mode of subsisting was con; B °0 K

fiderably different. None of the large animals ,
which abound on the continent were known there.
Only four species of quadrupeds, besides a kind of
frnall dumb dog, existed in the islands, the biggest
of which did not exceed the size of a rabbit w. To
hunt such diminutive prey, was an occupation
which required no effort either of activity or cou-
rage. The chief employment of a hunter in the
ifes was to kill birds, which on the continent
are deemed ignoble game, and left chiefly to the
pursuit of boysx. This want of animals, as well
as their peculiar situation, led the islanders to de-
pend principally upon fishing for their fubfit-
ence r. Their rivers, and the lea with which they
are surrounded, supplied them with this species of
food. At some particular seasons, turtle, crabs,
and other fhell-filh, abounded in such numbers,
that they could support themselves with a faci-
lity in which their indolence delightedz. At
other times, they ate lizards, and various reptiles
of odious forms '. To fishing, the inhabitants of
the islands added some degree of agriculture.
Maize b manioc, and other plants, were culti-
vated in the fame manner as on the continent.

w Oviedo, lib. xi;. in proem.

Ribas Hitl. de los Triumph. p. 13. De la Pothciic, ii. 33.
iii. 2C0

y Oviedo, lib. xiii. c. i. Gomaran [-ii. Gener. c. z8.
z Gomara [lill. Gencr. c. 9. Labh;r. ii. 2zl, &c.
' Oviceo, li. .xiii. . 3. b Se NOT XXXT.

But

B 0 0
o But all the fruits of their industry, together with

WV.

_ -.. what their foil and climate produced fpontane.
cultureigr, oufly, afforded them but a scanty maintenance.
limited. Though their demands for food were very sparing,

they'hatidly raised what was sufficient for their
own Corfumption. If a few Spaniards fettled in
any diftri&, such a small addition of fupernu-
merary mouths soon exhausted their scanty stores,
and brought on a famine.

Two coufe Two circumfiances, common to all the savage
fei,.p"'e nations of America, concurred with those which I

have already mentioned, not only in rendering
their agriculture irmperfe&, but in circumscribing
their power in all their operations. They had no
tame animals; and they were unacquainted with
the useful metals.

Thewant IN other parts of the globe, man, in his rudest
·.,eani- itate, appears as lord of the creation, giving law

to various tribes of animals, which he has tarned
and reduced to fubje&ion. The Tartar follows
his prey on the horse which he has reared, or
tends his numerous herds, which furnith him both
with food and clothing; the Arab has rendered
the camel docile, and avails himfclf of its perlc-
vering strength; the Laplander has formed the
rein-deer to be fubfcrvient to his will; and even
the people of Kamchatka have trained their dogs
to labour. This command over the inferior crea-
tures is one of the noblest prerogatives of man,

and

and among the greatest efforts of his wisdom and B O o K
power. Without this, his dominion is incom- *
plcte. He is a monarch, who has no subjes s; a
matter, without servants, and must perform every
operation by the strength of his own arm. Such
was the condition of all the rude nations in
America. Their reason was so little improved, or
their union so incomnplete, that they seem not to
have been conscious of the superiority of their na-
ture, and fuffcred all the animal creation to retain
its liberty, without establishing their own authority
over any one species. Molt of the animals, in-
deed, which have been rendered domestic in our
continent, do not exist in the New World; but
those peculiar to it are neither so fierce, nor so for-
midable, as to have exempted them from fervi-
tude. There are some animals of the fame fpe-
cies in both continents. But the rein deer, which
has been tamed and broken to the yoke in the one
hemisphere, runs wild in the other. The bison of
America is manifeltly of the fame species with the
horned cattle of the other hemifpherec. These,
even among the rudest nations in our continent,
have been rendered domeatic and in consequence
of his dominion over them, man can accomplilh
works of labour with greater facility, and has
made a vast addition to his means of subsistence.
The inhabitants of many regions in the New
World, where the bison abounds, might have de-
rived the fame advantages from it. It is not of a

¢ Buffon, Artic. Bi/an.

nature

B O K nature so indocile, but that it might have been

iv.
, l trained to be as subservient to man as our cattled.

But a savage, in that uncultivated ltate wherein
the Americans were discovered, is the enemy of
the other animals, not their superior. He waftes
and dcftroys, but knows not how to multiply or
to govern them e.

THIS, perhaps, is the most notable diftindtion

between the inhabitants of the Ancient and New
Worlds, and a high pre-eminence of civilized men
above such as continue rude. The greatest opera-
tions of man in changing and improving the face
of nature, as well as his most considerable efforts
in cultivating the earth, are accomplished by i. ans
of the aid which he receives from the animals
whom he has tamed and employs in labour. It is
by their firength that he subdues the stubborn foil,
and converts the desert or marsh into a fruitful
field. But man, in his civilized slate, is so accuf.
tomed to the service of the domestic animals, that he
seldom reflets upon tbe vati benefits which he de-
rives from it. If we were to suppose him, even when
most improved, to be deprived of their useful mi-
niftry, his empire over nature mufft in some mea-
sure cease, and he would remain a feeble animal,
at a loss how to fubifil, and incapable of attempt-

d Nouv. Decouverte par Hennepin, p. 19z. Kalm. i. 207.
t Buffbn. Hifl. Nat. ix. 85. Hill. Philo.l et Polit. des Eta.
blilffm. des Europ. dans les deux lndes, vi. 364.

ing

ing such arduous undertakings as their afllftance B 0 0 K

IV.
enables him to execute with ease. c-,

IT is a doubtful point, whether the dominion Wantof

the useful

of man over the animal creation, or his acquiring metals.
the use of metals, has contributed most to extend
his power. The aera of this important discovery
is unknown, and in our hemisphere very remote.
It is only by tradition, or by digging up some
rude inflruments of our forefathers, that we learn
that mankind were originally unacquainted with
the use of metals, and endeavoured to supply the
want of them by employing flints, shells, bones,
and other hard substances, for the fame purposes
which metals serve among polished nations. Na-
ture completes the formation of some metals.
Gold, silver, and copper, are found in their per-
sect fate, in the clefts of rocks, in the fides of
mountains, or the channels of rivers. There were
accordingly the metals first known, and first ap-
plied to use. But iron, the most serviceable of all,
and to which man is most indebted, is never disco-
vered in its perfe6t form its gross and stubborn
ore mult feel twice the force of fire, and go
through two laborious procefles before it become
fit for use. Man was long acquainted with the
other metals, before he acquired the art of fabri-
caring iron, or attained such ingenuity as to per-
fetL an invention, to which he was indebted for
thliof instruments wherewith he subdues the earth,

and

B 0 0 K and commands all its inhabitants. But in this, as

IV.
* , -_ well as in many other refpests, the inferiority of

the Americans was conspicuous. All the savage
tribes, scattered over the continent and islands,
were totally unacquainted with the metals which
their foil produces in great abundance, if we ex-
cept some trifling quantity of gold, which they
picked up in the torrents that descended from their
mountains, and formed into ornaments. Their
devices to supply this want of the serviceable me-
tals were extremely rude and awkward. The most
simple operation was to them an undertaking of
immense difficulty and labour. To fell a tree
with no other instruments than hatchets of stone,
was employment for a month '. To form a canoe
into shape, and to hollow it, consumed years; and
it frequently began to rot before they were able to
finish itg. Their operations in agriculture wcre
equally flow and defective. In a country covered
with woods of the hardest timber, the clearing of
a small field destined for culture required the
united efforts of a tribe, and was a work of
much time and great toil. This was the bufincfs
of the men, and their indolence was satisficd with
performing it in a very slovenly manner. The la-
bour of cultivation was left to the women, who,
after digging, or rather stirring the field, with
wooden mattocks, and (takes hardened in the firt,
sowed or planted it; but were more indebted for

f Gunill., iii. 196.
A Bordc Relat. des Caraibes, p. zz.

the

the increase to the fertility of the foil, than to B °0 K
their own rude industry. .

AGRICULTURE, even when the ftrengch of man

is seconded by that of the animals which he has
fubjtc&ed to the yoke, and his power augmented
by the use of the various instruments with which
the dilcovery of metals has furnished him, is till
a work of great labour; and it is with the sweat
of his brow that he renders the earth fertile. It is
not wonderful, then, that people destitute of both
these advantages should have made so little pro-
grels in cultivation, that they must be confidered
as depending for fubfi(tence on fimhing and hunt-
ing, rather than on the fruits of their own labour.

FROMt this description of the mode of fubfifling Polit;lin-

` flitutions

amnong the rude American tribes, the form and ariiin f, io
genius of their political institutions may be de-
duced, and we are enabled to trace various cir-
cumftances of diftindtion between them and more
civilized nations.

i. THEY were divided into small independent . Divided

into fInall

communities. While hunting is the chief source nommut-
of subsistence, a vafl extent of territory is requifitc '"'
for supporting a fm all nuniber of people. In pro-
portion as men multiply anti unit, the wild ani-
mals; on which they prey, dimninifh, or fly at a

b GLuniilla, iii. 166, &c. Let:. Edif. xii. io.

greater

B v° K greater distance from the haunts of their enemy.
a.. The increase of a society in this Rate is limited by

its own nature, and the members of it must either
disperse, like the game which they pursue, or fall
upon some better method of procuring food, than
by hunting. Beats of prey are by nature soli.
tary and unsocial, they go not forth to the chafe
in herds, but delight in those recesses of the forest
where they can roam and destroy undisturbed. A
nation of hunters resembles them both in occupa-
tion and in genius. They cannot form into large
communities, because it would be impoflible to
find subsistence ; and they must drive to a distance
every rival who may encroach on those domains,
which they confider as their own. This was the
fRate of all the American tribes, the numbers in
each were small, though scattered over vast coun-
tries; they were far removed from one another,
and engaged in perpetual hostilities or rivalfhip.
In America, the word nation is not of the fame
import as in other parts of the globe. It is
applied to frall societies, not exceeding, perhaps,
two or three hundred pcrfons, but occupying pro-
vinces larger than some kingdoms in Europe. The
country of Guiana, though of larger extent than
the kingdom of France, and divided among a
great number of nations, did not contain abuve
twenty-five thousand inhabitants,. In the pro.

Lo7.nno, Drccrip. del Gran Chaco, 59. 62. ernaniicz
R l::c. I}Idl. de lo) Chlquii. 1()2.

- Voyagcs dc Marclais, iv. 353.

vince

vinces which border on the Orinoco, one may tra- B 0 0 KI
vel several hundred miles in different directions, ^
without finding a single hut, or observing the
footsteps of a human creature'. In North Ame-
rica, where the climate is more rigorous, and the
foil less fertile, the desolation is still greater.
There, vast journeys of some hundred leagues
have been made through uninhabited plains and
forests'. As long as hunting continues to be the
chief employment of man to which he trusts for
subsistence, he can hardly be said to have occu,
pied the earth n.

2. NATIONS which depend upon hunting are Vnac;

quainted

firangers to the idea of property. As the animals 'With the
on which the hunter feeds are not bred under his 'Jo"'s
inspection, nor nourished by his care, he can
claim no right to them, while they run wild in the
forest. Where game is so plentiful that it may be
catched with little trouble, men never dream of
appropriating what is of small value, or of easy
acquisition. Where it is so rare, that the labour
or danger of the chafe requires the united efforts
of a tribe, or village, what is killed is a common
flock, belonging equally to all, who, by their skill
or their courage, have contributed to the success

' Gumilla, ii. vox.
m M. Fabry, quoted by Buffbn, iii. 488. Lafitau, ii. 179.

Boflu, Travels through Louisiana, i. ii1. See NOTE
XXX[I.

S" ee NOTE XXXIII.
VOL. II. of

B °0 K of the excursion. The forest, or hunting-grounds,
-,---' are deemed the property of the tribe, from which

it has a title to exclude every rival nation. But no
individual arrogates a right to any diftrit of there,
in preference to his fellow-citizens. They belong
alike to all; and thither, as to a general and un-
divided store, all repair in quest of fultenance.
The fame principles by which they regulate their
chief occupation, extend to that which is fubordi-
nate. Even agriculture has not introduced among
them a complete idea of property. As the men
hunt, the women labour together, and after they
have ihared the toils of the seed-time, they enjoy
the harvest in common . Among some tribes,
the increase of their cultivated lands is depfoited
in a public granary, and divided among them, at
stated times, according to their wantsP. Among
others, though they lay up separate stores, they
do not acquire such an exclusive right of property,
that they can enjoy superfluity, while those around
them susser wantq. Thus the difiindions arising
from the inequality us poffellions are unknown.
The terms rich or poor enter not into their lan-
guage, and being Itrangers to pro sity, they are
unacquainted with what is the great objet of laws
and policy, as well as the chief motive which in-

* Dr. Ferguson's Efnay, 125.
P Gumilla, i. 265. Brickell, Hill. of N. Carol. 327. See
NOTE XXX1V.

' Denys, Hill. Natur. ii. 392, 393.

a duccd

duced mankind to eftabli(h the various arrange- B o° K
ments of regular government',

3. PEOPLE in this state retain a high sense of High cnfis

of equality

equality and independence. Wherever the idea of di,"nde-
property is not cltablilhed, there can be no dif-
tindion among men, but what arifcs from personal
qualities. There can be conipicuous only on such
occasions as call them forth into exertion. In
times of danger, or in affairs of intricacy, the
wisdom and experience of age are consulted, and
prrf'ribe the mealures which ought to be pursued.
When a tribe of savages takes the field againIt the
enemies of their country, the warrior of most ap-
proved courage leads the youth to the combat .
If they go fortn in a body to the chafe, the most
expert and adventurous hunter is foremolt, and
directs their motions. But during seasons of tran-
quillity and inaction, when there is no occasion to
display those talents, all pre-eminence ceases.
Every circumitance indicates, that all the mem-
bers of the community are on a level. They are
clothed in the fame simple garb. They feed on
the fame plain fare. Their houses and furniture
are exactly similar. No diltinction can arise from
the inequality of poffreions. Whatever forms de-
pendence on one part, or constitutes superiority on

r P. Martyr. Decad. p. 45. Veneg. Hilt. of Californ. i.
66. Lery, Navig. in Brasil, c. 17.

' Acolta, Hilt. ihb. vi. c. 19. Stadius, Hill. Brasil, lib. ii.
c. 13. Dc Bry. iii. p. AIo. Ilict. 3'1.

I 2 the

* 0 0 K the other, is unknown. All are freemen, all feel

IV.
v , . themselves to be such, and afiert with firmness the

rights which belong to that condition '. This fen-
timent of independence is imprinted so deeply in
their nature, that no change of condition can era-
dicate it, and bend their minds to servitude. Ac-
customed to be absolute masters of their own con-
dut, they disdain to execute the orders of an-
other; and, having never known controul, will
not submit to correAion . Many of the Ameri-
cans, when they found that they were treated as
laves by the Spaniards, died of grief; many de-
firoyed themselves in despair x.

nfbordfna. 4. AMONG people in this sRate, government can
tion impcr- assume little authority, and the sense of civil sub-

ordination must remain very imperfect. While the
idea of property is unknown, or incompletely con-
ceived; while the spontaneous productions of the
earth, as well as the fruits of industry, are confi-
dered as belonging to the public stock, there can
hardly be any such subjea of difference or discus-
sion among the members of the fame community,
as will require the hand of authority to interpose
in order to adjust it. Where the right of separate
and exclusive poffeflion is not introduced, the

t Labat. vi. 124. Brickell, Hilt. of Carol. 310.
" See NOTE XXXV.

Ovicdo, lib. iii. c. 6. p. 97. Vega, Conquifl. de la Flo-

rida, i. 30. ii. 416. Labat. ii. 138. BenzoHill. Nov. Orb.
lib. iv. c. 25.

great

great object of law and jurifdition does not exist. B o o K
When called into the field, either in their own de- -
fence, or to invade the territories of their ene-
mies, when engaged in the toil and dangers of
the chafe, the members of a tribe perceive that
they are part of a political body. They are con-
fcious of their own connection with the companions
in conjunCtion with whom they as; and they fol-
low and reverence such as excel in conduct and
valour. But, during the intervals between such
common efforts, they are scarcely conscious of the
ties of political union Y. No visible form of go-
vernment is eftabli(hed. The names of magistrate
andfubjea are not in use. Every one seems to en-
joy his natural independence almost entire. If a
scheme of public utility be proposed, the members
of the community are left at liberty to chufe whe-
ther they will afift or not in carrying it into exe-
cution. No statute imposes any fcrvice as a duty,
no compulsory laws oblige them to perform it.
All their resolutions are voluntary, and flow from
the impulse of their own minds . The first Rtep
towards eftablilhing a publicjurifdition has not
been taken in those rude societies. The right of
revenge is left in private hands a: If violence is
committed, or blood is fled, the community does
not aflume the power either of inflicting or of mo-

Y Lozano, Dercr. del Gran Chaco, 9g. Melcndez Tcforos
Verdaderos, ii. 23. See NOTE XXXVI.

Charlev, Hill. Nouv. France, iii. 26u. z68.
* Herrera, dec. 8. lib. iv. c. 8.

I $ derating

o 0 0 K derating the punilhment. It belongs to the family
» and friends of the person injured or slain to avenge

the wrong, or to accept of the reparation offered
by the aggressor. If the elders intcrpofe, it is to
advise, not to decide, and it is seldom their coun-
fels are listened to for as it is deemed pufillani-
mous to susser an offender to escape with impu-
nity, resentment is implacable and everlalting .
The objrt of government among savages is rather
foreign than domestic. They do not aim at main-
taining interior order and police by public regula-
tions, or the exertions of any permanent autho-
rity, but labour to preserve such union among the
members of their tribe, that they may watch the
motions of their enemies, and at against them
with concert and vigour.

To wht SUCH was the form of political order established
pe, p!' those
iefc¢iptionl among the greater part of the American nations.
appl. In this slate were almost all the tribes, spread

over the vast provinces extending eastward of the
Minfiffippi, from the mouth of the St. Laurence
to the confir es of Florida. In a similar condition
were the people of Brasil, the inhabitants of Chili,
and leveral tribes in Paraguay and Guiana, and
in the countries which stretch from the mouth of
the Orinoco to the peninsula of Yucatan. Among
such an infinite number of petty associations, there
may be peculiarities which constitute a diftintion,

b Charlev. I (1. N. France, iii. 271, z72. Lafit. i. 486.
CaIfani Iilt. de Nucvo Reyno dc Granada, zz6.

and

and mark the various degrees of their civilization B °° K
and improvement. But an attempt to trace and -,
enumerate there would be vain, as they have not
been observed by perobns capable of discerning the
minute and delicate circumstances, which serve to
discriminate nations resembling one another in
their general character and features. The defcrip-
tion which I have given will apply, with little va-
riation, to the policy of every people in America,
which has added some degree of agriculture to
filhing and hunting.

RUDE and imperfect as those institutions may

appear, several tribes were not so far advanced in
their political progress. Among all thole petty
nations which trulled for fubiftence entirely to
fishing and hunting without any species of cultiva-
tion, the union was so incomplete, and their sense
of mutual dependence lb feeble, that hardly any
appearance of government or order can be dif-
cerned in their proceedings. Their wants are few,
their objects of pursuit simple, they form into fe-
parate tribes, and act to-ether, from instinct, ha-
bit, or conveniency, rather than from any formal
concert and association. To this clais belong the
Californians, several of the finall nations in the
extensive country of Paraguay, tome of the people
on the banks of the Orinoco, and on the river
St. Magdalene, in the new kingdom of Granada .

c Vcnegas, i. 68. Lettr. Edif. ii. I 6. Techo Ilif. of
Parag. Chutchill, vi. 78. Hill. Gen. dca Voyages, xiv. 74.

I 4 Bu3

B o l0 BUT though among there laft-mentioned tribes

there was hardly any Ihadow of regular govern.

Sore irre-
gular ap- merit, and even among those which I first de-
arttc. fcribed, its authority is slender and confined within

narrow bounds, there were .some places in Ame-
rica where it was carried far beyond the degree
which seems natural to rude nations. In survey-
ing the political operations of man, either in his
savage or civilized state, we discover singular and
eccentric institutions, which start as it were from
their station, and fly off so wide, that we labour in
vain to bring them within the general laws of any
system, or to account for them by those principles
which influence other communities in a similar
situation. Some instances of this occur among
those people of America, whom I have included
under the common denomination of savage. These
are so curious and important that I (hall describe
them, and attempt to explain their origin.

ParicuiIdy IN the New World, as well as in other parts of
in forne of
the w.rmer the globe, cold or temperate countries appear to
regon. be the favourite feat of freedom and independence.

There the mind, like the body, is firm and vi-
gorous. Conscious of their own dignity, and ca-
pable of the greatest efforts in aflerting it, men
aspire to independence, and their stubborn spirits
sloop with reluctance to the yoke of servitude.
In warmer climates, by whose influence the whole
frame is so much enervated, that prelent plealure
is the supreme felicity, and mere repose is enjoy-

6 ment,

mnent, men acquiesce, almost without a struggle, B o0 RK
in the dominion of a superior. Accordingly, if -V
we proceed from north to south along the conti-
nent of America, we Ihall find the power of thole
vetied with authority gradually increasing, and
the spirit of the people becoming more tame and
passive. In Florida, the authority of the sachems,
caziques, or chiefs, was not only permanent, but
hereditary. They were distinguished. by peculiar
ornaments, they enjoyed prerogatives of various
kinds, and were treated by their subjects with that
reverence, which people accu tomed to fubjedion pay
to a matter'. Among the Natchez, a powerful tribe Among the
now extinct, formerly situated on the banks of the N"ach"z.
Miffifi ppi, adiffrenceof rank took place, withwhich
the northern tribes were altogether unacquainted.
Some families were reputed noble, and enjoyed
hereditary dignity. The body of the people was
confidered as vile, and formed only for subjeCtion.
This diftintion was marked by appellations which
intimated the high elevation of the one slate, and
the ignominious deprefion of the other. The for-
mer were called Refpealable; the latter, the Stink-
ards. The great Chief, in whom the supreme
authority was vested, is reputed to be a being of
superior nature, the brother of the Sun, the sole
objeEt of their worship. They approach him with
religious veneration, and honour him as the repre-

c Cnrdenas y Cann Enfiyo Chronol. i la Iilt. de Florida,

p. 46. Le Nloyne de Morgues Icones Floride. Ap. de Bry.
P1 ' .1, &c. Chaxlev. l-t. N. France, iii. 467, 468.

tentative

B 0 0 K fentative of their deity. His will is a law, to

Iv.
.-_> which all submit with implicit obedience. The

lives of his subjects are so absolutely at his difpo-
fal, that if any one has incurred his displeasure,
the offender comes with profound humility and
offers him his head. Nor does the dominion of
the Chiefs end with their lives; their principal of-
ficers, their favourite wives, together with many
domestics of inferior rank, are sacrificed at their
tombs, that they may be attended in the next
world by the fame persons who served them in
this; and such is the reverence in which they are
held, that those victims welcome death with ex-
ultation, deeming it a recompence of their fide-
lity and a mark of difiinfion, to be fcleaed to ac-
company their deceased mailer . Thus a per-
fert despotism, with its full train of fuperfti.
tion, arrogance, and cruelty, is established among
the Natchez, and by a singular fatality, that
people has tafted of the worst calamities incident
to polished nations, though they themselves are
not far advanced beyond the tribes around them
In the in civility and improvement. In Hispaniola, Cuba,

and and the larger islands, their caziques or chiefs

possessed extensive power. The dignity was tranl-
mitted by hereditary right from father to son. Its
honours and prerogatives were considerable. Their
fubjecs paid great respect to the caziqucs, and
executed their orders without hesitation or re-

d Dumont Mcmo¥r. Hil. fur Louifiane, i. 175. Charlev.
Hltf. N. France, iii. 419, &c. Lettr. Edif. ao. io6. ill.

serve.

serve'. They were distinguished by peculiar or. B o o K
naments, and in order to prefcrve or augment the i , j
veneration of the people, they had the address to
cail in the aid of ilperltition to uphold their au-
thority. They delivered their mandates as the
oracles of heaven, and pretended to poflefs the
power of regulating the seasons, and of dispensing
rain or sunshine, according as their fubjeCds flood
in need of them.

1N some parts of the continent, the power of InBogota.

the caziques leems to have been as extensive as in
the isles. In Bogota, which is now a province of
the new kingdom of Granada, there was fettled a
nation, more considerable in number and more
improved in the various arts of life, than any in
America except the Mexicans and Peruvians. The
people of Bogota fubfiLced chiefly by agriculture.
'She idea of property was introdueed among thenm,
and its rights, secured by laws, handed down by tra-
dition, and observed with great care'. They lived in
laige towns. Theywere clothed in a decent manner,
and their houels may be termed commodious, when
compared with those of the small tribes around them.
T'hr clfftts of this uncommon civilization were con-
fpicuous. Government had assumed a regular form.
A jurildiction was etiablifhed, which took cogni-

* 1errera, dec. 1. lib. i. c. 16. lib. iii. c. 44. p. S8. Life
of Clumb. ch. 3 z.

f Piedrahita lit,. dc las Conquilt dcl N. Reyno de Gran.
p 46.

zance

B o0 K zance of different crimes, and punished them with

_* rigour. A diftintion of ranks was known; their

chief, to whom the Spaniards gave the title of
monarch, and who merited that name on account
of his splendor as well as power, reigned with ab.
solute authority. He was attended by officers of
various conditions; he never appeared in public
without a numerous retinue; he was carried in a
fort of palanquin with much pomp, and harbin.
gers went before him to sweep the road and itrew
it with flowers. This uncommon pomp was sup.
ported by presents or taxes received from his sub.
je&s, to whom their prince was such an obje& of
veneration, that none of them presumed to look
him dire&ly in the face, or ever approached him
but with an averted countenanceg. There were
other tribes on the fame continent, among which,
though far less advanced than the people of Bo.
gota in their progress towards refinement, the free.
dom and independence, natural to man in his fl.
vage slate, was much abridged, and their caziques
had assumed extensive authority.

Caufcs of IT is not easy to point out the circumitances, or
ihofe irre-
gularap- to discover the causes which contributed to intro.
Carancce. duce and establish among each of those people a

form of government so different from that of the
tribes around them, and so repugnant to the ge.
nius of rude nations. If the persons who had an

g Herrera, dec. 6. lib. i. . 2. lib. v. c. 56. Piedrahita, c. 5.
p. 25, &c. Gomara Hilt. c. 7z.

opportuni:Y

opportunity of observing them in their original B OV r
Rate, had been more attentive and more discern- - ,
ing, we might have received information from
their conquerors sufficient to guide us in this en-
quiry. If the tranfations of people, unacquainted
with the use of letters, were not involved in impe-
netrable obscurity, we might have derived forne in-
formation from thisdomeftic source. But as nothing
satisfactory can be gathered, either from the accounts
of the Spaniards, or from their own traditions, we
must have recourse to conjefures, in order to ex-
plain the irregular appearances in the political
state of the people whom I have mentioned. As
all those tribes which had loft their native liberty
and independence were feated in the Torrid Zone,
or in countries approaching to it, the climate may
be supposed to have had some influence in forming
their minds to that servitude, which seems to be
the destiny of man in those regions of the globe.
But though the influence of climate, more power-
ful than that of any other natural cause, is not to
be overlooked ; that alone cannot be admitted as
a solution of the point in question. The opera-
tions of men are so complex, that we must not at;
tribute the form which they assume, to the force
of a single principle or cause. Although despotism
be confined in America to the Torrid Zone, and
to the warm regions bordering upon it, I have
already observed that these countries contain va-
rious tribes, some of which possess a high degree
of freedom, and others are altogether unacquainted

with

X °0 K with the restraints of government. The indolence

IV.
k^__ and timidity peculiar to the inhabitants of the

islands, rendered them so incapable of the ecnti-
ments or efforts necessary for maintaining inde.
pendence, that there is no occasion to search fur
any other cause of their tame lubmiffion to the
will of a superior. The fubjec'ion of the Natchrz,
and of the people of Bogota, leerns to have been
the consequence of a difference in their slate from
that of the other Americans. They were fettled
nations, residing constantly in one place. Hunting
was not the chief occupation of the former, and
the latter seem hardly to have trufitd to it tbr
any part of their lflbiltcnce. Both had made such
progress in agriculture and arts, that the idea of
property was introduced in some degree in the one
community, and fully established in the ether.
Among people in this state, avarice and ambition
have acquired objects, and have begun to exert
their power; views of interest allure the fclfilh;
the desire of pre-eminence excites the enter-
prifing; dominion is courted by both; and pal-
lions unknown to man in his savage slate prompt
the intcrefted and ambitious to encroach on the
rights of their fellow-citizens. Motives, with
which rude nations are equally unacquainted, in-
duce the people to submit tamely to the ulurped
authority of their luperiors. But even among na-
tions in this slate, the spirit of fubjeds could not
have been rendered so oblcquious, or the power of
rulers so unbounded, without the intervention of

lupcrlliition

superstition. By its fatal influence, the human B ° o° r
mind, in every Rage of its progress, is depressed, ,
and its native vigour and independence subdued.
Whoever can acquire the direction of this formi-
dable engine, is secure of dominion over his fpe-
cies. Unfortunately for the people whole inftitu-
tions are the subjeA of inquiry, this power was in
the hands of their chiefs. The caziques of the
ifls could put what responses they pleased into
the mouths of their Cemis or gods; and it was by
their interposition, and in their name, that they
imposed any tribute or burden on their people'.
The great chief of the Natchez was the principal
minister as well as the representative of the Sun,
their deity. The refped which the people of Bo-
gota paid to their monarchs, was inspired by reli-
gion, and the heir apparent of the kingdom was
educated in the innermost recess of their principal
temple, under such austere discipline, and with
such peculiar rites, as tended to fill his fubjels
with high sentiments concerning the fancity of his
charafler, and the dignity of his flation '. Thus
superstition, which, in the rudest period of society,
is either altogether unknown, or waftes its force
in childish unmeaning pracices, had acquired
such an ascendant over thole people of America,
who had made some little progress towards refine-
ment, that it became the chief instrument of
bending their minds to an untimely servitude, and
fubje&ed them, in the beginning of their political

? IIerrera, dec. i. lib. iii. c. 3. J Picdrahita, p. 27.

career,

B Om K ~are r, to a despotism hardly less rigorous, than
mw.- . that which awaits nations in the last stage of their

corruption and decline.

Theirart V. AFTER examining the political inltitutions
of war. of the rude nations in America, the next object of

attention is their art of war or their provision for
public security and defence. The small tribes
dispersed over America are not only independent
and unconnected, but engaged in perpetual hofti.
lities with one another k. Though mostly strangers
to the idea of separate property vested in any indi-
vidual, the rudest of the American nations are
well acquainted with the rights of each commu-
nity to its own domains. This right they hold to
be perfe6t and exclusive, entitling the possessor to
oppose the encroachment of neighbouring tribes.
As it is of the utmost consequence to prevent them
from destroying or disturbing the game in their
hunting grounds, they guard this national pro-
perty with a jealous attention. But as their terri-
tories are extensive, and the boundaries of them
not exactly ascertained, innummerable subje&s of
dispute arise, which seldom terminate without
bloodshed. Even in this rimple and primitive
slate of society, interest is a source of discord, and
often prompts savage tribes to take arms, in order
to repel-or punish such as encroach on the forcfs
or plains, to which they trust tor fubfiflence.

k Ribas:Hif. dc los Triump. p. 9.

BUT

BUT interest is not either the moit frequent or B o o K

the moit powerful motive of the incefant hoftili- *
ties among rude nations. These must be imputed Their mo-
to the paiflon of revenge, which rages with such gagin in
violence in the breast of savages, that eagerness to
gratify it may be confidered as the diflinguifhing
charadteriftic of men in their uncivilized slate.
Circumstances of powerful influence, both in the
interior government of rude tribes, and in their
external operations against foreign cnemics, con-
cur in cherishing and adding ftrcngth to a paflion
fatal to the general tranquillity. When the right
of redrefling his own wrongs is left in the hands of
every individual, injuries are felt with exquisite
sensibility, and vengeance exercised with unrelent-
ing rancour. No time can obliterate the memory
of an offence, and it is seldom that it can be ex-
piated but by the blood of the offender. In car- From th

spirit of

rying on their public wars, savage nations are in- ,engeance.
fluenced by the fame ideas, and animated with the
fame spirit, as in prolfcuting private vengeance.
In frnall communities, every man is touched with
the injury or affront offered to the body of which
he is a member, as if it were a personal attack
upon his own honour or safety. The desire of re-
venge is communicated from breast to breast, and
soon kindles into rage. As feeble Societies can
take the field only in small parties, each warrior is
conscious of the importance of his own arm, and
feels that to it is committed a conliderable portion
of the public vengeance. War, which between

VOL. II. K cxtenfive

B 0 Kc extensive kingdoms is carried on with little ani-
--v--' nmofity, is prosecuted by small tribes with all the

rancour of a private quarrel. The refentrment of
nations is as implacable as that of individuals. It

T-nre tle may be diffsmbled or suppressed, bur is never ex-
f -r*"lt.
!i .r .-,, tinguifhcdl; and often, when leait exptaed or

dreaded, it burlls out with redoubled fury '. When
poli.hed nations have obtained the glory of vic-
tory, or have acquired an addition of territory,
they may terminate a war with honour. But fa-
vages are not latisficd until they extirpate the
community which is the objet of their rage.
'hey fight not to conquer, but to destroy. If
they engage in hostilities, it is with a rtfolurion
never to fee the face of the enemy in peace, but to
prosecute the quarrel with immortal enmity,.
The desire of vengeance is the firit, and almost
the only principle, which a savage inltils into the
minds of his children ". This grows up wIth hin
as he advances in life; and as his attention is di-
reeed to few objects, it acquires a degree of force
unknown among men, whose paflions are dissipated
and weakened by the variety of their occupations
and purluits. The desire of vengeance, which

i Boucher Hill. Nat. de N. France, p. 93. Chailev. Ilil.

dc N. France, iii. 215. zS . ;.Ley ap. te Bry, iii. zo0. CrcuY.
Iill. Canad. p. 72. Loznno Defcr. del Gran Chaco, 95. Illn-
ncp. Moeurs tics Sauv. 40.

Y ClharlcV. Hil. N. I:r. iii. 251. Colden, i. o08. ii. 12(.
B'irrcre, p. 170. 173.

" (C:ailcv. ii!l. N. Fr. iii. 326. Lcry ar. de Bry, iii. 236.
Lozaio lu1l. ce I'arnig. i. 114.

takles

takes possession of the heart of savages, resembles B ° ° K
the inftinftive rage of an animal, rather than the --
pafion of a man. It turns, with undifcerning
fury, even against inanimate objects. If hurt ac-
cidentally by a sone, they often fciize it in a tranf-
port of anger, and endeavour to wrvic- their ven-
geance upon it°. If itruck with an arrow in
bttrle, they will tear it from the wound, break and
bite it with their teeth, and dash it on the ground P.
With refpea to their enemies, the rage of vengeance
knows no bounds. When under the dominion of
this paflion, man becomes the rmoft cruel of
all animals. He neither pities, nor forgives, nor
spares.

THE force of this paflron is so well underflood

by the Americans themselves, that they always ap-
ply to it, in order to excite their people to take
arms. If the elders of any tribe attempt to rouze
their youth from sloth, if a chief withes to allure a
band of warriors to follow him in invading an
enemy's country, the most perfu.sive topics of
their martial eloquence are drawn from revenge.
" The bones of our countrymen," fay they, " lie
uncovered; their bloody bed has not been wafecd
clean. Their spirits cry against us; they must be
appeared. Let us go and devour the people by
whom they were slain. Sit no longer in.acCive
upon your mats; lift the hatcher, console the

Leryap. de Bry, iii. roo.
P Lery ap. de Bry, iii. zcg. Icrrern, dec. i. lib. vi. c. 8.

K 2 spirits

B v K spirits of the dead, and tell them that they shall be
t. --- avenged q"

and ihe:r ANIMATED with such exhortations, the ycuth
IrptuYy. snatch their arms in a transp:ort of fury, raise the

song of war, and burn with impatience to embrue
their hands in the blood of their enemies. Pri.
vate chiets often assemble frnall parties, and invade
a hostile tribe, without confulring the rulers of the
community. A tingle warrior, prompted by ca.
price or revenge, will tale the field alone, and
march several hundred miles to surprise and cut
off a straggling enemy . The exploits of a noted
warrior, in such f)litary excursions, often form
the chief part of the history of an American cam.
paign'; and their elders connive at such irregular
sallies, as they tend to cheri!h a martial spirit, and
accuttom their people to enterprise and danger'.
But when a war is national, and undertaken by
public authority, the deliberations are formal and
flow. The elders assemble, they deliver their
opinions in folermn speeches, they weigh with ma-
turity the nature of the enterprilf, and balance its
beneficial or disadvantageous consequences with no
inconsiderable portion of political difcernmcnt or
sagacity. Their pricfs and foothifaycrs are con-

q Charlcv. IIilf. N. SI. ii'. 2 6, 217. Lery ap. de Bry, iii.

See N OTE XXXVII. * Sec NOTE XXXVIII.

' Bcfl;, ii. 140. I ry ap. de BIy, z15. I-I:rncpin locurs

des tal;,.. A1. I
. litau, :. G6).

fllltcd,

fulted, and sometimes they ask the advice even of B o 0 K;
their women ". If the determination be for war, ----
they prepare for it with much ceremony, A leader
offers to condut the rxpedition, and is accepted.
But no man is constrained to follow him; the re-
solution of the community to commence hoflilities,
imposes no obligation upon any member to take
part in the war. Elich individual is flill master of
his own con. luc', and his engagement in the ser-
vice is perfectly voluntary x

TI!E maxims by which they regulate their mi- Modr of

litary operations, though extremely different from riAr.
thole which take place anong more civilized and
populous nations, are well suited to their own po-
litical slate, and the nature of the country in which
they aft. They never take the field in numerous
bodies, as it would require a greater effort of fore-
fight and industry, tl:han is usual among savages,
to provide for their fubfirltence, during a march of
some hundred miles through dreary forests, or
during a long voyage upon their lakes and rivers.
Their armies are not encumbered with baggage or
military flores. Each warrior, betides his arms,
carries a mat and a frnll bag of pounded maize,
and with there is completely equipped for any fcr-
vice. While at a distance from the enemies fron-
tier, they disperse through the woods, and lupporr
themselves with the game which they kill, or the

Charlev. Hifl. N. Fr. iii. z21. 268. Pi,'t. 367. 380.
' Clhrlcv. [lift. N. Fr. 2 17, 21 R.

K 3 fins

B °0 K flh which they catch. As they approach nearer to

Iv.
<;-._ the territories of the nation which they intend to

attack, they collect their troops, and advance
with greater caution. Even then they proceed
wholly by stratagem and ambuscade. They place
not their glory in attacking their enemies with
open force. To surprise and destroy is the greatftl
merit of a commander, and the highell pride of
his followers. War and hunting are their only oc-
cupations, and they conduct both with the fame
spirit and the fame arts. '1 h:y follow the track
of their enemies through the forrclt. They endea-
vour to discover their haunts, they lurk in lome
thicket near to thele, and, with the patience of a
sportsman lying in wait for gainr, will continue in
their ilation day after day, until they can ruth u;;on
their prey when molt secure, and least able to rcfill
them. If they meet no straggling party of the
enemy, they advance towards their villages, but
with such solicitude to conceal their own ap-
proach, that they often creep on their hands and
icet through the woods, and paint their skins of
the fame colour with the withered leaves, in order
to avoid deteCtiun . If l; frtiunarte as to remniin
unoblcrvcd, thcy let on fire the enemies huts in the
(dead of ni'iht, and rmallacrc the inhabitants, as
they fly naked and defencelels from the flames. It
they hope to cfilti a retreat without being pur-
Iacd(, they carry off lone prisoners, whom they re-

/ C'li.i:' . Iil!. N. Fr. iii. 237, 3 8, Hennip. Moeurs cLS
?,'. n .* t ' v.'

fcrvc

serve for a more dreadful fate. But if, notwith- B O K;

iV.

standing all their address and precautions, they .-
find that their motions are discovered, that the
enemy has taken the alarm, and is prepared to
oppose them, they urually deem ir moti prudent to
retire. They regard it as extreme folly to meet
an enemy who is on his guard, upon equal terms,
or to give battle in an open field. The molt dit-
tinrguihed success is a dilgrace to a leader, if pur-
chased with any conGderable lois of his followers z;
and they never boai of a victorv, if stained with
tie blood of their own couiry'!l :ll '. 'io fall in
battle, inftcad of being reckon, ; an honourable
death, is a misfortune which fubj,:c:ls the metnory
of a warrior to the imputation of rafiinefs or im-
prudence b.

Tris system of war was universal in America, r tNir,

and the infall uncivilized tribes, di-pc:-icd thiou.i ,; ,'U .'-
all its diffcrcnt regions and climnares, J!!ilay more
craft than boldness in carrying on their ho;litics.
Struck with this conduct, 1o oppolKie to tli i.,eas
and maxims of Europeans, Ievcral autlors contend
that it flows from a feeble and dtafirdly fi:irit pe-
culiar to the Americans, wich is incapable of .ny
g:nerous or manly exertion . But lhen we refltct

z See NOTE XXI1X.
' Charlev. Hi'. N. I:. ili. 23'. 3;7. Bie. i t-;. L .:tau
Mhoeurs de. Sativ. ii. :.:4'.

Charlev. iii. 376. Scc NO ' ;i..

c Recherches PlhlIof. fur Irs ,.:1 ic.. i. 115. \'oy '. -
M.l;d:il. iv. 4o10.

Ir 4 i. ,c

B 0 1 K that many of there tribes, on occasions which call

IV.

for extraordinary efforts, not only defend them-
selves with obstinate resolution, but attack their
enemies with the most daring courage, and that
they possess fortitude of mind superior to the
sense of danger or the fear of death, we must
ascribe their habitual caution to some other cause
than conffitutional timidity d. The number of
men in each tribe is so frmall, the difficulty of rear.
ing new members, amidit the hardships and dan.
gers of savage life, so great, that the lite of a ci-
tizen is extremely precious, and the preservation
of it becomes a capital object in their policy. Had
the point of honour been the fame among the
feeble American tribes as among the powerful
nations of Europe, had they been taught to court
fame or vicory in contempt of danger and death,
they must have been ruined by maxims so ill
adapted to their condition. But wherever their
communities are more populous, so that they can
ad with coi.fiderable force, and can sustain the
Iofs of several of their members, without being
lenfibiv weakened, the military operations of the
Americans more nearly resemble those of other na-
tions. The Brafilians, as well as the tribes situated
upon the banks of the river De la Plata, often
take the field in such numerous bodies, as deserve
the name of armies'. They defy their enerni-s

d Lafitau Moeuis des Sauv. ii. 248. 249. Charlev. N. Fr.
i1i. 307.

"Fabri Vcrif. Drs:Crip. India ap. de Bry, vii. p. 4z.

to

to thee combat, engage in regular battles, and B ° o K
maintilin the conflift with that defiperare ferocity, - -.
which is natural to men, who, having no idea of
war but that of exterminating their enemies, never
give or take quarter.'. In the powerful empires of
Mexico and Peru, great armies were assemblcd,
frequent battles were fought, and the theory as
well as pracice of war were different from what
took place in those petty Societies which assume
the name of nations.

BTr though vigilance and attention are the qua- rTnrapleof

urder or dlf.

lities chiefly requisite, where the objc't of war is c;!inc.
to deceive and to surprise ; and though the'Ame-
ricans, when acting singly, display an amazing de-
gree of address in concealing their own motions,
and in discovering those of an enemy, vet it is re-
markable that, when they take the field in parties,
they can seldom be- brought to observe the pre-
cautions most cffential to their own security. Such
is the difficulty of acclftoming ltavagcs to fubor-
dination, or to aR in concert; nli h is :heir impa-
tience under reflrainr, and such their caprice and
presumption, that it is rarely they can be brought
to conform themselves to the counsels and di-
rctions of their leaders. They never station cen-
tincls around the place where they reft at night,
and after marching fbine hundrltf nmiles to furpriie
an enemy, are often lurpriled tlic:nfclvcs, and cut

f Sec N OT I. .LL.

Off,

B 0 K off, while funk in as profound fl:ep as if they were
__-YJ not within reach of danger g.

IF, notwithstanding this negligence and fecu-

rity, which often frustrate their niola artiul
schemes, they catch the enemy unprepared, thty
rush upon them with the utnnoll ferocity, anj
tearing off the scalps of all those who fAll vit!.:;s
to their rage h, they carry home thole ftrangL- r .
phies in triumph. There they preicrvc as rnoi..
ments, not only of their own proweis, but o; tbe
vengeance which their arm has inflited upon tle
people who were objecs of public rei-ncmert: .
They are still more solicitous to ftize prifoncri.
During their retreat, if they hope to efltc- it u,.
molested, thtfe are commonly exempt fronm .ny
insult, and treated with some degree of humanii),
though guarded with the moll itrict attention.
T-rr-,int BUT after this temporary suspension, their raze

rekindles with new fury. As soon as they ap-
proach their own frontier, some of their nruinb.r
are difplatched to inform their countrymen with re-
jptcS to the fuccels of the expedition. ' hen t;
priliners begin to feel the wretchedncfs of' ti;r
condition. TIne women of the village, tol;ctil:
with tlih youth wlho have not attained to tle n '
of bearing .arms, afiemble, and forming themin\l'v

1 Clhnr'ev. '. Fr. iii. 236, 23,. Lcttr Edif. 17. -,. 2 .

13- I

U: '.i NI U ,us .
I :ii. i. 4 . I.i ho7tl, ii. ,70.

t* c t I' V XLI11. ' I.,.iLa i Mu.ur.,, ii. 2,'.

in'.'

into two lines, through which the prisoners mu Rs Bo 0
pass, beat and bruise thein with Iticks or tones in *.
a cruel manner '. After this first gratification of
their rage against their enemies, follow larnnta-
tions for the loss of lfch of their own countrymen
as have fallen in the service, accompanied with
words and actions which fctm to exprels the ut-
most anguifl and grief. But, in a moment, upon
ai gna! given, their tears ceale they pals, with a
ficddn and unaccountable tranfitiun, fr m)n the
ldpths or luirrow to tranlports of joy ; and begin
to celebrate their victory with all tilc wild ex.ulra-
lion of a barbarous triuilph '. The fate ot the
prilbincra rcm;ins 'lili undecided. The old men
deliberate concerning it. Some are deftin.d to be
rtrturcd to death, in order to faciart tlhe revenge
of the conquerors; so;me to replace the members
v.hich the community has loll in that or Lurnmer
dars. They who are r-lerved for this miltder fate,
-re led to the ihuts of tliul '.vihofe friends have
been killed. The v.'oiien mnet te: ti at theI door,
and if t(iey receive thelm, their

il, ris ale at an

rend. T'hcy arc adlop)ted i ilit - fiinmily, .r'l, ac-
c'rruilig to their piralel, alce Icltcedt uponl tlhe mat
of the deccTal: l. 1'1/y ali'uml: his namne, tlicy
.hod the faine ra :k, a tr tl!reate cci,;

tI.nc rd

with all lie tcntienl.i; c luec to a titheir, a b:other,
a hulb.nd, or a friend. ]Btr it; citli'lr friii ca-

'iice, or an unrelec;ning dciirL of revc::i;c, the

k [;'hontan, ii. iP.t.
i C,..c. Ilit. Ni . Fr. lii. i 2.1 . Litfitiu M.curs, ii. : gl

WoI I!crl

B 0 0
O C women of any family refute to accept of the pri.

1V.
, ( 'loner who is offered to them, his doom is fixed.

No power can save him from torture and death.

Theirin- 'WHILE their lot is in suspense, the prisoners
concening themselves appear altogether unconcerned about
theirfte, what may befal them. They talk, they eat, they

sleep, as if they were perfecdly at eale, and no
danger impending. When the fatal sentence is in.
timated to them, they receive it with an unaltered
countenance, raise their death-fong, and prepare

and sori- to susser like men. Their conquerors affer.ble as
tude under
tortule. to a solemn festival, resolved to put the fortitude

of the captive to the utmost proof. A scene en-
sues, the bare description of which is enough to
chill the heart with horror, wherever men have
been accustomed, by milder institutions, to refpe(t
their species, and to melt into tcndernefs at the
fight of human sufferings. The prisoners are tied
naked to a stake, but so as to be at liberty to
move around it. All who are present, men, wJ-
men, and children, ruflh upon them like furies.
Every species of torture is applied that the rancour
of revenge can invent. Some burn their limbs
with red-hot irons, some mangle their bodies with
knives, others tear their flesh from their bones,
pluck out their nails by the roots, and rend and
twill their sinews. They vie with one ano!ler in
rtfinencnts of torture. Nothing sets bounds to
their race but the dread of abridging the duration
of their vicrSge-ce by haftlcling the death of the sus-

fcrers

ferers; and such is their cruel ingenuity in tor- B o R
menting, that by avoiding induftrioufty to hurt .
any vital part, they often prolong this scene of
anguish for leveral days. In spite of all that they
susser, the victims continue to chant their death-
long with a firm voice, they boast of their own
exploits, they insult their tormentors for their
want of skill in avenging their friends and rela-
tions, they warn them of the vengeance which
awaits them on account of their death, and ex-
cite their ferocity by the most provoking re-
proaches and threats. To dilplay undaunted forti-
tude in such dreadful situations, is the noblest
triumph of a warrior. To avoid the trial by a vo-
luntary death, or to lhrink under it, is deemed
infamous and cowardly. If any one betray fymp-
toms of timidity, his tormentors often dispatch him
at once with contempt, as unworthy of being
treated like a man ,. Animated with those ideas,
they endure, without a groan, what it seems almost
impossible that human nature should sustain. They
appear to be not only insensible of pain, but to
court it. ' Forbear," said an aged chief of the
Iroquois, when his insults had provoked one of his
tormentors to wound him with a knife, ' for-
bear these stabs of your knife, and rather let me
die by fire, that those dogs, your allies, from be-
yond the sea, may learn by my example to fuiler
like men n." This magnanimity, of which there

I" De la Potherie, ii. 237. iii. 4R.
" Coldcn, HIilt. of Five Nations, i. 200.

~~~~* ~~are

Io o K are frequent instances among the American war.

lv.
_-i.,_ riors, instead of exciting admiration, or caliing

forth sympathy, exasperates the fierce spirits of
their torturers to fresh aEts of cruelty °. Weary at
length of contending with men, whose constancy
of mind they cannot vanquish, some chief in a
rage puts a period to their sufferings, by dispatch.
ing them with his dagger or club P.

Somr,;rrc THIS barbarous scene is often succeeded by one
rat th,'ij
PfIufis. no less shocking. As it is impofible to appea!e

the fell spirit of revenge which rages in the hW'art
of a savage, this frequently prompts the Ameri.
cans to devour those unhappy persons, who have
been the victims of their cruelty. In the ancient
world, tradition has preserved the memory of bir.
barous nations of cannibals, who fed on human
flesh. But in every part of the New World there
were people to whom this custom was familiar
It prevailed in the southern continent q, in lever2l
of the iflandsr, and in various diftrits of Nort'!
Americas. Even in those parts, where circuli-

* Voyages de Lahont. i. 236.
P Char'ev. Hi-l N. Fr. iii. 243, &c. 3R;. Lafi!au MNe:r',

ii. 265. Creuxij Iils. Canad. p. 73. lennner. Mlotu. dei'
Sauv. p. 6.1, &c. Lahlont. i. 233, &c. Tertre, ii. 4^5. DC
la Potherie, ii. z2, &c.

1 Sradius ar. de Biy. iii . 123. Lcry, ilid. 2.te. Bier. ^4.
,ettr. I.lif. 23. 341. Pifo, -. Coldaim. 84. 7. Rib.s, ll,:.
de los Triumipii. 473.

' Life of Cilumni. : z;. Mnrr. Dec. I . I'q Tr lc, i:. .4 .
* Dutllnt, Minl. i. 2;4. Clitarcv . i. .

N . i. z;. .

14 i.
iii. 21. t: laP i li, i, ji. ,

§ lances,

flances, with which we are unacquainted, had in a B o ° K
great measure abolished this practice, it seems for- . j
merly to have been so well known, that it is
incorporated into the idiom of their language.
Among the Iroquois, the phrase by which they
express their resolution of making war against an
enemy is, " Let us go and eat that nation." If
they solicit the aid of a neighbouring tribe, they
invite it to " eat brotl made of the flesh of their
enemies'." Nor was the practice peculiar to rude
unpolilhed tribrs; the principle from which it took
rile is lb deeply rooted in the minds of the Ame-
ricans, that it fub'ifted in Mexico, one of the
civilized empires in the New World, and relics of
it may be discoverad among the more mild inha-
bitants of Peru. It was not scarcity of food, as
some authors imagine, and the importunate crav-
ings of hunger, which forced the Americans to
those horrid repasts on their fellow.creatures. Hu-
man fle(h was never used as common food in any
country, and the various relations concerning
people, who reckoned it among the stated means
of subsistence, flow frurm the credulity and mif-
takes of travellers. The rancour of revenge first
prompted men to this barbarous action . The
tierceft tribes devoured none but prisoners taken
in war, or such as they regarded as enemies .

' Charle.

c i. hli . N'. iii. cii , 2C9. Lcttr. Edif. 23. p. 277.

Dc la 'otlierie, ii. 295. Sce N O(TE XIIII.

U Ilict. 3,3. I:la::co, Coivcrfion de Piii;u, p. 28. Bancroft,

Nat. lill. of Guiana, p. 2j9, &,.
x Scc N 0 T L XLIV.

Women

B O O K Women and children who were not the objects of

IW.

v
i
. enmity, if not cut off in the fury of their first in

road into gn holtile country, seldom fuffcrcd by
the deliberate effects of their revenge r.

THE people of South America gratify their re-

venge in a manner lmnewhat different, but with
no less unrelenting rancour. There prilbntrs,
after meeting at their first entrance with the far:T
rough reception as among the North Americans,
are not only exempt from injury, but treated wi:h
the greatefl kindneis. They are feasted and ca.
reffed, and some beautiful young women are ap.
pointed to attend and bolace them. It is not ealy
to account for this part of their conduct, unless
we impute it to a refinement in cruelty. For,
while they seem fludious to attach the captives :C
life, by supplying them with every enjoyment
that can render it agreeable, their doom is irrevo-
cably fixed. On a day appointed, the victorioL,
tribe assembles, the prisoner is brought forth with
great solemnity, he views the preparations for the
sacrifice with as much indifference as if he himfcit
were not the vi&im, and meeting his fate with un.
daunted firmness, is dispatched with a tingle blow.
The moment he falls, the women leize the boJy,
and dress it for the fealt. They besmear their chil-
dren with the blood, in order to kindle in their

v Bier. 382. Randini, Vita di Americo, 84. Tcrtrc, 4oj
Ferel.in. D)e'crip. de Surin. i. 5.

a Stadius ap. de Br!, iii. p. 40. 1Z3.

bofomn

btfotns a hatred of their enemies, which is never B O o°
extingailhed, and all join in feeding upon the _
flesh with amazing greediness and exultation '. To
devour the body of a slaughtered enemy, they
deem the molt complete and exquisite gratification
of revenge. Wherever this practice prevails, cap-
tives never escape death, but they are not tor-
tured with the fame cruelty as among tribes which
are less accustomed to such horrid feasts .

As the constancy of every American warrior

may be put to such severe proof, the great objet
of education and discipline in the New World is
to form the mind to futtain it. When nations
carry on war with open force, defy their enemies
to the combat, and vanquish them by the fupe-
riority of their kill or courage, soldiers are trained
to be active, vigorous, and enterprising. But in
America, where the genius and maxims of war
are extremely different, paflive fortitude is the
quality in highest eltimation. Accordingly, it is
early the study of the Americans to acquire a ta-
lent, which will enable them to behave like men,
when their resolution Ihall be put to the proof.
As the youth of other nations exercise themselves
in feats of activity and force, tholf of America
vie with one another in exhibitions of their pa-
tience under fuffcrings. They harden their nerves
by those voluntary trials, and gradually accuftQo

' Stadius ap. de B y, iii. 128, &c. Lery, ibid. 2zo.
b See NOTE XLV.
VOL. II. L themselves

B o0 K themselves to endure the sharpest pain, without

IV.
_' complaining. A boy and girl will bind their

naked arms together, and place a burning coal
between them, in order to try who first dilcovers
such impatience as to Ihake it off'. All the trials,
customary in America, when a youth is admitted
into the class of warriors, or when a warrior is
promoted to the dignity of captain or chief, are
accommodated to this idea of manliness. They
are not displays of valour, but of patience; they
are not exhibitions of their ability to offend, but
of their capacity to susser. Among the tribes on
the banks of the Orinoco, if a warrior aspires to
the rank of captain, his probation begins with a
long fast, more rigid than any ever observed by
the most abstemious hermit. At the close of this,
the chiefs assemble, each gives him three lathes
with a large whip, applied so vigorously, that his
body is almost flayed, and if he betrays the least
symptom of impatience or even sensibility, he is
disgraced for ever, and rejected as unworthy of
the honour. After some interval, the conltancy
of the candidate is proved by a more excruciating
trial. He is laid in a hammoc with his hands
bound fast, and an innumerable multitude of ve-
nomous ants, whose bite occasions exquisite pain,
and produces a violent inflammation, are thrown
upon him. The judges of his merit stand around
the hammoc, and, while these cruel infers fallen
upon the molt fenlible parts of his body, a sigh, a

' Chirlev. IIil. N. Fr, iii. 307.

groan,

groan, an involuntary motion expressive of what B o°° K
he suffers, would exclude him from the dignity A_
which he is ambitious to obtain. Even after this
evidence of his fortitude, it is not deemed to be
completely ascertained, but must itand another tefl
more dreadful than any he has hitherto undergone.
He is again suspended in his hammoc, and co-
vered with leaves of the palmetto. A fire of
stinking herbs is kindled underneath, bo as he may
feel its heat, and be involved in flnoke. Though
florched and almoti suffocated, he must continue
to endure with the fame patient insensibility.
Many perish in this rude essay of their firmness
and courage, but such as go through it with ap-
plause, receive the ensigns of their new dignity
with much solemnity, and are ever after regarded
as leaders of approved resolution, whose beha-
viour, in the molt trying situations, will do honour
to their country d. In North America, the previous
trial of a warrior is neither so formal, nor so revere.
Though even there, before a youth is permitted
to bear arms, his patience and fortitude are proved
by blows, by fire, and by insults, more intoler-
able to a haughty spirit than both'.

THE amazing fleadinefs with which the Ame-

ricans endure the molt exquisite torments, has in-
duced tome authors to suppose that, from the pe-
culiar fccblenefs of their frame, their lenfibility is

G (umilla, ii. 286, &c. Biet. 376, &C.
"Chailcv. 11n1. N. Fr. iii. 219.

. 2 not

B o 0 K not Co acute as that of other people; as women,
t- . and perlons of a relaxed habit, are observed to be

less affeced with pain than robu(t men, whole
nerves are more firmly braced. But the contitu-
tion of the Americans is not so different, in its
texture, from that of the ret of the human fpe-
cies, as to account for this diversity in their beha.
Viour, It flows from a principle of honour, in-
filled early and cultivated with such care, as to
inspire man in his rudest (late with an heroic mag.
nanimity, to which philosophy hath endeavoured,
in vain, to form him, when more highly improve,
and polished. This invincible conllancy he has
been taught to confider as the chief diftindion o0
man, and the highest attainment of a warrior.
The ideas which influence his condut, and the
paflions which take poffcflion of his heart, are
few, They operate of course with more decifiv;
effe&, than when the mind is crowded with a mul-
tiplicity of objects, or diftraated by the variety ,f
its pursuits ; and when every motive that ac;
with any force in forming the fentimtnts of a f,-
vage, prompts him to susser with dignity, he wvil
bear what might seem to be impossible for human
patience to fullain. But wherever the fortitude of
the Americans is not routed to exertion by their
ideas of honour, their feelings of pain are the
fame with those of the reft of mankind . Nor
is that patience under sufferings for which the

t See NOTE XLVI.

Arnericanr

Americans have been so jultly celebrated, an uni- B ° ° K
versal attainment. The constancy of many of the* ,-~
vicims is overcome by the agonies of torture.
Their weakness and lamentations complete the
triumph of their enemies, and reflet disgrace
upon their country .

THE perpetual hoflilities carried on among the WaRed by

their pcipc-

American tribes are produalive of very fatal es- tul, wa,.
fees. As their imperfect induflry does not supply
them with any superfluous itore of provisions,
even in fealbns of tranquillity, when the irruption
of an enemy desolates their cultivated lands, or
dillurbs them in their hunting excursions, such a
calamity reduces a community, naturally unpro-
vident and delsitute of resources, to extreme want.
All the people of the diltria that is invaded, are
frequently forced to take refuge in woods or moun-
tains, which can afford them no fubfittence, and
where many of them perifli. Notwithltanding
their excessive caution in conducing their mili-
tary operations, and the solicitude of every leader
to preserve the lives of his followers, as the rude
tr.bes in America feldomi enjoy any interval of
peace, the lots of men among them is conliderable
in proportion to the degree of population. Thu&
famine and the sword combine in thinning their
numbers. All their communities arc ftcble, and

t Charlev. Hifi. N. Fr. iii. 248. 38i. De la ptlheric,
lii. 48.

L 3 nothing

B °V0 K nothing now remains of several nations, which

IV.

s-y were once considerable, but the nameh.

ecrubite SENSIBLE of this continual decay, there are
bes, by tribes which endeavour to recruit their national
adopting prloncrs. force when exhausted, by adopting prisoners taken

in war, and by this expedient prevent their total
extincion. The practice, however, is not uni-
verfally received. Resentment operates more
powerfully among savages, than considerations of
policy. Far the greater part of their captives
was anciently facriticed to their vengeance, and it
is only since their numbers began to decline fall,
that they have adopted milder maxims. But such
as they do naturalize, renounce for ever their na-
tive tribe, and assume the manners as well as pas-
sions of the people by whom they are adopted' so
entirely, that they often join them in expeditions
against their own countrymen. Such a sudden
transition, and so repugnant to one of the molt
powerful instincts implanted by nature, would be
deemed strange among many people; but, among
the members of frnall communities, where national
enmity is violent and deep-rooted, it has the ap.
pearance of being still more unaccountable. It
leems, however, to result naturally from the prin-
ciples upon which war is carried on in America.
When nations aim at exterminating their enemies,

h Charlev. Ilil. N. Fr. iii. 2o0, 203. 429. Gumilla, ii.
227. &C.

I Charlev. Ilia, N. Fr. iii. 2z5, &c. Lafit. ii. 305.

no

no exchange of prisoners can ever take place. B o°O i
From the moment one is made a prisoner, his ---
country and his friends confider him as deadk.
He has incurred indelible disgrace by luffring
himself to be furpriled or to be taken by an
enemy; and were he to return home, after such a
stain upon his honour, his nearcLt relations would
not receive or even acknowledge that they knew
him'. Some tribes were (till more rigid, and if a
prisoner returned, the infamy which he had brought
or, his country was expiated, by putting him in-
ilantly to death ". As the unfortunate captive is
thus an outcast from his own country, and the
ties which bound him to it are irreparably broken,
he feels less reluctance in forming a new connection
with people, who, as an evidence of their triendly
sentiments, not only deliver him from a cruel
death, but offer to admit him to all the rights of
a fellow-citizen. The perfect similarity of man-
ners among savage nations facilitates and com-
pletes the union, and induces a captive to transfer
not only his allegiance, but his affeEtion, to the
community into the bosom of which he is re-
ceived.

BUT though war be the chief occupation of men Their infe-

in their rude state, and to excel in it their highest riorty i,
distinction and pride, their inferiority is always tione""d
manifest when they engage in competition with

k Scc NOTE XLVIT.
J I.ahont. ii. 185, 1H6.

l' errera, dec. 3. lib. iv. c. 16. p. 173.

L 4 polifbed

o v: K polished nations. DeRfitute of that foresight which
,- i discerns and provides for remote events, firangers

to the union and mutual confidence requisite inform-
ing any extensive plan.of operations, and incapable
ofthe subordination no less requisite in carrying into
execution such plans, savage nations may aftonilh
a disciplined enemy by their valour, but seldom
prove formidable to him by their conduct; and
whenever the contest is of long continuance,
must yield to superior art ". The empires of Peru
and Mexico, though their progress in civilization,
when measured by the European or Asiatic stand-
ards, was inconsiderable, acquired such an ascend-
ency over the rude tribes around them, that they
fubje&ed most of them with great facility to their
power. When the people of Europe over-ran the
various provinces of America, this superiority was
flill more conspicuous. Neither the courage nor
number of the natives could repel a handful of in-
vaders. The alienation and enmity, prevalent
among barbarians, prevented them from uniting
in any common scheme of defence, and while each
tribe fought separately, all were subdued.
Their art. VI. THE arts of rude nations unacquainted

with the use of metals, hardly merit any attention
on their own account, but are worthy of tome
notice, as far as they serve to display the genius
and manners of a people. The first distress a fa-

Scc NOTE XLVIII.

vage

vage must feel, will arise from the manner in B o K
which his body is affected, by the heat, or cold, . -
or moisture, of the climate under which he lives; Dorsaint
and his firlt care will be, to provide some covering
for his own defence. In the warmer and more
mild climates of America, none of the rude tribes
were clothed. To most of them Nature had not
even suggested any idea of impropriety in being
altogether uncovered d. As under a mild climate
there was little need of any defence from the inju-
ries of the air, and their extreme indolence shun-
ned every species of labour to which it was not
urged by absolute necessity, all the inhabitants of
the isles, and a considerable part of the people on
the continent, remained in this fRate of naked fim-
plicity. Others were satisficd with some fight
covering, such as decency required. But though
naked, they were not unadorned. They dressed
their hair in many different forms. They fattened
bits of gold, or snells, or shining stones, in their
ears, their notes, and checks ". They slained their
skins with a great variety of figures; and they
Ipent much time, and submitted to great pain, in
ornamenting their persons in this fanraftic manner.
Vanity, however, which finds cndlels occupation
Ibr ingenuity and invention, in nations where
drelfs has become a complex and intricate art,
is circumscribed within bs narrow bounds, and

d Lcry Navigat. ap. de Bry, iii. p. 164. Life of Colum-
)', c. z2. Venicgas lHil. of Californ. p. 70.

Lery ap. dc Bry, iii. 165. Letir. Edifiantes. 20. 223.

confined

1 0 0 K confined to so few articles among naked savages,
-- -' that they are not satisfied with those simple de.

corations, and have a wonderful propensity to al.
ter the natural form of their bodies. This prac.
tice was universal among the rudest of the Amcri.
can tribes. Their operations for that purpose be-
gin as soon as an infant is born. By compressing
the bones of the skull, while itill soft and flexible,
some flatten the crown of their heads; some
squeeze them into the shape of a cone; others
mould them as much as poflible into a square
figures; and they often endanger the lives of
their posterity by their violent and absurd es-
forts to derange the plan of Nature, or to im.
prove upon her designs. But in all their attempts
either to adorn or to new-model their persons, it
seems to have been less the object of the Americans
to please, or to appear beautiful, than to give an
air of dignity and terror to their afpeEt. Their at-
tention to dress had more reference to war than to
gallantry. The difference in rank and eflimation
between the two sexes was so great, as extin-
guifhed, in some measure, their solicitude to appear
mutually amiable. The man deemed it beneath
him to adorn his person, for the fake of one on
whom he was accustomed to look down as a slave.
It was when the warrior had in view to enter the
council of his nation, or to take the field against

r Oviedo Hifl. lib. iii. c, 5. Ulloa, i. 329. Voyage dc

Labat. ii. 72. Charlevoix, iii. 323. Gumilla, i. 197, &c.
Acugna Relat. de la Riv. dcs Amaz. ii. 83. Lawson's Voy. to
Carolina, p. 33.

3 its

its enemies, that he assumed his choicest orna- 8 o o K
ments, and decked his person with the nicest
careg. The decorations of the women were few
and simple; whatever was precious or splendid was
reserved for the men. In leveral tribes the women
were obliged to spend a considerable part of their
time every day in adorning and painting their hus-
bands, and could bestow little attention upon or-
namenting themellves. Among a race of men so
haughty as to defpile, or lo cold as to neglect
them, the women naturally became careless and
llovenly, and the love of finery and Ihew, which
has been deemed their favourite pafion, was con-
fined chiefly to the other sex h. To deck his person
was the distinction of a warrior, as well as one of
his molt serious occupations i. In one part of their
dress, which, at first fight, appears the most fin-
gular and capricious, the Americans have disco-
vered considerable sagacity in providing against
the chief inconveniences of their climate, which is
often sultry and moist to excess. All the different
tribes, which remain unclothed, are accultomed to
anoint and rub their bodies with the grease of ani-
mals, with viscous gums, and with oils of different
kinds. By this they check that profule perfpira-
tion, which, in the torrid zone, waltes the vigour

g Wafer's Voyage, p. 142. Lery ap. de Bry, iii. 167.

Charlev. Hid. N. Fran. iii. zz6. 22z.

h Charlev. Ililt. de la Nouv. France. iii. 278. 327. Lafitau,

ii. 53. Kalm's Voyage, iii. 273. Ltry ap. de Bry, iii. 169,
70o. Purch. Pilgr. iv. 1287. Ribas Hill. de los Triumph.
&c. 472.

' Sec NOTE XLIX.

Of

B O0 K of the frame, and abridges the period of human
*__ life. By this too, they provide a defence againt

the extreme moisture during the rainy feaon k.
They likewise, at certain seasons, temper paint ot
different colours with those unctuous substances,
and bedaub themselves plentifully with that corn.
position. Sheathed with this impenetrable varnish,
their skins are not only protected from the pene-
trating heat of the fun, but, as all the innume.
rable tribes of infects have an antipathy to tle
smell or taste of that mixture, they are dclivered
from their teazing persecution, which amidst so.
refts and marshes, especially in the warmer re-
gions, must have been altogether intolerable in
their state of nakedness'.

Wabits. THE next objeCt to dress that will engage the
tlos' attention of a savage, is to prepare rome habitation

which may afford him shelter by day, and a retreat
at night. Whatever is connected with his ideas of
perforral dignity, whatever bears any reference to
his military character, the savage warrior deems
an obje& of importance. Whatever relates only
to peaceable and inactive life, he views with per-
set: indifference. Hence, though finically atten-
tive to dress, he is little solicitous about the ele-
gance or disposition of his habitation. Savage na-
tions, far from that state of improvement, in

k See NOTE L.

Labat. ii. 73. Gumillao i. 1go. zoz. Bancroft Nat. Fil.
pfGuiana, 81, z8o.

which

which the mode of living is confidesed as a mark B 0 K

l

of diftinftion, and unacquainted with those wants, ___
which require a variety of accommodation, regu-
late the confrrution of their houses according
to their limited ideas of necef/ity. Some of the
American tribes were so extremely rude, and had
advanced so little beyond the primeval simplicity
of nature, that they had no houses at all. During
the day, they take shelter from the scorching rays
of the fun under thick trees; at night they form a
shed with their branches and leaves m In the
rainy fealon they retire into covers, formed by the
hand of Nature, or hollowed out by their own
industry ". Others, who have no fixed abode, and
roam through the forest in quest of game, sojourn
in temporary huts, which they eret with little la-
bour, and abandon without any concern. The
inhabitants of thole vast plains, which are deluged
by the overflowing of rivers during the heavy rains
that fall periodically between the tropics, raise
houses upon piles fattened in the ground, or place
them among the boughs of trees, and are thus
safe amidst that wide extended inundation which
surrounds them °. Such were the firlt efays of the
rudest Americans towards providing themselves

m See NOTE Ll.

Letfre Edif. v. 273. Venegas Hifi. or CaliTot. i, 76a

Lozano Defcrip. del Gran Chaco, p. 5. Lettrcs Edif. ii. 176»
Gumilla, i. 383. Bancroft Nat. lilt. of Guiana, 277.

' Gumilla, i. z25. Herrera, dec. j. lib, ix. c. 6. Oviedo
0Smmar, p. 53, C.

with

B 0 o K with habitations. But even among tribes which
A _
- are more improved, and whose residence is be.

come altogether fixed, the ftruRure of their houses
is extremely mean and simple. They are wretched
huts, sometimes of an oblong and sometimes of
a circlar form, intended merely for flelter, with
no view to elegance, and little attention to con-
veniency. The doors are so low, that it is ne.
ceffary to bend or to creep on the hands and feet
in order to enter them. They are without win-
dows, and have a large hole in the middle of the
roof, to convey out the smoke. To follow tra-
vellers in other minute circumstances of their dc-
scription, is not only beneath the dignity of his.
tory, but would be foreign to the objec of my re.
searches. One circumstance merits attention, as
it is singular, and illustrates the character of the
people. Some of their houses are so large as to
contain accommodation for fourscore or a hundred
persons. These are built for the reception of dif-
ferent families, which dwell together under the
fame roof , and often around a common fire,
without separate apartments, or any kind of screen
or partition between the spaces which they rcfpec-
tively occupy. As soon as men have acquired
diftin& ideas of property; or when they are so
much attached to their females, as to watch them
with care and jealouly; families ot course divide
and fettle in separate houses, where they can fe-

P Sec N.OTE LII.

cure

cure and guard whatever they wilh to preserve. B O o K
This singular mode of habitation may therefore be v_
considered not only as the effect of that commu-
nity of goods which fubfifled among the several
people in America, but as a proof of inattention
and indifference towards their women. If they
had not been accuitomed to perfec equality, such
an arrangement could not have taken place. If
their sensibility had been apt to have taken alarm,
they would not have trusted the virtue of their
women amidst the temptations and opportunities
of such a promiscuous intercourse. At the fame
time, the perpetual concord which reigns in habi-
tations where so many families are crowded toge-
ther, is surprising, and affords a striking evidence
that they mutl be people of either a very gentle, or
of a very phlegmatic temper, who, in such a fitua-
tion, are unacquainted with animosity, brawling,
and discord 9.

AFTER making some provision for his dress and Tht4arnt.
habitation, a savage will perceive the ncceffity of
preparing proper arms with which to assault or re-
pel an enemy. This, accordingly, has early exer-
cited the ingenuity and invention of all rude na-
tions. The first offensive weapons were doubtlcfs
fich as chance presented, and the first efforts of

i Journ. de Grillet & Bechamel dans la Goynnc, p. 65. r.a-
fitau Moeuri, ii. 4. 'Iorquen. Monarq. i. 247. Journal Iil.
de Joutal, zi-. Lery Iliit. Brasil, ap. dc Bry, iii. 23j. Lo-
rano Defcr. dcl Gran Chaco, 67.

art

3 o 0 K art to improve upon these, were extremely awk
A. ?-- ward and fimpe. Clubs made of some
heava

wood, stakes hardened in the fire, lances whofC
heads were armed with flint or the bones of fomn
animal, are weapons known to the rudest nations
All these, however, were of use only in colo en.
counter. But men wished to annoy their enemies
while at a diflance, and the bow and arrow is the
most early invention fur this purpose. This wca.
pon is in the hands of people, whole advances in
improvement are extremely inconsiderable, and i:
familiar to the inhabitants of every quarter of
the globe. It is remarkable, however, that fuoni
tribes in America were so destitute of art and in.
genuity, that they had not attained to the dif.
covery of this fnmple invention °, and seem to have
been unacquainted with the ufc of any missive wea.
pon. The fling, though in its conftrudion not
more complex than the bow, and among many
nations of equal antiquity, was little known
to the people of North AmericaP, or the ifan;s,
but appears to have been used by a few tribes in
the southern continent q. The people, in some
provinces of Chili, and those of Patagonia, to.
wards the southern extremity of America, use a
weapon peculiar to themselves. They fallen ltones,
about the size of a sift, to each end of a lcath:r
thong of eight feet in length, and swinging tli'.;

. pirdaahkta Conq. del Nuevo Reyno. ix. a.
P Nauf. dc Alv. Nun C tbeca de vaca, c. . p. 2.
I i'iediah, p. 16. See NOTE LI1I.

qt round

round their heads, throw them with such dexte- B O O K
rity, that they seldom miss the objet at which they *L
aim '.

AMoNo people who had hardly any occupation Theirdo-

mrefic utcn-

but war or hunting, the chief exertions of their in- si..
vention', as well as industry, were naturally di-
rected towards these objects. With respect to
every thing else, their wants and desires were so
limited, that their invention was not upon the
firetch. As their food and habitations are per-
fectly simple, their domeitic utensils are few and
rude. Some of the southern tribes had discovered
the art of forming veftels of earthen ware, and
baking them in the fun, so as they could endure
the fire. In North America, they hollowed a
piece of hard wood into the form of a kettle,
and filling it with water, brought it to boil by Drefing
throwing red-hot stones into itt. These vefels hcir food
they used in preparing part of their provisions;
and this may be confidered as a flep towards
refinement and luxury, for men in their rudest
state were not acquainted with any method of
drefling their vituals, but by roasting them on
the fire; and among several tribes in America,
this is the only species of cookery yet known u.

Ovalle's Relation of Chili. Church. Colletl. iii. Sz. Falk.
ner's Defcip. of Pdragon. p. 130.

See NOTE LIV.
' Chatlc. Hist. N. Fr. iii. 332.

See NO rE LV.
VOL. II. M But

B v0 K But the master-piece of art, among the savages of

IV.

Coirc* .America, is the conftrufion of their canoes. An
tionoftheir Efkimnaux, shut up in his boat of whalebone, co-
WIO"8' vered with the skins of feals, can brave that

stormy ocean, on which the barrenness of his
country compels him to depend for the chief part
of his fubfiitence*. The people of Canada ven-
ture upon their rivers and lakes, in boats made of
the bark of trees, and so light that two men can
carry them, wherever shallows or cataracts ob-
firu& the navigation y. In these frail vefels they
undertake and accomplish long voyagesz. The
inhabitants of the ifes and of the southern conti-
nent form their canoes by hollowing the trunk of
a large tree, with infinite labour, and though in
appearance extremely aukward and unwieldy,
they paddle and steer them with such dexterity,
that Europeans, well acquainted with all the im-
provements in the science of navigation, have been
aftonithed at the rapidity of their motion, and the
quickness of their evolutions. Their pirogues, or
war-boats, are so large as to carry forty or fifty
men; their canoes employed in fishing and in
short voyages are less capacious . The form, as
well as materials of all thele various species of vef-
fels, is well adapted to the service for which they
are defiined ; and the more minutely they are exa-
mined, the mechanism of their ftrudturr, as well

' Frlis Voy. 1 2. y Sec NOTE LVI.
" Lalirit Mlocurs, &c. ii. 21 .

L.abat \oyagcs, ii. 91, &c. 131.

as

as neatness of their fabric, will appear the more B ° 0 o

IV.
admirable.

But, in every attempt towards indufiry among Lifticfrnef

with which

the Americans, one striking quality in their cha- thry apply
ra&er is conspicuous. They apply to work with- to' *ou.
out ardour, carry it on with little acivity, and,
like children, are easily diverted from it. Even
in operations which seem the molt interesting, and
where the most powerful motives urge them to vi-
gorous exertions, they labour with a languid lift-
lcffnefs. Their work advances under their hand
with such slowness, that an eye-witness compares
it to the imperceptible progress of vegetationh.
They will spend so many years in forming a ca-
noe, that it often begins to rot with age before
they finih it. They will susser one part of a roof
to decay and perish, before they complete the
other c. The slightest manual operation consumes
a vast length of time, and what in polished nations
would hardly be an effort of industry, is among
savages an arduous undertaking. This slowness
of the Americans in executing works of every kind
may be imputed to various caules. Among Ia-
vages, who do not depend for subsistence up n
the efforts of regular industry, time is of so little
importance, that they set no value upon it; and
provided they can finish a dcfign, they never re-
gard how long they are employed about it. The
b Gumilla, ii. 297. c Borde Rclat. des Caraibc?, p. 2z.

M z tools

B3 0 K tools which they employ are so aukward and de.
_.. fe&ive, that every work in which they engage

must necessarily be tedious. The hand of the
most industrious and skilful artist, were it fur-
nifled with no better instrument than a stone
hatchet, a shell, or the bone of some animal, could
hardly perfect the most simple work. It is by
length of labour, that he must endeavour to sup.
ply his defect of power. But above all, the cold
phlegmatic temper peculiar to the Americans ren-
ders their operations languid. It is almost im-
possible to rouze them from that habitual indo-
lence in which they are funk; and unless when
engaged in war or hunting, they seem incapable of
exerting any vigorous effort. Their ardour of ap-
plication is not so great as to call forth that in.
ventive spirit which suggests expedients for facili-
tating and abridging labour. They will return to
a talk day after day, but all their methods of exe-
cuting it are tedious and operole '. Even since
the Europeans have communicated to them the
knowledge of their initruments, and taught them
to imitate their arts, the peculiar genius of the
Americans is conspicuous in every attempt they
make. They may be patient and afliduous in la-
bour, they can copy with a servile and minute ac-
curacy, but discover little invention, and no ta-
lents for dispatch. In spite of initruEtion and
example, the spirit of the race predominates;

° See NOT E LVII.

their

their motions are naturally tardy, and it is vain to B ° ° K
urge them to quicken their pace. Among the ---
Spaniards in America, the work of an Indian is a
phrase by which they delcribe any thing, in the
execution of which an immense time has been em-
ployed, and much labour wafted r.

VII. No circumstance refpeding rude nations The;r rcli-

has been the object of greater curiosity than their gil".
religious tenets and rites; and none, perhaps, has
been so imperfctly understood, or represented
with so little fidelity. Priests and miflionaries are PV-,,i'i,

difficultieo

the persons who have had the belt opportunities in this in.
of carrying on this inquiry, among the molt un- qlUry'
civilized of the American tribes. Their minds,
engrofled by the dotrines of their own religion,
and habituated to its infiitutions, are apt to dilco-
ver something which resembles those objects of
their veneration, in the opinions and rites of every
people. Whatever they contemplate, they view
through one medium, and draw and accommo-
date it to their own system. They itudy to recon-
cile the institutions, which fall under their ob-
servation, to' their own creed, not to explain them
according to the rude notions of the people them-
selves. They ascribe to them ideas which they
are incapable of forming, and suppose them to be
acquainted with principles and fads, which it is
impoflible that they (hould know. 1-lence, some

Voyages de Ulloa, i. 335. Lettr. Edif. &c. 5;. 348.

M 3 miflionaries

B O o C miflionaries have been induced to believe, that

Iv.
i_ | _even among the most barbarous nations in Ame-

rica, they had discovered traces, no less diftin&t
than amazing, of their acquaintance with the fu-
blime mysteries and peculiar institutions of Christ-
ianity. From their own interpretation of certain
exprefflons and ceremonies, they concluded that
these people had some knowledge of the doctrine
of the Trinity, of the incarnation of the Son of
God, of his expiatory sacrifice, of the virtue of the
cross, and of the efficacy of the facramentsr. In
such unintelligent and credulous guides as these,
we can place little confidence.

BUT, even when we make our choice of con-

du&ors, with the greatest care, we must not follow
them with implicit faith. An inquiry into the reli-
gious notions of rude nations is involved in pecu-
liar intricacies, and we must often pause in order
to fcparate the fads which our informers relate,
from the reasonings with which they are accompa-
nied, or the theories which they build upon them.
Several pious writers, more attentive to the itm-
portance of the subject than to the condition of
the people whose fentiinents they were endeavour-
ing to discover, have bestowed much unprofitable
labour in researches of this nature h.

g Venegas, i. 88. 92. Torqucmada, ii. 445. Garcia

Crig'.n. 12z. llerieiC , dec. 4. lib. ix. c. 7. dec, 5. lib.
iv. c. 7.

L iec NOTE LVIII.

THEKE

THERE arc two fundamental doctrines, upon B o00 K

which the whole fyftcm of religion, as far as it can .
be discovered by the light of nature, is ellablifhed. two ^,ndl,.
The one refpets the being of a God, the other
the immortality of the foul. To discover the
ideas of the uncultivated nations under our review
with regard to those important points, is not only
an obje6t of curiosity, but may afford inftruaion.
To thele two articles I shall confine my researches,
leaving subordinate opinions, and the detail of
local superstitions, to more minute inquirers.
Whoever has had any opportunity of examining The being
into the religious opinions of persons in the in- ° , d
ferior ranks of life, even in the most enlightened
and civilized nations, will find that their system
of belief is derived from inftrution, not difcov,
vered by inquiry. That numerous part of the
human species, whose lot is labour, whole prin.
cipal and almost sole occupation is to secure lifb-
filicnce, views the arrangement and operations of
nature with little reflection, and has neither leisure
nor capacity for entering into the path of refined
and intricate speculation which conducts to the
knowledge of the principles of natural religion.
In the early and most rude periods of savage life,
such disquisitions are altogether unknown. When
the intellectual powers are jull beginning to un-
fold, and their first feeble exertions are (lir-clte
towards a few objects of primary necessity and ufci
when the faculties of the mind arc lo limited, as

M 4 nnot

B 0 ° K not to have formed abftraf or general ideas ; when

language is. so barren, as to be destitute of names to
distinguish any thing that is not perceived by some
of the senses ; it is preposterous to expec that man
should be capable of tracing with accuracy the re-
lation between caufl and efic6t or to suppose that
he Ihould rife from the contemplation of the one
to the knowledge of the other, and form jiuft con-
ceptions of a Deity, as the Creator and (iovernor
of the universe. The idea of creation is so fami.
liar wherever the mind is enlarged by science, and
illuminated with revelation, that we eIldom reflcct
how profound and abstruse this idea is, or confider
what progress man mult have made in oblervation
and rcfearch, before he could arrive at any know-
ledge of this elementary principle in religion. Ac-
cordingly, leveral tribes have been discovered in
America, which have no idea whatever of a Su-
preme Being, and no rites of religious worship.
Inattentive to that magnificent fpecacle of beauty
and order presented to their view, unaccustomed
to reflect either upon what they themselves are,
or to inquire who is the author of their ex;l-
ence, men, in their ravage (tate, pass their days
like the animals round them, without knowledge
or veneration of any superior power. They have
not in their languages any name for the Deity, nor
have the noff accurate observers been able to
discover any practice or institution which feemeel
to imply that they recogniled his authority, or

were

were solicitous to obtain his favour'. It is only B o o K
among men in the most uncultivated state of na- - -
ture, and while their intellectual fdcalties are so
feeble and limited as hardly to elevate them above
the irrational creation, that we discover this total in-
sensibility to the impressions of any invisible power.
But the human mind, formed for religion, soon
opens to the r.-ception of ideas, which are dcltined,
when corrected and refined, to be the great Iburcc
of conlolation amidit the calamities of life.
Among onme of the American tribes, fill in the
infancy of improvement, we diccern apprehensions
of some invisible and powerful beings. T1hele ap-
prehensions are originally indistinct and perplexed,
and seem to be suggested rather by the dread of
impending evils, than to flow from gratitude for
blefings received. While Nature holds on her
course with uniform and undisturbed regularity,
men enjoy the benefits resulting from it, without
inquiring concerning its cause. But every devia-
tion from this regular course rouzes and aflonifhes
them. When they behold events to which they
are not accustomed, they search for the reasons of

l Biet, 539. Lery ap. de Bry, iii. 221. Nieuhoff. Church.

Coll0 .

ii. 13 Lettr. Edif. 2. 177. Id. 12, 13. Venegas, i.

R7. Lozano Defcript, del Grand Ciiaco, 59. Fernand. Misi.n.
deChiquit. 39. Gumilla, ii. 156. Rochefort H-ill. des An-
tillas, p. 468. Margrave Hifl. in Append. de Chilienfibus, z86.
Ulloa Notic. Americ. 335, &c. Barrere, z18, zig. Ilarcourt
Voy. toGuiana. Purch. Pilgr. iv. p. 1273. Account of Bra-
fil, by a Portuguerc. Ibid. p. 1289. Joncs's Journal, p. 59.
See NOTE LIX.

3 them

B 0 0K them with eager curiofiry. Their underflanding is
--<-- unable to penetrate into ther,; but imagination, a

more forward and ardent faculty of the mind, de.
cides without hesitation. It ascribes the extraordi-
nary occurences in nature to the influence of in-
visible beings, and supposes that the thunder, the
hurricane, and the earthquake, are effets of their
interposition. Some such confused notion of fpi.
ritual or invisible power, superintending over thole
natural calamities which frequently deiolate the
earth, and terrify its inhabitants, may be traced
among many rude nationsk. But betides this, the
disasters and dangers of savage life are so many,
and men often find themselves in situations so
formidable, that the mind, sensible of its own
weakness, has no resource but in the guidance and
protection of wisdom and power superior to what
is human. Deje6ted with calamities which oppress
him, and exposed to dangers which he cannot re-
pel, the savage no longer relies upon himself; he
feels his own impotence, and fees no profpeit of
being extricated, but by the interposition of some
invisible arm. Hence, in all unenlightened na.
tions, the first rites or practices which bear any re.
semblance to acs of religion, have it for their ob
jet to avert evils which men susser or dread. ThI
Manitous or Okis of the North Americans wer
amulets or charms, which they imagined to be o
such virtue, as to preserve the persons who repolse

k See NOTE LX,

confidenc

confidence in them from every difalfrous event, or B O O K
they were confidered as tutelary spirits, whole aid I
they might implore in circumstances of diftrefse.
The Cemis of the islanders were reputed by them
the authors of every calamity that afflics the hu-
man race; they were represented under the mol
frightful forms, and religious homage was paid
to them with no other view than to appease there
furious deities %. Even among those tribes whose
religious fytlem was more enlarged, and who had
formed some conception of benevolent beings de-
lighted with conferring benefits, as well as of ma-
licious powers prone to infli& evil; fuperflition
till appears as the offspring of fear, and all its
efforts were employed to avert calamities. They
were persuaded that their good deities, prompted
by the beneficence of their nature, would be/low
every blessing in their power, without solicitation
or acknowledgment; and their only anxiety was
to soothe and deprecate the wrath of the powers
whom they regarded as the enemies of mankind '.

SUCH were the imperfect conceptions of the
greater part of the Americans with refpec to the
intcrpofitions of invisible agents, and such, almost

Chailev. N. Fr. iii. 343, &c. Creuxii Hilt. Canad.

r. z, &c.

" Oviedo, lib. iii. c. I. p. I l. P. Martyr, decad. p. cz,

&c.

" Tcrtre, ii. 365. Borde, p. 14. State of Virginia, by a

N.tive, book iii. p. 32, 33. Dunont, i. 165. Bancroft Nat.
ill. of Guiana, 3c9.

universally,

BO O K universally, was the mean and illiberal object of

v their superstitions. Were we to trace back the

ideas of other nations to that rude state in which
history first prefints them to our view, we should
discover a surprising resemblance in their tenets
and practices; and should be convinced, that, in
similar circumstances, the faculties of the human
mind hold nearly the fame courfc in their progress,
and arrive at almost the fame conclusions. The
impreflions of fear are conspicuous in all the sys.
terns of superstition formed in this situation. And
the most exalted notions of men rife no higher
than to a perplexed apprehension of certain beings,
whose power, though supernatural, is limited as
well as partial,

.e~ulkable BTr, among other tribes, which have been

,ttil0 longer united, or have made greater progress in
ti"sno- improvement, we discern some feeble pointing to-

wards more just and adequate conceptions of the
power that presides in nature. They seem to per-
ceive that there must be some universal cause to
whom all things are indebted for their being. If
we may judge by Iome of their expreflions, they
appear to acknowledge a divine power as the
maker of the world, and the disposer of all events.
They denominate him the Great Spirit°. But
there ideas are faint and confused, and when
they attempt to explain them, it is manifest, that

* Charlev. N. Fr. iii. 343. Sagard, Voy. du Pays des Hu-

~rons~, -~.~among

among

among them the word pirit has a meaning very B °° o
different from that in which we employ it, and - '
that they have no conception of any deity but
what is corporeal. They believe their gods to
be of the human form, though of a nature more
excellent than man, and retail such wild incohe-
rent fables concerning their functions and opera-
tions, as are altogether unworthy of a place in
history. Even among there tribes, there is no
eltablifhed form of public worship; there are no
temples erected in honour of their deities; and
no ministers peculiarly consecrated to their service.
They have the knowledge, however, of several fu-
perftitious ceremonies and practices handed down
to them by tradition, and to there they have re.
course with a childish credulity, when rouzed by
any emergence from their usual insensibility, and
excited to acknowledge the power, and to implore
the protection of superior beings p.

THE tribe of the Natchez, and the people of Syftemo
Bogota had advanced beyond the other unculti- theNach".
vated nations of America in their ideas of religion,
as well as in their political institutions s and it
is no less difficult to explain the cause of this
diflindion than of that which we have already
confidered. The Sun was the chief objet of re-
ligious worship among the Natchez. In their
temples, which were constructed with some mag-

P Charlev. N. FP. iii. 345. Colden, i. 17.

nificence,

B o o I nificence, and decorated with various ornaments,

V' according to their m6de of architecture, they pre.

served a perpetual fire, as the purest emblem of
their divinity. Ministers were appointed to watch
and feed this sacred flame. The first funEion of
the great chief of the nation, every morning, was
an a& of obeisance to the Sun; and festivals re-
turned at stated seasons, which were celebrated by
the whole community with solemn but unbloody
rites q. This is the most refined species of super-
tfition known in America, and, perhaps, one of
the most natural as well as most reducing. The
Sun is the apparent source of the joy, fertility,
and life, diffused through nature; and while the
human mind, in its early essays towards inquiry,
contemplates and admires his universal and ani-
mating energy, its admiration is apt to stop short
at what is visible, without reaching to the unseen
cause; and pays that adoration to the most glo.
rious and beneficial work of God, which is due
only to him who formed it. As fire is the purerr
and most a&ive of the elements, and in some (f
its qualities and effects resembles the Sun, it was,
not improperly, chosen to be the emblem of his
powerful operation. The ancient Persians, a
people far superior, in every refpet, to that rudle
tribe whose rites I am describing, founded their
religious system on similar principles, and efta-
blilhed a form of public worship, less gross anti

q Dumont, i. i8, &c. Charley. N. Fr. iii. 417. &c. 42;
Lafitau, i. 167.

i exceptionable

exceptionable than that of any people deflitute of B o

o K

guidance from revelation. This surprising co.in- .

-

cidence in sentiment between two nations, in such
different fates of improvement, is one of the
many singular and unaccountable circumstances
which occur in the history of human affairs.

AMONG the people of Bogota, the Sun and
Moon were, likewise, the chief objeas of venera-
tion. Their system of religion was more regular
and complete, though les pure, than that of the
Narchez. They had temples, altars, priests, fa-
crifices, and that long train of ceremonies, which
superstition introduces wherever she has fully efta-
blihed her dominion over the minds of men. But
the rites of their worship were cruel and bloody.
They offered human vicims to their deities, and
many of their pracices nearly resembled the bar-
barous institutions of the Mexicans, the genius of
which we shall have an opportunity of confidering
more attentively in its proper placer.

WITH respect to the other great dotrine of re- Their i,-,
ligion, concerning the immortality of the foul, the the in ll.l

t,)~~~~~~~~~~~

. /* i < *l ty o' the

sentiments of the Americans were more united: foul,
the human mind, even when lcaft improved and
invigorated by culture, flrinks from the thoughts
of dissolution, and looks forward with hope and
expectation to a slate of future existence. This

' Piedrahita, Conq. del N. Rcyno, p. f. Hcrrcra, dec. 6.
lib. v. c. 6.

fcintjnen t,

3 O o K sentiment, -rcilting. from a fccrct.confcioufnefs of
v-_. its own dignity, from an io&ifttiw: Jonging after

immortality, iisuniverfal, and may be deemed na.
tural. Upon this, are founded the most exalted
hopes of man in his highest fateoof improvement;
nor has nature withheld fromnhin this soothing
consolation, in - the most early and rude period of
his progress. We can trace this opinion from one
extremity of America to the other. In some re-
gions more faint and obscure-, in others more per.
fe&ly developed, but no where unknown. The
molt uncivilized of its savage tribes do not appre.
hend death as the extinction of being. All enter.
tain hopes of a future and more happy state, where
they flall be for ever exempt from the calamities
which embitter human life in its present condition.
This they figure as a delightful country, blelffd
with perpetual spring, whose forests abound with
game, whose rivers swarm with fill, where famine
is never felt, and uninterrupted plenty (hall be
enjoyed without labour or coil. But as men, in
forming their first inperfet ideas concerning the
invisible world, suppose that there they lhall con-
tinue to feel the fame desires, and to be engaged
in the fame occupations, they naturally acribe
eminence and diftin6tion, in that state, to the fame
qualities and talents which are here the objct ot
their esteem. The Americans, accordingly, al-
lotted the highest place, in their country of Ipirits,
to the skilful hunter, to the adventurous and fuc-
cefsful warrior, and to such as had tortured the

greateR

greatet number of captives, and-devoured their B o O K
fed'. These notions were so prevalent, that tbey -,-.
gave rife to am universal custom, which is, at tod bu
once, bhe strongest evidence that the Americans ""'', c'
believe in a future Rate, and the best illufration dead.
of what they expet there. As they imagine,
that the dead begin their career anew in the world
whither they are gone, that their friends may not
enter upon it defencclefs and unprovided, they
bury with them their bow, their arrows, and other
weapons usld in hunting or war i they deposit in
their tombs the skins or fRuffs of which they make
garments, Indian corn, manioc, veniron, domeflic
otenils, and whatever is reckoned among the ne-
cefiaries in their Cimple mode of life '. In some
provinces, upon the decease of a caziqpe or chief,
a certain number of his wives, of his favourites,
and of his saves, were put to death, and interred
together with him, that he might appear with
the fame dignity in his future station, and be
waited uponby the fame attendants ". This per-

Lery ap. de Bry, iii. 22z. Charler. N. Fr. iii. 351, &c.

De I Potheric, ii. 4., &c. iii. 5.

' Chronica de Cieca de Leon, c. zS. Sagard, aS8. Creux.

Hit. Canad. p. 91. Rochefrt. Hist. des Antilles, 56t8.
Biet, 391. Dc la Potheric, ii. 4i. iii. 8. Blanco, Converf.
de Piritu, p. 35.

u Dumot, Louifiane, i. 20o, &c. Oviedo, lib. v. c. 3.

Gomara, I,(l. Gen. c. 29. P. Wart. decad. 304. Charlev.
N. Fr. iii. 4z1. lcrrera, dec. i. lib. iii. c. 3. P. Melchior
llernandez, Memor. de Chiriqyi. Coil. Orig. Papers, i.
Chron. de Cieca de Lcon, c. 33.

VOL. II. N fuafioo

B °0 K suasion is so deep-rooted, that many of the dc-

' ceased person's retainers offer themselves as volun.

tary vietims, and court the privilege of accompa-
nying their departed master, as an high diflinclion.
It has been found difficult, on rome occasions, to
set bounds to this enthufiafrn of affetionate duty,
and to reduce the train of a favourite leader
to such a number as the tribe could afford to
spare x.

Superflitiorn AMONG the Americans, as well as other unci-
connetted
with deo- vilized nations, many of the rites and obf rvances
ti'". which bear some resemblance to acts of re!ig;on,

have no connection with devotion, but proceed
from a fond desire of prying into futurity. The
human mind is most apt to feel, and to uilcover
this vain curiosity, when its own powers are most
feeble and uninfurmed. Astonished with occur-
rences, of which it is unable to comprehend the
cause, it naturally fancies that there is some-
thing mylterious and wonderful in their origin.
Alarmed at events of which it cannot diflcrn
the ifue or the consequences, it has recourse to
other means of dilcovering rh:im, than the exercise
of its own sagacity. Wherever fuperflition is so
etlablifhed as to form a regular system, this desire
of penetrating into the lecrets of futurity is con-
neaed with it. Divination becomes a religious
adt. Priests, as the m': iters of Heaven, pretend

See NOTE LXI.

to

to deliver its oracles to men. They are the only B 00 K
soothsayers, augurs, and magicians, who profess a, >
the sacred and important art of disclosing what is
hid from other eyes.

BUT, among rude nations, who pay no venera- Thisdeprt.

ment be-

tion to any superintending power, and who have no long to
established rites or miniiters of religion, their cu- ianph.'
riofity to discover what is future and unknown is
cherished by a difFerent principle, ald derives
firength from another alliance. As the difeals of
men, in the savage slate, are like those of the ani-
mal creation, few but extremely violent, their im-
patience under what they susser, and solicitude for
the recovery of health, soon inspired them with
extraordinary reverence for such as pretended to
understand the nature of their maladies, or to pre-
serve them from their sudden and fatal effeRs.
These ignorant pretenders, however, were such
utter (trangers to the ftruClure of the human
frame, as to be equally unacquainted with the
caufcs of its disorders, and the manner in which
they will terminate.. Supcrflition, mingled fre-
quently with tome portion of craft, supplied what
they wanted in science, They imputed the origin
of diseases to supernatural influence, and prescribed
or performed a variety of mysterious rites, which
tlicy gave out to be of power sufficient to remove
the most dangerous and inveterate maladies. The
credulity and love of the marvellous, natural to
uninformed men, favoured the deception, and

N 2 prepared

B tyO K prepared them to be the dupes of those impostors.

-v- Among savages, their first physicians are a kind of

conjurers or wizards, who boast that they know
what is past, and can foretell what is to come.
Incantations, sorcery, and mummeries of diverse
kinds, no less strange than frivolous, are the
means which they employ to expel the imaginary
causes of malignity y ; and relying upon the effi.
cacy of there, they prediEt with confidence what
will be the fate of their deluded patients. Thus
superstition, in its earliest form, flowed from the fc-
licitude of man to be delivered from present dif.
trefs, not from his dread of evils awaiting him
in a future life, and was originally ingrafted on
medicine, not on religion. One of the first, and
most intelligent historians of America, was struck
with this alliance between the art of divination and
that of physic, among the people of Hispaniola'.
But this was not peculiar to them. The ,Alexis, the
Piayas, the Autmoins, or whatever was the difttn.
guifhing name of their diviners and charmers "n
other parts of America, were all the physicians of
their refpeative tribes, in the fame manner as the
Buhitos of Hispaniola. As their funoRion led them
to apply to the human mind when enfeebled by
sickness, and as they found it, in that season of
dejetion, prone to be alarmed with imaginary
fears, or amuscd with vain hopes, they ealily in-

v P. Melch. Hcrnanlez, \'emorial de Clictqiqi. CoileO.
Orig. Pap. i.

Ovierdo, lib. v. c. i.

duced

duccd, it to rely with implicit confidence on the B o ° K
virtue of their spells, and the certainty of their -
predicions a.

WHENEVER men acknowledge the reality of fu- Cradully

pernatural power and discernment in one instance,
they have a propensity to admit it in others. The
Americans did not long suppose the efficacy of
conjuration to be confined to one subject. They
had recourse to it in every Situation of danger or
distress, When the events of war were peculiarly
disastrous, when they met with unforeseen difap-
pointments in hunting, when inundations or
drought threatened their crops with deltruc-ion,
they called upon their conjurers to begin their in-
cantations, in order to discover the causes of those
caJamities, or to foretell what would be their
issue', Their confidence in this delusive art gra-
dually increased, and manifested itself in all the
occurrences of life. When involved in any dif-
ficulty, or about to enter upon any tranlacion of
moment, every individual regularly consulted the
forcerer, depended upon his inflru&ions to extri-
cate him from the former, and to direct his con-
du& in the latter. Even among the rudest tribes
in America, superstition appears in this form,

Hcrrrra, dec. r. lib. iii. c. +. Osborne, Coll. ii. 86o.

Dumont, i. 169, &c. Charlie. N. Fr. iii. 361. 364, &c.
Lawson, N. Carol. 214. Ribas, Triumph. p. 17. iet, 386.
De la Potheric, ii. 35, &c.

b Charlev. N. Fr. iii. 3. Dumont, i. 173. Fernand. Re-
lac. de los Chiquit. p. 40. Lozano, 84. Margrave, 279.

N 3 and

B °0 K and divination is an art in high esteem. Long be.

'V.
I - X 'fore man had acquired such knowledge of a deity

as inspires reverence and leads to adoration, we
observe him firetching out a presumptuous hand
to draw aside that veil with which providence
kindly conceals its purposes from human know-
ledge I and we find him labouring, with fruitless
anxiety, to penetrate into the mysteries of the di-
vine administration. To discern, and to worship a
superintending power, is an evidence of the en-
largement and maturity of the human underfRand.
ing; a vain desire of prying into futurity, is tile
error of its infancy, and a proof of its weakness.

FROM this weakness proceeded likewise the

faith of the Americans in dreams, their observation
of omens, their attention to the chirping of birds,
and the cries of animals, all which they suppose to
be indications of future events, and if any one
of there prognoflics is deemed unfavourable, they
instantly abandon the pursuit of those measures on
which they are most eagerly bentc.

Detached VIII. BUT if we would form a complete idea of
ufRoms. the uncultivated nations of America, we mull not

pass unobfcrved some singular customs, which,
though universal and charateriftic, could not be
reduced, with propriety, to any of the articles

c Charlev. N. Fr. iii. 262. 353. Stadius, ap. de Bry, iii.

I zo. t reuxij Hilt. Canad. {'. 'echo, Hiil. of I'rag.
'liurch. Coll. vi. 37. De la Potheric, iii. 6.

into

A A' "

c~~~~~~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ n

~ r Si L~~ GES w
1 J1

o ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~

~ ~ ~~ ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~tN

~ .
4)~

00O~~~~~~~~~
tXLLJ ~ ~ ~ ~~~~~LLil~YYI~j~

.1~~~~r~

~~U11 c~r~ir

~ (U~
n (. /. ~~~~~~''''C./ Vl lIICdl rn~h~, :lnl7.·I ·

to which I have divided my inquiry concerning B ° O

eir manners. -.-.

AMONG savages, in every part of the globe, the Love or
ve of dancing is a favourite paffon. As a dci.
eat part of their time languishes away in indo-
ce, without any occupation to rouze or interest
em, they delight universally in a pastime which
lls forth the ative powers of their nature into
xercife. The Spaniards, when they firfl visited
merica, were aitonifhed at the fondness of the
atives for dancing, and beheld with wonder a
eople, cold and unanimated in most of their
ther pursuits, kindle into life, and exert them-
Ives with ardour, as often as this favourite
nufement recurred. Among them, indeed,
ncing ought not to be denominated an amuse-
ent. It is a serious and important occupation,
hich mingles in every occurrence of public or
ivate life. If any intercourse be necessary be-
ween two American tribes, the ambafadors of
h one approach in a fulemn dance, and present
he calumet or emblem of peace; the sachems
f the other receive it with the fame ceremony .
f war is denounced against an enemy, it is by
dance, expressive of the resentment which they
el, and of the vengeance which they meditated.
f the wrath of their gods is to be appeased, or

d De In Potherie Hll. ii. 17, &c. Charlev. N. Fr. iii. 211.
9. Li H 'utan. i. Ico. 13. . I ecnrnepin. Decou. 149, &c.

Chailcv N. Fr. iii. z28. Iafitau, i. 523.

N 4 their

B o0 K their, bneficenne to-be celebrated; if they rejoice
i .- a at.the birth of a child, or mourn the death of a

friend', they have dances appropriated to each of
these situations, and suited to the different fen-
timents with which they are then animated. If a
person is indifpoled, a dance is prescribed as the
most effectual means of retoring him to health;
and if he himself cannot endure the fatigue of tuch
an exercise, the physician or conjurer performs it
in his name, as if the virtue of his activity could
be transferred to his patient d.

ALL their dances are imitations of some action;

and though the.mufic by which they are regulated
is extremely simple and tiresome to the ear by its
dull monotony, some of their dances appear won-
derfully expressive and animated. The war dance
is, perhaps, the most firiking. It is the repre-
fentation of a complete American campaign.' The
departure of the warriors from their village, their
march into the enemy's country, the caution with
which they encamp, the address with which they
flation some of their party in ambush, the manner
of surprising the enemy, the noise and ferocity of
the combat, the scalping of those who are slain,
the feizing.of prisoners, the triumphant return of
the conquerors, and the torture of the victims, are
fucceflively exhibited. The performers enter with

C Joutel, 343. Gomars, Hist. Gen. c. 196.
d Denys Hist. Nat. 189. Brickell, 37X. De la Potherie,
ii. 36,

f3 ilch

such emhiuflaric ardour into their several parts, oc K
their gceures, their countenance, their voice, are
so wild and so well adapted to their various fitua-
tions, that Europeans can hardly believe it to be
a mimic fcenec o' view it without emotions of fear
and horror .

BUT-however expreflive some of the American
dances mny be, there is one circumstance in them
remarkable, and conne&ed with the-character of
the race. The iongs, the dances, the amusements
of other nations, expressive of the sentiments which
animate their hearts, are often adapted to display
or excite that sensibility which mutually attaches
the fcxes. Among some people, such is the ardour
of this passion, that love is almost the sole objed
of festivity and joy; and as rude nations are
firangers to delicacy, and unaccustomed to dif-
guise any emotion of their minds, their dances are
often extremely wanton and indecent. Such is the
Calenda, of which the natives of Africa are so pas-
fionately fond F; and such the feats of the dancing
girls, which the Asiatics contemplate with so
much avidity of desire. But, among the Ameri-
cans, more cold and indifferent to their females,
from causes which I have already explained, the
pailion of love mingles but little with their felli.

De la Potheric, ii. 16. Charlev. N. Fr . iii. 97. La.

itau, i. 5z3.

f Adanfon, Voy. to Senegal, p. iii. 2z7. Labat, Voyages,
iv. 5(63. Sloane, Hill Nar. of Jam. Introd . p. 4. Fermin.
Dcfcript. 4e Surin. i. p. 139.

vals

B o° K vals and pastimes. Their songs and dances are

*- v mostly solemn and martial, they are connetec

with some of the serious and important affairs of
life', and having no relation to love or gallantry,
are seldom common to the two sexes, but exe-
cuted by the men and women apartg. If, on
some occasions, the women are permitted to join
in the festival, the character of the entertainment
is still the fame, and no movement or gelsure is
exprefive of attachment, or encourages fami-
liarity h.

Pafi.o for AN immoderate love of play, especially at gamce
l52min. of hazard, which seems to be natural to all people un.

accustomed to the occupations of regular indultry,
is likewise universal among the Americans. The
fame causes, which fQ often prompt persons at
their ease in civilized life to have recourse to this
pastime, render it the delight of the savage. The
former are independent of labour, the latter do
not feel the necessity of it, and as both are un-
employed, they run with transport to whatever is
of power -to stir and agitate their minds. lhence
the Americans, who at other times are so indiffe-
rent, so phlegmatic, so silent, and so difincercfled,

f Dcfcrp. of N. France. Osborne, Coll. i. 83. CharlLv.
N. Fr. iii. 84.

c Wafer's Account of fnhmus, &.c. 16) Lecrv ap. de :,

iii. 1-7. Lo/an, Ili't. de Parag. i. . 19. Il('rrca. dec. .
lib. vii. c. 8. dec. 4. lit. x. c. 4. Sce O I E LX1.

h Barnere, Fr. Equin. p. 191,

as

as soon as they engage in play become rapacious, B o

00

impatient, noisy, and almost frantic with eager- -v-
nds. Their furs, their domestic utensils, their
clothes, their arms, are flaked at the gaming-
table, and when all is loft, high as their fenfc of
independence is, in a wild emotion of despair or
of hope, they will often rilk their perblnal liberty
upon a tingle cast'. Among several tribes, fuc!i
gaming parties frequently recur, and become their
most acceptable entertainment at every great fefli-
val. Superflition, which is apt to take hold of
those passions which are molt vigorous, frequently
lends its aid to confirm and Itrengthen this fa-
vourite inclination. Their conjurers are accuf-
tomed to prescribe a solemn match at play, as one
of the molt efficacious methods of appearing their
gods, or of restoring the tick to health'

FROM causes similar to those which render them and for

drinking.

fond of play, the Americans are extremely ad-
diEted to drunkenness. It seems to have been one
of the firfr exertions of human ingenuity to discover
ofme composition of an intoxicating quality; and
there is hardly any nation so rude, or so cleflitute
of invention, as not to have iucceeded in this fatal
rdclarch. The molt barbarous of the American
tribes have been so unfortunate as to attain this
Jrt; and even tholi which are so deficient in

' Chilecv. N. Fr. iii. 261. 318. Lafitau, ii. 338, &c.
.ilh.s, 'lriurTmf. 13. Brickell, 335.

C* h(3l ;v. N. Fr. ii:. 262.

knowledge,

°0 0 K knowledge, as to be unacquainted with the method

of giving an inebriating strength to liquors by ser.
mentation, can accomplilh the fame end by other
means. The people of the islands, of North
America, and of California, used, for this pur.
pose, the smoke of tobacco, drawn up with a cer-
tain instrument into the nostrils, the fumes of
which ascending to the brain, they felt all the
transports and frenzy of intoxication m. In almost
every other part of the New World, the natives
poifefled the art of extracting an intoxicating
liquor from maize or the manioc root, the fame
substances which they convert into bread. The
operation by which they effec this, nearly re-
fembles the common one of brewing, but with
this difference, that in place of yeft, they use a
nauseous infusion of a certain quantity of maize or
manioc chewed by their women. The saliva ex-
cites a vigorous fermentation, and in a few days
the liquor becomes fit for drinking. It is not
disagreeable to the taste, and when swallowcd in
large quantities, is of an intoxicating quality .
This is the general beverage of the Americans,
which they distinguish by various names, and for
which they feel such a violent and infaciable de-
fire, as it is not easy either to conceive or describe.
Among polilhed nations, where a fucceflion of va.
rious fun&ions and amusements keeps the mind in

- Oviedo, His. ap. Ramur. iii. 13. Venegas, i. (f8. Nau.
fragde Cabeca de Vaca, cap. 26. See NOTE LXIII.

a Stadius ap. dc Bry, iii. ii. Lery, ibid. 175.

continual

continual occupation, the desire for strong drink B 0° K
is regulated, in a great measure, by the climate,.
and increases or dirninifhes according to the va-
riations of its temperature. In warm regions, the
delicate and sensible frame of the inhabitants does
not require the flimulation of fermented liquors.
In colder countries, the constitution of the natives,
more robust and more sluggish, Rlands in need of
generous liquors to quicken and animate it. But
among savages, the desire of something that is of
power to intoxicate, is in every situation the fame.
All the people of America, if we except some
small tribes near the Straits of Magellan, whether
natives of the torrid zone, or inhabitants of its
more temperate regions, or placed by a harder
fate in the severe climates towards its northern or
southern extremity, appear to be equally under
the dominion of this appetite °. Such a similarity
of taste, among people in such different situations,
must be ascribed to the influence of some moral
cause, and cannot be confidered as the effct of
any physical or constitutional want. While en-
gaged in war or in the chafe, the savage is often
in the most interesting Situations, and all the
powers of his nature are rouzed to the most vigor-
ous exertions Rut tliofe animating scenes are fuc.
ceeded by long intervals of repose, during which

° Gumilla, i. 257. Lozano Defcrip. de Gran Cliaco, si.

lo;. Ribas, 8. Ulloa, i. .-.r;. 337. I//;ichais, iv. 436.
Fcriaidcez Million. de ins Ci;iqiuct. 35. EJrrere, p. 203.
Blanco Convcrf. de Piritu, r.

the

B 0 K the warrior meets with nothing that he deems of

IV.
IV' , sufficient dignity or importance to merit his atten.

tion. He languishes and mopes in this fealon of
indolence. The posture of his body is an emblem
of the state of his mind. In one climate, coger.
ing over the fire in his cabin; in another,
stretched under the shade of tome tree, he doses
away his time in seep, or in an unthinking joyles
ina&ivity, not far removed from it. As ltrong
liquors awake him from this torpid fate, give
a brisker motion to his spirits, and enliven him
more thoroughly than either dancing or gaming,
his love of them is excessive. A savage, when
not engaged in action, is a pensive melancholy ani.
mal; but as soon as he taftes, or has a profic' of
tafring, the intoxicating draught, he becomes g-.
and frolicsome P. Whatever be the occal;,n or
pretext, on which the Americans af'emble, th.
meeting always terminates in a debauch. Many of
their festivals have no other objet, and thyv we!-
come the return of them with transports of joy.
As they are not accultomed to reltrain any ai'le-
tite, they set no bounds to this. The riot often
continues without interminfion several days; and
whatever may be the fatal etffcs of their excdls,
they never cease from drinking as long as one clr)p
of liquor remains. The persons of greatcli cmi-
nence, the inoft dillinguifed 'varr'ios, and tLh
chiefs molt renowned for their wifdlon, have no

r Mclendez Tcforez V.rdad, iii. 3r9.

r';rccr

greater command of themselves than the most ob- B o O K
Iture member of the community. Their eagerness e
for present enjoyment renders them blind to its
fatal confcquences; and thole very men, who, in
other situations, fcein to poisess a force of mind
:ore than human, are in this inllance inferior to
children in foresight, as well as consideration, and
mere slaves of brutal appetite Y. When their pas-
sions, naturally strong, are heightened and in-
inflamed by drink, they are guilty of the molt
enarmous outrages, and the fetfiviry seldom con.
cludes without deeds of violence, or bloodlhed'.

BUT, amidfl this wild debauch, there is one
circumstance remarkable; the women, in most of
the American tribes, are not permitted to partake
of it. Their province is to prepare the liquor, to
serve it about to the guests, and to take care of
their husbands and friends, when their reason is
overpowered. This exclusion of the women from
an enjoyment so highly valued by savages, may be
Juily confidered as a mark of their inferiority, and
as an additional evidence of that contempt with
which they were treated in the New World. The
people of North America, when first dilcovered,
were not acquainted with any into;:icating drink;
but as the Europeans early found it their intcrefl
to supply them with spirituous liquors, drunken-

9 Ribas, 9 Ulloa, i. 3 8?

lI.ettr ii.

l if. . 178. Torquenada Mo Ind. i. 33,.
See NOTE 1.XIV.

2 incts

8 °0 K ness soon became as universal among them as

IV.
_ot among their countrymen to the south; and their

women having acquired this new tate, indulge
it with as little decency and moderation as the
men'.

?bttodeath IT were endless to enumerate all the detached
the aged d
ad in- cufioms which have excited the wonder of travel.
*u""be. lers in America; but I cannot omit one seemingly

as singular as any that has been mentioned. When
their parents and other relations become old, or
labour under any distemper which their slender
knowledge of the healing art cannot remove,
they cut flort their days with a violent hand,
in order to be relieved from the burden of sup.
porting and tending them. This pratice pre.
vailed among the ruder tribes in every part
of the continent, from Hudson's Bay to the
river De la Plata; and however shocking it
may be to thoif sentiments of tenderness and at.
tachment, which, in civilized life, we are apt to
confider as congenial with our frame, the cor-
dition of man in the savage Rfate leads and recon-
ciles him to it. The fame hardships and difficulty
of procuring subsistence, which deter savages, in
some cafes, from rearing their children, prompt
them to destroy the aged and infirm. ''he de-
clining state of the one is as helpless as the infancy
of the other. The former are no less unable than

t Hutchinson Hilt. of Maff4cliuf. 469. Lafitau, ii. i;i'
Sagard, 146.

the

the latter to perform the funstions thatbelong to a B °o° K
warrior or hunter, or to endure .those various '
diftrefies in which savages are so often involved,
by their own want of foresight and indu1try.
Their relations feel this, and, incapable of attend-
ing to the wants or weaknefles of others, their
impatience under an additional burden prompts
them' to extinguith that life which they find it
difficulc to sustain. This is not regarded as a deed
of cruelty, but as an aft of mercy. An Ameri-
can, broken with years and infirmities, conscious
that he can no longer depend on the aid of those
around him, places himself contentedly in his
grave; and it is by the hands,.of his children or
nearest relations that the tbon 'is pulled, or the
blow infliced, which releases Tim 'for ever from
the sorrows of life ·.

IX. AFTER contemplating the rude American Ccnerai

estimate of

tribes in such various lights, after taking a view thcir ch.-
of their customs and manners from so many dif-
ferent stations, nothing remains but to form a ge-
neral estimate of their chara&cer, compared with
that of more polished nations. A human being,
as he comes originally from the hand of nature, is
every where the fane. At his first appearance in
the state of infancy, whether it be among thie rudest
savages, or in the molt civilized society, we can

" Caffiai Hiltor. de N. Reyno de Gran. p. 3oo. Pifo, p. 6.
EllisVoy. 191. Gumilja, i. 333.

VOL. II. O discern

B °0 K discern no quality which marks any diftintion or

IV.
__-v--i superiority. The capacity of improvement seems

to be the fame; and the talents he may afterwards
acquire, as well as the virtues he may be rendered
capable of exercising, depend, in a great measure,
upon the slate of society in which he is placed.
To this state his mind naturally accommodates it-
self, and from it receives dilcipline and culture.
In proportion to the wants which it accultoms a
human being to feel, and the functions in which
there engage him, his inteilectual powers are called
forth. According to the connections which it
eltablifhes between him and the reft of his fpe-
cies, the affetions of his heart are exerted. It is
only by attending to this great principle, that awe
can discover what is the characer of man in every
different period of his progress.
Yr!eleaur. IF we apply it to savage life, and measure the

attainments of the human mind in that state by
this standard, we Ihall find, according to an ob-
servation which I have already made, that the in-
tellectual powers of man must be extremely limited
in their operations. They are confined within tlue
narrow sphere of what he deems neceflary for sup-
plying his own wants. Whatever has not some re-
lation to these, neither attracts his attention, nor
is the object of his inquiries. But however nar-
row the bounds may be within which the know-
ledge of a savage is circumllcribed, he poTcldes
thoroughly that finall portion which he has at-

taincld.

tained. It was not communicated to him by for- B 0 0 K
mal instruction; he does not attend to it as a mat- v
ter of mere speculation and curiosity; it is the re-
fult of his own observation, the fruit of his own
experience, and accommodated to his condition
and exigencies. While employed in the active oc-
cupations of war or hunting, he often finds him-
self in difficult and perilous situations, from which
the efforts of his own sagacity mull extricate him.
He is frequently engaged in measures, where every
ftep depends upon his own ability to decide, where
he must rely solely upon his own penetration to
discern the dangers to which he is expoled, and
upon his own wisdom in providing against them.

As the talents of individuals are exercised and Political

jlIents.

improved by fuch-exertions, much political wis-
dom is said to be displayed in conducting the as-
fairs of their finall communities. The council of
old men in an American tribe, deliberating upon
its interelts, and determining with refpe6t to peace
or war, has been compared to the senate in more
polilhed republics. The proceedings of the for-
mer, we are told, are often no less formal and fa-
gacious than those of the latter. Great political
wisdom is exhibited in pondering the various mea.
fures propo.ed, and in balancing their probable
advantages, against the evils of which they may
be producRive. Much addrcfs and eloquence are
employed by the leaders, who alpire at acquiring
fich confidence with their countrymen, as to have

O 2 an

0 o o IC an ascendant in those assemblies x. But, an:ong

IV.

-- savage tribes, the field for displaying political ta.

lents cannot be extensive. Where the idea of pri-
vate property is incomplete, and no criminal ju-
rifliction is established, there is hardly any func-
tion of internal government to exercile. Where
there is no commerce, and scarcely any inrercourlk
among separate tribes; where enmity is impla-
cable, and hostilities are carried on almost without
interminfion; there will be few points of public
concern to adjust with their neighbours; and that
department of their affairs which may be denomi-
nated foreign, cannot be so intricate as to require
any refined policy in conducting it. Where in-
dividuals are so thoughtless and improvident as
seldom to take effectual precautions for felf-pre-
servation, it is vain to expeEt that public mea.
fures and deliberations will be regulated by the
contemplation of remote events. It is the genius
of savages to ac from the impulse of preftnt pal:
sion. They have neither foresight nor temper to
form complicated arrangements with refpeEt to
their future conduct. The consultations of the
Americans, indeed, are so frequent, and their
negociations are so many Y, and lo long protradced,
as to give their proceedings an extraordinary aspect
of wisdom. But this is not owing so much to the
depth of their schemes, as to the coldncfs and

Charlev. N. Fr. iii. 269, &c.
Y See NOTE LXV.

phlcegLn

phlegm of their temper, which renders them flovw °o' K
in determining . If we except the celebrated -.-
league, that united the Five Nations in Canada
into a federal republic, which shall be confidered
in its proper place, we can discern few such
traces of political wdilom, ainong the rude Ame-
rican tribes, as discover any great degree of fore-
fight or extent of intellectual abilities. Even
among them, we (hall find public mealures more
frequently directed by the impetuous ferocity of
their youth, than regulated by the experience and
wisdom of their old men.

As the condition of man in the savage flat rP,.'"-

is unfavourable to the progress of the underfland-
ing, it has a tendency likewise, in tome respeCts,
to check the exercise of affection, and to render
the heart contracted. The strongest feeling in the
mind of a savage is a sense of his own independ-
ence. He has sacrificed so finall a portion of his
natural liberty by becoming a member of lociety,
that he remains, in a great degree, the sole maiter
of his own actions . I-Ie often takes his rcfo-
lutions alone, without consulting, or feeling any
connection with the persons around him. In many
of his operations, he stands as much detached
from the reft of his 1pecies, as if he had f.rmed
no union with them. Conscious how little he de-

Chnrlcv. N. Fr. iii. 271.
F' ecIrnandez Million. dc los Chiquit. 33.

0 3 pends

B 0 K pends upon other men, he is apt to view them

'V.
._ ' with a careless indifference. Even the force of his

mind contributes to increase this unconcern, and
as he looks not beyond himself in deliberating
with refpet to the part which he Whould a&, his
solicitude about the consequences of it seldom ex.
tends farther. He pursues his own career, and
indulges his own fancy, without inquiring or re-
garding whether what he does be agreeable or of-
fenfive to others, whether they may derive bene-
fit, or receive hurt from it. Hence the ungovern-
able caprice of savages, their impatience under
any Jpecies of restraint, their inability to suppress
or moderate any inclination, the scorn or neglect
with which they receive advice, their high efima-
tion of themselves, and their contempt of other
men. Among them, the pride of independence
produces almost the fame efftEts with interested-
ness in a more advanced slate of society, it refers
every thing to a man himself, and renders the gra-
tification of his own winces the measure and end
of conduEt.
Hardnefrso To the fame cause may be imputed the hard.

ness of heart, and insensibility, remarkable in all
savage nations. Their minds, rouzed only by
ltrong emotions, are little fulceptible of gentle,
d1tlicate, or tender aflez tions b. Their union is lo
incomplcte, that each individual aEts as if he re-

b Chailv. N. Fr. iii. 3n9.
I7 taintd

tained all his natural rights entire and undimi- B ° ° K
nilhed. If a favour is conferred upon him, or any _
beneficial service is performed on his account, he
receives it with much fatisfation, because it con-
tributes to his enjoyment; but this sentiment ex-
tends not beyond himself, it excites no fenie of
obligation, he neither feels gratitude, nor thinks
of making any return . Even among persons the
most closely connected, there is little correspond-
ence or exchange of those good offices which
strengthen attachment, mollify the heart, and
sweeten the intercourse of life. Their high ideas
of independence nourish a fullen reserve, which
keeps them at a distance from each other. The
nearest relations are mutually afraid to make any
demand, or to solicit any service d, left it should
be confidered by the other as impoling a burden,
or laying a restraint upon his will.

I HAVE already remarked the influence of this InrnTb.i-

hard unfeeling temper upon donmclic life, with re- 1y
fleft to the connection between husband and wife,
as well as that between parents and children. Its
tefiets are no less conspicuous, in the performance
of thole mutual offices of renderncs which the in-
firmities of our nature frequently exat. A mong
some tribes, when any of their number are seized
with a diltemper, they are generally abandoned by

Ovicdo ilti. ib,. xvi. c. 2. Se. NOTIE JYVI.
d J-' lla Potlic , i:i. 28.

O 4 all

B o0 K all around them, who, careless of their recovery,
{id fly in the utmost conternation from the supposcd

danger of infection'. But even where they are
not thus deferred, the cold indifference with
which they are attended can afford them little
consolation. No look of sympathy, no obothing
expreflions, no officious services, contribute to al.
leviate or to make them forget their sufferings'.
Their nearest relations will often refuse to fubmir
to the finalleft inconveniency, or to part with the
least trifle, however much it may tend to their ac-
commodation or relief s So little is the breast of
a savage susceptible of those sentiments which
prompt men to that feeling attention which miti-
gates diltrefs, that, in some provinces of America,
the Spaniards have found it necessary to inforce
the common duties of humanity by positive laws,
and to oblige husbands and wives, parents and
children, under severe penalties, to take care of
each other during their ficknefsh. The fame
harlhnefs of temper is still more conspicuous in
their treatment of the animal creation. Prior to
their intercourse with the people of Europe, the
North Americans had some tame dogs, which ac-
companied them in their hunting excursions, and

c Lettre de P. Cataneo ap. Muratori Chliflian, i. 3o0.

Tcrtre, ii. 410. Lozano, 1oo. Herrera, dec. 4. lib. viii. c. ;.
dec. 5. lib. iv. c. z. Falkner's Defcript. of Patagonia, ;8.

f G;umilla, i. 329. Lozano, ico.
g Garcia Crigen, &c. 90. Hcrrera, dec. 4. lib. viii. c. C.
h Cogulludo -lifl. de Yucathan, p. 30c.

fcrved

served them with all the ardour and fidelity pccu. B 0 0 K
culiar to the species. But, inftiad of that fond
attachment which the hunrer naturally feels to-
wards those useful companions of his toils, they
rrquite their services with neglect, seldom feed,
and never carels them '. In other provinces, the
Americans have become acquainted with the do-
meflic animals of Europe, anl avail themilelves
of their service; but it is univerlally obfcrved
that they always treat them harshly k, and never
employ any method either for breaking or ma-
naging them, but force and cruelty. In every
part of the deportment of man in his savage lfate,
whether towards his equals of the human ticcies,
or towards the animals below him, we recognize
the fame character, and trace the operations of a
mind intent on its own gratifications, and regu-
lated by its own caprice, with little attention
or lenfibility to the fenriments and feelings of the
beings around him.

AFTER explaining how unfavourable the savage Trci ;i.

state is to the cultivation of the underflanding, anld "l "
to the improvement of the heart, I should not
have thought it neceflhry to mention what may be*
diemed its lesser defects, if the charaaer of ni-
tion,, as well as of individuals, were not often morc
diltintly marked by clrcumttanccs apparently tri-

i Charlev. N. Fr. iii. 119. 337.
k U;loa Notic. American. 312.

vial,

B 0 0 K vial, than by those of greater moment. A fa

IV.
z ,-» vage, frequently placed in situations of danger an

diltrefs, depending on himself alone, and wrap
up in his own thoughts and schemes, is a feriou
melancholy animal. His attention to others i
small. The range of his own ideas is narrow
Hence that taciturnity which is so difguflipg to
men accustomed to the open intercourse of olcii
conversation. When not engaged in ation, th(
Americans often fit whole days in one pollure,
without opening their lips'. When they go forth
to war, or to the chace, they usually march in a line
at tome distance from one another, and without
exchanging a word. The fame profound silence is
observed when they row together in a canoe . It
is only when they are animated by intoxicating li.
quors, or rouzed by the jollity of the festival and
dance, that they become gay and convertible.
un ...g. TTo the fame cauies may be imputed the re.

fined cunning with which they form and execute
their schemes. Men, who are not habituated toa
liberal communication of their own sentiments and
wishes, are apt to be b (iiltruftful, as to place
little confidence in others, and to have recourle to
an insidious craft in accomplishing their own pur-
pcses. In civilized life, those persons, who, by
their situation, have but a few objects of purllit

Voyage dce Bouguer, 102.
, CL.Jr'cv. iii. 340.

C't

n which their minds incessantly dwell, are moit B 0 K
remarkable for low artifice in carrying on their -
ittle projecs. Among savages, whose views are
qually confined, and their attention no lets perse-
voring, thole circumitances muff operate itill more
powertully, and gradually accustom them to a dif-
ingenuous subtlety in all their transactions. The
brce of this is increased by habits which they ac-
quire in carrying on the two most interefring ope-
rations wherein they are engaged. With them
war is a fyftcml of craft, in which they trust for
success to Itratagem more than to open force, and
have their invention continually on the stretch to
circumvent and surprise their enemies. As hunt-
ers, it is their conltant obje& to ennlare, in order
that they may destroy. Accordingly, art and cun-
ning have been universally observed as diftinguilh-
ing charateriftics of all savages. The people of
the rude tribes of America are remarkable for
their address and duplicity. Impenetrably secret
in forming their mealures, they pursue them with
a patient undeviating attention, and there is no re-
finement of diffnmulation which they cannot em-
ploy, in order to insure success. The natives of
Peru were engaged above thirty years, in concert-
ing the plan of their infurredion, under the vice-
royalty of the marquis de Villa-Garcia; and
though communicated to a great number of all
different ranks, no indication of it ever transpired
during that long period; no man betrayed his
trust, or by an unguarded look, or rash word,

gave

B o O K gave rife to any suspicion of what was intended,.

IV.
*_ , I' The diflimulation and craft of individuals is no left

remarkable than that of nations. When let upor,
deceiving, they wrap themselves up so artificially,
that it is impofiible to penetrate into their inten.
tions, or to detea their designs°.
virtues. BUT if there be defe&s or vices peculiar to the

savage state, there are likewise virtues whicl i;
inspires, and good qualities, to the exercile ci

Indpcd- which it is friendly. The bonds of focietv fit f1
ent fiilit.

et oose upon the members of the more rude Amer,.

can tribes, that they hardly feel any reftra;nt,
Hence the spirit of independence, which is the
pride of a savage, and which he confiders as the
unalienable prerogative of man. Incapable of con.
troul, and disdaining to acknowledge any lfperior,
his mind, though limited in its powers, and erring
in many of its pursuits, acquires such elevation by
the conlcioufnefs of its own freedom, that he actr
on fomne occasions with aftonifling force, and per.
severance, and dignity.
:,:t: ... As independence nourishes this high spirit

among Livages, the perpetual wars in which they
are engaged call it forth into ation. Such Ion;
intervals of tranquillity as are frequent in polilhed,
societies, are unknown in the savage ftatc. 1 heir

" Voyage de Uioa, ii. 309.
D° (u;inilla, i. 1 :.i Cihailev. iii. 109.

eniniti1,

enmities, as I have observed, are implacable and B °0 K
immortal. The valour of the youth is never al- V--
lowed to rust in inaction. The hatchet is always
in their hand, either for attack or defence. Even
in their hunting excursions, they muff be on their
guard against surprise from the hostile tribes, by
which they are surrounded. Accustomed to con-
tinual alarms, they grow familiar with danger;
courage becomes an habitual virtue, resulting na-
turally from their situation, and strengthened by
conl'ant exertions. The mode of dilplaying forti-
tude may not be the fame in small and rude com-
munities, as in more powerful and civilized flates.
Their system of war, and standard of valour, may
be formed upon different principles, but in no fitua-
tion does the human mind rife more superior to
the sense of danger, or the dread of death, than in
its molt simple and uncultivated state.

ANOTHER virtue remarkable among savages, is Attichment
attachment to the community of which they are community.
members. From the nature of their political
union, one might expect this tie to be extremely
feeble. But there are circumstances which render
the influence, even of their loose mode of afsocia-
tion, very powerful. The American tribes are
small; combined against their neighbours, in pro-
fecution of ancient enmities, or in avenging re-
cent injuries, their interefis and operations are nei-
ther numerous nor complex. These are objecs,
which the uncultivated understanding of a savage

5 can

o o0 K can comprehend. His heart is capable of form.

IV.
v_ IV' ing connections, which are bo little diffused. H

assents with warmth to public measures, dictatec
by paflions similar to those which nfluence his
own conduEt. Hence the ardour with which indi.
viduals undertake the most perilous service, when
the community deems it necessary. Hence their
fierce and deep-rooted antipathy to the public ene.
mies. Hence their zeal for the honour of their
tribe, and that love of their country, whic:i
prompts them to brave danger that it may tri.
umph, and to endure the mott exquisite torments,
without a groan, that it may not be digraced.

Sal;,rfaon TIhUS, in every Situation where a human being
with their
owncodi. can be placed, even the most unfavourable, there
tion. are virtues which peculiarly belong to it; there

are affections which it calls forth; there is a fpe.
cies of happiness which it yields. Nature, with
most beneficent intention, conciliates and sorn:s
the mind to its condition ; the ideas and wifltes of
man extend not beyond that state of focietv to
which he is habituated. What it prelcnts as ob.
jeas of contemplation or enjoyment, fills and aI
tisfies his mind, and he can hardly conceive an)
other mode of life to be pleasant, or even to
lerable. The Tartar, accultomed to roam ove
extensive plains, and to fubfilt on the produR o
his herds, imprecates upon his enemy, as the
greatest of all curses, that he may be concemnec
to reside in one place, and to be nourished :tl

the top of a weed. The rude Americans, fond of B o 0 K
their own pursuits, and satisfied with their own I.-
lot, are equally unable to comprehend the inten-
tion or utility of the various accommodations,
which, in more polished society, are deemed efifn-
tial to the comfort of life. Far from complaining
of their own situation, or viewing that of men in
a more improved lfate with admiration or envy,
they regard themselves as the standard of excel-
lence, as beings the best entitled, as well as the
molt perfetly qualified, to enjoy real happiness.
Unaccultomed to any restraint upon their will or
their ations, they behold with amazement the in-
equality of rank, and the subordination which
take place in civilized life, and confider the volun-
tary submission of one man to another, as a renun-
ciation, no Icls base than unaccountable, of the
first ditlindion of humanity. Void of foresight, as
well as free from care themselves, and delightedl
with that state of indolent security, they wonder at
the anxious precautions, the unceasing indufr",
and complicated arrangements of Eluropeani, in
ouarding against diflant evils, or providing for
future wants, and exclaim against their prepo-
flerous folly, in thus multiplying the troubles, and
increasing the labour of life". This preference
of their own manners is conspicuous on every oc-
cafion. Even the names, by which the various
nations wins to be diltinguiflied, are assumed fiom

Charley. N. Fr. iii. o03. I.ahontan, ii. 9.

this

B o0 K this idea of their own pre-eminence. The appel.
_V_ ,lation which the Iroquois give to themselves is,

the chief of men P. Caraibe, the original name of
the fierce inhabitants of the Windward Islands,
signifies the warlike people . The Cherokee, from
an idea of their own superiority, call the Euro.
peans Nothings, or the accursed race, and assume
to tliemfelves the name of tie beloved people,
The fame principle regulated the notions of the
other Americans concerning the Europeans; for
although, at first, they were filled with altonilh.
ment at their arts, and with dread of their power,
they soon came to abate their estimation of n.en,
whose maxims of life were so different from ther
own. Hence they called them the froth of the
sea, men without father or mother. They sup.
posed, that either they had no country of their
own, and therefore invaded that which belonged
to others'; or that, being destitute of the neccl.
saries of life at home, they were obliged to roan
over the ocean, in order to rob such as were more
amply provided.

MEN, thus satisfied with their condition, are far

from any inclination to relinquifl their own ha.
bits, or to adopt those of civilized life. The
transition is too violent to be suddenly made.
Even where endeavours have been used to wean a

P Colden, i. 3. q Rocliefort lilt. des Antil!ec, 1i5.

Adair, Hill. of Amer. Indians, p. 3z.
Bcnzon. Hill. Novi Orbis, lib. iii. c. 21.

Iwive

savage from his own customs, and to render the B o O K
accommodations of polished society familiar to _--v-'.
him; even where he has been allowed to taste
of those pleafiures, and has been honoured with
those diftinfions, which are the chief objeas of
our desire, he droops and languishes under the re-
firaint of laws and forms, he seizes the first oppor-
tunity of breaking loose from them, and returns
with transport to the forest or the wild, where
he can enjoy a careless and uncontrouled free-
dom '.

THUS I have finished a laborious delineation of

the charaAer and manners of the uncivilized tribes
scattered over the vast continent of America. In
this, I aspire not at rivalling the great masters who
have painted and adorned savage life, either in
boldness of design, or in the glow and beauty of
their colouring. I am satisfied with the more
humble merit of having perlifted with patient in-
duftry, in viewing my subjet in many various
lights, and in collecting from the most accurate ob-
servers such detacheJ, and often minute features,
as might enable me to exhibit a portrait that re-
fembles the original.

BEFORE I close this part of my work, one ob- General

c.lution With

servation more is neccfary, in order to justify the rfpet to
conclusions which I have formed, or to prevent thi"inq"ry

' Charlv. N. Fr. iii. 3z2.
VOL.II. P the

B °0 K the mistakes into which such as examine them may

IV.
..--._ fall. In contemplating the inhabitants of a coun-

try so widely extended as America, great attention
should be paid to the diversity of climates under
which they are placed. The influence of this I
have pointed out with refpet to several important
particulars, which have been the obje& of re-
search; but even where it has not been men-
tioned, it ought not to be overlooked. The pro-
vinces of America are of such different tempera.
ment, that this alone is sufficient to constitute a
diflinaion between their inhabitants. In every
part of the earth where man exists, the power of
climate operates, with decisive influence, upon his
condition and chara&cer. In those countries which
approach near to the extremes of heat or cold, this
influence is so conspicuous as to itrike every eye.
Whether we confider man merely as an animal,
or as a being endowed with rational powers which
fit him for activity and speculation, we shall find
that he has uniformly attained the greatest perfec-
tion of which his nature is capable, in the tempe-
rate regions of the globe. There his conflitution
is most vigorous, his organs molt acute, and his
form molt beautiful. There, too, he possesss a
superior extent of capacity, greater fertility of
imagination, more enterprising courage, and a
sensibility of heart which gives birth to passions,
not only ardent, but persevering. In this favourite
situation he has displaycd the utmoll efforts of his
genius, in literature, in policy, in commerce, in

war,

war, and in all the arts which improve or embel- B °o K
lilh life". ' .

THIS powerful operation of climate is felt most

sensibly by rude nations, and produces greater es-
sects than in societies more highly polished. The
talents of civilized men are continually exerted in
rendering their condition more comfortable ; and
by their ingenuity and inventions, they can, in a
great mealure, supply the defe&s, and guard
against the inconveniences of any climate. But the
improvident savage is afFWc'ed by every circum-
fiance peculiar to his situation. He takes no pre-
caution either to mitigate or to improve it. Like
a plant, or an animal, he is formed by the climate
under which he is placed, and feels the full force
of its influence.

IN surveying the rude nations of America, this
natural distinction between the inhabitants of the
temperate and torrid zones is very remarkable.
They may, accordingly, be divided into two great
clafTes. The one comprehends all the North Ame-
ricans, from the river St. Laurence to the Gulf of
Mexico, together with the people of Chili, and a
ifw fmnall tribes towards the extremity of the
southern continent. To the other belong all the
inhabitants of the islands, and thoie fettled in the
various provinces which extend from the ilthmus

U Dr. Fcrgufon's Eflay on the I-Ifil. of Civil Socict;', part
ii4. . c .

P 2 of

B °0 K of Darien almost to the southern confines of Bra.
i -X * fil, along the east fide of the Andes. In the for.

mer, the human species appears manifestly to be
more perfel. The natives are more robust, mt-re
acive, more intelligent, and more courageous.
They possess, in the molt eminent degree, tha:
force of mind, and love of independence, which 1
have pointed out as the chief virtues of man in his
savage state. They have defended their liberty
with persevering fortitude against the Europeans,
who subdued the other rude nations of America
with the greatest ease. The natives of the tempe.
rate zone are the only people in the New World
who are indebted for their freedom to their own
valour. The North Americans, though long en.
compafed by three formidable European powers,
still retain part of their original possessions, and
continue to exist as independent nations. The
people of Chili, though early invaded, fiill main-
tain a gallant contest with the Spaniards, and ha'v
set bounds to their encroachments; whereas, in
the warmer regions, men are more feeble in their
frame, less vigorous in the efforts of their mind,
of a gentle but daflardly spirit, more enslaved by
pleasure and funk in indolence. Accordingly, it
is in the torrid zone that the Europeans have
most completely ellablilhed their dominion over
America; the moll fertile and desirable provinccs
in it are fubjeted to their yoke; and if several
tribes there still enjoy independence, it is either
becaule they have never been attacked by an

lenllmy

enemy already satiated with conquest, and pof- °o° K
sessed of larger territories than he was able to oc- A -
cupy, or because they have been saved from op-
preflion by their remote and inaccessible situation.

CONSPICUOUS as this distinction may appear be-

tween the inhabitants of those different regions,
it is not, however, universal. Moral and political
causes, as I have formerly observed, affect the
disposition and character of individuals as well as
nations, still more powerfully than the influence
of climate. There are, accordingly, some tribes,
in various parts of the torrid zone, poffefled of
courage, high spirit, and the love of independence,
in a degree hardly inferior to the natives of more
temperate climates. We are too little acquainted
with the hiltory of those people, to be able to
trace the several circumstances in their progress
and situation, to which they are indebted for this
remarkable pre-eminence. The fa&, neverthe-
Iefs, is certain. As early as the first voyage
of Columbus, he received information that feve-
ral of the islands were inhabited by the Caribbees,
a fierce race of men, nowise resembling their
feeble and timid neighbours. In his second ex-
pedition to the New World, he found this in-
formation to be just, and was himself a witness of
their intrepid valour . The fame charater they
have maintained invariably in all subsequent con-

Life of Columbus, c. 47, 48. Sec NOTE LXVIl.

P 3 tests

B o o K tests with the people of our continentr; and,

IV.

- even in our own times, we have seen them make

a gallant stand in defence of the last territory
which the rapacity of the Europeans had left in
their poffeflion Z. Some nations in Brasil were no
less eminent for vigour of mind, and bravery in
war . The people of the isthmus of Darien
boldly met the Spaniards in the field, and fre-
quently repelled those formidable invadersb. Other
instances might be produced. It is not by attend-
ing to any single cause or principle, however
powerful and extensive its influence may appear,
that we can explain the actions, or account for rte
characer, of men. Even the law of climate,
more universal, perhaps, in its operation than any
that afects the human species, cannot be applied,
in judging of their conduct, without many ex.
ceptions.

y Rochefort Iiff. des Antillks, 53r.

Sec NOTE LXVIII.

a Lery ap. de Bry, iii. 207, &c.
b Herlerd, dec. i. lib. x. c. 15, &c.; dec. z. pjftim.

# BOOK V.

THE

FHTISTORY
H I S T O R Y

OF
A M E RI CA.

BOOK V.
W HEN Grijalva returned to Cuba, he found B 0 0 K

the armament destined to attempt the con-

quest of that rich country which he had disco- PrcL,,,ton
vered, almost complete. Not only ambition, but of velaf-

' quz for in-
avarice, had urged Vclafquez to haften his prepa- vaiin- New

'

-- - Spain.

rations; and having such a profpec of gratifying
both, he had advanced considerable fums out of
his private fortune towards defraying the expence.
At the fame time, he exerted his influrnce as go-
vernor, in engaging the most diftinguilhed persons
in the colony to undertake the lirvice". At a
time when the spirit of the Sp.inifh nation was ad-
venturous to excels, a number of lolliers, eager
to embark in any daring enterp[rl-, loion appeared.
But it was not Ib easy to find a prrlon qualified to
take the command in an expedition of so much

See NOT E LXIX.

P 4 importance;

B ooV K importance; and the character of Velasquez, who
r^ v had the right of nomination, greatly increased the

5r'8' difficulty of the choice. Though of most aspiring

ambition, and not deflitute of talents for govern.
ment, he possessed neither such courage, nor such
vigour and activity of mind, as to undertake in
person the conduct of the armament which he was
preparing. In this embarrassing situation, he
formed the chimerical scheme, not only of atchiev.
ing great exploits by a deputy, but of securing to
himself the glory of conquests which were to be
made by another. In the execution of this plan,
he fondly aimed at reconciling contradictions. 1-c
was solicitous to chute a commander of intrepid
resolution, and of superior abilities, because he
knew there to be requisite in order to ensure fuc-
cess but, at the fame time, from the jealouly
natural to little minds, he wished this person to be
of a spirit so tame and obsequious, as to be en-
tirely dependant on his will. But when he came
to apply those ideas in forming an opinion con-
cerning the several officers who occurred to his
thoughts as worthy of being entrusted with the
command, he soon perceived that it was impossible
to find such incompatible qualities united in one
character. Such as were distinguished for courage
and talents were too high-fpirited to be passive in-
ftruments in his hand. Thofc who appeared more
gentle and tractable, were destitute of capacity,
and unequal to the charge. This augmented his
perplexity and his fears. He deliberated long,

3 and

and with much solicitude, and was fill wavering a ovO K
in his choice, when Amador de Lares, the royal t
treasurer in Cuba, and Andres Duero, his own '5'8'
secretary, the two persons in whom he chiefly con-
fided, were encouraged by this irresolution to pro-
pose a new candidate, and they supported their
recommendation with such assiduity and address,
that, no less fatally for Velasquez than happily for
their country, it proved successful b

THE man whom they pointed out to him was He appoint

Cortes com.

Fernando Cortes. He was born at Medellin, a amncr.
small town in Estremadura, in the year one thou-
sand four hundred and eighty-five, and delcended
from a family of noble blood, but of very mode-
rate fortune. Being originally destined by his
parents to the fludy of law, as the molt likely
method of bettering his condition, he was sent
early to the university of Salamanca, where he
imbibed some tincure of learning. But he was
soon disgusted with an academic life, which did
not suit his ardent and restless genius, and retired
to Medellin, where he gave himself up entirely to
asive sports and martial exercises. At this pe-
riod of life, he was so impetuous, so overbearing,
and so diffipaced, that his father was glad to com-
ply with his inclination, and fend him abroad as
an adventurer in arms. There were in that age
two conspicuous theatres, on which 'iuch of the

b B. Diaz. c. 9. Gomara Cron. c. 7. Ilercera, dec. z.
lib. iii . c. 1 .

Spanish

B O o K Spani(h youth as courted military glory might dif.

._ play their valour; one in Italy, under the corn.
518S. mand of the Great Captain; the other in the New

World. Cortes preferred the former, but was
prevented by indisposition from embarking with a
reinforcement of troops sent to Naples. Upon
this disappointment he turned his views towards
America, whither he was allured by the pro.
fpe& of the advantages which he might derive
from the patronage of Ovando', the governor of
Hispaniola, who was his kinfnian. When he
landed at St. Domingo in one thousand five hun.
dred and four, his reception was such as equalled
his mos sanguine hopes, and he was employed
by the governor in several honourable and lucra.
tive stations. These, however, did not satisfy his
ambition; and in the year one thousand five hun-
dred and eleven, he obtained permission to ac.
company Diego Velasquez in his expedition to
Cuba. In this service he diftinguifled himfelffo
much, that, notwithstanding fume violent con.
tests with Velasquez, occasioned by trivial events,
unworthy of remembrance, he was at length taken
into favour, and received an ample conceflion of
lands and of Indians, the recompence usually be.
stowed upon adventurers in the New World'.

THOUGH Cortes had not hitherto aced in high
command, he had displayed such qualities in le-

See NOTE L\X.
d Gromar. Cron. c. I, z, 3.

velal

veral scenes of difficulty and danger, as raised uni- B o°o °
verlal expectation, and turned the eyes of his
countrymen towards him, as one capable of per- 5iL
forming great things. The turbulence of youth,
as soon as he found objeds and occupations
suited to the ardour of his mind, gradually sub-
fided, and fettled into a habit of regular indefa-
tigable activity. The impetuosity of his temper,
when he came to aft with his equals, insensibly
abated, by being kept under restraint, and mel-
lowed into a cordial soldierly frankness. These
qualities were accompanied with calm prudence in
concerting his schemes, with persevering vigour in
executing them, and with what is peculiarto fu-
perior genius, the art of gaining the confidence
and governing the minds of men. To all which
were added the inferior accomplishments chat ltrike
the vulgar, and command their refpet; a grace-
ful perlon, a winning asped, extraordinary ad-
dress in martial exercises, and a constitution of
such vigour as to be capable of enduring any
fatigue.

As soon as Cortes was mentioned to Velasquez

by his two confidents, he flattered himself that he
had at length found what he had hitherto fought
in vain, a man with talents for cormmand, but
not an object of jcalouly. Neither the rank nor
the fortune of Cortes, as he imagined, were such
that lie could aliire at indcl cndence. lie had
realon to believe, that by his own readinrls to

buLIry

B O O K bury ancient animofities in oblivion, as well as his
.---. liberality in conferring several recent favours, he

I5'8' had already gained the good-will of Cortes, and

hoped, by this new and unexpected mark of con.
fidence, that he might attach him for ever to his
interest.

Soon be- CORTES, receiving his commission with the
ous ofhim. warmest expreions of refpe& and gratitude to the
OoftLc23. governor, immediately erected his standard before

his own house, appeared in a military dress, and
assumed all the ensigns of his new dignity. His
utmost influence and activity were exerted in per-
fuading many of his friends to engage in the ser-
vice, and in urging forward the preparations for
the voyage. All his own funds, together with
what money he could raise by mortgaging his
lands and Indians, were expended in purchaCing
military stores and proviions, or in supplying the
wants of such of his officers as were unable to
equip themselves in a manner suited to their
rank'. Inoffensive, and even laudable as this con.
duct was, his disappointed competitors were mali-
cious enough to give it a turn to his disadvantage.
They represented him as aiming already, with
little disguise, at eftablilhing an independent au-
thority over his troops, and endeavouring to fccure
their refpeA or love by his ostentatious and in-
terested liberality. They reminded Velasquez of

* See NOTE LXXI.

iss

his former dissensions with the man in whom he B 0o0 K
now reposed so much confidence, and foretold that -
Cortes would be more apt to avail himself of the 5'.
power, which the governor was inconsiderately
putting in his hands, to avenge past injuries,
than to requite late obligations. These infinua-
lions made such impression upon the suspicious
mind of Velasquez, that Cortes soon observed some
symptoms of a growing alienation and distrust in
his behaviour, and was advised by Lares and
!Luero, to haften his departure, before there (hould
become so confirmed, as to break out with open
violence. Fully sensible of this danger, he urged
forward his preparations with such rapidity, that
he set fail from St. Jago de Cuba on the eighteenth
of November, Velasquez accompanying him to
the shore, and taking leave of him with an ap-
pearance of perfec friendlhip and confidence,
though he had secretly given it in charge to some
of Corres's officers, to keep a watchful eye upon
every part of their commander's conduc '.

CORTES proceeded to Trinidad, a small fettle- Endeavour,

to deprive
mcnt on the fame fide of the island, where he was him of his

commiflion,

joined by several adventurers, and received a sup-
ply of provisions and military stores, of which his
flock was still very incomplete. He had hardly
left St. Jago, when the jealousy which had been
working in the breast of Velasquez, grew so vio-

Gomara Cron. c. -. B. Dia7, c. 20.

lent,

B 0 0 K lent, that it was impoflible to suppress it. The

V. --.-_ ^ armament was no longer under his own eye and
'5'S 'direction; and he felt, that as his power over it

ceased, that of Cortes became more absolute.
Imagination now aggravated every circumstance,
which had formerly excited suspicion: the rivals
of Cortes industriously threw in refleetions which
increased his fears; and with no less art than ma-
lice they called superstition to their aid, employing
the predictions of an astrologer in order to corn
plete the alarm. All there, by their united opera.
tion, produced the desired etffl. Velalquez re-
pented bitterly of his own imprudence, in havip
committed a trust of so much importance to a per.
son whose fidelity appeared so doubtful, and hafily
dispatched inftrutions to Trinidad, empowering
Verdugo, the chief magiflrate there, to deprive
Cortes of his commiflion. But Cortes had already
made such progress in gaining the esteem and con-
fidence of his troops, that, finding officers as well
as soldiers equally zealous to fnpport his authority,
he soothed or intimidated Verdugo, and was per.
mitted to depart trom Trinidad without mo.
legtation.

ni ion lay FROM Trinidad Cortes failed for the Havana,
him udecr
lekurt. in order to raise more loldiers, and to complete

the vitualling of his fleet. There Ieveral perions
of dillinaton entered into the service, and engaged
to lupply what provifinns were still wanting but
as it was neccf'Lry to allow them lome time tor

i' pepci'l rming

performing what they had promised, Velasquez, B O O K
enfible that he ought no longer to rely on a man a
of whom he had so openly discovered his distrust, 15'S'
availed himself of the interval, which this un-
avoidable delay afforded, in order to make one
attempt more to wrest the command out of the
hands of Cortes. He loudly complained of Ver-
dogo's conduc, accusing him either of childish
facility, or of maniftlt treachery, in fuffcring
Cortes to escape from Trinidad. Anxious to guard
againfl a second disappointment, he lent a person
of confidence to the Havana, with peremptory in-
uncions to Pedro Barba, his lieutenant-governor
n that colony, instantly to arrest Cortes, to fend
him prisoner to St. Jago under a firong guard, and
to countermand the failing of the armanment until
he lhould receive farther orders. He wrote like-
wife to the principal officers, requiring them to
alift Barba in executing what he had given him
n charge. But before the arrival of his messenger,
Franciscan friar of St. Jago had secretly con-
reyed an account of this intereiting tranlcation
o Bartholomew de Olnedo, a monk of the
ame order, who acted as chaplain to the expe-

Aion.

CORTES, forewarned of the danger, had time Cortle-
o take precautions for his own fatety. His Crer.,
i fLt ep was to find lome pretext for removinig ,,J'",,',,
rom the Havana Diego dt Oilaz, an officer ors '"'P.-
r:at merit, but in whom, on account of his

known

B o0 K known attachment to Velasquez, he could not

V.
V--' confide in this trying and delicate juncture. He
'51'3 gave him the command of a veflel, destined to

take on board some provisons in a small harbour
beyond Cape Antonio, and thus made sure of his
absence, without seeming to fufpec his fidelity.
When he was gone, Cortes no longer concealed
the intentions of Velasquez from his troops; and
as officers and soldiers were equally impatient to
set out on an expedition, in preparing for which
molt of them had expended all their fortune, they
exprefled their aftonilhment and indignation at
that illiberal jealousy, to which the governor was
about to sacrifice, not only the honour of their ge-
neral, but all their sanguine hopes of glory and
wealth. With one voice they intreated that he
would not abandon the important station to which
he had such a good title. They conjured him
not to deprive them of a leader whom they fol-
lowed with such well-founded confidence, and of-
sered to shed the last drop of their blood in main-
taining his authority. Cortes was easily induced
to comply with what he so ardently desired. H-I
swore that he would never desert soldiers who had
given him such a signal proof of their attachment,
and promised instantly to conduct them to that
rich country, which had been so long the object
of their thoughts and wishes. This declaration
was received with tranlports of military applause,
accompanied with threats and imprecations against
all who should presume to call in queflion tleju-

rildi i0on

rifdicfion of their general, or to obftrut the exe- B o°° K
cution of his designs. ;

15$8.

EVERY thing was now ready for their departure: The a-

but though this expedition was fitted out by the hi force..
united effort of the Spanish power in Cuba;
though every settlement had contributed its quota
of men and provisions; though the governor had
laid out considerable fums, and each adventurer
had exhausted his flock, or (trained his credit, the
poverty of the preparations was such as must afto-
ni(h the present age, and bore, indeed, no refem-
blance to an armament destined for the conquest
of a great empire. The fleet consisted of eleven
vessels; the largest of a hundred tons, which was
dignified with the name of Admiral; three of fe-
venry or eighty tons, and the refl small open
barks. On board of there were fix hundred and
seventeen men; of which five hundred and eight
belonged to the land service, and a hundred and
nine were seamen or artificers. The soldiers were
divided into eleven companies, according to the
number of the ships; to each of which Cortes ap-
pointed a captain, and zommitted to him the com-
mand of the vessel while at sea, and of the men
when on shore . As the use of fire-arms among
the nations of Europe was hitherto confined to a
few battalions of regularly disciplined infantry,
only thirteen soldiers were armed with nufkets,

z See NOTE ,XXrr.
VOL. I r. .2 thirty-

B o O K thirty-two were crofs-bow-men, and the reft had
-----swords and spears. Instead of the usual defenlive

518. armour, which must have been cumnberome in a

hot climate, the soldiers wore jackets quilted
with cotton, which experience had taught the
Spaniards to be a sufficient protection against the
weapons of the Americans. They had only sixteen
horses, ten small field-pieces, and four falconets h.

Feb. o, WIWIrH this (lender and ill-provided train did

1519.

His dcpar. Cortes set fail, to make war upon a monarch
ture from
Cub,' whose dominions were more extensive than all the

kingdoms fubjeft to the Spanilh crown. As reli-
gious enthusiasm always mingled with the Ipirit of
adventure in the New World, and, by a combina-
tion still more strange, united with avarice, in
prompting the Spaniards to all their enterprilss, a
large cross was displayed in their standards, with
this inscription, Let us follow the cross, for under
this sign wetiall conquer.

So powerfully were Cqrte r and his fullowers

animated with both these pafions, that no leIs
eager to plunder the opulent country whither they
were bound, than zealous to propagate the Christ-
ian faith among its inhabitants, they set out, not
with the solicitude natural to men going upon dan-
gerous service, but with that confidence whiti
ariles from security of success, and certainty of the
divine )pr.,teition.

k B. Diaz. c. I,;.

As

As Cortes had determined to touch at every B 0
place which Grijalva had visited, he fleered di- -~-
redly towards the island of Cozumel ; there he To.¢ces at
had the good fortune to redeem Jerome de Agui- Cuz""1'l;
lar, a Spaniard, who had been eight years a pri-
loner among the Indians. This man was perfecaly
acquainted with a dialec of their language, under-
stood through a large extent of country, and pof-
felling besides a considerable lhare of prudence
and sagacity, proved extremely useful as an inter-
preter. From Cozumel, Cortes proceeded to the March 4.
river of Tabasco, in hopes of a reception as bafi,.
friendly as Grijalva had met with there, and of
finding gold in the fame abundance; but the dif-
position of the natives, from some unknown cause,
was totally changed. After repeated endeavours
to conciliate their good-will, he was constrained to
have recourse to violence. Though the forces of
the enemy were numerous, and advanced with ex-
traordinary courage, they were routed, with great
slaughter, in several successive acions. The loss
which they sustained, al frill more the aftonifl-
ment and terror excited by the deflructivc efftc
of the fire-arms, and the dreadful appearance of
the horses, humbled their fierce spirits, and in-
duced them to sue for peace. They acknow-
ledged the king of Caflile as their sovereign, and
granted Cortes a supply of provisions, with a pre-
lent of cotton garments, some gold, and twenty
female saves '.

t Sec NOTE I.XX!I[.

Q 'z CORTaS

B o0 K CORTES continued his course to the westward,

V.
A_ - keeping as near the shore as poflible, in order to
ATi'.9t observe the country; but could discover no pro.
SiuJa'". d per place for landing, until he arrived at St. Juan
ADri . de Ulua k. As he entered this harbour, a large

canoe, full of people, among whom were two
who seemed to be persons of diltincion, approached
his ship, with signs of peace and amity. They
came on board without fear or distrust, and ad-
dressed him in a most refpecfful manner, but in a
language altogether unknown to Aguilar. Cortes
was in the utmost perplexity and distress, at an
event of which he instantly foresaw all the confe-
quences, and already felt the hesitation and uncer-
tainty with which he should carry on the great
schemes which he meditated, if, in his tranf-
a&tions with the natives, he must depend entirely
upon such an imperfe&t, ambiguous, and conjec-
tural mode of communication, as the use of signs.
But he did not remain long in this embarrasing
situation: a fortunate accident extricated him,
when his own fagacity4ould have contributed
little towards his relief. One of the female slaves,
whom he had received from the cazique of Ta-
balco, happened to be prefcnt at the firlt inter-
view between Cortes and his new guests. She per-
ceived his distress, as well as the confusion c;
Aguilar; and as she perfectly underllood ti;e
Mexican language, Ihe explained what they li:l

k B. Dia,. c. 31-36. Gomara Cron. c. 13-2;. ! -
rcra, dec. 2. lib. iv. c. Ir, &c.

in

in the Yucatan tongue, with which Aguilar was B O, K
acquainted. This woman, known afterwards by -
the name of Donna Marina, and who makes a *519.
conspicuous figure in the history of the New World,
where great revolutions were brought about by
small causes and inconsiderable instruments, was
born in one of the provinces of the Mexican em-
pire. Having been carried off a captive by some
holtile party, after a variety of adventures she fell
into the hands of the Tabafcans, and had resided
long enough among them to acquire their lan-
guage, without losing the ule of her own. Though
it was both tedious and troublesome to converse
by the intervention of two different interpreters,
Corres was so highly pleated with having disco-
vered this method of carrying on Come inter-
courlf with :he people of a country into which he
was determined to penetrate, that in the transports
of his joy he confidered it as a visible interposition
of Providence in his favour '.

HE now learned, that the two persons whom he Lands his

had received on board of his ship were deputies "t"PS.
from Pilpatoe and Teutile; the one governor of
that province under a great monarch, whom they
called Montezuma, and the other the commander
of his forces there; and that they were sint to in-
quire what his intentions were in viliting their
coalt, and to offer him what alilftance he might

B. Diaz. c. 37, 38, 39. Gomara Cron. c. 25, z6. Icr-
rcra, dec. 2. lib. v. c. 4.

Q 3 need,

B o0 K need, in order to continue his voyage. Cortes;

-- struck with the appearance of those people, as
'5'9' well as the tenor of the message, assured them, in

respectful terms, that he approached their country
with most friendly sentiments, and came to pro.
pole matters of great importance to the welfare of
their prince and his kingdom, which he would un.
fold more fully, in person, to the governor and
the general. Next morning, without waiting for
any answer, he landed his troops, his horses and
artillery; and having chosen proper ground, be-
gan to ereA huts for his men, and to fortify
his camp. The natives, instead of oppoing the
entrance of those fatal guests into their country,
assisted them in all their operations, with an ala-
crity of which they had ere long good reason to
repent.

HiS fir in- NEXT day, Pilpatoe and Teutile entered the
.t1h the Spanish camp with a numerous retinue, and Corces

xi confidering them as the ministers of a great

monarch, entitled to a degree of attention very
different from that which-the Spaniards were ac-
customed to pay to the petty Caziques, witl
whom they had intercourse in the isles, received
them with much formal ceremony. le informed
them, that he came as ambassador from Don
Carlos of Austria, king of Caflile, the greatrd
nionarch of the East, and was intrusted with pi(-
positions of such moment, that he could inmpart
thema to nonc but the emperor Montczuma liill-

iclt,

seif, and therefore required them to condu&t him, B 0°o K
without loss of time, into the presence of their -
malter. The Mexican officers could not conceal '1S9.
their uneasiness at a request, which they knew
to be disagreeable, and which they foresaw might
prove extremely embarrafling to their sovereign,
whose mind had been filled with many disquieting
apprehensions, ever since the former appearance of
the Spaniards on his coasts. But before they at-
tempted to dissuade Cortes from inifting on this
demand, they endeavoured to conciliate his good-
will, by entreating him to accept of certain pre-
sints, which, as humble saves of Montezuma,
they laid at his feet. These were introduced with
great parade, and confifed of fine cotton cloth, of
plumes of various colours, and of ornaments of
gold and silver, to a considerable value; the
workmanship of which appeared to be as curious
as the materials were rich. The display of there
produced an effect very different from what the
Mexicans intended. Instead of satisfying, it in-
creased the avidity of the Spaniards, and rendered
them tb eager and impatient to become masters of
a country which abounded with such precious pro-
ldudions, that Cortes could hardly liften with pa-
tience to the arguments which Pilpatoe and Teu-
tile employed to dissuade him from visiting the
capital, and in a haughty determined tone he in-
tilted on his demand, of being admitted to a per-
lonal audlicnce of their sovereign. During this
interview, tume painters, in the train of the Mexi-

Q, 4 canr

B o0 K can chiefs, had been diligently employed in deli.

V.
*. ;- & nearing, upon white cotton cloths, figures of the

5'9' ships, the horses, the artillery, the loldiers, and

whatever else attracted their eyes, as singular.
When Cortes observed this, and was informed
that thele picures were to be sent to Montezuma,
in order to convey to him a more lively idea
of the strange and wonderful objecs now presented
to their view, than any words could communicate,
lie resolved to render the representation fill more
animated and interefling, by exhibiting such a
fpecacle as might give both them and their
monarch an awful impression of the extraordinary
prowess of his followers, and the irresistible force
of their arms. The trumpets, by his order,
founded an alarm; the troops, in a moment,
formed in order of battle, the infantry performed
such martial exercises as were best suited to dil-
play tie effect of their different weapons; the
horle, in various evolutions, gave a specimen of
their agility and strength; the artillery pointed to-
wards the tlick woods which surrounded the
camp, made dreadful havoc among the trees. ] he
Mexicans looked on with that silent amazement,
which is natural when the mind is struck with ob-
jects, which are both awful and above its compre-
henfion. But, at the explosion of the cannon,
many of them fled, some fell to the ground, and
all were so much confounded at the fight of men
whole power so nearly resembled.! that of the Gods,
that Cortes found it difficult to compole and re-

(i assure

aflure them. The painters had now many new ob- B °O J
jeas on which to exercise their art, and they put i -.
their fancy on the stretch in order to invent figures '5'9
and characters to reprelent the extraordinary things
which they had icen.

MESSENGERS were immediately dispatched to tetg¢c; -
Montezuma with those picures, and a full account Monte-

zuma.

of every thing that had passed since the arrival of
the Spaniards, and by them Cortes sent a present
oitonic European curiorities to Montezuma, which,
though of no great value, he believed would be
acceptable on account of their novelty. The
Mexican monarchs, in order to obtain early in-
formation of every occurrence in all the corners of
their vast empire, had introduced a refinement in
police, unknown, at that time, in Europe. They
hlid couriers potted at proper Itations along the
principal roads; and as there were trained to agi-
lity by a regular education, and relieved one an-
uther at moderate distances, they conveyed intel-
ligence with surprising rapidity. Though the ca-
pital in which Montezuma resided was above a
';tinclrec and eighty miles from St. Juan de Ulua,
Cortks's presents were carried thither, and an an-
Isvcr to his demands was received in a few days.
'il'e fLme officers who had hitherto treated with
tic Spaniards, were employed to deliver this an-
iwer; but as they knew how repugnant the deter-
:1ira;ion of their master was to all the fchenes and
Aii.hes of the Spanilh commander, they would not

venture

B 0o K venture to make it known until they had pre.

.-.- vioufly endeavoured to soothe and mollify him,
Hi^st Sos this purpose, they renewed the negociation,

t by introducing a train of a hundred Indians, loaded

with presents sent to him by Montezuma. The
magnificence of these was such as became a great
monarch, and far exceeded any idea which the
Spaniards had hitherto formed of his wealth.
They were placed upon mats spread on the ,roun,',
in such order, as shewed them to the greatest ad.
vantage. Cortes and his officers viewed, with a!.
miration, the various manufacures of the country,
cotton stuffs so fine, and of such delicate text!:.-,
as to resemble silk; pictures of animals, treer, and
other natural objeEts, formed with feathers of di-:
ferent colours, disposed and mingled with fui;
skill and elegance, as to rival the works of the
pencil in truth and beauty of imitation. E3u
what chiefly attracted their eyes, were two lard,
plates of a circular form, one of marTive gold ic.
presenting the fun, the other of silver, an emblem
of the moon". These were accompanied lKith
bracelets, collars, rings, and other trinkets c;
gold; and that nothing might be wanting whicd
could give the Spaniards a complete icdea of wl,:;
the country afforded, with some boxes filll.d xvil
pearls, precious stones, and grains of tl,,ll I1u
wrought, as they had been founl in the 11)i1I
or rivers. Cortes rtceivcd all there mith i;:

S' SI-' N OTE l.XX.V.

aI p
r'tr.:i .

appearance of profound veneration for the moo B 0Ov0 K
narch by whom they were bestowed. But when _-
the Mexicans, presuming upon this, informed Sorb,9
him, that their master, though he desired him to Copre to

approach

accept of what he had sent as a token of his regard his capit'l.
for the monarch whom Cortes reprcfented, would
not give his consent that foreign troops ohould ap-
proach nearer to his capital, or even allow them. to
continue longer in his dominions, ,thc Spanish ge-
neral declared, in a manner more resolute and per-
emptory than formerly, that he muff insist on his
first demand, as he could not, without dilhonour,
return to his own sovereign, until. he was admit-
ted into the pretence of the prince whom he was
appointed to visit in his name. The Mexicans,
aitonilhed at feeing any man dare to oppose .that
will, which they were accustomed to confider as
fLpreme and irresistible, yet afraid of precipitating
their country into an open rupture with such for-
midable enemies, prevailed with Cortes to promise,
that he would not move from his present camp,
until the return of a messenger, .whom they sent to
Montezuma for farther initruCtions".

THE firmness with which Cortes adhered to his sw,, of the

original proposal, should naturally have brought .. .at
the negociation between him and Montezuma to a that peniod.
speedy issue, as it seemed to leave the Mexican
monarch no choice, but either to receive him with

E. Di.iz. c. 3 Goinara Cron. c. 27. llerrcra, dec. z.
l;b. v. c. 5, 6.

cofIci.icc

X o0o K confidence as afriend, or to oppose him openly

V.
<- - >as aan enemy. The latter was what might have

J5'9' been expected from a haughty prince in pofcfiuon

of extensive power. The Mexican empire, at
this period, was- at -a pitch of grandeur to which
ho sOciety ever attained in so short a per;od.
Though it had subsisted only a hundred and thirty
years, its dominion extended from the North to
the South Sea, over territories stretching, with
some small interruption, above five hundred leagues
from east to weft, and more than two hundred
from north to south, comprehending provinces
not inferior in fertility, population, and opulence
to any in the torrid zone. The people were war.
like and enterprising. The authority of the mo.
nsrch unbounded, and his revenues considerable.
If, with the forces which might have been fud.
denly assembled in such an empire, Montezuma
had fallen upon the Spaniards while encamped
on a barren unhealthy coast, unsupported by any
ally, without a place of retreat, and destitute of
provisions, it is impossible, even with all the ad-
vantages of their superior discipline and arms, that
they could have stood the shock, and they m:ist
either have perished in such an unequal contest,
or have abandoned the enterprise.

charaacrof As the power of Montezuma enabled him
tlhs', to take this spirited part, his own dispositions

seemed naturally to prompt him to it. Oi
all the princes who had swayed the Mexic. n
sceptre, he was the rmolt haughty, the moll

violent,

violent, and the. most impatient of controul. His B Oy K
fubjets looked up to him with awe, and his o-f
enemies with terror. The former he governed '59'
with unexampled rigour, but they were impressed
with such an opinion of his capacity, as com-
manded their refpe&; and, by many victories over
the latter, he had spread far the dread of his arms,
and had added several considerable provinces to
his dominions. But though his talents might be
suited to the tranfacions of a state so imperfealy
polished as the Mexican empire, and sufficient to
conduct them while in their accustomed course,
they were alogethcr inadequate to a conjunture so
extraordinary, and did not qualify him either to
judge with the discernment, or to as with the de-
cifion, requisite in such a trying emergence.

FROM the moment that the Spaniards appeared H"l p";r
on his coast, he discovered symptoms of timidity terrorupon

- ' r } the arrival

and embarrassment. Initead of taking such refo. of the spa.
lutions as the consciousness of his own power, or
the memory of his former exploits, might have in-
spired, he deliberated with an anxiety and hefita.
tion which did not escape the notice of his meanest
courtiers, The perplexity and discomposure of
Montezuma's mind upon this occasion, as well as
the general dismay of his fubjecs, were not owing
wholly to the impression which the Spaniards had
made by the novelty of their appearance and the
terror of their arms. Its origin may be traced up
to a more remote source. There was an opinion,

if

B o o K if we may believe the earliest and most authentic

-'- * Spanish historians, almost universal among the
's9-' Americans, that some dreadful calamity was im-

pending over their heads, from a race of formi.
dable invaders who should come from regions to.
wards the riling fun, to overrun and desolate their
country. Whether this disquieting apprehension
flowed from the memory of some natural calamity
which had affliced that part of the globe, and im.
pressed the minds of the inhabitants with fuperlti.
tious fears and forebodings, or whether it was an
imagination accidentally suggested by the astonish-
ment which the first fight of a new race of men
occasioned, it is impossible to determine. But as
the Mexicans were more prone to superstition than
any people in the New World, they were more
deeply affe&ed with the appearance of the Spa-
niards, whom their credulity inifantly reprefcnted
as the inltruments destined to bring about this fa.
tal revolution which they dreaded. Under those
circumltances, it ceases to be incredible that a
handful of adventurers should alarm the monarch
of a great empire, and all his fubjets °.

Continues NOTWITHSTANDING the influence of this im-l
aI".. preflon, when the messenger arrived from the

Spaniih camp with an account that Cortes, ad-
hering to his original demand, refused to obey the

9 Cortes Relaiine Seconda, ap. Ramus. iii. 2.4, 2lt

H errera, dec. z. lib. iii. c. . lib. v. c.ll. lib. vii. c.
Gomnra Cron. c. 66. ;z. 144.

8 orJcl

order enjoining him to leave the country, Monte- °0 o K
zuma assumed some degree of resolution, and, in -
a transport of rage natural to a fierce prince un- '5'9'
accuflomed to meet with any opposition to his
will, he threatened to sacrifice those presumptuous
firangers to his gods. But his doubts and fears
quickly returned, and inflead of issuing orders to
carry his threats into execution, he again called his
miniifers to confer and offer their advice. Feeble
and temporizing measures will always be the result
when men assemble to deliberate in a situation
where they ought to aft. The Mexican counsel-
lors took no effeaual measure for expelling such
troubllbome intruders, and were satisfied with
issuing a more positive injuntion, requiring them
to leave the country; but this they prepofteroufy
accompanied with a present of such value, as
proved a frelh inducement to remain there.

MEANWHILE, the Spaniards were not without Anxiety and

apprehien.
solicitude or a variety of sentiments, in delibe- finsofthe

Spaniards.

rating concerning their own future conduct. From
what they had already seen, many of them formed
such extravagant ideas concerning the opulence
of the country, that, despising danger or hard-
liips, when they had in view treasures which ap-
peared to be inexhaustible, they were eager to at-
tempt the conquest. Others, estimating the power
of the Mexican empire by its wealth, and enu-

rcrating the various proofs which had occurred of
its being under a well-regulated administration,

con tended,

B o o0 K contended, that it would be an aft of the wilder
i..-4. frenzy to attack such a state with a small body of

'5'9' men, in want of provisions, unconne&ted with any

ally, and already enfeebled by the diseases peculiar
to the climate, and the loss of several of their num.
ber P. Cortes fecrecly applauded the advocates
for bold measures, and cherished their romantic
hopes, as such ideas corresponded with his own,
and favoured the execution of the schemes which
he had formed. From the time that the fufpi.ions
of Velasquez broke out with open violence in the
attempts to deprive Cortes of the comand, he saw

Schmes of the neceslity of dilfolving a connetion which
Cortes.

would obftrua and embarrass all his operatio-s,
and watched for a proper opportunity of coming
to a final rupture with him. Having this in
view, he had laboured by every art to secure the
esteem and affetion of his soldiers. With h:s
abilities for command, it was easy to gain their
esteem ; and his followers were quickly fatisfie
that they might rely, with perfect confidence, on
the condut and courage of their leader. Nor was
it more difficult to acquire their affetion. Among
adventurers, nearly of the fame rank, and ferv;r.
at their own expence, the dignity of command d;d
not elevate a general above mingling with t'uoli
who aEted under him. Cortes availed himfeil or
of this freedom of intercourse, to insinuate himlicl
into their favour, and by his affable manners, b)

P B. Diaz. c. 40.

wcfl

well-timed a&s of liberality to some, by inspiring °V° K
all with vast hopes, and by allowing them to trade '
privately with the natives q, he attached the greater 5
part of his soldiers so firmly to himself, that they
almost forgot that the armament had been fitted
out by the authority, and at the expence, ot an-
other.

DURING those intrigues, Teutile arrived with H:s addreti

In carryiqg

the present from Montezuma, and, together with them on.
it, delivered the ultimate order of that monarch
to depart instantly out of his dominions; and
when Cortes, instead of complying, renewed his
request of an audience, the Mexican turned fron
him abruptly, and quitted the camp with looks
and gestures which strongly expresscd his surprise
and resentment. -Next morning, none of the na-
tives, who used to frequent the camp in great
numbers, in order to barter with the soldiers, and
to bring in provisions, appeared. All friendly
correspondence seemed now to be at an end, and
it was expe6ted every moment that hostilities
would commence. This, though an event that
might have been soresen, occasioned a sudden
consternation among the Spaniards, which em-
boldened the adherents of Velasquez not only to
murmur and cabal against their general, but to
appoint one of their number to remonttrarc openly
against his imprudence in attempting the conquclt

I See NOTE LXXV.
VOL. II. R of

B o o K of a mighty empire with such inadequate force,

and to urge the necelity of returning to Cuba, in
'S'9' order to refit the fleet and augment the army.

Diego de Ordaz, one of his principal officers,
whom the malcontents charged with this com-
miflion, delivered it with a soldierly freedom and
bluntness, assuring Cortes that he spoke the fcnti-
ments of the whole army. He lilened to this re.
monllrance without any appearance of emotion, and
as he well knew the temper and wifes of his fol-
dJicrs, and foresaw how they would receive a pro.
position fatal at once to all the splendid hopes and
schemes which they had been forming with such
complacency, he carried his dissimulation so far as
to seem to relinquilh his own measures in compli-
ance with the request of Ordaz, and iffled orders
that the army should be in readiness next day to
reimbark for Cuba. As soon as this vas known,
the disappointed adventurers exclaimed and threat.
ened the emifaries of Cortes, mingling with
them, inflamed their rage; the ferment became
general; the whole camp was almost in open mu-
tiny; all demanding with eagerness to fee their
commander. Cortes was not flow in appearing;
when, with one voice, officers and soldiers cx-
prefied their afonifinent and indignation at tile
orders which they had received. It was unworthy,
they cried, of the Castilian courage, to be daunted
at the first afpe& of danger, and infamnous to lu
before any enemy appeared. For their parts, they
were determined not to relinquish an cntclrrilc,

thlic

that had hitherto been successful, and which B °0 K
tended so visibly to spread the knowledge of true w-o-
religion, and to advance the glory and interest of 5'9
theircountry. Happy under his command, they
would follow him with alacrity through every
danger, in quest of those settlements and treatures
which he had so long held out to their view; but
if he chose rather to return to Cuba, and tamely
give up all his hopes of distinction and opulence
to an envious rival, they would instantly chufe an-
other general to conduct them in that path oi
glory, which he had not fpiric to enter.

CORTES, delighted with their ardour, tool; no
offence at the boldness with which it was uttered.
The sentiments were what he himself had inspired,
and the warmth ofexpreflion satisfied him that his
t1,lldwers had imbibed them thoroughly. He at-
sected, however, to be surprised at what he heard,
declaring that his orders to prepare for embark-
lg were issued from a persuasion that this was
agreeable to his troops; that, from deference to
what he had been informed was their inclina-
tion, he had sacrificed his own private opinion,
\hlicl was firmly bent on eflablifhing inimedi-
a:ly a settlement on the ita-coaft, and then on
c.diravouring to penetrate into the interior part of
t!;e country; th.t now he was convinced of his
error; and as he perceived that they were ani-
m.lted with the generous spirit which breathed in
tcry true Spaniard, he would resume, with frnef

R 2 ardour,

B ooK K ardour, his original plan of operation, and doubted

not to condut them, in the career of victory, to
'5's9 fich independent fortunes as their valour merited

Upon this declaration, shouts of applause teflified
the excess of their joy. The measure seemed to be
taken with unanimous content; such as secretly
condemned it being obliged to join in the acclain.
tions, partly to conceal their difaieEtion from
their general, and partly to avoid the imputation
of cowardice from their fellow-ioldiers'.

tfabli;i. WITHOUT allowing his men time to cool or to
vilTorn- refleEt, Cortes set about carrying his design into
MC"'c execution. In order to give a beginning to a co.

lony, he affcmbled the principal persons in his
army, and by their suffrage elected a council and
magistrates in whom the government was to be
vested. As men naturally transplant the inflitu-
tions and forms of the mother-country into their
new Settlements, this was framed upon the model
of a Spanilh corporation. The magistrates were
diftinguilhed by the fame names and ensigns of
office, and were to exercise a fimilarjurifdiEtion.
All the persons chosen were most firmly devoted
to Cortes, and the instrument of their election was
framed in the king's name, without any mention
of their dependance on Velasquez. The two prin-
ciples of avarice and enthusiasm, which prompted
the Spaniards to all their enterprises in the New

, D. Diaz. c. 4-, 4 , 4z. licrrera, dec. z. lib. v. c. ,7.

4 ,'olrl,

World, seem to have concurred in fuggefing the B 0 0 K.
name which Cortes bestowed on his infant fettle- --
inent. He called it, Villa rica de la vera Cruz; j5'9'
that is, Tbe rich town of the true Craos.

THE first meeting of the new council was dif- Rfigns h;s

tinguifhed by a tranfadion of great moment. As corhiljon,
soon as it assembled, Cortes applied for leave to
enter; and approaching with many marks of pro-
found refpe&, which added dignity to the tribunal,
and set an example of reverence for its authority,
he began a long harangue, in which, with much
art, and in terms extremely flattering to persons
just entering upon their new funation, he observed,
that as the fupremejurifdia.tion over the colony
which they had planted was now vested in this
court, he confidered them as clothed with the au-
thority, and representing the person of their fove-
rdgn; that accordingly he would communicate to
them what he deemed elffntial to the public
fafery, with the fame dutiful fidelity as if he
were addressing his royal master; that the security
of a colony fettled in a great empire, whose fove-
reign had already discovered his hostile intentions,
depended upon arms, and the efficacy of there
upon the subordination and discipline preserved
among the troops; that his right to command was
derived from a commifion granted by the governor
of Cuba; and as that had been long since revoked,
the lawfulness of his jurifdiEtion might well be
queStioned ; that he seemed to aa upon a de-

R 3 fclive,

B o0 K feltive, or even a dubious title; nor could they
L-.-~. trust an army which might dispute the powers of

5'19. its general, at a juncture when it ought implicitly

to obey his orders; that, moved by there con-
fiderations, he now resigned all his authority to
them, that they, having both right to chufe,
and power to confer fulljurifdiction, might ap.
point one, in the king's name, to command the
army in its future operations; and, as for his own
part, such was his zeal for the service in which
they were engaged, that he would most cheerfully
take up a pike with the fame hand that laid down
the general's truncheon, and convince his fellow-
soldiers, that though accustomed to command,
he had not forgotten how to obey. Having
finished his discourse, he laid the commiflion from
Velasquez upon the table, and, after kifling his
truncheon, delivered it to the chief magiltrate,
and withdrew.

andaicho(en TIlE deliberations of the council were not long,
chicfjuhicc
and captain. as Cortes had concerted this important mealure
e""''!. with his confident%, and had prepared the other

members, with great address, for the part which
he wished them to take. His resignation was
accepted; and as the uninterrupted tenour of their
prolierity under his conduct afforded the moll ia-
tisfying evidence of his abilities for command,
they, by their unanimous luffrage, elected him
chief justice of the colony, and captain-general of
its army, and appointed his commiiliun to be m.ad:

ou'

out in the king's name, with most ample powers, B o 0 K
which were to continue in force until the royal v-
pleasure should be farther known. That this '5'9'
deed might not be deemed the machination of a
junto, the council called together the troops, and
acquainted them with what had been resolved.
The soldiers, with eager applause, ratified their
choice; the air resounded with the name of Cortes,
and all vowed to shed their blood in support of his
authority.

CORTES having now brought his intrigues to A(frtrhis

the desired issue, and shaken off his mortifying ithvigour.
dependance on the governor of Cuba, accepted
of the commission, which vested in him supreme
jurildiction, civil as well as military, over the co-
lony, with many profcfions of refpecl to the
council, and gratitude to the army. Together
with his new command, he assumed greater dig-
nity, and began to exercise more extensive powers.
Formerly he had felt himself to be only the
deputy of a fubjeet; now he aced as the repre-
lkntative of his sovereign. The adherents of Ve-
lafquez, fully aware ot what would be the effect
of this change in the situation of Cortes, could no
longer continue silent and palfive ifpccators of his
a&ions. They exclaimed openly againit the pro-
ceedings of the council as illegal, and againlt
those of the army as mutinous. Cot'res, inflantly
perceiving the neceflity of giving a timely check
to such seditious dikcourfe by some vigorous mea-

1R 1 frc

B o 6 K sure, arrested Ordaz, Escudero, and Velasquez de
- Le Leon, the ringleaders of this faction, and sent

'59' them prisoners aboard the fleer, loaded with chains.

Their dependants, altonifhed and overawed, re.
mained quiet; and Cortes, more desirous to re-
claim than to punilh his prisoners, who were offi.
cers of great merit, courted their friendlhip with
such assiduity and address, that the reconciliation
wag perfecly cordial; and, on the most trying oc-
caslons, neither their connection with the governor
of Cuba, nor the memory of the indignity with
which they had been treated, tempted them to
swerve from an inviolable attachment to his in-
terest . In this, as well as his other negociations
at this critical conjuncture, which decided with re-
fpe&t to his future fame and fortune, Cortes owed
much of his fucccfs to the Mexican gold, which
he distributed with a liberal hand both among his
friends and his opponents'.

His rficled- CORTES, having thus rendered the union be.
ilp cnlrtled
byrhf7 Z.. tween himltelf and his army indissoluble, by thole
p" '"'l common ads of dilobedience, thought he might

now venture to quit the camp in which he had
hitherto remained, and advance into the country.
To this he was encouraged by an event no less for-
tunate than fcafunable. Some Indians having ap-
proached his camp in a myftcrious manner, were

' C. Diu. c. 4:, 43. Gomara Cron. c. 3c, 31. IIcIrl:,
ecc. 2. lib. v. c. 7.

1t t. Diaz. 4. 44.

introducd.l.

introduced into his presence. He found that they B OO IK
were sent with a proffer of friendlhip from the ca- t-
zique of Zempoalla, a considerable town at no '5'9.
great diltance; and from their answers to a variety
of questions which he put to them, according to
his usual pracice in every interview with the
people of the country, he gathered, that their
matter, though subjed to the Mexican empire,
was impatient of the yoke, ani filled with such
dread and hatred of Montezuma, that nothing
could be more acceptable to him than any pro-
fpe& of deliverance from the oppreflion under
which he groaned. On hearing this, a ray of
light and hope broke in upon the mind of Cortes.
He saw that the great empire which he intended
to attack was not united, nor its sovereign be-
loved. He concluded, that the causes of difaf-
feaion could not be confined to one province, but
that in other corners there mull be malcontents,
so weary of fubjeaion, or so desirous of change,
as to be ready to follow the standard of any pro-
te&or. Full of those ideas, on which he began to
form a scheme, that time, and more perfec in-
formation concerning the state of the country,
enabled him to mature, he gave a most gracious
reception to the Zempoallans, and prormifed soon
to vilit their cazique u.

IN order to perform this promise, it was not ne- M,,chrl to
effary to vary the route which he had already ZenipoJll&.

. Di2a. c. 41. (;omnara Ctn. c. 2'.

fixed

B 0 0 K fixed for his march. Some officers, whom he had

V.
_ - _* employed to survey the coalts, having discovered a

'5'9. village named Quiabiflan, about forty miles to

the northward, which, both on account of the
fertility of the foil, and commodiousness of the
harbour, seemed to be a more proper flation for a
settlement than that where he was encamped,
Cortes determined to remove thither. Zempoalla
lay in his way, where the cazique received hin
in the manner which he had rcatbn to expctc;
with gifts and caresses, like a man solicitous to
gain his good-will; with respect approaching al-
molt to adoration, like one who looked up to hin
as a deliverer. From him he learned many parti-
culars with respect to the character of Montezuma,
and the circumlfances which rendered his dominion
odious. He was a tyrant, as the cazique told him
with tears, haughty, cruel, and suspicious; who
treated his own fubjets with arrogance, ruined
the conquered provinces by excessive exactions,
and often tore their sons and daughters from them
by violence; the former to be offered as victims to
his gods; the latter, to be reserved as concubines
for himlelf or favourites. Cortes, in reply to him,
artfully insinuated, that one great object of the
Spaniards in viliting a country to remote from
their own, was to redress grievances, and to re-
lieve the opprefeTd ; and having encouraged him
to hope for this interpoCition in due time, he con-
tinued his march to Quiabiflan.

s T1'

TlHe fpoc which his officers had recommended B 0 0o

as a proper situation, appeared to him to be so
well chosen, that he immediately marked out Bqilds,
ground for a town. The houses to be erected for
were only huts; but thfet were to be surrounded
with fortifications, of sufficient strength to refilf
the afaults of an Indian army. As the finishing
of those fortifications was essential to the existence
of a colony, and of no less importance in prose-
cuting the designs which the leader and his fol-
lowers meditated, both in order to secure a place
of retreat, and to preserve their communication
with the sea, every man in the army, officers as
well as soldiers, put his hand to the work, Cortes
himself setting them an example of activiry and
perseverance in labour. The Indians of Zem-
poalla and Quiabiflan lent their aid; and this
petty flation, the parent of so many mighty fcitle-
ments, was soon in a tate of defence x.

WHILE engaged in this necessary work, Cortes Concrud a

had flveral interviews with the caziqucs of Zem- si,! ifi
poalla and Qiiabiflan; and availing himll of of .''r''
their wonder and aftonilhment at the new objects
which they daily beheld, he gradually inspired
them with such an high opinion of the Spaniards,
as beings of a superior order, and irrclillible in
arms, that, relying on their protection, they ven-
tured to infuk the Mexican power, at tlie ry

1 B. Diaz. c. 41, 46. 48. Golnara Cron, c. 3;, 33. 37.

Htrrera, dec. z. li. v .
. 8, 9.

namIe

B o o K name of which they were accustomed to tremble.

V.

Some of Montezuma's officers having appeared to
s'»s* levy the usual tribute, and to demand a certain

number of human vitims, as an expiation for
their guilt in presuming to hold intercourse with
thole strangers whom the emperor had comtil;ndcd
to leave his dominions, intlead of obeying the or-
der, the caziques made them prisoners, treated
them with great indignity, and, as their fuperti.
tion was no less barbarous than that of the Mexi.
cans, they prepared to sacrifice them to their
gods. From this last danger they were delivered
by the interposition of Cortes, who manifested the
utmost horror at the mention of such a deed. The
two caziques having now been pushed to an a& cf
such open rebellion, as left them no hope or
safety but in attaching themselves inviolaby to the
Spaniards, they soon completed their union with
them, by formally acknowledging themselves to
be vassals of the fame monarch. Their example
was followed by the Totonaques, a firrce pco;le
who inhabited the mountainous part of the coun-
try. They willingly fubjeaed themselves to the
crown of Castile, and offered to accompany
Cortes, with all their forces, in his march towards
Mexico Y.

I,1 .,.. . CORTES had now been above three months in
flrcite I - New Spain; and though this period had not been
firnl.lti)sn ('i

r

_. Di:,7.. c. 47. Gomara Cron. 35, 36. Herrera, dec.:.

t11v 'y tli

k1:,. Cli .
v. c. , 10, I f

.:niR.in.;1inicr

diftinguilhed by martial exploits, every moment 8 O°O o
had been employed in operations, which, thougeh ,_
less splendid, were more important. By his ad- '5'9
dress in conducting his intrigues with his own
army, as well as his sagacity in carrying on his
negociations with the natives, he had already laid
the foundations of his future success. But what-
ever confidence he might place in the plan which
he had formed, he could not but perceive, that
as his title to command was derived from a doubt-
ful authority, he held it by a precarious tenure.
The injuries which Velasquez had received, were
fich as would naturally prompt him to apply for
redress to their common sovereign; and such a
representation, he foresaw, might be given of his
condut, that he had reason to apprehend, not
only that he might be degraded from his prefenc
rank, but fubjec6ed to punishment. Before he
began his march, it was necessary to take the
most effectual precautions against this impending
danger. With this view, he persuaded the ma-
gitrates of his colony to address a letter to the
king, containing a long account of their own ser-
vices; a pompous description of the country
which they had discovered; its riches, the num-
ber of its inhabitants, their civilization and arts;
a view of the progress which they had already
made, in annexing several extensive provinces of
it to the crown of Castile, and of the fchemea
which they had formed, as well as the hopes
which they entertained, of reducing the whole to

ulbjeclion ;

B o O K fubjetion; and, last of all, they gave a minute
__ - detail of the motives which had induced them to
'''" renounce all connetion with Velasquez, to fettle a

colony dependant upon the crown alone, and to
vest the supreme power, civil as well as mili.
tary, in the hands of Cortes; humbly requesting
their sovereign to ratify what they had done by
his royal authority. Cortes himself wrote in a
similar strain ; and as he knew that the Spanilh
court, accustomed to the exaggerated reprefenta.
tions of every new country by its discoverer, would
give little credit to their splendid accounts of New
Spain, if there were not accompanied with such a
specimen of what it contained, as would excite an
high idea of its opulence, he solicited his soldiers
to relinquish what they might claim as their part
of the treasures which had hitherto been colleAted,
in order that the whole might be sent to the king.
Such was the ascendant which he had acquired
over their minds, and such their own romantic
expectations of future wealth, that an army of in-
digent and rapacious adventurers was capable of
this generous effort, and offered to their sovereign
the richest present that had hitherto been tranl
mitted from the New World z. Portocarrero and
Montejo, the chief magistrates of the colony,
were appointed to carry this present to Castile,
with express orders not to touch at Cuba in their
paffagc thither a.

' Sec NOTE LXXVI.
a 1. Diaz. c. 51.. Goniana Cron. c. .)c.

WIIILE

WHILE a vessel was preparing for their de- B 0° K

V.

parture, an unexpeted event occasioned a general -,
alarm. Some soldiers and sailors, secretly attached A conpi'.
to Velasquez, or intimidated at the profpeQ of racy against
the dangers unavoidable in attempting to pene-
trate into the heart of a great empire with such
unequal force, formed the design of fiizing one of
the brigantines, and making their escape to Cuba,
in order to give the governor such intelligence
as might enable him to intercept the ship which
was to carry the treasure and dispatches to Spain.
This conspiracy, though formed by persons of
low rank, was conducted with profound fecrery;
but at the moment when every thing was ready
for execution, they were betrayed by one of tlelr
associates.

THOUGH the good fortune of Cortes interposed He denft

so seasonably on this occasion, the detecion of is f"":.
this conlpiracy filled his mind with mol:t dilquiet-
ing apprehensions, and prompted hin to execute a
fchenme which he had long revolved. He per-
ceived that the fpiric of difafi:clion lill lurked
among his troops; that thiugli hithecrto checked
by the uniform luccels of his ichcemtn-, or kept
lown by the hand of authority, various events
might occur which would encourage andl call it
frtlh. -He oblerved, that many of his men,
weary of the fatigue of service, loilcd to rcvifit
their fettlerncnts in Cuba ; and that upon any ;ap-
pearance of cxtraordilnary djacer, or any reverie

of

B o0 K of fortune, it would be impofible to restrain them
-.~,---' from returning thither. He was sensible that his
1s19' forces, already too feeble, could bear no diminu.

tion, and that a very small defe&ion of his fol.
lowers would oblige him to abandon the enter.
prise. After ruminating often, and with much
"olicitude, upon those particulars, he saw no hope
of success, but in cutting off all possibility of re.
treat, and reducing his men to the neceffityof
adopting the fame resolution with which he him.
self was animated, either to conquer or to perils.
With this view, he determined to destroy his
fleet; but as he durst not venture to execute fuc,
a bold resolution by his single authority, he ]a.
boured to bring his soldiers to adopt his ideas
with respect to the propriety of this measure. His
address in accomplishing this was not inferiort
the arduous occasion in which it was employei
He persuaded tome, that the ships had suffered so
much by having been long at sea, as to be alto.
gether unfit for service; to others he pointed o;t
what a seasonable reinforcement of firength they
would derive from the juntion of an hundred men,
now unprofitably employed as"failors; and to all,
he represented the necessity of fixing their eyes anr
withes upon what was before them, without allow
ing the idea of a retreat once to enter thei
thoughts. With universal consent the mbips wer
drawn ashore, and after stripping them of thei
fails, rigging, iron-works, and whatever else migh
be of ute, they were broke in pieces. Thus, fror

i

an effort of magnanimity, to which there is nothing B o°° K
parallel in history, five hundred men voluntarily _---
consented to be (hut up in a hostile country, filled '59'
with powerful and unknown nations; and having
precluded every means of escape, left themselves
without any resource but their own valour and
perleverance b.

NOTHING now retarded Cortes; the alacrity of

his troops and the disposition of his allies were
equally favourable. All the advantages, how-
ever, derived from the latter, though procured
by much atliduity and address, were well nigh
lult in a moment by an indiscreet sally of reli-
gious zeal, which, on many occasions, precipi-
tated Cortes into actions inconfiitcnt with the pru-
ldence that distinguishes his character. Though
hitherto he had neither time nor opportunity to
explain to the natives the errors of their own fu-
perllition, or to instruct them in the principles of
the Chriflian faith, he commanded his soldiers to
overturn the altars and to destroy the idols in the
chief temple of Zempoalla, and in their place to
erre a crucifix and an image of the Virgin Mary.
The pople beheld this with altonifhrment and
horror; the priests excited them to arms; but
luclh was the authority of Cortes, and so great
the ascendant which the Spaniards had acquired,

h Rlat. di Cortes. Ramus. iii. 22z. B. Diaz..c 57, 58.
[rfr.ra, de,'. 2. lib. v. c. 14.

VOL. I1. S that

B 0 0 K that the commotion was appeased without blood.

V--. f, hed, and concord perfecly re-eftabli(hed c.
15S9.

Advances CORTES began his march from Zempoalla on the
country. sixteenth of August, with five hundred men, fit.

teen horse, and fix field-pieces. The reft of Lii;
troops, confiling chiefly of such as from age or
infirmity were lets fit for active service, he left as
a garrilon in Villa Rica, under the command of
Efcalante, an officer of merit, and warmly at.
tached to his interest. The cazique of Zem.
poalla supplied him with provisions, and with two
hundred of those Indians called Tamemes, whole
office, in a country where tame animals were un.
known, was to carry burdens, and perform all
servile labour. They were a great relief to the
Spanish soldiers, who hitherto had been obliged,
not only to carry their own baggage, but to drag
along the artillery by main force. He offered
likewise a considerable body of his troops, but
Cortes was satisfied with four hundred; taking
care, however, to chufe persons of such note as
might prove hostages for the fidelity of their
master. Nothing memorable happened in his
progress, until he arrived on the confines of Tlal-
cala. The inhabitants of that province, a warlike
people, were implacable enemies of the Mexicanr,
and had been united in an ancient alliance with
the caziques of Zempoalla. Though Icss civi-

c B. Diaz. c. 41, 4 . IIerrcr.l, cc. . lib. v. c. ;. .

i; ,,~,

lized than the fubjeds of Montezuma, they were B 00 K
advanced in improvement far beyond the rude na- A-,
tions of America, whose manners we have de- as9'
fcribed. They had made considerable progress in
agriculture; they dwelt in large towns; they were
not firangers to omne species of commerce; and in
the imperfect accounts of their infticutions and
laws, tranfmicted to us by the early Spani(h writers,
we discern traces both of distributive jutiice and of
criminal jurifdicion, in their interior police. But
still, as the degree of their civilization was incom-
plete, and as they depended for fubfitence not on
agriculture alone, but trusted for it, in a great
measure, to hunting, they retained many of the
qualities natural to men in this state. Like them,
they were fierce and revengeful ; like them, too,
they were high-lpirited and independent. In con-
sequence of the former, they were involved in per-
petual hoflilites, and had but a (lender and occa-
lional intercourse with neighbouring tlates. The
latter inspired them with iuch detestation of fervi-
tude, that they not only refused to fsoop to a so-
reign yoke, and maintained an obltinate and fuc-
cefsfil contest in defence of their liberty against
the superior power of the Mexican empire, but
they guarded with equal solicitude against do-
meltic tyranny; and disdaining to acknowledge
any malter, they lived under the mild and limited
juritdic'tion of a council edlcted by their several
tt ibes.

S a CORTES,

B 0 0 K CORTES, though he had received information

V. ,-- concerning the martial character of this people,
5ss'9 flattered himself that his profeffons of delivering

,ilthth, the opprefTed from the tyranny of Montezuma,
Tlafcalan,.

their inveterate enmity to the Mexicans, and the
example of their ancient allies the Zempoallans,
might induce the Tlalcalans to grant him a friendly
reception. In order to dispose them to this, four
Zempoallans of great eminence were fcnt ambal-
fadors, to request, in his name, and in that ot
their cazique, that they would permit the Spa-
niards to pass through the territories of the re-
public in their way to Mexico. But instead of the
favourable answer which was expEted, the Tiaf
calans seized the ambassadors, and, without any
regard to their public charaEter, made prepara-
tions for sacrificing them to their gods. At the
fame time, they afeimbled their troops, in order
to oppose those unknown invaders, if they should
attempt to make their passage good by force of
arms. Various motives concurred in precipitating
the Tlafcalans into this resolution. A fierce peo-
ple, shut up within its own narrow precincts, arid
little accustomed to any intercourse with foreign-
e s, is apt to confider every firanger as an enemy,
and is easily excited to arms. They concluded,
from Cortes's proposal of visiting Montezunma in
his capital, that, notwithi-ancing all his profcl-
sions, he courted the friend ship of a monarch
whom they both haited and Icared. The impru-
dent zeal of Cortes in violating the teipllcs ill

,, , i.ll i,. .l

Zempoalla, filled the Tlafcalans with horror; and B 0° K
as they were no less attached to their fuperltition v-_
than the other nations of New Spain, they were 'S19-
impatient to avenge their injured gods, and to ac-
quire the merit of offering up to them, as victims,
rhofe impious men who had dared to profane
their altars; the Spaniards, from the finallnefs of
their number, were objects of contempt; they had
not yet mealured their own strength with those
new enemies, and had no idea of the fuperio-
rity which they derived from their arms and dif-
cipline.

CORTES, after waiting rome days, in vain, for Alr. o.

the return of his ambafadors, advanced into the
Tlafcalan territories. As the resolutions of people
who delight in war are executed with no less
promptitude than they are formed, he found
troops in the field ready to oppose him. They
attacked him with great intrepidity, and, in the
first encounter, wounded some of the Spaniards,
and killed two hores : a lols, in their fiLuation,
of great moment, because it was irreparable. From
this specimen of their courage, Cortes law the ne-
ceflity of proceeding with caution. His army
marched in close order; he chote the stations,
where he halted, with attention, and fortified
every camp with extraordinary care. During four-
teen days he was exposed to almolt uninterrupted
aflaults, the Tlafcalans advancing with numerous
armies, and renewing the attack in various forms,

S 3 with

0 0 K with a degree of valour and perseverance to which
V.
* 1r the Spaniards had seen nothing parallel in the New
'519. World. The Spanish historians describe thole

successive battles with great pomp, and enter into
a minute detail of particulars, mingling many c -
aggerated and incredible circumstances d with such
as are real and marvellous. But no power of
words can renJer the recital of a combat interest-
ing, where there is no equality of danger; and
when the narrative closes with an account of
thoulands slain on one fide, while not a single per-
son falls cn the other, the molt laboured deicrip-
tions of the previous disposition of the troops, or
of the various vicissitudes in the engagement, com-
mand no attention.

ome fin. THERE are some circumstances, however, in
,mflanies this war, which are memorable, and merit notice,
"i it. as they throw light upon the character both of the

people of New Spain, and of their conquerors.
Though the Tlafcalans brought into the field such
vast armies as appear sufficient to have overwhelmed
the Spaniards, they were never able to make any
· mprcffion upon their small battalion. Singular
as this may seem, it is not inexplicable. The
Tlafcalans, though addiced to war, were, like
all unpolifhed nations, flrangers to military order
and discipline, and loft all the advantage which
they might have derived from their numbers, and
the impetuosity of their attack, by their constant

d See NOTE LXXVII.

Elicitude

solicitude to carry off the dead and wounded. 13 O K
This point of honour, founded on a sentiment of t ---
tenderness natural to the human mind, and '5'9
strengthened by anxiety to preserve the bodies of
their countrymen from being devoured by their
enemies, was universal among the people of New
Spain. Attention to this pious office occupied
them, even during the heat of combate, broke
their union, and diminished the force of .the im-
prefion which they might have made by a joint
effort.

NOT only was their fliperiority in number of

little avail, but the imperfection of their military
weapons rendered their valour in a great mealure
inofienfive. After three battles, and many fkir-
milhes and afautlts, not one Spaniard was killed
in the field. Arrows and spears, headed with
flint or the bones of fishes, flakes hardened in the
fire, and wooden swords, though defiructive wea-
pons among naked Indians, were easily turned
aside by the Spanish bucklers, and could hardly
penetrate the efcaupiles, or quilted jackets, which
the soldiers wore. The T'lafcalans advanced
boldly to the charge, and often fought hand to
hand. Many of the Spaniards were wounded,
though all flighdly, which cannot be imputed to
any want of courage in their enemies, but to the
df:fc of the arms with which they afiailcd them.

o B., Dii . . 6. .

S 4 NOTWITH-

B 0 0 K NOTWITHSTANDING the fury with which the

V.

a---- Tlafcalans attacked the Spaniards, they seem to
15'9. have condu&ed their hostilitics with some degree

of barbarous generosity. They gave the Spaniards
warning of their hostile intentions, and as they
knew that their invaders wanted provisions, and
imagined, perhaps, like the other Americans, that
they had left their own country because it did not
afford them subsistence, they Cent to their camp a
large supply of poultry and maize, desiring them
to eat plentifully, becaule they scorned to attack
an enemy enfeebled by hunger, and it would he
an affront to their Gods to offer them famishcd
victims, as well as disagreeable to themselves to
feed on such emaciated prey'.

WHEN they were taught by the first encoun:er

with their new enemies, that it was not easy to
execute this threat; when they perceived, in the
ifbfequent engagements, that notwithstanding all
the efforts of their own valour, of which they had
a very high opinion, not one of the Spaniards was
slain or taken, they began to conceive them to be
a tuperior order of beings, againit whom hlundan
power could not avail. In this extremity, they
had recourle to their prielts, requiring them to re-
veal the mysterious causes of such extraordinary
events, and to declare what new neans they fhoiuld
employ in order to repulse those formidable in-
vaders. The priclls, after many iacrifices and 11-

' ILTrrci, dcc. 2. lib. vi. c. 6. Goniara Cron- .
C 7.

canlations,

canrations, delivered this response. That there B O, K
firangers were the offspring of the fun, procreated G-
by his animating energy in the regions of the '5'9
cast; that, by day, while cherifhied with the in-
fluence of his parental beams, they were invinci-
ble; but by night, when his reviving heat was
withdrawn, their vigour declined and faded like
t,.e herbs in the field, and they dwindled down
into mortal meng. Theories less plautible have
gaine(d credit with more enlightened nations, and
have influenced their conduc. In consequence of
this, the Tlafcalans, with the implicit confidence
of men who fancy themselves to be under the
guidance of Heaven, ated in contradiction to one
of their most established maxims in war, and ven-
tured to attack the enemy, with a strong body, in
the night-time, in hopes of destroying them when
enfeebled and surprised. But Cortes had more
vigilance and discernment than to be deceived by
the rude stratagems of an Indian army. The cen-
tinels at his out-porls, observing some extraordi-
nary movement among the Tlafcalans, gave the
alarm. In a moment the troops were under arms,
and sallying our, diiperfed the party with great
slaughter, without allowing it to approach the
camp. Convinced, by fad experience, that their
priells had deluded them, and satisfied that they
attempted in vain, either to deceive or to vanquill
their enemies, the fierceness of the Tlalaiilals

' B. Diaz. c. 66.

abated,

B ooV K abated, and they began to incline seriously to

V.

peace.

Irs 9.

The Ti.C- THEY were at a loss, however, in what man-,er
colans die-
poled to to address the strangers, what idea to form of their
C'"C" characer, and whether to confider them as bceings

of a gentle or of a malevolent nature. There were
circumstances in their condu&t which feerned to
favour each opinion. On the one hand, as the
Spaniards constantly diniffed the prisoners whom
they took, not only without injury, but often
with presents of European toys, and renewed their
offers of peace after every victory; this lenity
amazed people accustomed to the exterminating
system of war known in America, who facrificel
and devoured without mercy all the captives taken
in battle, and disposed them to entertain favour-
able sentiments of the humanity of their new ene-
mies. But, on the other hand, as Cortes had
seized fifty of their countrymen who brought pro-
visions to his camp, and supposing them to be
spies, had cut off their hands h; this bloody Ipec-
tacle, added to the terror occasioned by the fire-
arms and horses, filled them with dreadful imr
pressions of their ferocity'. This uncertainty was
apparent in the mode of addrefing the Spaniards.
" If, said they, you are divinities of a cruel and
savage nature, we present to you five slaves, that
you may drink their blood and eat their flesh. It

h Cortes Relat. Ramua. iii. zz8. C. Gomara Cron. c. .8.
See NOTE LXXVIII.

you

yoi. are mild deities, accept an offering of incense B °0o K
ani variegared pl'umes. If you are men, here is -
mca:, an.l bread and fruit to nourish you k." The '59'
pcace which both parties now desired with equal
ardour, was Coon concluded. The Tlafcalans Concluded,
yielded themselves as vassals to the crown of Castile,
and engaged to assist Cortes in all his future opera-
tions. He took the republic under his protection,
and promised to defend their persons and poffeflions
from injury or violence.

THIS treaty was concluded at a feafonablejunc- Advantage.

ot iti to ,ho

ture for the Spaniards. The fatigue of service snit»o..
among a small body of men, surrounded by such
a multitude of enemies, was incredible. Half the
army was on duty every night, and even they
whoec turn it was to reft, slept always upon their
arms, that they might be ready to run to their
posts on a moment's warning. Many of them
were wounded, a good number, and among there
Cortes himself, laboured under the distempers pre-
valent in hot climates, and several had died since
they set out from Vera Cruz. Notwithstanding
the supplies which they received from the Tlafca-
lans, they were often in want of provilions, and
Ib destitute of the necessaries most requisite in dan-
gerous service, that they had no salve to dress their
wounds, but what was composed with the fat of
the Indians whom they had slain '. Worn out with

k B. Diaz. c. 70. Gomara Cron. c. 47. Ilerrera, dec.
l. lib. vi. c. 7. ' B. Diaz. c. 6z. 65.

such

B o0 K such intolerable toil and hardships, many of the

V.
,_- soldiers began to murmur, and, when they refleCted
13'9' on the multitude and boldness of their enemies,

more were ready to despair. It required the ut.
molt exertion of Cortes's authority and addrels to
check this spirit of despondency in its progress,
and to reanimate his followers with their wonted
sense of their own superiority over the enemies with
whom they had to contend m. The submission ot
the Tlafcalans, and their own triumphant entry
into the capital city, where they were received
with the reverence paid to beings of a superior
order, banished, at once, from the minds of the
Spaniards, all memory of past sufferings, dilpelled
every anxious thought with refpeft to their future
operations, and fully satisfied them that there was
not now any power in America able to withfranl
their arms".

Cortes foi- CORTES remained twenty days in Tlafcala, in
clan thir order to allow his troops a short interval of repoie
confidence. after such hard service. During that time, he was

employed in transactions and inquiries of great
moment with refpe& to his future schemes. In
his daily conferences with the Tlafcalan chiefs, he
received information concerning every particuliar
relative to the state of the Mexican empire, or to
the qualities of its sovereign, which could be or

'" Cortes Relat. Ramus. iii. 29. B. Diaz. c. 69. Go:31.IaI
L'ron. c. 51.

D Cortc , Rcl.t. Rarqur, iii. 230. B. Diaz. c, 7z.

Uts

use in regulating his conduct, whether he Should B o o K

V.

be obliged to ad as a friend or as an enemy. As -.
he found that the antipathy of his new allies to the '5's
Mexican nation was no less implacable than had
been represented, and perceived what benefit he
might derive from the aid of such powerful con-
federates, he employed all his powers of infinua-
tion in order to gain their confidence. Nor was
any extraordinary exertion of there necessary. The
Tlafcalans, with the levity of mind natural to un-
polilhed men, were, of their own accord, disposed
to run from the extreme of hatred to that of fond-
ness, Every thing in the appearance and conduc
of their guelts, was to them matter of wonder*.
They gazed with admiration at whatever the Spa-
niards did, and fancying them to be of heavenly
origin, were eager not only to comply with their
demands, but to anticipate their wishes. They
offered, accordingly, to accompany Cortes in his
march to Mexico, with all the forces of the re.
public, under the command of their most expe-
renced captains.
BUT, after bellowing so much pains on cement- w.ih he

had arnofs

ing this union, all the beneficial fruits of it were lot by hi.
On the point of being loft, by a new effusion of "h " '"
that intemperate zeal with which Cortes was ani-
Mljtel, no less than the other adventurers of the
age, They all confidered thenfelves as inftru-

See NOT E I.X'xX.

ments

0v
o K ments employed by Heaven to propagate the

, ,
- Chritian faith, and the less they were qualied,
*s's9 either by their knowledge or morals for such,

funcion, they were more eager to discharge it
The profound veneration of the Tlafcalans fur tiic
Spaniards, having encouraged Cortes to explain
to some of their chiefs the dotrines of the Chrib.
ian religion, and to infif that they should aban-
don their own fuperftiuions, and embrace the faiih
of their new friends, they, according to an idea
universal among barbarous nations, readily ac-
knowledged the truth and excellenceof whathe
taught but contended, that the Teules of T'1;fcnla
were divinities no less than the God in whom the
Spaniards believed ; and as that Being was intit'ed
to the homage of Europeans, so they were bound
to revere the fame powers which their ancefRors
had worshipped. Cortes continued, neverthllcs,
to urge his demand in a tone of authority, min.
gling threats with his arguments, until the rTlalc-
lans could bear it no longer, and conjured him
never to mention this again, left the gods lhou!'
avenge on their heads the guilt of having lilltrcd
to such a proposition. Cortes, aftonihcdl ;:nid c.-
raged at their obstinacy, prepared to execute by
force, what he could not accomplifln by pt:-!:uflin,
and was going to overturn their alc;.rs, and cll
down their idols with the fame violent .liand s a:
Zempoalla, if father Bartholemew de Olilicii,,
chaplain to the expedition, had not chccl:ked. i
inconsiderate impetuosity. -le reItrec!:tcrl ie

ii3i t:'.r.'
3

imprudence of such an attempt in a large city X oo aK
newly reconciled, and filled with people no less i - _v
fuperfitious than warlike; he declared, that the 'i5'
proceeding at Zempoalla had always appeared to
him precipitate and unjust; that religion was not
to be propagated by the sword, or infidels to be
converted by violence; that other weapons were
to be employed in this ministry; patient inftrution
must enlighten the understanding, and pious ex-
ample captivate the heart, before men could be
induced to abandon error, and embrace the truth P.
Amidst scenes, where a narrow-minded bigotry
appears in such close union with oppreflion and
cruelty, sentiments so liberal and humane soothe
the mind with unexpeced pleasure; and at a time
when the rights of conscience were little under-
flood in the Christian world, and the idea of tolera-
tion unknown, one is astonished to find a Spanifih
monk of the sixteenth century among the first ad-
vocates againff persecution, and in behalf of reli-
gious liberty. The remonfirances of an ecclesias-
tic, no less refpe&able for wisdom than virtue,
had their proper weight with Cortes. He left the
Tlafcalans in the undisturbed exercise of their own
rites, requiring only that they Mhould desist from
their horrid practice of offering human viCtims in
lacrifice.

CORTES, as soon as his troops were fit for AJcnceto

Cliolula.
Iervice, resolved to continue his march to- c

P 13. Diaz. c. 77. P. 5l. c. 83. p. 61-

wards

o00 R watds Mexico, .notwithstanding the earnest diffra-
a _--v-- fives, of the Tlgfcalans, who represented his de-

s'9' ltruf&ion as unavoidable, if he put himfclf in the

power of a prince so faithless and cruel as Monte-
zuma. As he was accompanied by fix thoufain
Tlafcalans, he had now the command of forces
on. 13. which resembled a regular army. They direated

their course towards Cholula; Montezuma, who
had at length consented to admit the Spaniards
into his presence, having informed Cortes, that
he had given orders for his friendly reception
there. Cholula was a considerable town, and
though only five leagues distant from Tlafcala,
was formerly an independent state, but had been
lately fubjefted to the Mexican empire. This was
confidered by all the people of New Spain as a
holy place, the fan&uary and chief feat of their
gods, to which pilgrims retorted from every pro-
vince, and a greater number of human viclimi
were offered in its principal temple than even in
that of Mexico q. Montezuma seems to have in;
vited the Spaniards thither, either from forae
superstitious hope that the gods would not fui-
ser this sacred mansion to be defiled, without
pouring Jown their wrath upon those impious
strangers, who ventured to insult their power in
the place of its peculiar residence; or from a be
lief that he himself might there attempt to cul

1 Torqiemnada Monar. Ind. i. 281, 282. ii. zl9. Gvma'i
Cron. c. 61. ITerrtr., dcc. ?. lib. vii. c z.

tlier

them off with more certain success, under the B 0°o K
immediate protection of his divinities. L

1519.
CORTES had been warned by the Tlafcalans, be- The rfve-

rity o

' his

fore he set out on his march, to keep a watchful procedur,
eye over the Cholulans. He himself, though re- theL'
ceived into the town with much teeming respect
and cordiality, observed several circumifances in
their conduct which excited suspicion. Two of
the Tlafcalans, who were encamped at some
distance from the town, as the Cholulans refused
to admit their ancient enemies within its precin&s,
having found means to enter in disguise, acquainted
Cortes, that they observed the women and chil-
dren of the principal citizens retiring in great
hurry every night; and that fix children had been
sacrificed in the chief temple, a rite which indi-
cated the execution of some warlike enterprise to
be approaching. At the fame time, Marina the
interpreter received information from an Indian
woman of diliintion, whose confidence The had
gained, that the deltruction of her friends was
concerted; that a body of Mexican troops lay con-
cealed near the town; that some of the fireets
were barricaded, and in others, pits or deep
trenches were dug, and slightly covered over, as
traps into which the horses might fall; that flones
and mitlive weapons were collected on the tops of
the temples, with which to overwhelm the in-
fantry that the fatal hour was now at hand, and
their ruin unavoidable. Cortes, 2..,rmed at this

VOL, II. T concurring

1 O ,0 K cc'curring evidence, secretly arrefed three of tle
<.-s_ chief prielts, and extorted from them a confelfion,

'5'9' that confirmed the intelligence which he had re.

ceived. As not a moment was to be loft, he in-
ftantly resolved to prevent his enemies, and to in-
flic on them such dreadful vengeance as might
strike Montezuma and his subjects with terror.
For this purpose, the Spaniards and Zempoallans
were drawn up in a large court, which had been
allotted for their quarters, near the centre of the
town; the Tlafcalans had orders to advance; the
magiflrates, and several of the chief citizens v.'c:
sent for, under various pretexts, and seized. On
a signal given, the troops rushed out, and fell
vipon the multitude, deflitute of leaders, and sI
much astonished, that the weapons droppiig from
their hands, they flood motionlels, and incapable
of defence. While the Spaniards preflcd them in
front, the Tlafcalans attacked them in the rear.
The fireets were filled with bloodfied and death,
The temples, which alfordcd a retreat to the
prielts and lome of the leading men, were ict on
fire, and they perished in the flames. This lcene
of horror continued two days; during which, the
wretched inhabitants fulecrcd all that the deltruc-
rive rag.: of the Spaniards, or the implacable
rtecngc of their Indian allies, could inllie. At
lengtl the carnage cealcd, after the flaug'intr (!
lfx thiouaind Cholulans, without tht lols of a
'ingle Spaniird. Cortes then rclcalid the im.,i-
l' .ates, and reproachling thelm bitterly t'or tci:' i;n-

tended treachery, declared, that as justice was now B °0 K

V.

appeared, he forgave the otience, but required
them to recal the citizens who had fled, and re- 1519'
cltablifh order in the town. Such was the ascend-
ant which the Spaniards had acquired over this fu-
perflitious race of men, and so deeply were they
inpreffed with an opinion of their superior discern-
ment, as well as power, that, in obedience to this
command, the city was in a few days filied again
with people, who, amidll the ruins of their sacred
buildings, yielded refpcRtful service to men, whole
hands were slained with the blood of their rela-
tions and fellow-citizens.

FROM Cholula, Cortes advanced direcly to- n,. 29.

wards Mexico, which was only twenty leagues to',d."
diflant. In every place through which he pancd, o.
he was received as a perlon pofifTl-d of sufficient
power to deliver the empire from the oppression
under which it groaned; and the caziques or go-
vernors, with the unrclerved confidence repoflei in
liperior beings, communicated to him all the
grievances which they felt under the tyrannical go-
vernmcent of Montezuima. When Cortes firt ob-
l'rved the feeds of diflontent in the remote-pro-
vinces of the empire, hope dawned upon his
mind; but when he now dilcovered such fyimp-
toms of alienation from their monarch near the

' Cortcs Rclar. Ramus. iii. 211. n. Diaz. c. 83. Gornaa
Cro"i. C. (. HIcrrera, ccr. 2. lib. vii. c. i, z. See N 1' .

1 2 feat

B O° K feat of government, he concluded that the vital
A_,i, parts of the constitution were affected, and con.
'5'9 ceived the most sanguine expectations of overturn.

ing a state, whole natural strength was thus
divided and impaired. While those refections
encouraged the general to persis in his arduous
undertaking, the soldiers were no less animated by
observations more obvious to their capacity. In
descending from the mountains of Chalco, across
which the road lay, the vast plain of Mexico
rir viewv opened gradually to their view. When they firfl

beheld this prolpect, one of the most striking and
beautiful on the face of the earth; when they ob.
served fertile and cultivated fields, itretching far.
ther than the eye could reach; when they saw a
lake resembling the sea in extent, encompassed
with large towns, and discovered the capital city
riling upon an illand in the middle, adorned with
its temples and turrets; the scene so far exceeded
their imagination, that some believed the fanciful
descriptions of romance were realized, and that its
enchanted palaces and gilded domes were pre-
sented to their fight; others could hardly perluade
themselves that this wonderful fpedacle was any
thing more than a dream'. As they advanced,
their doubts were removed, but their amazement
increased. They were now fully satisfied that the
country was rich beyond any conception which
they had formed of it, and flattered themlelves

Sec NOTfi LXXr.

that

that at length they Ihould obtain an ample recom. B O 0 K

V.
pence for all their services and sufferings. i_,_

5139.
No enemy had yet appeared to oppose their The irrefo-

Ncion of

progress, though several circumstances occurred Monte.
which led them to suspect that Come design was
formed to surprise and cut them off. Many mef-
fengers arrived successively from Montezuma, per-
mitting them one day to advance, requiring thenm
on the next to retire, as his hopes or fears alter-
nately prevailed; and so wonderful was this infa-
tuation, which seems to be unaccountable on any
supposition but that of a fupeiftitious dread of
the Spaniards, as beings of a superior nature, that
Cortes was almost at the gates of the capital, be-
fore the monarch had determined whether to re-
ceive him as a friend, or to oppose him as an enemy.
But as no signs of open hostility appeared, the
Spaniards, without regarding the fluctuations of
Montezuma's sentiments, continued their march
along the causeway which led to Mexico through
the lake, with great circumfpetion and the frictelt
di:cipline, though without teeming to fufped the
prince whom they were about to visit.

WHEN they drew near the city, about a thou. His"frn in-

sand pcrlons, who appeared to be of didlinction, wih the
came torch to meet them, adorned with plumes, Spani'rds.
and clad in mantles of fine cotton. lIach or thelc,
in his orler, paired by Cortes, and lalutcrl Iii-n
according to the mode deemed molt reip,.1 i -,nd

T 3

B 0 0 K fubmifive in their country, They announced the

V.
_-'- _ approach of Montezuma himself, and soon after
35'9' his harbingers came in fight. There appeared, rrlt

two hundred persons in an uniform drics, witl:
large plumes of feathers, alike in fafllion, n:arrci-
ing two and two, in deep silence, bare-footed, with
their eyes fixed on the ground. There were fol-
lowed by a company of higher rank, in their mo'!
fliowy apparel, in the midit of whom was Monte-
zuma, in a chair or litter richly ornamented \'nti
gold, and feathers of various colours. Four o(
his principal favourites carried him on their fhoul-
ders, others lupported a canopy of curious woik.
manlhip over his head. Before him marched
three officers with rods of gold in their handy,
which they lifted up on high at certain interval,
and at that signal all the people bowed their
heads, and hid their faces, as unworthy to Iccl,
on so great a monarch. When he drew near,
Cortes dismounted, advancing towards him vi;:i
officious haste, and in a refpelful poftlure. :\
the lame tirne Mlontezuma alighted from his chair,
and leaning on the arms of two of his near rela-
tions, approached with a flow and stately pace, hi;
attendants covering the flreet with cotton clothl,
that he might not touch the ground. Cortcs ac-
colled him with profound reverence, after the Llu-
ropean fashion. He returned the salutation, ac-
cording to the mode of his country, by tou.lil!i;
the earth with his hand, and then killing it. 1 T1h
rcrcinony, the cultomary expression us ventr;atioli

l.;:!i

from inferiors towards thoe who were above them B °0 K
in rank, appeared stich amazing condescension in
a proud monarch, who scarcely deigned to con- 15'9-
fldcr the reft of mankind as of the fame species
wiith himself, that all his subjects firmly believed
those persons, before whom he humbled himself in
this manner, to be fo.nething more than human.
Accordingly, as they marched through tie crowd,
the Spaniards freqL:untly, and with much fttisfac-
tion, heard themselves denominated T1'.cns, or di-
vinities. Nothing material passed in this first in-
terview. Mlontcztzma conducted Cortes to the
quarters which he had prepared for his reception,
immediately took leave of him, with a politeness
not unworthy of a court more refined. " You are
now," fays he, " with your brothers in your own
louse ; refrefli youriflves after your fatigue, and
be happy until I return'." The place allotted to
the Spaniards for their lodging was a houle built
by the father of Montezuma. It was liurrounclcl
by a t(one-wall, with towers at proper dill.incs,
which served for defence as well as for ornament,
and its appartments and courts were lo large, as to
accommodate both the Spaniards and their Inldian
allies. The firlt care of Cortes was to take pre-
c;autions for his lccurity, by planting the artillery
lo as to command the difFcrent avenues which
led to it, by appointing a large divilion of his

' C'r:es R.clat. Ram. iii. 232 -z5. B. Diaz. c. SR-SS.

(.;'n.ri t-con. c. 6.1, (5. 1 lic, ra, tit .
c . lii . vii. c. 3, .1, 5.

' 4 troops

B O o K troops to be always on guard, and by polting cen.

v , o

_ tinels at proper fiations, with injuncions to observe
35'9' the fame vigilant discipline as if they were within

fight of an enemy's camp.

fHi, des of IN the evening, Montezuma returned to visit his
the Spa-
niid.. guests with the fame pomp as in their firll inter.

view, and brought presents of such value, not
only to Cortes and to his officers, but even to the
private men, as proved the liberality of the mn,
narch to be suitable to the opulence of his king-
dom. A long conference ensued, in which Cortrs
learned what was the opinion of Montezuma with
respect to the Spaniards. It was an eftablilnid,
tradition, he told him, among the Mexicans, tlh:
their ancestors came originally from a remote re-
gion, and conquered the provinces now fubjedl to
his dominion ; that after they were fettled there,
the great captain who conducted this colony re.
turned to his own country, promising, that at
some future period his descendants fhoulJ vifi:
them, assume the government, and reform their
conftiturion and laws; that, from what he had
heard and seen of Cortes and his followers, Ih
was convinced that they were the very perlbns
whole appearance the Mexican traditions and pro-
phecies taught them to expet ; that accortliily
he had received them, not as Itrangers, but as re-
lations of the fame blood and parentage, anld cd-
fired that they might conlider themlclvcs as niillctis
in his dominions, for both himself and his rubjie.'

fliyo! I

Should be ready to comply with their will, and s o0 K
even to prevent their wifles. Cortes made a reply
in his usual file, with refpea to the dignity and 1519
power of his sovereign, and his intention in lend-
ing him into that country ; artfully endeavouring
so to frame his difcourle, that it might coincide as
much as pofiible with the idea which Montczuma
had formed concerning the origin of the Spaniards.
Next morning, Cortes and tome of his principal
attendants were admitted to a public audience of
the emperor. The three subsequent days were
employed in viewing the city; the appearance of
which, so far superior in the order of its build-
ings and the number of its inhabitants to any
place the Spaniards had beheld in America, and
yet so little resembling the itrudure of an Eu-
ropean city, filled them with furprile and ad-
miration.

MEXIco, or T'enuchtitlan, as it was anciently

called by the natives, is lituated in a large plain,
environed by mountains of such height, that,
though within the torrid zone, the temperature of
its climate is mild and healthful. All the moisture
which descends from the high grounds is collected
in several lakes, the two largest of which, of
about ninety miles in circuit, communicate with
each other. The waters of the one are fresh, those
of the other brackifl. On the banks of the latter,
iind on Ibme small islands adjoining to them, the
capital of Montezuma's empire was built. The

access

B o0o K access to the city was by artificial caulcwavs o:

V.

T-i - Itreets, formed of ltones and earth, about thi::"
's>9' feet in breadth. As the waters of the lake cdunn:

the rainy i1afon ovcrtlowed the flat countr:, ti:.:
causeways were of confideraihe length. Thar r
Tacuba, on the well, extended a mile and a hfl;
that of ''czte.co, on the north-welt, three rm;lts;
that of Cuoyacan, towards the south, fix nm;r.
On the cast t!here was no cauleway, and the ch .
could be approached only by canoes". In ea:
of thelf caulcvwavs were openings at proper in'c:-
vals, through which the waters sowed; and ov-r
these beams of timber were laid, which bein'; c-
vercd with earth, the caulcway or ftrett had tv,,.
where an uniform appearance. As the approuac;
to the city were singular, its confiruciJn was re-
markable. Nut only the temples o-; tieir gcoC,
but the houfcs belonging to the monarch, an.i to
perilonbs of dtlitinctior, were of' lch dim nfitCn-,
tilat, in comparil;n with any other hlildic:i

hllich had been difovered in America, they n::r:
be termed magnificent. The habitations ot t.c
common peop!e w,'re mean, relmnibling the hi::
oi other Indi.ans. Bur they were all pla(cedi
r-gutlar manner, on the banks of the canals \wnl;c.
l1 f hled o through tei city, in some o its dillihi,, c:
On the fidtc of the ltrcees which interftccll i:i'
otiler quartersc. In lcveral places were lare oun'
i' or
l(, I'it'rs, one of wlich, allotted for t.'i c;

i F. IPc'rrl,)io MS.

market, is said to have been so spacious, that forty 8 o o K
or fifty thousand persons carried on traffic there. t-_
In this city, the pride of the New World, and the 'S'
nhblctt monument of the industry and art of man,
while unacquainted with the ule of iron, and def-
:utte of aid from any doneflic animal, the Spa-
iards, who are most moderate in their compu.ti-
tinns, reckon that there wcre at leaIt liixy thou-

cind inhabitants .

BUT how much soever the novelty of those oh- 7 -.,din-
c-'ts might anufe or afloni'il the Spaniards, they ,' .. .
lcit the utmnoft lolicitude with relpfet to their own
fitia:ion. From a concurrence of circumflances,
ru ltes unexpccQed than favourable to their pro-
grefs, they had been allowed to penetrate into the
Lart of a powerful kingdom, and were now
dtged in its capital, wihout having once met
ulth open oppufliion from its monarch. The
Iliaralans, however, had carnefily dissuadcd them
From placing fIch confidt nce in Montczuma, as to
:ntcr a city of such a peculiar ficuation as Mexico,

thcrt that prince would have them at mercy, flhu

jp .s it werc in a fnarc, from which it was imlf-
ibl. to elciape. They affired him that the Mvlci-
.1:1 pricfts had, in the name of the Godls, coiin-
cl1d tlicir fovcrcign to admit the Spaniards into
:e capital, that he might cut them of]' tlhc:

' (oltcs Relat. Ram. iii. 21; . D ec. cI.lt. ( r!'a ga . CII..

'M:.lt\, pi r Uil (;c:tctlhuoiiio dcl (.'oitt . Ramn. ili. 31.
.* iL rcai, dcr . l.
. . vii. c. 1., ac.

;!L

.

o o K at one blow with perse& security . They nr,
_ . perceived, too plainly, that the apprehensions o
4';9 their allies were not destitute of foundation; thar,

by breaking the bridges placed at certain ir,t:.
vals on the caufewnys, or by dearoying part of t'e
causeways themselves, their retreat would be rtn.
dered impracicable, and tlly must remain coopd
up in the centre of a hostile city, surrounded b
nultitudes sufficient to overwhelm them, 2-:
without a poflibility of receiving aid from n:-
allies. iMuntezuma had, indeed, received them w,::
4iltinguifhed refpec. But onght they to recl0r
upon this as real, or to confider it as feignedc
Even if it were sincere, could they promilc o, :t
continuance ? Their fafcty depended upon t'-
will of a monarch in whose attachment they l;
po reason to confide; and an order flowing f:,
his caprice, or a word uttered by him in p.i;ir,,
might decide irrevocably concerning their tate.
SQlii;-udc THESE reflecions, so obvious as to (.-cur tott:

o¢~iyof meanest foldicr, did not escape the vigilant i.«:.

'Fw
8?t city of their general. Before he set out from Ci,.

lula, Cortes had received advice frmn Vi;!
pica', that Qualpopoca, one of the Me;s.:
generals on the frontiers, having aflnmblcd 1
army in order to attack fume of tile pc'i e
whom the Spaniards had encouraged to throw -::

Y B. Di;7.. . 8,, 86. a B. Diaz. c. p1'
4 Cirtcc Relat. Rzn . iii. 235. C.

he Mexican yoke, Efcalante had marched out B do k
with part of the garrison to support his allies; that a_
an engagement had ensued, in which, though the '59'
Spaniards were vi&corious, Elcalante, with seven
of his men, had been mortally wounded, his
horfl killed, and one Spaniard had been fur-
rounded by the enemy, and taken alive; that the
head of this unfortunate captive, after being car-
ried in triumph to different cities, in order to con-
vince the people that their invaders were not im-
mortal, had been sent to Mexico b. Cortes,
though alarmed with this intelligence, as an indi-
cation of Montezuma's hostile intentions, had con-
tinued his march. But as soon as he entered
Mexico, he became sensible, that, from an excess
of confidence in the superior valour and discipline
rs his troops, as well as from the disadvantage of
having nothing to guide him in an unknown
country, but the defective intelligence which he
had received from people with whom his mode of
communication was very imperfect, he had pushed
forward into a situation, where it was difficult to
continue, and from which it was dangerous to re-
tire. Disgrace, and perhaps ruin, was the certain
conelquence of attempting the latter. The ftc-
crls of his enterprise depended upon supporting
the high opinion which the people of New Spain
had formed with respect to the irrcfiflible power
of his arms. Upon the first symptom of timi-

B. Diaz. c. 93, 94. Hcrrer.i, dec. 2. lib. viii. c. t.

5$~ sr~~d.itl

B o o K dity on his part, their veneration would ce.il, ,.
--C-' Montezuma, whom fear alone restrained at pre.
'519' fenr, would let loole upon him the whole force

of his empire. At the fame time, he knew thal
the countenance of his own sovereign was to bi
obtained only by a series of vicdories, and that no.
thing but the merit of extraordinary success coCul
screen his conduct from the censure of irreguil.
rity. From all these considerations, it was nec:.
fary to maintain his station, and to extricate hir.
telf out of the difficulties in which one bild !l:p
had involved him, by venturing upon anotler
1till bolder. The situation was trying, but h;
mind was equal to it; and after revolving ti
matter with deep attention, he fixed upon a ;ln

r.'.... no less extraordinary than daring. He deterrmird
tez.... to seize Montezuma in his palace, and to carr.

him as a prisoner to the Spanish quarters. From
the superstitious veneration of the Mexicans ilf
the perlbn of their monarch, as well as their in.-
plicit fubmifion to his will, he hoped, by having
llontczunma in his power, to acquire the iupreme
diredtion of their aflairs; or, at least, with such a
sac.red pledge in his hands, he made no doubt o;
being lecure from any effort of their violence.

n;s ,nr Tr-HIS he immediately proposed to his oflicr.
,Il rIt~Ullllg
ti... The timid tartledat at a measure so audacious, anl

railed objections. The mnore intelligent andl rc!o-
lute, confIious that ir was the only relburcc in
Jwhich there appeaircd any prolicd of lalc;r,

i3)Wa: w. 1

viarmly approved of it, and brought over their B 0°o K
campanions so cordially to the fame opinion, that -
it was agreed inltantly to make the attempt. At 9'
his usual hour of visiting Montezunia, Cortes
went to the palace, accompanied by Alvarado,
Sindoval, Lugo, Vcla!qtucz de Leon, and l)avila,
Sive of his principal officers, and as many trufly
bkldiers. Thirty cholen men followed, not in re-
iulir order, but faunrering at rome diftanc-, as if
iicy had no object but curiosity ; small parties
scre poRted at proper intervals, in all the llreets
leading from the Spanish quarters to the court;
and the remainder of his troops, with the Tlafca-
lin allies, were under arms, ready to rally out on
t:e first alarm. Cortes and his attendants were
.ilmitted wi:hout fulpicion ; the Mexicans retiring,
ji uSual, out of relpec'. Ile addrefled the mo-
rarrch in a tone very different from that which lie
Lid employed in former conferences, reproaching
hin bitterly as the author of the violent alTault
nudle upon the Spaniards by one of his o[ficrrs,
a'3d demanded public reparation for the lols v.hicl
tCey had fullained by the death of some of tih-ir
companions, as well as ftr the int'ult oflcrcJ to
['ie great prince vwliole (crvants they w',re. Mlon-
trzuina, confoun:led at this unitxpccteJ acculfl-
t:on, and changing colour, either from coinlfiouf-
rck1 of guilt, or trom feeling t:ic indirgnity ,.iti

.!,icli lie was treated, afertedl his own inncernce
vi ti great earnellncis, ant, as a prolf of it, i[ayve

,' -s inll.antly to bling ()na-llpopuca and IIhis ;c-

CUIj)li-Ccs

B p 0 K complices prisoners to Mexico. Cortes replied,

V. .' with seeming complailance, that a declaration so
's*'9 relpe&able left no doubt remaining in his own

mind, but that something more was requisite to
satisfy his followers, who would never be con.
vinced that Montezuma did not harbour hofile
intentions against them, unless, as an evidence of
his confidence and attachment, he removed from
his own palace, and took up his residence in the
Spanish quarters, where he should be served and
honoured as became a great monarch. The sirs
mention of so strange a proposal bereaved Monte.
zuma of speech, and almost of motion. At length,
indignation gave him utterance, and he haughtil)
answered, " That persons of his rank were not
accustomed voluntarily to give up themelcves as
prisoners; and were he mean enough to do so, his
lubjedts would not permit such an affront to be
offered to their sovereign." Cortes, unwilling to
employ force, endeavoured alternately to soothe
and to intimidate him. The altercation becarre
warm; and having continued above three hours,
Velalquez de Leon, an impetuous and gallant
young man, exclaimed with impatience, " Why
wate more time in vain ? Let us either seize him
initantly, or stab him to the heart." The threaten-
ing voice and fierce geflures with which tlelle
words were uttered, struck Montezuini. The
Spaniards, he was sensible, had now procedeid lo
far, as left him no hope that they woould recede.
His own danger was imminent, the ncceffity una-

voidable.

voidable. He saw both, and abandoning him- B o° K
self to his fate, complied with their request.

1519.

His officers were called. He communicated to otion-rum.

them his resolution. Though aftoni(hed and as- "riSp ,,I
fided, they presumed not to question the will of quarters.
their matter, but carried him in silent pomp, all
bathed in tears, to the Spanish quarters. When
it was known that the strangers were conveying
away the emperor, the people broke out into the
wildest transports of grief and rage, threatening
the Spaniards with immediate deftrudion, as the
punifment justly due to their impious audacity.
But as ofon as Montezuma appeared with a seem-
ing gaiety of countenance, and waved his hand,
the tumult was nufhed, and upon his declaring it
to be of his own choice that he went to reside for
Ibme time among his new friends, the multitude,
taught to revere every intimation of their fove-
reign's pleasure, quietly diliperfed'.

THus was a powerful prince fcized by a few

flrangers, in the midst of his capital, at noondaiy,
and carried off as a prisoner without opposition or
Iloolnflcd. Hiflory contains nothing parallel to
this event, either with refpea to the temerity of
the attempt, or the fuccel of the execution; and
weLc not all the circumstances of this extraordinary
trmlaion authenticated by the molt unqueflion-

c ) .

Di9a. c. 9g. Gomnra Crcn. c. Sq'. C.1tCs Rt':lt.

i"'' i . , 23

. l;,

2 36 crjerr, dec. z. lit'. viii, c. z, 3.
VOL1. I. 1.. able

B o o K able evidence, they would appear so wild and ex-
~---.' travaganr, as to go far beyond the bounds of that

519' verisimilitude which must be prefcrved even in

fiditious narrations.
Reeiverd MONTEZUMA was received in the Spanish quar.

r, . ters with all the ceremonious relpect which Cortes
Ihad promnifed. He was attended by his own do-
mecfics, and served with his usual state. His
principal officers had free access to him, and he
carried on every function of government as if he
had been at pcrcft: liberty. The Spaniards, how-
ever, watched him with the scrupulous vigilance
which was natural in guarding such an important
prize", endeavouring at the fame time to sooth
and reconcile him to his situation, by every exter-
nal demonstration of regard and attachment. But
from captive princes the hour of humiliation and

s~ . aso ftffering is never far distant. Qualpopoca, his

crel i-:d ig
nt;ds. son, and five of the principal officers who served

under him, were brought prisoners to the capital,
l)rc. 4 in consequence of the orders which Montezuma

had issued. The emperor gave them up to Cortes,
that he might enquire into the nature of their
crime, and determine their punifhmen:. They
were formally tried by a Spanish court-martial;
and though they had acted no other part than what
became loyal subjects and brave men, in obeying
the orders of their lawful sovereign, and in oppo-
sing the invaders of their country, they were

d See NOTE LXXXII.

condemned
S

condemned to be burnt alive. The execution B o, K
of such atrocious deeds is seldom long suspend-
ed. The unhappy vitims were instantly led ','S
forth. The pile on which they were laid was
compored of the weapons collected in the royal
magazine for the public defence. An innumera-
ble multitude of Mexicans beheld, in silent aflo.
nifhment, the double insult offered to the ma-
jefty of their empire, an officer of distinction com-
mitted to the flames by the authority of strangers,
for having done what he owed in duty to his natu-
ral sovereign; and the arms provided by the fore-
fight of their anceflors for avenging such wrongs,
consumed before their eyes.

BUT these were not the molf-fhocking indignities

which the Mexicans had to bear. The Spaniards,
convinced that Qualpopoca would not have ven-
tured to attack Efcalante without orders from his
mailer, were not satisfied with inflicting vengeance
on the instrument employed in committing that
crime, while the author of it escaped with impu-
nity. Jufl before Qualpopoca was led out to
susser, Cortes entered the apartment of Montezu-
ma, followed by rome of his officers, and a soldier
carrying a pair of fetters and approaching the
monarch with a stern countenance, told him, that
as the persons who were now to undergo the pu-
nilhment which they merited, had charged him as
the cause of the outrage committed, it was necef-
fary that he likewise should make atonement for

U 2 that

B O o K that guilt; then turning away abruptly, without

-- l waiting for a reply, commanded the soldier to clap
'5'9' the fetters on his legs. The orders were inllantly

executed. The disconsolate monarch, trained up
with an idea that his person was sacred and invio.
lable, and confidering this profanation of it as the
prelude of immediate death, broke out into loud
lamentations and complaints. His attendants,
speechless with horror, fell at his feet, Latlingr
them with their tears; and bearing up the fetr.rs
in their hands, endeavoured with officious tender.
ness to lighten their pressure. Nor did their grief
and despondency abate, until Cortes returned from
the execution with a cheerful countenance, and
ordered the fetters to be taken off. As Montczu.
ma's spirits had funk with unmanly dejection, they
now rose into indecent joy; and with an unbecom.
ing transition, he passed at once from the anguifl
of despair to transports of gratitude and fond:lc
towards his deliverers.

Reasons of IN those transactions, as represented by the SpC--
.Jonti,. nifh historians, we search in vain for the qualitice

which ditlinguifh other parts of Cortes's condiut.
To usurp a jurisdiction which could not bclungtu
a firanger, who assumed no higher characi r tli:.
that of an ambasSador fiom a foreign prince, 1an',
under colour of it, to iniflit a capital punifihl;c.:
on men whose condua entitled them to eftcrim,
appears an aC of barbarous cruelty. To put .'
monarch of a great kingdom in irons, andi, :ztr

such ignominious treatment, suddenly to release B o ° K
him, seems to be a display of power no less incon- .
fiderate than wanton. According to the common '9'
relation, no account can be given either of the one
action or the other, but that Cortes, intoxicated
with success, and presuming on the ascendant
which he had acquired over the minds of the Mexi-
cans, thought nothing too bold for him to under-
take, or too dangerous to execute. But, in one
view, there proceedings, however repugnant to
justice and humanity, may have flowed from that
artfol policy which regulated every part of Cortes's
behaviour. The Mexicans had conceived the
Spaniards to be an order of beings superior to men.
It was of the utmost consequence to cherish this
illusion, and to keep up the veneration it inspired.
Cortes wished thatfhedding the blood of a Spaniard
should be deemed the mole heinous of all crimes;
and nothing appeared better calculated to establish
this opinion, than to condemn the first Mexicans
who had ventured to commit it, to a cruel death,
and to oblige their monarch himself to submit to a
mortifying indignity, as an expiation for being
accclary to their guilt'.

THE rigour with which Cortes punished the un- Tile icr .

happy persons who first presumed to lay violent ,,',,','.
hands upon his followers, seems accordingly to 1i-:.
have made all the impreflion that he desired. The

See NOTE LXXXIII.

U 3 spirit

B O O K spirit of Montezuma was not only overawed, but
A.,_ -_ subdued. During fix months that Cortes remained
3'50. in Mexico, the monarch continued in the Spanilh

quarters, with an appearance of as entire fatisfac.
tion and tranquillity, as if he had resided there, not
from constraint, but through choice. His mini-
flers and officers attended him as usual. He took
cognizance of all affairs; every order was issued
in his name. The external afpeEt of government
appearing the fame, and all its ancient forms being
Icrupuloufly observed, the people were so little
sensible of any change, that they obeyed the man-
dates of their monarch with the fame fubmilsive re-
verence as ever. Such was the dread which both
Montezuma and his fubjels had of the Spaniards,
or such the veneration in which they held them,
that no attempt was made to deliver their Sovereign
from confinement; and though Cortes, relying on
this ascendant which he had acquired over their
minds, permitted him not only to visit his temples,
but to make hunting excursions beyond the lake,
a guard of a few Spaniards carried with it such a
terror as to intimidate the multitude, and secure
the captive monarch .

THus, by the fortunate temerity of Cortes in

seizing Montezuma, the Spaniards at once secured
to themselves more extensive authority in the Mexi-
can empire than it was poflible to have acquired
in a long course of time by open force; and they

' Cortes Rclat. p. 236. E, B. Diaz. c. 97, 9%, 99'

excrcilce

exercised more absolute sway in the name of another B 0P0 K
than they could have done in their own. The arts -
ofpolifhed nations, in fubjeaing such as are less '5°0'
improved, have been nearly the fame in every pe-
riod. The fyflem of Screening a foreign ufurpa-
tion, under the sanction of authority derived from
the natural rulers of a country, the device of em-
ploying the magistrates and forms already efta-
blilhed as instruments to introduce a new dominion,
of which we are apt to boatl as sublime refinements
in policy peculiar to the present age, were inven-
tions of a more early period, and had been tried
with success in the Weft, long before they were
praflifed in the East.

CORTES availed himself to the utmost of the use which

power which he possessed by means of this. He i. m'os
lent some Spaniards, whom he judged bell quali-
sied for such commissions, into different parts of
the empire, accompanied by persons ofdiftindion,
whom Montezuma appointed to attend them both
as guides and protetors. They visited molf of
the provinces, viewed their foil and productions,
surveyed with particular care the ditfri&s which
yielded gold or silver, pitched upon leveral places
as proper flations for future colonies, and endea-
voured to prepare the minds of the people for lub-
mitting to the Spanish yoke. While they were
thus employed, Cortes, in the name and by the
authority of Montezuma, degraded some of the
principal officers in the empire, whose abilities or

U 4 independent

B o o K independent spirit excited his jealousy, and fubfti.
----' tuted in their place persons less capable or more

o Qbfequious.

ONE thing R(ill was wanting to complete his fe.

curity. He wished to have such command of the
lake as might ensure a retreat, if, either from le-
vity or dilguf, the Mexicans should take arm;
against him, and break down the bridges or caulc.
ways. This, too, his own address, and the faci-
lity of Montezuma, enabled him to accompfl:.
Having frequently entertained his priobner \i:h
pompous accounts of the European marine and ::rt
of navigation, he awakened his curiosity to s;,
those moving palaces which made their awj
through the water without oars. Under pret.-xt
of gratifying this desire, Cortes persuaded him to
appoint fore of his fubjets to fetch part of the
naval stores deposited at Vera Cruz to Mexico,
and to employ others in cutting down and prepar-
ing timber. With their assistance, the Spanish car-
penters soon completed two brigantines, which as-
forded a frivolous amusement to the monarch, and
were confidered by Cortes as a certain relource, it
he (hould be obliged to retire.

rMonteima» ENCOURAGED by so many inflances of the mo-
)..,g hi;- narch's tame fubmilfion to his will, Cortes ventured
tspai,1,. to put it to a proof (till more trying. He ur.;ei

Montezuma to acknowledge himself a vasal es tl:e
king of Caltile, to hold his crown of him as lulc-

rior,

rior, and to fubje& his dominions to the payment B °0 K
or an annual tribute. With this requisition, the -
jait and most humbling that can be made to one 'So
po0fcnld of Sovereign authority, Montezuma was
io oblsquious as to comply. He called together
the chief men of his empire, and in a solemn ha-
r:rngue, reminding them of the traditions and pro-
F!:cics which led them to expect the arrival of a
F:ople Ifrung from the fame flock with themselves,
in order to take poflcffion of the supreme power,
';. declared his belief that the Spaniards were this
proimilcd race; that therefore he recognized the
right of their monarch to govern the Mexican
emlpire; that he would lay his crown at his feet,
and obey him as a tributary. While uttering these
words, Montezuma discovered how deeply he was
affected in making such a sacrifice. Tears and
groans frequently interrupted his discourse. Over-
aced and broken as his spirit was, it itill retained
such a sense of dignity, as to feel that pang which
pirces the heart of princes when constrained to
rcign independent power. The first mention of
such a rcfolution firuck the affcmbly dumb with
altonilhment. This was followed by a fullen mur-
murof sorrow, mingled with indignation, which
indicated some violent eruption of rage to be near
at hand. This Cortes foresaw, and seasonably in-
tcrpofed to prevent it, by declaring thcat his malter
had no intention to deprive Montezuma of the
royal dignity, or to make any innovation upon the
constitution and laws of the Mexican empire.

This

B o0 K This assurance, added to their dread of the Spanil

V. __.. power, and to the authority of their monarch's

35Z0. example, extorted a reluctant consent from the as.

fembly 8. The aE of fubmiflion and homage wis
executed with all the formalities which the Sp,.
niards were pleased to prescribe h

The mrount MONTEZUMA, at the desire of Cortes, accom.
ok the tlea.
.,e oi- panied this profeflion of fealty and homage with a
the Spa- magnificent present to his new lovereign; and, as.
IW'1* ter his example, his fubjeEs brought in very liCe.

ral contributions. The Spaniards now colleded
all the treasure which had been either voluntarily
bestowed upon them at different times by Monte.
zuma, or had been extorted from his people under
various pretexts; and having melted the gold and
silver, the value of there, without including jewels
and ornaments of various kinds, which were pre.
served on account of their curious workmanship,

:v;fion or amounted to fix hundred thousand pesos. The
if, and the

ifcontenrit soldiers were impatient to have it divided, and
ocfioncd. Cortes complied with their desire. A fifrh of toe

whale was first set apart as the tax due to the
king. Another fifth was allotted to Cortes, as
commander in chief. The fums advanced by Ve.
lalquez, by Cortes, and by some of the officers,
towards defraying the expence of fitting out the
armament, were then deducted. The remainder

S See NOTE LXXXIV.
b Cortes Relat. 238. D. B. Diaz. c. 101. Gomara Clul.
c. . l. IIrrcr., dec. 2. lib. x. c. 4.

was

was divided among the army, including the garri- 0OO K
)bn of Vera Cruz, in proportion to their different _
ranks. After so many defalcations, the share of '5s'
a private man did not exceed a hundred pesos.
This fum fell To far below their sanguine expecta-
tions, that rome soldiers rejected it with scorn,
and others murmured lb loudly at this cruel dif-
appointment of their hopes, that it required all the
addrcfs of Cortes, and no small exertion of his
liberality, to appease them. The complaints of
the army were not altogether destitute of founda-
tion. As the crown had contributed nothing to-
wards the equipment or success of the armament,
it was not without regret that the soldiers beheld it
sweep away so great a proportion of the treasure
purchased by their blood and toil. What fell to
the ihare of their general appeared, according to
the ideas of wealth in the sixteenth century, an
enormous fum. Some of Cortes's favourites had
secretly appropriated to their own use several orna-
mentsof gold, which neither paid the royal fifth,
nor were brought into account as part of the com-
mon flock. It was, however, so manifestly the
interest of Cortes at this period to make a large
remittance to the king, that it is highly probable
those concealments were not of great consequence.

THE total fum amafTed by the Spaniards bears Rar,n,

no proportion to the ideas which might be forlncd, YSolluAd
either by reflecRing on the delcriptions given by i l,,,.h
hiitorians of the ancient Iplendour of Mexico, or titia.

by

B o o K by confidering the productions of its mines in
. modern times. But, among the ancient ,cxi.

0 cans, gold and silver were not the llan.ir.!s by

which the worth of other commodities Was clli.
mated ; and destitute of the artificial value derivcd
from this circumstance, were no farther in requtl;
than as they furnished materials for ornaments and
trinkets. These were either confecrateJ to t,e
gods in their temples, or were worn as n;:rks c;
diftinscion by their princes and some of their ii.u.
eminent chiefs. As the consumption of the; :c.
cious metals was inconsiderable, the demai.,l L:
them was not such as to put either the ingienui;
or industry of the Mexicans on the firetch, in Xr-
der to augment their flore. They were altogt::
unacquainted with the art of working the rlc:
mines with which their country abounded. \\i;:;
gold they had was gathered in the beds of riv:,
native, and ripened into a pure metallic ftatc,
The utmost effort of their labour in fcarch oi i;
was to walh the earth carried down by torrtr;s
from the mountains, and to pick out the grains ot
gold which subsided; and even this limple oipt.rl
tion, according to the report of the perlfos w\l;o.
Cortes appointed to survey the provinces whcar
there was a prospect of finding mines, t!lcy :er-
formed very unfkilfully k. From all tholf c;iulc,
the whole mals of gold in poffeflion of the Mr:-;

i Cortes Relat. p. z36. F. B. Diaz. c. Ioz, Ic3. (C
mara Cron. c. 91.

K B. Diaz. c. 103.

callS

cans was not great. As silver is rarely found pure, B o O K
and the Mexican art was too rude to condu6t the ---
process for refining it in a proper manner, the '5''
quantity of this metal was frill less considerable.
T'hus, though the Spaniards had exerted all the
power which they poffllEcd in Mexico, and often
with indecent rapacity, in order to gratify their
predominant pafion, and though Montezuma had
fondly exhausted his treasures, in hopes of fa-
tiating their thirst for gold, the produc of both,
.'hich probably included a great part of the bul-
lion in the empire, did not rife in value above
what has been mentioned '.

BUT however pliant Montezuma might be in Monte7iima

inflexible

other matters, with respect to one point he was in- with rcfpera
flexible. Though Cortes often urged him, with to rlii"o"'
the importunate zeal of a miflionary, to renounce
his faire gods, and to embrace the Christian faith,
he always rejeEted the proposition with horror.
Superstition, among the Mexicans, was fornmed
into such a regular and complete lyftem, that its
inflitutions naturally took faa hold of the mind;
and while the rude cribes in other parts of Ame-
rica were easily induced to relinquish a few no-
tions and rites, so loofi and arbitrary as hardly
to merit the name of a public religion, the Mexi-
cans adhered tenaciously to their imndc of wortlip,
which, however barbarous, was accompanied with

' Ilerr(r , die. 2. lib. iV. C. 4.
"See NOT LXXXV.

filch

B o 0 IC such order and solemnity as to render it the objrc
Do_. of veneration. Cortes, finding all his actemps in-
'5z'" effectual to shake the constancy of Montezumn

was so much enraged at his obstinacy, that in a
transport of zeal he led otlt his soldiers to throw
down the idols in the great temple by force. But
the prilts taking arms in defence of their altars,
and the people crowding with great ardour to sup.
port them, Cortes's prudence overruled his zeal,
and induced him to desist from his rash attempt,
after dislodging the idols from one of the ihrines,
and placing in their tRead an image of the Virgin
Mary ".

Schemes of FROM that moment the Mexicans, who had
theMoxCi- permitted the imprisonment of their sovereign,
firo th and suffered the exactions of strangers without a
5paniardl.

tfruggle, began to meditate how they might expel
or destroy the Spaniards, and thought themselves
called upon to avenge their insulted deities. The
priests and leading men held frequent consultations
with Montezuma for this purpose. But as it
might prove fatal to the captive monarch to
attempt either the one or the other by violence,
he was willing to try more gentle means. Having
called Cortes into his presence, he observed, that
now, as all the purposes of his embassy were fully
accomplished, the gods had declared their will,
and the people signified their desire that he and
his followers Ihould instantly depart out of the

i Sec NOTE LXXXVI.

empire.

empire. With this he required them to comply, B o o K
or unavoidable deftru&tion would fall suddenly on
their heads. The tenor of this unexpe&ed requifi- l'o.
tion, as well as the determined tone in which
it was uttered, left Cortes no room to doubt that
it was the result of some deep scheme concerted
between Montezuma and his subje&s. He quickly
perceived that he might derive more advantage
from a teeming compliance with the monarch's in-
clination, than from an ill-timed attempt to change
or to oppole it; and replied, with great compo-
lure, that he had already begun to prepare for re-
turning to his own country; but as he had de-
ltroyed the veffils in which he arrived, some.time
was requisite for building other ihips. This ap-
peared reasonable. A number of Mexicans were
lent to Vera Cruz to cut down timber, and some
Spanilh carpenters were appointed to superintend
the work. Cortes flattered himself, that during
this interval he might either find means to avert
the threatened danger, or receive such reinforce-
ments as would enable him to despise it.

ALMOST nine months were elapsed ince Porto- Anx;ety and

danger of

carrero and Montejo had failed with his dispatches corts.
to Spain; and he daily expeced their return with
a confirmation of his authority from the king.
Without this, his condition was insecure and
precarious, and after all the great things which
he had done, it might be his doom to bear
the name and susser the punishment of a trai-
tor. Rapid and extcnfive as his progress had

been,

B o K been, he could not hope to complete the re.

V. duction of a great empire with so small a bodyot
'5'O' men, which by this time the difeaics of the cli.

mate had confidcrably thinned; nor could he
apply for recruits to the Spanish fettlcments in th.e
islands until he received the royal approbation :,
his proceedings.

The arrival WHILE he remained in this cruel situation,
or a nlew
armarr^t anxious about what was past, uncertain with re.

fpe& to the future, and, by the late declaratio(
of Montezuma, oppressed with a new addition oi
cares, a Mexican courier arrived with an accour.
of some ships having appeared on the coa:,
Cortes, with fond credulity, imagining that his
messengers were returned from Spain, and that the
completion of all his wishes and hopes was at
hand, imparted the glad tidings to his compa.
nions, who received them with transports oi nu-
tual gratulation. Their joy was not of lron
continuance. A courier from Sandoval, whon
Cortes had appointed to succeed Efcalante in co0-
mand at Vera Cruz, brought certain inforinatio
that the armament was fitted out by Vclalfquez,
governor of Cuba, and instead of brinLin'r tihe ai
which they expecaed, threatened them with immn-
diate deltrution.

sied rut THE mottives which prompted Vclal;luez to tins
by V,.L violent measure are obvious. lrom tihe c;rcuil

fiances of Cortcs's departure, it was impoilbic not
to fufpe& his intention of throwing oil all lcl' tn!'

3en

once upon him. His neglecting to transmit any 8 °o° K
account of his operations to Cuba, strengthened -
this suspicion, which was at last confirmed, be- '''
yond doubt,. by the indifcrction of the officers
whom Cortes sent to Spain. They, from some
motive which is not clearly explained by the con-
temporary historians, touched at the island of
Cuba, contrary to the peremptory orders of their
general°. By this means Velalquez not only
learned that Cortes and his followers, after for-
mally renouncing all connetion with him, had
eftablilbed an independent colony in New Spain,
and were soliciting the king to confirm their pro-
ceedings by his authority ; but he obtained parti-
cular information concerning the opulence of the
country, the valuable presents which Cortes had
received, and the inviting profpeEts of success that
opened to his view. Every passion which can
agitate an ambitious mind; shame, at having been
so grossly overreached ; indignation, at being be-
trayed by the man whom he had fele&ed as the
obje& of his favour and confidence; grief, for
having wafted his fortune to aggrandize an ene-
my; and despair of recovering so fair an opportu-
nity of eftablilhing his fame and extending his
power, now raged in the bolbm of Velasquez. All
these, with united force, excited him to make an
extraordinary effort in order to be avenged on the

o B. Diaz. c. 54, 5;. Herrera, dec. 2. lib. v. c. 14. Co-
mara Cron. c. 96.

VOL. II. X author

B 0 0 K author of his wrongs, and to wceftfrom him his

v.-- usurped authority and conquests. Nor did he want
's50' the appearance of a good title to jultify sich an

attempt. The agent whom he sent to Spain with
an account of Grijalva's voyage, had met with a
mol favourable reception ; and from the fpeci-
mens which he produced, such high expetaatinn,
were formed concerning the opulence of New
Spain, tha; Velasquez was authorised to prolecu;e
the discovery of the country, and appointed go.
vernor of it during life, with more extenfivc powrr
and privileges than had been granted to any ad-
venturer from the time of Columbus . Elated by
this diflinguifhing mark of favour, and warranted
to confider Cortes not only as intriiuing upon hi;
juritdidion, but as diolbedient to the royal ma.
date, he determined to vindicate his own right.
and the honour of his sovereign by force of arms'.

Utn.lcrthe His ardour in carrying on his preparations, were
cornmn,'nd of
Nar. az. such as might have been expected froin the vio-

lence of the passions with which he was animate,,
and in a short time an armame.t was completrd.
conifing of eighteen Ihips, which had on bo.i::
fourscore horse-men, eight hundred foot IlJi¢:d,
of which eighty were muifketeers, and a hundred
and twenty crols-bow men, together with a train
of twelve pieces of cannon. As Velasquez's exp,
rience of the fatal conleqiince of committing:';

[Icreri, dec. 7. lib. iii. c. 1 l.
See N () TI' . I.X \ X\ I..

:not'.:':

another what he ought to have executed himfclf, B 0o K
had not rendered him more enterprising, he vetted _
the command of this formidable body, which, in '5,0.
the infancy of the Spanish power in America, m.-
rits the appellation of an army, in Pamphilo de
Narvaez, with inftrutions to seize Cortes and his
principal officers, to fend them prisoners to him,
and then to complete the dilcovery and conquest
of the country in his name.

AFTER a prosperous voyage, Narvaez landed The po-

his men without opposition near St. Juan de Ullua. Njrvc,..
Three soldiers, whom Cortes had sent to search Ap'
for mines in that diftric, immediately joined him.
By this accident, he not only received information
concerning the progress and situation of Cortes,
but as thele soldiers had made tomne progress in
tile knowledge of the Mexican language, he ac-
quired interpreters, by whose means he was en-
ahled to hold tome intcrcourfe with the people of
the country. But, according to the low cunning
of delerters, they framed their intelligcnce with
more attention to what they thought would be
agreeable, than to what they knew to be true
and rcpreclnted the situation of Coi tcs to be so
llperatce, and the dillYlc.lion of his followers to
be so general, as increal:d the natural confidence
and prefumnption of Narvaez. 1 lis firt operation,
however, might have taught him not to rely on
their partial accounts. Having sent to summon
the governor of Vera Cruz to furrcrndcr, Guevara,

X 2 a prielt

°O° oK a priest whom he employed in that service, made
-->-. the requisition with such insolence, that Sandoval,
'510- an officer of high spirit, and zealously attached to

Cortes, instead of complying with his demands,
seized him and his attendants, and sent them in
chains to Mexico.

Corts deep. CORTIS received them not like enemies, but as
ly aIrmed. friends, and condemning the severity of Sandoval,

set them immediately at liberty. By this well-
timed clemency, seconded by caresses and pre.
tents, he gained their confidence, and drew from
them luch particulars concerning the force and in-
tentions of Narvaez, as gave him a view of the
impending danger in its full extent. He had not
to contend now with half naked Indians, no match
for him in war, and still more inferior in the arts
of policy, but to take the field against an army in
courage and martial discipline equal to his own, in
number far superior, acting under the fan&ion ot
royal authority, and commanded by an officer of
known bravery. He was informed that Narvaez,
more solicitous to gratify the resentment of Velal
quez, than attentive to the honour or interest ot
his country, had begun his intercourse with the
natives, by representing him and his followers as
fugitives and outlaws, guilty of rebellion against
their own sovereign, and of injustice in invading
the Mexican empire, and had dcclared that his
chief object in visiting the country was to putnini
the Spaniards, and to relcue the Mexicans trom

op01reiltion

opprellion. He soon perceived that the fame un- B °O o
favourable representations had been conveyed to V_
Montezuma, and that Narvaez had found means '
to allure him, that as the conduct of those who
kept him under reltraint was highly displeasing to
the king his mafler, he had it in charge not only
to rescue an injured monarch from confinement,
but to reinRfate him in the poffellion of his ancient
power and independence. Animated with this
profpet of being set free from fubjetion to ftran-
gers, the provinces began openly to revolt from
Cortes, and to regard Narvaez as a deliverer no
less able than willing to save them. Montezuma
himself kept up a secret intercourse with the new
commander, and seemed to court him as a person
superior in power and dignity to those Spaniards
whom he had hitherto revered as the first of men'.

SUCH were the various afpets of danger and Hi, de!ib.

difficulty which presented themselves to the view ,erin, his
of Cortes. No situation can be conceived more ow-n on-
trying to the capacity and firmness of a general,
or where the choice of the plan which ought to'be
adopted was more difficult. If he should wait the
approach of Narvaez in Mexico, deftruAion seem-
ed to be unavoidable; for while the Spaniards
pressed him from without, the inhabitants, whole
turbulent spirit he could hardly restrain with all his
authority and attention, would eagerly lay hold on
fIch a favourable opportunity of avenging all their

See NOTE IXXXVIl.

X 3 wrongs.

oB 0o K wrongs. If he should abandon the capital, fct tle
t .- * captive monarch at liberty, and march out to meet

'5"- the enemy; he mnuf at once forego the fruits of

all his toils and victories, and relinquish advanta-
ges wiich could not be recovered without ex
traordinary efforts, and infinite danger. If, in-
tead of employing force, he should have recour:e
to conciliating meafuies, and attempt an accon.
modation with Narvaez, the natural haughtincls
of that officer, augmented by consciousness of iis
present fuperioriry, sorbad him to cherifl any fan-
guine hope of luccefs. After revolving every
cherne with deep attention, Cortes fixed uton
that which in execution was moLt hazardous, but,
if successful, would prove molt beneficial to his
country; and with the decisive intrepidity suited
to detcerir'e situations, determined to make ore
bold effort for victory under every disadvantage,
rather than sacrifice his own conquelts and the Spa-
nifh interest in Mexico.

BUT though he foresaw that the contcft n:fl be

JiT: nerprla-
ti .blr .nr terninated finlly by arms, it would havc bcz:i
the f,,ll,w-
r, o1 Nir- not only indccent, but criminal, to have nma:ilt.r

" againll his countrymen, without attenmptinl ti

adju.st matters by an amicable negociation. I; ii,[l
service he employed Olmcdo, his chapliiin, :o
whose charactcr the funcction was well lbitad, ald
who poffel(ed, besides, such prudence anl acd!rcls,
as qualified him to carry on the Iccret il;trigucs in
which Cortes placed his chief confidence. Narvarz

r,: tit c(t,

rejeced, with scorn, every fchemeof accommo- B O0 K
dation that Olmedo proposed, and was with dilfi-
culty rcftrained from laying violent hands on hinm i'5'
and his attendants. He met, however, with a
more favourable reception among the followers of
Narvaez, to many of whom he delivered letters,
either from Cortes or his officers, their ancicnt
friends and companions. Cortes artfully aclom-
panied thele with prcicnts or rings, chains of gold,
and other trinkets of value, which inlpired thoic
needy adventurers with high ideas of the wealth
he had acquired, and with envy of their good for-
tune who. were engaged in his lervice. Some,
from hopes of becoming fharcrs in those rich spoils,
declared for an immediate accommodation with
Cortes. Others, from public spirit, laboured to
prevent a civil war, which, whatever party should
prevail, mull (hake, and perhaps subvert the Spa-
nilh power, in a country where it was so imper-
ifely ettablifhed. Narvaez dilfregarded both, and
by a public proclamation denounced Cortes and his
adherents rebels and enemies to their country.
Cortes, it is probable, was not much lurpriled at
tlir unlr.trlable arrogance of Narvaez; and, after
Ihaving (iven such a proof of his own pacific dil-
puliuon as night jullify his recourfte to other
means, lie detcrmined to advance towards an
enemy whom he had laboured in vain to appeial:.

-IE left a hundred and fifty min in the capital, M .ir.
under the oummand of Pedro de Alvarado, an of- Aiy.

X 4 icer

B o o K sicer of diftinguilhed courage, for whom the Mexi.

V.

a- - cans had conceived a singular degree of refpe&.
'520o To the custody of this slender garrison he commit.

ted a great city, with all the wealth he had amafl.
ed, and, what was still of greater importance, the
person of the imprisoned monarch. His utmost
art was employed in concealing from Montezuma
the real cause of his march. He laboured to per.
fuade him, that the strangers who had lately ar.
rived were his friends and fellow-fubjeats; and that,
after a short interview with them, they would de-
part together, and return to their own country.
The captive prince, unable to comprehend the
designs of the Spaniards, or to reconcile what he
now heard with the declarations of Narvaez, and
afraid to discover any symptom of suspicion or dif-
trust of Cortes, promised to remain quietly in the
Spanish quarters, and to cultivate the fame friend-
ship with Alvarado which he had uniformly main-
tained with him. Cortes, with teeming confidence
in this promise, but relying principally upon the
injunctions which he had given Alvarado to guard
his priolner with the molt scrupulous vigilance, set
out frcm Mexico.

Nmher of His firength, even after it was reinforced by
;> toop). the juntion of Sandoval and the garrison of Vera

Cruz, did not exceed two hundred and fifty men.
As he hoped for success chiefly from the rapidity
of his motions, his troops were not encumbered
either with baggage or artillery. But as he dread-

,d

ed extremely the imprefflon which the enemy B O°° K
might make with their cavalry, he had provided v.
against this danger with the foresight and fagacicy '5'
which distinguish a great commander. Having
observed that the Indians in the province of Chi-
nantla used spears of extraordinary length and force,
he armed his soldiers with these, and accustomed
them to that deep and compa& arrangement which
the use of this formidable weapon, the best perhaps
that ever was invented for defence, enabled them
to assume.

WITH this small but firm battalion, Cortes ad- Continue.

to .cgociatt
vanced towards Zempoalla, of which Narvaez had *. he asd

arnccd.

taken poffeflion. During his march, he made re-
peated attempts towards some accommodation with
his opponent. But Narvaez requiring that Cortes
and his followers lhould intfantly recognize his
title to be governor of New Spain, in virtue of the
powers which he derived from Velasquez; and
Cortes refuting to submit to any authority which
was not founded on a commiflon from the emperor
himself, under whose immediate protection he and
his adherents had placed their infant colony; all
these attempts proved fruitless. The intcrcourfe,
however, which this occasioned between the two
parties, proved of no small advantage to Cortes,
as it afforded him an opportunity of gaining some
of Narvaez's officers by liberal presents, of lotten-
ing others by a semblance of moderation, and of
dazzling all by the appearance of wealth among his

troops,

B o o K troops, most of his soldiers having converted their

,,, .bare of the Mexican gold into chains, bracelets
'IO. and other ornaments, which they displayed with

military ostentation. Narvaez and a little junto of
his creatures excepted, all the army leaned towards
an accommodation with their countrymen. This
cifcovery of their inclination irritated his violent
temper almost to madness. In a transport of rage,
he set a price upon the head of Cor;es, and of his
principal officers; and having learned that he was
now advanced within a league of Zempoalla wite
his small body of men, he confidered this as an
insult which mcritd: immediate chaflifement, anu
r'rched out with all bis troops to offer him battle.

Attacks BUT Cortes was a leader of greater abilities and
the' "
ih experience than to fight on equal ground an enemy

so far superior in number, and so much better ap-
pointed. Having taken his station on the oppo-
site bank of the river de Canoas, where he knew
that he could not-be attacked, he beheld the ap-
proach of the enemy without concern, and dilre-
garded this vain bravade. It was then the begin-
ning of the wet season ', and the rain had poured
down, during a great part of the day, with the
violence peculiar to the torrid zone. The follow-
ers of Narvaez, unaccustomed to the hardships ot
military service, murmured lb much at being thus
fruitleifly cxpofcd, that, from their unoldizr-llile
impatience, as well as his own contempt of his

Ilackluyt. vol. iii. 467. DC Lace Defer. Ind. Occid. z2:

advcrlaLry,

adversary, their general permitted them to retire to s o o K

V.

Zempoalla. The very circumstance which induced *
them to quit the field, encouraged Cortes to form '5s*.
a fiheme, by which he hoped at once to terminate
the war. He observed, that his hardy veterans,
though flanding under the torrents, which conti-
nued to fall, without a tingle tent or any fhlter
whatsoever ro cover them, were so far from repin-
ing at 4lardfhips which were become familiar to
them, that they were still fresh and alert for ser-
vice. He foresaw that the enemy would naturally
give themselves up to repose after their fatigue,
and that, judging of the condu& of others by their
own effeminacy, they would deem themselves per-
fectly lecure at a season so unfit for action. He
resolved, therefore, to fall upon them in the dead
of night, when the surprise and terror of this un-
expeeted attack might more than compensate the
inferiority of his numbers. His soldiers, sensible
that no resource remained but in some desperate
effort of courage, approved of the measure with
luch warmth, that Cortes, in a military oration
which he addressed to them before they began their
march, was more solicitous to temper than to in.
flame their ardour. lie divided them into three
parties. At the head of the first he placed Sando-
val; entrusting this gallant officer with the molt
dangerous and important fcrvice, that of sizing
the enemy's artillery, which was planted before
the principal tower of the temple, where Narv;iae
had fixed his head-quarters. Chrifloval de Olid

commanded

0 °o° K commanded the second, with orders to assault the

V.

0 v-J tower, and lay hold on the general. Cortes him.
's5a' self conducted the third and smallest division,

which was to aft as a body of reserve, and to sup.
port the other two as there should be occasion.
Having pascd the river de Canoas, which was
much swelled with the rains, not without difficul-
ty, the water reaching almost to their chins, they
advanced in profound silence, without beat of
drum, or found of any warlike instrument; each
man armed with his sword, his dagger, and his
Chinantlan spear. Narvaez, remiss in proportion
to his security, had posted only two centinels to
watch the motions of an enemy whom he had such
good cause to dread. One of these was seized by
the advanced guard of Cortes's troops, tl.e other
made his escape, and hurrying to the town with
all the precipitation of fear and zeal, gave such
timely notice of the enemy's approach, that there
was full leisure to have prepared for their recep-
tion. But, through the arrogance and infatuation
of Narvaez, this important interval was loft. He
imputed this alarm to the cowardice of the centi-
ncl, and treated with derision the idea of being at-
tacked by forces so unequal to his own. The
Ihouts of Cortes's soldiers, rtifhing on to the al-
fault, convinced him at last, that the danger which
he despised was real. The rapidity with which
they advanced was such, that only one cannon
could be fired, before Sandoval's party closed with
enemy, drove them from their guns, and began

to

to force their way up the steps of the tower. Nar- a 0 0 K
vaez, no less brave in aaion than presumptuous .
in condut, armed himself in haste, and by his '5'*
voice and example animated his men to the com-
bat. Olid advanced to sustain his companions;
and Cortes himself, ruffing to the front, condu&-
ed and added new vigour to the attack. The
compat order in which this small body pressed on,
and the impenetrable front which they presented
with their long spears, bore down all opposition
before it. They had now reached the gate, and and over-
were firuggling to burst it open, when a soldier com
having set fire to the reeds with which the tower
was covered, compelled Narvaez to sally out. In
the first encounter he was wounded in the eye with
afpear, and falling to the ground, was dragged
down the steps, and in a moment clapt in fetters.
The cry of vicory resounded among the troops of
Cortes. Those who had sallied out with their
leader now maintained the conflict feebly, and be-
gan to surrender. Among the remainder of his
soldiers; itationed in two smaller towers of the
temple, terror and confusion prevailed. The
darkness was so great, that they could not clifin-
guilh between their friends and foes. Their own
artillery was pointed against them. Wherevcr
they turned their eyes, they beheld lights gleaming
through the obscurity of night, which, though
proceeding only from a variety of ihining iniefs,
that abound in moist and sultry climates, their as-
frighted imaginations represented as niumerous

bands

B3 0 0 bands of musketeers advancing with kindled

V.
, _-- - matches to the attack. After a short refiltance
'5°0. the soldiers compelled their officers to capitulate,

and before morning all laid down their arms, and
submitted quietly to their conquerors.

The effcra THIS complete victory proved more acceptable,
of this
vitaoy. as it was gained almost without bloodshed, only

two soldiers being killed on the fide of Cortes, ant!
two officers, with fifteen private men, of the ad-
verse faction. Corces treated the vanquilhed not
like enemies, but as countrymen and friends, and
offered either to fend them back directly to Cuba,
or to take them into his service, as partners in hii
fortune, on equal terms with his own foliicrs.
This latter propoition, seconded by a seasonable
distribution of some presents from Cortes, and li
beral promises of more, opened profpeEs so agree-
able to the romantic expectations which invited
them to engage in this service, that all, a few par-
tizans of Narvaez excepted, closed with it, and
vied with each other in professions of fidelity and
attachment to a general, whose recent fuccels had
given them such a striking proof of his abilities for
command. Thus, by a series of events no les;
fortunate than uncommon, Cortes not only clcapcd
from perdition which seemed inevitable, but, vwhen
he had least reason to expect it, was placed at the
head of a thousand Spaniards, ready to tolluW
wherever 1e should lead them. Whoever reflncct
upon the facility with which this victory was o>-

t.uilnolJ

tained, or con iders with what sudden and unani- sB ,0 K
mous transition the followers of Narraez ranged s-.
themfitves under the standard of his rival, will be 'sL'
apt to ascribe both events as much to the intrigues
as to the arms of Cortes, and cannot but fufpelt
that the ruin of Narvaez was occasioned, no less
by the treachery of his own followers, than by the
valour of his enemy u.

BUT, in one point, the prudent conduct and The Meni-

good fortune of Cortes were equally conspicuous. 'k na
Its, by the rapidity of his operations after he began h,^ s.''
his march, he had not brought matters to such a
speedy issue, even this decisive vicory would have
come too late to have saved his companions whom
he left in Mexico. A few days after the dif-
comfiture of Narvaez, a courier arrived with an
account that the Mexicans had taken arms, and
having seized and destroyed the two brigantines,
which Cortes had built in order to secure the com-
mand of the lake, and attacked the Spaniards in
their quarters, had killed several of them and
wounded more, had reduced to aftes their maga-
zineofprovifions, and carried on hostilities with
;uch fury, that, though Alvarado and his men de-
fended themselves with undaunted resolution, they
mnuf either be soon cut off by famine, or funk
under the multitude of their enemies. This re-

, C.nre, Relat. 242z D. B. DiZ .

e .-1 2c. H'crrera,
*'it. Z. lib. ix. c. 18, &c. Goinara Cron. c. 97, &c.

3 volt

a O0 K volt was excited by motives which rendered it fill

V.
i - more alarming. On the departure of Cortes for

'"S' Zempoalla, the Mexican& flattered themselves,

that the long-expeed opportunity of restoring
their sovereign to liberty, and of vindicating their
country from the odious dominion of strangers,
was at length arrived; that while the forces of their
oppreflbrs were divided, and the arms of one party
turned against the other, they might triumph with
greater facility over both. Consultations were held,
and schemes formed with this intention. The Spa.
niards at Mexico, conscious of their own feeble-
ness, fufpe&ed and dreaded those machinations.
A lavarado, though a gallant officer, possessed nei-
ther that extent of capacity, nor dignity of man.
ners, by which Cortes had acquired such an ascend
ant over the minds of the Mexicans, as never al-
lowed them to form a just estimate of his weaknels
or of their own strength. Alvarado knew no mode
of supporting his authority but force. Initcad 0o
employing address to disconcert the plans or to
soothe the spirits of the Mexicas, he waited the re.
turn of one of their solemn fetfivals, when til
principal persons in the empire were dancing, ac-
cording to custom, in the court of the great tenm
pie; he seized all the avenues which led to it, and,
allured partly by the rich ornaments which thts
wore in honour of their gods, and partly by rhr
facility of cutting off at once the authors of that
conspiracy which he dreaded, he fell upon them,
unarmed and unfufpicious of any danger, and matl

7 facired

racred a great number, none escaping but such as B °0° K
nlade their way over the battlements of the temple. a_
An ascion so cruel and treacherous filled not only ,50'
the city, but the whole empire, with indignation
and rage. All called aloud for vengeance; and
regardless of the safety of their monarch, whole
life was at the mercy of the Spaniards, or of their
own danger in aflaulting an enemy who had been
so long the objedt of their terror, they committed
all those ats of violence of which Cortes received
an account.

To him the danger appeared so imminent, as sr mrrFes,

to admit neither of deliberation nor delay. He set c.j ai.
out instantly with all his forces, and returned from
Zempoalla with no less rapidity than he had ad-
vanced thither. At Tlafcala he was joined by two
thousand chosen warriors. On entering the Mexi-
can territories, he found that difaffecion to the
Spaniards was not confined to the capital. The
principal inhabitants had deserted the towns through
which he passed; no pcrfon of note appearing to
meet him with the usual relped; no provision was
made for the fubfiftenceof his troops; and though
he was permitted to advance without oppoftion,
the solitude and silence which reigned in every
place, and the horror with which the people avoi(l-
ed all intertourfe with him, discovered a deep.
rooted antipathy, that excited the molf just alarm.
But, implacable as the enmity of the Mexicans
was, they were so unacquainted witl the fcliencc

VOL, 1. y ot

B 0v0 K of war, that they knew not how to take the pro.

V.
v , per measures, either for their own safety or the de.

'510. ftru6tion of the Spaniards. Uninftruded by their

former error in admitting a formidable enemy into
their capital, instead of breaking down the cause.
ways and bridges, by which they might have in.
closed Alvarado and his party, and have tficciu.
June 24. ally ftopt the career of Cortes, they again suffered

him to march into the city without mol.-tation,
and to take quiet polfffion of his ancient flation.

Improper THE transports of joy with which Alvarado and
rond,.¢~ of
Cot3. his soldiers received their companions cannot be

exprrcfed. Both parties were lo much elated, the
one with their fealonable deliverance, and the other
with the great exploits which they had atchievcd,
that this intoxication of success seems to have
reached Cortes himfcl; and he behaved on this
occasion neither with his usual sagacity nor atten-
tion. He not only neglected to visit Montczuma,
but embittered the insult by expressions full of
contempt for that unfortunate prince and his peo-
ple. The forces of which he had now the com-
mand, appeared to him so irreilltiblc, that he might
assume an higher tone, and lay aside the malk of
moderation, under which he had hitherto conceal-
ed his designs. Some Mexicans who undcrllood
the Spaniff language, heard the conteLmptuous
words which Cortes uttered, and reporting them
to their countrymen, kindled their rage anew.
They were now convinced that the initcntioiis of

9 t:h-

the general were equally bloody with thofeofAlva. BOO K
rado, and that his original purpose in visiting their -
country, had not been, as he pretended, to court '520.
the alliance of their sovereign, but to attempt the
conquest of his dominions. They resumed their The violent
arms with the additional fury which this discovery ,^'.Mi-
inlpired, attacked a considerable body of Spaniards ""*
who were marching towards the great square in
which the public maiket was held, and compelled
them to retire with some loss. Emboldened by
this success, and delighted to find that their op-
preftors were not invincible, they advanced next
day with extraordinary martial pomp to assault the
Spaniards in their quarters. Their number was
formidable, and their undaunted courage flill more
so. Though the artillery pointed againit their nu-
merous battalions, crowded togezher in narrow
streets, swept off multitudes at every discharge;
though every blow of the Spanifl weapons fell
with mortal effetl upon their naked bodies, the
impetuosity of the assault did not abate. Frefb
men rushed forward to occupy the places of the
slain, and meeting with the lame fate, were fuc-
ceeded by others no less intrepid and eager for ven-
geance. The utmost effort of Cortes's abilities
and experience, seconded by the dilciplined valour
of his troops, were hardly sufficient to defend the
fortifications, that surrounded the polt where the
Spaniards were flationed, into which the enemy
were more than once on the point of forcing their
way,

Y 2 CORTES

B v0 K CORTES beheld, with wonder, the implacab!'

. ferocity of a people, who seemed at firlt to fuib.

Dil-',of mit tamely to the yoke, and had continued so
h,. Sa- long passive under it. The soldiers of Narvaez,

who fondly imagined that they followed Cortes
to share in the spoils of a conquered empire, were
astonished to find that they were involved in a dan.
gerous war, with an enemy whose vigour was fili
unbroken, and loudly execrated their own weakness,
in giving such easy credit to the delusive promises
of their new leader x. But surprise and complaints
were of no avail. Some immediate and extraordi.
nary effort was requisite to extricate themfclve;
out of their present situation. As soon as the ap-
proach of evening induced the Mexicans to re-
tire, in compliance with their national cufton
of ceasing from holtilities with the setting fu,
Cortes began to prepare for a rally, next da',
with such a considerable force, as might either
drive the enemy out of the city, or compel them
to liften to terms of accommodation.

Cortes at- HE cordu&ed, in person, the troops defined
tacks then
without for this important service. Every invention known

cc. n the European art of war, as well as every pre-

caution, fuggetted by his long acquaintance with
the Indian mode of fighting, were employed to
ensure success. But he found an enemy prepared
and determined to oppose him. The force of the

x B. Diaz . c. 26.

Mexican!

Mexicans was greatly augmented by frelh troops, B o°° I
which poured in continually from the country, and -
their animosity was in no degree abated. They 15S0.
were led by their nobles, inflamed by the exhorta-
tions of their prieits, and fought in defence of
their temples and families, under the eye of their
gods, and in pretence of their wives and children.
Notwithstanding their numbers, and enthusiastic
contempt of danger and death, wherever the
Spaniards could close with them, the superiority
of their discipline and arms obliged the Mexi-
cans to give way. But in narrow itreets, and
where many of the bridges of communication
were broken down, the Spaniards could seldom
come to a fair rencounter with the enemy, and as
they advanced, were exposed to showers of arrows
and flones from the tops of the houses. After
a day of incessant exertion, though vast numbers
of the Mexicans fell, and part of the city was
burnt, the Spaniards, weary with the flaugh-
tcr, and harassed by multitudes which successively
iclicved each other, were obliged at length to re-
tire, with the mortilication of having accomplished
nothing so clecifive as to con penfate the unusual
calamity of twelve soldiers killed, and above sixty
wounded. Another sally, made with greater force,
was not more effct1ual, and in it the general him-
flf was wounded in the hand.

CORTES now perceived, too late, the fatal M,)n'.eum.
error into ivhich he had been betrayed by his own "a"n.

Y 3 contempt

B o o K contempt of the Mexicans, and was satisfied that

he could neither maintain his preicnt flation in the
'5°'- centre of an hostile city, nor retire from :t without

the most imminent danger. One resource dill re.
mained, to try what effrc the interpofiion of
Montezuma might have to soothe or overawe his
fubjcds. When the Mexicans approached next
morning to renew the assault, that unfurtunite
prince, at the merty of the Spaniards, and reduced
to the fad necefTity of becoming the infl!t,menr of
his own dilgrace, and of the slavery of his pciplc',
advanced to the battlements in his royal robes, and
with all the pomp in which he uled to appear on
solemn occasions. At fight of their luvtrc!!n,
whom they had long been accuflomed to honour,
and almost to revere as a god, the weapons tiropt
from their hands, every tongue was fileat, all
bowed their heads, and many prostrated themllc v.s
on the ground. Montezuma addressed them ith
every argument that could mitigate their rage, or
persuade them to cease from hottiliti's. 'ihen he
ended his discourse, a fullen murmur of d;il pro-
bation run through the ranks; to this fluccc:,cd
reproaches and threats; and the fury of thi) mul.
titude riling in a moment above every reltraintt o
decency or rcfpcc, rights of arrows and volky. of
stones poured in lb violently upon the ra!iil'r[,
that before the Spanish oIldiers, appointed w( co-
ver Montezuma with their bucklers, had tinumto

y Sec NOTE LXXXIX.

lift

lift them in his defence, two arrows wounded the B O O K
unhappy monarch, and the blow of a stone on his * -a
temple struck him to the ground. On feeing him I5O° '
fall, the Mexicans were so much astonished, that,
with a transition not uncommon in popular tu-
,nults, they passed in a moment from one extreme
to the other, remorse succeeded to insult, and they
fled with horror, as if the vengeance of Heaven
were pursuing the crime which they had com-
mitted. The Spaniards, without moleflation, car-
ried Montezuma to his apartments, and Cortes
hastened thither to console him under his misfor-
tune. But the unhappy monarch now perceived
how low he was funk, and the haughty spirit
which seemed to have been so long extin&, re-
turning, he scorned to survive this ialt humiliation,
and to protrat an ignominious life, not only as
the prisoner and tool of his enemies, but as the
ol)je& of contempt or detestation among his sub-
jects. In a transport of rage he tore the bandages
from his wounds, and refulfed, with such olbti-
nacy, to take any nourishment, that lie soon ended
his wretched days, rejicding with di:dain all the
solicitations of the Spaniards to embrace the Chrilt-
ian faith.

UPON the death of Montezumia, Cortes having N,,w on.

loft all hope of bringing the Mexicans to an ac- fleth.
cuolnmodation, law no prolpeat of fafery but in at-
t:nmpting a retrear, and began to prepare for it.
But a fuddcn motion of the Mexicans engaged

Y hi4

B o K him in new confiits. They took pofTfeion of a

-- high tower in the great temple which overlooked
'51' the Spanilh quarters, and placing there a garrilbn

of their principal warriors, not a Spaniard could
llir without b ing cxpofed to their misfile weapons.
Fronm his polt it was necessary to dillodge them
at any risk; and Juan de Efcobar, with a nume-
rous detachment of chosen foldierj, was ordered to
make the attack. But Efcobar, though a gallant
oflicer, and at the head of troops accutomncd
to conquer, and who now fought under the eyes
of their countrymen, was thrice repullcd. Cortrs,
fenible that not only the reputation but the farlty
of his army depended on the success of this anffult,
ordered a buckler to be tied to his arm, as ie
could not manage it with his woundcd hand, and
rulhed with his drawn sword into the thickert of
the combatants. Encouraged by the prelence of
their general, the Spaniards returned to the chara;e
with such vigour, that they gradually forced their
way up the Iteps, and drove the Mexicans to t e
platto;:m at the top of the tower. There a dread-
ful carnage began, when two young Mexicans ot
high rank, oblfrving Cortes as h- anilmateid nis
soldiers by his voice and example, rellvved to la-
crifice their own lives in order to cut ofl the au-
thor of all the calamities which delbloted tlicr
country. They approached him in a lulpplic;nt
pollure, as if they had intended to lay down tholir
arms, and seizing him in a moment, hurried him
towards the battlements, over which they tllrw

8 rhemlicives

themfclves headlong, in hopes of dragging him B °0 K
along to be dashed in pieces by the fame tall. But ---
Cortes, by his strength and agility, broke loose '
from their grasp, and the gallant youths perilhed
in this generous, though unsuccessful, attempt to
save their country. As soon as the Spaniards be-
came masters of the tower, they set fire to it, and,
without farther molestation, continued the prepara-
tions for their retreat.

THIs became the more necessary, as the Mexi- The Spt-

niara, ~ba.

cans were ol much aflonifhed at the last effort of the don the
Spanish valour, that they began to change their c"y.
whole fyflem of hostility, and instead of incceTlnt
attacks, endeavoured, by barricading the (treets,
and breaking down the caufceways, to cut off the
communication of the Spaniards with the continent,
and thus to ifarve an enemy whom they could not
subdue. The first point to be determined by Cor-
tes and his followers, was, whether they should
march out openly in the face of day, when they
could dilcern every danger, and fee how to regu-
late their own motions, as well as how to relifi. the
aff.iults of the enemy; or, whether they Ihould en-
dcavour to retire lctretly in the night ? The latter
was preferred, partly from hopes that their national
itpertlition would restrain the Mexicans from vcn-
turing to attack them in the night, and partly
iiom their own fond belief in the predictions of a
private soldier, who having acquired univerlil
credit by a Lmattcring of learning, and his prcten.

rions

B o0 K sions to astrology, boldly assured his countrymen

V.
vcz , of success, if they made their retreat in this man-

ner. They began to move, towards midnight, in
three divisions. Sandoval led the van; Pedro Al-
varado, and Velasquez de Leon, had the conduct
of the rear; and Cortes commanded in the centre,
where he placed the prilbners, among whom were
a son and two daughters of Montezuma, together
with several Mexicans of diftincion, the artillery,
the baggage, and a portable bridge of timber, in.
tended to be laid over the breaches in the caulcwav.
They marched in profound silence along the caul-
way which led to Tacuba, because it was fhortcr
than any of the reft, and lying most remote fro:n
the road towardsTlalcala and the fea-coaft,had been
left more entire by the Mexicans. They reached
the firit breach in it without molestation, hoping
that their retreat was undiscovered.

Atntaced BUT the Mexicans, unperceived, had not only
Mkicns,. watched all their motions with attention, b hit had

made proper difpofiticns for a molt formidable at-
tack. While the Spaniards were intent up:,n pla-
cing their bridge in the breach, and occupied in
conducting their horses and artillery along it, they
were fulddenly alarmed with the tremendous toundl
of wailike inltruments, and a general fliout from
an innumerable multitude of enemies; tlh lake was
covered with canoes; flilhts of arrows, and Ihow-
ers of lolles poured in upon themi from evciy
quarter; the Mexicans rusling forward to the

chJrLge

charge with fearless impetuosity, as if they hoped B o°

o

in that moment to be avenged for all their wrongs. v-_-
Unfortunately the wooden-bridge, by the weight 's'°
oi the artillery, was wedged Co fast into the Itones
and mud, that it was impossible to remove it.
Di!,nayed at this accident, the Spaniards advanced
with precipitation towarus the second breach.
The Mexicans hemrned them in on every fide, and
though they defended themselves with their usual
courage, yet crouded together as they were on a
narrow causeway, their dilcipline and military skill
were of little avail, nor did the obscurity of the
night permit them to derive great advantage from
their fire-arms, or the superiority of their other
weapons. All Mexico was now in arms, and so
eager were the people on the deftruacion of their
oppressors, that they who were not near enough
to annoy them in person, impatient of the delay,
prefed forward with such ardour, as drove on their
countrymen in the front with irresistible violence.
Fresh warriors instantly filled the place of such as
fell. The Spaniards, weary with faughter, and
unable to fuflain the weight of the torrent that
poured in upon them, began to give way. In a mo-
ment the confusion was univerl-il; horse and foor,
oificers and soldiers, friends and enemies, were
mingled together; and while all fought, and m;any
fell, they could hardly diltinguilh from what hand
thel blow came.

CORTES,

B o0 K CORTES, with about a hundred foot foldiers'and

V.

C~-C' * a few horse, forced his way over the two remain.
Ther dif. ing breaches in the causeway, the bodies of the
l'" dead serving to fill up the chafmns, and reached the

main land. Having formed them as soon as they
arrived, he returned with such as were yet capa.
ble of service, to assist his friends in their retreat,
and to encourage them, by his presence and ex-
ample, to persevere in the efforts requisite to efifcr.
it. He met with part of his soldiers, who had
broke through the enemy, but found many more
overwhelmed by the multitude of their aggreTffrs,
or perihing in the lake; and heard the piteous la.
mentations of others, whom the Mexicans, having
taken alive, were carrying off in triumph to be
sacrificed to the god of war. Before day, all who
had escaped aflembled at Tacuba. But when the
morning dawned, and discovered to the view of
Cortes his flattered battalion, reduced to lds than
half its number, the survivors dejected, and most
of them covered with wounds, the thoughts of
what they had fuffcred, and the remembrance of
so many faithful friends and gallant followers who
had fallen in that night of o;rrow', pierced his
foul with such anguish, that while he was form-
ing their ranks, and ifuing rome necclTary orders,
his soldiers oblJrved the tears trickling from his
eyes, and remarked, with mnuch fiatisficlion, Ihat

z NorhcT;Zfle is the name by which it is nill Iiiingui'ilci in
Nc.v 5Sa3ill.

v.'hilc

while attentive to the duties of a general, he was B o K
not infcnfible to the feelings of a man.

15 o.

IN this fatal retreat many officers of diftinsion and 1oa

perilhed', and among these Velasquez de Leon,
who having forsaken the party of his kinfnan, the
governor of Cuba, to follow the fortune of his
companions, was, on that account, as well as for
his superior merit, refpeded by them as the second
perfun in the army. All the artillery, ammuni-
tion, and baggage, were loft; the greater part of
the horses, and above two thousand Tlafcalans,
were killed, and only a very small portion of the
treasure which they had amassed was saved. This,
which had been always their chiefobje&, proved
a great cause of their calamity; for many of the
soldiers having so overloaded themselves with bars
of gold as rendered them unfit for action, and re-
tarded their flight, fell, ignominoufly, the vicims
of their own inconsiderate avarice. Amidst so
many disasters, it was some consolation to find that
Aguilar and Marina, whose funcion as interpreters
was of such efflntial importance, had made their
escape b.

THE first care of Cortes was to find some shelter Dif;cult re.
for his wearied troops for as the Mexicans infefR. spnifrd,

See NOTE XC.
b Cortes Relat. p. 248. B. Diaz. c. 128. Gomara Cron.
c. 10. Hcrrera, dec. 2, lib. x. c. gi, 12,

C4

B o o K ed them on every fide, and the people of Tacuba
,_ _. began to take arms, he could not continue in his
*510° present station. He direaed his march towards

the rising ground, and having fortunately dico.
vered a temple situated on an eminence, took pof.
fefIion of it. There he found not only the shelter
for which he wished, but, what was no leIs wanted,
some provisions to refresh his men; and though
the enemy did not intermit their attacks through.
out the day, they were with less difficulty prevent-
ed from making any impression. During this time
Cortes was engaged in deep consultation with his
officers, concerning the route which they ought to
take in their retreat. They were now on the wef
fide of the lake. Tlafcala, the only place where
they could hope for a friendly reception, lay about
fixty-four miles to the east of Mexico'; io that
they were obliged to go round the north end of the
lake before they could fall into the road which
led thither. A Tlafcalan soldier undertook to be
their guide, and coundu&ed them through a coun-
try in some places marshy, in others mountainous,
in all ill-cultivated and thinly peopled. They
marched for fix days with little respite, and under
continual alarms, numerous bodies of Mexi-
cans hovering around them, sometimes harassing
them at a diflance with their misfile weapons, and
Iometimes attacking them closely in front, in rear,
in flank, with great boldness, as they now knew

c Villa Segnor Teatro Amcricanos, lib. ii. c. i.

that

that they were not invincible. Nor were the fa- B O 0 K
tigue.and danger of chose incessant conflicts the --,-
wort evils to which they were expoled. As the '50'.
barren country through which they passel afforded
hardly any provisions, they were reduced co feed
on berries, roots, and the stalks of green maize;
and at the very time that famine was deprefring
their spirits and walling their strength, their fitua-
,ion required the most vigorous and unremitting
exertions of courage and activity. Amndft those
complicated distresses, one circumstance supported
and animated the Spaniards. Their commander
fu!lained this fad reverse of fortune with unshaken
m.gnanimity. His presence of mind never forsook
him; his lagacity forelaw every event, and his vi-
gilance provided for it. He was foremolE in every
danger, and endured every hardlhip with cheer-
fulness. The difficulties with which he was fur-
rounded seemed to call forth new talents; and his
soldiers, though despairing themfclves, continued
to tollow him with increaling confidence in his
abilities.

ON the sixth day they arrived near to Otumba, nB.,t, of
not far from the road between Mexico and Tlaf- Otumba.
cala. Early next morning they began to advance
towards it, flying parties of the enemy slill hang-
inuon their rear; and, ainidli the insults with which
&th-y accompanied their holiilities, l.irina remark-
td that they often exclaimed with exultation, " Go
on, robbers; go to the place where you Ihall

quicLI!y

B O v K quickly meet the vengeance due to your crimes."

, -y--j The meaning of this threat the Spaniards did not
I'5"' comprehend, 'until they reached the summit of

an eminence before them. There a spacious valley
opened to their view, covered with a vail army,
extending as far as the eye could reach. 1h
Mexicans, while with one body of their troops
they harassed the Spaniards in their retreat, had
aflembled their principl force on the other fide of
the lake; and marching along the road which led
directly to Tlafcala, posted it in the plain of Otum.
ba, through which they knew Cortes must pari.
At the fight of this incredible multitude, which
they could survey at once from the rising ground,
the Spaniards were afonifled, and even the boldeit
began to despair. But Cortes, without allowing
leisure for their fears to acquire strength by refec-
tion, after warning them briefly that no alternative
now remained but to conquer or to die, led them
instantly to the charge. The Mexicans waited
their approach with unusual fortitude. Suci,
however, was the superiority of the Spanish di-
cipline and arms, that the impreflion of this small
body was irresistible; and whichever way its force
was direced, it penetrated and dispersed the molt
numerous battalions. But while these gave way
in one quarter, new combatants advanced from
another, and the Spaniards, though fucceliful in
every attack, were ready to fink under those re.
peated efforts, without feeing any end of their toil
or any hope of victory. At that time Cortes ob

ieyrvcd

served the great standard of the empire, which was B 0°° K
carried before the Mexican general, advancing; A p
and fortunately recollecting to have heard, that on '5'"
the fate of it depended the event of every battle,
he assembled a few of his bravest officers, whose
horses were still capable of fcrvice, and placing
himself at their head, pushed forward towards the
standard with an impetuofiry which bore down
every thing before it. A chosen body of nobles,
Hho guarded the standard, made some resistance,
but were soon broken. Cortes, with a stroke of
his lance, wounded the Mexican general, and
threw him to the ground. One of the Spanifi of-
ficers alighting, put an end to his life, and laid
hold of the imperial standard. The moment that
their leader fell, and the flandard, towards which
all direted their eyes, disappeared, an universal
panic (truck the Mexicans, and, as if the bond
which held them together had been dissolved,
every ensign was lowered, each soldier threw away
his weapons, and all fled with precipitation to the
mountains. The Spaniards, unable to pursue them
far, returned to collet the spoils of the field,
which were so valuable, as to be some corpenfation
for the wealth which they had loft in Mexico; for
in the enemy's army were molt of their principal
warriors, drefled out in their richest ornaments, as
if they had been marching to aflurec vi..ory. Next
(lay, to their great joy, they entered the Tlaf-
calan territories '. July I

' Cortcs Relat. p. 219. B. Dia7. c. Izg, G m.ra Cion.
c. io. Ilerrcra, dec. e. lit. x. C. 12, 13.

Vul.. I. Z

B 0 0 K BUT, amidlt their fatisfadtion in having got be

V. _-.- yond the precincts of an holtile country, they couo:

tc-ption not look forward without solicitude, as they Mer
.,f h' Spa- fill uncertain what reception they might rme
ni rds in
TJfcala. with from allies, to whom they returned in a con

dition very different from that in which they hi,
lately let out from their dominions. } .lppi so:
them, the enmity of the Tla:.;iaans to the .\ixi.
can name was lo inveterate, tk:cir rdefir to ave.mat
the death of their countrymen so vehemenr, ar
the alcendant which Cortes had acquired over t;,c
chiefs of the republic so complete, that, far fromi
entertaining a thought of taking any advant.ag oi
the diftrefl'd situation in which they beheld tic
Spaniards, they -received them with a ten(ldrrc:,
and cordiality which quickly dissipated all t!ilr
lufpicions.

SOME interval of tranquillity and indulgence nwai

,bcri.ii of now absolutely necefary ; not only that the Spa-
Cortcs.

niards might give attention to the cure of trlr
wounds, which had been too long negleacd, but
in order to rec uit their ttrength, exhaulted I,'
luch a long fucceTffon of fatigue and harJfllip;.
I)uting this, Cortes learned that he an:d his con;-
Fanicns were not the only S;piniards who had Itft
the cfies of the Mexican enmity. A considerable
detachment, which was marching from Zelmpo-
alia towards the capital, had been cut off by the
l.eople of Tepcaca. A finaller party, returning
froml TILfalal to V.ra Cruz, with the flare of the

lMexican

Mexican gold allotted to the garrison, had been B 0O K
surprised and deflroyed in the mountains. At a _
juncdure when the life of every Spaniard was of 15's.
importance, such lof'cs were deeply felt. The
-Ihemens which Cortes was meiirating rendered
them peculiarly afflihive to him. While his ene-
nties, and even many of his own followers, confi-
dered the difaftcrs which had befallen him as fatal
to the progrels of his arms, and imagined ' at
nothing now remained but tpcedily to abandon a
country which he had invaded with unequal force,
his mind, as eminent for perseverance as for en-
terprifc, was flill bent on accomplishing his origi-
nal purpose, of subjecting the Mexican empire to
the crown of Cafi le. Severe and unexpected as
the check was which he had received, it did not
apptar to him a fufiicient reason for relinquilhing
the conquects which he had already made, or
against resuming his operations with bette:
hopes of success. The colony at Vera Crunlz :.as
not only safe, lbut had remained unmo!l=dJ.
The people of Zempoalla and the adjiacent 'iftpic1s
had discovered no lymptoms of d(c t ion. he
Tlafcalans continued rairhful to heiir !l.;incc. Oa
their martial fpirir, easily rouzcd to ar:':s, and in-
flamed with implacable hatred of th: Me.xiclns,
Cortes depended for powerful aid. i e h.di li1ll
the commnand of a body of Sp::niard.s, tq!.tl in
number to that with which he h.d olened his way
into the centre of the empire, and ihad t.aktn pof-
Illlion of the capital; kb that with the benefit of

Z 2 greater

B O oK greater experience, as well as more perfet know.

_ _t lledge of the country, he did not despair of quick.
J5'"' ly recovering all that he had been deprived of by

untoward events.
The mne. FULL of this idea, he courted the Tlafcalan

l'"it"'" chiefs with such attention, and difiributed among

them so liberally the rich Ipoils of Otumba, that lil
was secure of obtaining whatever he should require
of the republic. He drew a small supply of am-
munition, and two or three field-pieces, from his
flores at Vcra Cruz. He dispatched an officer of
confidence with four fluips of Narvaez's fleet to
Ilifpaniola and Jamaica, to engage adventurers,
and to purchal: horses, gunpowder, and other
military Rfores. As he knew that it would be vain
to attempt the rcduction of Mexico, unleis he
could secure the command of the lake, he gave
orders to prepare, in the mountains of Tlkfcala,
materials for building twelve brigantines, so as
they might be carried thither in pieces ready to be
put together, and launched when lie flood in need
of their lervice .

i .

t.. BUT whlile, with provident attention, ihe wa
1i,,rtt ot li. takinc thole neceiralry iteps towards the execution

of his mealures, an obflacle arose in a quarter
where it was least expelced, but molt forniidalble.
The lpirit of diicontent and mutiny broke out in

* CAitva R.cldt. p. 253 , E. Gomiaa Cion. c. 117.

5 li

his own army. Many of Narvaez's followers were n ,O" ;
planters rather than foldicrs, and had accompanied i
him to New Spain with sanguine hopes of obtain- '5:'
ing lettlemnints, but with little inclination to en-
,age in the hardflips and dangers of war. As the
l1me n;otives had induced them. to enter into their
new engagements with Cortes, they no sooner be-
came acquainted with the nature of the service,
than they bitterly repented of their choice. Such
ot them as had the good fortune to survive the
perilous adventures in which their own imprudence
had involved them, happy in having mn.dc their
cfcape, trembled at the thoughts of being exposed
a fccond time to Cimilar cal.amities. As loon as
they discovered the intention of Cortes, they began
secretly to murmur and cabal, and waxing gra-
dually more audacious, they, in a body, offered
a remonltrance to their gener-al againlt the inpru-
dInc^ of attacking a powerful empire with his
shattered forces, and formally required him to
lead them back diretly to Cuba. 'Though Cortes,
long rraetifed in the arts of command, employed
argluments, intreaties, and presents, to convince
or to soothe them; though his own soldiers, ani-
mated with the Ipirit of their leader, warmly fe-
conded his endeavours; he found their fears too
violent and deep-rooted to be renmoved, and the
utmost he could effect was to prevail with them to
detfr their departure for some time, on a promi'e
that he would, at a more proper junlture, difmnili
Such as should desire it.

Z 3 THT

B o0 K TIhAT the malcontents might have no liifiireto

..- ,-- bro(,d over the caulcs of their dilaffcaion, h;e i,

..i.' he solvcd inflantly to call forth his troops into ac'i.:;,
,:c..Yt ,-i He proposed to chaflife the people of 1 epeac;; ifr
..fd.nJ". the outrage which they had committed, and us

the detachment which they had cut ofr happci:,.
to be conpofed mnoftly of Ioldiers who hadl -rv-d
under Narvatz, thfir companions, from t:.
dcfire of veintcance, engaged more willingly i;I
s^*-U. thii war. lie t'jok the coninand in pcrlon, ac-

companicd by a numerous body of ] la;ilil.n,,
and in the space of a few weeks, after v.:riolt1 C.-
counters, wi'h great flauLhter of the Tet-ca c ::,
rcduced that province to fubjeciion. During ic.
veral months, whil he waited for the I;.ippllcs c;
men and ammunition which he expecte, and v.an
carrying on his preparations for conlfructing [he
brigantines, he kept his tioops conltantly enwpi(,-
ed in various expeditions againIt the adjacent l!t,-
vinccs, all of which were conJuiced with an u;i-
form tenor of success. By these, his men lbccame
again accutomcd to victory, and recith;ed t!:,cir
wonted fienl of fupcriority; the Mexican pov.cr
was weakened; the 'Ilaicalan warriors a.cuilrc
the habit of acting in conjunction with t!.c St'I.
niards ; and the chiefs of the republic d(eli.'I:ti
to fee their country enriched with the spoils o .iil
the people around them, and ailonilied every di.y
with frfhl dilcovcries of the irrefiflible prowcls of
their allies, declined no effort requisite to ftru'poi
them.

A'.{I

ALL those preparatory arrangements, however, n °o0 K
thouoh the molt prudent and efficacious which the - -"
i:uation of Cortes allowed him to make, would
have been of little avail, without a reinforcement
or Spanish soldiers. Of this he was so deeply fen-
fible, that it was the chief objec of his thoughts
and wishes; and yet his only profpeó of obtaining
it from the return of the officer whom he had sent
to the isles to lolicit aid, was both diflant and un-
certain. But what neither his own sagacity nor
pS wcr could have procured, he owed to a series of
i:.tunate and unforefilen incidents. The governor
cf Cuba, to whom the success of Narvaez appear-
-.- an event of infallible certainty, having sent two
1;1all fIips afcer him with new instructions, and a
l I'ply of men and military stores, the officer
v..jm Cortes had appointed to command on the
cnalt, artfully decoyed them into the harbour of
Vera Cruz, leized the vefiels, and easily persuaded
thlc 1,idiers to follow the standard of a more able
l.a,.er t!han him whum they were defcined to join'.
o oon a;fter, three fliips of more considerable force
t(ie into the harbour separately. 'Ihefe bclong-
ed to an armament litted out by Francilco de Ga-
ray, governor of Jamailca, who, being pofrcffcti
with the rage of dilcovcry and conquelt which
aiiimaled evtry Spaniard fettled in America, had
long aimed at intruding into some diltric of New
Spain, and dividing with Cortes the glory and
gain of annexing that empire to the crown oi

i. )ia,. . 3c 1.

Z 4 Caslie.

B o0 K Castile. They unadvisedly made their attempt on

V.

the northern provinces, where the country was
'5 poor, and the people fierce and warlike; and, after

a cruel fucceffior. of difalters, famine compelled
them to venture into Vera Cruz, and cast them.
selves upon the mercy of their countrymen. Their
OOobcr 23. fidelity was not proof against the 1plendid hopls

and promises which had 1educed other adventurer-,
and as if the spirit of revolt had been contagio:;;
in New Spain, they likewise abandoned the matter
whom they were bound to fcrve, and inlilled un-
der Cortes e. Nor was it America alone that fur-
nifhed Iuch unexpeced aid. A ship arrived from
Spain, freighted by some private merchants with
military fitres, in hopes of a profitable market in
;a country, the fame of whose opulence began to
ipread over Europe. Cortes eagerly purchased a
cargo which to him was invaluable, and the ciew,
following the general example, joined him at
'lafcala h.

FROMI those various quarters, the army of Cor-

tes was augmented with an hundred and eighty
men, and twenty horses, a reinforcement too in-
considerable to produce any consequence which
would entitle it to htve been mentioned in the
hillory of other parts of the globe. But in that
of America, where great revolutions were brought
about by caulcs which 1Cemed to bear no propor-

(Coirts Relat. ?53, 1". B. Diaz. c. 133.
1' lbid, c. I36.

tion

tion to their eff'cts, such fnall events rife into im- B o 0 K
portance, because they were sufficient to decide with -_
refpet to the fate of kingdoms. Nor is it the least 'l'"
remarkable initance of the singular felicity con-
Ipicuous in many paf3ages of Cortes's fiory, that
the two persons chiefly instrumental in furnishing
him with those seasonable ulpplies, should be an
avowed enemy who aimed at his deflrudion, and
an envious rival who wished to supplant him.

THE first effet of the juntion with his new ,Nmber of
followers was to enable him to dismiss such of lib torccs.
Narvaez's soldiers as remained with reluCtance in
:is service. After their departure, he fiill muf-
tered five hundred and fifty infantry, of which
fourscore were armed with muskets or cross-bows,
lorty horsemen, and a train of nine field-pieces .
At the head of these, accompanied by ten thousand
Tlafcalans and other friendly Indians, Cortes be-
gan his march towards Mexico, on the twenty-
eighth of December, fix months after his disastrous
retreat from that city k

NOR did he advance to attack an enemy unpre- r, .1 ;-
pared to receive him. Upon the death of Mlonte- r~.,:.'
zuma, the Mexican chiefs, in whom the right of ,,t1'ei de.
lctlng the emperor was veSted, had instantly
raised his brother Qietlavaca to the throne. His

' Cortes Relat. 255, E.
Rela:. ;$, A. B. Diaz. c. 137.

avowed

B o0 K avowed and inveterate enmity to the Spaniards

V,

t, - -would have been fuflicient to gain their fuffraee?,
*X10- although he had been less diftihguifled for courace

and capacity. He had an immediate opportunity
of shewing that lie was worthy of their chltice, by
condu6ting, in person, those fierce attacks which
compelled the Spaniards to abandon his capital;
and as soon as their retreat afforded him an rr.
spite from action, he took measures for preven;-
ing their return to Mexico, with prudence cqC..l
to the spirit which he had difplave( in driv\!n
them out of it. As from the vicinity of Tlaalial,
he could not be unacquainted with the mnotio:i
and intentions of Cortes, he obfcrved the florni
that was gathering, and began early to prov:Le
against it. He repaired what the Spaniards had
ruined in the city, and strengthened it with luth
new fortifications as the fl;ill of his fpbijeds wis
capable of eredincg. Beside filling his mridzint,
with the usual weapons of war, he gave dlrtclh,,n
to make long spears headed with the Iwords and
idaggers taken from the Spaniard%, in order to a,.
noy the cavalry. I-Ie flimmoncd the l'ol)pc 1.
tvery province of the empire to take armns ;,lil
their opprlffors, an as an enicouralgemtnrt to ex-
ert thernlelvcs with vi ,our, he pro:nl:i tl. t.il cix-
eruption from all the taxes which his 1)redecccll;)r
h.,d inpol:d '. But what he laboured wihl tilt
8rctecit carnfllnlfs was, to deprive the Si)ap;il.:s

Cortes Relt. p. 253, E. 254, A. B. Diaz. c. r4.

ell;

of the advantages which they derived from the B O o K
friend/hip of the Tlafcalans, by endeavouring to -_-
persuade that people to renounce all connection jz0o.
with men, who were not only avowed enemies of
the gods whom they worflipped, but who would
,,ot fail to fubjewt them at last to the fame yoke,
WhiLh they were now inconsiderately lending their
aiJ to impose upon others. These rcprelentations,
no less firiking than well founded, were urged so
forcibly by his anbaffadors, that it required all
the address of Cortes to prevent their making a
dangerous impreflion ".

BUT while Quetlavaca was arranging I:is plan
of defence, with a degree of foresight uncommon
in an American, his days were cut flort by the
f.iall-pox. This diflemper, which raged at that
rine in New Spain with fatal malignity, was un-
known in that quarter of the globe, until it was
introduced by the Europeans, and may be reckon-
ed among the greatest calamities brought upon
tten by their invaders. In his fRead the Mexicans
raifi;d to the throne Guatimozin, nephew and son-
in-law of Montezuma, a young man of such high
Irutation for abilities and valour, that in this ian-
,elous crisis, his countrymen, with one voice,
called hiln to the supreme command ,.

" P. Diaz. c. I 9. IIcr:era, 'cc. 2. lib. x. c. 14. 19.
' B. Dl) . c. 130.

As

B 0 0 K As soon as Cortes entered the enemy's territorice

V.

-.>-- - he discovered various preparations to obftruft ,i
Cors a.d- progress. But his troops forced their way ,i::
vance¢ to.
^,rds t little difficulty, and took possession of Tczeuco
McxZco. the second city of the empire, situated on lh;

banks of the lake about twenty miles from hlex.
co-. Here he determined to establish his heat.
quarters, as the most proper fIation for launching
his brigantines,as well as for making his approachks
to the capital. In order to render his resident
there more secure, he depoled the cazique orchk:.
who was at the head of that community, u.d;:
pretext of tome defied in his title, and lubltitunlt
in his place a person whom a faction of the nobes
pointed out as the right heir of that dignity. Ac.
tached to him by this benefit, the new caziqc
and his adherents served the Spaniards with invIc.
lable fidelity P.

His opera. As the preparations for conflrucing the brin-..
and .... tines advanced slowly under the unskilful handsc:
ous""' soldiers and Indians, whom Cortes was obliged o

employ in alifling three or four carpenters \\b
happened fortunately to be in his fervicc, andai
he had not yet received the reinforcement whil
he expected from Hlilpaniola, lie was not in a con-
dition to turn his arms directly against the capit.

o Villn Senor Thc: tro Amerc.nn,, i. 156.

<Cortes Rclat. z5", &c. B. Di.:z. c. c37. Goinar.aCro.
¢. , .. [l,'rrera;, dcc. 3. c. i.

Ta

o have attacked, at this period, a city so popu- B o o K
ous, so well prepared for defence, and in a fitua- t-V'
ion of such peculiar fIrength, must have exposed *5z.
his troops to inevitable deftruCdion. Three months
lapsed before the materials for the brigantines
were finihed, and before he heard any thing with
refpet to the success of the officer whom he had
ent to Hilpaniola. This, however, was not a
feaon of inaction to Cortes. He attacked fuccef-
vely several of the towns firuated around the lake;
and though all the Mexican power was exerted to
bftrud his operations, he either compelled then
to submit to the Spanish crown, or reduced them
to ruins. Other towns he endeavoured to conci-
liate by more gentle means, and though he could
not hold any intercourse with the ir.habitants but
by the intervention of interpreters, yet, under all
te disadvantage of that tedious and imperfect
mode of communication, he had acquired such
thorough knowledge of the state of the country, as
well as of the dispositions of the people, that he
conduced his negociations and intrigues with
altonilhing dexterity and fucceis. Molt of the
cities adjacent to Mexico were originally the capi-
talsof Imall independent htates; and omen of them
having been but lately annexed to the Mexican
empire, still retained the remembrance of their
ancient liberty, and bore with impatience the rigo-
rous yoke of their new male-rs. Cortes having
early oblcrved lymptoms of their difafl'ction,
avalled liimllf of this knowledge to gain their con-

fidence

B o0 K fidence and friendihip. By offering, with cor.

V.

i. - .i dence, to deliver them from the odious dominio
35'" of the Mexicans, and by liberal promises of mor

indulgent treatment, if they would unite with lih
against their oppressors, he prevailed on the peopi
of several considerable district, not only to acknow
ledge the king of Caltile as their sovereign, but;
supply the Spanish camp with provisions, and t
firengthen his army with auxiliary troops. Gua!i
mozin, on the first appearance of defeftion amor,
his fubjeas, exerted himself with vigour to pro
vent or to punish their revolt; but in Ipite of hi
efforts, the fpiric continued to Ipread. The Spa.
niards gradually acquired new allies, and wilt
deep concern he beheld Cortes arming againfl hii
empire those very hands which ought to have been
acive in its defence; and ready to advance againit
the capital at the head of a numerous body of hi
own fubjeatsq.

'WHILE, by those various methods, Cortes wai

gradually circumscribing the Mexican power within
such narrow limits that his profpet of overturning
it seemed neither to be uncertain nor remote, all
his schemes were well nigh defeated, by a con.
fpiracy no less unexpected than dangerous. l1;(
soldiers of Narvaez had never united perfectly with
the original companions of Cortes, nor did they

q CortebRclat. 256-26o. B. Diaz. c. 137-140. G0oncu
Cron. c. 12Z, Iz3. l-e rera, dec. 3. ib. i. c. I, a.

CntcI

enter into his mealures with the fame cordial zeal. B O°V K
Upon every occalion that required any extraordi- L-v--
nary effort of courage or of patience, their spirits
were apt to fink; and now, on a near view of what
they had to encounter, in attempting to reduce a
city lo inacceflible as Mexico, and defended by a
numerous army, the resolution even of those among
them who had adhered to Cortes when he was de-
ferted by their associates, began to fail. Their fears
kd them to presumptuous and unfoldicr like dif-
cullions concerning the propriety of their general's
neafures, and the improbability of their success.
-ronm these they proceeded to cenlure and invec-
tives, and at lalt began to deliberate how they
might provide for their own s'afety, of which they
deemed their commander to be totally negligent.
Antonio Villefagna, a private soldier, but bold,
intriguing, and strongly attached to Velalquez,
artfully fomented this growing spirit of disaffeCtion.
His quarters became the rendezvous of the mal-
contents, where, after many consultations, they
could discover no method of checking Cortes in
his career, but by affaflinating him and his nmoft
considerable officers, and conferring the command
upon fume person who would relinquish his wild
pilns, and adopt measures more confillent wi:h
the general fccurity. Despair inspired them with
courage. The hour for pcrpetrating the crime,
the perlons whom they deflined as vitims, the
officers to succeed them in command, were all
named; and the conspirators signed an afrociation,

8 lby

B o 0 K by which they bound themselves with molt folen;n

V_ oaths to mutual fidelity. But on the evening be.
151.' fore the appointed day, one of Cortes's ancient

followers, who had been reduced into the conlpi.
racy, touched with compunction at the imminent
danger of a man whom he had long been accuf.
tomed to revere, or struck with horror at his own
treachery, went privately to his general, and re.
vealed to him all that he knew. Cortes, though
deeply alarmed, discerned at once what conduct
was proper in a situation so critical. He repaired
instantly to Villefagna's quarters, accompanied by
tome of his most trusty officers. The aftonilh.
ment and confusion of the man at this unexpeced
visit anticipated the confession of his guilt. Corte;,
while his attendants seized the traitor, snatched
from his bosom a paper containing the association,
signed by the conspirators. Impatient to knot
how far the defection extended, he retired to read
ir, and found there names which filled him wi'it
turprife and sorrow. But, aware how dangeros:;
a stria scrutiny might prove at such a jundlure, I:
confined his judicial inquiries to Villefagna alone.
As the proofs of his guilt were manifest, he was
condemned after a short trial, and next mornin;
he was seen hanging before the door of the haulc
in which he had lodged. Cortes called his troni;S
together, and having explained to them the atro-
cious purpofeof the conlpirators, as well as lIic
jufiice of the punishment inflidtcd on Villet;.n.i,
he added, with an appearance of fatislaCtion, that

;c

he was entirely ignorant with refpe& to all the cir- B o o K
cumltances of this dark tranfadion, as the traitor, L-~
when arrested, had suddenly torn and Swallowed a SI
paper, which probably contained an account of it,
and under the severest tortures possessed such con-
ftancy as to conceal the names of his accomplices.
This artful declaration restored tranquillity to
many a breast that was throbbing, while he spoke,
with confciouftefs of guilt and dread of detection
and by this prudent moderation, Cortes had the
advantage of having discovered, and of being able
to observe such of his followers as were difaffeted;
while they, flattering themselves that their palt
crime was unknown, endeavoured to avert any
suspicion of is, by redoubling their activity and
zeal in his service '.

CORTES did not allow them leisure to ruminate His singular

on what had happened i and as the most effteual t'r) b,.air,,
means of preventing the return of a mutinous fpi- b;i'egtic'"
rit, he determined to call forth his troops imme-
diately to ation. Fortunately, a proper occasion
for this occurred without his teeming to court it.
fle received intelligence that the materials for build-
ing the brigantines were at length completely
finished, and waited only for a body of Spaniards
to conduct them to Tezeuco. The command of
this convoy, confiling of two hundred foot fol-

Cortcs Relat. aS3, C. B. Diaz. c. 146. [Ferrera, dec. 3.
lib . i . c. .

oi.. II. A a diers,

B 0 0 K diers, fifteen horsemen, and two field-pieces, he

V.
*- 1. gave to Sandoval, who, by the vigilance, a&ivity,
s35.' and courage which he manifested on every occa.

sion, was growing daily in his confidence, and in
the estimation of his fellow-foldiers. The service
was no less singular than important; the beams,
the planks, the marss, the cordage, the fails, the
iron-work, and all the infinite variety of articles
requisite for the confirufcion of thirteen brigantines,
were to be carried sixty miles over land, through a
mountainous country, by people who were unac-
quainted with the ministry of domestic animals, or
the aid of machines to facilitate any work of la.
bour. The Tlafcalans furnished eight thousand
Iamenes, an inferior order of men d;ftined for ser-
vile talks, to carry the materials on their fhoul-
ders, and appointed fifteen thousand warriors to
accompany and defend them. Sandoval made the
disposition for their progress with great propriety,
placing the Tamenes in the centre, one body of
warriors in the front, another in the rear, with
considerable parties to cover the flanks. To each
of these he joined some Spaniards, not only to as-
sift them in danger, but to accultom them to re-
gularity and subordination. A body so numerous,
and so much encumbered, advanced leifurcly, but
in excellent order; and in some places, where it
was confined by the woods or mountains, the line
of march extended above fix miles. Parties of
Mexicans frequently appeared hovering around
them on the high grounds; but perceiving no

prolp c,9

profpcQ of success in attacking an enemy conri- B O , K
nually on his guard, and prepared to receive them, -_
they did not venture to molest him; and Sandoval '5''
had the glory of conducing safely to Tezeuco, a
convoy on which all the future operations of his
countrymen depended '.

TnIS was followed by another event of no less Receives a

moment. Four .hips arrived at Vera Cruz from ftemnt.
Hispaniola, with two hundred soldiers, eighty
horses, two battering cannon, and a considerable
supply of ammunition and arms '. Elevated with
observing that all his preparatory schemes, either
for recruiting his own army, or impairing the force
of the enemy, had now produced their full effect,
Cortes, impatient to begin the ficge in form, ha-
fiened the launching of the brigantines. To fa-
cilitate this, he had employed a vast number of
Indians for two months in deepening the Imall ri-
vulet which runs by Tezeuco into the lake, and
in forming it into a canal near two miles in lengtn "
and though the Mexicans, aware of his intentions,
as well as of the danger which threatened them,
endeavoured frequently to interrupt the labourers,
or to burn the brigantines, the work was at lall
completed 1. On the twenty-eighth of April, all The r;.
the Spanish troops, together with the auxiliary In- lfuncLcd.
dians, were drawn up on the banks of the canal;

' Cortes Relar. 260, C. E. B. Diaz. c. ,4.
* Cortes Rclit. 259, F. 2bz, D. G-mara CLon. c. 129.
' See NOTE XLI. x B. Dii z. c. 14 .

A a
2 and

B o0 K and with extraordinary military pomp, heightened

V.

and rendered more solemn by the celebration of
1531' the molt sacred rites of religion, the brigantines

were launched. As they fell down the canal in
order, Father Olmedo blessed them, and gave
each its name. Every eye followed them with
wonder and hope, until they entered the lake,
when they hoisted their fails, and bore away before
the wind. A general shout of joy was railed; all
admiring that bold inventive genius, which, by
means so extraordinary that their success almost
exceeded belief, had acquired the command of a
fleet, without the aid of which Mexico would
have continued to set the Spanilh power and arms
at defiance Y.

Di'pofition CORTES determined to attack the city from
for the ie.e. three different quarters; from Tezeuco on the

eart fide of the lake, from Tacuba on the wef-,
and from Cuyocan towards the south. Those
towns were situated on the principal causeways
which led to the capital, and intended for their
defence. He appointed Sandoval to command in
the firit, Pedro de Alvarado in the Iecond, and
Chrilloval de Olid in the third; allotting to each
a numerous body of Indian auxiliaries, together
with an equal divifon of Spaniards, who, by the
jun(tion of the troops from Hifpaiiiola, a.lounted
now to eighlty-fix horclmen, and eight hundred

Y Cortes Relat. 2(7,, C. Ilcrtcra, dec. 3. 1'. .. 5.
Ginr.i Crun. c. i. -y.nd

and

arid eighteen foot soldiers; of whom one hundred B 0 0 K
and eighteen were armed with muskets or cross- _
bows. The train of artillery confidted of three '5"
battering cannon, and fifteen field-pieces z. He
rcefrved for himself, as the (tation of greatest im-
portance and danger, the conduct of the brigan-
tines, each armed with one of his small cannon,
and manned with twenty-five Spaniards.

As Alvarado and Olid proceeded towards the.Mayio.

polts assigned them, they broke down the aque-
duats which the ingenuity of the Mexicans had
ereated for conveying water into the capital, and by
the dillrefs to which this reduced the inhabitants,
gave a beginning to the calamities which they were
deflined to susser'. Alvarado and Olid found the
towns of which they were ordered to take poffeflion
delerced by their inhabitants, who had fled for safe-
ty to the capital, where Guatimozin had collected
the chief force of his empire, as there alone he
could hope to make a successful stand against the
formidable enemies who were approaching to as-
fault nlim.

THE first effort of the Mexicans was to destroy f(ex;cr.,

the fleet of brigantines, the fatal effects of whose 'b","g'k t.
operations they foresaw and dreaded. Though
the brigantines, after all the labour and merit of

Cortes Relat. 266, C.
Cattes RKlat. 267, B. B. Diaz c. . Io. Icirera, dec. a.
lib. i. c 3.

A a 3 Cortes

B o0 K Cortes in forming them, were of inconsiderable

i-.- bulk, ru;dely constructed, and manned chiefly with
*'*5' landmen, hardly pofirffed of {kill enough to con.

du6t them, they mult have been objects of terror
to a peolec unacquainted with any navigation but
that of their lake, and poffcffed of no vesTel larger
than a canoe. Neceflity, however, urged Guati.
mozin to hazard the attack; and hoping to supply
by numbers what he wanted in force, hie amffi;led
such a multitude of canoes as covered the face of
the lake. They rowed on boldly to the charge,
while the brigantines, retarded by a dead calm,
lcp'lfed. could scarcely advance to meet them. But as the

enemy drew near, a breeze suddenly sprung up;
in a moment the fails were spread, the brig.ntines,
with the utmost cafe, broke through thtir feeble
opponents, overlct many canoes, and dissipatcd
the whole armament with such Slaughter, as con.
vinced the Mexicans, that the progrels of the Eu-
ropeans in knowledge and arts rendered their lupe-
riority greater on this new element, than they had
hitherto found it by land "

Singular FROM that time Cortes remained mailer of the
pin ol con-
d,;ingthc' lake, and the brigantines nor only pr lefrved a
L'ye' communication between the Spaniards in their dit-

ferent fations, though at confidcrable dillance
from each other, but were employed to cover the

b Corte' Rclat. 267, C. B. D az. c. 150. G'mnara C.cn.
c. 1 3 . Herrcra, dec. 3. lib. i. c. 17.

caufewavs

causeways on each fide, and keep off the canoes, B 00

o K

when they attempted to annoy the troops as they -
advanced towards the city. He formed the bri- '5s"
gantines in three divisions, allotting one to each
station, with orders to second the operations of
the officer who commanded there. From all the
three stations he pushed on the attack against the
city with equal vigour; but in a manner so very
different from the conduct of sieges in regular war,
that he himlelf seems afraid it would appear no
less improper than singular, to persons unacquaint-
ed with his situation c. Each morning his troops
assaulted the barricades which the enemy had
erected on the causeways, forced their way over
the trenches which they had dug, and through the
canals where the bridges were broken down, and
endeavoured to penetrate into the heart of the city,
in hopes of obtaining some decisive advantage,
which might force the enemy to surrender, and
terminate the war at once; but when the obstinate
valour of the Mexicans rendered the efforts of the
day ineffectual, the Spaniards retired in the even-
ing to their former quarters. Thus their toil and
dlanger were, in tome measure, continually renew-
ed; the Mexicans repairing in the night what the
Spaniards had deatroyed through the day, and re-
covering the pofls from which they had driven
them. But necessity prescribed this flow and un-

' Cortes Relat. 270, F.

A a 4 toward

B °0 K toward mode of operation. The number of his

V.
_ _---- troops was so small, that Cortes dur(t not, with a
Z'S2' handful of men, attempt to make a lodgment in a

city where he might be surrounded and annoyed
by such a multitude of enemies. The rermem-
brance of what he had already fuffereJl by the ill-
judged confidence with which he had ventured into
such a dangerous situation, was still freSh in his
mind. The Spaniards, exhaulted with fatigue,
were unable to guard the various pofls which they
daily g.iined ; and though their camp was illcd
with Indian auxiliaries, they durst not devolve this
charge upon them, because they were so little ac.
customed to dilcipline, that no confidence could
he placed in their vigilance. Besides this, Cortes
was extremely solicitous to prefervo the city as
much as pofiible from being destroyed, both be-
cause he dc'l::;ed it to be the capital of his con-
quests, and wilhed that it might remain as a mo-
r.u;.cnt of his glory. From all there confidtra-
tiur-, ihe adhered obstinately, for a month after
the siege was opened, to the system which he had
adopted. The Mexicans, in their own defence,
displayed valour which was hardly inferior to that
with which the Spaniards attacked them. On land,
on water, by night and by day, one furiots ccn-
fliet succeeded to another. Several Spaniards were
killed, more wounded, and all were ready to fink
under the toils of unintermitting service, vhich
were rendered more intolerable by the injuries of

the

the leafon, the periodical rains being now set in B 0, K
with their usual violence d. V.-

151!.

ASTONISHED and disconcerted with the length toa,'ke th

and difficulties of the siege, Cortes determined to ,i' by
make one great effort to get poffefflon of the city,
before he relinquimhed the plan which he had hi-
therto followed, and had recourse to any other
mode of attack. With this view, he sent inftruc-
tions to Alvarado and Sandoval to advance with
their divisions to a general assault, and took the
command in person of that posted on the causeway
of Cuyocan. Animated by his presence, and the Jly 3.
expe&ation of some decisive event, the Spaniards
pu(hed forward with irrefittible impetuosity. They
broke through one barricade after another, forced
their way over the ditches and canals, and having
entered the city, gained ground incefantly, in
spite of the multitude and ferocity of their oppo-
nents. Cortes, though delighted with the rapidity
of his progress, did not forget that he might still
find it necessary to retreat; and in order to secure
it, appointed Julian de Alderete, a captain of
chief note in the troops which he had received from
!ilpaniola, to fill up the canals and gaps in the
causeway as the main body advanced. That offi-
cer, deeming it inglorious to be thus employed,
while his companions were in the heat of action and
';e career of victory, neglected the important

B. Dlaz. c. 15X.

charge

B o o K charge committed to him, and hurried on, incon;

A-_,. fiderately, to mingle with the combatants. The
5"' . Mexicans, whose military attention and skill were

dailyimproving, no sooner observed this, than they
carried an account of it to their monarch.
Repufied GUATIMOZIN inflantly discerned the confe.

quences of the error which the Spaniards had corn.
mnitted, and, with admirable presence of mind,
prepared to take advantage of it. He commanded
the troops potted in the front to flacken their es-
forts, in order to allure the Spaniards to push for-
ward, while he dispatched a large body of chofcn
warriors through different ltrects, tome by land,
and others by water, towards the great breach in
the caufcway, which had been left open. On a
signal which he gave, the priests in the principal
temple firuck the great dium consecrated to tie
god of war. No sooner did the Mexicans hear its
doleiul solemn found, calculated to inlpiie them
with contempt of death and enthufialtic ardour,
than they ruffled upon the enemy with frantic rage.
The Spaniards, unable to resist men urged on n'
less by religious fury than hope of fucc.ls, bc:in
to retire, at firlt leisurely, and with a good coun.
tenance; but as the enemy prefed on, and their
own impatience to escape increased, the terror and
confusion became so general, that when they ar-
rived at the gap in the causeway, Spaniards ar;d
Tlafcalans, horlemen and infantry, plunged in
promiscuously, while the Mexicans rufled upon

them

them fiercely from every fide, their light canoes B O00 Ko
carrying them through shoals which the brigan- --_
tines could not approach. In vain did Cortes at-.
tempt to stop and rally his flying troops; fear
rendered them regardless of his entreaties or com-
mands. Finding all his endeavours to renew the
combat fruitless, his next care was to save lome of
those who had thrown themselves into the water;
but while thus employed, with more attention to
their situation than to his own, fix Mexican cap- with confi-

derable loss.

tains suddenly laid hold of him, and were hurry-
ing him off in triumph; and though two of his of-
ficers rescued him at the expencc of their own lives,
he received several dangerous wounds before he
could break loose. Above sixty Spania rJs perished
in the rout; and what rendered the dilafte. more
afflicting, forty of these fell alive into the hands
of an enemy never known to shew mercy to a cap-
tive'.

THE approach of night, though it delivered the Thok, ho

* *

_ 0 '

0 were taken

dejected Spaniards from the attacks of t'lc enemy, J;rificd to
ushered in, what was hardly lets grievous, the wr.
noise of their barbarous triumph, and of the hor-
rid teflival with which they celebrated their vic-
tory. Every quarter of the city was illuminalted
the great temple lhone with such peculiar Iplcn-
dour, that the Spaniards could plainly fee the

Cortes Relat. p. 273. B. Di:iz. c. ;z. Gomnara Cion.
c. 138. Herrcra, dec. 3. lib. i. . zo.

people

B O o K people in motion, and the priests busy in haflening
_..I- the preparations for the death of the prisoners.
,I''' Through the gloom, they fancied that they dif.

cerned their companions by the w'itenefs of their
flins, as they were fiript naked, and compellcd to
dance before the image of the god to w:;om thve
were to be offered. They heard the fhricks of
those who were lacrificed, and thought that they
could diflinguifh each unhappy viEtim, by the
well-known iound of his voice. Imagination add-
ed to what they really law or heard, and augment.
ed its horror. The most unfeeling melted into
tears of companion, and the tfouteft heart trembled
at the dreadful fpe&acle which they beheld r.

New CORTES, who, besides all that he felt in corn.
/,bemnet
and effolts mon with his soldiers, was oppressed with the ad-
Micin,. ditional load of anxious reflections natural to a ge-

neral on such an unexpected calamity, could not,
like them, relieve his mind by giving vent to its
anguilh. He was obliged to assume an air of tran.
quillity, in order to revive the spirit and hopes of
his followers. The juncure, indeed, required an
extraordinary exertion cf fortitude. The Mexi-
cans, elated with their victory, rallied out next
morning to attack him in his quarters. But they
did not rely on the eflorts of their own arms alone.
They lent the heads of the Spaniards whom they
had lacrificed, to the leading men in the adjacent
provinces, and assured them that the god of war,

' Se NOTE XCII.

appeafedl

appeased by the blood of their invaders, which B O o K
had been shed so plentifully on his altars, had de- --
dared with an audible voice, that in eight days '5'
time those hated enemies should be finally destroy-
ed, and peace and prosperity re-established in the
empire.

A PREDTCTION uttered with such confidence, and Corts d-
in terms so void of ambiguity, gained universal ,mnyo, hi,
credit among a people prone to superstition. The aiii.
zeal of the provinces, which had already declared
against the Spaniards, augmented ; and several,
which had hitherto remained inactive, took arms,
with enthusiastic ardour, to execute the decrees of
he gods. The Indian auxiliaries who had joined
ortes, accustomed to venerate the fame deities
ith the Mexicans, and to receive the responses of
heirpriefts with the fame implicit faith, abandon-
d the Spaniards as a race of men devoted to cer-
ain destruction. Even the fidelity of the Tlafca-
ans was lhaken, and the Spanish troops were left
Imolf alone in their stations. Cortes, finding that
eattempted in vain to dispel the fupcrflitious fears
fhis confederates by argument, took advantage,
om the imprudence of those who had framed the
rophecy, in fixing its accomplilhmenr so near at
and, to give a striking demonstration of irs falsity.
e suspended all military operations during the
rid marked out by the oracle. Under cover of
prbrigantines, which kept the enemy at a diltance,

hIis

B o°v K his troops lay in safety, and the fatal term expired
-v---- without any disaster s.

1521.

Re regains Hls allies, aihamed of their own credulity, re.
their frciend-
flip, turned to their station. Other tribes, judging that

the gods who had now deceived the Mexicans, had
decreed finally to withdraw their prote&ion fron
them, joined his standard ; and such was the lev ty
of a simple people, moved by every flight impref.
sion, that, in a short time after such a general de.
section of his confederates, Cortes law himsel, if
we may believe his own account, at the head of a
and adopts ahundred and fifty thousand Indians. Even with

.fstk.i such a numerous army, he found it necefflryto

adopt a new and more wary system of operation,
Inftcad of renewing his attempts to become maletr
of the city at once, by such bold but dangerous
efforts of valour as he had already tried, he made
his advances gradually, and with every polfi',e
precaution against exposing his men to any cala.
mity similar to that which they Ltill bewailed. As
the Spaniards pushcd forward, the Indians regu-
larlv repaired the causeways behind ;hemn. As
soon as they got poflicffon of any part of the sown,
the houses were inflanrlv levelled with the ground.
Day by day, the Mexicans, forced to retire a
their enemies gained ground, were herinlmed ia
within more narrow limifts. Guatimozin, trnuli
unable to stop the career of the enemy, cont;;;id

S B. Diaz. c. 153. GomaraCron. c. 138.

11

to defend his capital with obflinate resolution, and B 0°° K
disputed every inch of ground. The Spaniards ty..
not only varied their mode of attack, but, by or-
der of Cortes, changed the weapons with which
they fought. They were again armed with the
long Chinantlan spears, which they had employed
with such success against Narvaez; and, by the firm
array in which this enabled them to range them-
fclves, they repelled, with little danger, the loose
assault of the Mexicans: incredible numbers of
them fell in the conflics which they renewed
every day h. While war wafted without, famine
began to consume them within, the city. The
Spanish brigantines, having the entire command
of the lake, rendered it almost impoflible to re-
ceive any supply of provisions by water. The
vast number of his Indian auxiliaries enabled
Cortes to shut up the avenues to the city by land.
The stores which Guatimozin had laid up were ex-
haufted, by the multitudes which crowded into the
capital, to defend their sovereign and the temples
of their gods. Not only the people, but persons
of the highest rank, felt the utmost distresses of
want. W hat they suffered, brought on infezctious
and mortal dcftempers, the last calamity that visits
besieged cities, and which filled up the measure
of their woes '.

Cortes Relat.. p. 75, C. 276, F. B. D;z. c. 153.
Cortes Relat. :26, E. 277, F. B. Diaz. 155. Gor.
.ron, c. 141.

BIT,

1 0 0 K BUT, under the pressure of so many and such

V.
- --- various evils, the spirit of Guatimozin remainej
cor.g' and firm and unfubdued. He reje&ed, with scorn,
tunlancy,. every overture of peace from Cortes; and, disdain-
z'n" ing the idea of submitting to the oppressors of his
July 27. country, determined not to survive its ruin. The

Spaniards continued their progress. At length all
the three divisions penetrated into the great square
in the centre of the city, and made a secure lodge-
ment there. Three-fourths of the city were now
reduced, and laid in ruins. The remaining quar-
ter was so closely pressed, that it could not long
withstand assailants, who attacked it from their new
flation with superior advantage, and more afiured
expectation of success. The Mexican nobles, soli.
citous to save the life of a monarch whom they
revered, prevailed on Guatimozin to retire from a
place where refitance was now vain, that he might
rouse the more diflant provinces of the empire to
arms, and maintain there a more successful ftrugle
with the public enemy. In order to facilitate the
execution of this measure, they endeavcured to
amuse Cortes with overtures of fubmiiion, that,
while his attention was employed in adjufsing the
articles of pacification, Guatimozin might :ciape
unperceived. But they made this attempt upon a
leader of greater sagacity and discernment than to
be deceived by their arts. Cortes lfuilpcilin th!c
intention, and aware of what mnomt nt it wv.e t( de
feat it, appointed Sandoval, the offl cr o0n vilho(
vigilance he could most per:cAlvy iry', to t!;,c 'h

c i( i-,i i

command of the brigantines, with ftric injunc- B o K
t'ons to watch every motion of the enemy. San- _--
doval, attentive to the charge, observing rome 's*'.
large canoes crowded with people rowing across
the lake with extraordinary rapidity, instantly
gave the signal to chace. Garcia Holguin, who
commanded the flecteft brigantine, soon overtook
them, and was preparing to fire on the foremost
canoe, which seemed to carry some person whom
all the reft followed and obeyed. At once the Heistaken
rowers dropt their oars, and all on board, throw- "prin".
ing down their arms, conjured him with cries and
tears to forbear, as the emperor was there. Hol-
guin eagerly seized his piize, and Guatimozin,
with a dignified composure, gave himself up into
his hands, requesting only that no insult might be
offered to the empress or his children. When con-
ducted to Cortes, he appeared neither with the
iullen fierceness of a barbarian, nor with the de-
jecion of a supplicant. " I have done," said he,
addressing himself to the Spanifi general, " what
became a monarch. I have dr-fended my people
to the las extremity. Nothing now remains but
to die. Take this deager," laying his hand on
one which Cortes wore, ' plant it in my breast,
and put an end to a life which can no longer be of
ulf k:,

k Cortes Relat. 279. B. Diaz. c. i;5. (jrnara Cron.
C. 142. Hecrera, dec. 3. lib. ii. c.7.

VOL. II. 3 b As

B °0 K As soon as the fate of their sovereign was

V.

L-.---- known, the resistance of the Mexicans ceascd;
Alu523. and Cortes took pofiffion of that small part of
Th' ciIy. the capital which yet remained undeftroyed. Thus

terminated the siege of Mexico, the most me-
morable event in the conquest of America. It
continued feventy-five days, hardly one of which
pafled without some extraordinary eftort of ore
party in the attack, or of the other in the def:nce
of a city, on the fate of which both knew that tl-.
fortune of the empire depended. As the ilrtiu!l
here was more obstinate, it was likewise more
equal, than any between the inhabitants of tle Ok!
and New Worlds. The great abilities of Guati.
mozin, the number of his troops, the peculila
situation of his capital, so far counterbalanced th:
superiority of the Spaniards in arms and dilcipi;:r,
that they must have relinquished the enterp;ift, 5;
they had trusted for success to themlelves alone.
But Mexico was overturned by the j aloLfy or
neighbours who dreaded its power, and by tlh; re-
volt of flubjets inpa :ent to shake off its yoke.
By their cffcEtual aid, Cortes was enablcd to ac-
compliflh what, without such support, ihe woul'
hardly have ventured to attemlpt. HHow nmuci
lbcver this account of .ihc rcc:;i'n of Aicxic',
may detract, ( :l tie o;c hal.iri, irj.n the ina:vci'
l( is rclt: i(,l:- , ut I lo r ':;:1'1:111 \\ ; :c: , 'iy alIcribing
tliat to limnpl andl oilVIil.I CAI'IIe' \'v.i!ic!l :l:(y at-
tr l3tLc t, the iL:i)nariic v.tluuir i1 tellCli' cuotiri'y

ir. rS

me;, it adds, on the other, to the merit and B o0o K
,bi:ities ofCortes, who, under every disadvantage, V.
acquired such an ascendant over unknown nations, '5"'
as to render them inflruments towards carrying his
schemes into execution'.

THE exultation of the Spaniards, on accom- smallness oF

plifhing this arduous enterprise, was at first ex- ted bdfOy
ceflive. But this was quickly damped by the cruel pointmet

of one Sp,-

disappointment of those sanguine hopes, which niArds.
had animated them amidst so many hardships and
dangers. Instead of the inexhaustible wealth which
they expected from becoming masters of Monte-
zuma's treasures, and the ornaments of so many
temples, their rapaciousness could colle& only an
inconsiderable booty atnidft ruins and desolation'.
Gu.timoz.in, aware of his impending fate, had
ordered what remained of the riches amassed by
his ancestors to be thrown into the lake. The
Indian auxiliaries, while the Spaniards were en-
gaged in conflict with the enemy, had carried off
the mot valuable part of the spoil. The fum to
be divided among the conquerors was fb small,
that many of them diliainedl to accept of the pit-
tance which fell to their share, and all murmured

' Se NO'TE XCI;I.
I he gold and si: er, nccording to Cortec, amounted only

t" 30o B;o pesos, celar. 2zA, A. a fuin much inferior to that
nhich the Spaniards had foi merly d ividd in ;exico.

B b 2 and

B 0 0 K and exclaimed frome, against Cortes and his con-

V.
%v- | sidents, whom they fufpeded of having fecretiy

5 appropriated to their own ule a large portion of

the riches which should have been brought into
the common flock; others, against Guatimozir,
whom they accused of obstinacy, in refuting to di::
cover the place where he had hidden his trcafurc.

Cuatimoz;n ARGUMENTS, intreaties, and promises were em-
totured. ployed in order to tooth them, but with so little

effect, that Cortes, from solicitude to check this
growing spirit of discontent, gave way to a deed
which stains the glory of all his great actions.
Without regarding the former dignity of Guati-
mozin, or feeling any reverence for those virtues
which he had displayed, he fubjcted the unhappy
monarch, together with his chief favourite, to
torture, in order to force from them a dilcovery
of the royal treasures, which it was supposed they
had concealed. Guatimozin bore whatever the
refined cruelty of his tormentors could inflic, with
the invincible fortitude of an American warrior.
His fellow-fufferer, overcome by the violence of
the anguish, turned a dejeaed eye towards hi,
master, which seemed to implore his permiflion to
reveal all that he knew. But the high-lpirited
prince, darting on him a look of authority mingled
with scorn, checked his weakness by asking, " All
I now reposing on a bed of flowers ?" Overawed
by the reproach, he persevered in his clutitil
silence, and expired. Cortes, aliamed of a fccre

3:

so horrid, rescued the royal vitiin from the hands 3 o o Kc
of his torturers, and prolonged a life rcferved for _
new indignities and luffcrings'". .s"-

THE fate of the capital, as both parties had Alltheprn-

foreseen, decided that of the empire. The pro- e frut.
vinces submitted one after another to the con-
querors. Small detachments of Spaniards march-
ing through them without interruption, penetrated
in different quarters to the great Southern Ocean,
,which, according to the ideas of Columbus, they
imagined would open a short as well as easy passage
to the East Indies, and secure to the crown of Ca-
stile all the envied wealth of those fertile regions ";
and the active mind of Cortes began already to Cortesformt

chcmet of

form schemes for attempting this important dif- new dice-
sovery . vcricl,

HE did not know, that during the progress of which are

completed

his vitorious arms in Mexico, the very scheme, of by MEcI-
which he began to form fonlc idea, had been un- '"la
dertaken and accomplishcd. As this is one of the
most splendid events in the history of the Spanish
discoveries, and has been productive of efFe&s pe-
culiarly interefling to thole extensive provinces
which Cortes had now fubjcted to the crown of

B. Diaz. c. 57. GomaraCron. c. 14'. llcircra, dec. 3.
lih. ii. c. 8. Torquem. Mon. In1d. i. 574.

Cortes Relat. 280, ), &c. 1!. Diaz. c. 157.
licrrera, dec. 3. lib. ii. c. 17. Goiiara (Ioin. c. 4)'j.

B b 3 Caflile,

VBO K Castile, the account of its rife and progress merits
c--/-- a particular detail.
15a1,

FERPINAND MAGALHAENS, or Magellan, a

Portuguese gentleman of honourable birth, having
served several years in the haft Indies, with ci-
Itinguifled valour, under the famous Albuquerque,
demanded the recompence which he thought duc
to his services, with the boldnels natural to a hil-
spirited soldier. But, for lome reason which is r):
explained, both his general an. his sovereign re.
je&cd his suit with a disdainful coldnef<, that
was intolerab!e to a man conscious of what he hai
done, and of what he delerved. In a tranlport or
resentment, he formally renounced his allegian.e
to an ungrateful matter, and fled to the court of
Caffile, in hopes that there his worth would be
more jufly eltimated. He endeavoured to recom-
mend himself by proposing to execute a ihen;.,
the accomplishment of which, he knew, outld
wound the monarch against whom he was ex.
afperated in the mofl tender part. He revivel
Columbus's original and favourite proj'ct, of dil-
covering a passage to India by a westerly courle,
and without encroaching on that portion of tie
globe which was allotted to the lPortugue!c y t;;'
line of demarcation. Fle founded his hopes o0
success on the ideas of that great navigator, con0
firmed by many observations, the result osl lis
own naval experience, as well as that of hli
country-men, in their intcrcourle with the ladt.

Th11

The undertaking, he acknowledged, was both B voO K
arduous and expensive, as it could not be at-
tr:npted but with a squadron of considerable 15'"
force, and victualled fur at lealt two years. For-
tunately, he applied to a minister who was not
,ip to be deterred, either by the boldness of a de-
fygn, or the expence of carrying it into execution.
Cardinal Ximenes, who at that time direSed the
aT.iirs of Spain, discerning at once what an in-
crease of wealth and glory would accrue to his
country by the fuccels of Magellan's proposal,
I flened to it with a most favourable ear. Charles V.
on his arrival in his Spanish dominions, entered
i-t3 the measure with no lets ardour, and orders
wv're issued for equipping a proper squadron at the
1,iblic charge, of which the command was given
tr Magellan, whom the king honoured with the
habit of St. Jago and the title of Captain-
(rcn ral P.

ON the tenth of August one thousand five hun- irI:-,;.

(i;d and nineteen, M1agellan failed fronm Seville
with five ships, which, according to the ideas of
the aec, were deemed to be of considerable force,
though the burden of the largell did nroi exceed
one hundred and twenty tons. '1 he crcevs ot the
whole amounted to two hundred andl tlirty folr
men, among whom were some of the moll ikiluli
pilucs in Spain, and flivcral 1'ortugucli i;lilors, in

P IIhrrcra, dec. . . ib. ii. c. zi. lib. iv. c. '. C.)mara
Il1i. . 91.

B b 4 wholse

B 0 0 K whose experience, as more extensive, Magellan

V. --,- placed still greater confidence. After touching
'5s' at the Canaries, he flood directly south towards

the equinoctial line along the coast of America,
but was so long retarded by tedious calms, and
spent so much time in searching every bay and in-
let for that communication with the Southrrn
Ocean which he wished to discover, that he did
not reach tte river De la Plata till the twelfth of
s5o0. January. That spacious opening through which

its vail body of water pours into the Atlartic
allured him to enter; bur, after failing up it for
some days, he concluded, from the shallowness of
the fiream and the freshness of the water, that the
wifhed-for strait was not situated there, and con-
tinued his course towards the south. On the
thirty first of March he arrived in the port of St.
Julian, about forty-eight degrees south of the
line, where he resolved to winter. In this un-
comfortable flation he loft one of his squadron, and
the Spaniards suffered so much from the exceflive
rigour of the climate, that the crews of three of
his flips, headed by their officers, rose in open
mutiny, and insisted on relinquishing the visionary
project of a desperate adventurer, and returning
directly to Spain. This dangerous insurrection
Magellan suppressed, by an efiort of courage no
less prompt than intrepid, and inflilted exemplary
punishment on the ringleaders. With the re-
mainder of his followers, overawed but not recon-

cilcd

ciled to his scheme, he continued his voyage to- B °0 K
wards the south, and at length discovered, near
the fifty third degree of latitude, the mouth of a 5s"'
firait, into which he entered, notwithstanding the
murmurs and remonstrances of the people under
his command. After failing twenty days in that
winding dangerous channel, to which he gave his
own name, and where one of his ships deferred
him, the great Southern Ocean opened to his
view, and with tears of joy he returned thanks to
Heaven for having thus far crowned his endea-
vours with success q.

BUT he was still at a greater distance than he
imagined from the objec of his withes. He failed
during three months and twenty days in an uni-
form direction towards the north-west, without
discovering land. In this voyage, the longet that
had ever been made in the unbounded ocean, he
suffered incredible distress. His flock of provi-
sions was almost exhausted, the water became
putrid, the men were reduced to the shortest al-
lowance with which it was possible to sustain life,
and the scurvy, the mofi dreadful of all the mala-
dies with which sea-faring people are afflicted, be-
gan to spread among the crew. One circumstance
alone afforded them some consolation; they en-

9 Herrera, dec. 2. lib. iv. c. lo. lib. ix. c. o1, &c. (7o-

mnara Hist. c. 92. Pigafetta Viagsio ap. Ramnuf. ii. p. 3;2,
&c.

joyed

B o K joyed an uninterrupted course of fair weather, vi!,

.

- A such favourable winds, that Magellan belowce cn
353.' that ocean the name of Paciic, which it [lill rctain.

When reduced to such extri'lhiry; that they nlmt;
Mirch 6. have funk under their fuiirings, they fell in mwi:1

a cluster of small but fertile ifands, vw hc.h abL'.
ed them refrefhnents in lu h ;iibund.nce, tl; t 1.
health was loon re-cftablithcd. From ticc :
which he called De los Ladr-on;es, lie pru.oce edd i;
his voyage, and ioon made a more important d::
covery of the ifands now known by the nanmcc
the Philitpines. In one oft tlhee he got into an
unfortunate quarrel with the natives, who :-
tacked him with a numerous body of troop-,. '.!
armed; and wlile he fou ght at te li:.d ct ii,
April. 26. men with his usual valour, he fell by the han:' of

those barbarians, together with ieveral of his prn-.
cipal officers.

THE expedition was prosecuted under otl::

commanders. After visiting many of the fin.llcr
iflcs fcatrered in the eaflern part of the Ind:.
ocean, they touched at the great island of 13)lrreo,
NoV. . and at length landed in Tidore, one of the \l,,-

luccas, to the astonishment of the IJorruon:ir,
who could not comprehend how the Span;cr..s, lb
holding a wellerly courfc, had arrived atr :!:tl-
queftcred feat of their nofl valu.lle (oril n.:t,
which they themlfelves had dilcovcrc(l by 1.1 -I
in an opposite diredion. Tlhere, and in tihe -i-

2 Jl:

jacent isles, the Spaniards found a people ac- BO 0
qtainted with the benefits of extensive trade, and
willing to open an intercourse with a new nation 's'"
They took in a cargo of the preciuus spices, which
are the distinguished produtaion of thoie islands;
and with that, as well as with lpecimens of the
rich commodities yielded by the other countries
which they had vilited, the ,ory, which, of the Jan., 5.
two ihips that remained of the Iquadron, was mofl
fit for a long voyage, set fail for Europe, under
ihe command of Juan Sebaflian del Cano. He
followed the course of the Porutuguefe by the
Cape of Good Hope, and, after many dilalters
and sufferings, he arrived at St. Lucar on the
seventh of September one thoullnd five hundred
and twenty-two, having failed round the globe
in the space of three years and twenty-eight
daysq.

THIOUGH an untimely fate deprived Magellan

of the fatisfaaion of accomplishing this great un-
dertaking, his contemporaries, just to his memory
and talents, ascribed to him not only the honour
of having formed the plan, but of having fur-
mounted almnll every obstacle to the completion
of it; and in the prclent age his name is h1ill
ranked among the highest in the roll ot eminent
and successful navigators. The naval gloly of

Itrrcra, decc. 3. lib. i. c. 3 9. lib. iv. c. i. Ciomara Cron.
c. 93, &c, Pigafetta ap. Kamuf. ii. p. 361, ':c.

Spain

o K Spain now eclipsed that of every other nation;
- --- and by a singular felicity she had the merit, in

5 the course of a few years, of discovering a new

continent almost as large as that part of the earth
which was formerly known, and of ascertaining by
experience the form and extent of the whole
terraqueous globe.

THE Spaniards were not satisfied with the glory

of having first encompassed the earth; they ex-
peeed to derive great commercial advantages from
this new and boldest effort of their maritime skill.
The men of science among them contended, that
the spice islands, and several of the richell coun-
tries in the EaRs, were so situated as to belong of
right to the crown of Castile, in consequence o0
the partition made by Alexander VI. The mer-
chants, without attending to this difculion, en-
gaged eagerly in that lucrative and alluring com-
merce, which was now opened to them. The
Portuguese, alarmed at the intrusion of such for-
midable rivals, remonstrated and negociated in
Europe, while in Asia they obftruted the trade
of the Spaniards by force of arms. Charles, not
sufficiently infru6ed with refpec to the import-
ance of this valuable branch of commerce, or
diftraded by the multiplicity of his lchemes and
operations, did not afford his fubjets proper pro-
tedion. At last, the low state of his finances, ex-
haufted by the efforts of his arms in every part of
Europe, together with the dread of adding a new

war

war with Portugal to those in which he was al- B o o K

V.

ready engaged, induced him to make over his - _
claim of the Moluccas to the Portuguese for three '5'
hundred and fifty thousand ducats. He reserved,
however, to the crown of Castile the right of re-
viving its pretensions on repayment of that fum,
but other objcóts engrossed his attention and that
of his successors; and Spain was finally excluded
from a branch of commerce in which it was en-
gaging with sanguine expecations of profit'.

THouGH the trade with the Moluccas was relin-
quilhed, the voyage of Magellan was followed by
commercial effects of great moment in Spain.
Philip II. in the year one thousand five hundred
and fixty-four, reduced those islands which he dil-
covered in the Eastern Ocean to fubjedion, and
established fettlenients there; between which and
the kingdom of New Spain, a regular intercourse,
the nature of which shall be explained in its pro-
per place, is carried on. I return now to the
transactions in New Spain.

AT the time that Cortes was acquiring such vast An n.drr

territories for his native country, and preparing, c,,,,
the way for future conquelts, it was his lingular
fate not only to be dcltitute of any comminiion or
authority from the oIvcreign whom he was Icrving
with such fucccfstul zeal, but to be regardtd as

IlcrrcrL, Idcc. 3. lilb. vi. c. 5, &c. dec. iv. lib. v c. *.
&c.

an

B O0 K an undutiful and seditious subject. By the in.

V.
«,,_- i fluence of Fonseca, bilhop of Burgos, his conduti

'5S' in assuming the government of New Spain was

declared to be an irregular usurpation, in contempt
of the royal authority; and Chriftoval de Tapia
received a commilrlon, impowering him to super.
fede Cortes, to seize his person, to confiscate his
effects, to make a strict scrutiny into his proceed.
ings, and to transmit the result of all the inquiries
carried on in New Spain to the cui it; of the In-
dies, of which the billi.Bp ot Burgos was prcfirent.
A few weeks aiter the redudion of Mexico, l'apia
landed at Vera Cruz with the royal mandate to
itrip its conqueror of his power, and to treat him
as a criminal. But Fonseca had chosen a very
improper instrument to wreak his vengeance on
Cortes. Tapia had neither the reputation nor tlhe
talents that suited the high command to which he

which he was appointed. Corres, while he publickly ex-
21udea.

pressed the most refpecdful veneration for the em-
peror's authority, secretly took meafurcs to defeat
the effet of his commission; and having involved
Tapia and his followers in a multiplicity of nego-
ciations and conferences, in which he Ibmetimrs
had rccourfe to threats, but more frequently em-
ployed bribes and promises, he at length prevailed
on that weak man to abandon a province which he
was unworthy of governing'.

Ilerrcra, dec. 3. lib. iii. c. 16. dec. iv. c. i. Cot. R'-
lat. 2 1, E. B. Diaz. c. 158.

i T

BUT notwithstanding the fortunate dexterity B o 0 K

with which he had eluded this danger, Cortes * -
was so sensible of the precarious tenure by which App'i'
he hel1 his power, that he dispatched deputies to tOut.
Spain, with a pompous account of the success of 5's1
his arms, with farther specimens of the produc-
tions of the country, and with rich presents to the
emperor, as the earnest of future contributions
from his new conquel ; requesting, in recom-
;ence for all his services, the approbation of his
proceedings, and that he might be entrusted with
the government of those territories, which his con-
dult, and the valour of his followers, had added
to the crown of Castile. The juncture in which
his deputies reached the court was favourable.
The internal commotions in Spain, which had dif-
quieted the beginning of Charles's reign, were just
appeased . The ministers had leisure to turn their
attention towards foreign affairs. The account of
Cortes's victories filled his countrymen with ad-
miration. The extent and value of his conquests
l'ccame the object of vast and interefling hopes.
\\ ha:ever stain he might have contracted, by the
irr gularity of the steps which he took in order to
attain powur, was lo fully effaced by the splendor
and merit of the great actions which this had
rnahled him to perform, that every heart revolted
at the thought of infli.tin! any censure on a rar,
xaliol1 fcrvi-ces entiL!tid hi:n to the li: i hcl marks

llili. of Clharlc \ V. vc!. ii. L. "*i.

cf

B oV0 K of diftin&ion. The public voice declared warmly

V.
ac_- in favour of his pretensions, and Charles arriving

15 in Spain about this time, adopted the fentimncnts

and ir ap- of his fubjets with a youthful ardour. Notwith.
pQinted

aptain- flanding the claims of Velasquez, and the partial
Goverorof representations of the bishop of Burgos, the em-
Ncw Spain. peror appointed Cortes captain-general and go.

vernor of New Spain, judging that no person was
so capable of maintaining the royal authority, or of
establishing good order both among his Spanish
and Indian fubjets, as the commander whom
the former would willingly obey, and the latter
had long been accustomed to fear and to re.
fpe 'X.

His rcemes EVEN before his jurifdiaion received this legal
and arrange- .
mcntr. fan&ion, Cortes ventured to exercise all the

powers of a governor, and, by various arrange-
ments, endeavoured to render his conquest a fe-
cure and beneficial acquisition to his country. He
determined to establish the feat of government in
its ancient station, and to raise Mexico again
from its ruins; and having conceived high ideas
concerning the future grandeur of the slate of
which he was laying the foundation, he began to
rebuild its capital on a plan which hath gradually
formed the most magnificent city in the New
World. At the fame time, he employed skilful
perfuns to fcarch for mines in different parts ot

x Herrera, dec. 3. lib. iv. c. 3. Gomara Cron. c. 164, 16.
1B. Li.:z. 167, i68.

the

the country, and opened some which were found B o 0 K
to be richer than any which the Spaniards had '----
hitherto discovered in America. He detached his s52'
principal officers into the remote provinces, and
encouraged them to fettle there, not only by be-
llowing upon them large trats of land, but by
granting them the fame dominion over the Indians,
and the fame right to their service, which the
Spaniards had assumed in the islands.

IT was not, however, without difficulty that the Inrirr--.
Mexican empire could be entirely reduced into M,;4c..,..

and curirty

the form of a Spanish colony. Enraged and ren- oftheeSa'-
dered desperate by opprefflion, the natives often Di'"d''
forgot the superiority of their enemies, and ran to
arms in defence of their liberties. In every con-
tell, however, the European valour and discipline
prevailed. But, fatally for the honour of their
country, the Spaniards sullied the glory redound-
ing from thefi repeated vicories by their mode of
treating the vanquiiled people. After taking
Guatimozin, and becoming masters of his capit.l,
they supposed that the king of Castile entered on
po/senion of all the rights of the captive monarch,
and afficted to confider everyeffort of the IMexicans
to afTcrt their own independence, as the rebellion
ofvafnidls against their sovereign, or the mrtliny of
slaves againfl their mailer. Under the l.in5ion of
those ill founded maxims, they violated every
right that (fould be held licred betwceen hotlile
nations. After each insurrection, they reduced the

VOL. II. C c commonl-

B o0 K common people in the provinces which they sub-

V.
s -,- dued, to the molt humiliating of all conditions,

'51' that of perlonal fervlcude. Their chiers, sup o!cd

to be more criminal, were punified w/ith grecter
severity, and put to death in the moit ign!o- iinious
or the molt excruciating mode, that the info-
lence or the cruelty of their conquerors could de-
vise. In almoll every district of the Mexican
empire, the progress of the Spanish arms is marked
with biood, and with deeds lo atrocious, as dcil-
grace the enterprililg valour that conducded thelr
to success. In the country of Panuco, sixty ca-
ziques, or leaders, and four hundred nobles, were
burnt at one t:ne. iNor was this flocking barba-
rity perpretated in any sudden sally of rage, or by
a commander ot inferior note. It was the adc of
Sandoval, an officer whole name is entitled to
the fitcond rank in the annals of New Spain, exe-
cuted after a fole:i-n confulration with Corres;
and to complete the horror of the scene, the chil-
dren and relations of the wretched victims were
assembled, and compelled to be fpedators of their
dying agonies Y. It seems hardly pofible to ex-
ceed in horror this dreadful example of severity;
but it was followed by another, which aff'.tlcd
the Mexicans tlill more lenfibly, as it gave tlhem
a mol t fling proof of their own degradation,
and of the t:nall regard which their haughtry
mailers retained fir the ancient dignity and liflcn-

X Cortcr Rclat. 291, C. Gomnra Cron. c. 155.

dour

dour of their state. On a flight suspicion, con- B O0 K
firmed by very imperfect evidence, that Gudtinmo- L--.
zin had formed a scheme to fliake off the yoke,
and to excite his former ftuj ccis to take arms,
Cortes, without the formality of a trial, ordered
the unhappy monarch, togethcr with the caziqurs
of Tezuco and Tacuba, the two persons of gre.ite!t
eminence in the empire, to Lc hanged; and the
Mexicans, with aftoniqhment and horror, beheld
this disgraceful punifhrnent inflicted upon perfins,
to whom they were accustomed to look up with
reverence, hardly inferior to that which they paid
to the gods themfelve, .. The example of Cortes
and his principal officers encouraged and justified
persons of subordinate rank to venture upon com-
mitting greater excefies. Nuno de Guzman, in
particular, stained an illuflrious ,iame by deeds of
peculiar enormity and rigour, in various expedi-
tions which he condu&ed .

ONE circumtlancc, however, facved the 1\lcxi- r;nnohj"

cans from farther consumption, perhals from one rl......n.n
as complete as that which lha. depoltl.tc-dl the .. U.
islands. The firl[ conque;ors did not attempt to
search for the precious mc.tals in the bowels of the
earth. They were neither ftlTiciently wealthy to
carry on the expensive works, which aire requi.ite
for opening thole deep recerfi.s whlere N;.tlre h;is
concealed the veins of goll. ald filvcr, Inor ftuffi.

Gomaa Cron. c. 170. B. D';z. c. 177. lI-erri-a, (!cc. 3.
lih. viii. c. 9. Sce NO I E XCIV.

Ilcrrera, (dIc. .I ali 5 I).plim.

C c z cicntly

B O O K ciently skilful to perform the ingenious operations
i ;- - by which they are separated from their refpedive

5 ores. They were satisfied with the more simple

method, practised by the Indians, Ds washing the
earth carried down rivers and torrents from the
ibuntains, and collecting the grains of native
metal deposited there. The rich mines of New
Spain, which have poured forth their treasures
with such profulion on every quarter of the globe,
i55S, &c. were not discovered for several years after the

conquet h. By that time, a more orderly govern.
ment and police were introduced into the colony;
experience, derived from former errors, had fug.
gelted many useful and humane regulations for
the protection and preservation of the Indians;
and though it then became necessary to increase
the number of those emyloyed in the mines, and
they were engaged in a species of labour more per-
nicious to the human constitution, they suffered
less hardship or diminution than from the ill.
judged, but less extensive, schemes of the firfR
conquerors.

rh,; 1'- i .'HIS extraordinary mortality among the In-
v"'') dians dilappointed the hopes of their new maf-

ters. Few feein to have derived any considerable
wealth from their ill-conduted researches. Ac-
cording to the usual fate of first settlers in new co-
lonies, it was their lot to encounter danger and to

b Herrcra, dec. 8. lib. x. c. zi.

7 itruggle

struggle with difficulties; the fruits of their vi,.o- B °oV K
ries and toils were reserved for times of tranquil- t--- -
lity, and reaped by fuccelfors of greater indutlry, S"
but of inferior merit. The early hiflorians of
America abound with accounts of the fuiTerings
and of the poverty of its conquerors . In New
Spain, their condition was rendered more grievous
by a peculiar arrangement. When Charles V.
advanced Cortes to the government of that coun-
try, he, at the fame time, appointed certain com-
milloners to receive and adminilrer the royal reve-
nue there, with independent jurisdiction '. T'Ihel
men, chosen from inferior stations in various de-
partments of public business at Madrid, were so
piuch elevated with their promotion, that they
thought they were called to adt a part of the firIt
consequence. But being accustomed to the mi-
nute formalities of office, and having contracted
the narrow ideas suited to the sphere in which
they had hitherto moved, they were astonished, on
arriving in Mexico, at the high authority which '524-
Cortes exercised, and could not conceive that the
mode of adminiltration, in a country recently lub-
ducd and fettled, must be different from what
took place in one where tranquillity and regular
government had been long established. In their
letters, they reprelbnted Cortes as an ambitious
ryrant, who having usurped a jurifdiflion iibpclrior

' Cortes Relat. 2g3, I". B. Diaz. c. 2c9.
d lcirrc;a, dec. 3. Jib. iv. c. 3.

Cc3 to

r

" law, aspired at independence, and by his ex-
_ ori-ltan; wealth and extensive influence, mnight ac.
5 conplifh thole disloyal schemes which h- appa.

rently meditated '. These insinuations mauc such
deep imprcfiion upon the Spanilh miniters, most
of \1hu'( had been formed to bufiners under the
jealous ;.i.d rigid adminitration of Ferdinand, that,
unmindfiul of all Cortes's past fcrvices, and re.
garuels of what he was then suffering in conduet.
ing that extraordinary expedition, in which he
advanced from t'le lake of Mexico to the western
extremities of Honduras', they infused the fame
ffijicions into the mind of their master, and pre.
vaiicd on him t1o order a !olemn inqueit to be
mtide into his con'iuLt, wich powers to the liccn.
's5;. tiite lPonce :c Lco;i, entrusted with that commilt

lion, to ftize his pertbn, if he should find thia
expedient, ;:nd ii-nd him pritbner to Spain ,.
Cor!c' re- Ti:: i futidi'n death of Ponce de Leon, a few (dais

0s:,~,. aftelr lii arrival in New Spain, prevented the ex-.

cuiion o(r ;iis cuion-ifion. lJt as the object ol
his aiFt;'int;1iiit 'as known, the mind ot Cortc:
v. !.; deeply c vOunide! with this unexpectecd relurr
t,)r icrviccs, whicii far excerded whatever any lul
jrct of Spain lhad irc-,ilcrcd to his olvereign. lii
c'i:.;lavoured, however, to maintain his lili,).
and to I.cover the confildence of the court. B1

· Ili'rtcra, (ecc. 3. lib. . c. 14.

S.:. I, I iE ,CV.
s: lirrlira, dec. 3. lb. viii. c. 1., 15.

cvc.

every person in office, who had arrived from Spain B o.° K
since the conquest, was a spy upon his conduct, - -
and with malicious ingenuity gave an unfavourable '5'5
reprelcntation of all his actions. The apprehcn-
fionsof Charles and his miniflers increakfd. A 5,sg.
new comminiion of inquiry was issued, with more
cxtenfive powers, and various p:recautions were
taken in order to prevent orito puninf hiim, if he
should be so prteumptuous as to attempt what was
incconrfllent with the fidelity of a subjec h. Cort. s
bl,:cidl the approaching crisis of his fortune with
All the violent emotions natural to a haughty mind,
co:.lious of high d-lcrt, and receiving unworthy
tr:ca.tnment. But though bome of his delperate fol-
luvers urged him to aflnrt his own rights againIt
I:is ungratci;il country, and with a bold naind to
li ze that power which the courticrs meanlc ' ;:ccujl-
ed him of covetingn, he retained such lelf-cum-
mand, or was actuated wi:h ifuch Ientiments of
loyalty, as to rejet their dangerous counlIcs, and
to chule the only courlc in which he couldl Jcure
his own dignity, with(cut c!t'parting from his dj tv.
lit resolved not to c loli himl]t to tile ignominy
of a trial, in that country which h.id been the scene
of his triumphs ; but without waitin!g for the ar-
rival of his judges, to repair directly to Callile,
and commit himl-elf and his caule to the jullice and
g'ncrofiry of his sovereign k.

!' lIrrcrn, dec. . lii). viii. c. 15. dec. 4. lib. ii. c. 1. 11b.
iv. c. 9, 10. B. Diaz. c. 172. 19. Goniar.i Cron. c. ,G6.

i 1. D)i, . c. 194.
; ltCrrtra, (lcc. 3. il. iv. . .

C C 4 CORTCS

B 0 o K CORTES appeared in his native country with the
.--,__- splendour that suited the conqueror of a mighty
,is5l1.SPp kingdom. He brought with him a great part of
tion Llcrc. his wealth, many jewels and ornaments of great

value, fevcral curious produdtions of the country ,
and was attended by some Mexicans of the ilit
rank, as well as by the moit considerable of his
own officers. His arrival in Spain removed at once
every fulpicion and fear that had been entertained
wirh refptct to his intentions. The emperor, hav-
ing now nothing to apprehend floin the designs ,t
Cortes, received him like a person whom coiili.
oulnc's of his own innocence had brought into tlih
preience of his matclr, and who was intitled, hy
the eminence of his forvices, to the highest nlrl
of distinction and refpec:. The order of St. Jago,
the title of Marquis del Valle de Guaxaca, ri;e
grant of a vast territory in New Spain, were fuc-
ceflivcly bestowed upon him; and as his manners
were correct and elegant, although lie had passcd
the greater part of his life among rough adven-
turers, the emperor admitted him to the iaime fa-
miliar intercourse with himfelt, that was cnjoyid
by noblemen of the firll rank .

Set.l-ment BuT, amidst those external proofs of regarJ,
verr.;'rlt in fymptonls of remaining liltruft appeared. ''lioiuli
Nc.v Spin Cortes carneftly solicited to be reinltated in the I,)-

S See NOTE XCVI.

m Hcrrer., dec. i. lih. iv. c. l. lib. vi. c. 4. ['. )il
C, 19ó( . (. o>n. Cle. (. . z.

VC lll:l';''i

vernment of New Spain, Charles, too sagacious B 0o i
to commit such an important charge to a man '---
whom he had once fifpeted, peremptorily refused '5. '
to invest him again with powers which he might
find it impossible to controul. Cortes, though is3-.
Jignified with new titles, returned to Mexico with
dliminifhcd authority. The military department,
with powers to attempt pew ditcoveries, was left
in his hands; but the supreme direCtion of civil
affairs was placed in a board, called The Audience
cf New Spain. At a subsequent period, when,
upon the increafeof the colony, the exertion of
authority more united and extensive became necef-
I'ry, Antonio de Mendoza, a nobleman of high
rank, was sent thither as Viceroy, to take the go-
vernment into his hands.

Tiis division of power in New Spain proved, as New

was unavoidable, the source of perpetual diffen- fch',,nc of
tion, which embittered the life of Cortes, and
thwarted all his schemes. As he had now no op-
portunity to display his active talents but in at-
lempting new discoveries, he formed various
hlicmcs for that purpose, all of which bear imprel-
sions of a genius that delighted in what was bold
and fplcndid. He early entertained an idea, thar,
either by fleering through the gulph of Florida
along the east coast of North America, Iobc firaiic
wouldl Ie found that communicated with the weft-
trn ocean; or that, by examining the isthmus of

Darien,

B oO K Darien, some paffae would be discovered betw-»,

V.
i_ -^t the North and South Seas". But having been (d'

J530. appointed in his expectations with respect to 1':;,,

he now confined his views to such voya!es cf ( !:
covery as he could make from the purts or ';,u
Spain in the South Sea. There he fitted out .c-
ceflively several Imall squadrons, which eitlicr [,r
rifled in the attempt, or returned without .: ;-
any discovery of moment. Cortes,weary of en::. :.
·536. ing the conduct of his operations to o!,;rs, ;r'

the command of a new armament in prxrl,, :,,
after enduring incredible hardships, an'd :'-;.,
tering dangers of every fLpecies, he difcovt rcl' :!
large peninsula of California, and furviy.; I'.
greater part of the gulf which fliparatcs it '1,n
New Spain. The dilcovery of a country cf ..;
extent would have reflicled credit on a Co,,i;.r
adventurer; but it could add little new hon ;r,;:
the name of Cortes, and was far from si i r;
the sanguine expectations which he had fnrm i
Dilgufted with ill fuccells, to which he had no
been accuflomnd, and weary of contelling .\i:i
adversaries to whorm he conlidered ir as a Cn'gr..
to be opposed, he once more foughI; for reu;.ls i,

s54o. his native country.
#li dciath. BUT his reception there was very difTlrent fr,:

that which gratitude, and even decency, ouLii:

" Cortes Relat. Rain. iii. 29 , r.

Ii t rrei, dcc. . ig . i hi.. c

.

t , cC. ,ec. . i. i

V negas lii ti:. of( .L.iforrn. i. 125z. Lorcnza.:na lli:l. l .
. ,

1,.,'

have secured for him. The merit of his ancient B o°0 K
exploits was already, in a great measure, forgot- -
ten, or eclipsed by the fame of recent and more '
valuable conquests in another quarter of America.
No service of moment was now expected from a
man of declining years, and who began to be un-
fortunate. The emperor behaved to him with
cold civility; his ministers treated him, sometimes
with neglect, sometimes with insolence. His
grievances received no redress; his claims were
urged without effect; and after several years spent
in fruitless application to ministers and judges, an
occupation the most irksome and mortifying to a
manof high spirit, who had moved in a sphere
where he was more accustomed to command than
to solicit, Cortes ended his days on the second of
December one thousand five hundred and forty-
seven, in the fixty-fecond year of his age. His
fate was the fame with that of all the persons who
diltinguilhed themselves in the discovery or con-
quetl of the New World. Envied by his contem-
poraries, and ill requited by the court which he
served, he has been admired and celebrated by
succeeding ages. Which has formed the most just
c(inmate of his character, an impartial consideration
f hiis actions mult determine.

NOT ES

AND
ILL US T RA T I ONS.

# NOTES AND ILLUSTRATIONS.

NOTES
N O T E S

AND
ILLUSTRATIONS.

NOTE I. p.3.

rrTIHE height of the most elevated point in the Pyrc-

[ nees is, according to MI. Cassini, fix thousand
f: hundred and forty-fix feet. The height of the moun-
.rm Gcmmi, in the canton of Berne, is ten thousand
e:n hundred and ten feet. The height of the Peak of
iTcneriffc, according to the mcafurement of P. Feuill],
i. thirtccn thotufind one hundred and feventy-eight feet.
The height of Chimborazzo, the most elevated point of
thc Andles, is twenty thouland two hundred and eighty
fc't. Voyage de I). Juan Ulloa, Obfcrvations Afiron.
ct Phfiq. tomr. ii. p. 114. The line of conge!ation on
C;inmhorazzo, or that p:;rt of the mountain which is
corted perpetually will foiow, is no f th lian two thou-
f:",] four hundred feet from its fumnmit. I'revot. IliJ.
(G:cr. dcs Voyages, vol. xiii. p. b3b.

NOTE Ii. p. 4
A S t particular d:fcription makkc' a 1Iro:,cir iUrnii7lo:a

tllii gencral ;itl .'.s, I shall

give uco ie ( , R,'( dc la

".t-.a by a11 eye-wittutcf, I'. C;tt.mci , Ia l\0I(d,'clL: j.lu.t,
.ilcd at B Aenos ves i i 7,.19, who thius rICpr<-clits

ihe
l felt when

v uIcch newl (c'jcits \V.st

e ill I)r(jntll.tC

' li LW. "'While I relidcd in ;Enu';c, n.l
'.'. in

1~ ~ ~ ~~~~~~~~Lo.

books of hifiory or geography that the mouth of the river
De la Plata was an hundred and fifty miles in breadth, I
confidered it as an exaggeration, because in this hemi-
sphere we have no example of such vast rivers. When I
approached its mouth, I had the most vehement dcfire to
afoertain the truth with my own eyes; and I have fund
the matter to be exatly as it was represented. Thi, I
deduce particularly from one circumstance: xVhlln wc
took our departure from Monte-Vidco, a fort situated
more than a hundred miles from the mouth of the ric:,
and where its breadth is considerably diminished, we C.il
a complete day before we discovered the land on the op-
pofite bank of the river; and when we were in the nieJJ;
of the channel, we could not discern land on either i:c,
and saw nothing but the sky and water, as if we had becn
in some great ocean. Indeed, we should have taken i:
to be sea, if the fresh water of the river, which was turbid
like the Po, had not satisfied us that it was a river,
Moreover, at Buenos Ayres, another hundred miles up
the river, and where it is still much narrower, it is no:
only impossible to discern the opposite coast, which is in-
deed very low and flat; but one cannot perceive tile
houses or the tops of the steeples in the Portugutfe fettlc-
ment at Colonia on the other tide of the river." Lettcea
prima, published by Muratori, II Chriftiancfino Fcllc,
&c. i. p. 257.

NOTE III. p. 7.
N EWFOUNDLAND, part of Nova Scotia alnd

C.anada, are the countries which lie in the l(.mleipa-

rallel of latitude with the kingdom of F:railcc; ;ul in
every part of these the water of the rivers is fiozen dtduiin
winter to the thicknl's of fcvcral feet the calth is cover-

cd

ed with snow as deep; almost all the birds fly, during
that season, from a climate where they could not live.
The country of the Elkimaux, part of Labrador, and the
countries on the south of Hudson's Bay, are in the fame
parallel with Great Britain ; and yet in all these the cold
is so intense, that even the industry of Europeans has not
attempted cultivation.

NOTE IV. p.'o.
A COSTA is the first philosopher, as far as I know, who

endeavoured to account for the different degrees of

heat in the old and new continents, by the agency of
the winds which blow in each. Hilt. Moral. &c. lib. ii.
& iii. M. de Buffon adopts this theory, and has not
only improved it by new observations, but has employed
his amazing powers of descriptive eloquence in embellish-
ing and placing it in the most firiking light. Some re-
marks may be added, which tend to illuflrate more fully
a docLrine of much importance in every inquiry concern-
ing the temperature of various climates.

WHEN a cold wind blows over land, it muff in its pas-

sage rob the surface of some of its heat. By means of
this, the coldness of the wind is abated. But if it con-
tinue to blow in the fame direction, it will come, by de-
grees, to pass over a surface already cooled, and will sus-
ser no longer any abatement of its own kecnne:s. Thus,
as it advances over a large tract of land, it biings on all
the severity of intense frost.

LET the fame wind blow over an extensive and deep

sea; the superficial water muff be immediately cooled to
a certain degree, and the wind proportionally warmed.
But the superficial and colder water becoming specifically
VOL. II. D d hcavicr

heavier than the warmer water below it, descends; what
is warmer supplies its place, which, as it comes to be
cooled in its turn, continues to warm the air which
passes over it, or to diminish its cold. This change of
the superficial water, and fucceflive ascent of that which
is warmer, and consequent fucceflive abatement of cold-
ness in the air, is aided by the agitation caused in the sea
by the mechanical aaion of the wind, and also by the
motion of the tides. This will go on, and the rigour o0
the wind will continue to diminish until the whole water
is so far cooled, that the water on the surface is no lone,
removed from the a&tion of the wind, falf enough to hll-
der it from being arrested by frost. Whenever the surface
freezes, the wind is no longer warmed by the water from
below, and it goes on with undiminished cold.

FROM those principles may be explained the feveritfof

winter frosts in extensive continents; their miidnefs in
small islands; and the superior rigour of winter in thofc
parts of North America with. which we are best ac-
quainted. In the north-wefl parts of Europe, the severity
of winter is mitigated by the weft winds, which ufuallk
blow in the months of November, December, and part
of January.

ON the other hand, when a warm wind blows over

land, it heats the surface, which must therefore cease to
abate the fervour of the wind. But the fame wind blow-
ing over water, agitates it, brings up the colder water
from below, and thus is continually losing somewhat ot
its own heat.

BUT the great power of the sea to mitigate the heat of

the wind or air pafling over it, proceeds from the follow-
ing circumstance, that on account of the tranfparcncy of

the

the sea, its surface cannot be heated to a great degree by
the fun's rays; whereas the ground, fubjeaed to their
influence, very floon acquires great heat. When, there-
fore, the wind blows over a torrid continent, it is soon
raised to a heat almost intolerable; but during its paflage
over an extensive ocean, it is gradually cooled; so that
on its arrival at the farthest shore, it is again fit for re-
fpiration.

THOSE principles will account for the sultry heats of

large continents in the torrid zone; for the mild climate
of illands in the fame latitude; and foi the superior warmth
in fumincr which l.::ge continents, situatcd in the tem-
perate or colder zones of the earth, enjoy, when com-
pared with that of islands. The heat of a climate depends
notonly upon the immediate effect of the fun's rays, but
on their continued op-ration, on the efrem which they
have formerly produced, and which remains for tome
time in the ground. This is the rcafon why the day is
warmcft about two in the afternoon, the summer warmefl
about the middle of July, and the winter coldest about
the middle of January.

THE forests which cover America, and hinder the fun-

beams from heating the ground, are a great cause of the
temperate climate in the equatorial parts. The ground,
not being heated, cannot heat the air; and the leaves,
which receive the rays intercepted from the ground, have
not a mars of matter sufficient to abif;b heat enough for
this purpose. Belides, it is a known fact, that the vege-
tative power of a plant occasions a pcrfpi ration from the
leaves in proportion to the heat to which they are cx-
poced ; and, from the nature of evaporation, this perfpi-
ration produces a cold in the leaf proportal to the per-
fpiration. Thus the cffitcA of the leaf in heating the air

1) d 2 i,

in contal with it, is prodigiously diminished. For those
observations, which throw much additional light on this
curious fubje&, I am indebted to my ingenious friend,
Mr. Robifon, profeflor of natural philosophy in the u i-
verfity of Edinburgh.

NOTE V. p. xo.
T HE climate of Brasil has been described by two emi-

nent naturalifis, Pifo and Margrave, who observed

it with a philosophical accuracy, for which we search in
vain in the accounts of many other provinces in America.
Both represent it as temperate and mild, when compared
with the climate of Africa. They ascribe this chiefly to
the refreshing wind which blows continually from the Tea.
'Ihe air is rnot only cool, but chilly through the night, in
b nmuch, that the natives kindle fires every evening in
their huts. Pifo de Medicina Brafilienfi, lib. i. p. i, &c.
M/iargravius Hiftor. Rerum Natural. Brafiliae, lib. viii.
c. 3. p. 264. Nieuhoff, who resided long in Brasil,
coclfirmls their description. Churchill's Colleaion, vol. ii.
p. 26. Gumilla, who was a miflionary many years
among the Indians, upon the river Oronoco, gives a
similar dc1Lription of the temperature of the climate there.
Hilt. de l'()renoque, tom. i. p. 26. P. Acugna felt a
very colnfiderable degree of cold in tlh countries on the
;anks of the river Amazons. Relat. vol. ii. p. 56, M.
[iict, who lived a considerable time in Cayenne, gives a
similar account of the temperature of that climate, and
acIribes it to the fame caufc. Voyage de la France,
Ekquillox, p. 330. Nothing can be more diffcrcnt from
thlcfi descriptions than that of the burning heat of the
African coast given by M. Adanfon. Voyage to Senegal,
pa fimm.

N 9TE

NOTE VI. p. It.
TWO French frigates were sent upon a voyage of

discovery in the year 1739. In latitude 44° south,

they began to 'rel a considerable degree of cold. In lati-
tude 48°, they met with islands of floating ice. Hiftoire
des Navigations aux Terres Australes, tom. ii. 256, &c.
Dr. Halley fell in with ice in latitude 59'. Id. tom. i.
p. 47. Commodore Byron, when on the coast of Pata-
gonia, latitude 50° 33' south, on the fifteenth of Decem-
ber, which is midsummer in that part of the globe, the
twenty-firft of December being the longest day there,
compares the climate to that of England in the middle
of winter. Voyages by Hawkefworth, i. 25. Mr. Banks
having landed on Terra del Fuego, in the Bay of Good
Success, latitude 55°, on the sixteenth of January, which
corresponds to the month of July in our hemisphere, two
of his attendants died in one night of extreme cold, and
all the party were in the most imminent danger of perish-
ing. Id. ii. 51, 52. By the fourteenth of March, cor-
rcfponding to September in our hemisphere, winter was
fCt in with rigour, and the mountains were covered with
snow. Ibid. 72. Captain Cook, in his voyage towards
the South pole, furnishes new and striking instances of
the extraordinary predominance of cold in this region of
the globe. " Who would have thought (fays he) that
an island, of no greater extent than seventy leagues in
circuit, situated between the latitude of 54° and 55,
ihould in the very height of Summer be, in a manner,
wholly covered, many fathoms deep, with frozen snow
but more especially the S. W. coal ? The very fuminits
of the lofty mountains were cased with lfow antd ice ; but
the quantity that lay in the valleys is incredible; and at

D 1 3 the

the bottom of the bays, the coast was terminated bh .
wall of ice of considerable height." Vol. ii. p. 217.

IN omne places of the ancient continent, an extraortii.

nary degree of cold prevails in very low latitudes. Mi.
Bogle, in his embassy to the court of the Delai Lamn,
pafled the winter of the year 1774 at Chamnanning, in
latitude 31° 39' N. He often found the thermometer in
his room twenty-nine degrees under the freezing point by
Fahrenheit's fcalc; and in the middle of April the stand.
ing waters were all frozen, and heavy showers of snow
frequently fell. The extraordinary elevation of the coun.
try seems to be the cause of this exceflive cold. In tra-
velling from Indoftan to Thibet, the afccnt to the fum-
mit of the Boutan Mountains is very great, but the
descent on the other fide is not in equal proportion. T'he
kingdom of Thibet is an elevated region, extremely bare
and desolate. Account of Thibet, by Mr. Stewart, read
in the Royal Society, p. 7. The extraordinary cold in
low latitudes in America cannot be accounted for by the
fame cause. Those regions are not remarkable for eleva-
tion. Some of them are countries depressed and level.

THE most obvious and probable cause of the superior

degree of cold, towards the southern extremity of Ame-
rica, seems to be the form of the continent there. Its
breadth gradually decrcafes as it ftrctches from St. Anto-
nio Southwards, and from the bay of St. Julian to the
Straits of Magellan its dimensions are much cont;a;ltc(!.
On the eafl and weft fides, it is waffed by the Atllanlt
and Pacific Oceans. From its southern point it is pro-
bable that an open sea extends to the Antarctic pole. In
whichever of there directions the wind blows, it is cooled
before it approaches the Magellanic regions, by paliin!l
over a vailt body of water, nor is thIe l.lid there of (uili

cx L(:I

extent that it can recover any considerable degree of heat
in its progress over it. These circumifances concur in
rendering the temperature of the air in this diftri& of
America more similar to that of an insular, than to that
of a continental climate, and hinder it from acquiring the
fame degree of summer heat, with places in Europe and
Asia, in a corresponding northern latitude. The north
wind is the only one that reaches this part of Ame-
rica, after blowing over a great continent. But from an
ittcntive survey of its position, this will be found to have
a tendency, rather to diminish than augment the degree
of heat. The southern extremity of America is properly
the termination of the immense ridge of the Andes, which
fretches nearly in a direct line from north to south,
through the whole extent of the continent. The molt
sultry regions in South America, Guiana, Brasil, Pa-
raguay, and Tucuman, lie many degrees to the east of
the Magellanic regions. The level country of Peru,
which enjoys the tropical heats, is situated considerably
to the weft of them. The north wind then, though it
blows over land, does not bring to the southern extre-
mity of America an increase of heat, collected in its
passage over torrid regions ; but before it arrives there,
it must have swept along the summits of the Andes,
and comes impregnated with the cold of that frozen
region.

THOUGH it be novw demonhrated that tlere is no

southern continent in that region of the globe which it
was supposed to occupy, it appears to be certain from
Captain Cook's dlifcoverics, that there is a large traCt of
land near the south pole, which is the source of most of
the ice spread over the vast southern ocean, vol. ii. p. 230.
239, &c. Whether the influence of this remote frozen
continent may reach the southern extremity of America,

I) d 4 anti

and assec& its climate, is an inquiry not unworthy of at.
tention.

NOTE VII. p. 14.

CONDAMINE is one of the latef and most
accurate observers of the interior state of South

America. " After descending from the Andes (fays he)
one beholds a vast and uniform profpea of water and
verdure, and nothing more. One treads upon the earth,
but does not fee it; as it is so entirely covered with
luxuriant plants, weeds, and shrubs, that it would re-
quire a considerable degree of labour to clear it, for the
space of a foot." Relation abrege d'un Voyage,&c. p.48.
One of the singularities in the forests is a fort of osiers,
or withs, called bejucos by the Spaniards, lianes by the
French, and nibbees by the Indians, which are usually
employed as ropes in America. This is one of the para-
fitical plants, which twists about the trees it meets with,
and rising above their highest branches, its tendrils de-
scend perpendicularly, strike into the ground, take root,
rife up around another tree, and thus mount and descend
alternately. Other tendrils are carried obliquely by the
wind, or rome accident, and form a confusion of inter-
woven cordage, which resembles the rigging of a ship.
Bancroft, Nat. Hist. of Guiana, 99. These withs are
often as thick as the arm of a inan. b. p. 75. M. Bou-
gucr's account of the forests in Peru perfectly relenmhlcs
this description. Voyage au Peru, p. i6. Ovicdo gives
a similar delcription of the forcls in other parts of Ame-
rica. Hlitf. lib. ix. p. 144, 1). The country of the
Moxos is so much overflowed, that they arc obliged to
reside on the fuminit of some riling ground during fume
part of the year, and have no communication with their
coun:trylnen at any difluicc. Lctcres Edifiantcs, tom. x,

7 1. 187,

p. 187. Garcia gives a full and jult description of the
rivers, lakes, woods, and marlhes, in those countries of
America which lie between the tropics. Origen de los
Indios, lib. ii. c. 5. § 4, 5. The incredible hardships
to which Gonzalez Pizarro was exposed, in attempting
to march into the country to the east of the Andes, con-
vey a very firiking idea of that part of America in its
original uncultivated fate. Garcil. de la Vega, Royal.
Comment. of Peru, part ii. book iii. c. 2-5.

NOTE VIII. p. 17.
THE animals of America seem not to have been al-

ways of a size inferior to those in other quarters of

the globe. From antlers of the moofe-deer which have
been found in America, it appears to have been an ani-
mal of great size. Near the banks of the Ohio, a confi-
derable number of bones of an immense magnitude have
been found. The place where this discovery has been
made lies about one hundred and ninety miles below the
junltion of the river Scioto with the Ohio. It is about
four miles distant from the banks of the latter, on the
fide of the marsh called the Great Salt Lick. The bones
lie in vit quantities about five or fix feet under ground,
.ild the stratum is visible in the bank on the edge of the
Lick. Journal of Colonel George Croglan, MS. penes me.
' his lipot seems to be accurately laid down by Evans in
Ilis map. These bones must have belonged to animals of
iorinous bulk; but naturalists being acquainted with no
living creature of such size, were at firI inclined to think
that they were mineral fubtfances. Upon receiving a
rcater number of fpecimncris, and after inljf)eting them
ImIre narrowly, they are now allowed to be the bones of
a animtal. As the clephant is the Jargelt known qua-

drupcd,

druped, and the tusks which were found nearly rcfenim
bled, both in form and quality, the tusks of an elephant
it was concluded that the carcases deposited on the Ohio
were of that fpecics. But Dr. Hunter, one of the per-
sons of our age bcft qualified to decide with refpe t t,
this point, having accurately examined several parcels of
tusks, and grinders, and jaw-bones, sent from the Ol:ij
to London, gives it as his opinion, that they did not be-
long to an elephant, but to fomc huge carnivorous ai:
mal of an unknown species. Phil. Tranfat. vol. Ivi:.
p. 34. Bones of the fame kind, and as remarkable for
their size, have been found near the mouths of the grea;
rivers Oby, Jenifeia, and Lena, in Siberia. Stralhrcn-
trrg, Defcript. of north and east Parts of Europe and Asia,
p. 402, &c. The elephant seems to be confined in hi,
range to the torrid zone, and never multiplies beyonu it.
In such cold regions as those bordering on the frozen lea,
he could not live. The existence of such large animals
in America might open a wide field for conjecture. The
more we contemplate the face of nature, and confider
the variety of her producions, the more we must be fa-
tisfied that astonishing changes have been made in the
terraqueous globe by convulsions and revolutions, of
which no account is preserved in history.

NOTE IX. p. 8.
THIS degeneracy of the domcffic European ani;i..

in America ought to be imputed partly to each: '

there causes. In the Spanish settlements, which are fitua:c
within either the torrid zone, or in countries bol dci
upnl it, the increase of heat, and divcrrity of fool, I -
ve;:.t fccp :nd lhorncdl cattle from attaining the fainmc f;'
as ill 'tillo'pe. '"1 hy feldoe1i Lcecomie so I;t, :rid ti-

t1 <'

defh is not so juicy, or of such delicate flavour. In North
America, where the climate is more favourable, and
similar to that of Europe, the quality of the graffes which
spring up naturally in their pafture-grounds is not good.
Mitchell, p. I51. Agriculture is still so much in its in-
f. ncy, that artificial food for cattle is not railed in any
quantity. During a winter, long in many provinces,
rird rigorous in all, no proper care is taken of their cattle.
The general treatment of their horses and horned cattle
is injudicious and harsh in all the English colonies.
These circumitances contribute more, perhaps, than any
thing peculiar in the quality of the climate, to the dege-
jeracy of breed in the horses, cows, and lheep, of many
if the North American provinces.

NOTE X. p.19.

N the year ix58, the island of Hispaniola was affliCed
with a dreadful visitation of those deftrudive infecls,

the particulars of which Herrera describes, and mentions
.1 ingular inflance of the fuperflition of the Spanish
planters. After trying various methods of exterminat-
i; the ants, they rcbolved to implore protection of the
Iints; but as the calamity was new, they were at a lors
;; lind out the faint who could give them the moit es-
:c:tuiil aid. They cafe lots in order to difcovcr the pa-
tiln whom they should invoke. The lots decided in fa-
stur of St. Saturninus. They celbrated his feltival with
I'at Ifllciiieity, and i3mmediatecly, adds the hitorian, the
t.. mity began to abate. Hcrrera, dec. . lib. iii. c. 15.
} cNO7.

NOTE

NOTE XI. p. 21.
T HE author of Recherches Philofophiques fur Its

Americains supposes this difference in heat to be

equal to twelve degrees, and that a place thirty de.
grees from the equator in the old continent, is as warm
as one situated eighteen degrees from it in America,
tom, i. p. I. Dr. Mitchell, after observations carried
on during thirty years, contends that the difference i:
equal to fourteen or fifteen degrees of latitude. Prefer:
State, &c. p. 257.

NOTE XII. p. 2t.

ANUARY 3d, 1765, Mr. Bertram, near the head
of St. John's river in East Florida, observed a frost

so intense, that in one night, the ground was frozen
an inch thick upon the banks of the river. The limeg,
citrons, and banana trees, at St. Augustine, were de-
stroyed. Bertram's Journal, p. 20. Other instances cf
the extraordinary operations of cold in the southern pro-
vinces of North America are collected by Dr. Mitchell.
Present State, p. 206, &c. February 7th, 1747, the
frost at Charleftown was so intense, that a person having
carried two quart bottles of hot water to bed, in the
morning they were split to pieces, and the water con-
verted into solid lumps of ice. In a kitchen, where ther.
was a fire, the water in a jar, in which there was a l;ig
live cel, was frozen to the bottom. Almnoli all rh.
orange and olive trees were dcfrtoyed. Defcnlption a0
South Carolina, 8vo. Lond. 1761.

>IOl!

NOTE XIII. p. 22.
A Remarkable instance of this occurs in Dutch Gui-

ana, a country every where level, and so low, that

during the rainy seasons, it is usually covered with wa-
ter near two feet in height. This renders the foil Co
rich, that on the surface, for twelve inches in depth, it
is a stratum of perfect manure, and as such has been
transported to Barbadoes. On the banks of the Efe-
quebo, thirty crops of ratoon canes have been raised fuc-
ceflively, whereas in the Weft-Indian islands more than
two is never expeAed. The expedients by which the
planters endeavour to diminish this exceflive fertility of
foil are various. Bancroft, Nat. Hit. of Guiana, p. Io,
a-c.

NOTE XIV. p. 34.
MULLER seems to have believed, without fuffi-

cient evidence, that the Cape had been doubled,

tom. i. p. I , &c.; and the Imperial Academy of St.
Peterfburgh give some countenance to it, by the -pal-
ncr in which fichukoOtfkoi-nofs is laid down in their charts.
But I am aflured, from undoubted authority, that no
Ruffian vcefel has ever failed round that cape, and as the
country of rfchutki is not fubjclt to the Ruffian empire,
It is very imperfcEtly known.

NOTE XV. p.37.
W ERE this the place for entering into a long and

intricate geographical disquisition, many curious

brcfrvations might arise from comparing the accounts of
*e two Ruffian voyages, and the charts of their rcfpcc-

tivc

tive navigations. One remark is applicable to both. We
cannot rely with ablbluto certainty on the position which
they aflign to several of the places which they vifite,.
The weather was so extremely foggy, that they feldo,,
saw the fun or liars, and the position of the islands a;;d
supposed continents was commonly determined by rec-
koning, not by observation. Behring and Tfchirikow
proceeded much farther towards the east than Krcnitzial.
The land discovered by Behring, which he imagined to
be part of the American continent, is in the 236th de-
gree of longitude from the first meridian in the isle of
Ferro, and in 58° 28" of latitude. Tfchirikow can:e
upon the fame coast in longit. 24[", lat. 56°. Mul!er,
i. 248, 249. The former must have advanced 60 d-
grees from the port of Pctropawlowfka, from which he
took his departure, and the latter 65 dcgrees. But fro-
the chart of Krenitzin's voyage, it appears that he d.d
not fail farther towards the east than the 2o8th degree,
and only 32 degrees from Petropawlowfka. In 1741,
Behring and Tfchirikow, both in, going and returninli,
held a course which was mofily to the south of that chaia
of islands, which they discovered ; and obfcrvinn the
mourftainous and rugged afpct of the head-lands which
they descried towards the north, they supposcd thcnl to
be promontories belonging to some part of the Aiicrm-
can continent, which, as they fancied, flretch'd as .::
south as the latitude 56. In this maniir thc,' ;Ir '..;1
down in the chart ptublifhcd by Muller, and likeviii' 1
a manuscript chart drawn by a mate of Bichring's si:,
communicated to me by Mr. Profcflbr Robifiln. I.ut

:

1769, Krenitzin, after wintering in the iflinmdl Alxi\,
flood so far towards the north in his return, that h:'
course lay through the middle of what they had firipljp'!
to be a continent, which he found to ie an open Iea, ;::
that they had miftakcn rocky iflcs for the head-lands ,, I

6 cuntilH'

continent. It is probable, that the countries discovered
in 174.1, towards the east, do not belong to the Ameri-
can continent, but are only a continuation of the chain
of ifands. From the extreme summer cold of all those
ifes, one is led to conjecture, that no large continent
lies very near to them. The number of volcanos in
this region of the globe is remarkable. There are feve-
ral in Kamchatka, and not one of the islands, great or
small, as far as the Ruffian navigation extends, is with-
out them. Many are aAually burning, and the moun-
tains in all bear marks of having been once in a slate of
eruption. Were I disposed to admit such conjectures as
have found place in other inquiries concerning the
peopling of America, I mighr suppose that this part of
the earth, havin fuffcered violcnt convwllicns from earth-
quakes and volcalos, an ifil:::.us, which may have for-
merly united Asia to America, has been broken, and
formed into a custer of islands by the flock.

IT is singular, that at the very tinm the Ru.lian na-

vigators were attempting to make dilEccveries in the
north-west of America, the Spaniards were pro!ecuting
the fame design from another quarter. In 1769, two
small vessels failed from Lorctto in California to explore
the coasts of the country to the north of that peninsula.
They advanced no farther than the port of Monte-Rcy
in latitude 36. But, in several successive expeditions
fitted out from the port of St. Bias in New Galicin, the
Spaniards have advanced as far as the latitude 58. Gaze.t
de Madrid, March 19, and May j4, 1776. lut as the
journals of those voyages have not yet been published,
I cannot compare their progrcfs with that of the Ruf
sians, or shew how near the navigators of the two na-
tions have approached to each other. It is to be hoped,
that the enlightened minister, who lias now the direc-

tio x

tion of American affairs in Spain, will not withhold this
information from the public.

NOTE XVI. p. 54.
F E W travellers have had such opportunity o, ,,;

serving the natives of America, in its various Ililli:.,

as Don Antonio Ulloa, in a work lately publiflied hb
him, he thus describes the characteriftical features ol th.
race: " A very frnall forehead, covered with h.ir ,:-
wards its extremities, as far as the middle of the cxe-
brows; little eyes; a thin nose, small and bending to-
wards the upper lip; the countenance broad; the car;
large; the hair very black, lank, and coarse; the linib.
well turned, the feet small, the body of just proportio!;
and altogether smooth and free from hair, until old a',
when they acquire some beaird, but never on the checkh."
Noticias Americanas, &c. p. 307. MI. le Chevalier de
Pinto, who resided several years in a part of Aiwrii
which Ulloa never visited, gives a sketch of the gcilc:al
aspect of the Indians there: " They are all of copji,
colour, with ibme diversity of fllade, not in prolu..)rtlu
to their distance from the equator, but according to ri;!
degree of elevation of the territory which they iiihab:.
'Ihofe who live in a high country are fairer than th)oic
in the mariliy low lands on the coast. Their ficc ;,
round, farther removed, perhaps, than that of any pe-
pie from an oval shape. Their forchcad is finaill, ti
extremity of their ears far from the face, thciji i;,
thick, their nofc flat, their eyes black, or of a cl:fi,:
colour, finall, but capable of discerning objecs a;l r
great distance. Their hair is always thick aind llt(.,
and without any tendency to curl. Thcy ihaie no .li1;;
on any part of their body but the head. At thi li si :
pert, a foithern American appeals to be mild and ijj:l.

(ii~t

cent, but on a more attentive view, one discovers in his
countenance fomathing wild, diflruftful, and fullen." MS,
penes mr. The two portraits drawn by hands very dif-
fercnt from thofc of common travellers, have a near rc-
semblance.

NOTE XVII. p. 54.
AMAZING accounts arc given of the perfevcrilg'

peed of the Americans. Adair relates the adven-

tures of a Chikkafah warrior, who run through woods
and over mountains, three hundred computed miles
in a day and a half and two nights. Hliit. of Amer.
Ind. 396.

NOTE XVIIIp. . 59.
\, GODIN LE JEUNE, who resided fifteen years .molng

the Indians of Peru and Quito, and twenty years

in the French colony of Cayenne, in which thire is a
constant intercourse with the Galibis and other tribes oil
the Orinoco, observes, that the vigour of constitution
among the Americans is cxadLlv in proportion to their
habits of labour. The Indians, in warm climaes, such
as those on the coasts of the South Sea, on the river of
Amazons, and the river Orinoco, are not to be com-
pared for fircngth with those in cold countries; and yet,
f.lys he, boats daily set out from Para, a Portugucte
cttlement on the river Amazons, to ancend that river
againit the rapidity of the itrcam, and with thie fame
trew they proceed to San Pablo, which is eight hundred
leauucs diflant. No crew of white people, or even of
ncgroes, would be found equal to a task of such perse-
vering fatigue, as the Portuguese bave cxpericnced, and

Vol.. 1. £ c )ye

yet the Indians, being accultomed to this labour from
their infanc), p-rfornr it. MS. penes nme.

NOTE XIX. p. 66.
DON AN-rTONIO ULLOA, who visIted a great part ns

Peru and Chili, the kingdom of New Granada, and

fcveral of the provinces bordering on the Mexican guli
while employed in the fame service with the French ma-
thematicians during the lpace of ten )years, and wih
afterwards had an opportunity of viewing the North
Americans, aflerts, "1 that if we have fcen one Ameri-
can, we may be ft.id to have fecn them all, their colour
and make are lb nearly the fame." Notic. Americanus,
p. 308. A morc early obfervcr, Pedro de Cicca dc
Leon, one of the conquerors of Peru, who had likewitl
travcrfcd many provinces of America, affirms, that t.r
people, men and women,. although there is such a mul-
titude of tribes or nations as to be almoff innumerable,
and itch diversity of climates, appear neverthelcls like
the children of one father and mother. Chronica del'
Peru, parte i. c. 19. There is, no doubt, a ccrtain
combination of features, and peculiarity of afpeft, which
forms what may be called a European or Asiatic coun-
tenance. There muff likcwife be one that may be de-
nominated American, common to the whole race. This
mn)y be flppolcld to firike the traveller at firfl fight,
while the v- iri os shade, which cdiflinguifli people ot
diffTerent re ui , cC;lLape his obfeirvation. But when per-
lus \whlo hadl rclildel fIo long anmong the Americans con-
cur in l ::erill teflimoiny) t the iimilarity of their :ip-
piC:ii;iLc iln every cli;lite, Swe niln conclude that it i,
nore rc!n.irkablc th tl that of ;ny other race. See like-
vifeiS u:rcit ()rigell de los Indi;is, p. 54. 2.12. lorquc-
*,l.:.3. n. litz.hi.' llni.:l!:i, ii. 5 1.

N 0 T E'

NOTE XX. p. 67.
M/ LE CHEVALIER DE PINTO, observes, that in the

interior parts of Brasil, he had been informed that

some persons rcrfcnbling the white people of Darien have
becn found; but that the breed did not continue, and
their children became like other Americans. This race,
however, is very imperfeEtly known. MS. pre:es mr.

NOTE XXI. p. -2.
r HE tcftimonies of different travellers, concerning

the Patagonians, have been collected and flated with

a considerable degree of accuracy by the author of Re-
cherches Philofophiques, &c. tom. i. 281, &c. iii. i8r,
&c. Since the publication of his work, fevcral naviga-
tors have visited the Magellanic regions, and, like their
predcceffors, differ very widely in their accounts of its
inhabitants. By Commodore Byron and his crew, who
failed through the Straits in 1764, the common size of
the Patagonians was eflimated to be eight feet, and many
of them much taller. Phil. TranfacL. vol. Ivii. p. 78.
1y Captains Wallis and Cartcret, >who atually mea-
fured them in 1766, they were found to be from fix feet
to fix feet five and seven inches in height. Phil. Tran.l
vol. Ix. p. 22. ThelC seem to have been the very pco-
p!. whose size had been so much over-ratec in the year
1764; for several of them had beads and redl baize of the
s.ar:i kind with what hi.d been put aboard Captain WVal-
lis's fliip, and he naturally concluded that they had got
thler from Mr. Byron. Hawkefw. i. In 1767 they were
agiain ncafured by M. Bougainville, whose account agrees
nearly with that of Captain WVallis. Voy. 129. To these
I 111ill add a teftimoiny of great weight. In the year

E1 c 2 1762,

1762, Don Bernardo Ibagncz de Echav:rri accompanied
the Marquis de Valdelirios to Buenos Ayrcs, and retid"-!
there several years. He is a very intelligent author, arid
his reputation for veracity unimpeached among his coun..
trymen. In speaking of the country towards the southern
extremity of America, " By what Indians," fays he,
" is it poflTleed ? Not certainly by the fabulous Patago-
nians, who are supposed to occupy this diftri&. I have
from many eye-witnefles, who have lived among those
Indians, and traded much with them, a true and accurate
=efcription of their persons. They are of the fame ita-
*re with Spaniards. I never saw one who rose in height
two varas and two or three inches," i. e. about 8o or
81.332 inches Englith, if Echavarri makes his computa-
tion according to the vara of Madrid. This agrees
nearly with the mcafurement of Captain Wallis. Reyno
Jefuitico, 23g. Mr. Falkner, who resided as a miflion-
ary forty years in the southern parts of America, fays,
that " the Patagonian, or Puelches, are a large-bodied
people; but I never heard of that gigantic race which
others have mentioned, though I have seen persons of
all the different tribes of southem Indians." Introd.
p. 26.

NOTE XXII. p. 76.
A NT'iONI SANCiHF. RIBEIRO, a learned and ingenious

physician, published a diflertation in the year i765,

in which h' en)lrh;volrs to prove, that this difcafe was
j:or introduced from America, but took its rife in Eu-
r(l)c,
: ;id was brought on by an epidemical and malig.
:I;int ,lilbl.ler. I)id I cliufc to enter into a difllifitioni on
slii fild-,jc, whiich I fhoiild not have mentioned, it it
i.il not bcrn ijitiii;;telv cronictcdl with this part of my

inquirics,

rmy inquiries, it would not be difficult to point out some
mnifakes with refpea to the fads upon which he founds,
r, well as some errors in the consequences which he
draws from them. The rapid communication of this dif.
cafe from Spain over Europe, ferms however to rc-
lemble the progrels of an epidemic, rather than that
of a disease tranfinitted by infedion. The firlt mcn-
tion of it is in the year 1493, and before the y-:ar
1497 it had made its appearance in moll countries of
Europe, with such aliuminig fymptonls as rendered it
neceflary for the civil magiftratc to intcrpofe, in order to
check its career. Since the publication of this work, a
second edition of Dr. Sanchcz's Diflcrtation has beer
communicated to rme. It contains fevcral additional
fads in confirmation of his opinion, which is sip-
ported with such plausible arguments, as render it a sub-
jee of inquiry well deli-rving the attention of learned
phvficians.

NOTE XXIII. p. 81.
T H E people of Otaheitc have no dcnomination foi

any number above two hundred, which is fuffi-

cient for their traalfations. Voyages by Hawkcfworth,
ii. 228.

NOTE XXIV. p. 87.
AS the view which I have given of rude nations is ex-

tremely different from that exhibited by very rc-

fpectable authors, it may be proper to produce some of
the many authorities on which I found my dcefription.
Thc manners of the savage tribes in America have never
been viewed by persons more capablc of obfcrving thenL

E c 3 with

with discernment, than the philosophers employed by
France and Spain, in the year 1735, to determine tle
figure of the earth. M. Bouguer, 1D. Antonio d'Ulla,
and D. Jorge Juan, resided long among the n ot;vcs of
the least civilized provinces in Peru. M. de la Condj-
mine had not only the fame advantages with them for
obfcrvation, but, in his voyage down the Maraglon, he
had an opportunity of infpEccing the slate of the various
nations feated on its banks, in its vast course acrol-(
the continent of South America. There is a won-
derful resemblance in their representation of the cla-
racdter of the Americans. " They are all extremc'v
indolent," fays M. Bouguer, " they are stupid, they pass
whole days fitting in the fame place, without moving,
or speaking a single word. It is not easy to dclcribc the
degree of their indifference for wealth, and all its advan-
tages. One does not well know what motive to propose
to them, when one would persuade them to perform any
service. It is in vain to ofler them money; they anfwcr,
that they are not hungry." Voyage au Pcrou, p. IC2.
" If one confiders them as men, the narrowncl's of their
understanding feerns to be incompatible with the excel-
lence of the loul. Their imbecility is so vilible, that
one can hardly form an idea of them diflerent from vhat
o:c has of the brutes. Nothing disturbs the tranquilll:ty
of their fouls, equally inlenfible to difaftcrs and to pro-
fperity. Though h.;lf-naked, they are as cotnlted ais .1
monarch in his mo iP ilnd(lid array. Riches do not ;t-
tract them in the tinilleft degree, andithe authority (r
dir;nitiis to which they may aspire, are so litle the (.l)-
jirts of their ambition, that an Indian will receive with
the famne fiane indifference the office of a judge (Alc;ildc)

hr that of a hangman, if deprived of the fornmcr, and ;ip-

printed to the l:ittr. Nothing can move or changi e h, in.
lntcrcfl has no po\er over them, and they often rclulie

to

to perform a small service, though certain of a. great re-
compence. Fear makes no impreflion upon them, and
refpe& as little. T'heii disposition is 1o singular, that
there is no method of influencing them, no Imeans of
rouzing them from that indifference, which is proof
against all the endeavours of the wilc} peribns ; no ex-
pedient which can induce them to abandon that gross
ignorancc, or lay aside that carclefs ncgligcnce, which dif-
concert the lprudence and difappoinit the care of i'uch as
are attentive to their welthirc." Voy:,ge Jc Ulloa, tonn.
i. 335. 356. Of thefc singular qualitics he produces
many extraordinary iiftances, p. 336-347. " Iinfcnf-
bility," fiys M. de la Condamine, " is the bails of the
American characier. I leave others to deterrine, whe-
ther this flould be digniiitcd by the name of apathy, or
disgraced with that of tupidity. It ariles, without doubt,
from the fm-:ll number of their ideas, which do not ex-
tend beyond their wants. (luttoins even to voracitx,
when they ha e wherewithal to Ilitisfy their appetite.
Temperate, when neceflity obligrcs them, to such a de-
gree, that they can endure want without flcniing to dcfire
any thing. Pufilanimious anid cowvardly to excess, unlefl
when they are rendered deJierate by dlrunklennefs. Axerfe
to labour, indifl'r-ent to c\vry motive of glory, honour,
or gratitude ; occupied entirely by the object that is pre-
sent, and always dctermicnd by it alonle, without any
solicitude about futurity ; incapable of torcfight or of re-
flcetion; abandoning tJremfelves, when under no rc-
Itraint, to a puerile joy, which they cxpreflC by frifl<iing
about, and immoderate fits of laughter ; without object
or design, they pals their lite without thinking, and grow
old without adlvan;lcil) beyond childhood, of which cthe
retain all the dctUis. Its ihii dclirilptioll w(re applicable
only to the Indians in olllc plrriiu-es of Per', who are
nfavcs in eve\r' rcipei, t Lbut Ile l.inUl, one inight bclic's,

1: c 4 thiat

that this degree of degeneracy was occafioned-by the ser.
vile dependence to which they are reduced; the ex:np.p!.
of the modern Grecks being proof how far fervituds
nay'degrade the human species. But the Indiant ill the
missions of the Jesuits, and the savages who flill enioy
unimpaired liberty, being as limited in their faculties,
not to fay as ltupid as the other, one cannot obfcrve,
without humiliation, that man, when abandoned to si:-
ple nature, and deprived of the advantages rcfulting from
education and focicty, differs but little from the brute
creation," Voyage de la Riv. de Amaz. 52, 53. dM.
de Chanvalon, an intelligent and philosophical obierrer,
who visited Martinico in 1751, and resided there fix
years, gives the following description of the Carihs:
' It is not the red colour of their complexion, it is nct
the singularity of their features, which conflitutes the
chief difi'erence between them and us. It is their excef-
five fimplcity ; it is the limited degree of their faculics.
'Their reason is not more enlightened or more providcnt
than the inftini of brutes. 'Ihe reason of the moltt rn!s
peasants, that of the negrces brought up in the r!arts ,f
Africa most remote from intercourse with the LurnopLan,
is such that we discover appearances of intelligcnce,
which, though imnperfcct, is capable of increnfe. BPut of
this the understanding of Caraibs seems to be hardly Iuf.
ccptiblc. If found philosophy and rcligien did not ftofrd us
their light, if we were to decide according to the firfl im-
prcflionl which the view of that people makes upon the
mind, wc flhould be difporfed to believe that they do not hb-
lonr to the fame fpccies with us. Their stupid eves arc rthc
tilCe miiri oar of tiicir fouls it appears to be without fucl-
liois. 'I'heir indolence is extrcmnl they have never the
lealt lolicitudo about the moment which is to fuccocd that
vwhich is prefelt." Vovaec 1 1a .1 artilliqte, p. 44, 4g.
51', I, de la Borde, lTrtre, and R9cllofort, couiiimi

tri'

this description; " The charae9riflics of the Californians,"
fays P. Venegas, " as well as of all other Indians, are
fupidity and insensibility; want of knowledge and re-
fleAion; inconflancy, impetuosity, and blindness of ap-
petite; an exceflive sloth, and abhorrence of all labour
and fatigue; an excefllive love of pleasure and amusement
of every kind, however trifling or brutal; pusillanimity;
and, in fine, a most wretched want of every thing which
constitutes the real man, and renders him rational, irr-
ventive, tradable, and useful to himself and society. It
is not cafy for Europeans, who never were out of their
own country, to conceive an adequate idea of those peo-
ple: for, even in the leat frequented corners of the
globe, there is not a nation so fRupid, of such contraAed
ideas, and so weak both in body and mind, as the un-
happy Californians. Their underRfanding comprehends
little more than what they fee; abftra& ideas, and much
less a chain of reasoning, being far beyond their power;
so that they scarce ever improve their first ideas, and
there are in general false, or at least inadequate. It is in
vain to represent to them any future advantages which
will result to them from doing or abfiaining from this or
that particular immediately present; the relation of means
and ends being beyond the stretch of their faculties. Nor
have they the least notion of pursuing such intentions as
will procure themselves Come future good, or guard them
againfi future evils. Their will is proportional to their
faculties, and all their paflions move in a very narrow
fphcre. Ambition they have none, and are more defi-
rnus of being accounted firong than valiant. The uelo
j'qs of ambition with us, honour, fame, reputation,
tiiles, rotls, and diftinaions of superiority, arc unknown
aIioung them i so that this powerful spring of action, the
c*iuf of To much ccmilng good ;iand real evil in the worlil,
1- no power here. 'fhis dilifotion of mind, ;s it givcs

them

them up to an amazing languor and laflitude, their liv.
fleeting away in a perpetual inacivity and deteflatio1 ,f
labour, so it likewise induces them to be attraaed by ti:e
fit'ft objet which their own fancy, or the persuasion 01
another, place before them; and at the fame time rc:;.
ders them as prone to alter their resolutions with the ian.e
facility. They look with indifference upon any kindi;cl;
done them ; nor is even the bare remembrance of it to be
expeted from them. In a word, the unhappy nrc, r,:
may be compared to children, in whom the dcvcloi,; -
of rcafon is not completed. They may indeed be ci'
a nation who never arrive at manhood." Hilt. of ' .
sorn. Eng. Tranf. i. 64. 67. Mr. Ellis gives a :..
lar account of the want of foresight and inconfdcr.:
disposition of the people adjacent to Iludlbn's 1B..
Voyage, p. 194, 195.

THE incapacity of the Americans is so remarka:

that negroes from all the different provinces of As:
are observed to be more capable of improving bv illrruc
tion. They acquire the knowledge of several particul.r
which the Americans cannot comprchend. Hence ::
negroes, though slaves, value themselves as a fupcr;o
order of beings, and look down upon the Amcrican
with contempt, as void of capacity and of rational diilcc.
ment. Ulloa Notic. Americ. 322, 323.

NOTE XXV. p. 94.

TIA V !E observed, p. 63, 64, that, for the iane .i
they never attempt to rcar chiihlrc who ;irt i..

dliortcd, or dcefe.ive in thei r malkc. So dcel] h v
both those idea: iniprinted in tlhe minds of the Ai:rn.o,
ti:at the ]'cru\i::nls, a ci i!ivedl pft'(lc, Vwhen c"llj' '

\.

with the barbarous tribes, whose manners I am defcrib-
ing, retained them; and even their intercourse with the
Spaniards has not been able to root them out. When
twins are born in any family, it is frill confidered as an
ominous event, and the parents have recourse to rigorous
,ils of mortification, in order to avert the calamities
with which they are threatened. When a child is born
with any deformity, they will not, if they can poflibly
avoid it, bring it to be baptized, and it is with difficulty
they 'an be brought to rear it. Arriaga Extirpac. de Ia
Idolat. del Peru, p. 32, 33.

NOTE XXVI. p. 98.
T HE number of the filh in the rivers of South Ame-

rica is so extraordinary, as to merit particular no-

tice. " In the Maragnon (fays P. Acugna) fish are so
plentiful, that, without any art, they may take them
with the hands." p. 138. " In the Orinoco (fays P.
Gumilla), besides an infinite variety of other fish, tor-
toifes or turtle abound in such numbers, that I cannot find
words to express it. I doubt not but that such as read
my account will accuse me of exaggeration: hut I can
affirm, that it is as difficult to count them, as to count
the sands on the banks of that river. One may judge of
their number by the amazing consumption of them; for
all the nations contiguous to the river, and even mall)
who are at a dilarnce, flock thither at the fcalon of breed-
inlm, and not only find fuftcnance during that time, but
c.irry off saft quantities both of the turtles and of their
r; s, &c." Hist. de l'(rcnloqliit, ii. c. 22. p. 59. M.
ic la Condamine confirms thtir accounts, p. 159.

NOTE

NOTE XXVII. p. 98.
p I S dcfcribes two of these plants, the Cururuapa, and

the Guajana-Tinme. It is remarkable, that thoug'

they have this fatal effec& upon fishes, they are so far
from being noxious to the human species, that they
are used in medicine with success. Pifo, lib. iv. c. 88.
Bancroft mentions another, the Hiarree, a Imall quanti y
of which is sufficient to inebriate all the fish to a confi-
derable distance, so that in' a few minutes they float mo.
tionlefs on the surface of the water, and are taken wi:h
cafe. Nat. Hilt. of Guiana, p. 0o6.

NOTE XXVIII. p. 102.
. EMARKKABLE instances occur of the calamities which

rude nations susser by famine. Alvar Nugnez Ca-

beca de Vaca, one of the moil gallant and virtuou, ct
the Spanish adventurers, resided almost nine years among
the savages of Florida. They were unacquainted wi;h
every species of agriculture. Their fubfiitence was poor
and precarious. " They live chiefly (fays he) upor
xoots of different plants, which they procure with grcea
difficulty, wandering from place to place in feirchl 0o
them. Sometimes they kill game, sometimes they catc
ffh, blut in such fiall quanttiics, that their hunger is ft
extreme as compels them to car (pidcrs, the eggs of alnt
worms, lizards, ferpcnts, a kind of untluous earth, ar
I am persuaded, that if in this country there were an,
itones, they would swallow thefc. They prefcrvc tl
bonies of fishes and serpents, which they grind into pow
der, and cat. The only season when they do not fitl:
much from famine, is when a certain fruit, which I
calls Tunas, is ripw. This is the fame with thl Of()untt

.. b~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

or prickly pear, of a reddiflh and yellow colour, with a
1sweet insipid taste. They are sometimes obliged to tra-
vel far from their usual place of residence, in order to find
thnm." Naufragias. c. xviii. p. 2c, 21, 22. In another
place, he observes that they are frequently reduced to pals
two or three days without food, c. xxiv. p. 27.

NOTE XXIX. p. 103.
XTM FERMIN has given an accurate dcfcription of the

two species of manioc, with an account of its cul-

rure, to which he has added some experiments, in order
to ascertain rome poifonous'qurlities of the juice extracted
from that species which he calls the bitier calfava.
Among the Spaniards it is known by the name of Yuca
brava. Dcfcr. de Surin. tom. i. p. 66.

NOTE XXX. p. 104.
THE plantain is found in Asia and Africa, as well as

in America. Oviedo contends, that it is not an in -

digenous plant of the New World, but was introduced
into the island of Hispaniola, in the year 1516, by father
Thomas de Berlanga, and that he transplantcd it from
the Canary Islands, whither the original flips had been
brought from the East Indies. Oviedo, lib.' viii. c. i.
But the opinion of Acolta and oxher naturaliits, who
reckon it an American plant, feiens to be better founded.
Acofta Hilt. Nat. lib. iv. al. It was cultivated byrude
tribes in America, who had little intcrcoulc with the
Spaniards, and who were dcltitute of that ingenuity
which difipofis men to borrow what is uleful from so-
reign nations. Gumil. Iii. I86. W'afer's Voyage,
P. 87

NOTE

NOTE XXXI. p. 105.

T is remarkable, that Acofla, one of the mofR acc:;
rate and beft-informed writers concerninr the W'!

Indies, affirms, that maize, though cultivated in ti,
continent, was not known in the islands, the inhabit.nl
of which had none but catlada bread. Hilt. Nat. lib. iv
c. 16. But P. Martyr, in the firit book of his i.,i
Decad, which was written in the year 1493, upon `t.
return of Columbus from his firit voyage, expressly men.
tions maize as a plant which the islanders cultivattce
and of which they made bread, p. 7. Gomara likcv.f,
afierts, that they were acquainted with the culture
maize. Hiftor. Gener. cap. 28. Ovicdo defcri')c
maize without any intimation of its being a plant thaj
was not natural toHifpaniola. Lib. vii. c. I.

NOTE XXXII. p. 113.
N E W HOLLAND, a country which formerly w;

only known, has lately been visited by intclligc:

observers. It lies in a region of the globe where it mui
enjoy a very favourable climate, as it stretches from the
ioth to the 38th degree of northern latitude. It is n
great extent, and from its square form mufl be nimu
more than equal to all Europe. The people who inhlab
the various parts of it appear to be of one race. 'lhe'
are evidently ruder than most of the Americans, and hau
made still lets progress in improvement and the art, c
life. There is not the least arpe:rance of cultivatilni 11
any part of this val' region. The inhabitants arc ex
tremcly few, so that the country appea:rs almofl dLlilb,!'
Their tribes arc flill mole incoliliderable than th(lcle
Americr.. They deplend lor fublulicnlC, alhof cntlirlyl

(01

on fiuing. They do not fettle in one place, but roam
about in queff of food. Both sexes go ftark-naked.
Their habitations, utensils, &c. are more simple and
rude than thofi of tihe Americans. Vo)ages, by Hawkef-
worth, iii. 622, &c. This, perhaps, is the country
where man has been discovered in the earliest flage of his
progress, and it exhibits a mifcrable specimen of his con-
dition and powers in that uncultivated state. If this
country shall be more full) explored by future navigators,
the comparison of the manners of its inhabitants with
those of the Americans will prove an inftru.ive article in
:he hiflory of the human species.

NOTE XXXIII. p. 13.
p GABRIEL lIAREST, who travelled from h;s flation

among the Illinois to Machillimakinac, thus dclfribcs

the face of the country: " Vec have marcheld twchelie
d.ays without meeting a single human creature. Some-
times we find ourfclvcs in vaif mcado\ws, of w.hich we could
not fee the boundaries, through -which there flowed many)
brooks and rivers, but without any path to conduct us-
Sometimes we were obliged to open a paflagc acrols thick
forests, through bushes, and underwood filldl with tlick
briars and thorns. Sometimes we had to palss through
deep marflcs, in which we funk up to the middle. After
being fatigued through the day, we had the earth for our
bed, or a few leaves, cxpofud to the wind, the rain, and
;ll the injuries of the air. Iettr. Edifinintes, ii. 36o.
I)r. tirickell, in an cxcurfioni from North Carolina to-
wards the mountaints, A. D. s73o, travelled fifteen days
without meeting -.ith a human cre;atu:e. Nat. llilt. of
North Carolina, 389. ])iego de Ordas, in attempting
to make a fettlcmnlnt in South America, A. . 1). 532,

marched

marched fifty days through,a country without one inha.
bitant. Herrera, dec. 5. lib. i. c. ix.

NOTE XXXIV. p. 114.
l STRONGLY fufpeR that a community of goods, and

an undivided ftorc, are known only among the rudelf

tribes of hunters; and that as soon as any species of agri-
culture or regular industry is known, the idea of an ex-
clufive right of property to the fruits of them is introduced.
I am confirmed in this opinion by accounts which I haie
received concerning the slate of property among the In-
dians in very different regions of America. " The ij"a
of the natives of Brasil concerning property is, thatd i
any person cultivate a field, he alone ought to enroy thn
produce of it, and no other has a title to pretend to it.
If an individual or family go a hunting or fishing, what
is caught belongs to the individual or to the family, and
they communicate no part of it to any but their cazique,
or to such of their kindred as happen to be indisposed. If
any person in the village come to their hut, he may fit
down freely, and eat without asking liberty. But this is
the consequence of their general principle of hospitality;
for I never observed any partition of the incrcafe of their
.fields, or the produce of the chace, which I could cbr-
fider as the result of any idea concerning a communitr
of goods. On the contrary, they are so much attached
to what they deem to be their property, that it would be
extremely dangerous to encroach upon it. As far as I
have seen, or can learn, there is not one tribe of Indians
in South America, among whom that community ' f
goods which has been so highly extolled is known. The
eircumftance in the government of the Jesuits, most irk-
lunic to the Indians of Paragutiy, was the co:inim,:t! (i

uo.!s

goods which those fathers introduced. This was repug-
nant to the original ideas of the Indians. They were ac-
quainted with the rights of private exclusive property, and
they submitted with impatience to regulations which dc-
stroyed them." M. le Cheval. de Pinto, MS. penes me.
" Atual pofleflion (fays a miflionary who resided several
years among the Indians of the Five Nations) gives a
right to the foil; but whenever a pofleflbr fees fit to quit
it, another has as good right to take it as he who left it.
This law, or cufton, rcfpcts not only the particular
spot on which he erecs his house, but also his planting-
ground. If a man has prepared a particular spot of
ground, on which he designs in future to build or plant,
no man has a right to incommode him, much less to the
fruit of his labours, until it appears that he voluntarily
gives up his views. But I never heard of any formal
conveyance from one Indian to another in their natural
lfate. The limits of every canton is circumscribed ; that
is, they are allowed to hunt as far as such a river on this
hand, and such a mountain on the other. This area is
occupied and improved by individuals and their families.
Individuals, not the community, have the use and pro-
fit of their own labours, or success in hunting." MS1
of Mr. Gideon Hawley, penes me.

NOTE XXXV. p. ix6.
T HIS difference of temper between the Americar;n

and negroes is so remarkable, that it is a proverbial

faying in the French islands, " Regarder un fauvage de
travers, c'eft le battrc; le battre, c'cll I tuer; battrc un
negre, c'eft le nourrir." Tertrc, ii. 490.

VOL. II. F f N OT

ROTE XXXVI. p. 117.
T HHE defctiption of the political iRate of the people o;

Cinaloa perfetly relembles that of the inhabitants of

North America. " They have neither laws nor kings
(fays a miflionary who resided long among them) to pu-
nifh any crime. Nor is there among them any species
of authority, or political government, to restrain them
in any part of their condut. It is true, that they ac-
knowledge certain Caziqucs, who are heads of their fa-
milies or villages, but their authority appears chiefly in
war, and the expeditions againit their enemies. Th':
authority the Caziques obtain not by hereditary right,
but by their valour in war, or by the power and number
of their families and relations. Sometimes they owe their
pre-eminence to their eloquence in displaying their own
exploits." Ribas Hifior. de las Triumph. &c. p. I,
the state of the Chiquitos in South America is nearly
the fame. ' Theyhave no regular form of government,
or tivil liste but in matters of public concern they liften
to the advice of their old men, and usually follow it.
The dignity of Cazique is not hereditary, but conferred
according to tnerit, as the reward of valour in war. The
union among them is imperfect. Their society refemblcs a
republic without any head, in which every man is mailtc
of himself; and, upon the least disgust, separates from
those with whom he seemed to be conneced." Rclacion
Hiforical de las Milliones de los Chiquitos, por P. Juan
Patr. Fernandez, p. 32, 33. Thus, under very differ-
ent climates, when nations are in a similar late of Io-
ciety, their inflitutions and civil government aflume tle
fame form.

N OTF

NOTE XXXVII. p. 132.
"I HAVE known the Indians (fays a person well ac.

quainted with their mode of life) to go a thousand

miles for the purpose of revenge, in pathless woods, over
hills and mountains, through huge cane swamps, exposed
to the extremities of heat and cold, the viciflitude of sea-
sons, to hunger and thirst. Such is their over-boiling
revengeful temper, that they utterly contemn all those
things as imaginary trifles, if they are so happy as to get
the scalp of the murderer, or enemy, to satisfy the crav-
ing ghosts of their deceased relations." Adair's Hist. of
Amer. Indians, p. I50.

NOTE XXXVIII. p. 132.

N the account of the great war between the Algon-
quins and Iroquois, the atchievements of Pifkaret, a

famous chief of the Algonquins, performed mostly by
himself alone, or with one or two companions, make a
capital figure. De la Potherie, i. 297, &c. Colden's
Hitl. of Five Nations, 125, &c.

NOTE XXXIX. p. 135.
T H E life of an unfortunate leader is often in danger,

and he is always degraded from the rank which h%
had acquired by his former exploits. Adair, p. 388.

NOTE XL. p. 135.
AS the ideas of the North Americans with refpea to

the mode of carrying on war, are generally known;
I have founded my observations chiefly upon the tcftimony

F f a of

of the authors who described them. But the fame ma-
xims took place among other nations in the New World.
A judicious miflionary has given a view of the military
operations of the people in Gran Chaco, in South
America, perfe&ly similar to those of the Iroquois.
" They are much addicted to war (fays he), which
they carry on frequently among themfclves, butperpe-
tually against the Spaniards. But they may rather be
called thieves than soldiers, for they never make head
against the Spaniards, unless when they can assault them
by ftcalth, or have guarded against any mischance by spies,
who may be called indefatigable; they will watch the
settlements of the Spaniards for one, two, or three year.,
obfcrving by night every thing that passes with the utmft
solicitude, whether they may expe& refitance or not,
and until they are perfectly secure of the event, they will
not venture upon an attack; so that when they do give
the aflault, they are certain of success, and free from .1l
danger. These spies, in order that they may not be ob-
served, will creep on all-four, like cats, in the night; but
if they are discovered, make their escape with much dex-
terity. But, although they never chufe to face the Spa.
niards, if they be surrounded in any place, whence thec'
cannot escape, they will fight with desperate valour, anl
fell their lives very dear." Lozano Defcrip. dcl C;r.:;
Chaco, p. 78.

NOTE XLI. p. 137.

E R V, who was an eye-witness of the proceeding;

of the Toupinambos, a Brafilian tribe, in a war againif

a powerful nation of their enemies, describes their courage
and ferocity in very striking terms. Ego cum Gallo
altero, paulo curiofius, magno nofiro periculo (fienim

25

ab hoftibus capti aut lafi fuiffemus, devorationi fuiflemus
devoti), barbaros noflros in militiam euntes comitari
volui. Hi, numero 4000 capita, cum hoftibus ad littus
decertarunt, tanta ferocitate, ut vel rabidos & furiosos
quofque fuperarent. Cum primum hostes confpexere, in
magnos atque editos ululatus perruperunt. Hxec gens
adeo sera eft & truculenta, ut tantifper dum virium vcl
tantillum reflat, continue dimicent, fugamque nunquam
capeflant. Quod a natura illis inditum fce reor. Tcftor
intcrca me, qui non femcl, turn peditum tur equitum
copias ingentes, in aciem inftrutas hlc confpexi, tanti
nunquam voluptate videndis peditum legionibus armis
fulgentibus, quanta turn pugnantibus iftis pcrcuflum
fuifle. Lcry Hiss. Navigat. in Brasil. ap. dc Bry, iii.
207, 203, 2p9.

NOTE XLII. p. 138.
THE Americans, like other fierce nations, originally

cut off the heads of the enemies whom they flew in

war, and carried them away as trophies. But, as they
found these cumbersome in their retreat, which they al-
ways make very rapidly, and often through a vail extent
of country, they became satisfied with tearing ofF their
scalps. This cuflom, though mofl prevalent in North
America, was not unknown arpong the fouthcrn tribes.
Iozaino, p. 79.

NOTE XLIII. p. 143.
T H E terms of the war-fong sccem to be diaatcd by

the fame fierce spirit of revenge. " I go to war to

revenge the death of my brothers; I (hall kill; I shall
exterminate ; I l(all burn my enemies ; I shall bring
. way slaves; I nlall devour their heart, dry their flcfb,

F f 3 drink

drink their blood; I shall tear off their scalps, and make
cups of their skulls.'* Boffu's Travels through Louisiana,
vol. i. p. 102. I am informed, by persons on whose
testimony I can rely, that as the number of people in
the Indian tribes has decreased so much, almof none of
their prisoners are now put to death. It is confidered as
better policy to spare and to adopt them. Those dread.
ful scenes which I have described occur now so rarelv,
that mifflonaries and traders who have resided long
among the Indians, never were witnesses to them.

NOTE XLIV. p. 143.
A LL the travellers who have visited the most uncivi.

lized of the American tribes, agree in this. It is

confirmed by two remarkable circumstances, which oc.
curred in the conquest of different provinces. In the ex.
pedition of Narvaez into Florida, in the year 1528, the
Spaniards were reduced to such extreme distress by fa.
mine, that, in order to preserve their own lives, they
eat such of their companions as happened to die. T'his
appeared so shocking to the natives, who were accuf-
tomed to devour none but prisoners, that it filled then
with horror and indignation against the Spaniards. Tor-
quemada Monarch. Ind. ii. p. 584. Naufragios de Alv.
Nugnez Caheca de Vaca, c. xiv. p. 15. During the
siege of Mexico, though the Mexicans devoured witll
greediness the Spaniards and Tlafcalans whom they
took prironers, the utmolt rigour of the famine which
they suffered could not induce them to touch the dc;id
bodies of their own countrymen. Bern. Diaz. del Ca-
tillo Conquift. de la N. Efpagna, p. 156.

NOTL

NOTE XLV. p. 1i5.
M A ANY singular circumflances concerning the treat.

mcnt of prifoncrs among the people of Brasil, are

contained in the narrative of Stadius, a German officer
in the service of the Portuguese, published in the year
1556. He was taken prisoner by the 7oupinambos, and
remained in captivity nine years. He was often present
at those horrid festivals which he describes, and was
destined himself to the fame cruel fate with other pri-
foners. But he saved his life by extraordinary efforts of
courage and address. De Bry, iii. p. 34, &c. M. de
Lery, who accompanied M. De Villegagnon in his ex-
pedition to Brasil, in the year 1556, and who resided
some time in that country, agrees with Stadius in every
circumflance of importance. He was frequently an eye-
witness of the manner in which the Brafilians treated
their prisoners. De Bry, iii. 210. Several striking par-
ticulars, omitted by them, are mentioned by a Portu-
guefe author, Purch. Pilgr, iv. 1294, &c,

NOTE XLVI. p. 14S,
T HOUGH I have followed that opinion concern-

ing the apathy of the Americans, which appeared to

ne most rational, and supportcd by the authority of the
most respectable authors, other theories have been formed
with regard to it, by writers of great emincice. I). Ant.
Ulloa, in a late work, contends, that the texture of the
skin and bodily habit of the Americans is such, that
they are les sensible of pain than the reft of mankind.
He produces several proofs of this, from the manner in
which they endure the mod cruel clirurgical operations,
&c. Noticias Americanas, p. 313, 314. I'lic lame
observation has been made by surgeons in Brasil. An

I f 4 Indian,

Indian, they fay, never complains under pain, and will
bear the amputation of a leg or arm without utterin:
a tingle groan. 'MS. penes me.

NOTE XLVII. p. xSi.
T H I S is an idea natural to all rude nations. Among

the Romans, in the early periods of their common-

wealth, it was a maxim that a prisoner, " turn decccfifli
videtur cum captus eft." Digest. lib. xlix. tit. 15. c. 18.
and afterwards, when the progress of refinement ren-
dered them more indulgent with rcfpect to this article,
they were obliged to employ two fictions of law to secure
the property, and permit the return of a captive; the one
by the Lex Cornelia, and the other by the Jus Pofli.
minii, Heinec. Eleln. Jur. Civ. sec. ord. Pand. ii. p. 294.
Among the negroes the fame ideas prevail. No ransom
was ever accepted for a prisoner. As soon as one is
taken in war, he is reputed to be dead ; and he is so in
effed to his country and his family. Voy. de Cheval. de;
Marchais, i. p. 369.

NOTE XLVIII. p. 152.
T HE people of Chili, the most gallant and high-fpi-

rited of all the Americans, arc the only exception ti

this observation. They attack their enemies in the open
field; their troops are ranged in regul:r order ; their
battalions advance to the charge not only with courage,
but with dil:ipline. 'I'he North Americans, though
many of them have fufittittcdc the European fire-armn in
placb of their own bows and arrows, fIill adhere to their
ancicnt maxims of war, ait(l carry it on according to
their own peculiar fyflcni. But the Chilcfe nearly re-

'~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~,11

fimble the warlike nations of Europe and Asia in their
military operations. Ovalle's Relation of Chili. Church's
Coll. iii. p. 7I. Lozano's Hist. Parag. i. 144, 145.

NOTE XLIX. p. z55.
H ERRERA gives a remarkable proof of this. In

Yucatan, the men are so felicitous about their dress,

that they carry about with them mirrors, probably made
of ifone, like thole of the Mexicans, Dec. iv. lib. iii.
c. 8. in which they delight to view themselves; but the
women never use there. Dec. iv. lib. x... 3. He takes
notice, that among the fierce tribe of the Panches, in the
new kingdom of Granada, none but distinguished war-
riors were permitted either to pierce their lips, and to
wear green stones in them; or to adorn their heads with
plumes of feathers. Dec. vii. lib. ix. c. 4. In rome pro-
vinces of Peru, though that empire had made confiderab!e
progress in civilization, the state of women was little im-
proved. All the toil of cultivation and domeflic work
was devolved upon them; and they were not permitted to
wear bracelets, or other ornaments, with which the men
were fond of decking themfilves. Zarate Hiss. de Pcru, i.
p. 15, 16.

NOTE L. p. x56.

H AV E ventured to call this mode of anointing and
painting their bodies, the drcfs of the Americans.

This is agreeable to their own idiom. As they never
fiir abroad if they are not completely anointed, they cx-
ciufe themselves, when in this situation, by faying, that
they cannot appear becaufc they arc naked. Gumilla
lift. de l'Orenoque, i. 191.

NOTE

NOTE LI. p. 157.
S 0 ME tribes in the province of Cinaloa, on the gulf

of California, seem to be among the rudest people

of America united in the social state. They neither cul-
tivate nor sow; they have no houses in which they re-
fide. Those in the inland country subsist by hunting;
those on the sea-coast, chiefly by fishing. Both depend
upon the spontaneous produEtions of the earth; fruits,
plants, and roots of various kinds. In the rainy season,
as they have no habitations to afford them flheter, they
'"athcr bundles of reeds, or firong grass, and binding
them together at one end, they open them at the other,
and fitting them to their heads, they are covered as with
a large cap, which like a pent-house throws off the rain,
and will keep them dry for several hours. During the
warm season, they form a ihed with the branches of
trees, which protects them from the fuitry rays of the
fun. When exposed to cold, they make large fires,
round which they sleep in the open air. Hiftoria de los
Triumfos de nucftra Santa F: entre Gentes las mas bar-
baras, &c. por P. And. Perez de Ribas, p. 7, &c.

N OTE III. p. 158.

HT-HESE houses resemble barns. " We have ie;it.
fured some which were a hundred and fifty pacs

long, and twenty paces broad. Above a hundred per-
sons refidc in some of them." Wilson's Account of
(uiana. Purch. Pilgr. vol. iv. p. 1263. Ibid. i291.
"' The Indian houses," fays NM. Barrere, " have a molt
wretched appearance, and arc a flriking image of the
rudcnefs of early times. Their huts are commonly built

I 011

on some rising ground, or on the banks of a river, hud-
dled sometimes together, sometimes firaggling, and al-
ways without any order. Their aspet is melancholy
and difagreesble. One fees nothing but what is hideous
and savage. The uncultivated fields have no gaiety. The
silence which reigns there, unless when interrupted by
the disagreeable notes of birds, or cries of wild beafis, is
extremely dismal." Rclat. de la France Equin. p. 146.

NOTE LIII. p. x60.
sOME tribes in South America can fend their ar-

rows to a great distance, and with confidesable force,

without the aid of the bow. They make use of a hol-
low reed, about nine feet long, and an inch thick, which
is called a Sarbacane. In it they lodge a frnall arrow,
with some unfpun cotton wound about its great end;
this confines the air, so that they can blow it with afto-
nifhing rapidity, and a sure aim, to the distance of above
a hundred paces. These fiall arrows are always poi-
soned. Fermin. Defer. de Surin. i. 55. Bancroft's
Hist. of Guiana, p. 281, &c. The Sarbacane is much
msed by the East Indians.

NOTE LIV. p. 161.

I 1IG HTF produce many inflances of this, but fliall
satisfy myself with one, taken from the Efkimatux.

" Their greatest ingenuity (fays Mr. Ellis) is fihwii in
the flil(tthre of their bows, made commonly

r il(, tlhrct

pieces of wood, each making part of the (litmc arch, very
nicely and cx.tIly joined together. Tliry :re commonily
of fir or larch; and as this wants flrciitli anJd c'!.ilti-
cit), they fukply beth by bracing the biwk of thle bio\

Wll1l

with a kind of thread, or line, made of the sinews of
their deer, and the bow-firing of the fame materials. To
make them draw more tifly, they dip them into water,
which causes both the back of the bow and the firing
to contra&, and consequently gives it the greater force;
and as they praltife from their youth, they (hoot with
very great dexterity." Voyage to Hudson's Bay, p. 138.

NOTE LV. p. x61.
N E C E S S T Y is the great prompter and guide of

rpankind in their inventions. There is, however,

fiuch inequality in rome parts of their progress, and some
nations get so far the fiart of others in circumftanccs
nearly similar, that we muff ascribe this to rome events
in their fiory, or to some peculiarity in their fituatioll,
with which we are unacquainted. The people in the
if.and of Otaheite, lately discovered in the South Sea, far
excel most of the Americans in the knowledge and prac-
tice of the arts of ingenuity, and yet they have not in-
vented any method of boiling water; and, having no vef-
fel that would bear the fire, they had no more idea that
water could be made hot, than that it could be made so-
lid. Voyages by Hawkefworth, i. 466. 484.

NOTE LVI. p. z62.
ON E of thelf boats, which could carry nine mren,

weighed only sixty pounds. Gofiol Relat. des Voy.
a la Virgin. Rec. dc Voy. au Nord. torn v. p. 403.

NO1TE LVII. p. 164.
A REMARKAIILE proof of this is produced by Llloa.

In weaving halmmocks, coverlets, and the otihe
coarse clutlis, which they are accuftoined to niainifacbiir'.

tl; i

their indnflry has discovered no more expeditious method,
than to take up thread after thread, and after counting
and forting them each time, to pass the woof between
them; so that in finishing a small piece of these fluffs,
they frequently spend more than two years. Voyage, i.
336. Bancroft gives the fame description of the Indians
of Guiana, p. 255. According to Adair, the ingenuity
and dispatch of the North American Indians are not
greater, p. 422. From one of the engravings of the
Mexican paintings in Purchas, vol. iii. p. I ic6, I think
it probable that the people-of Mexico were unacquainted
with any better or more expeditious mode of weaving. A
loom was an invention beyond the ingenuity of the moit
improved Americans. In all their works they advance
so slowly, that one of their artifis is two months at a to-
bacco-pipe with his knife, before he finifles it. Adair,
p. 423.

NOTE LVIII. p. I66.
THE article of religion in P. Lafitau's Lcxlurs de:.

Sauvages, extends to 347 tedious pages in quarto.

NOTE LIX. p. 169.
l HAVE referred the reader to fevcral of the authors

who describe the most uncivilized nations in Amn-

rica. Their teflimony is uniform. That of P. Rib.is
concerning the people of Cinaloa, coincides with the rdll.
" I was extremely attentive (fays he), during the years
I resided among them, to ascertain whether they were to
be confidered as idolaters; and it may be affirmed with
the molt perfet cexatnciefs, that though among sone of
them there may be traces of idolatry, yet others have not
the lcafR knowledge of God, or even of any faltl deity,

nor

nor pay any formal adoration to the Supreme Being, who
excrcifes dominion over the world; nor have they any
conception of the providence of a creator or governor,
from whom they exped in the next life the reward of
their good, or the punishment of their evil deeds. Nei.
ther do they publicly join in any ad of divine worship,"
Ribas Triumphos, &c. p. I6.

NOTE LX. p. 170.
TlpHE people of Brasil were so much affrighted by

thunder, which is frequent and dreadful in their

country, as well as in other parts of the torrid zone,
that it was not only the obje& of religious reverence,
but the most expreflive name in their language for the
Deity, was Toupan, the fame by which they diftinguilhed
thunder. Pifo de Medec. Brasil, p. 8. Nieuhoff. Church,
Coll. ii. p. T 32.

NOTE LXI. p. 178.
BY the account which M. Dumont, an eye-wit.

ness, gives of the funeral of the great chief of the

Natchez, it appears, that the feelings of the persons
who suffered on that occasion were very different. Some
solicited the honour with eagerness, others laboured to
avoid their doom; and several saved their lives by flying
to the woods. As the Indian Bramins give an intoxi.
cating draught to the women, who are to be burnt toge.
ther with the bodies of their husbands, which renders
them insensible of their approaching fate, the Natchae
obliged their vi.tims to swallow several large pills of to-
bacco, which produce a similar effec. Mem. de Louis,
i. 227.

NOTE

NOTE LXII p. 186.
ON Troe occafionsh particularly in dances inflitutrd

for the recovery of persons who are indifpoced, they

are extremely licentious and indecent. DLe la Pothcrie
His.. &c. ii. p. 4-2 Charlev. N. Fr. ii. p. 319. But
the nature of their dances is commonly uich as I h vc
described.

NOTE LXIII. p. 88,
Tk-E Othnomaco, a tribe feated on the banks of the

Orinoco, employ for the fame purpose a composition

trhich they call Yupa. It is formed of the feeds of an un-
known plarit reduced to powder, and certain fhclls burnt
and pulverized. The efticas of this, when drawn up in -
to the nofirils, are so violent, that they resemble madasis
rather than intrxication. Gurnilla, i. 286.

NOTE LXIV. p. 191.
THOUGH this observation holds true aniong the

greater part of the southern tribess there are some in

which the intemperance of the women is as cxccfli:c
as that of the men, Bancroft's Nat. Hill. of Guiana,
P 275.

NOTE LXV. p. 196.
EVEN In the mofl intelligent writers conccrning the

manners of the Americans, one meets with incontif-

ent and inexplicable circumnifices. P. Charlevoix, who,
1n onfoquence of the controverly betwcenl hi, orerr, ;intl

Y~~~~~~~~hJ

that of the Franciscans, with refpedt to the talents and
abilities of the North Americans, is disposed to reprefen:
both their intelletual and moral qualities in the moit fa.
vourable light, aflerts, that they are engaged in continuc!
negociations with theit neighbours, and conduct thcf,
with the noft refined address. At the fame time, he :dd.
c that it becomes their envoys or plenipotentiaries t,
exert their abilities and eloquence ; for% if the terms which
they offer are not accepted of, they had need to ltatid o::
their guard. It frequently happens, that a blow with ,
hatchet is the only return given to their propositions. ile
is not out of danger even if he is so fortunate as to acou.
the stroke; he may exped to be pursued, and if taken, to
be burnt." Hist. N. Fr. iii. 251. What occuls u.i;.
p. 260. concerning the manner in which the Tlafcalans
treated the ambaffors from Zempoalla, corresponds with
the fat related by Charlevoix. Men capable of such atd;
of violence, seemed to be unacquainted with the firfl
principles upon which the intercourse between nations 1;
founded ; and inltead of the perpetual negociations which
Charlevoix mentions, it seems almost impossible that thcrc
should be any correspondence whatever among them.

NOTE LXVI. p. 199.
IT is a remark of Tacitus concerning the Gcrman3

" Gaudent muneribus, fed nec data imputant, nec ac

ceptis obligantur." C. 21. An author who had a go0e
opportunity of obfcrving the principle which leads lai.igc
neither to cxprefs gratitude for favours which the'y i a
received, nor to expet any return for such as they be
flowed, thus explains their ideas: " If (fay they) yo.
give me this, it is because you have no need ut it v!ir
self; and as for me, I never part with that which I til1i

7 Ilc .llJr

necessary to me." Memoir fur le Galibis; Hill. des
Plantes de la Guiane Fran~oife, par M. Aublet, tom. ii.
p. 1r0.

NOTE LXVII. p. 213.
AND. BERNALDES, the contemporary and friend of

Columbus, hath preserved rome circumfRances con-

cerning the bravery of the Caribbees, which are not men-
tioned by Don Ferdinand Columbus, or the other hifto-
rians of that period, whose works have been published.
A Caribbean canoe with four men, two women, and a
boy, fell in unexpectedly with the fleet of Columbus in
his second voyage, as it was Rfecring through their
ifands. At first, they were struck almoR stupid with
aflonifhment at such a strange fpe&acle, and hardly moved
from the spot for above an hour. A Spanish bark, with
twenty-five men, advanced towards them, and the fleet
gradually surrounded them, so as to cut off their com-
munication with the shore. " When they saw that it
was impoflible to cfcape (fays the historian), they seized
their arms with undaunted resolution, and began the at-
tack. I use the expression, with undaunted rtfolutain, for
they were few, and beheld a vafi nunmber ready to as-
fault them. They wounded several of the Spaniards, al-
though they had targets, as well as other defensive ar-
mour i and even after their canoe was overset, it was
with no little difficulty and danger, that part of them
were taken, as they continued to defend themselves, and
to use their bows with great dexterity while swimming in
the sea." I-lift. de D. Iern. y Yfab. MSS. c. 119.

VoL.II. G g NOTE

NOTE LXVIII. p. 214.
A PROBABLE conjcc'ture may be formed with reflpec

to the cause of the diftincion in chiraaer between

the Caribbees and the inhabitants of the larger islands.
The former appear manifestly to be a separate racc.
Their language is totally different from that of tieir
neighbours in the large islands. They themselves have a
tradition, that their anceflors came originally from fmnic
part of the continent, and having conquered and exter-
minated the ancient inhabitants, took pofleflion of their
lands, and of their women. Rochefort, 384. Tertre, 36c.
Hence they call tbemfelves Banaree, which ignitis ;
man come from beyond sea. Labat. vi. 131. Accord-
ingly, the Caribbees still use two diftinca languages, one
peculiar to the men, and the other to the women. Tertlc,
361. The language of the men has nothing conimonn
with that spoken in the large islands. The dialet of the
women considerably resembles it. Labat. 129. Tl:i
strongly confirms the tradition which I have mentioned.
The Caribbees themfclves imagine, that they were a cu-
lony from the Galibis, a powerful nation of Gti:iia i.i
South America. Tcrtrc, 361. Rochefort, 348. lut a,
their fierce manners approach nearer to those of tih
people in the northern continent, than to those of the na-
tives of South America; and as their languiage h.ls like-
wife ofme affinity to that spoken in Florida, their ori-
gin ihould be deduced rather fiom the former th.n
from the latter. Labat. 128, &c. Ierrera, Dec. i. lib. ix.
c. 4. In their wars, they still oblfrve their ancient pr.ic-
tice of delroying all the male;, and prcfrrlvinlg til'
wolncn cither for fcrvitude or for breeding.

NOT'' E

NOTE LXIX. p. 215.
OUR knowledge of the events which happened in the

conqucft of New Spain, is derived from sources of

information more original and authentic thain that of any
tranfation in the history of America. The letters of
Cortes to the Emperor Charles V. are the moit valuable
of these, and the firt in order of time. As Cortes early
assumed a command independent of Velas(quez, it became
neceflary to convey such an account ot his operations to
Madrid, as might procure him the approbation of his lo-
vereign.

THE firit of his dispatches has never been made pub-

lic. It was sent from Vera Cruz, July i6th, 1519. As
I imagined that it might not reach the Emperor, until
he arrived in Germany, for which he set out early in the
year 1520, in order to receive the Imperial crown, I
made diligent search for a copy of this dispatch, both in
Spain and in Germany, but without fiiccefs. This,
however, is of lels confcquence, as it could not contain
any thing very material, being written so f)oni after Cortes
arrived in New Spain. But, in searching for the letter
from Cortes, a copy of one fromn the colony of Vcra
(ruz to thr- .nlpci or has been difcovcrcd in the Imperial
library at Vienna. Of this I have fubtjoincd lome ac-
count at the clolf of the Notes to the third volume. The
Ikcond diliatch, dated October 3otl1, 1520, w;as pub-
lifhed at Seville, A. 1). 1522 ; anld the third and furtll
!Lon :iater they were receivcd. A Latin tranfliation ot
them appeared in (;cri;niiy, .\ . 1). i 5.2. Ramulio sion
Jfter made them more gencially known, by infer ing,
ihemn in hi. val:lable collection. They cont;aii a rnrular

(, y'! . ;ri nd

and minute history of the expedition, with many curious
particulars concerning the policy and manners of the
Mexicans. 'I'he work does honour to Cortes; the tfyle
is fiinple and perspicuous; but as it was manifefily his
intireft to represent his own actions in the faircfl light,
his vidtories are probably exaggerated, his lofles dimi-
niflicd, and his acts of rigour and violence fomcwh.it
fiftnclel.

TIrE next in order is the Cronica de la Nucva

Efpagna, by frainciico Lopez de Gomara, published
A. D 55. 55 Gomara's historical merit is considerable.
His mode of narration is clear, flowing, always agree-
able, and fumetimes elegant. But lie is frequently inac-
curate and credulous; and as he was the domeflic chap-
lain of Cortes after his return from New Spain, and pro-
bably compoled his work at his desire, it is manifcft that
he labours to magnify the merit of his hero, and to con-
ceal or extenuate fich transactions as were unfavourable
to his character. Of this Herrera accrues him in one
inflance, Dec. ii. lib. iii. c. 2. and it is not once only
that this is coinfpicuous. lie writes, however, with so
much freedom corcerning (;'c ral meafilres of the Spanifil
court, that the copies both of his HIifloria de las Indias,
:and tof his Chronica, were cailcd iil by a decree of the
council of the Indies, ;nid they were lonr, conlidered as
prohibited books in Spain ; though of late licence to print
thiem has beetn grainted. P'1in1lo 1Jililioth. 589.

'FTr Chlroniclc of (;onara induced Bern:l Diaz dcl

C.iftillo to compose his Hilloria Vcrdadcria de la Cun-
quif a de Ia Nucva Etpagna. He had been an adventurer
in each of the expeditions to New Spain, and was the
comlpanion of Cortes in ;11 hiis battles :iand perils. WVhen
he found tli.at neither he himllfclt, rnut imany of hii fi'l-

luj, -

low-foldiers, were once mentioned by Gomara, but that
the fame of all their exploits was ascribed to Cortes, the
gallant veteran laid hold of his pen with indignation, and
composed his true history. It contains a prolix, minute,
confused narrative of all Cortes's operations, in such a
rude vulgar flyle as might be expeEted from an illiterate
soldier. But as he relates tranfa&ions of which he was
witness, and in which he performed a considerable part,
his account bears all the marks of authenticity, and is
accompanied with such a pleasant na:vet/, with such in-
tereffing details, with such amusing vanity, and yet so
pardonable in an old soldier who had been (as he boafls)
in an hundred and nineteen battles, as renders his book
one of the most singular that is to be found in any lan-
guage.

PET. Martyr ab Angleria, in a treatise de Iililis nu-

per inventis, added to his Decades dc Rebus Occanicis &
Novo Orbe, gives some account of Corte,'s expedition.
But he proceeds no farther than to relate what happened
after his firfi landing. This work, which is brief and
flight, seems to contain the informationl tranlinittcd by
Cortes in his first dispatches, embellished with fevcr:l
particulars communicated to the author by the officcrs
who brought the letters from Cortes.

BUT the book to which the greater part of miodlrn

hiflorians have had recourse for information cenncririn:.
the conquefi of New Spain, is 1lifil)ria dc l.a C('unlliit
de Mexico, por I). Antonio de Solis, firfl .ibliflhi
A. I). 1684. I know no author in a;ny l.)ang.1. ' wic)fe
literary fmric has rifeii fir

1 beyonul h Il cl rirrit. I),'

Solis is reckoned by his country)ncl one of tllc pil)e(!
writers in the Caftililla tolglue; ;Ln I1

it a fo;,i .';lr naIly
venture to bivr' Iis opillionl co licerliig a nltttc r ,i I.l-i

(; 3 S p).lii.lis

Spaniards alone are qualified to judge, he is entitled to
that praise. But, though his language be correct, his
tafle in composition is far from being just. His periods
are so much laboured as to be often fliff, and some-
times tumid; the figures which he employs by way of
ornament, are trite or improper, and his observations
superficial. There blenifhes, however, might cafily be
overlooked, if he were not defective with rcfpet to all
the great qualities of an historian. Deflitute of that pa-
tient indultry in research, which conducts to the know-
ledge of truth; a stranger to that impartiality which
weighs evidence with cool attention; and ever eaerc
to cftablifh his favourite system of exalting the character
of Cortes into that of a perfect hero, exempt from error,
and adorned with every virtue; he is less iolicitous to
discover what was true, than to relate what might ap-
pear splendid. WVhcn he attempts any critical difcuftion,
his reasonings are fallacious, and founded upon an impcr-
sec view of fads. Though he sometimes quotes the
dispatches of Cortes, he seems not to tlhve consultcd
them; and though he sets out with some cenfurc on
Gomara, he frequently prefers his authority, the mos
doubtful of any, to that of the other conteClmporary'
historians.

BUT of all the Spanish writers, Hcrrera furniflcs the

fullest and most accurate information conccrninll the
conqtufl of M\exico, ns well as every other traiiftiion of
America. 'lhe inidu(lry and attention with which ihe
consulted not only the books, but the original pa;pers ;ind
public records, which tended to throw any light upon the
lilbject of his enquiriics, were oi great, andl he uI;i;,lly
jiid!es of the evidcilce before him witlh lo nmic' impl;l'-
tiality and c.tndour, that his decads may he rinkcd .inloin,
;he mnoft judicious and uftiful tliforical collections. If,

)1 '1

by attempting to relate the various occurrences in the
New World in a fIrict chronological order, the arrange-
ment of events in his work had not been rendered so per-
plexed, difconne&ed, and obscure, that it is an unpleasant
t;fk to collec from different parts of his book, and piece
together the detached shreds of a tlory, he might juflly
have been ranked among the most eminent historians of
his country. He gives an account of the materials from
which he composed his work, Dec. vi. lib. iii. c. 19.

NOTE LXX. p.218.
CORTES purpcfed to have gone in the train of

Ovando when he eft out for his government in the

year 1502, but was detained by an accident. As he was
attempting in a dark night to scramble up to the window
of a lady's bed-chamber, with whom he carried on an
intrigue, an old wall, on the top of which he had mount-
cd, gave way, and he was so much bruiifd by the fall
as to be unfit for the voyage. Gomara, Cronica de la
Nueva Efpagna, cap. r.

NOTE LXXI. p. 220.
CORTES had two thousand pesos in the hands of

Andrew Ducro, :und he borrowed four thoifanrd.

'I lil ruins are about equal in value to fifteen hundred
Ifinids ftcrling; but as the price of every thing was cx-
trcieely high in America, they nlmade but a cantyy flock
when applied towards the equipment of a nilitary expe-
dition. Herrcra, Dec. ii. lib. iii. c. 2. 1B. Diaz. c. 20.

G g 4 NOTE

NOTE LXXII. p. 225.
T H E names of those gallant officers which will often

occur in the subsequent ltory, were Juan Velasquez

de Leon, Alonfo Hernandez Portocarrero, Francisco de
Montejo, Chrifloval de Olid, Juan de Efcalante, Fran-
cisco de Morla, Pedro de Alvarado, Francisco de Salcc-
la, Juan de Efcobar, Gines de Nortes. Cortes himself
commanded the Capitana, or Admiral. Francisco de
Orozco, an officer formed in the wars of Italy, had the
command of the artillery. The experienced Alaminos
.ced as chief pilot.

NOTE LXXIII. p.227.

N those different conflicts, the Spaniards loft only
two men, but had a considerable number wounded.

Though there be no occasion for recourse to any super-
natural cause to account either for the greatness of their
victories, or the smallness of their loss; the Spanish hifto-
rians fail not to ascribe both to the patronage of St. Jago,
the tutelar Saint of their country, who, as they relate,
fought at the head of their countrymen, and by his
prowess gave a turn to the fate of the battle. Gomara is
the first who mentions this apparition of St. James. It is
amusing to observe the embarraffmcnt of B. Diaz de
Castillo, occasioned by the struggle between his fuperfti-
tion and his veracity. The former disposed him to be-
lieve this miracle, the latter restrained him from attesting
it, 'I I acknowledge, fays he, that all our exploits and
victories are owing to our Lord Jesus Christ, and that in
this battle there was such a number of Indians to every
one of us, that if each had thrown a handful of earth, they
might have buried us, if by the great mercy of God we

had

had not been protected. It may be that the person whom
Gomara mentions as having appeared on a mottled grey
horse, was the glorious apostle Signor San Jago or Signor
San Pedro; and that I, as being a finner, was not wor-
thy to fee him. This I know, that I saw Francisco de
Morla on such a horse, but as an unworthy transgressor,
did not deserve to fee any of the holy apostles. It may
have been the will of God, that it was so as Gomara re-
lates;. but until I read his Chronicle, I never heard among
any of the conquerors that such a thing had happened."
Cap. 34.

NO TE LXXIV. p. 234.
SEVERAL Spanish hifiorians relate this occurrence

in such terms, as if they wished it should be believed,

that the Indians, loaded with the presents, had carried them
from the capital in the fame short space of time that the cou-
riers performed thatjourney. This is incredible; and Go-
mara mentions a circumstance which shews, that nothing
extraordinary happened on this occasion. This rich pre-
sent had been prepared for Grijalva, when he touched at
the fame place some months before, and was now ready
to be delivered, as soon as Montezuma sent orders for
that purpose. Gomara Cron. c. xxvii. p. 28.

ACCORDING to 1. Diaz del C.flillo, the value of

the silver plate representing the moon, was alone above
twenty thousand pesos, about five thousand pounds Sterl-
ing.

NOTE LXXV. p. 241.
TH I S private traffic was directly contrary to the in-

ftrudtions of Velasquez, who enjoined, that what-
ever was acquired by trade fhuuld be thrown into the com-

mon

mon flock. But it appears, that the soldiers had each
a private aflrtment of toys, and other goods proper
for the Indian trade; and Cortes gained their favour by
encouraging this under-hand barter. B. Diaz, c. 41.

NOTE LXXVI. p. 254.
G MARA has published a catalogue of the \ar;ju,

articles of which this present consisted. Cron. c. cq.

P. Martyr ab Angleria, who saw them after theyc itrc
brought to Spain, and who Icems to have examinied t'h,.,
with great attention, gives a description of each, wi :i
is curious, as it conveys iomne idea of the progrcl; \, hi
the Mexicans had made in several arts of elegance. 1);
Infulis nuper inventis Liber, p. 354, &c.

NOTE LXXVII. p. 262.
T H E R E is no circumifance in the history of the co!:-

quest of America, which is more queftionabic than

the account of the numerous armies brought into the tidd
againfi the Spaniards. As the war with the Tlafc::l.i .,
though of short duration, was one of the most coil:!c :-
able which they waged in America, the account gi '-s oi
their forces merits fume attention. iThe only aitlii::.
information concerning this, is derived from three authi i..
Cortes, in his second dilifatch to the enperor, id:tLti .t
Segura de la Frontcra, October 30, 1520, thus ctl:.in.''
the number of their troops; in the lirit battle 6o00, il t!'
second battle loo,coo, in the tl;ird hattie 15', .
Relat. ap. RamufL iii. 228. Bcrn:il Di)i. del C.'; l.!,
who was an cye-witlcfs, and engaged in .:11 thle ilt,
of this war, thus reckons their numbers ; in the il'.
battle 3000, p. 43 ; in tile lccond battle O(cG, ili'. i';

2 1,.

the third battle 50,000, p. * 5. Gomara, who was Cor-
res's chaplain after his return to Spain, and published his
Cronira in 1552, follows the computation of Cortes, ex-
cept in the second battle, where he reckons the Tlafcalans
at 8,oo00, p. 49. It was manifcifly the interest of Cor-
,es to magnify his own dangers and exploits. For it was
only by the merit of extraordinary services, that he could
hope to atone for his irregular conduc, in afTuming an
iidependent command. Bern. Diaz, though abundantly
iifpofed to place his ow\'n prowess, and that of his fellow~
conquerors, in the most advantageous point of light, had
not the fame temptation to exaggerate; and it is proba-
ble that his account of the numbers approaches nearer
t- the truth. Tile aflcmbling of an army of i5o,ooo
nlcl requires many previous arrangements, and fiich
provision for their subsistence as teems to be beyond the
lorefight of Americans. The degree of cultivation in
Tlafcala does not seem to have been so great, as to have
idrnifhed such a vaif army with provisions. Though
this province was so much better cultivated than other
regions of New Spain, that it was called the country of
!rcad; yet the Spaniards in their march suffered such
want, that they were obliged to filbift upon Tunas, a
fPcclesoffiruit which r-owvs wild in the fields. Herrera,
D)cc. ii. lib. vi. c. 5. p. S82.

NOTE LXXVIII. p. 266.
'T IES I. : unhappy victims are said to be pcrfons of

diltiiidtioii. it fccms imlrobable that so great a

number as fifty llould be employed as spics. So miliny
1 rilloers had been taken and difiniflied, and( thle Tl'lfcalans
h.id sent so many mnefiagcs to the Spainili( qtu:lrters, that
t!icre appears to be no rcalbno for hazarding the lives of

so

so many considerable people, in order to procure in-
formation about the position and fiate of their camp.
The barbarous manner in which Cortes treated a people
unacquainted with the laws of war established among po-
lifhed nations, appears so ihocking to the later Spaniih
writers, that they diminish the number of those whom
he punished so cruelly. Herrera fays, that he cut off the
hands of seven, and thumbs of rome more. Dec. ii. lib.
ii. c. 8. De Solis relates, that the hands of fourteen or
fifteen were cut off, and the thumbs of all the reft. Lib.
ii. c. 20. But Cortes himself, Relat. p. 228, b. and
after him Gomara, c. 48, affirm, that the hands of all
the fifty were cut off.

NOTE LXXIX. p. 269.
T HE horses were objecs of the greatest aflonifliment

to all the people of New Spain. At first they ima-

gined the horse and his rider, like the Centaurs of the
ancients, to be rome monstrous animal of a terrible form;
and supposing, that their food was the fame as that of
men, brought fiefh and bread to nourish them. Even
after they discovered their miflake, they believed the
horses devoured men in battle, and when they ncighed,
thought that they were demanding their prey. It wa
not the interest of the Spaniards to undeceive them.
Herrera, Dcc. ii. lib. vi. c. xi.

NOTE LXXX. p. 275.
ACCORDING to Bart. de las Casas, there was ni

reason for this naffacre, and it was an apt of w;mtltll

cruelty, perpetratcd merely to firike terror into the pcople
of New Spain. Relac. de la Dclruyc. p. 17, &c. HIl

i..

the zeal of Las Casas often leads him to exaggerate. In
opposition to him Bern. Diaz, c. 83, asserts, that the
first miflionaries sent into New Spain by the emperor,
made a judicial inquiry into this tranfadion; and having
examined the priefis and elders of Cholula, found that
there was a real conspiracy to cut off the Spaniards, and
that the account given by Cortes was exaaly true. As
it was the object of Cortes at that time, and manifcetly
his interell, to gain the good-will of Montezuma, it is
improbable, that he would have taken a flep which tend-
ed so vilibly to alienate him from the Spaniards, it he
had not believed it to be necessary for hit owi, prcflrva-
tion. At the fame time, the Spaniardl who lcrved in
America had such contempt for the natives, and thoutght
them so little intitled to the common rights of men, that
Cortes might hold the Cholulans as guilty upon flight and
imperfcdt evidence. The severity of the puniihment was
certainly exccflive and atrocious.

NOTE LXXXI. p. 276.
T l I S description is taken almotl literally from Bernal

Diaz del Catiillo, who was so unacquainted with

the art of composition, as to be incapable of embellifhilng
his narrative. He relates in a simple and rude tfylc what
palled in his own mind, and that of his licllow-foldicrs,
oni that occasion; " And let it not be thought strange,
fays he, that I ihould write in this manner of what then
happened, for it ought to be confidered, that it is one
thing to relate, another to have beheld things that were
never before fecn, or heard, or spoken of among men."
Cap. 86. p. 64. b.

NOTE

NOTE LXXXII. p. 290.
B. Diaz del Caffillo gives us some idea of the fati;u:

and hardships they underwent in performing thi,

and other parts of duty. During the nine months that
they remained in Mexico, every man, without any dif.
tinsion between officers and soldiers, slept on his arris,
in his quilted jacket and gorget. They lay on mats, c:
straw spread on the floor, and each was obliged to hoid
himself as alert as if he had been on guard. " Thi;,
adds he, became so habitual to me, that even now, in my
advanced age, I always sleep in my clothes, an d never
in any bed. When I visit my Enconminda, I reckon it
suitable to my rank, to have a bed carried along with mn
other baggage, but I never go into it; but, according to
cuflom, I lie in my clothes, and walk frequently duiing
the night into the open air, to view the flars as I wa'
wont when in service." Cap. oS.

NOTE LXXXIII. p. 293.
CORTES himself, in his second dispatch to the cmr

peror, does not explain the motives which indlucc.

him either to condemn Qualpopoca to the flames, or t,
put Montezuma in irons. Ramus. iii. 236. B. Dia7 i.
silent with refpeca to his reasons for the former; and th;
only cause he afligns for the latter was, that he miglr
meet with no interruption in executing the fenltclcc prl-
nounced againlt Qualpopoca, c. xcv. p. 75. But a,
Montezuma was his prisoner, and absolutely in his 1lo\-
er, he had no reason to dread him ; and the insult oftlirt'
to that monarch could have no effci but to irritate 1,i11
unneceflarily. Gomara supposes, that Cortes hlid :0
other object that to occupy Montezuma with his ow';

ditrch i

distress and fuffcrings, that he might give lcfs attention
to what besel Qualpopoca. Cron. c. 89. Herrcra adopts
the fame opinion. Dec. ii. lib. viii. c. 9. But it seems
an odd expedient, in order to make a person bear one in-
jury, to load him with another that is greater. De Solis
imagines, that Cortes had nothing else in view than to
intimidate Montezuma, so that he might make no at-
tempt to rescue the vicims from their fate; but the fpi-
rit of that monarch was so filbmiffive, and he had so
tamely given up the prisoners to the disposal of Cortes,
that he had no caulfc to apprehend any opposition from
him. If the cxplanation which I have attempted to give
of Cortes's proceedings on this occasion be not admitted,
it appears to me, that they must be reckoned among the
wanton and barbarous acts ofoppreflion, which occur too
(.s;ea in the hiflory of the conquefl of America.

NOTE LXXXIV. p. 298.
~D I Solis asserts, lib. iv. c. 3. that the proposition of

doing homage to the King of Spain came from

Montezuma himciflf, and was made in order to induce
the Spaniards to depart out of his dominions. He de-
fcribcs his condtuc on this occasion, as if it had been
founded upon Ichcmne of profound policy, and executed
with such refined adlcfr, as to deceive Cortes himfclf.
But there is no hint or circuiftaincc in the contemlmporary
hlitorians, Cortes, Di.az, or Gomrnra, to jullify this
theory. Alontczuma, on other occafiorn', difcovcred no
luch extent of art and abi!ities. The iinguilh which he
telt in perfoirming this humbllng ccrnl , i.s natural, if
we iuppolt: it to have been ilvCnoluntlary. IBut, accordin-
to the theory of De Solis, it would ihive been prepoflc-
rous and inconrifleit with his o in dvi,:' of dleceiving tha
Spaniards.

N () T

NOTE LXXXV. p. 301.

N several of the provinces, the Spaniards, with all their
indufiry and influence, could collec no gold. In

others, they procured only a few trinkets of small value.
Montezuma aflured Cortes, that the present which he
offered to the King of Castile, after doing homage, con-
sised of all the treasure amafred by his father; and told
him, that he had already diftrihuted the reft of his gold
and jewels among the Spaniards. B. Diaz, c. 104.
Gomara relates, that all the silver colleced amounted to
5oo marks. Cron. c. 93. This agrees with the account
given by Cortes, that the royal fifthof silver was ico
marks. Relat. 239, B. So that the fum total of silver
was only 4000 ounces, at the rate of eight ounces :I
mark, which demonfirates the proportion of silver to gold
to have been exceedingly small.

NOTE LXXXVI. p. 302.
D E Solis, lib. iv. c. x. calls in question the truth of

this tranfa&ion, from no better reason than that it

was inconsistent with that prudence which distinguishes
the charaacer of Cortes. But he ought to have recolleQ-
ed the impetuosity of his zeal at Tlafcala, which was
no less imprudent. He aflerts, that the evidence for it
refis upon the testimony of 1. Diaz dcl Castillo, of Go-
mara, and of Herrcra. They all concur indeed, in men-
tioning this inconsiderate ifep which Cortes took; and
they had good reason to do so, for Cortes himself relates
this exploit in his second dispatch to the Emperor, and
seems to glory in it. Cort. Relat. Ramus. iii. 140, ).
This is one inflance, among many, of Dc Solis's having
consultcd with little attention the lcttcrs of Cortcs to

Charlcs

Charles V. from which the moss authentic ilformatior
with relpcSt to his operations must be derived.

NOT i I,XXXXII. p. 306.
HIERERRA and DI) Solis fuppofc, that V'clafqucz wa3

enclcuraged to equip this :rni:al'el n .;gaillt Cortes,

by the accounts which he receivcd trmin Spal:1 conccriling,
the reception of the agne:s lent by the cir:n,- of 'cra
Cruz, and the warlith with which Fonlic.a biflnop of
Burgos had cfpoufcd his interefl', and tc,,lidcmncd th-
proceedings of Cortes. Hcrrcra, dec. ii. lib. ix. c. 8.
De Solis, lib. iv. c. 5. But the clironoli.gical order of
events refutes this fuppofitioii. i'iortoc.lrrcro and Montcjo
failcd from Vera Cruz, July .6, 15 1. f lcrtra, ec. ii.
lib. v. c. 4. They landed at St. Lucar in October, ac-
corldilg to Herrera, ibid. But P. Mr1Irt\ r, who atteindec
the court at that time, and commuiiic:itcd every occur-
rence of moment to his corrcfpotndents d;y bv day, mIen-
tions the arrival of there agents, for the fitfl time, in i)c-
cembcr, and ipeaks of it as a recent event. i.pilf. 65oc
All the historians atrce, that the ageirl;. f Cortes had
their rift .tudicnce of the Empcr,!r .at I' (,',lfellla:i, when
le- wevil to that town to visit his n'Ithl(il in his way to St,
Jna-i.. d- Cun;oiell. .t. Icerrera, dec. ii. lib. v. c. 4.
DI) Slii, li,. iv c. c . ]' ut the empceror l;t out trom
V:\ll'iiil for' 'I'orlelll:;s, o; the Ith of Marc-h 1 52';
>In ! i'.

O v.Irtt,' rnc'l l'- ; ilis hIavill n fI-n at th;tt tin: thic
pr,!cls nind;, to Cl. Ic'.i , il..il (.

6()5. 'Thc rmament

unde.; Narvaicz f.il'.: tr(in C(ub ill ,April 1520. It is
ni.ii;rfl thel, tli:.t \'cl:ilu / c,,uld not rreceLive a;ny ac-

itiI'l. (io v.'l;.it p l ill :

ii l;:I, ill v /

L at [1 TordiCfillas, pre-

vi5,nIs to h11is hoi' ilc p")rcj. t atl).i:, ;l ,:iirll ( il ii.. lis

, ': l
rl-otivc;s Iec1n tv b tl hsi whilIcl 1 ji;uv nlllltioned. T'il

V .L . 1, I 11 patnTItr

patent appointing him Adelantado of New Spain, with
such extensive powers, bears date November 13, 1519.
Herrera, dec. ii. lib. iii. c. 11. He might receive it
about the beginning of January. Gomara takes notice,
that as soon as this patent was delivered to him, he began
to equip a fleet and levy forces. Cron. c. 96.

NOTE LXXXVIII. p. 309.
D E Solis contends, that as Narvaez had no interpret-

ers, he could hold no intercourse with the people of

the provinces, nor converse with them in any way but
by signs, and that it was equally impoflible for him to
carry on any communication with Montezuma. Lib.
iv. c. 7. But it is upon the authority of Cortes himself
that I relate all the particulars of Narvacz's correspond-
ence, both with Montezuma and with his fubjecs in the
maritime provinces. Relat. Ramus. iii. 244, A. C.
Cortes affirms, that there was a mode of intercourse be-
tween Narvaez and the Mexicans, but does not explain
how it was carried on. Bernal Diaz supplies this dfect,
and informs us, that the three deserters who joined Nar-
vaez aded as interpreters, having acquired a competent
knowledge of the language, c. I lo. With his usual
minuteness, he mentions their names and characters, and
relates, in chapter 122, how they were punished for their
perfidy. The Spaniards had now resided above a year
among the Mexicans; and it is not furprifng, that fc-
veral among ther flhould have made some proficiency ili
speaking their language. This fcems to have been the
cafe. Herrera, dec. ii. lib. x. c. i. Both B. Diaz, who
was present, and Herrcra, the moil accurate and bess
informed of all the Spanifll writers, agree with Cortes in
his account of the fccret corrcfpondencc carried on with
Montezuma. Dec. ii. lib. ix. c. 18, 19. De Solis

fcme

fieems to confider it as a discredit to Cortes, his hero,
that Montezuma should have been ready to engage in a
correspondence with Narvaez. He supposes thlit Ino-
narch to have contracted such a wonderful affection for
the Spaniards, that he was not solicitous to be deliver-
ed from them. After the indignity with which he had
been treated, flch an affection is incredible; and even
De Solis is obliged to acknowledges that it must be look-
ed upon as one of the miracles which God had wrought
to facilitate the conquest, lib. iv. c. 7. The truth is,
Montezuma, however much overawed by his dread of
the Spaniards, was extremely impatient to recover his
liberty.

NOTE LXXXIX. p. 326.
T HE SE words I have borrowed from the anonymous

Account of the European Settlements in America,

published by Dodfley, in two volumes, 8vo. a work of
so much merit, that I should think there is hardly any
writer in the age who ought to be ashamcd of acknow-
ledging himself to be the author of it.

NOTE XC. p. 333.
T HE contemporary historians differ considerably with

refpet to the lots of the Spaniards on this occasion.

Cortes, in his second dispatch to the emperor, makes the
number only 150. Relat. ap. Ramus. iii. p. 249, A.
But it was manifestly his interest, at that juncture, to
conceal fron the court of Spain the ful extent of the slos
which he had fuIfained. De Solis, always fludious to
diminish every misfortune that besel his countrymen,
rates their loss at about two hundred men. Lib. iv. c. 9.
13. Diaz affirms, that they loft {87 meni, and that only

H h 2 44° elcaped

440 escaped from Mexico, c. 128. p. 1o8, b. Palaforx
bishop of Los Angeles, who seems to have inquired into
the early transactions of his countrymen in New Spain,
with great attention, confirms the account of H. Diaz:
with respect to the extent of their loss. Virtudes del In-
dio, p. 22. Gomara states their loss at 450 men. Cron.
c. 109. Some months afterwards, *vheln Cortes had re-
ceived several reinforcements, he tnufered his troops,
and found them to be only 590. Relat. ap. Ramus. iii.
p. 255, E. Now, as Narvaez brought 880 men into
New Spain, and about 400 of Cortes's soldiers were
then alive, it is evident, that his loss, in the retreat from
Mexico, mutf have been much more considerable than
what he mentions. B. Diaz, solicitous to magnify the
dangers and fuffcrings to which he and his fellow-con-
querors were exposed, may have exaggerated their 1ofs;
but, in my opinion, it cannot well be cftimated at lcfs
than 600 men.

NOTE XCI. p. 355.

OME remains of this great work are fiill visible, and
the spot where the brigantines were built and launch-

ed, is lfill pointed out to strangers. Torquermada vicwed
them. Monarq. Indiana, vol. i. p. 531.

NOTE XCII. p. 364.
TH E flation of Alvarado on the caiifeWay of Tacuba

was the nearest to the city. Cortes obfcrvcs, thai

there they could diflinrly obfcrve what passed when their
countrymen were sacrificed. Rclat. ap. Ramus. iii. p.
273, E. B. DIaz, who belonged to Alvarado'stlivifiiot,
rclates what he bclhld with his own eyes. C. 192.

p. 148,
$»

F. 148, b. 149, a. Like a man whose courage was so clea
as to be above fiufpicion, he describes with his usual fim-
plicity the imprefiion which this fpecCtacle made upon
him. " Before, Iliys he, I law the breasts of my com-
panions opened, their hearts, yet fluttering, offered to an
accursed idol, and their flch devoured by their exulting
enemies; I was accustomed to :enter a battle not only
without fear, but with high spirit. But (rom that time I
never advanced to fight the Mexicans without a secret
Tiorror and anxiety; my heart trembled at the thoughts of
,the death which I had seen them susser." He takes care
to add, that as loon as the combat bctan, his terror went
off; and, inIded, his adventurous bravery on every oc-
.cafion is full evidience of this. 3. Diaz, c. 156.. p,
J57, a.

NOTE XCIII. p. 371.
0 N E circuimfance in this siege merits particular no-

tice. Tie account which the Spanish writers give

of the numerous armies employed in the attack or defence
of Mexico, ficms to be incredible. According to Cortes
himself, he had at one time i 50,oco auxiliary Indians in
his service. Relat. Ramtf. iii. 275, E. Gomara as-
ecrts, that they were above 200,00o. Cron. c. 136.
llcrrera, an author of higher authority, ', y they were
nbout 200,000. D)c. iii. lib. i. c. 19. None of the
contemporary writers alcertain explicitly the number of
persons in Mexico duri:;g the siege. But Cortes on fe-
veral occasions mentiois the iinimber of Mexicans who

/Were slain, or who pcrifllcd for want of food ; and, if
we man rely on thofl circuimftuanics, it is p1,obablc, tlat
above two hundlr ed thoil.itnd nult ihai bCeen fluit up in
the town. But the l(iitity of provilionis neccflIry tor
the fubftitcnce of such vaift nultitudcs ailiibled in one

H h 3 j'lact

place during three months, is so great, and it requires so
much forcfight and arrangement to collec these, and lay
them up in magazines, so as to be certain of a regular
supply, that one can hardly believe that this could he ac-
complifted in a country where agriculture was so im-
pcrfea as in the Mexican empire, where there were no
tame animals, and by a people naturally so improvident,
and so incapable of executing a complicated plan as the
inoft improved Americans. The Spaniards, with all
their care and attention, fared very poorly, and were
often reduced to extreme diftlefs for want of provilfona.
L'. Dia7, p. 142. Cortes Relat. 271, D. Cortes on
one occasion mentions nightly the subsistence of his army;
alnd after acknowledging, that they vere often in great
want, adds, that thev reccived flpplies from the people
oi the country, (.f fifi, and of tonic fruit, which he calls
thc chcrrlis of the country. Ibid. 13. Diaz fays, that
they had cakce of maize, and cerafas de la tierra; and
whclp the feafjin of these was over, another fruit, which
!c, calls Tunas; but their niuof c)mfortable fubfiflcnce
was a root which the Indians use as food, to which lie
,ave the name of .Qii/itcs, p. 142. The Indian auxi-
lia;ics had one ncans ot fublifience more than the Spa-
niiards. 1'hey fedl upon the bodics of the lMexicans whom
they killed in battle. Cort. Rclat. 176, C. B. Dinz
c.,nirins his reL.tion, and adds, that when the Indians
rc.:irned from 2lcx.ico to their own country, they car-
ried with them large quantities of the Pefh of the Mexi-
cans :alted or dried, as a moll acceptable prefcnt to their
friends, that they might have the plcafure of feeding
vpon the bodies of their enemies in their festivals. P. 15-
I)e Solis, wlo seems to confider it as an imputation ot
dilcrcdit to his countrymen, that they (hould a't in con-
cert with auxiliaries who fed upon hunran fiefh, is loli-
citous to prove, that the Spaniards endeavoured to prc-

8 veint

vent their aflbciates from eating the bodies of the Mexi-
cans, lib. v. c. 24. But he has no authority for this
from the original historians. Neither Cortes himself, nor
B. Diaz, seem to have had any such such scruple; and,
on many occasions, mention the Indian repasts, which
were become familiar to them, without any mark of ab-
horrence. Even with this additional fRock of food for
the Indians, it was hardly poflible to procure fubfietence
for armies amounting to such numbers as we find in the
Spanilh writers. Perhaps the best tolution of the diffi.
culty is, to adopt the opinion of B. Diaz del Castillo,
the most artless of all thi Hi/oriadcres primitives. " When
Gomara (fays he), on some occasions, relates, that there
were To many thousand Indians our auxiliaries, and on
others, that there were so many thousand houses in this or
that town, no regard is to be paid to his enumeration, as
he has no authority for it, the numbers not being in
reality the fifth of what he relates. If we add together
the different numbers which he mentions, that country
would contain more millions than there are in Caltile."
C. 129. But though some considerable deduction should
certainly be made fiom the Spanish accounts of the Mexi-
can forces, they mull have been very numerous; for no-
thing but an immense superiority in number could have
enabled them to withstand a body of nine hundred Spa-
;liards, conductcd by a leader of such abilities as Cortes.

NOTE XCIV. p. 387.
I N relating the oppressive and cruel proceedings of the

conquerors of New Spain, I have not followed B. de

jas Casas as my guide. His account of them, Relat. de
la DIclruyc. p. 18, &c. is manifefly exaggerated. It is
from the teltimony of Cortes himself and of Gomara,
who wroa under his c y, that I have taken my account

of

of the punishment of the Panucans, 'and they relate it
without any disapprobation. B. Diaz, contrary to his
usual cuitom, mentions it only in general terms, c. 162.
Herrcra, solicitous to extenuate this barbarous action of
his countrymen, though he mentions 60 caziques; and
400 men of note, as being condemned to the flames,
affcrts, that thirty only were burnt, and the reft par-
doned. Dec. iii. lib. v. c. 7. But this is contrary to
the teftinony of the original historians, particularly of
Gomara, whom it appears he had conlulted, as headopts
several of his expressions in this passage. The punishment
of Guatimozin is related by the niot authentic of the
Spanish writers. Torquemada has extracted from a
hi/tory of 'Tezeuco, composed in the Mexican tongue, all
account of this tranfadtion, more favourable to Guati-
mozin than that of the Spanilh authors. Mon. Indiana, i,
575. According to the Mexican account, Cortes had
icarcely a shadow of evidence to jufhify such a wanton
·aft of cruelty. B. Diaz affirms, that Gu.itimozin and
his fellowv-fufiriers asserted their innocence with their lall
breath, and that many of the Spanish loldiers condemned
this adtion of Cortec as equally ulnncel:.iry and unjullt
p. 200, b. 201, a.

NOTE XCV. p. 9o.
Dj HE motive for tundcrtaking this expedition was, to

punifil Chriftova l te ()lid, one of his officers, who

had revolted against lhim, ;iild aimed at elfablifliin'g
;1i1 ildepecndent jurifiitdion. Cortes regarded this
inlfrrcfion as of such danglerous example, and dreaded
so iuich the abilities and popu;llrit) of its author, that
jn p.Il' f hie led the body i' ro tilps dctilled to suppress
it. lie mlarcllt!, :..ccoOliu;,, ( (;u)nlr;a, three thou-
l.lajd l;ilc-, thtroi .t aU '.Uw't!' abuunding with thickc

foreilit ,

firefts, rugged mountains, deep rivers, thinly inhabited4
and cultivated only in a few places. What he suffered
from famine, from the hofSility of the natives, from the
climate, and from hardships of every fpecics,' has nothing
in history parallel to it, but what occurs in the adventures
of the other discoverers and conquerors of the New
World. Cortes was employed in this dreadful service above
two years, and though it was not dilinguifhed by any) fplern
did event, he exhibited, during the course of it, greater
personal courage, more fortitude of mind, more perfeve-
rance and patience, than in any other period or scene in
his life. Flerrera, dec. iii. lib. vi. vii. viii. ix. Gomara
Cron. c. x63-177. . . Diaz, 174-q90. Cortec,
MS. penas me. MWere one to write a life of Cortes, the
account of this expedition should occupy a flplcndid place
in it. In a general hiflory of America, as the expedition
was productive of no great event, the mention of it is
sufficient.

NOTE XCVI. p. 392.
A CCOR INC to Ilerrera, the trcafire which

Cortes brought with him, confilled of fifteen hun-.

dired marks of wrought plate, two huldred thousand peflo
tf fine gold, and ten thoulind of inferior Ilandard, many
rich jewels, one in particular worth forty thousand pefus,
and fcveral trinkets an(l ornaments of vahlc. Dec. iv.
Jib. iii. c. 8. lil, iv. c. r. He ;laterwvrds cnratlcd to
give a portion with his daughter of a huilndred tiioulluid
pesos. Gomrara Cron. c .

2 '7. 'ih f ortune which lie

lcft his fibns was very coulfidcr.b!e. Iuit, as we hl.Ae be-
fi1re related, the fuin divided allonig tile coll(erors oil
thie lirl reduction of Mexico was

. c ry lin:ill. 'l h(lr
uippgars tlhen to be lioiie rcaflnv fur IULi1tiiiuL: th.t the

a:, ilhtt iiI S

accusations of Cortes's enemies were not altogether def-
titute of foundation. They charged him with having
unjustly applied to his own use a disproportionate share of
the Mexican spoils; with having concealed the royal
treasures of Montezuma and Guatimozin ; with defraud-
ing the king of his fifth; and robbing his followers
of what. was due to them. Herrera, dec. iii. lib. viii.
c. 15. dec. iv. lib. iii. c. 8. Some of the conquerors
themselves entertained suspicions of the fame kind. 13.
Diaz, c. 157. Z

EN'D OF THE SECOND VOLUME.
