THE
HISTORY

OF
SCOTLAND

DURING-THE REIGNS OF

QUEEN MARY

AND OF
KING JAMES VI.

TILL
HIS ACCESSION

TO THE

CROWN OF ENGLAND.
WITH A REVIEW OF THE SCOTTISH HISTORX

PREVIOUS TO THAT PERIOD

And
AN APPENDIX CONTANIING ORIGINAL PAPIERS.

IN TWO VOLUMES.

BY WILLIAM PROBERTSON,
D. D, Minifler of Lady Yefler's Edinburgh-

VOLUME I,
A NEW EDITION.

VIENNA,
Printed for FP A. SCHRiEhIBL,corner in the Karnthaer-

Street.-Nro. o103.

I 7 8 8$

# PREFACE.

PREFACE.
I Deliver this book to the world wirh all

the diffidence and anxiety natural to an

Author on publishing his first performance.
The time I have employed, and the pains
I have taken, in order to render it worthy
of the publick approbation, it is, perhaps,
prudeat to conceal, till it be known wvhe-
ther that approbation shall ever be bestow-
ed upon it.

But as I have departed, in many in-

stances, from former historians , as I have
placed facts in a different light, and have
drawn eharadcers with new colours, I
ought to account for this condua to my
readers; and to produce the evidence,
on which, at the distance of two cen-
turies, I presume to contradit the tef-
timony of less remote, or even of co-
temporary historians.

The tranfacrions in Mary's reign gave

rife to two parties, which were animated
against each other with the fiercest poli-
tical hatred, embittered by religious zeal.
Each of these produced historians of con-
fiderable merit, who adopted all their
fentiCuents 9 and defended all cheir aon-iQn

Truth was not the sole object of these
authors. Blinded by prejudices, and hear-
ed by the part which they themselves
had adied in the scenes they describe,
they wrote an apology for a sac-
tion, rather than the history of their
country. Succeeding Historians have
followed these guides almost implicitly,
and have repeated their errors and n:s-
representations. But as the famepaflions
which inflamed parties in that age Irhae
descended to their pofteriry; as almost
every event in Mary's reign has become
the obje~c of doubt or of disputes ;;e
eager spirit of controversy soon dlcolzver-
ed, that without some evidence more
authentick and more impartial than rhat
of Historians, none of the points in quef-
tion could be decided with certainty.
Records have therefore been searched,
original papers have been produced, and
publick archives, as vell as the repofi-
tories of private men, have been ransack-
ed by the zeal and curiosity of writers of
different parties. The attention of Cecil to
colle& whatever related to that period,
in which he aaed so conspicuous a part,
hath provided such an immense store of
original papers for illuflrating this part
of the English and Scottish history, as
are almost sufficient to satisfy the utmni

avidity of an Antiquarian. Sir Robert
Cotton (wrhofe library is now the pro-
perty of the publick) made great and valu.
able additions to Cecil's colletion, and
from this magazine, Digges, the compi-
lers of the Cabbala, Anderson, Keith,
Haynes, Sorbes, have drawn most of
the papers which they have printed.
No history of Scotland, that merits any
degree of attention, has appeared since
these collecions were published. By con-
fulting them, I have been enabled, in
many instances, to correct the inaccura-
cies of former Hitlorians, to avoid their
mistakes, and to dete& their mifrepreferL
tations.

But many important papers have efcap-

ed the notice of those industrious Col,
leitors, and after all they have produced
to light, much frill remained in darkness,
unobserved or unpublished. It was my
duty to search for these, and I found
this unpleasant task attended with con-
fiderable utility.

The library of the honourable faculty,

of Advocates at Edinburgh , contains
not only a large colleaion of original
papers relating to the affairs ofScotland
but copies of others no less curious,
which have been preserved by Sir Roa
bert Cotton, or are extant in the Publicl_

Ofices in England. Of all these the Cu-
rators of that library were pleased to
allow me the perusal.

Though the Bririfh Mufaum be not

yet open to the Publick, Dr. Birch,whofe
obliging disposition is well known, pro-
cured me access to that noble collection,
which is worthy the magnificence of a
great and polished nation.

That vast and curious colletion of

papers relating to the reign of Elizabeth,
which was made by Dr. Sorbes, and
of which he published only two volumes,
having been purchased since his death,
by the Lord vifcounr Royflon, his Lord-
ship was so good as to allow me the
afe of fourteen Volumes in Quarto,
containing that part of them which is
connected with my subjed.

Sir Alexander Dick communicated to

me a very valuable colletion of original
papers, in two large Volumes. They
relate chiefly to the reign of James.
Many of them are marked with Arch-
bilhop Spotswood's hand; and it ap-
pears from several pafrages in his hiflory,
that he had perused them with great at-
tention.

Mr. Calderwood, an eminent Prefby-
terian Clergyman of the last century,

.Qmpiled an HiLory of Scotland from the

beginning of the Reign of James V. to
the death of James VI. in fix large Vo-
lumes; wherein he has inferred many
papers of consequence, -which are no
where else to be found. A copy of this
history, which still remains in manuscript
in the poffeflion of the church of Scotland,
was put into my hands by my worthy,
friend the Reverend Mr. George Wifhartr
principal Clerk of the church,

Sir David Dalrymple not only commune

nicated to me the papers which he has
colle&ed relating to Gowrie's conspiracy;
but; by explaining to me his sentiments
with regard to that problematical passage
in the Scottish hiflory, has enabled me
to place that tranfaaion in a light
which dispels much of the darkness and
confusion in which it has been hitherto
involved.

Mr. Goodall, though heknew my fen.;

timents with regard to the condu& and
character of Queen Mary to be extre-
mely different from his own, commu-
nicated to me a Volume of manuscripts
in his poffeflion, which contains a great
number of valuable papers copied from
the originals in the Cottonian Library
and Paper Office, by the late Reverend
Mr. Crawford, Regius Professor off hurch
History in the ulniverfity of EdinbLrgh,

I likewise received from him the original
Register of letters kept by the Regent
Lennox during his administration.-

I have consulted all these papers as

far as I thought they could be of any use
towards illustrating. that period of which
I vrite the history. With what success
I have employed them tro confirm what
was already knoiwn, to ascertain what
was dubious, or to determine what was
controverted, the Publick muff judge.

I might easily have drawn, from the

different repositories to which I had ac-
,cess, as many papers as would have ren-
dered my Appendix equal in Iize to the
most bulky colleAion of my predecessors.
But 1 have satisfied myself with publishing;
a few of the most curious among them,
to which I found it necessary to appeal
as vouchers for my own veracity. None
of these, as far as I can recolled, ever
appeared in any former colledion.

I have added to the Appendix a Cri-

,ical Dissertation concerning the mzzr-
der of King Henry, and the genuineness
of the Queen's letters to Bothwell. The
fadts and observations which relate to
Mary's letters, I owe to my friend Mr.
John Davison, one of the Clerks to the
Signer, who hath examined this point
with hisuial acuteness and inldultry.

."~- ----'-

.:s ,
4

# BOOK I. Containing a Review of the Scottish History previous to the death of James V.

# The origin of nations fabulous and obscure.

TIE
H I S T 0 R Y

O F
SCO T L A N

BOOK I.
Containing a Review of the Scottish History

previous to the death of James V.

The origin of nations fabulous and obscure.

The first ages of the Scottish history are dark
and fabulous. Nations, as well as men, ar-
rive at maturity by degrees, and the events,
which happened during their infancy or early
youth, cannot be recolle&ed, and deserve not
to be remembered. The gross ignorance, which
anciently covered all the North of Europe, the
continual migrations of its inhabitants, and
the frequent and dellru&ive revolutions which
these occasioned, render it impossible to give
any authentick account of the origin of the dif-
ferent kingdoms now established there. Every
thing beyond that short period, to which well
attested annals reach, is obscure; an immense

Hist. of Scotl. Vol. T. A

# Origin of the Scots.

space is left for invention to occupy; each nation
with a vanity inseparable from human nature,
hath filled that void with events calculated to
display its own antiquity and lutfre. And
history, which ought to record truth and teach
xwifdomr, often sets out with retailing fictions
and absurdities.

Origin of the Scots.

The Scots carry their pretenlions to nnti-

quity as high as any of their neighbours. Rely-
ing upon uncertain legends, and the tradi;
tions of their bards, 1ill more uncertain, they
reckon up a series of kings several ages before
the birth of Chrifft; and give a particular detail
of the occurrences, which happened in their
reigns. But with regard to the Scots, as well
as the other northern nations, we receive the
earliest accounts on lwhich we can depend,
not fromn their own , but from the Roman au-
thors. MWhen the Romans Luder Agricola, A.
D. 8 . firl} carried their arms into the north-
ern parts of Britain, they found it poflefled by
the Caledonians, a fierce and warlike people;
and having repulsed, rather than conquered
them, they erected a firong wall between the
firchs of Forth aud Clyde, and there fixed the
boundaries of their empire. Adrian, on ac-
count of the difficulty of defending such a
diffant frontier, contracted the limits of the
Roman province in Britain, A. D. x , by build-

.:%c ' Ii '

.^^
: ^l-r

inga second wall, which ran between Newcastle
and Carlisle. The ambition of succeeding Em-
perors endeavoured to recover what Adrian had
abandoned; and the country between the two
walls was alternately under the dominions of
the Romans. and the Caledonians. About the
beginning of the fifth century, the inroads of
the Goths and other Barbarians obliged the
Romans, in order to defend the centre of their
empire, to recal those legions, which guarded
the frontier provinces; and at that time A. D.
421. they quitted all their conqIefts in Britain.

Their long residence in the island had polifi-

ed, in some degree, the rude inhabitants, and the
Britons were indebted to their intercourse with
the Romans, For the art oftvriting,and the use of
numbers, without which itis impossible long to
preserve the rnmmory of past events.

North Britain was, by their retreat, left

under the dominion of the Scots and Pi&s. The
former, whoarenot mentioned by any Roman
author before the end of the fourth century,
wvere probably a colony of the Celtne or Gauls:
Their affinity to whom appears from their lan-
guage, their manners, and religious rites ;cir-
cumitanocs more decisive, with regard to the
origin of nations, than either fabulous tradi-
tions, or the tales of ill-informed, and credulous
Annaliis. The Scots, if we may believe the
common accounts, fettled at firlf in Ireland; and,

A3

# History of Scotland peculiarly obscure.

extending themselves by degres, landed at lafi
on the coast opposite to that island, and fixed
their habitations there. Fierce and bloody wars
were, during several ages, carried on between
them and the Pies. At length, A. D. 838.
Kenneth II. the fixty-ninth King of the Scots
(according to their own fabulous authors) ob-
tained- a complete vieory over the Pi&s , and
united under one monarchy, the whole coun-
try, from the wall of Adrian, to the northerr
ocean, and his kingdom became known by its
present name, which it derived from a people
who at first fettled there as strangers, and re-
mained long obscure and inconsiderable.

History of Scotland peculiarly obscure.

From this period the hiltory of Scotland

would merit some attention, were it accompa-
nied with any certainty. But as our remote an-
tiquities are involved in the fame darkness with
those of other nations, a calamity peculiar to
ourselves has thrown almost an equal obfcuri-
ty over our more recent tranfaftions. This was
occasioned by the malicious policy of Edward
I. of England. Towards the end of the thir-
teenth century, this monarch called in question
the independence of Scotland, pretending that
that kingdom was held as a fief of the crown
of England, and fubjefted to all the conditions
of a feudal tenure. In order to establish his
claim, he seized the publick archives, he ran-

lacked churches and monasteries, and getting
pofeiston by force, or fraud, of many hiftori-
cal monuments, w:hich tended to prove the an-
tiquity or freedom of the kingdom, he carried
£ome of them into England, and commanded
the relt to be burned. *) An universal oblivion
of past tranfations might have been the es-
fe& of this fatal event, but some imperfeC
Chronicles had escaped the rage of Edward;
foreign -writers had recorded some important
sa&cs relating to Scotland; and the traditions
concerning recent occurents were fresh and
worthy of credit. These broken fragment
John de Fordun, who lived in the fourteenth
century, collected with a pious industry, and
from them picked out materials, which he form-
ed into a regular hiltory. His work was receiv-
ed by his countrymen with applause, and,
as no recourse could be had to more ancientre-
cords, it fapplied the place of the authentick an-
nals of the kingdom. It was copied in many
monasteries, and the thread of the narrative
was continued by different monks, through the
subsequent reigns. In the beginning of the fix-
teenth century, John Major and Hetor Boethius
published their histories of Scotland , the
former a fuccinft and dry writer, the latter a
copious and florid one, and both equally credu-
lous. Not many years after, Buchanan un-
dertook the fame work; and if his accuracy and
impartiality had been, in any degree, equalto
*) Jlnes Essay, 55.

# Four remarkable æras in the Scottish history.

the elegance of his taste, and to the purity and
vigour of his flyle, his hiflory might be placed
on a level with the molt admired compositions
of the ancients. But, instead of reje&ting she
improbable tales of Chronicle wxriters, he was
at the utmost pains to adorn them; and hath
clothed with all the beauties and graces of
fiction, those legends, which formerly had only
its wildness and extravagance.

Four remarkable xras in the Scuittff hifioryk

The hiflory of Scotland may properly be

divided into four periods. The first reaches
from the origin of the monarchy, to the reign
of Kenneth II. The second from Kenneth'$
conquest of the Piis, to the death of Alexan-
der 111. The third extends to the death of Ja-
nes V. The last, from thence to the accession
of James VI. to the crown of England.

The first period is the region of pure fable

and conjecture, and ought to be totally ne-
gleted, or be abandoned to the indufrry and
credulity of antiquaries. Truth begins to dawn
in the second period, with a light, feeble at
first. but gradually increasing; and the events
which then happened, Wnay be slightly touched,
but merit no particular or laborious inquiry.
In the third period , the history of Scotland,
chiefly by means of records preserved in Eng-
land, becomes nmore anthentick: not only are
events related, but their causes and eflets ex-.

# A review of the third aera.

plained ; the charaters of the aStors are dif-
played; the manners of the age described; the
revolutions in the conflitution pointed out: and
lere every Scotsman should begin not to read
only, but to study the history of his country.
During the fourth' period, the affairs of Scot-
land were so mingled with those of other na-
tions, its situation in the political slate of Europe
was so important, its influence on the opera-
tions of the neighbouring kingdoms was ob vi-
ftble , that its history becomes an objeEt of
attention to foreigners; and without some know-
ledge of the various and extraordinary revoln-
tions which happened there, they cannot form
a juit notion either of the moftilluftrious events,
or of the characters of the molt distinguished
personages in the sixteenth century.

A review of the third aera.

The following history is confined to the

last of these periods: to give a view- of the
political state of the kingdom, during that
which immediately preceded, it is the design of
this preliminary Book. The imperfe& know-
ledge which strangers have of the aflairs of
Scotland, and the prejudices Scotsmen them-
selves have imbibed with regard to the various
revolutions in the government of their country,
render such an introduction equally neceflary
to both.

# Rise of the controversy concerning the independence of Scotland.

The period, from the death of Alexander

III. to the death of James V. contains up.
wards of two centuries and-a half, from the
year 1286, to the year 1542.

Rife of the controversy concerning the independence

of Scotland,

It opens with the famous controversy con-

cerning the independence of Scotland. Before
the union of the two kingdoms, this was a
question of much importance. Js the one crown
had been confidered not as imperial and inde-
pendent, but as feudatory to the other, a treaty
of union could not have been concluded on equal
terms, and every advantage which the depen-
dentkingdom procured, must have been effeem-
ed the concefflon of a Sovereign to his vassaL
Accordingly, about the beginning of the present
century, and while a treaty of union between
the two kingdoms was on foot, this contro-
verfy was agitated with all the heat which
national animofities naturally inspire. What
was then a fubje& of serious concern, the
union of the two kingdoms hath rendered a
matter of mere curiosity. But though the
objets, which at that time warmed and interested
both nations, exist no longer. a question which
appeared to momentous to our anceflors, cannot
be altogether indifferent or uninftruaive to ux,

-Some of the northern counties of England

were early in the hands of the Scottish Kings,
who. as far back as the feudal customs can be

traced, held these pofeffions of the Kings of
England, and did homage to them on that
account. This homage, due only for the
territories which they held in England, was
in no wife derogatory from their royal dignity.
Nothing is more suitable to feudal ideas, than
that the fame person should be both a Lord
anr'a V.ital, independent in one capacity, and
dependent in another. *) The Crown of England
was without doubt imperial and independent,
though the Princes who wore it were, for
many ages, the vaflals of the Kings of France,
and, in consequence of their pofleffions in that
kingdom, bound to perform all the services,
vhich a feudal Sovereign has a title to exa&,
The fame was the condition of the Monarchs of
Scotland; free and independent as Kings, but,
as pofieffing English territories, vaflfls to the
King of England. The Englifhl Monarchss
satisfied with their legal and uncontroverted

.A very singular proof of this occurs in tlhe French history,

Arpin fold the vicomte of the city 13torges to Philip I, who
did homage to the count of Snlicerre for a part of thear
;lnds, hlich icld of that Noblemana. A, ). 11co. I be.
lieve that no example, of a King's doing homage (to one
of his own subjects, is to be met with in the histories
either of England or Scotland. Philip le Ball abolished
this piratice in France A. D. 130o. Henaut Abregt Chro.
nol. Somewhat similar to this, is a charter of the Ab.
bo' of \Melrofs, A. D. 1535. conflituting. James V. the
Bailiff or Steward of that Abbey, vesting in him all the
Powers which pertained to that office, and requiring him
to be nnfwerabie to the Abbot for his exercise of the fame,
Archiv, publ. Edin.

rights, were neither capable, nor had any
thoughts of usurping more. England, when
conquered by the Saxons, being divided by
them into many small kingdoms, was in no
condition to extend its dominion over Scotland,
united at that time under one Monarch. And
though these petty principalities were gradually
formed into one kingdom, the reigning princes,
exposed to continual invafionp of the Danes, and
often fubjeEted to the yoke of those formidable
pirates , seldom turned their arms towards
Scotland , and were utterly incapable of
efrablifhing new rights in that country. The
first Kings of the Norman race, busied with
introducing their own laws and manners into
the kingdom which they had conquered, or
with maintaining thenmfelves on the throne
which some of them possessed by a very dubious
title, were as little solicitous to acquire new
authority, or to form new pretensions in
Scotland. An unexpeted calamity that besel
one of the Scottifll Kings first encouraged the
English to think us bringing his kingdom under
dependence. William King of Scotland being
taken prisoner at Alnwick, Henry II. as the
price of his liberty, not only extorted from him
an exorbitant ransom, anda promise to surrender
the places of greatest strength in his dominions,
but compelled him to do homage for his whole
kingdom. Richard I. a generous Prince,
falemnly renounced this claim of homage, and

# Pretensions of Bruce and Baliol examined.

absolved William from the hard conditions
which Henry had imposed. Upon the death of
Alexander III. near a century after, Edward I.
availing himself of the fituatipn of affairs in
Scotland, acquired an influence in that kingdom
which no English Monarch before him ever
polTeflted, and imitating the interested policy
of Henry, rather than the magnanimity of
Richard, revived the claim of sovereignty to
which the former had pretended.

Pretenifons of Bruce and Baliol examined,

Margaret of Norway Grandaughter of'

Alexander, and heir to his crown, did not long
survive him. The right of succession belonged
to the descendants of David Earlof Huntingdon.
third son of King David I. Among there,
Robert Bruce, and John Baliol, two illustrious
competitors for the crown, appeared. Bruce
,was the son of Isabel, Earl David's second
daughter; Baliol, the grandson of Margarct the
eldest daughter. According to the rules of
succession which are now established , the right
of Baliol was preferable, and notwithfianding
B ruce's plea of being nearer in blood to
Earl David, Baliol's claim, as the reprefen-
tative cf his mother and grandmother, would
be deemed inconteftible. Eut in that age, the
order of succession was not ascertained with
the fame precision. The queflion appeared to
be on less intricate, than it was important,

And though the prejudices of the people, and
perhaps the laws of the kingdom, favoured
Bruce, each of the rivals was fiupported by a
powerful faction, Arms alone, it was feared,
must terminate a difpnte too weighty for the
laws to decide. But, in order to avoid the
miseries of a civil war, Edward was chosen
umpire, and both parties agreed to acquiesce in
his decree. This had well nigh proved fatal
to the independencp of Scotland; and the nation,
by its eagerness to guard against a civil war,
was not only exposed to that calamity, but
almost fubjeted to a foreign yoke. Edward
was artful, brave, enterprising, and comman.-
ded a powerful and martial people, at peace
with the whole world. The anarchy which
prevailed in Scotland, and the ambition of com-
petitors ready to sacrifice their country in order
to obtain even a dependent Crown, invited him
first to seize, and then to subje&t the kingdom.
The authority of an umpire, which had been
unwarily bestowed upon him, and from which
the Scots dreaded no dangerous confeqnences,
enabled him to execute his schemes with the
greater facility. Under pretence of examining
the question with the utmost solemnity, he
summoned all the Scottish Barons to Norham,
and having gained tome, and intimidated others,
he prevailed on all who were present, not ex-
cepting Bruce and Baliol, the competitors, to
acknowledge Scotland a fief of. the English

Crown, and to swear fealty to him as their
Sovereign or Liege Lord. This lep led to an-
other still more important. As it was vain to
pronounce a sentence which he had hot power
to execute, Edward demanded pofleffion of the
kingdom, that he might be able to deliver it
to him whose right should be found preferable.
And such was the pusillanimity of the nobles,
and the impatient ambition of the competitors;
that both assented to this strange demand , and
Gilberd, de Umfraville, Earl of Angus, was
the only man, who refused to surrender the
castles iu his custody to the enemy of his coun-
try. Edward finding Baliol the mofi obsequious
and the leaf formidable of the two competitors
soon after gave judgment in his favour. Baliol
once more profefied himself the valial of Eng-
land, and fabmitted to every condition, which
the Sovereign whom he had now acknowledged
was pleased to prescribe.

Edward, having thus placed a creature of

his own upon the throne of Scotland, and com-
pelled the nobles to renounce the ancient li-
berties and independence of their country, had
reason to conclude that his dominion was now
fully established. But he began too soon to as-
fume the master; his new vassals, fierce and
independent, bore with impatience a yoke, to
which they were not accustomed. Provoked
by his haughtiness, even the paflve spirit of
Baliol began to mutiny. But Edward, who

had no longer use for such a pageant King,
forced him to resign the Crown, and openly
attempted to seize it as fallen to himself by the
rebellion of his vafifa. At that critical period,
arose Sir William Wallace, a hero, to whom
the fond admiration of his countrymen hath
ascribed many fabulous a&s of prowess, though
his real valour, as well as integrity and wis-
dorn, is such, as needs not the heightcnings
of fiction. He, almost single, ventured to take
arms in defence of the kingdom, and his bold-
ness revived the spirit of his countrymnen. At
last, Robert Bruce, the grandson of him who
frood In competition with Baliol, appeared to
aiTert his own rights, and to vindicate the ho-
nour of his country. The nobles ashamed of
their former bafenets, and enraged at the many
indignities offered to the nation, crowded to
his standard. In order to crush him at once,
the English Monarch entered Scotland, at the
head of a mighty army. Many battles were
fought, and the Scots, though often vanquish-
ed, were not subdued. The ardent zeal with
xwhich the nobles contended for the indepen-
dence of the kingdom, the prudent valour of
Bruce, and above all a national enthufiafin
inspired by such a cause, baffled the repeated
efforts of Edward, and counterbalanced all the
advantages which he derived from the number,
and wealth of his fabjets. And though the
war continued with little interniffion upwards

of seventy years, Bruce and his posterity kept
pof'eflion of the throne of Scotland, and ruled
with an authority not inferior to that of its
former Monarchs.

But while the sword, the ultimate judge

of all difpntes between contending nations, was
employed to terminate this controyerfy, neither
Edward nor the Scots seemed to distrust the
justice of their cause; and both appealed to hi-
story and records, and from these produced,
in their own favour, fiuch evidence, as they
pretended to be unanfwverable. The letters
and memorials addrelfed by each party to the
Pope, who was then reverenced as the com-
mon father, and often appealed to as the com-
mon judge of all Christian Princes, are fill ex-
tant. The fabulous tales of the early British
hifory; the partial tcfrimony of ignorant Chro-
niclers; supposititious treaties and charters;
are the proofs, on which Edward founded his
title to the sovereignty of Scotland; and the
homage done by the Scottifli Monarchs for their
lands in England is prepofteronfly supposed to
imply the fubjecion of their whole kingdom.')
Ill founded, however, as their right was, the
Engliih did not fail to revive it, in all the sub-
sequent quarrels between the two kingdoms;
iwhile the Scots disclaimed it with the utmost
indignation. To this, we must impute the fierce

') Anderson's Hi.storical Essay concerning the Independency, &c,

# State of the kingdom when Bruce began his reign, 1306.

and implacable hatred to each other, which
long inflamed both. Their national antipathies
were excited, not only by the ufilal circum.
stances of frequent hostilities, and reciprocal
injuries; but the English confidered the Scots
as vaflals who had presumed to rebel, and the
Scots, In their turn, regarded the English as
nfurpers who aimed at enslaving their country.

State of the kingdom when Bruce began his reign,l3o6,

At the time, when Robert Bruce began

his reign in Scotland, the fame form of govern-
ment was established in all the kingdoms of
Europe. And the surprising similarity in their
constitution and laws demonstrates that the na-
tions which overturned the Roman empire,
and ereted these kingdoms, though divided in-
to different tribes, and distinguished by different
names , were originally the fame people. When
we take a view of the feudal systen of laws
and policy, that stupendous and singular fabrick
ere&ed by them; the first obje& that strikes us
is the King. And when we are told that he
is the sole proprietor of all the lands within
.his dominions, that all his fubjefts derive their
poffelTions from him, and in return consecrate
their lives to his service; when we hear that
all marks of diftinfion, and titles of dignity,
flow from him as the only fountain of honour;
when we behold the most potent peers, on their
bended knees, and with folded hands, swear-

ing

# Origin of the feudal Government, and its aristocratical genius.

ing fealty at his feet, and acknowledging him
to be their Sovereign and their Liege Lord; we
are apt to pronounce him a powerful, nay an
absolute Monarch. No conclusion, however,
would be more rash, or worse founded. The
genius of, the feudal government was purely
ariftocratical. With all the ensigns of royalty,
and with many appearances of defpotick pow-
er , a feudal King was the most limited of all
Princes.
Origin of the feudal Government, ntld its ariftocratical gehius,'

Before they sallied out of their own habi-

tations to conquer the world, many of the
northern nations seem not to have been sub-
ject to the government of Kings; *) and even
where monarchical government was established,
the prince pollefi'ed but little authority. A
General rather than a King, his milit;try com-
mand was extensive, his civil juritdiftion al-
most nothing. ::::) The army which he led
was not composed of soldiers, who could be
compelled to serve, but of such as voluntarily
followed his fiandard. ***) The'e conquered
not for their leader, but for themselves; and
being free in their own country, renounced
not their liberty when they acquired new fettle-

') Cumf. lib, vi. c, 23.

"') Tacit, cte Mor. Germanl. c. 7 II.

"'') C:t;. ibid.
Hist. of Scotl. Vol. T. 1

ments. They did not exterminate the an-
cient inhabitants of the countries which they
subdued, bit seizing the greater part of their
lands, they took their persons under prote1iiiin.
And the difficulty of maintaining a new con-
quelt, as well as the danger of being attacked
by new invaders, rendering it necellary to be
always in a posture of defence, the form of
government which they ctablifhed was alto-
gether military, and nearly resembled that to
which they had been accufl:omed in their nitive
country. Their general ltill continuing to be
the head of the colony, part of the conquered
lands were allotted to him; the remainder,
under the name of beneficia or fiefs, was di-
vided amongfl his principal officers. As ti{:
common safety required that these oli.cers
should, upon all occasions, be ready to appear
in arms, for the comnimon defence, and fliould
continue obedient to their general, they bound
themselves to take the field, when called, and
to serve him with a number of men, in pro-
portion to the extent of their territory. TheSe
great ollicers again parcelled out their lands
among their followers, and annexed the fainc
condition to the grant. A feudal kingdom was
properly the encampment of a great army;
military ideas predominated, military fibordina-
tion was established, and the poflefiion of land
was the pay which soldiers received for their
personal service. In consequence of there no-

# General causes which limited the power of the feudal monarchs.

# Their revenues were small.

tiolis, the possession of land was granted du-
ring pleasure only, and Kings were elective.
In other words, an officer disagreeable to his
general was deprived of his pay, and the per-
son who was moil capable of condudting an
army, was choleni to command it. Such were
the iirft rudiments, or itlfancy of feudal go,
vernment.

Bui loing before the begiining of the four-

teenth century, tle feudal rfftemn had under-
gone mnxany changes, of which the following
vere the mofl considerable. Kings formerly
eleEtive, were then hereditary ; and fiefs grant-
ed at firfl during pleasure, descended from father
to son, and were become perpetual. These
changes, not less advantageous to the nobles
than to the prince, made no alteration in the
ariftocratical spirit of the feudal conltitution.

General cnures which limited the pow er of the fetual mnontirchs.

The King, who at a difrance feetned to

be invested with majefiy and power, appears,
on a nearer view, to possess none of those
advantages which bestow on monarchs their
grandeur and authority. His revenues were
scanty; he had not a standing army; and he
enjoyed no proper jurifdi&ion.

Their revenues were Small,

At a time when pomp and splendor were un-
known, even in the palaces of kings; when the

B a

officers of the crown received little salary besides
the fees and perquisites of their office; when ein-
bassies to foreign courts were rare ; when armies
were composed of soldiers who served without
pay; it was not necellfry that a king should pof-
fess a great revenue; nor did the condition of
Europe, in those ages, allow its princes to be
opulent. Commerce made little progre's in tlie
kingdoms where the feudal government was es-
tablifhed. Inilitutions, which had no other ob-
jeR but to inspire a martial spirit, to train rien
to be soldiers, and to make arms the only ho-
nourable profession, naturally di'couraged the
commercial arts. The revenues, arising fro:n
the taxes imposed on the differcnt branches ol
commerce, were by consequence inconhiderable;
and the prince's treasury received little supply
from a source, which, among a trading people,
.lows with such abundance, and is almofi ine..
hautlible. A fixed tax was not levied even on
land; such a burthen would have appeared in-
tolerable to men who received their estates as
the reward of their valour, and who confidered
their service in the field as a full retribution for
what they pof£effed. The King's demesnes, or
the portion of land which he fiill retained il his
own hands unalienated, furnished fubfillence to
his court, and defrayed the ordinary expenceof
government. *) The only fiated taxes which

::) Craig, d Feud, lib. I. Dieg. 14. Du Cante Gloni; voc.

Dolinlic1um.

# They had no standing armies.

the feudal law obliged vassals to pay to the king,
or to those of whom they held their lands, were
three; one when his eldest son was made a
knight ; another when his eldest' daughter was
married; and a third in order to ransom him if
he should happen to be taken prisoner. Besides
these, the king received the feudal casualties of
the ward, marriage, &c. of his own vafrals.
And, on forne extraordinary occasions, his sub-
jefls granted him an aid, which they diftin-
guifhed by the name of a benevolence, in order
to declare that he received it notin consequence
of any right, but as a gift, flowing from their
good will. ') All these added together, pro-
duced a revenue, scanty and precarious, which,
far from enabling the king to attempt any thing
that could excite the jealousy or fear or the no-
bles, kept him in continual indigence, anxiety,
and dependence.

They had no 1tanding .'rmnies

Nor could the king supply the defect of his

revenues, by the terror of his arms. Mercenary
troops and standing armies were unknown, as
long as the feudal governmentfubfifted in vigour.
Europe was peopled with soldiers. The vassals
of the king, and the fub-vaffals of the barons,
were all obliged to carry arms. And while the
poverty of princes prevented them from fortify-

') Du CanGe voc, Auxilium.

ing their frontier towns, while a campaign con.
tinued but a few weeks, and while a fierce and
impetuous courage was impatient to bringevery
quarrel to the decision of a battle, an army,
without pay, and with little discipline, was
sufficient for all the purposes both of the fecu-
rity and of the glory of the nation. Such-an
army, however, far from being an engine at
the king's difporal, was often no !ess formidable
to him, than to his enemies. The morewar-
like any people were, the more independent
they became; and the fame persons being both
soldiers and fubjeets, civil privileges and immu-
nities were the consequence of their vicories,
and the reward of their martial exploits. -Con-
querors, whom mercenary armies, under our
present forms of government, often render the
tyrants of their own people, as well as the
scourges of mankind, were commonly, under
the feudal constitution, the most indulgent of all
princes to their fubjets, because they stood
mot. in need oftheir assistance. A prince, whom
even war and victories did not render the master
of his own army, possessed no shadow of mili-
tary power during times of peace. His disbanded
soldiers mingled with his other fubjets; not a
*ingle man received pay from himi many.ages
elapsed even before a guard was appointed to
defend his person; and destitute of that grea
instrument of dominion a sanding army, the au-

# Their jurisdiction was limited.

thoritv of the king continued always feeble, and
was often contemptible.

Their juriftliaiotJ was limited,

Nor were tlchre the only circunmfances which

contributed towards depressing the regal power.
By the feudal fyfemin, the king's judicial autho-
rity was extremely circumscribed. At first,
princes fccm to have been the supreme judges
of their people, and, in person, heard and de-
termined all controversies among them. The
multiplicity of caunes soon made it neceflary to
appoint judges, who, in the king's name, de-
cided matters that belonged to the royal jurif-
dicion. But the barbarians, who over-ran Eu-
rope, having def royed mlof of the great cities,
and the countries which they seized being can-
toned out among powerful barons, who were
blindly followed by numerous vassals, whom,
in return, they were bound to protet from
every injury; the administration of justice was
greatly interrupted, and the execution of any
legal sentence became almost impracticable.
Theft, rapine, murder, and disorder ofallkinds
prevailed in every kingdom ofEurope, to ade-
gree almost incredible, and scarce compatible
with the fiubfiftence of civil society. Every of-
fender flieltered himself under the protection of
fimc powerful chieftain, who screened him from
the pursuits of juilice. To apprehend, and to
Puuifh a criminal, often required the union and

eflort of halfakingdom. *) In order to remedy
there evils, many persons of difintion were en.
truited with the adminifiration of justice within
their own territories.. But what we may presume
was, at first, only a temporary grant, oraper-
fonal privilege, the incroaching spirit of the
noblesfoon converted into aright, and rendered
hereditary. The lands of some were ere&ted
into Baronies, those of others, into Regalities.
The jurisdiCtion of the furmer was extensive;
that of the latter, as the name implies, royal,
and almost unbounded. All causes, whether
civil or criminal, were tried by judges, whom

:) A remarkable instance ofthis occurs in the following his-

tory, so late as the year 156I. Mary, having appointed
a court of jiFrice to be held on lite borders, the inhabit-
ants of no less than eleven counties were funmoned to
guard the peifon, who was to a& as judge, and enable
him to enforce his decidlons. Vol. I. B, 111 Tne words of pro-
clnamation. which alsord fuchl a convincing proof of the feeble-
ness of the feudal governmentt deserve our notice.- ,. And
becaule it iti Iecellary for the execution of her Highne s' coint
lanidments aud'ervice, that her justice be well accompanied,
and her authority flfficiently fortificd, by the conccurrence
of a good power of her faithful fibjeas- Therefore com-
mands and charges all and sundry Earls, Lords , Barons,
Freeholders, Landed-men, and other Gentltnenl, dwell-
ing within the said counties , that they, and every one of
hemin, with their kin, friends, fcrvants, and houfhold-
len , well bodin in feir of war in the nmof fubftantious
manner, (i. e. completely aried and provided,) and with
twenty days viEuals to meet and to pars forward with him
to the borough of Jedbnrgh , and there to remain during
the said space of twenty days, and to receive such direc-
tion and commiands, as thall be given by him to therm ill
our Sovereign Lady's name, for quietness of the country;
and to put the fame in execution under the pain of loling
theirlife, lands, and goods. " Keith's Hit. of cotland, 198.

the lord of the regality appointed, and if the
king's courts called any person within his ter-
ritory before them, the lord of regality might
put a flop to their proceedings, and by thepri-
vilege of repledging, remove the cause to his
own court, and even punish his vassal, if he
submitted to a foreign jurifdiftion. :) Thus al-
*most every queffion, in which any person who
resided on the lands of the nobles was interested,
being determined by judges' appointed by the
nobles themselves, their vassals were fcarcefen-
fible of being, in any degree, fubje& to the
crown. A feudal kingdom was split into many
finali principalities, almost independent, and
held together by a feeble and commonly an im-
perceptible bond of union. And the king was
not only firipped of the authority annexed to
the person of a supreme judge, but his revenue
suffered no fmalldiminution, by the loss ofthore
pecuniary emoluments, which were, in that
age, due to the person who adminifteredjuftice.

In the fame proportion that the king funk

in power, the nobles rose towards indepen-
dence. Not satisfied with having obtained a
hereditary right to their fiefs, which they for-
merly held during pleasure, their ambition aim-
ed at something bolder, and by introducing en-
tails, endeavoured, as far as human ingenuity
and invention can reach that end, to render
') Craig, lib. iill Dieg. 7.

their poftebflons unalienable and everlafling. As
they had full power to add to the inheritance
trannfmitted to them from their anceflors, but
none to diniiniflh it; time alone, by means of
marriages, legacies, and other accidents, brought
continual accessions of wealth, and of dignity;
a great family, like a river, became confider-
able from the length of its course, and as it
rolled on, new honours and new property flow-
ed fuccefl'v-ely into it. Whatever influence is
derived from titles of honour, the feudal ba-
rons likewvife pofiefel'd in an ample manner.
These marks of distinCtion are, in their own
nature, either official or personal, and being
annexed to a particular charge, or bestowed by
the admiration of mankind upon illaftrions cha-
racters, ought to be appropriated to these. But
the son, however unworthy, could not bear to
be rripped of that appellation, by which his
father had been diflinguifhed. His prefutrp-
tion claimed, what his virtue did not merit;
titles of honour became hereditary, and added
new lustre to nobles already in possession of too
much power. Something more audacious and
more extravagant Rill remained. The supreme
direfion of all affairs, both civil and military,,
being committed to the great officers of the
crown, the fame and safety of princes, as well
as of their people, depended upon the fidelity
and abilities of there officers. But such was
the prepofierous ambition of the nobles , and

tso successful even in their wildest attempts to
aggrandize themselves, that in all the king-
doms where the feudal inflitutions prevailed,
mot of these offices were annexed to great fa-
milies, and held, like fiefs, by hereditary right.
A person whose undutiful behaviour rendered
him odious to his prince, or whose incapacity
exposed him to the contempt of the people, of-
ten held a place of power and trufi, of the
greatest importance to both. In Scotland, the
offices of Lord Jufiice General, Great Cham-
berlain, High Steward, High Contiable, Earl
Mlarfhal, and High Admiral, were all heredi-
tary; and in many counties, the office of She-
riff was held in the fame manner.

Nobles, whose property was so extensive,

and whose power so great, could not fail of
beingturbulent and formidable. Nor did they
wvant infirumients for executing their boldest de-
ligns. That portion of their lands, which they
parcelled out among their followers, supplied
them with a numerous band of faithful and de-
termined vassals; while that, which they retain-
ed in their own hands, enabled them to live
with a princely splendour, The great hall of
an ambitious baron was often more crouded
than the court, of his sovereign. The strong
castles, in which they retided, afforded a fe-
cure retreat to the discontented and seditious.
A great part of their revenue was spent upon
multitudes of indigent , but bold retainers.

# Their power greater in Scotland than in any other kingdom.

And if at any time they left their retreat to
appear in the court of their £overeign, they.
were accompanied, even in times of peace,-
with a vaif train of armed followers. The usual
retinue of William the sixth Earl of Douglas
confifed of 2ooo horse. Those bs the other
nobles were magnificent and formidable in pro-
portion. Impatient of subordination, and for-
getting their proper rank, fuclh potent and haugh-
ty barons were the rivals, rather than the sub-
je&s of their prince. They often defpiled his
orders, insulted his person , and wrelfed from
him his crown. And the history of Europe,
during several ages, contains little else, but
the accounts of the wars and revolutions oc-
calioned by their exorbitant ambition.

Their power greater in Scotland than in ally other

liingclon,

But, if the authority of the barons farex-

ceeded its proper bounds in the other nations
of Europe, we may affirm that the balance
which ought to be preserved between a king
and his nobles was entirely loft in Scotland.
The Scottifil nobles enjoyed, in common with
those of other nations, all the means for ex-
tending their authority which arise from the
ariftocratical genius of the feudal government.
Besides these, they pofifeied advantages peculiar
to themselves : The accidental sources of. their
power were considerable; and singular circumr

# The particular causes of this.

# The nature of the country.

,;' ces concurred with the spirit of the confti-

-ci to aggrandize them.

.\,'4 Tile partictilar causes of this.

To enumerate the most remarkable of tihfee

·vill serve both to explain the political slate of
the kingdom, and to illustrate many important
occurrences, in the period now under our
review.

The nature of the country.

I. The nature of their country was one

cause of the power and independence of the
Scottish nobility. Level and open countries
are formed for servitude. The authority of the
supreme magittrate reaches with ease to the
most distant corners; and when nature has
ereced no barrier, and affords no retreat, the
guilty or obnoxious are soon detected, and
punished. Mountains, and fens, and rivers set
bounds to defpotick power, and amidst there,
is the natural feat of freedom and independence.
In such places, did the Scottish nobles usually
fix their residence. By retiring to his own
castle, a mutinous baron could defy the power
of his sovereign, it being impra&ticable to lead
an army, through a barren country , to places
almolt inaccelfible to a tingle man. The fame
canl'es, which checked the progress of ;the Ro-
man arms, and rendered all the efforts of Ed-
ward I. abortive, often proteted the Scottish

# The small number of great cities.

nobles from the vengeance of their ptince;
and they owed their personal independence,
to those very mountains and marshes, which
saved their country from being conquered.

The , fnill number of great cities.

if. The want of great cities in Scotland

contributed not a little to increase the power
of the nobility, and to weaken that of the
Prince. Wherever numbers of men affemb'e
together, order mufl be ePfablifhed, and a re-
gular form of government iniituted, the an-
thority of the magistrate must be recognized,
and his deciiions meet with prompt and full
obedience. Laws and subordination take rife
in cities; and where there are few cities as
in Poland, or none as in Tartary, there are
few or no traces of any fort of police. But
under the feudal governments, commerce the
chief means of aflembling mankind, was ne-
g!e~ced; the.nobles, in order to flrengthen their
influence over their vafTals, resided among them,
and seldom appeared atcourt, where they found
a superior, or dwelt in cities, where they met
wMith equals. In Scotland, the rich counties
in the South lying open to the English, no
town situated there could rife to be great or
populous amidst continual inroads and alarms:
Thle residence of our monarchs was not fixed
to any particular place; many parts of the
country were barren and uncultivated; and in

# The institution of Glans.

coiifequcnce of there peculiar circumstances ,
added to the general causes flowing from thd
nature of the feudal institutions, the towns in
Scotland were extremely few, and very incon-
filerable. The va'fITls of every baron occupied.
a diftinEt portion of the kingdom, and fortned
a separate and almoll independent society. In-
stead of giving aid towards reducing to obe-
dience their seditious Chieftain, or any whont
he took under his protection, they were all
in arms for his defence, and obftruOted the
operations of justice to the iutnmol. The prince
was obliged to connive at criminals, whonm
he could not reach; the nobles, conscious of
this advantage, were not afraid to offend; andc
the difficulty of puniChing almost asi'red thenm
*of impunity.

The initiitniot of Glais.

III. The division of the country into clans

had no small effet in rendering the nobles con-
fiderable. The nations, which over-ran Europe,
were originally dividedinto many small tribes;
and when they came to parcel out the lands
which they had'conquered, it was natural for
every chieftain to bellow a portion, in the sirs
place, upon tliofe of his own tribe or family.
These all held their lands of him; and as the
safety-6s each individual depended on the ge-
neral union, these fnall societies clung together,
and were distinguished by some common ap-

pellatidn, either patronymical, or local, long
before the introdustion of surnames, or en.
Iigns armorial. But when thele became common,
the defcendauts and relations of every chieftain
aftumed the fame name and arms with him;
other vallals were proud to imitate their example,
and by degrees they were communicated to all
those who held of the faGme superior. Thus
clanfhips were formed; and in a generation or
two, that consanguinity which was, at firfl-in
a great mearure, imaginary, was believed to be
real; An artificial union was converred into a
xlatural one; men willingly followed a leader,
whom they regarded both as the superior of
their lands, and the chief of tlie;r blold , and
served him not only with the fidelity of vas-
falsh but with the alfTe&ion of friends. In the
other feudal kingdoms, we may obrerve such
unions, as we havedefcribed, imperfetly form-
ed; but in Scotland, whether they were the
production of chance, or the effeat of policy,
or introduced by the Irish colony above men-
tioned, and ftrengthenedby carefully preserving
their genealogies both genuine and' fabulous,
clanfhips were universal. Such a confederacy
might be overcome, it could not be broken;
and no change of manners, or of government,
has been able, in some parts of the kingdom,
to diflolve afifciations which are founded upon
prejudices so natural to the human mind. How
formidable were nobles at the head of followers,

usvh»

# The small number of the nobles.

who counting that cause just and honourable
which their chief approved, were ever ready
to take the field at his command, and to fa-
crilice their lives in defence of his person, or
of his fame! Aai:lnt fluch men, a king con-
tendtd w ith great disadvantage; and that cold
service, which money purchases, or authority
extorts, was not an equal match for their ar-
dour and zeal.

The flmall number of the nobles.

IV. The smallness of their number may

be mentioned among the causes of the grandeur
of the Scottish nobles. Our annals reach not
back to the first division of property in the
kingdom; but so far as we can trace the matter,
the original pofieflions of the nobles seem to
have been extensive. The ancient Thanes were
the equals and the rivals of their prince.
Many of the earls and barons, who succeeded
them, were matters of territories no less ample.
France and England, countries wide and fertile,
afforded settlements to a numerous and powerlul
nobility. Scotland, a kingdom neither exten-
five nor rich, could not contain many fuchl
overgrown proprietors. But the power of an
arifi-ocracy always diminishes, in proportion
to the increase of its numbers; feeble if divided
among a multitude, irrefiCfibie if centered in a
few. When nobles are numerous, their ope-
rations nearly resemble those of the people;

Hilt. of Scotl. Vol. I. C

# Their leagues and combinations.

they are roured only by what they feel, :ont
by what they apprehend; and submit to mainy
arbitrary and oppressive afts, before they tnakl
arms againfi their sovereign. A finall bodyv,
on the contrary, is more sensible, and more
impatient; quick in discerning, and prompt il
repelling danger; allits motions are as fuddcn,
as those of the other are flow. Hence pro.
ceeded the extreme jealousy, with which the
Scottish nobles observed their monarchs, andi
the fierceness with which they opposed their
incroachments. Even the virtue of a prince
did not render them less vigilant, or lels enci'
to defend tleir rights; and Robert Bruce,
notwitliflaiding the 1plendour of his victor;es,
and the glory of his name, was upon the
point of experiencing the vigour of their re.
fiftance, no less than his unpopular de'ccindaw:
James ll-. Betides this, the near alliance oi
the great families, by frequent intcrrnarriages,
was the natural consequence of their I'mali
number. And as consanguinity was, in thoie
ages, a powerful bond of union, all the kindrtil
of a nobleman interested themselves in his
quarrel, as a common caufc ; and every contcdl
the ling had, though with a single baron, Iton(
drew upon him the arms of a whole conl
federacy.

Their leagues aind coinbiiinaions.

V. Those natural connexions, both ,with
their equals and with their inferiors, the Scot-

tilh nobles flrengthened by a device, wh1ich,
if not peculiarto themselves, was at least more
frequent am,,ng them, than in any other na-
tion. Even in times of profonld peace, they
formed afibciations, which when made with
their equals , were called leagt-es of mutual
defence; and when with their inferiors, bonds
of manrent. By the former, the contrating
parties bound themselves mutually to affifl each
other, in all causes , and again(t all persons.
By the latter,. protction was fiipulated on the
one hand, and fidelity and personal fervicepro-
nmifed on the otiler. :) Self-prefervation, it
is probable, forced men at firfl into these con-
federacies; and while disorder and rapine were
universal, while government vwas unsettled,
and the authority of la\ws little known or re-
garded, near neighbours found it necessary to
unite in this manner for their security , and the
weak were obliged to court the patronage of
the strong. By degrees, these associations be-
came so many alliances olTenfive and defenlive
againlf the throne: :nild as their obligation was
.held to be more sacred than any tie whatever,
they gave much umbrage to our kings, and
contributed not a little to the power and in-
dependence of the nobility. In the reign of
James II. William the eighth earl of Douglas
entered into a league of this kind with the earls

::) Aa 30. Parl, i44, Aa. 43, P. 155,5

C

# The frequent wars with England.

of Crawford, Ross, Mlurray, Ovmond, the
lords Hamilton, Balveny, &c. and so formi-
dable was this combination to the king, that lie
had recourse to a measure no less violent than
unjaft, in order to dissolve it.

The frequent M\ars Y ith EI glanid,

VT. The frequent wars between England

and Scotland proved anotllr cause of augment-
ing the power of the nobility. Nature ]has
placed no barrier between the two kingdoms;
a river, almost every whvere fordable, divides
them towards the ealf: on the w\,ell they are
separated by an imaginary line. The fiall re-
venues of our kings prevented them from Cor-
tifying, (r placing garrisons in the towns on
the frontier; nor would tie jealousy of their
i'uljecrs have permitt'ed such a method ol de-
fence. 'The barons, whose estates lay n ler the
borders, confidered themselves as bound both
in honour and in interest to repel the enemy.
The wardenships of the dilferent marches, of-
jices of great trust and dignity, were always
bellowed on them. This gained tihen the lead-
ing of the warlike counties in the south; and
their vassals, living in a state of perpetual ho-
itility, or enjoying at bell: an insecure peace,
became more inured to war than een the rcfr
of their countrymen, and more willing to nc-
company their chieftain in his most hardy and
dangerons enterprises. It was the valour, no

# The frequent minorities which happened in Scotland.

less than the number of their followers, that
rendered the Douglases great. The nobles in
the nothern and midland counties were often
dutiful and obsequious to the croxn, but our
nionarcls always found it imtpradiicable to sub-
due the mutinous and ungovernable spirit of the
borderers. 'En all our domeftick quarrels, those
who could draw to their fide the inhabitants
as the foutiern counties, were sure of victory;
and conscious of this advantage, the lords who
pofteftcd authority there, were apt to forget
the duty which they owed their sovereign, and
to aspire beyond the rank of subje&s.

The frequent minorities lwhich happened in Scotland.

Vii. The calamities which besel ouf kings

contributed more than any other cause to dimi-
nifh the royal authority. Never was any race
of monarchs so unfortunate as the Scottish.
Of fix successive princes, from Robert II. to
James VI. not one died a natural death; and
the minorities, during that time, were longer,
and more frequent, than ever happened in any
other kingdom. From Robert Bruce to James
VI. we reckon ten princes; and seven of there
wvere called to the throne, while they were
minors, and almolf infants. Even tie Inof:
regular an best eftiablifhled governments feel
sensibly the pernicious e'lfects of a minori-
ty, and either become languid and inadtive,
or are thrown into violent and unnatural con-
vulfions. But, under the imperfet: and ill-ad?

jufled system of government in Scotland, these
elfects were still more fatal; and the fierce and
mutinous spirit of the nobles, unrefirained by
the authority of a king, scorned all lubjestion
to the delegated jurifdiaion of a regent, or to
the feeble commands of a minor. The royal
authority was circunmfcribed within narrower
limits than ever; the prerogatives of the crown,
naturally inconsiderable , were reduced almoof
to nothing; and the ariflocratical power gra..
dually rose upon the ruins of'the monarchical.
Left the perConal power of a regent should en-
able him to .Et with too much vigour, the au-
thority annexed to that ofitce, was sometimes
rendered inconsiderable, by being divided; or
if a single regent was chosen, the greater no-
bles, and the heads of the more illufiriois fa-
milies, were seldom raised to that dignity, It
was often conferred upon men, who pofteffed
little influence, and excited no jealousy. They,
conscious of their own weakness, were obliged
to overlook fume irregularities, and to permit
others; and in order to flipport their authority,
which was dceftitute of real strength, they en-
deavoured to gain the most powerful and asive
barons, by granting them poffeflions and im-
munities, which raised them to itill greater
power. When the king himself came to aflame
the reins of government, he found his revenues
wvafted or alienated, the crown lands seized or
given away, and the nobles so accuflomed to

# Review of the events favourable to the nobles during each minority.

# David II. 1329.

independence, that, after the firuggles of a
w:hole reign, he wvas seldom able to reduce
them to the fame fiate, in which they had been
at the beginning of his minority, or to vref:
from them lwhat they had usurped during that
time.

Icview- or thle events favourable to the nobles ulring

each nlinority.

if we take a view of what happened to

each of our !kings, who \as so

a unfortunate as

to be placed in this fitnation, the truth and
importance of this observation wvill fully appear.

David II, 1329.

The minority of David IT. the son of Ro-

bertBruce, was disturbed by the pretensions of
Edward Baliol, who, relying on the aid of
England, and on the support of some difaflCeted
barons among the Scots , invaded the kingdom.
The success which at first attended his arms,
obliged the young king to retire to France;
and Baliol took pofleffion of the throne. A
small body of tle nobles, however, continu-
ing faithful to their exiled prince, drove Baliol
out of Scotland; and after an absence of nine
years, .David returned from France, and took
the government of the kingdom into his own
hands. But nobles, who were thus wafling
their blood and treasure in defence of the crown,
had a right to the undisturbcd poffflion of
their ancient privileges; and even foine title

# James I. 1405.

to arrogate new ones. It seems to have been
a maxim in that age, that every leader iiight
claim as his own , the territory which his
sword had won from the enemy. Great ac-
quifitions were gained by the nobility in that
way: and to thefc the gratitude and liberality
of David added, by distributing among such as
adhered to him, the vas1, ponffelons which
fell to the crown by the forfeiture of his ene-
nlies. The family of Douglas, which began
to rife above the other nobles, in the reign of
his father, augmented both its power and its
property, during his minority.

James [. 1.>e5t

James T. was seized by the English dur-

ing the continuance of a truce, and ungene-
roufly detained a prifoneralmoft nineteen years.
During thatperiod, the kingdom was governed,
sirss by his uncle Robert duke of Albany, and
then, by Murdo his son. Both these noble-
men aspired to the crown; and their unna-
tural ambition, if we may believe most of our
historians, not only cut short the days of Prin-
ce David, the King's elder brother, but pro-
longed the captivity of James. They flattered
themselves that they might ifep with less op-
position into a throne, when almost vacant:
and, dreading the King's return, as the ex-
tintion of their authority, and the end of their
hopes, they carried on the negociations for

# James II. 1437.

obtaining his liberty with extreme remiifnefs,
At the fame time, they neglected nothingthat
could either sooth or bribe the nobles to ap-
prove their scheme. They flackend the reins
of government; they allowed the prerogative
to be encroached upon; they fulTered the mofi
irregular a'ts of power, and even wanton in-
ilances of oppreflion, to pass with impunity;
they dealt out the patrimony of the crown
among those whose enmity they dreaded, or
whose favour they had gained; and reduced
the royal authority to a state of imbecillity,
from which succeeding monarchs laboured in
vain to raise it.

lames II, 43*7.

During the minority of James :I. the

adminilrfration of afTairs and the custody of the
King's person were committed to Sir William
Crichton, and Sir Alexander Livingston. Jea-
lousy and discord were the effers of their
conjun&e authority, and each of them, in or-
der to strengthen himself, bestowed new power
and privileges upon the great men, whose aid
lie courted. While the young earl of Dou-
glas, encouraged by their divisions. erected a
fort of independent principality within the king-
dom: and forbidding his val'als to acknowledge
any authority but his own , he created Kinghts,
appointed a privy council , named olficers civil
and military, assumed every ensign of Royalty?

# James III. 1460.

# James V.

but the title of King, and appeared in publick
with a magnificence more than royal,

James 11. T460

Eighlt persons were chosen to govern the

'ingdom during the minority of James III. Lord
Boyd, however, by seizing the person of the
young King, and by the ascendant which he
acquired over him, soon engrofed the whole
authority. He formed the ambitious project
of raising his family to the fame pitch of power
and ?;randcur with those of the prime nobility;
and lie efTeAed it. While intent on this , he
relnaxed the vigour of government, and tle
Barons became accuftomled, once more, to
anarchy and independence. The power, which
Boyd had bten at so much pains to acquire,
was of no long continuance, and the fall of
his family, according to the fate of favourites,
was sudden and destructive; butupon its ruins,
the family of -lamilton role , which soon at-
tained the higheflr rank in the kingdom.

James V.

As the minority of James V, was longer,

it was likewise more turbulent than those of
the preceding Kings. And the contending
nobles, encouraged or protected either by the
King of France, or of England, formed them-
selves into more regular fa&ions, and difre-
garded more than ever the restraints of order

and authority. The French had the advantage
of feeing one, devoted to their interest , raised
to be regent. This.. was the duke of Albany,
h native of France, and a grandson of James
.II. But Alexander Lord Home , the' mol.
eminent of all the Scottil'h peers who survived
the fatal battle of Flbwden, thwarted all his
measures, during the firfe years of his adm.in-
iftration ; and the intrigues of the Queen Dow-
ager, sifter of Henry VIIT. rendered.the lat-
ter part of it no less feeble. Though ifuport-
ed by French auxiliaries, the nobles defpi'ed
his authority, and, regardless either of his
threats or his intreaties, peremptorily refused,
two several times, to enter England, to the
borders of which kingdom he had led them.
Provoked by these repeated instances of con-
tempt, the regent abandoned his troublesome
fration, and , retiring to France, preferred the
tranquillity of a private life, to an office def-
titute of real authority. Upon his retreat,
Douglas Earl of Angus becamlle mafrer of the
King's person, and governed the kingdom in
his name. Many efforts were made to deprive
him of his usurped authority. But the nume-
rous vaflals and friends of his family adhered to
him, because he divided \with them the power
and emol uments of his office; the people reverenc-
ed and loved the name of Douglas; he exer-
cifed. without the title of regant, a fuller and
.pore absolute authority than any who had'

# The power of the feudal nobles became intolerable to Princes.

enjoyed that dignity; and the ancient, but
dangerous pre-eminence of the Duglafes, seemed
to be reLlored.

To there, and to many other causes, omitted

or unobfcrved by us, did the Scottish nobility
owe that exorbitant and uncommon power, of
which infrances occur, so frequently, in our hiC-
tory. Nothing however demonstrates so fully
the extent of their power, as the length of its
duration. Many years after the declension of
tile feudal f'yfLems in the other kingdoms of
Europe, and when the arms or policy of Prin-
ces h:Ld, every where, fhalen, or laid it in
ruins, the foundations of that ancient fabrick
remina!ed, in a great reafure, firm and un-
touched in Scotland.

Tlh l wo;ver ~f the feuldal nobles jbecatnlc intoclrable

to Princes.

The powers, which the feudal inflititions

veRted in the nobles, soon became intolerable
to all the Princes of Europe, who longed to
poflefs something more than a nominal and pre-
carious authority. Their impatience to obtain
this, precipitated Henry III. of England , Ed-
ward II. and some other weak Princes, into
rash and premature attempts against the privile-
ges of the Barons, in which they were difap-
pointed or perished. Princes, of greater abili-
ties, were content to mitigate evils which they
could not cure; they fought occupation for the

# The attempts to humble the nobles successful in France and in England.

turbulent spirit of tleir nobles, in frequent\wars;
and allowed their liery courage to evaporate in
foreign expeditions, which, if they brought:
no other advantage, secured at leafi dnieliicl
tranquillity.

Tile attenipts to Ilnnille the niibles rncccr. fil ill France

a:ld inll Elglind.

But time and accidents ripened tlhe feudal

governments for delirulioun. Towards the end
of the fifteenth century, and beginning of the
fi.teentlh, all the Princes of Europe attacled,
as if by concert, the power of their nobles.
llen of genils then undertook v.ith fuccels
what their unfkilril predeccfiors had attempted.
in vain. Levis XI. of France, the mofk pro-
found and the n;ot adventurous genius of that
age, began, and, in a single reign, almot:
completed the scheme of their destruCtion. The
flre but concealed policy of Henry VII. ofEng-
land produced the fame effe&. The means,
indeed, employed by these nonarchs were very
dilYerent. The blow, which Lewis flruckl,was
sudden and fatal. The artilices of Henry re-
fembled those flow poisons, \lwich wxafle the
conltitution. but become not mortal till some
distant period. Nor did they produce confe-
quences less opposite. Lewis boldly added to
the crown whatever he wrested from the nobles.
Henry undermined his Barons,' by encouraging
them to fell their lands, which enriched the

# But the nobles continue to gather strength in Scotland.

# Our Kings endeavoured to extend the royal authority.

# General means towards this end.

commons, and gave them a weight in thelegil.
lature unknown to their predecessors.

futt the nobles contitnue to gather fIrength in Scot'and,

Bat Vwhile there great revolutions were

carrying on in two kingdoms, with which Scot.
land was intimately conneced, no alteration
happened there; the Kiing neither extended lis
own prerogative, nor enabled the commons to
encroach upon the aristocracy; the nobles not
only retained their ancient privileges and pofleLt
sions, but daily made new acquifirions.

Our Kings enldeavoured to extend the royal authority.

T'lis was rnot owing to' the inattention of

our Princes, or to the;rwant of ambition. They
'were abundanliy fcn;fible of rhe exorbitant )power
o,'the nobility, and extremely solicitous tol umble
that order. 'They did nor, how7ever, pofi'cls
maeans sufficient for accomplishing that end,
The resources of our mnonarchls were-few , and
the progress which they made inconsiderable.

General neans towards this end.

But as the nuniber of their followers, and

the extent of their jirifdiftion , were the two
chief circumiiftances vwhich rendered the noblei
formidable, in order to counterbalance the one,
and to relrain the other, all our Kings had
recourse to the fame expedients.

# Encourage discord among the nobles.

Eiicourage dihlord lamonG the nobles.

I. Among nobles of a fierce courtge , and,

ps unpolifhcd manners, surrounded with vafl'als
bold and licentious, whom they i',ere bound
by interefL and honour to protec:, the causes of
discord were many and unavoidable. And as the
contending parties could feldoin agree in ack-
nowledging the authority of any common fnpe-
rior or judge, and their imnpatiient spirit wonult
seldom wvait the flow decifioi.s of jullicc, their
quarrels were usually terminated 1 y the f\vord.
The offended Baron aflembled his vafials, and
wanfed the lands, or fhed,thlie b-itod of his enemy.
·To forgive an injury, was mean; to forbear
revenge, inf:mous or cowardly. ':) Hence quar-

', The fl)ilit of revenge waas enicotlraced not only by thei man-

tners, but, \hlbat is mIore ri'lall)lli!e , by tile I.\vs of thole
a. es. If aily pefrC'n thioughlt the proieciltiion of an injury
eiiered to lifi lanlily , too iroublel'one , or too diangerotis,
tile Salicle ia\\'s permitted lilml puiblicly to desist foill de-
il ll tiitl \'elligeance ; but the fatine law s il order to punilii
tiis cosvardice , eind winllt of afiflaioU to his fallily, depri-
ved iii of the liglt of fiiccc.lion. I-lenanlt's Abregd Chro-
nol p., sl. Animoig Ithe I\iigao-Saxon i, v'e find a iingl.lar
itllitiltion diiiligji il'licc, by tile l:'c of ridLilitim i ; a vtII110.-
I lry albociation, tihe olij.:a w.ihtreof \va, tl' p-ersonal fe-
curicy (,i triole who joiied.iin it, :lld \\lich ihi li ecbllnesf
ul [2. vcr linelit at that timne re ndfred 1iecellary. Ail1ong
other rellul:tiois, v ,'licl are coioniined ill one of these fill
extallt, ttle oIllosiillIt defertvs lnctice: ,, if any allociate
fliall citler eat or drink \vltll a person whlo 3hs killed anly

elilnlber of the fodalitiuli , uiilelfs in tie pitcfelic of I.iic

Iling, the B ,liho , or the Count, and unlel's, he c:al prove
that lie *lid lint kilow tlie periol n, let liiil pay a grea:
line. " Hicks Dilfert. Epifiolar. aplud i'ellhlat. LiinSi Sep-
tenir, vol. i. p. 21.

rels wiere transmittcd from father to son , and
under the name of deadly feuds subsisted for
many generations , with unmitigated rancour.
It was the interefl of the crown to fomenrt ra-
ther than to extinguish there quarrels; and by
scattering or cherishing the feeds of discord among
the nobles, that union which would have ren-
dered the arillocracy invincible, and which nuflt
at once have annihilated the prerogative, was
effe&ually prevented. To the fame cause, our
Kings were indebted for the success, with which
they sometimes attacked the most powerful chief-
tains. They employed private revenge to aid the
impotence ofpublick lawvs, and arming again t the
person who had incurred their dilpleafure, those
rival families which wished his fall, they reward-
ed their service, by fliaring among them the
spoils of the vanquished. BLUt this expedient,
though it served to humble individuals, did not
weaken the body of the nobility. Those, who
are now the inllruments of their Prince's ven-
geance, became, in a short time, the oljeP&;
of his fear. Having acquired power and wealth
by serving the Crown, they, in their t urn, set
np for independence: And though there might
be a flutuation of power , and of property;
tlough old families fell, and new ones roie
lupon their ruins; the rights of the ariflocracy
i mained entire, and its vigour unbroken.

It.

# Extend the jurisdiction of the King's courts.

Extend the jurirdilaion of tie King's courts.

I1. As the adminiffration of justice isoneof

the most powerful ties bettween a King and his
fubjeats, all our monarchs were at the utmost
pains to circmnfcribe the jurifdiEtion of the Ba-
rons, and to extend that of the Crown.The external
forms of subordination, naturil to the feudal
system, favoured this attempt. An appeal lay
from the judges and courts of the Barons, to
those of the King. The right, however, of
judging in the firit intiance, belonged to the
nobles, and they easily found means to defeat
the effec of appeals, as well as of many other
feudal regulations. The royal juriCdiction was
almost coilined within the narrow limits of the
King's demefies, beyond which his judges claim-
ed indeed much authority, but poffefi'ed next to
none. Our Kings were sensible of these limit-
ations, and bore them with impatience. Bat
it was impossible to overturn in a moment what
was so deeply rooted; or to It'ip the nobles,
at once, of privileges which they had held so
long, and which were wrought almost into
the frame of the feudal confiitution. To ac-
complil'h this, however, was an objectof uni-
form and anxious attention to all our princes.
James 1. led the way, here, as well as in other
instances, towards a more regular and perseEt
police. He made choice, among the eftatesof
parliament, of a certain number of perlons,

Hist. of Scotl. Vol. I. D

whom he difitngnifhed by the name of Lords ofi
Seflion, and appointed them to hold courts for
determining civil causes, three times in the
year, and forty days at a time, in whatever
place he pleased to name. Their jurifdiation
extended to all matters, which formerly came
under the cognizance of the King's council,
and being a committee of parliament, their de-
cifions were final. James IT. obtained a law,
annexing all regalities, which should be forfeit-
ed, to the crown, and declaring the right of
jurifdidtion to be unalienable for the futurc.
James III. imposed severe penalties uponthocf
judges appointed by the Barons , whose deci.
lions should be found on a review to be unjulc;
and, by many other regulations, endeavoured
to extend the authority of his own court. *) Ja-
mes IV. on pretence of remedying the incon-
veniencies ariling fron the short terms of the
court of Selion , appointed other judges called
Lords of Daily Council. The Seflion was an
ambulatory court, and met seldom: the Daily
Council was fixed, and fat confantly at Edin-
burgh; and though not composed of member.;
of parliament, the fame powers, which the
Lords of Session enjoyed, were veiled in it. Ar
last James V. erected a new court that fiill
fubfitls, and which he named the College of Ju-
fricc, the ludges or Senators of which were
called Lords of Council and Seflion. This court

") Aa s. P. 146). Aft 94, P. 1493. A1 99. P. 1487

not only exercised the fame jurifdition wvhich.
formerly belonged to the Selflon and Daily
Council but new rights were added. Privile-
ges of great importance were granted so its
nlemTbers, its forms were prescribed, its terms
fixed, and regularity, power, and splendour
conferred upon it. The perfonsconftitutedjudg-
es in all these different courts, hlad, in many
refpefts, the advantage of those who presided
inthe courts of tle Barons; they were more
eminent for their skill in law, their rules of
proceeding were more uniform, and their deci-
sions more confident. Such judicatories became
the objects of confidence, and of veneration.
Men willingly submitted their property to their
determination, and their encroachments on tile
jurifditions of the nobles were popular, and for
that reason successful. ]jy devices of a similar
nature, thejurifdiation of the nobles in criminal
causes was restrained, and the authority of the
court of Jufliciary extended. The crown, in
this particular, gaining insensibly upon the
nobles, recovered more ample authority; and the
King, wliofe jurifdiation once resembled that of
1a Baron, rather than that of a 'overeign, ;)

D"
) The imoft perlfe idea of the feuidal ryf)te of ,overnmtelit

i1ny be attained by ittelldill to tle liate of Geriuany,
aind to the Iiiftory of France. In the former , the feudal
inllituctiois ltill fulillt with great vi;iiir; and tho lgh alto-
getlier abolished in thelatter, the l mblick records have Ibert
, catlefliilly iref'-rved, that the French lawyers and na'iqulat

came more and more to be confidered as the
head of the community , and the supreme dif-
penser of jultice to his people. These acqui..
litions of our Kings , however, though compa.
ratively great, were in reality inconsiderable;
and, notwithflanding all their efforts, many ui
the separate jurisdiCtions pofifefed by the nobles
remained in greet vigour ; and their final aboli.
tion was reserved to a distant and more happy
period.

ries have been enabled with more certainty and prerili,
thai rtiofe ol y

o ty oiler coultry i l Ellrope, reo trace it>;ll:

its proglefs, and revolutions. In Cclrlally , every pim,
pality may he contlileredl as a lief, .nld all its great 'i!,.
ces as valhlds , holding or the Elilperor. Thiey peofyf
tlde feudal irivileges: their fiefs are perperiual; their jil-
di'tions ithiin their o\vin territories, Jc'larate aiud e.tri..
five; amI tie erclat ollices of tile empire are all leredil.
and annexed io particular failies. At tle fame time til
Elnperor retainls lmany of' tie prerogatives of the Ic'tl.
monarcths. Iike theill, ihis clains anld 1tietreifiois ;ire in.
numerable , and his pol wer friall ; his juirildicti,,i \\ itli
his own deillefltcs'or lib reLlitarv collntries , is coliitith ,
beyond the bounds of rlchfe it is nainoft notlilg; anl i
permanient are feudal principles , tlat althoughl the fcuI.
vfyflem ibe overturrned ill alniol every particular ii.;re
Germany , anld althourgh its Princes have all becomle aii.
lute, tlih original feudal contiit tion of tile empire fiili rl
liainls , anrd ideas peculiar to that forln of govelnlllet ii e,
ail its olperatioins , and determine the righrs of al its l';
ces. Our oblilerv\tiions \titli regard to tile limitedl ]jri.s.
tion of khiL $s uilder the 'feudal governlllents , are ,:r.'
illulirated by wliai hanllpenred in France. The feelilc l!'
and dotage of the defcenidniits of Charlemaigre encott:a;?:
the Peers to ifurrp nn indepenidelet ;trifdiclion. Nolir
relailled ill tie liamds of tile cro'wn ; nil was feizet b:
thelln. W\heln [liIgi Capet aflenrded the thiolne, A. '
987. he kept poll'flicnl of his private patrimony tle Crnl:
otf 'aris, antd all the jurifdi&tion , wilich the Kings hi. ;'

# Each of our Kings pursued some plan of humbling the nobles; this proved by a review of the events in their reigns.

lclih of our Kiiln.s plurfied rfoe pluin of hlillbling tle nlobles;

this proved by a review of thie tvent. ill their reigns,

But besides these methods of defending their

prerogative , and humbling the arilfocracy ,which
may be confidered as common to all our Princes,
we fhail find, by taking a review of their reigns,
that almofr every one of our Kings , from Robert
Bruce to .ames V. had formed some particular
system for deprefi.ng the authority of the nobles,
which was the ob'l(t both of their jealonutr and
terror. This conduc:e of our monarchs, if we
reft satisfied with the accounts of their hiitorians,
must be confidered as (lowing entirely from their
resentment again f: particular noblemen ; and all
their attempts to humble them, must be viewed
as the sallies of private passion, not as the confe-
quences of any general plan of policy. But, though
some of their afions may be imnpted to those
palflons, though the ditl'erent genius of the men,
the temrnerof the times, and the state of the na-
tion , neceflarily occasioned great variety in their
fchenies; yet, witlhout being chargeable with ex-
ceffive refinement, we may affirm that their end
was uniformly the fame. And the proje&t of re-

cefl',rse:.ercifed far fomne timle, Was wk.ihiii its territories.
There were ollly four tomwns in France, where lie coult
elflblilh Gralnds Baillis , or royal judges ; all the other lands,
towns, aiid Ili.es belonged to the nobles. The me-
thods to wvlichi tile Frellch mlonarchs had recourse for ex-
telding itheir juIridition, were exaftly linilar to thoro
employed by our Princes. Ilenault's Abrege, p. 67 , &cF
Ve I'srlrit des Loix: iiv, 30, ch,
C c,

# Robert Bruce.

ducing the power of the aristocracy, sometime3
avowed, and purflcd with vigour; sometimes
concealed, or seemingly suspended; vas nevec
altogether adandoned,

Robert Bruce.

No Prince was ever more indebted to his nob-

les than Robert Bruce. Their valour conquered
the kingdom. and placed him on the throne. -sis
gratitude and generosity beflowed on them the
lands of the vanquished. Property has seldom
undergone greater or more uHdden revolutions,
than those to which'it was subjet, at that time,
in Scotland. Edward I. having forfeited the
el ates of most of the ancient Scottish Barons,
granted them to his English fiubjefts. These
wvere expelled by the Scots, and their lands seized
by new masters. 'Amidst such rapid changes,
confusion was unavoidable; and many possessed
theirlandsby titles extremely defeftive. During
one of those truces between the two nations, oc-
cafioned rather by their being weary of war, than
desirous of peace, Robert formed a scheme for
checking the growing power and wealth of the
nobles. He fummnoned them to appear, and to
shew by what rights they held their lands.
They afiembled accordingty, and the quetfion
being put, they started up, at once, and
drew their swords,,, By these ' said they,,, we
acquired our lands, and with these we will
defend them." The King, intimidated by thei.

# David II.

# Robert II.

# Robert III.

boldnels, prudently dropt the proje'. But so
deeply did they resent this attack upon their
order, that notwithiianding Robert's popular
and splendid virtues, it occasioned a dangerous
conspiracy againit his life.

David II.

David his son, at firfr an cxile in France,

afterwards a prisoner in England, and involved
in continual war -vith Edward 111. had not
ieifure to attend to the internal police of his
kingdonm, or to think of retrenching the pri-
vileges of the nobility.

I\obert 11.

Our liftorians have been more careful to

relate the military, than the civil tranfations
of the reign of Robert II. Slirmifhlcs and
inroads of little consequence, they describe
minutely; but with regard to every thing that
happened, during several years oftranquillity,
they are altogether silent.

Robert 111.

The feeble administration of Robert III.

miuftlike-eife be passed overflightly. A Prince,
of a mean genius, and of a frail and fickjy
constitution, was not a fit person to enter the
lifts with aftive and martial Barons , or to at-
temlpt wresting from them any of their rights.

ducing the power of the aristocracy, fometimie
avowed, and pursued with vigour; fometiime
concealed, or seemingly suspended; was'neve,
altogether adandoned,

Robert Bruce.

No Princewas ever more indebted to his nob.

les than Robert Bruce. Their valour conquered
the kingdom. and placed him on the throne. -Iis
gratitude and generosity bestowed on them the
lands of the vanquiflhed. Property has seldom
undergone greater or more sudden revolutions,
than those to which'it was fubje&, at that time,
in Scotland. Edward I. having forfeited the
ellates of most of the ancient Scottish Barons,
granted them to his English fiibjets. These
were expelled by the Scots, and their lands seized
by new masters. Amidst such rapid changes,
confusion was unavoidable; and many possessed
theirlandsby titles extremely defetive. During
one of those truces between the two nations, oc-
cafioned rather by their being weary of war, than
desirous of peace, Robert formed a scheme for
checking the growing power and wealth of the
nobles. Eie fumtnoned them to appear, and to
shew by what rights they held their lands.
They affembled'accordingly, and the question
being put, they started up, at once, and
drew their swords,,, By these " said they,,,we
acquired our lands, and with these we will
defend them. " The King, intimidated by their

boldness, prudently dropt the projea. But so
deeply did they resent this attack upon their
order, that notwithilanding Robert's popular
and splendid virtues, it occasioned a dangerous
.conspiracy againfl his life.

David II.

David his son, at first an cxile in France,

afterwards a prisoner in England, and involved
in continual \war with Edward III. had not
leisure to attend to the internal police of his
kingdom, or to think of retrenching the pri-
vilcges of the nobility.

lRobcrt 11.

Our historians have been more careful to

relate the military, than the civil tranfaaions
of the reign of Robert II. Skirmiflles and
inroads of little. confcquence, they describe
minutely; but with regard to every thing that
happened, during several years oftranquillity,
they are altogether silent.

Robert 111.

The feeble adminifiration of Robert III.

muftlikewife be pafled over slightly. A Prince,
of a mean genius, and of a frail and fickJy
constitution, was not a fit person to enter the
lifts with a&ive and martial Barons , or to at-
tempt wresting from them any of their rights,

# James I.

JaIl es I.

The civil tranfadions in Scotland are bet-

ter known since the beginning of the reign of
James I. and a complete series of our laws
supplies the defes of our historians. Tile
English made some amends for their injustice
in detaining that Prince a prisoner, by their
generous care of his education. During his
long residence in England, he had an oppor-
tunity of observing the feudal system in a more
advanced state, and refined from many of the
imperfestions which iill adhered to. it, in his
own kingdom. He saw there nobles great,
but notindependent; a King Powerful, though
far from absolute; he saw a regular adminif-
tration of government; wife laws e.nated; and
a nation flourishing and happy, because all
ranks of men were accustomed to obey them.
Full of these ideas, he returned into his native
country, which presented to him a very dif-
ferent scene. The. royal atthoritv, never
great, was now contemptible, by having been
so long delegated to regents. The ancient
patrimony, and revenues of the crown, were
almost totally alienated. During his long ab-
fence, the name of a King was little known,
and less regarded. The licence of many years
had rendered the nobles independent. Universal
anarchy prevailed. The weak were exposed
tb the rapine and oppre-fion of the itrong, In

every corner some barbarous chieftain ruled at
pleasure, and neither feared the King , nor
pitied the people. :)

James was too wife a Prince to employ open

force to corre& such inveterate evils. Neither
the men, nor the times would have born it. He
applied the gentler, and less offensive remedy
of laws and flatutes. IIt a parliament held in-
mediately after his return, he gained the con-
fidence of his people, by many wife lawns,ten-
ding visibly to reestablish order, tranquillity,
and justice, in thelingdom. But, at the f.imne
time that he endeavoured to secure these blef-
sings to his subje&s, he discovered his intention
to recover those possessions of which the crown
had been unj uftly bereaved; and for that purpose
obtained an a& , by which he was impowxered
t.o summon those who had obtained crown lands
during the three last reigns, to produce the
rights by which they held them. **) As this ta-
tute threatened the property of the nobles, ano-
ther which pafied in a fub'equent parliament,
aimed a dreadful blow at their power. By it the
leagues and combinations, which we have al-
ready described, and which rendered the nobles
') A cotempornry Monkifiil riter describes there calamities very

feelingly, in his rude Latin. In diebus illis b non erat lex
in Scotia, fedl quilibet potentioruin jun'oremi oppreflit;
et totum regutlm Itnit utinin 1latrocinium ; hlomicidi , de-
lradrratiolles, inrendia, et racera tnalelicia renlzlnfelutl::
impulnita; et jillitia rele ,atn e:tra termnilos regni e.siuavir,
Clartular. Morav, aplud hlnes iTlay, vol, i, p. 2.

.
), Att 9, P. X.I4.

so formidable to the crown, were declared
unlarwful. *: ) Encouraged by this fucccfs in the
beginning of his enterprise, James's next ftep
vwas itill bolder and more decisive. During the
fitting of parliament, he seized, at once, his
cousin Murdo Duke of Albany, and his sons;
the Earls of Douglas, Lennox, Angus, March,
and obove twenty other peers and barons of
prime rank. To all of them, however, he was
immediately reconciled, except to Albany, and
his itns, and Lennox. These were tried by
their Peers, and condemned; for what crime
is now unknown. Their execution struck the
whole order with terror, and their forfeiture
added vast possessions to the crown. He seized,
lilkewife, the earldcms of Cuchan and Strathern,
upon dilTerent pretexts; and that of Mar fell to
him by inheritance. The patience and ina&i-
vity ofthe nobles, while the King was proceed-
ing so rapidly towards aggrandizing the crown,
are amazing. The only obftruaion he met with
was from a flight infurref&ion headed by the
Duke of Albany's youngest son, and that was
easily suppressed. The splendour and presence
of a King, to which the great men had been
long unaccustomed , inspired reverence: James
was a Prince of great abilities, and condu&ed
his operations with much prudence. He was
in friendship vith England, and closely allied

h) A& 30. P. 1434.

with the French King: He was adored by the
people, who enjoyed unusual security and
happiness under his adminirfration: And all his
acquisitions, however fatal to the body of the
nobles, had been gained by attacks upon indi-
viduals; were obtained by decisions of law;
and being founded on circumstances peculiar to
the persons who suffered, might excite mur-
murs and apprehenfionsbutafforded no colourable
pretext for a general rebellion. It was not
so with the next attempt which the King made.
Encouraged by the facility with which he had
hitherto advanced, lie ventured upon a mea-
sure that irritated the whole body of the nobility,
and which the events fhcw either to have been
entered into with too much precipitancy, oi
to have been carried on with too much violence.
The father of George Dunbar Earl of March
had taken arms against Robert Ill. the King's
father; but that crime had been pardoned, and
his lands restored by Robert duke of Albany.
James, on pretext that the regent had exceeded
his power, and that it was the prerogative of
the King alone to pardon treason, or to alien-
ate lands annexed to the crown, obtained a
sentence declaring the pardon to be void, and
depriving Dumbar of the earldom. Many of
the great men held lands by no other right
than what they derived from grants of the two
Dukes of Albany. Such a decision, though
they had reason to expect it in consequence of

the ftatnte which the King had obtained,, oc.
cafioned a general alarm. Though Dumbar
xvas, at present, the only sufferer, the pre.
cedent might be extended, and their titles to
pofleffions, which they confidered as the re.
wards of their valour, might be fubjeted to the
review of courts of law, whose forms of pro-
ceeding, and jurisdiction, were in a martial age
little known, and extremely odious. Terror
and discontent spread fast. upon this discovery

t llihe 'ling's intentions; the common danger
called on the whole order to unite, and to
make one bold stand, before they were firip-
pcd successively of their acquisitions, and redu-
ced to a skate of poverty and insignificance.
The prevalence of thefe-fefntitents among the
nobles encouraged a few desperate men, the
friends or follo\vers of those who had been the
chief futLerers under the King's adminiftratioii,
to form a conspiracy againf: his life. The firTf
uncertain intelligence of this wvas brought him
while he lay in his camp before Roxburgh castle.
He durfi not confide in nobles, to whom he
had givcn lco many causes of difuft , but instant-
ly difrniN:ed thein and their vassals, and, re-
tiring to a monastery near Perth, was soon after
murdered there, in the lmo'l cruel manrier.
All our historians mention , with astonishment
this circunmtance of the King's disbanding his
army, at a time when it was so necefrary for
his preservation. A King, fay they, farround-

# James II.

ed with hlis Baronsj is secure from secret trea-
jron, and imay defy open rebellion. But those
very Barons were the persons whom he chiefly
dreaded; and it is evident from this review of
his admiriiftation, that he had greater reason
to apprehend danger, than to expert defence
from their hands. It was the misfortune of
James, that his maxims and manners were too
refined for the age in whl'h ie lived. Happy
had he reigned in a kingdom more civilized;
his love of peace, of justice and of elegantce,
would have rendered his schemes successful;
and instead of perishing because he had attempt-
ed too much, a ;rrateful people would have
applauded and seconded his efforts to reform
and to improve them.

Iames It.

Crichton; the molR able man of those whol

had the direetion of affairs during the minority
of James II. had been the minister of James I.
and well acquainted with his resolution of humbl-
ing the 'nobility. He did not relinquifll the
design, and he endeavoured to inspire his pupil
with the fame sentiments. But what James had
attempted to es'e&i slowly, and by legal means,
his son and Crichton pursued with theimpetno-
fity natural to Scotfinen, and with the fierce-
iel's peculiar to that age. William the sixth
'arl of Douglas was the first viitim to their
barbarous policy. That young nobleman (as

'we have already observed) contemning the au-
thority of an infant prince, almost. openly re-
nounced his allegiance, andafpired to indepen-
dence. Crichton, too high-rpirited to bear fiuch
an insult, but too weak to curb or to bring to
jutfice so powerful an offender, decoyed him by
many promi'es to an interview in the castle of
Edinburgh, and, notwithtlanding these, mur-
dered both him and his brother. Crichton, how-
ever, gained little by this act of treachery,
which rendered him universally odious. William
the eighth Earl of Douglas was no less power-
ful, and no less formidable to the crown. By
forming ile league which we already mention-
ed with the Earl of Crawford and other Ba-
rons, he had united against his Sovereign almost
one half of his kingdoom. But his credulity
led him into the falme snare which had been
fatal to the former Earl. Relying on the King's
promises, who had now attained to the years
of manhood, and having obtained a fafe-conduat
under the great feal, he ventured to meet hirrt
in Stirling castle. James urged him to dif'olve
that dangerous confederacy into which he had
entered; the Earl obstinately refused; ,, If
you will not, " said the enraged monarch,
drawing his dagger, ,, This shall; "and stabbed
him to the heart. An aftion so unworthy of
a King filled the nation with astonishment, and
with horror. The Earl's vaftals ran to arms
with the utmost fury, and dragging the safe-

condiu&, which the King had granted and violat-
ed, at a horfc's tail, they marched towards
Stirling, burnt the town, and threatened to
beliege tle castle. An accommodation ensueid;
on what terms is notkllowvn. But the King's
jealousy, and the new Earl's power and resent-
ment, prevented it from being of long continL-
ance. Both took the ield, at the head of tleir
armies, and met near Abcrcorn. That of the
Earl, composed chiefly of borderers, was far
superior to the King's, both in number and in
valour; and a tingle battle muff, in all proba-
bility, have decided whether the house ofStew-
art or of Douglas was henceforth to poTiefs the
throne of,Scotland. But, while his troopsim-
patiently expaced the signal to engage, the
Earl ordered them to retire to their camp;
and Sir James Hamilton of Cadyow, the person
in whom ie placed the greatest confidence, con-
vinced of his want of genius to improve an op-
portunity, or of his want of courage to seize a
crown, deserted him that very night. This
example was followed by many ; and the Earl,
despised or forsaken by all, was soon driven out
of the kingdom, and obliged to depend for his
subsistence on the friendship of the King of
IEngland. The ruin of this great family, which
had so long rivalled and overawed the crown,
and the terror with which such an example of
unsuccessful ambition lilled the nobles, secured
the King, for lonie time, from oppoiition; and

the royal trthority renained uncontrolled and
alnioft absolute. James did not susser this fa-
voutable interval to pass unimproved; he pro-
cured thie consent of parliament to laws more
advantageous to the prerogative, and morefub-
verfive of the privileges of the ariftocracy,than
were ever obtained by any former orfubfequent
monarch of Scotland.

By one of there, not only all the vast por-

sessions of the Earl of Douglas were annexed
to the crown; but all prior and future-aliena-
tions of crown lands were declared to be void,
and the King was impowered to seize them at
pleasure , without any process or form of law,
and oblige the polTeffors to refund whatever
they had received from them. :) A dreadful
inftrn ment of oppression in the hands of a Prince !

Another law prohibited the wardenfbip of

the marches to be gran ted-hereditarily ; restrain-.
ed, in several instances, the jurifdiftion of thai:
ofice; and extended the authority of the King's
courts. :;)

By a third, it was enated that no Rega-

lity, or exclusive right of administering juflice
within a man's own lands, should be granted
In time to come without the consent of Par-
liament; ':*) a condition, which implied al-

') AM 41. P. 455.'

') Ibid. Aft 42.
"') Ibid. Aft 43.

# James III.

· most an express prohibition. Those nobles who
already poflefed that great privilege, would,
naturally be solicitous to prevent it from be-
Cotming common, by being beltowed on many.
Those who had not themselves attained it,
would-envy others the acquisition of such a
flattering diftinftion; and both would concur in
reje&ing the claims of new pretenders.

By a fourth aft, all new grants of here-

ditary 'offices were prohibited, and those ob-
tained since the death of the last King were
revoked. *)

Each of these fiatutes undermined some of

the great pillars on which the power of the
aristocracy refted. During the remainder of
his reign, this Prince pursued the plan which
he had begun, with the utmost vigour; and
had not a sudden death, occasioned by thefplin-
ter of a cannon which burst near him at the
siege of Roxburgh, prevented his progress, he
wanted neither genius nor courage to perfet
it: And Scotland might, in all probability,
have been the iirft kingdom in Europe which
'would have seen the fubverflon of the feudal
system.

James III.

James III discovered no less eagerness than
his father or grandfather to humble the nobi-

A) A& 44. P. 1455,
Hist. of Scotl, Vol. I. E

iity; but far inferior to either of them in abi!i.
ties and address, he adopted a plan extremel\y
impolitick, and his reign was disastrous, as well.
as his end tragical. Under the feudal govern.
ments, the nobles were not only the King'e
ministers, and poffelfed of all the great officee
of power or of trust; they were likewise hi!
companions and favourites, and scarce any bu:
them app"oached his perfoni i or were entitlei
to his regard. But James, who both feared
and hated his nobles, kept them at an unufua
distance , and befiowed every mark of donfidence
and afferion upon a few mean! persons, ni
professions so dishonourable, as ought to has;
rendered them unworthy of his presence. Shu'
up with there in his cattle of Stirliung he el.
dom appeared in publick, and amused himself w:it'
archite&ture, mufick, and other arts, w\hic:
wvere then little esteemed. The nobles behel:
the power and favour of these minions wi!t
indignation. Even the sanguinary ncafures o
his father provoked them less than his neglec
Individuals alone fufrered by the former; bythi
latter e;ery man thought himifelf injured, lb
cause all were contemned. Their difeonter
was much heightened by the King's recallih:
all rights to crown lands, hereditary offices,
regalities, and every other conceflion xvhici
was detrimental to his prerogative, and whici
had been extorted during his minority. Con:
binations among themselves, secret intrigue

with England, and all the usual preparatives:
for civil war, were the effets of their resent-
ment. Alexander Duke of Albany, and Joht-.
Earl of Mar, the King's brothers two young
men of turbulent and ambitious spirits, and'
incenCed againfr James, who treated them withl
the fame coldness as he did the other greatmen,
entered deeply into all their cabals. The King'
dete&ted their designs, before they were ripe
for execution, and, seizing his two brothers,.
committed the Duke of Albany to Edinburgh,
cattle. The Earl of Mar having remonstrated
with too much boldness againtl the King's con-
duct, was murdered, if we may believe our
historians, by his command. Albany, appre-
henfive of the fame fate, made his escape out
of the castle, and fled into France. Concern
for the, King's honour, or indignation at .his
measures, were perhaps the motives which
firr induced him to join the malecontents. But
James's attachment to favourites rendering him
every day more odious to the nobles, the pro-
fpeft of the advantages which might be derived
from their general difaffetion, added to the
rerentment which he felt on account of his bro-
ther's death, and his orn injuries, soon infpir-
,ed Albany with more ambitious and criminal
thoughts. He concluded a treaty with Edward
IV. of England in which he alfumed the name
of Alexander King of Scots; and in return for
-the alritanuce which was prormied him tosvard5

E3

dethroning his brother, he bound hitnrelf, of0.
soon as he was put in poflelFfion of the king.
dom, to swear fealty and do homage to the
Englifli monarch, to renounce the ancient al,
liance with France, to contract a new one with
England, and to surrender some of the strong.
eft castles and moit valuable counties in Scot.
land. *) That aid, which the Duke so barely
purchased at the price of his own honour, and
the independence of his country, was punc.
tually granted him, and the Duke of Gloucef
ter with a powerful army conduEted him to.
wards Scotland. The danger of a foreign in-
vafion obliged James to inplore the afiftance
of those nobles whom he had so long treated
with contempt. Some of them were in close
confederacy with the Duke of Albany, and ap-
proved of all his pretensions. Others were iin
patient for any event which would restore their
order to its ancient pre-eminence. They took.
the field, however, at the head of a powerful'
army of their followers , but with a stronger
disposition to redress their own grievances, thalt
to annoy the enemy; and with a fixed refolu-
tion of punishing those minions, whose insolence
they could no longer tolerate. This "relo-
lution they executed in the camp near Lawder,'
with a military dispatch and rigour. Havingi
previously concerted their plan, the Earls of

a) Abercr. MIat. Atch. v. ii. p. 443,

Angus, Hnntly, Lennox, followed by almoff
all the barons of chief note in the army, for-
cibly entered the apartment of their sovereign,
seized all his favourites except one Ranfay,
w!hom they could not tear from the King, in
whose arms he took shelter, and, without any
form of trial, hanged them inltantly over a
bridge, Among the most remarkable of those
who had engrofTed the King's affetion, were
Cochran a mason , Hommil a taylor, Leonard a
' smith, Rogers a mnfician, and Torfifan a fen-
ciugmafter. So despicable a retinue discovers
the capriciousness of James's chara&er, and ac-
counts for the indignation of the nobles, when
they beheld the favour, due to them, beltowed
on fulch unworthy objects.

James had no reason to confidein an army

so little under his command, and difmifling it,
shut hcmfelf up in the castle of Edinburgh. As-
ter variouii intrigues, Albany's lands and ho-
nours were at length restorcd to him, and he
seemed even to have regained his brother's fa-
vour, by some important services. But their
friendship was not of long duration. James
abandoned himself, once more, to the guidance
of favourites; and the fate of those whohad
fusTered at Lawder , did not deter others from
courting that dangerous pre-eminence, Albany,
.on pretext that an attempt had been made to
take away his life by poison, fled from court,
and, retiring to his cafle at Dunbar, drew\

thither a greater number of Barons than attend.&
ed on the King himself. At the fame time,
le renewed his former confederacy with Ed.
ward; the Earl of- Angus openly negociated
that infamous treaty; other Barons were ready
to concur with it; and if the sudden death of
Edward had not prevented Albany's receiving
any aid from England, the crown of Scotland
would probably have been the reward of this
unworthy combination with the enemies of his
country. But, ififlead of any hopes of reign.
ing in Scotland, he foumd, upon the death of
Edward, that he could not reside there in fa-
fety; and flying first to England, and then to
France, he seems from that time to have taken
no part in the affairs of his native country,
Emboldened by his retreat, the King and his
Mlinifters multiplied the insults which they of.
sered to the nobility. A standing guard, a
thing unknown under the feudal governments,
and inconsistent with the familiarity and con-
fidence with which monarchs then lived amidfl
their nobles, was raised for the King's defence,
and the command of it given to Ranmfay, lately
created Earl of Bothwell, the fame person who
had so narrowly escaped when his companions;
were put to death at Lawder. And, as if this
precaution had not been sufficient, a proclama-
tion was iilued, forbidding any person to ap-
*pear in arms within the precints of the court;*)

I) Ferrerlus, 39S-

xvwhlich,' at a time when no man. of rank left
his own house without a numerous retinue of
armed followers, was, in effeEt, debarring the
nobles from all access to the King. James, at
-the fame time, became fonder of retirement
than ever, and, funk in indolence or fuperfci-
tion, or attentive only to amufemnents, devolv-
.ed his whole authority upon his favourites.
So many injuries provoked the most coufidera-
*ble nobles to take arms, and having persuaded
,or obliged the Duke of Rothesay, the King's
eldest son, a youth of fifteen, to set himself at
their head, they openly declared their inten-
tion of depriving James of a crown , of which
,he had discovered himself to be so unworthy.
Rouufed by this danger, the King quitted his
retirement, took the field, and encountered
them near Bannockburn; but the valour of the
Borderers, of whom the army of the malecontents
was chiefly composed, .soon put his troops to
flight, and he himnfelf was ffain in the pursuit.
Suspicion, indolence, immoderate attachment
to favourites, and all the vices of a feeble mind,
are visible in his whole conduEt; but the cha-
rater of a cruel and unrelenting tyrant feeons
to be u1njuitly affixed to him by our hiflorians.
His negleEt of the nobles irritated, but did not
weaken them; and their discontent, the immo-
derate ambition of his two brothers, and their
unnatural confederacies with England, were
, uffiicient to have diflurbed a more vigorols

# James IV.

adminifration, and to have rendered a prince
of superior talents unhappy.

The indignation which many persons of

rank expressed against the condu&t of the con-
fpirators, together with the terror of the fen-
tence of excommunication which the Pope pro-
nounced against them, obliged them to use their
victory with great moderation and humanity.
And being conscious how detefiable the crime
of imbruing their hands in the blood of their
o.vereign appeared, they endeavoured to regain
the good opinion of their countrymen, and to
atone for the treatment of the father, by their
loyalty and duty towards the son. They pla-
ced him inftantlyon the throne, and the whole
kingdom loon united in acknowledging his
authority.

James IV.

James IV. was naturally generous and

brave; he felt,'in an high degree, all the pas-
sions which animate a young and noble mind,
He loved magnificence, he delighted in war,
and was eagcr to obtain fame. During his
reign, the ancient and hereditary enmity bet-
ween the King and nobles seems almost entirely
to have ceased, He envied not their splendor,
because it contributed to the ornament of his
court; nor did he dread their power, which
he confidered as the security of his kingdom,
not as an objeft of terror to himself. This

# James V.

eonfidence on his part met with the proper
return of duty and affeftion on theirs; and, in
his war with England, he experienced how
much a King, beloved by his noblest is able
,to perform. Though the ardour of his courage,
and the. spirit of chivalry, rather than the
profpet of any national advantage, were the
motions of that expedition: such was the zeal
of his subje&s for the King's glory, that he
was followed by as gallant an army, as ever
any of his ancestors had led upon English
ground. But though James himself formed no
scheme dangerous or detrimental to the ariffto-
cracy, his reign was distinguished by an event
extremely fatal to it; and one accidental bloxw
humbled it more than all the premeditated at-
tacks of preceding Kings. In the rash and
unfortunate battle of Flowden, a brave nobility
chose rather to die than to desert their
Sovereign. Twelve Earls, thirteen Lords, five
eldest sons of noblemen, and an increbible num-
ber of barons, fell with the King. *) The
whole body of the nobles, long and sensibly,
felt this disaster; and if a Prince of full age had
then ascended the throne, their conifernation
and feebleness would have afforded him advan,
tages which no former monarch ever posses'ed,

James V.

But James V. who succeeded his father,

Was an infant of a year old; and though the
") Aber, ii, 54q.

office of regent was conferred on the Ducke of
Albany, a man of genius and enterprise, a
native of France, and. accustomed to a govern.
ment where the power of the King was already
grcat; though he made many bold attempts to
extend. the royal authority; though he put to:
death Lord Home, and banished the Earl cil
Angus, the two noblemen of greatest influence
in the kingdom, the ariltocracy loft no ground'
under his administration. A itranger to thei
manners, the laws, and the language of thle.
people whom he was called to rule, he ated,
on some occasions, rather like a viceroy of the
French King, than the governor of Scotland;/
but the nobles aflerted their own privileges,!
and contended for the interefe of their country
with a boldness, vwhich convinced him of their
independence, and of the impotence of his own
authority. After several unffccefsful fruggles,
he voluntarily retired to France; and the Kingt
being then in his thirteenth year, the noblei;
agreed that he fhoald assume the government,[
and that eight persons should be appointed to
attend him by turns . and to advise and affiil
him in the administration of publick affairs.
The Earl of Angus, who was one of that num-
ber, did not long remain satisfied with such
divided power. He gained some of his collea-
gues, removed others, and intimidated the reft.
When the term of his attendance expired, he
still retained authority, to which all were ob-

-jiged to submit, becauie none of thern wasin
a condition to dispute it. The alfe&ion of the
*young King was the only thing wanting, to
fix and perpetuate his power. But an activer
and lhigh-fpirited Prince submitted, with great
impatience, to the rerfraint in which he was
kept. It ill suited his years, or disposition, to
be confined as a prisoner within his own palace;
to be treated with no refpet, and to be depriv-
ed of all power. He could not, on some oc-
cafions, conceal his indignation and resentment.
Angus foresaw that lie had much to dreadfrom.
there; and as he could not gain the King's
heart, he resolved to make sure of his person.
James was continually surrounded by the Earl's
spies and confidents; many eyes watched all
his motions, and obfcrved every ftep he took.
But the King's eagerness to obtain liberty elud-
ed all their vigilance. He escaped from Falk-
land, and fled to the castle of Stirling, the re-
fidence of the Queen his mother, and the only
place of strength in the kingdom which was not
in the hand of the Douglases. The nobles, of
wvhom rome were influenced by their hatred to
Angus, and others by their refpet fortheKing,
crowded to Stirling, and his court was soon
filled with persons of the greatest dillin&ion.
The Earl, though astonished at this unexpected
revolution, resolved, at first, to make one bold
push for recovering his authority, by marching
to Stirling at the head of his followers; but

he wanted either courage or strength to exe.
cute this resolution. In a parliament held soon
after, he and his adherents were attainted, and
after escaping from many dangers, and endur.
ing nmuch misery, he was at length obliged to
fly into England for refuge.

James had now not only the name, but,

though extremely young, the full authority of
a King. He was inferior to no prince of that
age in gracefuln.ess of person, or in vigour of
mind. His understanding was good, and his
heart warm; the former capable of great im.
provement, and the latter susceptible ofthebef
imprefflons. But according to the usual fateof
Princes who are called to the throne in their
infancy, his education had been neglected. His
private preceptors were more ready to flatter,
than to inifruf him. It was the interest of those
who governed the kingdom, to prevent him from'
knowing too much. And the Earl of Angus, inI
order to divert him from business, gave him an
early taste for such pleasures, as afterwards oc-
cupied and engrossed him more than became a!
King. Accordingly we discover in James all thei
features of a great but uncultivated spirit. On I
the one hand, violent passions', implacablere-j
fentment, an immoderate desire of power; and
the utmost rage at disappointment. On the
other, love to his people, zeal for the punifhl-
ment of private ,opprefiors, confidence in his
favourites, and the most engaging openness and
afrability of behaviour.

What he himself had fuaTered from the exor-

bitant power of the iobles, led him early to
imitate his ptedeceffors, in their attempts to
humble them, The plan he formed for that'pur-
pose was more profound, more fyftematick, and
pursued with greatei constancy and iteadinefs,
than that of any of lis anceflors. And the in.
fluence of the events iti his reign upon those of
the subsequent period) render it neceffaty to
explain his conduct at greater lehgth, and to
enter into a more minute detail of his aftions.
He had penetration enough to discover those
defe&s in the schemes adopted by formerKings,
which occasioned their miscarriage. The example
of James I. had taught him, that wife laws ope-
rate slowly on a rude people, and that the fierce
spirit of the feudal nobles was not to be subdued
by these alone. The effets of the violent mea-
fures of James II. convinced him, that the op-
pression of one great family is apt either to ex-
cite the fufcipion and resentment of the other
-nobles, or to enrich with its spoils some new
family, which would soon adopt the fame fen-
timents, and become equally formidable to the
crown. He saw', from the fatal end of Jalhes
III. that neglect was still more intolerable to the
nobles than oppression, and that the Miniffry
of new men and favourites was both dishonour-
able and dangerous to a Prince. At the fame
time, he felt that the authority of the crown
was not fufiicient to counterbalance the power

of the aristocracy, and that without some new e
accefion of strength, he could expect no better
success in the struggle than his ancestors. In
this extremity, he applied himself to the clergy,
hoping that they would both relish his plan,
and concur, with all their influence, in enabling
him to put it in execution. Under the- feudal[
government; the church, being reckoned a third
estate, had. its representatives in parliament;!
the number of these was considerable, and they
possessed great influence in that aflembly The
fuperfition of former Kings, and the zeal of
an ignorant age, had beflowTed on ecclefiafticks
a great proportion of the national wealth; and
the authority which they acquired by the re-
verence of the people, was fuperiot even to
that which they derived from their riches,
.This powerful body, however, depended en-
tirely on the crown. The Popes, notwith-
ilanding their attention to extend their ufur-
pations, had neglected Scotland as a diftantand
poor kingdom, and permitted its Kings to exer-
cife powers which they disputed with more
considerable princes. The Scottish monarchs
had the sole right of nomination to vacant bi'-
hlopricks and abbeys; ;) and James naturally
concluded, that men who expected preferment
from his favour, would be willing to merit it,
by promoting his designs. Happily for him,

> Epift, Reg. Scut. r. 197, &-c. Act 1135. P. 1540.

the nobles had not yet recovered the blowk
which fell on their order at Flowden; and if
we may judge either from their conduc, or
from the character given of them by SirRalph.
Sadler the English envoy in Scotland, they werd
men of little genius, of no experience in business;
and incapable of acting either with unanimity,
or with vigour. Many of the clergy, on.the
other hand, were difzinguifhed by their great
abilities, and no less by their ambition. Various
causes of disgust had arisen between them and.
the nobles, who despised their character, and
envied their power, or their wealth. By act-
ing in concert with the King, they not only
gratified him, but avenged themselves and
hoped to aggrandise their own order, by de-
preliing those who were their sole rivals, Se-
'cure of so powerful a concurrence, James ventur-
ed to proceed with greater boldness. In the
first heat of resentment, he had driven the Earl
of Angus out of the kingdom; and sensible that
a person, so far superior to the other nobles in
abilities, might create many obstacles, which
would retard or render ineffectual all his fche-
mes, he folemnily swore, that he would never
permit him to return into Scotland, and, not-
vwithfanding the repeated solicitations of the
King of England, he adhered to his vow with
unrelenting obstinacy. He then proceeded to
repair the fortifications of Edinburgh, Stirling,
and other castles, and to fill his magazines tith

arms and ammunition. Having taken there
precautions by way of defence, he began to
treat the nobility with the utmost coldness and
reserve. Those offices, which they were apt,
from long pofleffion, to confider as appropriat-
ed to their order, were now bestowed on ec-
clefiafticks, who alone poffefied the King's ear,
and, together with a few gentlemen ofinferior
rank, to vwhom he had communicated hisfche-
mes, were entrusted with the management of
all publick affairs. These ministers were chosen
with judgment; and Cardinal Beatoun, who
soon became the most eminent among them,
was a man of luperior genius. They served
the King with fidelity, they carried on his mea-
fures with vigour, with reputation, and with
success. James no longer concealed his con-
tempt of the nobles, and fallered no opportunity
of mortifying them to escape. Slight Qffences
were aggravated into real crimes, and punished
with severity. Every accusation againftperfons
of rank was heard with pleasure, every ap-
pearance of guilt was examined with rigour,
and every trial proved fatal to those who were
accused: the banishing Hepburn Earl of Both-
well for reasons extremely frivolous, the be-
heading the Master of Sorbes without fufficicnt
evidence of his guilt, and the condemning Lady
Glamis, a filler of the Earl of Angus , to be
burnt for the crime of witchcraft, of which
,even that credulous age believed her innocent,

are

are monuments both of the King's hatred of
the nobility, of the severity of his government,
and of the it:retches he made towards absolute
power. By these afts of authority, he. tried
the spirit of the nobles, and how much they
were willing to bear. Their patience increased
his contempt for them, and added to the ardour
and boldness with which he pursued his plan.
Meanwhile they observed the tendency of his
fchelmes with concern, and with resentment;
but the King's sagacity, the vigilance of his
ministers, and the want of a proper leader,
made it dangerous to concert any measures for
their defence, and impossible to acv with becon-
ing vigour. James and his counsellors, by a
false itep which they took, prf'ented to them,
at length, an advantage which they did not
fail to improve.

Motives, which are well known, had prompt-

ed Henry VIIi, to difelaim the Pope's authori-
ty, and to seize the revenues of the regular
clergy. His system of reformation satisfied none
of his fubjets. Some were enraged becaiufe he
had proceeded so far, others murmured because
lie proceeded no farther; and by his imperious
temper, and alternate persecutions of the zeal-
ots for Popery, and the converts to the Protest-
ant opinions, he was equally formidable to
both. Henry was afraid that this general dif-
fatisfastion of his people might encourage his
enemies on the continent to invade his kingdom

Hil. of Scotl. Vol. I. F

He knew that both the Pope and Emperor court-
ed the friendship of the king of Scots 1 and endea.
voured to engage him in an alliance against Eng-
land. He resolved, therefore, to disappoint the
effets of their negociations, by entering into
a closer union with his nephew, and for that
purpose sent ambassadors into Scotland, to pro-
pose a personal interview with him at York.
it was plainly James's interest to accept this
invitation; the assistance of so powerful an ally,
the high honours which were promised him,
and the liberal subsidies he might have obtained,
would have added no little dignity to his do.
meftick government, and must have greatly fa-
cilitated the execution of his favourite plan. On
the other hand, a war with England, which
he had reason to apprehend, if he rejected Hen-
ry's offers of friendship, was inconsistent with
all his views. This would bring him to depend
on his barons; an army could not be raised
without their afiilfance: Tor call nobles incenf.
ed against their prince into the field, was to
unite his enemies, to make them sensible of
their own strength, and to afford them an op-
portunity of revenging their wrongs. James,
who was not ignorant that all these confequen-
ces might follow a breach with England, liften-
ed at first to Henry's proposal, and consented
to the interview at York. But the clergy dread-
ed an union, which must have been established
on the ruins of the church. Henry had taken

great pains to infuse into his nephew his own
sentiments concerning religion, and had fre-
quently solicited him, by ambafladors, to re-
nounce theufurped dominion ofthePope, which
wasnolefs difnonourable to princes, than griev-
ous to their fubjets. The clergy had hither-
to, with great address, diverted the King from
regarding these solicitations. But, in an ami-
cable conference, Henry expeted, and they
feared, that James would yield to his entrea-
ties, or be convinced by his arguments. They
knew that the revenues of the church were an
alluring object to a Prince who wanted money,
and who loved it; that the pride and ambition
of ecclefiafticks raised the indignation of the
nobles; that their indecent lives gave offence to
the people; that the Protestant opinions were
Spreading fast throughout the nation; and that
an universal defection from the eftablif.;ed church
would be the consequence of giving the fmal-
left degree of encouragement to there princi-
ples. For there reasons, they employed all their
credit with the King, and had recourse to eve-
ry artifice and insinuation, in order to divert
him from a journey, which must have been so
fatal to their interest. They endeavoured to
inspire him with fear, by magnifying the danger
to which he would expose his person, by ven-
turing sofar intoEngland, without any fecuri-
.ty but the word of a Prince, -who having vio-
lated every thing venerable and sacred in reli-

F a

gion, wras no longer to be trufled; and by
way of compensation for the films which he
might have received from Henry, they offered
an annual donative of5o,ooo crowns; theypro-
mifed to contribute liberally towards [carrying
on a war with England, and flattered him with
the profped& of immense riches, arising from the
forfeiture of persons who were to be tried and
condemned as hereticks. Influenced by thele
considerations , James broke his agreement
with Henry who, in expectation of meeting
him, had already come to York; and that haugh-
ty and impatient Monarch resented the affront,
by declaring war againif Scotland. His army
was soon ready to invade the kingdom. Ja-
mes was obliged to have recourse to the nobles,
for the defence of his dominions. At his com-
mand, they af'embled their followers: but with
the fame dispositions which had animated their
ancefrors in the reign of James Iti. and with a
full resolution of imitating their example, and
by punishing those to whom they imputed the
grievances of which they had reason to com-
plain; and if the King's ministers had not been
men of abilities, superior to those of James IlI.
and of considerable interest even with their ene-
mies, who could not agree among themfelve,
what vi&tims to sacrifice, the camp of F11;
would have been as remarkable as that of Law-
der, for the daring encroachments of the nobi-
lity on the prerogative of the Prince. But though

his ministers were saved by this accident, the
nobles had soon another opportunity of disco-
vering to the King their diffatisfatcion with his
government, and their contempt of his autho-
rity. Scarcity of provisions, and the rigour ol'
the season, having obliged the English army,
which had invaded Scotland, to retire, James
imagined that he could attack them, with great
advantage, in their retreat; but the principal
barons, with an obfhinacy and disdain which
greatly aggravated their disobedience, refuted
to advance a ftep beyond the limits of their own
country. Provoked by this insult to himself,
and suspicious of a new conspiracy against his
ninifters, the King instantly disbanded an army
\vhich paid so little regard to his orders, and
returned abruptly into the heart of thekingdom.

An ambitious and high-fpirited Prince could

not brook such a mortifying afrront. His ho-
pes of success had been rash, and his derpair
upon a disappointment was excelfive. He felt
himself engaged in an unnecessary war with
England, which, instead of yielding him the
laurels and triumphs that heexfpeEted, had be-
gun with such circumstances, as encouraged
the insolence of his fubjets, and exposed him
to the scorn of his enemies. He saw how vain
and inelFTet&al all his proje&s to humble the no-
bles had been, and that, though in times of
peace a Prince may endeavour to depress them,
they will rife, during war, to their former im-

gion, was no longer to be trusted; and by
way of conpenfation for the fums which he
might have received from Henry, they offered
an annual donative of 5o,ooo crowns; theypro-
mifed to contribute liberally towards [carryill
on a war with England, and flattered him with
the profpeEt of immense riches, arising from the
forfeiture of persons who were to be tried and
condemned as hereticks. Influenced by there
confideratioins, James broke his agreement
with Henry. who, in expeetation of meeting
him, had already come to York; and that haugh-
ty and impatient Monarch resented the affront,
by declaring war against Scotland. His army
was soon ready to invade the kingdom. Ja-
mes was obliged to have recourse to the nobles,
for the defence of his dominions. At his com-
mand, they aflembled their followers: but with
the fame difpofltions which had animated their
ancestors in the reign of James 1I[. and with a
full resolution of imitating their example, and
by punishing those to whom they imputed the
grievances of which they had reason to com-
plain; and if the King's minilters had not been
men of abilities, superior to those of James II.
and of considerable interest even with their ene-
mies, who could not agree among themselves
what vistims to sacrifice, the camp of Fall
would have been as remarkable as that of Law-
der, for the daring encroachments of the nobi-
lity on the prerogative of the Prince. But though

his ministers were saved by this accident, the
nobles had soon another opportunity of dil'co-
vering to the King their difiatisfateion with his
government, and their contempt of his autho-
rity. Scarcity of provisions, and the rigour ol
the season, having obliged the English army,
which had invaded Scotland, to retire, James
imagined that he could attack them, with great
advantage, in their retreat; but the principal
barons, with an obfRinacy and disdain which
greatly aggravated their disobedience, refused
to advance a ftep beyond the limits of their own
country. Provoked by this insult to himself,
and suspicious of a new conspiracy against his
miniifters, the King instantly disbanded an army
which paid so little regard to his orders, and
returned abruptly into the heart of the kingdom.

An ambitious and high-fpirited Prince could

not brook such a mortifying affront. His ho-
pes of success had been rash, and his despair
upon a disappointment wras excelfive. He felt
himself engaged in an unnecessary wcar with
England, which, instead of yielding him the
laurels and triumphs that heexfpeEted, had be-
gun with such circumstances, as encouraged
the insolence of his fubjeEts, and exposed him
to the scorn of his enemies. He saw how vain
and inelretuial all his proje&s to humble the no-
bles had been, and that, though in times of
peace a Prince may endeavour to depress them,
they will rile, during war, to their former im-

portance and dignity. Impatience, resentment,
indignation, filled his bosom by turns, The vio.
lence of these passions altered his temper, and,
perhaps, impaired his reason. He became pen.
five, fullen, and retired. He seemed, through
the day. to be fwallowedup in profound medi..
tation, and, through the night, he was diflurb.
ed with those visionary terrors which make
impression upon a weak understanding only, or
a disordered fancy. In order to revive the
King's spirits, an inroad on the western borders
was concerted by his ministers, who prevailed
upon the Barons in the neighbouring provinces
to raise as many troops as were thought ne.
ceffary, and to enter the enemy's country. But
nothing could remove the King's aversion tohis
nobility, or diminish his jealouly of their power,
He would not even intrust them with the corn.
mand of the forces which they had assembled;
that was reserved for Oliver Sinclair his favour.
ite, who no sooner appeared to take possession
of the dignity conferred upon him, than rage
and indignation occasioned an universal mutiny
in the army. Five hundred English, who hap.
pened to be drawn up in fight, attacked the Scots
in this disorder. Hatred to the King, and con.
tempt of their general, produced an effect to
which there is no parallel in history. They
overcame the fear of death, and the love of
liberty; and ten thousand men surrendered to
a number so far inferior, without striking a single-

blow. No man was desirous of a vi&ory,
which would have been acceptable to the King,
and to his favourite; few endeavoured to save
themselves by flight; the English had the'choi-
ce of what prisoners they pleased to take; and
alm:)ft every person of diftintion, who was en-
gaged in the expedition, remained in their hands.
This astonishing event was a new proof to the
King of the general difaffetion of the nobility,
and a new discovery of his own weakness, and
want of authority. Incapable of bearing these
repeated insults, he found hinmfelf unable to
revenge them. The deepest melancholy and
despair succeeded to the furious transports of
rage, which the first account of the rout of his
army occasioned. All the violent passions, which
are the enemies of life, preyed upon his mind,
and wafted and confuimed a youthful and vigo-
rous constitution. Some authors of that age
impute his untimely death to poison; but the
diseases of the mind, when they rife to an
height, are often mortal; and the known es-
fe&s of disappointment, anger, and resentment,
upon a sanguine and impetuous temper, fuffi-
ciently account for his unhappy fate. ,, His
death ( fays Drummond) proves his mind to
have been raised to an high strain, and above
mediocrity; he could die, but could notdigeft
a disaster. " Had James survived this misfor-
tune, one of two things must have happened:
Either the violence of his temper would have

engaged him openly to attack the nobles, who
would have found in Henry a willing and po-
werful protecor, and have derived the fame
assistance from him, which the malecontents, in
the succeeding reign, did from his daughter Eli-
zabeth; in that cafe, a dangerous civil war
would have been the certain consequence. Or,
perhaps, necessity might have obliged him to
accept of Henry's offers, and be reconciled to
his nobility, In that event the church would
have fallen a sacrifice to their union, a Refor-
mation, upon Henry's plan, would have been
establishcd by law, a great part of the tem-
poralities of the church would have beenfeized
and the friendship of the King and Barons would
have been cemented by dividing its spoils.

Such were the eflorts ofour Kings, towards

reducing the exorbitant power of the nobles.
If they were not attended with fuccefs,we mnft
not. for that reason, conclude that they were
not conducted with prudence. Every circum-
fance seems to have combined against the crown.
Accidental events concurred with political cau-
fes, in rendering the best concerted measures
abortive. The affafiination of one King, the fud-
den death of another, and the fatal despair of
a third, contributed no lets than its own na-
tural firength, to preserve the aristocracy fron
ruin.

# The extraordinary influence of the Scottish Kings in Parliament.

# The reasons of it.

The extraordinary influence of the Scotti l 1illgs ir.

Parliamlenlt.

Amidst these struggles, the influence xvh ich

our Kings pflfeffed in their parliaments, - is a
circumstance feemringly inexplicable, and which
merits particular attention. As these assem-
blies were composed chiefly of the nobles, they,
we are apt to imagine, must have diaated all
their decisions; but, instead of this, every King
found them obsequious to his will, and obtained
such laws, as he esteemed neceffiry for extend-
ing his authority, All things were conduaed
there with dispatch and unanimity; and, in
none of our historians, do we find an instance
of any opposition formed against the court in
Parliament, or mention of any difficulty in car-
rying through the measures which were agree-
able to the King. In order to account for this
singular fat, it is necessary to inquire into tbe
origin and constitution of Parliament.

Tile re;notis of it.

The genius of the feudal government, uni-

form in all its operations, produced the fame
ffefes in small, as in great societies; and the
territory of a Baron was, in miniature, the mo-
del of a kingdom. He possessed the right of
jurifdiEtion, but those who depended on him,
being free men, and not slaves, could be tried
by their Peers only; and, therefore, his vaflals
were bound to attend his courts, and to afflf

both in palling and executing his sentences.
When aflembled on these occasions, they efta-
blifhed, by mutual content, fuchregulations as
tended to the welfare of their small society;
and often granted, voluntarily, fach supplies
to their Superior, as his necessities required.
Change now a tingle name: In place of Baron,
substitute King, and %we behold a Parliament in
its first rudiments, and observe the first exer-
tions of those powers, which its members now
possess as Judges, as Legislators, and as dif-
penfers of the publick revenues. Suitable to
this idea, are the appellations of the King's
Court, *) and of the King's Great Council, by
which, Parliaments were anciently distinguish-
ed; and suitable to this, likewise, were the
conilituent members of which it was conpofed.
In all the feudal kingdoms, those who held of
the Kingin chief were bound, by the condition
of their tenure, to attend and to assist in his
courts. Nor was this esteemed a privilege,but
a service. It was exaaed likewise of Bifhlops,
Abbots, and the greater ecclefiafticks, who
holding valf possessions of the Crown, were
deemed subjet to the fame burden. Parliaments
did not continue long in this state. Cities gra-
dually acquired wealth, a considerable share of
the publick taxes were levied on them, the in-
habitants grew into estimation, and, being en-

*) Du Cange. voc. Curin.

franchised by the Sovereign, a place in Parlia-
ment was the consequence of their liberty, and
of their importance. But as it would havebeen
absurd to confer such a privilege, or to Impose
such a burden on a whole community, every
borough was permitted to chufe one or two of
its citizens to appear in the name of the corpo-
ration; and the idea of representation was first
introduced in this manner. An innovation, still
niore important, naturally followed. The vas-
fals of the crown were originally few in num-
ber , and extremely powerful; but as it is im-
possible to render property fixed and permanent,
many of their poffefftons came, gradually, and
by various methods of alienation, to be split
and parcelled out into different hands. Hence
arose the diftintion between the Greater and
the Lesser Barons. The former were those who
retained their original fiefs undivided, the latter
were the new and less potelit vasals of the
Crown. Both were bound, however, to per-
form all feudal services, and, of consequence,
to give attendance in Parliament. To the Les-
ser Barons, who formed no inconsiderable body,
this was an intolerable grievance. Barons so-
utetimes denied their tenure, boroughsrenounc-
ed their right of eleCting, charters were obtain-
ed, containing an exemption from attendance;
and the anxiety with which our ancestors en-
deavoured to get free from the obligation of
fitting in Parliament, is furpafled by that only

with which theirpofterity solicit to be admitted
there. In order to accommodate both parties,
and, at once, to secure to the King a sufficient
number of members in his great council, and to
save his vaflals from an unnecessary burden, an
eary expedient was found out. The obligation
to personal attendance was continued upon the
Greater Barons , from which the Lesser Barons
were exempted, on condition of their ele&ing,
in each county, a certain number of Repre-
fentatives, to appear in their name. Thus a
Parliament became complete in all its members,
and was composed of Lords Spiritual and Tem--
poral, of Knights of the shires, and of Bur-
gefnes. As many causes contributed to bring
government earlier to perfection in England,
than in Scotland; as the rigour of the feudal
institutions abated sooner; and its defects were
supplied with greater facility in the one king-
dom, than in the other; England led the \way
in all there changes, and Burgef'es, and Knights
of the shire, appeared in the Parliaments of
that nation, before they were heard of in ours.
Burgenfes were first admitted into the Scottish
Parliaments byRobert Bruce; :) (A. D. 1326.)
and in the preamble to the laws of Robert IIl.
they are ranked among the confrituent members
of that afl'elbly. The Lefler Barons were in-
debted to James I. (xr27.) for a statute ex-
- ") Abercrombby, i..635

erupting them from personal attendance, an&
permitting them to eleEt representatives: the
exemption was eagerly laid hold onl; but the
privilege was so little valued, that, except one
or two inftanees, it lay negle&ted during 60o
years; and James V1. first obliged them to fend
representatives regularly to Parliament. ':)

A Scottish Parliament, ;:hen. consisted an-

ciently of GreatBarons, of Ecclefiafticks, and
a few representatives of boroughs. Nor were
these divided, as in England, into two houses,
but composed one afiembly, in which the Lord
Chancellor presided. **) And, in rude ages,
xwhen the science of government was extremely
imperfe&t among a martial people, unacquaint-
ed with the arts of peace, strangers to the ta-
lents which make a figure in debate, and defpil-
ing them, Parliaments were not held in the

') Elfays on Brit, Antiq. Eff; 11. Dalrymnp. Hitt. of Feud.

Prop. ch. 8.
") In England, the Peers and Commons seem early to have

niet in separate houses; and James 1. wvio was fond of
imitating the English in all their cultoms had probably
an intention of intrroducinig forne considerable clillintion
between the Greater andi Leser Barots in Scotland; at
least he determined that their conlultittions fhoulhl ino be
carried'on under the direction of the fame Prelident; for
by his law, A. D. 1327, it is provided,, that out of tile
Commiiliioners of all the shires filall be chosen a wife and
expert man, called the common Speaker of the Parliament,

h, o shall propose all and sundry needs and causes per-

raining to the Commons in the Parliament or general
council. " No such Speaker, it would seem , was ever
rhofen ; and by a fubfeqltent law the Chancellor was de-
clared perpetual PrefidTnt of Parliament.

fame estimation as at present; nor did haughty
Barons love those courts, in which they appear-
ed with such evident marks of inferiority. Par-
liaments were often hafily assembled, and it
was, probably, in the King's power, by the
manner in which he iflfued his writs for that
purpose, to exclude those who were averse
from his measures. At a time when deeds of
violence were common, and the restraints of
law and decency were little regarded, no man
could venture with safety to oppose the King
in his own court. The Great Barons, or Lords
of Parliament, were extremely few; even so
late as the beginning of the reign of James VI .;)
they amounted only to fifty-three. The Ec-
clefhafticks equalled them in number, and being
devoted implicitly to the Crown, for reasons
vwhich have been already explained, rendered
all hopes of vistory in any struggle desperate.
Nor were the nobles themselves so anxious, as
might be imagined, to prevent a&s of Parlia-
ment favourable to the royal Prerogative; con-
fcious of their own strength, and of the King's
inability to carry these afts into execution wi-
thout their concurrence, they trusted either to
elude, or to contemn them; and the statute
revoking the King's property, and annexing
alienated jurifdiftions to the Crown, repeated
in every reign, and violated and despised as

') And. Coll. v. i. prGf. 40,

often, is a franding proof of the impotence of
laws, when opposed to power. So many con-
curring caifes are sufficient, perhaps, to ac-
count for the ascendant, which our Kings ac-
quired in Parliament. But, without having re-
course to any of these, a single circumstance,
peculiar to the constitution of the Scottish par-
liament, the mentioning of which we have hi-
therto avoided, will abundantly explain this fad,
seemingly so repugnant to all our reasonings
concerning the weakness of the King, and the
power of the nobles.

As far back as our records enable us to

trace the constitution of our Parliaments, we find
a committee, distinguished by the name of Lords
of Articles. It was their business to prepare,
and to digest all matters which were to be laid
before the Parliament; every motion for anew
law was first made there, and approved or re-
jeted by them atpleafure; what they approved
was formed into a bill, and presented to Parlia-
ment; what they reje&ed could not be intro-
duced into the house. This committee owed
the extraordinary powers vested in it, to the
military genius of the ancient nobles, too in-
patient to submit to the drudgery of civil bu-
finess, too impetuous to observe the forms, or
to enter iDto the details neceflary in conducting
it, they were glad to lay that burden upon a
small number, while they themselves had no
other labour than limply to. give, or to refuse

their sanction to the bills, which werepretfent-
ed to them. The Lords of Articles, then, not
only directed the whole proceedings of Parlia.
ment, but possessed a negative before debate,
That committee was chosen and constituted in
such a manner, as put this valuable privilegei
entirely in the King's hand. It is extremelyi
probable, that the King once had the sole rightl
of nominating the Lords of Articles. *) Theyi
came afterwards to be ele&Eed by the parlia.-
ment, and consisted of an equal number out of

each
') It appears from authentick records, that a parliament wea

alppointed to be held March 12, 1566, and that the [.ori
of Articles were cliolen and tmet ou thle 7th, live days l).
fore the alV'eiibling of Parliament. If they colld be re-
gulalrly elected so long belore the meeting of Parliamenlit
it is natural to conclude, that the Prince allone policfl'd
the right of eleaing them. There are two different ac-
counts of the manner of their elecion at that time , ol.
by iMary herself, in a letter to the archhifhop of Glafgu\w;
,, e, accomipanied with our nobility for thle tiei, paRt to
,, the Tolbooth of Edinburgh, for holding of our pirba-
,, nient on the 7th day of this intant . and ele&ed tle
,, Lords Articulars. '* If we explain there words, accord-
ing to ftriit gramniar, we mult conclude that the Qucen
herself eleted them. It is, however, more probable til:
Mary meant to fay, that the nobles then prefentwithi er,
viz. her privy soiunftellors, and others, eleaed the Lord'
of Articles. Keith's Hilt. of Scotland, p. 33. The otihe
account is Lord Ruthven's , who expressly afiirms tlat tile
Queen Iherelf eleced them. Keith's Append. I26. Whetlier
we embrace the one or the other of tllel'e opinions, is oi
no confelquelce. If the privy counsellors and nobles ai
tendinl, the court had a right to elefl the Lords of Ar-
ticles, it was equally advantageous for the Crowi , as iP
the Prilice had had the sole nomination of them.

,.ech estate, and most commonly of eight Tem-
pc.al and eight Spiritual Lords, of eight repre-
fentatives of burroughs, and of the eight great
oilicers of the Crown. Of this body, tho eight
ecclefiafticks, together with the officers of the
Crown, were entirely at the King's devotion,
and it was scarce possible that tle choice could
fall on such Temporal Lords and BurgeHfes as
Wvould unite in opposition to his measures.
Capable either of influencing their eleftion, or
of gaining them when eleated, the King com-
monly found the Lords of Articles no less ob-
fequious to his will, than his own privy coin-
cil, and by means of his authority with them,
he could put a negative upon his Parliament
before debate, as well as after it; and what
may seem altogether incredible, the mofl: limit-
ed Prince in Europe accually ptoffefied, in one
instance, a prerogative which the moll absolute
could never attain. *)
"') 1tving dedcced the hilory of the committee of Lords of

Articles as low as the fib!ject of this prelitinary book re-
quired, it mnaw be agreeable, perlaps, to Iome of mly rend-
ers, to kiiow the i'nlequllet varintions in this filllnar iiu-
f;it:tion , and the political fle \i hichl out Kings aIlide of
t;lel'e. \'lelln Parlialnents becamle more Irtllerolls, nad
niore considerable by tile admilion of the reprel'entatives
of the lelier Barons, the preserving their itillueiice over
the Lords of Articles becainu, liiewife, an objed orgreater
itnportance to .gtr Kilngs. James VI. on lpre tece tliat the
Lords of Articles could not il)d Icifure to colider the great
multitude of anlairs laid before themil, obtained all alt, ap-
pointing four persons to be namlled out of eachli elare.
Vho fliould mect t'wenlty days before the comminlecenment
Iift. ofScotl. Vol. L. G

# State of Europe at the beginning of the 16th century.

State of Europe at the beginnlin of the IGth century.

To this account of the internal conillitutio

of Scotland, it will not be improper to add a
view of the political liate of Europe at that

ci Parliament, ') to receive all ftpplications., c. and re.
]efiini \v'liP tr' thiey otle*hiit fiVul's , fiiorltl enugrofs ill a
book .h::tI tile, thlulgilt v'orily rhe atteltiol of the l.ori
of Articles. .o 1provilicn is iin:tle in tle aet for tile chuict
us' tiis filei. body', :iad rthe Kil)ir would, of course, I;.;
· laimedl tlit p'irvilei c. lil i6^3 \\ lien Charles 1. was be-
,i'i li1;% to illtro.r dtc th rie ili)N vii\t;o ils \ llicil gave so nlltill
uil'enc- to t:le 1natinl lie idreadedi rte oppolition of i.
'arli:Ln:lc:r,, niil in order to prevent that, an artifice ea,
)nrle life or tio feciure the Lords of Articles for the Cro\il,
The 'sTenlimoral P-eers ji e ltapp noiheto clioofe eighli BiCl.;,
and thle iifiorps eilt Pee; rs; rielt li:xt:cel mnet t'ogetil,

nold t:ie'ltel tight Kiliilit. 't.; tile AShire, and eight lit':.
ge'tit:s, :tld to t tiefe ii cloIn' oflicers \xvee added
fuilal. If \m'e canl only iltippofe eiglit pitrlbns of 1' nome.).!
a body, ns tile Peers of Scotlnild x\ ere becomei by tih,:
tiln, ;,tt;rlchl-d to tlie court, tihlfe, it is obvious , \oirih
be tllu ,iicni .'m h th!e lililops 'would choose, and of nr.n-
fequetcc tlie \vlioe Lords of Articles were the tools n:.'
crcatures of tie !ing. 'fhiis praElice, so incotnilfeiit \: :
libecry\, was abcliried during tile civil war: And tie li-
rute of r jlaes V[, aas reipealed. After the ]lefioralior
Parliaillcints bec:llle it ore fts vile thall ever. \V' h:t \ .
wnly temporary device, in tie reign of Charles 1. v'as, ti:!.,
converted ihto a ftraidinig lan. ,, For my part, " fiys th:.
a utlhor Iroln i'l oou I have borrowed mlniiy of there pI -
ticilars, ,, I fliould have thouiglt it less crimilinl ill r:.
,, Jlllcaratiol Pi;lliament, to have openly befio\ ed uI'I

,, te lKingl a negative before delbate, than, il ftuch allu ti-
,, derhand ar.ilicial mlanner, to bettay tleir coliiiliutvli.
,, and the nation . EI-i'nys on Brit. Antiq. 55. 1r I>
probable, lov'ever, fromi a letter of Randolph's to Ctcil
lo Aug. 1560, printed ill the Appendix, at tat ti.; I'.r:ih
inent luid foinll appearaince of aniieitr ireceden: to il!i;'
tleir unll\ortlhy conduct.

') A 2, rP. 1594.

period, where the following history commences.
A thorough knowledge of that general system,
of which every kingdom in Europe forms a
part, is not less requilite towards understanding
the history of a nation, than an acquaintance
with its peculiar government and laws. The
latter may enable us to comprehend domeftick
occurrences and revolutions; but without the
former, foreign tranfations must be altogether
myrterious and unintelligible. By attending
to this, many dark paflages in our history may
be placed in a clear light; and where the bulk
of hifcorians have seen only the effect, we may
be able to discover the cause.

The subversion of the feudal government in

France, and its declension in the neighbouring
kingdoms, occasioned a remarkable alteration
in the political state of Europe, Kingdoms,
whlich were inconsiderable when broken, and
parcelled out among nobles, acquired firnnefs
and fcrength, by being united into a regular
monarchy. Kings became conscious of their
own power and importance. They meditated
schemes ofconqueft, and engaged in wars at a
dillance. Numerous armies were raised , and
great taxes imposed for their fubfitence. Con-
fiderable bodies of infantry were kept in constant
pay; that service grew to be honourable; and
cavalry, in which the strength of European ar-
mies had hitherto consisted, though proper
enough for the short and voluntary excursions

G 3

of Barons who fcrved at their own expence,
were found to be unfit either for making, or
defending any important conquest.

It was in Italy, thatthe powerful monarchs

of France and Spain and Germany sirs appeared
to make a trial of their new strength. The di.
vision of that country into so many small states,
the luxury of the people, and their effeminate
aversion to arms, invited their more martial
neighbours to an easy prey. The Italians, who
had been accustomed to mock battles only, and
to decide their quarrels by innocent and blood.
less victories, were astonished at the fight ,f
real war; and as they could not resist the to.-
rent, they suffered it to take its course, and tu
spend its rage. Intrigue and policy fuppliil
the want of strength; and neceflity and fclf-
preservation led that ingenious people to the
great secret of modern politicks, by teaching
them how to balance the power of one Prince,
by throwing that of another into the oppolite
scale. By this happy device, the liberty of
Italy was long preserved. The scales were
poised by very skilful hands ; the smallest va-
riations were attended to, and no Prince was
allowed to'retain any superiority, that couldbe
dangerous.

A system of conduc, pursued with so much

faccefs in Italy, was not long confined to that
country of political refinement. The maxim
f preserving a balance of power is founded f0

much upon obvious reasoning, and the fitlation
of Europe rendered it so necefiary, that it foort
became a matter of chief attention to all wife
politicians. Every ftcp any Prince took -was
observed by all his neighbours. Ambafiadors,
a kind of honourable spies, authorised by the
mutual jealousy of Kings, resided altloft con-
flantly at every different court , and had it in
charge to watch all its motions. Dangers were
foreseen at a greater distance, and prevented
with more cafe. Confederacies were formed
to humble any power which rose above its due
proportion. Revenge or felf-defence were no
longer the only causes of hostility, it became
common to take arms out of policy; and war,
both in its commencement, and in its operations,
w-as more an exercise of the judgment, than of
ihe passions of men. Almost every war in Eu-
rope became general, and the most inconlfder-
able Ilates acquired importance, because they
could add weight to either feale.

Francis I. who mounted the throne of

France in the year 155r, and Charles V. who
obtained the Imperial Crown in the year I5 r9.
divided between them the strength and afrec-
tions of all Europe. Their perpetual enmity
was not owing either to personal jealousy, or
to the caprice of private passion, but was found-
ed so much in nature and true policy, that it
subsisted between their posterity for several ages;
and, notwithstanding their present accidental

and unnatural union, must again revive. Char-
les succeeded to all the dominions of the honrfe
of Autria. No family had ever gained so mucle'
by wife and fortunate marriages. By acquifl.
tions of this kind the Austrian Princes rose, ini
a short time, fromobfcure Counts ofl-apflourg,
to be Archdukes of Aufsria, and Kings of Bo.
hernia, and were in poffeflfion of the imperia!
dignity by a fort of hereditary right. Besides
these territories in Germany , Charles was heir
to the Crown of Spain, and to all the domi.
nions which belonged to the houie of Burgundy,
The Burgundian provinces engrofied, at tliai
time, the riches and commerce of one half ot
Europe; and he drew from them, on manyoc.
cations, those i-mmnnfe fums, which no people
.without trade and liberty are able to contri-
bute. Spain furnished him a gallant and hardy
infantry, to -whose discipline he was indebted
for all his conquests. And atl the fame time,
by the discovery of the new world, a vein oi
wealth ·was opened to him, which all the ex-
travagance of ambition could not exhaust. These
advantages rendered Charles the first Prince in
]3irope ; but lie wished to be more, and openly
arpired to universal monarchy. His genius was
of that kind xwhich ripens slowly. and lies leng
concealed; but it grew up without observation,
to an unexpected height and vigour, IHe pof-
sesscd, in an eminent degree, the characieriftici
virtues of all the difierent races of Princes to

whom he was allied. In forming his schemes,
he discovered all the fibtlety and penetration
of Ferdinand his grandfather: he pursued them
wvith that obstinate and inllexible perfevea'ance
which has ever been peculiar to the Aufl:rian
blood; and in executing- them, he could em-
ploy the magnanimitty, and boldncfs of his Bur-
gundian anceltors. Hlis abilities were equal to
his power, and neither of them would have
been inferior to his designs, had not lrovidence,
in pity to mankind, and in order to prcferve
them from the worl. of all evils, l-niverlal
gIlonarchy, raised up Francis I. to defend the
liberty of Europe. .[is dominions were less cx-
.tensive, but more united than the Emperor's.
His fubj(cts were numerous, avive, and war-
like, lovers of glory, and luvers of their King.
To Charles, power was the only objcit of de-
fire, and he pursued it with an unwearied and
joyless induifry. Francis could mingle pleature
and elegance with his ambition; andt though
he ncegleRed some advantages, which a more
phlegmatick or more frugal Prince would have
improved, an active and intrepid courage sup-
plied all its defe&s, and checked or defeated
many of the Emperor's designs.

The reft of Europe observed all te motions

of there mighty rivals, with ajealous attention.
On the one fide, the Italians saw the danger
wvhich threatened Christendom, and in order to
avert it, had recourle to the expedient, which

they had often employed with success, The'y
endeavoured to divide the power of the two
contending Monarchs into equal scales, and byv
the union of several small states to counterpoise
him, whose power became too great. But,
what they concerted with much wisdom, the)
wvere able to execute with little vigour; and
intrigue and refinement were feeble fences
against the incroachments of military power.

On the other fide, Henry V1I1. of England

held the balance with less delicacy, but with
a stronger hand. He was the third Prince of
the age in dignity and in power; and the ad.
vantageous situation of his dominions, his do.
meflick tranquillity, his immense wealth, and
absolute authority, rendered him the natural
guardian of the liberty of Europe. Each of the
rivals courted him with emulation; lie kneit
to be his interest to keep the balance even, and
to restrain both, by not joining entirely wxitl
either of them. But he was seldom able to
reduce his ideas to prat-ice; he was governed
by caprice more than by principle; and the pa;-
lions of the man were an overmatch for the
maxims of the King. Vanity and refentmcnt
were the great springs of all his undertakings,
and his neighbours easily found the way, by
touching these, to force him npon many riaf
and inconfifient enterprises. His reign was a
perpetual series of blunders in politicks; and
while he esteemed himself the wisest Prince in

Europe, he was a confnant dupe to those, who
found it necessary, and could fibmit to flat-
ter him.

In this situation of Europe, Scotland, Wvhich

had hitherto wafted her strength in the quarrels
between France and England, emerged fromher
obscurity, took her fRation in the fyfrem, and
began to have some inluenre upon the fate of
distant nations. Her afiiftance was, frequently,
of consequence to the contending parties, andt
the balance was often so nicely adjusted, that
it was in her power to make it lean to either
fide. The part alfigned her, at this juncture,
was to divert Henry from carrying his arms
into the continent. That Prince, having rout-
ed the French at Guinegat, and invested Te-
ronenne, France attempted to divide his forces,
by engaging James IV. in that unhappy expe-
dition which ended with his life. Forthe fame
reason Francis encouraged and affifed the Duke
of Albany, to ruin the families of Angus and
Home, which were in the interest of England,
and would willingly have persuaded the Scots
to revenge the death of their King, arid to en-
ter into a new war with that kingdom. Henry
and Francis having united not long after against
the Emiperor, it was the interest of both Kings,
that the Scots should continue inactive; and a
long tranquillity was the effe& of their union.
Charles endeavoured to break this, and to em-
barrafs Henry by another inroad of the Scots.

For this end, he made greatadvances to James
V. flattering the vanity of the young Monarch,
by eleting him a Knight of the Golden Fleece,
and by olLering him a match in the imperial fa.
mily; while, in return for these empty honours,
lie demanded of him to renounce his alliance
with France, and to declare war againll England.
But James, who had much to lose, and who
could gain little by embracing the Emperor'si
proposals, rejecled them with decency, and'
keeping firmn to his ancient allies, left Henry
at full liberty to aEt upon the continent witil
his lwhole tlrcengt1h.

Henry himself began his reign, by imitat-

ing the example of his ancestors with regard
to Scotland. He held its power in fuich ex;-
treme contempt, that lie was at no pains to gain
its friendship; but, on the contrary, lheirritat-
ed the whole nation, by reviving the antiquat-
ed pretensions of the crown of England to tle
sovereignty over Scotland. But his own expe-
rience, and the cxample of his enemies, gave
him a hlgher idea of its importance. It was
impossible to defend an open and extenlive fron-
tier, against the incurlions of an a&ive and mar-
tial people. During any war on the-continent,
this obliged him to divide tie ll-rength of his
kingdom. It was necefiary to maintain a Ki;d
of army of observation in the north ofEngland;
:and after all precautions, the Scottish borderers,
.who were superior to all mankind in the prac-

tice of irregular war, often made successful in-
roads, and spread terror and desolation over
ninny counties. He fell, at last, upon the true
secret of policy, with refpet to Scotland, vwhich
his predecessors had too little penetration to
discover, or too much pride to employ. The
iituation of the country, and the bravery of the
people, made the conquest of Scotland impof-
fible; but the national poverty, and the violence
of faction, rendered it an easy matter to divide,
and to govern it. He abandoned, therefore,
the former design, and resolved to employ the
utmost address in executing the latter. It had
not yet become honourable for one Prince to re-
ceive pay from another, under the more decent
name of a subsidy. But, in all ages, the fame
arguments have been good in courts, and of
weight with ministers, fatious leaders, and
favourites. WThat were the arguments by which
Henry brought over so many to his interest dur-
ing the minority of James V. we know by the
original warrant flill extant, :) for remitting
considerable flnms into Scotland. By a proper
distribution of these, many persons of note were
gained to his party, and a faction which held
secret correspondence with England, and re-
ceived all its directions from thence, appears
henceforward in our domeftick contef-s. In the
sequel of the history, we shall find Henry la-

') Burn, Hit, Reft v, i. p. 7.

bouring to extend his influence in Scotland.
His successors adopted the fame plan, and im-
proved upon it. The affairs of the two king-
doms became interwoven , and their interests
were often the fame. Elizabeth divided her
attention almost equally between them, and the
authority, which she inherited in the one, was
not greater than that, which she acquired in
the other,

Tl^-- -IJI .I J-- ,| , u .
. «^

# BOOK II.

# Birth of Mary, and state of the kingdom.

TH E

HISTORY
H I 5 T O R Y

of
S CO T L A N D.

BOOK II.

Birtl of Mary, and slate of the kilngdoin.

M'AR'Y Queen of Scots was born a few days
before the death of her father James V. ( Dec.
14. I 542.) The situation in which he left the
kingdom alarmed all ranks of men with the
profpeet of a turbulent and difatfrous reign. A
war against England had been undertaken with-
out necessity, and carried on [without success.
Many persons of the firlt rank had fallen into
the hands of the English, in the unfortunate
rout near the firth of Solway, and were ftili
prisoners, at London. Among the rel: of the
nobles there was little union either in their
views, or in their affections; and the religious
difpates occasioned by the opinions of the re-
'ormers, growing every day more violent, added
to the rage of those fastions which are natural
:o a form of government nearly ariftocratical,

# Pretensions of Cardinal Beatoun to the regency.

The government of a Queen was unknown

in Scotland, and did not imprint much rever
ence in the minds of a martial people. The
government of an infant Queen was still more
destitute of real authority: and the proflpctl of
a long and feeble minority invited to fadion 3by
the hope of impunity. James had not even
provided the common remedy against the dif-
orders of a minority, by committing to proper
persons the care of his daughter's education,
and the adminifiration of affairs in her name.
Though he saw the clouds gathering, and fore-
told that they would quicklyburft into a fiorm,
lie was so little able to disperse them, or tode-
fend his daughter and kingdom against the in-
minent calamities, that, in mere despair, he
abandoned them both to the mercy of fortune,
and left open to every pretender, the olfice of
Pegent, which he could not fix to his own fa-
tisfadtion.

Pretenfons of Cardinal Beatoun to the regency.

Cardinal Beatoun , who had for manyyears

been confidered as prime minister, was the lirl'
who claimed that high dignity; and in support
of his pretenflons, he produced a testament, :)
which he himself had forged in the name of the
late King; and without any other riglt, in-
ftantly aflumed the title of Regent. Hehoped.

) Sadler's Lett. I6l.

# Earl of Arran chosen Regent.

# Character of Beatoun.

by the assistance of the clergy, the conntenance,
of France, the connivance of the Queen Dow-
ager, and the ftupport of the whole popifl
fa&tion, to hold by force, what he had feizecl
on by fraud.

Earl of Aiini cliofein lege-nt.

But Beatoun had enjoyed power too long

to be a favourite of the nation. Those among,
the nobles who wished for a Reformation in
religion dreaded his severity, and others con-
fidered the elevation of a Churchman to tlhe
highefl office in the kingdom as a depreflion o.
themselves. At their infligation , James HIa-
milton Earl of Arran, and next heir to the
Queen, roused himself from his inaftivity, and
was prevailed on to aspire to that station, to
which proximity of blood gave him a naturia
title. The nobles, who were assembled for
that purpose, unanimously conferred on him
'the office of Regent; and the publick voice ap-
plauded their choice.

Clarafter of Beatoii: ,

No two men ever differed more widely in

(lifpofition and character, than the Earl of Ar-
ran and Cardinal Beatoun. The Cardinal was
by nature of immoderate ambition; by long ex-
perience he had acquired address and refine-
ment; and insolence grew upon him from con-
tinual success. His high station in the church

# Of Arran.

placed him in the way of great employments;
his abilities were equal to the greatest ofthel';
nor did he reckon any of them to be above his
merit. As his own eminence was founded
upon the power of the church of Rome, he w::g
a zealous defender of that fuperitition, and for
the fame reason an avowed enemy to the doc-
trine of the Reformers, Political motives alone
determined him to support the one, or to op-
pose the other. His early application to pu.
blick business kept him unacquainted with the
learning and controversies of the age; he
gave judgment, however. upon all points in
dispute, with a precipitancy, violence, and ri-
gour, .which cotemporary historians mention
with indignation.

Or Arran.

The character of the Earl of Arran'was,in

almost every thing, the reverse of Beatoun's.
He was neither infeated with ambition, nor in-
clined to cruelty: The love of ease extinguifl-
ed the former, the softness of his temper pre-
served him from the latter. Timidity and irrc-
solution were his predominant failings, the one
occasioned by his natural conflitution, and the
other arising from a consciousness that his aWli
li{Cies were not equal to his station. With
these dispositions he might have enjoyed anIt
adorned private life; but his publick condlud
was without courage, or dignity, or confiltellnc

Tilt

# Schemes of Henry VIII. with regard to Scotland.

The perpetual slave of his own fears, and, by
consequence, the perpetual tool of those, who
found their advantage in praCifing upon them.
But as no other person could be set in oppofi-
tion to the Cardinal, with any probability of
success, the nation declared in his favour with
so general a content, that the artifices of his
rival could not witihftand its united strength.

Scllienes of [-lciry Viil. with regard to Scotland.

The Earl of Arran had scarce taken pof-

feflion of his ne\w dignity, when a negociation
was opened with England, which gave birth
to events of the molt fatal consequence to him-
self, and to the kingdom. After the death of
James, Henry VIII. was no longer afraid of
any interruption from Scotland to his delliins
ngainft France; and immediately conceived ho-
pes of rendering this security perpetual, by the
marriage of Edward his only Ion with theyoung
Queen of Scots. He communicated his inten-
tion to the prisoners taken at Solway, and pre-
vailed on them to favour it, by the promise of
liberty, as the reward of their success. In the
mean time he permitted them to return into
Scotland, that, by their pretence in the Par-
liament which the Regent had called, they
might be the better able to persuade their
countrymen to fall in with his proporals. A
cause, intrusted to fucl able and zealous advo-
cates, could not well miss of coming to an happy,

Hill of Scotl. Vol. I. H

# Ill conducted by himself.

# Odious to the Scots, though in part accepted by them.

iflue. All those vho feared the Cardinal, or
who desired a change in religion, were fond of
an alliance, which afforded protetion to the
do&trine which they had embraced, as well as
to their own persons, against the rage of that
powerful and haughty Prelate.

111 condu&cd ly himirelf.

But Henry's rough and impatient temper

was incapable of improving this favourable con-
juneture. Address and delicacy in managing
the fears, and follies, and interets of men,vere
arts with which he was utterly unacquainted.
The deligns he had formed upon Scotland were
obvious from the marriage which he had pro-
posed, and he had not dexterity enough to dii-
guise, or to conceal them. Infread of yielding
to the fear or jealousy of the Scots, what time
and accidents would soon have enabled him ta
recover, he, at once, alarmed and irritated the
whole nation, by demanding that the Queen's
person should be immediately committed to his
custody, and that the government of the king-
dom should be put ip his hands during her mi-
nority.

Odious to the Scots, though in part accepted by them.

Henry could not have prescribed more igno-

minious conditions to a conquered people, and
it is no wonder they were rejeted, with in-
dignation, by men who scorned to purchase an

# Favoured by the Regent and opposed by the Cardinal.

alliance with England, at the price of their
ownliberty. The Parliament of Scotland, how-
ever, influenced by the nobles who returned
from England; desirous of peace with that king-
dom; and delivered, by the Regent's confining
the Cardinal as a prisoner, (March 12, 1543.)
from any opposition to which he might have
given rife; contented to a treaty of marriage
and of union, but upon somewhat a moreequal
footing. And after some dark aud unsuccess-
ful intrigues, by which his ambassador endea-
voured to carry off the young Queen and Car-
dinal Beatoun into England, Henry was obliged
to give up his own proposals, and to accept of
theirs. On his £ide, he consented that the
Queen should continue to retide in Scotland,
and himself remain excluded fiom any share in
the government of the kingdom. On the other
hand, the Scots agreed to fend their Sovereign
into England as Coon as she attained the full
age of ten years, and instantly to deliver fix
persons, of the iirft rank, to be kept as host-
ages by Henry till the Queen's arrival at his
court.

Favoured by the Regent and opposed by the Cardinal.

The treaty was fiill so manifestly of ad-

vantage to England, that the Regent loft much
of the publick confidence by contenting to it.
The Cardinal, who had now recovered liberty,
watched for such an opportunity of regaining

H 2

credit, and he did not fail to cultivate and imn-
prove this to the utmost. He complained loudly
that the Regent had betrayed the kingdom to i
its -noft inveterate enemies, and sacrificed its
honour to his own ambition. He foretold the
extintion of the true catholick religion, under
the tyranny of an excommunicated heretick;
but above all, he lamented to fee an ancicrn
kingdom consenting to its own slavery, descend.
ing into the ignominious station of a dependedu
province; and, in one hour, the weakness or
treachery of a single man surrendering every
thing for which the Scottish nation had ftru'.
gled and fought during so many ages. Thecli
renonfirances of the Cardinal were not withcbn
effe&t. They were adreffed to prejudices anu
passions which are deeply rooted in the hunma
heart: The fame hatred to the ancient enemie;
of their country, the fame jealousy of national
honour, and pride of independence, which, at
the beginning of the' present century, went
near to prevent the Scots from consenting to
an union with England, upon terms of great
advantage, did, at that time, induce the wiole
nation to declare againfft the alliance which llad
been concluded. In the one period, an hunldrle
and fifty years of peace between the two na-
tions, the habit of being fubjeEted to the fanm
King, and governed by the fame maxims, lad
considerably abated old animoiities, and Ire'
pared both people for incorporating. In the

# He excites almost the whole nation against the English.

other, injuries were still fresh, the wounds on
both fides were open, and, in the warmth of
resentment, it was natural to leek revenge, and
to be averse from reconcilement. At the Union
in 1707, the wisdom of parliament defpifedthe
groundless murmurs occasioned by antiquated
prejudices; but in 1543, the complaints of the
nation were better founded, and urged with
a zeal and unanimity, which it is neither just
nor faile to disregard. The rage of the people
rose to such ant height, that the English Am-
baffador could hardly be proteced from their
insults. The clergy contributed a great fult
towards preserving the churclh from the domi-
nion of a Prince, whose system of Reformation
was so fatal to their power. The nobles, after
having mortified the Cardinal, so lately, in such
a cruel manner, were, now, ready to applaud
and to second him, as the defender of the
honour and liberty of his country.

lic excites alhnof the whole llation againlt t.le ElngliFl'.

Argyll, Hun tly, Bothwell, and other power-

ful Barons declared openly against the alliance
with England. By their affiftancc, the Cardinal
seized on the persons of the young Queen and
her mother, and added to his party the fplen-
dour and authority of the royal name. *) He
received, at the fame time, a more real accef-
*) Keith's HiR, of Sco:l, 30.

sion to his firength, by the arrival of Matthew
Stewart Earl of Lennox, whose return from
France he had earnefily solicited. This young
nobleman was the hereditary enemy of the
house of Hamilton. He had many claims upon
the Regent, and pretended a right to exclude
him, not only from succeeding to the Crown,
but to deprive him of the pofierfion of his pri-
vate fortune. The Cardinal flattered his vanity
with the profpe&t of marrying the Queen Dow.
ager, and afTeced to treat him with so much
refpeEt; that the Regent became jealous of him
as a rival in power,

This suspicion was artfully heightened by

the Abbot of Paisley, who returned into Scot.
land some time before the Earl of Lennox, and
ased in concert with the Cardinal. He was
a natural brother of the Regent, with whom
he had great credit; a warm partisan of France,
and a zealous defender of the established Re-
ligion. He took hold of the Regent by the
proper handle, and endeavoured to bring about
a change in his sentiments, by working upon
his fears. The desertion of the nobility, the
difaffecion of the clergy, and the rage of the
people; the resentment of France, the power
of the Cardinal, and the pretensions of Lennox,
were all represented with aggravation, and with
their most threatening aspee.

# Obliges the Regent to renounce the friendship with England;

Obliges the Regent to renounce the frientdfhip

wihl Englaild;

Mean while, the day appointed for thera-

tification of the treaty with England, and the
delivery of the hostages, approached, and the
Regent was still undetermined in his own mind.
He acted to the !aft, with that irresolution and
inconsistence, which is peculiar to weak men,
when they arc so unfortunate as to have the
chief part in the conduct of difficult athirs. On
the 25th of Augnft, he ratified the treaty with
Henry, and proclaimed the Cardinal, who frill
continued to oppos'e it, an enemy to his
country. On the 3d of Septemnber, he secretly
wxithdrew from Edinburgh , met with the Car-
dinal at Callendar, renounced the friendfhiip of
England,' and declared for the interests of
France. ::)

Henry, in order to gain the Regent, had

not spared the most magnificent promises. 1-le
iiad ofTered to give the Princess Elizabeth in
marriage to his eldest son, and to constitute him
King of that part of Scotland, which lies beyond
the river Forth. But upon finding his interest
in the kingdom to be less considerable than he
had imagined, the English monarch began to
treat him with little refpet. The young Queen
was now in the Custody of his enemies, who
grew every day more numerous and more po-
pular. They formed a separate court at Stir-
ling, and threatened to elea another Regent.
') Sadler, 339. 356.

# and to persecute the Reformers.

The French King was ready to afford them his
protection, and the nation, out of hatred to tle
Einglifh, would have united in their defence.
In this situation, the Regent could not retail
his authority, without a sudden change of his
measures; and though he endeavoured, by ra-
tifying the treaty, to preserve the appearances
of good faith with England, lie was obliged
to throw himself into the arms of the party
wyhich adhered to France.

and to perrecite tLic Reformer,.

Soon after this fidden revolution in his po-

litical principles, the Regent changed his fen.
timents concerning religion. The spirit ofcon-
troverfy was then new and warm ; books of
that kind were eagerly read by men of everv
rank; the love of novelty, or the conviction
of truth , had led the Regent to express great
esteem for the writings of the Reformers; and
having been powerfully supported by those l:who
had embraced their opinions, he, in order to
gratify them, entertained, in his own family,
two of the most noted preachers of the Pro-
teflant doc&rine, and, in his first Parliatent,
contented to an act, by which the laity were
permitted to read the Scriptures in a language
which they understood. Truth needed only
a fair hearing to be an over-match for error.
Absurdities, which had long imposed onl the
ignorance and credulity of mankind , were de-

tcfted and exposed to publirk ridicule; and
under the countenance of the Regent, the Re-
formation made great advances. The Cardinal
observed its progress with concern, and was at
the utmost pains to obftru&t it. He represent-
ed to the Regent his great imprudence in giVing
encouragement to opinions so favourable to Len-
nox's pretensions; that his own legi inacy de-
pended upon the validity of a feiitence of di-
vorce, founded on the Pope's authority; and
that by suffering it to be cailrd in quefrion, he
weakened his own title to the succession , and
furnished his rival with the only argument by
which it could be rendered doubtful. *) These
insinuations made a deep impression on the
Regent's timorous spirit, who, at the profpcct
offuch imaginary dangers, was as much ftartledt
rs the Cardinal could have wished; and his
zeal for the Protest.ant religion was not long
proof against his fear. He publickly abjured the
doE&riii of the Reforme rs in the Franciscan
church at Stirling, and declared not only for

) TI e pretenrions of the Earl of Lennox' to the fuccefion

w\ele tir s founded. i\lary, the danutlhter of ]Ji)mes 11. was

lanliried to ]:3: es l.ord Ilariltonl Elizabeth. a daughter

of thalt n.l:l-i::ge, Wnas tic twife

or Matthew Earl of Lelnnox,

rind thie lire'tl';t Earl was lier ,raidfon. The Regent was
iikewirfe the .,,randfou oi' tie Princess Mary. But his father hav-
ilg 1larrired Janet Beatoun the iegent's mother, after he had
biuur:ietl a; divorce frumri Eli.rabeth Homue his former \vise,
Ler)o:x pretenrded that the sentence of divorce was uniirt,
and that the Regent bcilfnr Iorn whlile Elizabeth lloime Uwas
till alive, ought to be conflidered as illegitimate. CrawEf.
Peer. :[92,

# Beatoun engrosses the chief direction of affairs.

the political, but the religious opinions of his
new confidents.

The Proteflant dotrine did not faffer much

by his apoftacy. It had already taken so deep
root in the kingdom, that no difcouragementor
severity could extirpate it. The Regentindeed
consented to every thing that the zeal of tlhe
Cardinal thought necessary for the preservation
of the established religion. The Reformers
were persecuted with all the cruelty which fu-
perftition inspires into a barbarous people. Mlany
were condemned to that dreadful death, which
the church has appointed for the punishment
of its enemies; but they suffered with a spirit
so nearly resembling the patience and fortitude
of the primitive martyrs, that more were con-
verted than terrified by such fpeetacles.

Beatoul engrolles the chief d;reaion of affairs.

The Cardinal, however, was now in pof-

session of every thing his ambition could desire:
and exercised all the authority of a Regent,
without the envy of the name. Hehad nothing
to fear from the Earl of Arran, who having
by his inconstancy forfeited the publick esteem,
was contemned by one half of the nation, and
little trusted by the other. The pretensions of
the Earl of Lennox were the only thing which
remained to embarrass him. He had very fuc-
ccfsfully made use of that nobleman to work
upon the Regent's jealousy and fear, but as he

no longer flood in need of fiuch an instrument,
he was willing to get rid of him with decency.
Lennox soon began to fufpe&t his intention;
promises, flattery, and refpe&t, were the.only
returns he had hitherto received for substantial
services; but at last the Cardinal's artifices could
no longer be concealed, and Lennox, instead
or attaining power and dignity himself, saw
that he had been employed only to procure
there for another. Resentment and disappoint-
ed arnbitionl pus!ed him on to seek revenge on
that cunning prelate, who, by sacrificing his
interest, had so ungenerously purchased the
Earl of Arran's friendship. He withdrew, for
that reason, from court, and declared for the
party at enmity with the Cardinal, which, with
open arms, received a convert who added so
much lustre to their cause.

The two factions which divided the king-

dom were frill the fame, without any alterations
in their views or principles; but, by one of
tihofe strange revolutions, which were frequent
in that age, they had, in the courle of a few
weeks, changed their leaders. Tile Regent
was at the head of the partisans of France and
the defenders of Popery, and Lennox in the
fame fation with the advocates'for the English
alliance, and a reformation in religion. The
one laboured to pull down his own work, which
the other upheld with the fame hand, that
had hitherto endeavoured to destroy it.

# Henry invades Scotland.

Lennox's impatience for revenge got the

start of the Cardinal's activity. He surprised
both him. and the Regent by a fidden march to
Edinburgh with a numerous army; and might
easily have crushed them, before they could
prepare for their defence. iBut he was weak
enough to liften to proposals for an accommo-
dation, and the Cardinal amafed him so art.
fully, and fipun out the treaty to such a length,
that the greater part of the Earl's troops, who
served, as is usual wherever the feudal infti-
tutions prevail, at their own expence, deserted
him; and in concluding a peace, inflead ofgiv.
ing the law, he was obliged to receive it. A
second attempt to retrieve his affairs endedyet
more unfortunately. One body of his troops
was cut to pieces, and the relt dispersed; and
with the poor remains of a ruined party, he
must either have submitted to the conqueror, or
have fled out of the kingdom, if the approacl
of an English army had not brought him a short
relief.

Ilenry invades Scotland.

Henry was not of a temper to bear tamely

the indignity, with which he had been treated,
both by the Regent and Parliament of Scotland,
who at the time when they renounced their
alliance with him, had entered into a new and
friEter confederacy with France. The rigour
of the season retarded for tome time the exe-

cution of his vengeance. But in the spring, a
considerable body of infl'utry which was delin-
ed for France, received orders to fail for Scot-
land, and a proper number of cavalry was'ap.-
pointed to join it by land. The Regent and
Cardinal little expected such a visit. They had
trusted that the French war would lind employ-
ment for all Henry's forces; and, from an uin--
accountable security, were wholly unprovided
for the defence of the kingdom. The Earl of
Hertfdrd, a leader fatal to the Scots in that
age, commanded this army, and landed it,
without opposition , a few miles above Leitl:.
He was quickly maser of that place; (May 3,
X544.) and marching dire&ly to Edinburgh,
entered it with the fame ease. Afterplunder-
ing the adjacent country, the richest, and most
open in Scotland, he set on lire both these
towns, and upon the approach of some troops
gathered together by the Regent, put his booty
on board the ilect, and with his land forces
retired safely to the English borders, delivering
the kingdom, in a few days, from the terror'of
an invalion, concerted with little policy, carried
on at great expence, and attended with no ad-
vantage. If Henry aimed at the conquest of
Scotland, he gained nothing by this expedition;
if the marriage he had proposed, was still in
his view, he loft a great deal. Such a rough
courtship, as the Earl of Huntly humorously
called it, disgusted the whole nation; their

# A peace concluded.

aversion for the malch grew into abhorrence;
and exasperated by so many indignities, the
Scots Were never at any period more attached
to France, or more alienated from England.

The Earl of Lennox alone, in spite tothe

Regent and French King, continued a corre-
fpondence with England, which ruined his own
interest, without promoting Henry's. Many
of his own vafnals preferring their duty to their
country before their afeftion to him, refused to
concur in any design to favour the publick enemy.
And after a few feeble and unsuccessful at-
tempts to dilsurb the Regent's administration,
he was obliged to fly for safety to the court of
England, where Henry rewarded services which
he had the inclination, but not the power to
perform, by giving him in marriage his niece
the Lady Margaret Douglas. This unhappy
exile, however, was destined to be the father
of a race of kings. He saw his son Lord
Darnley mount the throne of Scotland, to the per-
petual exclusion of that rival who now triumph-
ed in his ruin. And, from that time, hispof-
terity have held the sceptre in two kingdoms,
by one of which he was cast out as a cri-
minal, and by the other received as a fugitive.

A peace concluded.

Mean while hostilities were continued by

both nations, but with little vigour on either
fide. The historians of that age relate minutely

the circumitances of several fkirrnihes and in-
roads, which as they did not produce any
conliderable efl'et , at this diflance of time de-
serve no remembrance. *) At last an end-was

2) Though this war was distinguished by no important or de-

cifive nation , it Wlas, however, extremely ruinous to il-
dividuals. Tiere fill remain two original papers, whbich
give us roome idea of the milferies, to which the moll ser-
tile counties il the kingdom were exposed , by thie fudilen
and deftrunive incursions of the borderers. The tirlt seems
to he the report made to lHenry by the Enrglifh ss ardents of
the marches, for the year 54.4. anti contaili tiheirexplots
from the 2d of july to the l7th of N oveinhber. The ac-
count it gives o<f the different inroads, or Forrays, as they
are called, is very milnute; and in conclulion , the fiii
total of miliifcief they did is thus comiputed:
Towns, towers, fRedes, bairnekltls, parifil-churclies,

ballel-houfes cast down, or burnt - 92

Scots slain - - - 4o3
Priltoners taken - - 16
NIt, i. e,.-horned cattle. taken - To,386
Shee-p- - I2,492
Nags aSnd geldings - - I,296
Goalts - - 20oo
Bolls of corn - - 8
lifight-gear, i e. houfhold furniture, not reckoned.

Hiynes's State Papers, 43.

The other contains an account of .ia inroad by the Eail

cf Hertford, between the Sth atid 23d of September, 1545:
lie niarrative is more general, b!it it appears thar lie iaa
burnt, raced, and dcfroycd il the countties o;' Bcrwici
and Roxburgh only,

Monasteries and Friar-houfes 7
Caltces, towers, and piles I I1
Ihiaillet toM'1n - - -
Villages - - - 2.3
Mlilns - - - 13
Hospitals - - - 3

All these were cafl down or burnt. Haynes 52. As thle
irots Were no lelf skillful in the prRatice of irreiuilar v ar,

# The murder of Beatoun.

put to this languid and ina&ive war, by apeace,
in which England, France, and Scotland were
comprehended. Henry labouredto exclude the
Scots from the benefit of this treaty, and to
reserve them for that vengeance, which his at.
tention to the affairs of the continent had hii
therto delayed. But although a peace withl
England was of the last consequence to Francis I.
whom the Emperor was preparing to attack
with all his forces, he was too generous to
abandon allies, who had served him with fide-
lity; and he chose rather to purchase Henry's
friendship with disadvantage to himself, thanto
leave them exposed to danger. By yielding (oie
things to the interest, and more to the vanity
of that haughty Prince; by submission, flattery,
and address, he, at length, prevailed to have
the Scots included in the peace agreed upon.

The murder of Beatoun.

An event which happened a short tine

before the conclusion of this peace, rendered
it more acceptable to the whole nation. Car-
dinal Beatoun had not used his power wvi,.
moderation, equal to the prudence by wliicil
he attained it. Notwithstanding his great abi-
lities, he had too many of the paflionsanld pe-

j udices

We may conclude that the damage which they did in It;,
land was not inconhiderable; and that their raids wdr ri
let's wasteful than the forrays of the Enlilih,

judices ofan angry leader of a faction, to govern
a divided people with temper, His resentment
againll one party of the nobility, his insolence
towards the reft, his severity to the Reformers,
and, above all, the barbarous and illegal exe-
cution of the famous George Wifhart, a man
of honourable birth and of primitive fantity,
wore out the patience of a fierce age; and no-
thing but a bold hand was wanting to gratify the
publi.clwilh by his deftruaion. Private re-
venge, inflamed and fanEtified by a false zeal
for religion, quickly supplied this want. Nor-
manLefly, the eldest son of the EarlofRothes,
had been treated by the Cardinal with injustice
and contempt. It was not the temper of the
man, or the spirit of the times, quietly to digest
an affront-. And as the profession of his ad-
verfary screened him from the eRt'eas of what
is called an honourable resentment, he resolved
to take that fatisfadion which he could not
demand. This resolution deserves as muchcen-
sure, as the singular courage and conduce with
which he put it in execution excite wonder,
The Cardinal, at that time, resided in the castle
of Saint Andrews, which he ,had fortified at
great expence, and in the opinion of the age
had rendered it impregnable. His retinue was
numerous, the town at his devotion, and the
neighbouring country full of his dependents.
In this situation, sixteen persons undertook to
surprise his castle, and to allafiinate ihimfflf;

Hist. of Scotl. Vol. 1. 1-

# The Regent attempts in vain to seize the murderers.

and their success was equal to the boldness o,
the attempt. Early in the morning (May ni,
x546.) they seized on the gate of the caltie,
*which was set open to the workmen who wer'
employed in finishing the fortifications; and
having placed sentries at the door of the Car-
dinal's apartment, they awakened his numer(io:
domelticks one by one, and turning them oir
of the castle, they, without noise or tumult,
or violence to any other person, delivered thei:
country, though by a most unjutifiable acion,
from an ambitious man, whose pride was ii;.
supportable to the nobles, as his cruelty ani
cunning were the great checks to the Refo;e
aation.

The Regent attempts in vain to seize the murderer,.

His death was fatal to the Catholick reli-

gion , and to the French interest in Scotland,
The fame zeal for both continued among a grea
party in the nation, but when deprived of tie
genius and authority of so skilful a leader, was
of small consequence, Nothing can equal ti
consternation which a blow so unexpe&ed oc.
cafioned among his adherents; while the Re-
gent secretly enjoyed an event, which remnovc,!
out of hiswxay a rival, who had not only eclipl
ed his greatness, but almost extinguishcd lhi
power. Decency, however, the honour .l
the church, the importunity of the Qucel
Dowager and her fation, his engageamentl

with France, and, above all these, the desire
of recovering his eldest ton, whom the Cardinal
had detained for rome time at St. Andrew's in
pledge of his fidelity, and who, together with
the catle, had fallen into the hands ofthecon-
fpirators, induced him to take arms, in order
to revenge the death of a man he hated.

He threatened vengeance, but was unable

to execute it. One part of military science,
the art of attacking fortified places, was then
unknown in Scotland. The weapons, the dif-
cipline, and impetuosity of the Scots, rendered
their armies as unfit for sieges, as they were
active in the field. An hundred and fifty men,
which was the greatest number the conspirators
ever aff'enbled, reflled all the efforts of the
Regent for five months, *) in a place which a
single battalion, with a few battering cannon,
would now reduce in a few hours. This te-
dious liege was concluded by a truce. The
Regent undertook to procure for the conspirators
an absolution from the Pope, and a pardon in
parliament; and upon obtaining these, they en-
gaged to surrender the castle, and to set his
Ion at liberty,

It is probable, that neither of them were

sincere in this treaty, On both fides, they
fought only to amuse, and to gain time. The

I

S
L) EpiiR. Res. Scot. 2, 370.

Regent had applied to France for affifRance, and
expe&ed soon to have the conspirators at mercv.
On the other hand, if Lefly and his aflbciate.
were not at first incited by Henry to mutlder
the Cardinal, they were, in the sequel, power-
fully supported by him. Notwithstanding the
silence of cotemporary historians, there are vio-
lent presumptions of the former; of the latter
there is undoubted certainty. *) During tlih
:Tiege, the conspirators had received from Enl-
land supplies both of money and provisions;
and as Henry was preparing to renew his pro-
pofals concerning the mnarriage and the union
lie had projected, and to second his negociationi
with a numerous army, they loped, by coi-
curring with him, to be in a situation, in whiii
they would no longer need apardon, but miigl'
'claim a reward.

The death of Henry (January 28, I54-.)

blasted all these hopes. It hrppened in the be-
ginning of next year, after a reign of greater
splendour than true glory; buifling, though nol
adtive; oppressive in domeftick government, and
in foreign politicks wild and irregular. Bpt
the vices of this Prince were more beneficial
to mankind, than the virtues of others. llis
xapacioufnefs, his profusion, and even his ty-
ranny, by depressing the ancient nobility, and
by adding new property and power to the Com-

,) Keitli. 60.

# Troops arrive from France and force the castle of St. Andsew's to surrender.

mons, laid the foundations ofthe BritiCh liberty.
His other passions contributed no less towards
the downfal of Popery, and the establishment
of religious freedom in the nation. H1is re-
fentment led him to abolish the power, and
his covetousness to seize the wealth of the
church; and by withdrawing there supports,
made it easy, in the following reign, to over-
turn the whole fabrick of fuperltition.

Troops arrive fronl France Mnd force the caltle of

St. Aindsee 's to surrender.

Francis I. did not long survive a Prince,

who had been alternately his rival and his
friend; but his fuccel''or Henry II. was not
negletful of the French interest in Scotland.
He sent a considerable body of men, under the
command of Leon Strozzi, to the Regent's as-
fiftance. By their long experience in the Ita-
lian and German wars, the French had become
as dexterous in the conduct of sieges, as the
Scots were ignorant; and as the boldness and
despair of the conspirators could not defend
them against their superior art, they, after a
short resistance, surrendered to Strozzi, who
engaged, in the name of the King his tnafter,
for the security of their lives; and as his pri-
ioners transported them into France. Thecaftle
itself, the monument of Beatoun's power and
vanity, was derolifhed, in obedience to the
canon law, which, with admirable policy, de-

# New breach with England.

iounces its anathemas even against the houses
in which the sacred blood of a Cardinal hal,-
pens to be flied, and ordains them to be laid
in ruins. *)

The archbifhoprick of St. Andrew's was

befowved by the Regent upon his natural
brpther John-Hamilton, Abbot of Paisley.

'ew breach with England.

The delay of a few weeks would have

saved the conspirators. Those ministers of
Henry VIIT. who had the 'chief diretion of
affairs during the minority of his son Edward VI.
conduEted themselves, with regard to Scotland, by
the maxims of their late master, and resolved
to frighten the Scots into a treaty, which they
had not abilities or address to bring about by
any other method.

But before we proceed to relate the events

which their invasion of Scotland occasioned, we
shall stop to take notice of a circumstance un-
observed by contemporary historians, but ex.
tremely remarkable for the discovery it makes
of the sentiments and spirit, which then pre-
vailed among the Scots. The conspirators against
Cardinal Beatoun found the Regent's eldest son
in the castle of St. Andrew's; and as they need.
ed the protection of the English, it was to be
feared that they might endeavour to purchase il,

) Burn. Hist, Ref. IT, 38h

by delivering to them this important prize. The
prefiiniptive heir to the crown in the hands of
the avowed enemies of the kingdom, was a
dreadful profpecc. And, in order to avdid it,
the Parliament fall upon a very extraordinary
expedient. By an aft made of purpose, they
excluded ,, the Regents eldeftfon from all right
,, of ficceilon, publick or private , so long as
,, he should be detained a prisoner, and sub-
,, tituted in his place, his other brothers, ac-
,, cording to their seniority, and in failure of
, them, those whoe wo ere next heirs to theRe-

g, gent. " ') Succeflion by hereditary right

is an idea so obvious and so popular, that a
nation seldom ventures to make a breach in it,
but in cafes of extreme neccfeity. Such a ne-
cellity did the Parliament discover in the pre-
sent situation. Hatred to England, founded on
the memory of pafr hoffilities, and heightened
by the fmrart of recent injuries, was the na-
tional passion. This dictated that uncommon
fratute, by which the order of lineal fucceflion
was so remarkably broken. The modern theo-
ries, which represent this right as divine and
unalienable, and that ought not to be violated
upon any consideration whatsoever, seem to have
been then altogether unknown.

') Eifn, Reg, Scot, 2. 3J9o

# Scotland invaded by the English.

Scotland invaded by the English.

In the beginning of September, the Earl

of Hertford, now Duke of Somerset, and Pro.
te&or of England, entered Scotland at the head
of x8,ooo men, and, at the fame time, afleet
of I6 ships appeared on the coast, to second
his land forces. The Scots had for some time
observed this storm gathering, and were pre.
pared for it. Their army was almost double
to that of the enemy, and posted to the greatest
advantage on a rising ground, above Mulfel-
burgh, not far from the banks ofthe riverEfke.
Both these circumstances alarmed the Duke of
Sommerfet, who saw his danger , and would
willingly have extricated himself out of it, by
a new overture of peace on conditions extre-
mely reasonable. But this moderation being
imputed to fear, his proposals were rejected
with that scorn which the confidence of fuccels
inspires; and if the condut of theRegent, wlio
commanded the Scottish army, had been in any
degree equal to his confidence, the deftru&ion
of the English must have been inevitable. They
were in a situation, precisely similar to that of
their countrymen under Oliver Cromwell, in
the following century. The Scots had chosen
their ground so well, that it was impossible to
force them to give battle; a few days had ex-
haulted the forage and provision of a narrow
country; the fleet could only furnish a scanty
and precarious subsistence; a retreat therefore

# Battle of Pinkey;

vwas nece.fftry'; but disgrace, and perhaps ruin,
were the consequences of retreating.

Battle of Pinikey;

On both these occasions, the national heat

and impetuosity of the Scots saved the English,
and precipitated their own country into the ut-
mnoft danger. The undisciplined courage of the
private men became impatient at the fight of an
enemy. The General was afraid of nothing,
but that the English would escape from him by
flight; and leaving his strong camp, he attack-
ed the Duke of Somerset near Pinkey, withno
better success than his raflhnefs deserved. The
Proteetor had drawn up his troops on a gentle
eminence, (September Io. I547.)and had now
the advantage of ground on his fide. The Scot-
tifh army consisted almost entirely of infantry,
wvhofe chief weapon was a long spear, and for
that reason their files were very deep and their
ranks close. They advanced towards the enemy
in three great bodies, and, as they parled the
river, were considerably exposed to the fire of
the English fleet, which lay in the bay ofMuf-
felburgh, and had drawn near the shore. The
English cavalry, flushed with an advantage
which they had gained in a skirmish some days
before, began the attack with more impetuo-
lity than good condu&e. A body so firm and
compa& as the Scots, easily refited the im-
pression of cavalry, broke them, and drove

them off the field. The English infantry,
however, advanced, and the Scots wereatonce
exposed to a flight of arrows, to a fire in flank
from 400 foreign fusileers who served the ene.
my, and to their cannon which were planted
behind the infantry on the highest part of the
eminence. The depth and closeness of their
order making it impossible for the Scots to faand
long in this situation; the Earl of Angus, who
commanded the vanguard, endeavoured to
change his ground, and to retire towards the
nmain body. But his friends unhappilymiftook
his motion for a flight, and fell into confusion.
At that very instant, the broken cavalry having
rallied, returned to the charge; the foot pur.
sued the advantage they had gained: the pro-
ifpeEt of victory redoubled the ardour of both:
and in a moment the rout of the Scottish army
became universal and irretrievable. The en-
counter in the field was not long nor bloody;
but in the pursuit, the English discovercd all
the rage aud fierceness which national antipathy,
kindled by long emulation, and inflamed byre-
ciprocal injuries, is apt to inspire. The pur-
suit was continued for five hours, and toagreat
distance. All the three roads, by which the
Scots fled, were screwed with spears, and
swords, and targets, and covered with thebo-
dies of the slain. Above-io,ooo men fell on
this day, one of the most fatal Scotland ha:!
ever seen. A few were taken prisoners, an'd

among these some persons of diffinaion. And
the Prote&or had it now in his power to be-
come mafier of a kingdom, out of vwhich, not
miany hours before, he was almot: obliged to
retire with infamy. *)

) The following palTage ill a curious and r.ire Journal of the

Prote&or's expedition into Scotland, written by \V. Patten,
who was joined in cominiifion with Cecil, as Judge Mar-
filal of thearmly, and printed in I54S, deserves olr no-
tice; as it gives a ju.i idea of the military dilcipline of
the Scots at that time. ,, But what after I learned, fpe-
cially touching their order, their armour, and their man-
ner as well of going to offend, as of standing to defend.
I have thought necelffary here to titter. Hackbutters have
they few or none, and appoint their ighr mort commonly
always a-foot. They come to the field well furnitfhed all
with jack aid fktill, dagger and buckler, and swords all
broad and thin, of exceeding good temper, and univerf-
ally so made to slice, that as I never law none so good,
so I think it hard to devise the better. Hereto every Imal
his pike, and a great kercher wrapped twice or thrice
about his neck, not for cold, but for cutting. In their
array towards joining with the enemny, they clilg and
thrult so near in the fore rank, shoulder and shoulder to-
gether, · ith their pikes il both their hands straight afore
them, and their followers in that order Ib hard at their
batks, laying their piles over their foregoers shoulders,
that, if they do afiail utdifcovered , no force can well
withfiand tlhem. St;lding at defence they thrust fliouldera
lihexwie so nigh together, the fore ranks well nigh to
kneeling, Itoop low before, their fellows behind holdinig
*hoir'pikes with both hands, and therewith in their lefe
their bucklers, the one end of their pike againlt their
right foot, and the other ngainl: the enemy breat-high ;
their follom'ers croffiig their pike points twith them for-
wardt; and thus each rwith other so nigh as space and place
vill stiffer, through the v'hole ward, so thick, that as
easily shall a bare finger pierce through the skin of an angry
liedge-hog, as any encounter the front of their pikes.
9ther curious particulars are found in this journal, from,

# Their victory of little benefit to the English.

Their viory of little benefit to the Enig!irl.

But this victory, however great, was oi

no real utility, for want of skill, or of leisure,
to improve it. Every new injury rendered the
Scots more averse from an union with England;
and the Protestor neglected the only measure
which would have made it necessary for them
to have given their consent to it.. He amused
himself in wafting the open country, and i!
taking or building several petty catles; whereai,
by fortifying a few places which were accessible
by sea, he would have laid the kingdom open
to the English, and, in a short time, the Scots
must either have acceptedof his terms, or have
submitted to his power. By such an impro.
vement of it, his vicory at Dunbar gaveCrom-
well the command of Scotland. The battle of
Pinkey had no other effet but to precipitate the
Scots into new engagements with France. The
situation of the English court may, indeed, be
pleaded in excuse for the Duke of Somerset's
conduit. That cabal of his enemies, which
occasioned his tragical end, was already formed;
and while he triumphed in Scotland, they fe-
cretly undermined his power lnd credit athome.

which Sir John Hayward has borrowed his accounlt o
this expedition.

Life of Edward VI. :79, &c.

The length of the Scotch pike or spear was appoculed

by At 44 P. 1471. to be fix ells ; i. e. eighteen feetl "
inches.

# Forces the Scots into a closer union with France.

Seifprefervation, therefore, obliged him to prefer
his safety before his fame, and to return without
reaping the fruits of his victory. At this time,
however, the cloud blew over; the conspiracy
by which he fell was not yet ripe for execu-
tion; and his presence suspended its efiect for
some time. The supreme power fill remaining
in his hands, he employed it to recover the op-
portunity which he had loft. A body of troops,
by his command , seized and fortified Htdding-
toun; (April, 1548.) a place, which, on ac-
count of its distance from tke sea, and from any
English garrison, could not be defended with-
out great expence and danger.

Forces the Scots into a clorer tillion l ith France.

Mean while the French gained more by the

defeat of their allies, than the English did by
their viEtory. After the death of Cardinal Bea-
toun, Mary of Cuife, the Queen Dowager,
took a cbnfiderable share in the direction of as-
fairs. She was warmly attached by blood, and
by inclination, to the French interelt; and, in
order to promote it, improved with great dex-
terity every event which occurred. The spirit
and strength of the Scots were broken at Pin-
key; and in an assembly of nobles which met
at Stirling to consult upon the situation of the
kingdom, all eyes were turned towardsFrance,
no profpe& of safety appearing but in aflifiance
from thence. But Henry II. being then at peace

# And to offer their Queen in marriage to the Dauphin.

with England, the Queen reprefentedthattlthey
could not expe&t him to take part in theirquar.
relj but upon views of personal advantage;and
that without extraordinary concefflions in his
favour, no assistance, in proportion to their pre.
sent exigencies, could be obtained; The pre.
judices of the nation powerfully seconded thele
representations of the Queen. What often hap.
pens to individuals, took place among the nobles
in this convention; they were swayed entirely
by their paflions; and in order to gratify them,
they deserted their former principles, anddifre.
garded their true interest.

And to offer their Queen in marringe to the Dauphin,

In the violence of resentment, they forgot

that zea! for the independence of Scotland,
wvhich had prompted them to reje&t the pro-
pofals of Henry VII. and by offering, volun-
tarily, their young Queen in marriage to the
Dauphin, eldell son of Henry II. and, which
was still more, by proposing to fend her im-
mediately into France to be educated at his
court, they granted, from a thirst of vengeance,
what formerly they would not yield upon any
consideration of their own safety. To gain at
once such a kingdom as Scotland, wasamatter
of no small consequence to France. Henry,
'without hesitation, accepted the offers of the
Scottish .ambafTadors, and prepared for the vi-
gorous defence of his new acquisition. Sit

# The treaty for that purpose concluded.

thousand veteran soldiers, under the command
of Monsieur Defse, affifled by tome of the befi
officers, who were formed in the long wars
of Francis I. arrived at Leith. They -erved
two campaigns in Scotland, with a spirit equal
to their former fame. But their exploits were
not considerable. The Scots soon became jea-
lous of their designs, and negleted to support
them with proper vigour; and the caution of
the English, in aRing wholly upon the de-
fenfive, prevented them from attempting any
enterprise of consequence; and obliged them to
exhaust their strength in tedious lieges, under-
taken under many disadvantages. Their es.
forts, however, were not without some benefit
to the Scots, by compelling the English to e-
vacuate Haddingtoun, and to surrender several
finall forts, which they pol£efled in different
parts of the kingdom.

The treaty for that purpose concluded.

But the consequence of these operations of

his troops were iill of greater importance to
the French King. The diverfCon which they
occasioned enabled him to wrest Boulogne out
of the hands of the English ; and the influence
of his army in Scotland obtained the concur-
rence of Parliament with the overtures made
to him, by the affemnbly of nobles at Stirling,
concerning the Queen's marriage with the Dau-
phin, and her educatien at the court of France.

# Mary sent to be educated in France.

In vain did 'a few patriots remonstrate against
such extravagant concessions, by which Scot.
land was reduced to be a province of France;
and Henry, from an ally, raied to be mafier
of the kingdom; by which the frieidfhip of
France became more fatal than the enmity of
England; and every thing was fondly given up
to the one, that had been bravely defended
agairift the other. A point of so much confe.
quence was hastily decided, in a Parliament,
assembled in the camp before Haddingtoun:
(June 5, r548.) The intrigues of the Queen
Dowager, the zeal of the clergy, and resent.
ment againit England, had prepared a great
party in the nation for such a ftep; theFrench
General and Ambaflador, by theirliberalityand
promires, gained over many more. The Regent
himself was weak enough to stoop to the offer
of a pension from France, together with the
title of Duke ofChatelherault in that kingdom.
A considerable majority declared for the treaty,
and the interest of a fa&ion was preferred be-
fore the honour of the nation.

Mary lent to be educated in France.

Having hurried the Scots into this rash and

fatal resolution, the source of many calamities
to themselves and to their sovereign, the French
allowed them no time for reflefion or repent-
ance. The fleet, which had brought over
their forces, was still in Scotland, and, witlholt

delay,

delay, conveyed the Queen into France. atary
was then fix years old, and by her education
in that court, one of the politest, but moit
corrupted in Europe, she acquired every ac-
complifhment thr.c could add to her charms as
a woman, and contracted many of those pre-
judices which occasioned her misfortunes as a
Queen.

From the time that Mary was put into their

hands, it was the interest of the French tofuf-
ser the war in Scotland to languif;. The re-
covering of the Boulonnois was the objectHen-
ry had molt at heart; and a flight diversion ii
Britain was sufficient to divide the attention and
itrengch of the English, whose domeflick sac-
tions deprived both their arms and councils of
their accutocmed vigour. The government of
England had undergone a great revolution. The
Duke of Sommerfet's power had been acquired
will too much violence, and was exercised
with too little moderation, to be of long con-
tiniiance. Many good qualities, added to great
love of his country, could not atone for his am-
bition in usurping the 'ole diretion of affairs.
il¥any of the most eminent courtiers combined
against him; and the Earl of Warwick, their
leader, no less ambitious, but more artful than
Somerset, conducted his meafares with so mun
dexterity, as to raise himself upon the ruins of
his rival. Without the invidious name of Pro-
teator, he succeeded to all the power and in-

Hist. of Scotl. Vol. I. K

# Peace concluded, March 24, 1550.

fluence, of which Somerset was deprived, and
he quickly found peace to be necessary for the
establishment of his new authority, and the
execution of the vast designs he had conceived.

Peace concluded, March 24, I55o.

Henry was no stranger to Warwick's si.

tuation, and improved his knowledge of it to
good purpose, in condu&ting the negociations
for a general peace. He prescribed what terms
he pleased to theEnglifh minister, who scrupled
at nothing, however advantageous to that Mon.
*arch and his allies. England consented to ref-
tore Boulogne and its dependencies to France,
and gave up all pretensions to a treaty of mar-
riage with the Queen of Scots, or to the con-
quest of her country. A few small forts, of
which the English troops had hitherto kept
pofieltion, were rafed; and peace between the
two kingdoms was established on its ancient
foundation.

Both the British nations loll power, as

well as reputation, by this unhappy quarrel.
It was on both lides a war of emulation and
refentmcnt, rather than of interest; and was
carried on, under the influence of nationalani-
nmofities, which were blind to all advantages.
The French, who entered into it with greater
coolness, condu&ed it with more skill; andby
dexterously availing themselves of every cir-
cumftance which occured, recovered pofleflion

# The Scots become jealous of the French.

.f an important territory which they had loft,
and added to their monarchy a new kingdom.
The ambition of the Englifli Minister betrayed
to them the former; the inconsiderate rage of
the Scots againlt their ancient enemies beflowed
on them the latter; their own address and good
policy merited both.

The Scots become jealous of thi Frencli.

Immediately after the conclusion of the

peace, the French forces leftScotlahd, as much
to their own fatisfaftion, as to that of the na-
tion. The Scots loon found, that the calling
to their afiili'ance a people more powerfnl than
thenifelves, was a dangerous expedient. They
beheld, with the utmost impatience, those who
had come over to protege the kingdom, taking
upon them to command in it; and on many
occasions they repented the rash invitation they
had given. The peculiar genius of the French
nation heightened this disgust, and prepared
the Scots to throw off the yoke, before they
had vwell begun to feel it. The French were,
in that age, what they are in the present, one
of the most polifhied nations in Europe. But
it is to be observed, in all their expeditions into
foreign countries, whether towards the south
or north, that their manners have been remark-
ably incompatible with the manners of every
other people. Barbarians are tenacious of their
own customs, because they want knowledge

K ai

and tafle to difcoverthe reafonablenefsandpro.
priety of customs which differ from them. Na.
tions, vhich hold the firIt rank in politeness,
are frequently no less tenacious out of pride,
The Greeks were so in the ancient world; and
the French are the fame in the modern. Fall
of themselves; flattered by the imitation of their
neighbours; and accustomed to confider their
own modes as the flandarts of elegance, they
scorn to disguise, or to lay aside the distinguish.
ing manners of their own nation, or to make
any allowance for what may differ from them
among others. For this reason, the behaviour
of their armies has,on every occasion, been in-
supportable to lfrangers, and has always ex-
posed them to hatred, and often to deftrnldion.
In that age,'they over-ran Italy four several
times by their valour, and loft it, as often,by
their insolence, The Scots, naturally an
irafcibleand high-fpirited people, and who, of
all nations, can least bear the most distant in-
linuation of contempt, were not of a temper to
admit all the pretenflons offach afl'uming gueitS.
The fynmptons of alienation were soon visible;
they seconded the military operations of the
French troops with the utmost coldness, and
their disgu'st grew insensibly to a degree of in-
dignation that could hardly be restrained; and
on occasion of'a very flight accident,, broke
out with fatal violence. A private French fol-
dier engaging in an idle quarrel with a citizen

# Progress of the Reformation.

of Edinburgh, both nations to6k arms, with
equal rage, in defence of their countrymen.
The Provost of Edinburgh, his son, and several
citizens of diftintion, were killed in the.fray;
and the French were obliged to avoid the fury
of the inhabitants, by retiring out of the city.
Notwithstanding the ancient alliance of France
and Scotland, and the long intercourse of good
offices between the two nationS, an averion
for the French took its rife at this time, among
the Scots, the eTffes whereof were deeply
felt, and operated powerfully through the sub-
sequent period.

Progress of the Reformation.

From tie death of Cardinal Beatoun, no-

thing has been said of the state of religion.
While the war with England continued, the'
clergy had no Icifure to molest the Protestants:
and they were not yet considerable enough to
expet any thing more than connivance andirn-
punity. The new dotrines were flill in their
infancy; but during this flhort interval oftran-
quillity, they acquired strength, and advanced
by large and firm steps, towards a full efrablifh-
ment in the kingdom. The sirs preachers against
Popery in Scotland, of whom several had ap-
peared during the reign of James V. were more
eminent for zeal and piety, than for learning.
Their acquaintance with the principles of the
Reformation was partial, and at second hand;

some of them had been educated in England;
all of them had borrowed theirnotions from the
books published there; and, in the first dawn
of the new light, they did not venture far be.
fore their leaders. But, in a short time, the
doctrines and writings of the foreign Reformers
became generally known; the inquisitive genius
of the age pressed forward in quest of !truth;
the discovery of one error opened the way to
others: the downfal of one imposture drew
many after it: the whole fabrick, which igno.
rance and superstition had ere&ed in times o!
darkners, began to totter: and nothing v'as
wanting to complete its ruin , but a daring and
a&five leader to direct the attack. Such was
the famous John Knox, who, with better qua-
lifications of learning, and more extensive views
than any of his prodecel'ors in Scotland, pof-
sessed a natural intrepidity of mind, which set
him above fear. He began his publick ministry
at St. Andrew's in the year 1547, with that
fuecefs: which always accompanies a bold nnd
popular eloquence. Instead of amusing himself
with lopping the branches, he flruck direfly
at the root of popery, and attacked both the
do-rine and discipline of the efcablifhed church,
with a vehemence peculiar to himself, but ad-
mirably suitable to the temper and wishes of
the age.

An adversary so formidable as Knox, would
not have easily escaped the rage of the clergy,

who obrerved the tendency and progress of his
opinions, with the utmost concern. But, 'at
first, he retired for safety into the cafile of St.
Andrew's, and while the conspirators kept
pofeffion of it, preached publickly under their
protetion. The great revolution in England,
which followed upon the death of Henry VIII.
contributed no less than the zeal of Knoe,
towards demolishing the Popish church in Scot-
land. Henry had loosened the chains, and
lightened the yoke of Popery. The ministers
of his son Edward VT. cast them off altogether,
and established the Proteltant religion upon al-
most the fame footing whereon it now stands in
that kingdom. The influence of this example
reached Scotland, and the happy effects of ec-
clefiaffical liberty, in the one nation, inspired
the other with an equal desire of recoveringit.
The Reformers had, hitherto, been obliged to
conduc themselves with the utmoff caution,
and seldom ventured to preach, but in private
houses, and ata diftancefrom court; theygain-
ed credit, as happens on the fir&t publication of
every new religion, chiefly among persons in
the lower and middle rank of life. But several
noblemen, of the greatest diftin&tion, having,
about this time, openly espoused their principles,
they were no longer under the necefity of act-
ing with the fame reserve; and with more fe-
curity and encouragement, they had likewise
greater success. The means of acquiring and

# The Queen Dowager aspires to the office of Regent.

£preading knowledge became more common, and
the spirit of innovation, peculiar to that period,
grew every day bolder and more universal.

Happily for the Reformation, thisfpiritwas

fill under some restraint. It. had not yet at-
tained firmness and vigour, sufficient to overturn
a fyifem founded on the deepest policy, and
supported by the most formidable power. Under
the present circumstances, any attempt towards
a&tion must have been fatal to the Protestant
doCtrines; and it is no small proof of the au.
thority, as well as penetration of the headsof
the party, that they were able to restrain the
zeal of a fiery and impetuous people, till that
critical and mature junCture, when every ftcp
they took was decisive and successful.

Meanwhile their cause received reinforce.

nent from two different quarters, whencethey
never could have expe&ted it. The ambition
of the house of Guise, and the bigotry of Mary
of England, hastened the'fubverfion ofthe Papal
throne in Scotland; and by a singular disposition
of Providence, the persons who opposed the
Reformation in every other part of Europewith
the fiercest zeal, were madeinftruments for ad
vancing it in that kingdom.

The Queen Dowager aspires to the office of Regent.

Mary of Guise possessed the fame bold and

aspiring spirit which distinguished her family.
But in her it was softened by the female cha.

rarer, and accompanied with great temper and
addrefi. Her brothers, in order to attain the'"
high objets at which they aimed, ventured
upon such daring measures, as suited theirgreat
courage. Her designs upon the fnpreme power
were concealed with the utmost care, and ad-
vanced by address and refinements more natural
to her sex. By a dexterous application ofthofe
talents, she had acquired a considerable influence
on the councils of a nation hitherto unacquaint-
ed with the government of women; and, with-
out the smallest right to any share in the ad-
ministration of affairs, had engrossed the chief
direction of them into her own hands. But
she did not long reft satisficd with the enjoy-
ment of this precarious power, which the fickle-
ness of the Regent, or the ambition of those
who governed him, might so easily disturb;
and she began to set on foot 'new intrigues,
with a design of undermining him, and of
opening to herself a way to succeed him in that
high dignity. Her brothers entered warmly
into this scheme, and Supported it with all their
credit at the court of France. The French king
willingly concurred in a measure, by which he
hoped to bring Scotland entirely under mana.
gement, and, in any futurebroil withEngland,
to turn its whole force upon that kingdom.

In order to arrive at the desired elevation,

the Queen Dowager had only one of two ways
to chufe; either violently to wrest the power

# Courts the Reformers.

out of the hands of the Regent, or to obtain it
by his content. Under a minority, and among
a warlike and fa&ious people, the former was
a very uncertain and dangerous experiment,
The latter appeared to be no less impra&icable.
To persuade a man voluntarily to abdicate the
supreme power; to descend to a level with
those, above whom he was raised; and to be
content with the second place where he hath
held the first, may well pass for a wild and
chimerical projet. This, however, the Queen
attempted; and the prudence of the attempt
was sufficiently justified by its success.

The Regent's inconstancy and irresolution,

together with the calamities which had befallen
the kingdom under his administration, raised
the prejudices both of the nobles and of the
people against him, to a great height; and the
Queen secretly fomented these with much in-
dultry. All who wifhedfor a change metwith
a gracious reception in her court, and theirfpirit
of difaffe&ion was nourished by filch hopesand
promises, as, in every age, impose on thecre-
dulity of the facious.

Courts the Reformers.

The favourers of the Reformation being the

rmoft numerous and spreading body of the Re-
gent's enemies, flie applied to them, with a
particular attention; and the gentleness of her
disposition, and seeming indifference to the re-

lig'oug points in dispute, made all her promises
of protection and indulgence pass upon them
for sincere. Finding so great a part of the
nation willing to fall in with her meafures;the
Queen set out for France, ( Oc&. 1550.) under
pretence of visiting her daughter, and took
along with her those noblemen, who pofleffed
the greateRt power and credit among their
countrymen. Softened by the pleasures of
an elegant court, flattered by the civilities of
the French King, and the caresses of the house
of Guise, and influenced by the seasonable
distribution of a few favours, and the liberal
promise of many more, they were brought to
approve of all the Queen's pretensions.

While fie advanced by these flow but sure

tleps, the Regent either did not foresee the
danger which threatened him, or.negleEted to
provide against it. The firfi discovery of the
train which was laid, came from two of his own
confidents, Carnegie of Kinnaird, and Panter
Bishop of Ross, whom the Queen had gained
over to her interest, and then employed as the
molt proper instruments for obtaining his con-
sent. The overture was made to him in the
name of the French King, enforced by proper
threatenings, in order to work upon his natural
timidy, and sweetened by every promise that
could reconcile him to a proposal so disagree-
able. On the one hand , the confirmation of
his French title, together with a considerable

pension, the parliamentary acknowledgment of
his right of succession to the Crown, and a
publick ratification of his conduft during his
regency, were offered him. On the other
hand, the displeasure of the French King, the
power and popularity of the Queen Dowager,
the difaffestion of the nobles, with the danger
of an after-reckoning, were represented in the
itrongeft colours.

It was not possible to agree to a propofalfo

extraordinary and unexpected, without some
previous struggle; and had the Archbishop of
St. Andrew's been present to fortify the irre.
solute and passive fpiritof theRegent, he would,
in all probability, have rejected it with disdain.
Happily for the Queen, the sagacity and am.
bition of that Prclate could, at this time, beno
obftruftion to her views. He was lying at the
point of death, and in his absence, the influence
of the Queen's agents on a flexible temper
counterbalanced several of the strongest passions
in the human mind, and obtained his content
to a voluntary surrender of the supreme power.

After gaining a point of such difficulty

with so much ease, the Queen returned into
Scotland, (Dec. 1551.) in full expecation of
taking immediate poffefion of her new dignity.
But, by this time, the Archbishop of St. An-
drew's had recovered of that difternper, which
the.ignorance of the Scottish physicians had
pronounced to be incurable, This he owed

to the assistance of the famous Cardan, one of
those irregular adventurers in phylofohpy, of
whom Italy produced so manyabout this period.
A bold genius led him to some useful difeove-.
ries, which merit the esteem of a more discern-
ing age; a wild imagination engaged him in
those chimerical sciences, which drew the ad-
miration of his contemporaries. As a pretender
to astrology and -magick, he was revered and
consulted by all Europe; as a proficient in na-
tural phylotbphy, he was but little known.
Tile Archbishop, it is probable, confidered
hlim as a powerful magician , when he applied
to him for relief; but it was his knowledge as
a philosopher, which enabled him to cure his
.disease. *)

Together with his health, the archbishop

recovered the entire government of the Regent,
and quickly persuaded him to recall that dif-
honourable promise, which he had been seduced
by the artifices of the Queen to grant. However
great her surprise and indignation were, at this
fresh instance of his inconstancy, the was obliged
to differnble, that she might have leisure to
renew her intrigues with all parties; with the
*) Cardan himself was more desirous of being confidered as

an Afirologer than a Philofoplier; in his book De Geni-
turis, we find a calculation of the Archbilliop's nativity,
from which he pretends both to have predifed his disease,
and to have effe&ed his cure. He received, from tho
Arclibifiop, a reward of ISoo crowvnc. A greae furu i
that age, DC vita liu, p, 3'.

# Prevails on the Regent to resign his office.

# She obtains the Regency.

Protestants, whom she favoured and courted
more than ever; with the nobles, to whom she
rendered herself agreeablM by various arts ; and
with the Regenthimfelf, in order to gain whom,
she employed every argument. But whatever
impressions her emif'aries might have made on
the Regent, it was no easy matter to over-reach
or to intimidate the archbifilop.

Prevails on the Regent to resign his ofiice.

Under his management, the negociation

were spun out to a great length, and hisbrothcr
maintained his station with that address and
firmness, which its importance so well merited.
The universal defeEtion of the nobility, the
growing power of the Protefrants, who all ad-
hered to the Queen Dowager, the reiteratcd io-
iicitations of the French King, and, above all,
the interposition of the young Queen, who was
now entering the twelfth year of her age, and
claimed a right of nominating whom she pleaied
to be Regent, obliged him, at last, to resign
that high office, which he had held many years.
He obtained, however, the fame advantageous
terms for hinfelf, which had been formerly
stipulated.

She obtains the Regency.

It was in the Parliament which met on the

Io,th of Aprili554, that the Earl of Arraiie.e-
cuted this extraordiinary resignation; and al tl'

# Reformation continues to make great progress.

fame time Mary of Guise was raised to that
dignity, which had been so long the object of
her wishes. Thus, -w.ith their own approba-
tion, a woman and a stranger was advaficed
to the supreme authority, over a fierce and tur-
bulent people, who seldom submitted, without
reluctance, to the legal and ancientgovernment
of their native Monarchs.

reformation continues to make great progress.

While the Queen Dowager of Scotland con-

tributed so much towards the progress of the
Reformation, by the protection which she as-
forded it, from motives of ambition; the Eng-
lifh Queen, by her indiscreet zeal, filled the
kingdom with persons ative in promoting the
fame cause. Mary ascended the throne of Eng-
land, on the death of her brother Edward,
(July 6, r553. ) and soon after married Phi-
lip II. of Spain. To the persecuting spirit of
the Rornifh superstition, and the fierceness of
that age, fle added the private resentment of
her own and of her mother's fulferings, with
which she loaded the reformed religion; and
the peevishness and severity of her natural
temper carried the acrimony of all there pas-
lions to the utmost extreme. The cruelty of
her persecution equalled the deeds of those ty-
rants, who have been the greatest reproach to
human nature. The bigotry of her clergy could
scarce keep pace with the impetuosity of her

# A view of the political causes which contributed towards that.

zeal. Even the unrelenting Philip was obliged,
on tome occasions, to mitigate the rigour of
her proceedings. Many among the moit emi-
nent Reformers suffered for the dotrines which
they had taught; others fled from the storm,
To the greater part of these, Switzerland and
Germany opened a secure asylum; and not a
few, out of choice or neceflity. fled into Scot-
land. What they had seen and felt in England,
did not abate the warmth and zeal of their il.
dignation against Popery. Their attacks were
bolder and more successful than ever; and their
dotrines made a rapid progress among all ranks
of men.

These doctrines , calculated to reEtify the

opinions, and to reform the manners of man-
kind, had hitherto produced no other effets;
but they soon began to operate with greater
violence, and proved the occasion, not only of
subverting the established religion, but of fhak-
ing the throne, and endangering the kingdom.

A view of the prlit'cal caul'es hiic!h contributed

towaLrs istat

The causes which facilitated the introduc.

tion of these new opinions into Scotland, and
vwhich difieminated them so fast through the
nation,: merit, on that account, a particular
and careful inquiry. The Reformation is one
of the greatest events in the hiflory of mankind,

anld,

and, in whatever point of light we view it, is
inltru'ive and interesting.

The revival of learning in the 5th and

i6th centuries roused the world from that
lethargy in which it had been funk for many
ages. The human mind felt its own strength,
broke the fetters of authority by which it had
been so long restrained, and venturing to move
in a larger sphere, pushed its inquiries into
every fubjest, with great boldness and furprif-
ing success.

No sooner did mankind recover the capacity

of exercising their reason, than religion was
one of the firfl objeEts which drew their atten-
tion. Long before Luther published his famous
Theses, which i'fook the Papal throne, science
and philosophy had laid open, to many of the
Italians, the imposture and abl'frdity of the
established fiperlition. That subtle and refined
people, satisfied with enjoying thofedifcoveries
in secret, were little disposed to af'ume the
dangerous charafter of Reformers, and con-
cluded the knowledge of truth to be the pre-
rogative of the wife, while vulgar minds muff
be overawed and governed by popular errors.
But, animated with a more noble and disinterest-
ed zeal, the German Theologian boldly erected
the standard of Truth, and upheld it with an
unconquerable intrepidity, which merits the
admiration and gratitude of all succeeding ages.

Hist. of Scotl. Vol. I. L

The occasion of Luther's being irfl- dirgufted

with the tenets of the Kotnifh church, and how,
from a finall rupture, the quarrel widened into
an irreparable breach, is known to every one
who has been the least conversant in history.
From the lheart of Germany, his opinions spread,
with aitonifhing rapidity, all over Europe;
and, vwhere-ever they came, endangered or
overturned the ancient, but ill-founded fyfrcem
The vigilance and address of the court ofRome,
and the power and bigotry of the Aulfrian fa.
nily, fupprefled these notions on their first ap-
pearance, in the southern kingdoms of Europe.
B3ut the fierce spirit of the north, irritated by
multiplied impolitions, could neither be molii.
lied by the fame arts, nor fabdued by the fame
force, and encouraged by some Princes from
piety, and by others out of avarice, it easily
bore down the feeble opposition of an illiterate
and immoral clergy.

The superstition of Popery seems to have

growvn to the molt extravagant height in those
countries which are situated towards the dif-
ferent extremities of Europe. The vigour of
imagination, and sensibility of frame, peculiar
to tile inhabitants of southern climates, rendered
them susceptible of the deepest impressions of
superstitious terror and credulity. Ignorance
and barbarity were no less favourable to the
progress of the fame spirit, among the northern
nations. They knew little, and were diflpoid

to believe every thing. The most glaring ab-
furdities did not s£hock their gross underflandings,
and the moil improb:ble fictions were received
with implicit af'lent and admiration.

Accordingly, that form of Popery, which

prevailed in Scotland, was of the moilt bigotted
and illiberal kind. Those dottrines which are
molt apt to shock the human unrderitanding, and
those legends which farthest exceed belief, were
proposed to the people without any attempt to
palliate or difguile the m; nor did they ever
call in question the reasonableness of the one, or
the truth of the other.

The power and wealth of the church kept

pace with the progress of fuperfrition; for itis
the nature of that -spirit to obil)rve no bounds
in its refped and liberality towards those wliofe
character it efteeins sacred. The Scottish Kings
early demonllrated how much they were under
its influence, by their vast additions to the im-
munities and riches of the clergy. The profuse
piety of David I, who acquired on that account
the name of Saint, transferred almoit the whole
crown-lands, which were at that time of great
extent, into the hands of ecclefiallicls. The
example of that virtuous Prince was imitated
by his fuccellors. The spirit spread among all
orders of men, who daily loaded the priesthood
with new poilefiions. The riches of the church
all over Europe were exorbitant; but Scotland
was one of those countries, wherein they had

L 3

farthest exceeded the jufl proportion. The
Scottish clergy paid one-half of every tax im.
posed on land; and as there is no reason to
think that, in that age, they would be loaded
with any unequal thare of the burden, we may
conclude, that by the time of the Reformation,
little less than one half of the property in tihe
nation had fallen into the hands of a society,
which is always acquiring, and can never lose,

The nature too, of a considerable part of

their property, extended the influence of the
clergy. Many estates, throughout the kingdom,
held of the church ; church-lands were let in
lease at an easy rent, and were poffefled by the
younger sons, and descendants of the best fa-
milies. :) The connexion between superior
and vafnal, between landlord and tenant, created
dependences, and gave rife to an union of
great advantage to the church; and in eflimat-
ing the influence of the Popish ecclefiafticlks
over the nation, these, as well as the real
-amount of their revenues, nuft be attendedto,
and taken into the account.

This extraordinary share in the national

property was accompanied with proportionable
weight in the supreme council of the kingdom,
At a time, when the number of the temporal
Peers was extremely small, and when theLefler
Barons and representatives of Burroughs seldom

') Keitlh, 521, Nut. (b)

attended Parliaments, the Eccleiafticks formed
a considerable body there. And it appears from
the ancient rolls of Parliament, and from the
manner of chufing the Lords of Articles,- that
the proceedings of that high court must have
been, in a great measure, under their di-
retion. *)

The reverence due to their sacred character,

which was often carried incredibly far, contri-
buted not a little towards the growth of their
power. The dignity, the titles, and precedence
of the Popish clergy are remarkable, both as
causes and effets of that dominion which they
had acquired over the reft of mankind. They
were regarded by the credulous laity as beings
of a superior species; they were neither sub-
je& to the fame laws, nor tried by -the fame
judges. Every guard, that religion could .sup-
ply, was placed around their power, theirpof-
sessions, and their persons; and endeavours
were used, not without success, to represent
them all as equally sacred.

The reputation for learning, which, how-

ever inconsiderable, was wholly engrossed by
the clergy, added to the reverence which they
derived from religion. The principles of found
philosophy, and of a just taste, were altogether
unknown; in place of these were fibftituted
fludies, barbarous and uninftruccive; butas the

') Spots. Hist. of thQ Church of Scotland, 449,

Ecclefiaficks alone were conversant in them,
this procured them efteemr; and a very little
knowledge drew the admiration of rude ages,
which knew nothing. \Var was the sole pro-
feflion of the nobles, and hunting their chief
amusement; they divided their. time between
these; unacquainted with the arts, and unim-
proved by science, they disdained any employ.
inent foreign from military affairs, or whichre-
quired rather penetration and address, than
bodily vigour. Wherever the former were ne-
ceflary, the clergy were intrusted; because
they alone were properly qualified for the trut.
Almost all the high offices in civil government
devolved, on this account, into their hands,
The Lord Chancellor was the firit fubje~in the
kingdom, both in dignity and in power. From
the earliest ages of the monarchy, to the death
of Cardinal Beatoun, fifty-four persons had held
that high office; and of these, forty-three had
been Ecclefiaflicks. :) The Lords of Session
were supreme Judges in all matters of civil
right; and by its original confiitution, the
.President and one half of the Senators in this
court were churchmen.

To all this we may add, that the clergy

being separated from the reft of mankind by
the law of celibacy; and undiftraEted by those
cares, and unincumbered with those burdens,
,0) Crawf, Offit, of State,

which occupy and oppress other men, the in-
terest of their order became their only obje&t,
and they were at full leifulre to pursue it.

The nature of their funcion gave then ac-

cess to all persons, and at all seasons. They
could employ all the motives of fear and of
hope, of terror and ofconfolation, which operate
molt powerfully on the human mind. They
haunted the weak and the credulous; they be-
fieged the beds of the lick and of the dying.
They filtered few to go out of the world with-
out leaving marks of th eir liberality to the
church, and taught them to compound with
the Almighty for their fins, bybeftowingrichles
upon tlhoe who called themselves his servants.

Whlen their own indultry, or the fupcrfti-

tion of mankind failed of producing this effe&,
the Ecclefiafticks had influence enough to call
in the aid of law. Whoever died intestate,
was presumed to have destined his moveables
to pious uses. The church took pofleffion of
them. The children, tile wife, the creditors
of the person deceased, were often excluded
from any share, in what was esteemed a sacred
property. *) As men are apt to trust to the
continuance of life with foolish confidence, and
childishly shun every thing that forces them to
think of their mortality, many die without
fettling their affairs by will; and the bold ufur-

') Essays on Brit. Antiq, 174.

pation of the clergy in this cafe, ofvwhich there
are frequent vestiges in our laws, though none
in our historians, may be reckoned among the
most plentiful sources of the wealth of the
church.

At the fame time, no matrimonial or tef.

tamentary'caufe could be tried but in the fpiri.
tual courts, and by laws which the clergy them.
selves had framed. The penalty, too, by
which the decisions of these courts were en.
forced, added to their authority. A sentence
of excommunication was no less formidable,
than a sentence of outlawry. It was pronounc.
ed on many occasions, and againfl various crimes:
and besides excluding those, upon whom iifell,
from Christian privileges, it deprived themn of
all their rights as men, or as citizens; andthec
aid of the secular power concurred with the si-
perftition of mankind, in rendering the thunders
of the church no less defiru&ive than terrible.

To these general causes, may be attributed

the immense growth both of the wealth and
power of the Popish church ; and without enter-
ing into any more minute detail, this may serve
to discover the foundations, on which a ftruc-
ture so flupendous was ereted.

But though the laity had contributed, by

their own superstition and profuseness, to raise
the clergy from poverty and obscurity to riches
and eminence, they began, by degrees, to feel
and to murmur at their encroachments. NO

wonder haughty and martial Barons should view
the power and pofIeffions of the church with
envy; and regard the lazy and inaetive charac-
ter of churchmen with the utmost contempt.
While, at the fame time, the indecent and li-
centious lives of the clergy gave great and just
offence to the people, and considerably abated
the veneration, which they wereaccufomned to
yield to that order of men.

Immense wealth, extreme indolence, gross

ignorance, and above all, the fevereinjunction
of celibacy, had concurred to introduce this
corruption of morals among the clergy; who,
presuming too much upon the submission of the
people, were at no pains eitler to conceal, or
to disguise their own vices. According to the
accounts of the Reformers, confirmed by several
Popifli writers, the most open and scandalous
dissolution of manners prevailed among the Scot-
tifh clergy. *) Cardinal Beatoun, with the
fame publick pomp which is due to a legitimate
child, celebrated the marriage of his natural
daughter with the Earl of Crawfurd's son; **)
and, if we may believe Knox, he publickly
continued to the end of his days a criminal cor-
refpondence with her mother, who was a woman
') Winzet. ap. Keith Append. 3o2«. 05, Lefl. de Reb. Gefr,

Scot. 232.
") The marriage articles fuibcribed with his own hand, in

Which he calls her my daughlter, are frill *xtant. Keith,
pag. 4,.

of rank. The other prelates seem not to hIve
been more regular and exemplary than their
Primate. *)

Men of such charasters ought, in realbn,

to have been alarmed at the sirs clamours raied
against their own morals, and the doctrines of
the church, by the Protestant preachers; but
the Popish Ecclefiatlicks , either out of pride
or ignorance, negleEted the proper methods for
silencing them. Instead of reforming theirlives,
or dirguifing their vices, they asseted to def-
pife the censures of the people. And while
the Reformers, by their mortifications and au-
flerities, endeavoured to resemble the first pro-
pagators of Christianity, the PopiCh clergy were
compared to all those persons who are most in-
famous in history, for the enormity and scandal
of their crimes.

On the other hand, :-nftead of mitigating the

rigour, or colouring over the absurdity, of the
established doctrines; instead of attempting to
found them upon scripture, ortoreconcile them

') A remarkable proof of the dissolute manners of the cleri,

is found in the publick records. A greater number ofiettei
of legitimation was granted during the first thirty years after
the Refornnation , than during the whole period that hia
elapsed since that time. Thlefe were obtained by the iuli'
of the Popihf clergy. The ecclefiafticks, who were alloaoed
to retain their benefices, alienated them to their children;
Who, when they acquired wealth, were desirous that tie
ltain of illegitimacy might no longer remain upon their fl-
milies. In Keith's Catalogue of the Scotlifh Bishops , 'x
find several instances of such alienations of church iirid'
by the Popish incumbents, to their untural children.

to reason; they left them without any other
support or recommendation, than the authority
of the church, and the decrees of councils.
The fables concerning purgatory, the virtues
of pilgrimage, and the merits of the faints, were
the topicks, on which they insisted in their dif-
courses to the people; and the duty of preaching
being left wholly to Monks of the lowest and
ooft illiterate orders, their compositions were
hlill more wretched and contemptible, than
the fubjelts on which they inflited. While
the Reformers were attended by crowded and
admiring audiences, the Popish preachers were
either universally deferred, or listened to with
scorn.

The only device which they employed in

order to recover their declining reputation, or
to confirm the wavering faith of the people,
was equally imprudent and unsuccessful. As
many do&rines of their church had derived
their eredit, at firfi, from the authorityof false
miracles, they now endeavoured to call in these
to their aid. *) But those lying wonders,
which were beheld with unfafpicious admira-
tion, or heard with implicit faith, in times of
darkness and of ignorance, metwith a very dif-
ferent reception, in a more enlightened period.
The vigilance of the Reformers detected these
impostures, and exposed not only them, but

'>) Spotfwood, 69,

the cause, which needed the aid of such arti.
sices, to ridicule.

As the Popifhl Ecclefiafticks became more

and more the objeEts of hatred and of contempt,
the discourses of the Reformers were listened to
as so many callsto liberty; andbefidesthepious
indignation which they excited against those
corrupt doctrines, which had perverted the na-
ture of true Christianity; besides the zeal, which
they inspired for the knowledge of-truth, and
the purity of religion; they gave rife also,
among the Scottish nobles, to other views and
passions. They hoped to shake off the yoke of
ecclesiastical dominion, which they had long felt
to be oppressive, and which they now discover-
ed to be unchristian. They expeced to recover
possession of the church revenues, which tliey
were now taught to confideras alienations made
by their ancestors, with a profusion no less un-
discerning than unbounded. They flattered
themselves, that a cheek would be given to the
pride and luxury of the clergy, who would be
obliged, henceforward, to confine themselves
within the sphere peculiar to their sacred cha-
rafter. An averion for the established church,
which flowed from so many concurring caules,
which was railed by considerations of religion,
and heightened by motives of policy, spread faCt
through the nation, and excited a spirit, that
burf out, at last, with irresistible violence.

# The Queen Regent begins her administration with some unpopular measures,

Religious considerations, alone, were sus-

/icient to have routed this Ipirit. The points
in controversy with the church of Rome were
of so much importance to the happiness of man-
kind, and so elfential to Chrifrianity, that they
merited all the zeal with which theReformers
contended in order to eflablifi them. But the
Reformation having been represented as the es-
sect of some wild and enthufiaftick frenzy in
the human mind, this attempt to account for
the eagerness and zeal with which our ancef-
tors embraced and propagated the Protestant
doctrines, by taking a view of the political mo-
tives alone which influenced them, and by shew-
ing how naturally there prompted them to aft
with so much ardour, will not, perhaps, be
esteemed an unnecellary digreflion. We now
return to the course of the history.

The Queen Regent begins her adihiiiiftration with

tonie unpopular ineafires,

The Queen's elevation to the office of Re.

gent ( I554.) seems to have transported her,
at sirs, beyond the known prudence and mo-
deration of her character. She began her ad-
minifiration, by conferring upon foreigners fe-
veral offices of trust and of dignity; a flep,
which, both from the inability of firangers to
discharge these offices with vigour, and from
the envy which their preferment excites among
the natives, is never attended with good confe-

quences. Vilmort was made Comptroller, and
intrusted with the management of the publick
revenues; Bonot wvas appointed Governor of
Orkney; and Rubay honoured with the cufiody
of the Great Seal, and the title of Vice Chan.
cellor. *) It was with the highest indignation,
that the Scots beheld offices of the greatest emi-
nence and authority, dealt out among strangers.
By there promotions they conceived the Queen
to have offered an infalt both to their under.
flandings and to their courage; to the former,
by fuppoling them unfit for those fations, which
their ancestors had filled with so much dignity;
to the latter, by imagining that they were tame
enough not to complain of an affront, which,
in no former age, would have been tolerated
with impunity.

While their minds were in this disposition,

an incident happened which infamed their aver-
sion from French councils to the highest degree.
Ever since the famous contest between the houses
of Valois and Plantagenet, the French had been
accustomed to embarrass the English, and to
divide their strength by the sudden and formid-
able incurlions of their allies, the Scots. But,
as these inroads were feldorn attended with any
real advantage to Scotland, and exposed it to
the dangerous resentment of a powerful neigh-
bour, the Scots began to grow less tratable

') Lefly, de Reb, Gcf, Scot, ISS.

tilan formerly, and scrupled, any longer, to
serve an ambitious ally attheprice of their own
quiet and security. The change, too, which
was daily introducing in the art of war,.ren-
dered the affftance of the Scottish forces of less
importance to the French Monarch. For there
realbns, Henry having resolved upon a war with
Philip II. and foreseeing that the Queen of
England would take part in her husband's quar-
rel , was extremely solicitous to secure, in
Scotland, the assistance of some troops, which
would be more at his command than an undif-
ciplined army, led by chieftains who were al-
most independent. In prosecution of this design,
but under pretence of relieving the nobles from
the expence and danger of defending the borders,
the Queen Regent proposed, in Parliament,
( 1555.) to register the value of lands through-
out the kingdom, to impose on them a finall
tax, and to apply that revenue towards main-
taining a body of regular troops in conftantpay.
A fixed tax upon land, which the growing ex-
pence of government hath introduced into al-
ioft every part of Europe, wvas unknown at
that time, and seemed altogether inconfiffent
with the free and independent spirit of the feu-
dal government. Nothing could be more shock-
ing to a generous and brave nobility, than the
intrusting, to mercenary hands, the defence of
those territories which had been acquired, or
preserved, by the blood of their ancell:ors.

# Attempts to engage the kingdom in a war with England.

They received this proposal with the utmost
indignation. About 300 of the letler Barons
repaired in a body to the Qtueen Regent, and
represented their sense of the intended inno-
vation, with that manly and determined bold-
ness which is natural to a free people, in a
martial age. Alarmed at a renonftrance de.
livered in so firm a tone, and supported by such
formidable numbers, the Queen prudentlyaban-
doned a scheme, which lhe found to be univcr-
sally odious. As the Queen herfelfwas known
perfeftly to understand the circumstances and
temper of the nation, this measure was imputed
awholly to the fuggefiions of her foreign coun-
fellors; and the Scots were ready to proceed
to the molt violent extremities against them.

Attempts to cngage the kilgdom in a war with

- nglall.d,

'The French, infread of extinguishing, adtdedl

fuel to the flame. They had now commenced
holfilities againfl Spain, and Philip had prevailed
on the Queen of England to reinforce his army
with a considerable body of her troops. In
order to deprive him of this aid, Henry had re-
course, as he projecied, to the Scots; and at-
tempted to excite them to invade England.
But, as Scotland had nothing to dread from a
Princess of Mary's chara&er, who; far froni any
ambitious scheme of disturbing her neighbouls,
was wholly occupied in endeavouring to reclaim

her

her heretical fiubjets; the nobles, who were
af'embled by the Queen Regent at Newbottle,
lifrened to the fblicitations of tile French MIon-
arch with extreme coldness, and prudentlyde-
clined engaging the kingdom in an enterprise so
dangerous and unneceelary. hl:at lfne could
not obtain by perfuaifion , the Queen Regent
brought about by a stratagem. Notwithfland-
ing the peace which fubiilFed between the t\wo
kingdoms, she commanded her French soldiers
to rebuild a finall fort near Berwick, which
was appointed, by the Jaft treaty, to be raced.
The garrison of Berwick rallied ott, interrupt-
ed the work, and ravaged the adjacent country.
This insult roused the fiery spirit of the Scots,
and their promptnels to revenge the leafr ap-
pearance of national injury, difiipated, in a
molnen t, the wife and pacilick refolu tions which
tley had so lately formed, War was deter-
mined, and orders instantly given for railing
a numerous army. But before their forces could
aflemble, the ardour of their indignation had
time to cool, and the English h:lvingdifcvered
no intention to pauh the war with vigour, the
nobles refured their pacifick system, and re-
solved to stand altogether upon the defensive.
Tlhey marched (1I556.) to the banks of the
Tweed; they prevented the incurrions of the
enemy; and having done what they thought
fulficient for the safety and honour of their
country, the Queen could not induce them either

Hil. of Scot]. Vol. I, M

bvy her entreaties, or her artifices, to advance
another ftep.

While the Scots persisted in their ina&ivity,

D'Oyfel, the Commander of the French troops,
who pofefl'ed entirely the confidence of the
Queen Regent, endeavoured, with her con-
nivance, to engage the two nations in hostilities,
Contrary to the orders of the Scottish General,
he marched over the Tweed with his own fol.
diers, and invelred WVer-k, a garrison of the
English. The Scots, instead of seconding his
attempt, were enraged at his prefuniption.The
Queen's partiality towards France hadlongbeen
fufpeted; but it was now visible that she
wantonly sacrificed the peace and fafetv of
Scotland, to the interefh of that ambitious and
affuning ally. Under the feudal governments,
it was in camps that fubjets were accustomed
to address the boldest remonstrances to their
Sovereigns. While arms were in their hands,
they felt their own strength; and at that time
all their representations of grievances carried
the authority of commands. On this occasion,
the indignation of the nobles broke out wiith
such violence, that the Queen, perceiving all
attempts to engage them in aftion to be vain,
abruptly difmifled her army, and retired with
the utmost shame and difgult; having discovered
the impotence of her own autlority, without
efL'e&ing- any thing which could be of advantage
to France.

# The Queen's marriage with the Dauphin.

Tt is observable, that this fiifr inflance of

contempt for the Regent's authority can, in no
degree, be imputed to the inrinence of thenesV
opinions in religion. As the Queen's pr'eten-
lions to the Regency had been principally sup-
ported by those who favoured the Reformation,
and as she iill needed them for a counterpoise
to the Archbishop of St. Andrew's, and thepar-
tifans of the house of Hamilton; they were
now treated by her with great refpe&t, and
even admitted to no inconsiderable share in her
favour and confidence. Kirkaldy of Grange,
and the other surviving conspirators against Car-
dinal. Bcatoun, were, about this time, recalled
by her from banifhmnent; and, through her con-
nivance, the Proteflant preachers enjoyed an
interval of tranquillity, which was of great
advantauge to their cattfe. Soothed by there
instances of the Queen's moderation and huma-
nity, the Protestants left to others the olficeof'
remonflrating; and the leaders of the opposite
fadtion set them the first example of disputing
the will of their Sovereign.

The Queen's martrage with the Dauphin.

As the Queen Regent felt how limited and

precarious her authority was, while it depend-
ed on the poise of these contrary faCtions, she
endeavoured to establish it on a broader and
more secure foundation, by baftening the con-
clflion of her daughter's marriage with the

Iw a

Dauphin. Amiable as the Queen of Scots then
was, in the bloom of youth; and considerable
as the territories were, which she would have
added to the French Monarchy; rceaons were
not wanting to dissuade Henry from completing
his first plan of marrying her to his son. 'The
Constable lontmiorency had employed all his
interest to defeat an alliance, which refle'tedfo
much lustre on the Princes of Lorrain. He
had represented the impofiibility of maintainitn
order and tranquillity among a turbulent people,
during the absence of their Sovereign; and f)r
that reason, had advised Henry to belftow tie
young Queen upon one of the Princes of the
blood, who, by residing inScotland, mightpre-
serve that kingdom an useful ally to France,
which, by a nearer union to the Crown, would
become a mutinous and ungovernable province.':)
But, at this time, the Constable was a prifoiier
in the hands of the Spaniards, and the Princes
of Lorrain were at the height of their glory;
and their influence, seconded by the charms of
the young Queen, triumphed over theprudent,
but envious, remonflrances of their rival.

The French King accordingly applied totlie

Parliament of Scotland, which appointed (cDc. 4,
1557.) eight of its members :;) to reprcfelln

") Melv, Mem. 15.
40) Viz. The.Archbifllop of Glasgow, tihe Bithop or Ross, thi

lil'hop of Orkney, the Earls of Rothes and Canils, Ld

# Artifices of the French in the marriage treaty.

the whole body of the nation, at the marriage
of the Queen. Among the persons on whomn
the publick choice conferred this honourable
chara&eer, were some of the inoft avowed, and
zealous advocates for the Reformation; by
which may be estimated the degree of refp-ct
and popularity, which that party had now at-
tained in the kingdom. The inftrictions of the
Parliament to those Commissioners ftillremain,*)
and do honour to the wvifdom and integrity of
that aflembly. At the fame time that they ma-
nifefted, with refpe& to the articles ofmarriage,
a laudable concern for the dignity and interetl
of their Sovereign, they employed every pre-
caution which prudence could dictate, for pre-
serving the liberty and independence of the na-
tion, and for securing the succession of the Crown
in the house of Hamilton.

Artifices of the FIrenchi in the marriage treaty.

With regard to each of these, the Scots ob-

tained whatever fatisfa&ion their fear orjealoufy
could demand. The young Queen, the Dauphin,
and the King of France ratified every article
with the most solemn oaths, and confirmed them
by deeds in form, under their hands and feals.
But on the part of France, all this was one con-

Fleming, Lnrd Seton, the Prior of St. Andrew's, and John
Eirkiine or I)D n.
*) Keith, Ajppelid. I3.

tinned scene of fludied and elaborate deceit.
Previous to these publick transactions with the
Scottish deputies, lMary had been persuaded to
subscribe privately three deeds, equally unjufr
and invalid; by which, failing the heirs of her
own body, she conferred the kingdom of Scot.
land, vith whatever inheritance or fuccefijon
mnight accrue to it, in free gift upon the crown
of France, declaring all promises to the con.
trary, which the necessity of her affairs, and
the solicitations of her fubjets had extorted, or
might extort from her, to be void and of no
obligation. *) As it gives us a proper ideaof
the characer of theFrench courtunder Henry IL
wve may observe that the King hinifelf, the
Yeeper of the Great Seals, the Duke of Guile,
and the Cardinal of Lorrain, were the persons
engaged in conducting this perfidious and dif-
honourable projtft. The Queen of Scots Ras
the only innocent astor in that scene of iniquity.
Her youth, her inexperience, her education in
a foreign country, and her deference to her
uncle's will, must vindicate her, in the judg-
ment of every impartial person, from any im-
putation of blame on that account.

This grant, by which Mary beflowed the

inheritance of her kingdom upon firangers, wns
concealed with the utnmoft care from her fuib
jeis. They seem, however, not to have been

*) Corps Diplomat, tom. v. z,, Rketh, 73.

unacquainted with the intention of the French
to overturn the settlement of the fuccellion in
favour of- the Duke of Chatelhcirault. The
zeal, with which the Archbishop of St. An-
drew's opposed all the measures of the Queen
Regent, evidently proceeded from the fears and
suspicions of that prudent prelate, on this
head. '*)

The marriage, however, was celebrated

ivith great pomp; (April x., i558.) and the
French, Nwho had hitherto aflefted to draw a
veil over their designs upon Scotland, began
now to unfold their intentions without any diC-
guise. In the treaty of marriage, the deputies
had agreed that the Dauphin should aflnme the
name of King of Scotland. This they confi-
dered only as an honorary title; but the French
laboured to annex to it some solid privileges
and power. They insisted that the Dauphin's
title should be publiclly recognised; that the
Crown Matrimonial should be conferred upon
him; and that all the rights pertaining to the
husband of a Queen should be vefred in his
person. By the laws of Scotland, a person
who married an heiress kept pofleffion of her
estate during his own life, if he happened to
') Abuut this time, the French seem to have had some de-

sign of reviving the Earl of Lennox's pretetifions to tbe
fiiccenioti, il order to intimidate and alarm the Duke of
Chatelherault. Haynes, 215,. 19. Forbes's Collect..vol.
i, 19S'

survive her and the children born of the mar.
riage. *) This was called the courtesy of
Scotland. The French aimed at applying this
rule, which tales place in private inheritances,
tothe fucceiTon of the kingdom ; and that seems
to be implied in their demand of the Crown
Matrimonial, a phrase peculiar to the Scottish
historians, and which they have negleted to
explain. As the French had rearon to expc&
difficulties in carrying through this measure,
they began with founding the deputies wvlio
were then at Paris. The English, in the mar-
riage articles between their Queen and Phliip
of Spain, had set an example to the age, of
that prudent jealousy and reserve, vwith mwhich
a foreigner should be admitted so near the
throne. Full of the fame ideas, the Scottifhl
deputies had, in their oath of allegiance to the
Dauphin, exprefled themselves with remarkable
caution. ;*) Their answer was in the fame
spirit, refpecful , but firm; and discovered a
fixed resolution of consenting to nothing, that
tended to introduce any alteration in the order
of fucce'fion to the crown.

Four of the deputies '**) happening todie
before they returned into Scotland, this acci-

:) Reg. Maj. ilb. ii. 58S

*') Ieith. Appends no.
'*) The Bishop of Orkney, the Enrl of Rothes, thd Earl e

Caffils, and Lord Flerning.

dent was universally imputed to the effe&s of
poison, which was supposed to have been given
them by the emissaries of the house of Guise.
The historians of all nations discover an amazing
credulity with refpecc to stories of this kind,
which arc so well calculated to please the ma-
lignity of ;ome men, and to gratify the love
of the marvellous which is natural to all, that
in every age they have been swallowed with-
out examination, and believed contrary to rea-
son. No wonder the Scots should easily give
credit to a suspicion, which received such itrong
colours of probability, both from their own re-
fentmcnt, and from the known charaiter of the
Princes ofLorrain, To little scrupulous about the
justice of the ends which they pursued, or of
the means which they employed. For the
honour of human nature, it must, however, be
observed, that as we can discover no motive,
which could induce any man to perpetrate such
a crine, so there appears no evidence to prove
that it was committed. But the Scots of that
age, influenced by national animofities and pre-
judices, were incapable of examining the cir-
cumflances of the cafe with calmnes , or of
judging concerning them with candour. All
parties agreed in believing the French to have
been guilty of this detestable action; and it is
obvious how much this tended to increase the
aversion for them, which was growing among
all ranks of men.

# The Regent prevails on the Parliament to grant the Crown Matrimonial to the Dauphin, Nov. 29.

The Regent prevails on the Parliament to grant the

Crown Matriilolial to the Dauphin, Nov. .9.

Notwitlhfanding the cold reception which

their proposal concerning the Crown Matrinlo-
nial met with from the Scottish deputies, the
French ventured to move it in parliament. The
partisans of the house of Hamilton, fufpicinus
of their designs upon the succession, opposed
it with great zeal. But a party, which the
feeble and uniteady conduft of their leaderhad
brought under much difreputation, was little
able to withRtand the influence of France, and
the address of the Queen Regent, feconded,on
this occasion, by all the numerous adherents
of the Reformation. Besides, that artful Prin-
cess dref'ed out the French demands in a less
offensive garb, and threw in so many limtita-
tions, as seemed to render them of small con-
sequence. These either deceived the Scots, or
removed their scruples: and in compliance to
the Queen, they pased an at, conferring the
Crown Matrimonial on the Dauphin; and, wiill
the fondest credulity, trusted to the frail fecu-
rity of words and statutes, against the danger-
ous encroachments of power. *)

*) The AA of Pnrliament is worded with the utmoff care, witih

a view to guard againift any breach of the order of I'lc-
cession. But the Duke, not relying on tthis alone, enter-
ed a folelnl protestation to secure his own right. leirll, 7,6
It is plain, that he fufpeafed the French of having fomin
intention to set aside his right of fucceflion ; and, indeed.
if they had no design of that kind, the eagerness wittl
which they urged their demanaud, was chiidifhl

# Continues to court the Protestants.

Continues to court the Protestants.

The concurrence of the Protestants, with

the Queen Regent, in promoting a measure so
acceptable to France, while the Popish clergy,
under the influence of the A.,rclibifhop of St.
Andrew's, opposed it with so much violence, *)
is one of those filgular circumfances , in the
condua of parties, for which this period is so
remarkable. It may be ascribed, in some de-
gree, to the dexterous management of the
Queen, but chiefly to the moderation of those
who favoured the Reformation. The Protcit-
ants were, by this time, almost equal to the
Catholicks, both in power, and in number;
and, conscious of their own strength, they sub-
mitted with impatience to that tyrannical au-
thority, with which the ancient laws armed
the eccleflalticks againif them. They longed to
be exempted fiom this oppressive jurifdition,
and publickly to enjoy the liberty of profefling
those opinions, and of exercising that worship,
which so great a part of the nation deemed to
be founded in truth, and to be acceptable to
the Deity. This indulgence, to which the
whole weight ofprieltly authority was opposed,
there were only two ways of obtaining. Either
violence must extort it from the relu&ant hand
of their Sovereign, or by prudent compliances
they might expect it from her favour, or her

c) Melv. 47.

gratitude. The former is an expedient for the
redress of grievances, to which no nation his
recourse faddenly; and fubjefts seldom venture
upon resistance, which is their latl remedy, but
in cafes of extreme necessity. On this occasion
the Reformers wifely held the opposite course,
and by their zeal in forwarding the Queen's de-
signs, they hoped to merit her protection. This
difpoxition the Queen encouraged to the utmost,
arid amused them so artfully with many pro-
mises, and tome conceflions, that, by their as-
fiftance, she furmnounted in Parliament the force
of a national, and perhaps a laudable jealousy,
which would, otherwise, have swayed with
the greater number.

Another circumtnance contributed fomewvlat

to acquire the Regent such considerable influence
in this Parliament. In Scotland, all thebifhop-
ricks, and those abbeys which conferred a title
to a feat in Parliament, were in the gift of the
Crown. *) From the time of her accession to
the Regency, the Queen had kept in her own
hands almost all those which became vacant,
except such as were, to the great disgust of
the nation, bestowed upon foreigners. Among
these, her brother the Cardinal of Lorrain had
obtained the abbeys of Kelfo and Melrofs, two
of the most wealthy foundations in the king-

) See Book I.

# Elizabeth succeeds to the Crown of England.

rom. *) By this conduct, she thinned theec-
clefialtical benchl, '::) which was entirely under
the influence'of the Archbifllop of St. Andrew's,
and which, by its numbers and authority, ufu-
ally had great weight in the house, so as to
render any opposition it could give, at that
time, of little consequence.

The Earl of Argyll, and James Stewart

Prior of St. Andrew's, one the most powerful,
and the other the most popular leader of the
Protestants, were appointed to carry the Crown
and other ensigns of royalty to the )Dauphin.
But from this they were diverted by the part
they were called to act, in a more interesting
feene, which now begins to open.

Elizabeth filcceeds to the Crown of Elngland.

Before we turn towards this, it is necef-

fary to observe, that on the x7th of Novem-
ber, Mary of England finished her flort, and
inglorious reign. Her fifler Elizabeth took pof-
session of the throne without opposition; and
the Protefiant religion was, once more, establish-
ed by lawv in England. The accefiTlon of a
Queen, who, under verydiulic!lt circumstances,
had given firong indications of thote eminent
qualities, which, in the fequcl, rendered her

1') Lefly, 2os.
') It appears from tlih roll. of tlji P aili ellre , wvlicl I.efly

c:alls a very Ill o e, that only I'lv eit 3illioys and lixte.i
Albotri Wee l e:;i :.

reign so illanurious, attra&ed the eyes of all
Europe. Amolg the Scots, both parties ob-
lerved her first motions with the utmost con-
cern, as they cafily foresaw that f:ie would not
remain long an indifferent fpec&ator of their
tranfadtions.

Under many discouragements, and much

oppression, the Reformation advanced towards
a full establishment in Scotland. All the low
country, the most populous, and, at thattime,
the nmot warlike part of the kingdom , was
deeply tin&ured with the Protestant opinions;
and if the fame impressions were not made in
the more distant counties, it was owing to no
wxant of the fame dispositions among the people,
but to the scarcity of preachers, whose nmoftin-
defatigable zeal could not satisfy the avidity ,f
those who desired their inftrui&;ons. Among a
people bred to arms, and so prone to muttiny
as the Scots; and in an age, when religions
passions had taken such firong pofleffion of the
human mind, and moved and agitated it with
so much violence, the peaceable and regular
demeanor of so numerous a party is truly as-
tonifling. From the death of Mr. Patrick Ha-
milton, the first who fuflered in Scotland for
the Proteflant religion, thirty years had elapscd.
and during so long a period, no violation of
publick order or tranquillity had proceededfriom

that fe&:; *) and though roused and irritated
by the most cruel excesses of eccleliaftical ty-
raiay, they did, in no inflance, transgress
those bounds of duty which the law prescribes
to fubje&Es. Betides the prudence of their own
leaders, and the protedion which the Queen Re-
gent, from political motives, afforded them, the
moderation of the Archbishop of St. Andrew's
encouraged this pacilick difpoiition. ThatPre-
late, whole private life cotemporary writers
tax with great irregularities, *":) governed the
church, for some years, with a temper and pru-
dence of which there are few examples in that
age. But some time before the rmeeting of last
Parliament, the Archbishop departed from those
humane maxims, by which he had hitherto
regulated his conduEt; and whether, in spite
to the Queen, 'who had entered into so close
an union with the Proteflants, or in compliance
with the importunities of his clergy, he let
loose all the rage of persecution againlf the Re-
formed; sentenced to the flames an aged priest,
who had been conviced of embracing the Pro-
teftant opinions; and summoned several others,
suspected of the fame crime, to appear beforea
") The murder of Cardinal Bentoun was occasioned by pIi-

vate revenge, and being contrived anid executed lyfiixitcRa
persons only, cannot, Mwitil jufticc , be implllted tu ti:C
Whole P'rotellant party.
") lKnox, Buchannn; Kcitli, 2oS.

I

fynod of the clergy, which was soon to con.
vene at Edinburgh.

Nothing could equal the horror of the Pro-

tet.ants at this unexpected and barbarous exe.
cution, but the zea!, with which they espoused
the defence of a cause, that now seemed de-
voted to deftrution. They had immediate re-
course to the Queen Regent; and as her fuc-
cess in the Parliament, which was then about
to meet, depended on their concurrence, she
not only sheltered thein from the impending
fttorm, but permitted them the exercise of their
religion, with more freedom than they had hi-
therto enjoyed. Unsatisfied with this precarious
tenure, by which they held their religious li-
berty, the Protestants laboured to render their
pof'efilon of it more secure and independent.
With this view, they determined to petition
the Parliament for some legal protection, aginft
the exorbitant and oppressive jurifdiation of the
ecclesiastical courts, which, by their arbitrary
method, of proceeding, founded in the cinmin
law, were led to sentences tile muol' fhochking
to humanity, by mnaxims the most repugilnnt
to justice. But the Queen , who dreaded tile
effect of a debate on this delicate subje&t, \lhlii
could not fail of exciting high and daingerous
pairlons, prevailed on the leaders of the party,
by new and more folemin promises of her pro-
tection, to defifl from any application to pa'r
liament, where their numbers and influe'ice

\vould,

would, in all probability, have procured them, if
not the entire redress, at least some mitigation
of their grievances.

They applied to another assembly, 'to a

convocation of the Popish .lergy, but with the
fame ill success, which had always attended
every proposal for reformation, addressed to
that order of men. To abandon usurped power,
to renounce lucrative error, are sacrifices, which
the virtue of individuals has, on some occa-
sions, offered to truth; but from any society of
men, no such effort can be expected. The
corruptions of a society, recommended by com-
mon utility, and justified by universal pra&ice,
are viewed, by its members, without shame,
or horror; and reformation neverproceeds from
thenmfelves, but is always forced upon them by
some foreign hand. Suitable to this unfeeling
and inflexible spirit, was the behaviour of the
Convocation in the present conjuncture. ( 1559.)
All the demands of the Proteflants were re-
je&ed with contempt; and the Popish clergy,
far from endeavouring, by any prudent concef-
sions, to tooth and to reconcile such a numerous
body, aflerted the doctrines of their church,
concerning some, of the most exceptionable ar-
ticles, with an ill-timed rigour, which gave
new offence. *)

R) Keith, 8I.
RIift, of Scotl. Vol. L, X

# Ambitious views of the Princes of Lorrain.

During the fitting of the Convocation, the

Protestants first began to fufpeftfome changein
the Regent's disposition towards them. Though
joined with them for many years by interell,
and united, as they conceived, by the firongeft
ties of affec&ion and of gratitude, she discover-
ed, on this occalion, evident symptoms, not
only of coldness, but of a growing disgust and
aversion. In order to account for this, our
hifiorians do little more than produce the trite
observations concerning the influence of prof-
perity to alter the charader, and to corrupt the
heart. The Queen, fay they, having reached
the utmost point to which her ambition aspired,
no longer preserved her accustomed moderation,
but, with an insolence usual to the fortunate,
looked down upon those, by whose affiflance
she had been enabled to rife to high. But it
is neither in the depravity of the human heart,
nor in the ingratitude of the Queen's disposition,
that we must search for the motives of herpre-
sent condut. These were derived from another,
and a more remote source, which, in order to
clear the subsequent tranfa&ions, we shall en-
deavour to open with some care.

Arrbitious views of the Princes of Lorrnin.

The ambition of the Princes of Lorrain had

been no less successful, than daring; but all
their schemes wvere distinguished by being vas
and unbounded. Though flrangers at thecouri

of France, their eminent qualities had raised
them, in a short time, to an height of power,
superior to that of all other fubjeEts, and had
placed them on a level even with the .princes
of the blood themselves. The church, the army,
the revenue, were under their direction. Noth-
ing but the royal dignity remained unattained,
and they were elevated to a near alliance with
it, by the marriage of the Queen of Scots to
the Dauphin. In order to gratify their own
vanity, and to render their niece more worthy
the heir of France, they set on foot her clairm
to the crown of England, which was founded
on pretences not unplaufible.

The tragical amours and marriages of Henry

VIII. are known to all the world. Moved by
the caprices of his love, or of his resentment,
that impatient and arbitrary Monarch had di-
vorced, or beheaded four of the fix Queens,
whom he married. In order to gratify him,
both his daughters had been declared illegiti-
mate by As of Parliameut; and yet, with that
fantaftick inconsistence which diftingui'hes his
character, he, in his last will, whereby he was
impowered to fettle the order of succession,
called both of them to the throne upon the death
of their brother Edward; and, at the fame time,
palling by the posterity of his eldest filer Mar-
garet Queen of Scotland, he appointed the line
of fucceflion to continue in the descendants of
his younger lifter, the Duchess of Suffolk.

N .

# They persuade Mary to assume the title of Queen of England.

In consequence of this destination, the va-

lidity whereof was admitted by the English,
but never recognized by foreigners, Mary had
reigned in England without the least complaint
of neighbouring Princes. But the fame causes,
which facilitated her acceflion to the throne,
were obstacles to the elevation of her sifter
Elizabeth, and rendered her poflefion of it
precarious and insecure. Rome trembled for
the Cacholick faith, under a Protestant Queen
of such eminent abilities. The fame fuperfti.
tious fears alarmed the court of Spain. And
France beheld, with indignation, a throne, to
which the Queen of Scots could form so many
pretonfions, occupied by a rival, whose birth,
in the opinion of all good Catholicks, excluded
her from any legal right of fuccellion. The
impotent hatred of the Roman Pontiff, or the
flow councils of Philip II. would have produced
no sudden or formidable eTed:.

They persuade iMary to afTnure the title of Queen

of Eilgland.

The ardent and impetuous ambition of the

Princes of Lorrain, who, at that time, govern-
ed the court of France, was more decisive, and
more to be dreaded. Instigated by them,Hen-
ry, soon after the death of Mary, persuaded
his daughter-in-law, and her husband, to assume
the title of King and Queen of England. They
affected to publish this to all Europe. They

# Resolve to invade England.

used that flyle and appellation in publick pa-
pers, tome of which still remain. *)

Resolve to invaidc England.

T.he arms of England were engraved 'on

their coin and plate, and borne by them on all
occasions. No preparations, however, were
made to support this inpolitick and premature
claim. Elizabeth was already feated on her
throne; she poffefled all the intrepidity of fpi-
rit, and all the arts of policy, which were ne-
ceffary for maintaining that flation. England
was growing into reputation for naval power:
The marine of France had been utterly ne-
glected; and Scotland remained the only avenue,
by which the territories of Elizabeth Fcould be
approached. It was on that fide, therefore,
that the Princes of Lorrain determined to make
their attack; **) and, by using the name and
pretensions of the Scottish Queen, they hoped
to rouse the English Catholicks, formidable at
that time by their zeal and numbers, and ex-
afperated to the utmost against Elizabeth, on
account of the change which she had made in
the national religion.

') Anders. Diplorn. Stot. No. 6S aud 104.
") Sorbes, Colleft. i. 253. Z77.

# In order to this, it was necessary to check the Reformation in Scotland.

In order to this, it was neceifary to check the Reformatiop

in Scotland.

It was vain to expe&t the afiflance of the

Scottish Protestants to dethrone a Queen, whom
all Europe esteemed the guardian and defender
of the reformed faith. To break the power
and reputation oftthat party in Scotland, became,
for this reason, a necessary ftep towards the
invasion of England. With this the Princes of
Lorrain resolved to open their fcherne. And as
persecution was the only method for suppressing
religious opinions, known in that age , or dic-
tated by the defpotick and sanguinary spirit of
the Romish superstition, this, in its utmost
violence, they determined to employ. The
Earl of Argyll, the Prior of St. Andrew's, and
other leaders of the party, were marked outby
them for immediate destruCtion; *) and they
hoped, by punishing them, to intimidate their
followers. Inftru&ions for this purpose were
sent from France to the Queen Regent. That
humane and sagacious Princess condemned a
ineafure, which was equally violent and im-
politick. By long residence in Scotland, the
had become acquainted with the eager and im-
patient temper of the nation; she well knew
the power, the number, and popularity of the
Protestant leaders; and had been a witness to
the intrepid and unconquerable refolutionwhich
e) Sorbes, i. 152*

religious fervour could inspire. What, then,
could be gained by routing this dangerous fpi-
rit, which, hitherto, all the arts of policy had
scarce been able to restrain? If it once broke
loo'e, the authority of a Regent would be little
capable to subdue, or even to moderate its rage.
And. if, in order to quell it, foreign forces were
called in, this would give the allarm to the
whole nation, irritated already at the exceflive
power which the French pofleffled in the king-
dom, and suspicious of all their defigns.Amidft
the shock which this might occasion, far from
hoping to exterminate the Protelfant doctrine,
it would be well if the whole fabrick of the
established church were not shaken, and per-
haps overturned from the foundation. These
prudent remonstrances made no imprefion on
her brothers; precipitant, but inflexible in all
their resolutions, they inlifted on the full and
rigorous execution of their plan. Mary, pal-
fionately devoted to the interest of France, and
ready, on all occasions, to sacrifice her own
opinions to the inclinations of her brothers, pre-
pared to excute their commands with implicit
submission; *) and, contrary to her own judg-
ment, and to all the rules of found policy, she
became the instrument of exciting civil comrno-
tions in Scotland, which ended with the ruin

") Melv . 4S, iern. de Caflenau, app. Jebb. voI. ii. 446.

# The Regent alters her conduct with regard to the Protestants.

of the French power, and of the Popish religion
in that kingdom.

The Regent alters her conduft with regard to the

Protestants.

From the time of the Queen's competition

for the Regency with the Duke of Chatelherault,
the Popish clergy, under the dire&ion of the
Archbishop of St. Andrew's, had set themselves
in opposition to all her measures. Her first
ftep toward the execution of her new scheme,
was to regain their favour. Nor was this re-
concilement a matter of difficulty. The Popish
ecclefiafticks, separated from the reft of man-
kind by the law of celibacy, the boldest and
rnoft successful invention of human policy;and
combined among thenfelves in the closest and
most sacred union; have been accustomed, in
every age, to sacrifice all private and particular
passions to the dignity and interest of their or-
der. Delighted, on this occasion, with the
profpeft of triumphing over a faction, whose
encroachments they had long dreaded, and ani-
mated with the hopes of re-establishing their
declining grandeur on a firmer basis; they, at
once, cancelled the memory of pfta injuries,
and engaged to second the Queen in all herat-
tempts to check the progress of the Reforma-
tion. The Queen, being secure of their as-
fiftance, openly approved of the degrees of the
Convocation, by which the principles of the Re-

# Summons their preachers to appear before her.

formers were condemned; and at the fame time
she issued a proclamation , enjoining all persons
to observe the approaching fetlival of Easter
according to the Romish ritual.

As is wat no longer pofiible to mifrake the

Queen's intentions, the Protestants, who saw
the danger approach, in order to avert it, em-
ployed the Earl of Glencairn, and Sir Hugh
Campbell of London, to expostulate with her
concerning this change towards severity, which
their former services had so little merited, and
which her reiterated promises gave them no
reason to expeft. She, without disguise or
apology, avowed to them her resolution of
extirpating the Reformed religion out of the
kingdom. And, upon their urging her former
engagements, with an unconrtly, but honest
boldness, she so far forgot her usual modera-
tion, as to utter a sentiment, which, however
apt those of royal condition may be to entertain
it, prudence flould teach them to conceal as
much as possible. "The promises of Princes,
faysfhe, ought not to be too carefully remem-
bered, nor the performance of them exafted,
unless it suits their own conveniency. "

Summons their preachers to appear before her.

The indignation , which betrayed the

Queen into this rash exprerflon, was nothing
in comparison of that with which she was ani-
mated, upon hearing that the public exercise

of the Reformed Religion had been introduced
into the town of Perth. At once, she threw
off the mask, and commanded all the Proteflant-
preachers in the kingdom to be summoned to a
court of justice, which was to be held at Stir.
ling on the tenth of May. The Protestants,
who, from their union, began, about this
time, to be distinguished by the name of the
Congregation, were alarmed, but not intimi-
dated by this danger; and instantly resolved
not to abandon the men, to whom they were
indebted for the most valuable of all blerfings,
the knowledge of truth. At that time, there
prevailed in Scotland, with refpeEc to criminal
trials, a custom , introduced , at first, by the
institutions of vassalage and clanfhip, and tole-
rated, afterwards, under a feeble government;
any person accused of a crime was accompanied
to the place of trial by a retinue of his friends
and adherents, aflembled for that purpose from
every quarter of the kingdom. Authorised by
this ancient pracice. the Reformed convened,
in great numbers, to attend their pastors to
Stirling. The Queen dreaded their approach
with a train so numerous, though unarmed;
and in order to prevent them from advancing;
she empowered John Erskine of Dun; a person
of eminent authority with the party, to promi-
fe, in her name, that she would put a itop
to the intended trial, on condition the preachers
and their retinue advanced no nearer to Stirling.

# Breaks a promise on which they had relied.

Er.cklne, being convinced himself of the Queen's
sincerity, served her with the utmost zeal.
And the Protestants, averse from proceeding to
any at of violence, listened with pleasure to
so pacifick a proposition. The preachers, with
a few leaders of the party, remained at Perth;
the multitude, which had gathered from diffe-
rent parts of the kingdom, dispersed, and re-
tired to their own habitations.

Bre.ks a prouiife on which they had relied.

But, notwithfRanding this solemn promise,

the Queen, on the tenth of May, proceeded
to call to trial the persons who had been fum-
moned, and upon their non-appearance, the
rigour ofjuftice took place, and they were pro-
nounced outlaws. By this ignoble artifice, so
incompatible with real dignity, and so inconfi-
ftent with that integrity which should prevail
in all transactions between Sovereigns and their
subjects, the Queen forfeited the esteem and
confidence of the whole nation. The Prote-
ftants, shocked no less at the indecency with
which flie violated the public faith, than at
the danger which threatened themselves, pre-
pared boldly for their own defence. Erskine,
enraged at having been made the initrutnent
for deceiving his party, instantly abandoned
Stirling, and repairing to Perth, added to the
zeal of his aifociates, by his representations

# This occasions an insurrection at Perth.

of the Queen's inflexible resolution to suppress
their religion.

This occasions an inutrretion at Perth.

The popular rhetorick of Knox powerfully

seconded his representations: He having been
carried a prisoner into France, together with
the other perrons'taken in'the caitle of St. An-
drew's, soon made his escape out of that coun.
try; and residing sometimes in England, so.
metimes in Scotland, had, at last, been driven
out of both kingdoms by the rage of the Po-
pish clergy, and was obliged to retire to Ge-
neva. Thence he was called by the leaders of
the Protestants in Scotland; and, in complian-
ce with their solicitations, he set out for his
native country, where he arrived a few days
before the trial appointed at Stirling. He hur-
ried instantly to Perth, to share with his bre-
thren in the common danger, or to assist them
in promoting the common cause. While their
minds were in that ferment, which the Queen's
perfidiousness and their own danger occasioned,
he mounted the pulpit, and by a vehement ha-
rangue against idolatry, inflammed the multi-
tude with the utmost rage. The indiscretion
of a pries , who, immediately after Knox's
sermon, was preparing to celebrate mars, and
began to decorate the altar for that purpole.
precipitated them into immediate acion. With
tumultuary, but irresistible violence, they fell

# The Regent marches against them.

upon the churches in that city, overturned the
altars, defaced the piAtures, broke in pieces
the images; and proceeding next to the mona-
Iteries, they, in a few hours, laid thole fuimp-
tuous fabricks alnoft level with the ground.
This riotous infurretion was not the es'e6t of
any concert, or previous deliberation: Cenfu-
red by the reformed preachers, and publickly
condemned by the persons of most power and
credit with the party, it muff be regarded me-
rely as an accidental eruption of popular rage.*)

The Regeni marches against them.

But to the Queen herself, these procee-

dings appeared in a very different light, Befl-
des their manifest contempt for her authority,
the Protestants had violated every thing in re-
ligion which she esteemed venerable or holy;
and on both these accounts, she determined to
inflict the severest vengeance of the whole par-
ty. She had already drawn the troops in
French pay to Stirling; with these, and what
Scottish forces she could levy of a sudden, she
marched dire&ly to Perth, in hopes of furpri-
sing the Protestant leaders before they could
af'emble their followers, whom, out of confi-
dence in her disingenuous promises, they had
been rashly induced to dismiss. Intelligence of
these preparations and menaces was soon con-
') Knox, Hist. 137, Ins.

veyed to Perth. The Proteltants would, gladly,
have soothed the Queen, by addrefl'es both to
herself, and to the persons of greatest credit
in her court; but finding her inexorable, they,
with great vigour, took measures for their own
defence. Their adherents, animated with zeal
for religion, and eager to expose themselves in
so good a cause., flocked in such numbers to
Perth, that they not only secured the town
from danger, but, within a few days, were
in a condition to take the field, and to face the
Queen, who advanced with an army 7000
firong.

Neither party, howewer, was impatient

to engage. The Queen dreaded the event of
a battle with men, whom the fervour of reli.
gion raised above the sens'e of fear , or of dan-
ger. The Protestants beheld with regret the
Earl of Argyll, the Prior of St. Andrew's, and
iomne other eminent persons of their party, fill
adhering to'the Queen; and deffitute of their
aid and counsel, declined hazarding an aftion,
the ill success of which might have proved the
ruin of their cause. The profpea of an ac-
commodation was for these reasons highly ac-
ceptable to both fides; Argyll and the Prior,
who were the Queen's commissioners for con-
du&ing the negociation, feemn to have been
sincerely desirous of reconciling the contending
factions; and the Earl of Glencairn arriving
unexpetedly with a powerful reinforcement to

# A treaty concluded.

the Congregation, augmented the Queen's ea-
gernefs for peace.

A treaty cuirclitded.

A treaty was accordingly concluded , in

which it was stipulated, that both armies should
be disbanded, and the gates of Perth set open
to the Queen; that indemnity should be gran-
ted to the habitants of that city, and to all
others concerned in the late infurreftion; that
no French garrison should be left in Perth, and
no French soldier should approach within three
miles of that place; and that a Parliament
should immediately be held, in order to com-
pose whatever differences might fill remain. *)

The Leaders of the Congregation, distrust-

ful of the Queen's sincerity, and sensible that
concessions, flowing not from inclination, but
extorted by the necellity of her affairs, could
not long remain in force, entered into a new
association May 29. 559, by which they bound
themselves, on the first infringement of the
present treaty, or in the least appearance of
danger to their religion, to re-assemble their
followers, and to take arms in defence of what
they esteemed the cauife of God, and of their
country. i')

') Keith , 89
':') Knox, 138.

# Broken by the Regent.

Brocken by the Regent.

The Queen, by her condurf, demonftra.

ted there precautions to be the reftlt of no
groundless or unneceflary fear. No sooner we.
re the Proteltant forces difmiiled , than she
broke every article in the treaty. She intro.
duced French troops into Perth, fined some of
the inhabitants, banished others, removed the
Alagiicrates out of office, and, on her retiring
to Stirling , she left behind her a garrison of
600oo men, with orders to allow the exercise of
ao other religion than the Roman Catholick,
The situation of Perth, a place at that time of
some strength, and a town the most proper of
any in the kingdom for the station of a garri.
son, feerms to have allured the Queen to this
unjustifiable , and ill-judged breach of public
faith; which file endeavoured to colour, by
alledgingthat the body of men left at Perth was
entirely composed of native Scots, though kept
in pay by the King of France.

The Queen's scheme began gradually to

unfold; it was now apparent, that not only
the religion, but the liberties of the kingdom
were threatened; and that the French troops
were to be employed as instruments for fib-
duing the Scots, and wreathing the yoke about
their necks. Martial as the genius of the Scots
then was, the poverty of their country made
it impoftible to keep their armies long aflnm-
bled; and even a very small body of regular

troops

# The Protestants again take arms.

troops might have proved formidable to the
nation , though confilling ;wholly of soldiers.
But, what number of IFrench forces were then
in Scotland, at wvhat times, and under what
pretexts they returned, after having left the
kingdown in 155o, we cannot, with any cer-
tainty, determine. Cotemporary historians of-
teln elec't, with little judgment, the circum-
stances \vhich they tranfrnit to po{terity; and
with refpe&t to matters of the greatest curiofitv
and importance, leave succeeding ages alto-
gether in the dark. We may conjealure how-
ever, from fomne passages in Buchanan , that
the French and Scots in French pay amounted
at least to 3000 men, under the command of
Ilonf. D'Oyfcl, a creature of the houle of
Guil'e; and they were soon augmented to a
much more formidable number,

T;:e PTotef.liits a, .a tal;k anms.

The Queen encouraged by having so con-

iiderable a body of v-ell-difciplined troops at
her command, and instigated by the vioien:
counfe!s of D'Oyfel, had ventured. as we have
observed, to violate the treaty of Perth, and,
by that rash ation, once more threw the na-
tion into the most dangerous convuifions. The
Earl of Argyll and Prior of St. Andrew's in-
ftantly deserted a court, where faith and honoi:
seemed to them to be no longer regarded.
The Barons from the neighbouring co!tlties re-

Hill, of Scotl. Vol. I. 0

# They aim at redressing civil as well as religious grievances.

paired to them, the preachers roused the people
to arms, and wherever they came, the fame
violent operations, which accident had occa.
hioned at Perth, were now encouraged of po-
licy. The enraged multitude was let loole,
and churches and monasteries, the monument,.
of ecclesiastic pride and luxury, were sacrificed
to their zeal.

In order to check their career, the Queen,

without losing a moment, put her troops in
motion; but the zeal of the Congregation got
the slart, once more , of her vigilance and
activity. In that warlike age, when all men
were accustomed to arms, and on the lealt
proflpeCr of danger were ready to ran to them,
the leaders of the Proteflants found no difficul-
ty to raise an army. Though they let oul:
from St. Andrew's with a slender train of an
hundred horse, crowds flocked to their fian-
dards from every corner of the country throuigh
which they marched; and before they reached
Falkland, a village only ten miles dirtant, they
were able to meet the Queen with fuiperior
force. :)

Tley ailm :t redrellilg civil as %well as

religioLus grievances.

The Queen, surprised at the approach of
so formidable a body, which was drawn up by

') Knox , 4I.

its leaders in such a manner as added greatly
in appearanco to its numbers, had again recur-
fe to negociation. She found, howtever, that
the preservation of the Proteflant religion, their
zeal for which had at first roused the leaders of
the Congregation to take arms, was not the
only object they had now in views They were
animated with the warmest love of civil liberty,
which they conceived to be in imminent danger
from the attempts of the French forces; and
these two passions mingling, added reciprocally
to each other's strength. Together with more
enlarged notions in religion, the Reformation
filled the human mind with more liberal and
generous sentiments concerning civil govern-.
ment. The genius of Popery is extremely fa-
vourable to the power of Princes. The implicit
fubmilfion to all her decrees, which is exa&ted
by the Romish Church, prepares and breaks
the mind for political servitude; and the doctri-
nes of the Reformers, by overturning the ellab-
lifhed system of fiperltition, weakened the
firmest foundations of civil tyranny. That bold
spirit of inquiry, which led men to reject theo-
logical errors, accompanied them in other fci-
ences, and discovered every where the fame
manly zeal for truth. A new fiudy introduced
at the fame time, added greater force to the
spirit of liberty. Men became acquainted with
the Greek and Roman authors, who described
oxguifite models of free. government, far fupe-

0 Z

rior to. the inaccurate and opprefive fyftenm
established by the feudal law; and produced
such illustrious examples of public virtue , as
wonderfully suited both the circuinftances and
spirit of that age. Many, among the most
eminent Reformers , were themselves con-.
fiderable malters in ancient learning; and all of
them eagerly adopted the maxims and spirit of
the .ancients, with regard to government. *)
The mofe ardent love of liberty accompanied
the Proteflant religion throughout all its pro;..
refs; and wherever it was embraced, it rouleil
an independent spirit, which rendered men
attentive to their privileges as fubiets , and
jealous of the encroachments of their fovercigns.
Knox , and the other preachers of the Refor-
mation, infafed generous sentiments concerning
government into the minds of their hearers,
and theScottifh barons, naturally free and bold,
were prompted to a!fcrt their rights with more
freedom and boldness than ever. Instead of
obeying. the Quenn Regent, who had enjoined

T) The excefive admiration ,n ancient po.icy was the occafcin
of Kinox's falnois hook concerning the Government o'
Wollen, wherein , conformable co the lnaxims of lh'
ancielr legislators, which modern experience has proved
- to be ill founded , he pronounces the elevation of m onIeC
to tlh fupreine authority, to be utterly deftruaive of good
govrerneinlt. His principlles, authorities , and examilleO
vere all. drawn from ancientwriters. Tle fatne oblervatioll
may be made with regard to Buchanan's Dialogiue, Ul
Jure lIegni apud Scotos, It is founded not on tile tnmaxiim
*r feudal, but of -ancient governmelt,

# A second treaty violated.

them to lay down their arris, they 'demanded
not only the redress of their religious grievan-
ces , but, as a preliminary towards fettling the
nation, and securing its liberties, required the
immediate expulsion of the French troops out- of
Scotland. It was not in the Queen's power
to make so important a concession without the
concurrence of the French M'lonarch;'and as
some time was requisite in order to obtain that,
she hoped, during this interval, to receive
flich reinforcements from France, as wvould in-
lure the accomplishment of that design, which
she had twice attempted with unequal ilrength.
Mean while, she agreed June x3. 1559. to a
cessation of arms for eight days, and before tihe
expiration of these, engaged to transport the
French troops to the south fide of the Forth;
and to fend commissioners to St. Andrew's, who
should labour to bring all differences to an ac-
commodation. As file hoped, by means of
the French troops, to overawe the Protestants
in the southern counties, the former article in
the treaty was punetually executed; the latter
having been inserted merely to amuse the
Congregation, was no longer remembered.

A second treaty violated.

By these reiterated and wanton infrances of

perfidy, the Queen los all credit with her ad-
verfaries; and no safety appearing in any other
course, they again -took arms with niore

# Rapid march and success of the Protestants.

inflamed resentment, and with bolder and more
extensive views. The removing of the French
forces had laid open to them all the country
situated between Forth and Tay. The inhabit-
ants of Perth alone remaining fubjefted to the
insolence and exaftions of the garrison. which
the Queen had left there, implored the assistance
of the Congregation for their relief. Thither
they marched , and having , witholt efi'er,
required the Queen to evacuate the town in
terms of' the former treaty, they prepared to
besiege it in form, The Queen ernplooed the
Earl of Huntly and Lord Erskine to divert theml
from this enterprise. But her wonted artifices
were now of no avail; repeated so often, they
could deceive no longer; and without lifieniig
to her offers, theProteftants continued the siege,
and soon obliged the garrison to capitulate.

Rapid march and fuccers of the Iroteftants.

After the lots of Perth, the Queen endea-

voured to seize Stirling, a place of forne strength,
and , from its command of the only bridge
over the Forth, of great importance. But the
leaders of the Congregation, having intelligence
of her design, prevented the execution of it,
by an hafly march thither with part of their
forces. The inhabitants, heartily attached to
the cause, set open to them the gates of their
town. Thence they advanced, with the fame
rapidity, towards Edinburgh, with the Queens

on their approach, abandoned with precipitation,
and retired to Dunbar.

The Proteflant army, wherever it came,

uindled, or spread the ardour of Reformation,
and the utmost cxceffes of violence were com-
mitted upon churches and monasteries. The
former were spoiled of every decoration, whichl
was then esteemed sacred; the latter were laid
in ruins. MWe are apt, at this diltance of time,
to condemn the furious zeal of the Reformers,
and to regret the overthrow of so many stately
fabricks , the monuments of our ancestors
magnificence, and among the noblest ornaments
of the kingdom. But amidst the violence of a
Reformation, carried on in opposition to legal
authority, some irregularities were unavoidable;
and perhaps no one could have been permitted
more proper to allure and interest the multitude,
or more fatal to the grandeur of the established
church. However absurd and ill-founded the
speculative errors of Popery may be, some
inquiry and attention are requisite towards
discovering them. The abufcs and corruptions,
which had crept into the publick worship of
that church, lay more open to observation,
and by striking the senses, excited more
universal disgust. Under the long reign of
Heathenism, superstition seems to have exhaust-
ed its talent of invention, so that when a
superstitious spirit seized Christians, they were
obliged to imitate the Heathens in the pomp

and magnificence of their ceremonies, and to
borrow from them the ornamenrs and de-
corations of their temples. To the pure and
simple worship of the primitive Chrifrians, there
succeeded a species of splendid idolatry, nearly
resembling those pagan originals, whence it
had been copied. The contrariety of such
observances, to the spirit of Chriftianitv, was
almost the first thing, in the Romifhi fyicmn,
which awakened the indignation of the Re-
formers, who, applying to these the denun-
ciations in the Old Testament against idolatry,
imagined that they could not endeavour at
fupprdffing them with too much zeal. No tal'k
could be more acceptable to the multitude, than
to overturn those feats of fupertition; they ran
with emulation to perform it, and happy was
the man ¥whoSe hand was mool adventurous and
successful in executing a work esteemed lb
pious. Nor did their leaders labour to refirain
this impetuous spirit of Reformation. Irregular
and violent as its sallies were, they tended
direEtly to that end which they had in view;
for, by demolifling the monasteries throughout
the kingdom, and setting at liberty their
wretched inhabitants, they hoped to render it
impossible ever to rebuild the one, or to re-af-
femble the other.

But amidst these irregular proceedings, a

circumstance, which does honour to the conduct
and humanity of the leaders of the Congregation,

deCerves notice. They so far restrained the
rage of their followers, and were able so to
temper their heat and zeal, that few of the
Roman Catholicks were exposed to any. per-
fonal insult, and not a tingle man fulaered
death. :)

At the fame time we discover, by the fa-

cility with whicsh these great revolutions were
efleEted, how violently the current of national
favour ran towards the Reformation. No more
than ,oo men marched out of Perth under the
Earl of Argyll and Prior of St. Andrew's; :::)
with this inconsiderable force they advanced.
But whereever they came, the people joined
them in a body; their army was seldom lels
numerous than 5000 men; the gates of every
town were thrown open to receive them; and,
without striking a tingle blow, they took pof-
feflion of the capital of the kingdom. (June 29.
1559.)

This rapid and astonishing success seems to

have encouraged the Reformers to extend their
views, and to rife in their demands. Not fa-
tisfed with their firfi claim of toleration for
their religion, they now, openly, aimed at
efiablifhing the Proteflant doctrine on the ruins
of Popery. For this reason, they determined
to fix their relidence at Edinburgh; and, by

*) Lefly, 231.
") Keith, 94.

their appointmen, Knox, and some other preach..
ers, taking possession of the pulpits, whiclh
had been abandoned by the afrightened clergy,
declaimed against the errors of Popery with
such fervent zeal, as could not fail of gaining
many proselytes.

In the mean time, the Queen, who had

prudently given way to a torrent which she
could not resist, observed wvith pleasure that
it now began to subside. The leaders of the
Congregation had been above two months in
arms, and by the expences of a campaign, pro-
trafted so long beyond the usual time offervice
in that age, had exhausted all the money, which
a country, where riches did not abound, had
been able to fapply. The multitude, dazzled
with their success, and concluding the work to
be already done, retired to their own habita-
tions. A few only of the more zealous or
wealthy Barons remained with their preachers
at Edinburgh. As intelligence is procured in
civil wars with little difficulty, whatever was
tranfa&ed at Edinburgh was soon known at
Dunbar. And the Queen, regulating her own
condut by the Situation of her adversaries, art-
fully amused them with the profpe& of an im-
mediate accommodation; while, at the fame
time, fie, by studied delays, span out the ne-
'gociations for that purpose, to such a length,
that, in the end, the party dwindled to an ii-
considerable number; and, as if peace had been

# A third treaty.

already reestablished, became careless of mi!i-
tary discipline. The Queen, who watched for
such an opportunity, advanced, unexpectedly,
by a sudden march in the night will all her for-
ces, and appearing before Edinburgh, filled that
city with the utmost coniternation. The Pro-
teftants, weakened by the imprudent dispersion
of their followers, durst not encounter the
'French troops in the open field; and were even
unable to defend an ill fortified town against
their aflaults, Unwilling, how ever, tto abandon
the citizens to the Queen's mercy, they endea-
voured, by facing the enemy's army, to gain
time for collecting their own aflociates. But
the Queen, in spite of all their refifance, would
have easily forced her way into the town, if
the seasonable conclusion of a truce had not
procured her admission without the effusion of
blood.

A third treaty.

Their dangerous situation eafilyinduced the

Congregation to liften to any overtures of peace;
and as the Queen was looking daily for thear-
rival of a strong reinforcement from France, and
expected great advantages from a cef'ation of
arms, she also agreed to it upon no unequal;
conditions. Together with a fulpenfion of hol-
ilities,: from the 2 th of July to the Toth of
January, it was stipulated, in this treary,that,
on the one hand, the Protestants should open

the gates of Edinburgh next morning to the
Queen Regent; remain in dutiful fubjetion to
her government; abstain from all future viola-
tion of religious houles; and give no interrop.
tion to the eflablifhed clergy, either in the
discharge of their functions, or in the enjoy-
ment of their benefices. On the other hand,
the Queen agreed to give no molestation to the
preachers or profefiors of the Proteflant religion:'
to allow no other form of worship in Edinburgh
but the Reformed; and to permit the free and
publick exercise of it all over the kingdom, The
Queen, by these liberal concessions in behalfol
their religion, hoped to sooth the Protelinais,
and expeEted, from indulging their favourite
pafiion, to render them more compliant with
refpeEt to other articles, particularly the e<-
pnlfion of the French troops out of Scotland.
The anxiety which the Queen expressed for re-
taining this body of men, rendered them, more
and more, the obje&s of national jealousy an(l
aversion. The immediate expulsion of them
wvas therefore demanded anew, and with greater
warmth; but the Queen, taking advantage of
the distress of the adverse party, eluded the
requelt, and would consent to not.inEg more.
than that a French garrison fhouid not be iil
troduced into Edinburgh.

The desperate state, of their a ffairs, ilipofcdi

on the Congregation the necessity of agreeing tn
this article, mwhich, however, was very farfroln

giving thetn satisfaction. Whatever apprehen-
lions the Scots had conceived, from retaining
the French forces in the kingdom, were abun-
dantly justified during the late commotions. A
iiall body of thole troops, maintained incon-
Jiant pay, and rendered formidable by regular
difeipline, had checked the progress of a ma?-
tial people, though animated with zeal both for
religion and liberty. The finallefL addition to
their nurnber, and a considerable one was daily
expected, might prove fatal to publick liberty,
and Scotland might be exposed to the danger
of being reduced fron an independent kingdom,
to the mean condition of a province, annexed
to the empire of its powerful ally.

In order to provide against this imminent

calamity, the Duke of Chatelllerault, and Earl
of Hluntly, immediately after concluding the
truce, delired an interview with the chiefs of
the Congregation. These two noblemen, the
inoft potent, at that time, in Scotland, were
hle leaders of the party which adhered to the
eltabliflied church. They had followed the
Queen, during the late comnnotions, and having
access to observe more narrowly the dangerous
tendency of her councils, their abhorrence of
the yoke which was preparing for their country
surmounted all other considerations, and deter-
mined them rather to endanger the religion
which they professed, than to give their aid to-
wards the execution of her pernicious deftgus,

They proceeded farther, and promised to Argyll,
Glencairn, and the Prior of St. Andrew's, vho
were appointed to meet them, that ifthe Queen
should, with her usual insincerity, violate any
article in the treaty of truce, or refuse to gra.
tify the wishes of the whole nation, by difmnif.
sing her French troops, they would, then, ill.
fiantly join with their countrymen in compell
ing her to a measure, which the publick safety,
and the preservation of theirliberties, rendered
necessary. *)

About this time died Henry IT. of France;

(July 8. I559.) just when he had adopted a
fyfterm with regard to the affairs of Scotland,
,which would, in all probality, have restored
union and tranquillity to that kingdom. '')
Towxards the close of his reign, the Princes o0
Lorrain began visibly to decline in favour, and
the Conflable Montmorency, by the affiilance
of the Duchess of Valentinois, recovered that
ascendant over the spirit of his master, vhich
his great experience, and his faithful, though
often unfortunate services, seemed justly to
merit. That prudent minister imputed the in.
fLrreftions in Scotland wholly to the Duke of
Guise and Cardinal of Lorrain, whose violent
and precipitant counsels could not fail of tranf-
porting, beyond all bounds of moderation, mer,

') K1ox, 154.
') Melv.-49.

whole -minds were pofleffed with thatjealoufy,
which is inseparable from the love of civil li-
berty, or inflamed with that ardour which ac-
companies religious zeal: And, in order to con-
vince Henry that he did not load his rivals witli
any groundless accusation, he prevailed to have
Melvil, *) a Scottish gentleman of his retinue,
dispatched into his native country, with in-
ftrutions to observe the motions both of the
Regent, and of her adversaries; and the King
agreed to regulate his future proceedings, in
that kingdom, by Melvil's report.

Did history indulge herself in these fpecu-

lations, it would be aiufing to inquire what a
difTerent direction might have been given, by
this resolution, to the national spirit; and to
what a different iflhe, Melvil's report, which
would have set the conduct of the malecontents
in the most favourable light, might have con-
duEted the publick disorders. Perhaps by gentle
treatment, and artful policy, the progress of
the Reformation might have been checked, and
Scotland brought to depend upon France. Per-
haps, by gaining poffelion of this avenue, the
French might have made their way into Eng-
land, and, under colour of supporting Mary's
title to the Crown, they might have reestablish-
ed the Roman Catholick religion, and destroyed
the liberties of that kingdom, But, into this
') The Author of the iMcomoirr.

# Accession of Francis II. to the Crown of France.

boundless field of fancy and conjecture, the
hifiorian must make no excurlions; to relate
real occurrences, and to explain their real
causes and effccts, is his peculiar and only
province.

Accession of Francis Il to the Crown of France.

The tragical and untimely death of the

French Monarch put an end to all moderate and
pacifick measures, with regard to Scotland. The
Duke of Guise , and the Cardinal his brother,
upon the acceliion of Francis II. a prince void
of genius, and without experience, aflinied
the chief direction of French affairs. Allied so
nearly to the throne, by the marriage of their
niece the Queen of Scots with tie youngKing,
they now wanted but little of regal dignity,
and nothing of regal power. This power did
not long remain inaative in their hands. The
fame vast schemes of ambition, which they had
planned out under tho former reign, wcre
again resumed; and they were enabled, by
pofeffeing such ample authority, to purfuethem
with more vigour, and greater probability of
faccefs. They beheld, with infinite regret, the
progress of the Protestant religion in Scotland;
and sensible what an unsurmountable obflacle it
would prove to their designs, theybentalltheir
flrength to check its growth, before it role to
any greater height. For this purpose, they
carried on their preparations with all politble

expe-

expedition, and encouraged the Queen their
fitter, to expect, in a short time, the arrival of
an army, to powerful, as the zeal of their ad-
verfaries, however desperate, would not ven-
ture to oppose.

Nor were the Lords of the Congregation

either ignorant of those violent counsels, which
prevailed in the court of France since the death
of Henry, or careless of providing against the
danger, which threatened them from that quarter.
The success of their cause, as well as their per-
fonal safety, depending entirely on the unani-
mity and vigour of their own resolutions, they
endeavoured to guard against division, and to
cement together more closely, by entering into
a ftri&er bond of confederacy and mutual de-
fence. Two persons concurred in this new as-
fociation, who brought a great acceflion both of
reputation and of power to the party. These
were the Dake of Chatelherasit, and his eldest
son the Earl of Arran. This young nobleman,
having resided tome years in France, where he
commanded the Scottish guards, had imbibed
the Protestant opinions concerning religion,
Hurried along by the heat of youth, and the
zeal of a proselyte, he had uttered sentiments
with refpeEt to the pointsin controversy, which
did not suit the temper of a bigotted court, in-
tent, at that junture, on the extinction of the
Proteilant religion; in order to accom plifh which,
the greatest e xcefies of violence were comumitted,

Rif. of Scotl. Vol. I, P

The church was fuflered to wreak its utmofr
fury upon all who were fufpeEted of heresy.
Courts were erected in different parts of France,
to take cognizance of this crime, and by their
sentences, several persons of distinction were
condemned to the flames.

But, in order to inspire more universal

terror, the Princes of Lorrain resolved to felet,
for a facriice, sone person, whose fall might
convince all ranks of men, that neither fplen.
dour of birth, nor eminence in fration, could
exempt from punifhnient, those who should be
guilty of this unpardonable transgression. The
Earl of Arran was the person defined to be
the unhappy vitim. ':) As he was allied to
one throne, and the presumptive heir to another;
as he pofiefled the firfr rank in his own country,
and enjoyed an honourable station in France;
his condemnation could not fail of making the
desired impreflion on the whole kingdom. But
the Cardinal of Lorrain having let fall someex-
pressions, which railed Arran's suspicions of the
design, he escaped the intended blow by a ti-
mely flight. Indignation, zeal, resentment, all
prompted him to Teek revenge upon there per-
fecutors of himself and of the religion which
be professed; and as he passed through England,
on his return to his native country, Elizabetlhi
by hopes and promises, inflamed those paflions,

") Thntla, lilb. xx- .

p .
46 Edit, Fraucof.

# Earl of Arran joins the Protestant.

and Cent him back into Scotland, animated with
the fame implacable aversion to France, which
poflfel'ed a great part of his countrymen.

Earl of Arran joins the Protestant.

He quickly communicated these sentiments

to his father the Duke of Chatelherault, who
was already extremely disgusted with the mea-
fures carrying on in Scotland; and as it was the
fate of that nobleman to be governed in every
instance by those about him, he now fufrered
himself to be drawn from the Queen Regent;
and having joined the Congregation, was con-
fidered, from that time, as the head of the
party.

But with rerpe& to him, this diftinC&ioZ

was merely nominal. James Stewart, Prior of
St. Andrew's, was the person who moved and
aftuated the whole body of the Protestants,
among whom, he pol'efled that unboundedcon-
fidence, which his strenuous adherence to their
interest, and his great abilities fojuftly merited.
He was the natural son of James V. by a
daughter of Lord Erskine; and as thatamorous
M\onarch had left several others a burden upon
the Crown, they were all defined for the church.
where they could be placed in Rations of dig'
nity and affluence. In consequence of this re-
solution, the Priory of St. Andrew's had been
conferred upon James: But,'during so busy a
period, he soon became disgusted with the in,

P %z

dolence and retirement of a monaftick life; and
his enterprising genius called him forth , to adt
a principal part on a more publick and con.
fpicuous theatre. The scene, in which he ap.
peared, required talents of different kinds:
Military virtue, and political discernment, vere
equally neceflary in order to render him illnf.
trious. These he poffelFed in an eminent degree.
To the molt nnqueftionable personal bravery, lie
added great fiill in the art of war, and in erery
enterprise his arms were crowned \with fuccels,
-is sagacity and penetration in civil affairs en
abled him, amidit the reeling and turbulence
of fa&ions, to hold a.profperous course. While
his boldness in defence of the Reformation, to
gether with the decency, and even severity of
his manners, secured him the reputation of
being fincerly attached to religion, without
which, it was impoflible, in that age, to gain
an ascendant over mankind.

It was not without reason, that the Qucee

dreaded the enmity of a man, so capable to
obftruta her designs. And as she could lot,
with all her address, make the least impreflion
on his fidelity to his albociates, she endeavour-
ed to lessen his influence, and to scatter among
them the feeds of jealousy and difirufi, by in-
finuating that the ambition of the Prior aspired
beyond the condition of a fabjet&, and aimedat
nothing less than the Crown itself.

An accusation so improbable gained but

little credit. Whatever thoughts of this kind.
the prefumptiol} of unexpected success, and his
elevation to the highest dignity in thekingdoim,
may be alleged to .have inspired, at any fubfe-
quent period, it is certain that, at thisjuncture,
he could form no such vast design. To dethrone.
a Queen, who was lineal heir to an ancient race
of Monarchs; who had been guilty of no ac:ion.
by which she could forfeit the efleem and as-
feEtion of her fubjeats; who could employ, in
defence of her rights, the forces of a kingdon,
much more powerful than her own; and to
substitute, in her place, a person whom the il-
legitimacy of his birth, by the practice of all
civilized nations, rendered incapable of any in-
heritance, either publick or private; was a pro-
je& so chimerical, as the mol: exravagant am-
bition would scarce entertain, and could never
conceive to be prac&icable. The promise too,
which the Prior made to Mlelvil, of residing
contfantly in Franre, on condition the publick
grievances were redreficd; *) the confidence
reposed in him by the Duke of Chatelherault
and his son, the presumptive heirs to the Crown ;
and the concurrence of almoit the whole Scot-
tifh nobles, in promoting the measures, by
which he gave oTfenfe to the French court, go
far towards his vindication from those illegeal
") MClvis, 54, .

# Troops arrive from France, and fortify Leith.

and criminal designs, with the imputation of
which, the Queen endeavoured, at that time,
to load him.

Troops arrive from France, and fortify Leith,

The arrival of a thousand French soldiers

omnpenfated, in some degree, for the loss which
the Queen fultained by the defection of the
Duke ofChatelherault. These were, immediar
tely, commanded to fortify Leith, in which
place, on account of its commodious harbour,
and its Situation in the neighbourhood of Edin.
burgh, and in a plentiful country, the Queen
resolved to fix the head-quarters of her foreign
forces. This unpopular neafure, by the man.
ner of executing it, was rendered lill more
unpopular. In order to bring the town entirely
under their command, the French turned out a
great part of the ancient inhabitants, and taking
pofreffion of the houses, which they had obliged
them to abandon, presented to the view of the
Scots, two objets equally irritating and ofTen-
five; on the one hand, a number oftheircoun-
trymen expelled their habitations by violence,
and wandering without any certain abode; on
the other, a colony of foreigners, fettling with
their wives and children, in the heart of Scot.
land, growing into strength by daily reinforce-
ments, and openly preparing a yoke, to which,
without some timely exertion of national spirit,
the, whole kingdom muff, of necessity, fibnit,

# The Protestants remonstrate against this.

# The Regent disregards their remonstrances.

The Proteltants remonflrate against this.

It vas with deep concern that the Lords

of the Congregation beheld this bold and deci-
five ftep, taken by the Queen Regent: Nordid
they hesitate a moment, whether they should
employ their whole firength, in one generous
effort, to rescue their religion and liberty from
impending deftrnEtion. But, in order to justify
their own conduct, and to throw the blame en-
tirely on their adversaries, they resolved to pre-
serve the appearances of decency and refpeft
towards their fuiperiors, and to have no re-
course to arms, without the moll urgent and
apparent necessity. They joined, with this view,
in an address to the Regent, (Sept. 29. i559.)
representing, in the firongeft terms, their dif-
fatisfaLtion with the meafires she waspurfuing,
and beseeching her to quiet the fears and jea-
loufies of the nation, by defiftingfrom fortifying
Leith. The Queen, conscious of her present
advantageous lituation, and elated with the
hopes of frcfh succours, was in no disposition
for listening to demands, utterly inconsistent
with her views, and urged with that bold im-
portunity, which is so little acceptable to
Princes.

The Regent disregards their rcmioifllrlaices.

The suggestions of her French counsellors

contributed, without doubt, to alienate her
still farther fiom any fchcme of accommodation.

As the Queen was ready on all occalfons, to
discover an extraordinary deference for the opi-
nions of her countrymen, her brothers, whoio
knew her secret disapprobation of the violent
measures they were driving on, took care to
place near her such persons, as betrayed hIer,
by their insinuations, into many actions, whiiih
her own unbiaffed judgment would have highly
condemned. And as their fucccfs in the prc-
sent juncture, when all things were hai-ening
towards a crisis, depended entirely -on the
Queen's firmness, the Princes of Lorrain did
not trufl wholly to the influence of their ordi-
nary agents; but, in order to add the greater
weight to their councils, they called in aid the
Nlinifiers of Religion; and, by the authority of
their sacred character, they hoped elffeuallvto
recommend to their sifter, that system of fevo-
rity which they had espoused. `) With this
view, but under pretence of confounding the
Protestants by the skill of such able masters in
controversy, they appointed several French di-
vines to reside in Scotland. As the head of
there, and with the character of legate from
the Pope, was Pelleve Bishop of Amiens, and
afterwards Archbirhop and Cardinal of Sens,
a furious bigot, **) servilely devoted to the
house of Guise, and a proper infirument forre-

') Lefy, 215. Caftlenau, ap. Jebb, vol. ii. 446. 473;
") Davila. Brantome,

# They take arms in their own defence.

commending or executing the most outrageous
meafntres.

AmidRi the noise and danger of civil arms,

there Doftors had little opportunity to di-play
their address in the afe of their theological
weapons. But they gave no fniall offence to
the nation by one of their aftions. They
persuaded the Queen to seize the church of St.
Giles in Edinburghl, which had remained, ever
since the late truce, in the hands of the Protefi-
ants; and having, bv a new and solemn con.-
fecration, purified the fabrick fiom the pollution,
with which they supposed the profane minift-
rations of the Protestants to have defiled it,
they, in direct contradiction to one article in
the late treaty , reeflablifhed there the rites
of the Romish church. This , added to the
indifference, and even contempt, wvitli which
the Queen received their remon ftrances, con-
vinced the Lords of the Congregation, that it
was not ohly vain to expeft any redress of
their grievances at her hands, but absolutely
necelTary to take arms in their own defence.

They take aflns in their own defence.

The eager and impetuous spirit of the

nation, as well as every consideration of good
policy, prompted them to take this bold ftep
without delay. It was but a finall part of the
French auxiliaries which had as yet arrived.
The fortifications of Leith, though advancing

fafl, were itill far from being complete. Under
these circumrnfances of disadvantage, they con-
ceived it possible to surprise the Queen's party,
and, by one sudden and decisive blow, to
prevent all future bloodshed and contention.
Full of these expeteations; (O&ober 6. ) ad.
vanced rapidly towards Edinburgh with a nn-
mnerous army. But it was no easy matter to
deceive an adversary, so vigilant and attentive
as the Queen Regent. With her usual sagacity.
she both foresaw the danger, and took the only
proper course to avoid it. Instead of keeping
the field against enemies, superior in number,
and formidable on a day of battle, by the
ardour of their courage, she retired into Leith,
and determined patiently to wait the arrival of
new reinforcements. Slight and unfinished as
the fortifications of that town then were, she
did not dread the efforts of an army, provided
neither with heavy cannon, nor with military
fIore, and utterly ignorant of the method of
attacking any place fortified with more art than
those ancient towers, ereted all over the
kingdom, in defence. of private property againfr
the incursions of banditti.

Nor did the Queen, mean while, ncgleEt

to have recourse to those arts, which The had
often employed, to weaken 'or divide her ad-
verfaries. By private solicitations and promises.
she shook the fidelity, or abated the ardour of
some. By open reproach and accusation, she

# Renew their remonstrances;

blaRfed the reputation, and ditninifhed the aut-
hority of others. Her emiifaries were every
where at work, and, notwithstanding the zeal
for religion and liberty, which then animated
the nation, they seem to have laboured not
without success. We find Knox, about this
period, abounding in complaints of the luke-
warm and languid spirit, which had begun to
spread among his party. *) But if their zeal
slackened a little, and fualered a momentary
intermiflion, it soon blazed up with fresh
vigorr, and rose to a greater height than ever;
The Queen herself gave occasion to this, by the
reply which she made to a new remonstrance
from the Lords of the Congregation.

Renew their remonlrances;

Upon their arrival at Edinburgh, they once

more represented to her the dangers arising
from the increase of the French troops, the
fortifying of Leith, and her other measures,
which they conceived to be deftru&ive to the
peace and liberty of the kingdom; and in this
address, they spoke in a firmer tone, and
avowed more openly than ever, their refolu-
tion of proceeding to the utmotl extremities, in
order to put a flop to filch dangerous encroach-
ments.
") Knox, igc,

# But without success.

# Deliberate concerning the course which they ought to take.

But without fuccers,

To a remonfirance of this nature, and

urged with so much boldness, the Queen replied
in terms no less vigorous and explicit. She
pretended that she was not accountable to the
confederate Lords for any part of her condu&;
and upon no representation of theirs , would
she either abandon measures ; which she deemed
necefl'ary; or dismiss forces, which she found
useful; or demolish a fortification, which might
prove of advantage. At the fame time, flhc
required them , on pain of treabfn , to disbar!
the forces which they had assembled.

This haughty and imperious style founded

harshly to Scottish nobles, impatient, from
their national character, of the slightest appear-
ance of injury; accculomied even from theii
own Monarchs , to the most refpedtful treat-
nent; and possessing, under an ariftocraticai
form of government, such a share of power, a.
equalled, at all times, and often controlled
that of the sovereign. They were sensible, at
once, of the indignity offered to themselves,
and alarmed with this plain declaration of the
Queen's intentions; and as there now remained
but one ftep to take, they wanted neither
publick spirit nor resolution to take it.

Deliberate concerning the coul:re vhich

they ought to take,

But, that they might not seem to depart
from the efrablifhed forms of.the conititutinll,

# They deprive the Queen of the office of Regent.

Tor which, even amidst their the violeit ope-
rations, men always retain the greatest reve-
rence, they assembled O&. 21 the whole
Peers, Barons, and Rcprefentatives of bur-
roughs, who adhered to their party. These
formed a convention which exceeded in number,
and equalled in dignity, the usual meetings of
parliament. The 'leaders of the Congregation
laid before them the declaration which the
Queen had given in answer to their remonii-.
rance; represented the unavoidable ruin, which
the measures, file therein avowed and jufriiied,
would bring upon the kingdom; and requiring
their direftion with regard to the obedience
due to an adminiFrration so un jtln and oppreli.ve,
they submitted to their dec ion, a queltion,
one of the nmot delicate and intcre'lfing that
can poifibly fall under the counrer::.ion of sub-
je&s.

They deprive the Queen of the cftice of Regent,

This afiernbly proceeded to decide, vlith

no less dispatch, than unanimity. Strangers to
those forms, which protra& business; unac-
quainted with the arts, which make a figure
in debate; and much more fitted for aftion
than discourse: A warlike people always haften
to a conclufion,'and bring their deliberations to
the shortest iflue. It was the work but of one
day, to examine and to resolve this nice problem.
concerning the behaviour es fubjeEts towards a

# The rights of their conduct.

ruler who abuses his power. But, however
abrupt their proceedings may appear, they
were not destitute of solemnity. As the
determination of the point in doubt, was con.
ceived to be no less the office of divines, than
of laymen , the former were called to afiift
with their opinion. Knox and Willox appeared
for the whole order, and pronounced, without
hesitation, both from the precepts and examples
in scripture , that it was lawful for fubjets
not only to resist tyrannical princes, but to
deprive them of that authority, xwhich, in their
hands, becomes an instrument for destroying
those, whom the Almighty ordained them to
protest. The decision of persons, revered so
highly for their sacred charaEter, but more for
their zeal, and their piety, had great weight
with the whlole aflembly. Not satisfied with
the common indiscriminate manner of signifying
content, every person present was called in
his turn to declare his sentiments, and rising
up in order, all gave their suffrages, without
one dissenting voice, for depriving the Queen
of the office of Regent, which she had exercised
so much to the detriment of the kingdom. o)

The rights of their condu&.

This nxtraordinary sentence was owing no
less to the love of liberty, than to zeal for

*) Kuox, 184.

religion. In the aa of deprivation, religious
grievances are slightly mentioned; and the
dangerous encroachments of the Queen upon
the civil conititution are produced, by the
Lords of the Congregation, in order to prove
their conduc to have been not only just, but
neceffiry. The introducing foreign troops into
a kingdom, at peace with all the world; the
seizing and fortifying towns in different parts
of the country; the promoting firangers to
offices of great power and dignity; the debaf-
ing the current coin; :) the subverting the
ancient laws; the inpofing of new and burd-
enfome taxes; and the attempting to subdue
the kingdom, and to oppress its liberties, by
open and repeated acs of violence are enume-
rated atgreat length, and placed in the strongest
light. On all these acconnts, the Congregation
maintained that the nobles, as counsellors by
birth-right to their monarchs, and the guardians
and defenders of the constitution , had a right
to interpose; and therefore , by virtue of this
' Theftandard of money in Scotland was contin:lally varying.

in the A6th of James V. A. D, 1529 , a pound weight of
gold, ;l.en coined , produced IcS pounds of current
money. lBut under tle Queen Regent's adminiltration, A,
D. 1556, a poulid weight of gold . although the quantity
of alloy was .onfiderably increased, produced 144 1. cur-
rent money. In 1J39, a pound wxeight of silver, whel
coined, produced 9 1. 25; but in I556, it produced 131.
u.irrest money. Ruddiman. Praefat. ad Anders. Diplomat.
Srotiae, p, Xo, 8I. from which it appears, that this
ionoplaint, whlich the malecontents often repeated, was
atc a'ltgethtsr Aie.tiot fu fundati>n

iight, in the name of the King and Qiueel,
and with many expressions of duty and fubmil-
sion towards them, they deprived the Queen
Regent of her office, and ordained, that, for
the future, no obedience filould be given to
her commands. *)

Violent as this ation may appear, there

wanted not principles in the conflitution, nor
precedents in the history of Scotland, to juatify
and to authorise it. Under the arijtocratica!
form of government established amotig the
Scots, the pouer of the Sovereign was extrem.
ely limited. The more conliderable nobles
-were thelnmelves petty princes , poflefling
extensive jurifdiftions, alrnoft independent of
the crown, and Followed by numerous valhals,
who, in every contest, espoused their chief-
tain's quarrel, in oppofiton to the King. Hence
the mtany infCances of the impotence of regal
authority, which are to be found in theScottifh
history. In every age , the nobles not only
claimed, but exercised the right of controlling
the King. Jealous of their privileges, and
eager to take the iield in defence of them,
every error in adminiltration was obferred,
every enrroachmlent upon the rights of the

ari-
*) M, Cantelnau, nafer condemning the dangerous councils ci

the Princes of Lorrain , with regnrd to the atlairs 0o Scor
land, acknowledges, wvith his ufnal candour, thlc i"
Scots declared war againnt the Qieeu Regent, rathel sr"'
a desire of vindicating their civil liberties than fio;

l "alY
motive of teligionl Mem. 44(i,

aristocracy excited indignation, and no prince
ever ventured to transgress the boundaries,
which the law had prescribed to prerogative,
without meeting refiflance, which shook. or
overturned his throne. Encouraged by the
spirit of the coniftitutioni, and countenanced by
the example of their anceffors, the Lords of
the Congregation thought it incumbent on them;
at this junn&ure, to inquire into the mal-ad-
minifration of the Queen Regent, and to
preserve their country from being enslaved or
conquered, by depriving her qs the power to
execute such a pernicious scheme. *)
*) The aft of deprivation, and a letter from the Lords of the

Congregation to the Queen Hlegelin, are still extant. l.nox,
184. They discover not only that inafculine and undalunt-
ed fiirit , natural to men capable of so bold a refolutio ;
but are remarkable for a precilion , and vigour of expref-
sion , which we are frrprifed to meec with in an age so
unpolifhed, The fame obfervatioa may be nade vwith
rerpe& to the other publick papers of that period. Ther
ignorance or bad taste of an age may render the compo-
fitions of authors by profeliion obfclre, or affected, or
absurd; but the language of burfinfs is neariy tie fame at
all tines , and wherever men think clearly, and are
thoroughly interested, they exprefls checnfcles with per-
Jicuity and force.
'lift, of Scotl Vol. H, Q

# BOOK III.

# The Congregation involved in difficulties.

THE
HIS TORY

OF
SCO T L AND.

BOOK IIL

The Congregation involved in diffcultieso

T irc Lords of the Congregation soon found,
that their zeal had engaged them in an under-
tkling, which it was beyond their urnioFt
ability to accomplish. The French garrison,
defpiling their numerous, but irregular forces,
refured to surrender Leith, and to depart out
of the kingdom; nor were they sufficiently
fkili'al in the art of war to reduce the place by
force, or possesed of the artillery, or magazines.,
requisite for that purpose; and their followers,
though of undaunted courage s yet being ae-
customed to decide every quarrel by a battle,
were itrangers to the fatigues of a long cam-
paign, and soon became impatient of the severe
:lnd confltait duty which a liege requires. The
Queen's emillaries, who found it easy to mingle
with their countrymen , were st the uitmof£

Q a

# Apply to Elizabeth for assistance.

pains to heighten their disgust, which difcovei.
ed itself at ftrft in murmurs and complainrs, lit
on occasion of the want of money for pavil
the army, broke out into open mutiny. The
most eminent leaders were scarce ft:ctre from,
the unbridled insolence of the soldiers; \vhi!e
some of inferior rank, interposing too rashly in
order to quell them , were torn in pieces
by their rage. Discord , conllernation. and
perplexity, reigned in the camp of rhe R;'.
mers. The Duke, their General, funk, \virh
his nfual timidity, under the terror of apj roac..
ing danger, and discovered manail'ell: ifvnpt(ll
of repentance for his rashness, in elpoufin
such a desperate cause.

ApIply to Elizabeth for allilanice.

In this situation of their affairs, the Coni

gregation had recourse to Elizabeth, frolm wlhofe
prote'tion they could derive their only reafo-
nable hope of success. Some of their more
sagacious leaders , having foreseen that the
party might probably be involved in great dif.
ficulties, had endeavoured to secure a resource
in any such exigency, by entering into a secret
correspondence with the court of England. )
£Elizabeth, aware of the dangerous deligns
which the Princes of Lorrain had formed againl
her Crown, was early sensible of how much

', I:,t,. i-'t, ,.', ,. A[,ppend. 278. ceitiJ . Append. 21,

importance it would be, not only to check the
progress of the French in Scotland, but to
extend her own influence in that kingdom; *)
and perceiving how eleEtually the present in-
furreuions would contribute to retard or defeat
the schemes formed against England , file
liflened with pleasure to these applications of the
malecontcnts, and gave them private assurances
of powerful support to theircaufe. Randolph,':*)
an agent extremely proper for condu&ing any
dark intrigue, was dispatched into Scotland,
and residing secretly among the Lords of the
Congregation, observed, and quickened their
motions. Money seemed to be the only thing
they wanted at that time; and it was owing to
a feaConable remittance from England, ::) that
the ScottiCh nobles had been enabled to take
the Jield, and to advance towards Leith. But
as Elizabeth was diftrulftul of the Scots, and
ltudious to preserve appearances with France,
her subsid(ies were bestowed at first with ex-
treme frugality. The fubfiffence of an army,
and the expences of a liege, soon exhausted
this penurious supply, to which the Lords of
the Congregation could make little addition
from their own funds; and the ruin and difperl

') See Append. No, I.

') lIcith, Append, 29.
") K;ox: 214, beitih, Append. 44.

# She sends them a small sum of money.

# Which is intercepted.

perfion of the party must have instantly fol.
lowed.

She fends them a small fum of money.

In order to prevent this, Cockburn of Or.

mifton was sent, with the utmost expediiioi,
to the governors of the town and castle of
Berwick. As 1erwick was , at that time. the
town of greatest importance on the Scotilbi
frontier, Sir Ralph Sadler and Sir James Ciofr;,
persons of considerable figure, were enmploned
to command there, and were entrufred sit a
discretionary power of supplying the Scnttifil
malecontents, according to the exigency of their
affairs. From them Cockburn received 4cco
crowns, but little to the advantage of his parry.
The Earl of Bothwell, by the Queen's inlti
gation, lay in wait for him. on his retlrl,
dispersed his followers, uwounded him, and
carried off the money.

Which is intercepted,

This unexpected disappointment proved

fatal to the pari:y. In mere despair, fonie 0
the more zealous attempted to aflult Le.ith;
but the French beat them back with difgrce,
seized their cannon, and pursuing them to thl
gates of Edinburgh, were on the point of en
tering along with them. All the terror and
confusion, which the profpet of pillage or 0o
rmafacre can excite in a place taken by to0rn

# They retire from Leith in confusion.

Slled the city on this occasion. The inhabitants
fed ffrom the enemy by the opposite gate; the
iorces of the Congregation were irrefolilte and.
difinayed; and the Queen's partisans in the
town openly insulted both. At last , a few of
tile nobles ventured to face tle enemy, lwho.
aftcr blundering fonme honres in the suburbs,
retired with their booty, and delivered the city
from this dreadful alarm.

A second fkirmifli, which happened a few

days after, was no less unfortunate. Tih
French sent out a detachement to intercept na
convoy of provisions which xas designed for
Edinburgh. The Lords of the Congre,;atio,",
iaving intelligence of this, marched in ,all haie
with a considerable body of their troops, and
falling upon the enemy between iReftalrir and
Leith, with more gallantry than good conduit.
were almofls firrounded by a second party of
French, who advnr.ccd in order to flupport thlei
OWl m1en,

They retire fromn l.ciri il col:ifi;on.

Tn this situation, a retreat wxas the only

thing which could save the Scots; but a retre;i
over marshy ground, and in the face of an
enemy superior in number, con:!d not long be
conducEed with order. A frn.il body of the
enemy hung upon their rear, horse and foot
fell inro the utmofl confinfion, and it was
entirelv owing to the caution of the Frcnrl,

that any of the party escaped being cut in
pieces.

On this second blow, the hopes and spirits

of the Congregation funk altogether. They did
not think themselves secure, even within the
walls of Edinburgh, but instantly determined
to retire to some place at a greater distance from
the enemy. In vain did the Prior of St. An-
drew's, and a few others, oppose this cow-
ardly and ignominious flight. The dread of
the present danger prevailed over both the sens
of honour, and zeal for the cause. At mid-
night (Novemb. 6.) they set out from Edin-
burgh, in great confusion, and marched with-
out halting till they arrived at Stirling.

During this last infurreftion, the great

body of the Scottish nobility joined the Con-
gregation. The Lords Seton and Borthwick
were the only persons of rank who took arms
for the Queen, and assisted her in defending
Leith. :) Bothwell openly favoured her cause,
but resided at his own house. The Earl of
Huntly, conformable to the crafty policy which
distinguishes his character , amused the leaders
of the Cogregation, whom he had engaged to
assist, with many fair promises, but never joined
them with a tingle man. **) The Earl of
Morton, a member of the Congregation, fluf.

*) Keith, Append. 31.
"') Kiith, Aypend. 33. Knox, 2.q,

# Maitland revolts from the Queen Dowager.

uated in a fate of irresolution, and did not at
heartily for the common cause. Lord Erskine,
Governor of Edinburgh Castle, though a Pro-
teflant, maintained a neutrality, which he esteem-
ed becoming the dignity of his office; and.
having been intrusted by Parliament with the
command of the principal fortress in the king-
dom, he resolved that neither faCtion should get
it into their hands.

Maitland revolts floni the Queen Dowager.

A few days before the retreat of the Con-

gregation, the Queen suffered an irreparable
loss by the defetion of her principal Secretary,
William Maitland of Lethington. His zeal for
the Reformed religion, together with his warm
remonstrances against the violent measures which
the Queen was carrying on, exposed him Co
much to her refeniment, and to that of her
French Counsellors, that he, fu'pe&ting his life
to be in danger, withdrew secretly from Leith,
and fled to the Lords of the Congregation; :)
and they, with open arms, received a convert,
whose abilities added both strength and reputa-
tion to their cause; Maitland had early applied
to publick business admirable natural- talents,
improved by an acquaintance with the liberal arts;
and, at a time of life, when his countrymen of
the fame quality were following the pleafulres
*) Knox, 19g.

of the chace, or serving as adventurers in the
armies of France, he was admitted into all the
secrets of the cabinet, and put upon a level with
persons of the moit consummate experience in
the management of affairs. He possessed, ill
an eminent degree, that intrepid spirit, which
delighcs in pursuing bold designs, and was no
less master of that political art and dexterity
which is necessary for carrying them on with
success. But these qualities were deeply tinft-
ured with the neighbouring vices. His address
sometimes degenerated into cunning; his acu-
tenefs bordered upon excess of subtlety and re-
finement; his invention, over fertile, fuggefred
to him, on some occasions, chimerical fyfters
of policy, little suitable to the genius of the
age; and his enterprizing spirit engaged himin
projects vaif and splendid, but beyond his ut-
nmol power to execute. All the contemporary
-writers, to whatever faction they belong, men-
tion him with an admiration, which nothing
could have excited but the greatest superiority
of penetration and abilities.

The precipitate retreat of the Congregation

increased, to such a degree, the terrorandcon-
fusion which had seized them at Edinburgh,
that, before they reached Stirling, their army
dwindled to an inconsiderable number. .Tle
spirit of Knox, however, still remained un-
daunted and ereEt, and having mounted the
pulpit, he addrefied, to his desponding hearers,

# The Lords of the Congregation apply again to Elizabeth.

an exhortation which wonderfully animated and
revived them. The heads of this discourse are
inserted in his history, *) and afford a firiking
example of the boldness and freedom of reproof
afl'umed by the first Reformers , as well as a
fpeciinen of his own flill in chufing the topicks
most fitted to influence and route his audience.

The Lotd; of the Congregation apply again to

Elizabetii.

A meeting of the leaders being called, to

confider what course they should hold, no\v-
that their own resources were all exhaufled.
and their deftlrution appeared to be unavoidable.
without foreign aid, they turned their eyes
once more to England, and resolved to implore
the alfiftance of Elizabeth towards finishing an
enterprise, in which they had so fatally exne-
rienced their own weakness, and the flrenglh
of their adversaries. Maitland, as the most able
negotiator of the party, was employed in this
embassy. In his absence, and during the in-
aftive season of the year, it was agreed to
dismiss their followers, worn out by the sati-
gues of a campaign, which had so far exceeded
the ufaal time of fervicc. But, in order to
preserve the counties mole devoted to their in-
terest, the Prior of St. Andrew's, with part of
the leaders, retired into Fife. The Duke of

') KnoxN, 193.

# Motives which determined her to assist them.

Chatelherault, with the reft, fixed his residence
at Hamilton. There was little need of Mait-
land's address or eloquence to induce Elizabetl!
to take his country under her Protection. She
observed the prevalence of the French counsels,
and the progress of their arms in Scotland, with
great concern; and as she well forefav the dan-
gerous tendency of their schemes in that king-
dom , she had already come to a resolution with
regard to the part she herself would aft, iftheir
power there should grow still more formidable.

Motives which determinled her'to allt thlemn

In order to give the Queen and her Privv

Council a sulland diftinat view of anyimportan.
matter which might come before them, it seems
to have been the pratice of Elizabeth's mi-
nifters to prepare memorials, in which thec
clearly stated the point under deliberation, laii
down the grounds of the conduct which the;
held to be most reasonable, and proposed a me-
thod for carrying their plan into execution.
Two papers of this kind, written by Sir Wil-
liam Cecil with his own hand, still remain; ::)
they are intitled, ,, A short difculfion of the
, weighty matter of Scotland, " and do honour
to the industry and penetration of that great
Minifier. The motives, which determined tlh
Queen to espouse so warmly the defence of the

') Burn. vol. iii. Append, 383. Keith. Appetnd. 24

Congregation, are represented with perfpicuiry
and force; and the confequencesoffufTering the
French to establish themselves in Scotland, are
prediced with great accuracy and discernment.

He lays it down as a principle, agreeable

to the laws both of God and of nature, that
every society has a right to defend itself, not
only from present dangers, but from such as
may probably ensue; to which le adds, that
nature and reason teach every3 Prince to defend
kIinifelf by the fame means , which his adver-
saries employ to diftret's him. Upon these
grounds, he elfablifhes the right of England to
interpose in the affairs of Scotland, and to pre-
vent the conquest of that kingdom, at which
the French openly aimed. 'The French, lie ob-
serves, are the ancient and implacable enemies
of England. Hostilities had fubfifled between
the two nations for many centuries. No treaty
of peace, into which they entered, had ever
been cordial or sincere. No good effe.t was
therefore to be expected from the peace lately
agreed upon, which being extorted by present
necessity, would be negligently observed, and
broken on the slightest pretences. In a very
short time, France would recover its former
opulence; and though nows drained of men and
money by a tedious and unsuccessful war, it;
would quickly be in a condition for asing, and
the restless and martial genius of the people
Would render aftion necefharv. 'I';e Princesof

Lor'ain, who at that time had the entire dij
rec-ion of French affairs, were animated with
the mol: virulent hatred againit the ;nglifh na,
tion. They openly called in question the legi.
timacy of the Queen's birth, and by advancing
the title and pretensions of their niece the
Queen of Scotland, studied to deprive Eliza-
beth of her Crown. With this view, they
had laboured to exclude the English from the
treaty of Chateau en Cambrefis, and endeavour-
ed to conclude a separate peace with Spain.
They had persuaded Henry II. to permit iis
daughter in law to assume the title and arms of
Queen of England; and even since the conclu-
lion of the peace, they had solicited at Rome,
and obtained a bull, declaring Elizabeth's birth
to be illegitimate. And though the wisdom and
moderation of the Constable Montmorency had,
for ibme time, checked their career, yet these
restraints being now removed by the death of
Henry II. and the disgrace of his minister, the
nttmoft excesses of violence were to be dreaded
from their furious ambition, armed with s.o-
vereign power. Scotland is the quarter, whence
they can attack England with molt advantage.
A war on the borders of that country expoies
France to no danger, but one unsuccessful aItion
there may hazard the Crown, and overturn the
government of England. In political conduce,
it is childish to wait till the designs of an enemy
be ripe for execution. The Scottish noble>,

after their ntmofl efforts, have been obliged to
quit the field; and far from expelling the in-
vaders of their liberties, they be hold the French
power daily increasing, and muil at lall cease
from straggling any longer in a contest so un-
equal, The invading of England will inimmedia-
tely follow the reduction of the Scottil'h male-
contents, by the abandoning of whom to the
mercy of the French, Elizabeth will open a
way for her enemies into the heart of her own
kingdom, and expose it to the calamities of
war, and the danger of conqucff. Nothing
therefore remained but to meet the enemy
while yet at a distance from England, and by sup-
porting the Congregation with a powerful army,
to render Scotland the theatre of the war, to
crufl the designs of the Princes of Lorrain in
their infancy, and, by such an early and unex-
pcted effort, to expel the French out of Bri-
tain, before their power had time to take root,
and grow up to any formidable height. Butas
the matter was of as much importance, as any
which could fall under the consideration of an
English I\lonarch, wisdom and mature counsel
were neceflary in the first place, and after-
wards vigour and expedition in conduft; the
danger was urgent, and, by losing a single mo-
ment, might become unavoidable. ')
') The arguments which the Scots employed, in order -o

obtain Elizabeth's afliltance, are urged with great force:. :,
a papor of IMaitland's. See Appendix, No. II,

# The Queen Dowager mean while sends her French troops against them.

These arguments produced their full effeft

upon Elizabeth, who was jealous, in an ex.
treme degree, of every pretender to her Crown,
and no lets anxious to preserve the tranquillity
and happiness of her subje&s. From these mo-
tives she had a&ted, in granting the Congre-
gation an early supply of money; and from the
fame principles she determined, in their pre.
sent exigency, to afford them more effetual
aid. One of Maitland's attendants wasinftantly
dispatched into Scotland with the ifrongeft as-
furances of her protection, and the Lords of
the Congregation were desired to fend commil-
fioners into England to conclude a treaty, and
to fettle the operations of the campaign, with
the Duke of Norfolk. *)

The Queen Doowagr mean while fends her Frenci

troops against them.

Mean while, the Queen Regent, from whom

nomotion of the Congregation could long be
concealed, dreaded the success of this negotia-
tion with the court of England, and forefa\
how little she would be able to resist the united
effort of the two kingdoms. For this reason
she determined, if possible, to get the start of
Elizabeth; and by venturing, notwithstanding
the inclemency of the winter season, to attack

the
') Keith, I14.

the malecontents in their present dispersed and
helpless situation, she hoped to put an end to
the wsar, before the arrival of their Englifl
allies.

A considerable body of her French forces,

who were augmented, about this time, by the
arrival of the Count de Martigues, with a thou-
land veteran foot, and some cavalry, were coOtn
manded to march to Stirling. Having there
crofled the Forth, they proceeded along 'the
coast of Fife, deilroying and plundering, with
exceilive outrage, the houses and lands ofthofe
whom they eteerned their enemies. Fife was
tie most populous and powerful county in the
kingdom, and mofi devoted to the Congrega-
tion, who had hitherto drawn frorn thence their
most considerable supplies, both of men and
provisions; and therefore, besides punifhingthe
iifatfe&tion of the inhabitants, by pillaging the
country, the French proposed to seize and for-
tify St. Andrew's, and to leave in it a garrison
sufficient to bridle the mutinous spirit of the
province, and to keep possession of a port fituat-
ed on the main ocean.

But on this occasion, the Prior of St. An-

drew's, Lord Ruthven, Kirkaldy of Grange,
and a few of the nmoft aFtive leaders of the Con-
gregation, performed, by their bravery and
good conduc, a service of the utmof import-
ance to their party. Having aflembled fix
hundred horse, they infested the French with

Hist. of Scot). Vol. I, R

# The English fleet arrives to their assistance.

continual incursions, beat up their quarters.
intercepted their convoys of provisions, cut of'
their straggling parties, and so harassed them
with perpetual alarms, that they prevented
them for more than three weeks from ad-
vancing. *)

The English fleet arrives to their affiflance.

At last the Prior, with his feeble party,

was constrained to retire, and the French ie.
out fiom Kirkaldy, and began to move along
the coalt towards St. Andrew's. They iiad
advanced but a few rmiles, when, from an emi-
nence, they dercried ( January 23. 5,60.) i
powerful fleet fleering its course up the Fritil
of Forth. As they knew that the Marquisl)'li-
beuf was, at that time, preparing to fail for
Scotland with a numerous army, they hanfiil
concluded that there ships belonged to him, and
gave way to the most immoderate tranfportsot
joy, on the profpet of this long expec:ted fuc-
cour. Their great guns were already fired to
welcome their friends, and to spread the tidings
and terror of their arrival among theirenemies,
when a fimall boat from the opposite coast landed,
and blasted their premature and fhort-livetd
triumph, by informing them, that it was the
fleet of England which was in fight, intended
for the aid of the Congregation, and was soo0
to be followed by a formidable land army. ")

!) Knox, 2o.0
") ILid. 303.

Throughout her whole reign, Elizabeth

was cautious, but decisive; and by her promp-
titude in executing her resolutions, joined to
the deliberation with which flie formed them,
her administration became remarkable, no lets
for its vigour, than for its wiNdom. No sooner
did fie determine to afford her protetion to the
Lords of the Congregation, than they expe-
rienced the aftivity, as well as the extent of
her power. The ieaton of the year would not
permit her land army to take the field; but left
the French should, in the mean time, receive
new rcinforcements, she inftlantly ordered a
ifrong squadron to criuife in the Frith of Forth.
She seems, by her inftruErtions to Winter her
Admiral, to have been desirous of preserving
the appearances of friendship towards the
French. :) But there wvere only appearances;
if any French fleet should attempt to land, he
was commanded to prevent it, by every a& of
hostility and violence. It was the fight of this
squadron, which occasioned at first so much joy
among the French, but which soon inrpired
them with such terror, as saved Fife from the
efl'es of their vengeance. Apprehensive rs
being cut off from their companions on the op-
pofite shore, they retreated towards Stirling

) elR

Apndix 45
") Keitl, Appendix 45.

# They conclude a treaty with England.

with the utmost precipitation, and, in a dread-
ful season, and through roads almost impassable,
arrived at Leith, harafled and exhaufccd with
fatigue. *)

The Lnglifh fleet cast anchor in the road

of Leith, and continuing in that flation till the
conclusion of peace, both prevented the garnifon
of Leith from receiving succours of any kiind,
and con:fderably facilitated the operations us
their own forces lyy lard.

Th'!y ouncluhd ., treatry with E;.gi::i.d

Soon after thc arrival of the Eng.rli flqua-

dron, the Commii. oners of the Con gregatio
repaired to Berwiclk, and concluded wiliil the
Duke of Norfolk, a treaty, ( Feb. z:. ) the
bond of that union with Elizabeth, vlwhichl wa
of so great advantage to the cause. To givea
check'to the dangerous and rapid progress of
the French arms in Scotland, was the profefled
design of the contrading parties. In order to
this, the Scots engaged never to fufllr any
closer union of their country with France; and
to defend themselves to the uttermost against
all attempts of conqueil; and for their afiftaice,
Elizabeth promiled to employ, in Scotland, a
powerful army, which the Scots undertook to
oil with all their forces; no place in Scotland
was to remain in the hands of the Enllifli

') Knox, a20.

# The English army lays siege to Leith.

lwhltever should be taken from the enemy was
either to be rated, or kept by the Scots, at
their choice; if any invasion should be-.made
upon England, the Scots were obliged to afiit
llizabeth with part of their forces; and to as-
ccrtain their faithful observance of the treaty,
they bound themlfelves to deliver hloftages to
Elizabeth, before the march of her army into
Scotland; in conclusion, the Scots made many
proteltations of obedience and loyalty towards
their own Queent, in every tlhing not incon-
ilftent with their religion, and the liberties of
their country. :)

Thle 'n1iglill armly lays fiese to l.cit:.

The English army, confisling of fix thousand

foot, and two thousand horse, inder the com-
mand of Lord Gray of WVilton, entered Scotland
early in the Spring. The members of the Con-
gregation aflembled from all parts of the king-
dom to meet tleir new allies; and having joined
them with great multitudes of their followers,
they advanced together towards Leith. (April z.)
The French were little able to keep the field
against an enemy so much fuperiorin number. A
strong body of troops, destined for their relief,
hadbeen scattered by a violent storm, and had
either perished on the coast of France, or with
difficulty had recovered the ports of that king-
') luIlox, 217,

dom. *) But they hoped to be able to defend
Leith, till the Princes of Lorrain should nmke
good the magnificent promises of affifance,
with which they daily encouraged them; or
till fearcity of proviiions should constrain the
Englifn to retire into their own country. In
order to haften this latter event, they did not
negleEt the usual, though barbarous precaution
for diftrefing an invading enemy, by burning
and laying waste all the adjacent country. ')
The zeal, however, of the nation frustratcd
their intentions; eager to contribute towards
removing their oppressors, the people produced
their hidden flores to support their friends; the
neighbouring counties supplied every thing ne-
cefiary, and far from wanting fubfiflence, the
English found, in their camp, all forts of pro-
visions at a cheaper rate than had for fonietime
been known in that part of the kingdom. ":')

On the approach of the English army, the

Queen Regent retired into the castle of Edin-
burgh. Her health was now in a declining
slate, and her mind broken and deprefled bythe
misfortunes of her administration. To avoid
the danger and fatigue of a siege, she commit-
ted herself to the protection of Lord Erskine.
This nobleman frill preserved his neutrality

*) Mem. de Castel. 450.

*) Knox, S2S.
'") Knox, ibid.

and by his integrity, and love of his country,
merited equally the esteen of both parties. He
received the Queen herself with the utmost
honour and refpe&, but took care to admit no
such retinue, as might endanger his command
of the castle. *)

A few days after they arrived in Scotland,

the English invested Leith. (April 6.) The
garrison, shut up within the town, was almost
half as numerous as the army which fat down
before it, and by an obstinate defence protracted
the siege to a great length. The circumstances
of this liege, related by contemporary historians,
men without knowledge or experience in the
art of war, are often obscure and imperfet,
and at this distance of time are not considerable
enough to be entertaining.

At first the French endeavoured to keep

poffellion of the Hawk Hill, a rising ground not
far distant from the town, but were beat from
it (April I5. ) with great slaughter chiefly by
the furious attack of the Scottish cavalry.
Within a few days, the French had their full
revenge; having sallied out with aftrongbody,
they entered the English trenches, broke their
troops, nailed part of their cannon, and killed
at least double the number they had loft in the
former fkirmifb. Nor were the English more
fortunate in an attempt which they made to
*) Sorbes'5 Colledt. vol. i, zo3. KEith, 133.

take the place by assault; ( May 7.) they were
met with equal courage, and repulsed with
considerable loss. From the detail of thefecir.
cumftances by the writers of that age, it is caly
to observe the different charaters of theFroenll
and English troops. The former, trained to
war, under the aftive reigns of Francis I. atnd
Henry II. defended themselves not only with
the bravery, but with the skill of veterans,
The latter, who had been more accuflomed to
peace, still preserved the intrepid anddefperate
valour peculiar to the nation, bat discovered
few marks of military genius, or of experience
in the pratice of war. Every misfortune or
dilappointment during the liege must be inmpt-
ed to manifelt errors in condut:. The success
of the besieged in their tally was owing enti-
rely to the security and negligence of theEng-
lillh: many of their officers were absent; their
soldiers had left their stations; and the trenches
were alimoft without a guard. The ladders,
which had been provided for the assault, want-
ed a great deal of the necessary strength; and
the troops employed in that service were ill
supported. The trenches were opened, at firfl,
in an improper place; and as it was found ex-
pedient to change the ground, both time and
labour were loft. The weakness of their own
Generals, no lets than the strength oftheFrench
garrison, rendered the progress of the EngliFi
wonderfully flow. The length, however, of

the siege, and the lois of part of their magazi-
nes by an accidental fire, reduced the French
to extreme distress, which the profpe&t of relief
made them bear with admirable fortitude.

While the hopes and courage of the French

protra&ed the siege so far beyond expectation,
the leaders of the Congregation were not idle.
By new associations and confeder:cis, they la-
boured more perfectly to unite their party. B3y
publickly ratifying the treaty concllided at Ber-
wicK , they endeavoured to render the alliance
with England firm and indiljlluble. Among
the subscribers of these papers, we fintl the
larl of Huntly , and some others , who had
not hitherto concurred with the Congregation in
any of their meafares. ::) Several of there
Lords, particularly the Earl of Huntly, frill
adhered to the Popish church; but on this occasion,
neither their religious fentinents , nor their
former cautious maxims, zwere regarded ; the
torrent of national resentment and indignation
against the French hurried tnem on. **)

') Burn. vol. iii, 2S7. Knox, 221.
*') The dread of the French power l dit , on many occainons,

flrmorunt the zeal which the Catliolick nobles had for their
religion. Befldes the prefiulnpive evidence for this,.rifring
fiomn the nemorial menrtioned by llrniet , His(. of the Re-
formation, vol. iii. 2Sl. antd p,il)lil'ijel by him, Appp. p.27S;
the infirurnions of Elizabeth to Ralloll h ler riliut, piuc
it beyond all doubt, that many zealous Plapills tlhogillt
the alliance with England to le necellary for prefervilig tihe
liberty *nd independence of tlhe kiRndom. Keith, 15S.

# Death and character of the Queen Dowager.

Death and charaaer of the Queen Dowager.

The Queen Regent, the infirument, rather

than the cause of involving Scotland in those
calamities, under which it groaned at that time.
died during the heat of the siege (June ro.) No
Princess ever pofl'efed qualities more capable of
rendering her administration illustrious, or her
people happy. Of much discernment, and no less
address; of great intrepidity, and equal prudence;
gentle and humane, without weakness; zealous
for her religion , without bigotry; a lover of
justice, without rigour. One circumftancc,
however, and that, too, the excess of a virtue,
rather than any vice, poisoned all these great
qualities, and rendered her government unfor-
tunate, and her name odious. Devoted to the
interest of France, her native country, and
attached to the Princes of Lorrain her brothers,
with most passionate fondness ; fie departed, in
order to gratify them, from every maxim
which her own wisdom. or humanity would
have approved. She outlived, in a great mea-
sure, that reputation and popularity which had
smoothed her way to the highest flation in the
kingdom; and many examples of falsehood,
and some of severity , in the latter part of her
adminifiration, totally alienated from her the

luntly himfellt began a correspondence with E!izabctifi
Minifler s, before the inarch of the Enllifh army into Sco'-
land. Iayvues's State Papers. 26r. 263. See Apyr;:r-
Niro. ill,

affetions of a people, who had once placed
in her an unbounded confidence. But, even
by her enemies, these injuftifiable ations were
imputed to the facility, not to the malignity
of her nature; and while they taxed her
brothers, and French counsellors, with rashness
and cruelty, they still allowed her the praise
of prudence and of lenity. ;:) A few days
before her death, file desired an interview with
the Prior of St. Andrew's , the Earl of Argyll,
and other chiefs of the Congregation. To them
she lamented the fatal issue of those violent
councils, which she had been obliged to follow;
and, with the candour natural to a generous
mind, confessed the errors of her own adminift-
ration, and begged forgiveness of those to
whom they had been hurtful; but, at the fame
time, she warned them, amidst their firuggles
for liberty, and the shock of arms, not to lore
fight of the loyalty and subjection which was
due to their sovereign. '*) The remainder of
her time flhe employed in religious meditations
and exercises. She even invited the attendance
of Willox, one of the mols eminent among
the Reformed preachers, listened to his inftruc-
tions with reverence and attention, ;**) and

B) Buchal, 334.

") Lefly, de Rebus Gefi. Scot, ^^>.
*"') Knox, 338.

# Motives of the French to conclude a peace.

prepared for the approach of death with a
decent fortitude.

Motives of the Fiencllh o conclude a peare.

Nothing could now save the French troop,

ifhut up in Leitih, but the immediate conclusion
of a peace, or the arrival of a powerful army
from the continent. The Princes of Lorrain
amnued their party in Scotland with continual
expectations of the latter, and had thereby kepi
alive their hopes and their courage. But at
last, the situation of France, rather than the
terror of the English arms, or the remonftrancces
of the Scottish malecontents, constraincd them,
though with relu]cance , to turn their thoughts
towards pacifick councils. The Protestants in
France were, at that time, a party formidable
by their number, and more by the valour and
enterprifingr genius of their leaders. Francis li,
had treated them with extreme rigour, and
discovered by every ftep he took, a fettled
resolution to extirpate their religion, and to
ruin those who professed it. At the profpeEt
of this danger to themselves, and to their
cause, the Protecfants were alarmed, but not
terrified. Animated with zeal, and inflamed
w\ith resentment, they not only prepared for
their own defence, but resolved, by some bold
action, to anticipate the schemes of their
enemies; and as the Princes of Lorrain were
efteenied the authors of all the King's violent

# The negotiations for that purpose.

neafures, they marked them out to be the
Iirft vicims of their indignation. Hence, and.
not from any disloyalty to the King, proceeded
the famous conlpiracy of Aniboife (ilar:h.x5.);
and though the vigiiance and good fortune of
tihe Princes of Lorrain discovercd and difap-
pointed that design, it was easy to observe new
storms gathering in every province of the king-
dom, and ready to bnrlt out with all the fury
and outrage of civil war. In this litnation, the
ambition of the House of Lorrain was called olt
from the thoughts of foreign conquests, to
defend the honour and dignity of the French
crown, and initead of fending new reinfor-
cements into Scotland, it became necessary to
withdraw the veteran troops already employed
in that kingdom. ':)

Tiie lnegoi:ltiolls fr that purl:olie.

In order to condnu an affair of so much

importance and delicacy, the Princes of Lorraiu
made choice of Monluc Bishop of Valence, and
of the Sieur de Randan. As both these, efpe-
cially the former, were reckoned inferior to
no persons of that age in address and political
refinement, Elizabeth opposed to them Ambaf-
fadors of equal abilities; Cecil her Prime
Miniller, a man perhaps of the greatest capacity
vho had ever held that office; and Wotton
'') Leriy. 324.

Dean of Canterbury, grown old in the art of
negotiating inder three fucccilive Monarchs.
The interefrs of the French and Englifli courts
were soon adjuffed by men of si; great dexterity
in buflnefs; and as France easily consented to
withdraw those forces, which had been the
chief occasion of the war; the other points in
dispute, between that kingdom and England,
wvere not matters of tedious, or of difficult
difcunifon.

The grievances of the Congregation, and

their demands upon their own Sovereigns for
redress, employed longer time, and required
to be treated with a more delicate hand. After
so many open attempts, carried on by command
of the King and Queen, in order to overturn
the ancient conritution, and to suppress the
religion which they had embraced, the Scottish
nobles could not think themselves secure, with-
out fixing some new barrier against the future
encroachments of regal power. But the legal
iReps towards accomplishing this were not lo
obvious. The French ambassadors confidered
the entering into any treaty with fubjets, and
with rebels, as a condescension unworthy the
dignity of a Sovereign; and their scruples on
.this head might have put an end to the treaty,
if the impatience of both parties for peace liad
not suggested an expedient, which seemed to
provide for the security of the ftbje-t, witliotu
derogating from the honour of the Prince.

# Articles of the treaty.

Articles of the treaty.

The Scottish nobles agreed, on this oc-

cafion, to pass from the point of right and pri-
vilege, and to accept the redress of their grie-
vances as a matter of favour. Whatever ad-
ditional security their anxiety forperfonal safety,
or their zeal for publick liberty, prompted
them to demand, was granted in the name of
Francis and Mlary, as acts of their royal favour
and indulgence. And left concessions of this
kind should seem precarious, and liable to be
retraced by the fame power which had made
them, the French Ambaflador agreed to insert
them in the treaty with Elizabeth, and thereby
to bind the King and Queen inviolably to
oblCerve them. *)

In relating this tranfation , contemporary

historians have confounded the concessions of
Francis and Mary to theirScottifhl subje&s, with
the treaty'between France and England; the
latter, betides the ratification of former treaties
between the two kingdoms, and stipulations
with regard to the time and manner of removing
both armies out of Scotland, contained an ar-
ticle, to which, as the source of many impor-
tant events; we shall often have occasion to
refer. The right of Elizabeth to her crown is
thereby acknowledged in the ftrongelt terms;
*) Keith, 134. &c.

and Francis and Mary folcmnly engage neither
to affune the title, nor to bear the arms of
King and Queen of England in any time to
con;e.

Honourable as this article was for Eli.

zabeth herself, the conditions she obtained for
her allies the Scots were no lets advantageous
to them. IAlonluc and Randan consented,
(July 6.) in the name of Francis and MIary,
that the French forces in Scotland shoud instantly
be tent back into their own cointry, and no so-
reign troops be hereafter introduced into the
klingdom without the knowledge and content of
Parliament; that the fortifications of Leith and
.Dunbar should immediately be rated, and no
new fort be erefted without the permission of
Parliament; that a Parliament should be held
on the first day of August, and that aflenibly
he deemed as valid, in all respects, as if it had
been called by the express commandment of
the King and Queen; that, conformable to the
ancient laws and customs of the country, the
King and Queen should not declare war, or
conclude peace, without the concurrence of
Parliament; that, during the Queen's abrence,
the administration of government should be ve-
iled in a council of twelve persons, to be chosen
out of twenty-four named by Parliament, seven
of which council to be eleEted by the Queen,
and five by the Parliament; that hereafter, the
King and Queen should not advance foreigners

to

# The effects of it.

to places of trust or dignity in the kingdom,
nor confer the offices of 'reaffirer or Comptrol-
ler of the Revenues upon any ecclefialtick;
that an aft ofoblivion, abolishing the guilt and
memory of all of'ences , committed since the
6th of March, i558, fpould be pafled in the
enfuling Parliament, and be ratified by the King
and Queen; that the King and Queen should
not, under colour of punishing any violation
of their authority during that period, seek to
deprive any of their subjects of the offices, be-
nefices, or estates which they now held; that
the redress due to churchmen, for the injuries
which the had sustained during the late infur-
reftions, should be left entirely to the cogni-
zance of Parliament. With regard to religious
controversies , the AmbaTfadors declared that
they would not presume to decide, but permit-
ted the Parliament, at their first meeting, to
examine the points in difference, and to represent
their sense of them to the King and Queen.*:

The effe&s of it.

To such a memorable period did the Lords

of the congregation, by their courage and per-
severance, condua an enterprie , which , at
first, promised a very different issue. Frotr

') itl h 137 &c.
Hill. of Scotl. Vol. I. S

# A Parliament held.

beginnings extremely feeble and even contenpt.
ible, the party grew dy degrees to great power;
and being favoured by many fortunate incicients,
baffled all the efforts of their own Queen, aided
by the forces of a more considerable kingdol..
The sovereign authority was, by this treany,
transferred wholly into the hands of the Con-
gregation; that limited prerogative, which tiie
Crown had hitherto poffefled, was almost eiiii-
rely annihilated, and the arifl-ocratical pow\:
which always predominated in the Scotii'ii
government, became iiiprerne and incon.roiaL.,
By this treaty, too, the inlulnence of Flrlic,.
which had long been of much w ieight in ih'
aliairs of Scotland, was greatly diminifilhcd; ind
not only were the present encroacllcnel, ts ;
that ambitious ally reitrained, but, by con
federating with England, protection wxas pro
vided against any future attempt from the f;nir
quarter. At the fame time, the contro)erlic;
in religion being left to the consideration 01
Parliament, the Proteflants might reckon upon
obtaining whatever decision was most favonr'able
to the opinions which they profefled.

A few days after the conclulion of tiie

treaty both the French and English armies
quitted Scotland.

A I'Paliamnert iieid.

The eyes of every man in that kingd0o
were turned towards the approaching Parlia

ment. A meeting, fuimmoned in a manner so
extraordinary, at such a critical jundure, and
to deliberate upon matters of so much confe-
quence, was expected with the utmost an*
xiety.

A Scottish Parliament, suitable to the arif-

tocratical genius of the government, was pro-
perly an assembly of the nobles. It was com-
pored of Bishops, Abbots, Barons, and a few
commissioners of boroughs, who met altogether
in one house. The Lel'er Barons though pof-
fed of a right to be present, either in person,
or by their representatives, seldom exercised it.
The expence of attending, according to the
fashion of the times, with a numerous train of
vn'l'als and dependants; the inattention of the
age to any legal or regular fyvlem of govern-
ment; but above all, the exorbitant authority
of the greater nobles, who had drawn the
whole power into their own hands, made this
privilege of lo little value, as to be almoff
neglefted. It appears from the ancient rolls,
that during times of tranquillity, few cormif-
fioners of boroughs, and almost none of the
1eil'er Barons appeared in Parliament. The or-
dinary administration of government was aban-
doned, without scruple or jealousy. to the
King and to the Greater Barons. But in extra-
ordinary conjunctures, when the struggle for
liberty was violent, and the spirit of opposition
to the Crown rote to an height, the Burgefles

S a

and Lefler Barons were roused from their in.
adtivity , and flood forth to vindicate the rights
of their country. The turbulent reign of
James III. affords examples in proof of tiis
observation. *) The publick indin:ition a;ainil
the rash designs of that weak aud ill-ad,.'ifid
Prince, brought into Parliament, besides tlh
greater nobles and prelates, a confiderablT
number of the Lefl'er Barons.

The fame causes occalioned the unll'if

confluence of all orders of men to the Parii;.
ment, which met on the firlt of Augiufi. Tile
universal passion for liberty, civil and relihgiolli,
which had seized the nation ,' fhuiered few
persons to remain unconcerned fpeetators of an
afl'embly, wlofe a(is were likely to prove de-
cifive with refpe&d to both. 1rom all corner;
of the kingdom men flocked in, eager and de-
termined to aid, with their voices in the senate,
the fame canfe, which they had defended with
their fxvords in the field. Besides a full con-
vention of Peers, Temporal and Spiritual,
there appeared the representatives of alniolst 1!
the boroughs, and above an hundred 1Baruns,
swho, though of the lesser order, were gen-
tlemen of the first rank and fortune in tilm
nation. ;:;;*)

') Keith, X4;,
'*) Keith. 14ó.

The Parliament was ready to enter on

business with the ntmoft zeal, when a difficulty
wvas flarted concerning the lawfulness -of the
meeting. No Commiiioner appeared in the
name of the King and Queen, and no figniication
of their content and approbation was yet re-
ceived. Thele were deemed, by many, essential
to the very being, of a Parliament. But, in
oppolition to this sentiment, the cxprefs words
of the treaty of Edinburgh were urged, by
which this al'embly was declared to be as
valid, in all relpe&ts, as if it had been called.
and appointed by the express command of the
King and Queen. As the adherents of the
Congregation greatly outnumbered their adver-
saries , the latter opinion prevailed. Their
holdeft leaders, and those of most approved
zeal, were chosen to be Lords of the Articles,
who formed a committee of ancient use, and
of great importance in the Scottish Parliament.
The deliberations of the Lords of the Articles
were carried on with the most unanimous and
ative zeal. The aft of oblivion, the nomi-
nation of twenty four persons, out of whom
the council, intruded with fupretne authority,
was to be elected ; and every other thing
prescribed by the late treaty, or which seemed
leceflary to render it effeccual, pased without
diipute or delay.

# Its proceedings with regard to religion.

Its proceedings with regard to religion.

The article of religion employed longer

time, and was attended with greater dilffculrv.
It was brought into Parliament by a petition
from those who had adopted the principles of
the Reformation. Many doftrines of the Popifl'
church were a contradiction to reason, and a
disgrace to religion; its discipline had become
corrupt and oppreifive; and its revenues were
both exorbitant and ill-applied. Against nll
these, the Protestants remonflrated with the
utmost severity of style, which indignation nt
their abfirdity, or experience of their pernicious
tendency, could inspire; and encouraged, by
the number and zeal of their friends, to mhn
prove such a favourable junEture, they aimed
the blow at the whole fabrick of Popery; and
besought the Parliament to interpose their
authority for reftifying these multiplied ab-
uses, *)

Several prelates, zealously attached to the

ancient fuperllition , were present in this
Parliament. But during there vigorous pro-
ceedings of the Protestants, they stood con-
founded, and at a gaze; and persevered in a
silence which was fatal to their cause. They
efteerned it impossible to resist or divert that
torrent of religious zeal, which was still in its
full firength; they dreaded that their opposition

*) Knox, 137.

vould irritate their adversaries, and excite them
to new afts of violence; they hoped that the
King and Queen would soon be at leisure to
put a stop to the career of their insolent fubjel-s,
and that, after the rage and havock of the
prcfent itorm, the former tranquillity and order
would be restored to the church and kingdom.
They were willing, perhaps, to sacrifice the
doftrine, and even the power of the church,
in order to ensure the safety of their own
persons, and to preserve the polTeffion of those
revenues, which were frill in their hands.
From whatever motives they ated , their
lilence, which was imputed to the confciofnefs
of a bad cause, afforded matter of great
triumph to the Protestants , and encouraged
them to proceed with more boldness and ala-
crity. *)

The Parliament did not think it enough to

condemn those docrines mentioned in the
petition of the Protest-ants ; they, moreover,
gave the fan&ion of their approbation to a
Confeflion of Faith presented to them by the
Reformed teachers, *') and compored, as might
be expected from such a performance at that
juntiure , on purpose to expose the absurd
tenets and practices of the Romish church. By
another at, the jurifdition of the ecclesia-.

') Knox, 253,
") ld. ibtl,

# Its proceedings with regard to the revenues of the church.

flickal courts was abolished, and the causes,
which formerly came under their cognizance,
were transferred to the decision of civil judges. :)
By a third statute, the exercise of religious
worship, according to the rites of the Romifli
church, was prohibited.--The manner in vwhich
the Parliament enforced the observation of tiis
law discovers the zeal ot that assembly ; the
first tranfgrefiion fubje&ed the offender to tile
forfeiture of his goods, and to a corpornl
punishment, at the discretion of the jiiudge;
banishment was the penalty of a focond vio-
lation of the law; and a third aft of disobedience
was declared to be capital. **) Such firangers
were men, at that time, to the spirit of tole-
ration, and to the laws of humanity; and with
such indecent haste did the very persons, hlo
liad just efeaped the rigour of ecclcfiaical
tyranny, proceed to imitate those examples of
severity, of which they themselves had so justly
complained.

Its proceedings with regard to the revenues of the

church.

The vigorous zeal of the Parliament over.

turned, in a few days, the ancient system of
religion, which had been eflablifhed so many
ages. In reforming the doctrine and discipline
of the church, the nobles kept pace with the
ardour and expectations even of Knox lhinfell.
But their proceedings, with refpe& to these,

*) Keith, 152.
*^ Rnux, 2R64>

wvcre not more rapid and impetuous than they
were flow and dilatory, when they entered
on the consideration of, ecclesiastical revenues.
Among the lay members, some were already
enriched with the spoils of the church, and
others devoured in expecation the wealthy
benefices which still remained untouched. The
alteration in religion had afforded many of the
dignified ecclefiafticks themselves an opportu-
niry of gratifying their avarice or ambition.
The demolition of the monasteries having set
the Monks at liberty from their confinement,
they inflantly dispersed all over the kingdom,
and commonly betook themselves to tome secular
employment. The Abbot, if he had been so
fortunate as to embrace the principles of the
Reformation from convi&cion , or so cunning as
to espouse them out of policy, seized the whole
revenues of the fraternity, and, exceptswhathe
allowed for the fubilftence of a few superannuated
Monks, *) applied them entirely to his own
use. The proposal made by the Reformed
teachers, for applying these revenues towards
the maintenance of Ministers, the education of
youth, and the support of the poor, was equally
dreaded by all these orders of men. They op-
posed it with the utmost warmth, and by their
numbers and authority, easily prevailed on the
Parliament to give no ear to such a disagreeable
') Keith. 496. Appendix ly9', 191.

# The validity of this Parliament called in question.

demand. *) Zealous as the first Reformer.
wvere, and animated with a spirit superior to
the low considerations of interest, they beheld
these early symptoms of felfifhnefs and avarice
among their adherents with indignation; and
wve find Knox expressing the utmost fenfibilirv
of that contempt, with which they were treat-
ed by many, from whom he expe&ted a more
generous concern for the success of religion,
and the honour of its Ministers. ";:")

Tihe validity of this Parliainent called ill queflion.

A difficulty hath been farted, with regard

to the a&ts of this Parliament, concerning reli-
gion. This difficulty, frivolous in itself, and
at this diflance of time of no importance, is
founded on the words of the treaty of Edinburgh.
By that, the Parliament was permitted to take
into consideration the state of religion, and tc
Signify their sentiments of it to the King and
Queen. But, inflead of presenting their desires
to their Sovereigns, in the humble form of a
supplication or address, the Parliament convert-
ed them into so many ats; which, although
they never received the royal assent, obtained,
all over the kingdom, the weightand authority
of laws. In compliance with their injunEtions,
the established system of religion was every
') See Append, No. IV.

n"o) Knox, S39. 256.

# Ambassadors sent by the Parliament to France.

where ovelthrowrn, and that reconmmended by
the Reformers introduced in its place. The
parriality and zeal of the people overlopked or
supplied any defet in the form of these aftsof
Parliament, and rendered tlhe obervanceoftthem
more iniverfal than ever had been yielded to
the statutes of the most regular or (confiitttional
aff'enbly. By those proceedings, it mnutl, how-
ever, be confefled that the Parliament, or rather
the nation, violated the lass article in the treaty
of Edinburgh, and even exceeded the powers
which belong to fitbjeEts. But when once men
have been accustomed to break through the
common boundaries of fubjeftion; and their
minds are inflamed with the passions which ci-
vil war inspires; it is mere pedantry or ignor-
ance to measure their conduct by those rules,
which can be applied only where government
is in a Rfate of order and tranquillity. A nation,
when obliged to employ fuich extraordinary es-
forts in defence of its liberties, avails itself of
every thing which can promote this great end;
and the neceflity of the cafe, and the import-
ance of the obje&, justify any departure from
the common and established forms of the con-
Ritution.

.Amlafradors rent by the Pariiament to Frauce.

In consequence of the treaty of Edinbnrgh,

as well as by the ordinary forms of busines's, it
became necefiary to lay the proceedings of Par-

# And to Elizabeth.

liament before the King and Queen. For tlhi;
purpose, Sir James Sandilands of Calder Lord
St. John, was appointed to repair to the court
of France. After holding a course so irregular,
the nobles had no reason to flatter themselves
that Francis and lary would ever approve their
conduct, or confirm it by their royal af'en.c
The reception of their Ambaflador was no other
than they might have expeced. He was treated
by the King and Queen with the utmost cold.
ness, and diftniffed without obtaining the rati-
fication of the Parliament's proceedings. From
the Princes of Lorrain, and their partisans, lit
endtred all the scorn and insult which it wa,
natural for them to pour upon the party he re-
presented. *)

And to Elizabeth.

Though the Earls of Morton , Glencairtn,

and Maitland of Lethington, the AmbafladJor
of the Parliament to Elizabeth their Protechrefs.
net with a very different reception; theywerc
not more successful in one part of the negocia-
tion intrutcd to their care. The Scots, fenlible
of the security which they derived fromn their
union with England, were desirous of rendering
it indissoluble. With this view, they empower-
ed these eminent leaders of their party to testify
to Elizabeth their gratitude for that seasonable

") Knox,35, Eucli. 327.

# The death of Francis II.

and eiTec&ual aid which she had afforded them,
and at the fame time, to beseech her to render
the friendflhip between the nations perpetual,
by condescending to marry the Earl oP Arran,
>ho, though a subject, was nearly allied to
the royal family of Scotland, and, after Mary,
the undoubted heir to the Crown.

To the former part of this cornmiflon Eli-

zabeth listened with the utniot fatisfacihln, :ind
encouraged the Scots, in any future e;igency,
to hope for the continuanceof her good olfires;
with regard to the latter, she discovered those
sentiments to which she adhered throughout her
whole reign. Averse from marriage, as some
pretend through choice, but more probably out
of policy, that ambitious Princess would never
admit any partner to the throne; but delighted
with the entire and uncontrolled -exercise of
power, she sacrificed to the enjoyment of that,
the hopes of transmitting her Crown to her own
posterity. The marriage with the Earl of Ar-
ran could not be attended with any such ex-
traordinary advantage, as to shake this refo-
lution; she declined it therefore, but with many
expressions of good will towards the Scottish
nation, and of refpe&f for Arran himself. :)

The death of Francis II,

Towards the conclusion of this year, diftin-
guilfhed by so many remarkable events, there

') Durn. 3. Append. 308. Keith. r:,- &c.

happened one of great importance. On the
4th of December, died Francis 11. a Prince of
a feeble conltitution, and of a mean undcr-
flan ding, As he did not leave .aly ill'it bv lie
Queen, no incident coual have been more for-
tunate to thos'e, who, during the late contnio-
ticns in Scotland, had taken part with tlieC(n-
gregation. Mary, by the charms of herbeauty,
had acquired an e;tire afcendalnt over her hus-
band; and as she tralsferred all her influence
to her uncles the Princes of 'Lo)rrain, FranciS
followed ethem implicitly in whatever track they
were pleased to lead him. The power of
France, under fuchl direction, alarmed theScot-
tifh malecontents with apprehensions of danger,
no less formidable than well founded. Theiin
tefline disorders which raged in France, and the
leafonable interposition of England in behalf oL
the Congregation, had hitherto prevented the
Princes of Lorrain from carrying their defilgs
upon Scotland into execution. But under their
vigorous and decisive adiiniiration, it wasim--
poflible that the commotions in France could i)e
of long continuance, and many tlhings iniglht
fall in to divert Elizabeth's attention, for the
future, from the afflairs of Scotland. In either
of these events, the Scots would stand exposed
to all the vengeance, which the resentment of
the French court could inflic. The blow,
Iowever long suspended, was unavoidable, and
:must fall at last Pwith redoubled weight. froln

# Mary retires from the court of France.

this profpeft and expectation, of danger, the
Scots were delivered by the death of Francis;
the ancient confederacy of the two kingdoms
aid already been broken, and by this event,
the only bond of union which remained was
dissolved. Catherine of Medicis, who, during
the minority of Charles IX. her second son, en,
grolied the entire direCtion of the French coun-
cils, was far from any thoughts of vindicating
the Scottifih Queen's authority. Catherine and<
Alary had been rivals in power during the reigri
of Francis 1I. and had contended for the govern-
ment of that weak and unexperienced Prince;
but as the charms of the wife easily triumplhed
over the authority of the mother, Catherine
could never forgive such a dilfappointmeut in
her favourite pafion, and beheld nowv, with fe-
cret pleasure, the difficult and perplexing scene,
on which her daughter in law was about to
enter.

Miary retires from the court of France.

M1ary, overwhelmed with all the sorrow

which so fad a reverse of fortune could occa-
lion; flighted by the Queen mother; -:) and
forsaken by the tribe of courtiers, who appear
only in the sunshine of prosperity, retired to
Rheims, and there, in solitude, indulged her
grief, or hid her indignation. Even the Princes

) Henan lt, 340. Caflern. 454.

# Establishment of Presbyterian church government.

of Lorrain were obliged to contra& their views;
to turn them from foreign todomeflick objefts;
and instead of forming vast projed&s with regard
to Britain, found it neceflary to think of ac.
quiring and eftablifhiag an interelf with the
new administration.

It is impossible to describe the emotions of

joy, which, on all these accounts, the deatil of
the French Monarch excited among the Scots.
They regarded it as the only event which could
give firmness and flability to thait fytern of re-
ligion and government, which was now intro-
duced; and it is no wonder contemporary hi-
ftorians should ascribe it to the immediate care
of Providence, which, by unforeseen expe-
dients, can secure the peace and happinels of
kingdoms, in those situations, where human
prudence and invention would utterly de-
fpair. *)

Eltablifhnient of Presbyterian church governrn iti .

About this time, the Protestant church ol

Scotland began to assume a regular form. Tts
principles had obtained the fantion of publick
authority, and some fixed external policy be-
came necessary for the government and prefer-
vation of the infant society. The model intro-
duced by the Reformers differed extremely from

that,
") Knox, 259.

tlint, which had been so long established. The
motives, which induced them to depart so far
from the ancient sys'tem, deserve to be ex-
phlained.

As the vices of the clergy had, at first, ex-

cited the indignation of mankind, and roured
that spirit of inquiry, which proved so fatal to
the whole Popish fyritem: As this ditguflat the
vices of eccleflafticks was loon transferred to
their persons, and, fhitfing from them, by no
violent transition , fettled at last on the offices
vwhich they enjoyed; the effects of the Refor-
mation would naturally have extended not only
to the do&trile, but to the government of the
Popish church ; and the fame spirit which abolish-
ed the former, would have overturned the latter,
But, in a great part of Germany, in Englaud,
and in the northern kingdoms, its operations
were checked by the power and policy oftheir
Princes: and the ancient Episcopal jurifdi&ion,
under a few limitations, was still continued in
thofc churches. The episcopal hierarchy ap-
pears to be more conformable to the practice of
the church, since Christianity became the
clr:blifhed religion of the Roman 'empire. The
ecclefafticai government was, at that time,
plainly copied from the civil; the firit not only
borrowed its form, but derived its authority
fioml the latter; and the dioceses and jurifdic-
tions of Patriarchs, Archbishops, and Bishops,
corresponded with the division and confritution

Hit. of Scotl. Vol.I, T

of tle empire. In Switzerland, and the Lo:v.
countries, the nature of the government allnow
ing full scope to the genius ofthe Reftrniation,
all pre-eninence of order in the churlch w\as
destroyed, and an equality eitablifhed more fiit.
able to the spirit of republican policy. Tie
situation of the primitive church funGei;''d r.e
idea, and furnish'ed the model of the latter f) lic;,
which has since been called Prefbyteviaii. ''e
first Christians, opprefi'd by continual r i'iLo-
tions, and obliged to hold their religo;it as-
femblies by stealth, and in corners , ,vee con.
tented with a form of government extremely
simple. The inlluence of religion concurred,
with the sense of danger, in extinguifhling
among t themthe spirit of ambition, and in pre.
serving a parity of rank, the elCeEt of their sts-
feringsy and the cause of many of their virtues,
Calvin, vhofe decisions were received, among
the Proteiantts of that age, with incredible fl-
mifflon, was the patron and refrorer of thii
feileme of ecclefiaflical policy. The church of
Geneva, formed under his eye, and by his di.
re&tion, was esteemed the most perfect model
of this governrceut; and Knox, who, diring
his residence in that city, had studied and ad-
mired it, warmly recommended it to the imi-
tation of his countrymen.

Among the Scottifl nobilily, some hated

the persons, and others coveted the wealth of
the dignified clergy; and by abolishing that

order of tnen, the former indulged their re-
fentment, and the latter hoped to gratify. their
avarice. The people, inflamed with the tnoff
violent aversion of lPopery, and approving of
every scheme that departed farthert from the
practice of the Itomifh church, were delighted
w.ith a iyfrtem fr admirably suited to their pre-
dominiiiaiit paNfion. While the friends of civil
liberty beheld, with pleafuire, the Protestant
riergy pulling down, with their own hands,
that fabrick of ecclesiastical power, which their
predece'iors had reared with so much art and
indurtry; and flattered thenifelves, that by
lending their aid to strip churchmen of theit
dignity and wealth, they might entirely deliver
the nation from their exorbitant and opprefiive
jurifdidiion. The new mode of government
easily made its way among men, thus prepar-.
ed, by their various interests and palions , for
its reception.

But» on the first introdufion of his fvfretil,

Knox did not deem it expedient to depart alto-
gether from the ancient form. *) Infiead of
Bishops, he proposed to establish ten or twelve
Superintendants in different parts of the king-
dom. These, as the name implies, were em-
powered toihfpe&c the life and do-trine of the
other clergy. They presided in the inferior

T
') Spotfwuod, 5SS,

judicatories ofthe church, and performed leverai
other parts of the Episcopal funclion. Their
jurifdietion, however, extended to facredthingi
only; they claimed no feat in Parliament, and
pretended no right to the dignity or revenues
of the former Biflhops.

The number of inferior clergy, to vhorr.

the care of parochial duty could be committed,
was still extremely fnall, they had enibraced
the principles of the Reformation at different
times, and from various motives; during the
publick commotions, they were scattered, me.
rely by chance, over the different provinces of
the kingdom ; and, in a few places only, were
formed into regular classes or societies. The
firif general afiemnbly of the church, which was
held this year, ( 156o. Decem. 0o. )bears all the
marks of an infant and unformed society. The
members were but few in number, and of no
considerable rank ; no uniform or confilrcnt
rule seems to have been observed in elcting
them. From a great part of the kingdom, no
representatives appeared. In the name oflomne
entire counties, but one person was prefect;
while, in other places, a single town or church
sent several members. A convention, so feeble
nnd irregular, could poflefs no great authority;
and confcions of their own weakness, themem-
bers put an end to their debates, without ven-
turing upon any decision of much inportance. ')

') Kteith, 405.

In order to give greater strength and con-

lifence to the Presbyterian plan, Knox, with
the afftilance of his brethren, composed (.I561.)
the firrf book of discipline, which contains the
model or platform of the intended policy. *)
They presented it to a convention of estates,
which was held in the beginning of this year.
(Jan. 1I5.) Whatever regulations were pro-
posed with regard to ecclefiaflical dtfcipline and
jurifdition , would have easily obtained the
faniition of that al'embly; but a design to re-
cover the patrimony of the church , which is
there insinuated, met with a very different re-
ception.

In vain did the clergy display the advan-.

tages which would accrue to the publick , by
a proper application of ecclesiastical revenues.
In vain did they propose, by an impartial dif-
tribution of this fund, to promote true religion,
to encourage learning, and to support the poor.
In vain did they even intermingle threatenings
of the divine dilfleafure againfl the unjust de-
tainers of what was appropriated to a sacred
Cfe. The nobles held fast the pray, which
they had seized; and bellowing upon the pro-
pofl the name of a devout imagination, they
glledted to confider it as a project altogether
visionary, and treatedit with the utmost fcoru. 3)
') Spots, j15.

# The Queen invited to return into Scotland.

The Queen invited to return into Scotland,

This Convention appointed the Prior of St.

Andrew's to repair to the Queen, and to invite
her to return into her native country, and to
assume the reins of government, which had
been too long committed to other hands. And
though some of her fubjeFts dreaded herreturn,
and others foresaw dangerous consequences witli
which it might be attended, ') the bulk of
them desired it with so much ardour , that tire
invitation was given with the greatest appear-
ance of unanimity. Iut the zeal of the Romi
Catholicks got the start of the Prior in paving
vourt to Mary; and Lefly, afterwards Bifhlt
of Ross, who was commissioned by them, nr-
rived before him at the place of her relidence.')
Lefly endeavoured to infuse into the Queen's
mind suspicions of her Protestant fubjecs, and
to persuade her to throw herself entirely into
the arms of those who adhered to her ownre-
ligion. For this purpose, he insisted that file
should land at Aberdeen; and as the Protestant
doEtrines had made no considerable prngrefs in
that part of the kingdom, he gave her an'urance
of being joined, in a few days, by 2o,ooo men;
and flattered her, that with such an army, en-
couraged by her presence and authority, sI

*) See Append. No. V,
") h-elly, 227.

might easily overturn the Reformed church, be-
fore it was firmly fettled on its foundations.

But at this jundture, the Princes of Lor-

rain were not disposed to liflen to this extra-
vagant and dangerous proposal. Intent on de-
fending themselves againfl Catherine of Medicis,
whose insidious policy was employed in under-
mining their exorbitant power, they had no
leisure to attend to the affairs of Scotland, and
xifhied their niece to take pofl'eflon of her king-
dom, with as little disturbance as polfible. The
French officers, too, who had served in Scot-
land, dii'uaded Mary from all violent measures;
and, by representing the power and number of'
the Protestants to be irresistible, determined her
to court them by every art; and rather to em-
ploy the leading men of that party as her mi-
nifters, than to provoke them, by a fruitless
opposition, to become her enemies. *) Hence
proceeded the confidence and affeftion, with
which the Prior of St. Andrew's was received
by the Queen. His representation of the state
of the kingdom gained great credit; and Lefly
beheld, witi regret, the new channel in which
court favour was likely to run.

Another Convention of Estates was held

in MIay. The arrival of an Ambafiador from
France, seems to have been the occafian of this
meeting. He was inffruted to folicittle Scots
') Melv, 61.

to renew their ancient alliance with France, to
break their new confederacy with England, anil
to restore the Popish ecclefiafticks to. the pof-
fefion of their revenues, and the exercise of
their funtions. It is no easy matter to form
any conjecture concerning the intentions of
the French court, in mraking these extraordinary
and ill-timed propositions. They were re-
jeted with that scorn , which might well have
been expected from the temper of the nation.')

In this convention, the Protestant clergy

did not obtain a more favourable audience tilln
formerly, and their profpeft of recovering the
patrimony of the church fill remained as dillant
and uncertain as ever. But, with regard to
another point, they found the zeal of the nobles
in no degree abated. The book of discipline
seemed to require that the monuments of Po-
pery, which still remained in the kingdom,
fiould be demolished: ;*) and, though neither
the fame pretence of policy, nor the fame un-
governable rage of the people, remained to
justify or excuse this barbarous havock, the
Convention, confidering every religious fabrick
as a relit of idolatry, passed sentence upon
them by an at in form; and persons, the mlolt
remarkable for the afivity of their zeal, were
appointed to put it in execution. Abbies, ca-

t IKnox, a69. "73.
*), S.potf\Vood,, i3.

# Mary beginns to prepare for it.

thedrals , churches, libraries, records , and
even the sepulchres of the dead, periflhed in
one common ruin. 'The ftorin of popular in-
furre&ion, though impetuous and irreliftible,
had extended only to a few counties, and soon
spent its rage; but now a deliberate and uni-
versal rapine comnpleted the devalVation of-every
thing, venerable and magnificent, which had
escaped its violence. :)

Alary beginns to prepare for ir.

In the mean time, Mary was in no bofte

to return into Scotland. Accuffomed to the
elegance, splendour, and gaiety of a polite
court, she still fondly lingered in France , the
fccne of all these enjoyments, and contem-
plated, with horror, the barbarifif of her own
country, and the turbulence of her fubjeEls,
which presented her with a very different face
of things. The impatience, however, of her
people, the persuasions of her uncles, but
above all, the fludied and mortifying neglec&,
with which flie was treated by the Quedn-
mother, forced her to think of beginning this
disagreeable voyage. *') But while she was
preparing for it, there were sown between her
and Elizabeth the feeds of that perfonaljealoufy

') Spotlwood, 174.
"') Brantome, Jebb, vol. ii 48S2.

# Origin of the discord between her and Elizabeth.

and discord, which embittered the life, and
shortened the days of the Scottish Queen.

Origin of the discord between her and Elizabeth.

The ratification of the late treaty of Ed;u,

burgh was the immediate occasion of this fatal
animosity ; the true causes of it lay mud:
deeper. Arnoft every article, in that treaty,
had been executed by both parties with a fcru-
pulous exiafEncfs. The fortifications of Le'li
were demolifled, and the armies of France
and England withdrawn within the appointed
time. The grievances of the Scottifih male-
contents were redressed, and they had obtaiued
whatever they could demand for their future
security. %With regard to all there , Mlary
could have little reason to decline, or Elizabeth
to urge, the ratification of the treaty.

The sixth article remained the only source

of contest and difficulty.. No lMinifter ever
entered more deeply into the schemes of his
Sovereign, or pursued them with more dexte-
rity and success than Cecil. In the condu&t of
the negotiation at Edinburgh, the found under-
standing of this able politician had proved great-
ly an overmatch for Wlonluc's refinements in
intrigue, and had artfully induced the Frelcht
Ambassadors, not only to acknowledge that
the Crowns of England and Ireland did of rigi't
belong to Elizabeth alone, but also to promire
that in all times to come, Mary should abstain

from using the titles, or bearing the arms of
tnofe kingdoms.

The ratification of this article would have

been of the molt fatal consequence to Mlary,
The Crown of England was an objec worthy
of her ambition. Her pretensions to it gave her
great dignity and importance in the eyes of all
Europe. By many, her title was efleemed
preferable to that of Elizabeth. Among the
English themselves, the Roman Catholicks,
who formed, at that time, a numerous and
a&tive party, openly espoused this opinion; and
even the Proteltants, who supported Elizabeth's
throne, could not deny the Queen of Scots to
be her immediate heir. A proper opportunity to
avail herself of all there advantages, could not,
in the course of things, be far distant, anl
many incidents might fall in, to bring this op-
portunity nearer than was expeted. In theft
circurmfances, Mary, by ratifying the article
in dispute, would have loft that rank which the
had hitherto held among neighbouring Princes';
the zeal of her adherents must have gradually
cooled; and The might have renounced, from
that moment, all hopes of ever wearing the
English Crown.

None of these beneficial consequences es-

capcd the penetrating eye of Elizabeth, who,
for this reason, had recourse to every thing,
by which she could hope either to sooth or
frighten the Scottish Queen into a compliance

with her demands; and if that Princess had
been so unadvised as to ratify the rash con.
ceiions of her Ambassadors, Elizabeth, by that
deed, would have acquired an advantage,
which, under her management, must have
turned to great account. By such a renun-
ciation, the question, with regard to the right
of succession, would have been left altogether
open and undecided; and, by means of that,
Elizabeth might either have kept her rival in
perpetual anxiety and dependance, or, by the
authority of her Parliament, she might have
broken in upon the order of lineal fucceifion,
and transferred the Crown to some other deC-
cendant of the royal blood. The former conduct
she observed towards James VI. whom, during
his whole reign, she held in perpetual fear
and fubjeEtion. The latter, and more rigorous
method of proceeding, would, in all probabi.
lity, have been employed against Mary, whom,
for many reasons, she both envied and hated,

Nor was this ftep beyond her power, un-

precedented in the hiltory, or inconsistent with
the conflitution of England. Though fuccefiion
by hereditary right be an idea so natural and
so popular, that it has been effablifhed in
almofi every civilized nation, yet England
affords many memorable instances of deviations
from that rule. The Crown of that kingdom
having once been seized by the hand of a con-
queror, this invited the bold and enterprifng

in every age to imitate such an illufirious ex-
aimple of fortunate ambition. From the time of
William the Norman, the regular courre of
descent had si ldom continued thllough1 three
fucceleive reigns. Tlhole Princes, whose i;.-
trigues or valour opened to them a wany to the
throne, called in the authority of the great
council of the nation to confirm their dubious
titles. Hence, parliamentary and heredirary
right became in England of equal consideration.
That great aflmembly claimed and afually pofl
'cii'ed a power of altering the order of regal
fuccelfion, and even so late as Henry VIII. an
act of Parliament had authorised that capricious
}lonarch to fettle the order of fucceflion at his
pleasure. The English, jealous of their reli-
gious liberty, and averse front the dominion of
firangers, would have eagerly adopted the
passions of their sovereign, and might have
been easily induced to exclude the Scottish line
from the right of succeeding to the Crown.
There seem to have been the views of both
Queens, and there were the difficulties which
retarded the ratification of the treaty of Edin-
burgh.

But, if the sources of their discord were

to be traced no higher than this treaty, an
ilconfiderable alteration in the words of it,
might have brought the present question to an
amicable issue. The indefinite and ambiguous
expression, which Cecil had inserted into the

treaty, might have beenr changed into one more
limited but more precise; and Mary, inilead of
promising to abstain from bearing the title of
Queen of England in all times to come, might
have engaged not to al'ume that title, during
the life of Elisabeth, or the lives of her lawful
posterity.

Such an amendment, however, did not

suit the views of either Queen. Though Mary
had been obliged to suspend, for fame time, the
prosecution of her title to the English crown,
she had not however relinqui['hed it. She de-
termined to revive her claim, on the firl'
profpeft of success, and was unwilling to bind
herself, by a positive engagement, not to take
advantage of any fulch fortunate occurrence.
Nor would the alteration have been more ac-
ceptable to Elizabeth, who, by agreeing to it.
would have tacitly recognised the right of her
rival to ascend the throne after her deceaft.
But neither the Scottish nor English Queen
durst avow there secret sentiments of their
hearts. Any open discovery eS an inciinattion
to difrurb the tranquillity of England , or to
Wvreft the sceptre out of Elizabeth's hands,
might have proved fatal to Mary. Any sis-
picion of a design to alter the order of fuccefrion,
and to set aside the claim of the Scottish Queen,
'would have exposed Elizabeth to much and de-
served censure, and have raised up against her
many and dangerous enemies. These,, how'

ever carefulvl concealed, or artfilly difgnifed,
wvere , in all probability, the re:rl notives
which determined til one Que'en1 to lflicit, and
thc other to refutle the ratification of the tr:ry,
in its original form; while neither had r..oil'o
to that explication of it, which to :i I eriC
unwarped by political interell , and libc. i;y
desirous of union and concord, would have
appeared so obvious and natural.

BRtt though considerations of interest first

occafloned this rupture between the Bril:ilh
Queens, rivalflip of another kind contributed
to widen the breach, and female jealoulfy in-
crenfed the violence of their political hatred.
Elizabeth, with all those extraordinary qua-
lities, by which she equalled or furpanied such
of her sex as have merited the greatefi renown,
discovered an admiration of her own person, to
a degree, which women of ordinary under-
standings either do not entertain, or prudently
enldeavour to conceal. Her attention to dress,
her solicitude to display her charms , her love
of flattery, were all excessive. Nor were thefr
weaknefles confined to tlat period of life,
when they are more pardonable. Even in very
advanced years, the wisest woman of that, or
perhaps of any other age, wore the garb, and
asseted the manners of a girl. *) Though
') [ohilton Hil. Rer. Britan. 346 . 347. Carte , voi. iii.

199. Cacaloguc of Royal and Nubio A clhors. Articl,
il'ex,

Elizabeth was as much inferior to Mary, ir
beauty, and gracefulness of perion, as she ex.
celled her in political abilities, and in tile art
of government, she was weak enough to coin.
pare herself with the Scottish Quieen; *) ad
as it was impossible she could be altogether
ignorant how much'Mary .gained by the corn-
parison, she envied and hated her as a rival,
by whom she was eclipsed. In judging of the
conduEt of Princes, we are apt to ascribe too
much to political motives, and too little to
the paflions which they feel in common with
the reft of mankind. In order to account for
Elizabeth's present, as well as her fabfequein
condu& towards Mary, we must not always
confider her as a Queen, we muff sometimes
regard her as a woman.

Elizabeth, though no firanger to MIary's

difficulties with refpet to the treaty, continued
to urge her, by repeated applications, to ratil'
it. :";:) Mary , under various pretences , Ji!l
contrived to gain time, and to elude the relquclt
But while the one Queen solicited witl perf't
vering importunity, and the other evaded w\ith
artful delay, they both fludied an extreme
politeness of behaviour, and loaded each other
with profeflions of sisterly love , with reci-

pro.
K" Kieth, 151 . 6.c,

# Elizabeth refuses Mary a safe conduct.

# Mary begins her voyage.

procal declarations of unchangeable esteem and
amity.

Eliiaibetil reflres Mary a fare condulet

It was not long before Mary was convinced,

that, among Princes, there exprefilons of friend-
ship are commonly far distant from the heart.
In failing from France to Scotland, the course
lies along the English coalt. In order to be
safe from the insults of the English fleet, or,
in cafe of tempeiiuous weather, to secure a
retreat in the harbours of that kingdom, Mary
sent Mr. D'Oyfel to demand of Elizabeth a
safe condut during her voyage. This requeti,
'which decency alone obliged one Prince to
grant to another, Elizabeth rejec-ed, in such
a manner, as gave rife to no flight ftufpicion
of a design, either to obltruct the palnage, or
to intercept the person of the Scottish Queen. *)

Mary begins her voyage.

This ungenerous behaviour of Elizabeth

filled Mary with indignation, but did not retard
her departure from France. She was accom-
panied to Calais, the place where she embarked,
in a manner suitable to her dignity, as the
Queen of two powerful kingdoms. Six Princes
of Lorrain her uncles, with many of the molt

') Keith, 171, Cambden. See Appendix, No. VI,
Hilt, of Scotl, Vol. 1, U

eminent among the French nobles, were in her
retinue. Catherine, vwho secretly rejoiced at
her doparture, graced it with every circum-
stance of magnificence and refpea-. After bid-
ding adieu to her mourning attendants, with a
fad heart, and eyes bathed in tears, Mary left
that kingdom, the short but only scene of her
life in which fortune smiled upon her. While
the French coals continued in fight, she il-
tently gazed upon it, and muting, in a thought.
ful posture, on that height of. fortune whence
The had fallen, and presaging, perhaps, the
disasters and calamities which embittered the
remainder of her days, she sighed often, and
cried out. ,, Farewel France! Farewel beloved
,, country, which I shall never more behold!"'
Even when the darkness of the night had hid
the land from her view, she would neither re-
tire to the cabin, nor taste food, but com-
manding a couch to be placed on the deck,
she there waited the return of day, with the
utmost impatience. Fortune soothed her on
this occasion; the galley made little way
during the night. In the morning, the coast
of France was frill within fight, and she conti-
nued to feed her melancholy with the profpee;
and as long as her eyes could distinguish it, to
utter the fame tender expreftions of regret. ")

') Brantone, 483. Hle imnfet! Was in the fame .alley v::k

the Queen.

# Arrives in Scotland.

# State of the kingdom at that time.

Arrives in Scotland.

At last a brisk gale arose, by the favour

of which for some days, and afterwards under
the covert of a thick fog, Mary escaped the
English fleet, which lay in wait to intercept
her; ':) and on the g9th of August, after an
abrence of near thirteen years, landed safely
at Leith in her native kingdom.

Ilary received by her fubje&ts with shouts

and acclamations of joy, and with every de-
monlftration of welcome and regard. But as
her arrival was unexpected, and no suitable'
preparation had been made for it, they could
not with all their efforts, hide from her the
poverty of the country, and were obliged to
condu&t her to the palace of Holyrood-houfe
with little pomp. The Queen accufiomed from
her infancy to splendour and magnificence, and
fond of them, as was natural at her age, could
not help observing the change in her situation,
and feenled to be deeply affeded with it. **)

State of the kingdom at that thne.

Never did any Prince ascend the throne at

a junEture which called for more wisdom in
council, or more courage and iteadinefs in
a&ion. The rage of religious controversy was
fill unabated. The memory of past oppression

U a
^) Goodal, sol. . i175. Caftleou 455S

r') n.i.t, 484.

exasperated the Protestants; the smart of recent
injuries rendered the Papists desperate; both
were zealous, fierce, and irreconcilable. The
absence of their Sovereign had accustomed the
nobles to independance; and during the late
commotions, they had acquired such an increase
of wealth, as threw great weight into the scale
of the aristocracy , which flood not in need of
any accefflon of power. The kingdom had long
been under the government of Regents, wiv.
exercised a delegated jurifdietion, attended with
little authority, and which inspired no reve-
rence. A state of pure anarchy had prevailed
for the two last years, without a Regent,
without a supreme council, without the power,
or even the form of a regular government. ")
A licentious spirit, unacquainted with fibordi-
nation, and disdaining the refiraints of law and
justice, had spread among all ranks of men.
The influence of France, the ancient ally of
the kingdom, was withdrawn or deliifed.
The English, of enemies become confederates,
had grown into conlidence with the nation,
and had gained an ascendant over all its coun-
cils. The Scottish Alonarchs did not derive
more splendour or power from the friendfllip
of the former, than they had reason to dread
injury and diminution from the intcrpofition ol
the latter. Every consideration , whether of

:") Ieith, Append. 92.

interest, or of felfprefrvation, obliged Eliza-
beth to depress the royal authority in Scotland,
and to create the Prince perpetual difiicullies,
by fomenting the spirit of difihtisfa&ion among
the people,

In this posture were the affairs of Scot-

land, when the admiiiifltration fell into the
iiands of a young Queen, not nineteen years
of age, unacquainted with the manners and
laws of her country, a stranger to her fubjefts,
without experience, without allies, and almoil:
without a friend.

On the other hand, in Mary's situation we

find some circumstances, which , though they
did not balance there disadvantages , contri-
buted, however, to alleviate them; and, wvith
skilful nmenagement, might have produced great
ef'c&s. Her subje&s , uinaccuftomed so long
to the residence of their Prince, were not only
dazzled by the novelty and splendour of the
royaiprefence, butinfpired with awe and reve-
rence. Besides the places of power and profit
beltowed by the favour of a Prince, his pro-
retion, his familiarity, and even his frniles,
confer honour and win the hearts of men.
I:rom all corners of the kingdom, the nobles
crowded to testify their duty and afleetion to
their sovereign, and studied, by every art, to
wipe out the memory of past mifcondu&t , and
to lay in a stock of future merit. The arnufe-
ments and gaiety of her court; which was

filled with the most accomplished of the French
nobility, who had attended her, began to
soften. and to polish the rude manners of the
nation. Mary herself possessed many of these
qualifications, which raise affection, and pro.
cure esteem. The beauty and gracefulness of
of her person drew universal. admiration, the
elegance and politeness of her manners com-
manded general refpet. To all the charms of
her own sex, she added many of the accom-
plifhments of the other. The progress she had
made in all the Arts and Sciences, which were
then esteemed necef'ary or ornamental. was
far beyond what is commonly attained by
Princes; and all her other qualities were ren-
dered more agreeable by a curteous allabi-
lity, which, without lef'ening the dignity of
a Prince, iteals on the hearts of fubjefs with
a betwitching insinuation.

From these circumstances, notwithflanding

the threatening afpeft of affairs at Mary's return
into Scotland, notwithstanding the clouds which
gathered on every hand, a political observer
would have predi&ted a very different ilihe of
her reign; and whatever sudden gusts of faction
he might have expeEted, he would never hale
dreaded the deftrufive violence of that storm
which followed.

While all parties were contending whlo

should discover the most dutiful attachment to
the Queen, the zealous and impatient spirit of

the age broke out in a remarkable infRance.
On the Sunday after her arrival, the Queen
commanded macs to be celebrated in the chapel
of her palace. The first rumour of this occa-
sioned a fecrer murmuring among the Protest-
ants who attended the court; complaints and
threatenings soon followed; the servants be-
longing to the chapel were insulted and abused;
and, if the Prior of St. Andrew's had not sea-
fonably interpoed , the rioters might have
proceeded to the utmost excesses. *)

It is impossible, at this dillance of time,

and under circumstances so very different, to
conceive te violence of that zeal against Popery,
which then posses'ed the nation. Every instance
of condefeenfion to the Papists was esteemed
an aft of apoftacy, and the toleration of a tingle
mass pronounced to be more formidable to the
nation than the invasion of ten thousand armed
men. ":*) Under the influence of there opi-
nions, many Protestants would have ventured
to go dangerous lengths; and, without attemp-
ting to convince their Sovereign by argument,
or to reclaim her by indulgence, would have
abruptly denied her the liberty of worshipping
God in that manner, which alone she thought
acceptable to him. But the Prior of St. And-
rew's, and other leaders of the party, not only

") Ibid. 387.

restrained this impetuous spirit; but, in spite
of the murmurs of the people, and the excla-
mations of the preachers , obtained for the
Queen and her domefticks the undifLurbed cx-
ercife of the Catholick religion. Near an hun-
dred years after this period, when the violence
of religious animofities had begun to subside,
when time and the progress of learning had
enlarged the views of the human mind, an
English Houre of Commons refuted to indulge
the wife of their Sovereign in the private use
of the mars. The Protestant leaders deserve,
on this occasion, the praise both of wisdom
and of moderation for conduft so different. But,
at the fame time, whoever reflets upon the
encroaching and sanguinary spirit of Popery,
will be far from treating the fears and caution
of the more zealous Reformers as altogether
imaginary and destitute of any real foundation.

The Protestants, however, by this con-

pliance with the Queen's prejudices, obtained
a proclamation highly favourable to their re-
ligion. The Reformed doftrine, though efta-
blifhed all over the kingdom, had never re-
ceived the countenance or fantion of royal
authority. On ithis occasion , Aug. 25. the
Queen declared any attempt towards an alte-
ration or subversion of it, to be a capital
crime. *)

') Keith , 50.

# She employs only Protestants in the administration.

# Attempts to gain Elizabeth's favour.

She employs only Proteflants in the administration.

The Queen, conformable to the plan which

had been concerted in France, committed the
administration of affairs entirely to Protestants.
Her council was filled with the most eminent
persons of that party; not a tingle Papist was
admitted into any degree of confidence. *)
The Prior of St. Andrew's and Maitland of Le-.
thington seemed to hold the .firt place in the
Queen's affection, and pofleffed all the power
and reputation of favourite Ministers. Her
choice could not have fallen upon persons more
acceptable to her people; and, by their prudent
advice, Mary conducted herself with so much
moderation, and deference to tie sentiments of
the nation, as could not fail of gaining the as-
feEtion of her fubjeE&s, *:) the firmest fourda-
tion of a Prince's power, and the only genuine
source of his happiness and glory.

Attempts to gain Elizabeth's favour,

A cordial reconcilement with Elizabeth was

another object of great importance to Mary;
and though she seems to have had it much at
heart, in the beginning of her administration,
to accomplish such a delirable conjunction, yet
many events occurred to widen, rather than to

') Enox, 285.
")Lefly, 235.

close the breach. The formal offices of friendfllhp,
however, are seldom negleted among Prince;,
and Elizabeth, who had attempted so openly
to obftrut the Queen's voyage into Scotland,
did not fail, a few days after her arrival, to
command Randolph to congratulate her safe re.
turn. Mary, that she might be on equal terms
with her, sent Mlaitland to the English court,
with many ceremonious expressions of regard
for Elizabeth. *) Both the Ambassadors were
received with the utmost civility; and, oneach
fide, the profeflions of kindness, as they were
made with little sincerity, were listened to with
proportional credit.

Both were intrusted, however, with so.

rnething more than mere matter of ceremony.
Randolph urged Mary, with fresh importunity,
to ratify the treaty of Edinburgh. Alaitland
endeavoured to amuse Elizabeth, by apologizing
for the dilatory condu& of his Mistress with
regard to that point. The multiplicity ofpublicl
affairs since her arrival in Scotland, the impor-
ance of the queflion in dispute, and the absence
of many noblemen, with whom she was obliged
in decency to consult, were the pretences of-
sered in excuse for her condu&; the realcaules
of it were those, which have already been me'i-
tioned. But, in order to extricate herself out
of these difficulties, into which the treaty of

*) Keith, SI. &,c.

Edinbirgh had led her, Malry wras brought to
yield a point, which formerly the seemed de-
termined never to give up. She inftrua&ed
Maitlarid to signify her willingness to difclairn
any right to the crown of England, during the
life of Elizabeth, and the lives of her posterity;
if, in failure of these, she were declared next
heir by aft of Parliament. *)

Reasonable as this proposal might appear to

Mary, who thereby precluded herself from
disturbing Elizabeth's pofleffion of the throne,
nothitng could be more inconliftent with Eliza-
beth's interest, or more contradicory to a pas-
sion, which predominated in the character of
that Princess. Notwithstanding all the great
qualities which threw such luflre on her reign,
wve may observe, that she was tinEured with
a jealousy of her right to the Crown, which
often betrayed her into mean and ungenerous
acions. The peculiarity of her situation heigh-
tened, no doubt, and increased, but did not in-
fuse this palfion. It descended to her from
Henry VII. her grandfather, whom, in several
features of his character, she nearly resembled.
Like him, she fiflfered the title by which flo
held the Crown to remain ambiguous and con-
troverted, rather than fubmic it to parliamentary
difcuflion, or derive any addition to her right,
from such authority. Like him, she observed
') Camden, 387. BUch, 329.

every pretender to the succession, not only virh
that attention, which prudence prescribes; blI:
with that aversion, which suspicion inspires.
The present uncertainty with regard to the rigjt
of succession, operated for Elizabeth's advantage,
both on her fubjeEts, and on her rivals. Among
the former, every lover of his country regarded
her life as the great security of the national
tranquillity; and chore rather to acknowledge
a title which was dubious, than to search for
one that was unknown. The latter, while
xnothing was decided, were held in dependence,
and obliged to court her. The manner in whicii
she received this ill-timed proposal of the Scol-
tifh Queen, was no other than might have been
expected. She rejected it in a peremptory tone.
with many expressions of a refolntion never
to permit a point of so much delicacy to he
touched.

About this time, ( Sept. I. ) the Queen

made her publick entry into Edinburgh with
great pomp. Nothing was negleted, which
could express the duty and affecion of the ci-
tizens towards their Sovereign. But amidit
these demonstrations of regard, the genius and
sentiments of the nation discovered themselves,
in a circumstance, which, though inconsiderable,
ought not to be overlooked. As it was the
mode of the times to exhibit many pageants at
every publick solemnity; most of these, on thli
occasion, were contrived to be representations

# Restrains the licence of the borderers.

of the vengeance which the Almighty had in-
ilifted upon idolaters. ;) Even while they
studied to amule and to flatter the Queen, her
fubjets could not refrain from testifying their
abhorrence of that religion which she professed.

Rfrntilns the licence of the borderers.

To restore the regular administration of

juflice, and to reform the internal policy of the
country, became the next object of the Queen's
care. The laws enacted for preservation of
publick order, and the security of private pro-
perty, were nearly the fame in Scotland, as
in every other civilized country. But the na-
ture of the Scottifli conflitution, the impotence
of regal authority, the exorbitant power of the
nobles, the violence of faction, and the fierce
manners of the people, rendered the execution
of these laws feeble, irregular, and partial.
In the counties which border on England, this
defcEt was most apparent; and the consequences
of it most sensibly felt. The inhabitants, strangers
to industry, averse from labour, and unacquaint-
ed with the arts of peace, fuibfifted entirely by
spoil and pillage, and, being confederated in
septs or clans, committed these excesses not only
with impunity, but even with honour. During
the unsettled state of the kingdom from the
death of James V. this dangerous licence had

) Keith, IS9,

grown to an unusual height; and the inroads
and rapine of those freebooters were beconleno
less intolerable to their own countrymen, than
to the English. To restrain and punifll thle
outrages, was an aetion equally popular in both
kingdoms. The Prior of St. Andrew's was the
person chosen for this important service, and
extraordinary powers, together with the title
of the Queen's lieutenant, were vested in hin
for this purpose.

Nothing can be more surprising to mnen ac.

customed to regular government, than the pre-
parations made on this occasion. They were
fiich as might be expeEted in the rudest and
moSt imperfe&t state of society. The fret holders
of eleven several counties, with all their so!.
lowers completely armed, were summoned to
assist the Lieutenant in the discharge of his of.
lice. Every thing resembled a military expe-
dition, rather than the progress of a court of
jufiice. ':) The Prior executed his comnmillioi
xwitl such vigour and prudence, as acquired
himn a great increase of reputation and popula-
rity among his countrymen. Numbers of the
banditti fufIered the pnnilhnient due to their
crimes; and, by the impartial and rigorousad-
ministration of justice, order and tranquillity
were retlored to that part of the kingdom.
*) Keith, Issg.

# The Papists attempt, in vain, to get into favour with her.

The Papists attempt, in vain, to get into favour

With her.

During the ablence of the Prior of.St. An-

drew's, the leaders of the Popish facion feeim
to have taken some steps towards insinuating
theinfelves into the Queen's favour and confi-
dence. *) But the Archbishop ofSt. Andrew's,
the moit remarkable person in the party for
abilities and political address, was received witl
little favour at court; and whatever secret par-
tiality the Queen might have towards those who
profefled the fame religion with herself, she
discovered no inclination, at that time, to take
the administration of affairs out of the hands to
which she had already committed it.

The cold reception of the Archbishop of

St. Andrew's was owing to his connexion with
the house of Hamilton; from which the Queen
vas much alienated. The Duke of Guise and
the Cardinal could never forgive the zeal, with
which the Duke of Chatelherault, and his son
the Earl of Arran, had espoused the cause of
the Congregation. Princes seldom view their
Auccellbrs without jealousy and distrust. The
Prior of St. Andrew's, perhaps, dreaded the
Duke as a rival in power. All there causes
concurred in infusing into the Queen's mind an
aversion for that family. The Duke indulging
his love of retirement, lived at adiftance from
') Keith, ao3.

court, without taking pains to insinuate him.
seif into favour; and though the Earl of Arran
openly aspired to marry the Queen, he, by a
most unpardonable aft of imprudence, was the
only nobleman of diflin&ion who opposed lary's
enjoying the exercise of her religion; and by
rathly entering a publick protestation again I it,
entirely forfeited her favour. ;:) At the fame
time, the fordid parsimony of his father obliged
him either to hiderhimfelf in some retirement,
or to appear in a manner unbecoming his dignity
as first Prince of the blood, or his high preten-
lions as filitor to the Queen. **) His love, in-
flamed by disappointment, and his impatience
exasperated by neglet, preyed gradually on his
reason; and, after many extravagancies, broke
out at last in ungovernable frenzy.

Towards the end of the year, a Convention

of EfRates was held, (Dec. 20. 1561.) chiefly
on account of ecclesiastical affairs. The afllembly
of the church, which fat at the fame time,lpre-
sented a petition, contailiing many detmands
with refpea to the suppressing of Popery, the
encouraging the Protestant religion, and the
providing for the maintenance of the clergy. :*)

The

') Keith, o20. 2o4. Knox, S6.

") Keith, 196.
*") Ibid, Slo,

# A new regulation concerning the revenues of the church.

The last wvas a matter of great importance,
and the Rteps taken towards it deserve to be
traced.

A new regulation concerning the revenues of

tle church.

Though the. number of Protestant preachers

was now considerably increased, many more
were frill wanted, in every corner oftheking-
dom. No legal provision having been made for
them, they had hitherto drawn a scanty and
precarious fubifilence from the benevolence of
their people. To susSer the Ministers of an
eltbllifhed church to continue in this Itate of
indigence and dependence, was an indecency
equally repugnant to the principles of religion,
and to the maxims of found policy; and would
have jutified all the imputations of avarice,
with which the Reformation was then loaded
bv its enemies. The revenues of the Popish
church were the only fund which could be em-
ployed for their relief; but during the three
last years, the slate of these was greatly alter-
ed. A great majority of Abbots, Priors, and
other heads of religious houses, had, either
from a fen'e of duty, or from views ofintereft,
renounced the errors of Popery; and notwith-
standing this change in their sentiments, they
retained their ancient revenues. Almost the
'whole order of Bishops, and several of the other
dignitaries, still adhered to the Romish super-

Hist. of Scotl. Vol. I. X

ftition: And though debarred from every fpi.
ritual function, continued to enjoy the tempor-
alities of their benefices. Some laymen, efpe.
cially those who had been aftive in promoting
the Reformation, had, under various pretences,
and amidst the licence of civil wars, got into
their hands poflefiions which belonged to the
church. And thus, before any part of the an-
cient ecclesiastical revenues could be applied
towards the maintenance of the Protestant mi-
nifters, many different interefis were to be ad.
justed; many claims to be examined; and the
prejudices and passions of the two contending
parties required the application of a delicate
hand. After much contention, the following
plan was approved by a majority of voices, and
acquiesced in even by the Popish clergy them-
selves. An exact account of the value of ec-
clefiaftical benefices throughout the kingdom
wvas appointed to be taken. The present in-
cumbents, to whatever party they adhered,
were allowed to keep poffel'fon: Two-thirds
of their whole revenue were reserved for their
own use, the remainder was annexed to the
Crown; and out of that, the Queen undertook
to aflign a fulficient maintenance for the Pro-
teftant clergy. *)

As most of the Bishops and several of the
other dignitaries were ilill firmly attached to

''') Keith, Append. i17;. Kao x, 194,

the Popish religion, the extirpation ofthewhole
order, rather than an aE of such extraordinary
indulgence, might have been expected from the
zeal of the preachers, and from the spirit which
had hitherto animated the nation. But, on
this occasion, other principles obftruated the
operations of such as were purely religious.
Zeal for liberty, and the love of wealth, two
passions extremely opposite, concurred in deter-
mining the Protestant leaders to fall in wrich
this plan, which deviated so manifestly fromn
the maxims by which they had hitherto regu-
lated their conduct.

If tie Reformers had been allowed to a&

without controul, and to level all dirtinftions
in the church, the immense revenues annexed
to ecclefiatical dignities could not, with any
colour ofjuftice, have been retained by those
in whose hands they now were; but muff
either have been diflributed amongst the Pro-
teftant clergy, who performed all religious of-
sices, or must have fallen to the Queen, from
the bounty of whose ancestors, the greaterpart
of them was originally derived. The former
scheme, however suitable to the religious spirit
of many among the people, was attended with
manifold danger. The Popish ecclefiafticks had
acquired a share in the national property, which
far exceeded the proportion that was confident
with the ihappinefs of the kingdom; and the
nobles were determined to guard againlt this

X 3

evil, by' preventing the return of those vafi pof-
sessions into the hands of the church. Nor \was
the latter,, which exposed the constitution to
more imminent hlazard, to be avoided withlels
care. Even that circumscribed prerogative,
which the Scottish Kings poffefied, was the ob-
jc of jealousy to the nobles. If they had al-
lowed the Crown to seize the spoils of the
church, such an increase of power muit have
followed that accession of property, as would
have raised the royal authority above controiil,
and have rendered the moit limited Prince in
Europe the most absolute and independent.
The reign of IHenry VTII. presented a recent
and alarming example of this nature. The wealth
which flowed in upon that Prince, from the
fuppreflion of the monasteries, not only changed
the maximes of his government, but the temper
of his mind; and he who had formerly fiubmit-
ted to his Parliaments, and courted his people,
di&tated, from that time, to the former with in-
tolerable insolence, and tyrannized over the
latter with uaprecedented severity: and if his
policy had not been extremely short-sighted, if
he had not fi]ialaudered what he acquired, wvitll
a proftfion equal to his rapacioufilefs, and
whichI defeated his ambition, he might have
established despotism in England, on a basis so
broad and firong, as all the efforts of the sub-
jests would never have been able to shake. In
Scotland, where the riches of the clergy bore

as great a proportion to the wealth ofthe king-
dom, the acquisition of church lands would have
been of no lets importance to the Crown; and
no less fatal to the ariffocracy. The nobles,
for this rcafon, guarded against such an increase
of the royal power, and thereby secured their
ownI independence.

Avarice mingled itself with their concern

for the interest of their order. The reuniting
the possessions of the church to the Crown, or
the belloxing them on the Proteflant clergy,
would have been a fatal blow, both to those
nobles, who had, by fraud or violence, seized
part of these revenues, and to those Abbots and
Priors who had totally renounced their eccle-
fiaftical charaRer. But as the plan, which was
propoefd, gave some fanftion to their ufurpa-
tons, they promoted it with their utmost in-
luence. The Popifl ecclefiafiicks, though the
lopping of' a third of their revenues was by no
means agreeable to them, contented, under their
present circumstances, to sacrifice a part of their
poffelTions, in order to purchase the secure en-
joyment of the remainder; and after deeming
the whole irrecoverably loft, they confidered
whatever they could retrieve as to much gain.
Many of the ancient dignitaries were men of
noble birth; and as they no longer entertained
hopes of refroring the Popish religion, they
wished their own relations, rather than the
Crown, or the Protestant clergy, to be enriched

with the spoils of the church. They connived,
for this reason , at the encroachments of the
nobles; they even aided their avarice and vio-
lence; they dealt out the patrimony of the church
among their own relations, and by granting
feuds and perpetualleafes of lands and tithes,
gave, to the utmost of their power, some colour
of legal possession, to what was formerly mere
usurpation. Many vestiges of such alienations
still remain. *) The nobles, with the con-
currence of the incumbents, daily extended
their encroachments, and gradually stripped the
ecclefiafticks of their richest and tnoft valuable
possessions. Even that third part, which was
given up in order to silence the clamours ofthe
Protestant clergy, and to be some equivalentto
the Crown for its claims, amounted to no con-
fiderable fum. The thirds due by the more
powerful nobles, especially by such as had em-
braced the Reformation, were almost universally
remitted. Others, by producing fraudulent
rentals; by estimating the corn, and otherpay-
ments in kind, at an undervalue; and by the
connivance of collectors, greatly diminifhedthe
charge against themselves: **) And the nobles
had much reason to be satisfied with a device
which, at so small expence, secured to them
such vast possessions.

I) Keith, 507. Spott'v. 175.
'") Keith, Appendix I88. Spotfw. 153.

# The Protestant clergy no gainers by it.

# Dissensions among the nobles.

The Protestant clergy no gainers by it.

Nor were the Proteflant clergy considerable

gainers by this new regulation; they fo.und it
to be a more easy matter to kindle zeal, than
to extinguish avarice. Those very men, whom
formerly they had swayed with absolute autho-
rity, were now deaf to all their remonstrances.
The Prior of St. Andrew's, the Earl of Argyll,
the Earl of Morton, and Maitland, all the mofl:
zealous leaders of the Congregation, were ap-
pointed' to aflign, or, as it was called, to modify
their stipends. An hundred marks Scottish was
the allowance which their liberality afforded to
the generality of Ministers. To a few three
hundred marks were granted. *) About twen-
ty-four thousand] pounds Scottifli appears to
have been the whole fim allotted forthe main-
tenance of a national church established by law,
and esteemed, throughout the kingdom, the
true church of God. **) Even this fum was
paid with little exatnefs, and the Ministers
were kept in the fame poverty and dependance
as formerly.

Dilrenfions among the nobles.

The gentleness of the Queen's adminiitra-

tion, and the elegance of her court, had mi-

') Knox, s3i.
') Keith, Append. I8SB

tigated, in some degree, the ferocity of the
nobles, and accustomed them to greater mild-
ness and humanity; while, at the fame time,
her presence and authority were a check to
their fafious and tumultuary spirit. But, as a
fate of order and tranquillity was not natural
to the feudal arifftocracy, it could not be of
long continuance; and this year became re-
markable for the most violent eruptions of in-
teftine discord and animosity.

Among the great and independent nobility

of Scotland, a Monarch could possess little au-
thority, and exercise no extensive or rigorous
jurifdiaion The interfering of interest, the
unsettled state of property, the frequency of
publick commotions, and the flercenefs of their
own manners, sowed, among the greatfamilies,
the feeds of many quarrels and contentions.
These, as we have already observed, were de-
cided not by law , but by violence. The of-
fended Baron, without having recourse to the
Monarch, or acknowledging his superior autho-
riry, assembled his own followers, and invaded
the lands of his rival in an hostile manner.
Together with his estate and honours, every
nobleman transmitted some hereditary feud to
his posterity, who were bound in honour to
adopt and to prosecute it with the fame inve-
terate rancour.

Such a dissension had subsisted between the
house of Hamilton and the Earl of Bothweli,

and was heightened by mutual injuries during
the late commotions.*) Both the Earl of Arran
and Bothwell happening to be in waiting at the
fame time, their followers quarrelled fre-
quently in the streets of Edinburgh, and ex-
cited dangerous tumults in that city. (February
1562. ) At last , the mediation of their friends,
particularly of Knox, brought about a reconci-
lement, but an unfortunate one to both these
these noblemen. *"*)

A few days after, Arran came to Knox,

and, with the utmost terror and confusion, con-
feffled firfl to him, and then to the Prior of
St. Andrew's, that, in order to obtain the sole
direction of affairs, Bothwell and his kinfineu
the Halmiltons, had conspired to murder the
Prior, Maitland, and the other favourites of
the Queen. The Duke of Chatelherault re-
garded the Prior as a rival, who had supplanted
him in the Queen's favour, and who filled that
place at the helm, which he imagined to be
due to himself, as first Prince of the blood.
Bothwell, on account of the personal injuries
which he had received from the Prior during the
late commotions, was no less exasperated against
him. But whether le and the Hamiltons had
agreed to cement their new alliance with the
blood of their common enemy, or whether the

) Keith, 215.
"') Knox, 305.

# The Earl of Huntly's enmity to the Queen's Ministers.

conspiracy existed only in the frantick and dif-
ordered imagination of the Earl of Arran, it is
impossible, amidst the contradiftion of historians
and the defetivenefs of records, positively to
determine. Among men inflamed with re-
fentment, and impatient for revenge, rash ex-
pressions might be uttered, and violent and cri-
criminal expedients proposed; and on that foun-
dation, Arran's distempered fancy might rear
the whole faperftruEture of a conspiracy. All
the persons accused, denied their guilt with
the utmost confidence. But the known cha-
rafters of the men, and the violent spirit of
the age, added greatly to the probability of
the accusation, and abundantly justify the con-
duct of the Queen's ministers, who confined
Bothwell, Arran, and a few of the ringlea-
ders , in separate prisons, and obliged the
Duke to surrender the firong castle of Dumbar-
ton, which he had held ever since the time of
his resigning the office of Regent. *)

The Earl of Huntly's enmity to the Queen's Milniters.

The designs of the Earl of Huntly against

the Prior of St. Andrew's were deeper laid, and
produced more memorable and more tragical
events. George Gordon Earl of Huntly, having
been one of the nobles who conspired against
James III.and who raised his son James IV. to the

') Kuox , 30°. 3o8. Keith, nob.

throne, enjoyed a great share in the 'confidence of
that generous Prince. *) By his bounty, great
acceflions of wealth and power were added to a
family already opulent and powerful. On the
death of that Monarch, Alexander the next
Earl, being appointed Lord Lieutenant of all
the counties beyond Forth, left the other nobles
to contend for offices at court; and retiring to
the north, where his estate and influence lay,
resided there in a kind of princely indepen-
dence. The Chieftains in that part of the
kingdom dreaded the growing dominion of luch
a dangerous neighbour, but were unable to
prevent his encroachments. Some of his rivals
he secretly undermined , others he subdued
by open force. His estate far exceeded that
of any other subjet, and his fuperiorities and
jurifdistions extended over many of the nor-
thern counties. With power and pofleffions
so immense, under two long and feeble mino-
rities, and amidst the fliock of civil commotions,
the Earls of H-untly might have indulged the
most elevated hopes. But happily for the
Crown, an aEtive and entcrprifing spirit was
not the charaeteriflick of that family, and what-
ever object their ambition might have in view,
they chose rather to acquire it by political ad-
dress, than to seize it openly, and by force
(f arms.
i) Crawf. Officers of Stace, 56.

The condu&t of George the present Earl,

during the late commotions, had been perfectly
suitable to the character of the family, in that
age, dubious, variable, and crafty. While the
success of the Lords of the Congregation was
uncertain, he assisted the Queen Regent in her
attempts to crush them. When their affairs
put on a better aspec' , he pretended to join
them, but never heartily favoured their cause.
I-e was courted and feared by each of the
contending parties; both connived at his en-
croachments in the north; and, by artifice and
force, which he well knew how to employ al-
ternately, and in their proper places, he added
every day to the exorbitant power and wealth
which hc possessed.

He observed the growing reputation and

authority of the Prior of St. Andrew's with the
greatest jealousy ad concern, and confidred him
as a rival who had engrossed that share in
the Queen's confidence, to which his own
zeal for the Popish religion seemed to give
him a preferable title. Personal injuries soon
increased the misunderstanding occasioned by
rivalfhip in power. The Queen having deter-
mined to reward the services of the Prior of
St. Andrew's, by creatiug him an Earl, Feb. Io.
she made choice of Mar, as the place whence
he should take his title; and, that he might
be better able to support his new honour, be-
Itowed upon him, at the fame time, the lands

cf'that 'name. These were part of the royal
demesnes, *) but the Earls of Huntly had
been permitted, for several years, to keep
pofleflion of them. *") On this occasion, the
Earl not only complained, with some reason,
of the loss which he sustained, but had real
cause to be alarmed at the intrusion of a for-
midable neighbour into the heart of his territo-
ries, who might be able to rival his power, and
excite his oppressed vassals to shake off his
yoke.

An incident, which happened soon after,

June 27. increased and confirmed Huntly's sus-
picions. Sir John Gordon, his third son, and
Lord Ogilvie had a dispute about the property
of an estate. This dispute became a deadly
quarrel. They happened, unfortunately, to
meet in the lfreets of Edinburgh , and being
both attended with armed followers, a scuffle
ensued, in which Lord Ogilvie was dangerously
wounded by Sir John. The Magistrates seized
both the offenders, and the Queen commanded
them to be ftrialy confined. Under any regu-
lar government, such a breach of publick peace
and order would expose the perCon offending to
certain punishment. At this time, some feve-
rity was neceifary, in order to vindicate the
Queen's authority from an insult , the most

') Crav. Peer. P97.
") Buch, 334,

heinous which had been offered to it since her
return into Scotland. But, in an age acculf
tomed to licence and anarchy, even this mode-
.rate exercise of her power, in ordering them
to be kept in custody, was deemed an aft in-
tolerable rigour; and the friends of each party
began to convene their vaflals and dependants,
in order to overawe, or to frustrate the deci-
sions ofjuftice. *) Mean while, Gordon made
his escape out of prison, and flying into Aber-
deenfhire, complained loudly of the indignity
with which he had been treated; and as all
the Queen's actions were, at this juncture,
imputed to the Earl. of Mar, this added not a
little to the resentment which Huntly had
conceived against that nobleman.

At the very time when these passions ser-

mented, with the utmost violence, in the minds
of the Earl of Huntly and his family, the
Queen happened to set out on a progress into
the northern parts of the kingdom, (In the month
of Auguln.) fie was attended by the Earls of
Al'ar and IVlorton . Maitland, and other leader:;
of that party. The presence of the Queen, in
a country where no name greater than tihe
Earl of Huntly's had been heard of, and no
power superior to his had been exercised. for
many years, was an event, of itself , abun-
dantly mortifying to that haughty noblemanl

* Keith, 23.,

But while the Queen was entirely under the
direction of Mar, all her actions were more apt
to be misrepresented, and conflrued into inju-
ries; and a thousand circumstances could not
but occur to awaken Huntly's jealousy, to of-
fend his pride, and to inflame his resentment.
Amidlf the agitations of so many violent pas-
Lions, some eruption was unavoidable.

On Mary's arrival in the North, Huntly

employed his wife, a woman capable of exe-
cuting the commission with abundance of dex-
terity, to tooth the Queen, and to intercede
for pardon to their son. But the Queen per-
emptorily required that he should again deli-
ver himself into the hands of justice, and rely
on her clemency. Gordon was persuaded to
do so; and being en;oined by the Queen to
enter himself prisoner in the cafrle of Stirling,
he promised likewise to obey that command.
Lord Erskine, Mar's uncle, was, at that time,
Governor of this fort. The Queen's severity,
and the place in which she appointed Gordon
to be confined, were interpreted to be new
marks of Mar's rancour , and augmented the
hatred of the Gordons against him.

Mean time, Sir John Cordon set out tow-

ards Stirling; Sept. i. but inflead of performing
his promise to the Queen, made his escape
from his guards, and returned to take the
command of his followers, who where rising
in arms all over the north. These were deftin-

# They take arms against the Queen.

ed to second and improve the blow, by which
his father proposed, secretly, and at once, to
cut off Mar, Morton, and Maitland, his prin-
cipal adversaries. The time and place for per-
petrating this horrid deed were frequently ap-
pointed; but the executing of it was wonder-
fully prevented , by some of those unfor seen
accidents, which so often occur to disconcert
the schemes, and to intimidate the hearts of
affafins. *) His own house at Strathbogie
was the last and most convenient scene ap..
pointed for committing the intended violence.
But, on her journey thither, the Queen heard
of young Gordon's flight and rebellion, and
refusing, in the first transports of her indigna-
tion, to enter under the father's roof, by that
fortunate expression of her resentment, lhved
her Miniflers from unavoidable destruction.:: ')

They take arms againit the Queen.

The ill success of there efforts of private

revenge precipitated Huntly into open rebellion.
As the Queen was intirely under the direction
of his rivals, it was impossible to work their
ruin, without violating the allegiance which
he owed his Sovereign. On her arrival at in-
vernefs, the commanding officer in the cafrle,

by

K) Keith, 230o
'*) Knox, 318.

by Hluntly's orders, shut the gates againfl her.
JAlary was obliged to lodge in the town, which
was open and defenceless ; but this too was
quiclkly surrounded by a multitude of the Earl's
followers. *) Tile utmolft conifernation seized
the Queen, \who owas attended by a very flen-
der train. She every mortient expeEted the
approach of the rebels, and some ships were
already ordered into the river to secure her
cfcape. The loyalty of the lonroes, Frazers,
lacklintofhes, and some neighbouring clans,
\vho took artns in her defence, saved her from
this danger. By their alliftance, she even
forced the cattle to surrender, and infli'ted on
the Governor the punifhmrent which his info-
lence deserved.

This open act of disobedience w.as the oc-

cafion of a measure more galling to Huntly than
any the Queen lad hitherto taken. Lor(.
Erskine, having pretended a right to the Elarl
dom of Mar, Steward resigned it in his favonr;
and at the fame time Mary coiferred apoi; iinm
the title of Earl of Mutrray, vith the efta'e
annexed to that dignity , which lad been in
the polleffion of the Earl of Huntly since the
year 1548. **) From this he co!clinded .imat
his family was devoted to defcruciion; niti

') Cr.awr. O!iccrs ol'State. .

87. S-

') Crawf. Pcer. 359,
Hit. of Scotl. Vol. I. Y

dreading to be firippcd, gradually , oftthof:
pofllefions, which, in reward of their services,
the gratitude of the Crown had befrowed on
himself, or his ancestors , he no longer dif-
guised his intentionls, but, in defiance of the
Queen's proclamation, openly took arms. In-
stead of yielding thole places of strength, which
Mlary required him to surrender, his followver;
dispersed or cut il pieces the parties whicl
she diipatched to take pofleffion of them; e)
and lie hinmfell advancing with a considerable
body of men towards Aberdeen, to which place
the Queen was now returned, filled her small
court with contiernation. Murray had only a
handful of men in whom he could confide. '*)
In order to form the appearance of an army, lih
was obliged to call in the affifiance of the
neighbouring Barons; but as ntoft of there either
favoured Huntly's designs, or stood in awe of
his power, from them no cordial or eli'ecRuai
service could be expected,

Witll thcfe troops, howtever, Murray, whu

could gain nothing by delay, marched briskly
towards the enemy. (O&cob, 28.) He founti
them at Corriclhie, polfed to great advantage;
be commanded his northern afloci:-tes inltantly
to begin the attack ; but on the tirft motion o!
the enemy, they treacherously turned their

') lKnox, 319.
:':) Kieith, 23o.

# He is defeated by the Earl of Murray.

backs; and Hunitly's followers, throwing aside
their spears, and breaking their ranks, drew
their swords, and- rushed forward to the. pur-
suit.

He is defeated by the Earl of Murray.

It was then, that Murray gave proof both

of fleady courage, and of prudent conduct.
He stood immovable on a rising ground, with
the small but trusty body of his adherents, wh(
presenting their spears to the enemy, received
them with a determined resolution, which they
little expected. The Highland broad sword is
not a weapon fit to encounter the Scottish
ipear. In every civil commotion, the fuperio-
rity of the latter has been evident, and has
always decided the conteit. On this occfion
the irregular attack of Huntly's troops was
easily repulsed by Murray's firm battalion. Be-
fore they recovered from the confusion occa-
sioned by this unforeseen resistance, those who
bad begun the flight, willing to regain their
credit with the viforiuus party, fell upon thenm
and completed the rout. Huntly himnelf, who
was extremely corpulent, was trodden to death
in the pursuit. His sons, Sir John and Adam,
were taken, and Murray returned in triumph
to Aberdeen with his prisoners.

The trial of men taken in aftual rebellion

against their Sovereign was extremely short.
Three days after the battle, Sir John. Gordon

Y z

was beheaded at Aberdeen. His brother Adami
was pardoned on account of his youth. Lord
Gordon, who had been privy to his father's
designs, was seized in the forth, and upon
trial found guilty of treason; but, through tle
Queen's clemency, the punifhmnent was re
mitted. The firit Parliament proceeded agiinli
this great family , with the uttroll rigour of
law, and reduced their power and fortune to
the lowest ebb, :)

*) This conlrpiracy of tile Earl of Huntly is one of the inrl

intricate and myfleriols pfl'ages in the Scottish ililtr.
As it vas a trainfatioll purely domeflick, and illn wxhi
the Englifli were little interiened, few original prii-,;
concerning it have been futtid ill Cecil's tolle0iini, thi
great ftorelloufe of evidence and informatioll witll rcarail
to the alla rs al' this period.

Bitchliiana fuppolfes lMaiy to liave sorned a defin al),o: l:.

tinle of Mdellroyilg; MNirrly , aind of empilloyi it tile p'i w
of tie Earl of Htntiy for this puirlolfe. Iuit lis accollnt t
this whovle tranlfaitlion apilears to le so void of' tll,

:i!i

even of lirobabiliy , as to deserve no ferioits ex:lilillniti"'
At thlat time i, Ml-.y v\iated power, and I'eetis to !.::c
lhad no illCliatio:t i ro :Ollllii it any aa of vio!ence It:oni .'
brother.

Two otier lIvpothefes tave been advanced , iln Lrdili t

explain this mauxtter; but they appear to be equally !c.:tce
frotn tilth.

1. It caninot Meiil be conceived, that the Qtleei's joinre)y *J

the north was a Icbeille concerted by lu.trr ay ill o'tLc t*
ruin the Ehrl ofl' ihtly. I. iHnly lad relid a
:ilinolt ever lince tile Queen's return. Keith, .9S. A'I'
lteid. 1 75, &c. 'Tis \\ as thle proper lla e to l!'ltC
s'eized himn il. To attaclk liill ill .belde.t iilire, tie
tear of his powver, and itl the inidft of Iis vafnals, \'lt
pro;,et equlally abftird aild hazardous. 2. The Queei xll
not accoilpalnied wiith a body of troops. clip.be o :-
temlptinis g any tihing againt Huntly by viletce; elir trlit
vas tnot nlore nninerctus :a .an \, n it!'tua ill tlsit '

As the fall of the Eatl of Huntly is the

mnoft important event of this year, it would
have been improper to interrupt the narrative
hy taking notice of lesser tranfations , Wvhich
may now be related with equal propriety.

Greatest tranqnility, Keith, 23o. S. There remain two
origilaal letters with regard to thils collpirlacy o!e ('rl1 t
Randolph the liiIlifih Refidellt, and another frolm haitlald.
both diref'ed to Cecil. They talk of Huntly's neal'ures a,
notorioil'ly treasonable. Randolph mentions his repeated
attempts to ainfliniate Murray, &c. No hint is given of
any previous resolution, formed by Mary's Milliters, to ruin
Iluntly and his family. H-lad any fulch design ever exilted.
it was Randollpl's duty to have difcoveted it; nor woultd
11aitland have laboured to conceal it froin the English fecre-
tary. Keith , 229. 232-

11, To suppose that the Earl of Huntly had laid any plan for

t'eizing tle Queen , and her AMiniFrers , feelms to he no lerf
i:ipribabhle. 1. Onl the Qiteetn' arrival inl the ntorth , het
laboured, in good earnerli to gain her favour, and to oh-
tain a pardon for his fitl. Knox. 31S. 2. He miet tie
Queen, firil' at Aberdeen , and thens at Rlothemlay, wilither
lie woulld not have veltitred to come, had he harboured
any filch trea'sonable refo)lutiol. Knox , 317. 3. His condti(i
,was irre'iolute and wavering, lilie that of a mant difcoti:erted
by an uil'orefeen danger, tino like one executing a coln-
certed planl. 4. The inofi considerable perfors ors his cpir
fibtmiitted to the Queen, and fouitd surety to obey lier
colmmands. Keith, 226. Had the Earl been previoli'ly
determinied to rife in arils againif the Queen , or to feizc
her hlinircers, it is probable he hwould have imparted it to
his principal followers , nor oul'd they have deserted hibn
in this manlner.

For these ral'ons, w/e have, oil the one land , vinudi-

cated the Eari of Murrny from ally deliberate intentit.n of
ruining the family of Gordon; and on the other hand, we
hive itputted the violene cotndtiti of the Ei rl of Hnitly , to
a 'iletlen start of relentment, without clarging hinm 'ith
auy preme:lirtaed purpore of rfebllion.

# An interview between Elizabeth and Mary proposed.

An interview between Elizabeth and Mary propored.

In the beginning of summer, Mary, who

was desirous of entering into a more intimate
correspondence and familiarity with Elizabeth,
employed Maitland to desire a perfonai inter.
view with her, somewhere in the noith of
England. As this proposal could not be rejefted
with decency, the time, the place, al:d the
circurniances of the meeting were inflantly
agreed upon. But Elizabeth was prudent
enough not to admit into her kingdom, a rival,
who outshone herself, so far, in beauty , and
gracefulness of person; and who excelled, so
eminently, in all the arts of insinuation and
addrets. Under pretence of being confined to
London , by the attention which she was ob-
liged to give to the civil wars in France, she
put off the interview for that season, *) and
prevented her fubjies from feeing the Scottish
Queen, the charms of whose appearance and
behaviour she envied, and had fame reason to
dread.

During this year, the Aflembly of the

church met twice. (June 2. Decemb. 25.)
In both these meetings, were exhibited many
complaints of the poverty and dependence of
the church ; and many murmurs against the
negligence or avarice of those, who had been

') K~eith> 2l6,

# Negotiations with regard to the Queen's marriage.

appointed to collet, and to difrribute the fnall
fund , appropriated for the maintenance of
preachers. *) A petition, craving redress of
their grievances, was presented to the Queen;
Lbt without any efTecE. There was no reason
to expeft that Mary would discover any for-
wardnefs to grant the requests of such ftp-
plicants. And as her Minillers, though all most
zealous Protestants, where thenfelves growing
rich on the inheritance of the church , they
were equally regardless of the indigence and
demands of their brethren.

Negotiations wilth,regard to the Que:e's inarringe.

Mary had now continued above two years

in a slate of widowhood. Her gentle admini-
ftration had secured the hearts of her subjects,
who were impatient for her marriage, and wish-
ed tile Crown to descend in the right line
from their ancient Monarchs. She herself was
the most amiable woman of the age, and the
fame of her accomplishments , together with
the favourable circumstance of her having one
kingdom already in her pofeillion , and the
prolpce& of mounting the throne of another,
prompted many different Princes to solicit an
a!liancp so illurrrions. Scotland, by its situation,
threw so much weight and power into wh:t-
ever scale it fell, that all Europe waited with

# She is solicited by different Princes.

# By the Archduke Charles.

Solicitude for Mary's determination; and no
event in that age e:cited stronger political fears
and jealousies; none interested more deeply the
passions of several Princes, or gave rife to more
contradictory intrigues, than the marriage of
the Scottish Queen.

She is solicited by different Princes.

The Princes of the House of Austria re-

membered what vast projets the French h:ad
founded on their former alliance with the
Queen of Scots; and though the unexpe&6ele
death, first of Henry and then of Francis, had
hindered these from taking effet , yet if Alary
should again make choice of a husband among
the French Princes, the fame designs might be
revived and prosecuted with better success.

By the Archduke Charles.

In order to prevent this, the Emperor en-

tered into a negotiation with the Cardinal of
Lorrain, who had proposed to marry the Scot-
tifh Queen to the Archduke Charles, Ferdi-
nand's third son. The matter was communi-
cated to Mary; and Melvil, who at that time
attended the Eletor. Palatine, was commanded
to inquire into the character and situation of
the Archduke. ':)

-;' M'. 63. 065. Keith, 239, See Append. No, VII,

# By Don. Carlos of Spain.

# By the Duke of Anjon.

By Do!.Carlos of Spain.

Philip Il. though no less apprehensive of

Mary's falling once more into the hands of
France, envied his uncle Ferdinand the acqui-
fition of so important a prize; and as his own
insatiable ambition grasped at all the kingdoms
of Europe, he employed his amblaffador at the
French court, to solicit the Princes of Lorraii
in behalf of his son Don Carlos, at that time
the heir of all the extensive dominions which
belonged to the Spanish monarchy. :)

By the Duke of Anjon.

Catherine of Medicis, on the other hand,

dreaded the marriage of the ScottiCh Queen
with any of the Austrian Princes, which would
have added so much to the power and preten-
sions of that ambitious race. Her jealousy of
the Princes ofLorrain rendered her no less averse
from an alliance, which, by fecnring them the
proteteion of the Emperor or King of Spain,
would give new boldness to their enterprising
spirit, and enable them to set the power of the
Crown, which they already rivalled, at open
defiance: and as she was afraid that these fplendicd
proposals of the Austrian family would dazzle
the young Queen, she instantly dispatched Caf-
telnau into Scotland, to offer her in marriage

) Cafteln, 461. Addit, a Labour. 50I. 503.

# Mary's deliberations concerning it.

the Duke of Anjou, the brother of her fortner
husband, who soon after mounted the throne
of France. *)

Mary's deliberations concerting it.

MIary attentively weighed the pretensions

of so many rivals. The Archduke had little to
recommend him, but his high birth. The
example of Henry VIII. was a warning againif
contrasting a marriage with the brother of her
former husband; nor could fhebear the thoughts
of appearing in France, in a rank inferior to
that which she had formerly held in that king..
dom. She listened, therefore, with partiality,
to the Spanish propositions, and the profpectof
such vast power and dominions flattered the am.
bition of a young and aspiring Princess.

Three several circumstances, however,con-

curred to divert Mary from any thoughts of a
foreign alliance.

The first of there was the murder of her

uncle the Duke of Guise. The violence and
ambition of that nobleman had involved 'his
country in a civil war; which was condufed
with furious animosity, and various success.
At last the Duke laid siege to Orleans, the bul-
wark of the Proteofant cause; and he had re-
duced that city to the last extremity, when lie
was afiaffinated by the frantick zeal of Poltrot.

') Castelnanl, 4C'l.

# The views of Elizabeth.

Tbhi blow proved fatal to the Queen or Scots.
The young Duke was a minor; and the Car-
dinal of Lorrain, though subtle and intriguing,
wanted that undaunted and enterprising cou-
rage, which rendered the ambition of hit brother
so formidable. Catherine, inflead of encourag-
ing the ambition, or furthering the pretensions
of her daughter in law, took pleasure in mor-
tifying the one, and in disappointing the other,
In this fituatioi, and without such a prote&or,
it became necessary for Mary to contra& her
views, and to proceed with caution; and what-
ever profpedt of advantage might allure her, sho
could venture upon no dangerous or doubtful
measure.

The views of Elizabeth.

The second circumstance which weighed

with Mary, was the opinion of the Queen of
England. The marriage of the Scottish Queen
intereifed Elizabeth more deeply than any other
Prince; and she observed all her deliberations
concerning it with the molt anxious attention.
She herself teems early to have formed a refo-
lution of living unmarried, and she discovered
no frnall inclination to impose the fame law on
the Queen of Scots. She had already expe-
rienced what use might be made of Mary's
power and pretensions, to invade her dominions,
and to disturb her pollellion of the Crown. The
death of Francis II. had happily delivered her

from this danger, -which fihe determined to
guard again t for the future, with the utmoFi
care. As the relilefs ambition of the Aultrian
Princes, the avowed and bigotted patrons of
the Catholick fuperflition, made her, in a par-
ticular manner, dread their neighbourhood, she
infiruEed Randolph to remonfirate, in thn
firongeft terms, againfl any alliance with then ;
and to acquaint Mary, that as fle herfelfwou!d
confider such a match to be a breach of the
personal friendship, in which they were so hap-
pily united; so the English nation would regard
it, as the diflolution of that confederacy which
now fubtifted between the two kingdoms:That,
in order to preserve their own religion 'and li-
berties, they would , in all probability, take
some ftep prejudicial to her right of fucceflion.
which, as she well knew, they neither wanted
power nor pretences to invalidate and set aside.
This threatening was accompanied with a pro-
mise , but expressed in very ambiguous terms,
that if Mary's choice of a husband should prove
agreeable to the English nation, Elizabeth
would appoint proper persons examine her title
to the succession, and, if well founded, conm-
mand it to be publickly recognised. She ob-
served, however, a mysterious silence concern-
ing tile person, on whom she wished the choice
of the Scottish Queen to fall. The revealing
of this secret was reserved for some future ne-
gotiation. Mean while she threw out some

# The sentiments of her own subjects.

obscure hints, that a native of Britain, or one
not of princely rank, would be her lafefl and
most inoTfenive. choice *') And advice oflered.wich
such an air of superiority and command, mor-
tified, no doubt, the pride of the Scottish
Queen. But, under her present circtumflances,
The was obliged to bear this indignity. IDefitute
of all foreign assistance, and intent upon the
English succession, the great objel- of her wishes
and ambition, it became necefliry to court a
rival, whom, without manifest imprudence, she
could not venture to offend.

The fcitin enits of her own II!je so

The inclination of her own fubjebts was

another, and not the least coniderable circun-
Itance, which called for Mary's attention at this
conjuncture. They had been taught, by the
fatal experiment of her former marriage, to
dread an union with any great Prince, whose
power might be employed to oppress their re-
ligion and liberties. They trembled at the
thoughts of a match with a foreigner; and if
the Crown should be strengthened by new do-
minions or alliances, they foresaw that the
royal prerogative would soon be fretched beyond
its ancient and legal limits.. The'r eagerness
to prevent this could scarce fail of throving
them into the arms of England. -Eilizalbeth
*) Kaeitli, 345. 14ii

# A Parliament held.

would be ready to afford them her aid, towards
obftrafting a measure so disagreeable to herself.
'v'was easy for theni to seize the person of the
Sovereign. By the assistance of the Englifli
fleet, they could render it difficult for any
foreign Prince to land in Scotland. The Roman
Carholicks , now an inconsiderable party in the
kingdom, and dispirited by the loss of the Earl
of Huntly, could give no obfrrustion to their
designs. To what violent extremes, the national
abhorrence of a foreign yoke might have been
carried, is manifest from the tranfa&ions, both
previous and subsequent to the present period.

For there reasons, Mary laid aside, at that

time, all thoughts of foreign alliance, and seem-
ed willing to sacrifice her own ambition, in order
to remove the jealousies of Elizabeth, and to
quiet the fears of her owin lubje&s.

A Parliament held.

- The Parliament met this year, (May 26.

a 56 3. ) for the first time since the Queen's return
5nto Scotland. Mary's administration had hi-
therto been extremely popular. Her Ministers
poflefled the confidence of the nation; and, by
consequence, the proceedings of that assembly
were condu&ted with perfec: unanimity. The
grant of the earldom of Murray to the Prior of
St. Andrew's was confirmed: The Earl of
Huntly, and several of his vassals and depen-
liaats, were attainted: The attainder againRf

# Nothing determined with regard to religion;

Kirkaldy of Grange, and some of his accom-
plices in the murder of Cardinal Beatoun, was
reversed: *) The at of oblivion , mentioned
inl the treaty of Edinburgh, received the roytal
fanition. But lary, who had determined ilev.,r
to ratify that treaty, took care that this ifaition
should not be deemed any acknowledgment of
its validity; she granted her consent merely in
condescension to the Lords in Parliament, who,
on their knees, besought her to allay the jea-
loufies and apprehensions of her fubjests, by
such a gracious law. *:)

Nuotiltig determined with regard to religio,;

No attempt was made, in this Parliament,

to procure theQueen's aflent to the laws eflablifh-
ing the Protetiant religion. Her Ministers,
though zealous Protestants themselves, were
aware that this could not be urged without.
manifest danger and imprudence. She had
confenlted, through their influence, to tolerate
and prote&t the reformed doctrine. They had
even prevailed on her to imprison and prosecute
the Archbishop of St. Andrew's , and Prior of
Whithorn, for celebrating mass contrary to her
proclamation. '>::) Mary. however, was fliJi

') Kox , 330,

") Spotlfr . 18.
"') K~eith', 3~.^0

# Which offends the clergy.

passionately devoted to the Romish superstition;
and though, from political motives, she had
granted a temporary protection of opinions,
which she disapproved, tnere were no grounds
to hope that she would agree to establish them
for perpetuity. The moderation of those who
yrofelfed it, was the best method for reconciling
the Queen to the Proteflant religion. Tine
might abate her bigotry. Her prejudices might
.wear off gradually, and at last she might yield
to the wiflhes of her people, what their ism-
portunity of their violence could never haveex-
torted. Many laws of importance were to be
proposed in Parliament; and to defeat all these,
by such a fruitless and ill-timed application to
the Queen, would have been equally injurious
to individuals, and detrimental to the publick.

which offends the clergy,

The zeal of the Protestant clergy wxas deai

to all these considerations of policy. Eager
and impatient. it brooked no delay: Severe and
inflexible, it would condescend to no compliances,
The leading men of that order insisted, that this
opportunity of efrablifhingreligion by law-,u'as
not to' be neglected. They pronounced the
moderation of the courtiers, apoftacy; ani
their endeavours to gain the Queen, they reckon-
ed criminal and servile. Knox solemnly r'
nounced the friendship of the Earl of Ilurry.
as a. man devoted to Mary, and so blindly zealous

fol

# and occasions a tumult among the people.

forlier service, as to become regardless of thore
objets which he had hitherto esteemed most
f£cred. This rupture, which is a strong proof
of Murray's sincere attachment to the Queen at
that period, continued above a year and a
half. *)

The preachers being disappointed by the

men in whom they placed the greatest confi-
dence, gave vent to their indignation in their
pulpits. These echoed more loudly than ever,
with declarations againfL: idolatry ; with difinal
presages concerning the Queen's mnarriage with
a foreigner; and with bitter reproaches againit
tlofe, who, from interefled motives, had de-
ferted that canue, which they once reckonedit:
their honour to support.

alsd occnflons a tumult among the people.

The people, inflamed by such vehement:

declamations, which were diciated by a zeal
more sincere than prudent, proceeded to rarh
and unjufrifiable acLs of violence. During the
Queen's absence, on a progress into the weft,
mass continued to be ceiebrated in her chapel
at Holyrood house. The multitude of tliofe
wilo openly resorted thither, gave great of-
fence to the citizens of Edinburgh, who, being
free from the restraint wshich file royal presence

')Kliox, 331,;
His, of Scot;, 7lo!t. . Z

# Knox tried on that account, but acquitted.

'imposed, assembled in a riotous manner, ( 1763.
in the month of August) interrupted the ser-
vice, and filled fiuch as were present, witlh !ie
utmost conifernation. Two of the ringleaders
in this tumult were ieized, and a day appoilin
ed for their trial. !)

Knox tried on that account, but acquilited.

Knox, who esteemed the zeal opfthefeper-

sons laudable, and their conduft meritorious,
confidered them as full'erers in a good cause;
and in order to screen them from danger, he
ifl'ued circular letters, requiring all who pro-
efl'ed the true religion, or were concerned for
the preservation of it, to aflemble atEdinburgli
on the day of trial, ( Otober 8.) that, by tliei
presence, they miglit comfort and ail'it tlieir
distressed brethren. **) One of these letters
fell into the Queen's hands. To aflemble the
fubjetts without the authority of the Sovereign,
was conifrrued to be treason, and a resolution
was taken to prosecute Knox for that crime,
before the Privy Council. (Dec. I5.) Happily
for him, his judges were not only zealous Pro-
teftants, but the very men, who, dnring the
late commotions, had openly reftired and let
at defiance the Queen's authority. It was under
precedents, drawn from their own condulr

:') ilox, 335,
") Ibid. 336.

# Negotiations with regard to the Queen's marriage.

that Knox endeavoured to shelter himself. Nor
would it have been an easy matter for these
Counsellors to have found out a diftin&iqn, by
which they could censure him, without con-
demning themselves. After a long hearing, he
was unanimouflv acquitted. Sinclair Bishop of
Ross, and Prelldent of the Court of Sefflon, a
zealous Papilf, heartily concurred with the other
Counsellors in this decision; :) a remarkable
fa&, which shows the unsettled itate ofgovern-
ment in that age; the low condition to whici'
regal authority was then funkl; and the impu-
nity with which fubjefts might invade those
rights of the Crown, which are now held
sacred.

Negotiations \ibth regard t, hile Q;eenr's marriage.

The marriage of the Scottish Queen con-

tinued Rill to be the obje&e of attention andin-
trigue. Though Elizabeth, even while she
wished to direa Mfary, treated her with a dil-
guftful reserve ; though she kept her, without
necessity, iu a itatc of fiifpence; and hinted
often at the person whom she defiined to be
her husband, without direftly mnentioning his
name; yet Mary framed all her ations to ex-
press such a prudent refpe for the Englishs
Queen, that foreign Princes began to imagine

") Knox, 345
) 1(11Ox, g45

she had given herself up implicitly to h;r di-
rection. *) The prospect of this union alarm..
e.l Catherine of Medicis. Though Catlerin:
ilad taken pleasure, ail along, in doing ill o'-
sices to the Queen of Scots; though, soon after
the Duke of Guise's death, she had put upon
her a most mortifying indignity, by stopping
the payment of her dowry, by depriving her
'ubjeSt the Duke of Chatelherault of his peni.nn,
and by bestowing the command of the Scottifi
Guards on a Frenchman; '*") she resolved,
however, to prevent this dangerous conjunitlioii
of the British Queens. For this purpose, flie
now employed all her art to appeate Mary, :'"')
to whom she had given so many causes of of-
fence. The arrears of her dowry were inftantlv
paid; more punEtual remittances were promised
for the future; and offers made, not oniy tn
restore, but to extend the privileges of tlir.
Scottish nation in France. It was ealy for
Mary to penetrate into the rotives ofthis fuddcii
change; she well knew the charater of her
mother'in law, and laid little firess upon pro-
feflions of friendship, which came from a Prin-
cess of such a false and unfeeling heart.

') Keitl, 24S.

"') Id. 244.
"') See AppCjiid. No. Vi.ll

# Elizabeth recommends Leicester to her for a husband.

Elizabnbeth recomnnends Leicester to her for a

Iihufland.

The negotiation with England, relative to

the marriage, fuflered no interruption from this
application of the French Queen. As Mary, in
compliance to her subjects, and preficd by the
ftrongell matives of interest, determined specd-
ily to marry, Elizabeth was obliged to brealk
that unaccountable silence, which she had hi-
therto all'e&ec. The secret was difciofed,
( March 1.564.) and her favourite Lord Robert
])udlcy, afterwards Earl of Leiceller, was de-
clared to be the happy man, whom flie had chosen
to be the husband of a Queen courted by so
many Princes. '::)

Elizabeth's wifdorm and penetration were

remarkable in the choice of her Miinifters; in
diftiingtifhing her favourites, those great quali-
ties were less conspicuous. She was influenced
in two cafes so opposite, by merit of very dif-
ferent kinds. Their capacity for business, their
knowledge, their prudence, were the talents
to which alone flte attended, in chufing her
Aliniifers; whereas beauty and gracefulness of
pclron, po!ifhed manners, and courtly address,
\'ere the :!.omtnplifhments on which she be-
ilow.ed her sf-our. She ated in the one cafe
with the il fdom of a Queen, in the other,
flhe dilcovered the weakness of a woman. To

# Mary offended at this.

this; LeiceRfer owed his grandeur. Though
remarkable neither for eminence in virtue, nor
superiority of abilities, the Queen's partiality
distinguished him on every occasion. Sheraifcd
him to the highest honours, she bestowed on
him the moit important employments, and ma-
nifefted an afTetion so disproportionate to his
merit, that, in the opinion ofthat age, itcould
be accounted for only by the power of planetary
influence. ")

Mary offended at this.

The high spirit of the Scottish Queen could

not well bear the first overture of a match with
a subjet. Her own rank, the splendour of her
former marriage, and the solicitations, at this
time, of so many powerful Princes, crouded
into her thoughts, and made her sensibly feel
how humbling and difrefpetful Elizabeth's pro-
pofal was. She diflembled, however, with
the English Resident; and though she declared,
in strong terms, what a" degradation fhex ould
deem this alliance, which brought along uwith
it no advantage, that could justify such neglect
of her own dignity, she mentioned the Earl of
Leicester, notwithstanding, in terms full of
refpet. '*)

') Canden, g49.
***) Kieith, 2353.

# Elizabeth's views in recommending him.

Elizabeth's views in recoinmletning him.

Elizabeth, we rtay preftime, did not wifsh

that the proposal should be received in any
nther manner. After the extraordinary marks
h'e had given of her own attachment to Lei--
cefter, and while he was still in the very
lieight of favour, it is not probable she could
think seriously of beftowinug him upon another.
"rwas not her aim to persuade, but only to
amilfe Mary. *) Almost three years were
elapsed since her return into Scotland; and
though solicited by her fuibjefs, and courted
Ly the greatefl Princes in Europe, she had hi-
therto been prevented from marrying, chiefly
by the artifices of Elizabeth. And if, at this
time, the English Queen could have engaged
gMary to lifen to her proposal in favour of Lei-
cefter, ler power over this creature of her own
.:ould have enabled her to protract the nego-
tiation at pleasure; and by keeping her rival
unmarried, flie would have rendered the pro-
fpeft of her fuccefion less acceptable to the
lEnglifh.

Leicester's own situation was extremely de-

licate, and embarralffing. To gain poJleffion cf'
the most arnmible woman of the age, to carry
away this prize frotu so many contending Prlin-
ces, to mount !the throne of an ancient: kilng'

domt, might have flattered the ambition of a
fubje& much more considerable than him. He
saw all these advantages, no doubt; and, in
secret, they made their full 'mprellion on him,
But, without offending Elizabeth, he durst not
venture on the mofi distant discovery of his
sentiments, or take any ftep towards facilitating
his acquisition of objects so worthy of desire.

On the other hand, Elizabeth's partiality

towards him, which she was at no pains to
conceal, *) might inspire him with hopes of
attaining the supreme rank in a kingdom, more
illustrious than Scotland. Elizabeth had often
declared, that nothing but her resolution to lead
a single life, and his being born her own fab-.
jet, would have hindered her from chufing the
Earl of Leicelter for a husband. Such confi-
derations of prudence are, however, often fur-
mounted by love; and Leicester might tatter
himself, that the violence of her afl'eclion would
at length triumph both over the maxims of po-
licy, and the scruples of pride. These hopes
induced him, now and then, to conclude the
proposal of his marriage with the Scottish Queen
to be a project for his deftrucion; and he im-
puted it to the malice of Cecil, who, under
the specious pretence of doing him honour, il-
tended to ruin him in the good opinion both
of Elizabeth and Mary. **)

"*) Meiv. . 9 94.
") !bid, I.Q.

# Mary entertains thoughts of marrying Lord Darnly.

A treaty of marriage, proposed by one

Queen, who dreaded its fuccers; lifiened to
by another , who was secretly determined
against it; and fc:rce desired by the man him-
self, whose interest and reputation it was; cal-
culated, in appearance , to promote; could
not, under so many unfavorable circumitances,
be brought to a fortunate iflue. Both Eliza-
beth and Mary continued, however. to aftk
with equal dilfmtulation. The former, not-
withfranding her fears of loling Leicester, so-
licited warmly in his behalf. The latter,
though fihe began about this time to cast hter
eyes upon another fubjeft of England, did not:
at once, venture finally to rejet Elizabeth's
favourite.

flary entertains thoulightis f Lnarryliw, t.ord i)aminl.

The person towards whom Mary began to

turn her thoughts, was Henry Stewart Lord
Darnly, eldefr son of the Earl of Lennox. That;
nobleman, having been driven out of Scotland
under the regency of the Duke ofChatelherault,
'ad lived in banishment for twenty years. H-is
wife, Lady MaargaretDouglas, was Mary's molt
dangerous rival in her claim upon the English
fiicceffion. She was the daughter of Margaret,
the eldest sifter of Henry VII. by the Earl:t of
Angus, whom that Queen married after dle
dcath of her husband James IV. In thaL atge
trle right and order ofiilcceffion was not fettled

with the fame accuracy, as at present. Titne.
and the decision of almost every cafe that can
possibly happen , have at last introduced cer-
tainty into a matter, which , naturally, is
fubje& to all the variety arising from the caprice
of lawyers, guided by obscure, and often inna-
ginary analogies, Lady Lennox, though born
of a second marriage, was one degree nearer
the royal blood of England than Mary. Shr
was the daughter, Mary only the grand daunT-
ter of Margaret. This was not the on!'- nii-
vantage over Mary which Lady Lennox en-
joyed. She was born in England, and by a
maxim of law in that country, with regard ti
private inheritances, ,, whoevor is not born in
lEngland, or at least of parents, who, at the
time of his birth, were in the obedience of
the King of England, cannot enjoy any inlhc-
ritance in the kingdom. ::) " This maxin,
H-ales, an English lawyer, produced in a treat-
ife , which he published at this time, and er.
deavoured to apply it to the right of fuccefico!
to the Crown. In a private canfe, theec pre-
texts might have given rife to a long and doubt-
ful litigation; where a Crown was at stake,
such nice disputes and fubtilties were to be
avoided wvitlh the utmost care. If Darnly should
happen to contraR an alliance with any of the
powerful families in England , or should p:1i'-

") Carte , Hili. o' Elug vol. iii. 4-:.

# Elizabeth secretly pleased with this.

]icly profess the Proteflant religion, these plau-
fible and popular topicks might be so urged, as
to prove fatal to the pretelnions of a foreigner,
and of a Papist.

Nlary was aware of all this; and in order

to prevent any danger from that quarter, had
early endeavoured to cultivate a friendly cor-
relpondence with the family of Lennox. In
the year I562, *) both the Earl and the Lady
Margaret were taken into cutiody by Eliza-
beth's orders, on account of their holding a
secret correspondence with the Scottish Queen.

Elizabeth fecrerly pleated with this.

From the time that Mary became sensible

of the difficulties, which would attend her
marrying a foreign Prince, file entered into a
still closer connexion with the Earl of Len-
nox, *') and invited him to return into Scot-
land. This she endeavoured to conceal from
Elizabeth; but a tranfaftion of so much import-
ance did not escape the notice of that dif-
cerning Princess. She observed, but did not
interrupt it. Nothing could fall in more per-
feftly with her views, concerning Scottish
affairs. She was pleased to fee the pride of
the Scottish Queen stoop , at lass , to the
thoughts of taking a subje&c. to her bed. Darnly

') Cambd. 389,
') Id. 396.

vwas in ro situation to excite her jealonluf, (r
her fears. His father's estate lay in Enl;land.
and by means of this pledge, fihe hoped to keeji
the negotiation entirely in her own hands, to
play the fame game of artifice and delay,
xvhich she had planned out, if her recommendl.
ation of Leicelter had been more favourably
receiv.cd.

As before the union of the two Crowns,

no subje6c of one kingdom could pals into the
other without the permission of both fovereitrs;
no sooner did Lenno: , under pretence of ir-
fecuting his wife's claim upon the carldoiii (,s
Angus, apply to Elizabeth for her licene '
go into Scotland, than he obtained it. Tl.
gether with it, fie gave him letters, wairnly
recommending his person and cause to Mary s
fricndfhip and protefion. *) But at the an:e
time, as it was her manner to involve all her
tran.fa'tions with regard to Scotland in lontl
degree of perplexity and contradiftion; fie
wvarne2d Mary, that this indulgence of Lcnno:
mig.tt prove fatal to herself, as his return
could not fail of reviving the ancient animo!.t'
between Lini and the house of Hamilton.

This admonition gave umbrage to MlIar

and drew from her an angry reply, xvwi(!' 'c
eafioned, for some time a total interruptionl o!

) lKeitli, 255. S6S.

all correspondence between the two Queens, *)
Ilary was not a little alarmed at this; fie
bthl dreaded the effects of Elizabeth's ref.-nt-
_,,ent, and felt fenlibly the disadvantage of
beilng excluded from a free intercourle with
England, where her AmibalTadors had all aionG
carried on, with some success, secret ncrCo-
tiations, which increased the number of :cL
partisans, and paved her way towards tlh
throne. In order to remove the causes cf li;e
lrefent difficulty, Melvil was sent e::prl'C; to
the court of England. He found it no dil'iicult
miatterto bring about a reconcilement ; and loon
reestablished the appearance, but :not the c')n-
fidence of friendship, which was all that had
tubfilted , for some time, between the tVwo
Queens.

During this negotiation, Elizabeth's pro-

feflions of love to Mary, and Melvil's replies in
name of his Mistress, were made in the lan-
guage of the warmest and most cordial friend-
ship. But what lelvil truly observes, with
refpeEt to Elizabeth, may be extended, with-
out injustice, to both Queens. ,, There was
neither plain dealing, nor upright meaning,
but great diflimulation . envy, and fear. *) "

'Keith, 25j. Mlely. S3,
D') Aelv·. 104,

# Lennox arrives in Scotland.

..cnnox arrives in Scotland,

Lennox , however, in consequence of the

licence which he had obtained, set out fr
Scotland, and was received. by the Queen, not
only with the rcfpect due to a nobleman so
nearly allied to the royal family, but treated
with a diitinguifhed familiarity which could not
fail of inspiring him with more elevated hopes,
The rumour of his son's marriage to the Queen
began to spread over the kingdom; and the
eyes of all Scotland were turned upon him as
the father of their future Master. The Duke
of Chatelherault was the firit to take the alarm.
Hie confidered Lennox as the ancient and herc-
ditary enemy of the house of Hamilton; and,
in his grandeur, saw the ruin of himself and
his friends. But the Queen interposed her au-
thority to prevent any violent rupture, and enim
ployed all her influence to bring about an ac-
commodation of the differences. *)

The powerful family of Douglas no lets

dreaded Lennox's return, from an apprehenfinm
that he would wrest the earldom of Angus out
of their hands. But the Queen, who well knew
how dangerous it would be to irritate Morton,
and other great men of that name, prevailed on
Lennox to purchase their friendship, by allow-

*) Keith, 539.

# The Clergy suspicious of the Queen's Zeal for Popery.

ilig his Lady's claim upon the earldom of Angus
to drop. *)

After there preliminary fleps, Mlary ven

tured to call a meeting of parliament. (.In the
month of December. ) The at of forfeiture,
pafied against Lennox in the year 545 , was
repealed, and be was publickly refrored to the
honours and elate of his ancestors. 4*)

The eccleiialtical tranfa&ions of this year

(June 25. Decem. 25.) were not conliderable,
In the afiemblies of the church, the fame coim-
pla nts of the increase of idolatry, the fame re-
presentations concerning the poverty of the
clergy, were renewed. The reply which the
Queen made to these, and her prornifes of
redress, were more satisfying to the Protest-
ants than any they had hitherto obtained. *;*)

Thle Clerg.y fupicious or the Queen's zeal for Popery.

But, notwithflanding her declaratio;s in

their favour, they could not help lharbouring
many suspicions concerning iMlary's designs
against their religion. She had never once
consented to hear any preacher of the reformed
do&frine. She had abated nothing of her bigot-
ted attachment to the Romish faith, The g,-

') Keitl , 268, Note (b).
") See Appendix, No. 1.-,

l') Keithl, 533. 539,

nius of that fuperflition, averse, at all times,
from toleration, was, in that age, ilerce and
unrelenting. Mary had given her friends on
the continent repeated aifurauces of her reifo
lution to reeftablifli the Catholick churcli, *)
She had industriously avoided every opportu.
nity of ratifying the acts of Parliament i560,
in favour of the Reformation. Even the pru-
te&tion, which , ever since her return , lhe had
aRTorded the Proteflant religion , was merely
temporary , and declared , by her own pro-
clamation, to be of force only ,, till she should
take some final order in the matter of reli-
gion. **) " The vigilant zeal of the preachers
was inattentive to none of these circumflances.
'ho coldness of their principal leaders, \who
were, at this time entirely devoted to the
conrt, added to their jealousies and fears.
These they uttered to the people, in language
which they efceemed suitable to the necessity o[
the times, and which the Queen reckoned dil-
refpeffu! and insolent. In a mpeting of ti:h
General Aftembly, Mlaitland publickly accused
Knox of teaching seditious doEtrine, concerning
the right of fubjeEts to refilf those Sovereigns,
xwho trespass against the duty which they owe
to the people. Knox was not backward to jl.

{ti-

C) Carte, vol. iii. 415,
"') Keith, 504. 510.

# Dissimulation both of Elizabeth and Mary, with regard to her marriage.

jf;fy what he had taught. And upon this ge-
neral dotrine of resistance , so jlff in its own
nature, but so delicate in its application to
particular cares, there ensued a debate, wvhich
admirably displays the talents and character of
both the disputants, the acuteness of the for-
mer embellished with learning , but prone to
ifbtletly; the vigorous underRfanding of the
latter, delighting in bold sentiments, and fu-
perior to all fear. *)

Diflimnulationl both of Elizabtth .id l Mary with

regard to her marriage.

Two years had already been consumed ir.

fruitless negotiations concerning the marriage
of the Scottish Queen. Mary had full lei'iur&
and opportunity to discern the fallacy and de-
ceit of all Elizabeth's proceedings with refpeet:
to that affair. But, in order to set the real in-
tentions of the JiEng'lifh Queen in a clear .ight,
and to bring her to tome explicit declaration of
her sentiments, Mary , at last , intimated to
Randolph, (Feb; 5.) that , on condition her
right of fucceflion to the Cirown of England
were publickly acknowledged, she was ready
to yield to the solicitations of his Mistress in
behalf of Leiceiter. *') Nothing ,

could be fartlhe

') Knox, 349.

':') Keith, 369.
Hist. of Scotl, Vol. 3. A.

than this from the mind and intention of Eli.
zabeth. The right of succession was a myfterv.
which, during her whole reign, her jealolivj'
preserved untouched, and unexplained. She
had promised, however, when file first began
to interest herself in the marriage of the Scot-.
tifh Queen , all that wras now demanded. H-ow
to retreat with decency, how to elude her for.
mer offer, was , on that account, not a little
perplexing.

The facility , with which Lord Darrny

obtained permifrfon to visit the court of Sclt
land, was owing, in all probability, to tli: r
embarraifinent, From the time of Melvil's am.
bafl'y, Lady Lennox had warmly solicited this
liberty for her ion. Elizabeth was no flranger
to the ambitious hopes with which that young
nobleman flattered himself. She had received
repeated advices from her Minilters of the fen-
timents which Mary began to entertain in his
favour. *) It was entirely in her powcr to
prevent his stirring out of London. In the
present conjuncture, however, nothing could
be of. more advantage to her, than Darnly's
journey into Scotland. She had already btought
one actor upon the stage, who, under lhe
management, had, for a long time, amused
the Scottish Queen. She hoped, no less abfo-
Intely, to direEt the motions of Darnly, wvh

'') K«;th, 1590. 261, 3<6.

# Darnly arrives in Scotland.

# Gains the Queen's heart.

was likewise her fubjeft; and again to involve
Alary in all the tedious intricacies of nego-
tiation. These motives determined Elizabeth
and her Minifiers to yield to the folicitatiolas of
Lady Lennox.

Darnly arrives in Scotland.

But this deep laid scheme was in a mo-

ment disconcerted. Such unexpefted events,
as the fancy of poets ascribes to love, are, at
some times, really produced by that pailion.
An affair, which had been the objet of so
many political intrigues , and had moved and
interefed so many Princes, was at last decided
by the sudden liking of the two young pert
sons. Lord Darnly was, at this time, in the
sirs bloom and vigour of youth. In beauty and
greacefulnefs of person, he surpassed all his
contemporaries he excelled, eilniently, in such
arts, as add ease and elegance to external
form, and which ena.ble it not only to dazzle,
but to pleacf. Mary was of an age, and of
a temper, to feel the full, power of these ac-
sonplilfnents.

Gains the Quenrs hearC,.

The impression which Lord Darnly made

upon her was visible from the time of their
firt interview. (Feb. 13.) The whole bu-
fiiefs of the court was to amuse, and An-

Aa a

tertain this illuflrious guest; ') and in all thuie
scenes of gaiety, Darnly, whose qualificationli
were altogether i'uperlicial and 'howy, aIp-
peared to great advantage. His conqucll of tlh
Queen's heart became complete; and inclination
now prompted her to conclude a marriage, the
first thoughts of lwhich had been suggested by
considerations merely political.

Elizabeth contributed, and perhaps not

without design, to increase the violence of this
patlion. Soon after Darnly's arrival in Scot-
land, she, in return to that meflage, whereby
Mary had signified her willingness to accept 0ot
Leicester, gave an answer, in fucl terms, as
plainly unravelled her original intention in ciiat
intrigue **). She promised , if tlhe Scottil'l
Queen's marriage with Leicester fliould take
place, to advance him to great honours:; bur
with regard to her title to the Englifl' fuc-
celion, she would neither susser any leg:l
inquiry to be made concerning it, nor permik
it to be publickly recognized, till fle herfell
fihould declare her resolution never to marry.
Notwithitanding Elizabeth's former promises,
Mary had reason to exped every thing contain-
ed in this reply; her high spirit, however,
could not bear, with patience, such a cruel
discovery of the contempt, the artifice, and

") IKnox, 369 p
"') 'Keith, ~?o. . Aprcnd. X55.

# The French court approves of the match.

utockery with ,which, under the veil of friend-
s'hip, she had been so long abused. She burIt
jinto tears of indignation, and ex;pre/lxd, vith
r,. utmost bitterness, her sense of that d'fin-
genuous craft. which had been employed to
deceive her. ")

The natural effeE: of this indignation was

to add to the impetuosity with which she pur-
fiued her own scheme. Blinded by resentment,
as well as by love, she observed no defets in
the man whom she had chosen; and began to
take the neccl]'ary steps tovwards accoimplifhing
her design, with all the impatience natural to
those paillons.

As Darnly was so nearly related to the

Queen, the canon law made it nece'iary to ob-
tain the Pope's dispensation before the cele-
brat.on of the marriage. For this purpose, she
early set on foot a negotiation rwith the court
of Rome. **)

'The French colrt approves of the miatch

She was bnfy, at the fame time, in pro-

curing the content of the French King and his
mother. Having communicated her design, and
the motives which determined her choice, to
Cailelnau the French Ambaflidor, she employed
him, as the molt proper person, to bring hi.s

') Keith, Append. I59t
") CaRnd, 369o

# Darnly disgusts several of the nobles.

court to fall in with her views. Among other
arguments to this purpose, Caftelnau mention.
ed Mary's attachment to Darnly, which he re.
presented to be so violent and deep rooted, that
it was no longer in her own power to break
off the match. *) Nor were the French Mli.
nifiers backward in encouraging Mary's passion,
HIer pride would never stoop to an alliance with
a subjet of France. By this choice, they
were delivered from the apprehension of a
snatch with any of the Austrian Princes, as
well as the danger of too close an union with
Elizabeth; and as Darnly professed the Roman S
Catholick religion , this suited the' bigotted
Schemes which that court had adopted.

Darnly disgusts several of the nobles,

While Mary was endeavouring to reconcile

foreign courts to a measure which file had so
much at heart; Darnly, and his father, by
their behaviour were raising up enemies at
home to obftru&t it. Lennox had, during the
former part of his life, discovered no great
compass of abilities , or political wisdom; and
appears to have been a man of a weak un-
derftanding, and violent passions. Darnly was
not superior to his father in understanding, and
all his passions were still more impetuous. ''

Cafteln. 464.
R· Keith, Z2. S?3.

# Particularly Murray.

To these, he added that insolence, which the
advantage of external form, when accompanied
with no quality more valuable, is apt to inspire.
Intoxicated with the Queen's favour, he began
already to afturne the haughtiness of a King,
and to put on that imperious air, which ma-
jetly itself can scarce render tolerable.

Particularly- Murray,

It was by the advice, or at leat with the

content of Murray, and his party, that Len-
nox had been invited into Scotland; *) and yet
no sooner did he acquire a firm fcoting in that
kingdom, than he began to enter into secret
cabals with those noblemen , who were known
to be avowed enemies to Murray, and, with
regard to religion, to be either neutrals, or
favourers of Popery. ;.:") Darnly, still more
imprudent, allowed some rash expressions con-
cerning those favours which the Queen's bounty
had conferred upon Murray, to escape him. *"*)

But, above all there, the familiarity which

Darnly cultivated with David Rizio the Italian,
contributed to increase the fnfpicion and disgust
of the nobles.

') KIJ.x, 367. Keit, .74.

') Kleith, 272,
'") d. '274,

# The rise of Rizio's favour.

The rife of Rizio's fzvo;ll.

The low birth and indigent condition of

this man , placed him in a station in wvlich he
ought naturally to have remained unknown to
poflerity. But what fortune called him to aLt,
and to susser in Scotland, obliges-hiftory tc de-
scend from its dignity, and to record his ad-
ventures. He was the son of a mulician in
Turin, and having accompanied the Piedmioi-
tefe Ambassador into Scotland, gained admil-
sion into the Queen's family by his skill iln
mufick. His servile condition had taught himi
suppleness of spirit, and insinuating manners.
He quickly crept into the Queen's favour, and
her French Secretary happening to return at
that time into his own country, was preferred
by her to that office. He now began to make
a figure in court, and to appear as a man of
weight and confequeice. The wvhole train of fiit-
ors and expeAants, who have an extreme saga-
city in discovering the paths which lead molt
dire&tly to success, applied to him. His recom-
mendations were observed to have great in-
fluence over the Queen, and he grew to be
confidered not only as a favourite, but as a
Minister. Nor was Rizio careful to abate that
envy, which always attends such an extraor-
dinary and rapid change of fortune. He studied,
on the contrary, to display the whole extent
of his favour, He asseted to talk often, and

# Darnly's connexion with him.

familiarly, with the Queen in publick. l He
equalled the greatest and most opulent fubjets,
in richnels of dress, and in the number of his
attendants. He discovered, in all his behalviour,
that assuming insolence , with which unmerited
prosperity inspires an ignoble mind. It was
with the utmost indignation that the nobles be-
held the power; it was with the utmoff diffi-
culty, that they tolerated the arrogance, of
this unworthy minion. Even in the Queen's
presence they could not forbear treating him
with Imarks of contempt. Nor was it his ex-
orbitant power alone, which exasperated the
Scots. They confidered him, and not without
reason, as a dangerous enemy to the Protefant
religion, and fufpe&ted that he held, for this
purpose, a secret correspondence with thecourt
of Rome. :*)

Dlrnlly' connexion with hinil

It was Darnly's misfortune to fall under

the management of this man, who, by flattery
and assiduity, easily gained on his vanity and
unexperience. Rizio's whole influence on the
Queen was employed in his behalf, and con-
tributedj without doubt, towards establishing
him more firmly in her afl'efions. **) But what-
ever benefit he might reap from his patronage,
') Buchan. 340. Melv. 1o7.

MeNly. :in.

# Elizabeth declares against the Queen's marriage with Darnly.

it did not counterbalance the contempt, and even
infamy, to which he was exposed, on account
of his familiarity with such an upstart.

Though Darnly daily made'progrefs in tl,

Queen's afet&ions, file conducted herself, how-
ever, with such prudent reserve, as to itnpofe
on Randolph the English Resident, a man other-
wife shrewd and penetrating. It appears from
his letters at this period, that lhe entertained
not the leat suspicion of the intrigue which
was carrying on; and gave his court repeated
af'urances, that the Scottifi Queen had no de-
sign of marryingDarnly. *) In the midst of
this security, Mary dispatched Maitland to si-
gnify her intention to Elizabeth, and to solicit
her consent to the marriage with Darnly. Tils
embassy was the first thing which opened tile
eyes of Randolph.

Elizabeth declares against the Queen's marriage

with Darnly.

Elizabeth asseted the greateit surprise at

this sudden resolution of the Scottish Queen,
(April I8. 1565.) but without reason. The
train was laid by herself, and she had nocaufe
to wonder when it took effe&. She expressed,
at the fame time, her disapprobation of the
match, in the strongest terms; and pretended
to foresee many dangers and inconveniencies

') heith, 713, and Append, I59,

arising from it, to both kingdoms. But this,
too, was mere affcctation. Mary had often
and plainly declared her resolution to marry.
It was impossible she could make any choice
more inoffensive. The danger of introducing
a foreign interest into Britain, which Elizabeth
had so justly dreaded, was entirely avoided.
Darnly, though allied to both Crowns, and pof-
fefled of lands in both kingdoms, could be for-
midable to neither. It is evident from allthefe
circumntances, that Elizabeth's apprepenfions of
danger could not poflibly be serious; and that,
in all her violent declarations against Darnly,
there was much mere of grimace than of
reality. ;:)

There were not wanting, however, politi-

cal motives of such weight, to induce thatwife
Princess to put on the appearance of great dif-
pleasure. Mary, intimidated by this, might
perhaps delay her marriage; which Elizabeth
desired to obftruft with a weakness that little
suited the dignity of her mind and the elevation
of her characer. Betides, the tranquillity of
her own kingdom was the great objet of Eli-
") Even the Hiltorians of that anie acknowledge, that the

marriage of the Scottifhl Queen with a ftibjeft wasfarfrom
being disagreeable to Elizabeth. Knox, 369. 373. nu-
r.aRn. 339. Caltelnau, wiho at that time was well acquaint-
ed wicli the intrigues of both the British courts, asserts,
upon grounds of great probability. that the match was
'Wholly Elizabeth's own work: Cafteln. 462. and that she
rejoiced at the accoinplifhmeiht of it, appears from the
letters of her own Amilal'adors. Keith, S80. 2S8.

zabeth's policy; and by declaring her diflatls
faction with Mlary's conduCt, she hoped to alarm
that party in Scotland, which was attached to
the EngliLh interest, and to encourage such of
the nobles, as secretly disapproved the matci,
openly to oppose it. The feeds of discord
would, by this means, be scattered through
that kingdom. Intestine commotions mighi
ariCe. Amidst these Mary could form none of
thole dangerous schemes, to which the unioir
of her people might have prompted her. Eii.
zabeth would become the umpire between the
Scottish Queen and her contending subje:t,.
And England might look on, with security,
while a tlorni, which she had raised, wafted
the only kingdom, which could possibly difsurb
its peace.

In prosecution of this scheme, she laid. bc-

fore her Privy Council the message from the
Scottish Queen, and consulted them with regard
to the answer fhefhouldreturn. ( May I. I565.)
Their determination, it is easy to conceive,
was perfectly conformable to her secret views.
They drew up a remonstrance against the in-
tended match, full of the imaginary dangers
with which that event threatened the king-
dom. *)

') Ieith, g;74, See Append. No. X.

# Sends Throgmorton to obstruct it.

Selnds Throginormtor to obftrult it.

Nor did she think it enough, to tfgniry

her disapprobation of the neaflure, either by
Mdaitland, Mary's Anmbafl'ador, or by Raridolph,
her ow\n Resident in Scotland; in order to add
nore dignity to the farce which file clhofe to
a&, fhie appointed Sir Nicholas 'Throgmorton
her Ainba£:ador lE;tr:o;dinary. She commanded
him to declare, in the firongeft terms, her dif-
fatisfaEtion with the frtp which Mlary proposed
to take; and, at the fanie time, toproduce the
determination of the Privy Council, as an evi-
dence that the fentiiments of the nation were
not dilferent from her own. Not long after, she
confined Lady Lenno. as a prisoner, firef in her
own house, and then feclt her to the Tower. *)

Intelligence of all this reached Scotland,

before the arrival of the English Ambaltador,
In the first transports of her indignation, Mary
relolved, no longer, to keep any measures with.
Elizabeth; and sent orders to Maitland, who
accompanied Throgmorton, to return infl-antly
to the English court, and, in her name, to de-
dare to Elizabeth, that after having been anmufed
so long to so little purpose; after having beenr
fooled, and imposed on so grossly by her arti-
sices; she was now resolved to gratify her own
inclination, and to ask no other ' cr; ent, but
') Keith, Append. 16I.

# Murray's aversion to Darnly.

that of her own fubjeAs, in the choice of an
husband. Mlaitland, with his uufal sagacity,
foresaw all the effects of such a rash and angry
message, and ventured rather to incur.the dif-
pleasure of his Milirefs, bydifobeying hercorn.
mands, than to be made the instrument oftear-
ing asunder, so violently, the few remaining
ties, which fiill linked togethsr the two
Queens. *).

Mary herself soon became sensible of her

error. She received the Engli'h ambassador
with refpe&t; justified her own condu&t with
decency; and though unalterable in her refo"
lution, she afTe&ed a wonderful solicitude to
reconcile Elizabeth to the measure; and even
pretended, out of complaisance towards her, to
put off the consummation of the marriage for
some months. *:) Jt is probable, however, that
the want of the Pope's dispensation, and the
profpeft of gaining the consent of her own lub-
jeers, were the real motives of this delay.

lurray's aversion to Drnlyf,

This content Mary laboured with the ut-

irholf induRtry to obtain. The Earl of Murray
was the person in the kingdom, whose concur-
rence was of the greatest importance; but she
had reason to fear that it would not be lro0

') Keith, Append, 160,
"} lIid, 'S-7

cured without extreme difficulty. From the
time of Lennox's return into Scotland, Murray
perceived that the Queen's affeltions began gra-
dually to be estranged from him. Dalrnlv,
Athol, Rizio, all the court favourites, combined
against him. His ambitious spirit could not
brook this diminution of his power, which his
former services had so little merited. He re-
tired into the country, and gave way to rivals,
with whom he was unable to contend. *) The
return of the Earl of Bothwell, his avowed
enemy, who had been accused of a design upon
his life, and who had resided for some time in
foreign countries, obliged him to attend to his
own safety. No intreaty of the Queen could
persuade him to a reconcilement with that noble-
man. He insisted on having him brought to a
publick trial, and prevailed, by his importu-
nity, to have a day fixed for it. Bothwell
durst not appear in opposition to a man, who
came to the place of trial, attended by 5000
of his followers on horseback. He was once
more constrained to leave the kingdom; but,
by the Queen's command, the sentence of out-
lawry, which is incurred by nonappearancer
was not pronounced against him. **)

Mary, sensible, at the fame time, of how

much importance it was, to gain a subjee si
') Reith, o73. 274. Append, 159-

IEith, ibid. s6o,

poswerFul and so popular as the Earl of Murray,
invited him back to court, and received him with
many demonflrations of reflpect and confidence.
At lafl flie desired himi to set an example to her
other fubjeEts by fabfcribing a paper, containing
a formal approbation of her marriage with Darnly.
Murray had many reasons to hesitate, and even
to withhold his al'ent. Darnly had not only
undermined his credit with the Queen, but
difcovored , on every occasion, a rooted aver-
sion to his person. By consenting to his ele-
vation to the throne, lie would give him such
an accefiion of dignity and power, as no man
willingly bellows on an enemy. The unhappy
eonseq uences which might follow upon a breach
with England were, likew ife, of considerable
weight with Murray. He had always openly
preferred a confederacy with England, before
the ancient alliance with France. By his means
chiefly, this change in the system of national
politicks had been brought about. A league vith
England had been established; and he could not
think of sacrificing, to a rash and youthful pas-
sion, an alliance of so much utility to the king-
dom; and which he and the other noblesIwere
bound, by every obligation, to maintain. :)
Nor was the interest of religion forgotten on
this occasion. Mary, though surrounded by

iro-
") Keith, l<i9.

# A Convention of the nobles approves of the marriage. May 14. 1565.

Proteliant Countellors , had found means to
hold a dangerous correfpondcence witl foreign
Catholicks. She had even conrted the Pope's
protection, who had senti her a subsidy of Soo
crowlns. *) Though Mlurra:y had hitherto en-
deavoured to bridle the zeal of the reformed
clergy, and to set the Queen's conduct in the
mlfol: favourable light, yet her obstinate ad-
ilerence to her own religion, could not fail of
altrming him, and by her refoi tiion to mnarrv
a papill, the only hope of reclaiming her, which
remainied, was for ever cut off. Each of these
cnfiderations had its inflence on Murray, and
all of them determined hii to decline comply-'
inii; at that time, with the Queen's reouefr.

A Coivtiv on of tie ino'le: approver of tl'

milarrit.te. May il. I;15ó5

The Convention of nobl!s, which ;vns :!a--

fembled a fc\e, d;ay, after, discovered a greatei.
dil'pofition to gratify the Queen, Many o?
them, without llefitation, exprefled their ap-
probation of the irtended match; but as other-
were fiartled at the fame dangers which }lha
alarmed Murray, or were influenced by his
example, to refute their consent, another Con-
vention was appointed at Perth, in order to e-
liberate more fully concerning this., matter, *")

') Keith, 295.. Mclv, 14-
') ld. 253. ,Knox, 373.
Hilt, of Scotl, Voi.L I. b

Mean while, M'ary gave a publick evidence

of her own inclination , by confcrring rir,.
Darnly titles of honour peculiar to thie roya! f.
mily. The oppoiition file shad hitherto r;.:
'with, and the many contrivances employed to)
thwart and disappoint her inclination, producei
rheir usual effe&t on her heart, they conlirnmiti
her pailici, and increased its violence. 'hli
iimplicity of tat: age inmputed an affection, If
excessive , to the i;if:uelce of \vitccralt. ':) i1
-as o\ving, however, to no other charm, tiihin
the irreliftible power of youth and beauty orvc

y:. youn0 g and tender heart. Da!nly.grewg ic;-

with his profpcrity. Flattered b)y the love ,.
sa Queenu, and the applause of manl amul !ie:'
lubjecis, his natural haughtiness and inl;lce'.'
became infupportabie, and he could no ii:c:
bear advice, far less contradi&ion. Lord Rti;.
ven, happening co be the iirfl person wh, il-
bormed him that Mary, in ordcr to footll Eliz.-
beth, had delayed, for some time, creating i;i:
Duke of Albany, he, in a frenzy of rage, linr.
his dagger and attempted to stab him.::':) :
required all Mary's attention , to prevent !hi
falling under tlat contempt, to which fu:lc !bc
haviour deservedly exposed him.

# Mary's address in gaining her subjects,

Mary's addre;f i:I gaiiing lier fubjfe&s,

In no fceeie of herlife was ever Mary's owni

address more remarkably displayed. Love sharp-
cned her invention, and made her fludy every
method of gaining her fubjcts. Many of the
nobles she won by her address, and more by
her promises. On orne she beftowved lands, to
others the gave new titles of honour. -:) She
even condelfended to court the Protestant clergy ;
and having invited three of theirfuperintendants
to Stirling, she declared, in strong terms, her
resolution to prote&t their religion, exprefied
her willingness to be present at a conference
upon the points in do&trine which were dif-
puted between thie Protestants and Papists, and
went to far as to show some desire to ihear' Cch
of their preachers as were most remarkable for
moderation. :'*y) By these arts, the Quee-n
gained wonderfully upon the people, who, un-
less their jealousy be raised by repeated injuries,
are always ready to view the actions of their
Sovereign with an indulgent eye.

On the other hand, Murray and his afio-

ciates were plainly the dupes of Elizabeth's pol-
icy. She talked in so high a R:rain, of her dift
pleasure at the intended match5 she treated

") Keith. Appe/,d. 28..
") Kinox, 397.

# Schemes of Darnly and Murray against each other.

Lady Lennox \vith so much rigour; she wrote
to the Scottish Queen in such firong teris;
she recalled the Earl of Lennox and his son, iij
such a peremptory manner, and with such Ife
vere denunciations of her vengeance, if lthey
should presume to disobey; :') that all thel'c
expressions of aversion fully persuaded them of
her sincerity. This belief fortified their fcrupie;
'with refper to the match, and encouraged them
to oppose it. They began with forming amono
themselves bonds of confederacy and mutual de-
fence; they entered into a secret correfpon
dence with the English Resident. in order to
Jecare Elizabeth's afliftance when it f'holud be-.
come needful; ::"' they endeavoured to filltihe
nation with such apprehenlions of danger, as
mnight counterbalance the influence oftholf ai:s,
which the Queen had enmployed,

Scheumes ,f Darnly nid IMurray again. cacil ot:tI:.

Besides these intrigues, there were fecreti.

carried on, by both parties, dark deilgns of a
more criminal nature, and more flitable to the
spirit of the age. Darnly, impatient of that
opposition, which he imputed wholly to l\uhr-
ray, and resolving at any rate to getridoffuc'i
a powerful enemy, formed a plot to l f'alillate
him, during the meeting of the Convention al

::)- IKeith, $85. ZS6.
"*) Id. 2-9. 29^2 299.

perth. Murray, on his part, despairing of pre-
venting the marriage by any other means, had,
together wirii the Duke of Chatelherauit, ind
the Earl of Argyll, corccerted measure's for
i'cizing Darnly, and carrying h!imn a prifolner iirto
Englan1d.

In either of tlefe conspiracies had taken es-

fecE, this convention might have been attended
with consequences extremely tragical, but both
were rendered abortive, by the vigilance or
good fortune of those againf whom they were
formed. Murray, being warned of his danger
by some retainers to the court, who still fa-
voured his interest , avoided the blow by not:
going to Perth. Mary, receiving intelligence.
of Murray's enterprise, retired with the utmost
expedition, along with Darnly, to the other
fide of Forth. Conl'cious, on both fides, of guilt,
and inflamed with resentment, it was impoj'-
fible they could either forget the violence,
vwhich themselves had meditated, or forgive the
injuries intended againftthem. From that no-
ment, all hope of reconcilement was at an end,
and their mutual enmity burfr oni: with every
yinmptom of implacable hatred. ::)

T) Tle rc:lity o' tlere two oppolile coilp:i',ciCs hins

t ia.i

occalioii to manny Iifipuies nid inuch coi l n' d:;,iil. gh!l
deniy that ainy defigt l was fointel i:,dii the li' o< Mt'.-
ray ; uthers cll ill quellion tiic rrit! ofi ri:e ci)ipo i.-acy
;Ig:infit Darnilv. Tlbere feeimr, hl \"evcr. ru o

R e godi r ea-

ilols for bt:licvinl both i; tlihouig; the zeal hl (;:il'il0Cy ,.r
lpaltv w:riters have :a ded to cich l iiiaily c;;aggcrarteil C:.

# Mary summons her vassals to take arms against Murray.

Mary fumrmons her vassals to tlake arms agi;aii

Mlurray,

On Mary's return to Edinburgh, she fnm.
mnoned her vassals by proclamation, and fulicitcd

cumRtanccs. The following argutnents render it pr'j:,i ,
that some violence was intended Pguaiif'r Murra\.

1. This is positively allerted by uklbhaliln, 3.l . 2. 'l

English Resident wsrites to Cecil, that Mlturray \sis:al.il
infolrmed that a de{Sn xv.ars laid to lltamrder hint 0t 1'';,,
and describes the inaitinel in wiich: lli, lot \\td; il b.;
been executed. Keith, 287. 3. Murray hiil'scl'f Cr.:;; ':
and publickly aflirniei, that hIuch a design was 1.,!t 2,
agaiiift his life. Ieith, Append. 10o. Aid thougi. gl\,
called upon by the Queen to bring legal e\'id<nie : 1.,
aflertion, and a safe coindy& offered uinll, lIl.e lilr t.i.
to court for that purpole; ibid. yet \'hoeve:r col:itiL.q
Murray's fituaition, nnd the spirit ofl tliofe a\ h rii.-d :i
court at that time, will scarce deem it ally ipoolf rl i.is
guilt, tlat he did not chufe to risk his person i)l fil, l -
cuiity. 4. The furious pallions of Darnly , the licrceir",
o' his refeltinent, ^ hichi fcruipled at no, violence, aii i,-
mnnnners of the age, tieder the imlputation o l t [,ii;e
less improbable.

11. That Mturray and his afrociates had resolved to fr!:

Darnly's pet l'oll, applears '\'itl lill greatter celrdh ,it
I, From the expires teriithnny of Melvil, 1i2. ;l'(.l!::
Buichauttn, p. 341. and llKnox, p. 3?7, a't, ia, i'lllt 'i'1
reafooll to represent tilis as all idle lrumlour. . 2. 'The :t
Ilion was ptt to Randolph, wietlher tihe Governor fr li(r-
x.'ick 'oultd receive Lennox and his foi, if tilht \ ei
carried prif'onicrs to that place. Tllis plainly flhexs, rli:.
some fuesc deiiln iWas in hand, and Randlolph did nlt (ii.'
courage it by the Ranii'er vlich Ihe gave. Ieitil, 2-)0.
3. Tlhe s recipintatio:i, ith which the Queen retired, .'1l!
the teafsnll flho ga\ve for this sudden liglit, are ileriE'i-'!
by Rautiollh. Keitith, s91. 4. A great part of the Scit:i
noblels, and a.n-! .g these tle Earls of Argyll ad ;l 'i.
ewho \ve:e tlc:t.reit c', privy to tihe deigl, alfert the rc;l:;:
f, :he conr.pr ,,. . c;ood. vol. ii. 358.

tiem by her letters, to repair thither in arms,
fur the Proteftion of her person again f hler
foreign and donieftick ene ies. ::) She v'nas
obeyed with all tle promptneis and ala-crit,
wvitil which fubjec-s run to defend a mild and
ppoplar adminifiration. Thispopularity, hov--

All these circuinrances leave lttle room to douht as tho

truth of both coilfpriraries. Puit we mny obTerve howv fir
ilis proof, thoeugh draxvnr from publick records, f:ils tiiort,
on both lides, of letll iadd forital cvidriice. Ir liiuchanall
iIdl Randolplh, i their accountit elf the coufp'iracy " ainlll
Murray, difler widely in anlnofc every circumitlanice. Tilc
accotuits of the :ttellipt ulpoll D)rilllly, ale llot Illore cnll-
liltent. Mclvil alleges, that tihe delign of tile colfpilnttor s
was to carry Darnly a prisoner into E tllalnid; the Iropollal
made to Randolph agrees with this. lanlidlpli fays, thai:
they iiteiled to carry the Queen to St. Andrex\'s, actd
Darnly to Calfre Ca lpbell. Thie Lords, In their idclira-
tion, alfirni the design of the cnlllirators to have lbell
to inur.iuer Daritly and his father, to conltine tie Qieel: iii
Lochleven dUlI ,l [ life, aiiid Cto ii'lrp tlne ioverniillent. '1T
,eiieve impliritly, 'llntever tltey lind i ll all cicent paper,
;s a folly to wh;ich Anitijl:lries are cxtreiely pronc. A1--
iernt pl:el, l

oeve'. cvc often coliitain nothilig more rilia

·e fi.lides:; of a ;lparty, and tile lie of che day. The de-.
.:!:.:ationii f the iohbles referred to, is of this kind; it is
l;i..nly rancorols, and written in the very hent of fai'ioi.
lLIany thints ;ilftrred il it, are evidently false or e.tang-
i,?ratedre L.et Mulrray alid hisi colnfecerates he as .anlhi-
tiiuSs .as wc cai frlipipfe, they niift nave hId fionie pre..
teinces, and i!: liible olles too before they coiuld vciitu;'c
to imniprif tieir St overi t', for iife, and to itt izte the '.i:,
o.' gocir'nll!c t t; 3'1i it liat runee tlre Qt 'el's conilitlti liIit,
ilnordit'od l o c,;!*.ltll;:!! l ef.cife forl prloct edinig to ficlh e,:..

mT5-:i: s. l:i- is, liksuvife, lei.ilI;itbile, that ill all tile pro-

clntilnatiois ag:iiir M'iit .lr , ,f v. liI I, I l iIty are putiilitled
ill Kcirh, Aplenldix siS, .'ic, ;ic:t;h r tie violetit nrtetrn;
ipI"' IDarnli, notr thi.t whlich lie is allesed to hlave folincd
arlinlk th:e (Q.'t;c :: r -! 'c!f. cr rr c
'; Or Ote l lleltio lled,

ever, she owed in a great measure to Murray,
who had directed her adminiiirationli witl g;rr,t
prudence. But the crime of opposing her nlr-
riage, obliterated the memory of his fmirni
services; and Mary, impatient of contraiihiimn,
and apt to conlider those who difpltted iir
will, as enemies to her person, deterniined to
let him feel the whole weight of her veigT:inc'c.
For this purpose she fumnioned hiin to a,)le.:
before her upon a ihort warning, to anmvwe r!
such things as fhiould be laid to his charge. ')
At this very time, IMurray, and tlhe Lords w-i,
adhered to him, were afl'embled at Stirling. t0
deliberate what course they should hold, in 1'iich
a difficult conjuntiure. But the current of 'po-
pular favour ran so strongly against them, aid,
notwithstanding some fears and jealousies. there
prevailed in the nation such a general di;'p),fi-
tion to gratify the Queen, in a matter \vlich
so nearly concerned her, that, without: coinig:
to any otherconclufion, than to implore the
Queen of England's prote&tion, they putani end
to their inefTetual consultations, and returned
every man to his own house.

Together with this discovery of the wenak-

ness of her enemies, the confluence of her flb-
jets from all corners of the kingdom, alO'rdled
Mary an agreeable proof of her own firengtti
While the Queen was in this prosperous 1i
t Keith , Append. loS,

# Celebrates her marriage with Darnly.

ruation, she determined to bring to a period,
an aftair, which had so long engrofied her
heart, and occupied her attention.

Celebrates her marriage wvitli Dani.y.

On the z9th of July , fie married Lord

Darnly. The ceremony was performed in the
Q:iecn's Chapel, according to the rites of the
l(omifh church; the Pope's ball dispensing with
their marriage, having been previously obtain-
ed. :) She issued, at the fame time , procla-
mations, conferring the title of King of Scots
upon her htl)band, and commanding that hence-
forth all writs at law should run in the joinfl
names of King and Queen. *:? Nothing can be
a Itronger proof of the violence of Mary's love,
or the xvealnefs of her councils than this tail
fmep. Whether she had any right to chute
a husband, without content of Parliament,
nwas, in that age, a matter of fmne dispute; :::)
that she had no right to confer upon him, by
her private authority, the title and dignity of
King; or, by a simple proclamation, to raise,
her husband to be the master of her people,
seems to be beyond all doubt. Francis II. in-
deed, bore the fame title. It was not, how-
ever, thle gift of the Queen, hut of the nation;

') Keith , 307.

") A:deriun , i. 33, See Appetnd. No. XI.
"P"") B3iicim:;, 341.·

and the consent of Parliament was obtained,
before he ventured to assume it. Darnly's con..
dition, as a fubje&, rendered it frill more ne.
ceflary to have the concurrence of the fupreine
Council in his favour. Such a violent and un-
precedented firetch of prerogative as the fubili-
tuting a proclamation in place of an a-t of par-
liament, might have jaffly alarmed the nation.
But the Queen poff;f'ed so entirely the confi.
dence of her flbjes , tilat, notwithli:alding
all the clamours of the malecontents, no frmL-
p orms of general discontent appeared on th:tac.
co un t.

Even amid f that scene of joy, \which a.i-

ways accompanies fuccefsfull love, Mary did
not susser the comi.rfe of her venlleancie ,,i; 'L;i
the malcontent nobles to be interrupted.
Three days after the marriage, Mlurray \vns
again summoned to court, under the fevereli
penalties, and upon his non-appearance, the
rigour of juflice took place, and he was de-
clared an out-law. ::;) At the fame time, the
Queen set at liberty Lord Gordon , lho, ever
since his father's insurrection int the year 156G.
had been detained a prisoner; she recalled wlie
Earl of Sutherland , w io on account of hli
concern in that conspiracy, had fled into
ilanders; and she permitted Bothwell to rettir
again into Scotland. The first, and lai'r

'*) Keithi, 309, j3C.

# Marches against Murray and his associates.

thcfe, wei; among the most powerful fubjeEts
in the kingdom n, and all of them animated with
implacable hatred to Mlurray , wvhom they
eleemed the ciemy of their families, and the
aiilhor of their own fufrerings. This common
iatred became tile foundatiou of the firicteft
union wvith the Queen, and gained them an
aiiendant over all her councils. lMurray hitnfelf
coiifidered this confederacy with his avowed
enemics, as a nore certain indication than any
ncal'ure she had yet taken, of her inexorable
refentltenef.

M:i che: ; ag a.iiill Iiurrny uand hii .a.i'ociates.

The malecontents had not yet openly taken

up arms. ::) Iut the Queen hlaving ordered
her fubjedtCs to march agaitift thl!en, they were
driven to the last extemity. They found them-
selves unable to imake head againfi t the nu-
merous torces vwhich Mrary had afrembled; and
iled into Argylefflire, in cxpeEfnation of aid
from Elizabeth , to whomr they had secretly
'" After tiheir fruile's confulration ii! S:iriing, the Lords re-

tired to their own 11onies. Leithl, 304. Alrray w.as Itil!
at St. Andrew's on Jiul 2. t>eitil, -oC. B1y thl Iilices
of rendezvous, appointed for the irl.hdt;nllts of the dilfer-
cnt counties, Atlgllt 4, it np;-:nrs thi:: ith Queen's inten-
tionl 'was to Illarch into Fire , tile ¢ l lllnry ill whichl Mlrrny,
Rothes, Kirkaldy, and other lhi-lf (of the Ialcetollrert
resided. Keith, 31o. Their (ih li.t :hio tie Metti , Kieith,
312, prevented this expediti:., nlld thle foriict rLendez-
Vous W'as alcereti, Iei ill, lo.

# Elizabeth interposes in their favour.

dispatched a messenger, in order to implore her
immediate afliitance. *)

Elizabett interposes in their favout:,

Mean while , Elizabeth endeavoured to

emibarrafs Mary, by a new declaration of dil-
gust at her condut. She blamed both ler
choice of Lord Darnly, and the precipitrtio!
witli which she had concluded the marriage.
She required Lennox and Darnly, whonl t'he
fIill called her fubjeas, to return into Engllad:
and, at the fime time, fie warmly intercedei
in behalf of IMurray, whose behaviour she re-
presented to be not only innocent, but laudablc,
This teflage , so mortifying to the pride of tlih
Queen, and so full of contempt for her hitfbara,
wras rendered still more infupportabie by tiie
petulant and saucy demeanour of Tamwortlh,
the person who delivered it. *") Mary vilni-
cated her own conduct with warmth, but 'ith
great firength of reason; and rejected the inter-
ceflion in behalf of Murray, not without figan
of resentment at Elizabeth's pretending to inter-
meddle in the internal government of her king-
dorm. **")

She did not, on that account, interini: in
the least the ardour with which she pnurflled

") Keith, 312. Knox , 38o.

') Caind. 398.
**') Keith, Ap1Cpe:d. 99.

Ilarray and his adherents. *) They now ap-
peared openly in arms; and having received a
small supply in money from Elizabeth ;:*) we-
re endeavouring to raise their fo3llov.ers in the
western counties. But Mary's vigilance hin-
dered them from affen-bliiig in any conliderable
body. All her military operations, at that
time, were concerted with wifdonm, executed
with vigour, and attended with fuccels. In1
order to encourage her troops , fie herlel'
marched along with thenm, rode with loadedi
pistols, '*') and endured all the fatigues of war
with admirable fortitude. Her alacrity inlfpied
her forces with an invincible relolution, lwhich,
together with their superiority in number, de-
terred the malecontents from facing them in
the field; but having artfully palled the Queen's
army, they marched with great rapidity to
Edinburgh, and endeavoured to rouze the in-
habitants of that city to arms. (August 31..)
The Queen did not fufler them to remain long;
unmoleited; and, on her approach, they were
') Tle molt conficderable perrolis who joined Mlurray, were

the Duke of Clltr.lliei raiilr, the Earls of ArgylI, Glencairn,
Rothles; L.rd Beyd and Ochiltree: ith Lords of Grange.
Cui lltni hahlulead , [alcomiie , Cariivylie , l-.a\w rs , Bare
Dreghorn , Pittarrow , Comptroller, a ,i .ie Tul tor o&
Pitcur, hliox, 382.
*') Knox. 3 d,.

K'i) Keith, Append. 164,

# They are obliged to retire into England.

forced to abandon that place, and retire in ct:.
fusion towards the western borders. ':)

Tley are obligcd to renre into Engl:i'!.

At it was uncertain, for some time, ;!'.:

route they had taken, IlIary employed tlat in,
terval in providing for tile security of the coinn.
ties in the heart of the kingdom. She fAeizei
the places of strength which belonged to thr
rebels; and obliged the considerable Barons i,
those shires, which 'she ncft fufpefcdd, to joiM
in aflociations for her defence. :;:::; vi-
thus left all the country behifid her in tranilii!-
lity, she, with an army i8ooo ilrong, nmr-
ched towards Dumfries, where the rebels then
were. During their retreat, they had flnt
letters to the Queen, fromn almost every Iplacc
where they halted, full of fubtnminfon, and con-
taining various overtures towards an nacoin.-
modation. But Mary, who determined nol
to let flip such a favourable opportunity o.
crushing the mutinous spirit of her subjects, re-
jested them with disdain. As she advanced, the
malecontents retired. And , having recei:ve
no effetIual aid from Elizabeth, ;'::) they d.l-
paired of any other means of safety, led in.;o

') Keith, Appowid. 315.

"' Id. 113.
"*'> See Appendix, No, XII. Xlii.

# They meet with unexpected ill treatment from Elizabeth.

Engrland , ( Ocob. 2o.) and put themselves
under the protec&iou of the EJarl of Bedford
Warden of the marches,

Tney meet with unep-.;eaed ill tre. r.e:I;lt fram

Eliab cbth.

Nothing, which Bedford's pcrfonal friend-

ship for Murray could supply, was wanting to
render their retreat agreeable. But .Eilizabeth
herfelftreated them with extreme negledi. She
had fully gained her end, and, by their me.ins,
bad excited such discord and jealousies amUlon
the Scots, as would, in all probabiliry. lolng
distract and weakein iliarv's coiuncils. Her bu-
finers now was to ave appearances, and to
justify herself to the Ministers of Firance and
Spain, who accused her of fomnenting the troul-
bles in Scotland by lier intrigues. The expedient
file contrived for her vindication ftronglv dif-.
plavs her own charafter, and the wretched
condition of exiles, who are obliged to depend
on a foreign Prince. IVlurray and Hamilton,
Abbot of Kiilwinning-, being appointed by the
other fugitives to wait on Eliiabeth, instead of
meeting with that welcome reception which
was due to men, who , out of conidence in.
her promises, had hazarded their lives and for-
tunes, could not even obtain thle favot.r of a:u
audience, until they had meanly cons. nted to>
acknowledge, in the presence o' the Fr:ncl:.
and Spanish AmbaPaldors, thlat 1lizablth had

given them no encouragement to take arms.

o6 sooner did they make this declaration, than

she aflRonifhed them with this re',y , ., ,o.:
have declared the truth; ] am far from fetling
an example of rebellion to my owi ftbjects, by
countenancing those who rehel agtainle tlei;
lawful Prince. The treason , of w':ich ynu
have been guilty, is detestable ; and as traiior'
I banish you from my presence. *) " Not.
,.vithtianding this fcne of farce and of falfc-
hood, so dishonourable to all the per'ins
wvho acced a part in it, Elizabeth pernlitted tl.!
malecontents peaceably to reside in iher do:ni
nions, fuipplied them secretly withl money, and
renewed her intercession with the Scottiii'
Queen in their favour. *;)

The advantage she had gained over them

did satisfy Mary; she resolved to follow the
blow , and to prevent a party , which she
dreaded, from ever recovering any footing in
the nation. With this view, she called a
Ineeting of Parliament; and in order that a fen-
tence of forfeiture might be legally pronounced
against the banished Lords, she fumnioned
them, by publick proclamation, (Decemb. I.)
to appear before it. :**)

The
""? JKeith. 3"0.

The Duke- of Chatelherault, on his humble

application, obtained a separate pardon; but not
without difficulty, as tile King violently op-
posed it. He was obliged, however, to Jeave
tile kingdom, and to reside for some time in
France. *)

The numerous forces which Mary brought

into the field, the vigour with which ftic
aLted, and the length of time she kept them in
arms, reffemble the efforts of a Prince with re-
venues much more.confiderable than those which
she poflefled. But armies were then levied
and maintained by Princes at finall charge. The
val'al followed his luperior, and the superior
attended the Monatch , at his own expence.
Six hundred horsemen, however, and three
companies of foot , besides her guards, receiv-
ed regular pay from the Queen. This extra-
ordinary charge , together with the deburfe-
ments occafoned by her marriage, exhaulled
a treasury, which was far from being rich.
In this exigency , many devices were fallen
lpon for railing money. Fines were levied on
the towns of St. Andrew's, Perth, and Dundee%
which were fuflpefted of favouring the male-
contents. An unusual tax was imposed on
the boroughs throughout the kingdom; and A
great fumi was demanded of the citizens of
Edinburgh , Dy way of loan. This unprece-
') Knox, 389.

lift. of Scotl. Vol. 1. C r

# Church affairs.

dented exaction alarmed the citizens. Tley
lind recourse to delays, and started difli-
culties in order to evade it. These Mlary con-
ftrued to be aats of avowed disobedience, and
instantly committed several of them to priron.
But this severity did not subdue the undaunted
spirit of liberty, which prevailed among the
inhabitants. The Queen was obliged to mort-
gage to the city the superiority of the town of
Leith, by which she obtained a confiderible
fuum of money. :;) The thirds of ecclefiafiical
benefices proved another source , whence the
Queen derived some supply. About this time,
we find the Proteflant clergy complaining more
bitterly than ever of their poverty. The army,
it is probable, exhausted a great part of than
fund, which was appropriated for their rmain-
tenance. ;':)

Church 5'airs.

The aiemnblies of the church were not un-

concerned fpe&ators of the commotions of this
turbulent year. In the meeting June 24, le.
veral of the malecontent nobles xwere present,
and seem to have had great influence on their
decisions. The high strain in which the as-
fembly addreiFed the Queen, can be imputed
only to those fears and jealousies, with regard

') Knox, 383. 386.
") ilan . ift. ft Edinburghi. -,.

tc religion, which they endeavoured to infuse
into the nation. The aflembly complained,
with some bitternes's, of the flop which had
been put to the progress of the Reforratien by
the Queen's arrival in Scotland; they required
not only the total fuppreflion of the Popish
w,'fhip throughout the kingdom but even in
the Queen's own chapel; and besides the legal
efiablifhment of the Protefrant religion, they
demanded that Mlary herselF should publickly
embrace it. The Queen, after some delibe.
ration, replied, that neither her cnnfcience,
nor her interest, would permit her to take
such a ftep. The former would for ever re-
pronch her for a change, which proceeded
fiom no inward conviction ; the latter would
fiirer by the ofrence, which her apotlacy mufit
give to the King of France, and her other allies
on the continent. *)

It is remarkable, that the prosperous si-

tnation of the Queens affairs, during this year,
began to work some change in favour of her
religion. The Earls of Lennox, Achol , and
Cflils , openly attended mass; she herself as-
forded the Catholicks a more avowed protec-ion
than formerly; and, by her permission, some
of the ancient Monks ventured to preach
publickly to the people. **)

C c 3

') Knox, 374, 376.
') Id. 3S9. 39o.

# BOOK IV.

# Mary's deliberations concerning the exiled nobles.

THE
HISTORY

OF
SCOTLAND.

BOOK IV.

Mary's deliberations concerning the exiled nobles.

As the day appointed for the meeting of Pars
liament approached, Mary and her Miniftere
were employed in deliberating concerning thh
course which it was most proper to hold wit-
regard to the exiled nobles. Many motives
prompted her to set 1no bounds to the rigour of
justice. The malecontents had laboured to de-
feat a frheme, which her interest conspired with
her passions in rendering dear to her; they
were the leaders of a party, whose friendfliip
she had been obliged to court, while she held
their principles in abhorrence; and they were
firmly attached to a rival, whom she had good
reason both to fear and to hate.

But, on the other hand, several weighty

considerations night be urged. The noblemen,
whore fate was in suspense, were among the
most powerful fubjets in the kingdom ; their

wealth great, their connexions extensive, and
their adherents numerous. They were now at
mercy. the objeis of conlpafion, and fuirg
for pardon with the molt humble submission.

In those circumf-ances, an aft of clemency

would exalt the Queen's chara&er, and appear
no less splendid among foreigners, than act
ceptable to her own fubjeEts. Mary herself,
though highly incensed, was not inexorable;
but the King's rage was implacable and unre-
lenting. They were solicited in behalf of the
fugitives from various quarters. Morton, Rtli-
ven, Maitland, and all who had been merrbers
of the Congregation , were not forgetful of
their ancient union with Murray, and his fel-
low sufferers; nor negle&ful of their safety,
which they esteemed of great importance to
the kingdom, Melvil, who at that time pof-
sessed the Queen's confidence, seconded their
solicitations. And Murray, having slooped so
low as to court Rizio, that favourite, whi,
was desirous of fecnring his protecion againit
the King, -whose displeasure he had lately in-
curred, seconded the intercessions of his other
friends with the whole of his influence. ')
The interposition of Sir Nicholas Throgrorton,
who had lately been Elizabeth's Ambassador in
Scotland, in behalf of the exiles, was of more
weight than all these, and attended with nmorO

i) ~Mtiv, 133.

# She resolves to treat them with clemency.

juicers. Throgmorton, out of enmity to Ce-
cil, had embarked deeply in all tie intrigues
which were carried on at the English court, in
order to undermine the power and credit of
that minister. He espoused, for this reason,
the cause of the Scottish Queen, towards whole
title and pretensions the other was known to
bear little favour; and ventured, in the present
critical juncture, to write a letter to Mary,
containing the most salutary advices with regard
to her conduc. He recommended the par-
doning of the Earl of Murray, and his affocia-
tes, as a measure no less prudent than popular.
An action of this nature, fays he, the pure
effe& of your Majesty's generosity, will spread
the fame of your lenity and moderation, and
engage the English to look towards your ac-
cellion to the throne, noi: only without preju-
dice, but with desire. By the fame means , a
perfect harmony will be retlored amoug your
own subje&s, who, if any rupture should hap-
pen with England, will serve you with that
grateful zeal, which your clemency cannot fail
of inspiring. *)

She resolves to treat them with clemency.

These prudent remonstrances of Throgmor-

ton, to which his reputation for wvifdom, and
known' attachment to the Queen, added great

') Melv. 119.

# Is diverted from this resolution by the solicitation of France, and her zeal for Popery.

authority, made a deep impression on her pi;.
rit. Her courtiers cultivated this happy difpo.
fition and prevailed on her, notwithfiandillg
the King's Inflexible temper, to sacrifice her
own private resentment to the intercefion of
her fubjeats, and the wxifhes of her friends. i)
With this view, the Parliament, which had
been called to meet on the 4th of February,
was prorogued to the 7th of April; :') and
in the mean time, she was bury in confi-
dering the manner and form in which ihe
should extend her favour to the Lords wsie
were under disgrace,

Is diverted from this resolution by the folicitatioit of

France, and her zeal for Popery.

Though NIary discovered on this occasion,

a mind naturally prone to humanity, and ca-
pable of forgiving, she wanted firmness, how-
ever, to resist the influence, which was fatally
employed to disappoint the effects of this amia-
ble disposition. About this time, (February .)
and at no great distance from each other, two
envoys arrived from the French King. The
former was intrusted with matters of mere ce.
remony alone, he congratulated the Queen on
her marriage , and inverted the King with the
ensigns of the order of St. 1iichael, Tite

') Melv. 125.
') Good. vol. i. z24.

instructions of the latter related to matters of
more importance, and produced greater es-
fe&s. :;)

An interview between Charles IX. and his

Sifter the Queen of Spain had been often pro-
posed; and after many obstacles arising from
the opposition of political interest, was at last
appointed at Bayonne. Catherine of Medicis
accompanied her son; the Duke of Alva at-
tended his Mistress. Amidst the scenes of
publick pomp and pleasure, which seemed to
be the sole occupation of both courts, a scheme
was formed, and meafires concerted, for ex-
terminating the Hugonots in France, the Pro-
teftants in the Low Countries, and for fuip-
prefiing the Reformation throughout all Euro-
pe. **) The aEtive policy of Pope Pins IV.
and the zeal of the Cardinal of Lorrain, con-
firmed and encouraged dispositions, so suitable
to the genius of the Romish religion, and Po
beneficial to their own order.

It was on account of this holy league

which the second French envoy brought to
Mary, conjuring her, at the fame time, in the
name of the King of France, and the Cardinal
of Lorrain, not to restore the leaders of the
Protestants in her kingdom to power and favour,
at the very time when the Catholick Princes

d) Keith, 325. Append, 167.
* ") Thuan lib. 37,

were combined to destroy that feet in all the
countries of Europe. *)

Popery is a species of false religion, re.

marlable for the strong possession it takes ofthe
heart. Contrived by men of deep infight in the
human chara&er, aud nimproved by the expe.
rience and observation of many successive ages;
it arrived at last to a degree of perfeAtion,
ivh ch no former system of superstition had ever
attained. There is no power in the under.
standing, and no passion in the heart, to whicl
it does not present objets, adapted to rouse,
and to interest them. Neither the love ofplea-
sure, which, at that time, prevailed in the court
of France, nor the pursuits of ambition which
occupied the court of Spain, had secured them
from the dominion of bigotry. Laymen and
courtiers were agitated with that furious and
unmerciful zeal, which is commonly confider-
ed as peculiar to ecclefiafiicks; and Kings and
Alinifters thought themselves bound, in con-
science, to extirpate the Protestant doctrine.
Mary herself was deeply tin&ured with all the
prejudices of Popery; a passionate attachment
to that superstition is visible in every part of
her character, and runs through all the scenes
of her life: She was devoted, too, with the
utmost fubmiflion to the Princes of Lorrain, her
uncles; and had been accufomned, from herin-

*) Melv. 126.

# A Parliament called to attaint the exiled nobles; and prevented by the conspiracy against Rizio.

fancy, to lilten to all their advices with a filial
refpeft. The profpet of restoring the publick
exercise of her own religion, the pleasure of
complying with her uncles, and the hopts of
gratifying the French Monarch, whom the pre-
sent situation of her affairs in England made it
necessary to court, counterbalanced all the
prudent confidcrations which had formerly
wveighed with her. She instantly joined the
confederacy, which had been formed for the
deilru&ion, of the Protestants, and altered
the 'whole plan of her condua with regard to
Murray and his adherents, *)

To this fatal resolution may be imputedall

the subsequent calamities of Mary's life. Ever
since her return into Scotland, fortune may be
said to have been propitious to her, ratherthan
adverse; and if ner prosperity did not rife to
any great height, it had, however, suffered no
considerable interruption. A thick and fettled
cloud of adversity, with few gleams of hope,
and none of real enjoyment, covers the re.
mainder of her days.

A Parliament called to attaint the exiled nobles and

prevented by the coinfpiracy againllt Rizio.

The effe&s of the new system, which

Mary had adopted, were soon visible. The
time of the prorogation of Parliament was

) Sec Append, No. XIV.

shortened; and by a nev proclamation, the
izth of March was fixed for its meeting. *)
Mary resolved, without any further delay, to
'proceed to the attaindre of the rebel Lords, and,
at the fame time, determined to take fomefteps
towards the reestablishment of the Romish re.
ligion in Scotland. **) The Lords of the Ar.
tides were chosen, as usual, to prepare the
business which was to come before the Parlia.
ment. They were all persons in whom the
Queen could confide, and bent to promote her
designs. The ruin of Murray and his party
seemed now inevitable, and the danger of the
Reformed Church imminent, when an event

i) Keith, 36.i,

e") It is not on the authority of Knox alone, that we charge

the Queen with the design of reeftahlifhilng the Roman
Catholick religion. He, indeed, afTerts that the alar,,
which fnould have been erewted in the church of St.Gile',
'Were already provided, 394. 1. Mary herrelf, in a letter
to the Archbishop of Glasgow, her Ambassador in Fralce,
acknowledges, ,,that in that parliament file intended ro
have done foine good, with refpett to recforing the oil
religion. " Keith, 331. 2. The Spiritual Lords, i. e. the
Popish ecclefiaticks, had, by her authority, resumed their
ancient place in that altenebly. Ibid. 5. She had joined
the confederacy at Bayonne. Keith, Append, I67. 4. She
allowed mass to be celebrated in different parts of the
kingdom, ibid. and declared that she would have ais'
free for all men wvho would hear it. Good. vol. i. 274,
5. Blackwood, who was furnished by the Archbiflhop Of
Glargow with materials for writing his Mlartyre de Marie,
affirms that the Queen intended to have procured, il thii
Parliament, if not the reeftabiilhment of the Catholic'
religion, at leafr something for the efe ofCatlholicks. leb',
Tol, ii, 204.

# Darnly loses the Queen's affection.

nnexpe&edly happened, which saved both. If
we regard either the barbarity of that age,
when such a&s of violence were common, or
the mean' condition of the unhappy perfoil who
suffered, the event is little remarkable; but if
we reflet upon the circumstances with which
it was attended , or upon the consequences
which followed it, it appears extremely me-
morable; and the rife and progress of itdeferve
to be traced with great care.

Darnly loses the Queen's affeilon,

Darnly's external accomplishments had ex-

cited that sudden and violent paflion which
raised him to the throne. But the qualities of
his tnind corresponded ill with the beauty of
his person. Of a weak underifanding, and
witho ut experience, conceited, at the fame time,
of his own abilities, and ascribing his extraor-
dinary success entirely to his distinguished me-
rit. All the Queen's favour made no impref-
sion on such a temper. All her gentleness could
not bridle his imperious and ungovernable spirit.
All her attention to place about him persons
capable of dire&ting his condu&, could not pre-
serve him from rash and imprudent actions. *)
Fond of all the amusements, and even prone to
all the vices of youth, he became, by degrees,
careless of her person, and a stranger to her
') Ooo;l, vol. i. 122.

# Suspects Rizio to be the cause of it.

company. To a wornan, and a Queen, such
behaviour was intolerable. The lower she had
ilooped in order to raise him, his behaviour apl
peared the more ungenerous and criminal. And
in proportion to the strength of hr first affeitioii,
was the violence with which her disappointed
passion now operated. A few months after
the marriage, their domefticl quarrels began to
be observed. The extravagance of Darniy's am.
bition gave rife to these. Instead of being fa-
tisfied with a share in the adminifiration of
government, or with the title of King , which
Mary, by an unprecedented firetch of power,
had conferred on him, he demanded the Crown
Matrimonial with most insolent importunity. *)
And though Mary alleged that this gift was
beyond her power, and that the authority of
Parliament nlmufc be interposed to beflow it, he
wanted either understanding to comprehend, or
temper to admit, so jus a defence; and often
renewed and urged his request.

Stlf;pet Rizio to be the cause of it.

Rizio, whom the King liad at sirs- taken

into great confidence, did not hurnour him in
these follies. By this, he incurred Henry's
displeasure; and as it was impoflible for Nary
to behave towards her husband with the fanme
affetion which distinguished the first and happy

") Keith, 339, RUOX. 404.

# Rizio hated by the friends of the exiled nobles.

days of their union, he imputed this coldness,
not to his own behaviour, which had so well
merited it, but to the insinuations of Rizio.
Mary's own conduc confirmed and ffrengthened
there fafpicions. She treated this stranger with
a familiarity, and admitted him to a share in her
confidence, to which neither his first condition,
nor the office she had lately bellowed on him,
gave him any title. He was perpetually in her
pretence, intermteddled in every btlfinefs, and,
together with a few favourites, was the com-
panion of all her private amusements. The
haughty spirit of Darnly could not bear the in-
trufion of such an upstart; and impatient of any
delay, and unrerfrained by any scruple, he in-
ftantly resolved to get rid of him by violence.

Rizio hated by the friends of the exiled nobles.

At the fame time, another design, which

took in rife from very different motives, was
tarrying on against the life of Rizio. Morton,
Ruthven, Lindsay, and Maitland, were the
contrivers of it. In all former commotions they
had been firidtly united with iMurray, though
in the late infurreEion they had deserted him,
for various reasons. Morton was nearly allied
to the family of Angus, and, during the mi-
nority of the present Earl, adted as chief of
the name of Douglas. Ruthven was married
to the King's aunt. Lindfy's wife was of the
fame blood. All there had warmly concurred

with the Queen in promoting a marriage which
did so much honour to the house of Douglas,
and naturally expeEted, that, under a King of
their own blood, the chief management of as-
fairs would be committed to them. Maitland,
with his usual sagacity, foresaw that Murray's
opposition to the match would prove dangerous
and ineffectual; but whoever ruled at court, he
hoped, by his dexterity and talents, to render
himself necessary and of importance. They
were all equally disappointed in their expec-
tations. The King's headifrong temper ren-
dered him incapable of advice. The Queen
could not help diffrufting men who had beenflo
long and so intimately connected with Mlurray,
and gave herself up entirely to such Counse!lors
as complied with all her inclinations. There-
turn of that nobleman and his followers was
therefore the only event which could rcftore
Morton, Maitland, and their associates to their
former acendant over the Queen's councils.
For this reason, nothing could he more morti-
fying to them, than the resolution which elunry
Lad taken to treat the exiles with rigour. This
they imputed to Rizio, who, after he had en-
gaged to aid Murray with all his ini.;- Li, was
now the most active inftrumentin promrioting the
measures which were concerted for the ruin of
that nobleman. This officious zeal completed
the disgust which they had conceived against
him, and inspired ithem with thoughts of ven-

geance,

# They combine in order to murder him.

geance, in no wife suitable to juffice, to hu.
ianity, or to their own dignity.

They combine in order to murder himn

While they were ruminating upon their

scheme, the King communicated his resolution
to be avenged of Rizio to Lord Ruthven, and
implored his affifiance, and that of his friends,
towards the execution of this design. Nothing
could be more acceptable to them than this
overture. They saw at once all the advantages
they would reap, by the concurrence of such
an afbciate. Their own private revenge upon
Rizio would pass, they hoped, for an at of
obedience to the King ; and they did not defr
pair of obtaining the restoration of their banish-
ed friends, and security for the Proteltant relic
gion, as the price of their compliance with his
will,

But as Henry vwas no less fickle than rash,

they hesitated for some time, and determined
to advance no farther, without taking every
porfible precaution for their own rafety. They
did not, in the mean time, susser the King's
resentment to abate. Morton, who was infe-
rior to no man of that intriguing age, in all the
arts of insinuation and address, took the young
Prince under his management. He wrought
upon his ruling passion, ambition, to obtain the
latrimonial Crown. He represented Rizio's
credit with the Queen to be the chief and only

Hist. of Scote. Vol. I. D d

obstacle to his success in that demand. Tbhi
million, alone, he said, possessed her confi.
dence; and out of complaisance to him, her
fubje&ts, her nobility, and even her husband,
were excluded from any participation of her
secret councils. Under the appearance ofa con..
fidence merely political, he insinuated, and tle
King perhaps believed, that a familiarity of
quite a different and of a very criminal nature
might be concealed. *) Such various and com.
*) Of all our hiftorinns , Buchanlla alone avowedly accufei

Mary of a crilinal love for Rizio, 340. 344. lKox fligilty
inliiluates that such a fulpiicionl was entertnined , 391.
Melvil, ill a coOverration with thi Queen , inltimates lia
lie was afraid her familiarity with Rizio might be liableto
mlilconslrniaion, IIo. The King bimfelf seems, both by
Melvil's account, and by his expoltulation with tile Queel,
wvhich Rutlivell mnentions, to have given credit to lleft
fuiriicions. Melv. 127. Keith. Append. 123. 1c4. 'il'at
the King's furpicions were strong, is likewise evident froil
the paper published Append. No. XV. But , il oplpofriio
to there fifpiciois , and they are nothing more , ie ma!
,bbfcrve that Ranlet, tie Queen's French Secretary, M11'
lil;mill'cd fronm her service, and Rizio advanced to tha: 0o
iice in December 1564. Keith. 26S. It w as ill cuon"
quenlce of this pieferinent, that he acquired his great crr-
dit with the Queen. Melv. Io7. Darlfly arrived inl Siec
land iibout two montlts alter. Keith, 269. Tle Queenilm-
jnediately conceived for hiim a palion, wlii ch had ail tie
fyimptoms of genuine and violent love. Rizio aided this
pa lion , and promoted the marriage with all his interen,
Melv. IlI. During folne mouths after the marriage, the
Queen's fondiiefs for Darnly continued. She fron proved
With child. From this enumeration of cilcumilflnces, t
appears almoit impollible that the Queen , unlels ¥,e fop-
pose her to have been a wontan utterly nbandotled, cou"d
carry on any criminal intrigue with Rizio. But the ilec*
of RandolI)ll, the Englihfi lefident, a man abtundantly ready
t:a lnletrioll, and to aeg ravate Mary's faults, and whs dsCi

# Perpetrate that crime in the Queen's Palace.

plicated pafrions raged in the King's bosom, with
the utnoft fury. He became more impatient
than ever of any delay, and even threatened to
jtrike the intended blow with his own hand.
At lat, preliminaries were fettled on both fides,
and articles for their mutual security agreed
upon. The King engaged to prevent the at-
tainder of the banished Lords, to consent to
their return into Scotland, to obtain for them
an ample remilion of all their crimes, and to
support to the utmost of his power, the religion
which was now eflablifhed in the kingdom.
On their parts, they undertook to procure the
Crown Matrimonial for Henry, to secure his
right of fuccefion, if the Queen should diebe-
fore him, and to defend that right to the utter-
most, against whatever person should prefunie
to dispute it; and if either Rizio, or any other
person, should happen to be killed in profecut-
ing of the design, the King promised to acknow-
ledge himrelf to be the author ofthe enterprile,
and to prote& those who were embarked in it. *)

Perpetrate that crime in the Queen's Palace.

Nothing now remained but to concert the
plan of operation, to chufe the aEtors, and to

Dd a

not once inilnunte that her confidence in Rizlo concealed
any thing critrlinal, is in itself a Iuflicient vindicttion oC
her innocence.
') Good. vol. i. G66.

assign them their parts in perpetrating this de-
testable crime. Every circumRnance there paints
and chara&terizes the manners and men of that
age, and fills us with horror at both. The place
chosen for committing such a deed, was the
Queen's bedchamber. Though Mary was nov\
in the sixth month of her pregnancy, and though
Rizio might have been seized elsewhere without
any difficulty, the King pitched upon this place,
that he might enjoy the malicious pleasure of
reproaching Rizio with his crimes before the
Queen's face. The Earl of Morton, the Lord
BHigh Chancellor of the kingdom, undertook to
dire&l an enterprise, carried on in defiance of
all the laws of which he was bound to be the
guardian. The Lord Ruthven, who had been
confined to his bed for three months, by a very
dangerous distemper, and who was fill fofeeble
that he could scarce walk, or bear the weight
of his own armour, 'was intrusted with the exe-
cutive part; and while he himself needed to be
supported by two men, he came abroad to
commnit a murder in the presence of his Sove-
reign.

On the 9th of March, Mlorton entered the

court of the palace with an hundred and sixty
men ; and without noise, or meeting with any
refiflance, seized all the gates. While the Queen
was at supper with the Countess of Argyll, Ri-
zio, and a few domefticks, the King suddenly
entered the apartment, by a private paflage

A': his back was Ruthven, clad in complete ar-
mour, and with that ghastly and horrid look
which long sickness had given him. Three or
four of his most trusty accomplices followed
ilin. Such an uinulual appearance alarmed those
who were present. Rizio Instantly apprehend-
ed that he was the victim at whom the blow
was aimed; and in the utmost consternation re-
tired behind the Queen, of whotn helaid hold,
hoping that the reverence due to her person
might prove some prote&tion to him. Thecon-
fpirators had proceeded too far to be restrained
by any consideration of that kind. Numbers
of armed men rushed into the chamber. Ruth-
ven drew his dagger, and with a furious mien
and voice, commanded Rizio to leave a place of
which le was u nworthy, and which lie had
occupied too long. Mary employed tears, and
entreaties, and threatenings, to £ave her fa-
vourite. But. notwithfianding all these, he was
torn from her by violence, and before lie could
be dragged through the next apartment, the
rage of his enemies put an end to his life,
piercing his body with fifty-fix -wounds. :)

Athol, Huntly, Bothwell, and other confi-

dents of the Queen who lodged in the palace,
were alarmed at the uproar, and filled with the
utmost terror on their own account; but either
no violence was intended against them, or the
') See Applandix, No, XV,

# They confine the Queen herself.

conspirators durst not shed the noblest blood';n
the kingdom, in the fame illegal manner with
which they had ventured to take the life of a
Stranger. Some of them were dismissed, and
others made their escape.

They confiine the Queen herself.

The conspirators, in the mean time, kept

possession of the palace, and guarded the Queen
with the utmost care. A proclamation was
published by the King, prohibiting the par-
liament to meet on the day appointed; and
measures were taken by him for preventingany
tumult in the city. *) Murray, Rothes, and
their followers being informed of every flep
taken against Rizio, arrived at Edinburgh next
evening. Murray was graciously receivedboth
by the King and Queen. By the former, on
account of the articles which had been agreed
upon between them; by the latter, because she
hoped to prevail on him, by gentle treatment,
not to take part with the murderers of Rizio.
Their power she still felt, and dreaded; and
the insult which they had offered to her au-
thority, and even to her person, so far exceed-
ed any crime she could impute to Murray, that
in hopes of wreaking her vengeance on them,
she became extremely willing to be reconciled
to him. The obligations, however, '!i!h

') Keith, Append, i26,

# But she gains the King, and makes her escape.

Murray lay under to men, who had hazarded
their lives on his account, engaged him to labour
for their falety. The Queen, who scarce had
the liberty of choice left, was perfiiaded to ad-
mit Morton and Ruthven into her presence,
and to grant them the promise of pardon in
whatever terms they fheuld deem neceflary for
their own security.

But she gaits the Eing, and makes her ercape.

The King, mean while, flood afl-onifhed at;

the boldness and fucce's of his own enterprile,
and uncertain what course to hold. The Queen
observed his irresolution, and availed her'elf of
it. She employed all her art to disengage hiin
from his new associates. His coiifcioul'iefs oi
the insult which he had offered to so iiluflrious
a benefactress, iulplircd hinm wi'-I untlcori;,noi
facility and complaisance. In spite of all 'the
warnings he received to diftrufl the Queen's ar-
tifices, she prevailed on hin to difnifs the guards
which the conspirators had placed on her peron ;
and that fame night he made his escape along
with her, attended by three persons only, and
retired to Dunbar. (March Ii.) The scheme
of their flight had been communicated to Hunt-
ly and Bothwell, and they were quicklyjoined
by them, and feveralother of the nobles. Both-
well's estate lay in that corner of the kingdom,
and his followers crowded to their Chief in

# Is reconciled to the exiled nobles.

# The conspirators against Rizio fly into England. March 19. 1566.

such numbers, as soon enabled the Queentofet
the power of the conspirators at defiance.

Is reconciled to the exiled nobles.

This sudden flight filled them with inex.

preffible consternation. They had obtained a
promise of pardon; and it now appeared from
the Queen's condut, that nothing more wasin-
tended by this promise than to amuse them,
and to gain time. They ventured, however,
to demand the accomplishment of it; but their
messenger was detained a prisoner, and the
Queen advancing towards Edinburgh, at the
head of 8ooo.men, talked in the higheff strain
of resentment and revenge. She had the ad-
dress, at the fame time, to feparateMurrayand
his afrociates from the conspirators against Ri-
zio. Sensible that the union of these parties
would form a confederacy, which might prove
formidable to the Crown, she expressed great
willingness to receive the former into favour;
towards the latter she declared herself inexor-
able. Murray and his followers were no less
willing to accept a pardon, on her terms.

The conspirators against Rizio fly into England.

March 19. 1566.

The conspirators against Rizio, deprived of

every resource, and incapable of resistance, fled
precipitately to Newcastle, having thus changed

situations with Murray and his party, who left
that place a few days before.

No man so remarkable for wifdoim, and even

for cunning, as the Earl of Ilorton, ever en-
gaged in a more unfortunate enterprise. De-
ferred basely by the Kiug, who now denied his
knowledge of the conspiracy, by publick pro-
clamations, and abandoned uiigenerotfly by
Murray and his party, :) he was obliged to
jiy from his native country, to resign the highest
office, and to part with one of the most opu-
lent fortunes in the kingdom.

On her return to Edinburg, Mary began

to proceed against those concerned in the mur-
der of Rizio, with the utmost rigour of law.
But, in praise of her clemency, it must be ob-
served, that only two persons, and there of
no considerable rank, futTered for this crime.:';;)

In this conspiracy there is one circumstance,

which, though fornewhat detached, deserves
not to be forgotten. In the confederacy be-
tween the King and the conspirators, the real
intention of which was affallination, the pre-
serving of the Reformed Church is, neverthe-
less, one of the most considerable articles; and
the fame men who were preparing to violate
one of the firit duties of morality, affeced the
highest regard for religion. Hiitory relates these
') Melv. 130.

e*) elith, Append, I3o. 334.

# An account of the frequency of assassinations in that age.

extravagances of the human mind , witlilotL
pretending to justify, or even to account for
them; and regulating her own opinions by the
eternal an immutable laws of justice and of vir.
tue, points out such inconfiflencies, as featu.
res of the age which she describes, and record-
them for the inftru'tion of ages to come.

An account of the frequency of af.tafinations in

that age.

As this is the second instance of deliberate

al'afrination which has occurred, and as we shall
hereafter meet with many other inrtances of
the fame crime, the causes which gave rile to
a pratice so shocking to humanity, deserve
our particular attention. Resentment is, for
obvious and wife reasons, one of the strongest
passions in the human mind. The natural de-
mand of. this passion is, that the person who
-feels the injury should himself inflia the eil
geance due on that account. The permittilng
this, however would have been deftrucive to
society; and punishment would have known
no bounds, either in severity, or in duration.
For this reason, in the very infancy of the so-
cial state, the sword was taken out of private
hands, and committed to the Magistrate. But
at firl, while laws aimed at restraining, they
really strengthened the principle of revenge.
The earliest and most limple punishment for
crimes was retaliation; the offender forfeited

limb for limb, and life for life. They payment:
of a compensation to the person injured, sic-
ceeded to the rigour of the former institution.
In both these, the gratification of private re-
venge was the object of law; and he who fils-
sered the wrong, was the only person who had
a right to pursue, to exac, or to remit the
punishment. While laws allowed such full
scope to the revenge of one party, the interests
of the other were not negle&ed. If the evi-
dence of his guilt did not amount to a full
proof, or if he reckoned himself to be unjultly
accused, the person to whom a crime was imr
puted had a right to challenge his adversary to
single combat, and, on obtaining the vi&tory,
vindicated his own honour. In almost every
considerable cause, whether civil or criminal,
arms were appealed to, in defence, either of
the innocence, or the property of the parties.
Justice had seldom occasion to use her balance;
the sword alone decided every contest. The
paflion of revenge was nourished by all there
means, and grew, by daily indulgence, to be
incredibly strong. Mankind became habituated
to blood, not only in times of war, but of
peace; and from this, as well as other causes,
contracted an amazing ferocity of temper and
of manners. This ferocity, however, made it
neceffarv to discourage the trial by combat; to
abolish the payment of compensations in crimi-
nal cafes; and to think of Come milder method

of terminating disputes concerning civil righls
The punifhlments for crimes became more feve-
re, and the regulations concerning property
more fixed; but the Princes, xvhofe province
it was to inflic the one, and to enforce the
other, pofleffed little power. Great offenders
despised their authority; smaller ones fhelkercd
theimnelves under the jurifdiclion of those, from
wvilofe protection they expected impunity. The
administration of justice was extremely feeble
and dilatory. An attempt to pnnifh the crimes
of a Chieftain, or even of his vassals, oftei
excited rebellions and civil wars. To nobles,
haughty and independent, among whom the
causes of discord were many and unavoidable,
who were quick in discerning an injury, and
impatient to revenge it; who erfeemed it in-
famous to submit to an enemy, and cowardly
to forgive him; who confidered the right ol
punifiling those who had injured them , as a
privilege of their order, and a mark of indepen-
dence; such flow proceedings were extremely
unfatisfahtory. The blood of their adversary
was, in their opinion, the only thing which
could wash away an affront; where that was
not shed, their revenge was disappointed, their
courage became fafpe&ed, and a stain was left
on their honour. That vengeange , which the
impotent hand of- the Magistrate could not in-
flit, their own could easily execute; under
governmnents so feeble, men assumed, as in a

hate of nature, the right of judging, and re-
drefling their own Wrongs. And thus aflaffi-
nation, a crime of all others the most deitruct-
ire to society, came not only to be allowed,
int to be deemed honourable.

The hiltory of Europe , during the I4th

and i5th centuries, abounds with deteRable in-
lrances of this crime. It prevailed chiefly
among the French and Scots, between whom.
there was a close intercourse at that time, and
a farprifing resemblance in their national cha-
rafters. In 1407 , the only brother of the
King of France was murdered publickly itn
the fireets of Paris; and so far was this hor-
rible afion from meeting with proper pnniih-
ment, that an eminent lawyer was allowed to
plead in defence of it before the Peers of Fran-
ce, and avowedly to maintain the lawfulness of
assassination. In r417, it required all the elo-
quence and authority of the famous Gerfon, to
prevail on the Council of Conflance to con-
demn this proposition. .,That there are some
cafes in which afaflination is a virtue more
meritorious in a Knight than in a squire and more
meritorious in aKing than in a Knight. *) " The
"umber of eminent persons who were murdered
in France and Scotland, on account either of
private, or political, or religious quarrels, du-
ring the isth and I6th centuries, is almost in-
credible. Even after those causes, which first
') L'Knrant, Hil. Conr- de Conrc.

gave rife to this barbarous practice, were re.
moved; after the jurisdiction of Magiftrates,and
the authority of laws, were better established,
and become more universal; after the progress
of learning and philosophy had polished the
manners, and humanized the minds of men,
this crime continued in some degree. It was
towards the close of the I7th century before
it disappeared in France. The additional vigour,
which the royal authority acquired by the ac-
cession of James VI. to the throne of England,
seems to have put a flop to it in Scotland.

The influence, however, of any national

custom, both on the understanding and on tlle
heart, and how far it may go towards pervert-
ing, or extinguishing moral principles ofthe great-
eft importance, is remarkable. The authors of
those ages have perfecly imbibed the fendi-
ments of their contemporaries, with regard to
afaffiination; and they, who had leisure to re-
fleet, and to judge, appear to be no more
shocked at this crime, than the persons who
committed it during the heat and impetuosity
of passion. Buchanan relates the murder of
Cardinal Beatoun and of Rizio , witlout ex-
preling those feelings which are natural to a
man , or that indignation which became an
historian. *) Knox , whose mind was fiercer
and more unpolifled, talks of the death of
* ') Buclian. 295, 34i-

Bentoun and of the Duke ofGuife, not only
without censure, but with the utmost exulta-
tion. *) On the other hand, the Bishop of
Ross mentions the afiaiFination of the Earl of
ilaurray, with some degree of applause. *"')
Blackwood dwells upon it with the most index
cent triumph, and ascribes it directly to the
hand of God. :"*) Lord Ruthven, the principal
ator in the conspiracy againit Rizio, wrote
an account of it tome short time before his own
death, and in all his long narrative there is
not one expreflion of regret, or one symptom
ofcompuntion, for a crime no less dishonour-
able than barbarous. *':':*) Morton , equally
guilty of the fame crime, entertained the fame
sentiments concerning it; and in his last mo-
ments, neither he himself, nor the Ministers
who attended him, seem to have confidered it
as an action which called for repentance; even
then he talks of David's slaughter as coolly, as
if it had been an innocent or commendable
deed.*****) The vices of another age astonish and
shock us; the vices of our own become fami-

') Knox, 334,

") Anders. 3. 84,

"') Jebb, 2. 363,

"') Keith , Append. 119,
"'";) Crawf. Merm. Appeiii.

# The Queen's hatred to Darnly increases.

liar, and excite little horror. I return from
this digression to the course of the history.

The Queen's hatred to Darnly inccnafes.

The charm, which had at first attached the

Queen to Darnly, and held them for some
time in an happy union, was now entirely dif-
solved; and love no longer covering his follies
and vices with its friendly veil, they appeared
to Mary in their full dimension and deformity.*)
Though Henry published a proclamation , di-f
claiming any ;knowledge of the conrpiracy
against Rizio, the Queen was fully convinced,
that he was not only accessory to the contriv-
ance, but to the commiflion of that odious
crime. '!:) That very power which, \'ith li-
beral and unfufpicious fondness, fCie had con-
ferred upon him, he had emlployed to iniuit
her authority, to limit her prerogative, and
to endanger her person. Such an outrage, it
-was impoflible any woman could bear or for-
give. Cold civilities, ferret distrust, frequent
quarrels, succeeded to their former transports
of affeEtion and confidence. The Queen's fa-
vours were no longer conveyed through his
hands. The crowd of expectants ceased to
court his patronage, which they'found to avail

i) See Appendix, Nio. XVI.
") Keith , 350.

# The rise of Bothwell's favour.

so little. Among the nobles, some dreaded his
furious temper , others complained of hisperfi-
dioulnefs ; and all of them despised the weak-
ness of his understanding, and the inconfiancy
of his heart. The people themselves observed
forne parts of his conduct, which little suited
the dignity of a King. Addi&ed to drunkeness,
beyond what the manners of that age could
bear, and indulging irregular paflions, which
even the licentiousness of youth could not ex-
cnre, he, by hi; indecent behaviour. provoked
theQueen to the utnmoft; and the passions which
it occasioned, often forced tears from her eyes,
both in publick and in private. *) Her aversion
for him increased every day, and could be no
longer concealed. He was often absent from
court, appeared there with little splendour!
and was trulled with no power. Avoided
equally by those who endeavoured to please
the Queen , who favoured Morton and his afnb-
ciates, or who adhered to the house of Hamil-
ton; he was left alnmoft -.lone in a neglected
and unpitied folitudc *::')

The rife of Bothwell's favour,

About this time a new favourite grew into

great credit with the Queen, and soon gained

') Keith , 329,

") Melv. 131. &c,
Hist,. of Scotl. Vol. l, E e

an ascendant over her heart, whichl elcouraged
his enterprising genius to form designs ttat
proved fatal to himnfelf, and'the occasion of all
IAlary's subsequent misfortunes. This was Jmnes
lepburn, Earl of Bothwell, the head of an
ancient family, and, by his extensive pol'cl'
sions and numerous vassals, one of the mod
powerful noblemen in the kingdom. Even in
that turbulent age, when so many vast projeAts
were laid open to an aspiring mind, and in-
vited it to aation, no man's ambition was more
daring than Bothwell's, or had recourse to bol-
der or more singular expedients for obtaining
power. When almost every person of di-
flircnion in the kingdom, whether Papist or
Protestant had joined the Congregation in op-
posing the dangerous encroachments of the
French upon the liberties of the nation, lir,
though an avowed Proteflant, adhered to the
Queen Regent, and acted with vigour on her
*fide. The success which attended the arms of
the Congregation having obliged him to retire
into France, he was taken into the Queen's
service, and continued with her till the time of
her return into Scotland. *) From that period,
every flep of his condud] towards Mary vas
remarkably dutiful; and arnidft all the shiftings
of fftion , we scarcely ever find him holding
any course which could be offensive to her
* ) Anderi. I, so.

\iTien Murray's proceedings with regard to her
marriage gave umbrage to the Queen, she re-
called Bothwell from that banishment into
wliich she had with reluctance driven him; and
confidered his zeal and abilities as the most
powerful supports of her authority. When the
conspirators againil Rizio seized her person, he
became the chief infrument of recovering her li-
berty,and served her, on that occafion,with so much
fidelity and success, as made the deepest im-
ireflion on her mind, and greatly increased
the confidence which she had hitherto placed
in ilim. :) Her gratitude loaded him with
marks of her bounty; she raised him to offices
of profit and of trui?, and tr:nfaaed no matter
of importance without his advice. **) By com-
plaifance and assiduity, he confirmed and for-
tified these dispositions of the Queen in his fa-
vour, and infenlib'y paved the way towards
that vast project, which his immoderate ambi-
tion had perhaps already conceived, and whlich,
in spite of many difficulties, and at the expence
of many crimes, lie at !aft accomplished.

The hour of the Queen's delivery now ap-

proached. As her palace was defended only
by a slender guard, it seemed imprudent to ex-
pole her person , at this time, to the insults

E e 2,

Ee)

*) Anders. I, 92, 93.
") MClv. 133. Knox , 306-

# Birth of James VI.

she might susser in a kingdom torn by factions,
and prone to mutiny. For this reason, the
Privy Council advised the Queen to fix her re-
fidence in the castle of Edinburgh, the strongest
fortress in the kingdom, and the most proper
place for the security of her person. *) In or-
der to render this security more perfeft, Mlary
laboured to extinguish the domeftick feuds
which divided some of the principal nobles.
IMurray and Argyll were exasperated againf
Huntly and Bothwell, by reciprocal and re-
peated injuries. The Queen, by her authority
and entreties, effeted a reconcilement among
them, and drew from them a promise to bury
their discords in everlasting oblivion. This re-
concilement Mary had so much at heart, that
she made it the condition on which she again
received Murray into favour. **)

Birth of James VI.

On the I9th of June, Mary was delivered

of her only son James, a Prince whose birch
was happy for the whole Ifland,and unfortun-
ate to her alone. His acceflion to the throne
of England united the two divided kingdoms in
one mighty monarchy , and established the
power of Great Britain on a firm foundation.
While fihe, torn early from her son by the

O) Kcith, 335.
* ) llaid, 336, Append, rI .

# The Queen continues to reat Darnly with indifference and neglect.

cruelty of her fate, was never allowed to in-
dulge those tender passions, nor to taste those
joys which fill the heart of a mother.

Mlelvil was inflantly dispatched to London

with an account of this event. It firuck Eliza-
beth, at first, in a sensible manner; and the
advantage and superiority which her rival had
acquired by the birth of a son , forced tears
from her eyes. But before Melvil was admit-
ted to audience, she had so far recovered the
command of herself, as to receive him not only
with decency, but with excessive cheerfulness;
and willingly accepted the invitation which
Mary gave her , to fland godmother to her
son. *)

As Mary loved splendour and magnificence,

she resolved to celebrate the baptism of the
young Prince with great pomp; and for that
purpose sent invitations of the fame kind to
the French King, and to the Duke of Savoy,
the uncle of her former husband.

The Queen continues to iea.t Darnly with indifference

and negle&.

The Queen, on her recovery, discovered

no change in her sentiments with refpet to the
King. '*) The death of Rizio, and the coun-
tenance he had given to an aCtion so insolent

;) Mlelv. 138.
o") S.e Append. No, X.V1

# Her attachment to Bothwell increases.

and injuftifiable, were fiill fresh in her memo.
ry. She was frequently pensive and dejefted. *)
And though Henry sometimes attended at court.
and accompanied her in her progrefles through
different parts of the kingdom, he met with
little reverence from the nobles, while Mary
treated him with the greatest reserve, and did
not susser him to possess any authority. **)
The breach between them became every day
more apparent. ***) Attempts were made tow-
ards a reconcilement, particularly by Caftelnau
the French Ambassador; but after such a violent
rupture, it was found no easy matter to bind
the nuptial knot a new; and though he pre-
vailed on the King and Queen to pass two
nights together, ****) we may, with great
probability , pronounce this appearance of
union, to which Caftelnau truRfed, not to have
been Sincere; we know with certainty that it
was not lasting.

Her attachment to Botliwell increales.

Bothwell, all this while, was the Queen's

prime confident. Without his participation no
business was concluded, and no favour bestow-

*) See Append. 148.

°) Keith, 350. Melv. 132,

"") Keith, Apjpend. 169,
"'3) Ibid.

ea. Together with this ascendant over her
councils, Bothwell, if we may believe the
contemporary historians, acquired no less sway
over her heart. But, at what precise .time
this ambitious Lord first allowed the sentiments
of a lover to occupy the place us that duty and
refpeEt which a fuljeat owes his Sovercign;
or when Mary , instead of gratitude. for his
faithful services, felt a paflion of another na-
ture rising in her bosom , it is no easy matter
to determine. Such delicate transitions of pal-
sion can be discerned only by those, who are
admitted near the persons of the parties, and
who can view the secret 'workings of the heart
with calm and acute observation. Neither Knox
nor Buchanan enjoyed these advantages. Their
humble station allowed them only a distant
access to the Queen and her favourite. And
the ardour of their zeal, and the violence of
their prejudices , rendered their opinions rash,
precipitate, and inaccurate. It is by the effeEts
of this reciprocal paflion, rather than by their
accounts of it, that fubfeqiient historians can
judge of its reality.

Adventlous as Bothwell's projet to gain

the Queen may appear, it was formed and car-
ried on under very favoutable circumifances.
Mary was young, gay, and aflable, She pof-
feted great sensibility of temper, and was ca-
pable of the utmost tenderness of affeftion. She
had placed her love on a very unworthy object

# The King resolves to leave Scotland.

who requited it with ingratitude, and treated
her with neglet, with insolence, and with
brutality. All these she felt, and resented,
In this situation, the attention and complaisance
of a man, who had vindicated her authority,
and proteded her person; who entered into all
her views, who soothed all her passions, who
watched and improved every opportunity of in.
finuating his design , and recommending his
paflion , *) could scarce fail of making an in.
pression on a heart of such a frame as Mary's.

The King resolves to leave Scotland.

The haughty spirit of Darnly, nursed up in

fattery, and accustomed to command, could
not bear the contempt under which he had now
fallen, and the state of insignificance to which
he saw himself reduced. But in a country,
where he was universally hated or despised, he
could never hope to form a party, which would
second any attempt he might make to recover
power. He addressed himself, therefore, to
the Pope, and to the Kings of France and Spain,
with many profefions of his own zeal for the
Catholick religion, and with bitter complaints
against the Queen, for negleeting to promote
that Interest: **) And soon after, he took a
resolution, equally wild and desperate, of ell-

) Anderr. I, 93. 94.
:') Knox., 399«

# His capricious behaviour.

burking on board a ship, which he provided,
and of flying into foreign parts. It is almost
impossible to form any satisfactory conje&ure
concerning the motives which influence -a ca-
pricious and irregular mind. I-e hoped, per-
haps, to recommend himself to the Catholick
Princes on the continent by his zeal for reli-
gion, and that they would employ their intir-
ell towards reinflating him in the poflfelion of
that power which he had olft. Perhaps, he
expec-ed nothing more than the comfort of hid-
ing the disgrace under which he was now fal-
len, among firangers, vwho had never been
witnesses of his former prosperity.

H4is capricious behaviour.

He communicated the design to the French

\rmbaffador Le Croc, and to his fatherthe Earl
of Lennox. They both endeavoured to dif-
fuade him from it, but without fuccers. Len-
nox, who seems, as well as his on , to have
loft the Queen's confidence, and who, about
this time, was seldom at court, instantly com-
municated the matter to her by a letter. Henry,
who had refused to accompany the Queen fronm
Stirling to Edinburgh, waslikewife abfentfrom
court. He arrived there, however, on the
fame day she received the account of his in-
tended flight. But he was more than usually
wayward and peevish; and scrupling to enter
the palace unless certain Lords who attended

# Mary endeavours to prevent his intended slight.

the Queen were dirmiffed, Mary was obliged
to meet him without the gates. Atlaft hefuf-
sered her to conduct him into her own apart.
ment. She endeavoured to draw from him the
reasons of the firange resolution which he had
taken, and to divert him from it. In spite
however of all her arguments and intreaties, lie
remained silent and inflexible. Next day the
Privy Council, by her direction, expoitulated
with him on the fame head. He persisted, not-
xvitlftanding, in his sullenness and obstinacy;
and neither deigned to explain the motives of
his condu&, nor signified any intention of al.
tering it. As he left the appartment, he turned
towards the Queen, and told her, that she
should not fee his face again for a long time.
A few days after, lie wrote to Mary, and men-
tioned two things as grounds of his disgust.
She herself, he said, no longer admitted him
into any confidence, and had deprived him of
all power; and the nobles, after herexample,
treated him with open neglect, so that he ap-
peared in every place without the dignity and
splendour of a King.

Mary endeavours to prevent his intended flight.

Nothing could be more mortifying to Mlary,

than this intended flight of the King's, which
would have spread the infamy of their doieftiCk
quarrel all over Europe. Compaflion for a Mon-
arch who would then appear to be forcedinto

exile by her neglet and ill usage, miglt have
disposed mankind to entertain sentiments con-
cerning the causes of their discord, little to
her advantage. In order, therefore, to- prc-
poflefs the minds of her allies, and to fcreeln
her reputation from any cenfare with which
Darnly might endeavour to load it, the Privy
Council transmitted a narrative of this whole
tranfacion, both to the King, and to the Qucen
Mother of France. It is drawn with great art,
and sets Mary's conduEt in the most favourable
point of light. *)

About this time, the licence of the bor-

derers called for redress; and Mary refolvingto
hold a court of justice at Jedburgh, the inhabi-
tants of several adjacent counties were fumn-
moned to attend their Sovereign in arms, ac-
cording to cullom. **) Bothwell was, at that
time, Lieutenant or Warden of all the marches,
an office among the most important in the king-
dom; and though usually divided into three
diftint governments, bestowed by the Queen's
favour upon him alone. In order to display his
own valour and activity in the discharge of this
traft, he attempted to seize a gang of banditti,
who, lurking among the marshes of Liddefdale,
infested the reft of the country. But while he
*was laying hold of one of those desperadoes,

') Keith, 345- 347.
") Ilid, 353, Good. vol. i. 302-

he was wounded by him in several places,
(O&tober I6.) so that his followers were ob-
liged to carry him to Hermitage castle. Mary
inflantly flew thither, with an impatience which
firongly marks the anxiety of a lover, butlittle
suited the dignity of a Queen. *) Finding
that Bothwell was threatened with no dangerous
symptom, she returned that fame day to Jed-
burgh. The fatigue of such a journey , added
to the anguish of mind she had suffered on
Bothwell's account, threw her next morning
into a violent fever. **)I Her life was despair-
ed of, but her youth, and the vigour of her
conflitution, refilled the malignity of her dif-
ease. During the continuance of the Queens
illness, the King, who resided at Stirling, never

') The distance between Jedburgh and Hermitage is IS Scn-

tifh miles, through a country almno impalTable. The
fealbn of the year was far advanced. Bothwell feemts to
have been wounded in a fculTle, occasioned by the despair
of a single man, rather than any open infurre&ion of tie
borderers. It does not appear that the Queen was attend-
ed thither by any considerable train. Had any iiiilitar)
operation been necessary, as is supposed, Good. vol. I.
304. it would have been extremely improper to riftritetile
Queen's person in an expedition against thieves. So ool!
as the Queen found Bothwell to be in no danger, flit
inftnntly returned, and after this we hear no more of tie
infurreftion, nor have we any proof that the rioters toot.
refuge in Englaud. No other reason but that which we
lhave produced, seems fuflicient to account for the Qtteela'
eouidu&.
*') Keith, 351. 353.

# The English Parliament favours Mary's pretensions to the succession.

came near Jedburgh; *) and when he after-
wards thought fit to make his appearance there,
( Novemb. 5.) he met with such a cold recep-
tion, as did not encourage him to make' any
long fay. **) Mary soon recovered strength.
enough to return along the eastern borders to
Punrbar.

While she resided in this place, her atten-

tion was turned towards England. Elizabeth,
notwithstanding her promise, and even procla-
mations to the contrary, not only allowed, but
encouraged Morton and his associates to remain
in England. *:'*) Mary, on the other hand, as-
forded her protection to several English fugi-
tives. Each Queen watched the motions of
the other with a jealous attention, and secretly
countenanced the practices which were carry-
ing on to difRurb the administration of her rival.

The English Parliament favours Mary's prctenflons

to the filccefliol.

For this purpose, Mary's Ambassador, Ro-

bert Melvil, and her other eminlaries, were ex-
tremely acive and successful. We may im-
pute, in a good degree, to their intrigues, that
spirit which appeared in the Parliament ofEng-

') Keith, Append. I33-
") Knox, 400,

land , and which raised a storm that threatened
Elizabeth's domeftick tranquillity more than
any other event of her reign, and required all
her art and dexterity to allay it.

Elizabeth had now reigned eight years

without discovering the leait intention tornarry.
A violent distemper, with which she had la.
tely been seized, having endangered her life,
and alarmed the nation with the profpesE of
all those calamities which are occalioned by a
disputed and dubious succession; a moiion wab
made, and eagerly listened to in both houses,
for addressing the Queen, to provide against any
such danger in times to come, either by figni-
fying her own resolution to marry, or by con-
senting to an a&t, establishing the order of fnc-
celfion to the Crown. *) I-Ier love to her fib-
jeats, her duty to the pnblick, her concern or
posterity, it was pretended, not only called
upon , but obliged her to take one of these
fleps. Thei insuperable averlion which fJe
had all along discovered for marriage, made it
improbable that she would chufe the former;
and if she complied witl the latter requeltt, no
title to the cro\wn could, with any colour of
.justice, be set in opposition to that of the Scot-
tifh Queen. Elizabeth was sagacious enougll
to fee the remotest consequences of this rnotioll
and observed them with the greatest anxiety.

) D'Ewes Journ, of ';,rlI, io.,

# Elizabeth's perplexity on that account.

ljry, by refusing so often to ratify the treaty
of Edinburgh, had plainly intimated a delfgn of
embracing the firlt promising opportunity for
prosecuting her right to the English Crown;
and by her secret negotiations, she had gained
many to favour her title. *) All the Roman
Catholicks ardently wished for her fucceflion.
Her gentleness and humanity had removed many
of those apprehensions which the Protefrants
entertained on account of her religion. The
court faction, which envied the power of Cecil,
and endeavoured to wvreft the adminillration
out of his hands, advanced the pretensions of
the Scottish Queen in opposition to him. The
union of the two kingdoms was a defireable
objet to all wife men in both nations; and
the birth of the young Prince was a security
for the continuance of this blessing, and gave
hopes of its perpetuity.

Elizabeth's perplexity on that account.

Under there circumfiances, and while the

nation was in such a temper, a parliamentary
declaration of Mary's title Mwould have been
highly detrimental to Elizabeth. The present
unsettled state of the fucceiflon left much in
her power. Her resentment alone might have
gone far towards excluding any of the compe-
titors from the Crown ; and the dread of this

*)M l.136.

# Mary endeavours to improve this opportunity.

had hitherto restrained, and overawed the am.
bition of the Scottish Queen. But if this check
should be removed by the legal acknowledgment
of her title, Mary would be at full liberty to
pursue her dangerous designs, and to as with-
out fear or reserve. Her partisans were already
meditating schemes for infurretions indifferent
parts of the kingdom; *) and an aft of Par-
liament, recognising the rights of that Princes.
whose pretensions they favoured, would have
been nothing less than a signal to arms; ani
notwxithftanding Elizabeth's just title to the as-
fecions of her subje&s, mighthave shaken and
endangered her throne.

Mary endeavours to improve this opportunity.

VWhile this matter remained in fufpence in

both hoafes, an account of it was tranfinitted
to Mary by Melvil her Ambassador. As fie
did not want advocates for her right, even
among those who were nearElizabeth'sperfon,
she endeavoured to cultivate the disposition
.which appeared towards fettling the right of
succession in her favoul, by a letter to the Privy
Counsellors of England. She expressed in it
a grateful sense of Elizabeth's friendlhip, which
she ascribes chiefly to their good offices with
their Sovereign in her behalf. She declared

her
*) Melv, 141,

her resolution to live in perpetual armity with
England, without urging or pursuing her claim
upon the Crown, any farther than should be
agreeable to the Queen. But, at the fame time,
as her right of succession was undoubted, fle
hoped it would be examined with candour, and
judged of with impartiality. The nobles who
attended her, wrote to the English Privy Coun-
cil in the fame strain. *) Mary artfully gave
there letters the air of being nothing more than
a declaration of her own , and of her fubjeEts
gratitude towards Elizabeth, But as she could
not be ignorant of the jealousy and fear with
which Elizabeth observed the proceedings of
Parliament, a Riep Co uncommon as this, of one
Prince's entering into publick correspondence
with the Privy Counsellors of another, could
not be otherwise conferued than as taken Witl
an intention to encourage the spirit which had
already been raised among the English. In this
lightt it eems to have appeared to Elizabeth
hertelf. **) But the disposition of her people
rendering it neceflary to treat Mary's person
with great decency, and her title with much
regard, she mentioned it to her only in the?
softest language.

') Keith, 354. Append. t 6.

") Keitih, 357.
Hist. of Scot, Vol. 1, F f

# Elizabeth sooths and gains her Parliament.

Elizabetli sooths nlld gains hcr Parllalise:rl,

Nothing, however, could be a more cruel

mortification to a Princess of Elizabeth's cia-
ratLer, than the temper which both houses of
Parliament discovered on this occasion. She
bent all her policy to defeat or elude the mo-
tion. After allowing the tirft heat of their zeal
to evaporate, she called into her presence acer-
tain number of each house. She soothed and
caressed them; she threatened and proinifed;
she remitted subsidies which were due; andre-
fused those which were offered; and in the end
prevailed to have this formidable motion put off
for that feflion. Happily for her, the conduc
of the Scottish Queen, and the misfortunes
which besel her, prevented the revival of such
a motion in any future Parliament. *)

Mlean time, in order to preserve the repu-

tation of impartiality, and that she might nct
drive ilary into any desperate measure, she
committed to the Tower one Thornton, who
had published something derogatory to the right
of the Scottish line; "') and signified her dif-
pleasure against a Member of the House of Com-
mons, who seemed, by some words ina peech,
to glance at Mary. :::'*)

') D'Ewe s ]ourri Io4 -- I . C-rLd, ':.i, .\elv. 1'.

Haynes, 446.

'") Camd, 401.
'"') Hayne, 449,

# An extraordinary step of Mary's in favour of Popery.

Anl extraordinary ftep of Mary's in favour of Popery.

Amidfi all her other cares, Mary was ever

solicitous to promote the interest of that reli-
gion which she professed. The reestablishment
of the Romish dotrine seems to have been her
Ifa'ourite paflion; and though the design was
concealed with care, and condufted with cau-
tion, she pursued it with a persevering zeal.
At.this time, she ventured to lay aside some-
what of her usual reserve; and the aid wliicl
she expeEted from the Popish Princes, who had
engaged in the league of Bayonne, encouraged
her to take a flep, which, if we confider the
temper of the nation, appears to be extremely
bold. Having formerly held a secret corre-
fpondence with the court of Rome, The lnow
resolved to allow a Nuncio from the Pope pub-
lickly to enter her dominions. Cardinal Lau-
rea, at that time Bishop of rlondovi, was tile
person on whom Pils V. conferred this olei)ce,
and along withl him he sent the Queen a pre-
sent of o,Dooo crovns. *) It is not the cha-
racter of the Papal court to open its treasury
upon diflant or imaginary hopes. The bufinef'
of the Nuncio in Scotland could be no other,
thau to attempt a reconciliation of that king-
dom to the Romish fee. Thus Mary herself un-
derflood it ; and in her anfwerto a letter whiih

Fs a
') Vita Card. Latr. up. ap. urn. e-l. ill, p. i ~.

she received from the Pope, after expreiiingliet
grateful sense of his paternal care and liberality,
she promises that file would bend her whole
firength towards the reeflablifhment and propa-
gation of the Catholick faith; that she would
receive the Nuncio with every possible demon-
firation of refpeft, and concur, with the utmost
vigour, in all his deligns towards promoting
the honour of God, and restoring peace to the
kingdom; that she would celebrate the baptism
of the Prince according to the ceremonies which
the Romish ritual prescribes, hoping that her
fubjets would be taught, by this example,
again to reverence the sacraments of the church,
which they had so long treated with contempt;
and that she would be careful to instil early
into her son the principles of afincere love and
attachment to the Catholick faith. *) But
though the Nuncio was already arrived at Pa-
ris, and had sent over one of his attendants
with part of the money, the Queen did not
think the juncture proper for his reception,
Elizabeth was preparing to fend a magnificent
embafly into Scotland, against the time of the
Prince's baptism, and as it would have been
improper to offend her, she wifely contrived,
under various pretences, to detain Laurea at
Paris. **) The convullions into which the

*) Conaei Vita Mnriae ap. Jcbb, 7!.

7 i, p. .r,
'"') Keitli, Append. 13?;.

# Her aversion for the King excessive.

kingdom wvas thrown soon after, made it im-
possible ,for him to pursue his journey any
farther.

At the very time that Mary was secretly

carrying on these negotiations for subverting the
Reformed Church, she did not scruple publickly
to employ her authority towards obtaining for
its Ministers a more certain and comfortable
fubfitence. ') During this year, she iffled
several proclamations and ats of council for that
purpose, and readily approved of every scheme
which was proposed for the more efFetual pay-
ment of their stipends. This part of her con-
du& does little honour to Mary's integrity: and
though jultified by the example of Princes, who
often reckon falsehood and deceit among the
necessary arts of government, and even autho-
rifed by the pernicious cafuifiry of the Roman
Church, which transfers breach of faith to he-
reticks from the lift of crimes, to that of du-
ties, such dissimulation, however, must be num-
bered among those blenifhes which never stain
a truly great and generous charaser.

Her ave:'ron for the King excessive.

As neither the French nor Piedmontefe

Ambassadors were yet arrived, ( in the month
of December) the baptism of the Prince was
put off from time to time. Mean while Mary
') Keith, 561, S4Q, Anox, 4l1.

# A divorce between them proposed.

fixed her residence at Craigmillar. *) Such a
retirement, perhaps, snited the present temper
of her mind, and induced her to prefer it be-
fore her own palace of Holy-rood-houfe. IHer
aversion for the King grew every day more con.
firmed, and was become altogether incurable,
A deep melancholy succeeded to that gaiety of
spirit, which was natural to her. The rashness
and levity of her own choice, and the King's
ingratitude and obflinacy, filled her with shame
and with despair. A variety of passions preyed
at once on a mind, all whose sensations were
exquisite, and all its emotions strong, and often
extorted from her, the last with of the unfor-
tunate, that life itself would come to an end.")

A divorce between them proposed.

Murray and lMaitland observed all those

workings of passion in the breast of the Queen,
and conceived hopes of turning them to thead-
vantage of their ancient aflociates, Morton,and
the other conspirators againlt Rizio. They
wvere still in banishment, and the Queen's re.
fentment against them continued unabated. lDlur-
ray and the Secretary flattered thenmfelves, how
ever, that her inclination to be separated from
Darnly would surmount this deep rooted aver
sion, and that the hopes of an event so desirable

K) Keith, 355.
t') Keith, Pref. vii.

light. induce her to be reconciled to the con-
fpirators. It was easy to find reasons, in the
King's behaviour, on which to found afentence
of divorce. This sentence they had interet
enough to obtain, and to procure the ratification
of it in Parliament. In return for this service,
they proposed to stipulate vith the Queen to
grant a pardon to Morton and his followers.
The design was first of all communicated to Ar.-
gyll) who, as well as Murray, owed his return
into Scotland to the conspiracy against Rizio.
Huntly and Bothwell, who at that time direted
all Mary's councils, were likewise admitted in-
to the concert. They joined together in mak-
ing the overture to the Queen, and enforced it
with all Maitland's eloquence. "') But Mary.
however desirous of obtaining that deliverance
from Darnly's caprices, with which they en-
deavoured to allure her, had nevertheless good
reasons for rejecting the method , by v-hich
they proposed to accomplifli it. The birth of
her son had greatly strengthened her claim upon
the EngliCh fucccffion, and encouraged the abet-
tors of it to appear witll greater boldness, and
to a&t with more vigour. She could scarce
hope to be divorced from her niufband, without
throwing some imputation on her son. This
might open a new dispute with regard to the
succession, and put it in the power of Elizabeth
') Auderr. vl,. ;v, Part ii, iS;

and her Ministers to call in duefion thePrince's
legitimacy, or at least to fubje& it to all the
delays and cavils of a judicial inquiry. The
fear of these inconveniences weighed with Mary,
and determined her rather to endure her hard
fate, than to seek relief, by venturing onfuch
a dangerous experiment.

The Earl of Bedford, and the Count de

Brienne, the English and French Ambafladots,
being arrived, Mary set out for Stirling, tpce.
lebrato the baptism of her son. Bedford was
attended by a numerous and splendid train, and
brought presents from Elizabeth, suitable to her
own dignity, and the refpe& with which she
affTeed, at that time, to treat the Queen of
Scots. Great preparations had been made by
Miary, and the magnificence displayed by heron
this occasion, exceeded whatever had beenfor-
merly known in Scotland. The ceremony it.
self was performed according to the ritesofthe
Romish Church. (Dec. It. ) But neither Bed.
ford, nor any of the Scottish nobles who pro-
fefled the Proteffant religion. entered within
the gates of the chapel. *) The spirit of that
age, firm and uncomplying, would not, upon
any inducement, condescend to witness an ac-
tion, which it esteemed idolatrous;

. ) Keitt. 3ó0.

# The King's capricious behaviour at the baptism of the Prince.

The King's capricious behaviour at the baptifin

of the Prince,

Henry's behaviour, at this junature, per-

Ieftly discovers the excess of his caprice, as well
as of his folly. He chore to reside at Stirling,
but confined himself to his own apartment; and
as the Queen diRrLifted every nobleman who
ventured to converse with him, he was left in
absolute solitude. Nothing could be more fin-
gular, or was less expeEted, than his chufing
to appear in a manner, that both published the
contempt under which he had fallen, and, by
exposing the Queen's domeflick unhappiness to
the observation of so many foreigners, looked
like a ftep taken on purpose to mortify and to
offend her. Mary felt this insult sensibly; and
notwithstanding all her efforts to aflame the
gaiety which suited the occasion and which was
neceflary for the polite reception of her guefis,
she was sometimes obliged to retire, in order
to be at liberty to indulge her sorrow and give
vent to her tears. *) The King flill persisted
a his design of retiring into foreign parts and
iaily threatened to put it in execution. **)

') Ieith , Prep. vii,
t") Camden affirms, 401, that Bedford was commanded by

Elizabeth not to give Darnly the title of King. As this
Was an indignity, not to be borne, either by Mary or her
husband, it hath been afterted to be the cause of the
King's absence front the ceremony of his fol's bnptifn.
Keith, 360. Good. 319. Btit, I. No such thing is to be
found amoong Bedford's intrttdlions, the original of 'hicb

# Elizabeth endeavours to accomodate her differences with Mary.

Elizabeth eudcarvoirs to accommodate her diTerencrs:

with MIary.

The ceremony of witnessing the Prince's

baptifin was not the sole business of Bedford',
embassy. Hi-s inftrutions contained an over.
ture, which ought to have gone far towards
extinguifling those jealousies which had so iong
fubfiaed between the two Queens. The treaty
of Edinburgh, which has been so often menl.
tioned, was the principal occasion of there.
The spirit, however, which had risen to such
an height in the late Parliament, the power of

iill remains. Keith. 356. 2. Bedford's ndvice r tI:t
Queen by Melvil is utterly inconlfirenrr with Caniden '.
fertion. Melv. 153. i\Clvil's account is confirmed by lI:
zabeth's inftru&ions to Sir Henry oiris, where ife ahilni.
;hat she coimmander Bedford to employ his belt rnliie,
towards reconciling Mlary to her husband, \ iici she i
nttempted to no (pirpore. Digges's Compl). Arebar. p. 1.
A paper publifired Append. No. XVI1. proves tile Dfi:r
thigoi. 3. I C Croc the French Resident nimentions tli ii;'"
absence , but wi'hoilt giviipl that reason for it, rv.lici I.
teen founded on Camden's 'words, iholigh , i tiat !,'
been the real one, he would 'carce ihae failed to 1ln-
tion it. His account of this matter i:; that wvlirih I

lih r

followVed , Ieith, I'res. vii. 4. Ie iifornis his court, 'i
on account of the ditfference betwixt the liig alr t

I

Queen, he had refused to hold any further rrrefpjolinlec
ivith tile former , though he appears;, il nanlly in;lans'e
to have been his great conlfident. Ibid. ,. As tie ':1[,

a s nlot present at the baptifln , he seens to Ihave bc.

excluded from any share inl the ordinary admnii:! 1"1;'
of bulilel's. Two aas of Privy Council o, e ona tlhe :t '.
aond the other on the 21( of December , are fr:lnl I:
ieith , 562. They both runl in tile Queenl's inalne ainlr
The King seems not to have been present. This cCild t!'
be owuiu. to Elizabeth's initrufions to Bedford.

the party which favoured the Scottish Queen's
title, the number and aftiviry of her agents in
different parts of the kingdom, alarmed Eliza-
beth, and induced her to forego any advantage,
which the ambiguous and artful expressions in
that treaty might afford her. Nothing was now
demanded of Mary, but to renounce any title
to the crown of England during Elizabeth's life,
and the lives of her posterity; who, on the
other hand, engaged to take no ifep, which
might prove injurious to Mary's claim upon the
succession. *')

Mary could not , with decency , reject a

proposition so equitable; fie insisted, however,
that Elizabeth should order the right upon
which she claimed to be legally examined, and
publickly recognised, and particularly that the
teflament of Henry VIII. whereby he had ex-
cluded the descendants of his eldelt fitter the
Queen of Scotland, from the place due to them
in the order of fuccefiion, might be produced,
and confidered by the English nobility. Mary's
Ministers had credulously embraced an opinion,
that this testament, which they so justly con-
ceived to be injurious to their mitrrefs, was a
mere forgery; and on different occasions had
urged Elizabeth to produce it. Mary would
have funlered considerably by gaining this point,
The original testament is still extant, and not
*) Kieith, 35(i,

the. least doubt can be entertained of its genui.
nenefs and authenticity. But it was not Eliza.
beth's intention to weaken or to fetafide the title
of the house of Stewart. She aimed at nothing
more, than to keep the question concerning the
fucceflion perplexed and undecided, and by
industriously eluding this request, she did real
service to Mary's cause. *)

A few days after the baptism of the Prince,

Morton and all the other conspirators againfi
Rizio obtained their pardon, and leave to re.
turn into Scotland. Mary, who had hitherto
continued inexorable to every entreaty in their
behalf, yielded at last to the solicitations of
Bothwvell. *:') He could hope for no success in
those bold designs on which his ambition re.
solved to venture, without drawing aid from
every quarter. By procuring a favour for Aor.
ton and his associates, of which they had good
reason to despair, he expeEed to secure a band
of faithful and determined adherents.

The King still remained at Stirling, in so.

litude, and under contempt. His impatience
in this situation, together with the alarm given
him, by the rumour of a design to seize his
person, and confine him to prison, **') was the oc-

") Keitil, 36r. 353. Note (c) Murdin , ;6.

"') Good. vol, i. 140. Melv. 154.
"') Keith, Pref. viii.

# Assemblies held about church affairs. (June 25. Decemb. 25. )

nfion of his leaving that place in an abrupt
manner, and retiring to his father at Glasgow.

Assemblies held about church afairs, (June 25,

Deccnib. 25. )

Two aflemblies of the church were held

during this year. New complaints were made,
and upon good grounds, of the poverty and
contempt under which the Proteliant clergy
were suffered to languish. Penurious as tho
allotment for their subsistence was, they had
not received the least part of what was due for
the preceding year. *) Nothing less than a
zeal, ready to endure and to fufler every thing
for a good cause, could have persuaded men to
adhere to a church, so indigent and so neglect-
ed. The extraordinary expences, occasioned
by the Prince's baptifin, had exhausted the
Queen's treasury, and the fums appropriated
for the subsistence of the clergy were diverted
into other channels. The Queen was therefore
obliged to prevent the jut remonitrances of the
af'embly, by falling on some new method for
the relief of the church. Some symptoms of
liberality , some stretch towards munificence,
might have been expeted in an afiignment
which was made with an intention of soothing
and silencing the clergy. But both the Queen
and the nobles held fast the riches of the church
') Keith, 562.

which they had seized. A tum, which, at the
highest computation, can scarce be reckoned
equal to 9000 i. sterling, ') was deemed fulti.
cient for the maintenance of a whole national
churdh, by men who had lately seen single
nonafteries poffeired of revenues far superior in
value.

The ecclefiafticks in that age bore the

grievances which afTfeted themselves alone with
astonishing patience; but wherever the re.
formed religion was threatened, they were ex-
tremely apt to be alarmed, and to proclaim, in
the loudest manner, their apprehensions of
danger. A just occasion of this kind was given
them, a short time before the meeting of the
afrlembly. The usurped and opprefiive jurif-
diftion of the spiritual court had been abolished
by the Parliament 1560, and commiTilaries wele
appointed to hear and determine the causes
which formerly came under their cogni-
7ance. **) Among the few aCts of that Parlia-
ment, to which Mary had paid any regard,
this was one. She had confirmed the authority
of the Commiflaries, and had given them in-
firu&tions for direting their proceedings, :::')
which are still of great authority in that court

:) Keith, 562,

') Id. 152.%
:'L*) Id. n51,

From that time there judges had continued in
ihe uninterrupted exerci'e of their function,
when of a sudden the Queen issued a proclama-
rion, restoring the Archbilhop of St. Andrew's
to his ancient jurifdition, and depriving the
Conmiflaries of all authority. ;)

A motive, \xhich cannot be justified, ren-

dered the Queen not unwilling to venture upon
ihis rash altion. She had been contriving, for
some time, how to reefrablifh the Popish reli-
gion; and the restoring the ancient ecclefiaflicks
to their former jurifdiaion , seened to be a
considerable Itep towards that end. The motive
which prompted Bothwell, to whose influence
over the Queen this afion iuft be chieily im-
puted, *:) was fill more criminal. His enter-
prifing ambition had already formed that bold
delign , which he soon after put in execution;
and the use which we shall hereafter find him
making of that authority, which the Popish ec-
rlefiafficks regained, discovers the realons of
his present conduft, in contributing to revive
Iheir power. The Protestant clergy were not
unconcerned fpeftators of an event, which
threatened their religion with unavoidable de-.
ftrntion; but as they despaired of obtaining
the proper remedy from the Queen herself,
they addrefl'ed a remonstrance to the whole bo-,

*) Kilox, 40o3.
'") Id, ilbid.

# The King falls sick at Glasgow.

dy of the Protestant nobility, full of that axrdent
zeal for religion, which the danger to which
it was exposed at that time, feerned to re-
quire. *) What effets this vehemenT t exh0r.
tation might have produced, we have no op.
portunity of judging, the attention of the ni.
tion being quickly turned towards events of
another, and more tragical nature.

The King falls sick at Glasgow.

Immediately upon the King's leaving Srir-

ling, and before he could reach Glalgow, he
was seized with a dangerous distemper. The
symptoms which attended it were violent and
unusual, and in that age it was conmmonly im-
puted to the effec&s of poison. '':) It is impol-
fible, amidst the contradickions of historians, to
decide with certainty concerning its nature, or
its cause. ;::::) H.is life was in the utlniOf

daon

::) Keith, 6.

'") Melv, 154. Knox, 401.
'') Buchalnail and ;inox are poritive tinat ti:e Kin:g iad he'r

poisoned. Thliy mention the black and putlid liulitiei
Vyhich broke out all over his body. Buchanan addils, :i
Abernethy the ling's pihyfician plainly declared tIlt loiso
was the cause of there fynptois , and that the Quien iit
fured to allow her oun physician to attend him. Biichi. 3':
lKnox, 401I. . Blackwood, Caulit, &c. Jebb. vol. ii.24 5',
assert, that the smallpox was the dileare nvth w\vlllic
King Was seized. He is called a Pockifli maln i the Qui:ci"
letter. Good. vol. ii. 15. The reason given by Frt)c!
Paris for lodging the IKing tt the Kirk of Field, viz, le:
the young Prince fholild catch the infeAtion if hle lAidi :

# Neglected by Mary.

danger; but after languishing for some weeks,
the vigour of his confiitution ftrmounted the
malignity of the disease.

Negleaed by Mnry.

Mary's negleft of the King, on this occa-

sinn, vwas equal to that with which he had
treared her during her illness at Jedburgh. She
nK, longer felt that warmth of conjugal afl'fetion
which prompts to sympathy, and delights in all
thoie tender offices which tooth and alleviate
fcknefs and pain. At this junt&ure, she did
lot even put on the appearance of this paflion.
NotwithfIanding the King's danger, she amuled
herself with excirfions to diTerent parts of the
country, and fuirered near a month to elapse
before she irifted him at Glafgowv . By that
time, the violence of the difteinper was over.
and the King;, though weak and languishing,
was out of all danger.

the palare , seems to frvour this opinions Anders. 'oi iix
I93. Carte mentions it as a proof of Mary's teinderiief
to her htlllfbhi, , that tholugh rfie never had tie nillall ipox
herlelf, flhe ventured to attend him , vol. .i. 441. This, if
it had been trule, would have afnorded a good pretence fur
1o " viliting hil fooler ; bit Mary had the flmall pox in her
ilifancy. Sadler's Lerrers, 3. B3ifholp Iefly ilrfllis i tha:
the King's disease was the French pox. Keith, 304. Note (b)s
In that age , tiis difeilte was eltedleed so contagious, tha'
pellbos infected with it were removed without th4l viula;
of cities,
sHit, of Scotl. Vol. ... gó

# The breach between them irreparable.

The breach betWeen them irreparable.

The breach between Mary and her hnfband

was not occasioned by any of those flight di'.
gusts, which interrupt the domeftick union,
without difrolving it altogether. Almost all
thle pafiions, which operate with greatest vio.
ience on a female mind, and drive it to the
mol: dangerous extremes, concurred in raifitn
and fomenting this unhappy quarrel. Ingrati-
tude for the favours she had beflowed, contemnt
of her person, violations of the marriage vow,
encroachments on her power, confpiraciei
agaiinf her favourites, jealousy, infolencc, and
obstinacy, were the injuries of which Adary
lhad great reason to complain. She felt them
with the utnioft fenlibility; and added to the
anguish of disappointed love, they produced
those symptoms of despair which we have a!.
ready described. Her resentment against the
King seems not to have abated from the tim=
of her leaving Stirling. In a letter written Mwiti
her own hand to her Ambassador in France
just before she set out for Glasgow, (Jan. 2o.,
no tokens of sudden reconcilement appear. 0O
the contrary, she mentions, with some bitter
ness, the King's ingratitude, the jealousy Bwith
which he observed her acions, and the inelin
ation he discovered to ditlurb her governmlnt:

# Visits the King at Glasgow.

# Her dissimulation.

atil at the fane time talks of all his attempts
with the utmost scorn. *)

Visits lie King at Glanfgow.

After this discovery of iIary's fentimentsj

it was 'carce to be expected that she would.
vift the King , or that any thing but marks of
jealousy and distrust should appear in such an
interview. This, however, was far from being
the cafe; she not only visited Henry, but, by
all her words and acions, endeavoured to ex"
press an uncommon affection for him: And
though this made itnprellion on the credulous
ipirit of her hufsband, no less flexible, on some
occaions, than obstinate on others; yet, to
tho)e who are acquainted with the human
]leart, and who know how seldom and how
slowly fucch wounds in domeftick happiness are
healed, this fuidden transition will appear with
a very suspicious air, and will be conlidered
by tlhem as the effe&t of artifice.

Her diiimularion4

But it is not on suspicion alone, that Mary

is charged with diflimulation in this part of her
condut. Two of her famous letters to Bothl
well were written during her stay at Glafgoxvj
and fully lay open this scene of iniquity. H-

) geith

Prf

v
') Keith Pr~t', viii

had so far fuccecded in his ambitious and cri.
minal design, as to gain an absolute afcendaln
over the Queen ; and in a situation , such a
\:lary's, merit not so conspicuous, lervices us
flar inferior importance, and address much less
insinuating than Bothwell's , may be fuppoled
to steel imperceptibly on a female heart, and
entirely to overcome it. Among those in the
higher ranks of life, scruples with regard to
conjugal fidelity are, unhappily, neither many,
nor firong: Nor did the manners of that cotnr,
in which Mary had been educated, contribute
ro increase or to fortify them. The amorous
turn of Francis I. and Henry II. the wildness
of the military character in that age, and the
liberty of appearing in all companies, which
Lbe-an to be allowed to women, who had not
yet acquired that delicacy of tentiment , and
rhofe polished manners, which alone can ren-
dler this liberty innocent , had introduced,
among the French , a licentioufinefs of morals
that rose to an aflonifhing height. Such exam-
iies, vwhich were familiar to iMary from her
infancy, could hardly fail of diminifting that
L.arror of vice lwhich is natural to a virtuous mind.
Tihe K]ing's behaviour would render the firlf
approach of forbidden sentiments less fl ocling;
resentment, and dilappointed love, would be
apt to represent whatever soothed her revenge,
as jufcifiable on that account; and so iinlil

# The motives of it.

concurring causes mighft, alinoft imperceptibly,
kindle a new paflion in her heart.

The nlotivcs of it,

But whatever opinion we may form wvith

regard to the rife and progress of this paTion,
the letters themselves breathe all the ardour
and tenderness of love. The affeation which
Mary there expreftes for Bothwell , fully ac-
counts for every fuibfequent part of her con-
dua&; which , without admitting this circum-
fance, appears altogether mnvilerious , incon-
fiflent, and inexplicable. That reconcilement
with her husband, of lhich , if we allow it to
be genuine, it is impossible to give any plausible
account, is discovered, by the Queen's own
confefiion , to have been mere artifice and
deceit. As her aversion for her husband , and
the suspicious attention with which she oh-
served his conduet, became universally known,
her ears wcere oli.cioufly filled, as is usual in
such cafes, with groundless or aggravated ac-
counts of his a&cions. By some , The was told,
that the King intended to seize the person of
the Prince his son, and in his name to ufnrp
the gevernment; by others she was anffred,
that he resolved instantly to leave the kingdom;
that a vessel was hired for this purpose, and
lay in the river Clyde ready to receive him. i)
') eitib, P!'.-s, viii,

# Prevails on him to come to Edinburgh.

The last was what Mary chiefly dreaded.
Henry's retiring into a foreign country must
have been highly dishonourable to the Queen,
and would have entirely disconcerted Bothlwell's
measures. While he resided at Glasgow, at a
distance from her, and in that part of the king-
dom where the interest of his family was
greatest, he might, with more facility, ac.
complifh his designs.

Prevails on him to come to Edinburghi

In order, therefore, to prevent his exe-

cuting any such wild scheme, it was necefiliry
to bring him to some place were he would be
more immediately under her owvn eye. So;
this purpose, she first employed all her art to
regain his confidence, and then proposed to
remove him to the neighbourhood of Edinburgh,
'under pretence, that there he would have easer
access to the advice of physicians, and that fie
herself could attend him without being ablent
from her son. *) The King w'as weak enough
to susser himself to be persuaded; and being fiill
feeble, and incapable of bearing fatigue, was
carried in a litter to Edinburgh.

The place prepared for his reception was a

house belonging to the Provost of a collegiate
church, called Kirk of Field. It flood almofi
Upon the fame spot where the house belongin:';

*} Gopd, vol. ii. g,

# He is murdered there.

to the Principal of the university now Itands.
Such a situation, on a rising ground, and at that
time in an open field, had all the advantages
of heathful air to recommend it; bat, on the
other hand , the solitude of the place rendered
it extremely proper for the commission of that
crime, with a view to which, it seems mani-
feftly to have been chosen.

e is murdered thlier.

Mary continued to attend the King w-ith

the most assiduous care. She seldom was absent
from him through the day; she slept several
nights in the chamber under his apartment.
She heaped on him so many marks of tender-
ness and confidence, as, in a great meafuire,
quieted those suspicions which had so long di-
flurbed him. But while he was soundly indul-
ging in dreams of the return of his former hap-
piness , he flood on the very brink of de-
ftruEtion. On Sunday the ninth of February,
about eleven at night, the Queen left the Kirk
of Field, in order to be present at a malquein
the palace. At two next morning, the houlf
in which the King lay was blown up with gun-
powder. The noise and shock, which this
sudden explosion occasioned, alarmed the whole
city. The inhabitants ran to the place whence
it came. The dead body of the King, with
that of a servant who slept in the fame room,
'were found lying in an adjacent garden, with.

# His character.

# Bothwell and the Queen suspected of the murder.

out the city wall, untouched by fire, and vith
no bruise or mark of violence.

His chara&er,

Such wat the unhappy fate of Henry Stew-.

art Lord Darnly , in the twenty first year of
his age. The indulgence of fortune, and lIi.
own external accomplishments , without any
other merit, had raised him to an height of
dignity, of which he was altogether unworthy.
Bv his folly and ingratitude, he loft the heart
of a woman who doated on him to diftraftion.
Ilis insolence and inconflancy alienated front
him such of the nobles as had contributed mont
zealously towards his elevation. His levity
and caprice exposed him to the scorn of the
people, who once revered him as the defcen-
dant of their ancient Kings and heroes. -ad
he died a natural death, his end would have
been unlamented, and his memory have been
forgotten; but the cruel circumstances of his;
murder, and the remifnofs with which it was
afterwards avenged, have made his name to be
remembered with regret, and have rendered
him the objec of pity, to which he had other-
wife no title.

Bothwell and the Queen furpeaed of the murder.

Every one's imagination was at work to

guess who had contrived and executed this cN-
eclable deed, The fiifricion fell, with almon.

ageneral consent, on Bothwell; ") and some
refleitions were thrown out, as if the Queen
herself were no stranger to the crime. Of
Bothwell's guilt there remains the fullest evi-
dence that the nature of the aftion will admit.
The Queen's known sentiments with regard to
her huifbnnd, gave a great appearance of proba-
bility to the imputation with which flie was
loaded. :)

Two days after the murder, a proclama-

tion was ifnued by the Queen, offering a con-.
flderable reward to any person who should dif-
cover thole \who hlad been guilty of such a
hiorrid and detefiable crime; I'*:-) and though
Botlihell was now one of the greatest fabje&ts
in the kingdomr formidable on account of his
own power, and prot-e4ed by the Queen's fa-
vour, it was impolfibe to suppress the senti-
;nents and indignation of the people. Papers
were affixed to the most publick places of the
city, accufitng him of the murder, and naming
his accomplices; pictures appeared to the fame
purpose, and voices were heard in the middle
of the night, charging hin- with that barbarous
afion. But the authors of these rumours did

') Mielv. 155. Aldert. vol, i. 156,
') See Dissertation concerning tlhe murder of Henry Darnly,

iad the geniilenefl s of Ml'ay's letters to BotiihMell, Ay-
pelndix,
'") nderf, vol. i, 36,

hot confine their accusations to Bothwell alone
they insinuated that the Queen herself was ac.
ceffary to the crime. *) This bold accusation,
which so dire&ly attacked Mary's reputation,
drew the attention of her council; and by en.
gaging them in an inquiry after the authors of
these libels, diverted them from searching for
the murderers of the King. **) It could scarce
be expeted that Mary herself would be ex-
tremely solicitous to discover those who had
rid her of an husband, whom she had so vin-
lentlv hated. It was Bothwell's interest, w\il
had the supreme direcion of this , as well as
other affairs, to stifle and suppress whatever
evidence should be offered, and to cover, if
pofiible, the whole transaction under the veil
of darkness and of silence. Some inquiry, how-
ever, was made, and some persons called be.
fore the council; but the examination wascon-
duEed with the noft indecent remifrlefs, and
in such a manner, as to let in no light upon
that scene of guilt. ":*)

It was not her own fubjets alone whofuf.

peted Mary of having been accefihry to this
unnatural crime; nor did an opinion, so dif-
honourable to her charater, owe its rife and
progress to the jealousy and malice of her fchious

*) Anders. vol, ii. 156.

'") Id. vol. i. 3S.
I'' ) id, vol, iv, 167. Ii s.

# Lennox accuses Bothwell of the King's murder.

iobles. The report of the manner and circum-
liances of the King's murder spread quickly over
all Europe, and, even in that age , which was
accutlomed to deeds of violence, it excited uni-
versal horror. As her unhappy breach with her
husband had long been matter of publick dif-
courfc, the firfi conjectures which were formed
with regard to his death, were extremely to
her disadvantage. I-er friends, at a loss what
apology to offer for her condu&t, called on her
to prosecute the murderers with the utmofli di-
ligence, and expedted that the rigour of he:
proceedings would prove the belt and fulleil;
vindication of her innocence. *::

Lelil ox icurifes Bothwell of tlie ling's murder.

Lenno:;, at the fame timee, incited Mary

te vengeance wvth inccfthnt importunity. This
noblemaln had lhared in his lon's dilgrace, and
being treated by Mary witlh negle&, usually re-
lided at a dillance from court. Roused, how-
ever, by an event no less shocking to the heart
of a father, than fatal to all his schemes o am-
bition, he ventured to write to the Queen,
(Febr. 2I. 1.567.) and to ofter his advice with
refipe& to the most efreftual method for dif-
covering and convicing those who had so cruelly
deprived him of a son, and her of a husband.
He urged her to prosecute those who were guilty

*) lKeith, Pref. ix.

# Mary continues to favour him.

with vigour, and to bring them to a speedy
trial; he declared his own furpicion of Both.
well, and of those who were named as his ac-
complices; he required that, out of regard to
decency, and in order to encourage evidence
to appear against them, the persons accused of
such an atrocious crime should be comnmittedto
custody, or at least excluded from her court
and presence. *)

Mary was then at Seaton, whither fie had

retired after the burial of the King. wvhfe bodrr
was deposited among the Mlonarcls of Scotland.
in a private but decent manner. ::*) The for-
mer part of the Earl's demand could not, on
any pretence, be eluded; and it was refol0ed
to bring Bothwell immediately to trial.

Mary continues to favour him.

But, instead of confining him to anyprifol,

Iary admitted him into all her councils, and
allowed a person, universally reputed a mur-
derer of her husband, to enjoy all the security,
the dignity, and the power of a favourite. :':)
The offices which Bothwell already polleffed,
gave him the command of all the south ofScot-
land. The castle of Edinburgh, however, v,'

*) Keith, 369.

') Anders. vo. i. 23.
,"'*) Id. ibld, 40, &i;.

# Hastens on his trial.

a place of too much consequence not to xvifh
it in his own power. The Queen, in orderto
prevail on the Earl of MVar to £urrender it, con-
sented to put the person of the young Prince
in his hands, (March I9.) and immediately
beifow.ed the government of that important for-
tref's upon Both :

ell.

:: ) So many steps in lher

conduct, inconifnlent with all the rules of pru-
dence, and of decency, must be imputed to an
excels either of folly or of love. Mary's known
charaCter fully vindicates her from the former;
of the latter, many and itriking proofs soon
appeared.

I-Ilaens on his trial,

No dire& evidence had yet appeared againtE

Bothwell ; but as time might bring to light the
circumstances of a crime, in which so many ac-
complices were concerned, it was of greatim-
portance to hurry over the trial, while nothing
more than general suspicions, and uncertain
iiurmifes, could be produced by his accusers.
'or this reason, in a meeting of Privy Council
held on the nSth of March, the I2th of April
was appointed for the day of trial. And though
the law allowed, and the manrner in hich
criminal causes were carried on in that age re-
quired, a much longer interval, it appears, from
several circumstances, that this fhurt space was

''Ariierf, vol. i, Plei-s , 1,~ KEi'..37,

considerably contraFed, and that Lennox bad
only eleven days warning to prepare for acct ln('1
a person, so far superior to himself, botlh i
power and in favonr. :") 'TNo man could be i's
in a condition to contend vtil:h an alta.goliltt
who -was thus supported. Though Lennox's
paternal estate had been restored to him, lwen
lie was recalled into Scotland, it fecer.s to have
been considerably impaired during his banifil
mnent. lis vafials, vhile ihe resided in Eng-
land, had been accuftorned to Come degree ol'
independence, and he had not recovered that
absolute ascendant over them, which a fieud.aI
chief usually pofiefflcd. -le had no reafoil to
expeac the concurrence of any of those faieions

') The nft of Privy Connrii, apoiitin; the day of Bo'IMti;'

tiial, heair; date 1Marcti tile 25cl . h\icli h11al llend :ai a1
Tilurlday, Anderi. vol. i. 5<,. Th' Uueeii's w\rrti,:
tile nileflengers hipowering themn to flinllloll lctl;::I; t1
be pretlent, is dated on lte a2th. Anderr. vol, ii. ij. lIC

S'as fuLinmoned by publick iroclailatiion at tile (.Cio oi,

Edinburgh on tie fame day, Ibid, Ioo. -le was I'uiL;.IIa!e!
at his dweelli.r-hon'es i1 Gliafov, nlon Dlumbarton ll 3-i.
ofe March, tie si nland 2d days of April. Ibid, l1o. I'1
was fummoted at Pecli, Aptil Ilt 'bid, Io2. I'I.;
Lennox resided ac thla tine 40 miles froml Edltibiirllh. tic
citation ii iltiiic have been l;ivenl hilm sooner. Sitli at11 *11-
necessary delay li'ords foiLe cauf' soir Cfifliciout. 'Ts tre-
Mary in lier letter, i. arcii 24th, ilnvitied Lennox it, clili;
to Edinlburgh the cnrfuiin week; tins [;ave hliinl \\:l .il.
some days foeoer, that file intended to btilig on tlti '.I
Without delay. But tle precise time could not ie le,:llY
or certainly klo\ll to Lellnox foonler thanll 1i or 1 dit.
before the day Io Which lie WaS requiled to a1ipe:l;' Lj
the law and pratice, o' Scotland, :Lt tl:it tin:e, tr;
Were fllllollued, in cafes cf treilae, 40 days prtr.-,:1t::
the trial,

# Lennox craves a delay.

into wvhich the nobles were divided. During
the short period of his son's prosperity, he hadi
taken fach steps as gave rife to an open breach
with Murray and all his adherents. The parl-
tizans of the honfe of Hamilton were his he-
reditary and mortal enemies. Huntly was linked
in the closest confederacy with Bothwell; and
thus, to the disgrace ofthe nation, Lennox stood
alone in a cause, wvliere both honour and
humanity called so loudly on his countrymen.
to second him.

It is remarkable too, that Bothwellhimfelf

was present, and fat as a member in that meet-
ing of Privy Council, which gave directions
with regard to the time and manner of his trial;
and he flill enjoyed not only full liberty, but
was received into the Qneen's presence with the
fame distinguished familiarity as formerly. ')

Ie1nlu craves a Celay.

Nothing could be a more cruel disappoint-

:nent to the willhes and resentment of a father,
thaln such a premature trial ; every ftep towards
which seemed to be taken by directions from
the person who was himfelfaccufed of the crime,
and calculated on purpose to conceal rather than
to detect his guilt. Lennox foresaw what would
be the ifl'ue of this mock inquiry, and with how
iittle safety to himself, or success to his cause,

? Anderr. vol. 1. So. 52.

# Applies for this purpose to Elizabeth.

he could venture to appear on the day prefixed,
In his former letters, though under expreliions
the molt refpeftful, some fympto-ns of his dil-
trusting the Queen may be discovered. lie
lpoke out now in plain language. Hle coni-
plained of the injury done him, by hurrying on
the trial with such illegal precipitation. He re-
presented once more the indecency of allowing
Bothwell, not only to enjoy perbonal liberty,
but to retain his former influence over her
councils. He again required her, as she re-
garded her own honour, to give forme evidence
of her sincerity in prosecuting the murder, by
confining the person who was, on good grounds,
fufpeaed to be the author of it; and, till that
were done, he fignilied his own resolution not
to be present at a trial, the-manner and cir-
cumftances of which were so irregular and un-.
fatisfa&ory. ":)

Applies for this piulloi'e to Elizabeth.

He seems, however, tohave expecredlittie

success from this application to Mary; and tlie
refore, at the fame time, besought Elizabeth
to interpose, in order to obtain fucb a delay as
he demanded. ;) Nothing can be a stronger
proof how violently le fulpeaed the one Queen,

thaIn

') Anders. vol. i. 52Z
t) Good. vol. ii, 35",,

# The trial proceeds.

than his fubnitting to implore the aid of the
other, who had treated his foin with theutmoft
contempt, and himself and family with the
greatest rigour. Elizabeth, who was neve un-
willing to interpose in the afiairs of Scotland,
wrote inrtantly to Mary, adviled her to delay
the trial for iome time, and urged, in such
lfrong terms, the fame arguments which Len-
nox had used, as might have convinced her to

hliat an unfavourable conflruftion her condudt

wvould be liable, if she perlifred in her present
method of proceeding. ")

The trial proceeds.

Neither her intreaties, however, notthofe

of Lemnox, could prevail to have the trial put
olT. On the day appointed, Bothwell appeared,
but with fucli a formidable retinue, that it would
iiavebeen dangerous to condemn, and itnpolilble
to punish him. 'Bjides a numerous body of
iis friends and valhlls assembled, according to
custom, from difterert parts of the kingdomi he
was attended by a band of hired foldiersj who
marched with flying colours along the sireetd
of Edinburgh. :*) A court of juflice was held
With the accufromed formalities. An indic-mnent
Was presented against Bothwell, and Lennto

") Anderson, Pref, 6J. See Applend; No, jl.

') Anders. vol. i. 135,
Hill. of Scotl. Vol. I. H hi

# Bothwell is acquitted.

was called upon to make good his accusation
in his name appeared Robert Cunningham, one
of his dependants. He excused his Maser's ab-
fence, on account of the shortness of the time,
which prevented his assembling his friendsand
vassals, without whose assistance he could not,
with safety, venture to set himself in opposition
to such a powerful antagonist. For this realon,
be desired the court to stop proceeding, and
protested, that any sentence which should be
pafied at that time, ought to be deemed illegal
and void. Bothwell, on the other hand, inlift.
ed that the court should instantly proceed to
trial. One of Lennox's own letters, in wliich
he craved of the Queen to prosecute the mur-
derers without delay, was produced. Cun-
ningham's obje&tions -were overruled; and the
jury, confifling of Peers and Barons of the Iirft
rank, found Bothwell not guilty of the crime.

Bothwell is acquitted.

No person appeared as an accuser, not z

tingle witness was examined, nor any evidence
produced against him. The jury, under these
circunmfances, could do nothing else but acquit
him. Their verdi&t, however, was far from
gratifying the wifThes, or silencing the murmurs
of the people. Every circumtrance in the trial
gave grounds for suspicion, and excited indig-
nation; and the judgment pronounced, inllead
of being a proof of Bothwell's innocence, wan

cfleemned an argument of his guilt. Pasquinades
and libels were alfixed to diflerent places, ex-
pressing tile sentiments of the publick with the
utmost virulence of language.

The jury themselves seem to have been

aware of the censure to which their proceedings
w'ould be exposed; and, at the fame time, that
they returned their verdiEt acquitting Bothwell,
the Earl of Caithness proteited, in their name,
that no crime should be imputed to them on
tlhat account, because no accuser had appeared,
and no proof was brought of the indictment.
He took notice, likewii'e, that the ninth in-
fiead of the tenth of February was mentioned in
the indi&itment, as the day on wvhich the murder
had been committed. A circumflance, which
discovers the extreme inaccuracy of those who
prepared the indictment; and at a time when
men were disposed, and not without reason, to
be lufpiciotus of every thing, this small matter
contributed to conllirnl and to increase their 'us-
picions. ";)

Even Bothwell hinifelf did not rely on the

judgment which he had obtained in his favour,
as a full vindication of his innocence. Imme-
diately after his acquittal, he , in compliance
with a cutlomn which was not then obsolete,
published a writing , in which he offered to

H h h
') T3othw, Trinl, Aindrf. vol. i, 97, &c.

# A Parliament held.

light, in tingle combat, any Gentlemanofgood
fame, who should presume to accuse him of
being acceflary to the murder of the King.

Mary, however, continued to treat him as

if he had been cleared by the most unexception-
able and fatisfaatory evidence. The ascendant
he had gained over her heart, as well as over
her councils, was more visible than ever; and
Lennox, who could not expet that his own
person would be safe in a country where the
murder of his son had been absolved, without
regard to justice; and loaded with honours, in
contempt of decency; fled with precipitation
towards England. :')

A Parliament held.

Two days after the trial, a Parliament was

held, at the opening of which the Queen diftin-
guifhed Bothwell, by appointing him to carry
the sceptre before her. **) Most of the asti
pansed in this Aftembly were calculated on pur.
pose to strengthen his party, and to promote
his designs. He obtained the ratification of all
the polellfions and honours which the partiality
of the Queen had conferred upon him; and the
at to that efl'e'e contained the strongest decla-
rations of his faithful services to the Crown in
all times pall. The surrender of the cafle of

:'') Ieitil ,

3 8 ot (d),
*.':) l, il, i-.

# Remarkable law in favour of the Reformation.

Edinburgh by Mar was confirmed. The law
of attainder against Huntly was repealed, and
he, and his adherents, were refiored to the
elfates and honours of their ancestors. Several
of those who had been on the jury which ac-
quitted him, obtained ratifications of the grants
made in their favour; and as pasquinades daily
multiplied, a law passed, whereby those, into
whose hands any paper of that kind fell, were
commanded initantly to destroy it; and if,
through their neglet, it should be allowed to
spread, they were fubje&ed to a capital punifhl-
ment, in the fame manner as if they had been
the original authors. *)

Remark-ahl law in favour of tie Reforniation.

But the absolute dominion which Bothwell

had acquired over Mary's mind, appeared in the
clearest manner, by an aft in favour of the
Protestant religion, to which, at this time, she
gave her assent. Mary's attachment to theRo-
mifh faith was uniform and faperftitious; she
had never laid aside the design, nor loft the ho-
pes of restoring it. She had, of late, come
under new engagements to that purpose, and,
in consequence of these, had ventured upon
some steps more publick and vigorous than any
she had formerly taken. But Bothwell was
prompted, by powerful motives, to promotethis
:::) Keith, =89.

law. He had been guilty of crimes, which
rendered him the objeEt of just and universal
detestation. He was meditating others, which
he easily foresaw would heighten the publick
indignation against him. By this popular law,
he might hope to divert, or to delay the re-
fentment of the nation, and flattered himself,
that the obtaining this unexpected and legal fe-
curity for the Protestant religion would atone
for much guilt, silence the clamours of the
clergy, and induce the people to connive at, or
to tolerate his crimes. The aft itself was so
favourable to the doftrine of the Reformers,
that the Parliament. which met next year, un-
der very different leaders, could fubfiitute no-
thing stronger or more explicit in its place; and
thought it fluflcient to ratify it word for word.: )
To pass such an a&t was utterly inconsistent
with ail the maxims which Mary followed in
every other period of her life; but what could
never be extorted from her by the solicitations
of the Assemblies of the church, or by the in-
treaties of the people, the more powerful in-
fluence of Bothwell now obtained. "*)

* Parl, I Jac, VI. c, 31,

B

) Buchanan, Hill. 355. not only omits taling any notice

of this law, but afferrs that the Queen, though Ihe had
given proumires in favour or the Rerormed religion, ri-
fured to permit any a& to pats in futpport of it, and evc"
dirinifTed the deputies of the church with contempt. Spo'f-
Wood. no2, and Calderwond, vol. iii. 4r. both aflirin tiC
fIlre thing. It oult

\ayou e
nr been neceP.ary to obierve

# Bothwell prevails on the nobles to recommend him as an husband to the Queen.

Both-vell prevails on the noble6 to recommencd him

. a an Ihubland to the Queen.

Every frep taken by Bothwell had hithcrro

been attended with all the success which his tnofl
sanguine wiflles could expct. He had entirely
gained the Queen's heart; the murder of the
King had excited no publick commotion; he
had been acquitted by his Peers of any share
in that crime; and their decision had been, in
some fort, ratified in Parliament. But in a
kingdom, where the regal authority was so
extremely limited, and the power of the nobles
so formidable, he durlt not venture on the lalt
aftion, towards which all his ambitious proje-s
tended, without their approbation. In order to
secure this. he, immediately after the dif'oln-
tion of Parliament, invited all the nobles who
were present to an entertainment. ( April 19.
1567. ) Having filled the house with his friends
and dependants, and surrounded it with armed
men, *) he opened to the company his intention
of marrying the Queen, whose consent, he told
them, he had already obtained; and demanded

this inlrance of Btchanan's inaccuracy, but thlat an author
so aoniveralnt il our laws as Spotfwood, and onle so ill
diiltrious as Calderwoo.i, fliould commit flich an err.r,

lien not only tie original fttute was exta lit il thie rel:oris

of Mary's Parliament, hut even when the print,.! at- oi
Alurray's l'arliaineiir was before their eyes, is remnrkiabl ,
Even Bachanil hiimrelf has taken notice of tlll; att.. 1).
teAio. p. y.
') Good. vol. ii, 141,

their approbation of this match, which, he raid,
was no less acceptable to their Sovereign, than
honourable to himself. *) Huntly and Seaton,
who were privy to all Bothwell's schemes, and
promoted them with the utmost zeal; the Io-
pish eccieflafticks, who were absolutely devoted
to the Queen, and ready to sooth all her pas-
sions, instantly declared their fatisfa&ion with
what he had proposed. Thereft, who dreaded
the exorbitant power which Botlwell had ac-
quired, and oblerved the Queen's growving as.
feEtion towards him in all her actions, were
willing to make a merit of yielding to a mea.
sure, which they could neither oppose nor de.
feat. Some few were confounded and enraged,
But, in the end, Bothwell, partly by promises
and flattery, partly by terror and force, pre-
vailed on all who were present to subscribe a
paper, which leaves a deeper stain than anyoc-
currence in that age, on the honour and cha-
rater of the nation.

This paper contained the strongest decla-

rations of Bothwell's innocence; and the most
ample acknowledgment of his good services to
the kingdom. If any future accusation should
be brought againfl him, on account of the King's
murder, the subscribers promised to stand by
him as one man, and to hazard their lives and
fortunes in his defence. They recommended

') Anders. vol. h, 94,

him to the Queen as the most proper perfbn she
could chufe for a husband; and if she could
condescend to bellow on him that mark of her
regard, they undertook to promote the fnar-
riage, and to join him with all their forces in
opposing any person who endeavoured to ob-
ftruO: it. *) Ameng the falbfcribers of this pa-
per, we find some who were the Queen's chief
confidents, others who were firangers to her
councils, and obnoxious to her dilfleafure; so-
me who faithfully adhered to her through all
the vicissitudes of her fortune, and others who
became the principal authors of her fulrerings;
some paflionately attached to the Romniflh uper-
ftition, and others zealous advocates for the
Protestant faith. '"7') No common interelt can
be supposed to have united men of fuichoppofite
principles and parties, in recommending to
their Sovereign a ftep so injurious to her ho-
nour, and to fatal to her peace. This firange
coalition was the effect of much artifice, and
must be confidered as the boldest and most ma-
flerly stroke of Bothwell's address. It is ob-
fervable, that amidst all the altercations and
mutual reproaches of the two parties which
arose in the kingdom, this unworthy tranfaftion
is seldom mentioned, Conscious on both fides,
that in this particular their conduct could ill

*) Anderr. vol. I. 177.
') Keith, 3S38

bear examination, and would redound little to
their fame, they always touch upon it unvil-
lingly, and seem defiderous that it should re-
main in darkness, or be burried in oblivion.
But as so many persons , who, both at that
time, and ever after, possessed the Qneen's
favour, subscribed this paper, the suspicion be.
comes strong that Bothwell's ambitious hopes
'were neither unknown to Mary, nor difap-
proved by her. :)

:) Of all the different fyfreins with regard to thi:i ranfa i:l.,

that of Camden seems to be the lealt accurate, and the
worf founded. He filpofes that Bothrwell was hated by
Murray, Morton, &c. who had been his aflocintes in the
niutirer of the King, and that they lnoSr wanted to ruin
hil. He allirms, at the fame time, that the fttbfcriptiotns
to this pnper Were obtained by them ollt of fear ti-.
Bothwell might fink in his hopes , and betray the wlole
bloody secret, 404. But beildes the absurdity of fulppofii
that ally manl's enemies would contribute towards raifilc
hin to fnch Iligi dignity, on the uncertain hopes of as-
terwxards deprivilg him of it; betides the impofihilry n'
accomplifiing fitch a marriage , if ic had been either un-
kno.wn to the Queen , or difagreable to her, we may oh-
serve that this fippofition is deflrnyed bv thre direF te};-
mony or the Queen herself, who ascribes the consent of the
nobles to Bothlwell's artifices, who purchased it by giving them
to uinderltand that we were content therewith. Anders.
vol. i. 94. It would have been no Inlall advantage to
Mary, if fihe could have represented the content of the
nobles to have been their own voluntary deed. It is still
more ftrprifinlg to find Lefly afcribiin this paper to lMur-
ray and his f.laion. Anders. vol. i. 26. The Bishop him-
self was one of the persons who fulifcrihed it, Keith, 353.
The King's commiiffoners, at the conference held at York
I568, pretended that none of the nobles , except risl
Earl of Huint!y, would subscribe tils paper till a warrlm:
from the Queen was prodired, by whicl they w cez al-
lowed to do so; this Warrant they had in tieir cullo,;.

These suspicions are confirmed by the most

direEt proof. Melvil, at that time, enjoyed a
confiderablc fliare in her favour. He, as well
as his brother, kept a secret corrcpondence in
England with those who favoured her preten-
sions to that Crown. The rumour of her in-
tended marriage w ith Bothwell having spread
early in that kingdom, excited universal in-
dignation; and Melvil received a letter from
thence, which represented, in the strongest
terms, what would be the fatal ell'ets of such
an imprudent flcp. He put this letter into the
Queen's hands, and enforced it with the utmoit
warmth. She not only disregarded these re-
monfirances , but communicated the matter to
Bothwell; and Mclvil, in order to save his life,
was obliged to Ily from court, whither lie durst
not return till the Earl's rage began to abate.*)

anld exhibited. Adierf, vol. iv. Part. S. TIlhis ditfers
froin Btlc!hallnln's accounllt, who ftlppofes thit all the liolles
prelent filbfcribed the paper on the igth, and that nex:
day they obtained the alpprobation of x, hat they had done,
by wily of lecirity to thelifelves, 353.
) Melv. 156. Acrording to 1\elvil, .ord lJerries likewise

remnonftratedi igaiilt the marriage, aid conljilled thle Queen,
on his knees, to lay aftde all thoughts of fucli a dil.o-
aiourable alliance, 156. Blit it has been oblerved , that
Herries is one of the nobles lwho fublcribed tile buil,
April 19. ieith, 3S3. 3. That he is one of tie wtitnelies
to the marriage aiticles between the Queen nil dBthw;Cil,
IMay 14. Good. vol. ii. 61. 3. That lie fat in council
With B3otl\well, May 17. Keith , ,3SC. B3t this re:n.iil-
rance of Lord Herries agaiinfi the marriage haplpenred before
these, mlade by Melvil hinfelf. 157. Melvil's relionirran-

# Bothwell carries the Queen by force to Dunbar.

At the fame time, Elizabeth warned Mary of
the danger and infamy to which she would ex-
pose herself, by such an indecent choice: but
an advice from her met with fill less regard.e)

Bothl'ell carries the Queen by force to Dunbar.

Three days after the rising of Parliament,

IMary went from Edinburgh to Stirling, in or-
der to visit the Prince her son. Bothwell had
now brought his schemes to full maturity, and
every precaution being taken which could ren.
der it safe to enter on the last and decisive ftep,
the natural impetuosity of his spirit did not sus.
ser him to deliberate any longer. Under pre-
tence of an expedition against the freebooters
on the borders, he assembled his followers;
and marching out of Edinburgh with a thousand
horse, turned suddenly towards Linlithgow,
met the Queen on her return near that place,
(April 24.) dispersed her slender train without
refiltance, seized on her person, and conduct-

ce mutt have happened sone time before thie meeting, of
Parliament ; for after offending Bothwell, he tetired fromr
court; he allowed his rage time to fublfde , and had aga;
joi.ed the Queei , when hie was seized , April 24. 15 S.
lihe time whiclh mnuft have elapsed, by this account of the
matter , was perhaps fulicient to have gained Herries from
being an opposer to become a promoter of the marriage.
Perhipls Melvil may have committed some mniltake witil re-
sird to this fast, so far as relates to Lord Herries. Hd
could not well be mistaken with regard to what Iliilnflf
did.
e) Anders. vol. i. I06.

ed her, together with a few of her courtiers,
as a prisoner to his castle of Dunbar. She ex-
prel'ed neither surprise, nor terror, nor in-
dignation, at such an outrage committed on her
person, and such an insult offered to her autho-
rity, but seemed to yield without struggle or
regret. *) IMelvil was, at that time, one of
her attendants ; and the officer by whom he
was seized, informed him, that nothing was
done without the Queen's own consent. ':') If
we may rely on the letters published in Nlary's
name, the fcbeme had been communicated to
her, and every ftep towards it was taken with
her participation and advice. ***)

Both the Queen and Bothwell thought it of

advange to employ this appearance of violence.
It afforded her a decent excuse for her condu&t;
and while she could plead that it was owing
to force rather than choice, she hoped that her
reputation, among foreigners at leatd, would
escape without censure, or be exposed to less
reproach. Bothwell could not help distrusting
all the methods which had hitherto been used,
for vindicating him from any concern in the
murder of the King. Something was fill wan-
ting for his security, and for quieting his guil-

') lieitb, 383 .

") Melv. 1rS,
'i) Gool. vol. i{. 37-

# Is divorced from his own wife.

ty fears. This was a pardon under the Great
Seal. By the laws of Scotland, the most hein-
ous crime mull be mentioned by name in apar-
don, and then all lesser offences are deemed to
be included under the general clause, and all
other crimes whatsoever.*) To seize the perCon of
the Prince, is high treason; and Bothwell hoped
that a pardon obtained for this, would extend
to every tling of which he had been accuf.
cd. "*)

Is divorced fromn his own wive.

Bothwell, having now got the Queen's

person into his hands, it would have been un-
becoming either a politician or a man of gallan-
try to have delayed confuimmating his schemes.
For this purpose, he inflantly conmmenced a
suit, (April 29.) in order to obtain a sentence
of divorce from his wife Lady Jane Gordon,
the Earl of Huntly's fifier. This procels w\as
carried on, at the fame time, before Proteflant
and Popish judges; before the former, in the
court of Commiffaries ; and before the latter
in the spiritual court of the Archbifhlop of St.
Andrew's , whose jurifdiEtion the Queen had
lately restored. The pretexts which lie pleaded
were trivial, or scandalous. Bat his authoritr
had greater weight than the justice of !ii:

) Parl. 6, Jac. IV. c. 6:.
:'* \nderf. ;-olo iv, p. * i, ,..,

carse; and in both courts, sentence of divorce
was pronounced with the fame indecent and
suspicious precipitancy. *)

While this infamous tranfation was car-

rying on, the Queen resided at Dunbar; de-
tained as a prisoner, but treated with the
greatest refpe&t. Soon after Bothwell, with a
numerous train of his dependants, conducted
her to Edinburgh, ( May 3.) but , instead of
lodging her in the Palace of Holyroodhoufe, he
conveyed her to the castle, of which he was go-
vernor. The discontent of the nation rendered
this precaution neceflary. In an house unfor-
tified, and of easy access, the Queen might
have been rescued without difficulty out of his
hands in a place strength , fle was secured
from all the attempts of his enemies.

One small difficulty flill remained to be

surmounted. As the Queen was kept in a fort
of captivity by Bothwell, a marriage concluded
in that condition might be imputed to force,
and be held invalid. In order to obviate this,
Mlary appeared in the Court of Session, ( May I 2.)
and, in presence of the Chancellor, and other
judges, and several of the nobility, declared
that she was now at full liberty ; and thought
Bothwell's violence in seizing her peroln had.
at firlR, excited her indignation, yet his refpCe'-
full behaviour since that time, had not only ap-
') And. i. 13s .

# Is married to the Queen.

peased her resentment, but determined her to
'raise him to higher honours. *)

Is married to the Queen.

WVhat there were, soon became publick.

The title of Duke of Orkney was conferred
upon Bothwell; and on the I5th of May, his
marriage with the Queen, which had so long
been the objeR of his wishes, and the motive
of his crimes, was solemnized. The cere-
mony was performed, in publick, according
to the rites of the Protestant Church, by Adam
Bothwell bishop of Orkney, one of the few
Prelates who had embraced the Reformation,
and on the fame day was celebrated in private,
according to the forms prescribed by the Popifl
religion. '") The boldness with which Craig,
the Minister who was commanded to publish
the banns, testified against the design; the
small number of the nobles, who were present
at the marriage; and the fullen and difrefpe.t-
ful ilence of the people, when the Queen
appeared in publick; were manifest fymproms
of the violent and general diflatisfastion of her
own fubje'ts. The refusal of Du Croc the
French ambassador to be present at the nlipti.d
ceremony or entertainment, discovers the fen-

") And. i. S1.
"') Id, 136, iiE. Z7M

imncnts of her allies, with regard to tllis part
of her conduEt; and although every other
iction in Mary's life could be juflified by the
rules of prudence, or reconciled to the prin-
ciples of virtue, this fatal marriage would re-
main and inconteflable proof of her rashness, if
not of her guilt.

Mary's first care was to offer some apology

for her condut , to the couris of France and
England. The inftruftions to her ambassadors
ifill remain , and are drawn by a masterly
hand. But under all the artificial and falle co-
louring she employs, it is easy to discover not:
only that many of the steps she had taken were
unjustifiable, but that she herself was conscious
that they could not be jullified. ")

The title of King was the only thing which

was not bestowed upon Bothweli. Notwith-
standing her attachment to him, M.ary re-ierin-
bered the inconveniences -which had arisen fromn
the rash advancement of her former husband to
that honour. She agreed, however, that he
should sign, in token of consent, all the pub-
lick writs iflhed in her name. '') Th:is vas
nothing more than mere form, but, together
with it, he po'eflied all the reality of power.
The Queen's person was in his hands; 1he nwav.

") And. i. sy.

") Good. i;. oo.
Hill. of Scot:. Vol. I, i

# Endeavours to become master of the Prince's person.

surrounded more closely than ever by his crew-
tures; none of her fubjedts could obtain au-
dience without his perniflion; and , unless in
his own presence, none but his confidents were
permitted to converse with her. *) The Scot.
tifh Monarchs were accustomed to live among
their fubjeEts as fathers or as equals, witho.it
diflruft , and with little state ; armed guards
1tanding at the doors of the royal apartment.
difflculty of access , difance and retirement,
Cwere things unknonsv, and unpopular.

!Ilnleuvol:rs to becminc nailer of the Prillce's person,

Thl'fe precautions were neceflary for fecu-

ring to Bothwell the power which he had ac-
quired. But, without being master of the per.
son of the young Prince,'he esteemed all that
he had gained to be precarious and uncertain.
The Queen had committed her son to the care
of the Earl of Mar. The fidelity and loyalty of
that nobleman were too well known to expe&t
that he would be willing to put the Prince into
the hands of the man who was so violently
iufpedted of having murdered his father. Both-
well, however, laboured to get the Prince into
his power, with an anxiety which gave rife to
the blackest suspicions. All his address, as
Wvell as authority, were employed to persuade,
or to force Mar, into a compliance with his

':') And. i. 10C.

# General indignation which the Queen's conduct excited.

demands. :') And it is no flight prdof, both
of the firminefs and dexterity of that nobleman,
that he preserved a life of so much importance
to the nation, frotn lying at the mercy of a
man, whom fear or ambition might have
prompted to violent attempts against it.

General indignation which the Queen's condu& excited.

The eyes of the neighbouring nations were

fixed, at that time, upon the great events,
which had happened in Scotland, during three
months. A King murdered with the utmost
cruelty, in the prime of his days, and in his
capital city; the perlon ftifpeted of that odious
crime suffered not only to appear pablickly in
every place, but admitted into the presence of
the Queen, difringuifhed by her favour, and.
intrudled with the chief diretion of her affairs;
fubjeted to a trial which was carried on with
mofi fhaimelefs partiality, and acquitted by a.
sentence, which served oil;y to confirm the
suspicions of his guilt; divorced frouI his wife.
on pretences frivolous, or indecent: and after
all this, instead of meeting with the ignominy
due to his a&ions, or the punifhlmet merited
by his crimes, permitted openly, and without
opposition, to marry a Queen, the wife of the
Prince whom he had affallinated; and the guar-

1 i X
'') Melv. l/ia. anic'i. "/,!

# The nobles combine against her and Bothwell.

dian of those laws which he had been guilty oC
violating. Such a quick succession of incidents,
so singular and so deteflable, is not to be
found in any other history. They left, in the
opinion of foreigners, a mark cf infamy on the
character of the nation. The Scots were held
in abhorrence all over Europe; they durst scar-
ce appear any where in publick; and after sus-
fering so many atrocious deeds to pass xwith
impunity, they were universally reproached a.
men void of courage, or of humanity, as equal-
ly regardless 'of the reputation of their Queen,
and the honour of their country. *)

Thlie inobleF combine anFainit her and Botlihwell.

These reproaches roused the nobles, who

had been hitherto amused by Bothwcll's arti-
sices, or intimidated by his power. The
manner in which he exercised the authority
which he had acquired, his repeated attempts
to become malter of the Prince's person, together
with some rash threatenings against him, whicl
he let fall, :';) added to the violence and prompt-
ness of their resolutions. A considerable body
of them assembled at Stirling, and entered into
an aflociation for the defence of the Prince's
person. Argvll, Athol, Mar, Morton, Glen-

') Anid'rrL vo' ; I:. 1

bl:h.

. 3.
4, el. 6. ;e" : Al',ie"d ! .

No. XX.
') e:.v. Cj.

cairn , Home , Lindsay, Boyd, Murray of
Tuallibardin, Kirkaldy of Grange, and Maitland
the Secretary, where the heads of this confe-
dicracy. :') Stewart Earl of Athol was r'-
markable for an uniform and bigottod attach-
nent to popery; but his indignation on account
of the murder of the King, to whom he was.
nearly allied, and his zeal for the safety of the
Prince, overcame, on this occasion, all confi-
derations of religion, and united him with the
most zealous Protelantas. Several of the other-
nobles acted, without question, from a land--
able concern for the safety of the Prince, and
the honour of their country. But the spirit
which some of them discovered, during the
subsequent revolutions, leaves little room to
doubt, that ambition or resentment were the
real motives of their conduc ; and that, on
many occasions, while they were pursuing
ends just and necessary, they where aftuated
by principles and passions altogether unjuili-
liable.

The first accounts of this league filled the

Queen and Bothwell with great consternation.
They were no firangers to the sentiments of
the nation, with refpet to their codnUi ; and
though their marriage had not met with publick
oppolition, they knew that it had not been car-
ried on without the secret difgnul and mur-

l) Kithl, 39I..

# The Queen and Bothwell retire to Dunbar.

murings of all ranks of men. They foresaw
the violence with which this indignation wou!id
burst out, after having been so long fupprefli'td;
and in order to prepare for the lform. lMary
ifiued a proclamation, (May 28. ) requiring her
fubjeEts to take arms, and to attend her hulhatnd

i

by a day appointed. At the iame time, 1'he
published a fort of manifeflo, in which she la-
boured to vindicate her government from tho'e
imputations with which it had been loaded, and
employed the strongest terms to express her
concern for the safety and welfare of the Prince
her son. Neither of these produced any con.
fiderable effeft. Her proclamation was ill obey.
ed , and her manifesto met with little crc.
dit. *)

The Qgleen and Bothwvell retire to Dunbar.

The confederate Lords carried on their pre-

parations with no lets aCtivity, and with much
more success. Among a warlike people, men
of so much power and popularity found it an
easy matter to raise an army. They were ready
to miarch before the Queen and Bothwell were
in a condition to refitt them. The castle of
Edinburgh was the place whither the Queen
ought naturally to have retired, and there lie'
:person might have been perfe&tly safe. But tle
confederates had fallen on means to shake, 0

') Ieith, 387. 395. 396,

eorrupt the fidelity of Sir James Balfour, the
deputy governor, and 1Bothwell durst not com-
mit to him such an important trust. HJe con-
ducted the Queen to the castle of Brothwick,
and on the appearance of Lord Home, with a
body of his followers, before that place, (June 6.)
le fled with precipitation to Dunbar , and was
followed by the Queen disguised in men's
clothes. The confederates advanced towards
Edinburgh, where Huntlv endeavoured, in vain,
to animate the inhabitants to defend the town
against them. They entered without opposition,
and were instantly joined by many of the citi-
zens, whose zeal became the firmefl: support
of their cause. *)

In order to set their own condu&t in the

most favourable light, and to route the publick
indignation against Bothwell, the nobles pub-
lifhed a declaration of the motives which had
induced them to take arms. All Bothwell's
pafc crimes were enumerated, all his wicked.
intentions displayed and aggravated, and every
true Scotsman was called upon to join them
in avenging the one, and in preventing the
other. ;;-)

Meanwhile, Bothwell affiembled his forces

at Dunbar, and as he had many dependants in
that corner, he soon gathered furci !t'engtil,

') Keith, 398.
"'. Anders, vol. i. 1tS,

# The nobles march against them.

that he ventuared to advance towards the confe.
derates. Their troops were not numerous;
the suddenness and secrecy of their enterprise
gave their friends at a distance no time to join
them; and as it does not appear that they were
supported either with money or fed with hopes
by the Queen of England, they could not ha:ve
kept long in a body. But on the other hand,
Bothwell durst not risk a delay. ") His army
followed him wvith reluctance in this quarrel,
and served him with no cordial affeEtion; so
that his only hope of success was in fumprifing
the enemy, or in striking the blow before his
own troops had leisure to recollect theml'elves,
or to imbibe the fame unfavourable opinion of
his actions, which had spread over the reft of
the nation. There motives determined the
Queen to march forward, with an inconsiderate
and fatal speed.

The nobles march .gailll them.

On the firftc intelligence of her approach,

the confederates advanced to met her. (July I5.)
The found her forces drawn up upon the fame
ground which the English had occupied before
the battle of Pinkie. The numbers on both
Tides were nearly equal; but there was no
equality in point of discipline. The Queen's
army consisted chiefly of a multitude, hastily
*) Keith, 40bo

# An accomodation attempted.

assembled, without courage or experience in
war. The troops of the confederates were cotn-
posed of Gentlemen of rank and reputation, fol-
loved by their rnoft trufry dependants, who
were no less brave than zealous. *)

An accomlodation attempted.

Du Croc the French Ambaflfdor, who was

in the field, laboured, by negotiating b'oth with
the Queen and the nobles, to put an end to the
quarrel without the effusion of blood. He re-
presented to the confederates the Queen's in-
clinations towards peace, and her willingners
to pardon the ofrences which they had com-
mitted. Morton replied with warmth, that
they had taken arms not against the Queen,
but against the murderer of her husband; and
if he were given up to juflice, or banished from
her presence, she fliould find them ready to
yield the obedience which is due from subje&s
to their Sovereign. Glencairn added, that they
did not come to ask pardon for any offence, but
to punish those who had offended. Such haughty
answers convinced the ambassador, that his me-
diation would be ineffestual, and that their
passions were too high to allow them to liften
to any pacifick propositions, or to think of re-
treating after having proceeded so far. **)

:::) Cald. vol, li. 48. 49,

I(C Kethi, 401.

The Queen's army was 'potted to advan-

tage, on a riting ground. The confederates ad-
vanced to the attack resolutely, but slowly, and
-virh the caution which was natural on that
unhappy field. Her troops were alarmed at
their approach, and discovered no inclination tI
fight. Mary endeavoured to animate them; he
wept. she threatened, she reproached them
with cowirdice, but all in vain. A few of
Bothwell's immediate attendants were eager
for the encounter; the reft flood wavering and
irresolute, and some began to teal out of the
field. Bothwell attempted to inspirit them, by
offering to decide the quarrel, and to vindicate
his own innocence in Jingle combat with any
of his adversaries. Kirkaldy of Grange, MIlur-
ray of Tullibardin, and Lord Lindfy contended
for the honour of entering the lifts against him.
But this challenge proved to be a mere bravade.
Either the consciousness of guilt deprived Both.
well of his wonted courage, or the Queen, iy
her authority, sorbad the combat. *)

After the symptoms of fear discovered by

her followers, Mary would have been inexcitf-
able, had she hazarded a battle. To have re
treated in the face of an enemy, who had al-
ready surrounded the hill on which she flood,
with part of their cavalry, was :utterly imprac-
ticable. In this situation, the was under the

*) Cald. vo], ii. 50.

# Bothwell obliged to fly.

# Mary surrenders to the nobles.

cruel neceflity of putting herfelfinto the hands
of those fubjeAs who had taken arms against
her. She demanded an interview with Kir-
kaldy, a brave and 'generous man, who com-
m;nded an advanced body of the enemy. He,
with the content and in the name of the leaders
of the party, prorr.ired that, on condition she
would dismiss Bothwell from her presence, and
govern the kingdom by the advice of her no-
bles, they would honour and obey h3r as their
Sovereign. *)

Bothlwell obliged to fly.

During this parley, Bothwell took his last

farewell of the Queen, and rode off the field
with a few followers. This dismal reverse hap-
pened exatly one month after that marriage,
which had colt him so many crimes to accom-
plifh, and which leaves so foul a stain on Mary's
memory.

iMary fnrrenders to the nobles.

As soon as Bothwell retired, Mary furren-.

dered to Kirkaldy, who conducEed her toward the
confederate army, the leaders of which received
her with much refpe&; and Morton, in their
name, made ample professions of their future
loyalty and obedience. '*) But she was treated

:') Good. vol. ii. 164. Melv. 165.
"') Good, vol. ii, I65,

by the common soldiers with the utmost infu-
lence and indignity. As she marched along,
they poured upon her all the opprobrious na-
mes, which are beflowed only on the lowest
and nmoft infamous criminals. Where ever fie
turned her eyes, they held up before her ;a
standard, on which was painted the dead body
of the late King. stretched on the ground, and
the young Prince kneeling beforeit, and uttering
these words, ,, Judge and revenge my caule,
,, O Lord ! " Mary turned with horror from
such a shocking fight. She began already to
feel the wretched condition to which a captive
Prince is reduced. She uttered the most bitter
complaints, she melted into tears, and could
scarce be kept from finking to the ground. The
confederates carried her towards Edinburgh;
and in spite of many delays, and after looking
with the fondness and credulity natural to the
unfortunate, for some extraordinary relief, she
arrived there. The fireets were covered with
multitudes, whom zeal or curiosity had drawn
together, to behold such an unusual scene. The
Queen, worn out with fatigue, covered with
dufl, and bedewed with tears, was exposed as
a fpeEtacle to her own fubjeEts, and led to the
Provost's houle. Notwithflanding all her argu-
ments and intreaties, the fame standard was
carried before her, and the fame insults and re-
proaches repeated. A woman, young, beauti-
ful, and in distress, is naturally the obje& of

compafion.. The comparison of their present
misery with their former splendour, usually
softens us in favour of illufrious fuiTerers. But
the people beheld the deplorable fiitation of
their Sovereign xvith infenfibilily; and fbolrong
wsas their perfaaflon of her guilt, and lo great
the violence of their indignation, that the Luf-
fcrings of their Queen did not, in any degree,
mitigate their resentment, or procure her that
sympathy, which is seldom denied to unfortunate
Princes. *)

*) MN.lv 6 ,,
66 . (.

# BOOK V.

# Deliberations of the nobles concerning the Queen.

T H Es
H I S T 0( R Y

OF
SCOTL AND .

BOOK V.

Deliberations of the nobles concerning the Queen,

THE confederate Lords had proceeded to such
extremities againif their Sovereign, that itnow
became almost impoflible for them either to flop
short, or to pursue a course less violent. Many
of the nobles had refused to concur with them
in their enterprise; others openly condemned
it. A fmali circumstance might abate that in-
dignation with which the multitude were, at
present, animated againt: the Queen, and de-
prive them of that popular applause whichwas
the chief foundation of their power. There
considerations inclined some of themn to treat
the Queen with great lenity.

But, on the other hand, Mary's :aTeaion

for Bothwell continued as violent as ever; she
obtinately refused to hearken to any proposal
for dissolving their marriage, and determined
not to abandon a mnan, for whose !'-":e flie had

# They imprison her in Lochlevin.

already sacrificed so much. ') If they fCould
allow her to recover the supreme power, the
firfl exertion of it would be to recall Bothwell;
and they had reason, both from his resentment,
from her condu&, and from their own, to ex-
peet the severest effeats of her vengeance.

They imprison hor in Lochllevin.

These considerations surmounted every

other motive; and reckoning tlienfelves ab-
solved, by Mary's incurable attachn-ent to Both-
well' from the engagements whlich they lhia
come under when she yielded herself a prif:o'ier,
they, withotit regarding the duty 5ihich they
owed her as their Queen, and without con-
fulting the reft of the nobles, carried her next
evening, under a strong guard, to the caitlie ot
Lochlevin, and signed a warrant to Williala
Douglas the owner of it, to detain her as a
prisoner. This castle is situated in a imal:
Island, in the middle of a lake. Douglas, to
'vhom it belonged, was a near relation of Mor-
ton's, and had married the Earl of Murray's
mot.her. In this place, under stria custody,
'rith a few attendants, and fubjeeted to the in-
fults of a haughty woman, who boafied daily
of being the lawful wife of James :V. Mary sts-

sered
') Keith, 4.9.446.449. Melv. I67. See Append. No, X[.

sered all the rigour and miseries of capti.
vity. *)

Immediately after the Queen's imprison-

mient, the confederates were at the utmost pails
tu strengthen their party; they entered into
new bonds of afrociation; they alTumed the title
of Lords of the secret Council, and without
any other right, arrogated to themfulves the
whole regal authority. One of their firt a&ts
of power was to search the city of Edinburgh
for those who were concerned in the murder
of the King. This fhov of zeal gained repu-,
tation to themselves, and threw an oblique re-
jle&ion on the Queen for her remniflhefs. Se-
veral fufpeteed persons were seized. Captain
Blackadder and three others were condemned
and executed. But no discovery of importance
was made, If we believe some historians, they
were convifted by sufficient evidence, if we
give credit to others, their fenennce was unjtit,
and they denied, with their lalt breath, any
knowledge of the crime for which they sus-
sered. :*)

An unexpeced accident, however, put into

the hands of Mary's enemies what they deemed
the fullelt evidence of her guilt. Bothwell
having left in the castle of Edinburgh a casket,

*) Keith, 403. Note (b).

") Cald. vol. ii. 53. Crawf. Mem. 3S.
Hilt. of ScotL Vol. I, K k

# Some of the nobles favour the Queen.

containing several sonnets and letters written
with the Queen's own hand; he now sent one0
of his confidents to bring to him this precious
depofite. But as his ref'enger returned, lie
was intercepted, and the casket seized byMor.
son. *) The contents of it were always pro-
duced by the party, as the most ample juftil-
cation of their own conduEt, and the most un-
answerable proof of their not having loaded their
Sovereign with the imputation of imaginary
crimes. ;:'*)

Somle of tlie nobleh f.tvour thte QtLeoll.

But the confederates, notwithftandig their

extraordinary success, were still far from being
perfet&l at ease. That so small a part of the
nobles ihould pretend to dilpofe of the person
of their Sovereign, or to affurne the authority
which belonged to her, without the concur-
rence of the refi, appeared to many of that body
to be unprecedented and presumptuous. Se-
veral of thele were now assembled at Hamil-
ton, in order to deliberate what course they
should hold in tilis difficult conjuncture. The
confederates made some attempts towards a
coalition with them, but without effect. They
employed the mediation of the Assembly of the
Church, to draw them to a personal interview

') A derf. vol. ii, 92. Good. vol. ii. 90.
") See DifTertation at the end eo the Appendix.

# Elizabeth interposes in her behalf.

at Edinburgh, but with no better success. That
party, however, though its numbers were for-
midable, and the power of its leaders great,
soon loft reputation by the want of unanimity
and vigour; all its consultations evaporated in
murmurs and complaints, and no scheme was
concerted for obftruiUng the progress of the con-
federates. *)

Elizabeth interposes in her behalf,

There appeared some profpea of danger

from another quarter. This great revolution
in Scotland had been carried on without any
aid from Elizabeth, and even without her
knowledge. ;'*) And though she was far from
being displeased to fee the affairs of that king-
dom embroiled, or a rival, whom she hated,
reduced to distress; she neither wished that it
should be in the power of the one faction en-
tirely to suppress the other, nor could she view
the steps taken by the confederates without
great offence. Notwithstanding the popular
maxims by which she governed her own sub-
jeEts, her notions of royal prerogative were
very exalted. The confederates had, in her
opinion, encroached on the authority of their
Sovereign, which they had no right to contronl,

Ks k

X') Keith , 407,
)Ibid. 415,

and had offered violence to her person, which
it was their duty to esteem sacred. They had
set a dangerous example to other fubjeis, and
Mary's cause became the common cause of
Princes. *) If ever Elizabeth was influenced
with regard to the affairs of Scotland by the
feelings of her heart, rather than by confidera-
tions of interest, it was on this occasion. She
infiantly dispatched Throgmorton into Scotland,
(June 30.) with power to negotiate both with
the Queen, and with the confederates. In his
infiruations there appears a remarkable solicitude
for Mary's liberty, and even for her reputation. *'")
And the choice of an Ambaflador, so devoted
to the interest of the Scottish Queen, proves
this solicitude to have been sincere. But
neither Elizabeth's friendship, nor Throgmor-
ton's zeal, were of much avail to Mary. The
confederates foresaw what would be the effets
of these good offices; and thattheQueen, elated
by the profpet of protetion, would rejeft with
scorn the overtures which they were about to
make her. They, for that reason, peremp-
torily denied Throgmorton access to their pri-
soner; and what propositions he made to them
in her behalf they either refused, oreluded.*"*1)

') Keith, 412. 415.

*") Id. 41I.
**') Id. 417. 427.

# Schemes of the confederate nobles.

Scheimes of the confederate noble.:.

Mean while they deliberated with the at-

most anxiety, concerning the settlement of the
nation, and the future disposal of the Que'en's
person. Elizabeth, observing that Throgmor-
ton made no progress in his negotiations with
them, and that they would liften to none of
his demands in Mary's favour, turned towards
that party of the nobles who were assembled
at Hamilton, incited them to take arms in or-
der to restore their Queen to liberty, and pro-
mifed to assist them in fich an attempt to the
utmost of her power. *) But they difeovered
no greater union and vigour than formerly, and,
behaving like men who had given up all concern
either for their Queen or their country, tamely
allowed an inconsiderable part of their body,
whether we confider it with refpeft to numbers,
or to pover, to fettle the government of the
kingdom, and to dispose of the Queen's person
at pleasure. Many consultations were held,
and various opinions arose with regard to each
of these. Some seemed desirous of adhering to
the plan on which the confederacy was at first
formed; and after punishing the murderers of
the King, and diflblving the marriage with Both-
well; after providing for the safety of the young
Prince, and the security of the Protellant reli-
') See Appe nd, No. XXU,

# They oblige the Queen to resign the government.

gion; they proposed to reeflablifh the Queen
in the pof'efllon of her legal authority. The
success with which their arms had been accom-
panied, inspired others wvith bolder and more
desperate thoughts, and nothing less would fa-
tisfy them than the trial, the condemnationand
punishment of the Queen herself, as the prin-
cipal conspirator against the life of her husband,
and the safety of her son: *) the former was
M'laitland's system, and breathed too much of a
p)cifick and moderate spirit, to be agreeable
to the temper or wishes of the party. The
latter was recommended by the clergy, and
warmly adopted by many laicks; but the nobles
durst not, or would not venture on such an ur.
precedented and audacious deed. ":)

They oblige the Queen to resign the government.

Both parties agreed at lafi upon afclheme,

neither so moderate as the one, nor so daring
as the other. Mary was to be persuaded or
forced to resign the Crown; the young Prince
was to be proclaimed King, and the Earl of
Murray was to be appointed to govern the
kingdom, during his minority, with the name

*) Keith, 420, 421, 42". 532.
') The intention of putting the Queen to death reetns to have

been carried on by some of her fubjefts: At this tille we
often find Elizabeth hoalfing that Mary owed her life to
her interpofitioii. Digges's Compl. Anmb. 14, &c. Set A:i
yend, No, XV11I.

and authority of Regent. With regard to tile
Queen's- own person, nothing was determined.
It seems to have been the intention of the con-
federates to keep her in perpetual imprison-
ment; but in order to intimidate herself, 'and
to overawe her partisans, they till reserved to
themselves the power of proceeding to more
violent extremes.

It was obvious to foresee difficulties in the

execution of this plan. Mary was young, am-
bitious,. high-fpirited, and accuflomed to com-
mand. To induce her to acknowledge her ovw
incapacity for governing, to renounce the di-
gnity and power which she was born to enjoy,
to become dependant on her own fubjefts, to
consent to her own bondage, andtoinveft those
persons, whom she confidered as the authors of
all her calamities, with that honour and autho-
rity of which she herself was stripped, were
points hard to be gained. These, however,
the confederates attempted,, and they did not
want means to insure success. Mary had en-
dured, for several weeks, all the hardships and
terror of a prison; no profpe6t of liberty ap-
peared; none of her subje&s had either taken
arms, or so much as solicited her relief; *)
no person, in whom she could confide, was
admitted into her presence; even the Ambillbib-
dors of the French King, and Queen of l1ng-

") Keith~, 435.·

land, were refused access to her. In this so.
litary fate, without a counsellor or a friend,
under the pressure of difrefs, and the approe
henfion of danger, it was natural for a woman
to hearken almost to any overtures. The con.
- federates took advantage of her condition, and

of her fears. They employed Lord Lindsay,
the fiercest zealot in theparty, to communicate
their scheme to the Queen, and to obtain her
subscription to those papers which were necefv
fary for rendering it effectual. He executed
his commission with harshness and brutality.
Certain death was before Mary's eyes if she
refused to comply with his demands. At the
fame time, she was informed by Sir Robert
iVlelvil, in name of Athol, Maitland, and Kir-
kaldy, the persons among the confederates who
'were most attentive to her interest, that a re-
fignation extorted by fear, and granted during
her imprisonment, was void in law, and might
be revoked so soon as she recovered liberty,
Throgmorton, by a note which he found means
to convey to her, suggested the fame thing. *)
Deference to their opinion, as well as concern
for her own safety, obliged her to yield to
every thing which was required, and to sign all
the papers which Lindsay presented to her.
(July 24.) By one of there, she resigned the
Crown, renounced all share in the government

a) Keith, 43.1 Nate (b), Melv. l609

# James VI. crowned, and Murray chosen Regent.

of the kingdom, and consented to the corona-
tion of the young King. By another, she ap-
pointed the Earl of Murray Regent, and con-
ferred upon him all the powers and privileges
of that high office. By a third, she substituted
some other nobleman in Murray's place, if he
should refuse the honour which was designed
for him. Mary , when she subscribed these
deeds, was bathed in tears; and while file gave
a'vay, as it were with her own hands, the
sceptre which she had swayed to long, she felt:
a pang of grief and indignation, one of the fe-
vereft, perhaps, which can touch the human
heart. *)

James VI. crowned, and lMurray chosen Regent.

The confederates endeavoured to give this

resignation all the weight and validity in their
power, by proceeding without delay to crown
the young Prince. The ceremony was perform-
ed at Stirling, on the 9zth of Jule 1567, with
much solemnity, in pretence of all the nobles
of the party, a considerable number of lesser
barons, and a great assembly of the people.
From that time, all publick writs were issued,
and the government carried on in name of Ja-
mes VI. *M)

No revolution so great was ever effeEted

with more ease, or by means so unequal to

") Keith, 430. Crawf. Mem. 38.
*) lb, 437.

# Reasonings of both parties.

the end. In a warlike age, and in less time
than two months, a part of the nobles, who
neither poffefled the chief power, nor the
greatest wealth in the nation, and who never
brought 3000 men into the field, seized, irn-
prisoned, and dethroned their Queen, and with-
out shedding a single drop of blood, set her
son, an infant of a year old, on the throne,

Reasonings of both parties.

During this rapid progress of the confede-

rates, the eyes of all the nation were turned
on them, with astonishment; and various and
contradictory opinions were formed concerning
the extraordinary steps which they had taken.

Even under the ariftocratical form of go-

vernment, which prevails in Scotland, said the
favourers of the Queen, and notwithifanding
the exorbitant privileges of the nobles, the
Prince posses'es considerable power, and his
person is treated with great veneration. No
encroachments should be made on the former,
and no injury offered to the latter, but in cafes
where the liberty and happiness of the nation
cannot be secured by any other means. Such
cafes seldom exiff, and it belongs not to any
part, but to the whole, or at least to a majo-
rity of the society to judge of their existence.
By what aftion could it be pretended that Mary
had invaded the rights or property of her fuib-
jecs, or what scheme had she formed againli

the liberty and constitution of the kingdom ?
Were fears, and suspicions, and surmises,
enough to justify the imprisoning, and the de-
pofirg a Queen, to whom the Crown descend-
ed from so long a race of Mlonarchs? The prin-
cipal author of whatever was reckoned culpable
in her condut, was now driven from her pre..
fence. The murderers of the King might have
been brought to condign punifhmrent, the safety
of the Prince have been secured, and the Pro-
teftant religion have been established, without
wresting the sceptre out of her hands, or con-
demning her to perpetual irnprifonment. What-
ever right a free Parliament might have had to
proceed to such a rigorous conclusion, or what-
ever name its determinations might have merit-
ed, a sentence of this nature , pafled by a few
nobles, without acknowledging or consulting
the reft of the nation, must be deemed a re-
bellion againit the government, and a conrpiracy
against the person of their Sovereign.

The partisans of the confederates reasoned

very differently. 'Tis evident, said they, that
Mary either previously gave content to the
King's murder, or did afterwards approve of that
horrid acfion. Her attachment to Bothwell, the
powers and honours with which she loaded him,
the manner in which she suffered his trial to be
carried on, and the indecent speed with which
She married a man, stained with so many crimes,
raise strong suspicions of the former, and put the

latter beyond all doubt. To have suffered the
supreme power to continue in the hands of an
ambitious man, capable of the most atrocious
and desperate actions, would have been disgrace.
ful to the nation, dishonourable to the Queen,
and dangerous to the Prince. Recourse was,
therefore, had to arms. The Queen had been
compelled to abandon a husband, so unworthy
of herself. But her affeftion toward him frill
continuing unabated; her indignation against
the authors of this separation being visible, and
often expressed in the firongeft terms; they,
by restoring her to her ancient authority, would
have armed her with power to destroy thern-
selves, have enabled her to recall Bothwell, and
have afforded her an opportunity of pursuing
schemes fatal to the nation with greater eager-
ness; and with more success. Nothing, there-
fore, remained, but by one bold action to
deliver themselves and their country from all
future fears. The expedient they had chosen
was no less refpe&ful to the royal blood, than
necessary for the publick safety. While one
Prince was set aside as incapable of governing,
the Crown was placed on his head who was
the undoubted representative of their ancient
Kings.

Whatever opinion posterity may form on

comparing the arguments of the two contending
parties, whatever sentiments we may entertain
concerning the justice or necessity of that course

# Murray assumes the government.

which the confederates held, it cannot be deni-
ed that their condu , so far as regarded them-
'elves, was extremely prudent. Other expe-
dients, less rigorous towards Mary, might hate
been found for fettling the nation; but, after the
injuries they had already offered the Queen,
there was none so effeEtual for securing their
own safety, or perpetuating their own power.

To a great part of the nation, the conduft

of the confederates appeared not only wife, but
just. The King's accession to the throne was
every where proclaimed, and his authority sub-
mitted to without opposition. And though fe-
veral of the nobles were still aflenibled at Ha-
milton, and seemed to be entering into some
combination againfi his government, an aflboca-
tion for supporting it was formed, and signed
by so many persons of power and influence
throughout the nation, as entirely discouraged
the attempt. ")

Murray nffumes the governmxent.

The return of the Earl of Murray, about

this time, added strength to the party, and
gave it a regular and finished form. Soon after
the murder of the King, this nobleman had re-
tired into France, upon what pretence hitlo-
rians do not mention. During his residence
there, he had held a close correspondence with
!>) Anders. rol. >i, 83r,

the chiefs of the confederacy, and, at their
desire, he now returned. He seemed, at first,
unwilling to accept the office of Regent. This
felitation cannot be ascribed to the scruples
either of diffidence, or of duty. Murray wanted
neither abilities to entitle him, nor ambition to as-
pire to this high dignity. He had received the
first accounts of his promotion with the utmost
fatisfation ; but by appearing to continue for
some days in fufpence, he gained time to view
with attention the ground on which lie was to
asEt; to balance the strength and resources of
the two contending fa&tions, and to examine
·whether the foundation on which his future
fame and success must reft, were found and
:firm.

Before he declared his final resolution, he

waited on Mlary at Lochlevin. This visit, to a
filler, and a Queen, in a prison , from lwhich
he had neither any intention to relieve her, nor
to mitigate the rigour of her confinement, niay
be mentioned among the circumstances which
discover the great want of delicacy and refhie-
ment in that age. Murray, who was naturally
rough and uncourtly in his manner, :') expolfu-
lated so warmly with the Queen concerning her
past condu&t, and charged her faults so home
upon her, that Mary, who had flattered herself
with more gentle and brotherly treatment from

') Klitl,, 96,

# Fate of Bothwell.

him, melted into tears, and abandoned hereclC
entirely to despair. *;) This interview, from
which Murray could reap no politicaladvantage,
and wherein he discovered a spirit so fevtere
anId unrelenting, may be reckoned among the
most bitter circumstances in Mary's life, and is
certainly one of the imot unjullifiable in his
cond uet.

Soon after his return from Lochlevin, Mur-

ray accepted the office of Regent, (AugufICt 2.).
and began to aft in that chara&ter without op-
polition.

F::te: o Buothwell,

Amidst so many great and unexpei-c"d

events, the fate of I3othwell, the chief cause
of them all, hath been almost forgotten. After
his flight from the confederates , he lurked fuir
some time among his vaftals in the neighbour-
hood of Dunbar. But finding it impossible for
him to make head, in that country, againIt
his enemies, or even to secure himnfelf from
their pursuit, he fled for shelter to his kinsman
the Bishop of Murray; and when he, overawed
by the confederates, was obliged to abandon
hmn, he retired to the Orkney Isles. Hunted
from place to place, deserted by his friends,
and accompanied by a few retainers, as defle-
rate as himself, he fuflered at once the inifcries

;,) Keith, 445, 446.

of infamy, and of want. His indigence forced
him upon a course which added to his infamny,
He armed a few small ships, which had ac-
companied him from Dunbar, and attacking
every vessel which fell in his way, endeavour-
ed to procure fubffftence for himself and his
followers by piracy. Kirkaldy and Murray of
Tullibardin were sent out against him by the con-
federates; and flrprifing him while he rode at
anchor, scattered his small fleet, took a part of
it, and obliged him to fly with a tingle ship
towards Norway. On that coat , he fell in
with a veflel richly laden, and immediately at-
tacked it; the Norwegians failed with armed
boats to its a'liftance, and after a desperate
iight, Bothwell and all his crew were taken
prisoners. His name and quality were both
unknown, and he was treated at firfr with all
the indignity and rigourwhich the odious crine
of piracy merited. His real character was soon
discovercd, and though it saved him from the
infamous death to which his aflociates were
condemned, it could neither procure him liber-
ty, nor mitigate the hardships of his impril'n.-
ment. He languished ten years in this unhappy
condition; melancholy and despair deprived him
of reason, and at last he ended his days, un-
pitied by his countrymen, and unassisted by
itrangers. ") Few men ever accomplifnl'd

their
') Mclv. 168.

# Success of the Regent's administration.

their ambitious projects by worse means, or
reaped from them less fatisfaftion. The early
part of his life was refllefs and enterprising, full
of danger and of viciflitudes. His enjoyment
of the grandeur, to which he attained by so
many crimes, was extremely flort; imbittered
by much anxiety, and disquieted by many fears.
In his latter years, he fuiffered the molt into-
lerable calamities, to awhich the wretched are
fubjedt, and from pwhich persons who have
moved in so high a sphere are commonly ex-
empted.

Success of the Regent's admninilration.

The good effefts of Murray's accelion to

the Regency were quickly felt. The party
forming for the Queen was weak, irresolute,
and disunited; and no sooner was the govern-
ment of the kingdom in the hands of a man , so
remarkable both for his abilities and popularity,
than the nobles, ,f whom it was composed,
loft all hopes of gaining ground, and began to
treat separately with the Regent. So many of
themn were brought to acknowledge the King's
authority, that scarce any appearance of oppo-
fition to the established gdvernment was left in
the kingdom. Had they adhered to the Queen
with any firmness , it is probable, from Eliza-
beth's disposition at that time, that she would
have afforded them such affifrance as might have
enabled them to face their enemies in the field.

Hist. of Scotl. Vol. I. L 1

# A Parliament held, (Decemb. 15.)

But there appeared so little vigour or harmony
in their councils, that she was discouraged
from espousing their cause ; and the Regent,
taking advantage of their situation, obliged
them to fubrit to his government, without
granting any terms, either to themselves, or
to the Queen. :)

The Regent wvas no less successful in his

attempt to get into his hands the places of
strength in the kingdom. Balfour, the deputy
governor, surrendered the castle of Edinburgh;
and as the reward of his treachery, in deserting
Bothwell his patron, obtained terms of great
advantage to himnelfi. The Governor of Dun-
bar, who discovered more fidelity, was ibnii
forced to capitulate; Come other small forts fur.
rendered without reftRance.

A Pallianmelt held, ( Daccclb. 15.)

This face of tranquillity in the nation en- .

couraged the Regent to call a meeting of Par-
liament. Nothing was wanting to confirm the
King's authority, and the proceedings of the
confederates, except the approbation of this
fupremle court; and after the success -whirch
had attended all their measures, there could
be little doubt of obtaining it. The numbers
that resorted to an Aflembly which was called
to deliberate on matters of so much importance,

'*) Keith, 447. 45o. 463.

# Confirms the proceedings of the consederates.

vcre great. The meeting was opened with the
utmost solemnity, and all its afts pafled with
much unanimity. Many, however, of the
Lords who had discovered the warmest attach.
ment to the Queen , were present. But they
had made their peace with the Regent. Argyll,
Huntly, and Herries acknowledged, openly in
Parliament, that their behaviour towards the
King had been undutiful and criminal. *) Their
compliance, in this manner, with the measures
of the Regent's party, was either the condition
on which they were admitted into favour, or
intended as a proof of the sincerity of their re-
concilement.

(Conlfirmls tlie proceedings of tle coleidelirates.

The Parliament granted every thing the

confederates could demand, either for the safe-
tv of their own persons, or the security of that
form of government which they had established
in the kingdom. Mlary's resignation of the
Crown was accepted, and declared to be valid.
The King's authority, and Murray's election,
were recognised, and confirmed. The impri-
soning the Queen, and all the other proceed-
ings of the confederates, were pronounced law-
fill. Tlue letters which Mary had written to
Bothwell were produced, and she was declared

LI ^
*) Adllertfl, riv. rv S3, See Append. No, X l!!

to be accefiary to the murder of the King. )
At the fame time, all the a&ts of Parliament
1569, in favour of the Protefiant religion, were
publickly ratified; new statutes to the fame
purpose were enaC'cd. And nothing that could
contribute to root out the remains of Popery,
or to encourage the growth of the Reformation,
was negleaed.

It is observable, however, that the fane

palimnonious spirit prevailed in this Parliament,
as in that of x56o. The Protestant clergy, not.
-withstanding many discouragements, and their
extreme poverty, had, for seven years, per-
formed all religious offices in the kingdom. The
expedients fallen upon for their subsistence had
hitherto proved ineffetual, or were intended
to be so. But notwithstanding their known in-
digence, and the warm remonfirances of the
Assembly of the church, which met this year,'
the Parliament did nothing more for their relief,
than prescribe some new regulations concerning
the payment of the thirds of benefices, which
did not produce any considerable change in the
situation of the clergy.

A few days after the difliolution of Parlia-

ment, four of Bothwell's dependants were con-
vited of being guilty of the King's murder.
and suffered death as traitors. (January 3. 1568)
Their confessions brought to light many cir'

<') CGood, vol. ii, óG. Ander. vol,. ii. 26.

eumftances relative to the manner of committing
that barbarous crime; but they were persons of
low rank, and seem not to have been admitted
into the secrets of the conspiracy. *)

Notwithstanding the universal submission to

the Regent's authority, there still abounded in
the kingdom many secret murmurs and cabals.
The partisans of the house of Hamilton reckoned
Mlurray's promotion an injury to the Duke of
Chatelherault, who , as first Prince of the
blood , had, in their opinion, an undoubted
right to be Regent. The length and rigour of
lary's sufferings began to move many to com-
miferate her cafe. All who leaned to the an-
cient opinions in religion dreaded the efl'ets of
Murray's zeal. And he , though his abilities
were great, did not pofeefs the talents requisite
for soothing the rage or removing the jealousies
of the different factions. By insinuation , or
address, he might have gained or softened ma-
ny, who had opposed him; but he was a itran-
ger to these gentle arts. His virtues were fe-
vere; and his deportment towards his equals,
especially after his elevation to the Regency,
distant and haughty. This behaviour offended
some of the nobles, and alarmed others. The
Queen's faction, which had been so ea-
fily dispersed, began again to gather, and to
unite, and was secretly favoured by some who
') Anders, vol. ii, I6.3

# Mary escapes from Lochlevin.

had hitherto zealously concurred with the con.
federates. *)

Mary ercapes from L]c.hlevin,

Such was the favourable difpolition of the

nation towards the Queen, when she recovered
her liberty, in a manner no less surprising to
her friends, than unexpeted by her enemies.
Several attempts had been made to procure her
an opportunity of escaping, which some unfore-
seen accident, or the vigilance of her keep-
ers, had hitherto disappointed. At last, Mlary
employed all her art to gain George Douglas
her keeper's brother, a youth of eighteen. As
her manners were naturally affable and infinuat-
ing , she treated him with the mott flattering
diftincion; file even allowed him to entertain
the most ambitious hopes, by letting fall some |
expressions , as if she would chute him for her
husband. ::") At his age, and in such circun-
stances, it was impofible to refill such a temp-
tation. He yielded, and drew others into the
plot. On Sunday the ad of May, while his
brother fat at supper, and the reft of the family
were retired to their devotions, one of his ac-
complices found means to steal the keys out of
his brother's chamber, and opening the gates
to the Queen and one of her maids, locked

: d Melv. 179.

K') Keith , 469.

# Arrives at Hamilton, and raises a numerous army.

them behind her, and then threw the keys into
the lake. Mary ran with precipitation to the
boat which was prepared for her, and on reach-
ing the fllore, was received with the utnmof
joy, by Douglas, Lord Scaton, and Sir James
Hamilton, who, with a few attendants, wait-
ed for her. She infrantly mounted on horse-
back, and rode full speed towards Niddrie,
Lord Seaton's feat in Weft-Lothian. She ar-
rived there that night, without being pursued,
or interrupted. After halting three hours, she
set out for Hamilton; and travelling at the fame
pace, she reached it next morning.

Arrives at Iln1ilton , and raires a nlumelrous army.

On the first news of Mary's escape, her

friends, whom, in their present disposition, a
much finaller accident would have roused, ran
to arms. In a few days, her court was filled
with a great and splendid train of nobles, ac-
companied by such numbers of followers , as
formed an army above 6ooo strong. In their
presence she declared that the resignation of the
Crown, and other deeds she had signed during
her imprifonnent, were extorted from her by
fear. Sir Robert Mlelvil confirmed her declara-
tion; and on that, as well as on other ac-
counts, a council of the nobles and chief men
of her party pronounced all these tranfa6tions
void and illegal. (May 8.) At the fame time,
an aflociation was formed for the defence of

# Consternation of the Regent's adherents.

her person and authority, and subscribed by
nine Earls, nine Bishops, eighteen Lords, and
many gentlemen of diftintion. ;) Among them,
we find several who had been present in the
last Parliament, and who had signed the coun-
ter-aflociation in defence of the King's govern-
ment; but fach sudden changes were then so
common, as to be no matter of reproach.

Consternation of the Regent's adherents.

At the time when the Queen made her

escape, the Regent was at Glasgow, holding a
court of justice. An event so contrary to their
expecations, and so fatal to their schemes, gave
a great shock to his adherents. Many of them
appeared wavering and irresolute; others began
to carry on private negotiations with the Queen;
and some openly revolted to her fide. In so
difficult a juncure, where his own fame, and
the being of the party depended on his choice,
the Regent's most faithful afrociates were di-
vided in opinion. Some advised him to retire,
without loss of time, to Stirling. The Queen's
army was already strong, and only eight miles
distant; the adjacent country was full of the
friends and dependents of the house of Hamil-
ton, and other Lords of the Queen's faftion;
Glasgow was a large and unfortified town; his
own train consisted of no greater number than

*) Keith, 475.

# His prudent conduct.

was usual in times of peace; all these reasons
pleaded for a retreat. But on the other hand,
arguments were urged of no inconfiderablc
weight. The citizens of G!afgow were well
aflfeaed to the cause; the vafihls of Glencairn,
Lennox and Semple lay near at land, and were
both numerous, and full of zeal; ficcours might
arrive froin other parts of the kingdom in a
few days; in war, uccefs depends upon repu.-
tation, as much as upon numbers; reputation
is gained or loft, by the firlt ilep one takes;
in his circumf-ances, a retreat would be attend-
ed with all the ignominy of a flight, and would
at once dispirit his friends, and inspire his ene-
mies with boldness.

His prtil:e conduct.il

In such dangerous exigencies as this, the

fitperiority of Murray's genius appeared, and
enabled him both to chlufe with wvifdom, and
to as w-ith vigour. He declared again if retreat-
ing, and fixed his head-quarters atGlafgowv. And
while he amused the Queen for fore days, by
pretending to hearken to some overtures, which
flie made for accommodating their differences,
lie was employed, with the utmofi. induitry,
in drawing together his adherents, from diller-
cnt parts of the kingdom. He was loon in a
condition to take the field; and though far in-
'rCrior to the enemy in number, be conifided so
'nuchl in the valour ofhis troops, ard the ex..

perience of his officers, that he broke ofr
the negotiation, and determined to hazard ;
Lattle. ':)

At the fame time the Queen's generals had

,commanded her army to move. (May 13.)
Their intention was, to condut her to Dun..
b!arton-caftle, a place of great ftrengtii, which
lthe Rcgent had not been able to wvreft out of
tie hands of Lord Fleming the governor; bur
if the enemy should endeavour to interrupt
their march , they resolved not to decline an
engagement. In Mary's situation, no refolu.-
tion could he more imprudent. A part only of
her forces was aflembled. Huntly, Ogilvie, and
the northern clans were soon expe&ted; herfuf-
ferings had removed, or ditlinifhed the preju-
dices of many among her fubjests; the address
vi'th which she surmounted the dangers that
obfiruared her escape, dazzled and interected
the people; the sudden confluence of so many
nobles added luitre to her canfe; she might as-
furedly depend on the friendship and counte-
nance of France; fle had reason to expect the
protedion of England; her enemies could not
pofiibly look for support from that quarter.
She had much to hope from purfaing flow and
cautious measures; they had every thing to
fear.

'J Buchan, y},

# Battle of Langside, wherein the Queen's army is defeated.

But Mary, whose hopes were naturally

sanguine, and her passions impetuous, was so
elevated by her sudden transition from the
depth of dilfrefs, to such an unusual. appearance
of prosperity, that she never doubted of fuc-
cess. Her army, which was almost double to
the enemy in number, confilted chiefly of the
IHamiltons, and their dependants. Of thefo
the Archbishop of St. Andrew's had the chief
direction, and hoped, by a victory, not only
to crush Murray, the ancient enemy of his
house, but to get the person of the Queen into
his hands, and to oblige her, either to marry
one of the Duke's sons, or at least to commit
the chief direEion of her affairs to himself.
His ambition proved fatal to the Queen , to
himself, and to his family. *)

Battle of Lauglde , wherein the Queen'.s army is

defeted.

Mary's imprudence, in resolving to figlit,

was not greater than the ill condut of her ge-
nerals in the battle. Between the two armies,
and on the road towards Dunbarton, there w-as
an eminence called Langfide-Hill. This the
Regent had the precaution to seize, and ported
his troops in a small village , and among forne
gardens and inclofures adjacent. In this advan-
tageous situation he waited the approach of the

') Anders. vo.a iv. .; , Meiv. ISs-

# Mary's flight.

enemy, whose superiority in cavalry could be
of no benefit to them, on fach broken ground.
The Hamiltons, who composed the vanguard,
ran so eagerly to the attack , that they put
tlicmfelves out of breath, and left the main
battle far behind. The encounter of the spear-
men was fierce and desperate; but as theforcec
of the Hamiltons were exposed, on the one
flank, to a continued fire from a body of muf-
queteers, attacked on the other by the Re-
gent's most choice troops, and not fapported
by the reft of the Queen's army, they were
soon obliged to give ground, and the rout im-
mediately became universal. Few viftories, in
a civil war, and among a barbarous people,
have been pursued with less violence, or at-
tended with less bloodshed. Three hundred fell
in the field: In the flight scarce any were
killed. The Regent and his principal officers
rode about, beseeching the soldiers to spare
their countrymen. The number ofprifoners was
great, and among them many persons of dif-
tin&ion. The Regent marched back to Glasgow,
and returned publick thanks to God for this
great, and, on his fide, almost bloodless vico-
ry. *)

ilary's night.

During the engagement, Mary flood on a
hill, at n6 great dillance, and beheld all that

# Resolves on retiring into England.

passed in the field, with such emotions of rnin1
as are not ealily described. When she saw the
army, which was her last hope, thrown into ir-
retrievable confusion, her spirit, which all her
palt misfortunes had not been able entirely to
subdue, funk altogether. In the iitmoft con-
flernation, she began her flight, and so lively
were her impreflions of fear, that she never
closed her eyes till she reached the abbey of
Dundrenan in Galloway, full lixty Scottish
miles from the place of battle. ::)

Thele revolutions in Mary's fortune had

been no less rapid than finglllar. In the short
space of eleven days, she had been a prisoner
at the mercy of her most inveterate enemies;
she had seen a powerful army under her com-
mand, and a numerous train of nobles at her
devotion: And now she was obliged to fly, in
the utimolt danger of her life, and to lurk, with
a few attendants, in a corner of her kingdom.
Not thinking herself safe, even in that retreat,
her fears impelled her to an adtion, the most
unadviCed, as well as the most unfortunate in
her whole life. This was her retiring into
England, a ftep, which , on many accounts,
ought to have appeared to her rash and dan-
gerous.

Refu'ves cn retiring inito England.

Before Mary's arrival in Scotland, mutna!

distrust and jealousies had arifCni becteen her
*) ie:;!, zlSr.

and Elizabeth. All their fiubfequent tranfa&ions
had contributed to exasperate and inflame these
pafficns. She had endeavoured, by secret ne-
gotiations and intrigues to disturb the tranquil-
lity of Elizabeth's government, and to advance
her own pretensions to the English Crown.
Elizabeth, who pofleffed great power, and
acred with lets reserve, had openly supported
TMlary's rebellious subjes s, and fomented all
the dif'enfions and troubles in which her reign
had been involved. The maxims of policy fili
authorized that Queen to pursue the fame
course; as by keeping Scotland in confusion,
flhe effeatually secured the peace of her own
kingdom. The Regent, after his victory, had
marched to Edinburgh, and not knowing whalt
course the Queen had taken, it was several
days before he thought ofpurfuing her. *) She
might have been concealed in that retired cor-
.ier, among fubjets devoted to her interest,
till her party, which was dispersed rather than
broken, by the late defeat, should gather such
strength, that she could again appear with fa-
fety at their head. There was not any danger,
which she ought not to have run, rather than
throw herself into the hands of an enemy, from
whom file had already ful'ered so many inju.
ries, and who was prompted both by incliin;a
tion, and by interest, to renew them.

') (:;A'\vr. ,7em. 31.)

But, on the other hand, during Mary's

confinement, Elizabeth had declared againll the
proceedings of her fibje&ts, and fblicited for
her liberty, with a warmth which had all the-
appearance of sincerity. She had invited her
to take refuge in England, and had promired to
meet her in person , and to give her ficlh a re-
ception as was due to a Queen, and an ally. ::)
W\hatever apprehension Elizabeth might enter-
tain of Mary's deligns, while she had power
in her hands, she was , at present, the object,
not of fear, but of pity; and to take advantage
of her lituation, would be both ungenerous and
inhuman. The horrors of a pril'o were frefi
in Mary's memory, and if she fiould fall a
second time into the hands of her fLbje&s,
there was no injury to which the presumption
of success might not embolden them to proceed.
To attempt elcaping into France, was danger-
ous; and, in her lituation, almofL iinpoffible;
nor could she bear the thoughts of appearing
as an exile, and a fugitive, in that kingdom,
where she had once enjoyed all the splendour
of a Queen. England remained her only afy-
lum ; and, in spite of the entreaties of Lord
Herrics , Fleming , and her other attendants,
who conjured her, even on their knees, not
to confide in Elizabeth's promises or generosity,
her infatuation was invincible, and she resolved
to lly thither.

. ;amndt4S9. Anderr, vo!. iv, 99 ,19, '!urdin, 3Gg.

# Her reception at Carlisle.

# Elizabeth deliberates concerning the manner of treating her.

lIer reception at Cariifle.

Herries , by her command , wvroe to

Lowther the deputy-governor of Carlisle , to
know what reception he would give her; anc,
before his an(\ver could return, her fear and
impatience were so great, that she got into a
iifher-boat, (MVay i6.) and with about twenty
attendants, landed at WVirkington in Cumber-
and , and thence flie was conduted with many
marks of refpcet to Carlisle. :)

Elizabeth clbecrtes c .ilceriiiiig tie nia:ilncr o'

trc.atlnl Iher.

So soon as Ilary arrived in England , s'he

wrote a long letter to the Queen, reprefentilg,
in the firongeft terms, the injuries which flic
had suffered from her own fubjeets, and im-
ploring that pity and affiflance which her pre-
sent situation demanded. '";) An event so extra-
ordinary, and the condust which might be pro-
per in consequence of it, drew the attention,
and employed the thoughts, of Elizabeth and
her council. If their deliberations had been in-
fluenced by considerations of justice or genero-

Iity
:1 ;-' ") Keith , 4S3. Air-'c rs vol. '.v. 2.

£ity alone, they would not have found them
long or intricate. A Queen, vanquifled by
her own fubjeets, and threatened by them with
the loss of her liberty, or of her life, had fled-
from their violence, and thrown herself into
the arms of her nearefi neighbour and ally,
from whom she had received repeated aifu-
rances of friendflip and protetion. Thcfe cir-
curnifances entitled her to refpe-l and to com-
pafiion, and required that fie fholld eiiier be
restored to her own kingdomL, or at leafi be left
at full liberty to leek aid from any other ouar.-
rer. Bnit with Elizabeth and her confellors,
the queflion was not, what was moil jurf or
generous, but what was tnoit beneficial to her-
self, and to the English nation. Three difler-
ent resolutions might have been taken, with
regard to the Queen of Scots. To re-inflate
her in her throne, was one; to allow her to
retire into France, was another; to detain her
in England, was a third. Each of these drew
consequences after it, of the utmost importance,
which were examined, as appears from papers
still extant, :') with that minute accuracy,
which Elizabeth's Minister; employed in all
their consultations upon affairs of moment.

To restore Mary to the full exercise of

the royal authority in Scotland, they observed,

°) Anlerf. vol. i v. ,4. 99. Io2.
Hifi. of Sc!ott. Vo,1. T, M mR

would render her more powerful than ever,
The nobles who were most firmly attached to
the English interest would quickly feel the ut-
most weight of her resentment. And as the
gratitude of Princes is seldom strong or lasting,
regard to her own interest might loon efface the
memory of her obligations to Elizabeth, and
prompt her to renew the alliance of the Scot-
tifh nation with France, and revive her own
pretensions to the English Crown. Nor wasit
poifible to fetter and circumscribe the Scottis'h
Queen, by any conditions that would prevcnt
these dangers. Her party in Scotland was nu-
merous and powerful. Her return, even with-
out any support from England, would inspire
her friends with new zeal and courage; a tingle
vi6tory might give them the superiority, which
they had loft by a single defeat, and render
Mary a more formidable rival than ever to Eli-
zabeth.

The dangers arising from suffering Mary to

return into France, were no lets obvious. The
French King could not refuse his assistance to-
wards restoring his sifter and ally to her throne.
Elizabeth would, oncemore, feea foreignarmy
in the island, overawing the Scots, and ready
to enter her kingdom; and if the commotions
in France, on account of religion, were fettled,
the Princes of Lorrain might resume their am-
bitious projects, and the united forces ofFranct

# Resolves to detain her in England.

and Scotland might invade England', where it
is weaken and molt defeincelefs.

Resolves to detain her in EniliiiLd.

Nothing therefore remained but to detain

her in England; and to permit her either to
live at liberty there, or to confine her in a pri-
son. The former was a dangerous experiment.
Her court would become a place of resort to
all the Roman Catholicks, to the difafr'cced,
and to the lovers of innovation. Though Eli-
zabeth afleted to represent MaIVry's pretensions
to the Englifhl Crown as altogether extravagant
and ill-founded, file was notignoranttbatthey
did not appear in that light to the nation, and
that many thought them preferable even to her
own title. If the aftivity of her emiflaries had
gained her so many abettors, her own personal
influence was much more to be dreaded; her
beauty, heraddrefs, her sufferings, by tle ad-
miration and pity which they would excite,
could not fail of making many converts to her
party. *)

It was indeed to be apprehended, that the

treating Mary as a prisoner would excite uni-
versal indignation against Elizabeth, and that
by this unexampled severity towards a Queen,
who implored, and to whonm lhe had promiled

M m s
') rii'.rsT, ve.: i. ; ó, 6,'

her proteftion, she would forfeit the praise of
juilice and hunmanity, which was hitherto due
to her administration. But the Englifih Monarchs
vere often so solicitous to secure their kingdom
againfr the Scots, as to be little scrupulous
about the means which they employed forthat
purpose. Henry IV. had seized the heir of the
Crown of Scotland, who was forced, by the
violence of a iorm, to take refuge in one of the
ports of his kingdom; and, in contempt of the
rights ofhofpitality, withoutregarding his tender
age, or tie tears and intreaties of his father,
detained him a prisoner for many years. This
action, though detelted by posterity, Elizabeth
resolved now to imitate. Her virtue was not
more proof than Henry's had been, againil the
temptations of interest; and the poffelTion of a
present advantage was preferred to the profped
of future fame. The fatisi'a&ion which he felt
in mortifying a rival, whose beauty and ac-
coinplifhments she envied, had, perhaps, no
less influence than Ipolitical considerations, in
bringing her to this resolution. But, at the
fame time, in order to screen herself from the
censure which this conduat merited, and to
make her treatment of the Scottish Queen lool
like the efFect ofneceffity, rather than of choice,
she determined to put on the appearance o0
concern for her interel}, anld. of deep sympathy
with her fufsterings.

# Mary demands admittance into Elizabeth's presence.

With this view, she inflantly dispatched

Lord Scroope warden of the weft marches, and
Sir Francis Knollys Iier vice-chamberlain, to the
Queen of Scots, (IMay o2. 1568.) with letters
full of expreflions of kildnefs and condolence.
But, at the fame time, they had private in-
ftruEtions to watch all her motions, and to
take care that she should not escape into her
own kingdom. *)

Mlary demands admittance into Eli;abetil's prerence.

On their arrival, Mary demanded a perfo-:

nal intervievw vith the Queen, that she might
lay before her tlie injuries xvhich she had sus-
sered, and receive from her those friendly of-
sices which she had been encouraged to cxpe&t.
They answered, that is was with reluccance
this honour was at present denied her; that
while she lay under the imputation of a crime
so horrid as the murder of her hafband, their
Mistress, to whom he was so nearly allied,
could not, without bringing a stain upon her
own treputation, admit her into her presence;
but as soon as she had cleared herself from that
aspersion, they pronifed her a reception finit-
able to her dignity, and aid proportioned to
her distress. *')

') Aldeilf. v,'. i.-.'3ó. 7c, u,.

# She offers to vindicate her conduct.

# Elizabeth takes advantage of this offer.

She offers to vindicate her condutt

Nothing could be more frivolous than tlhis

pretence. It was the occasion, however, of
leading the Queen of Scots into the fiare in
which Elizabeth and her Mlinirfers wished to
entangle her. Mary expressed the utmost filr-
prize at this unexpected manner of evading her
rcquclt; but as she could not believe so many
profellions of friendship to be void of sincerity,
she frankly offered to submit her cause to the
cognizance of Elizabeth, and undertook to pro'
duce such proofs of her own innocence, ani
of the falsehood of the accusations brought againfi.
her, as should fully remove the scruples, and
satisfy the delicacy of the English Queen.

1liizabetli takes advantage of this olfer.

This was the very point to which Eliza-

beth laboured to bring the matter. By this ap-
peal of the Scottifhl Queen, she became the um-
p-re between her and her fabjets, and had it
entirely in her own power to protract the in-
quiry to any length, and to perplex and involve
it in endless difficulties. In the mean time, she
was furnished with a plausible pretence for
keeping her at a distance from court, and for
refuting to contribute towards replacing her on
the throne. As Mary's conduct had been 'ex-
tremely incautious, and the presumptions of her
guilt were many and tlrong, it was not itipof-

fible her subje&s might make good their charge
against her; and if this should be the result of
the inquiry, she would, thenceforth, cease to
be the object of regard, or of compassion, and
the treating her with coldness and negle& wEould
merit little censure. In a matter so dark and
mysterious, there was no probability that. Mary
could bring proofs of her innocence, so incon-
tcetcd, as to render the condu& of the English
Queen altogether culpable. And perhaps, her
impatience under restraint, her suspicion of Eli-
zabeth's partiality, or her discovery of her arti-
sices, might engage her in such cabals, as
would juflify the using her with greater rigour.

Elizabeth early foresaw all thole advantages,

which would arise from an inquiry into the
conduct of the Scottish Queer, carried on under
her diretion. There was some danger, how-
ever, that Mary might discover her fecrct in-
tentions too soon, and by receding from the
offer which she had made, endeavour to dif-
appoint them. But even in that event, fle de-
termined not to drop the inquiry, and had
thought of several different expedients for car-
rying it on. The Countess of Lennox, con-
vinced that Mary was accelfary to the murder
of her son, and thirsting for that vengeance
wvhich it was natural for a mother to demand.
had implored Elizabeth's juflicc, and solicited
her, with many tears, in her own name, and
in her husband's, to 'bring the Scottish ,Queen

to a trial for that crime. '') The parenis :,
the unhappy Prince had a just right to prefei
this acculation; nor could she , who was their
nearcfl kinf\voman, be condemned for listening
to so equitable a demand. Besides, as the
Scottifl nobles openly accused tMary of tllefani
crime, and pretended to be able to confirm their
charge by sufficient proof, it would be no dif-
ficult matter to prevail on them.to petition the
Queen of England to take cognizance of their
proceedings against their Sovereign; and it was
the opinion of the English council, that it would
be reasonable to comply with the requcft. '")
At the fame time, the obsolete claim of the fu-
periority of England over Scotland began to be
talked of; and, on that account, it was pre-
tended that the decision of the contest between
Mary and her fibjets belonged of rifght to Eli-
zabeth. But though Elizabeth revolved all there
expedients in her mind, and kept them in re-
serve to be made use of as occasion might re.
quire, flhe wiifhed that the inquiry into Mary's
conduct should appear to be undertaken purely
in compliance with her own demand, and in
order to vindicate her innocence; and so long
as that appearance could be preserved, none of
the other expedients were to be employed.

") Camrd. 4r12 Hayncs, 469.
*') Anterr. vol. iv. 37.

# Mary greatly offended at Elizabeth's conduct.

When Mary consented to fabmit her cause

to Elizabeth, she was far from fufpeaing that
any bad consequences could follow, or thatany
dangerous pretensions could be founded on her
offer. She expeted that Elizabeth herself
would receive, and examine her defences; :')
she meant to confider her as an equal, for
whose satisfaction fie was willing to explain
any part of her conduat that was liable to cen-
lure, not to acknowledge her as a superior,
before whom she was bound to plead her cause.
But Elizabeth put a very different sense on
Mary's offer. She confidered herself as chosen
to be judge in the controversy between the
Scottish Queen and her fubljcets. and began to
act in that capacity. She proposed to appoint
commiffloners to hear the pleadings of both
parties, and wrote to the Regent of Scotland
to impower proper persons to appear before
them, in his name, and to produce what he
could allege in vindication of his proceedings
against his Sovereign.

Mary greatly offended at Elizabeth's coiidau ,

Mary had, hitherto, relied with unac-

countable credulity on Elizabeth's profeflions of
regard, and expected that so many kind speeches
would, at last, be accompanied with some suit-
able actions. But this proposal entirely unde-
'") Anderi. vnl. ;v. to.

ceived her. She plainly perceived the artifice
of Elizabeth's condu& , and saw what a dimi-
nution it would be to her own honour, to ap-
pear on a level with her rebellious fubjets, and
to stand together with them at the bar of a fu-
perior, and a judge. She retra&ed the o.fet
vhich she had made, and which had been per-
verted to a purpose so contrary to her intention,
She demanded, with more earnestness thia
ever, to be admitted into Elizabeth's preferce;
and wrote to her (June 30.) in a strain very
different from what flie had formerly used, and
which fully discovers the grief and indignation
that preyed on her heart. ,, In my present
,,fitnation, fays she, I neither will, nor can
,, reply to the accusations of my rubje&s. I atn
,,ready, of my own accord , and out of friend-
,,ship to you, to satisfy your scruples, and to
,, vindicate my own condiil'. Mly fubje&l-s are
,,not my equals; nor will 1, by fubtnitting my
,,cause to a judicial trial, acknowledge then.
,,to be so. I fled into your arms, as into thore
,, of my ncareft relation, and most perfec friend.
,,I did you honour, as I imagined, in chufinlg
,,you, preferably to any other Prince, to be
, the restorer of an injured Queen. Wvas it ever
,, known that a Prince was blamed for hearing,
,,in person, the complaints of those who ap-
,,pealed to his jufiice, againfl the false accu-
,,fations of their enemies? You admitted into
·.your presence my bastard brother, who had

# Elizabeth's precautions against her.

,been guilty of rebellion; and you deny me
,,that honour! God forbid that I flould be the
,,occasion of bringing any stain upon your re-
,,putation ! I expeted that your manner of'
, treating me would have added lustre to it.
, Sufter me either to implore the aid of other
,, Princes, whose delicacy on this head will be
,,le's , and their resentment of my wrongs
,,greater; or let me receive from your hands
,,that assistance, which it becomes you, more
, than any other Prince, to grant; and by that
,, benefit bind me to yourself in the indissoluble
, ties of gratitude. :) "

Elizabetli's precautionll aSgnilt hi;'h

This letter somewhat disconcerted Eliza-

beth's plan, but did not divert her from the pro-
fecution of it. She laid the matter before the Privy
Council, (June 2o.) and it was there determin-
ed, notwithstanding the intreaties and remon-
ftrances of the Scottish Queen, to go on with
the inquiry into her conduOt, and till that were
finished, it was agreed that Elizabeth could
not, conlfitently with her own honour, or with
the safety of her government, either give her
the assistance which she demanded, or permit
her to retire out of the kingdoma. And left she
should have an opportunity of escaping, while
she resided so near Scotland, it was thought
') Anderr. vol. iv. 94.

# Proceedings of the Regent against the Queen's adherents.

advifeable to remove her to some place at a
greater distance from the borders. ")

Proceedings of the Regent against the itQteen'

adiheernts.

While the English court was occupied in

these deliberations, the Regent did not negledc
to improve the viftory at Langfide. That event
was of the uitmoft importance to him. It not
only. drove the Queen herself out of the king-
dom, but left her adherents dispersed, and
without a leader, at his mercy. He feemetd
rcfolved, at first, to proceed against them with
the utinoft rigour. Six persons of some di-
iinftion,' who had been taken prisoners in the
battle, were tried and condemned to death, as
rebels against the King's government. They
-were led to the place of execution, but by the
powerful interceflion of Knox they obtained a
pardon. Hamilton of Bothwellhaugh was one
of the number, who lived to give both the
Regent and Knox reason to repent this comi-
mendable as of lenity. **)

Soon after, the Regent marched with an

army, consisting of 4oo0 horse and Iooo foot,
towards the weft borders. - The nobles in this
part of the kingdom were all of the Queen's
fation; but as they had not force fufiicient to

*) Anders. vol. iv. lo2.
"') C.ld. vol. ii. 99.

# Marry carried to Bolton. (July 13.)

obiirut his progress, he must either have ob-
liged them to fubnit to the King , or would
have laid waste their lands with fire and f\vord.
But Elizabeth , whose interest it was to keep
Scotland in confusion, by preserving the ba-
lance between the two parties, and who was
eudeavouring to 'ooth the Scottish Queen by
gentle treatrlent, interposed at her desire. After
keeping the field two wxeeks, the Regent, in
compliance to the ]inglifh Ambanfi'dor, difiniiffd
his forces; and an expedition, which might
have proved fatal to his opponents, ended with
a few aors of severity. ;)

lanrry carlitcd ta (Jolr:ou. (July 13,)

The resolution of the English Privy Council

with regard to l\ary's person, was soon carried
into execution ; and, wi.hout regarding her
remonlfrances or complaints, she was con-
dueted to Bolton, a castle of Lord Scroop's, on
the borders of Yorkfhirc. ':*) In this place, her
correfpondcnce with her friends in Scotland
became more dil'icult, and any profpecE of
making her escape was entirely cut off. She
now felt herself to be entirely in Elizabeth's
power, and though treated as yet with the
refpeat due to a Qecen, her real condition was
that ofaprifoner. iMary knew what it was to be

' Cald. vol. ii. 99.
*') Ai;derf, vol. iv, 3.!,

# Agrees that an inquiry be made into her conduct.

# Her dissimulation with regard to religion.

deprived of liberty, and dreaded it as the worfi:
of all evils.

Agrees that an inquiry be made into her couduft,

While the remembrance of her late impri-

fonment was still lively, and the terror of a
new one filled her mind, Elizabeth thought: i(
a proper juncure to renew her former propo..
fition , (July 28.) that she would susser tlic-
Regent and his adherents to be called into Eng-
land, and consent to their being heard in de.-
fence of their own conduat. And on her parl:
ffie proMlifed, whatever should be the issue of
this inquiry , to employ all her power and
influence towards replacingMary on her throne,
under a fewv limitations, which were far front
being unreasonable. Fear, impatience, derpair.
as well as this soothing promise, with which
the proposition was accompanied, induced the
Scotr-ifh Q'leen to comply. ':)

Her dillbeulation w ith regard to religion.

In order to persuade Elizabeth that flie

desired nothing so much as to renlder the union
between them as close as poflible, she flhewcd
a difpolition to relax somewhat in one point,
with regard to which, during all her past and
fnbfequent misfortunes, she was uniformly in-
flexible. She expressed a great veneration for

"' ,\iderfoli. vol. iv, 1o9. Htaynes, 468.

# A Parliament held in Scotland. (Aust 13. )

the liturgy of the Church of England; she was
often present at religious worship, according to4
the rites of the Reformed Church; made choice
of a Protestant clergyman to be her chaplain;
heard him preach against the errors of Popery
with attention and seeming pleasure; and dilt
covered all the symptoms of an approaching
conversion. ') Such was Mary's known and
big-otted attachment to the Popifll religion, that
it is impossible to believe her sincere in this pari:
of her conduc; nor can any thing mark more
Rfrongly the wretclhednefs of her condition, and
the excess of her fears, than that they betrayed
her into difiniulation, in a matter concerning
which her ientimients w>ere, at all other times,
scrupulously delicate.

A ';Lrli:.nen' ield in Scotland, A::; u;l 1

: . )

At this time the Regent called a Parliament,

in order to proceed to the forfeiture of thol'
who refused to acknowledge the King's autho.
rity. The Queen's faciion was alarmed, land
Argyll and Huntly, wvlom n lary had appointed
her lieutenants, the one in the south, and the
other in the north of Scotland, began to as-
iemble forces to obftru& this meeting. Com-
pailion for the Queen, and envy at those who
governed in the iKing's name , had added (o
much strength to the part , that the Regeii

Al Ande s,

c er ,
TO'. ;v. !!n;·n i·: *TQ?

# Elizabeth requires the Regent to defend his conduct.

would have found it difficult to withstand its
*efforts. But as Mary had submitted her cause
to Elizabeth, she could not refuse, at her de-
fire, to command her friends to lay down their
arms, and to wait patiently till matters were
brought to a decision in England. By procuring
this ceflation of arms, Elizabeth afforded as
seasonable relief to the Regent's fa&ion , as she
had formerly given to the Queen's. *)

The Regent, however, would not consent,

even at Elizabeth's reqneft, to put off the meet-
ing of Parliamcnt. But we may ascribe to her
influence, as well as to the eloquence of Mait-
land , who laboured to prevent the one half
of his countrymen from exterminating the other,
any appearances of moderation which this Par.
liament discovercd in its proceedings. The
nmoft violent opponents of the King's govern-
lent were forfeited; the reit were allowed
iill to hope for favour. :;)

Elizabeth requires the Regent to defend his condiia.

No fooncr did the Queen of Scots fubmii

her cause to her rival, than Elizabeth required
the Regent to fend to York deputies properly
inftrueted for vindicating his conduEt, in pre-
fence of her commillioners. It was not with-
out hesitation and anxiety, that the Regent

coin-
':') Anders, vul. ;\v, 12^; .

# Both the Queen and he appoint commissioners.

consented to this measure. His authority wvas
already eflablified in Scotland , and confirmed
by Parliament. To fuller its validity now to
be called in question, and fubjetded to a foreign
jurifdiation, was extremely mortifying. To ac-
cufe his Sovereign before firangers, the ancient
enemies of the Scottish name, was an odious
tafl. To fail in this accusation was dangerous;
to succeed in it was disgraceful. But the
strength of the adverse fation daily increased.
lie dreaded the interposition of the French King
in its behalf. In his iituation, and in a matter
which Elizabeth had si mtuch at heart, her
commands were neither to be disputed , nor
disobeyed. *)

Both the Queen and he appoint comifniioncri.

The necessity of repairing in person toYork

added to the ignominy of the ftep which he
was obliged to take. All his aflociates declined
the office; they were unwilling, it would seem,
to cxpofe themselves to the odium and danger
with which it was easy to foresee that the
discharge of it would be attended, unless he
himself consented to share these in comion with
them. The Earl of Morton, Bothwell Bishop
of Orkney, Pitcairn Commendator of Dunfern-
ling, and Lord Lindsay, were joined with him

') Bur.. 372. See Append, No, XXV,
1-ift. of Scot!. Vol. TI N n

in cornmiffion. (Sept. 18. ) Macgill of Rankeilor,
and Balnaves of Hallhill, two eminent Civilians,
George Buchanan his faithful adherent, a man
whose genius did honour to the age, Maitland,
and several others, were appointed to attend
them as assistants. Maitland owed this di-
ftinEion to the Regent's fear, rather than to
his afferion. He had warmly remonstrated
against this measure. He wished his country
to continue in friendship with England, but
not to become dependant on that nation. He
was desirous of reeflablifhing the Queen in some
degree of power, not inconsistent with that
which the King possesed; and the Regent could
not, with safety, leave behind him a man,
whose views were so contrary to his own , and
who, by his superior abilities, had acquired an
influence in the nation, equal to that which
others derived from the antiquity and power of
their families. ")

Mary impowered Lefly Bishop of Ross,

Lord Livingston, Lord Boyd, Lord Herries,
Gavin Hamilton Commlendator of Kilwinning,
Sir John Gordon of Lochinvar, and Sir James
Cockburn of Skirling , to appear in her
name. ;; :

Elizabeth nominated Thomas Howard Duke
of Norfolk, Thomas Ratcliff Earl of Suffex, and

') Luch. 37r . Andell. ol. iv, 35. Melv. IS6. IS8,
''') Ain ers. vo!. i\·' 33,

# The conference at York.

# Views of the different parties.

Sir Ralph Sadler, her Commissioners to hear
both parties,

The conference at York.

The fourth of Ocoober was the day fixed

for opening the Conference. The great abilities
of the deputies on both tides, the dignity of the
judges before whom they were to appear, the
high rank of the persons whose cause was to be
heard, and the importance of the points in dif-
pute, rendered the whole transaCtion no less
illufirious, than it was singular. The situation
in which Elizabeth appeared, on this occasion,
lirikes us with an air of magnificence. Her ri-
val, an independant Queen, and the heir of
an ancient race of Monarchs, was a prisoner in
her hands, and appeared, by her Anibailadors,
before her tribunal. The Regent of Scotland,
who represented the majesty, and polleiTed the
authority of a King, tlood in person at her
bar. And the fate of a kingdom, whose power
her anceflors had often dreaded, but could never
subdue, was now absolutely at her diCpofal.

Views of the different -prties,

The views, however, with which the

several parties consented to this Conference, and
the issue to which they expected to bring it.
were extremely different.

Mary's chief object was the recovering her
former authority. This induced her to coufena:

N n I

to a measure against which she had long ftrug-
gled. Elizabeth's promises gave her ground for
entertaining hopes of being restored to her king-
dom; in order to which, she would have wii-
lingly made many concessions to the King's
party; and the influence of the English Queen,
and her own impatience under her present si-
tuation, might have led her to many more. ;')
The Regent aimed at nothing but securing Eli-
zabeth's prote&ion to his party, and seems not
to have had the molt distant thoughts of coming
to any composition with Mary. Elizabeth's
views were more various, and her schemes
more intricate. She seemed to be full of concern
for Mary's honour, and solicitous that she should
wipe off the aspersions which blemished her
character. This she pretended to be the in-
tention of the Conference; amusing Mary, and
eluding the solicitations of the French and Spa-
nifh Ambafladors in her behalf, by repeated
promises of assisting her, as soon as she could
venture to do so, without bringing disgrace on
herself. But, under this veil of friendship and
generosity, Elizabeth concealed sentiments of
a different nature. She expected that the Re-
gent would accuse Mary of being acceflory to
the murder of her husband. She encouragei
him, as far as decency would permit, to take

' Anderit; vol. iv. 33. G.od. -o;. ii. 337.

c

this desperate ftep. *) And as this accusation
might terminate two different ways, she had
concerted measures for her future conduct suit-
able to each of these. If the charge againlt
Mary should appear to be well founded, -the
resolved to pronounce her unworthy of wearing
a Crown , and to declare that she would never
burden her own conscience with the guilt of an
a&tion so detestable, as the restoring her to her
kingdom. **) If it should happen, that what
her accusers alleged did not amount to a proof
of guilt, but only of mal-administration , she
determined to set on foot a treaty for refloring
her, but on such conditions, as would render
her for ever dependant on England , and the
slave of her own fubjefts. ***) And as every
ftep in the progress of the Conference, as well
as the final result of it, was in her own power.
she would fill be at liberty to chufe which of
these courses she would hold ; or if there ap-
peared to be any danger or inconveniency in
pursuing either of them, she might protract the
whole cause by endless delays, and involve it
in extricable perplexity.

) Anders, vol. iv. II. 4. H3 ynes , .-'l,
:'a) Anders. vol. iv. II,

i.) Id, ibid, 16.

# Complaint of the Queen's commissioners against the Regent.

Cormplaint of the Queen's comllifiloners againf t'

Regeiit.

The Conference , however, was opened

with much solemnity. But the very firfi fre;
discovered it to be Elizabeth's intention to in-
flame, rather than to extinguish the dissensions
and animofities among the Scots. No endeavours
were used to reconcile the contending parties,
or to mollify the fierceness of their hatred, by
bringing the Queen to offer pardon for what was
pat , or her fubjets to promnife more dutiful
obedience for the future. On the contrary,
Mary's commifioners were permitted to prefer
a complaint against the Regent and his party,
( October 8. ) containing an enumeration of
their treaqonable aftions, of their seizing her
person by force of arms, committing her to
prison, compelling her to resign the Crown,
and making use of her son's name to colour
their usurpation of the whole royal authority.
And of all these enormities, they required fucll
speedy and effetual redress , as the injuries of
one Queen demanded from the justice of
another. '")

It was then expe&ted that the Regent would

have disclosed the whole circumstances of that
unnatural crime, to which he pretended the
Queen had been accessory, and would hrave
produced evidence in support of his charge. But

') Anders. vol. iv. 52,

# Intrigues of Norfolk with the Regent.

far fronm accusing Mary, the Regent did not
even answer the complaints brought againit
himself. He discovered a relu&ance at the un-
dertaking that office, and flarted many doubts
and scruples, with regard to which, he de-
manded to be resolved by Elizabeth herself. :)
His reserve and hefitarion were no less furprif-
ing to the greater part of the English commis-
fioners than to his own afibciates. They knew
that he could not vindicate his own condu&
without charging the murder upon the Queen,
and he had not hitherto shown any extraordi-
nary delicacy on that head. An intrigue had
been secretly carried on, iince his arrival ;!:
York, which explains this mystery.

Intrigues o' Ncrfolk twiri thie Re¢crnnt.

The Duke of Norfolk was, as that time,

the moRs powerful and modl popular man in
England. His wife was lately dead; and he
began already to form a project, which he as-
terwards more openly avowed, of mounting
the throne of Scotland, by a marriage with the
Queen of Scots. He saw the infamy which
would be the consequence es a publick accu-
fation against Mary, and how prejudicial it
might be to her pretensions to the Englifli fuc-
cession. In order to save her this cruel morti-
fication, he applied to Maitland, and expressed

') HlayneF, 478g

his astonishment at feeing a man of so much re-
putation for wisdom, concurring with the Regent
in a measure so dishonourable to themselves, to
their Queen, and to their country; submitting
the publick tranfadions of the nation to the
judgement of foreigners ; and publishing the
ignominy, and exposing the faults of their Sove-
reign which they were bound, in good po-
licy, as well as in duty , to conceal and to
cover. It was easy for Maitland, whose fentin
ments Were the fame with the Duke's, to vin.
dicate his own conduct. He assured him, that
he had employed all his credit to dissuade his
countrymen frorr this measure; and would still
contribute, to the utmost of his power, to divert
them from it. This encouraged Norfolk to
communicate the matter to the Regent. He
repeated and enforced the fame arguments
which he had lsed with Maitland. He warned
him of the danger to which he must expose
himself by such a violent a&tion as the publick
accusation of his Sovereign. Mary would never
forgive a man, who had endeavoured to fix
such a brand of infamy on her character. If
she ever recovered any degree of power, his
deftrufion would be inevitable, and he would
joftly merit it at her hands. Nor would Eli-
zabeth screen him from this, by a publick ap-
probation of his condut. For whatever evi-
dence of Mary's guilt he might produce, she was
resolved to give no definitive sentence in the

cause. Let him only demand that the matter
should be brought to decilion immediately ater
hearing the proof, and he would be fully con-
vinced how false and insidious her intentions
wVere, and, by consequence, how improper it
woltld be for him to appear as the accuser of
his own Sovereign. *) The candour which
Norfolk seemed to discover in there remon-
ftranccs, as well as the truth which they con-
tained, made a deep impression on the Regent.
He daily received the strongest afTurances of
Mary's willingness to be reconciled to him, if
he abtlained from accusing her of uch an odious
crime, together with the denunciations of her
irreconcilable hatred, if he aAed a contrary
part. **) All there considerations concurred
in determining him to alter his purpose, and to
-make trial of the expedient which the Duke
had suggested.

He demanded, therefore, ( Ofob. 9.) to

be informed, before he proceeded farther,
whether the English commissioners were em-
powered to declare the Queen guilty', by a
judicial aft; whether they would promise to
pass sentence, without delay; whether the
Queen should be kept under such restraint, as
to prevent her from disturbing the government

:) Melv. 157. Haynes, 573.
"') Anders. vol. iv, 77. Good, vol. ii. X57, See Appepd,

No. XXV;,

now established in Scotland; and whether Eli-
zabeth, if fihe approved of the proceedings of
the King's party, would engage to protect it
for the future. *) The paper containing these
demands was signed by himself alone, without
communicating it to any of his attendants, ex-
cept Maitland and Mclvil. ::') Nothing could
appear more natural than the Regent's solicitude,
to know on what footing he Rood. To have
ventured on a fep so uncommon and dangerous,
as the accusing his Sovereign, without pre-
rionlly ascertaining that he might take it with
safety, would have been unpardonable impru-
dence. But Elizabeth, who did not expe&
that he would have moved any such difficulty,
had not empowered her commiflioners to 'give
him that fa&tsf'iation which he demanded. It
became neceflary to transmit the articles to her-
seif, and by the light in which Norfolk placed
them, it is easy to fee that he wished that they
should make no flight impression on Elizabeth
and her ministers. ,, Think not the Scots, said
,, he, overfcrupulous or precise. Let us view
,, their conduft as we would wish our own
, to be viewed in a like situation. The game
,, they play is deep; their estates, their lives,
,, their honour are at flake. It is now in their
,, own power to be reconciled to their Queen;

A) Anders. vol. iv. 55.'
") Ibid6.56. Melv. t19.

, or to offend her irrecoverably, and in a matter
,, of so much importance, the utmost degree
, of caution is not excessive. " )

While the English commissioners waited for

fuller inftrurtions with regard to the Regent's
demands, he gave in an anwver to the complaint,
which had been offered in name of the Scottish
Queen. It was cxpreffed in terms perfecly
conformable to the system which he had at that
time adopted. It contained no insinuation of
the Queen's being accessory to the murder of
her huCband; the bitterness of style peculiar to
the age was considerably abated; and though
he pleaded, that the infamy of the marriage
with Bothwell, made it neceflary to take arms
in order to dissolve it; though Mary's attach-
ment to a man so odious jultified the keeping
her for some time under restraint; yet nothing
more was said on there fubjeers than was barely
requisite in his own defence. The Queen's
commissioners did not fail to reply. :!:) (Ofto-
ber x7. ) But while the article with regard to
the murder remained untouched, these were
only skirmishes at a distance, of no consequence
towards ending the contest, and were littlere-
garded by Elizabeth or her commissioners.

) Anderi. vol. iv. 77.
') Id. 61. So.

# The conference removed to Westminster.

The-conference removed to Weftninfter,

The conference had, hitherto, been con-

du&ed in a manner which disappointed Eliza-
beth's views, and produced none of those dif.
coveries which she HIad expe&ed. The difnance
between York and London, and the necessity
of consulting her upon every difficulty xwhich
occurred, consumed much time. Norfolk's ne-
gotiation with the Scottifl Regent, however
secretly carried on, was not, in aIl probability,
unknown to a princess so remarkable for her
sagacity in penetrating the designs of her ene-
nmies, and feeing through their deepest schemes.*)
Instead, therefore, of returning any answer to
the Regent's demands, she resolved to remove
the conference to Westminster, and to 'appoint
new commissioners, in whom she could more
absolutely confide. Both the Scottish Queen
and the Regent were brought, without diffi-
culty, to approve of this resolution. *')

We often find Mary boasting of the fupe-

riority of her commissioners during the confer-
ence at York, and how, by the strength of
their arguments, they confounded her adver-
saries, and silenced all their cavils. *'"*) The
dispute flood, at that time, on a footing which

°) Good, vol. ii, 160. Anders, vol. iii. 24.

'*) Haynes, 484. Anderr. vol. iv. 94.
*') Gocd. vol. i. I86, :S4. 350.

iendered her vitory not only apparent, but
easy. Her participation of the guilt of the
King's murder was the only circumstance, which
could justify the violent proceedings of her sub-
jets. And while they induifrioufly avoided
mentioning that, her cause gained as much as
that'of her adversaries loft by fupprefling this
capital argument.

Elizabeth resolved that 5Mary fhouldnoten-

joy the famir advantage in the conference to be
held at Weftminfier. She deliberated with tlh
utmost anxiety, how she might overcome tlih
Regent's fcrupies, and persuade him to accule
the Queen. She conlidered of the mnoft proper
method for bringing WMary's commifioners to
answer such an accusation; and as she foresaw
that the promises with which it was necelfary
to allure the Regent, and which it was impol-
fible tc conceal from the Scottish Queen, would
naturally exasperate her to a great degree, file
determined to guard her more narrowly than
ever; and though Lord Scroop had given her
no reason to difruft his vigilance or fidelity,
yet because he was the Duke of Norfolk's
brother-in-law, 'he thought it proper to remove
the Queen as soon as poilible to Tuthbury in
Staffordshire, and commit her to the keepingof
the Earl of Shrev.flury , to whom that castle
belonged. ')

*I!!i,"nes, 43-7

# Mary's suspicions of Elizabeth's intentions.

# Claims a personal audience of Elizabeth.

Mary's fuifpicions of Elizabeth's intentions.

Mary began to 'fufpeft the design of this

second conference; (OEtob. 2I.) and notwith-
standing the fatisfation file expressed at feeing
her cause taken more immediately under the
Queen's own eye, *) fie framed her infrruc-
tions to her commissioners, in such a manner,
as to avoid being brought under the necessity of
anfvering the accusation of herfubjefts, if they
should be so desperate as to exhibit one against
her. ''") These suspicions were soon confirmed
by a circumfilance extremely mortifying. The
RIegent having arrived at London, in order to
be present at the conference, was immediately
adi!:tted into Elizabeth's pretence, and received
by iher, not only with refpet, but with as-
section.

Claims n perfoniil audience of Elizabeth,,

This Mary justly confidered as an open de-

claration of that Queen's partiality towards her
adversaries. In the iirft emotions of her re-
fentment , she wrote to her commissioners,
(Nov. 22.) and commanded them to complain
in the presence of the Engliflh nobles, and be-
fore the ambaflhdors of foreign Princes, of the
iif'age she had hitherto met with, and the ad-

':) Andlerr vol. iv. 9J.

G') Good. vol. ih. 3 9,.

ditional injuries which she had reason to ap-
prehend. Her rebellious fubjeds were allowed
access to the Queen, she was excluded from
her presence; they enjoyed full liberty, she
languished under a long imprifinment; they
were encouraged to accuse her, in defending
herself flie laboured under every disadvantage.
For these reasons she once more renewed her
demand, of being adinitted into the Queen's
presence; and if that were denied, file inllruned
them to declare, that she recalled the consent
she had given to the conference at \,Vefltinfter,
and protelied, that whatever was done there,
should be held to be null and invalid. ;;;)

Tlis, perhaps, was the moit prudent refo-

lution Mary could have taken. The pretences
on which she declined the conference were
plausible, and the junaure for offering them
well chosen. But either the Queen's letter
did not reach her commiillioners in due time, or
they fitl'ered themllnlves to be deceived by Eli-
zabeth's profefiiins of regard for their Miftrcfa,
and coufented to che opening of the conference.S:)::)

To the commifiioners who had appeared in

her name at York, (Nov. 25.) Elizabeth now
added Sir Nicholas Bacon, Keeper of the (ieat
Seal, the Earls of Arunde! and T.clccfer, Lord

) Good, vol. ii, I:l!,
") Anldeii: Yul, ;:'. "-,

# The Regent accuses the Queen of being accessory to her husband's murder.

Clinton, and Sir William Cecil. ") The dif-
liculties which obftruEted the proceedings at
York were quickly removed. A satisfying
answer was given to the Regent's demands;
nor was he so much disposed to hesitate, and
raise obje&icns as formerly. His negotiation
Lvith Norfolk had been discovered to Morton by
otne of Mary's attendants, and he had commu-
nicated it to Cecil. "::) H'is personal safety,
as well as the continuance of his power, de-
pended on Elizabeth. By savoiring Mary, she
might at any time ruin him, and by a question
which file artfully started, concerning the per-
son who had a right, by the law of Scotland,
to govern the kingdom during a minority, file
let him fee, that even without refloring the
Queen, it was an easy matter for her to deprive
him of the supreme directions of affairs. *'")
These considerations, which were powerfully
seconded by most of his attendants, at length
determined the Regent to produce his accufa-
tion against the Queen.

The Regent accuses the Queen of being accelfory

to her hufhand's nmurder.

He endeavoured to lessen the infamy, with
which he was fenlible this adion would be ar-

tended,
') Anders. vol. iv. 99.

A':l"; Is.-.yres, 4£4.

tended, by protesting, that it was with theut-
molt relulance he undertook this difagreeabtl
task; that his party had long suffered theircon-
du& to be mifconfirued, and had borne the
worst imputations in Iilence, rather than expofo
the crimes of their Sovereign to the eyes of
Ilrangers; but that now the inlblence and in-
portunity of the adverse fation, forced them to
p,!lilifl, what thley had hitherto, though witit
loss to themetelves, endeavoured to conceal. ')
Thefe.prete;tst are decent; and, had the party
dilcovered any delicacy ur reserve, with regard
to the Queen's atLipns, in the reft of theircon-
duf, might have passed for the real principles
1by which they were influenced. But their
former treatnent of the Queen renders it im-
pofirble to give any credit to these professions.
And the Regent, it is plain, was drawn by
the necellity of his affairs, and Elizabeth's ar-
tifices, into a lituation, where no liberty of
choice was left him; and was obliged either
to acknowledge himlelfto be guilty ofrebellion,
or to charge Mary with having committed
murder.

The accusation itlelf was conceived in the

frrongeft terms. Mary was charged, not only
with having contented to the murder, but with
being accessory to the contrivance and executioIx

') Anders. vol. iv. II5.
Hilt. of Scotl. Vol. I, 0 o

# Her commissioners refuse to answer.

of it. Bothwell, it was pretended, had beeR
-screened from the pursuits ofjuflice by her fa-
vour; and she had formed designs nolefs dan-
gerous to the life of the young Prince, than
subversive of the liberties and constitution of
the kingdom. If any of these crimes should
be denied, an offer was made to produce the
most ample and undoubted evidence in confir-
mation of the charge. *)

At the next meeting of the conimifiloners,

(Nov. 29.) the Earl of Lennox appeared be-
fore them; and after bewailing the tragical and
unnatural murder of his son, he implored Eli-
zabeth's justice against the Queen of Scots,
whom he accused, upon oath, of being the an-
thor of that crime, and produced papers, which.
as he pretended, would make good what he
alleged. The entrance of a new ador on tho
stage, so opportunely, and at a junfture so cri-
tical, can scarce be imputed to chance. ThiR
contrivance was manifestly Elizabeth's, inorder
to increase, by this additional accusation, the
infamy of the Scottish Queen. *'*)

Hor conimiflioners refute to anlDWer.

1M'ary's commiflioners expressed the utmost

surprise and indignation at the Regent's pre-
s'umption, in loading the Queen with calum-

') Anders, vol. iv. II ,

1) Id. ibid. Iz3z

nies, which, as they affirmed, she had so little
merited. (Dec. 4.) But, inrlead of attempting
to vindicate her honour, by a reply to the charge,
they had recourie to an article in their inftruc-
tions, which they had formerly negleEed to
mention in its proper place. They demanded.
an audience of Elizabeth ; and having renewed
their iiftrels's request, of a personal interview,
they protelted, if that were denied her, again (t
all the future proceedings of the commiflloners. "')
A protestation of this nature, offered just at the
critical time, when flch a bold accuf.:tion had
been preferred againtl Mary, and when the
proofs in support of it were ready to be exa-
mined, gave reason to suspect that she dreaded
the event of that examination. This suspicion
received the ftron.eft confirmation from anothler
circurftance; Rols and Herries, before they
were introduced to Elizabeth, inorder to make
this protestation, privately acquainted Leiceler
and Cecil, that as their Mistress had, from the
beginning, discovered an inclination towards
bringing the differences between herself and her
fuibjeEts to an amicable accommodation, so file
was still desirous, notwithstanding the Regent's
audacious accusation, that they should be ter-
minated in that manner. **)

Oo

') Anderr. vol. iv. 133. 158.
**) Ibid. iv, I34. Cabbala, x17.

Such moderation is fearce compatible with

the firong resentment which calumniated inno-
cence naturally feels; or with that eagerness
to vindicate itlief, which it always discovers.
In Mary's situation, an offer so ill-timed must be
confidered as a confession of the weakness of
her cause. The known character of her cornm-
missioners exempts them from the imputation of
folly, or the suspicion of treachery. Some
secret convie&ion, that the conduct of their
Mlillrefs could nor bear so itri& a scrutiny, feetns
to be the molt probable motive of this impru-
dtent proposal, by which they endeavoured to
avoid it.

It appeared in this light to Elizabeth, and

afforded her a pretence forreje&cing it. She told
Mary's commiflioners, (Dec. 5.) that, in the
present junc:ure, nothing could be so difho-.
nourable to their Illiftrefs, as an accommodation;
and that the matter woul:l seem to be huddled
up in this manner, merely to suppress difcove-
ries, anti to hide her shame; nor was it pof-
fible that she could be admitted, with any de-
cency, into her presence, while she lay under
the infamy of such a publick accusation.

Upon this repulse, Mary's commilffoners

withdrew; and as they had declined anfvering,
there seemed now to be no further reason for
the Regent's producing the proofs in support
of his charge. But without getting these into
her hands, Elizabeth's schemes were incom-

# Elizabeth treats Mary with greater rigour.

plete; and her artifice for this purpole wva, as
mean, hut as su-ccessful as any file had hitherto
employed. She commanded her commiffionci's
to testify her indli-gnation and displeasure at the
Rcegent's prefuai-ption, in forgetting so far the
duty of a fubjeft, as to accuse his Sovereign
of such atrocious crimes. HIe, in orderto regain
the good opinion of such a powerful protetrefs,
offered to shew that his accusations were not
malicious, nor ill-grounded. Then were pro-
duced and delivered to the English cotnmniffoilers,
the acs of the Scottish Parliament in confir-
mation, of the Regent's authority, and of the
Queen's relignatfion; the confefiions of theper-
sons executed for the King's murder; and the
fatal casket which contained the letters, son-
nets, and contra&s, that have been already
mnentioned,

Elizabeth Ircits Mary with greater rigour.

Elizabeth having got these into her posses-

sion, began to lay aside the expreflions of
friendship and refpeEt which fle had hitherto
us'ed in all her letters to the- Scottish Queen.
Shel now wrote to her in such terms, as if the
presumptions of her guilt had amounted almost
to. certainty; she blamed her for refuting to
vindicate herself from an accusation which
could not be left unanswered, without a ma-
nifeft injury to her character; and plainly in.
titnated, that unle's thatwere done, nochange

would be made in her present situation. *) She
hoped that such a discovery of her sentiments
would intimidate Mary, who was scarce re-
covered from-the shock of the Regent's attack
on her reputation, and force her to confirm her
resignation of the Crown, to ratify Murray's
authority as Regent, and to consent that both
berfelf and her son should reside in England,
'under her prote&tion. This scheme Elizabeth
had much at heart; she proposed it both to
lTary and to her commissioners, and negle&ed
no argumnent, nor artifice, that could possibly
recommend it. Mary saw how fatal this would
prove to her reputation, to her pretenfions,and
even to her personal safety. She rejedted it
without hesitation. ,,Death, said she, is less
,, dreadful than such an ignominious ftep. Rather
,, than give away, with my own hands, the
,, Crown, which descended to me from my
,, anceflors, I will part with life; but the last
,, words I utter, shall be those of a Queen of
, Scotland. " :*)

At the fame time she seems to have been

sensible how open her reputation lay to censure,
while she suffered such a publick accusation to
remain unanfwvered; and though the conference
was now dissolved, she empowered her corn

*) Anders. vol. iv. 179. 1S3. Good. vol. ii. B6o.
'') lHaynes, 497. See Append. No. XXVII. Good vol. ii.

374. 501.

# Dismisses the Regent without either approving or condemning his conduct.

mnffiioners to present a reply to the allegations
of her enemies, in which she denied, in the
strongest terms, the crimes imputed to her;
( Decem. "4. ) and recriminated upon the Re-
gent and his party, by accusing them of having
devised and executed the murder of theKing. *)
The Regent and his associates af'erted their in-
nocence with great warmth. Mary continued
to insist on a personal interview, a condition
which she knew would never be granted. '')
Elizabeth urged her to vindicate her own ho-
nour. But it is evident from the delays, the
evasions, and subterfuges, to which both Queens
had recourse by turns, that Mary avoided, and
Elizabeth did not desire to make any furtherpro-
grefs in the inquiry.

Difmifles the Rei;etnt wiholut either approvitig or con-

demning his conduat.

The Regent was now impatient to return

into Scotland, where his adversaries were en-
deavouring, in his absence, to raise some com-
motions. Before he set out, he was called
(Febr. a. I569.) into the Privy Council, to receive
a final declaration of Elizabeth's sentiments. Ce-
cil acquainted him, in her name, that on one
hand nothing had been objected to his conduct,
which she could reckon detrimental to his ho-

*) Good. ii. 285.
") Ibid. ,83. Cabbala, 157.

# But secretly supports his party.

nour, or inconsistent with his duty; nor had
he, on the other hand, produced any thing
against his Sovereign, on which she could found
an unfavourable opinion of her actions; and for
this reason, she resolved to leave all the affairs
of Scotland, precisely in the fame situation ill
which she had found them at the beginning of
the conference. The Queen's commissioners
were dismissed much in the fame manner. *)

But secretly frIpports his party.

After the attention of both nationshadbeen

fixed so earnestly on this conference upwards
of four months, such a conclusion of the whole
appears, at first fight, trifling and ridiculous.
Nothing, however, could be more conformable
to her future schemes. Notwithstanding her
fecniing impartiality, she had no thoughts of
continuing neuter; nor was she at any loss on
xvhom to befxow her protecion. Before the
Regent left London, she supplied him with a
conliderable fum of money, and engaged tofup-
port the King's authority, to the utmot of her
power. **) Mary, by her own condu&, for-
tified this resolution. Enraged at the repeated
instances ofElizabeth's artifice and deceit, which
the had discovered during the progress of the
conference, and derpairing of ever obtaining any

') Good. ii. 315. g33.

Ib) W,d, 313. C5rte, iiip 478,

# Efforts of Mary's adherents against him.

succour from her, she endeavoured to roufeher
own adherents in Scotland to arms, by imputing
such designs to Elizabeth and lMurray, as could
not fail to inspire every Scotchman with indi-
gnation. Murray, fi;e pretended, had agreed
to convey the Prince her son into England; to
surrender to Elizabeth the places of greateRf
strength in the kingdom; and to acknowledge
the dependence of the Scottish upon the Eng-
lifh nation. In return for this, lie was to be
declared the lawful heir of the Crown of Scot-
land; and, at the fame time, the question with
regard to the English succession was to be de-.
cided in favour of the Earl of Hartford, who
had promised to marry one of Cecil's daughters,
An account of these wild and chimerical projeCts
was spread indulirioufly among the Scots. Eli-
zabeth, perceiving it was calculated of purpose
to bring her government into difreputation, la-
boured to defRroy its effeEts, by a counter-pro-
clamation, and became more disgusted than
ever with the Scottish Queen, *)

Efforts of Mary's adherents again.i him.

The Regent, on his return, found the king-

dom in the utmost tranquillity. But the rage
of the Queen's adherents, which had been sus-
pended in expectation that the conference in
England would terminate to heradvantage, was

') Haynes, 500, 503. See Append. No. XXVIII,

# His vigorous conduct breaks her party.

now ready to break out with all the violence of
civil war. They were encouraged, too, by
the appearance of a leader, whose high quality
and pretensions entitled him to great authority
in the nation. This was the Duke of Cbatel-
herault, who had resided for some years in
France, and was now sent over by that court,
with a small supply of money, in hopes that
the presence of the sirs nobleman in the king-
dom would strengthen the Queen's faEtion.
Elizabeth had detained him in -England , for
some months, under various pretences, butwas
obliged at last to susser him to proceed on his
journey. Before his departure, ( Feb. 25. )
Mary invefied him with the high dignity of her
Lieutenant General in Scotland, together with
the fantaftick title of her adopted father.

His vigorous condu& breaks her party.

The Regent did not give him time to form

his party into any regular body. He assembled an
army, with his usual expedition, and marched
to Glasgow. The followers of Argyll and
Huntly, who composed the chief part of the
Queen's faition, lying in very diflant corners
of the kingdom, and many of the Duke's de-
pendants having fallen, or having been taken
in the battle of Langfide, the spirit and strength
:of his adherents was totally broken, and an
accommodation with the Regent was the only
thing which could prevent the deftruaCion of

his estate and vassals. This was ereed with-
out difficulty; and on no unreasonable terms.
The Dule promired to acknowledge the autho-
rity both of the King and of the Regent; and
to claim no jnrifdiition in consequence of the
commilion, which he had received from the
Queen. The Regent bound himself to repeal
the aif which had pas'ed for attainting several
of the Queen's adherents; to restore all who
would submit to the King's government, to the
possession of their estates and honours; and to
hold a Convention, wherein all the differences
between the two parties should be fettled by
mutual content. The Duke gave hostages for
his faithful performance of the treaty; and, in
token of their lincerity, he and Lord Herries
accompanied the Regent to Stirling, and visited
'the young King. The Regent set at liberty
the prisoners taken at Langfide. *)

Argyll and Huntly refused to be included

in this treaty. A secret negotiation was car-
rying on, in England, in favour of the captive
Queen, with so much success, that her affairs
began to wear a better aspet& and her return
into her own kingdom seemed to be an event
not very distant. The French King had lately
obtained such advantages over the Hugonots,
that the extincion of that party appeared to be
inevitable, and France, by recovering domeftick

') Cabbali k, ri CraWf.Mem. 106.

# A proposal in favour of Mary rejected.

tranquillity, would be no longer prevented.
from proteeting her friends in Britain. These
circumrtances not only influenced Argyll and
Huntly , but made so deep an impreflion on the
Duke, that he appeared to be wavering and
irresolute, and plainly discovered that he wish-
ed to evade the accomplishment of the treaty.
The Regent saw the danger of allowing the
Duke to shake himself loose, in this manner,
from his engagements; and instantly formed a
resolution equally bold and politick. He com-
manded his guards to seize Chatelherault in his
own house in Edinburgh, whither he had come
in order to attend the Convention agreed upon,
and, regardless either of his dignity as the
iirfl nobleman in the kingdom, and next heir
to the Crovn, or of the promises of, )nal
fecuriry, on which hie had relied, corn itted
him and Lord Herries prisoners to the castle of
.Edinburgh. ;) A blow so fatal and unexpe&ed
dispirited the party. Argyll submitted to the
King's government, (April I6.) and made his
peace with the Regent on very easy terms;
and HIuntly, being left alone, was at last ob-
liged to lay down his arms.

A proposal in favour of Mary rejeAed.

Soon after, Lord Boyd returned into Scot-
land, ( July a2. ) and brought letters to the

*} CrawSf, Memn. xll Melv. -oz.

# Norfolk's scheme for marrying the Queen of Scots.

Regent , both from the English and ScottifiL
Queens. A Convention was held at Perth, in
order to confider them. Elizabeth's letter con-
tained three different proposals with regard to
mlary; that she fhonld either be restored to the
full polleffion of her former authority ; or be
admitted to reign jointly with the King her fbn ;
or at leall: be allowed to reside in ScotlandO,
in some decent retirement, without any share
in the administration of government. These
overtures were extorted by the importunity of
Fenelon the French Ambaflhdor, and have fomuc
appearance of being favourable to the captive
Queen. They were, however, perfe&-ly suit-
able to Elizabeth's general fyftein with regard
to Scottifli affairs. Among propositions so un-
equal and disproportionate , she easily faow
where the choice would fall. The two former
were rejected; and long delays mufl necessarily
have intervened, and many difficulties have
arisen , before every circumstance relative to
the last could be finally adjusted. *)

Norfolk'5 fTheme for marrying the Queen of Scots.

Mary, in her letter, demanded that her

marriage with Bothwell should be reviewed by
the proper judges, and if found invalid, should
be diflblved by a legal sentence of divorce. This
fatal marriage was the principal source of all

"":s) SpotrW» 330.

thle calamities she had endured two years; a
divorce was the only thing which could repair
the injuries her reputation had suffered by that
Rsep. It was her interest to have proposed it
early; and it is not easy to account for her
long silence with refpeft to this point. Her
particular motive for proposing it, at this time,
began to be so well known, that the demand
was rejeEred by the Convention of estates.
They imputed it not so much to any abhorrence
of Bothwell, as to her eagerness to conclude a
marriage with tie Duke of Norfolk.

This marriage was the object of that secret

negotiation in England, which we have already
mentioned; but, like all those concerted for
the relief of the Queen of Scots, it ended tra-
gicallv. The fertile and projecting genius of
glaitland Jirft conceived this scheme. During
the Conference at York, he communicated it
to the Duke himself , and to the Bishop of
Ross. The former readily closed with a scheme
so flattering to his ambition. Thelatterconfider-
ed it as a probable device for restoring his MifIrefs
to liberty, and replacing her on her throne.
Nor was Mary, with whom Norfolk held a
correspondence by means of his fifler Lady
Scroop, averse from a measure, which would
have restored her to her kingdom with so much
splendour. *) The sudden removal of the Con-

'") Ca -nd, 419, Ha1ynes, 573. State Trials, Z. 73.

# Conceals it from Elizabeth.

ferefice from York to Weftminlfer suspended,
but did not break off this intrigue. Maitland
and Ross were fiilI the Duke's prompters, and
his agents; and many letters and love tokens
were exchanged between him and the Queen of
Scots.

Conceal: it from Eliza beth.

But as he could not hope, that under an

adminiltration so vigilant as Elizabeth's , such
a intrigue could be kept long concealed, he
rttempted to deceive her by the appearance of
openness and candour, an artifice which feldoni
fails of success. He mentioned to her the
rumour which was spread of his marriage with
the Scottish Queen; he complained of it as a
groundless calumny; and difclaitned all thoughts
of that kind, -wirt many exprellions full of con-
tempt, both for Mary's character and dominions.
Jealous as Elizabeth was of every thing rela-
tive to the Queen of Scots, she seems to have
credited there profelions. *) But, inltead of
discontinuing the negotiation, he renewed it
with greater vigour; and admitted into it new
associates. Among these was the Regent of
Scotland. He had given great offence to Nor-
folk, by his publick accusation of the Queen, in
breach of the concert into which he had enter-
ed at York. He was then ready to return into

") HaynuM, 574. Stato Trials, I, 79. Sia

# Gains the consent of the English nobles.

Scotland. The influence of the Duke,. in-the
North of England, was great. The Earls of
Northumberland and XVetmorland , the nmoil
powerful noblemen in that part of the kingdoim,
threatened to revenge upon the Regent the in-
juries which he had done his Sovereign. In
order to secure his safe retreat, he addrefled
]himfelfto Norfolk, and after some apology for
his past conduct, he insinuated that the Duke's
scheme of marrying the Queen his filler was
no less acceptable to him , than beneficial to
bothkingdoms; and that he would concur with
the utinoft. rdour in promoting so desirable an
event. '*) Norfolk heard him with the credu-
lity natural to those who are passionately bent
npon any design. He wrote to the two Earls
to delist from any hostile attempt against Mlur-
iay , and to chat lie owed his paftage through
the Northern counties without disturbance.

Gains the consent of the Euglifli nobles.

Encouraged by his success in gaining the

Regent, he next attempted to draw the English
nobles to approve his design. The nation be-
gan to derpair of Elizabeth's marrying. Her
jealousy kept the queflion with regard to the
right of fuccefiion undecided. The memory of
the civil wars, which had desolated England
for more than a century, on account of the

dif-
') Anders, iii. .,

disputed titles of the houses of York and Lan-
cafler, was flill recent. Alrmoft the whole
ancient nobility had perished, and the nation
itself had been brought to the brink of deftruc-
tion in that unhappy contest. The Scottish
Queen, though her right of succession was ge-
nerally held to be undoubted, might meet with
formidable competitors. She might marry a so-
reign and a Popish Prince, and bring both li-
berty and religion into danger. But, by mar-
rying her to an Englishman, a zealous Protest-
ant, the nioft powerful and molt universally
beloved of all the nobles, an efleftual remedy
seemed to be provided against all these evils.
The greater part of the Peers, either direfly
or tacitly, approved of it, as a faiutary projet.
The Earls of Arundel, Pembroke, Leicester,
and Lord Lnmley , fibfcribed a letter to the
Scottish Queen, written with Leiceieer's hand,
in which ,they warmly recommended the match,
but infilled, by way of preliminary, on Mary's
promise, that fhle should attempt nothing, in
consequence of her pretensions to the English
Crown, prejudicial to Elizabeth, or to her pof-
terity; that she should consent to a league, of-
fenfive, and defensive, between the two king-
doms; that she should confirm the present
effablifhment of religion in Scotland; and re-
ceive into favour such of her fubjeEts as had
appeared in arms againit her. Upon heragreeing
to the marriage, and ratifying these articlers

Hist. of Scot,, Vci. 1. P D

they engaged that the English nobles would
not only concur in restoring her immediately
to her own throne, but in securing to her that
if England in reversion. Mary readily consent-
ed to all these proposals, except the second,
with regard to which she demanded some time
for consulting her ancient ally the French
King. -)

The whole of this negotiation was indus-

trioufly concealed from Elizabeth. Herjealoufy
of the Scottish Queen was well known, nor
could it be expeted that she would willingly
come into a measure, which tended so visibly
to save the reputation, and to increase the
power of her rival. But, in a matter of so
much consequence to the nation, the taking a
few steps without her knowledge could scarce
be reckoned criminal; and while every person
concerned, even Mlary and Norfolk thenifelves,
declared that nothing should be concluded with
out obtaining her consent, the duty and alle-
giance of fubjeets seemed to be fully preserved.
The greater part of the nobles regarded the
matter in this light. Those who conducted the
intrigue, had farther and more dangerous views.
They saw the advantages which Mary procured
by this treaty, to be present and certain; and
the execution of the promises which she came
under., to be distant and uncertain. They had

') Anderr. vol. iii. 51. Camrd, 420.

early communicated their scheme to the Kings
of France and Spain, and obtained their ap-
probation. :) A treaty concerning which
they consulted foreign Princes, while they
concealed it from their own Sovereign, could
not be deemed innocent. They hoped, how-
ever, that the union of so many nobles would
render it necefl'ry for Elizabeth to comply;
they .lattered themselves that a combination so
strong would be altogether irresistible, and such
was their confidence of success, that when a
plan was concerted, in the North of England,
for rescuing Mary out of the hands of her keep-
ers, Norfolk, who was afraid that if she re-
covered her liberty, her fentiinents in his favour
might change, fecd all his interest to dissuade
the conspirators from attempting it. ;')

In this situation did the affair remain, when

Lord Boyd arrived from England; and, betides
the letters which he produced publickly, brought
others in cyphers from Norfolk and Throgmor-
ton to the Regent, and to Maitland. These
were full of the most sanguine hopes. -The
whole nobles of England concurred, said they,
in favouring the design. Every preliminary was
adjusted; nor was it poflible that a scheme so
deep laid, condu&fed with so much art, and
supported both by power and by numbers, could

Pp a

*) Anderr, vol. iii. 63.
'::) Camrd. q40.

rifcarry, or be defeated in the execution.
Nothing now xwas wanting, but the concluding
ceremony. It depended on the Regent to haften
that, by procuring a sentence of divorce, which
would remove the only obstacle that flood in
the way. This was expe&ed of him, in con-
sequence of his prom ire to Norfolk; and if he
regarded either his interest or his fame, or even
his safety, he would not fail to fulfil these en-
gagements. *)

But the Regent was now in very different

circumstances from thore which had formerly
induced himi to affeEt an approbation of Nor-
folk's fcllemes. He fax that the downfal of
his own power must be the first consequence of
the Duke's success. And if the Queen, who
confidered him as the chief author of all her
misfortunes, should recover her ancient autho-
rity, he could never expet favour, nor scarce
hope for impunity. No wonder he declined a
itep so fatal to himself, 'and which would have
efrablifried the grandeur of another on the ruins
of his own. This refusal occasioned a delay.
But, as every other circumstance was fettled,
the Bishop of Ross, in name of his Mistress,
and the Duke, in person, declared, in pretence
of the French Ambafildor, their mutual consent
to the marriage, and a contract to this purpose
*' laynes 5, o. Spoti., 30. See Appendix , vn.

XXIX.

# Elizabeth discovers the Duke's design, and defeats it.

was signed, and intrufled to the keeping of
the Amnb:i'atador. *)

Elizabehi discovers tie Duke's derign, anl: deceats it.

The intrigue was now in so many hands,

that it could nor long remain a secret. It began
to be wil'pered at court; and Elizabeth calling
the Duke into her presence, (Aug. i3.) exprePfedc
the utmost indignation at his coiidlnt, and
charged hin to lay alide all tloughts of prose-
cuting such a dangerous design. Soon after
Leicester, who perhaps had countenanced the
projeft with no other intention, revealed the
whole circumfanrces of it to the Queen. Pern-
broke, Arundel, ulnley, and Throgmorton were
confined and examined. Mlary was watched
more narrowly than ever; and HaftingsEarl of
Huntingdon, who pretended to dispute with the
Scottish Queen her right to the flccefl'ion, being
joined in comminion with Slhrewfbur,y render-
ed her imprisonment more intolerable, by the
excess of his vigilance and rigour. ;:;) TheScot-
tifh Regent, threatened with Elizabeth's dif-
pleasure, meanly betrayed the Duke; put his
letters into her hands; and furnished all the in-
telligence in his povwer. '*:".) The Duke him-

') C:arte , vol. .ii, 8S6.

~') H;.ynes, ', 5e6. 53c(. 53 2.
'") Se Appecni.\ , No. :;.K

# Maitland imprisoned by the Regent.

self retired first to Ioward-houfe, and then,
in contempt of the summons to appear before
the Privy Council, fled to his feat in Norfolk.
Intimidated by the imprisonment of his aflbciates;
coldly received by his friends in that county;
unprepared for a rebellion; and unwilling
perhaps to rebel; he hesitated for some days,
and at laif obeyed a second call, and repaired
to Vintdfor. He was first kept as a prisoner in
a private house, (Oct. 3.) and then sent to the
Tower. After being confined there upwards
of nine months, he was released upon his
humble fubmilion to Elizabeth, giving her a pro-
mise, on his allegiance, to hold no farther cor-
refpondence with the Scottish Queen. ') During
the progress of Norfolk's negotiations , the
Queen's partisans in Scotland , who made no
doubt of their ifi'uing in her restoration to the
throne, with an increase of authority, were
wonderfully elevated.

Maitiand inlm rironed by the Regent.

MVaitland was the foul of that party, and

the person wvhofe ativity and ability the Regent
chiefly dreaded. He had laid the plan of that
intrigue which had kindled such combustion in
England. He continued to foment the spirit of
dilfraffeion in Scotland, and had seduced from
the Regent Lord Home, Kirkaldy, and fevera!

" )Iaynes, 5,5. 507:

# A rebellion against Elizabeth by Mary's adherents.

of his former associates. While he enjoved li-
berty, the Regent could not reckon his own
power secure. For this reason he employed
Captain Crawfurd, one of his creatures, to ac-
cufe him of being accessory to the murder of
the King; and under that pretence carried hlir
a prisoner to Edinburgh. He would soon have
been brought to trial, but was saved by the
'riendlfhip of Kirkaldy, Governor of the catle,
who , by pretending a warrant for that purpose
from the Regent, got him out of the hands of
the person to whose care he was committed,
and conduCted him into the callle; which, fromt
that time, was entirely under Mlaitland's com-
mand. The loss of a place of so much impor-
tance, and the defection of a man so eminent
for military skill as Kirkaldy , brought the Re-
gent into iome dilfeputatioin, for whiclL, how-
ever, the success of his ally Elizabeth abun-
dantly compensated.

A rebellion ig:nill 7 Elizabeth by Mary's adherents.

The intrigue carried on for restoring the

Scottiflh Queen to liberty having been discover-
ed, and disappointed, an attempt was made, to
the fame purpose, by force of arms; but with
no better success. The Earls ofNorthumberland
and Westmorland, though little dilfiuiigifiled by
their personal merit, were two of the most an-
cient and powerful of the English Peers. Their
eflates in the northern counties vcrc great, and

they pofi'cEcd that influence over the inhabit-
ants, which was hereditary in the popular and
martial families of Percy and of Nevil. They
were both attached to the Popifi' religion, and
discontented with the court, where new men
and a new fyflem prevailed. Ever since Mary's
arrival in England, they had warmly espoused
her intereil; and zeal for Popery, opposition to
the court, and commiseration of her futlerings,
had engaged them in different plots for her re-
lief. Notwithstanding the vigilance of her keep-
ers, they held a close correlpondence with her,
and communicated to her all their designs. *)
They were privy to Norfolk's schemes; but the
caution with which he proceeded did not suit
their ardour and impetuosity. The liberty of
the Scottish Queen was not their sole object.
They aimed at bringing about a change in the
religion, and a revolution in the government of
the kingdom. For this reason, they solicited
the aid of the King of Spain, the avowed and
zealous patron of Popery in that age. Nothing
could be more delightful to the reflefs spirit
of Philip, or more neccffary towards facili-
tating his fclenies in the Netherlands, than the
involving Elngland in the confusion and miseries
of a civil wear. The Duke ofAlva, by his di-
re&ion, encouraged the two Earls, and pro-
mifed, so soon as they either took the field

w'ith
K") HNyuet. 595. Mindill,, q4. 62,'S-c.

# Defeated.

with their forces, or furprired any place of
strength, or rescued the Queen of Scots, that
he would supply them both with money and a
strong body of troops. LaMothe, the Governor
of Dunkirk, in the disguise of a sailor, founded
the ports where it would be most proper toland.
And Chiapini Vitelli, one of Alva's ablest offi-
cers, was dispatched into England,onpretence
of fettling some commercial differences betwxeen
the two nations; but in reality, that the rebels
might be sure of a leader of experience, asfoon
as they ventured to take arms. *)

Defeated,

The conduA of this negotiation occasioned

many meetings and meffiges between the two
Earls. Elizabeth was informed of there; and
though she fufpeted nothing of their real design,
she concluded that they were among the num-
ber of Norfolk's confidents. They were fnm-
moned, for this reason, to repair to court.
Conscious of guilt, and afraid of discovery, they
delayed giving obedience. A second, and
more peremptory order was issued. This they
could not decline, without shaking off theiral-
legiance. And as no time was left for deli-
beration, they instantly ereted (Nov. p.) their
standard against their Sovereign. The reefta-
blifhing the Catholick religion; the fettling the

') Carte, vol. iii. 439, 490. Canid. 42r.
Hill, of Scotl. Vol. L Qq

order of succession to the Crown; the defence
of the ancient nobility; were the motives they
alleged to juflify their rebellion. *) Many of
the lowerpeople flocked to them with such arms
as they could procure; and had the capacity of
the leaders been, in any degree, equal to the
enterprise, it must have soon grown to be ex,
tremne!y formidable. Elizabeth afted with pru~
de;ce and vigour; and was served by her sub-
jects with fidelity and ardour. On the firftrn-
mo(r of an infurreftion, Mary was removed to
,Coventry, a place of strength, which could not
be taken without a regularfiege; a detachment
of the rebe!s, which was sent to rescue her, re-
turned without success. Troops were assembled
in different parts of the kingdom; as they ad-
vanced, the malecontents retired. In their re-
treat their numbers dwindled away, and their
spirits funk. Despair and uncertainty whither
to direst theirflight, kept together for some time
a small body of them among the mountains of
Northumberland, but they were at lenght ob-
liged to disperse, and the chiefs took refuge
among the Scottish borderers. The two Earls,
together with the Counters of Northumberland,
wandering for some days in the waftes of Lid-
*difdale, were plundered by the banditti, ex-
posed to the rigour of the season, and left de-
ftitute of the neceiQ'aries of life. Westmorland

') Strypo, vol» i. 5$47

# Church affairs.

was concealed by Scot of Buccleugh and Ker
of Ferniherfl, and afterwards conveyed into the
Netherlands. Northumberland was seized by
the Regent, who had marched with some troops
towards the borders, to prevent any imprefiion
the rebels might maake on those mutinous pro-
vinces. :)

Church affairs.

Arnmdt so many surprising events, the as-

fairs of the church, for two years, have almost
escaped our notice. Its General AfTemblies
were held regularly; but no bulinefs of macli
iLmportance employed their attention. As the
nltrnber of the Protellant clergy daily increased,
the d'iciency of the finds, set apart for their
fubtil-ence, becatme greater. Many efforts were
nJade towards recocvirng the ancient patrinony
et tne church, or at leall of so much of it as
wias pofllffed by the Popish incumbents, a race
of men, who were, now, not only ufelels, but
burdensome to the nation. But though the
r.anner in which the Regent received their ad-
dresses and complaints, was very diTerentfrona
that to which they bad been accuftotned, no es-
festal remedy was provided; and while they
surfered intolerable oppreflion, and groaneS

Qq a
s) Cabbala, 171. Cumd, 43S«

# Elizabeth resolves to give up Mary to the Regent.

under extreme poverty, fair words, and liberal
promires were all they were able to obtain. *)

Elizabeth refolvcs to give up IMary to the Regent.

Elizabeth now began to be weary of keep-

ing such a dangerous prisoner as the Scottish
Queen. During the sorner year, the tran-
quillity of her government had been diflurbed,
first by a secret combination of some of her
nobles, then by the rebellion of others; and
she often declared, not without reason, that
Alary was the hidden cause of both. Many of
her own fubjets favoured, or pitied the cap-.
tive Queen; the Roman Catholick Princes on
the continent were warmly interested in her
taufe. The detaining her any longer in Eng-
land, she foresaw, would be made the pretext
or occasion of perpetual cabals and infurreftions
among the former; and might expose her to
the hostile attempts of the latter. She resolved,
therefore, to give up Mary into the hands of
the Regent, whose security, no less than her
own, depended on preventing her from re-
ascending the throne. The negotiation for this
purpose was carried some length, when it was
discovered by the vigilance of the Bishop of
Ross, who, together with the French andSpa-
nifh Ambassadors, remonfirated against thein-
famy of such an acion, and repreferted the

*) COkI, vnl. ii. So 0 <**

# But he is murdered.

farrenldering the Queen to her rebellious sub-
jeets to be the fame thing, as if Elizabeth
should by her own authority, condemn her to
initant death. This procured a delay; nnd the
murder of the Regent prevented the revival of
that design. :)

But be is murdered.

Hamilton of Bothwellhaugh was the perron

who committed this barbarous action. He had
been condemned to death soon after the battle
of Langfde, as we have already related, and
o'wed his life to the Regent's clemency. Bue
part of his estate had been befrowed upon one
of the Regent's farourites, who seized his house,
and turned out his wife naked, in a cold night,
into the open fields, where, before next mor-
ning, she became furiously mad, This injury
made a deeper impretilon on him than the be-
nefit he had received, and from that moment
he vowed to be revenged upon the Regent.
Party-rage strengthened and inflamed his private
resentment. His kinsmen the HIamiltons ap-
plauded the enterprise. The maxims of that
age justified the most desperate conrfe he could
take to obtain vengeance. He followed the
Regent for some time, and watched for an op-
portunity to strike the blow. He resolved at
lant to wait till his enemy should arrive atLin-

') Cat,% vol. iii. 491. Anlarr. v-l, iii. 4-

lithgow, through which he was to pass in hia
way froin Stirling to Edinburgh. He took his
stand in a weoden gallery, which had a windoxw
towards the street; spread a feather-bed on the
floor, to hinder the noise of his feet from being
heard; hung up a black cloth behind him, that
his fliado w mii!ht not be observed from without;
and after all this preparation, calmly expefed
the Regent's approach , who had lodged during
the night ir a house not far difant. Somein-
diftinit information of the danger which threaten-
ed hinm lhad been conveyed to the Regent, and
ne paid so amuch regard to it, that he rerolved
to return by the fame gate through which he
had entered, and to fetch a comnpafs round the
town. But as the crowd about the gate wsas
great, and lie himself unacquainted with fear,
he proceeded dire6tly along the fireet; and the
throng of the people obliging him to move very
lowvly, gave the affafiin time to take so true
an aim, that he shot him with a single bullet
through the lower part of his belly, and killed
the horse of a gentleman who rode on his other
lide. lis followers inflantly endeavoured to
break into the house whence the blow had
come, but they found the door strongly bar-
ricaded; and before it could he forced open,
Hamilton had mounted a fleet horse, which
stood ready for him at a back-paiiage, and was
got far beyond their reach. The Regent died
the fame night of his wound. ';)

'5 !3icliino. 383. r'ri s Mem. rr.d.i

# His character.

Ills character.

There is no person, in that age, about whom

hliftorians have been more divided, or vwhofe
charater has been drawn with such oppollte
colours. Personal intrepidity, military fCill,
sagacity and vigour in the adminifiration of civii
affairs, are virtues, which even his enemiesal-
low him to have possessed in an eminent degree.
-lis moral qualities are more dubious, and ought
neither to be praised, nor censured, without
great reserve, and many difin&ioons. In afierce
age, he was capable of using vi&tory with hu-
manity, and of treating the vanquished with
moderation. A patron oflearniing, which, among
martial nobles, was either unknown, or despised.
Zealous for religion, to a degree, which diflin-
,guifhed hirn, even at a time when profeleions
of that kind were not uncommon. His confi-
dence in his friends was extreme, and inferior
only to his liberality towards them, which knew
no bounds. A difinterefled paflion for the li-
berty of his country, prompted him to oppose
the pernicious fyrcem, which the Princes of
Lorrain had obliged the Queen -mother to pur-
sue. On Mary's return into Scotland, he served
her with a zeal and affetion, to which lie fa-
crificed the friendship of those who were nmot
attached to his person. But, on the otherhand,
iis ambition was immoderate; and events hap-
pened that opened to him vast projefs, which
allured his enterprising genius, and led him to

ations inconsistent with the duty of a subjet.
His treatment of the Queen, to vhofe bounty
.be was so much indebted, was unbrotherlyand
ungrateful. The dependence on Elizabeth, un-
der which lhe brought Scotland, was disgrace-
ful to the nation. He deceived and betrayed
Norfolk with a baseness unworthy of a man of
honour. His elevation to such unexpe&ed di-
gniry inspired him with new passions, with
haughtiness and reserve; and instead ofhisna-
tural manner, which was blunt and open, he
.af'feced the arts of dissimulation and refinement.
Fond, towards the end of his life, of flattery,
and impatient of advice, his creatures, by
fooliing his vanity, led him astray, while his
ancient friends flood at a dilfance, and predi&ed
his approaching fall. But, amidst the turbulence
and confusion of that facious period, he dif-
pensed justice with so much impartiality, he
repreiTed the licentious borderers with so much
courage, and established such uncommon order
and tranquillity in the country, that his admi-
niflration was extremely popular, and he was
long and affe&ionately remembered among, the
conmmons, by the name of the Good Regent.

END Of THE IIRST VOLUME.
