THE
H I S T O R Y

OF
A M E R I C A.

By WILLIAM ROBERTSON, D.D.
RItlCIPAL or TuB VNIVY111TY O0 YDINIWIUIGON# NTOlIOOGXAPnB

TO 3IS MAJ1STY POR *COTLAND, AND MY.LXI Or TtSZ

LOYAL ACAOXIY or llsTOtr AT MA*RID.
IN THREE VOLUMES.

VO L. III.
THE SEVENTH EDITION.

LONDON:
PtRITID FOI A. TRAHAIA, AND T. CADILLJ

AND L. *ALPOVU, IDINBUIOH:
And Sold by T. CADILL Jun. and W. DAvrls

(Succeflb to Mr. CADILL,) in thi Strnd.

1796.
(DrM,.)

# BOOK VI.

THE
HISTORY

OF
A M E R I CA.

BOO K VI.
FOM the time that Nugnez de Balboa dco- BOO i

vered the great Southern Ocean, and received -,-

the firfl obscure hints concerning the opulent coun- Stk5*o
tries with which it might open a communication, dioverin
the wilhes and schemes of every enterprising person
in the colonies of Darien and Panama were turned
towards the wealth of those unknown regions. In
an age when the spirit of adventure was so ardent
and vigorous, that large fortunes were waited, and
the most alarming dangers braved, in pursuit of
discoveries merely possible, the faintest ray of hope
was followed with an eager expecation, and the
slightest information was sufficient to inspire such
perfet confidence, as conduted men to the most
arduous undertakings'.

AccoRDINGLY, several armaments were fitted unLtccf.

ful for fonM
out in order to explore and take poffcfiion of the tim.

ee NOTE 1.
VOL. lm. countries

B o0 K countries to the eatl of Panama, but under the

VI.
I-_- conduct of leaders whose talents and resources
1523. were unequal to the attemptb. As the excursions

of those adventurers did not extend beyond the
limits of the province to which the Spaniards have
given the name of Tierra Firme, a mountainous
region covered with woods, thinly inhabited, and
extremely unhealthy, they returned with dismal
accounts concerning the diftrefles to which they
had been exposed, and the unpromising afpeEt of
the places which they had visited. Damped by
these tidings, the rage for discovery in that direc-
tion abatedi and it became the general opinion,
that Balboa had founded visionary hopes, on the
tale of an ignorant Indian, ill understood, or cal-
culated to deceive.

Undertaken BUT there were three persons fettled in Panama,
hy Pizarro, on whom the circumstances which deterred others.
Almragro,
and Luque. made to little impression, that at the very moment

154l+ when all confidered Balboa's expecations ofdifco-

vering a rich country, by fleering towards the calt,
as chimerical, they resolved to attempt the execu-
tion of his scheme. The names of those extraor.
dinary men were Francisco Pizarro, Diego de
Almagro, and Hernando Luque. Pizarro was
the natural son of a gentleman of an honourable
family by a very low woman, and, according to
the cruel fate which often attends the offspring of
unlawful love, had been so totally neglected in his

k Calancha Coronica, p. Ioo.

youth

youth by the author of his birth, that he seems B O°° K
to have destined him never to rife beyond the con- --.z
dition of his mother. In consequence of this unge-
nerous idea, he set him, when bordering on man-
hood, to keep hogs. But the aspiring mind of
young Pizarro disdaining that ignoble occupation,
he abruptly abandoned his charge, enlisted as a fol-
dier, and, after serving some years in Italy; em-
barked for America, which, by opening such a
boundless range to active talents, allured every
adventurer whose fortune was not equal to his am-
bitious thoughts. There Pizarro early distinguish-
ed himself. With a temper of mind no less daring
than the constitution of his body was robust, he
was foremost in every danger, patient under the
greatest hardships, and unfubdued by any fatigue.
Though so illiterate that he could not even read,
he was soon confidered as a man formed to com-
mand. Every operation committed to his conduct
proved filccefsful, as, by a happy but rare conjunc-
tion, he united perseverance with ardour, and was
as cautious in executing, as he was bold in forming
his plans. By engaging early in ative life, with-
out any resource but his own talents and industry,
and by depending on himself alone in his struggles
to emerge from obscurity, he acquired such a
thorough knowledge of affairs, and of men, that
he was fitted to assume a fiperior part in condut-
ing the former, and in governing the latter'.

' Herrera, dec. i & a, palim. dec.. . ib. vi. c. o07. Go-
mara Hist. c. a14. Zarate, lib. iv. c. 9.

X 2 ALMAORO

B o 0 K ALMAGRO had as little to boast of his decent as
, -.-.. Pizarro. The one was a bastard, the other a found-

154. ling. Bred, like his companion, in the camp, he

yielded not to him in any of the soldierly qualities
of intrepid valour, indefatigable acivity, or infur-
mountable conitancy in enduring the hardships in-
separable from military service in the New World.
But in Almagro there virtues were accompanied
with the openness, generosity, and candour, natural
to men whose profession is arms; in Pizarro, they
were united with the address, the craft, and the
dissimulation of a politician, with the art of con-
cealing his own purposes, and with sagacity to pe-
netrate into those of other men.

HERNANDO DE LUQUE was an ecclefiallic, who

aEted both as priest and schoolmaster at Panama,
and, by means which the cotemporary writers
have not described, had amassed riches that in-
ipired him with thoughts of rising to greater emi-

nence.

I'trms as SUCH were the men defined to overturn one of
/'heir afrloci-
,:in. the most extensive empires on the face of the earth.

Their confederacy for this purpose was authorised
by Pedrarias, the governor of Panama. Each en-
gaged to employ his whole fortune in the adven-
ture. Pizarro, the leaf wealthy of the three, as
he could not throw so large a fum as his associates
into the common stock, engaged to take the de.
partment of grcateit fatigue and danger, and to

command

command in person the armament which was to B oo oK

VI.

go first upon discovery. Almagro offired to con- . -=
duct the supplies of provisions and reinforcements 's5
of troops, of which Pizarro might stand in need.
Luque was to remain at Panama to negociate with
the governor, and superintend whatever was carry-
ing on for the general interest. As the spirit of
enthusiasm uniformly accompanied that of adven-
ture in the New World, and by that strange union
both acquired an increase of force, this confede-
racy, formed by ambition and avarice, was con-
firmed by the most solemn act of religion. Luque
celebrated mass, divided a consecrated host into
three, and reserving one part to himself, gave the
other two to his aflociates, of which they partook;
and thus, in the name of the Prince of Peace, ra-
tified a contraf of which plunder and bloodshed
were the objects.d

THE attempt was begun with a force more suited Their first

to the humble condition of the three associates, attelpt.
than to the greatness of the enterprise in which they
were engaged, JPizarro set fail from Panama with Nov. 4.
a single vessel, of small burden, and a hundred and
twelve men. But in that age, so little were the
Spaniards acquainted with the peculiarities of cli-
mate in America, that the time which Pizarro
chore for his departure was the most improper in
the whole year; the periodical winds, which were
then set in, being directly adverse to the course

Ilerrcra, d40. 3. lib .
v . . 13. Zarate, lib.i. c. i.

B 3 whichl

B o O K which he purposed to fleer . After beating about

'-_t for seventy days, with much danger and inceflant
525.- fatigue, Pizarro's progress towards the south-east

was not greater than what a skilful navigator will
now make in as many hours. He touched at fe-
veral places on the coast of Tierra Firma, but
found every where the fame uninviting country
which former adventurers had described; the low
grounds converted into swamps by an overflowing
of rivers; the higher, covered with impervious
woods; few inhabitants, and those fierce and ho-
stile. Famine, fatigue, frequent rencounters with
the natives, and above all, the distempers of a
moist, sultry climate, combined in wafting his

Attended slender band of followers. The undaunted refo-
with'1 ltllution of their leader continued, however, for some

time, to sustain their spirits, although no sign had
yet appeared of discovering those golden regions to
which he had pronifed to condut them. At
length he was obliged to abandon that inhospitable
coast, and retire to Chuchama, opposite to the
pearl islands, where he hoped to receive a supply
of provisions and troops from Panama.

BUT Almagro having failed from that port with

seventy men, stood directly towards that part of
the continent where he hoped to meet with his as-
fociate. Not finding him there, he landed his fol-
diers, who, in searching for their companions, un-
derwent the fame diftrefers, and were exposed to the

Hcrrers, dec. 4. lib.ii. c. 8. Xerez, p. 179.

satrnc

fame dangers, which had driven them out of the B o o v
country. Repulsed at length by the Indians in a ._.
sharp conflit, in which their leader loft one of his 5'5s.
eyes by the wound of an arrow, they likewise were
compelled to reimbark. Chance led them to the
place of Pizarro's retreat, where they found tome
consolation in recounting to each other their ad-
ventures, and comparing their sufferings. As Al- June 4.
magro had advanced as far as the river St. Juan,
in the province of Popayan, where both the coun-
try and inhabitants appeared with a more promising
afpe&, that dawn of better fortune was sufficient to
determine such sanguine projetors not to abandon
their scheme, notwithstanding all that they had
suffered in prosecuting it'.

ALMAGRO repaired to Panama, in hopes of re- i526.

cruiting their shattered troops. But what he and fuythe
Pizarro had suffered, gave his countrymen such an sdtr'a
unfavourable idea of the service, that it was with
difficulty he could levy fourscore men . Feeble as
this reinforcement was, Almagro took the command
of it, and having joined Pizarro, they did not he-
fitate about resuming their operations. After a
long series ofdifafters and disappointments, not in-
ferior to those which they had already experienced,
part of the armament reached the Bay of St. Mat-
thew, on the coast of Quito, and landing at Taca-
mez, to the south of the river of Emeraulds, they

' Herrera, dec. 3. lib. viii. c. I , Is. See NOTE II.
s Zarte, lib.i. c. i.

B 4 beheld

B OOK beheld a country more champaign and fertile

than any they had yet discovered in the Southern
z*S6. Ocean, the natives clad in garments of woollen or

cotton tfuff, and adorned with several trinkets of
gold and filer.

BUT, notwithstanding those favourable appear-

ances, magnified beyond the truth, both by the
vanity of the persons who brought the report from
Tacamez, and by the fond imagination of those
who listened to them, Pizarro and Almagro durst
not venture to invade a country so populous with
a handful of men enfeebled by fatigue and difeales.
They retired to the small island of Gallo, where
Pizarro remained with part of the troops, and his
associate returned to Panama, in hopes of bringing
such a reinforcement as might enable them to take
poffeilon of the opulent territories, whose existence
seemed to be no longer doubtful .

Pizarro rc- BUT some of the adventurers, less enterprising,
<.ald by the
governorof or less hardy than their leaders, having secretly
Panama. conveyed lamentable accounts of their sufferings

and loftes to their friends at Panama, Almagro met
with an unfavourable reception from Pedro de los
Rios, who had succeeded Pedrarias in the go-
vernment of that settlement. After weighing the
matter with that cold cconomical prudence which
appears the first of all virtues to persons whose li-
mited faculties are incapable of conceiving or cxc-

X Xerez, 181. Hcrrcra, dec. 3. lib; viii. c. 13.

cuting

cuting great designs, he concluded an expedition, B o Oa
attended with such certain waste of men, to be ib -
detrimental to an infant and feeble colony, that he 5s6
not only prohibited the raising of new levies; but
dispatched a vessel to bring home Pizarro and his
companions from the ifand of Gallo. Almagro
and Luque, though deeply asseted with those
measures, which they could not prevent, and durst
not oppose, found means of communicating their
sentiments privately to Pizarro, and exhorted him
not to relinquilh an enterprise that was the founda-
tion of all their hopes, and the only means of re-
establishing their reputation and fortune, which
were both on the decline. Pizarro's mind, bent
with inflexible obstinacy on all its purposes, needed
no incentive to persist in the scheme. He pe- Pcr tru h
remptorily refused to obey the governor of Pana- hl dc4iJ
ma's orders, and employed all his address and elo-
quence in persuading his men not to abandon him.
But the incredible calamities to which they had
been exposed were fill so recent in their memories,
and the thoughts of revisiting their families and
friends after a long absence, rushed with such joy
into their minds, that when Pizarro drew a line
upon the fan4 with his sword, permitting such as
wished to return home to pass over it, only thir-
teen of all the daring veterans in his service had
resolution to remain with their commander'.

Herrera, dec. 3. lib. x. c. 2, 3. Zarate, lib. i. c. z.
Xcicz, 81. Gomara Hist . c. o1.

Tat1s

B 0 0 K THIS small, but determined band, whose names

VI
_.- the Spanilh historians record with deserved praise,
1526. as the persons to whose persevering fortitude their

country is indebted for the most valuable of all its
American possessions, fixed their residence in the
island of Gorgona. This, as it was farther re-
moved from the coast than Gallo, and uninhabited,
they confidered as a more secure retreat, where,
unmolested, they might wait for supplies from Pa-
nama, which they trusted that the activity of their
affbciates would be able toprocure. Almagro and
L uque were not inattentive or cold solicitors, and
their incessant importunity was seconded by the
general voice of the colony, which exclaimed
loudly againit the infamy of exposing brave men,
engaged in the public service, and chargeable with
no error but what flowed from an excess of zeal
and courage, to perish like the most odious cri-
minals in a desert island. Overcome by those
entreaties and expoitulations, the governor at last
consented to fend a small vessel to their relief. But
that he might not seem to encourage Pizarro to any
new enterprise, he would not permit one landman
to embark on board of it.

ila,!nlrii By this time, Pizarro and his companions had
, ,u"iuCd. remained five months in an island, infamous for

the most unhealthy climate in that region of Ame-
rica'. During all this period, their eyes were
turned towards Panama, in hopes of succour from

k See NOTE III.

their

their countrymen; but worn out at length with B o o
fruitless expetationj, and dispirited with suffering . '
hardihips of which they saw no end, they, in de- *5j6.
fpair, came to a refoludon of committing them-
selves to the ocean on a float, rather than continue
in that deteffable abode. But, on the arrival of
the vessel from Panama, they were transported with
such joy, that all their sufferings were forgotten.
Their hopes revived, and, with a rapid transition,
not unnatural among men accustomed by their
mode of life to sudden viciflitudes of fortune; high
confidence succeeding to extreme deje&ion, Pizarro
easily induced not only his own followers, but the
crew of the vessel from Panama, to resume his for-
mer scheme with fresh ardour. Instead of return-
ing to Panama, they flood towards the south-east,
and more fortunate in this than in any of their pail
efforts, they, on the twentieth day after their de-
parture from Gorgona, discovered the coast of
Peru. After touching at several villages near the Dicovn,
shore, which they found to be no wife inviting, they P"ru
landed at Tumbez, a place of rome note, about
three degrees south of the line, diltinguilhed for its
flately temple, and a palace of the Incas or fove-
reigns of the country'. There the Spaniards
feasted their eyes with the first view of the opu-
lence and civilization of the Peruvian empire,
They beheld a country fully peopled, and culti-
vated with an appearance of regular industry; the
natives decently clothed, and poielffed of ingenuity

Calancha, p. o13.

so

*

B o o K so far furpafling the other inhabitants of the New

v' _ World, as to have the use of tame donieftic ani-
JSz6, mals. But what chiefly attrated their notice, was

such a show of gold and flver, not only in the or-
naments of their persons and temples, but in fe-
veral vessels and utensils for common use, formed
of those precious metals, as left no room to doubt
that they abounded with profusion in the country.
Pizarro and his companions seemed now to have
attained to the completion of their most sanguine
hopes, and fancied that all their wilhes and dreams
of rich domains, and inexhauRible treasures, would
soon be realized,

Returns to BUT with the fender force then under his cornm
r*in" mand, Pizarro could only view the rich country of

which he hoped hereafter to obtain poffeflion. He
ranged, however, for some time along the coast,
maintaining every where a peaceable intercouref
with the natives, no less aftonifled at their new
visitants, than the Spaniards were with the uniform
appearance of opulence and cultivation which they
t57.. beheld. Having explored the country as far as

was requisite to ascertain the importance of the dif-
covery, Pizarro procured from the inhabitants some
of their L!amas or tame cattle, to which the Spa.
niards gave the name of sheep, some veilels of gold
and silver, as well as some specimens of their other
works of ingenuity, and two young men, whom
he proposed to inftruef in the Castilian language,
that they might serve as interpreters in the expedi-

tion

tion which he meditated. With there he arrived a o o i
at Panama, towards.the close of the third year fom .v.L
the time of his departure thence ". No adventurer 57.
of the age fuffcred hard/hips or encountered dan-
gers which equal those to which he.was exposed
during this long period. The patience with which
he endured the one, and the fortitude with which
he surmounted the other, exceed whatever is re-
corded in-the history of the New World, where so
many romantic displays of those virtues occur,

NEITHER the splendid relation that Pizarro gave is,:.

of the incredible opulence of the country which he fches
had discovered, nor his bitter complaints on ac- cm.
count of that unseasonable recal of his forces, which
had put it out of his power to attempt making any
settlement there, could move the governor of Pa-
nama to swerve from his former plan of condut.
He till contended, that the colony was not in a
condition to invade such a mighty empire, and re-
fused to authorire an expedition which he foresaw
would be so alluring that it might ruin the province
in which he presided, by an effort beyond its
strength. His coldness, however, did not in any
degree abate the ardour of the three associates; but
they perceived that they could not carry their
scheme into execution without the countenance of
superior authority, and mult solicit their sovereign

m Herrera, dec. . lib. x . . 3-6. dec. 4 lib ii. c. 7, 8.

Vega, a. lib.i. c. lo--4. Zarate, lib.i. c.s. BcnzoHif.
Novi Orbi,. lib. iii. c, i.

to

B °O K to grant that permiflon which they could not extort

-,- I from his delegate. With this view, after adjusting
158a among themselves that Pizarro mhould claim the

station of governor, Almagro that of lieutenant-
governor, and Luque the dignity of bilhop in the
country which they purposed to conquer, they lent
Pizarro as their agent to Spain, though their for-
tunes were now so much exhausted by the repeated
efforts which they had made, that they found some
difficulty in borrowing the small fum requisite to-
wards equipping him for the voyage .

Piarro rent PIZARRO loft no time in repairing to court, and
o,,sOte new as the scene might be to him, he appeared be-

fore the emperor with the unembarraffed dignity of
a man conscious of what his services merited; and
he condueted his negociations with an insinuating
dexterity of address, which could not have been
expected either from his education or former ha-
bits of life. His feeling description of his own sus-
ferings, and his pompous account of the country
which he had discovered, confirmed by the lpeci-
mens of its productions which he exhibited, made
such an impression both on Charles and his mi-
nilters, that they not only approved of the intended
expedition, but seemed to be interested in the fuc-
cess of its leader. Presuming on those dispositions
in his favour, Pizarro paid little attention to the

Neiealin interest of his associates. As the pretensions of
aslv~.;t.,

lecrrera, dec. 4. lib. iii. c. i. Vega, 2. lib. i. c. 14.

Luquc

Luque did not interfere with his own, he obtained B 0o K
for him the ecclefiafical dignity to which he ,
aspired. For Almagro, he claimed only the corn- ss.
mand of the fortress which should be ere&ed at
Tumbez. To himself he fccured whatever his
boundless ambition could desire. He was ap- July2s.
pointed governor, captain-general, and adelantado ':""P`
of all the country which he had discovered, and ,,prcnac
hoped to conquer, with supreme authority, civil to bi,,K
as well as military; and with full right to all the
privileges and emoluments usually granted to ad-
venturers in the New World. His jurifdition
was declared to extend two hundred leagues along
the coast to the south of the river St. Jago to be
independent of the governor of Panama; and he
had power to nominate all the officers who were to
serve under him. In return for those conceflions,
which cost the court of Spain nothing, as the en-
joyment of them depended upon the success of
Pizarro's own efforts, he engaged to raile two
hundred and fifty men, and to provide the (hips,
arms, and warlike stores requisite towards subje&t-
ing, to the crown of Castile, the country of which
the government was allotted-him.

INCONSIDERABLE as the body of men was which srmar

force he

Pizarro had undertaken to raise, his funds and cre- a^bltrae.
dit were To low that he could hardly complete half s'9'
the number; and after obtaining his patents from
the crown, he was obliged to Real privately out of

3 the

oo K the port of Sevill, in order to elude the scrutiny
v .. of the officers who had it in charge to examine,
1529. whether he had fulfilled the stipulations in his con-

tta& °. Before his departure, however, he received
some supply of money from Cortes, who having
returned to Spain about this time, was willing to
contribute his aid towards enabling an ancient com-
panion, with whose talents and courage he was well
acquainted, to begin a career of glory similar to
that which he himself had finished '.

HE landed at Nombre de Dios, and marched

across the isthmus to Panama, accompanied by his
three brothers, Ferdinand, Juan, and Gonzalo, of
whom the first was born in lawful wedlock, the two
latter, like himself, were of illegitimate birth, and
by Francisco de Alcantara, his mother's brother.
They were all in the prime of life, and of such abi-
lities and courage, as fitted them to take a diftin-
guilhed part in his subsequent tranfa&ions.

10o. ON his arrival at Panama, Pizarro found Alma-

siat,'ic- gro so much exasperated at the manner in which he
withI A- had conduted his negociation, that he not only

refused to a& any longer in concert with a man, by
whose perfidy he had been excluded from the power
and honours to which he had a just claim, but la-
boured to form a new aflociation, in order to
thwart or to rival his former confederate in his dif-

Herrera, dec. 4. lib. vii. c.9. P Ibid. lib. vii. c. io.

6 coveries.

Coveries. Pizarro, however, had more wisdom and B o o K
address than to susser a rupture so fatal to all his - :
schemes, tobecome irreparable. By offering vo- 53'0
luntarily to relinquilh the office ofadelantado, and
promising to concur in soliciting that tite, with an
independent government, for Almagro, he gra-
dually mitigated the rage of an open-hearted fol-
dier, which had been violent, but was not im-
placable. Luque, highly satisfied with having been
successful in all his own pretcnfions, cordially fe-
conded Pizarro's endeavours. A reconciliation
was effe&ed; and the confederacy renewed on its
original terms, that the enterprise flould be carried
on at the common expence of the aflociates, and
the profits accruing from it should be equally di.
vided among them 9.

EVEN after their re-union, and the utmost efforts Thei;rra.

of their interest, three small vessels, with a hun- mert'
dred and eighty soldiers, thirty-fix of whom were
horfcmen, composed the armament which they
were able to fit out. But the aftonilhing progress
of the Spaniards in America had inspired them
with such ideas of their own fyperiority, that Pi-
zarro did not hesitate to fail with this contemptible ,3.
force to invade a great empire. Almagro was left Fbruary
at Panama, as formerly, to follow him with what
reinforcement of men he mhould be able to muster.

q Herrcrs, dec. 4. lib. vii. c. 9. Zzrate, lib. i. c. A.
Vega, z. lib. i. c. I4.

vol.. ¢I. A

B o o K As the season for embarking was properly chosen,

, and the course of navigation between Panama and
'53. Peru was now better known, Pizarro completed

the voyage in thirteen days; though, by the force
of the winds and currents, he was carried above a
hundred leagues to the north of Tumbez, the place
of his deftinacion, and obliged to land his troops

Lands in in the bay of St. Matthew. Without losing a mo-
PlIU. ment, he began to advance towards the south,

taking care, however, not to depart far from the
sea-shore, both that he might easily effet a junc-
tion with the supplies which he expected from Pa-
nama, and secure a retreat in cafe of any difalter,
by keeping as near as possible to his ihips. But
as the country in several parts on the coast of Peru
is barren, unhealthful, and thinly peopled; as the
Spaniards had to pass all the rivers near their
nouth, where the body of water is greatest; and
as the imprudence of Pizarro, in attacking the na-
tives when he Ihould have studied to gain their
confidence, had forced them to abandon their ha-
bitations; famine, fatigue, and diseases of various
kinds, brought upon him and his followers cala-
mities hardly inferior to those which they had en-
dured in their former expedition. What they now
experienced corresponded so ill with the alluring
description of the country given by Pizarro, that
many began to reproach him, and every soldier
must have become cold to the service, if even in
this unfertile region of Peru, they had not met
with sone appearances of wealth and cultivation,

10 which

which seemed to justify the report of their leader. B OO K
At length they reached the province of Coaque; -
and, having surprised' the principal settlement of Ap,,';
the natives, they seized their vessels and ornaments
of gold and ilver, to the amount of thirty thou-
sand pesos, with other booty of such value, as dif-
pelled all their doubts, and inspired the mot de-
fponding with sanguine hopes r.

PIZARRO himself was so much delighted with His mea.

furrs for

this rich spoil, which he confidered as the first- otinin
fruits of a land abounding with treasure, that he areorce.
instantly dispatched one of his ships to Panama
with a large remittance to Almagro; and another
to Nicaragua with a considerable fumr to several
persons of influence in that province, in hopes of
alluring adventurers, by this early display of the
wealth which he had acquired. Meanwhile, he
continued his march along the coast, and disdain-
ing to employ any means of reducing the natives
but force, he attacked them with such violence in
their scattered habitations, as compelled them either
to retire into the interior country, or to submit to
his yoke. This sudden appearance of invaders,
whose aspet and manners were so strange, and
whose power seemed to be so irresistible, made
the fame dreadful impreflion as in other parts of
America. Pizarro hardly met with resistance until
he attacked the island of Puna in the bay of Guay-
quil. As that was better peopled than the country

r Herrera, dcc. 4. lb. vii. c. g.
lib. ii. c. .. Xres 1 8z.

c 2 through

B o o K through which he had passed, and its inhabitants

V1.
I . ~^ fiercer and less civilized than thofc of the conti-

3331. nent, they defended themselves with such obRfinate

valour, that Pizarro spent fix months in reducing
them to fubjetion. From Puna he proceeded to
Tumbez, where the distempers which raged
among his men compelled him to remain for
three months'.

WHILE he was thus employed, he began to reap

advantage from his attention, to spread the fame

Receives of his first success at Coaque. 'Two different de-
rome, and
continueSt tachments arrived from Nicaragua, which, though
advance, neither exceeded thirty men, he confidered as a re-

inforcement of great consequence to his feeble
band, especially as the one was under the com-
1532. mand of Sebaltian Benalcazar, and the other of

Hernando Soto, officers not inferior in merit and
reputation to any who had served in America.
May i6. From Tumbez he proceeded to the river Piura,

and in an advantageous fiation near the mouth of
it, he eftablifled the first Spanish colony in Peru;
to which he gave the name of St. Michael.

,As Pizarro continued to advance towards the
center of the Peruvian empire, he gradually re-
ceived more fill information concerning its extent
and policy, as well as the situation of its affairs at

* P. Sancho ap. Ramur. iii. p. 371, F. Herrers, dec. 4.

lib.vii. c. 18. lib. ix. c. i. Zarate, lib. ii. c.a, 3. Xere,
p. 18S, &c.

13 that

that juncture. Without some knowledge of these, n o K
he could not have conduced his operations with ,-v.,
propriety; and without a suitable attention to '53*.
them, it is impossible to account for the progress
which the Spaniards had already made, or to un-
fold the causes of their subsequent success.

AT the time when the Spaniards invaded Peru, Stateofthe

the dominions of its sovereigns extended in length, PtPa
from north to south, above fifteen hundred miles
along the Pacific Ocean. Its breadth, from eaf
to weft, was much lecs considerable; being uni,
formly bounded by the vast ridge of the Andes,
fretching from its one extremity to the other.
Peru, like the reft of the New World, was origi-
nally poffefied by 'mall independent tribes, differ-
ing from each other in manners, and in their forms
of rude policy, All, however, were Co little civi-
Jized, that, if the traditions concerning their mode
of life, preferred among their descendants, de-
serve credit, they mufl be clafied among the most
unimproved savages of America. Strangers to
every species of cultivation or regular industry,
without any fixed residence, and unacquainted with
those sentiments and obligations which form the
tirft bonds of social union, they are said to have
roamed about naked in the forcfts, with which the
country was then covered, more like wild beats
than like men. After they had struggled for fe-
veral ages with the hardships and calamities which
,ire inevitable in such a slate, and when no circum-

c 3 ftatnc

2 ~ HISTORY OF AMERICA.'
B O K fiance seemed to indicate the approach of any un-

VI.
, - common effort towards improvement, we are told
2531. that there appeared on the banks of the lake Ti-

tiaca, a man and woman of majestic form, and
clothed in decent garments. They declared them-
selves to be children of the Sun, sent by their be-
neficent parent, who beheld with pity the miseries
of the human race, to inftrue and to reclaim them.
At their persuasion, enforced by reverence for the
divinity in whose name they were supposed to
speak, several of the dispersed savages united
together, and receiving their commands as hea-
venly injunctions, followed them to Cuzco, where
they fettled, and began to lay the foundations of a
city.

MANCO CAPAC and Mama Ocollo, for such

were the names of those extraordinary personages,
having thus colleced some wandering tribes,
formed that social union, which, by multiplying
the desires, and uniting the efforts of the human
species, excites indutfry, and leads to improve-
mient. Manco Capac instructed the men in agri-
culture, and other useful arts. Mama Ocollo
taught the women to spin and to weave. By the
labour of the one sex, subsistence became less pre-
carious; by that of the other, life was rendered
more comfortable. After securing the objecs of
firfi neceflity in an infant state, by providing food,
raiment, and habitations, for the rude people of
whom he took charge, Manco Capac turned his

attention

attention towards introducing such laws and policy B o0 K
as might perpetuate their happiness. By his infti- _-,
tutions, which (hall be more particularly explained '1s3
hereafter, the various relations in private life were
eftablilhed, and the duties resulting from them
prescribed with such propriety, as gradually formed
a barbarous people to decency of manners. In
public administration, the functions of persons in
authority were so precisely defined, and the fubordi-
nation of those under their jurifdi&ion maintained
with such a Ready hand, that the society in which
he presided, soon assumed the aspet of a regular
and well-governed state.

THUS, according to the Indian tradition, was

founded the empire of the Incas or Lords of Peru.
At first its extent was small. The territory of
Manco Capac did not reach above eight leagues
from Cuzco. But within its narrow prccin&s he
exercised absolute and uncontrolled authority. His
successors, as their dominions extended, arrogated
a similar jurifdition over the new fubjcas which
they acquired; the despotism of Asia was not
more complete. The Incas were not only obeyed
as monarchs, but revered as divinities. Their blood
was held to be sacred, and, by prohibiting inter-
marriages with the people, was never contaminated
by mixing with that of any other race. The family,
thus separated from the reft of the nation, was
distinguished by peculiarities in dress and orna-
ments, which it was unlawful for others to assume.

c 4 The

B OO K The monarch himfelfappeared with ensigns of roy-
V-I.- alty reserved for him alone; and received from his
'53Z. fubjccts marks of obfcquious homage and refpet,

which approached almost to adoration.

BUT, among the Peruvians, this unbounded

power of their monarchs seems to have been uni-
formly accompanied with attention to the good of
their subjects. It was not the rage of conquest, if
we may believe the accounts of their countrymen,
that prompted the Incas to extend their dominions,
but the desire of diffusing the blessings of civiliza-
tion, and the knowledge of the arts which they
possessed, among the barbarous people whom they
reduced. During a fucceflion of twelve monarchs,
it is said that. not one.deviated from this beneficent
character'.

WHEN the Spaniards first visited the coast of

Peru, in the year one thousand five hundred and
twenty-fix, Huana Capac, the twelfth monarch
from the founder of the state, was feated on the
throne. He is represented as a prince diflinguifhed
not only for the pacific virtues peculiar to the race,
but eminent for his martial talents. By his vi&o-
rious arms the kingdom of Quito was filbje&ed, a
conquest of such extent and importance as almost
doubled the power of the Peruvian empire. He
was fond of residing in the capital of that valuable

* Cicca de Leon, Chron, c. 44, Herrers, dec. 3. lib. x.
c.4. dec. . lib. iii. c. 17.

province,

province, which he had added to his dominions; B 0 K
and, notwithstanding the ancient and fundamental -y-
law of the monarchy againit polluting the royal 53*'
blood by any foreign alliance, he married the
daughter of the vanquished monarch of Quito.
She bore him a son named Atahualpa, whom, on
his death at Quito, which seems to have happened
about the year one thousand five hundred and
twenty-nine, he appointed his successor in that
kingdom, leaving the reft of his dominions to
Huafcar, his eldest son, by a mother of the royal
race. Greatly as the Peruvians revered the memory
of a monarch who had reigned with greater repu-
tation and splendour than any of his predecefbors,
the destination of Huana Capac concerning the
fucceflion, appeared so repugnant to a maxim coe-
val with the empire, and founded on authority
deemed sacred, that it was no sooner known at
Cuzco than it excited general disgust, Encouraged
by thof& sentiments of his fubjets, Huafcar re-
quired his brother to renounce the government of
Quito, and to acknowledge him as his lawful
superior. But it had been the first care of Atahu-
alpa to gain a large body of troops which had ac-
companied his father to Quito. These were the
flower of the Peruvian warriors, to whose valour
Huana Capac had been indebted for all his vico-
ries. Relying on their support, Atahualpa first
eluded his brother's demand, and then marched
against him in hostile array.

THUS

B 0 O K THUS the ambition of two young men, the title

V1.
L -~... of the one founded on ancient usage, and that of

'53. the other asserted by the veteran troops, involved

Peru in civil war, a calamity to which, under a
fucceflion of virtuous princes, it had hitherto been
a stranger. In such a contest the iflue was obvious.
The force of arms triumphed over the authority of
laws. Atahualpa remained victorious, and made a
cruel use of his victory. Conscious of the defect
in his own title to the crown, he attempted to ex-
terminate the royal race, by putting to death all
the children of the Sun descended from Manco
Capac, whom he could seize either by force or
firatagem. From a political motive, the life of
his unfortunate rival -fuafcar, who had been taken
prisoner in a battle which decided the fate of the
empire, was prolonged for some time, that, by
issuing orders in his name, the usurper might more
easily eftablilh his own authority".

rFvounrae WHEN Pizarro landed in the bay of St. Mat-
crots osPo- thew, this civil war raged between the two bro-

zarro hers in its greatest fury. Had he made any hostile

attempt in his former visit to Peru in the year one
thousand five hundred and twenty-feven, he must
then have encountered the force of a powerful
state, united under a monarch, pocffelTe of capa-
city as well as courage, and unembarraffed with

u Zarate, lib. i. c. S. Vega, i. lib. ix. c. 12 and 32-
40. HeI rera, dec. 5. lib. i. c. z. lib. iii. c. 17.

any

any care that could divert him from opposing his Ba .o K
progress. But at this time, the two competitors, t..v
though they received early accounts of the arrival '53'
and violent proceedings of the Spaniards, were so
intent upon the operations of a war, which they
deemed more interesting, that they paid no attention
to the motions of an enemy, too inconsiderable in
number to excite any great alarm, and to whom,
it would be easy, as they imagined, to give a
check when more at leisure.

BY this fortunate coincidence of events, whereof Heaivil

himfdf of

Pizarro could have no foresight, and of which, it,, dd.
from his defective mode of intercourse with the 'Vic
people of the country, he remained long ignorant,
he was permitted to carry on his operations un-
molested, and advanced to the centre of a great
empire before one effort of its power was exerted
to stop his career. During their progress, the Spa-
niards had acquired rome imperfect knowledge of
this struggle between the two contending fations.
The first complete information with refpe& to it,
they received from messengers whom Huafcar sent
to Pizarro, in order to solicit his aid againit Ata-
hualpa, whom he represented as a rebel and an
usurper". Pizarro perceived at once the import-
ance of this intelligence, and foresaw so clearly all
the advantages which might be derived from this
divided fate of the kingdom, which he had in-

U Zarate, lib. ii. c. 3.

vadcd,

I oO K vaded, that, without waiting for the reinforcement
,._ . which he cxpeded from Panama, he determined
5532. to pusl forward, while inreftine discord put it out

of the power of the Peruvians to attack him with
their whole force, and while, by taking part, as
circumstances lhould incline him, with one of the
competitors, he might be enabled with greater
cafe to crush both. Enterprising as the Spaniards
of that age were in all their operations against Ame-
ricans, and diftinguifl.cd as Pizarro was among his
countrymen for daring courage, we can hardly
fuppole, that after having proceeded hitherto slowly,
and with much caution, he would have changed at
once his fyfl-em of operation, and have ventured
upon a mealure so hazardous, without rome new
motive or profpeet to justify it.
Stas ofrhis As he was obliged to divide his troops, in order

to leave a garrioln in St. Michael, Iffficient tq
defend a Rfation of equal importance as a place of
retreat in cafe of any difal'cr, and as a port for
receiving any supplies which should come from
Panama, he began his march with a very slender
and ill-accoutred train of followers. They con-
sifted of fixty-two horsemen", and a hundred and
two foot-foldiers, of whom twenty were armed
with cross-bows, and three with muskets. He di-
rcted iiis courfc towards Caxamalca, a small town
at the distance of twelve days march from St.

s See NOTE IV.

Michael,

Michael, where Atahualpa was encamped with B O K
a considerable body of troops. Before he had pro- .
ceeded far, an officer dispatched by the Inca met '53ts
him with a valuable present from that prince,
accompanied with a proffer of his alliance, and
aflurances of a friendly reception at Caxamalca.
Pizarro, according to the usual artifice of his coun-
trymen in America, pretended to come as the am-
bafrador of a very powerful monarch, and declared
that he was now advancing with an intention to
offer Atahualpa his aid against those enemies who
disputed his title to the throne '.

As the obje& of the Spaniards in entering their deas of the

country was altogether incomprehensible to the coacemn
Peruvians, they had formed various conjectures tihird.-
concerning it, without being able to decide whe-
ther they should confider their new guests as beings
of a superior nature, who had visited them from
some beneficent motive, or as formidable avengers
of their crimes, and enemies to their repose and
liberty. The continual professions of the Spa-
niards, that they came to enlighten them with the
knowledge of truth, and lead them in the way of
happiness, favoured the former opinion the out-
rages which they committed, their rapaciousness
and cruelty, were awful confirmations of the latter.
While in this state of uncertainty, Pizarro's decla-
ration of his pacific intentions To far removed all

Herrera, dec. 5. lib. . c . 3 Xers, p. 189.

the

B o o K the Inca's fears, that he determined to give him

V-' . a friendly reception. In consequence of this refo-
353». lution, the Spaniards were allowed to march in

tranquillity across the sandy desert between St.
Michael and Motupe, where the most feeble effort
of an enemy, added to the unavoidable distresses
which they suffered in passing through that com-
fortlefs region, must have proved fatal to them".
From Motupe they advanced towards the moun-
tains which encompaired the low country of Peru,
and paled through a defile so narrow and inac-
ceffible, that a few men might have defended it
against a numerous army. But here likewise, from
the fame inconsiderate credulity of the Inca, the
Spaniards met with no opposition, and took quiet
poffefion of a fort erected for the security of that
important Ifation. As they now approached near
to Caxamalca, Atahualpa renewed his profeflions
of friendship; and as an evidence of their since-
rity, sent them presents of greater value than the
former. A

Arriveat ON entering Caxamalca, Pizarro took poffeflion
Caxanialca. of a large court, on one fide of which was a house

which the Spanilh historians call a palace of the
Inca, and on the other a temple of the Sun, the
whole surrounded with a (trong rampart or wall of
earth. When he had poted his troops in this ad-
vantageous flation, he dispatched his brother Ser-
dinand and H-ernando Soto to the camp of Ata-

s See NOTE V.

hualpa,

hualpa, which was about a league distant from the a o O K
town. He instructed them to confirm the declara- -_
tion which he had fbrmerly made of his pacific dif- ',ss
position, and to desire an interview with the Inca,
that he might explain more fully the intention of
the Spaniards in visiting his country. They were
treated with all the relpecfill hospitality usual
among the Peruvians in the reception of their most
cordial friends, and Atahualpa promised to visit the
Spanish commander next day in his quarters. The
decent deportment of the Peruvian monarch, the
order of his court, and the reverence with which
his fubjets approached his person and obeyed his
commands, aftoni.hed thole Spaniards, who had
never met in America with any thing more digni-
sied than the petty cazique of a barbarous tribe.
But their eyes were still more powerfully attraced
by the vast profusion of wealth which they observed
in the Inca's camp. The rich ornaments worn by
him and his attendants, the vefTels of-gold and fil-
ver in which the repast offered to them was served
up, the multitude of utensils of every kind formed
of those precious metals, opened profpccts far ex-
ceeding any idea of opulence that a European of
the sixteenth century could form.

ON their return to Caxamalca, while their minds Prrfidiou

were yet warm with admiration and desire of the Pizaro.
wealth which they had beheld, they gave such a
description of it to their countrymen, as confirmed
Pizarro in a resolution which he had already taken.

From

B 0 0 K From his own observation of American manners
-.--.. during his long service in the New World, as well
'531. as from the advantages which Cortes had derived

from seizing Montezuma, he knew of what confe-
quence it was to have the Inca in his power. For
this purpose, he formed a plan as daring as it was
perfidious. Notwithstanding the character that he
had assumed of an ambassador from a powerful mo-
narch, who courted an alliance with the Inca, and
in violation of the repeated offers which he had
made to him of his own friendlhip and assistance,
he determined to avail himself of the unfufpicious
simplicity with which Atahualpa relied on his pro-
sessions, and to seize the person of the Inca during
the interview to which he had invited him. He
prepared for the execution of his scheme with the
fame deliberate arrangement, and with as little
compuntion, as if it had refleted no dilgrace
on himself or his country. He divided his cavalry
into three finall squadrons, under the command ot
his brother Ferdinand, Soto, and Benalcazar; his
infantry were formed in one body, except twenty
of molt tried courage, whom he kept near his own
person to support him in the dangerous service
which he reserved for himfilf; the artillery, con-
sifting of two field-pieces and the crol-bowmen,
were placed olpp(fite to the avenue by which Ata-
hualpa was to approach. All were commanded to
keep within the fquarc, and not to move until the
signal for action was given.

' Xercz, p. 194.

EARL

EARLY in the morning the Peruvian camp was B o o K

all in motion. But as Atahualpa was solicitous to -
appear with the greatest splendour and magnifi- N'iS6.
cence in his first interview with the frangers, the Vtittd by

the Inca.

preparations for this were so tedious, that the day
was far advanced before he began his march. Even
then, left the order of the procession ihould be de-
ranged, he moved so slowly, that the Spaniards
became impatient, and apprehensive that some sus-
picion of their intention might be the cause of this
delay. In order to remove this, Pizarro dispatched
one of his officers with fresh assurances of his
friendly disposition. At length the Inca approach-
ed. First of all appeared four hundred men, in an
uniform dress, as harbingers to clear the way be-
fore him. He himself, fitting on a throne or
couch, adorned with plumes of various colours,
and almost covered with plates of gold and silver
enriched with precious stones, was carried on the
Shoulders of his principal attendants. Behind him
came some chief officers of his court, carried in the
fame manner. Several bands of fingers and dan-
cers accompanied this cavalcade; and the whole
plain was covered with troops, amounting to more
than thirty thousand men.

As the Inca drew near the Spanish quarters, fa- Strange ha.

ther Vincent Valverde, chaplain to tile expedition, LthrVAt.
advanced with a crucifix in one hand, and a bre- vcrde.
viary in the other, and in a long discourse explain-
ed to him the dotrine of the creation, the fall of

VOL. 111. D Adam:

B OO K Adam, the incarnation, the sufferings and refur-

VI.

._ .* retion of Jesus Christ, the appointment of St.
'532- Peter as God's vicegerent on earth, the tranfmif-

sion of his apostolic power by fucceflion to the
popes, the donation made to the king of Castile
by pope Alexander of all the regions in the New
World. In consequence of al1 this, he required
Atahualpa to embrace the Chriflian faith, to ac-
knowledge the supreme jurifdition of the pope,
and to submit to the king of Castile as his lawful
sovereign; promising, if he complied instantly with
this requisition, that the Castilian monarch would
prote&t his dominions, and permit him to continue
in the exercise of his royal authority; but if he
should impiously refute to obey this summons, he
denounced war against him in his master's name,
and threatened him with the most dreadful effets
of his vengeance.
Rq.%:yoftCie T'115 Itrange harangue, unfolding deep myfte-

ries, and alluding to unknown fads, of which no
power of eloquence could have conveyed at once
a diftin& idea to an American, was so lamely tranf-
lated by an unskilful interpreter, little acquainted
with the idiom of the Spanih tongue, and inca-
pable of exprcffing himself with propriety in the
language of the Inca, that its general tenor was
altogether iricolprclhenfible to Atahualpa. Some
parts in it, of more obvious meaning, filled hirm
with anlonillmcnt and indignation. His reply,
howevcr, ws temperate. He began with obferv-

ing,

ing, that he was lord of the dominions over which B o o K
he reigned by hereditary succession; and added,. -V-_
that he could not conceive how a foreign priest s31-
should pretend to dispose of territories which did
not belong to him; that if such a preposterous
grant had been made, he, who was the rightful
poilfelor, refused to confirm it; that he had no in-
clination to renounce the religious inffitutions efta-
blifhed by his ancestors; nor would he forsake the
service of the Sun, the immortal divinity whom he
and his people revered, in order to wor(hip the
God of the Spaniards, who was fubjeft to death;
that with refpeat to other matters contained in his
discourse, as he had never heard of them before,
and did not now understand their meaning, he de-
fired to know where the priest had learned things
so extraordinary. " In this book," answered Val-
verde, reaching out to him his breviary. The
Inca opened iteagerly, and turning over the leaves,
lifted it to his ear: " This," fays he, " is silent;
it tells me nothing;" and threw it with disdain to
the ground. The enraged monk, running towards
his countrymen, cried out, " To arms, Christians,
to arms; the word of God is insulted; avenge this
profanation on those impious dogs b."

PIZARRO, who, during this long conference, riarro at.

had with difficulty refrained his soldiers, eager to crkuI,,
seize the rich spoils of which they had now so near
a view, immediately gave the Agnal of assault. At

b See NOTE V[.

1> 2 'once

B o K once the martial music struck up, the cannon and
L_ . muskets began to fire, the horse rallied out fiercely
5s5. to the charge, the infantry rushed on sword in hand.

The Peruvians, astonished at the iuddennefs of an
attack which they did not expe&, and dismayed
with the deitru&ive effecs of the fire-arms, and
the irresistible impression of the cavalry, fled with
univerlal conlfernation on every fide, without at-
tempting either to annoy the enemy, or to defend
- themselves. Pizarro, at the head of his chosen

band, advanced directly towards the Inca; and
though his nobles crowded around him with offi-
cious zeal, and fill in numbers at his feet, while
they vied one *iith another in sacrificing their own
lives, that they might cover the sacred person of
their sovereign, the Spaniards soon penetrated to
anli uizs the royal feat; and Pizarro seizing the Inca by the

arm, dragged him to the ground, and carried him
as a prisoner to his quarters. The fate of the mo-
narch incrcalf(d the precipitate flight of his follow-
ers. The Spaniards pursued them towards every
quarter, and with deliberate and unrelenting bar-
barity continued to (laughter wretched fugitives,
who never once oftired to refil. The carnage did
not cea.e until the close of day. Above four thou-
l.nd Peruvians were killed. Not a tingle Spaniard
tell, nor was one wounded but Pizarro himself,
whose hand was (lightly hurt by one of his own
soldiers, while ltruggling eagerly to lay hold on the
Inca c

';Sec NOTE VII.

THI:

THB plunder of the field was rich beyond any a O K:

idea which the Spaniards had yet formed concern-
ing the wealth of Peru, and they were so transport- 1531.
ed with the value of the acquisition, as well as the
greatness of their success, that they pafled the night
in the extravagant exultation natural to indigent
adventurers on such an extraordinary change of
fortune.

AT first the captive monarch could hardly be- Djeion f

lieve a calamity which he so little expeted to be tic in.
real. But he soon felt all the misery of his fate,
and the deje&ion into which he funk was in pro-
portion. to the height of grandeur from which he
hadfallen. Pizarro, afraid of losing all the ad-
vantages which he hoped to derive from the pof-
session of such a prisoner, laboured to console him
with professions of kindness and refpet, that cor-
responded ill with his actions. By residing among
the Spaniards, the Inca quickly discovered their
ruling passion, which, indeed, they were no-wise
Solicitous to conceal, and by applying to that, made
an attempt to recover his liberty. He offered as Hlisoffcr'L
a ransom what astonished the Spaniards, even after lm
all they now knew concerning the opulence of his
kingdom. The apartment in which he was con-
fined was twenty-two feet in length and sixteen in
breadth; he undertook to fill it with vessels of
gold as high as he could reach. Pizarro closed
eagerly with this tempting proposal, and a line was

P 3 dr.twn

B o .K drawn upon the walls of the chamber, to mark the

- fipulated height to which the treasure was to rife.

ATAHALPA, traported with having obtained
ATAatUALPA, transported with having obtained

some profpe& of liberty, took measures instantly
for fulfilling his part of the agreement, by fending
messengers to Cuzco, Quito, and other places,
where gold had been amasscd in largest quantities,
either for adorning the temples of the gods, or the
houses of the Inca, to bring what was nectcfary for
completing his ranobm directly to Caxamalca.
Though Atahualpa was now in the custody of his
enemies, yet so much were the Peruvians accuf-
tomed to refpe& every mandate issued by their fa-
vereign, that his orders were executed with the
greatest alacrity. Soothed with hopes of recover-
ing his liberty by this means, the subje&s of the
Inca were afraid of endangering his life by forming
any other scheme for his relief; and though the
force of the empire was still entire, no preparations
were made, and no army assembled to avenge their
own wrongs or those of their monarch '. The
Spaniards remained in Caxamalca tranquil and un-

The Sp. molested. Small detachments of their number
dirfftrent marched into remote provinces of the empire, and,
provincce. instead of meeting with any opposition, were every

where received with marks of the most submissive
refpe& ".

Alrnagmar. INCONSIDERABLE as those parties were, and de-
reinorc. firous as Pizarro might be to obtain rome know.
mrtnt.

d Xercz, 205. ' Sec NOTE VIII.

ledge
*

ledge of the interior state of the country, he could a o O K
not have ventured upon any diminution of his main . -,'.
body, if he had not about this time received an Dcc3r.
account of Almagro's having landed at St. Michael
with such a reinforcement as would almost double
the number of his followers f. The arrival of this
long-expeC&ed succour was not more agreeable to
the Spaniards, than alarming to the Inca. He saw
the power of his enemies increase; and as he knew
neither the source whence they derived their sup-
plies, nor the means by which they were conveyed
to Peru, he could not foresee to what a height
the inundation that poured in upon his dominions
might rife. While disquieted with such apprehen- Huac3rput
sions, he learned that rome Spaniards, in their way to deth.
to Cuzco,'had visited his brother Huafcar in the
place where he kept him confined, and that the
captive prince had represented to them the justice
of his own cause, and as an inducement to espouse
it, had promised them a quantity of treasure greatly
beyond that which Atahualpa had engaged to pay
for his ransom. If the Spaniards should liften to
this proposal, Atahualpa perceived his own deftruc-
tion to be inevitable; and fufpe&ing that their in-
satiable thirit for gold would tempt them to lend a
favourable ear to it, he determined to sacrifice his
brother's life, that he might save his own; and
his orders for this purpose were executed, like all
his other commands, with scrupulous punctuality 5.

f Xerez, so4. Herrera, dec. lib. ii. c. ., a.
: Zarate, lib. ii. c. 6. Gomara HiRl. c. i . Herrera,
dec. 5. lib. iii. c. . *

D 4 MeAN.

B 0 K MEANWHILE, Indians daily arrived at Caxa-

-

v1 malca from different parts of the kingdom, loaded
,S533 with treasure. A great part of the fipulated quant-
niards make tity was now amalred, and Atahualpa assured the
a diviflon of
the spoil. Spaniards, that the only thing which prevented

the whole from being brought in, was the remote-
ness of the provinces where it was deposited. But
such vast piles of gold presented continually to the
view of needy soldiers, had so inflamed their ava-
rice, that it was impoflible any longer to restrain
their impatience to obtain pofecfion of this rich
booty. Orders were given for melting down the
whole, except some pieces of curious fabric, re-
served as a present for the emperor. After setting
apart the fifth due to the crown, and a hundred
thousand pesos as a donative to the foldlers which
arrived with Almagro, there remained one million
five hundred and twenty-eight thousand five hun-
dred pesos to Pizarro and his followers. The fef-
July 5. tival of St. James, the patron faint of Spain, was

the day chosen for the partition of this enormous
fum, and the manner of condu&ing it strongly
marks the strange alliance of fanaticism with ava.
rice, which I have more than once had occasion to
p')int out as a striking feature in the characer of
the conquerors of the New World. Though as-
femblcd to divide the spoils of an innocent people,
procured by deceit, extortion, and cruelty, the
tranfadion began with a solemn invocation of the
name of God ', as if they could have expcaed the

h Herrcra, dec. 5. lib. iii. c. 3.

guidance

guidance of Heaven in distributing those wages of B o0 K
iniquity, In this division above eight thousand
pefls, at that time not inferior in effective value to '53*
as many pounds fierling in the present century, fell
to the share of each horseman, and half that fum
to each foot soldier. Pizarro himself, and his offi-
cers, received dividends in proportion to the dig-
nity of their rank.

THERE is no example in history of such a sudden Thef ,-

acquisition of wealth by military service, nor was
ever a fum so great divided among so small a num-
ber of soldiers. Many of them having received a
recompence for their services far beyond their molt
sanguine hopes, were so impatient to retire from
fatigue and danger, in order to spend the remain-
der of their days in their native country, in ease and
opulence, that they demanded their difchargc with
clamorous importunity. Pizarro, sensible that from
such men he could expect neither enterprise in ac-
tion nor fortitude in fuffcring, and persuaded that
wherever they went, the display of their riches
would allure adventurers, less opulent but more
hardy, to his standard, granted their suit without
relucance, and permitted above sixty of them to
acompany his brother Ferdinand, whom he sent
to Spain with an account of his success, and the
prcfent destined for the emperor'.

THE Spaniards having divided among them the The In
treasure amafied for the Inca's ransom, hIe insisted l;'kmty,,,h

llecrrcra, dec. S, lib, ii. c. 4. V gn, p. . lib, i. c. 38. v"a

( , with

B o O K with them to fulfil their promise of setting him at

-. v... liberty. But nothing was farther from Pizarro's
533- thoughts. During his long service in the New

World, he had imbibed those ideas and maxims of
his fellow-foldiers, which led them to confider its
inhabitants as an inferior race, neither worthy of
the name, nor entitled to the rights, of men. In
his compact with Atahualpa, he had no other ob-
ject than to anufe his captive with such a prospect
of recovering his liberty, as might induce him to
lend all the aid of his authority towards collecting
the wealth of his kingdom. Having now accom-
plilhed this, he no longer regarded his plighted
faith; and at the very time when the credulous
prince hoped to be replaced on his throne, he had
fccretly resolved to bereave him of life. Many
circum.tances seem to have concurred in prompting
him to this action, the molt criminal and atrocious
that stains the Spaniflf name, amidst all the deeds of
violence committed in carrying on the conquet of
the New World.

Ire and the THOUGH Pizarro had seized the Inca, in imita-
Ip,,:n ard tion of Cortes's conduct towards the Mexican mo-
jilous. narch, he did not pofTfls talents for carrying on

the fame artful plan of p!licy. D)rltitute of the
temper and a(ddrcfs requiite for gailinng the confi-
dence of his prisoner, he never reaped all the ad-
vantages which might have been derived fronm be-
ing inailr of his pcrlbn and authority. Atalhalpa
was, indeed, a prince of greater abilities and dif-

ccrnmcnt

crnment than Montezuma, and seems to have pe- n o O
netrated more thoroughly into the chara&er and -v
intentions of the Spaniards. Mutual suspicion and '5id
distrust accordingly took place between them. The
ftrift attention with which it was necessary to guard
a captive of such importance, greatly increased the
fatigue of military duty. The utility of keeping
him appeared inconsiderable; and Pizarro felt him
as an incurnbrance, from which he wilhed to be
delivered .

ALMACRO and his followers had made a demand Almagr

and his fol-

of an equal share in the Inca's ransom; and though lown d-
Pizarro had bestowed upon. the private men the rhc.
large gratuity which I have mentioned, and en-
deavoured to sooth their leader by presents of great
value, they still continued diflitisfid. .They were
apprehensive, that as long as Atahualpa remained
a prisoner, Pizarro's soldiers would apply whatever
treasure should be acquired, to make up what was
waoting of the quantity stipulated for his ransom,
and under that pretext exclude them from any pare
of it. They insisted eagerly on putting the Inca
to death, that all the adventurers in Peru might
thereafter be on an equal footing '.

PIZARRO himself began to be alarmed with ac- Motives
counts of forces assembling in the remote provinces dued Pi.

rro to

conlent.

f Herrer, dec. . lib. iii. c. 4. conn
t Zarate, lib. ii. c. 7 Vega, P. a. lib. i. c. 7. llcrrert
dec. 5. lib. iii. c, 4.

of

B o o K of the empire, and fufpe&ed Atahualpa of having
_-- 1 issued orders for that purpose. There fears and

3533- suspicions were artfully increased by Philippillo,

one of the Indians whom Pizarro had carried off
from Tumbez in the year one thousand five hun-
dred and twenty-feven, and whom he employed as
an interpreter. The funtion which he performed
admitting this man to familiar intercourse with the
captive monarch, he presumed, notwithstanding the
meanness of his birth, to raise his affecions to a
Ccya, or descendent of the Sun, one of Atahualpa's
wives; and feeing no profpe&t of gratifying that
paflion during the life of the monarch, he endea-
youred to fill the ears of the Spaniards with such
accounts of the Inca's secret defgns and prepara-
tions, as might awaken. their jealousy, and incite
them to cut him off.

WHILE Almagro and his followers openly de-

manded the life of the Inca, and Philippillo la-
boured to ruin him by private machinations, that
unhappy prince inadvertently contributed to haften
his own fate. During his confinement he had at-
tached himifclf with peculiar affection to Ferdinand
Pizarro and Hlernando Soto; who, as they were
pcrfons of birth and education superior to the rough
adventurers with whom they served, were accuf-
tomed to behave with more decency and attention
to the captive monarch. Soothed with this refpe&
from persons of fulch high rank, he delighted in
their society. But in the pretence of the governor

he

he was always uneasy and overawed. This dread B o O K
fooh came to be mingled with contempt. Among
all the European arts, what he admired mod was 1533.
that of reading and writing; and he long delibera-
ted with himfclf, whether he lhould regard it as a
natural or acquired talent. In order to determine
this, he desired one of the soldiers, who guarded
him, to write the name of God on the nail of his
thumb. This he ihewed successively to several
Spaniards, asking its meaning; and to his amaze-
ment, they all, without hesitation, returned the
fame answer. At length Pizarro entered; and on
presenting it to him, he blulhed, and with,fome
confusion was obliged to acknowledge his igno-
rance. From that moment, Atahualpa confidered
him as a mean person, less inftruted than his own
soldiers; and he had not address enough to conceal
the sentiments with which this discovery inspired
him. To be the objet of a barbarian's scorn, not
only mortified the pride of Pizarro, but excited
such resentment in his breast, as added force to all
the other considerations which prompted him to
put the Inca to death".

BUT in order to give some colour ofjultice to His tri.

this violent action, and that he himself might be
exempted from standing singly refponlible for the
commiflion of it, Pizarro resolved to try the Inca
with all the formalities observed in the criminal
courts of Spain. Pizarro himself, and Almagro,

Herrera, dec. 5. lib. iii. c. 4. Vega, p. 1 . lib. i. c. 38.

with

B o0 K with two aftllants, were appointed judges, with

V].
.-.c- ' full power to acquit or to condemn; an attorney-

general was named to carry on the prosecution in
the king's name; counsellors were chosen to alllft
the prisoner in his defence; and clerks were or-
dained to record the proceedings of court. Before
this ifrange tribunal, a charge was exhibited still
more amazing. It confited of various articles;
that Atahualpa, though a bastard, had difpoffeffed
the rightful owner of the throne, and usurped the
regal power; that he had put his brother and law-
fil sovereign to death; that he was an idolater, and
had not only permitted, but commanded the offer-
ing of human sacrifices; that he had a great num-
ber of concubines; that since his imprisonment he
had wafted and embezzled the royal treasures,
which now belonged of right to the conquerors;
that he had incited his fubjeets to take arms against
the Spaniards. On theft heads of accusation, Ibme
of which are so ludicrous, others so ablurd, that
the effrontery of Pizarro, in making them the foun-
dation of a serious procedure, is not less hlirpri-
sing than his injuflice, did this strange court go on
to try the fovcrcign of a great empire, over whom
it had no juritiction. W'ith rcli)et to each of the
articles, wiincffes were examined; but as they de-
livered their evidence in their native tongue, Phi-
lippillo had it in lis power to give their words
whatever turn beci lu'.ild his malevolent intentions.
To judges prelctc.tri lcd in ticir opinion, this
lltiscon- evidence appareld li!iitKicnt. 'I'lcs pronounced

Atahualpa

Atahualpa guilty, and condemned him to be burnt 3 o o
alive. Friar Valverde proftituted the authority of _
his sacred funcion to confirm this sentence, and by 's
his signature warranted it to bejuf. Astonished at
his fate, Atahualpa endeavoured to avert it by tears,
by promires, and by entreaties, that he might be
sent to Spain, where a monarch would be the ar-
biter of his lot. But pity never touched the un-
feeling heart of Pizarro. He ordered him to be
led inRtantly to execution; and, what added to the
bitterness of his last moments, the fame monk who
hadjuft ratified his doom, offered to console, and
Attempted to convert him. The most powerful
argument Valverde employed to prevail with him
to embrace the ChriRian faith, was a promise of
mitigation in his punishment. The dread of a
cruel death extorted from the trembling vi&im a
desire of receiving baptism. The ceremony was
performed; and Atahualpa, infead of being burnt, nd e.
was strangled at the stake " ted.

HAPPILY for the credit of the Spaniff nation, svl

even among the profligate adventurers which it spo'[f
sent forth to conquer and desolate the New World, againait.
there were persons who retained rome tinture of
the CafRilian generosity and honour. Though, be-
fore the trial of Atahualpa, Ferdinand Pizarro had
let out for Spain, and Soto was sent on a separate

a Zarate, lib. ii. c. 7. Xerez, p. 233. Vega, p. 11.

lib. i. c. 36, 37. Gomara Hill. c. 117. ilirrera, dec. 5.
lib. iii. c. 4.

4 comrranJ

B 0 0 K command at a distance from Caxamalca, this odious

VI.
- __ tranfaclion was not carried on without censure and
53-" opposition. Several officers, and among those some

of the greatest reputation and most refpc&able fa-
milies in the service, not only remonstrated, but
protested against this measure of their general, as
disgraceful to their country, as repugnant to every
maxim of equity, as a violation of public faith, and
an usurpation of jurildi&ion over an independent
monarch, to which they had no title. But their
laudable endeavours were vain. Numbers, and the
opinion of such as held every thing to be lawful
which they deemed advantageous, prevailed. Hist
tory, however, records even the unfucefsful exer-
tions of virtue with applause; and the Spanish
writers, in relating events where the valour of
their nation is more conspicuous than its humanity,
have not failed to preserve the names of those who
made this laudable effort to save their country
from the infamy of having perpetrated such a
crime ".

D;Wolution ON the death of Atahualpa, Pizarro inverted
f govern.
mit and one of his sons with the ensigns of royalty, hoping
wider in C*
leru. that a young man without experience might prove

a more paflive instrument in his hands, than an
ambitious monarch, who had been accustomed to
independent command. The people of Cuzco,

e Vega, p. 1I. lib. i. c. 37. Xerez, i. 235. Herrera,
dec. 5. lib. iii. c. 5.

and

and the adjacent country, acknowledged Manco B O K
Capac, a brother of Huafcar, as Inca . But nei- -
ther polTefed the authority which belonged to a 's33-
sovereign of Peru. The violent convulsions into
which the empire had been thrown, first by the
civil war between the two brothers, and then by
the invasion of the Spaniards, had not only de-
ranged the order of the Peruvian government, but
almoR dilTolved its frame. When they beheld
their monarch a captive in the power of strangers,
and at last suffering an ignominious death, the
people in several provinces, as if they had been
set free from every restraint of law and decency,
broke out into the most licentious excesses'. So
many descendents of the Sun, after being treated
with the utmof indignity, had been cut off by
Atahualpa, that not only their influence in the Rate
diminished with their number, but the accustomed
reverence for that sacred race fenlibly decreaed.
In consequence of this fate of things, ambitious
men in different parts of the empire aspired to in- *
dependent authority, and usurped jurifdition to
which they had no title. The general who com-
manded for Atahualpa in Quito, seized the brother
and children of his master, put them to a cruel
death, and disclaiming any connetion with either
Inca, endeavoured to etablilh a separate kingdom
for himself'.

P Vega, p. a. lib. i. c. 7.
q Herra, dec. S. lib. ii. c. is. lib. iii. c. 5.

Zarate, lib. ii. c. 8. Vega, p. ai, lib ii, c. 3, 4.
VOL. Iir. a ~"H

a o0 K THE Spaniards, with pleasure, beheld the spirit

- of discord diffusing itself, and the vigour of go-

Piza?33ad. vernment relaxing among the Peruvians. They
ano to
' confidered those disorders as symptoms of a slate

hastening towards its dissolution. Pizarro no longer
hesitated to advance cowards Cuzco, and he had
received such considerable reinforcements, that he
could venture, with little danger, to penetrate so
far into the interior part of the country. The ac-
count of the wealth acquired at Caxamalca ope-
rated as he had foreseen. No sooner did his bro-
ther Ferdinand, with the officers and soldiers to
whom he had given their discharge after the par-
tition of the Inca's ransom, arrive at Panama, and
display their riches in the view of their astonished
countrymen, than famne spread the account with
such exaggeration through all the Spaniih fettle-
ments on the South Sea, that the governors of
Guatimala, Panama, and Nicaragua, could hardly
restrain the people under their jurifdi&ion, from
Abandoning their polefflons, and crowding to that
inexhauflible source of wealth which fegmed,$o be
opened in Peru'. In spite of every check aq4 re-
gulation, such numbers retorted thither, that Pi-
zarro began his march at the head of five hundred
men, after leaving a considerable garrison in St.
Michael, under the command of Benalcazar, The
Peruvians had assembled some large bbdies of
troops to oplpoc his progress. Several fierce en-

" Gomara Itill. c, 25. Vega, p. i. lib . c,. . . Her.
reri, dec. 5. lib. iii. c. 5S

counters

counters happened. But they terminated like all B o o t
the actions in America; a few Spaniards were . -_;
killed or wounded; the natives were put to flight '*3
with incredible slaughter. At length Pizarro
forced his way to Cuzco, and took quiet poffeflon
of that capital. The riches found there, even
after all that the natives had carried off and con-
cealed, either from a fupertitious veneration for
the ornaments of their temples, or out of hatred
to their rapacious conquerors, exceeded in value
what had been received as Atahualpa's ransom. But
as the Spaniards were now accustomed to the
wealth of the country, and it came to be parcelled
out among a greater number of adventurers, this
dividend did not excite the fame surprise, either
from novelty, or the largeness of the fum that fell
to the share of each individual'.

DURING the march to Cuzco, that son of Ata-

hualpa whom Pizarro treated as Inca, died; and
as the Spaniards substituted no person in his place,
the tide of Manco Capac seems to have been uni-
verfally recognized".

WHILE his fellow-foldiers were thus employed, Qitocon.

Benalcazar, governor of St. Michael, an able and daby
cnterprifing officer, was ashamed of remaining in-
ative, and impatient to have his name diftin-
guifhed among the discoverers and conqueror. of

' See NOTE IX. Herrer, dec. 5. lib.r. c.s.

I a the

0 o0o K the New World. The seasonable arrival of a frelh
a__-- body of recruits from Panama and Nicaragua, put

1533. it in his power to gratify this pailion. Leaving a

sufficient force to protet the infant settlement en-
trusted to his care, he placed himself at the head
of the reft, and set out to attempt the reduction of
Quito, where, according to the report of the na-
tives, Atahualpa had left the greatest part of his
treasure. Notwithstanding the distance of that
city from St. Michael, the difficulty of marching
through a mountainous country covered with
woods, and the frequent and fierce attacks of the
best troops in Peru, commanded by a skilful
leader, the valour, good conduc, and perseverance
of Benalcazar. surmounted every obstacle, and he
entered Qiito with his vitorious troops. But
they met with a cruel mortification there. The
natives, now acquainted to their sorrow, with the
predominant passion of their invaders, and know-
ing how to disappoint it, had carried off all those
treasures, the profpet of which had prompted them
to undertake this arduous expedition, and had
supported them under all the dangers and hard-
lhips wherewith they had to struggle in carrying
it on x.

Alvrados BtENALCAZAR was not the only Spanish leader
expedition. who attacked the kingdom of Quito. The fame

Zarate, lib. ii. c. 9. Vega, p. I1. lib. ii. c. 9. Her,
rcra, dec. 5. lib, iv. c. is, 12. lib. . C. c. 3. lib. vi. c. g.

Of

of its riches attracted a more powerful enemy. 3 o0 S
Pedro de Alvarado, who had distinguished him- . -
self so eminently in the conquest of Mexico, hav- 53
ing obtained the government of Guatimala as a
recompence for his valour, soon became disgusted
with a life of uniform tranquillity, and longed to
be again engaged in the bustle of military service.
The glory and wealth acquired by the conquerors
of Peru heightened this passion, and gave it a de-
termined diretion. Believing, or pretending to
believe, that the kingdom of Quito did not lie
within the limits of the province allotted to Pi-
zarro, he resolved to invade it. The high reputa-
tion of the commander allured volunteers from
every quarter. He embarked with five hundred
men, of whom above two hundred were of such
diftintion as to serve on horseback. He landed
at Puerto Viejo, and without sufficient knowledge
of the country, or proper guides to condut him,
attempted to march directly to Quito, by follow-
ing the course of the river Guayquil, and crossing
the ridge of the Andes towards its head. But in
this route, one of the most impracticable in all
America, his troops endured such fatigue in forcing
their way through forests and marhes on the low
grounds, and suffered so much from excellive cold
when they began to ascend the mountains, that
before they reached the plain of Quito, a fifth part
of the men and half of their horses died, and the
reft were so much dispirited and worn out, as to be

z3 almost

B 0 0 K almost unfit for service y. There they met with a

VI.
v- body, not of Indians but of Spaniards, drawn up
's5, in hostile array against them. Pizarro having re-

ceived an account of Alvarado's armament, had
detached Almagro with some troops to oppose this
formidable invader of his jurifdition; and these
were joined by Benalcazar and his vi&orious
party. Alvarado, though surprised at the fight of
enemies whom he did not expe&, advanced
boldly to the charge. But, by the interposition of
some moderate men in each party, an amicable
accommodation took place; and the fatal period,
when Spaniards suspended their conquests to em-
brue their hands in the blood of their countrymen.
was postponed a few years. Alvarado engaged to
return to his government, upon Almagro's paying
him a hundred thousand pesos to defray the expence
of his armament. Most of his followers remained
in the country; and an expedition, which threat-
ened Pizarro and his colony with ruin, contributed
to augment its ftrcngth '.

BY this time Ferdinand Pizarro had landed in

i Spain. The immense quantitiesof gold and flver

on Pizarro which he imported, filled the kingdom with no
and Almna.
fro. less aftonilhment than they had excited in Panama

r See NOTE X.

ZrateC, lib. ii. . io-

1 3. Vega, p. 1 , lib . i. o , a.

9. &c. Gomar Hil. c. 126, &c. Remefal Hil. Gordul,
lib. iii. c 6. Herrera, dcc. 5. lib.vi. c. l, a. 7, S.

Se NOTE XI.

and

and the adjacent provinces. Pizarro was received a O O
by the emperor with the attention due to the bearer __
of a present so rich, as co exceed any idea which '1
the Spaniards had formed concerning the value of
their acquisitions in America, even after they had
been ten years matters of Mexico. In recom-
pence of his brother's services, his authority was
confirmed with new powers and privileges, and the
addition of seventy leagues, extending along the
coast, to the southward of the territory granted in
his former patent. Almagro received the honours
which he had so long desired. The tite of Ade-
lantado, or governor, was conferred upon him,
with jurifdi&ion over two hundred leagues of coun-
try, stretching beyond the southern limits of the
province allotted to Pizarro. Ferdinand himself
did not go unrewarded. He was admitted inta the
military order of St. Jago, a diftin&cion always
acceptable to a Spanih gentleman, and soon
let out on his return to Peru, accompanied by
many persons of higher rank than had yet served
in that country .

SOME account of his negociations reached Peru Beginnitft

of ditfen.

before he arrived there; himiclf. Almagro no ^loibe-
sooner learned that he had obtained the royal grant tw",n .
of an independent government, than, pretending Alniro.
that Cuzco, the imperial residence of the Incas,
lay within 4, boupdaries, he attempted to render

b Zarate, ib.iii. . Vip.

c3. V , . ni. . c. 9 Her
ret, dec. $. lib. vi. . 3.

a 4 himself

B OK himself matter of that important station. Juan
L* . and Gonzalez Pizarro prepared to oppose him.

S34. Each of the contending parties was supported by

powerful adherents, and the dispute was on the
point of being terminated by the sword, when
Francis Pizarro arrived in the capital. The recon-
ciliation between him and Almagro had never been
cordial. The treachery of Pizarro in engrofling
to himself all the honours and emoluments, which
ought to have been divided with his associate, was
always present in both their thoughts. The former,
conscious of his own perfidy, did not expe&t for-
givenefs; the latter, feeling that he had been de-
ceived, was impatient to be avenged; and though
avarice and ambition had induced them not only
to dissemble their sentiments, but even to a& in
concert while in pursuit of wealth and power, no
sooner did they obtain poffefiion of these, than the
fame passions which had formed this temporary
union, gave rife to jealousy and discord. To each
of them was attached a small band of interested
dependents, who, with the malicious art peculiar
to such men, heightened their suspicions, and mag-
nified every appearance of offence. But with all
those feeds of enmity in their minds, and thus
afiduoufly cherished, each was so thoroughly ac-
quainted with the abilities and courage of his rival,
that they equally dreaded the consequences of an
open rupture. The fortunate arrival of Pizarro at
Cuzco, and the address mingled with firmness
which he manifcfted in his expofulations with

U I Almagro

Almagro and his partzans, averted that evil for 3B o o
the present. A new reconciliation took place the i
chief article of which was, that Almagro lhould m5*
attempt the conquest of Chili i and if he did not
find,in that province an eftablilhment adequate to
his merit and expe&ations, Pizarro, by way of in-
demnification, should yield up to him a part of
Peru. This new agreement, though confirmed Junret
with the fame sacred folemniies as their first con-
tra&, was observed with as little fidelity '.

SOON after he concluded this important tranf- Regultions

action, Pizarro marched back to the countries on ofPiao.
the sea-coast, and as he now enjoyed an interval of
tranquillity, undisturbed by any enemy, either
Spanish or Indian, he applied himself with that
persevering ardour, which diftinguilhes his cha-
ra&er, to introduce a form of regular government
into the extensive provinces fubjeCf to his autho-
rity. Though ill qualified by his education to
enter into any difquifrion concerning the principles
of civil policy, and little accustomed by his former
habits of life to attend to its arrangements, his
natural sagacity supplied the want both of science
and experience. He distributed the country into
various diftri&es he appointed proper magirates
to preside in each; and eftablilhed regulations con-
cerning the administration of justice, the coUleion

Zarate, lib. ii. c. 13. Vega, p. Ii. lib. ii. c. 19, Benzo,
lib. Iii. c. 6. Ierrern dec . I5.. ii, c. 8.

of

a o o K of the royal revenue, the working of the mines,
_., and the treatment of the Indians, extremely simple,
'34- but well calculated to promote the public profpe-

rity. But, though, for the present, he adapted his
plan to the infant state of his colony, his aspiring
mind looked forward to its future grandeur. He

roundation confidered himself as laying the foundation of a
( Li"m. great empire, and deliberated long, and with much

solicitude, in what place he should fix the feat of
government. Cuzco, the imperial city of the
Incas, was situated in a corner of the empire, above
four hundred miles from the sea, and much farther
from Quito, a province of whose value he had
formed an high idea. No other settlement of the
Peruvians was so considerable as to merit the name
of a town, or to allure the Spaniards to fix their
residence in it. But, in marching through the
country, Pizarro had been struck with the beauty
and fertility of the valley of Rimac, one of the
most extensive and best cultivated in Peru. There,
on the banks of a small river,'of the fame name
with the vale which it waters and enriches, at the
diftancc of fix miles from Callao, the most com-
modious harbour in the Pacific Ocean, he founded
a city which he defined to be the capital of his

3Ss. government. He gave it the name of Ciudad de
Jnuary I. los Reyes, either from the circumstance of having

laid the firit stone, at that season when the church
celebrates the festival of the Three Kings, or, as
is more probable, in honour of Juana and Charles,
the joint sovereigns of Castile. This name it Rill

7 retains

retais among the Spaniards, iwr egal and fortnal a o, Jr
deedsi but it is better knQon to reigners by that ~ ,,
of Zira)a a cormpdon of the ancient appellation of '
the valley in which it is situated. Under his in-
fpecion, the buildings advanced with such rapi-
dity, tha it loon alfumed the form of a city, which,
by a magnificent palace that he ereaed for himflf,
and, by the tately hoies built by several of his
officers, gave, even in its infancy, some indication
of its subsequent grandeur .

IN confequcnce of what had been agreed with umagmiu.

Pizarro, Almagro began his march towards Chili M t CiL
and as he poflcffed in an eminent degree the virtue,
most admired by soldiers, boundless liberality and
fearless courage, his standard was followed by five
hundred and seventy men, the greatest body of
Europeans that had hitherto been aflembled in
Peru. From impatience to finilh the expedition,
or from that contempt of hardship and danger
acquired by all the Spaniards who had served long
in America, Almagro, initead of advancing along
the level country on the coast, chose to march
across the mountains by a route that was florter
indeed, but almost impraticable. In this attempt
his troops were exposed to every calamity which
men can fuffcr, from fatigue, from famine, and
from the rigour of the climate in those elevated
regions of the torrid zone, where the degree of

d Herren, dec. S. Ub. ,i. c. is. lib. vii. c. s3. Calacho
Cotoica, ib. i.c. 37. Barneuvo, Lima fondara, i. 89f.

cold

s 0 0 K cold is hardly inferior to what is felt within the

-^ »

_ polar circle. Many of them perilhed; and the
*5359 survivors, when they descended into the fertile

plains of Chili, had new difficulties to encounter.
They found there a race of men very different from
the people of Peru, intrepid, hardy, independent,
and in their bodily constitution, as well as vigour
of spirit, nearly resembling the warlike tribes in
North America. Though filled with wonder at
the first appearance of the Spaniards, and till
more astonished at the operations of their cavalry
and the effects of their fire-arms, the Chilefe soon
recovered so far from their furprize, as not only to
defend themselves with obstinacy, but to attack
their new enemies with more determined fierceness
than any American nation had hitherto discovered.
The Spaniards, however, continued to penetrate
into the country, and collected some considerable
quantities of gold; but were so far from thinking
of making any settlement amidst such formidable
neighbours, that, in spite of all the experience and
valour of their leader, the final issue of the expedi-
tion fill remained extremely dubious, when they
were recalled from it by an unexpeted revolution
in Peru . The causes of this important event I
fllall endeavour to trace to their source.

An inilr- So many adventurers had flocked to Peru from
re:lion of
lhc c.ru. every Spanifli colony in America, and all with

v Zarate, lib. iii. c. i. Gomara Hilt. c. 131. Vega, p. 2.

lib. ii. c. 2o. Ovalle Hilt.. de Clile, lib. iv. c. 15, &c.
Herrcra, dec. I. lib. vi. c. 9. lib. x. c. i, &c.

such

such high expe&tations of accumulating independ- B O°v K
ent fortunes at once, that, to men poiuefled with .--»
notions so extravagant, any mention of acquiring '3S'
wealth gradually, and by schemes of patient in-
dufiry, would have been not only a disappoint-
ment, but an insult. In order to find oc-
cupation for men who could not with safety be
allowed to remain inacive, Pizarro encouraged
some of the most distinguished officers who had
lately joined him, to invade different provinces of
the empire, which the Spaniards had not hitherto
visited. Several large bodies were formed for this
purpose; and about the time that Almagro set out
for Chili, ehey marched into remote diftris' of
the country. No soonet did Manco Capac, the ts rife,
Inca, observe the inconsiderate security of the Spa-
niards in thus dispersing their troops, and that only
a handful of soldiers remained in Cuzco, under
Juan and Gonzalez Pizarro, than he thought that
the happy period was at length come for vindi-
cating his own rights, for avenging the wrongs of
his country, and extirpating its opprelffor Though
ftricly watched by the Spaniards, who allowed
him to reside in the palace of his ancetfors at
Cuzco, he found means of communicatinig his
scheme to the persons who were to be entrusted
with the execution of it. Among people accuf-
tomed to revere their sovereign as a divinity,
every hint of his will carries the authority of a
command; and they themselves were now con-
vinced, by the daily increase in the number of

their
. .~~~~~~~~~

0BOO K their invaders, that the fond hopes which they
V.
-* -had long entertained of their voluntary departure
'S35- were altogether vain. Al perceived that a vi-

gorous effort of the whole nation was requisite to
expel them, and the preparations for it were car-
ried on with the secrecy and silence peculiar to
Americans.
and pro AFTER some unsuccessful attempts of the Inca

re to make his escape, Ferdinand Pizarro happening
,is6. to arrive at that time in Cuzco, he obtained per-

million from him to attend a great feffival which
was to be celebrated a few leagues from the capi-
tal. Under pretext of that solemnity, the great
men of the empire were alfembled. As soon as
the Inca joined them, the standard of war was
creced; and in a ihort time all the fighting men,
from the confines of Quito to the frontier of Chili,
were in arms. Many Spaniards, living securely
on the settlements allotted them, were mafiacred.
Several detachments, as they marched carelefly
through acountry which seemed to be tamely sub-
mnilive to their dominion, were cut off to a man.
An army amounting (if we may believe the Spa-
niih writers) to two hundred thousand men, at-
tacked Cuzco, which the three brothers endea-
voured to defend with only one hundred and
seventy Spaniards. Another formidable body in-
veiled Lima, and kept the governor closely lhut
up. There was no longer any communication be-
tween the two cities; the numerous forces of the

Peruvians

Peruvians fpmading over the country, intercepted B o o K
every mefTenger; and as the parties in Cuzco and . -- j
Lima were equally unacquainted with the fate of 53
their countrymen, each boded the worst concerning
the other, and imagined that they themselves were
the only persons who had survived the general ex-
tinaion of the Spanish name in Peru d.

IT was at Cuzco, where the Inca commanded in sipgof

person, that the Peruvians made their chief effort. cuco.
During nine months they carried on the siege with
incelfant ardour, and in various forms; and though
they displayed not the fame undaunted ferocity as
the Mexican warriors, they condu6ted 'ome of
their operations in a manner which discovered
greater sagacity, and a genius more susceptible of
improvementt in the military, art. They not only
observed the advantages which the Spaniards de-
rived from th'eirtificipline and their weapons, but
they endeavoured to imitate the former, and turn
the latter a'ihtht them.' they armed a confider-
able body of their bravei warriors with the sword,
the' ears, and bucklers, which they had taken
from the Spanish soldiers whom they had cut off
in difiercnt parts of the country. Thefejhey endea-
vpoure to marflal in that regular compa& order,
to 'which experience had taught them that the Spa-

' Vega, p.l i. lib. ii. c. sa. Zarate, lib. iii. c. 3. Cieca

de Leon, c. 8a. Gemira lilt c. c. 135 errera, dea. so
lib. viii. c. S.

niards

B o K niards were indebted for their irrefiible force in

_-L a&ion. Some appeared in the field with Spanish
536-. muikets, and had'.acquired [kill and resolution

enough to use them. A few of the boldest, among
whom was the Inca himself, were mounted on the
horses which they had taken, and advanced briskly
to the charge like Spanish cavaliers,with their lances
in the reft. It was more by their numbers, however,
than by those imperfet essays to imitate European
arts and to employ European arms, that the Pe-
ruvians annoyed the Spaniards . In spite of the.
valour, heightened by despair, with which the
three brothers defended Cuzco, Manco Capac re-
covered.poffeflion of one half of his capital; and
in their various efforts to drive him out of it, the
Spaniards loft Juan Pizarro, the belt beloved of
all the brothers, together with some other persons
of note. Worn out with the fatigue ofinceflant duty,
distressed with want of provision%, and despairing
of being able any longer to resist an enemy whose
numbers daily increased, the soldiers becawm im-
patient to abandon Cuzco, in hopes either of join-
ing their countrymen, if any of them yet fulyvjved,
or of forcing their way to the sea, and finding tome
means of escaping from a country which had been
so fatal to the iSpanifh rname '. While they were
brooding over those desponding thoughts, which
their officers laboured in vain to dispel, Alma-
gro appeared suddenly in the neigllbourbood of
Cuzco.

Sec NOTE XI. f Herrera, dec. 5. lib. viii. 0.4.

THe

THi accounts traninitted to Almagro concern- B o K

ing the general infurredion of the Peruvians,were N .V
such as would have induced him, without hefita- A^,,6O
tion, to relinquilh the conquest of Chili, and Alb,"s
haften to the aid of his countrymen. But in this of his con.
reolution he was confirmed by a motive lefi gene-
rous, but more interesting. By the fame messen-
ger who brought him intelligence of the Inca's
revolt, he received the royal patent creating him
governor of Chili, and defining the limits of his
jurifdi&ion. Upon confidering the tenor of it, he
deemed it manifest beyond contradition, that
Cuzco lay within the boundaries of his 'govern-
ment, and he was equally solicitous to prevent the
Peruvians from recovering poffelion of their capi-
tal, and to wrest it out of the hands of the Pizarros.
From impatience to accomplilh both, he ventured
to return by a new route; and in marching through
the randy plains on the coast, he suffered, from
heat and drought, calamities of a new species,
hardly inferior to those in which he had been in-
volved by cold and famine on the summits of'the
Andes.

His arrival at Cuzco was in a critical moment. '137.

The Spaniards and Peruvians fixed their eyes upon uions,
him with equal solicitude. The former, as he
did not Rudy to conceal his prctcefions, were at a
loss whether to welcome him as a deliverer, or to
take precautions against him as an enemy. The
latter, knowing the points in coteft between him

VOL. Il, F and

i0 0o K and his countrymen, flattered themselves tbht they

hV -A had more to hope than to dread from his opera-
1537. tions. Almogro himself, unacquainted with the

detail of the events which had happened in his
abefnce, and solicitous to learn the precise polure
of affairs, advanced towards the capital slowly,
and with great circumfp&cion. Various negocia-
tions with both parties were set on foot. The
Inca conduEted them on his part with much ad-
dress. At first he endeavoured to gain the friend-
ihip of Almagro; and after many fruidefs over-
tures, despairing of any cordial union with a Spa-
niard, he attacked him by surprise with a nume-
rous body of chosen troops. But the Spanish difci-
pline and valour maintained their wonted fupe-
rioriry. The Peruvians were repulsed with such
nlaughter, that a great part of their army dispersed,
and Almagro proceeded to the gates of Cuzco
without interruption.

Takes pof- TnB Pizarros, as they had no longer to make
ffflon of
cuzO. head against the Peruvians, diredted all their at,

tention towards their new enemy, and took mea-
fures to obitru& his entry into the capital. Pru-
dence, however, rcftrained both parties for some
time from turning their arms against one another,
while surroundcd by common enemies, who would
rejoice in the mutual laughter. Different schemes
of accommodation were proposed. Each endea-
voured to deceive the other, or to corrupt his
folbwers: The generous, open, affable temper of

Almagro

Almagro gained many adherents of the Pizarros, B o o it
who were disgusted with their hatlh domineering n
manners. Encouraged by this defection, he ad- ',s'
vanced towards the city by night, surprised the
centinels, or was admitted by them, and inveing
the house where the two brothers resided, com-
pelled them, after an obstinate defence, to fur-
render at discretion. Almagro's claim of jurif-
di&tion over Cuzco was universally acknowledged,
and a form of adminiftrarion established in his
name '

Two or three persons only were killed in this Cvl wNe,

first a& of civil hostility; but it was soon followed ibccefsrof
by scenes more bloody. Francis Pizarro having Almaro,
dispersed the Peruvians who had invested Lima,
and received some considerable reinforcements from
Hispaniola and Nicaragua, ordered five hundred
men, under the command of Alonfo de Alvarado,
to march to Cuzco, in hopes of relieving his bro-
thers, if they and their garrison were not already
cut off by the Peruvians. This body, which, at
that period of the Spani(h power in America, must
be deemed a considerable force, advanced near to
the capital before they knew that they had any
enemy more formidable than Indians to encounter.
It was with aftonilhment that they beheld their
countrymen posted on the banks of the river Aban*
cay to oppose their. progress. Almagro, however,

Zarate, lib. iii. e. 4. Vega, p. 1 . lib. il. c. 29. 31.
Gomar Hilt. c. 13. Herre, dec. 6. lib. ii, c. -5.

~F
a ~ wishcd

B O O K wished rather to gain than to conquer them, ad

-_- * by bribes and promises endeavoured to seduce their
537. leader. The fidelity of Alvarado remained un-

bhaken; but his talents for war were not equal to
his virtue. Almagro amused him with various
movements, of which he did not comprehend the
July :. meaning, while a large detachment of chosen fol-

diers palled the river by night, fell upon his camp
by surprise, broke his troops before they had time
to form, and took him prisoner, together with his
principal officersh.

butdoesnot By the sudden rout of this body, the contest
improve his
advantages. between the two rivals must have been decided,

if Almagro had known as well how to improve as
how to gain a vicory. Rodrigo Orgognez, an
officer of great abilities, who having served under
the constable Bourbon, when he led the Imperial
army to Rome, had been accustomed to bold and
decisive measures, advised him iniRantly to issue
orders for putting to death Ferdinand and Gon-
zalo Pizarros, Alvarado, and a few other perobns
whom he could not hope to gain, and to march
dire&ly with his victorious troops to Lima, before
the governor had time to prepare for his defence.
But Almagro, though he difccrned at once the
utility of the counfcl, and though he had courage
to have carried it into execution, suffercd himself
to be influenced by sentiments unlike those of a

h Zarate, lib. iii. c. 6. Gom. Hifl. c. 138. Vega, p. z t
lib. ii. c, 32. 34. Hcrreri, dec. 6. lib. ii. c. 9.

soldier

soldier of fortune grown old in service, and by B o O
scruples which suited not the chief of a party who
had drawn his sword in civil war. Feelings ofhuma- 's7.
nity restrained him from ihedding the blood of his
opponents; and the dread of being deemed a rebel,
deterred him from entering a province which the
king had allotted to another. Though he knew
that arms must terminate the dispute between himl
and Pizarro, and resolved not to shun thag mode
of decision, yet, with a timid delicacy preposterous
at such a junture, he was so solicitous that his
rival should be confidered as the aggressor, that
he marched quietly back to Cuzco, to wait his ap-
proach '

PIZARRO was still unacquainted with all the in- DifarTf

teresting events which had happened near Cuzco. Pliza.
Accounts of Amalgro's return, of the loss of the
capital, of the death of one brother, of the impri-
fonment of the other two, and of the defeat of
Alvarado, were brought to him at once. Such a
tide of misfortunes almost overwhelmed a spirit
which had continued firm and ere& under the
rudest Ihocks of adversity. But the necefllty of
attending to his own safety, as well as the desire
of revenge, preserved him from finking under it.
He took measures for both with his wonted saga- Hi;a rtfU
city. As he had the command of the sea-coast,
and expeted considerable supplies' both of men
and military flores, it was no less his intcreft to

Herrera, dec. 6. lib. i. c. so, 1i.

r 3 gain

B o K c gain time, and to avoid action, than it was that of
a . Almagro to precipitate operations, and bring the.

s37. contest to a speedy issue. He had recourse to arts

whichllie had formerly pratifcd with success, and
Alrmaro was again weak enough to susser himself
to be 'amused with a profpe&' of terminating their
differteces by some amicable accommodation. By
varying his overtures, and shifting his ground as
often as it suited his purpose, sometimes teeming
to yield eViip- thing which his rival could desire,
and then rcpc"ting all that he.had granted, Pizarro
dexterously. protraced the negociation to such a
length, that though;.every day was precious to
Almagro, several' jhths clapsed without coming
to any final agreciient. While the attention of
Almagro, and of the officers with whom he con-
fulted, was occupied in detecing and eluding the
fraudulent intentions of the governor, Gonzalo
Pizarro and Alvarado found means to corrupt the
soldiers to whose custody they were committed,
and not only made their escape themselves, but
persuaded sixty of the men who formerly guarded
them to accompany their flightk. Fortune having
thus delivered one of his brothers, the governor
scrupled not at one a& of perfidy more to procure
the release of the other. Hecpropofed, that every
point in controversy between Almagro and himself
ihould be submitted to the decision of their fove-
reign; that until his award was known, each
%hould retain undisturbed poffcelion of whatever

k Zaratc, lib. iii. c. 8. icrrcra, dec. 6. lib. ii. c. 14.

part

part of he country he now occupied; tduhat e- o o.,
nand Pizarro ihould be set at liberty, and. retun
intantly to Spain, together with de oficers, whom 3"
Almagro purpofd to lend thither to Peprefent the
justice of his claims. Obvious as the design of
Pizarro was in those propositions, and familiar as
his artifices might now have been to his opponnt,
Almagro, with a credulity approaching to infitua-
tion, relied on his sincerity, and concluded an
agreement on these terms'.

THE moment that Ferdinand Pizarro recovered Hi prep,.

his liberty, the governor, no longer fettered in his wuO.'
operations by anxiety about his brother's life, threw
off every disguise which his concern for it had
obliged him to assume. The treaty was forgotten,
pacific and conciliating measures were no nore
mentioned; it was in the field he openly declared,
and not in the cabinet; by arms, and not by ne-
gociation; that it must now be determined who
should be nter of Peru. The rapidity of his
preparations suited such a decisive efolution. Seven
hundred men were hfon ready to march toward
Cuzco. The command of these was given to ha s5t
two brothers, in whom he could percty onfJde
for the execution of his most violent fcemea, as
they were urged on, not only by the cmmity flow.
ing from the rivallhip between their family aad
Almagro, but animated with the dere of venge~

I Herrera, dec. 6. lb. iii . . 9. Zarat, Ub. hi. c. 9.
GomaraHi,. c. 140. Vega, p. Ii. lib. i, . .3S.

lP 4 ance,

B P o K ance, excited by recolleaion of their own recent

' V, disgrace and fuffcrings. After an unfucccfiful at
s383 tempt to cross the mountains in the direc road be-

tween Lima and Cuzco, they marched towards the
south along the coast as far. as Nafca, and then
turning to the left, penetrated thiough the defiles
in that branch of the Andes which lay between
them and the capital. Almagro, iqrtead pfhearken-
ing to some of his officers, who advised him to at,
tempt the defence of those difficult pafres, waitc4
the approach of the enemy in the plain of Cuzco.
Two reasons seem to have induced him to take this
resolution, His followers amounted hardly to five
hundred, and he was afraid of weakening such a
feeble body by fending any.dectchment towards the
mountains. His cavalry far exceeded that of the
adverse party, both in number and discipline, and
it was only in an open country that he could avail
himself of that advantage,

Hs amy THE Pizarros advanced without any obitrudion,

,narchc to but what arose from the nature of the desert and
Cuzco.

horrid regions through which they marched. As
soon as they reached the plain,. both factions were
equally impatient to bring this long-protrated
,contest to an .ifue. Though countrymen and
-friend+, the subjes .of the fame sovereign, and
each with the royal standard displayed; and though
they beheld the mountains that surrounded the plain
in which they were drawn up, covered with a vast
multitude of Indians, aflembled to enjoy the spec-

tack.

tacle of their mutual carnage, and prepared to at- s o o K

V.

tack whatever party remained master of the field; '- 1
so fell and implacable was the rancour which had *'Is
taken poflieffon of every breast, that not one pa-
cific counsel, not a single overture towards accom-
modation proceeded from either fide. Unfortu-
nately for Almagro, he was To worn out with the
fatigues of service, to which his advanced age was
unequal, that, at this crisis of his fate, he could
not exert his wonted activity; and he was obliged
to commit the leading of his troops to Orgognez,
who, though an officer of great merit, did not
possess the fame ascendant either over the spirit or
affetions of the soldiers, as the chief whom they
had long been accustomed to follow and revere.

THE conflict was fierce, and maintained by each April .

party with equal courage. On the fide of Alma- defa,
gro, were more veteran soldiers, and a larger pro-
portion of cavalry; but these were counterbalanced
by Pizarro's superiority in numbers, and by two
companies of welldifciplined mulketeers, which,
on receiving an account of the infurretion of the
Indians, the emperor had sent from Spain . As
the use of fire-arms was not frequent among the
adventurers in America", hastily equipped for
service, at their own expence, this small band of
soldiers, regularly taied and armed, was a no-
velty in Peru, and decided the fate of the day.

Herrera, dec. 6. lib. iii. c. 8.
a Zra te, lib. i. c. 8.

Wherever

o o x Wherever it advanced, the weight of a heavy and

X" L .. well-fuftained fire bore down horse and foot before
's3a it; and Orgognez, while he eadeavaured to rally

and animate his troops, having received a dangerous
wound, the rout became general. The barbarity
of the conquerors stained the glory which they ac-
quired by this complete victory. The violence of
civil rage hurried on some to slaughter their coun-
trymen with indiscriminate cruelty; the meanness
of private revenge inffigated others to single out
individuals as the objects of their vengeance. Or.
gognez and several officers of distinction were maf-
sacred in cold blood; above a hundred and forty
soldiers fell in the field; a large proportion, where
the number of combatants were few, and the heat
of the contest soon over. Almagro, though so
feeble that he could not bear the motion of a horse,
had insisted on being carried in a litter to an emi-
nence which overlooked the field of battle. From
thence, in the utmost agitation of mind, he viewed
the various movements of both parties, and at last
beheld the total defeat of his own troops, with all
the passionate indignation of a veteran leader long
nd takcn. accuRfomed to vi&ory. He endeavoured to save

himself by flight, but was taken prisoner, and
guarded with rtle ftrideft vigilance .

TIEt Indians, instead of executing the resolution
which they had formed, retired quietly after the

0 Zarate, lib. iii. c. il, 12. Vega, p. It. lib. ii. c. 36-

H8. Herrera, dec. 6. lib, iii. c. o10-1. lib. iv. c. i-6.

battle

battle was over; and in the history of the New oo -.
World, there is not a more liriking intance of the v -
wonderful ascendant which the Spaniards had ac- z3.
quired over its inhabitants, than that after feeing
one of the contending parties ruined and dispersed,
and the other weakened and fatigued, they had
not courage to fall upon their enemies, when for-
tune presented an opportunity of attacking them
with such advantage P.

Cuzco was pillaged by the victorious troops, who New expe-

found there a considerable booty, confiRing partly ditiont"
of the gleanings of the Indian treasures, and partly
of the wealth amassed by their antagonists from
the spoils of Peru and Chili. But so far did this,
and whatever the bounty of their leader could add
toit, fall below the high ideas of the recompence
which they conceived to be due to their merit, that
Ferdinand Pitarro, unable to gratify such extra-
vagant expetations, had recourse to the fame ex-
pedient which his brother had employed on a fimi-
lar occasion, and endeavoured to find occupation
for this turbulent assuming spirit, in order to pre-
vent it from breaking out into open mutiny. With
this view, he encouraged his most ative officers to
attempt the discovery and reducsion of various
provinces which had not hitherto submitted to the
Spaniards. To every standard ere&ted by the
leaders who undertook any of those new expedi,

f Zar&te lib. ii. c. It. Vegs, p. 1l. lib. iL c. 38.

tions,

s op tiKons, volunteers resorted with the ardour and hope
I._ peculiar to the age. Several of Almagro's soldiers
3538. joined them, and thus Pizarro had the- fatisfaftion

of being delivered both from the importunity of
his difeontented friends, and the dread of his an-
cient enemies '.
Almagre ALMAGRO himself remained for several months

in custody, under all the anguish of fufpence. For
although his doom was determined by the Pizarros
from the moment that he fell into their hands,
prudence constrained them to defer gratifying their
vengeance, until the soldiers who had served under
him, as well as several of their own followers in
whom they could not perfectly confide, had left
Cuzco. As soon as they set out upon their differ-
ent expeditions, Almagro was impeached of trea-
ondemned, son, formally tried, and condemned to die. The

sentence astonished him, and though he had often
braved death with undaunted spirit in the field, its
approach under this ignominious form appalled
him so much, that he had recourse to abjet sup-
plications, unworthy of his former fame. He be-
fought the Pizarros to remember the ancient friend-
ship between their brother and him, and how much
he had contributed to the prosperity of their fa-
mily; he reminded them of the humanity with
which, in opposition to the repeated remonstrances
·of his own most attached friends, he had spared

q Zarate, lib. iii c. c1. Goman Hit. c. zil. Herrera,
dec. 6. lib. iv. c. 7.

their

their lives when he had them in his power he z o ox
conjured them to pity his age and infirmities, and v_
to susser him to pass the wretched remainder of his tiS-
days-in bewailing his crimes, and in making his
peace with Heaven. The entreaties, fays a Spa-
nith historian, of a man so much beloved, touched
many an unfeeling heart, and drew tears from
many a fern eye. But the brothers remained in-
flexible. As soon as Almagro knew his fate to be
inevitable, he met it with the dignity and fortitude
of a veteran. He was firangled in prison, and as- and putio
terwards publicly beheaded. He' suffered in the
feventy-fifth year of his age, and left one son by an
Indian woman of Panama, whom, though at that
time a prisoner in Lima, he named as fuccefor to
his government, pursuant to a power which the
emperor had granted him:'

As, during the civil difIentions in Peru, all in- s539

tercourfe with Spain was suspended, the detail of tion the
the extraordinary tranfa&tions there did not soon P`o ,f
reach the court. Unfortunately for the victorious C,',t,*t
faftion, the first intelligence was brought thither Peru
by some of Almagro's officers, who left the coun-
try upon the ruin of their, cause; and they related
what had happened, with every circumitance un-
favourable to Pizarro and his brothers. Their
ambition, their breach of the most solemn engge-
ments, their violence and cruelty, werc painted

' Zarate, lib. iii, c. 1X. Gomara HiR. c. t41. Vega, p.,s i.
lib. ii. c. 39. Herrera, dec. 6. lib. iv. c. 9 i. v. . 1.

with

B OO K with all the malignity and exaggeration of party
~.-..s hatred. Ferdinand Pizarro, who arrived soon as-
'539* ter, and appeared in court with extraordinary fplen-

dor, endeavoured to efface the impression which
their accusations had made, and to justify his bro-
ther and himself by representing Almagro as the
aggressor. The emperor and his ministers, though
they could not pronounce which of the contending
factions was most criminal, clearly discerned the
fatal tendency of their dissentions. It was obvious,
that while the leaders, entrulted with the condu&
of two infant colonies, employed the arms which
ihould have been turned against the common ene-
my, in destroying one another, all attention to the
public good mutt ceate, and there was reason to
dread that the Indians might improve the advan-
tage which the dilunion of the Spaniards presented
to them, and extirpate both the victors and van-
quifhed. But the evil was more apparent than the
remedy. Where the information which had been
received was so defective and suspicious, and the
scene of ation so remote, it was almost impoflible
to chalk out the line' of conduct that ought to be
followed; and before any plan that should be ap-
proved of in Spain could be carried into execution,
the situation of the parties, and the circumstances
of affairs, might alter so entirely as to render its
cffeets extremely pernicious.

Vtl.. NOTHING therefore remained but to fend a per-
thithcr^h son to Peru, vested with extensive and discretionary

5 power,

power, whoy 4rser viewing deliberately the posture i d a
of affairs with his own eyes, and enquiring upon '

-.-

the tpot into the conduc of the different leaders, MpT-
should be authorised to establish the government powers
in that form which he deemed most conducive to
the interest of the parent state, and the welfare of
the colony. The man fele&ed for this important
charge was Chriftoval Vaca de Castro, a judge in
the court of royal audience at Valladolid; and his
abilities, integrity, and firmness, justified the choice.
His inftru&ions, though ample, were not such as
to fetter him in his operations. According to the
different aspet of affairs, he had power to take
upon him different charaaers. If he found the
governor still alive, he was to assume only the title
ofjudge, to maintain the appearance of acting in
concert with him, and to guard against giving any
just cause of offence to a man who had merited so
highly of his country. But if Pizarro were dead,
he was entrusted with a commiflion that he might
then produce, by which he was appointed his flc-
ceffor in the government of Peru. This attention
to Pizarro, however, seems to have flowed rather
from dread of his power, than from any approba-
tion of his measures; for at the very time that the
coort teemed To oflicitous not to irritate him, his
brother Ferdinand was arrested at Madrid, and
confined to a prison, where he remained aboves
twenty years '.

, Gomara Hist. c. ,4. Vela, p. 1t. lib. ii. c. 40. Her.

ra, dec.6. lib. viii. .
c . l, . ib.x. c. a.

WIILEL

B K WHILE Vaca de Castro was preparing for his
,v,. voyage, events of great moment happened in Peru.
rya ;u- The governor, confidering himself, upon the death
vld.i r of Almagro, as the unrivalled poffcffor of that vast
ft . empire, proceeded to parcel out its territories

among the conquerors; and had this division been
made with any degree of impartiality, the extent
of country which he had to bestow, was fuffcient
to have gratified his friends, and to have gained
his enemies. But Pizarro conduted this tranfac-
tion, not with the equity and candour of a judge
attentive to discover and to reward merit, but with
the illiberal spirit of a party leader. Large diftri&s,
in parts of the country most cultivated and populous,
were set apart as his own property, or granted to
his brothers, his adherents and favourites. To
others, lots les valuable and inviting were as-
signed. The followers of Almagro, amongst whom
were many of the original adventurers to whose
valour and perseverance Pizarro was indebted for
his success, were totally excluded from any portion
in those lands, towards the acquisition of which
they had contributed To largely. As the vanity of
every individual set an immoderate value upon his
own services, and the idea of each concerning the
rccompence due to them rose gradually to a more
exorbitant height in proportion as their conquests
extended, all who were disappointed in their ex-
petations exclaimed loudly against the rapacious-
ness and partiality of the governor. The partisans

13 of

of Aiago .murmured in fccrt, and meditated a o 6 K
terenged '., . - .«w

VI,

RAPID as the progress of the Spaniards in South PrFAof

America had been since Pizarro landed in Peru, rm
their avidity of dominion was not yet satisfied.
The officers to whom Ferdinand Pitarro gave the
command of different detachments, penetrated hxto
several new provinces, and though some of them
were exposed to great hardships in the cold and
barren regions of the Andes, and,others fuflered
distress not inferior amidst the woods and marhes
.of the plains, they made discoveries and conquests
which not only extended their knowledge of 'the
counrry, but added considerably to the terrko~es
of Spain in the New World. Pedro de-ilddia
reaifmed .Almagro's scheme of invading 'Cili,
and notwithfanding the fortitude of the na~vs in
defending their pofflefons, made such progress in
the ednqueft of the country, that he fobndd the
city of St. Jago, and gave a beginning to the efta-
blilhment of the Spanilh dominion in that' pro-
vince'1. But of all the enterprizes undertaken Remrkahli
about: his period, that of Gonz*lo Pitairo' as Pdlonaiol
the moR temarkable. The governor, who'fiCes P'rO.
to have rtolved that no perfoh in NPru fhoidda'o-r
fess any fhtion of diftinguihed eminence or auto:-

Vega, p. rs. ib.iiic.. c. ermn, dee. 6. ib. vii,
c. S.

Zarate, lib. iii. c. 3. Ovalle, lib. ii c. I, &c.
VOL. il. o tit

B 0 0 K rity but those of his own family, had deprived Be-
L-.-_ nalcazar, the conqueror of Quito, of his com-
'54a0 mand in that kingdoms and appointed his brother

Gonzalo to take the government of it. He in-
ftru&ed him to attempt the discovery and corqueft
of the country to the catl of the Andes, which,
according to the information of the Indians,
abounded with cinnamon and other valuable spices.
Gonzalo, not inferior to any of his brothers in
courage, and no less ambitious of acquiring dif-
tin&ion, eagerly engaged in this difficult service.
He set out from Quito at the head.of three hun-
dred and forty soldiers, near one half of whom
were horsemen, with four thousand Indians to
carry their provisions. In forcing their way
through the defiles, or over the ridges of the
Andes, excess of cold and fatigue, to neither of
which they were accustomed, proved fatal to the

Hardships greater part of their wretched attendants. The
thy endure. Spaniards, though more robuR, and inured to a

variety of climates, suffered considerably, and loft
some men; but when they descended into the low
country their distress increased. During two
months it rained incessantly, without any interval
of fair weather long enough to dry their clothes'.
The immense plains upon which they were now
entering, either altogether without inhabitants, or
occupied by the rudest and least industrious tribes in
the New World, yielded little fubifRcnce. They

Zarte, lib. iv. c. a.

could:

toidd not advance a Rep but as they cut a toad a o o
through woods, or made it through marshes. Such -
incessant toil, and continual scarcity of food, seem 's
more than fufficientto have exhausted and dispirited
any troops. But the fortitude and perseverance of
the Spaniards in the sixteenth century were infu.
perable. Allured by frequent but false accounts of
rich countries before them, they persisted in ftrug-
gling on, until they reached the banks of the Coca
or Napo, one of the large rivers whose waters
pour into the Maragnon, and contribute to its
grandeur. There, with infinite labour, they built
a bark, which they expe&ed would prove of great
utility, in conveying them over rivers, in pro-
curing provisions, and in exploring the country.
This was manned with fifty soldiers, under the
command of Francis Orellana, the officer next In
rank to Pizarro. The stream carried them down
with such rapidity, that they were soon far a-head
of their countrymen, who followed slowly and with
difficulty by land.

AT this distance from his commander, Orellana, Deserted by

a young man of an aspiring mind, began to fancy OrtL
himself independent, and transported with the pre-
dominantpaflon of the age, he formed the scheme
of diftinguihing hlmfelf m a discoverer by fol-
lowing the course of the Maragnon, until it joined
the ocean, and by surveying the aft regions
through which it flows. This scheme of Orel-
lana's was as bold as it was treacherous. For, if

o a he

a o o K he be chargeable with the guilt of having violated

V1. his duty to his commander, and with having aban-
xsi4 doned his fellow-foldiers in a pathless desert, where

they had hardly any hopes of success, or even of
safety, but what were founded on the service which
they expe&ed from the bark; his crime is, in some
measure, balanced by the glory of laving ventured
upon a navigation of near two thousand leagues,
through unknown nations, in a vessel hastily con-
ftru&ed, with green timber, and by very unskilful
hands, without provisions, without a compass, or
a pilot. But his courage and alacrity supplied

Sails down every defe&. Committing himself fearlessly to the
the Marag.
non. r guidance of the stream, the Napo bore him along

to the south, until he reached the great channel of
the Maragnon. Turning with it towards the coast,
he held on his course in that diretion. He made
frequent descents on both fides of the river, some-
times seizing by force of arms the provisions of the
fierce savages feated on its banks; and sometimes
procuring a fuipply of food by a friendly intercourse
with more gentle tribes. After a long series of
dangers, which he encountered with amazing for.
titude, and of distresses which he supported with
no less magnanimity, he reached the ocean r, where
new perils awaited him. These he likewise hlr-
mounted, and got Wfae to the Spanilh icttlement in
the ifand Cubagua; from thence he failed to Spain.
The vanity natural to travellers who visit regions
unknown to the ref of mankind, and the art of an

v See NOTE XIII.

adventurer,

adventurer, solicitous to magnify his own merit, B 0 o x
concurred in prompting him to mingle an extraor- -

v.

dinary proportion of the marvellous in the narra- 's"
tive of his voyage. He pretended.to have disco-
vered nations so rich, that the roofs of their
temples were covered with plates of gold; and de-
fcribed a republic of women so warlike and power-
ful, as to have extended their dominion over a con-
fiderable trast of the fertile plains which he had
visited. Extravagant as those tales were, the gave
rife to an opinion, that a region abounding with
gold, distinguished by the name of El Dorado, and
a community of Amazons, were to be found in
this part of the New World; and such is the pro-
penfity of mankind to believe what is wonderfiu
that it has been slowly and with difficulty that rea-
son and observation have exploded those fables.
The voyage, however, even when Rripped of every
romantic embellishment, deserves to be recorded,
xot only as one of the most memorable occurrences
in that adventurous age, but as the first event
which led to any certain knowledge of the exten-
five countries that stretch eastward from the Andes
to the ocean '

No words can describe the eonfternation of Pi- Ditnr of

zarro, when he did not find the bark at the con- P"iTo.
fluence of the Napo and Maragnon, where he had

r Zaate, lib. iv. c.4. omr His. c. 86. Vega,p. i .

lib.iii. c. 4. Herrerfdec. 6. lib. ix. c. s-- Rodriguex El
Muragon y Amasonu, lib.i. c. 3,

o 3 ordered

B O OK ordered Orellana to wait for him. He would not
(WV~ allow himself to fufpeft that a man, whom he had
·S4*o intrufded with such an important command, could

be so base and so unfeeling, as to desert him at
such a juncture. But imputing his absence from
the place of rendezvous to some unknown accident,
he advanced above fifty leagues along the banks
of the Maragnon, expe&ing every moment to fee
354?. the bark appear with a supply of provisions. At

length he came up with an officer whom Orellana
had left to perish in the desert, because he had the
courage to remonstrate againR his perfidy. From
him he learned the extent of Orellana's crime, and
his followers perceived at once their own defperato
fituarion, when deprived of their only resource,
The spirit of the stoutest hearted veteran funk with-
in him, and all demanded to be led back intantly,
Pizarro, though he assumed an appearance of tran-
quillity, did not oppose their inclination. But he
was now twelve hundred miles from Quito; and in
that long march the Spaniards encountered hard-
ihips greater than those which they had endured in
their progress outward, without the alluring hopes
which then toothed and animated them under their
fiifferings. Hunger compelled them to feed on
roots and berries, to eat all their dogs and horses,
to devour the most loathsome reptiles, and even to
gnaw the leather of their faddlks and fword-belts.
Four thousand Indians, and two hundred and
ten Spaniards, perished in this gild difaRfrous ex-
pedition, which continued near two years i and as

fifty

fifty men were aboard the bark with Orellana, only a o o
(ourfcore got back to Quito. These were naked v
like savages, and so emaciated with famine, or '54'
worn out with fatigue, that they had more the ap-
pearance of fpearcs than of men .

BuT, instead of returning to enjoy the repofc Numberof

.. .alecon.

which his condition required, Pizarro, on entering tu in
Quito, received accounts of a fatal event that Pu''
threatened calamities more dreadful to him than
those through which he had paifed. From the
time that his brother made that partial division of
his conquerts which has been mentioned, the ad-
herents of Almagro, confidering themselves aspro-
fcribcd by the party in power, no longer enter-
tainod any hope of bettering their condition.
Great numbers in derpair retorted to'Lima, where
the house of young Almagro was always open to
them, and the slender portion of his father's for-
tune, which the governor allowed him to enjoy,
was spent in affording them subsistence. The
warm attachment with which every person who
had served under the elder Almagro devoted him-
self to his interests, was quickly transferred to his
son, who was now grown up to the age of man-
hood, and pofleffed all the qualities which captiP
vate the affetions of soldiers. Of a graceful ap- conder
pearance, dexterous at all martial exercises, bold, M ri.a

their iq$der

Zarate, ib. iv. c. s-$. Vega, p. A . lib. ii. c. 3, 4, 5.

14. Herrera, dec. 6. lib. viii. c. 7, 8. lib. ix. c. s-5. dec. 7.
lib. iiic.c. 1. Piw,. Varones, lllumtr 349, &c.

0 4 open,

B 0 K open, generous, he seemed to be formed for comr

-- mand; and as his father, conscious of his own in-
54M- feriority, from the total want of education, had

been extremely attentive to have him inftru&ed in
every science becoming a gentleman; the accomr
pliihments which he had acquired heightened the
refpe&t of his followers, as they gave him diftintion
and eminence among illiterate adventurers. In
this young man the Almagrians found a point of
union which they wanted, and looking up to him
as their head, were ready to undertake any thing
for his advancement. Nor was affe&tion for Al-
magro their only incitement; they were urged on
by their own distresses. Many of them, deltitute
of common necessaries*, and weary of loitering
away life, a burden to their chief, or to such of
their associates as had saved some remnant of their
fortune from pillage and confiscation, longed im-
patiently for an occasion to exert their a&ivity and
courage, and began to deliberate how they might
be avenged on the author of all their misery.

Copirc Their frequent cabals did not pass unobserved;
g,"efp!h and the governor was warned to be on his guard

a. against men who meditated some desperate deed,

and had resolution to execute it, But either from
the native intrepidity of his mind, or from con-
tempt of persons whose poverty seemed to render
their machinations of little consequence, he dif-
regarded the admonitions of his friends. "' Be in
no pain," said he carelessly, "about my life; it

Scc NOTE XIV.

'3 is

is perfetly safe, as long as every man in Peru b o o.
knows that I can in a moment cut off any head 'a
which dares to harbour a thought againt it." This 'I
efcurity gave the Almagrians full leisure to digct
and ripen every part of their scheme and Juan de
Herrada, an officer of great abilities, who had the
charge of Almagro's education, took the direc-
tion of their consultations, with all the zeal which
this connecion inspired, and with all the authority
which the ascendant that he was known to have
over the mind of his pupil gave him,

ON Sunday, the twenty-ixth of June, at mid-

day, the season of tranquillity and repose in all
sultry climates, Herrada, at the head of eighteen
of the most determined conspirators, sallied out of
Almagro's house in complete armour; and draw-
ing their swords, as they advanced hafily towards
the governor's palace, cried out, " Long live the
king, but let the tyrant die !" Their afrociates,
warned of their motions by a signal, were in arms
at different fations ready to flpport them. Though
Pizarro was usually surrounded by such a nume-
rous train of attendants as suited the magnificence
of the most opulent subject of the age in which he
lived, yet as he was jus risen from table, and most
of his domestics had retired to their own apart-
ments, the conspirators paired through the two
outer courts of the palace unobserved. They were
at the bottom of the Raircafc, before a page in

waiting

0 o o x waiting could give the alarm to his matter, who

- was conversing with a few friends in a large hall.
'54' The governor, whose Ready mind no form of dan-

ger could appal, flarting up, called for arms, and
commanded Francisco de Chaves to make sis the
door. But that officer, who did not retain so much
pretence of mind as to obey this prudent order,
running to the top of the fiair-cale, wildly alked
the conspirators what they meant, and whither
they were going ? Instead of answering, they stab-
bed him to the heart, and burst into the hall.
Some of the persons who were there threw them-
selves from the windows; others attempted to fly;
and a few drawing their swords, followed their
leader into an inner apartment. The conspirators,
animated with having the obje& of their vengeance
now in view, rushed forward after them. Pizarro,
with no other arms than his sword and buckler,
defended the entry, and supported by his half-
brother Alcantara, and his little knot of friends,
he maintained the unequal contest with intrepidity
worthy of his past exploits, and with the vigour of
a youthful combatant, "( Courage," cried he,
" companions, we are yet enow to make those
traitors repent of their audacity." But the armour
of the conspirators protected them, while every
thrust they made took effe&. Alcantara fell dead
at his brother's feet; his other defenders were
mortally wounded. The governor, so weary that
he could hardly wield his sword, and no longer

3 able

able to parry the many weapons furiously aimed at a o o

1

him, received a deadly thrust full in his throat, . -
funk to the ground, and expired. 541.

As Coon as he was slain, the aflalins ran out Almaso

icknowo

into the streets, and waving their bloody swords, tkdb~ ai
proclaimed the death of the tyrant. Above two fCf
hundred of their associates having joined them,
they conduCted young Almagro in solemn pro-
ceflion through the city, and assembling the magif-
trates and principal citizens, compelled them to
acknowledge him as lawful successor to his father
in his government. The palace of Pizarro, toge-
ther with the houses of several of his adherents,
were pillaged by the soldiers, who had the satis-
fation at once of being avenged on their enemies,
and of enriching themselves by the spoils of those
through whole hands all the wealth of Peru had
paled b.

THE boldness and success of the conspiracy, as Newap.

well as the name and popular qualities of Alma- o diford.
gro, drew many soldiers to his standard. Every
adventurer of desperate fortune, all who were
difatisfied with Pizarro, and from the rapacious-
ness of his government in the latter years of his
life, the number of malcontents was considerable,
declared without hesitation in favour of Almagro,

Zarate, lib. iv. c. 6-8. Gomra Hist. c. 44, 1+5.

Vega, p. si. lib. ii. c. c-7. Hcrrera, dec. 6. lib.x, c.4-7.
fi\arro Var. IUU. p. 183.

and

0 0° K and he was soon at the head of eight hundred of
a-- the most gallant veterans in Peru. As his youth
'54J' and inexperience disqualified him from taking the

command of them himself, he appointed Herrada
to aft as general. But though Almagro speedily
collected such a refpe&able force, the acquiescence
in his government was far from being general.
PiLarro had left many friends to whom his memory
was dear; the barbarous assassination of a man to
whom his country was so highly indebted, filled
every impartial person with horror. The ignomi-
nious birth of Almagro, as well as the doubtful
title on which he founded his pretensions, led
others to confider him as an usurper. The officers
who commanded in some provinces refused to re-
cognize his authority, until it was confirmed by
the emperor. In others, particularly at Cuzco,
the royal standard was erected, and preparations
were begun in order to revenge the murder of their
ancient leader.
iv : THOSE feeds of discord, which could not have

lain long dormant, acquired great vigour and adi-
vity, when the arrival of Vaca de Castro was
known. After a long and disastrous voyage, he
was driven by firef of weather into a small har-
bour in the province of Popayan; and proceeding
from thence by land, after a journey no less tedious
than difficult, he reached Quito. In his way be
received accounts of Pizarro's death, and of the
events which followed upon it. He immediately

produced

produced the royal commfinion appointing him o OK.
governor of Peru, with the fame privileges and _
authority; and his jurisdiction was acknowledged wh%,'
without hesitation by Benalcazar, adelantado or fi.tlof
lieutenant-general for the emperor in Popayan, 'o-
and by Pedro de Puelles, who, in the abefnce of
Gonzalo Pizarro, had the command of the troops
left in Quito. Vaca de Castro not only assumed
the supreme authority, but shewed that he pof-
fefled the talents which the exercise of it at that
jun&uire required. By his influence and addrefi he
soon afrembled such a body of troops, as not only
ft him above all fear of being exposed to any in-
fult from the adverse party, but enabled him to
advance from Quito with the dignity that became
his character. By dispatching persons of confi-
dence to the different settlements in Peru, with a
formal notification of his arrival and of his com-
million, he communicated to his countrymen the
royal pleasure with refpe& to the government of
the country. By private emilfaries, he excited
such officers as had discovered their disapprobation
of Almagro's proceedings, to manifest their duty
to their sovereign by supporting the person ho-
noured with his commifion. Thole measures were
produ5live of great effets. Encouraged by the
approach of the new governor, or prepared by his
machinations, the loyal were confirmed in their
principles, and avowed them with greater boldness;
the timid ventured to declare their fentimentsi the

neutral

B 0 0
o neutral and wavering, finding it necessary to chue

a fide, began to lean to that which now appeared to

='S' be the safest, as well as the mot just'.

Conduaof ALMAGRO observed the rapid progress of this
Alm~r. spirit of difaffe&ion to his cause, and in order to

give an effetual check to it before the arrival of
ij4i. Vaca de Castro, he set out at the headof his troops

for Cuzco, where the most considerable body of
opponents had ere&ed the royal standard, under
the command of Pedro Alvarez Holguin. During
his march thither, Herrada, the Ikilful guide of
his youth and of his counsels, died; and from that
time his measures were conspicuous for their vio-
lence, but concerted with little sagacity, and exe-
cuted with no address. Holguin, who, with forces
far inferior to those of the opposite party, was de-
scending towards the coafft at the very time that
Almagro was on his way to Cuzco, deceived his
unexperienced adversary by a very simple strata-
gem, avoided an engagement, and effe&ed a junc-
tion with Alvarado, an officer of note, who had
been the first to declare against Almagro as an
usurper.

Progres of SOON after, Vaca de Castro entered their camp
caro.d' with the troops which he brought from Quito,

and erecing the royal standard before his own
tent, he declared, that as governor, he would dif-

c Benzon, lib. iii. c. 9. Zarate, lib. iv. c.. 1 . Gomrs
c. 146, 147. Herrera, dec. 6. lib. x. c. I, , 3. 7, &sc.

charge

charge in person all the fun&ions of general of B O 0
their combined forces. Though formed by the
tenour of his pat life to the habits of a fedentar '5s4
and pacificprofeffion, he at once assumed the acti-
vity and discovered the decision of an officer long
accustomed to command. Knowing his trength
to be now far superior to that of the enemy, he was
impatient to terminate the contest by a batte.
Nor did the followers of Almagro, who had no
hopes of obtaining a pardon for a crime so atro-
cious as the murder of the governor, decline that
mode of decision. They met at Chupaz, about scp. x.
two hundred miles from Cuzco, and fought with
all the fierce animosity inspired by the violence
of civil rage, the rancour of private enmity, the
eagerness of revenge, and the las efforts of despair.
Viatory, after remaining long doubtful, declared DJert
at last for Vaca de Castro. The superior number Ah~
of his troops, his own intrepidity, and the martial
talents of Francisco de Carvajal, a veteran officer
formed under the great captain in the wars of
Italy, and who on that day laid the foundation of
his future fame in Peru, triumphed over the bra-
very of his opponents, though led on by young
Almagro with a gallant spirit, worthy of a better
cause, and deserving another fate. The carnage
was great in proportion to the number of the com-
batants. Many of the vanquilhed, cfpecially such
as were conscious that they might be charged with
being accessory to the assassination of Pizarro, rulh.
ing on the swords of the enemy, chofr to fall like

ibldiers,

B OOK soldiers, rather than wait an ignominious dooim,
h^--. Of fourteen hundred men, the total amount of com-
's4. batants on both fides, five hundred lay dead on

the field, and the number of the wounded was fill
greater'.

Severityof IF the military talents displayed by Vaca de
his proceed.
h pWC.ed Castro, both in the council and in the field, fur-

prifed the adventurers in Peru, they were still more
aftoniihcd at his condu& after the vitory. As he
was by nature a rigid dispenser of justice, and per-
fuaded that it required examples of extraordinary
severity to restrain the licentious spirit of soldiers
so far removed from the feat of government, he
proceeded directly to try his prisoners as rebels.
Forty were condemned to susser the death of trai-
tors, others were banished from Peru. Their
leader, who made his escape from the battle,
being betrayed by rome of his officers, was pub-
licly beheaded in Cuzco; and in him the name
of Almagro, and the spirit of the party, was
extinct.

Consults- DURINo those violent convulsions in Peru, the
tions of the
tm'pero emperor and his ministers were intently employed
''de8mig in preparing regulations, by which they hoped not
nionsin only to re-establish tranquillity there, but to intro-

4 Zarate, lib. iv. c. IS-19. Gomara, c. 148. Vega,

p. 11. lib. iii. c. a--l8. Herrera, dec.7. lib. ic. I, s,3.
lib! iii. c. i--1 l.

e Zarate, lib. iv. c. as. Gomara, c. 15o. Hcrrera, dec. 7.
1ib. iii. c. 1s. lib.vi, c. m.

duce

duce a more perse&' fytem of internal policy into Ba o K
all their settlements in the New World. It is ma- -
nifeft from all the events recorded in the history of 's54
America, that rapid and extensive as the Spanilh
conquerts there had been, they were not carried
on by any regular exertion of the national force,
but by the occasional efforts of private adventurers.
After fitting out a few of the sirs armaments for
discovering new regions, the court of Spain, during
the bury reigns of Ferdinand and of Charles V.,
the former the most intriguing prince of the age,
and the latter the most ambitious, was encumbered
with such a muliplicity of schemes, and involved
in war with so many nations of Europe, that it had
not leisure to attend to distant and less interesting
objects. The care of prosecuting discovery, or of
attempting conquest, was abandoned to individuals; i
and with fitch ardour did men push forward in
this new career, on which novelty, the spirit of
adventure, avarice, ambition, and the hope of
meriting heaven, prompted them with combined
influence to enter, that in less than half a century
almost the whole of that extensive empire which
Spain now poffelfes in the New World, was sub-
jet&ed to its dominion. As the Spanish court con-
tributed nothing towards the various expeditions
undertaken in America, it was not entitled to claim
much from their success. The sovereignty of the
conquered provinces, with the fifth of the gold
and silver, was reserved for the crown; every
thing else was seized by the alTociates in each ex.
pedition as their own right. The plunder of the'

VOL. IlI. t countries

B O 0 K countries which[ they invaded served to indemnify

_ them for what they had expended in equipping
rIt'* themselves for the service, and the conquered ter-

ritory was divided among them, according to rules
which custom had introduced, as permanent efta-
blifhments which their successful valour merited.
In the infancy of those settlements, when their ex-
tent as well as their value were unknown, many
irregularities escaped observation, and it was found
necessary to connive at many excefles. The con-
quered people were frequently pillaged with
deftrucive rapacity, and their country parcelled
out among its new masters in exorbitant shares, far
exceeding the highest recompence due to their ser-
vices. The rude conquerors of America, inca-
pable of forming their eltablifhments upon any
general or extensive plan of policy, attentive only
to private interest, unwilling to forego present gain
from the profpeft of remote or public benefit, seem
to have had no objet but to amass sudden wealth,
without regarding what might be the consequences
of the means by which they acquired it. But
when time at length discovered to the Spanith
court the importance of its American pofeffiions,
the necefity of new-modelling their whole frame
became obvious, and in place of the maxims and
practices, prevalent among military adventurers,
it was found requisite to substitute the institutions
of regular government.

O.E evil in particular called for an immediate
renmely. The conquerors of Mexico and Peru

irritate d

imitated the fatal example of their countrymen B o o K
fettled in the islands, and employed themselves in .-
searching for gold and silver with the fame incon- S4-
fiderate eagernefsi Similar effects followed. The
natives employed in this labour by matters, who in
imposing talks had no regard either to what they
felt or to what they were able to perform, pined
away and perished so fast, that there was reason to
apprehend that Spain, instead of pofeflcing coun-
tries peopled to such a degree as to be susceptible
of progreflive improvement, would soon remain
proprietor only of a vast uninhabited desert.

THE emperor and his ministers were so sensible

of this, and so solicitous to prevent the extihntion
of the Indian race, which threatened to render their
acquisitions of no value, that from time to time ,
various laws, which I have mentioned, had been
made for securing to that unhappy people more
gentle and equitable treatment. But the distance
of America from the feat of empire, the feebleness
of government in the new colonies, the avarice and
audacity of soldiers unaccustomed to reltraint, pre-
vented there salutary regulations from operating
with any considerable influence. The evil conti-
nued to grow, and at this time the emperor found
an interval of leisure from the affairs of Europe to
take it into attentive consideration. He consulted Theperfors

with whimnl

not only with his ministers and the members of the he dvife.
council of the Indies, but called upon several per-
sons who had resided long in the New World, to

H 2 aid

B 0 o K aid them with the result of their experience and

VI.

.-v~-~ observation. Fortunately for the people of Ame-
3541' rica, among these was Bartholomew de las Casas,

who happened to be then at Madrid on a million
from a Chapter of his order at Chiapa'. Though,
since the miscarriage of his former schemes for the
relief of the Indians, he had continued Ihut up in
his cloister, or occupied in religious funcions, his
zeal in behalf of the former objects of his pity
was so far from abating, that, from an increased
knowledge of their sufferings, its ardour had aug-
mented. He seized eagerly this opportunity of
reviving his favourite maxims concerning the treat-
ment of the Indians. With the moving eloquence
natural to a man on whose mind the scenes which
he had beheld had made a deep imprefllon, he
described the irreparable waste of the human fpe-
cies in the New World, the Indian race almost to-
tally swept away in the islands in less than fifty
years, and hastening to extintion on the continent
with the fame rapid decay. With the decisive tone
of one strongly prepossessed with the truth of his
own system, he imputed all this to a single cause,
to the exa&ions and cruelty of his countrymen,
and contended that nothing could prevent the de-
population of America, but the declaring of its
natives to be freemen, and treating them as sub-
jets, not as laves. Nor did he confide for the
tuccefs of this proposal in the powers of his ora-

r Remefal Hild. de Chiapa, p. 146.

tory

tory alone. In order to enforce them, he corn- B o o
posed his famous treatise concerning the de-
ftruaion of America', in which he relates, with 354
many horrid circumstances, but with apparent
marks of exaggerated description, the devastation
of every province which had been visited by the
Spaniards.

THE emperor was deeply affli&ed with the re- nH folic.

cital of so many ations /hocking to humanity. trodue a
But as his views extended far beyond those of Las ss lr-
Casas, he perceived that relieving the Indians from of overn.
oppreflion was but one Rep towards rendering his
poffeflions in the New World a valuable acquifi-
tion, and would be of little avail, unless he could
circumscribe the power and usurpations of his own
fubjets there. The conquerors of America, how-
ever great their merit had been towards their coun-
try, were moRly persons of such mean birth, and of
such an abjec rank in society, as gave no diftinc-
tion in the eye of a monarch. The exorbitant
wealth with which some of them returned, gave
umbrage to an age not accuftoined to fee men in
inferior condition elevated above their level, and
riling to emulate or to surpass the ancient nobility
in splendour. The territories which their leaders
had appropriated to themselves were of such enor-
mous extent h, that if the country ihould ever be
improved in proportion to the fertility of the foil,
they mutt grow too wealthy and too powerful for

S Remefal, p. 192. 199. X Sec NOTB XV.

H 3 subje6s.

B 0 0 K subje&s, It appeared to Charles that this abuse
X ,-' _ required a remedy no less than the other, and that

- the regulations concerning both must be enforced

by a mode of government more vigorous than had
yet been introduced into America.

'ew re~u- WITH this view he framed a body of laws,
this, pur containing many salutary appointments with re-

i spec& to the constitution and powers of the supreme

council of the Indies; concerning the station and
jurifdi&ion of the royal audiences in different parts
of America; the administration of justice; the
order of government, both ecclesiastical and civil.
These were approved of by all ranks of men. But
together with them were issued the following regu-
lations, which excited universal alarm, and occa-
sioned the most violent convulsions: " That as the
repartimientos or shares of land seized by several
persons appeared to be exceflive, the royal
audiences are empowered to reduce them to a
moderate extent: That upon the death of 'any
conqueror or planter, the lands and Indians granted
to him shall not descend to his widow or children,
but return to the crown: That the Indians (hall
henceforth be exempt from personal service, and
shall not be compelled to carry the baggage of
travellers, to labour in the mines, or to dive in
the pearl fisheries: That the flated tribute due by
them to their superior shall be ascertained, and
they flall be paid as servants for any work they
voluntarily perform: That all persons who are or

13 have

have been in public offices, all eccefiaftics of every a O 0o
denomination, all liofpitals and monasteries, (hall be -
deprived of the lands and Indians allotted to them, 2s4.
and these be annexed to the crown: That every
person in Peru, who had any criminal concern in
the contests between Pizarro and Almagro, ihould
forfeit his lands and Indians '."

ALL the Spanilh mtnifters who had hitherto HisminiLf

been entrutfed with the direction of American rater.
affairs, and who were best acquainted with the state ts"Rre
of the country, remonstrated against those regula-
tions as ruinous to their infant colonies. They
represented, that the number of Spaniards who
had hitherto emigrated to the New World was so
extremely small, that nothing could be expeted
from any effort of theirs towards improving the
vast regions over which they were- scattered; that
the success of every scheme for this purpose must
depend upon the ministry and service of the In-
dians, whose native indolence and aversion to la-
bour, no profpe&t of benefit or promise of reward
could surmount; that the moment the right of im.
poring a task, and exacting the performance of it,
was taken from their malters, every work of in-
duftry muf cease, and all the sources from which
wealth begun to pour in upon Spain must be ftopt
for ever. But Charles, tenacious at all times of
his own opinions, and so much impreflcd at prefcnt

! Herrcra, dec. 7. lib. vi. c. . Fcraandez His. lib. i.
£, I, 2.

H 4 with

Bo o K with the view of the disorders which reigned in
a. America, that he was willing to hazard the appli-

'54'. cation even of a dangerous remedy, perfifRed in

his resolution of publishing the laws. That they
might be carried into execution with greater vi-
gour and authority, he authorised Francisco Tello
de Sandoval to repair to Mexico as Vifitador or
fuperintendant of that country, and to co-operate
with Antonio de Mendoza, the Viceroy, in en-

'A viceroy forcing them. He appointed Blasco Nugnez Vela
4ppointed
for Pcru. to be governor of Peru, with the title of Vice-

roy; and in order to strengthen his administration,
1543. he established a court of royal audience in Lima,

in which four lawyers of eminence were to preside
as judges a.

tffca tof THE viceroy and fuperintendant failed at the
thonR euw fame time and an account of the laws which they
Spain. were to enforce reached America before them.

The entry of Sandoval into Mexico was viewed as
the prelude of general ruin. The unlimited grant
of liberty to the Indians affected every Spaniard in
America without diftin&ion, and there was hardly
one who might not on some pretext be included
under the other regulations, and fuffcr by them.
But the colony in New Spain had now been so
long accustomed to the restraints of law and autho-
rity under the steady and prudent administration
of Mendoza, that how much ibever the spirit of

k Zarate, lib, iii.

i. 4. Gom-ra, c, 151. Vega, p. 2.
lib. iii. c. so.

the

the new statutes was deteted and dreaded, no at- Ba 0 r
tempt was made to obltru& the publication of -
them by any a& of violence unbecoming fubjets. t '3
The magistrates and principal inhabitants, how-
ever, presented dutiful addresses to the viceroy and
superintendent; representing the fatal consequences
of enforcing them. Happily for them, Mcndoza,
by long residence in the country, was so thoroughly
acquainted with its state, that he knew what was
for its interest as well as what it could bear; and
Sandoval, though new in office, displayed a degree
of moderation seldom pofleffed by persons just en-
tering upon the exercise of power. They engaged
to suspend, for rome time, the execution of what
was offensive in the new laws, and not only con-
sented that a deputation of citizens should be sent
to Europe to lay before the emperor the appre-
henfions of his fubjecs in New Spain with refpe&
to their tendency and ffects, but they concurred
with them in supporting their sentiments. Charles,
moved by the opinion of. men whose abilities and
integrity entitled therm decide concerning what
fell immediately under their own view, granted
such a relaxation of the rigour of the laws as re-
cftablifhed the colony in its former tranquillity'.

IN Peru the storm gathered with an aspet still in Per.
more fierce and threatening, and was not so soon

Fernandez Hill. lib. i. c. 3, 4, 5. Vega, p. a1. lib. iil.

C. l2, 22. Herrera, dec. 7. lib. v. c. 7. lib. vii. c. 14, 15.
Torquem. Mond. Ind. lib.v, c. 13.

difpcllcd.

5 0 K dispelled. The conquerors of Peru, of a rank
Do. - much inferior to those who had fubjeeted Mexico

s43. to the Spanish crown, farther removed from the

infpecion of the parent state, and intoxicated with
the sudden acquisition of wealth, carried on all
their operations with greater licence. and irregula-
rity than any body of adventurers in the New
World. Amidst the general subversion of law
and order, occasioned by two fuccefive civil wars,
when each individual was at liberty to decide for
himself, without any guide but his own interest or
paflions, this turbulent spirit rose above all sense
of Subordination. To men thus corrupted by
anarchy, the introduction of regular government,
the power of a viceroy, and the authority of a re-
ipetable court ofjudicature, would of themselves
have appeared formidable restraints, to which they
would have submitted with reluctance. But they re-
volted with indignation against the idea of comply-
ing with laws, by which they were to be itripped at
once of all they had earned so hardly during tmany
years of service and fuffring. As the account of
the new laws spread fucceflively through the dif-
ferent fettlenlents, the inhabitants ran together,
the women in tears, and the men exclaiming against
the .injutlice and ingratitude of their sovereign in
depriving them, unheard and unconvided, of their
poffcffions. " Is this," cried they, " the recom-
pence due to persons, who, without public aid, at
their own expence, and by their own valour, have
ilbjcaed to the crown of Castile territories of ilhii

immenli

immense extent and opulence ? Are there the re- B o o K
wards bestowed for having endured unparalleled dif- . -
trefs, for having encountered every species of dan- 's+-
ger in the service of their country ? Whose merit
is so great, whose condu&t has' been so irreproach-
able, that he may not be condemned by some penal
clauft in regulations, conceived in terms as loose
and comprehensive, as if it had been intended that
all should be entangled in their filare ? Every Spa-
niard of note in Peru has held some public office,
and all, without difinaion, have been constrained
to take an active part in the contest between the
two rival chiefs. Were the former to be rob-
bed of their property because they had done their
duty? Were the latter to be punished on account
of what they could not avoid ? Shall the conquer-
ors of this great empire, instead of receiving marks
of diftinfion, be deprived of the natural confola-
tion of providing for their widows and children,
and leave them to depend for subsistence on the
scanty supply they can extort from unfeeling cour-.
tiers " ? We are not able now, continued they,
to explore unknown regions in quest of more fe-
cure settlements; our constitutions debilitated with
age, and our bodies covered with wounds, are no
longer fit for active service; but still we poflefs
vigour sufficient to assert our just rights, and we
will not tamely susser them to be wrested from us"."

n Herrera, dec. 7. lib. vii. c. 4, I5.
a Gomara, c. 152. Herrera, dec. 7. lib. vi. c. so, [I.
Vega, p. i a. lib. iii. c. so, 2z. lib. iv, c. 3, 4.

BY

ao o K By discourses of this fort, uttered with vehe.
I 1' ro mence, and listened to with universal approbation,
AlS3; their passions were inflamed to such a pitch, that
reaion pre- they were prepared for the most violent measures;
vented by
the mndw and began to hold consultations in different places,
notion otf

,Htro. how they might pppofe the entrance of the viceroy

and judges, and prevent not only the execution
but the promulgation of the new laws. From this,
however, they were diverted by the addref of
Vaca de Castro, who flattered them with hopes,
that, as soon as the viceroy and judges should ar-
rive, and had leisure to examine their petitions and
remonstrances, they would concur with them in
endeavouring to procure fom: mitigation in the
rigour of laws which had been framed without due
attention either to the state of the country, or to
the sentiments of the people. A greater degree of
accommodation to these, and even some concessions
on the part of government, were now become re-
quifite to compose the present ferment, and to
soothe the colonists into fubmilion, by inspiring
them with confidence in their superiors. But with-
out profound discernment, conciliating manners,
and flexibility of temper, such a plan could not be

The riit carried on. The viceroy poffefled none of there.
d difatfec.
tion in- Of all the qualities that fit men for high command,
Creaked by
gicer. he was endowed only with integrity and courage;

the former harlh and uncomplying, the latter bor-
dering To frequently on raffnefs or obstinacy, that
in his fittation they were defecs rather than vir-
Ifarh 4. tues. From the moment that he landed at Tum-

6 bez,

4-

bez, Nugnez Vela seems to have confidered him- B o o r
self merely as an executive officer, without any dif- .-
cretionary power; and, regardless of whatever he 1i+3
observed or heard concerniug the state of the
country, he adhered to the letter of the regulations
with unrelenting rigour. In all the towns through
which he paired, the natives were declared to be
free, every person in public office was deprived of
his lands and servants; and as an example of obe-
dience to others, he would not susser a single In-
dian to be employed in carrying his own baggage
in his march towards Lima. Amazement and con-
fternation went before him as he approached i and
so little solicitous was he to prevent there from aug-
menting, that, on entering the capital, he openly
avowed that he came to obey the orders of his
sovereign, not to dispense with his laws. This
harsh declaration was accompanied with what ren-
dered it fill more intolerable, haughtiness in de-
portment, a tone of arrogance and decision in dif-
course, and an insolence of office grievous to men
little accustomed to hold civil authority in high re-
fpe&. Every attempt to procure a suspension or
mitigation of the new laws, the viceroy confidered
as flowing from a spirit of difafffetion that tended
to rebellion. Several persons of rank were con-
fined, and some put to death, without any form of
trial. Vaca de Castro was arrested, and notwith-
itanding the dignity of his former rank, and his
merit, in having prevented a general infurretion

in

B o0 K in the colony, he was loaded with chains, and shut

Vi.

hA .-. *up in the common jail .

The al- BUT however general the indignation was against
tontents
chufo on- such proceedings, it is probable the hand ofautho-
to beheir rity would have been strong enough to fuppreli it,
eader. or to prevent it bursting out with open violence,

if the malcontents had not been provided with a
leader of credit and eminence to unite and to di-
rec their efforts. From the time that the purport
of the new regulations was known in Peru, every
Spaniard there turned his eyes towards Gonzalo
Pizarro, as the only person able to avert the ruin
with which they threatene'tt-he colony. From all
quarters, letters and addresses were tent to him,
conjuring him to stand forth as their common pro-
tector, and offering to support him in the attempt
with their lives' and fortunes. Gonzalo, though
inferior in talents to his other brothers, was equally
ambitious, and of courage no less daring. The
behaviour of an ungrateful court towards his bro-
thers and himself, dwelt continually on his mind.
Ferdinand a state prisoner in Europe, the children
of the governor in custody of the viceroy, and tent
aboard his fleet, himself reduced to the condition
of a private citizen in a country, for the discovery
and conqueit of which Spain was indebted to his
family. These thoughts prompted him to feck for

* Zarate, lib. iv. c. 23, 24, 25. Gomara, c. 153--15.
Vega, p. i . lib. i'. c. 4, 5. Fernandez, lib. i. c. 6-0o.

vengeance,

vengeance, and to aflirt the rights of his family, A o o K
of which he now confidered himself as the guar- X

v

dian and the heir. But as no Spaniard can easily '543
surmount that veneration for his sovereign which
seems to be interwoven in his frame, the idea of
marching in arms against the royal standard filled
him with horror. He hesitated long, and was still
unresolved, when the violence of the viceroy, the
universal call of his countrymen, and the certainty
of becoming soon a vi&im himself to the severity of
the new laws, moved him to quit his residence at
Chuquifaca de la Plata, and repair to Cuzco. All
the inhabitants went out to meet him, and received
him with transports of joy as the deliverer of the
colony. In the fervour of their zeal, they elected
him procurator-general of the Spanilh nation in
Peru, to solicit the repeal of the late regulations.
They empowered him to lay their remonitrances
before the royal audience in Lima, and upon pre-
text of danger from the Indians, authorised him to
march thither in arms. Under fandion of this s+54
nomination Pizarro took polfeflion of the royal
treaurre, appointed officers, levied soldiers, seized
a large train of artillery which Vaca de Castro had
deposited in Gumanga, and set out for Lima, as if
he had been advancing against a public enemy.
I)ifafcltion having now assumed a regular form,
and being united under a chief of such diftinguthied
name, many persons of note retorted to his stand-
ard; and a considerable part of the troops, raised by

the

o 6 K the viceroy to oppose his progress, dcferted to him
VJ

- in a body°.

Difntiuon BEFORE Pizarro reached Lima, a revolution had
es the vice.
toy and happened there, which encouraged him to proceed
court of
uience. with almost certainty offuccefs. The violence of

the viceroy's adminiftrarion was not more formi-
dable to the Spaniards of Peru, than his overbear-
ing haughtiness was odious to his associates, the
judges of the royal audience. During their voyage
from Spain, some symptoms of coldness between
the viceroy and them began to appear P. But as
soon as they entered upon the exercise of their re-
fpeaive offices, both parties were so much exaf-
perated by frequent contests, arising from inter-
ference of jurifdiftion, and contrariety of opinion,
that their mutual disgust soon grew into open en-
mity. The judges thwarted the viceroy in every
measure, set at liberty prisoners whom he had
confined, justified the malcontents, and applauded
their remonfirances. At a time when both de-
partments of government lhould have united against
the approaching enemy, they were contending with
ench other for superiority. The judges at length

Theviety prevailed. The. viceroy, universally odious, and
imirn)ri1b:l! ,

rept. I, abandoned even by his own guards, was seized in

o Zaratc, lib. v. c. . Gomara, c. 156, 157. Vega, p. 1 .

lib. iv. c. 4-12. Fernandez, lib. i. c. 1t-17. Hcrrcii,
dcc. 7. lib. vii. c. 18, &c. lib. viii. c. t-5.

P Gomaa, c. 171.

his

his palace, and carried to a defcrt island on the B 0 0 i
coast, to be kept there until he could be sent home
to Spain. '5*.

THE judges, in consequence of this, having viewsof

alfumed the supreme dire&ion of affairs into their Pizarro.
own hands, issued a proclamation suspending the
execution of the obnoxious laws, and sent a mef-
sage to Pizarro, requiring him, as they had already
granted whatever he could request, to dismiss his
troops, and to repair to Lima with fifteen or twenty
attendants. They could hardly expec that a man
Co daring and ambitious would tamely comply with
this requisition. It was made, probably, with no such
intention, but only to throw a decent veil over
their own condu&; for Cepeda, the president of
the court of audience, a pragmatical and aspiring
lawyer, seems to have held a secret correspondence
with Pizarro, and had already formed the plan,
which he afterwards executed, of devoting himself
to his service. The imprisonment of the viceroy,
the usurpation of the judges, together with the
universal confusion and anarchy consequent upon
events so singular and unexpeted, opened new and
vft profpclts to Pizarro. He now beheld the
supreme power within his reach. Nor did he want
courage to pulh on towards the obje& which for-
tune presented to hi#.view. Carvajal, the promp-
ter of his resolutions, and guide of all his aaions,
had long fixed his eye upon it as the only end at
which Pizarro ought to aim. Instead of the ins¢-

VOL, ill. 1 rior

B O O K rior function of procurator for the Spanish fettle-

Vl.

A __r ments in Peru, he openly demanded to be gover-
1544. nor and captain-general of the whole province, and

required the court of audience to grant him a com-
mission to that effet. At the head of twelve hun.
dred men, within a mile of Lima, where there was
neither leader nor army to oppose him, such a re-
quest carried with it the authority of a command.
But the judges, either from unwillingness to relin-
quilh power, or from a desire of preserving some
attention to appearances, hesitated, or seemed to
hesitate, about complying with what he demanded.

Hc aT",!rns Carvajal, impatient of delay, and impetuous in all
the g¢;'n r ,.*
rv.rt. his operations, marched into the city by night,

1iized several officers of diftin&ion obnoxious to
Pizarro, and hanged them without the formality of
a trial. Next morning the court of audience issued
a commifion in the emperor's name, appointing
Pizarro governor of Peru, with full powers, civil
as well as military, and he entered the town that
day with extraordinary pomp, to take poffeflion of
his new dignity .

ot. 2s. BUT alnidft the diflrder and turbulence which

']'Ihe viciroy
iscovtrlhis accompanied this total difiblution of the frame es
KFity. government, the minds of men, set loose from the

ordinary restraints of law and authority, a&ed with
ulch capricious irregularity, that events no less ex-

q ZArate, lib. v. c. 8-1o. Vega, p. II. lib. iv. c. 13-

19. Guiara, c. 159-163. Fernandez, lib. i. c. 18-:5.
Iicrrcra, dec. 7. lib. viii. c. 1o-zo.

traordinary

traordinary than unexpe&ed followed in a rapid B 0 0 K
fucceflion. Pizarro had scarcely begun to exercise
the new powers with which he was invested, when '54
he beheld formidable enemies rife up to oppose
him. The viceroy having been put on board a
vessel by the judges of the audience, in order that
he might be carried to Spain under custody of Juan
Alvarez, one of their own number; as soon as they
were out at sea, Alvarez, either touched with re-
morse or moved by fear, kneeled down to his pri-
soner, declaring him from that moment to be free,
and that he himself, and every person in the ship,
would obey him as the legal representative oftheir
sovereign. Nugnez Vela ordered the pilot of the
vessel to Ihape his course towards Tumbez, and as
soon as he landed there, ereted the royal standard,
and resumed his funtions of viceroy. Several
persons of note, to whom the contagion of the fe-
ditious spirit which reigned at Cuzco and Lima
had not reached, instantly avowed their refo-
lution to support his authority'. The violence
of Pizarro's government, who observed every in-
dividual with the jealousy natural to usurpers, and
who punihied every appearance of difafFetion with
unforgiving severity, soon augmented the number
of the viceroy's adherents, as it forced rome
leading men in the colony to fly to him for refuge.
While he was gathering such strength at Tumbez,

'Zarate, lib. v. c. 9. Gomara, c. i6;. Fernandez, lib. i.
c.. Herrera, dec. 7. lib. viii. c. 15.

x 2 that

B o K that his forces began to assume the appearance of

v t

. what was confidered as an army in America, Diego
1*4s Centeno, a bold and aEive officer, exasperated by

the cruelty and oppression of Pizarro's lieutenant-
governor in the province of Charcas, formed a
conspiracy against his life, cut him off, and declared
for the viceroy'.

1545. PIZARRO, though alarmed with those appear-

Pizarro ,arches ances ofhoftility in the opposite extremes of the
an him.' mpire, was not disconcerted. He prepared to

assert the authority to which he had attained, with
the spirit and condu& of an officer accustomed to
command, and marched direcly against the vice-
roy as the enemy who was nearest as well as most
formidable. As he was master of the public re-
venues in Peru, and most of the military men were
attached to his.family, his troops were so nume-
rous, that the viceroy, unable to face them, re-
treated towards Quito. Pizarro followed him;
and in that long march, through a wild moun-
tainous country, suffered hardships and encoun-
tered difficulties, which no troops but those ac-
customed to serve in America could have endured
or surmounted ". The viceroy had scarcely reached
Q uito, when the van-guard of Pizarro's forces ap-
peared, led by Carvajal, who, though near four-
score, was as hardy and aAive as any young fol-

t Zaratc, lib. v. c. 18. Gomara, c. 169. Herrera, de. 7.
lib. ix. c. 27.

u See NOTE XVI.

dicr

dier under his command. Nugnez Vela instantly B o o
abandoned a town incapable of defence, and with -v-
a rapidity more resembling a flight than a retreat, '5+s.
marched into the province of Popayan. Pizarro
continued to pursue; but finding it impofible to
overtake him, returned to Quito. From thence
he dispatched Carvajal to oppose Centeno, who
was growing formidable in the southern provinces
of the empire, and he himself remained there to
make head agaiift the viceroy '.

BY his own ativity, and the afliftance of Benal- The viceroy

cazar, Nugnez Vela loon assembled four hnndred defeated,
men in Popayan. As he retained, amidst all his
diaflters, the fame elevation of mind, and the fame
high sense of his own dignity, he rejeted with
disdain the advice of some of his' followers, who
urged him to make overtures of accommodation
to Pizarro, declaring that it was only by the sword
that a contest with rebels could be decided. With
this intention he marched back to Quito. Pizarro, '546,
relying on the superior number, and still more on the
discipline and valour of his troops, advanced refo-
lutely to meet him. The battle was fierce and January ig.
bloody, both parties fighting like men who knew
that the poflcflion of a great empire, the fate of
their leaders, and their own future fortune, de-
pended upon the issue of that day. But Pizarro's

Zarate, lib. v. c. 15, 16-24. Gomara, c. 167. Vega,

P. Il. lib. iv. c.' 5-z8. Fernandez, lib. i. c. 34. 40.
lecrrera, dec. 7. lib, viii. c. 16. 20-27.

i 3 veterans

B 0 K veterans pushed forward with such regular and

- -- well-dire&ed force, that they soon began to make
3546. impreflion on their enemies. The viceroy, by ex-

traordinary exertions, in which the abilities of a
commander and the courage of a soldier were
equally displayed, held vitory for some time in
and lain fufpence. At length he fell, pierced with many

wounds; and the rout of his followers became ge-
neral. They were hotly pursued. His head was
cut off, and placed on the public gibbet in Quito,
which Pizarro entered in triumph. The troops
assembled by Centeno were dispersed soon after by
Carvajal, and he himself compelled to fly to the
mountains, where he remained for several months
concealed in a cave. Every person in Peru, from
the frontiers of Popayan to those of Chili, sub-
mitted to Pizarro; and by his fleet, under Pedro
de Hinojofa, he had not only the unrivalled com-
mand of the South-Sea, but had taken pofleffion of
Panama, and placed a garrison in Nombre de
Dios, on the opposite fide of the itthmus, which
rendered him master of the only avenue of com-
munication between Spain and Peru, that was uscd
at that period Y.

ri7arroad. AFTER this decisive vi&ory, Pizarro and his
vi~cd to a.-
rtlne thr followers remained for some time at Quito, and
lover.ignty
o0 'cru:

Y Zarate, lib. v. c. 31,32. Gomara, c. 170. Vega, p. 1.

lib. iv. c. 33, 3.1 Fcrnanudz, lib. i.c. 51-54. Herrera,
dec. 7. x. c. 12. 19-

dec. 1.

li-. -

c i. 39-

d. libi 1-3. Benzo,
lib. iii. C. I .

during

during the first tranfporcs of their exultation, they B o 0 K
ran into every excess of licentious indulgence, with . _
the riotous spirit usual among low adventurers ,s46-
upon extraordinary success. But amidst this dif-
fipation, their chief and his confidents were obliged
to turn their thoughts sometimes to what was fc-
rious, and deliberated with much solicitude con-
cerning the part that he ought now to take. Car-
vajal, no less bold and decisive in counsel than in
the field, had from the beginning warned Pizarro,
that in the career on which he was entering, it was
vain to think of holding a middle course; that he
must either boldly aim at all, or attempt nothing.
From the time that Pizarro obtained polfeflon of
the government of Peru, he inculcated the fame
maxim with greater earnestness. Upon receiving
an account of the viEtory at Quito, he remonstrated
with him in a tone still more peremptory. ' You
have usurped (said he, in a letter written to Pizarro
on that occasion) the supreme power in this coun-
try, in contempt of the emperor's commilflon to
the viceroy. You have marched, in hoftik array,
against the royal standard; you have attacked the
representative of your sovereign in the field, have
defeated him, and cut off his head. Think not
that ever a monarch will forgive such insults on his
dignity, or that any reconciliation with him can be
cordial or fincerc. Depend no longer on the pre-
carious favour of another. Assume yourielf the
sovereignty over a country, to the dominion of
which your fancily has a title founded on the rights

1 4 bqth

BOO K both of difcovcry and conquest. It is in your

VI.
^ -.l power to attach every Spaniard in Peru of any
J546. consequence inviolably to your interest by liberal

grants of lands and of Indians, or by instituting
ranks of nobility, and creating titles of honour
similar to those which are courted with so much
eagerness in Europe. By eftablilhing orders of
knighthood, with privileges and diftintions re-
fembling thofc in Spain, you may bestow a grati-
fication upon the officers in your service, suited to
the ideas of military men. Nor is it to your coun-
trymen only that you ought to attend; endeavour tq
gain the natives. By marrying the Coya, or daugh-
ter of the Sun next in fuccelfion to the crown, you
will induce the Indians, out of veneration for the
blood of their antient princes, to unite with the
Spaniards in support of your authority. Thus, at
the head of the antient inhabitants of Peru, as well
as of the new settlers there, you may set at defi-
ance the power of Spain, and repel with cafe any
feeble force which it can fend at such a distance."
Cepeda, the lawyer, who was now Pizarro's con-
fidential counsellor, warmly seconded Carvajal's
exhortations, and employed whatever learning he
possessed in demonstrating, that all the founders of
great monarchies had been raied to pre-eminence?
not by the antiquity of their lineage, or the validity
of their rights, but by their own aspiring valour and
personal merit'.

* Vega, p. i . lib. iv. c. 40. Fcrnandez, lib. i. c. 34.
lib. ii. c. i. 49. llerrera, dcc. 8. lib. ii. c, io.

PIzARRO

PIZARRO listened attentively to both, and could a o o

VI.

not conceal the satisfaction with which he contem- i -.
plated the object that they presented to his view. ut Bs.*
But happily for the tranquillity of the world, few toncsociw

with the

men possess that superior strength of mind, and cout o
extent of abilities, which are capable of forming SP'aa
and executing such daring schemes, as cannot be
accomplished without overturning the eftablihed
order of society, and violating those maxims of
duty which men are accustomed to hold sacred.
The mediocrity of Pizarro's talents circumscribed
his ambition within more narrow limits. Inflead
ofafpiring at independent power, he confined his
yiews to the obtaining from the court of Spain a
confirmation of the authority which he now pof-
sessed; and for that purpose, he sent an officer of
distinction thither, to give such a representation of
his condut, and of the itate of the country; as
might induce the emperor and his ministers, either
from inclination or from necessity, to continue him
in his present station.

WHILE Pizarro was deliberating with refpe& to Conrun.-

the part which he should take, consultations were spa'itm-
held in Spain, with no less solicitude, concerning the ,",,it.
measures which ought to be pursued in order to re-
cftablifh the emperor's authority in Peru. Though
unacquainted with the last exclffes of outrage to
which the malcontents had proceeded in that coun-
try, the court had received an account of the infur-
retion againt the viceroy, of his imprisonment, and

the

B o o K the usurpation of the government by Pizarro. A
t--. 1 revolution so alarming called for an immediate in-

546. terpofition of the emperor's abilities and authority.

But as he was fully occupied at that time in Ger-
many, in conducting the war againif the famous
league of Smalkalde, one of the most interesting and
arduous enterprises in his reign, the care of providing
a remedy for the disorders in Peru devolved upon
his son Philip, and the counsellors whom Charles
had appointed to afiif: him in the government of
Spain during his absence. At first view, the ac-
tions of Pizarro and his adherents appeared so re-
pugnant to the duty of subje&s towards their so-
vereign, that the greater part of the ministers in-
iftled on declaring them instantly to be guilty of
rebellion, and on proceeding to punish them with
exemplary rigour. But when the fervour of their
zeal and indignation began to abate, innumerable
obstacles to the execution of this measure presented
themselves. The veteran bands of infantry, the
strength and glory of the Spanish armies, were
then employed in Germany. Spain, exhausted of
men and money by a long series of wars, in which
file had been involved by the rellefs ambition of
two fucceflive monarchs, could not easily equip an
armament of sufficient force to reduce Pizarro. To
transport any reflpeaacle body of troops to a
country so remote as Peru, appeared almost im-
pofible. While Pizarro continued master of the
South Sea, the direct route by Nombre de Dios

7 and

and Panama was impraticable. An attempt to B o K
march to Qmito by land through the new kingdom _
of Granada, and the province of Popayan, across *6.
regions of prodigious extent, desolate, unhealthy,
or inhabited by fierce and hostile, tribes, would be
attended with unsurmountable danger and hardships.
The passage to the South-Sea by the Straits of
Magellan was so tedious, so uncertain, and so little
known in that age, that no confidence could be
placed in any effort carried on in a course of navi-
gation so remote and precarious. Nothing then
remained but to relinquish the system which the
ardour of their loyalty had first suggested, and to
attempt by lenient measures what could not be es-
sected by force. It was manifell, from Pizarro's
solicitude to represent his condut in a favourable
light to the emperor, that, notwithitanding the
excesses of which he had been guilty, he still re-
tained sentiments of veneration for his sovereign.
By a proper application to there, together with
some such concefflons as ihould discover a spirit of
moderation and forbearance in government, there
was still room to hope that he might be yet re-
claimed, or the ideas of loyalty natural to Spaniards
might so far revive among his followers, that they
would no longer lend their aid to uphold his usurped
authority.

THE success, however, of this negociation, no ocarap-

Iclf delicate than it was important, depended en- repaito
tircly on the abilities and address of the person to t'lru a".

whom

p o o K whom it should be committed. After weighing

VI.
v- j with much attention the comparative merit of va-
145' rious persons, the Spanish miniffers fixed with

unanimity of choice upon Pedro de la Gafca, a
priest in no higher station than that of counsellor
to the Inquisition. Though in no public office, he
had been occasionally employed by government in
affairs of trust and consequence, and had conduct-
ed them with no less skill than success; displaying
a gentle and insinuating temper, accompanied with
much firmness; probity, superior to any feeling of
private interest; and a cautious circumfpe&ion in
concerting measures, followed by such vigour in
executing them, as is rarely found in alliance with
the other. These qualities marked him out for the
function to which he was destined. The emperor,
to whom Gafca was not unknown, warmly ap-
proved of the choice, and communicated it to him
in a letter containing expressions of good-will and
confidence, no less honourable to the prince who
wrote, than to the subjea who received it. Gafca,
notwithstanding his advanced age and feeble confti-
tution, and though, from the apprehensions natural
to a man, who, during the course of his life, had
never been out of his own country, he dreaded the
effets of a long voyage, and of an unhealthy cli-
matc ', did not hesitate a moment about complying

in, mode. with the will of his sovereign. But as a proof that
rtion. it was from this principle alone he aaed, he re-

fused a bishopric which was offered to him, in order

* Fcrnandez, lib. ii. c. i7.

that

that he might appear in Peru with a more digni- B o o
fled character; he would accept of. no higher tie l .,
than that of president of the court of audience in 's54
Lima; and declared that he would receive no salary
on account of his discharging the duties of that
office. All he required was, that the expence of
supporting his family Ihould be defrayed by the
public, and as he was to go like a miniser of peace.
with his gown and breviary, and without any reti-
nue but a few domertics, this would not load the
revenue with any enormous burden b.

BUT while he discovered such difintereftd mo- Thepomw

deration with refpec to whatever related personally to hb'
to himself, he demanded his official powers in a
very different tone. He insisted, as he was to be.
employed in a country so remote from the feat of
government, where he could not have recourse to
his Sovereign for new inftrudlions on every emer-
gence; and as the whole success of his negoci-
ations muff depend upon the confidence which
the people with whom he had to treat could place
in the extent of his powers, that he ought to be
inverted with unlimited authority; that his jurif-
dition must reach to all persons and to all causes;
that he must be empowered to pardon, to punish,
or to reward, as circumstances and the behaviour
of different men might require; that in cafe of

b Zarate, lib. vi. c. 6, Gomara, c.. 7. PFrnandez, lib. li.

c. 14-16. Veg, p. t. lib. v c . . Hrlrra, dc. . lib. i.
c. 4, &c.

i rrefifance

V

B o o K refitance from the malcontents, he might be au.
*, - thorifed to reduce them to obedience by force of
1546- arms, to levy troops for that purpose, and to call

for afliftance from the governors of all the Spanifl
settlements in America. There powers, though
manifefily conducive to the great objects of his
million, appeared to the Spanish ministers to be
inalienable prerogatives of royalty, which ought
not to be delegated to a subje&t, and they refused
to grant them. But the emperor's views were
more enlarged. As, from the nature of his employ-
ment, Gafca must be entrusted with discretionary
power in several points, and all his efforts might
prove ineffectual if he was circumscribed in any
one particular, Charles scrupled not to invest him
with authority to the full extent that he demanded.
Highly satisfied with this fresh proof of his matter's
confidence, Gafca hastened his departure, and, with-
out either money or troops, set out to quell a for-
midable rebellionc.

Jul 17. ON his arrival at Nombre de Dios, he found
Panamari Herman Mexia, an officer of note, potted there,

by order of Pizarro, with a considerable body of
men, to oppose the landing of any hostile forces.
But Gafca appeared in such pacific guise, with a
train so little formidable, and with a tide of no
such dignity as to excite terror, that he was re-
ceived with much refped. From Nombre de Dios
he advanced to Panama, and met with a similar

Fcrnandez, lib. ii. c. 16-18,

reception

reception from Hinojofa, whom Pizato had en- B 6 o K
trufRed with the government of that town, and the . . .
command of his fleet stationed there. In both 's5
places he held the fame language, declaring that
he was sent by their sovereign as , messenger of
peace, not as a minister of vengeance; that he
came to redress all their grievances, to revoke the
laws which had excited alarm, to pardon past of-
fences, and to re-establish order and justice in the
government of Peru. His mild deportment, the
simplicity of his manners, the san&ity of his profef-
sion, and a winning appearance of candour, gained
credit to hlis declarations. The veneration due to
a person clothed with legal authority, and a&ing
in virtue of a royal commiflion, began to revive
among men accultoned for some time to nothing
more rcfpetable than an usurped jurifdi&ion.
Hinojofa, Mexia, and several other officers of dif-
tin&ion, to each of whom Gafca applied separately,
were gained over to his interest, and waited only
for some decent occasion of declaring openly in his
favour.d.

THIS the violence of Pizarro soon afforded them. violent

proceeding

As soon as lie heard of Gafca's arrival at Panama, ovrizo.
though he received, at the fame time, an account
of the nature of his commiflion, and was informed
of his offers not only to render every Spaniard in
Peru caly concerning v/what was past, by an a& of

(

a Fcrnandez, lib. ii. c. 21, &c. Zarate, lib. vi. c. 6, 7.
Comara, c. 175. Vega, p. 1l. Jib. v. c. 3.

general

B to0 K general oblivion; but secure with refpea to the
^..' .. future by repealing the obnoxious laws; instead of

is46. accepting with gratitude his sovereign's gracious

concessions, he was so much exasperated on find-
ing that he was not to be continued in his station as
governor of the country, that he inftanty resolved
to oppose the president's entry into Peru, and to
prevent his exercising any jurifdition there. To
this desperate resolution he added another highly
preposterous. He sent a new deputation to Spain
to justify this condu&, and to insist, in name of all
the communities in Peru, for a confirmation of the
government to himself during life, as the only
means of preserving tranquillity there. The per-
sons entrusted with this strange commiflion, inti-
mated the intention of Pizarro to the president, and
required him, in his name, to depart from Panama
and return to Spain. They carried likewise secret
'initru&ions to Hinojofa, directing him to offer
Gafca a present of fifty thousand pesos, if he would
comply voluntarily with what was demanded of
him; and if he should continue obstinate, to cut
him off either by affafination or poison '.

6afi gains MANY circumstances concurred in pulhing on
hi flet. Pizarro to those wild meafurea. Having been

once accustomed to supreme command, he could
not bear the thoughts of descending to a private

Zarate, lib. vi. c. 8. Fernandez, lib. ii. c. 33, 34.
Icrrnera, dec. 8. lib. ii. c, 9, lo.

itation.

Ration. Conscious of his own demerit, he fufpeEt- sB o 9
ed that 4he emperor studied only to deceive him, . .
and would never pardon the outrages which he had ''.
committed. His chief confidents, no let guilty,
entertained the fame apprehensions. The approach
of Gafca without any military force excited no
terror. There were now above fix thouland Spa-
niards lettled in Peru '; and at the head of these
he doubted not to maintain his own independence,
if the court of Spain ihould refuse to grant what
he required. But he knew not that a spirit of de-
fedion had already begun to spread among thore
whom he trusted most. Hinojofa, amazed at Pi-
zarro's precipitate resolution of setting himself in
opposition to the emperor's commiflion, and dif-
daining to be his instrument in perpetrating the
odious crimes pointed out in his secret inftrumions,
publicly recognized the title of the president to
the supreme authority in Peru. The officers under
his command did the fame. Such was the con-
tagious influence of the example, that it reached
even the deputies who had been sent from Perui
and at the time when Pizarro expeced to hear
either of Gafca's return to Spain, or of his death,
he received an account of his being master of
the fleet, of Panama, and of the troops fationed
there.

IRRITATED almost to madness by events so un. r 47.

Piwro ro-
expected, he openly prepared for war; and inr foiv,,O

war.

r Herrer, dec. 8. lib. iii. c. i.
VOL. 1. K order

B o o K order to give some colour ofjuftice to his arms, he

_A-L.. appointed the court of audience in Lima to pro-
'57. ceed to the trial of Gafca, for the crimes of having

seized his ships, seduced his officers, and prevented
his deputies from proceeding in their voyage to
Spain. Cepeda, though a&ing as a judge in vir-
tue of the royal commission, did not icruple to
prostitute the dignity of his function by finding
Gafca guilty of treason, and condemning him to
death on that account . Wild, and even ridicu-
lous as this proceeding was, it imposed on the
low illiterate adventurers, with whom Peru was
filled, by the fcmblance of a legal fan&ion war-
ranting Pizarro to carry on hostilities against a con-
victed traitor. Soldiers accordingly resorted from
every quarter to his ltandard, and he was soon at
the head of a thousand men, the beR equipped
that had ever taken the field in Peru.

Prcpara- GASCA, on his part, perceiving that force must
Gafca. be employed in order to accomplifl the purpose of

his million, was no lets afliduous in collecting
troops from Nicaragua, Carthagena, and other
lfttlements on the continent; and with such fuc-
cess, that he was soon in a condition to detach a
squadron of his fleet, with a considerable body of
Aprilfoldiers, to the coast of Peru. Their appearance

excited a dreadful alarm; and though they did not

r Fernandez, lib. ii. c. 5,. Vega, p. I. lib. v. c..
Hcrrera, dec. 8. lib. iii. c. 6.

attempt

attempt for some time to.make any dccent, they zo I
did more cffetual service, by retting aihore in dif- .s 'k
fcrent places persons who dispersed copies of the ' -
aCt of general indemnity,,and the revocation of
the late edits; and who made known every where
the pacific intentions, as well as mild temper, of
the president. The effea of spreading this in-
formation was wonderful. All who were diflatif-
fled with Pizarro's violent administration, all who
retained any sentiments of fidelity to their fove-
reign, began to meditate revolt. Some openly
deserted a cause which they now deemed to be un-
just. Centeno, leaving the cave in which he lay Infumrrion

of C;lu:lis

concealed, assembled about fifty of his former ad-
herents, and with this feeble half-armed band ad-'
vanced boldly to Cuzco. By a sudden attack in
the night-time, in which he displayed no less mili-
tary skill than valour, he rendered himself master
of that caRital, though defended by a garrison
of five hundred men. Most of there having
ranged themfelvci under his banners, he had
soon the command of a refpedable body of
troops b.

PIZARRO, though aftoniihed at beholding one agi;n

enemy approaching by tea, and another by land, who P-
at a time whenwhe trusted to the union of all Peru marhcs,
in his favour, was of a spirit more undaunted, and

b Zarate, lib. vi. c. 1-1a6. Gomua, c. 18o, 81. For.
andez, lib. ii. c,. a. 64, &c.

K2 more

B 0 0 K more acciltomed to the vicifitudes of fortune,
c" _r than to be disconcerted or appalled. As the dan-

'547. ger from Centeno's operations was the most urgent,

he instantly fee out to oppose him. Having pro-
vided horses for all his soldiers, he marched with
amazing rapidity. But every morning he found
his force diminilhed, by numbers who had left him
during the night; and though he became suspicious
to excess, and punished without mercy all whom
he fufpe&ed, the rage of desertion was too violent
to be checked. Before he got within fight of the
enemy at Huarina, near the lake Titiaca, he could
not muster more than four hundred soldiers. But
these he justly confidered as men of tried attach-
ment, on whom he might depend. They were
indeed the boldest and most desperate of his fol-
lowers, conscious, like himself, of crimes for
which they could hardly expetf forgiveness, and
without any hope but in the success of their arms.
Oatober o. With there he did not hesitate to attack Centtno's

troops, though double to his own in'number. The
royalitls did not decline the combat. It was the
molt obstinate and bloody that had hitherto been

?nd d crFats fought in Peru. At length the intrepid valour of
'in"' Pizarro, and the superiority of Carvajal's military

talents, triumphed over numbers, and obtained a
complete vi&ory. The booty was immense ', and
the treatment of the vanquished cruel. By this
signal fuccels the reputation of Pizarro was rc-

'See NOTE XVII.

efRablihecd,

eftablilhed, and being now deemed invincible in a o o K
the field, his army increascd daily in number k. *--

»547.

BUT events happened in other parts of Peru,

which more than counterbalanced the splendid
victory at Huarina. Pizarro had scarcely left Lima,
when the citizens, weary of his oppressive domi-
nion, ere&ed the royal standard, and Aldana, with
a detachment of soldiers from the fleet, took pof-
fecfion of the town. About the fame time', Garcla lnd
Gafca landed at Tumbez with five hundred men. t Pru
Encouraged by his pretence, every settlement in
the low country declared for the king. The situ-
ation of the two parties was now perfecly reversed;
Cuzco and the adjacent provinces were poellffed
by Pizarro; all the reft of the empire, from
Quito southward, acknowledged the jurifdiaion of
tle prelsdent. As his numbers augmented fast,
Gafca advanced into the interior part of the coun-
try. His behaviour still continued to be gentle
and unassuming; he exprefled on every occasion,
his ardent wilh of terminating the contest without
bloodlhed, More solicitous to reclaim than to
punish, he upbraided no man for past offences, but
received them as a father receives penitent children
returning to a sense of their duty. Though desirous
of peace, he did not flacken his preparations for

k Zaratc, lib. vii. c. s, 3. Gomara, c. i8. Vegs, p. 1.

lib. v. c. 8, &c. Fernandez, lib. ii. c. 79. Herrera, dec. 8.
lib. iv. c. I, 2.

i Zarate, lib. vi, c. Iy.

K3 war.

B 0 IK war. He appointed the general rendezvous of his

,' -- troops in the fertile valley of Xauxa, on the road

Adc47 to Cuzco . There he remained for some months,
towards not only that he might have time to make another

attempt towards an accommodation with Pizarro,
but that he might train his new soldiers to the use
of arms, and accustom them to the discipline of
a camp, before he led them againit a body of vic-
torious veterans. Pizarro, intoxicated with the
success which had hitherto accompanied his arms,
and elated with having again near a thousand
men under his command, refused to liften to any
terms, although Cepeda, together with fevcral of
his officers, and even Carvajal himself", gave it as
their advice to close with the prefideit's offer of a
general indemnity, and the revocation of the ob-
noxious laws°. Gafca having tried in vain every
expedient to avoid imbruing his hands in the blood
Dec. 15. of his countrymen, began to move towards Cuzco,

at the head of sixteen hundred men.

BothlPartie PIZARRO, confident of vi6tory, fuffcred the
Ctlo.r royalists to pals all the rivers which lie between

354s. Guamanga and Cuzco without opposition, and to

advance within four leagues of that capital, flat-
tering himself that a defeat in such a situation as
rendered escape impracticable would at once ter-
minate the war. 1-He then marched out to meet

m Zarate, lib. vii. c. 9. Fernandcz, lib. ii. c. 77. 8a.
D See NOTE XVIII.
o Zaraic, lib. vii. c. 6. Vega, p. Ii. lib. v. c. 27.

the

the enemy, and Carvajal chose his ground, and .B o K
made the disposition of the troops with the difccrn- . -v..
ing eye, and profound knowledge in the art of war ,4i-
conspicuous in all his operations. As the two
armies moved forwards (lowly to the charge, the
appearance of each was singular. In that of Pi-
zarro, composed of men enriched with the spoils
of the mos opulent country in America, every
officer, and almost all the private men, were clothed
in stuffs of silk, or brocade, embroidered with
gold and silver; and their horses, their arms, their
standards, were adorned with all the pride of
military pomp . That of Gafca, though not so
splendid, exhibited what was no less striking. He
himself, accompanied by the archbishop of Lim?,
the bilhops of Q ito and Cuzco, and a great num-
ber of ecclesiastics, marching along the lines, bess-
ing the men, and encouraging them to a resolute
discharge of their duty.

WHEN both armies were just ready to engage, ;,,rro de.

Cepeda set spurs to his horse, galloped off, and fur- fertPdby",
rendered himself to the president. Garcilaffo de la
Vega, and other officers of note, followed his ex-
ample. The revolt of persons in such high rank
fithck all with amazement. The mutual confidence
on which the union and strength of armies depend,
ceased at once. Distrust and consternation spread
from rank to rank. Some silently flipped away,

Zarate, lib. vi. c. 1.

K 4 others

B O O K others threw down their arms, the greatest number

*V1. went over to the royalists. Pizarro, Carvajal, and
'54'- some leaders, employed authority, threats, and

entreaties, to stop them, but in vain. In less
than half an hour, a body of men, which might.
have decided the fate of the Peruvian empire,
was totally dispersed. Pizarro, feeing all irretriev-
ably loft, cried out in amazement to a few officers
who fill faithfully adhered to him, " What remains
for us to do ?" " Let us rulh," replied o/e of
them, "s upon the enemy's firmed battalion, and die
like Romans." Dejeced with tuch a reverse of
fortune, he had not spirit to follow this foldirrly
counsel, and with a tameness difgracefiil to his
taktn, former fame, he surrendered to one of Gafca's

officers. Carvajal, endeavouring to escape, was
overtaken and seized.
and put to GASCA, happy in this bloodless victory, did not

dt ain it with cruelty. Pizarro, Carvajal, and a

small number of the most diftinguilhcd or noto-
rious offenders, were puniihed capitally. Pizarro
was beheaded on the day after he surrendered. 1-l
submitted to his fate with a composed dignity, and
seemed desirous to atone by repentance for the
crimes which he had committed. The end of Car-
vajal was suitable to his life. On his trial he offered
no defence. When the sentence adjudging him
to be hanged was pronounced, he carclefsly re-
plied, " One can die but once." During the in-
tcrval between the sentence and execution, he dif-

covcred

covered no figp ciher of remorse for the pas, or o tQ
of solicitude about the future i offing at al who
visited him, in his usual sarcastic vein of mirth, '1,s
with the fame quickness of repartee and gross plea-
fantry as at any other period of his life. Cepcda,
more criminal than either, ought to have shared
the fame fate; but the tmerit of having deferred
his associates at such a critical moment, and with
such decisive effet, saved him from immediate
punishment. He was sent, however, as a prisoner
to Spain, and died in confinement 1.

IN the minute detail which the contemporary

historians have given of the civil dissentions that
raged in Pert, with little interruption, during ten
years, many circumstances occur so striking, and
which indicate such an uncommon state of manners,
as to merit particular attention.

1THouoH the Spaniards who first invaded Peru Nomece.

-*« . n i ~ r . 1 1 * ~aary foldietr
were of the lowes order in fociery, and the greater in the civil

wars of

part of those who afterwards joined them were per- -Iv.
Ions of desperate fortune, yet in all the bodies of
troops brought into the field by the different klad
ers who contended for superiority, not one man
afted as a hired ibldier, that follows his standard
for pay. Every adventurer in Peru confidered
himself as a conquerors entitled, by his services, to

q Zarate, lib. vii. c. 6, 7, 8. Gomara, e. 185, i86.

Vega, p. it. lib. v. c. 30, &c. Fernandez, lib. ii. o. 86, &c.
Herrera, dec. 8. lib. iv. c. i , &c.

at

B 0 0 K an establishment in that country which had been

v-i acquired by his valour. In the contests between

5 the rival chiefs, each chose his fide as he was di-

rected by his own judgment or affecions. He
joined his commander as a companion of his for-
tune, and disdained to degrade himfelfby receiving
the wages of a mercenary. It was to their sword,
not to pre-eminence in office, or nobility of birth,
that most of the leaders whom they followed were
indebted for their elevation; and each of their
adherents hoped, by the fame means, to open a
way for himself to the polffllion of power and
wealth ,

Armies im. BUT though the troops in Peru served without
nwnsdvy ¢x-
xnuvYe any regular pay, they were raised at immense ex-

pence. Among men accustomed to divide the
spoils of an opulent country, the desire of obtain-
ing wealth acquired incredible force. The ardour
of pursuit augmented in proportion to the hope of
success. Where all were intent on the fame objc&,
and under the dominion of the fame paflion, there
was but one mode of gaining men, or of securing
their attachment. Officers of name and influence,
besides the promise of future establishments, re-
ceived in hand large gratuities from the chief with
whom they engaged. Gonzalo Pizarro, in order
to raire a thouflnd men, advanced five hundred
thousand pesos . Gafca expended in levying the

Vega, p. I 1. lib. iv. c. 38. 41.
I'trnandcz, lib. ii. c. S

troops

troops which he led against Pizarro nine hundred B oo X
thousand pesos'. The distribution of property, -_
bestowed as the reward of services, was Rtill more 54'.
exorbitant. Cepeda, as the recompence of his *andnm.
perfidy and address, in persuading the court of .wrd toia.
royal audience to give the fan&ion of its authority
to the ufiurped jurisdiction of Pizarro, received a
grant of lands which yielded an annual income of
a hundred and fifty thousand pesos'. Hinojofa,
who, by his early defection from Pizarro, and fur-
render of the fleet to Gafca, decided the fate of
Peru, obtained a district of country affording two
hundred thoutand pesos of yearly value `. While
iuch rewards were dealt out to the principal offi-
cers, with more than royal munificence, propor-
tional /hares were conferred upon those of inferior
rank.

SUCH a rapid change of fortune produced its rThe;rp,

natural effects. It gave birth to new wants, and fuxuryn4
new desires. Veterans, long accustomed to hard-
Ihip and toil, acquired of a sudden a taste for pro-
fuse and inconsiderate dissipation, and indulged in
all the excefres of military licentiousness. The riot
of low debauchery occupied some; a relilh for
cxpenfive luxuries Ipread among othersy. The
meanest soldier in Peru would have thought him-
iss degraded by marching on foot; and at a time

t Zarate, lib. vii. c. o. Herrera, dec. 8. lib. v. c. 7.
' Gomara, c. 164. "Vqga, p. II. lib. vi. c.3.
Herrcra, dec. 5. lib. ii. c. 3, dec.8, lib. viii. c. io.

when

Bo o K when the prices ofhorfes in that country were ex.
%IW qrbitant, each infilted on being furnilhed, with ore

'w1' before he would take the field. But though les

patient under the fatigue and hardlhips of service,
they were ready to face danger and death with as
much intrepidity as ever; and animated by the
hope of new rewards, they never failed, on the day
of battle, to display all their ancient valour.

erocity TOGETHER with their courage, they retained
t.irh chic all the ferocity by which they were originally dif
t^ri wee tinguilhed. Civil discord never raged with a more

fell spirit than among the Spaniards in Peru. To
all the passions which uliially envenom contcfr
among countrymen, avarice was added, and ren-
dered their enmity more rancorous. Eagerness to
seize the valuable forfeitures expected upon the
death of every opponent, Ihut the door again,
mercy. To be wealthy, was of ttfelf lifficient to
expofc a man to accusation, or to ItbjAe him to
punifhmrcnt. On the flighted tufpicions, Pizarro
condemned many of the molt opulent inhabitants
in Peru to death. Carvajal, without searching for
any pretext to juflify his cruelty, cut off mniny
more. The number of thofc who suffered by the
hand of the executioner, was not much inferior
to what fell in the field ; and the greater part
was condemned without the formality of any legal
trial.

· Sec NOTE XX.Y,

THn Vidlence 'with which the'coritendifig parties b' 1

treated their opponents was not accompanied'with _._
its usual attendants, attachment and fidelity'to tho6e d ^,,.
with whom they a&ed. The ties of honour, which 'fat
ought to be held sacred among soldiers, and the
principle of integrity, interwoven as thoroughly
in the Spanish chara&ter as in that of any nation,
seem to have been equally forgotten. Even regard
for decency, and the sense of lhame, were totally
loft. During their dissentions, there was hardly a
Spaniard in Peru who did not abandon the party
which he had originally espoused, betray the afib-
ciates with whom he had united, and violate the
engagements under which he had come. The
viceroy Nugnez Vela was ruined by the treachery
of Cepeda and the otherjudges of the royal au-
dience, who were bound by the duties of their
titntion to have supported his authority. The
chief adviisrs and companions of Gonzalo Pizarro's
revolt, were the first to forsake him, and submit
to his enemies. His fleet was given up to Gafca,
by the man whom he had singled out among his
officers to entrust with that important command,
On the day that was to decide his fate, an army of
veterans, in fight of the enemy, threw down their
arms without flriking a blow, and deserted a leader
who had often conduted them to victory. In-
stances of such general and avowed contempt of the
principles and obligations which attach man to
man, and bind them together in social union, rarely
occur in history. It is only where men are far

a removed

B 0O K removed.from the feat of government, where the

, -..- restraints of law and order are little felt, where the
's482 profpec of gain is unbounded, and where immeni

wealth may cover the crimes by which it is ac.
quired, that we can find any parallel to the levity,
the rapaciousness, the perfidy and corruption pre.
valent among the Spaniards in Peru.

Gafcade- ON the death of Pizarro, the malcontents in
-,ife em-
ployment every corner of Peru laid down their arms, and
drhiel. tranquillity seemed to be perfectly re-established.

But two very intererfing obje&s still remained to
occupy the president's attention. The one was to
find immediately such employment for a multitude
of turbulent and daring adventurers with which the
country was filled, as might prevent them from
exciting new commotions. The other, to bestow
proper gratifications upon those to whose loyalty
and valour he had been indebted for his fuccefi.
The former of there was in some measure accom-
plifhed, by appointing Pedro de Valdivia to profl-
cute the conquest of Chili; and by empowering
Diego Centeno to undertake the difcovcry of the
vail regions bordering on the river De la Plata.
The reputation of those leaders, together with the
hopes of acquiring wealth, and of rising to conli-
quence in tome unexplored country, alluring many
of the nmoft indigent and delperate soldiers to tblluw
their standards, drained off no inconsiderable por-
tion of that mutinous spirit which Gafca dreaded.

THE latter wa. an asir of greater difficulty, 3 o o

VI.

and to be adjusted with a more attentive and deli- _
cate hand. The repartimientos, or allotments of 1Hi5vi
lands and Indians which fell to be distributed, in lol ofthe

country

consequence of the death or forfeiture of the for- among his
mer poflitfors. exceeded two millions bs pesos of foow
yearly rent'. Gafca, when now absolute maiter
of this immense property, retained the fame difin-
trefted sentiments which he had originally pro-
fcffcd, and refused to reserve the finallcR portion
of it for himself. But the number of claimants was
great;. and whilst the vanity or avarice of every
individual fixed the value of his own services, and
estimated the recompence which he thought due to
him, the pretensions of each were so extravagant,
that i: was impoflible to satisfy all. Galca listened
to them one by one, with the most patient atten-
tion; and that he might have leisure to weigh the
comparative merit of their several claims with ac-
curacy, he retired, with the archbishop of Lima and
a tingle secretary, to a village twelve leagues from
Cuzco. There he spent several days in allotting
to each a diftrit of lands and number of Indians, in
proportion to his idea of their pail services and fu-
ture importance. But that he might get beyond
the reach of the fierce storm of clamour and rage,
which he foresaw would burst out on the publica-
tion of his decree, notwithstanding the impartial
equity with which he had framed it, he set out for
Lima, leaving the irltrument of partition fealed

' Vega, p. s . lib. vi. c. 4.

ups

B o o K up, with orders not to open it for some days after

Vl.
,-2l-- his departure.
r548.

Aug. 24. THE indignation excited by publilhing the de.
The dilcon. .
tnt itocta- cree of partition was not less than Gafca had ex-
dolls. peted. Vanity, avarice, emulation, envy, ihame,

rage, and all the other paflions which most vehe-
mently agitate the minds of men when both their
honour and their interest are deeply ass&ed, con.
spired in adding to its violence. It broke out with
all the fury of military inbolence. Calumny, threats,
and curies, were poured out openly upon the pre-
sident. He was accused of ingratitude, of partia.
lity, and ofinjultice. Among tbldiers prompt to
aetion, filch seditious discourse would have been
soon followed by deeds no Icii violent, and they
already began to turn their eyes towards rome dif-
contented leaders, expefting them to stand forth in
redress of their wrongs. By some vigorous inter-
positions of government, a timely check was given
to this mutinous spirit, and the danger of another
civil war was averted for the present .

1t47. GASCA, however, perceiving that the flame was
blithesordr fupprcleed rather than extinguished, laboured with

lsuvcrrn. the utmoff assiduity to soothe the malcontents, by

beltowing large gratuities on Ibmc, by promising
repariimientos, when they fell vacant, to others, and

b Zarate, lib. vii. c. 9. Gomara, c. 187. Vega, p. i.

lib. vii. c. 1. &c. Fernandez, p. 11. lib. i. c. , &c. Her-
rera, dec. 8. lib. iv. c, 17, &c.

by

by careng.and flattering all. But that ti blic Boi.o.I
,icuriy might reft on a foundation more ~bbc than -
their good affe&tion, he endeavoured to strengthen inw
the hands of his fuccefbors in office, by re-eftabliih-
ing the regular administration of juRice in every
part of the empire. He introduced order and fimrn
plicity into the mode of colleing the royal reve,
oue. He issued regulations concerning the treat.
ment of the Indians, well calculated to protet them
from oppreflion, and to provide for their inftrluioa
in the principles of religion, without depriving the
Spaniards of the benefit accruing from their labour.
Having now accomplished every objet of his mif- :so.
sion, Gafca, longing to return again to a private
fhtion, committed the government of Peru to the
court ofaudience, and set out for Spain. As, de- Feb. .
ring the anarchy and turbulence of the four lhi for spti
years, there had been no remittance made of the
royal revenue, he carried with him thirteen hun-
dred thousand pesos of public money, which the
aeconomy and order of his adminifration ena-
bled him to save, after paying all the expences of
the war.

Hz Warfeoeived in' his native country with uni- Hi .cep.
versal idmiration of his abilities, and of his virtue. lonrc.
Both were, indeed, highly coufpicuou, Without
army, or fleet, or publie funds; with a train. so
timple, that only three thousand ducats were ex-
pended in equipping him ', he let out zo oppose a

' Fenandez, lib. i. e. s8.
VOL. MI. L formidable

B OO K formidable rebellion. By his address and talents
« _v-i he supplied all those defects, anrd seemed to create

2l5is intrumnents for executing his designs. He ac-

quired such a naval force, as gave him the com.
mand of the sea. He raised a body of men able
to cope with the veteran bands which gave law to
Peru. He vanquished their leader, on whose arms
viaory had hitherto attended, and in place of
anarchy and usurpation, he established the govern-
ment of laws, and the authority of the rightful
sovereign. But the praise bestowed on his abili.
ties was exceeded by that which his virtue merited.
After residing in a country where wealth presentcd
allurements which had seduced every person who
had hitherto possessed power there, he returned
from that trying station with integrity not only
untainted but unfufpeed. After distributing
among his countrymen poffelions of greater ex-
tent and value than had ever been in the disposal of
a fubje& in any age or nation, he himself remained
in his original state of poverty; and at the very
time when he brought such a large recruit to the
royal treasury, he was obliged to apply by petition
for a rmall fum to discharge some petty debt
which he had contraced during the course of his
service d. Charles was not insensible to such difin-
terested merit. Gafca was received by him with
the most distinguishing marks of eteem, and being
promoted to the bifopric of Palcncia, he paffle

' MS. penes me.

till

he remainder of his days in the trdnquifli"'i of'r' X.

t r

sirement, refpe&ed by his country, honoured t
his fboereign, and beloved.by all. ;
. t' p

NOTWITHSTANDINO' all Gafca's wis reg-ula

tions, the tranquillity of Peru was not of long Aon.
tinuance. In a country, where the authority of
government had been almost forgotten during the
long prevalence of anarchy and misrule, where
there were disappointed leaders ripe for revolt,
and seditious soldiers ready to follow them, it was
not difficult to raise combustion. Several fuccef-
five infurreaions desolated the country for some
years. But as those, though fierce, were only
transient storms, excited rather by the ambition
and turbulence of particular men, than by general
or public motives, the detail of them is not the
objec of this history. These commotions in Peru,
like every thing of extreme violence either in
the natural or political body, were not of long
duration, and by carrying off the corrupted hu-
mours which had given rife to the disorders, they
contributed in the end to strengthen the society
which at first they threatened to destroy. During
their fierce contests, several of the first invaders
of Peru, and many of those licentious adventurers
whom the fame of their success had allured thi-
ther, fell by each other's hands. Each of the
parties, as they alternately prevailed in the ftrug-
gle, gradually cleared the country of a number
of turbulent spirits, by executing, proscribing, or

L a banishing

3B o K banihng their opponents.. Men less enterprising,
E..V lefi desperate, and more accustomed to move in

.'ys the path of fobcr and peaceable industry, fettled

in Peru; and the royal authority was gradually
cftabliihed as firmly there as in the other Spanilh
colonies.

# BOOK VII.

. ? ,
HIST OR Y

OF
AM ER IC A.

BOOK VII.

As the conquest of the two great empires of B o o K
A Mexico and Peru forms the modt splendid. v
and intcrefting period in the history of America, .a
view of their political inftiutions, and a description
of their national manners, will exhibit the human
species to the cottempltion of intelligent obfervrs
in a very singular stage of jts progress*.

WHzN compared with other parts of. t4e New Mexl and
World, Mexico and Peru may be confidered as poimd
poliihed states. Instead of small, independent, oto
hostile tribes, fruggling for fubli(tence $inidt America
woods and marshes, strangers to indufry aSd arts,
unacquainted with subordination, and almost with-
out the appearance of regular government, we.fina
countries of great extent fubjectd to the dominion
of one fovcreign, the inhabitants colle'ced together

'Sec NOTE XX.

L 3 in

B 0 0

O in cities, the wisdom and foresight of rulers em.
_ -1 ployed in providing fbr the maintenance and fe-

curity of the eople, the empire of laws in some
measure established, the authority of rdigion recog-
nized, many of the arts essential to life brought to
some degree of maturity, and the dawn of such as
are ornamental beginning to appear.

.. . '. . ..

heir infe- BUT if the comparison be made with the people

riority to
the nations of the ancient continent, -the inferiority of Ame.
of the an- . .
<ientonti- rica in improvement will be conspicuous, and nei-
sInt'- ther the Mexicans nor- Peruvians will be entitled

to rank with those nations which merit the name
of civilised. The people of-both the.great empires
in 'America, like the rude tribes around them,
were totally unacquainted with the useful metals,
and the progress which they had made in extending
their dominion over the animal creation was in,
considerable. The Mexicans had gone no farther
than to tame and rear turkeys, ducks, a species of
small dogs, and rabbits b. By this feeble essay of
ingentity, the means cf subsistence were rendered
somewhat more plentiful and secure, than when
men depend solely on hunting; but they had no
idea of attempting to subdue the more robust ani-
mals, or of deriving any aid from their ministry in
carrying on works of labour. The Peruvians seem
to have negleted the inferior animals, and had
not rendered any of them domestic except the

b Herrera, dec. Ia. lib. vii. c. 12.

13 duck;

duck; but they were more fortunate in taming o K
the Llama,' an animal peculiar to their country,
of a form which bears rome resemblance to a deer,
and some to a camel, and is of a size somewhat
larger than a sheep. Under the protetion of man;
this species multiplied greatly. Its wool furnished
the Peruvians with clothing, its fiefh with food.
It was even employed as a beast of burden, and
carried a tmoderate load with much patience and
docility . It was never used for draught; and the
breed being confined to the mountainous country,
its service, if we may judge by incidents which
occur in the early Spanifi writers, was not very
extensive among the Peruvians in their original
itate.

IN t*iong the line by which nations proceed

towards civilization, the discovery of the useful
metals, and the acquisition of dominion over the
animal creation, have been marked as steps of ca-
pital importance in their progrcfs. In our conti-
nent, long after men had attained both, society
continued in that state which is denominated bar-
barous. Even with all that command over nature
which there confer, many ages elapse, before in-
duftry becomes so regular as to render subsistence
secure, before the arts which supply the wants and
furnihf the accommodations of life are brought to
any considerable degree of perfection, and before

' Ve, p. i. Ub. viii, c. 6. Zul, lib. i. c. 14.

L4 an

B o O K any idea is conceivedof various institutions requisite

_-,- t in a well-ordered society. The Mexicans and Pc.

ruvians, without knowledge of the useful metals, or
the aid of domestic animals, laboured under difad-
vantages which must have greatly retarded their
progress, and in their highefc state of improvement
their power was so limited, and their operations so
feeble, that they can hardly be confidered as having
advanced beyond the infancy of civil life.

Viewofthe AFTER this general observation concerning the
institutions
anda mn. most singular and ditinguifhing circumstance in the
cSofic, R fate of boh the great empires in America, I £hall

endeavour to give such a view of the constitution
and interior police of each, as may enable us to
ascertain their place in the political scale, to allot
them their proper fiation between the rude tibes
in the New World, and the polihed states of the
ancient, and to determine how far they had risen
above the former, as well as how much they fell
below the latter.

Imperfcd MsXICO was first fubjeEted to the Spanish crown.
iniormation
conceinS But our acquaintance with its laws and manners

ic. s not, from that circumstance, more complete.
What I have remarked concerning the defedtive
and inaccurate information on which we mud; rely
with refpc't to the condition and cugfons of the
savage tribes in America, may be applied likewise
to our knowledge of the Mexican empire. Cortes,
and the rapacious adventurers who accompanied

him,

him, had not leisure or capacity to enrich wither a o o t
civil or natural history with new obferwtions. They *
undertook their expedition in quest of one obje~,
and teemed hardly to have turned their eyes to.
wards any other. Or, if during some short inter-
val of tranquillity, .when the occupations of war
ceased, and the ardour of plunder was suspended,
the institutions and manners of the people whom
they had invaded drew their attention, the inquiries
of illiterate soldiers were conduced with so little
sagacity and precision, that the accounts given by
them of the policy and order eftablihed in the
Mexican monarchy are superficial, confused, and in-
explicable. It is rather from incidents which they
relate occasionally, than from their own deducions
and remarks, that we are enabled to form ofQm idea
of the genius and manners, of that people. The
obscurity in which the ignorance of its conqueronr
involved the annals of Mecioo, was augmented by
.the fuperftiion of those who fucceede tchn As
the memory ofpaft events was preserved among the
Mexicans by figures painted on skins, on cotton
cloth, orn a kind 'of pf(teboard, or on the bark of
trees,. the early rpilionaries, unable to comprehend
their meaning, and struck with their uncouth'fb~,l,
conceived them to be monuments of idolatry which
ought to be deftrdyed, in order to facilitate the con-
version of the Indians. In obedience to an edi&
issucd by Juan de Zummaraga, a Franciscan monk,
the firt bishop of Mexico, as many records of the
ancient Mexican story as could be colleced were

committed

B o o K committed to the flames. In consequence of this
s @- &fanatical zealof the monks who sirs visited New

Spain (which their successors loon began to la,
ment), whatever knowledge of remote events such
rude monuments contained was almost entirely loft,
and no information remained concerning the ad-
cient revolutions and policy of the empire, but
what was derived from tradition, or from rome frag-
ments of their historical paintings that escaped the
barbarous researches of Zummaraga d. From the
experience of all nations it is manifest, that the me-
mory of past transactions can neither be long pre-
served, nor be transmitted with any fidelity, by
tradition. The Mexican paintings, which are sup-
posed to have served as annals of their empire, are
few in number, and of ambiguous meaning. Thus,
amidst the uncertainty of the former, and the ob-
fcurity of the latter, we must glean what intelligence
can be collected from the scanty materials fcatered
in the Spanilh writers .

AcCORDING

Acofta, lib. vi. c. 7. Torquer. Proem libi ii. lib. iii
c. 6. lib.xiv. c. 6.

* In the sirs edition, I ob'erved that in consequence of the

dellrulion of the ancient Mexican paintings. occasioned by the
zeal of Zummaraga, whatever knowledge they might have
conveyed was emtirly loft. Every candid reader must have
perceived that the expreflion war inaccurate i a in a few
lines afterwards I mention some ancient paintings to be till
extant. M. Clavigero, not satisfied with laying hold of this
inaccuracy, which I correded in the fubequent editions, la.
bourn to render it more glaring, by the manner in which he

quotes

ACPORDRNG to the account 'of the Mexicans Boo

themselves, their empire ;wa nt f. lpng duraion. X '
Their country, as thfy relate, was originally poC °ries'
fefled, rather than pcpled, by finall independent ,oarchy.

- ... . ..

" tribes,

quotes the temlining part of the feitence. 'He reprehends
with. great a(perity the acconfat whidt' I gat of the 'ointy
materials for writing the ancient biforfy o:' Mexicp. Vol. I.
Account of Writers, p. xxvi. V. II. 30o, My :word, bow-
ever, are almort the fame with those of Torquemada, who
seems to have been better acquainted with the ancient monu-
ments of the Mexicans than any Spanini author whole wdoks
I have fen. - Lib. xir. c. 6. M. Clavigero himself gives
description of (he delfruflion of ancient paintings. in almost
the fame terms I have used and'mentions, ai an additional
ltafon of there beirg so rniall a number of ancient paintings
known to the Spaniards, that the natives have become so
Ibliitou: to preserve and conceal them, that it is " difficult,
A'jf not imiobler.to make them part with ode of them.'!
Vol. 1. 407. I .'i94. No point can be more afcerained
thani that~ew of the Mexican 'hiftocal paintiags have been
jprefrved. -:Thhi several Spaniards Wave carried on inqlufiei
into the antiqaie~t.of the Menxican epnire, no engruwing
froaMexica pmitings have been communicated to the public,
except thof.by-Pnrcbas, Gemelli Carreri, and Lorenana.., it
ffords me some fatisfadion, that in the course of my refarche,
:1 hive discovered two colleftions of Mexican paintings which
Mere unknown to former inquirers. The cut which 1 pbliihed
is an exaft copy of the original, and gives no high idea ofths
progref which the Mexicans had made in the art of paintig.
1 cannot conjearre what colid indite Mi Clangrtow rxprf*

ome diffatisfa ion with me for having publiflid it without the
fame colours it ha* in the original patitig. p. xdxx. He migKt
have recellefted, that neither Purchis, nor Gemelli Carreri, nor
Lorenzana, thought it necelary to colour the print' whichthey
'have pnblithe, and they have ncet'been cenrred on that ad-

,,~, ,* .~ co rt.

B o K tribes, whose mode of life and manners resembled

* . those of the rudest savages which we have de.

fcribed. But about a period corresponding to the
beginning of the tenth century in the Chrifian
ara, several tribes moved in fucceflive migrations
from unknown regions towards the north and
north-west, and fettled in different provinces of
Anahuac, the ancient name of New Spain. These,
more civilized than the original inhabitants, began
to form them to the arts of social life. At length,
towards the commencement of the thirteenth cen-
tury, the Mexicans, a people more polished than
any of the former, advanced from the border of
the Californian gulf, and took poffefion of the
plains adjacent to the great lake near the centre of
the country. After residing there about fifty years,
they founded a town, since diftinguilhed by the
name of Mexico, which from humble beginnings
loon grew to be the most considerable city in the
New World. The Mexicans, long after they were

count. He may ref afllred, that though the colobu in the
paintings in the Imperial Library are remarkably bright, they
are laid on without art, and without " any of that regard to light
" and lhade, or the rules of perfpeetive," which M. Claviger
requirem. V. II. 378. If the public exptef any desire to have
the seven paintings fill in my pofflelion engraved, I am ready
to communicate them. The print publilbed by Gemelli Car-
teri, of the route of the ancient Mexicans when they travelled
towards the lake on which they built the capital of their em.
pire, Churchill, Vol. IV. p. 48 , is the modt fnished monument
of art brought from the New World, and yet a very flight in-
fpeaion of it will satisfy every one, that the annals of a nation
conveyed in this manner murl be very meagre and imperfet.

cftablifhcd

eftabliffed in their new pofeffion, continued, like a o o t
other martial tribes in America, unacquinted with t
regal dominion, and were governed in peace, and
conducted in war, by such as were entitled to prec
eminence by their wisdom or their valour. But
among them, as in other Rates whole power and
territories become extensive, the supreme autho-
rity centered at last in a single person; and when
the Spaniards under Cortes invaded the country,
Montezuma was the ninth monarch in order who
had swayed the Mexican sceptre, not by hereditary
tight, but by election.

SUCH is the traditional tale of the Mexicans con- vcyrmc,

cerning the progrefi of their own empire. Ac-
cording to this, its duration was very short. From
the first migration of their parent tribe, they can
reckon little more than three hundred years. From
the eftablifliment of monarchical governmenrt not
above a hundred and thirty years, according to
one account, or a hundred and ninety-feven, ac-
cording to another computation , had elapsed. If,
on one hand, we suppose the Mexican fate to
have been of higher antiquity, and to have sub-
fited during such a length of time as the Spanilh
accounts of its civilization would naturally lead. us
to conclude, it is difficult to conceive how, among
a people who pofieffed the art of recording events
by pictures, and who confidered it as an effntial

' Acof. Hifi. lib. vil. c. , c. f Puicha Pilgr. ill.
iP 1068, &c.

part

B o o K part of their national education, to teach their

vir.

., _children to repeat the hiflorical songs which cele-
brated the exploits of their ancestors , the know-
ledge of past tranfa&ions ihould be so fender and
limited. If, on the other hand, we adopt their
own system with refpet to the antiquities of their
nation, it is no less difficult to account either for
that improved itate of society, or for the extensive
dominion to which their empire had attained, when
first visited by the Spaniards. The infancy of na-
tions is so long, and, even when every circumstance
is favourable to their progress, they advance so
slowly towards any maturity of strength or policy,
that the recent origin of the Mexicans seems to be a
strong presumption of some exaggeration, in the
splendid descriptions which have been given of their
government and manners,

Fa.n which BUT it is not by theory or conjectures that his.
pogreft in tory decides with regard to the state or characer of
civilization. nations. It produces fa&s as the foundation of

every judgment which it ventures to pronounce. In
collecing those which must regulate our opinion
in the present inquiry, some occur that suggest an
idea of considerable progress in civilization in the
Mexican empire, and others which seem to indi-
cate that it had advanced but little beyond the fa-
vage tribes around it. Both shall be exhibited to
the view of the reader, that, from comparing them,

Herrera, dee. 3. lib. ii. c. 8.

he
J

re may determine on which fide the evidence pre- a o ox
ponderates.

-I the Mexican empire, the right of private pro- Ta, ret

perty was perfectly understood, and eftablilhed in . L
its full extent. Among several savage tribes, we
have fcen, that the idea of a tide to the separate and
exclusive poffeflion of any objet was hardly known;
and chat among all, it was extremely limited and
ill-defined. But in Mexico, where agriculture and
industry had made some progres, the diftintion be-
twecn property in land and property in goods had
taken place. Both might be transferred from one
person to another by sale or barter; both might
descend by inheritance. Every person who could
be denominated a freeman had property in land.
This, however, they held by various tenures. Some
pofefled it in full right, and it descended to their
heirs. The title of others to their lands was de-
rived from the office or dignity which they enjoyed;
and when deprived of the latter, they loft posses-
sion of the former. Both these modes of occupy-
ing land were deemed noble, and peculiar to citi-
zens of the highest class. The tenure, by which
the great body of the people held their property,
was very different. In every diftrit a certain quan-
tity of land was measured out in proportion to the
number of families. This was cultivated by the
joint labour of the whole; its produce was depo-
fited in a common storehouse, and divided among
them according to their refpetive exigencies. The

members

B 00 K members of the Calpullee, or associations, could not

Vii.
. alienate their share of the common estate; it was

an indivisible permanent property, destined for the
support of their families h. In consequence of this
difiribution of the territory of the state, every
man had an interest in its welfare, and the happi-
ness of the individual was conne&ted with the pub-
lic security.

The num- ANOTHER striking circumstance, which diftin-
bgreatn of guifhes the Mexican empire from those nations in
*heir ciC. America we have already described, is the num-

ber and greatness of its cities. While society con-
tinues in a rude state, the wants of men are so
few, and they stand so little in need of mutual as-
fiftance, that their inducements to crowd together
are extremely feeble. Their industry at the fame
time is so imperfet, that it cannot secure subsist-
ence for any considerable number of families let-
tled in one spot. They live dispersed, at this pe-
riod, from choice as well as from necessity, or at
the utmost alfemble in small hamlets on the banks
of the river which supplies them with food, or on
the border of some plain left open by nature, or
cleared by their own labour, The Spaniards, ac-
customed to this mode of habitation among all the
savage tribes with which they were hitherto ac-

h Herrera, dec. 3. lib. iv. c. IS. Torquem. Mon. Ind.
lib. xiv. c. 7. Corita, MS.

7 quainted,

quainted, were aftonilhed, on entering New Spainj B o It
to find the natives residing in towns of such extent S
as resembled those of Europe; In the first fervour of
their admiration, they compared Zempoalla, though
a town only of the second or third size, to the ci-
ties ofgreateft note in their own country, When,
afterwards, they .ifited in fuccefllon Tlafcala, Cho..
lula, Tacuba, Tezeuco, and Mexico itself, their
amazement increased so much, that it led them to
convey ideas of their magnitude and populousness
bordering on what is incredible. Even when
there is leisure for observation, and no interest that
leads to deceive, conjecural estimates of the num-
ber of people in cities are extremely loose, and
usually much exaggerated. It is not surprising,
then, that Cortez'and his companions, little ac-
cultomed to such computations, and powerfully
tempted to magnify, in order to exalt the merit of
their own discoveries and conquests, should have
been betrayed into this cormmon error, and have
raised their descriptions considerably above truth.
For this reason, some considerable abatement ought
to be made from their calculations of the number
of inhabitants in the Mexican cities, and we may
fix the standard of their population much lower
than they have done; but itill they will appear to
be cities of such consequence, as are not to be
found but among people who have made some
Confidrable progrefi in the ar of social life'.

., sw OTS XXL
feL. Irz. XM ,FroT'

B o o K From their accounts, we can hardly suppose Mexico,
.-._ the capital of the empire, to have contained fewer

than sixty thousand inhabitants.

The repara. THE reparation ofprofeflons among the Mexi-
tion ot pro-.
fenoons. cans is a symptom of improvement no less remark-

able. Arts, in the early ages of society, are so few
and so simple, that each man is sufficiently master
of them all, to gratify every demand of his own
limited desires. The savage can form his bow,
point his arrows, rear his hut, and hollow his ca.
noe, without calling in the aid of any hand more
skilful than his own. Time muff have augmented
the wants of men, and ripened their ingenuity, be-
fore the produtions of art became so complicated
in their ftrufture, or so curious in their fabric, that
a particular course of education was requisite to-
wards forming the artificer to expertness in con-
trivance and workmanship. In proportion as re-
finement spreads, the diftin&ion of profefions in-
creases, and they branch out into more numerous
and minute subdivisions. Among the Mexicans,
this separation of the arts necefTary in life had taken
place to a considerable extent. The fun&ions of
the mason, the weaver, the goldsmith, the painter,
and of several other crafts, were carried on by dif-
ferent persons. Each was regularly inftruetd in
his calling. To it alone his industry was confined;
and, by afTiduous application to one object together'
with the persevering patience peculiar to Ameri-
cans, their artizans attained to a degree of ncatanrs

and

and perfcltion in work, far beyond what could have B o o
been expeted from the rude tools which they em- *
ployed. Their various productions were brought
into commerce; and by the exchange of them in
the stated markets held in the cities, not only were
their mutual wants fuppliedk, in such orderly in-
tercourfe as characterizes an improved slate of so-
ciety, but their industry was daily rendered perse-
vering and inventive.

THE diftinftion of ranks established in the Mex- ThledA;nec

tion of

ican empire is the next circumstance that merits ran..
attention. In surveying the savage tribes of Ame-
rica, we observed, that consciousness of equality,
and impatience of subordination, are sentiments na-
tural to man in the infancy of civil life. During
peace, the authority of a superior is hardly felt
among them, and even in war it is but little ac-
knowledged. Strangers to the idea of property,
the difference in condition resulting from the ine-
quality of it is unknown. Birth or titles confer
no pre-eminence; it is only by personal merit and
accomplishments that diftinAion can be acquired.
The form of society was very different among the
Mexicans. The great body of the people was in a
most humiliating state. A considerable number,
known by the name of Mayeques, nearly resembling
in condition those peasants who, under various de-

k Cortes Relat. ap. RamuC. iii. 39, &c. Gom. Crn. C. 79.
Torquerm. liói xiii. c, 3. Hmerrea, dec. a. lib. vii. ci . ., &c.

M 2 nominations,

B o o K nominations, were confidered, during the prevalence

.-1.., of the feudal system, as instruments of labour at-

tached to the foil. The Mayeques could not change
their place of residence without permifllion of the
superior on whom they depended. They were
conveyed, together with the lands on which they
were fettled, from one proprietor to another; and
were bound to cultivate the ground, and to per-
form several kinds of servile work'. Others were
reduced to the lowest form of fubjeaion, that of do-
meftic servitude, and felt the utmost rigour of that
wretched slate. Their condition was held to be so
vile, and their lives deemed to be of so little value,
that a person who killed one of these saves was
not iubjeced to any punishment'. Even thofc
confidered as freemen were treated by their haughty
lords as beings of an inferior species. The nobles,
poffelfed of ample territories, were divided into
various classes, to each of which peculiar titles of
honour belonged. Some of these titles, like their
lands, descended from father to son in perpetual
fuccetilon. Others were annexed to particular of-
sices, or conferred during lift as marks of peffonal
diftincion". The monarch, exalted above all, en.
joyed extensive power, and supreme dignity. Thus
the diftindiion of ranks was completely established,
in a line of regular subordination, reaching from
the highest to the lowest member of the commu.

Herrera, dec. 3. lib. iv. c. 17. Corita, MS.
,- HOrrera, dec. 3. lib. iv. c. 7.

Icrrera, dec. 3. lib. iv. c. i,. Corita, MS.

rity.

nity. Each of these knew what he could claim, and B o o K
what he owed. The people, who were not allowed _--
to wear a dress of the fame faihion, or to dwell in
houses of a form similar to those of the nobles, ac.
coiled them with the most submissive reverence. In
the presence of their sovereign, they durst not lift
their eyes from the ground, or look him in the
face'. The nobles themselves, when admitted to
an audience of their sovereign, entered bare-footed,
in mean garments, and, as his slaves, paid him ho-
mage approaching to adoration. This refpe& due
from inferiors to those above them in rank, was
prescribed with such ceremonious accuracy, that it
incorporated with the language, and influenced its
genius and idiom. The Mexican tongue abounded
in expressions of reverence and courtesy. The stile
and appellations, used in the intercourse between
equals, would have been so unbecoming in the
mouth of one in a lower sphere, when he accosted a
perfop in higher rank, as to be deemed an insult'.
It is only in societies, which time and the infitution
of regular government have moulded into form,
that we find such an orderly arrangement of men
into different ranks, and such nice attention paid to
their various rights.

THE spirit of the Mexicans, thus familiarized Tbeir pom.

ad bended to Subordination, was prepared for sub- c,,'iJ
mlitting to monarchical government. But the dc-

e Herera, dec. 3. lib. it. c. I^.
f Sec.NOTE XXII.

M 3 criptions

B O K scriptions of their policy and laws, by the Spa.
y - niards who overturned them, are so inaccurate and

contraditory, that it is difficult to delineate the
form of their constitution with any precision. Some.
times they represent the monarchs of Mexico as
absolute, deciding according to their pleasure, with
refpe& to every operation of the state. On other
occasions, we discover the traces of established
customs and laws, framed in order to circumscribe
the power of the crown, and we meet with rights
and privileges of the nobles which seem to be op-
posed as barriers against its encroachments. This
appearance of inconsistency has arisen from inat-
tention to the innovations of Montezuma upon the
Mexican policy. His aspiring ambition subverted
the original system of government, and introduced
a pure despotism. He disregarded the ancient
laws, violated the privileges held mors sacred, and
reduced his fubje6ts of every order to the level of
slaves'. The chiefs, or nobles of the first rank,
submitted to the yoke with such relucance, that,
from impatience to fliake it off, and hope of re-
covering their rights, many of them courted the
protection of Cortes, and joined a foreign power
against their domestic oppressor'. It is not then
under the dominion of Montezuma, but under the
government of his predecessors, that we can dif-
cover what was the original form and genius of

r Herrera, dec. 3. lib. ii. c. 14. Torqucm. i. ibi. C. 69.
* Herrcra, dec. 2. lib. v . o1, i. Torquem. lib. iv. c. 49.

Mexican

Mexican policy. From the foundation of the mo-. o o K

VI1.

narchy to the eletion of Montezuma, it seems to o-
have fubfifed with little variation. That body of
citizens, which may be diftinguiihed by the name
of nobility, formed the chief and most refpe&able
order in the slate. They were of various ranks,
as has been already observed, and their honours
were acquired and transmitted in different man-
ners. Their number seems to have been great.
According to an author accustomed to examine
with attention what he relates, there were in the
Mexican empire thirty of this order, each of whom
had in his territories about an hundred thousand
people, and subordinate to these, there were about
three thousand nobles of a lower class'. The ter-
ritories belonging to the chiefs of Tezeuco and'
Tacuba were hardly inferior in extent to those of
the Mexican monarch'. Each of there possessed
complete territorial jurifdi&ion, and levied taxes
from their own vassals. But all followed the itand-
ard of Mexico in war, serving with a number of
men in proportion to their domain, and most of
them paid tribute to its monarch as their superior
lord.

IN tracing those great lines of the Mexican con-

ftitution, an image of feudal policy, in its molt
rigid form, rifes to view, and we discern its three

Herrera, dec. z. lib. viii. c. I .
Torqucm. lib. ii. c. 57. Corita, MS.

M 4 diftinguifliing

s o K distinguishing charateriftics, a nobility poffefling

__ 1. almost independent authority, a people depressed

into the lowest state of fubjetion; and a king en.
trusted with the executive power of the state. Its
spirit and principles seem to have operated in the
New World in the fame manner as in the ancient.
The jurifdition of the crown was extremely limited.
All real and effetive authority was retained by the
Mexican nobles in their own hands, and the shadow
of it only left to the king. Jealous to excess of
their own rights, they guarded with the moll vigi-
lant anxiety against the encroachments of their so-
vereigns. By a fundamental law of the empire,
it was provided that the king Ihould not determine
concerning any point of general importance, with-
out the approbation of a council composed of the
prime nobilityx. Unless he obtained their consent
he could not engage the nation in war, nor could
he dispose of the most confiderabls branch of the
public revenue at pleasure; it was appropriated to
certain purpofcs from which it could not be di.
verted by the regal authority alone'. In order to
secure full effct to those constitutional reflraints,
the Mexican nobles did not permit their crown to
descend by inheritance, but disposed of it by clecion.
The right of ele&tin seems to have been originally
vestfd in the whole body of nobility, but was after-

Hlerrcra, dec. 3. lib. ii. c. 19. Id. dec. 3. lib. iv. c. 16.

Corita, MS.
r Hcrrera, dcc. 3. lib. iv. c. 17.

~3, H'lwards

wards committed to fix eletors, of whom the B o K

VIL

Chiefs of Tezeuco and Tacuba were always two.
From refpeft for the family of their monarchs, the
choice fell generally upon iome person sprung from
it. But as the ativity and valour of their prince
were of greater moment to a people perpetually
engaged in war, than a strict adherence to the
order of birth, collaterals of mature age or of
diftinguilhed merit were often preferred to those
who were nearer the throne in dire& descents. To
this maxim in their policy, the Mexicans appear
to be indebted for such a fuccefliop of able and
warlike princes, as raised their empire in a fliort
period to that extraordinary height of power
which it had attained when Cortes landed in New
Spain.

WHILE the jurifdiftion of the Mexican mo- or,, an
narchs continued to be limited, it is probable that fpli.rdo
it was exercised with little ostentation. But as ""'nc-
their authority became more cxtenfive, the fplen-
dour of their government augmented. It was in
this last f-ate that the Spaniards beheld it; and
fruc. with the appearance of Montezuma's court,
they describe its pomp at great length, and with
much admiration. The number of his attendants,
the order, the silence, and the reverence with
which they fcrved him; the extent of his royal

' Acofa, lib. vi. c. z4. Herrera, dc. . 3 li. ii. c. Ij.
Corita, MS.

mansion,

B K mansion, the variety of its apartments allotted toa

-I_ different officers, and the ostentation with which

his grandeur was displayed, whenever he permitted
his fubjeas to behold him, seem to resemble the
magnificence of the ancient monarchies in Asia,
rather than the Omplicity of the infant states in the
New World.

Orderof BUT it was not in the mere parade of royalty
their :.o-
vrnl,,nt. that the Mexican potentates exhibited their power,

they manifested it more beneficially in the order
and regularity with which they conducted the in-
ternal administration and police of their dominions.
Complete jurisdiction, civil as well as criminal,
over its own immediate vassals, was vetted in the
crown. Judges were appointed for each depart-
ment, and if we may rely on the account which
the Spanish writers give of the maxims and laws
upon which they founded their decisions with re.
fpe& to the distribution of property and the punilh-
mcnt of crimes, juflice was administered in the
Mexican empire with a degree of order and equity
referbling what takes place in societies highly
civilized.

Piov;fion TIEIR attention in providing for the flipport of
portl ftp. government was not less sagacious. Taxes were

laid upon land, upon the acquisitions of industry,
and upon commodities of every kind exposed to
sale in the public markets. These duties were
considerable, but not arbitrary or unequal. They

14 were

were imposed according to established rules, and B o o K
each knew what share of the common burden he -.
had to bear. As the use of money was unknown,
all the taxes were paid in kind, and thus not only
the natural produtions of all the different pro-
vinces in the empire, but every species of manufac-
ture, and every work of ingenuity and art, were
collected in the public store-houses. From those the
emperor supplied his numerous train of attendants
in peace, and his armies during war, with food,
with clothes, and ornaments. People of inferior
condition, neither poffefling land nor engaged in
commerce, were bound to the performance of va-
rious services. By their stated labour the crown-
lands were cultivated, public works were carried
on, and the various houses belonging to the emperor
were built and kept in repair .

THE improved state of government among the Ther po-

Mexicans is conspicuous, not only in points effen-
tial to the being of a well-ordered society, but in
several regulations of inferior consequence with re-
fpe& to police. The institution which I have al-
ready mentioned, of public couriers, stationed at
proper intervals, to convey intelligence from one
part of the empire to the other, was a refinement
in police not introduced into any kingdom of Eu-
rope at that period. The structure of the capital
city in a lake, with artificial dykes, and causeways

a Herrera, dec. a. lib. vii. c. 13. dec. 3. lib. iv. c. 16, 17.
Sec NOTE XXIII.

of

o o of great length, which served as avenues to it fron
VJ_ different quarters, ere&ed in the water, with no

less ingenuity than labour, seems to be an idea that
could not have occurred to any but a civilized
people. The fame observation may be applied to
the ftruaure of the aquedu&s, or conduits, by
which they conveyed a stream offrelh water, from
a considerable distance, into the city, along one
of the causeways b. The appointment of a num-
ber of persons to clean the fireets, to light them by
fires kindled in different places, and to patrole as
watchmen during the night', discovers a degree
of attention which even polished nations are late in
acquiring.
Th-ira. THE progress of the Mexicans in various arts, is

confidered as the most decisive proof of their fupe-
rior refinement. Cortes, and the early Spanish au.
thors, describe this with rapture, and maintain,
that the most celebrated European artists could
not fiurpafs or even equal them in ingenuity and
neatness of workmanfhlip. They'reprefented men,
animals, and other objecs, by such a disposition
of various coloured feathers, as is said to have pro-
duced all the cffTecs of light and shade, and to have
imitated nature with truth and delicacy. Their
ornaments of gold and silver have been described
to be of a fabric no less curious. But in forming
any idea, fiom general descriptions, concerning the

Sre NOTer XXIV.
; il .;tcr, dec. z. lib. viii. c. 4. Torribio, MS.

flats

slate of arts among nations imperfctly polished, n o o

VIA.

we are extremely ready to err. In examining the _,
works of people whose advances in improvement
are nearly the fame with our own, we view them
with a critical, and often with a jealous eye.
Whereas, when conscious of our own superiority,
we survey the arts of nations comparatively rude,
we are astonished at works executed by them un-
der such manifest disadvantages, and, in the warmth
of our admiration, are apt to represent them as
productions more finished than they really are. To
the influence of this illusion, without supposing
any intention to deceive, we may impute the
exaggeration of some Spanish authors, in their ac-
counts of the Mexican arts.

IT is not from those descriptions, but from con-

fidering such specimens of their arts as are still pre-
served, that we must decide concerning their de-
gree of merit. As the ship in which Cortes sent
to Charles V. the mofft curious productions of the
Mexican artisans, which were collected by the
Spaniards when they firit pillaged the empire, was
taken by a French corfaird, the remains of their
ingenuity are less numerous than those of the Pe-
ruvians. Whether any of their works with sea-
thers, in imitation of painting, be fill extant in
Spain, I have not learned; but many of their or-
naments in gold and silver, as well as various
utensils employed in common life, are deposited in
the magnificent cabinet of natural and artificial

* Relax. de Cort. .amuf, iii. 9+, F.

proieif1 lons,

B o o K produEions, lately opened by the king of Spain;
A-, _ and I am informed by persons on whose judgment

and taste I can rely, that these boasted efforts of
their art are uncouth repreefntations of common ob-
jeats, or very coarse images of the human and some
other forms, destitute of grace and propriety'.
The justness of there observations is confirmed by
inipecting the wooden prints and copper-plates of
their paintings, which have been publilhed by va-
rious authors. In them every figure of men, of
quadrupeds, or birds, as well as every reprefenta-
tiorr of inanimated nature, is extremely rude and
awkward *. The hardest Egyptian style, stiff and

imperfe&

e See NOTE XXV.

* As a specimen of the spirit and file in which M. Clavigero

makes his itridures upon my Hillory of America, I fiall publilh
his remarks upon this pffaage. " Thus far Robertson; to

whom we answer, firfi, That there is no reason to believe

' that those rude works were really Mexican; secondly,

That neither do we know whether thole persons in whose
judgment he confides, may be persons fit to merit our faith,
because we have observed that Robertson truRls frequently
to the teftinmony of Gage, Correal, Ibagnez, and other

' such authors, who are entirely undeferving of credit.-

Thirdly, It is more probable that the arms of copper, be.
lieved by those intelligent judges to be certainly Oriental,
are really Mexican." Vol. II. 391.-When an author,

not entirely deflitute of integrity or discernment, and who has
fume solicitude about his own characer, afterts that he re-
ceived his information concerning any particular point from
persons "' on whose judgment and taste he can rely ;" a very
slender degree of candour, one Ihould think, might induce
the reader to believe that he does not endeavour to impofd
upon the public by an appeal to testimony altogether unworthy

of

imperfec as it was, is more elegant. The scrawls n o o K
of children delineate objects almost as accurately. I- V,

BUT however low the Mexican paintings may

be ranked, when viewed merely as works of art,
a very different flation belongs to them, when
confidered as the records of their country, as his-

of credit. My information concerning the Mexican works of
art deposited in the King of Spain's cabinet, was received
from the late Lord Grantham, ambassador extraordinary from
the court of London to that of Madrid, and from Mr. Arch-
deacon Waddilove, chaplain to the embassy; and it was upoa
their authority that I pronounced the coat of armour, men-
tioned in the note, to be of Oriental fabric. As they were
both at Madrid in their public chara&er when the firtt edi-
tion of the Hillory of America was publilhed, I thought it
improper at that time to mention their names. Did their
decision concerning a matter of tarte, or their teflimony con-
cerning a point of fad, Rand in need of confirmation, I might
produce the evidence of an intelligent traveller, who, in de-
scribing the royal cabinet of Madrid, takes notice that it con-
tains " Specimens of Mexican and Peruvian utensils, vases, kce
in earthen-ware, wretched both in tafe and execution." Dil-
ion's Travels through Spain, p. 77. As Gage compored his
Survey of Artw Spain with all the zeal and acrimony of a new
convert, I have paid little regard to his tefsimony with refpe& to
points relating to religion. But as he resided in several provinces
in New Spain, which travellers seldom visit, and as he seems
to have observed their manners and laws with an intelligent
eye, I have availed myself of his information with refpec to
matters where religious opinion could have little influence.
Correal I have seldom quoted, and never refied upon his evi-
dence alone. The Ration in which lbagnca was employed in
America, as well as the credit given to his veracity by printing
his Regno Jefuitico among the large collecion of documents
peblilhed (as I believe by authority) at Madrid, A, D. 1767,
julliiles me for appealing to his authority.
. torical

B o K torical monuments of its policy and tranfaAions;
..- ... and they become curious as well as interesting ob-

jecs of attention. The noblest and most beneficial
invention of which human ingenuity can boast, is
that of writing. But the first elays of this art,
which hath contributed more than all others to the
improvement of the species, were very rude, and
it advanced towards perfecion slowly, and bya
gradual progrefTion. When the warrior, eager
for fame, wished to transmit tome knowledge of
his exploits to succeeding ages; when the grati-
tude of a people to their sovereign prompted them
to hand down an account of his beneficent deeds
to posterity; the first method of accomplishing
this, which seems to have occurred to them, was to
delineate, in the belt manner they could, figures
representing the action of which they were folici-
tous to preserve the memory. Of this, which has
very properly been called pitlure-writing , we find
traces among rome of the most savage tribes of
America. When a leader returns from the field,
he strips a tree of its bark, and with red paipt
Scratches upon it tome uncouth figures which re-
present the order of his march, the number of his
followers, the enemy whom he attacked, the scalps
and captives which he brought home. To those
simple annals he trusts for renown, and soothes
himself with hope that by their means he 1hall re-
ceive praise from the warriors of future times a.

f Divine Legat. of Moses, iii. 73.
* Sir W. Johnson Pihilof. TranfaLt. vol. xiii. p. 143. Mcem.
Bdla liontan, ii. 191. Lafittu, Mccrs de Sauv.ii.43.

COMPARED

COMPARED with those awkward essays of their B o o

Vn.

savage countrymen, the paintings of the Mexicans .
may be confidered as works of composition and de-
sign. They were not acquainted, it is true, with
any other method of recording tranfadions, than
that of delineating the objects which they wilhed
to represent. But they could exhibit a more com-
plex series of events in progreflive order, and de-
scribe, by a proper disposition of figures, the oc-
currences of a king's reign from his accession to
his death; the progress of an infant's education
from its birth until it attain to the years of ma-
turity; the different recompences and marks of
diftin&ion conferred upon warriors, in proportion
to the exploits which they had performed. Some
singular specimens of this picture-writing have
-been preserved, which are justly confidered as the
most curious monuments of art brought from the
New World. The most valuable of there was
published by Purchas in fixty-fix plates. It is di-
vided into three parts. The first contains the
history of the Mexican empire under its ten mo-
narchs. The second is a tribute-roll, representing
what each conquered town paid into the royal
treasury. The third is a code of their inflitutions,
domestic, political, and military. Another fpeci-
men of Mexican painting has been published in
thirty-two plates, by the present archbishop of
,Toledo. To both are annexed a full explamtion
of what the figures were intended to reprtfent,
which was obtained by the Spaniards from Indians

VOL. Irl. N well

B v0 K well acquainted with their own arts. The flyle o(
sci- painting in all ti.efe is the fame. They represent

things, not words. They exhibit images to the
eye, not ideas to the understanding. They may,
therefore, be confidered as the earliest and most
imperfe& essay of men in their progress towards
discovering the art of writing. The defe&s in
this mode of recording tranfa&fions mufi have been
early felt. To paint every occurrence was, from
its nature, a very tedious operation; and as affairs
became more complicated, and events multiplied
in any society, its annals must have swelled to an
enormous bulk. Besides this, no obje&s could
be delineated but those of sense; the conceptions
of the mind had no corporeal form, and as long as
piture-writing could not convey an idea of there,
it must have been a very imperfe& art. The ne-
ceffity of improving it must have rouzed and sharp-
ened invention, and the human mind holding the
fame course in the New World as in the Old,
might have advanced by the fame fucceflive steps,
first, from an acual picture to the plain hierogly-
phic; next, to the allegorical symbol; then to the
arbitrary character; until, at length, an alphabet
of letters was discovered, capable of expressing all
the various combinations of found employed in
speech. In the paintings of the Mexicans we, ac-
corqingly, perceive, that this progress was begun
among them. Upon an attentive infpedion of the
plates, which I have mentioned, we may observe
fom: approach to the plain or simple hieroglyphic,

/i;
i~ ~where

where some principal part or circumflance in the B o o I
fubje& is made to stand for the whole. In the an- ,
nals of their kings, published by Purchas, the
towns conquered by each are uniformly represented
in the fame manner by a rude delineation of a
houie; but in order to point out the particular
towns which submitted to their vi&orious arms,
peculiar emblems, sometimes natural objecs, and
sometimes artificial figures, are employed. In the
tribute-roll published by the archbishop of To.
ledo, the house, which was properly the pi&ure of
the town, is omitted, and the emblem alone is em.
ployed to represent it. The Mexicans seem even
to have made ofme advances beyond this, to-
wards the use of the more figurative and fanciful
hieroglyphic. In order to describe a monarch,
who had enlarged his dominions by force of arms,
they painted a target ornamented with darts, and
placed it between him and those towns which he
fibdued. But it is only in one instance, the no-
tation of numbers, that we difgern any attempt to
exhibit ideas which had no corporeal form. The
Mexican painters had invented artificial marks, or
signs of convention, for this purpose. By means of
these, they computed the years of their kings'
reigns, as well as the amount of tribute to be
paid into the royal treasury. The figure of a
circle represented unit, and in finall numbers, the
computation was made by repeating it. Larger
numbers were expressed by a peculiar mark, and
they had such as denoted all integral numbers,

.s a from

B o o K fiom twenty to eight thousand. The short dura.,

- tion of their empire prevented the Mexicans from

advancing farther in that long course which con-
duas men from the labour of delineating real ob-
jets, to the simplicity and ease of alphabetic
writing. Their records, notwithstanding some
dawn of such ideas as might have led to a more
perfect flyle, can be confidered as little more than
a species of pi&ure-writing, so far improved as to
mark their superiority over the savage tribes of
America; but still so defecive, as to prove that
they had not proceeded far beyond the first frage in
that progress which must be completed before any
people can be ranked among polished nations '.

llier modc THEIR mode of computing time may be confi-
of comput-
h t.aic. dered as a more decisive evidence of their progress

in improvement. They divided their year into
eighteen months, each confifing of twenty days,
amounting in all to three hundred and sixty. But
as they observed that the course of the fun was not
completed in that time, they added five days to
the year. These, which were properly intercalary
days, they termed Jupernumerary or wafle; and as
they did not belong to any month, no work was
done, and no sacred rite performed on them ; they
were devoted wholly to feflivity and paftimee. This
near approach to philosophical accuracy is a rc-
markable proof that the Mexicans had bellowed
Ibme attention upon inquiries and speculations, to

Sec NOTE XXVI. ' Acofla, lib. vi. c. 2.

which

which men in a very rude state never turn their B OOK

vII.
thoughts *. .

SUCH are the most iriking particulars in the Fatlsirdi-

eating a

manners and policy of the Mexicans, which ex- fmali pro.
hibit them to view as a people considerably refined. gres in i'
But from other circumstances, one is apt to fufpet
that their chara&er, and many of their institutions,
did not differ greatly from those of the other inha-
bitants of America.

LIKE the rude tribes around them, the Mexi- Theirwars

continual
cans were inccffantly engaged in war, and the mo- and froci-

OU$.

tives which prompted them to hoRtility seem to
have been the fame. They fought, in order to
gratify their vengeance, by shedding the blood of
their enemies. In battle they were chiefly intent
on taking prisoners, and it was by the number of
these that they estimated the glory of vitory. No
.captive was ever ranfonled or spared. All were
facrificel without mercy, and their fleh devoured
with the finle barbarous joy as among the fiercest
savages. On some occasions it rose to even wilder
excelles. Their principal warriors covered them-
selves with the skins of the unhappy viaims, and
danced about the streets, boasting of their own va-

* The Mexican mode of computing time, and every other

particular relating to their chronology, have been considerably
elucidated by M. Clavigero, Vol. I. 288; Vol. II. ai5, &a.
'I'he observations and theories of the Mexicans concerning those
fubjeas discover a greater progress in fpeculativc fcicnce than
we find among any people in the New World.

N 3 lour,

B o O K lour, and exulting over their enemies . Even in

V11.
S-- their civil institutions we discover traces of that

barbarous disposition which their system of war
inspired. The four chief counrellors of the em-.
pire were distinguished by titles, which could have
been assumed only by a people who delighted in
blood . This ferocity of chara&cer prevailed
among all the nations of New Spain. The Tlaf-
calans, the people of Mechoacan, and other states
at enmity with the Mexicans, delighted equally in
war, and treated their prisoners with the fame
cruelty. In proportion as mankind combine in
social union, and live under the influence of equal
laws and regular policy, their manners soften, fen-
timents of humanity arise, and the rights of the fpe-
cies come to be understood. The fierceness of
war abates, and even while engi.,,d in hostility,
men remember what they owe one to another. The
savage fights to defiroy, the citizen to conquer.
The former neither pities nor spares, the latter
has acquired sensibility which tempers his rage.
To this sensibility the Mexicans seem to have been
perfee strangers, and among them war was carried
on with so much of its original barbarity, that we
cannot but suspect their degree of civilization to
have beln very imperfect.

?hei'func. TIEIR funeral rites were not less bloody than
irtcs. those of the molt .tva3g tribes. On the death of

f Herrera, dec. 3. lib. ii. c. 15. Gom. Cron. C. 17.
A Sec NOTE XXVII.

any

any diflinguilhed personage, especially of the Enr- B o o K
peror, a certain number of his attendants wore k.
chosen to accompany him to the other world, and
those unf,)rtunate viEtims were put to death without
mercy, and buried in the fame tomb .

THOUGH their agriculture was more extensive Theiragri-

culture imo

than that of the roving tribes who trusted chiefly perfca.
to their b(wv for fFr ,1, it seems not to have sup-
plit.ld Linm vitih fuich subsistence as men require
whel! cnllgag"'l in elFrts of active induilry. The
Spanliars appear not to have been itruck with any
superiority of the Mexicans over the other people
of America in bodily vigour. Both, according
to their observation, were of such a feeble frame
as to be unable to endure fatigue, and the strength
of one Spaniard exceeded that of several Indians.
This they imputed to their scanty diet, on poor
fare, sufficient to preserve life, but not to give
firmness to the constitution. Such a remark could
hardly have been made with refpet to any people
furnished plentifully with the necessaries of life.
The difficulty which Cortes found in procuring
subsistence for his small body of soldiers, who were
often constrained to live on the spontaneous pro-
duEtions of the earth, fcems to confirm the remark
of the Spanish writers, and gives no high idea of
the fiate of cultivation in the Mexican empire'.

h Herrera, dec. 3. lib. ii. c. 18. Gom. Cron. c. ZoQ.

l Rclat. amu. iiin . 306, A. llerrcra, dec. 3. lib. iv,
c. 17. dec. z. lib. vi . . 16.

N4 A PRAC

B o 0 K A PRACTICE that was universal in New Spain

VII.

* »> appears to favour this opinion. The Mexican
A further proofofthis. women gave fuck to their children for several

years, and during that time they did not cohabit
with their hufbandsk. This precaution against a
burdensome increase of progeny, though necessary,
as I have already obfcrved, among savages, who,
from the hardships of their condition, and the prc-
carioufnefs of their fubfiflecnce, fin.l it impossible
to rear a numerous fainily, can hardly be fuptoftd
to have continued among a people who lived at
cafe and in abundance.

otlItscon- THE vast extent of the Mexican empire, which
cerning the
extentotthe has been confidered, and with justice, as the mo(
empire. decisive proof of a considerable progress in regular

government and police, is one of thole fats in the
hiltory of the New World which seems to have
been admitted without due examination or fuffi-
cient evidence. The Spanish historians, in order
to magnify the valour of their countrymen, are
accuf'omed to reprcfent the dominion of Monte-
zuma as stretching over all the provinces of New
Spain from the Northern to the Southern Ocean.
But a great part of the mountainous country was
poflTflcd( by the Otcmies, a fierce uncivilized peo-
ple, who seem to have been the residue of the ori-
ginal inhabitants. The provinces towards the north
and weft of Mexico were occupied by the Cl'i, he-
iecas, and other tribes of hunters, None of theiC:

k Gom. Cron. c. o28. Hcrrcra, dec. 3. lib. iv. c. 16.

1 recognized

recognized the Mexican monarch as their filperior. B o o K
Even in the interior and more level country, there' -^- '
were several cities and provinces which had never
submitted to the Mexican yoke. Tlafcala, though
only twenty-one leagues from the capital of the
empire, was an independent and hostile republic.
Cholula, though still nearer, had been fubje&ed
only a flort time before the arrival of the Spa-
niards. Tepeaca, at the distance of thirty leagues
from Mexico, seems to have been a separate state,
governed by its own laws'. Mechoacan, the fron-
tier of which extended within forty leagues of Mexi-
co, was a powerful kingdom, remarkable for its
implacable enmity to the Mexican name". By
these hostile powers the Mexican empire was cir-
cumlcribed on every quarter, and the high ideas
which we are apt to form of it from the description
of the Spanish historians, should be considerably
moderated.

IN confcquence of this independence of several Linlei-

trcourfe

states in New Spain upon the Mexican empire, aiion. its
there was not any considerable intercourse between r,,v,,"'.
its various provinces. Even in the interior coun-
try not far distant from the capital, there seem to
have been no roads to facilitate the communication
of one diftrid with another; and when the Spa-
niards firfR attempted to penetrate into its several
provinces, they had to open their way through

I lerrera, dec. 3. lib. x. c. I5. 2.. B. Diaz, c. 130.
*1 lhcrrcra, dec. 3. lib. ii. c. 0o.

forefis

b o o K forefis and marihes". Cortes, in his adventurous

, f march from Mexico to Honduras in 1525, met with

obftrutions, and endured hardships, little inferior
to those with which he must have firuggled in the
molt uncivilized regions of America. In foine places
he could hardly force a passage through impervious
woods, and plains overflowed with water. In others
he found so little cultivation, that his troops were
frequently in danger of perilhing by famine. Such
fats correspond ill with the pompous description
which the Spanish writers give of Mexican police
and industry, and convey an idea of a country
nearly similar to that poffffeed by the Indian tribes
in North America. Here and there a trading or
a war path, as they are called in North America, led
from one settlement to another o, but generally there
appeared no sign of any established communica-
tion, few marks of industry, and fewer monuments
of art.

Further A PROOF of this imperfection in their commer-
proof thi . cial intercourse no less striking, is their want of

money, or Come universal standard by which to eti-
mate the value of commodities. The difcovcry of
this is among the steps of greatest consequence in
the progress of nations. Until it has been made,
all their tranfL6tions must be lb awkward, so ope-
rose, and lo limited, that we may boldly pronounce
that they have advanced but a little way in their

I B. Diaz. c. 16C. c. 176.
f Herrcra, dec. 3; lib. vii, c. 8.

career.

career. The invention of such a commercial B o o
standard is of such high antiquity in our hemi- _., j
sphere, and rites so far beyond the sra of authentic
history, as to appear almost coeval with the exist-
ence of society. The precious metals seem to have
been early employed for this purpose, and from
their permanent value, their divisibility, and many
other qualities, they are better adapted to serve as
a common standard than any other substance of
which nature has given us the command. But in
the New World, where there metals abound most,
this use of them was not known. The exigencies
of rude tribes, or of monarchies imperfectly civi-
lized, did not call for it. All their commercial in-
tercourfe was carried on by barter, and their igno-
rance of any common standard by which to facili-
tate that exchange of commodities which contri-
butes so much towards the comfort of life, may be
jutly mentioned as an evidence of the infant state
of their policy. But even in the New World the
inconvenience of wanting fume general instrument
of commerce began to be felt, and some efforts
were made towards supplying that defec. The
Mexicans, among whom the number and greatncfs
of their cities gave rile to a more extended com-
merce than in any other part of America, had begun4
to employ a common flandard of value, which ren-
dered finaller tranfadions much more cafy. As
chocolate was the favourite drink of persons in
every rank of life, the nuts or almonds of cacao,
of which it is composed, were of such universal

confump-

Bo o K consumption, that, in their flated markets, these

-1 _were willingly received in return for commodities

of small price. Thus they came to be confidered
as the instrument of commerce, and the value of
what one wished to dilpofe of was estimated by the
number of nuts of the cacao, which he might ex-
pect in exchange for it. This seems to be the ut-
most length which the Americans had advanced to.
wards the discovery of any expedient for supplying
the ife of money. And if the want of it is to be
held, on one hand, as a proof of their barbarity,
this expedient for supplying that want, should be
admitted, on the other, as an evidence no lets satis-
fying, of some progress which the Mexicans had
made in refinement and civilization, beyond the
savage tribes around them.

Douhtscon- IN such a rude itate were many of the Mexican
ccrning the.
fiateoftheir provinces when frit visited by their conquerors.

Even their cities, extensive and populous as they
were, seem more fit to be the habitation of men
just emerging from barbarity, than the residence
of a polished people. The description of TIlfc;la
nearly resembles that of an Indian village. A
number of low firaggling huts, scattered about
irregularly, according to the caprice of each pro-
prietor, built with turf and stone and thatched
with reeds, without any light but what they re-
ceived by a door, so low that it could not be en.
tered upright . In Mexico, though, from the

IIe:rcra, dec. 2. lib. vi. c. 12.

pcculi-

peculiarity of its situation, the disposition of the R o oK
houses was more orderly, the itruture of the i.
greater part was equally mean. Nor does the fa-
bric of their temples, and other public edifices, ap- Temples,
pear to have been such as entitled them to the
high praises bestowed upon them by many Spanilh
authors. As far as one can gather from their ob-
fcure and inaccurate descriptions, the great temple
of Mexico, the most famous in New Spain, which
has been represented as a magnificent building,
raised to such a height, that the ascent to it was by
a flight of a hundred and fourteen steps, was a
solid mars of earth of a square form, faced partly
with stone. Its bale on each fide extended ninety
feet, and decreasing gradually as it advanced in
height, it terrminated in a quadrangle of about
thirty feet, where were placed a shrine of the deity,
and two altars on which the vietims were facri-
siced q. All the other celebrated temples of New
Spain exactly resembled that of Mexico'. Such
ItruLures convey no high idea ofprogrefs in art and
ingenuity; and one can hardly conceive that a
form more rude and simple could have occurred
to a nation in its first efforts towards erecting any
great work.

GREATER flill and ingenuity were displayed, if "andot

we may believe the Spanish historians, in the houses uildinV.
of khe emperor and in those of the principal no-
4 ferrera,dec. a. lib. vii, c.17. 'See NOTE XXVIII.

bility.

B o o K bility. There, some elegance of design was vi-

v ' , Tfible, and a commodious arrangement of the apart-

ments was attended to. But if buildings corre-
fponding to such dcfcriptions had ever cxifted in
the Mexican cities, it is probable that some re-
mains of them would fill be visible. From the
manner in which Cortes conduced the siege of
Mexico, we can indeed easily account for the total
deftrueion of whatever had any appearance of
splendor iu that capital. But as only two centuries
and a half have elapsed since the conquest of New
Spain, it seems altogether incredible that in a pe-
riod so short, every veltige of this boasted elegance
and grandeur should have disappeared } and that
in the other cities, particularly in those which
did not susser by the deftrudive hand of the con-
querors, there are any ruins, which can be confi-
dered as monuments of their ancient magnificence.

EVEN in a village of the rudelt Indians, there

are buildings of greater extent and elevation than
common dwelling-houfes. Such as are deflined
for holding the council of the tribe, ant in which
all affreble on occasions of public feltivity, may
be called fiately edifices, when compared with the
reft. As among the Mexicans the diftintion of
ranks was eftablilhcd, and property was unequally
divided, the number of dililnguiflied firutdres in
their towns would of course be greater than in
other parts of America. But there fecin not to
have been either so solid or magnificent as to merit

the

the pompous epithets which some Spanilh authors B a ao
employ in describing them. It is pro6able that,, V
though more ornamented, and built on a larger
scale, they were ereted with the fame flight mate-
rials which the Indians employed in their common
buildings', and Time, in a space much less than
two hundred and fifty years, may have swept away
all remains of them'.

FROM this enumeration of fa&s, it seems, upon

the whole, to be evident, that the itate of society in
Mexico was considerably advanced beyond that of
the savage tribes which we have delineated. But it
is no less manifict, that with refpec& to many parti-
culars, the Spanilh accounts of their progress ap-
pear to be highly embellished. There is not a more
frequent or a more fertile source of deception in de-
scribing the manners and arts of savage nations, or
of such as are imperfealy civilized, than that of p-
plying to them the names and phrases appropriated
to the institutions and refinements of polished life.
When the kader of a small tribe, or the head of
a rude community, is dignified with the name of
king or emperor, the place of his residence can
receive no other name but that of his palace; and
whatever his attendants ilay be, they must be called
his court. Under such appellations they acquires
in our estimation, an importance and dignity which
does not belong to them. The illusion spreads,

See NOTE XXIX. t See NOTE XXX.

and

.B o o K and giving a false colour to every part of the nar-

VII.
-, _* rative, the imagination is so much carried away

with the resemblance, that it becomes difficult to
diccern objects as they really are. The Spaniards,
when they firit touched on the Mexican coast,
were so much firuck with the appearance ofattain.
ments in policy and in the arts of life, far lupcrior
to those of the rude tribes with which they were
hitherto acquainted, that they fancied they had
at length discovered a civilized people in the New
World. This comparison between the peopleof
Mexico and their uncultivated neighbours, they
appear to have kept constantly in view, and ob-
serving with admiration many things which marked
the pre-eminence of the former, they employ in
describing their irnperfecd policy and infant arts,
such terms as are applicable to the institutions of
men far beyond them in improvement. Both tlice
-circumstances concur in detrating from the credit
due to the descriptions of Mexican manners by the
early Spanifl writers. By drawing a parallel be-
tween them and those of people so much lels civi-
lized, they raised their own ideas too high. By
their mode of delcribing them, they conveyed
ideas to others no less exalted above truth. Later
writers have adopted the Ityle of the original his
torians, and improved upon it. The colours with
which De Solis delineates the character and dc-
scribes the aótions of Montezuma, the splendor of
his court, the laws and policy of his empire, are
the fame that he muit have employed in exhibiting

to view the monarch and institutions of an highly B o o K

VII.
polilhed people. I._

BUT though we may admit, that the warm ima-

gination of the Spanifl writers has added some em-
bellifhmcnt to their descriptions, this will not justify
the decisive and peremptory tone, with which fe-
vcral authors pronounce all their accounts of the
Mexican power, policy and laws, to be the ficions
of men who wished to deceive, or who delighted
in the marvellous. There are few historical si&s
that can be ascertained by evidence more unex-
ceptionable, than may be produced in support of
die material articles, in the description of the
Mexican constitution and manners. Eye witnesses
relate what they beheld. Men who had resided
among the Mexicans, both before and after the
conqueff, describe inffitutions and customs which
were familiar to them. Persons of profeflions so
different that obje&s muff have presented them-
selves to their view under every various alpe&;
soldiers, priests, and lawyers, all concur in their
testimony. Had Cortes ventured to impose upon
his Sovereign, by exhibiting to him a piture of
imaginary manners, there wanted not enemies and
rivals who were qualified to derect his deceit, and
who would have rejoiced in exposing it. But ac-
cording to the just remark of an author, whose in-
genuity has illustrated, and whose eloquence has
adorned the history of America", this supposition
is in itself as improbable, as the attempt would have

" M. I' Abb6 Raynal Hit. philof. & polit . . iii. 127.
VOL. ni. o been

Bo o K been audacious. Who among the destroyers of
a_._ . this great empire was so enlightened by science,

or so attentive to the progress and operations of
men in social life, as to frame a ficitious system of
policy so well combined and so confident, as that
which they delineate, in their accounts of the
Mexican government? Where could they have
borrowed the idea of many institutions in legifia-
tion and police, to which, at that period, there
was nothing parallel in the nations with which they
were acquainted ? There was not, at the beginning
of the sixteenth century, a regular establishment
of posts for conveying intelligence to the sovereign
of any kingdom in Europe. The fame observation
will apply to what the Spaniards relate, with re-
fpeft to the ftruaure of the city of Mexico, the
regulations concernnig its police, and various law
established for the administration of justice, or fe-
curing the happiness of the community. Whoever
is accustomed to contemplate the progress of na-
tions, will often, at very early stages of it, discover
a premature and unexpe&ed dawn of those ideas,
which give rife to institutions that are the pride
and ornament of its most advanced period. Even
in a state as imperfecly pplifhed as the Mexican
empire, the happy genius of some sagacious ob-
server, excited or aided by circumstances unknown
to us, may have introduced institutions which are
seldom found but in Societies highly refined. But
it is almost impollible that the illiterate conquerors
of the New World fiould have formed in any one
instance a conception of customs and laws, beyond

the

the standard of improvement in their own age B 0 0 K
and country. Or if Cortes had been capable of - _
this, what inducement had those by whom he was
superseded to continue the deception ? Why Ihould
Corita, or Motolinea, or Acofta, have amused their
sovereign or their fellow-citizens with a tale purely
fabulous ?

IN one particular, however, the guides whom Religion of

thie Mtxi-

we muLf follow have represented the Mexicans to cans.
be more barbarous, perhaps, than they really were.
Their religious tenets, and the rites of their wor-
Ihip, are described by them as wild and cruel in
an extreme degree. Religion, which occupies no
considerable place in the thoughts of a savage,
whose conceptions of any superior power are ob-
fcure, and his sacred rites few as well as simple,
was formed, among the Mexicans, into a regular
system, with its complete train of priests, temples,
vitims, and festivals. This, of itself, is a clear
proof that the state of the Mexicans was very dif-
ferent from that of the ruder American tribes'
But from the extravagance of their religious no-
tions, or the barbarity of their rites, no conclusion
can be drawn with certainty concerning the degree
of their civilization. For nations, long after their
ideas begin to enlarge, and their manners to refine,
adhere to systems of fuperitition founded on 'the
crude conceptions of early ages. From the genius
of the Mexican religion we. mry however, form
a most just conclusion with respect to its influence
upon the character of the people. The aspe&t of

o 2 fiuprftition

1 o o K superstition in Mexico was gloomy and atrocious.

VIA.

_ Its divinities were clothed with terror, and de-

lighted in vengeance. They were exhibited to
the people under detestable forms, which created
horror. The figures of serpents, of tygers, and of
other deftrucive animals, decorated their temples.
Fear was the only principle that inspired their vo-
taries. Falls, mortifications, and penances, all ri-
gid, and many of them excruciating t6 an ex-
treme degree, were the means employed to appease
the wrath of their gods, and the Mexicans never
approached their altars without sprinkling them
with blood drawn from their own bodies. But, of
all offerings, human sacrifices were deemed the
most acceptable. This religious belief, mingling
with the implacable spirit of vengeance, and adding
new force to it, every captive taken in war was
brought to the temple, was devoted as a victim to
the deity, and sacrificed with rites no less solemn
than cruel . The heart and head were the portion
consecrated to the gods; the warrior, by whose
prowess the prisoner had been seized, carried off
the body to feait upon it with his friends. Under
the impreiflon of ideas so dreary and terrible, and
accultomed daily to scenes of blood(hed rendered
awful by religion, the heart of man must harden
and be steeled to every sentiment of humanity.
The spirit of the Mexicans was accordingly un-

Cort. Rclat. ap. Ranuf. iii. *4o, &c. B. Diaz, c. 82.

Acolta, lib. v. c. 13, &c. Herrera, dec. 3. lib. ii. c. 15, &c.
Gomara Cron. c. 80, &c. Sec NOTE XXXI.

feeling»

feeling, and the genius of their religion so far B 0 o K
counterbalanced the influence of policy and arts, __
that notwithstanding their progress in both, their
manners, inflead of softening, became more fierce.
To what circumstances it was owing that super-
flition assumed such a dreadful form among the
Mexicans, we have not sufficient knowledge of their
history to determine. But its influence is visible,
and produced an effet that is singular in the history
of the human species. The manners of the people
in the New World who had made the greatest
progress in the arts of policy, were, in several
refpets, the most ferocious, and the barbarity of
rome of their customs exceeded even those of the
savage state.

THE empire of Peru boaits of an higher anti- Pretcnfions

quity than that of Mexico. According to the tra- °' Pe"u ,i
ditionary accounts collected by the Spaniards, it tiquity
had fifbifted four hundred years, under twelve fuc-
ceffive monarchs. But the knowledge of their
ancient story, which the Peruvians could commu-
nicate to their conquerors, must have been both
imperfect and uncertain '. Like the other Ame- unceltin.
rican nations, they were totally unacquainted with
the art of writing, and destitute of the only means
by which the memory of past tranfations can be
preserved with any degree of accuracy. Even
among people to whom the use of letters is known,
the aera where the authenticity of history corn-

* See NOTE XXXII.

o 3 mences,

B o o K mences, is much poflerior to the introduction of
,-vl- writing. That noble invention continued, every

where, to be long subservient to the common bufi.
ness and wants of life, before it was employed in
recording events, wityha view of conveying inform-
ation from one age to another. But in no coun-
try did ever tradition alone carry down historical
knowledge, in any full continued fiream, during a
period of half the length that the monarchy of
Peru is said to have fubfited.

Defaesin IHE .uipos, or knots on cords of different co-
cords by lours, which are celebrated by authors fond of the

i'rs- marvellous, as if they had been regular annals

of the empire, imperfectly supplied the place of
writing. According to the obscure description of
them by Acofta', which Garcilaifo de la Vega has
adopted with little variation and no improvement,
the quipos seem to have been a device for render-
ing calculation more expeditious and accurate. By
the various colours different objects were denoted,
and by each knot a diffin& number. Thus an
account was taken, and a kind of register kept, of
the inhabitants in each province, or of the several
produtions colleced there for public use. But as
by thefc knots, however varied or combined, no
moral or abftraft idea, no operation or quality of
the mind could be represented, they contributed
little towards preserving the memory of ancient
events and inffitutions. By the Mexican paintings

a Hill. lib. vi. c. 8.

alnJ

and symbols, rude as they were, more knowledge B o o K
of remote tranfations seems to have been co- _
veyed, than the Peruvians could derive from their
boasted quipos. Had the latter been even of more
extensive use, and better adapted to supply the
place of writter records, they perished so generally,
together with other monuments of Peruvian inge-
nuity, in the wreck occasioned by the Spanish con-
quest, and the civil wars subsequent to it, that no
accceffon of light or knowledge comes from them.
All the zeal of Garcilaflo de la Vega, for the
honour of that race of monarchs from whom
he descended, all the industry of his researches,
and the superior advantages with which he car-
ried them on, opened no source of information
unknown to the Spanish authors who wrote before
him. In his Royal Commentaries, he confines him-
self to illustrate what they had related concerning
the antiquities and institutions of Perub; and his
illustrations, like their accounts, are derived en-
tirely from the traditionary tales current among his
countrymen.

VERY little credit then is due to the minute de-

tails which have been given of the exploits, the
battles, the conquests, and private chara&er of the
early Peruvian monarchs. We can reft upon no-
thing in their story, as authentic, but a few fadts, so
interwoven in the system of their religion and po-
licy, as preserved the memory of them from being

b Lib.i.c. so.

o 4 loft;

B o o K loft; and upon the defcripfion of such customs and

ViI.
A-, institutions as continued in force at the time of the

conquefi, and fell under the immediate observation
of the Spaniards. By attending carefully to these,
and endeavouring to separate, them from what ap-
pears to be fabulous, or of doubtful authority, I
have laboured to form an idea of the Peruvian
government and manners.

Origin of THE people of Peru, as I have already obfcrvcd',
their civil
pc',cy. had not advanced beyond the rudest form of lavage

life, when Manco Capac, and his consort Mama
Ocollo, appeared to inltrut and civilize them. Who
these extraordinary personages were, whether they
imported their system of legislation and knowledge
of arts from some country more improved, or, if na-
tives of Peru, how they acquired ideas so far filpe-
rior to those of the people whom they addressed,
are circumstances with refpet to which the Peru-
vian tradition conveys no information. Manco
Capac and his consort, taking advantage of the
propensity in the Peruvians to superstition, and par-
ticularly of their veneration for the Sun, pretended
to be children of that glorious luminary, and to
deliver their inftrucions in his name, and by au-
thority from him. The multitude listened and be-
lieved. What reformation in policy and manners
the Peruvians ascribe to those founders of their
empire, and how, from the precepts of the Inca
and his conlolrt, their ancestors gradually acquired

c Book vi. p. 21, &c.

fomc

some knowledge of those arts, and some relish for ma o K
that industry, which render fubiltence secure and -
life comfortable, hath been formerly related. Those
bleflings were originally confined within narrow
precincts; but in process of time, the successors of
Manco Capac extended their dominion over all the
regions that stretch to the weft of the Andes from
Chili to Quito, eftablilhing in every province their
peculiar policy and religious institutions.

THE mofl singular and ifriking circumstance in Founded in

the Peruvian government, is the influence of reli- " lseo0"
gion upon its genius and laws. Religious ideas
make such a feeble impriflion on the mind of a
savage, that their eftct upon his sentiments and
manners is hardly perceptible. Among the Mexi-
cans, religion, reduced into a regular system, and
holding a considerable place in their public infti-
tutions, operated with conspicuous efficacy in form-
.ing the peculiar chara&er of that people. But in
Peru, the whole system of civil policy was founded
on religion. The Inca appeared not only as a le-
giflator, but as the messenger of Heaven. His pre-
cepts were received not merely as the injuntions
of a fiuperior, but as the mandates of the Deity.
lHis race was to be held sacred; and in order to
prrfcrve it dilinit, without being polluted by any
mixture of less noble blood, the sons of Manco
Capac married their own fifers, and no person was
ever admitted to the throne who could not claim it
by fich a pure descent. To those Children Of the
n'u:, for that was the appcllation bestowed upon all

8 the

s o o K the offspring of the firit Inca, the people looked up
I_, _, with the reverence due to beings of a superior

order. They were deemed to be under the im-
mediate protection of the deity from whom they
issued, and by him every order of the reigning
Inca was supposed to be dicated.

Two re. FROM those ideas two consequences resulted.
,e5 of The authority of the Inca was unlimited and abfo.
tIis' lute, in the most extensive meaning of the words.

Whenever the decrees of a prince are confidered as
the commands of the Divinity, it is not only an aft
of rebellion, but of impiety, to dispute or oppose

The ahfo- his will. Obedience becomes a duty of religion;
bite pow..r
or thc lnc.. and as it would be prophane to control a monarch

who is believed to be under the guidance of Heaven,
and presumptuous to advise him, nothing remains
but to submit with implicit refpe&. This must ne-
ceff;rily be the effecQ of every government efta-
blifhcd on pretensions of intercourse with superior
powers. Such accordingly was the blind fubmiflion
which the Peruvians yielded to their sovereigns.
The persons of highest rank and greatest power in
their dominions acknowledged them to be of a
more exalted nature; and in testimony of this,
when admitted into their presence, they entered
with a burden upon their Ihoulders, as an emblem
of their servitude, and willingness to bear whatever
the Inca was pleased to impoce. Among their
subje&s, force was not requisite to second their
commands. Every officer entrusted with the exe-
cution of them was revered, and, according to

tilr'

the account of an intelligent observer of Peruvian B o o K
manners d, he might proceed alone from one extre- -
mity of the empire to another without meeting op-
position'; for, on producing a fringe from the
royal Borla, an ornament of the head peculiar to
the reigning Inca, the lives and fortunes of the
people were at his disposal.

ANOTHER consequence of eftablilhing govern- All crime

punished

ment in Peru on the foundation of religion was, pitally.
that all crimes were punilhed capitally. They
were not confidered as tranfgrefions of human laws,
but as insults offered to the Deity. Each, without
any diltindion between such as were flight and
Iuch as were atrocious, called for vengeance, and
could be expiated only by the blood of the offender.
Consonantly to the fame ideas, punishment followed
the trespass with inevitable certainty, because an
offence against Heaven was deemed such an high
enormity as could not be pardoned . Among a
people of corrupted morals, maxims ofjurifprudence
so severe and unrelenting, by rendering men fero-
cious and desperate, would be more apt to multiply
crimes than to reltrain them. But the Peruvians,
of simple manners and un'ufpicious faith, were
held in such awe by this rigid dilcipline, that the
number of offenders was extremely finall. Vene-
ration for monarchs, enlightened and directed, as
they believed, by the divinity whom they adored,
prompted them to their dutyi the dread of p[u-
niliincnt, which they were taught to confidcr as

Zarate, lib. i. c. 13. Vega, lib, ii. r. 6.

6 unavoid.

B 0 0 K unavoidable vengeance iqflicLed by offended Hea.

VII.

L_-_- ven, withheld them from evil.

MI thgcitcis T'E fyftm of superstition on which 'the Incas
ia;on. ingrafred their pretenions to such high authority,

was of a gtnius very different from that citablilhed
among the Mexicans. Manco Capac turned the
veneration of his followers entirely towards natural
objects. The Sun, as the great fourcc of light, of
joy, and fertility in the creation, attracted their
principal homage. The Moon and Stars, as co-
operating with him, were entitled to econdary ho-
nours. Wherever the propensity in the human
mind to acknowledge and to adore some superior
power, takes this direction, and is cmploycd in
contemplating the order and benclicence that really
exist in nature, the spirit of fuperilition is mild.
Wherever imaginary beings, created by the fancy
and the fears of men, are ilJppofed to preside in
nature, and become the objects of worflip, fu-
perftition always assumes a more revere and atro-
cious form. Of the latter we have an example
among the Mexicans, of the former among the
people of Peru. The Peruvians had not, indeed,
made such progress in observation or inquiry, as to
have attained just conceptions of the Deity; nor
was there in their language any proper name or
appcllation of the Supreme Power, which inti-
mated, that'they had formed any idi a of him as the
Creator and Governor of the World'. But by

f Acofa, lib . c. 3. . r;:

(.'ircctinZ

dire&ing their veneration to that glorious luminary, B o rK

VII.

which, by its universal and vivifying energy, is i_
the best emblem of divine beneficence, the rites
and observances which they deemed acceptable to
him were innocent and humane. They offered to
the Sun a part of those producions which his ge-
nial warmth had called forth from the bosom of the
earth, and reared to maturity. They sacrificed, as
an oblation of gratitude, some of the animals which
were indebted to his influence for nourishment.
They presented to him choice specimens of those
works of ingenuity which his light had guided the
hand of man in forming. But the Incas never
stained his altars with human blood, nor could
they conceive that their beneficent father the Sun
would be delighted with such horrid victimst.
Thus the Peruvians, unacquainted with those bar-
barous rites which extinguish sensibility, and sup-
preli the fcelings of nature at the fight of human
fufe;rings, were isrmed by the spirit of the su:er-
ilition which they had adopted, to a national cha-
ratcr, more gentle than that of any people in
America.

TIrL influence of this fuperflition operated in the itsi,,lunc

fame manner upon their civil inflitutions, and tend- , '"c'l Po.
td to corrca in them whatever was adverse to gen-
tlcncrs of charaSter. The dominion of the Incas,
though the nloit abfolutc of all dcfpotifms, was miti-
gated by its alliance with religion. The mind was

t Sc NOTE XXXHI.

not

B O ) K not humbled and deprelfed by the idea of a forced

v".
I__ _ f'fubjc-3tion to the will of a filperior; obedience,

paid to one who was believed to be clothed with
divine authority, was willingly yielded, and im..
plied no dcgi.i.tion. The sovereign, conscious
that the rbliibiiive reverence of his people flowed
firom their belief of his heavenly descent, was con.
tinlrally reminlded of a diflindion which promptel
him to initate that beneficent power which lhe
was f-;i)pofcd to represent. In conlequence of thole
iniprelifons, there hardly occurs in the traditional
hillory of Peru, any inltance of rebellion against
the reigning prince, and among twelve fucccflivc
monarchs, there was not one tyrant.

andl on ttir EVEN the wars in which the Incas engaged, were
military
lyit,'l. carried on with a- spirit very dif'erent from that of

other American nations. They fought not, like
f:lvages, to delfroy and exterminate; or, like the
Mexicans, to glut blood thirsty divinities with
human flacrilices. They conquered, in order to
reclaim and civilize the van(quished, and to diffufc
the knowtledge of their own inflitutions and arts.
Prilrnecrs f-t1(' not to hiave been expolcd to the in-
fuiit and tortures, which were their lot in every
other part of the New World. 'The Incas took
tle peophl whom they i'bdLlucd under their pro-
tcdion, iinl allmitted them to a participation of
all the ad:v;nt.l';es enjoyed by their original fib-
icj'l. This prl'adlicc, ;) repugnant to American
f';'rcity, anil rdcilil. the liiinvinity of tlie mIll
p)clillicl I .ltill, nul} 1., ai:,'ibed, li ke other, i'-

culi i iti '.

culiarities which we have observed in the Peruvian n o o K
manners, to the genius of their religion. The Vl
Incas, confidering the homage paid to any other
object than to the heavenly powers which they
adored as impious, were fond of gaining proselytes
to their favourite system. The idols of every con-
quered province were carried in triumph to the
great temple at Cuzco h, and placed there as tro-
phies of the superior power of the divinity who was
the protetor of the empire. The people were
treated with lenity, and inffru&ted in the religious
tenets of their new matters', that the conqueror
might have the glory of having added to the num-
ber of the votaries of his father the Sun.
TE fltate of property in Peru was no lets fin- Pecuhiar

[tale of p0o-

gular than that of religion, and contributed, like- prty.
wife, towards giving a mild turn of character to
the people. All the lands capable of cultivation
were divided into three fliares. One was confe-
crated to the Sun, and the product of it was ap-
plied to the ercation of temples, and furnilhing
what was re(uifite towards celebrating the public
rites of religion. The ficond belonged to the
Inca, and was frt apart as the provision made by
the community for the support of government.
TIhe third and largcfl fllarc was reserved for the
maintenance of the people, among whom it was
parcelled out. Neither individuals, however, nor
communities, had a right of exclufivc properLy ill

h Ilerrcra, dec. 5. lib. iv, c. 4. ec , lib. v. c. 1 .
l lvrrer:, dec. 5. llb. iv, c. 8.

i :

B o o K the portion set apart for their use. They poffleffed

it only for a year, at the expiration of which a new
division was made in proportion to the rank, the
number, and exigencies of each family. All those
lands were cultivated by the joint industry of the
community. The people, summoned by a proper
officer, repaired in a body to the fields, and per-
formed their common task, while songs and musical

ffeas of instruments cheered them to their labourk. By
this' this singular distribution of territory, as well as by

the mode of cultivating it, the idea of a common in-
terest, and of mutual subserviency, was continually
inculcated. Each individual felt his conneótion with
those around him, and knew that he depended on
their friendly aid for what increase he was to reap.
A state thus constituted may be confidered as one
great family, in which the union of the members
was so complete, and the exchange of good offices
so perceptible, as to create stronger attachment,
and to bind man to man in closer intercourse, than
subsisted under any form of society eftablithed in
America. From this resulted gentle manners, and
mild virtues unknown in the savage state, and with
which the Mexicans were little acquainted.

inequality BUT, tl:ouh the institutions of the Incas were
of ranks. so fiamed as to strengthen the bonds of affc&ion

among their subjects, there was great inequality in
their condition. The distinction of ranks was fully
established in Peru. A great body of the inhabit.

k Hcrrcra, dec. 5. lib. iv. c . V. ga, lib. v. c. 5.

anitS,

ants, under the denomination of 'anaconas, were B 0 0 K
held in a state of fervirmde. Their garb and "
houses were of a form different from those of free-
men. Like the Tamemes of Mexico, they were
employed in carrying burdens, and in performing
every other work of drudgery'. Next to them in
rank, were such of the people as were free, but
distinguished by no official or hereditary honours.
Above them were raised, those whom the Spaniards
call Orejones, from the ornaments worn in their
ears. They formed what may be denominated
the order of nobles, and in peace as well as war
held every office of power or trust". At the head
of all were the children of the Sun, who, by their
high descent, and peculiar privileges, were as much
exalted above the Orejoncs, as these were elevated
above the people.

SUCH a form of society, from the union of its Stateofart

members, as well as from the distinction in their
.ranks, was favourable to progress in the arts. But
the Spaniards having been acquainted with the
improved state of various arts in Mexico, several
years before they discovered Peru, were not so
much struck with what they observcd in the latter
country, and describe the appearances of ingenuity
there with less warmth of admiration. The Peru-
vians, nevertheless, had advanced far beyond the
Mexicans, both in the necessary arts of life, and in
such as have some title to the name of elegant.

J Herrera, dec. S. lib. iii. c. 4. lib. x. c. 8.
m Herrera, dec. 5, lib. iv, c. I.

VOl. III. P IS

aB0 0

o K I Peru,. agriculture, the art of primary necef.
I .L1 fity in social life, was more extensive, and carried
mproved, on with greater skill than in any part of America,
9lwrn. The Spaniards, in their progress through the coun.

try, were so fully supplied with provisions of every
kind, that in the relation of their adventures \e
meet with few of those dismal scenes of diftrefsoc-
calfoned by famine, in which the conquerors of
Mexico were To often involved. The quantity of
foil under cultivation was not left to the discretion
of individuals, but regulated by public authority
in proportion to the exigencies of the community.
Even the calamity of an unfruitful season was but
little felt, for the produc of the lands consecrated
to the Sun, as well as those set apart for the
Incas, being deposited in the 7ambos, or public
storehouses, it remained there as a flated provision
for times of scarcity ". As the extent of cultiva-
tion was determined with such provident attention
to the demands of the state, the invention and in-
duftry of the Peruvians were called forth to cx.
traordinary exertions, by certain defects peculiar
to their climate and foil. All the vast rivers tha:
flow from the Andes take their course eastward to
the Atlantic Ocean. Peru is watered only by some
lireams which ruth down from the mountains like
torrents. A great part of the low country is sandy
and barren, and never rcfrelhed with rain. In
order to render such an unpromising region fertilei
the ingenuity of the Peruvians had recourse to va.

Zrate, lib,i. c. 14. Vega, lib. i. c. 8.

2 rrioi

rious expedients, By means of artificial canals B3 0 0
conduted, with ,uch patience and considerable y~
art, from the torrents that poured across their
country, they conveyed a regular supply of moif-
ture to their fields°. They enriched the foil by
manuring it with the dung of sea-fowls, of which
they found an inexhaustible store on all the islands
Scattered along their coaftsp. In describing the
customs of any nation thoroughly civilized,' such
practices would hardly draw attention, or be men-
tioned as in any degree remarkable; but in the
hiltory of the improvident race of men in the New
World, they are entitled to notice as singular proofs
of industry and of art. The use of the plough,
indeed, was unknown to the Peruvians. They
turned up the earth with a kind of mattock of hard
wood'. Nor was this labour deemed so degrad-
ing as to be devolved wholly upon the women.
Both sexes joined in performing this necessary
work. Even the children of the Sun set an ex-
ample of industry, by cultivating a field near Cuzco
with their own hands, and they dignified this func-
tion, by denominating it their triumph over the
earth '.

THE superior ingenuity of the Peruvians is ob- Theirbai.

vious, likewise, in the conftru&ion of their houses i1"L
and public buildings. In the extensive plains
which stretch along the Pacific Ocean, where the

9 Zarate, lib . i. c. Vega, lib. v. c. I, & 24.
r Acofi,lib.iv.c.37.Voega,lib.v.c.3.See NOTE XXXIV,
Zarate, lib. i. c, 8. Vega, lib. v. c. a.

,P n2y

B OO K, sky is perpetually serene, and the climate mild,

i,._y., their houses were very properly of a fabric ex-

tremely flight. But in the higher regions, where
rain falls, where the viciffltude of seasons is known,
and their rigour felt, houses were conflruedt with
greater solidity. They were generally of a square
form, the walls about eight feet high, built with
bricks hardened in the fun, without any windows,
and the door low and strait. Simple as these ftruc-
tures were, and rude as the materials may seem
to be of which they were formed, they were so
durable, that many of them frill subsist in different
parts of Peru, long afctr every monument that
might have conveyed to us any idea of the domestic
slate of the other American nations has vanishel
from the face of the earth. But it was in the tem-
ples conliccatcl to tile Sun, and in the buildings
deflined for the refidcence of their monarchs, that
the Peruvians difpl;yed the utmost extent of their
art and contrivance. The descriptions of them by
Inch of the Spanish writers as had an opportuniky
of contemplating thcm, while, in fohle measure,
entire, nfight have appeared highly exaggerated,
if the ruins wl.ic fiill remain, did not vouch the
truth of thei; rclaLions. These ruins of sacred or
royal buildings ;r- fobuid in every province of the
renlile, and by their frequency demonstrate that
they are imonuilncnts ufa powerful people, who muin
have fubfifl.cd, c'ltiin,, a lecriodl of bome extent, in
a tlate of no inconfiterr.bl improvement. They
appear to hlave been editices various in their (i-
menfiuri. Some of a modcrate fizc, many ofim-

Illnclli

mense extent, all remarkable for solidity, and re- r o K

vii.

fembling each other in the file of architeEture. .
The temple of Paclacamac, together with a pa-'
lace of the Inca, and a fortress, were so connected
together as to form one great trui&ure, above half
a league in circuit. In this prodigiols pile, the
fime singular taste in building is confiicuouis, as
in other works of the i'Pruvians. As they were
unacquainted with the uit of the pulley, and other
mechanical powers, and could not elevate the large
stones and bricks which they emp)loyed in building
to any considerable height, the wvalls of this edi-
sice, in which they seem to have made their greatest
cfort towards magnificence, did not rife above
twelve feet from the ground. Though they had
not discovered the use of mortar or of any other
cement in building, the bricks or sones were join-
ed with so much nicety, that the seams can hardly
be discerned '. The apartments, as fir as the dif-
tribution of them can be traced in tile ruins, were
ill-difpofed, and afforded little accommodation.
There was not a single window in any part of the
building; and as no light could enter but by the
door, all the apartments of largefli dimension mullf
tither have been perfcEtly dark, or illuminated by
some other means. B,1t with all thefc, and many
other imperfections that might be mentioned in
their art of building, the works of the P'cruvians
which frll remain, must be confidercd as fzlpen-
dous efforts of a people unacquaillted with the ufc

See NOTE XX ;V.

1'3 of

BOO K of iron, and convey to us an high idea of the

VII..

K, V-_ power possessed by their ancient monarchs.
'Thcrpobtic THESE, however, were not the noblest or most

useful works of the Incas, The two great roads
from Cuzco to Quito, extending in an uninter-
rupted firetch above fifteen hundred miles are en-
titled to frill higher praise. The one was conduc.
ed through the interior and mountainous country,
the other through the plains on the sea-coast. From
the language of admiration in which rome of the
early writers express their astonishment when they
first viewed those roads, and from the more pomp-
ous descriptions of later writers, who labour to sup-
port Come favourite theory concerning America,
one might be led to compare this work of the
Incas to the famous military ways which remain as
monuments of the Roman power: But in a country
where there was no tame animal except the Llama,
which was never used for draught, and but little as
a beast of burden, where the high roads were fel-
dom trod by any but a human foot, no great de-
gree of labour or art was requisite in forming
them. The Peruvian roads were only fifteen feet
in breadth ', and in many places To slightly formed,
that time has effaced every vestige of the course
in which they ran. In the low country little more
seens to have been done, than to plant trees or to
fix polls at certain intervals, in order to mark the
proper rout to travellers, To open a path through

Cicca, c. 60,

the

the mountainous country was a more arduous talk. X o o K
Eminences were levelled, and hollows filled up, "'. ~
and for the preservation of the road it was fenced
with a bank of turf. At proper distances, Tambos,
or storehouses, were erected for the accommoda-
tion of the Inca and his attendants, in their progress
through his dominions. From the manner in which
the road was originally formed in this higher and
more impervious region, it has proved more du-
rable; and though, from the inattention of the Spa-
niards to every obje& but that of working their
mines, nothing has been done towards keeping it
in repair, its course may still be traced". Such
was the celebrated road of the Incas; and even
from this description, diverted of every circum-
fiance of manifcft exaggeration, or of suspicious
afipeft, it muff be confidered as a striking proof of
an extraordinary progress in improvement and po-
licy. To the savage tribes of America, the idea
of facilitating communication with places at a dif-
tance had never occurred. To the Mexicans it
was hardly known. Even in the most civilized
countries of Europe, men had advanced far in re-
finement, before it became a regular object of na-
tional police to form such roads as render inter-
course commodious. It was a capital object of
Roman policy to open a communication with all
the provinces of their cxtenfive empire, by means
of those roads which are justly confidered as one of

Xerez, p. z89. 191. Zarate, lib. i. c. 13, 14. Vega,

lib.i. c-. 1iogur Voyage, p.10. Ull ontretcnemicn-
si, p. 365.

P4 the

B O o K the noblest monuments both of their wisdom and

VII.

L their power. But during the long reign of barba-

rifm, the Roman roads were negleted or destroyed;
and at the time when the Spaniards entered Peru,
no kingdom in Europe could boait of any work of
public utility that could be compared with the great
roads formed by the Incas.
and bridses, TiH formation of those roads introduced another

improvement in Peru equally unknown over all the
reit of America. In its courle from south to north,
the road of the Incas was interfeted by all the tor-
rents which roll from the Andes towards the Weft-
ern Ocean. From the rapidity of their course, as
well as from the frequency and violence of their
inundation, there were not fordable. Some expe-
dient, however, was to be found for pafling them.
The Peruvians, from their unacquaintance with the
use of arches, and their inability to work in wood,
could not conftruj' bridges either of stone or tim-
ber. But neceflity, the parent of invention, fig-
gested a device which supplied that defect. They
formed cables of great strength, by twitting toge-
ther tome of the pliable withs or osiers, with which
their country abounds; fix of these cables they
firetched across the fiream parallel to one another,
and made them fall on each fide. These they
bound firmly together by interweaving smaller ropes
so clole, as to form a compact piece of net-work,
which being c)vered with branches of trees and
earth, they palled along it with tolerable security .

Sec NOT.E XXXVI.

I'roper

Proper persons were appointed to attend at each B o o K
bridge, to keep it in repair, and to assist paffengersy.
In the level courtry, where the rivers became deep
and broad and flill, they are passed in B.?.':'s, or
floats; in the conftriution, as vell as navigation
of which, the incenuity of the Plruvians appears
to be far fuperiur to that of any people in America.
These had advanced no farther in n::val f;ill than
the ife of the paddle, or oar; tlhe: 'cruvians ven-
tured to raise a inaft, and spread a fail, by nmans of
which their balzas not only went nimlly before the
wind, but co!!t veer and tack I, ;h grcat cicrity z.

NOR were the ingenuity and art of he Peruvians o.icleofre-

confined solely to objects of etfcnltial utility. Tlhey fir, ivr
had made some progress in arts, which may be
called elegant. They polfclrcd the precious metals
in greater abundance than any prpeic of America.
They obtained gold in the fame manner with the
AMexicans, by searching in the channels of rivers, or
washing the earth in which particles of it were con-
tained. But in order to procure silver, they ex-
erted no inconsiderable degree of skill and inven-
tion. They had not, indeeld, attained the art of
finking a flaft into the bowels of the earth, and
penetrating to the riches concealed there ; but they
hollowed deep caverns on the banks of rivers and
the idles of mountains, and emptied such veins as
did not dip suddenly beyond their reach. In other

Y Sancho ap. Ram. iii. 376, B. Zirat, lib, i. c. 14. V'cg¾,
lib. iii cC.7, 8. Hcrrera, dec. S. lib. iv. c. 3, 4.

Ulloa Voy. i. 167, &c.

places,

B o o K places, where the vein lay near the surface, they
, vIl. dug pits to such a depth, that the person who

worked below could throw out the ore, or hand
it up in baskets'. They had difrovered the art of
finelting and refining this, either by the simple ap.
plication of fire, or where the ore was more hiub-
born, and impregnated with foreign substances, by
placing it in finall ovens or turnaces, on high
grounds, so artificially conltruaed, that the draught
of air performed the function of a bellows, an en-
gine with which they were totally unacquainted.
By this firmpl device, the purer ores were fmcltcd
with f acility, and the quantity of silver in Peru was
so considerable, that many of the utcnfils enmpl.ycd
in the functions of common life were made of it'.
Several of thoc: velfels and trinkets arc said to have
merited no finall degree of eftimction, on account
of the neatness of the workmanship, as well as the
intrinsic value of the materials. But as the con-
querors of America were well acquainted with the
latter, but had scarcely any conception of the
former, most of the silver velfels and trinkets were
melted down, and rated according to the weight
and fineness of the metal in the division of the spoil.

Worktor IN other works of mere curiosity or ornament,
eAgsnce. their ingenuity has been highly celebrated. Many

specimens of thole have been dug out of the Ga-
cas, or mounds of caIth, with which the Peruvials

* Rnmuio, iii. 414, A.
b A(olla, lib. iv. c. 4, 5. V egn, p. i. 1 . vil. Cv .

c.
Ulla Iu Eitrcten. S58.

ceVwret

covered the bodies of the dead. Among these are o o r
mirrors of various dimcnfions, of hard Ihining lfones L
highly polished; veftls of earthen ware of different
forms; hatchets, and other inltruments, some de-
Itined for war, and others for labour. Some were
of flint, some of copper, hardened to such a degree
by an unknown process, as to supply the place of
iron on several occasions. Had the use of those
tools formed of copper been general, the progress
of the Peruvians in the arts might have been such,
as to emulate that of more cultivated nations. But
either the metal was To rare, or the operation by
which it was hardened so tedious, that their inftru-
ments of copper were few, and lb extremely fmalle
that they seem to have been employed only in
lighter works. But even to such a circumscribed
use of this imperfect metal, the Peruvians were in-
debted for their superiority to the other people of
America in various arts . The fame observation,
however, may be applied to them,. which I for-
merly made with refpe& to the arts of the Mexi-
cans. From several specimens of Peruvian utensils
and ornaments, which are deposited in the royal ca-
binet of Madrid, and from some preserved in dif-
ferent collecions in other parts of Europe, I have
reason to believe that the workmanship is more to
be admired on account of the rude tools with which
it was executed, than on account of its intrinsic
neatness and elegance; and that the Peruvians,
though the most improved of all the Americans,
were not advanced beyond the infancy of arts.

UUoa Voy. co,. i. 381, kc. Id. Entrctc. p. 369, &c.

BuT

B o O K BUT notwithstanding so many particulars, which
u. ..

- seem to indicate an high degree of improvement in

Animper- Peru, other circumstances occur that suggest the
f.t civiliza-
*ion. idea of a society fti!l in the firt ftiages of its tranfi-

tion from barbarilin to civilization. In all the do-
woc:ties minions of the Incas, Cuzco was the only place that

had the appearance, or was entitled to the name of
a city. Evcry where else, the people lived moilly
in detached habitations, disperscd over the country,
or, at the utmoi}, fettled together in small vil-
lages'. But until men are brought to affnemble in
numtiroui. bodies, and incorporated in such close
tlnion, :, io enjo) iioy;c.l .lt int'rco;rlI, and to feel
rlutual dcpendncc, they) never inmbibe pcrfectly
the fii)ri;, or aflnic the manners of fuciai liie. In
a country ofimmncnic extent, with only one city, the
progretf of manners, and the improvement either
of the, necefary or more refined arts, mulf have
been io flow, and carried on under inch dilad-
vantages, that it is more iurplrifing the Peruvians
ihould have advanced lto far in refinement, than
that they did not proceed farther.

No rdfclc IN conlfequCnce of this tl;:c of im;pcrfcct: union,
il;:,tison1, the separation of lp'ciCliions in l'tru was not fC

complete as among the Mexicans. The lels clo'ely
men aflfciate, the more flnlmle are tilhir manners,
and tle fewer their wants. The crafts of common
and moll niicclletry ulfe in life do not, in such a slate,
become so complex or dilficult, as to render it re-
quifite that men lhould be trained to them by ans

/.Jrate, lib. i. c. 9 tIcrrcra, dee. 5. lib. vi. c. 4.

particular

particular course of education. All the arts, accord- B O K
ingly, which were of daily and indispensable utility, j
were exercised by every Peruvian indiscriminately.
None but the artists, employed in works of mere
curiosity or ornament, constituted a separate order
of men, or were diliniguifhed from other citizens*.

FROM the want of cities in Peru, anoiler coni- Little corn.

quence followed. There was litte commercial t:r:.
intercourse among the inhabitants of that great
empire. The activity of conmmerce i- coeval with
the foundation of cities; and fi'onl the mo:cent that
the members of any conmiunity f.'t.lc in conlidcr-
able numbers in one place, its operations become
vigorous. The citizen mult depend fur libliflence
on the labour of thoil who cuitivatz the ground.
They, in return, nmult receive lume equivalent.
Thus mutual intercourse is tclabliflied, and the
productions of art are regularly exchanged for the
fruits of agriculture. In the towns of the Mexican
empire, fiated markets were held, and whatever
could supply any want or dcfire of mian was an ob-
jec of commerce. But in Peru, fiomn the singular
mode of dividing property, and the manner in
which the people were fettled, there v a':s hardly any
Ipecies of coinmmerce carried on bre;w': dillercnlr
provinces', and the coilnmiiniy ,;i lai: ac quainted

ith that aDive intercouri.', whiich is ar once a bond
of union, and an incentive to ilnl,ruv.:neCr.

"Acola, lib. vi. c. 15. 'VcZ , 1 :. v. c. 9. icrrcra,

dee. 5. lib. iv. c. 4.
f Vcga, lib, vi. c. 3.

Cl-Tr

B o o K BUT the unwarlike spirit of the Peruvians wa
L . f!L the most remarkable, as well as most fatal defe& in
Unwaiiike their charafter . The greater part of the rude

it of the
.eruvians. nations of America opposed their invaders with

undaunted ferocity, though with little conduc or
success. The Mexicans maintained the firuggle
in defence of their liberties, with such perfevcring
fortitude, that it was with difficulty the Spaniards
triumphed over them. Peru was subdued at once,
and almolt without refitance; and the most fa.
vourable opportunities of regaining their freedom,
and of crushing their opprefIors, were loft through
the timidity of the people. Though the traditional
history of the Peruvians represents all the Incas as
warlike princes, frequently at the head of armies,
which they led to victory and conquest; few fymp.
toms of such a martial spirit appear in any of their
operations subsequent to the invasion of the Spa-
niards. The influence, perhaps, of those inftitu-
Lions which rendered their manners gentle, gave
their minds this unmanly softness; perhaps, the
constant serenity and mildness of the climate may
have enervated the vigour of their frame; perhaps,
some principle in their government, unknown to us,
was the occasion of this political debility. What
ever may have been the cause, the fa& is certain, anC
there is not an instance in history of any peopli
so little advanced in refinement, so totally def
titute of military enterprize. This character had
descended to their posterity. The Indians of Pen

s Xerez, 19o. Sancho ap. Rm..il372 . Herrera, dec.
lib. i. c. 3.

' 1~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~L

are now more tame and depressed than any people B o o K
of America. Their feeble spirits, relaxed in life- VIL
less inacion, teem hardly capable of any bold or
manly exertion.

BuT, betides those capital defeas in the political

slate of Peru, some detached circumstances and
faas occur in the Spaniih writers, which discover
a considerable remainder of barbarity in their man-
ners. A cruel custom, that prevailed in some of
the noft ravage tribes, subsisted among the Peru-
vians. On the death of the Incas, and of other
eminent persons, a considerable number of their at-
tendants was put to death, and interred around their
Guacas, that they might appear in the next world
with their former dignity, and be served with the
fame refpe&. On the death of Huana-Capac, the
most powerful of their monarchs, above a thousand
vitims were doomed to accompany him to the
tomb . In one particular, their manners appear
to have been more barbarous than those of most
rude tribes. Though acquainted with the use of
fire in preparing maize, and other vegetables for
food; they devoured both flcfh and fish perfectly
raw, and allonilhed the Spaniards, with a practice
repugnant to the ideas of all civilized people'.

BUT though Mexico and Peru are the polfeflions Other do-

m;nions of
of Spain in the New World, which, on account spninn

Amuica.

h Acofta, lib. v. c. 7.
I Xerez, p. 190. Sancho, Ram. iii. 372, C. Herrera,
dc. 5. lib. i.c. 3.

both

B o O K both of their ancient and present state, have at-
' va.b' tradted the greatest attention; her other domini-

ons there are far from being inconsiderable, either
in extent or value. The greater part of them was
reduced to fubjetion during the firif part of the
Sixteenth century, by private adventurers, who
fitted out theit- small armaments either in Hifpa-
niola or in Old Spain; and were we to follow each
leader in his progress, we should discover the fame
daring courage, the fame persevering ardour, the
fame rapacious desire of.wealth, and the fame ca-
pacity of enduring and surmounting every thing in
order to attain it, which distinguished the opera-
tions of the Spaniards in their greater American
conquests. But, instead of entering into a detail,
which, from the similarity of the tranfaations, would
appear almost a repetition of what has been already

A brief fur- related, I shall fitisfy myself with such a view of
vyofthcm. those provinces of the Spanifl empire in America,

which have not hitherto been mentioned, as may
convey to my readers an adequate idea of its great-
nefs,'fertility, and opulence.

Such as ile I BEGIN with the countries contiguous to the two
adjacent to
the emrpire great monarchies, of whoi:e hittory and institutions

I have given some account, and flall then bricily
describe the other difirias of Spanish America.
The juritlii'iion of the viceroy of New Spain ex-
tends over kvcral provinces, \hliich were not sub-

Cinaloa and jec to the: dominion of the Mexicans. The coun-
Soioia, .3c tries of Cinaloa and Sonora, that stretch along the

calt lide of the Vermilion lea, or gulf of California,

a$

as well as the immense kingdoms of New Navarre B-O o rK
and New Mexico, which bend towards the weft I
and north, did not acknowledge the sovereignty of
Montezuma, or his prcdeceffors. These regions,
not inferior in magnitude to all the Mexican em-
pire, are reduced some to a greater, others to a less
degree of fubje&ion to the Spanilh yoke. They
extend through the most delightful part of the tem-
perate zone; their foil is, in general, remarkably
fertile, and all their productions, whether animal or
vegetable, are molt perfet in their kind. They
have all a communication either with the Pacific
Ocean, or with the Gulph of Mexico, and are wa-
tered by rivers which not only enrich them, but
may become subservient to commerce. The num-
ber of Spaniards fettled in those vast countries, is
indeed extremely small. They may be said to have
subdued rather than to have occupied them. But
if the population in their ancient eftablifnlments in
America shall continue to increase, they may gra-
dually spread over those provinces, of which, how-
ever inviting, they have not hitherto been able to
take full pofrelfion.

ONE circumstance may contribute to the speedy R;icmin,.

population of some difiridts. Very rich mines both
ofgold and silver have been discovercd in many
of the regions which I have mentioned. Wherever
these are opened, and worked with fiicces, a mul-
titude of people resort. In order to iipply them
with the necessaries of life, cultivation muit be in-
creased, artisans of various kinds must afflnblr,

VOL. HI. (L and

B o o K and induRry as well as wealth will be gradually

VII
LVa * diffused. Many examples of this have occurred in

different parts of America since they fell under the
dominion of the Spaniards. Populous villages and
large towns have suddenly arisen amidit uninhabited
wilds and mountains; and the working of mines,
though far from being the most proper objet to-
wards which the attention of an infant society should
be turned, may become the means both of pro.
moting useful ativity, and of augmenting the

* recent number of people. A recent and singular instance
and remark-
able dico of this has happened, which, as it is but little known
very. in Europe, and may be produEtive of great effcts,

merits attention. The Spaniards fettled in the
provinces of Cinaloa and Sonora, had been long
disturbed by the depredations of some fierce tribes
of Indians. In the year 1765, the incursions of
those savages became so frequent, and so deftruc-
tive, that the Spaniih inhabitants, in despair, ap-
plied to the Marquis de Croix, viceroy of Mexico,
for such a body of troops as might enable them to
drive those formidable invaders from their places
of retreat in the mountains. But the treasury of
Mexico was so much exhausted by the large sunms
drawn from it, in order to support the late war
against Great Britain, that the viceroy could afford
them no aid. The respect due to his virtues, ac-
complilhed what his official power could not effec.
He prevailed with the merchants of New Spain to
advance about two hundred thousand pesos for
defraying the expence of the expedition. The war
was conducted by an officer of abilities; and after

being

being protraced for three years, chiefly by the dif- B o o K
ficulty of pursuing the fugitives over mountains and 'i
through defiles which were almost impaflable, it
terminated, in the year 177r, in the final fubmif-
sion of the tribes, which had been so long the ob-
ject of terror to the two provinces. In the course
of this service, the Spaniards marched through
countries into which they seem not to have pene-
trated before that time, and discovered mines of
such value, as was astonishing even to men ac-
quainted with the riches contained in the mountains
of the New World. At Cineguilla, in the province
of Sonora, they entered a plain of fourteen leagues
in extent, in which, at the depth of only sixteen
inches, they found gold in grains of such a size,
that some of them weighed nine marks, and in such
quantities, that in a hort time, with a few labour-
ers, they colleced a thousand marks of gold in
grains, even without taking time to wash the earth
that had been dug, which appeared to be so rich,
that persons of skill computed that it might yield
what would be equal in value to a million of pesos.
Before the end of the year 1771, above two thou- Probable
sand persons were fettled in Cineguilla, under the ,'f ofr
government of proper magistrates, and the infpec-
tion of several ecclesiastics. As several other mines,
not inferior in richness to that of Cineguilla, have
been discovered, both in Sonora and Cinaloa k, it is
probable that these neglected and thinly-inhabiteq
provinces, may soon become as populous and va-
luable as any part ofthe Spanish empire in America.

$ See NOTE XXXVII.

o,. 2 THx

n o K THE peninsula of California, on the other Gide of
A _

-1J the Vermilion sea, seems to have been less known
cait n, to the ancient Mexicans, than the provinces which

I have mentioned. It was discovered by Cortes in
the year 1536 '. During a long period it continued
to be so little fiequented, that even its form was
unknown, and in most charts it was represented as
an illand, not as a peninsula'". Though the cli-
mate of this country, if we may judge from its
situation, must be very deirable; the Spaniards
have made small progrel; in peopling it. Towards
the close of the last century, the Jesuits, who had
great merit in exploring this negleced province,
and in civilizing its rude inhabitants, imperceptibly
acquired a dominion over it as complete as that
which they poffelled in their missions in Paraguay,
and they laboured to introduce into it the fame po-
licy, and to govern the natives by the fame maxims.
In order to prevent the court of Spain from con-
ceiving anyjealoufy of their designs and operations,
they seem fludioufly to have depreciated the coun-
try, by reprefcnting the climate as so disagreeable
and unwholesome, and the foil as so barren, that
nothing but a zealous desire of converting the
natives, could have induced them to fettle there ".
Several public-li'irited citizens endeavoured to un-
deceive their 1;vc'reigns, and to give them a bet-

Ja;,,,rl ter view of C'aliiirnia; but in vain. At lengtlh,
,,',;,,.;,,:i. on the expullioln of the Jesuits fiom the Spanifl

ldolinion;s, thle I (uiu of Madrid, as prone at that

Book.v. vol.ii p. 41 2. m Sec NOTE XXXVIII.
VcnegnC liIl. o01 (;li.fornia, i. z6.

junciurc

jun&ure to fufpeft the purity cf the Order's in- R o o K
tentions, as formerly to confide in them with im- ,2 j
plicit truss, appointed Don Joseph Galvez, wholb
abilities have since railed him to the high rank of
minister for the Indies, to vilir that peninsula. His
account of the country was favourable; he found
the pearl fifiery on its coasts to be valuable, and
he discovered mines of gold of a very promising
appearance . From its vicinity to Cinaloa and So-
nora, it is probable, that if thc population of these
provinces shall increafl in rth manner vwhich I have
'uppofed, California may, be degrees, receive from
them such a recruit of inhabitant,, as to be no
longer reckoned among the c! fuLote and ulilefs
diftriEts of the Spanilli empire.

O the eaf of Mexico, Yucatan and Ilonduras Vuctan

are comprehended in the government of New dwI"'.
Spain, though anciently they can hardly be said to
have formed a part of the Mcxican empire. Theie
large provinces, stretching firom the Bay of Cam-
peachy beyond Cape (raci:s a Dios, do not, like
the other territories of Spain in the New World,
derive their value cither froml the fertility of their
foil, or the richnels ot' their mines ; but they pro-
duce in greater abundance, tlan any part of Ame-
rica, the logwood tree, vhich, in dying some co-
burs, is so far preferable to any other material,
that the confumptibn of it in ]:urnpe is confider-
able, and it has become an article in conllltrce of
great value. During a long period, no European

Lorcnzano, 349, 350.

Q. 3 nation

B 0 o K nation intruded upon the Spaniards in those pro-

VII. __-... vinges, or attempted to obtain any share in this

branch of trade. But after the conquest of Ja-
maica by the English, it soon appeared what a
formidable rival was now feated in the neighbour-
hood of the Spanilh territories. One of the first
objets which tempted the English fettled in that
island, was the great profit arising from the log-
wood trade, and the facility of wresting some por-
Their de- tion of it from the Spaniards. Some adventurers

from Jamaica made the first attempt at Cape Ca-
toche, the south-east promontory of Yucatan, and
by cutting logwood there, carried on a gainful
traffic. When most of the trees near the coast in
that place were felled, they removed to the island
of Trift, in the Bay of Campeachy; and in later
times, their principal station has been in the Bay of
Honduras. The Spaniards, alarmed at this en-
croachment, endeavoured by negociation, remon-
ftrances, and open force, to prevent the Englilh
from obtaining any footing on that part of the A-
merican continent. But after struggling againit it
for more than a century, the disasters of lalt war
extorted from the Court of Madrid a reluctant
consent to tolerate this settlement of foreigners in
the heart of its territoriesP. The pain which this
humbling concession occasioned, seems to have
prompted the Spaniards to devise a method of ren-
dering it of little consequence, more effecual than
all the efforts of negociation or violence. The
logwood produced on the weft coast of Yucatan,

P Treaty of Paris, Art. xviii.

where

where the foil is drier, is in quality far superior to a o o
that which grows on the marlhy grounds where the -_
Englith are fettled. By encouraging the cutting of and rriv.
this, and permitting the importation of it into
Spain without paying any duty', such vigour has
been given to this branch of commerce, and the
logwood which the Englilh bring to market has
funk so much in value, that rheir trade to the Bay
of Honduras has gradually declined, since it ob.
tained a legal fantion; and, it is probable, will
soon be finally abandoned. In that event, Yucatan
and Honduras will become pofleflions of confider-
able importance to Spain.

STILL farther east than Honduras lie the two cota Rica

nd Vea.

provinces of Costa Rica and Veragua, which like- sua.
wife belong to the vice-royalty of New Spain; but
both have been so much neglected by the Spaniards,
and are apparently of such small value, that they
merit no particular attention.

THE most important province depending on the Chil

vice.royalty of Peru, is Chili. The Incas had
cftablilhed their dominion in some of its northern
diftrics; but in the greater part of the country,
its gallant and high-fpirited inhabitants maintained
their independence. The Spaniards, allured by
the fame of its opulence, early attempte the con-
quest of it under Diego Almagro. and Haer his
death, Pedro de Valdivia resumed the deign. Both

Real Cedula, Campomanes, uii. 14S.
Sce NOTR XXXIX.

0 4 met

i OO K met with fierce opposition. The former relin-

vn__ quifhed the enterprize in the manner which I have

mentioned'. The latter, after having given many
displays, both of courage and military skill, was cut
off, together with a considerable body of troops
under his command. Francisco de Villagra, Val-
divia's lieutenant, by his spirited conduct, checked
the natives in their career, and saved the remain-
der of the Spaniards from deftrution. By de-
grees, all the champaign country along the coast
was lubjefted to the Spanish dominion. The
mountainous country is still possessed by the Puel-
ches, Araucos, and other tribes of its original in-
habitants, formidable neighbours to the Spaniards;
with whom, during the course of two centuries,
they have been obliged to maintain almost perpe-
tual hoflility, suspended only by a few intervals of
insecure peace.

Excellenec THAT part of Chili then, which may properly
of its climate
and toil. be deemed a Spanilh province, is a narrow diftritt,

extended along the coast from the desert of Ata-
camas to the island of Chiloe, above nine hundred
miles. Its climate is the most delicious in the New
World, and is hardly equalled by that of any re-
gion on the face of the earth. Though bordering
on theTorrid Zone, it never feels the extremity of
heat, being fcrecned on the east by the Andes, and
.rdfrefhed..frotn the weft by cooling fea-breezes.
.The temperature of the air/is so mild and equable,
that the Spaniards give it the preference to that of

* ook vl. p. 60, &c.

the

the southern provinces in their native country. The B o o
fertility of the foil corresponds with the benignity of J-. _
the climate, and is wonderfully accommodated to
European productions. The most valuable of
thlei, corn, wine, and oil, abound in Chili, as if
they had been native to the country. All the fruits
imported from Europe attain to full maturity there.
The animals of our hemisphere not only multiply,
but improve in this delightful region. The horned
cattle are of larger size than tlhoei of Spain. Its
breed of horses surpasses, both in beauty and in
spirit, the famous Andalufian race, from which they
sprung. Nor has nature exhaufled her bounty on
the surface of the earth ; ihe has stored its bowels
with riches. Valuable mines of gold, offilver, of
copper, and of lead, have been discovered in va-
rious parts of it.

A COUNTRY diftinguifled by so many blenings, curcof i

bringi r:-

we may be apt to conclude, would early become a gscacd ,y
favourite station of the Spaniards, and must have ,',d S"
been cultivated with peculiar predilection and care.
Instead of this, a great part of it remains unoccu-
pied. In all this extent of country, there are not
above eighty thousand white inhabitants, and about
three times that number of negroes and people of
a mixed race. The most fertile foil in America
lies uncultivated, and tome of its most promising
mines remain unwrought. Strange as this neglect
of the Spaniards to avail thenllclves of advantages,
which lcenmed to court their acceptance, may ap-
pear, the causes of it can be traced. The only

intcrcourib

B o o K intercourse of Spain with its colonies in the South

v"' Sea, was carried on during two centuries by the

annual fleet to Porto-bello. All the produce of
these colonies was fhippid in the ports of Callao,
or Arica in Peru, for Panama, and carried from
thence across the isthmus. All the commodities
which they received from the mother-country, were
conveyed from Panama to the fame harbours.
Thus both the exports and imports of Chili paflcd
through the hands of merchants fettled in Peru.
These had of course a profit on each; and in both
transactions the Chilefe felt their own fubordina-
tion; and having no direct intercourse with the
parent state, they depended upon another province
for the disposal of their productions, as well as for
the supply of their wants. Under such discourage-
ments, population could not increase, and industry

Profpee of was detfitute of one chief incitement. But now
Its improve.
mnpv. that Spain, from motives which I lhall mention

hereafter, has adopted a new system, and carries on
her commerce with the colonies in the South Sea,
by ships which go round Cape Horn, a direc in-
tercourfc is opened between Chili and the mother-
country. The gold, the silver, and the other com-
modities of the province will be exchanged in its
own harbours for the manufactures of Europe.
Chili may speedily rife into that importance among
the Spanish fitrlements to which it is entitled by its
natural advantages. It may become the granary
of Peru, and the other provinces along the Pacific
Ocean. It may supply them with wine, with cattle,
with horses, with hemp, and many other articles for

1 3 which

which they now depend upon Europe. Though n o o
the new fyftcm has been eftablilhed only a few years, VU.
those effects of it begin already to be observed'. If
it (hall be adhered to with any fReadinefs for half a
century, one may venture to foretel, that population,
industry, and opulence will advance in this province
with rapid progress.
To the east of the Andes, the provinces of Tu- Provinced

Tucu~n

cuman and Rio de la Plata border on Chili, and uadRodela
like it were dependent on the vice-royalty of Peru. p
These regions of immense extent stretch in length
from north to ibuth above thirteen hundred miles,
and in breadth more than a thousand. This coun- Norther
try, which is larger than most European kingdoms, ,d oiho
naturally forms irfelfinto two great divisions, one on
the north, and the other on the south of Rio de la
Plata. The former comprehends Paraguay, the
famous millions of the Jesuits, and several other
diftrits. But as disputes have long subsisted be-
tween the courts of Spain and Portugal, concern-
ing its boundaries, which, it is probable, will be
soon finally ascertained, either amicably, or by the
decision of the sword, I chute to reserve my account
of this northern division, until I enter upon the his-
tory of Portuguese America, with which it is in-
timately connected; and, in relating it, I lhall be
able, from authentic materials, fipplied both by
Spain and Portugal, to give a full and accurate de-
scription of the operations and views of the Jcfuicu,
in rearing that singular fabric of policy in America,

s Clmpomanec, ii. 157.

which

B o o K which has drawn so much attention, and has been fb

"
_'-_ imperfeetly understood. The latter division of the

province contains the governments of Tucuman and
Buenos-Ayres, and to these I shall at present con-
fine my observations.
vieof the THE Spaniards entered this part of America by

the river De la Plata; and though a succession of
cruel diflaters besel them in their early attempts 10
establish their dominion in it, they were encouraged
to persis in the design, at firit by the hopes ofdifco.
vering mines in the interior country, and afterwards
by the neceflity of occupying it, in order to prevent
any other nation from fettling there, and penetrating
by this rout into their rich possessions in Peru. But
except at Buenos-Ayres, they have made no fettle-
ment of any confiquence in all the vafc space which
I have mentioned. There are, indeed, scattered
over it, a few places on which they have bellowed
the name of towns, and to which they have endea-
voured to add Ibme dignity, by erecting them into
bishoprics; but they are no better than paltry vil-
lages, each with two or three hundred inhabitants.
One circumstance, however, which was not ori-
girially forcleen, has contributed to render this lil-
trit, though thinly peopled, ofconfiderable import-
ance. The province of Tucuman, together with
the country to the south of the Plata, instead of
being covered with wood like other parts of Ame-
rica, forms one extensive open plain, almofl without
a tree. The foil is a deep fertile mould, watered
by many Itreams descending from the Andes, and

clotlcd

clothed in perpetual verdure. In this rich pasturage, B o o K
the horses and cattle imported by the Spaniards v

-

from Europe have multiplied to a degree which al-
mcoft exceeds belief. This has enabled the inhabit-
:nts not only to open a lucrative trade with Peru,
by supplying it with cattle, horses, and mules, but
to carry on a commerce no less beneficial, by the
exportation of hides to Europe. From both, the
colony has derived great advantages. But its com-
modious situation for carrying on contraband trade,
has been the chief source of its prosperity. While
the court of Madrid adhered to its ancient system,
with rcfpecd to its communication with America,
the river De la Plata lay so much out of the course of
Spanish navigation, that interlopers, almost without
any risk of being either observed or obftruced,
could pour in European manufactures in such quan-
tities, that they not only ftilplicd the wants of the
colony, but were conveyed into all the eastern
diftris of Peru. When the Portuguese in Brasil
extended their fettlemcnts to the banks of Rio de
la Plata, a new channel was opened, by which pro-
hibited commodities flowed into the Spanish ter-
ritories, with flill more facility, and in greater
.abundance. This illegal traffic, however detri-
mental to the parent Irate, contributed to the in-
creafc of the settlement, which had the immediate
benefit of it, and Buenos-Ayres became gradually
a populous and opulent town. What may be the
efl'cA of the alteration lately made in the govern-
nrent of this colony, the nature of which flhall be

7 described

B OO K described in the subsequent Book, cannot hitherto
AL-, ~. be known.

Other terri. ALL the other territories of Spain in the New
tories of
spain. World, the ifands excepted, of whose discovery

and reduction I have formerly given an account,
are comprehended under two great divisions; the
former denominated the kingdom of Tierra Firme,
the provinces of which stretch along the Atlantic,
from the eastern frontier of New Spain to the
mouth of the Orinoco; the latter, the New King-
dom of Granada, situated in the interior country.
With a short view of there I ihall close this part of
my work.

To the east of Veragua, the last province sub-

ject to the viceroy of Mexico, lies the ilthmus of
tian. Darien. Though it was in this part of the con-

tinent that the Spaniards firfl began to plant co-
lonies, they have made no considerable progress in
peopling it. As the country is extremely moun-
tainous, deluged with rain during a good part of
the year, remarkably unhealthful, and contains no
mines of great value, the Spaniards would pro-
bably have abandoned it altogether, if they had
not been allured to continue by the excellence of
the harbour of Porto-bello on the one sea, and that
of Panama on the other. There have been called
the keys to the communication between the north
and south sea, between Spain and her most valuable
colonies. In consequence of this advantage, Pa-

nama

nama has become a considerable and thriving town. Ba o o
The peculiar noxiousness of its climate has pre- ..^L
vented Porto-bello from increasing in the fame pro-
portion. As the intercourse with the settlements
in the Pacific Ocean is now carried on by another
channel, it is probable that both Porto-bello and
Panama will decline, when no longer nourished
and enriched by that commerce to which they
were indebted for their prosperity, and even their
txiftence.

THE provinces of Carthagena and Santa Martha cathdmi
tretch to the eastward of the isthmus of Darien. Martha.
The country still continues mountainous, but its
vallies begin to expand, are well watered, and
extremely fertile. Pedro de Heredia fubjeted this
part of America to the crown of Spain, about the
year 1532. It is thinly peopled, and of course ill
cultivated. It produces, however, a variety of
valuable drugs, and some precious stones, parti-
cularly emeralds. But its chief importance is de.
rived from the harbour of Carthagena, the safest
and best fortified of any in the American dominions
of Spain. In a situation so favourable, commerce
soon began to flourilh. As early as the year 1544,
it seems to have been a town of some note. But
when Carthagena was chosen as the port in which
the galeons should first begin to trade on their ar-
rival from Europe, and to which they were di-
rected to return, in order to prepare for their
voyage homeward, the commerce of its inhabitants
was 1b much favoured by this arrangement, that

it

3 o 0 K it soon became one of the most populous, opulent,
.' _
.. and beautiful cities in America. There is, how-

ever, reason to apprehend, that it has reached its
highest point of exaltation, and that it will be so
far affcted by the change in the Spanish system of
trade with America, which has withdrawn from it
the desirable visits of the galeons, as to feel at least
a temporary decline. But the wealth now colleted
there, will soon find or create employment for it-
self, and may be turned with advantage into some
new channel. Its harbour is so safe, and so con-
veniently situated for receiving commodities from
Europe, its merchants have been so long accuf-
tomed to convey these into all the adjacent pro-
vinces, that it is probable they will still retain this
branch of trade, and Carthagena continue to be a
city of great importance.
Vcntzuela. THE province contiguous to Santa Martha on

the east, was firfl visited by Alonfo de Ojeda, in
the year 1499"; and the Spaniards, on their
landing there, having observed some huts in an
Indian village built upon piles, in order to raire
them above the flagnated water which covered the
plain, were led to bellow upon it the name of
Venezuela, or Little Venice, by their usual propen-
fity to find a rcfemblance between what they dif-
covered in America, and the objecas which were
familiar to them in Europe. They made some at-
tempts to fettle there, but with little success. The
final reJdLion of the province was accomplilllcd

" Book. ii, vol. i. p. 3 2.

by

by means very different from those to which Spain B o o K
was indebted for its other acquisitions in the New -
World. The ambition of Charles V. often engaged
him in operations of such variety and extent, that
his revenues were not sufficient to defray the ex-
pence of carrying them into execution. Among
other expedients for supplying the deficiency of his
funds, he had borrowed large fums from the Velfers
of Augfburgh, the most opulent merchants at that
time in Europe. By way of retribution for there,
or in hopes, perhaps, of obtaining a new loan, he
bellowed upon them the province of Venezuela, to
be held as an hereditary fief from the crown of Caf-
tile, on condition that within a limited time they
Ihould render themselves mafiers of the country,
and eftablilh a colony there. Under the dire&ion
of such persons, it might have been expected, that
a ettlement would have been eftablilhed on maxims
very different from those of the Spaniards, and bet-
ter calculated to encourage such useful industry, as
mercantile proprietors might have known to be the
most certain source of prosperity and opulence.
But unfortunately they committed the execution of
their plan to some of those soldiers of fortune with
which Germany abounded in the sixteenth century.
There adventurers, impatient to amass riches, that
they might speedily abandon a Ration which they
soon discovered to be very uncomfortable, instead
of planting a colony in order to cultivate and im-
prove the country, wandered from difrit to dif-
triA in search of mines, plundering the natives with
unfeeling rapacity, or opprelfing thenm by the im-

VOL. iI, Rl position

B O O K pbition of intolerable talks. In the course of a
t. _J. few years, their avarice and exaaions, in compari.

son With which those of the Spaniards were mode-
rate, desolated the province so completely, that it
could hardly afford tiem fubflftence, and the Vel-
sers relinquifled a property from which the incon-
fiderate condu&t of their agents left them no hope
of ever deriving any advantage'. When the
wretched remainder of the Germans deserted Vene-
zuela, the Spaniards again took poffefTion of it;
but notwithstanding many natural advantages, it is
one of their most languilhing and unproductive set-
tlements.

Caraccal THE provinces of Caraccas and Cumana are the
and Cuma-
ial. last of the Spanish territories on this coast; but in

relating the origin and operations of the mercantile
company, in which an exclusive right of trade with
them has been vetled, I Ihall hereafter have occasion
to confider their ilate and prbduEtions.

New King- THE New Kingdom of Granada is entirely an
dom of
:ranada. inland country of great extent. This important

addition was made to the dominions of Spain about
the year 1536, by Sebastian de Benalcazar and
Gonzalo Ximenes de Quefada, two of the bravest
and most accomplifled officers employed in the
conquest of America. The former, who com-
manded at that time in Quito, attacked it from the
south; the latter made his invasion from Santa
Martha on the north. As the original inhabitants

Civcdo y Bagnos Hist. de Vcnezucla, p. I , &c.

of

of this region were farther advanced in improve- B o o K
ment, than any people in America but the Mexi-
cans and Peruviansy, they defended themselves
with great resolution and good condu&. The abi-
lities and perseverance of Benalcazar and Quefada
surmounted all opposition, though not without en-
countering many dangers, and reduced the country
into the form of a Spanish province.

THI New Kingdolm of Granada is so far ele-

vated above the level of the lea, that though it
approaches almost to the equator, the climate is
remarkably temperate. The fertility of its vallies
is not inferior to that of the richest diftrits in
America, and its higher grounds yield gold and
precious stones of various kinds. It is not by
digging into the bowels of the earth that this gold
is found; it is mingled with the foil near the fur-
face, and separated from it by repeated wafling
with water. This operation is carried on wholly
by negro saves; for though the chill fubteranean
air has been difcovcred, by experience, to be so
fatal to them, that they cannot be employed with
advantage in the deep Silver mines, they are more
capable of performing the other fpccies of labour
than Indians. As the natives in the New Kingdom
of Granada are exempt from that service, which has
wafted their race so rapidly in other parts of Ame-
rica, the country is still remarkably populous,
Some ditrias yield gold with a profusion no less
wonderful than that in the vale of Clneguilla,

Y Book iv. vol. ii. p. 139, &c.

If 2 which

s o K which I have formerly mentioned, and it is often
< found in large pepitas, or grains, which manifei

the abundance in which it is produced. On a rising
ground near Pamplona, single labourers have col-
le&cd inr a day what was equal in value to a thou-
sand pesos'. A late governor of Santa Fc brought
with him to Spain a lump of pure gold, estimated
to be worth seven hundred and forty pounds fter-
ling. This, which is, perhaps, the largest and
finest specimen ever found in the New World, is
now deposited in the royal cabinet of Madrid.
But without founding any calculation on what is
rare and extraordinary, the value of the gold usually
collected in this country, particularly in the pro-
vinces of Popayan and Choco, is of considerable
amount. Its towns are populous and flourilhing.
The number of inhabitants in almost every part of
the country daily increases. Cultivation and in-
duftry of various kinds begin to be encouraged,
and to prosper. A considerable trade is carried on
with Carthagena, the produce of the mines, and
other commodities, being conveyed down the great
river of St. Magdalen to that city. On another
quarter, the New Kingdom of Granada has a com-
munication with the Atlantic by the river Orinoco;
but the country which firetches along its banks to-
wards the cast, is little known, and imperfectly oc-
cupied by the Spaniards.
X Piedrahita Hi. del N. Reyne, p. 481. MS. penes we.

# BOOK VIII.

THE
HISTORY

OF
M E R IC .

BOOK VIII.
AFTg tracing the progress of the Spaniards in B 0 0

their discoveries and conquests during more

than halfa century, I have conduced them to that pVicwoyat
period when their authority was established over -adeofthe

Spani 0 co-

almost all the vast regions in the New World fRill Ionic.
subjec to their dominion. The effea of their set-
tlements upon the countries of which they took
poffeflion, the maxims which they adopted in
forming their new colonies, the interior ilru&ure
and policy of these, together with the influence of
their progreflive improvement upon the parent
state, and upon the commercial intercourse of na-
tions, are the objects to which we now turn our
attention.

THE first visible consequence of the establish- Depopula.
ments made by the Spaniards in America, was the merica the

trfir cfrca

diminution of the ancient inhabitants, to a degree of them.
eqMally aftonilhing and deplorable. I have already,

R3 on

1 o K on different occasions, mentioned the disastrous

-v, A influence under which the connection of the Ame-

ricans with the people of our hemisphere com-
menced, both in the islands, and in several parts
of the continent, and have touched upon various
causes of their rapid consumption. Wherever the
inhabitants of America had refolutior to take arms
in defence of their liberty and rights, many periffed
in the unequal contest, and we're cut off by their
fierce invaders. But the greatest desolation fol-
lowed after the sword was sheathed, and the con-

caures of querors were fettled in tranquillity. It was in the
this in the
flands, and ifands, and in those provinces of the continent
,JfTrtPon. which stretch from the Gulf of Trinidad to the
i'"'n"' confines of Mexico, that the fatal effects of the

Spanish dominion were first and most sensibly felt.
All these were occupied either by wandering tribes
of hunters, or by such as had made but small pro-
grefs in cultivation and indultry. When they were
compelled by their new makfers to take up a fixed
residence, and to apply to regular labour; when
talks were imposed upon them disproportioned to
their strength, and were exaaced with unrelenting
severity, they poffefled not vigour either of mind
or of body to sustain this unul'ual load of oppref-
sion. Dejetion and despair drove many to end
their lives by violence. Fatigue and famine de-
stroyed more. In all those extensive regions, the
original race of inhabitants wafted away; in some
it was totally extinguished. In Mexico, where a
powerful and martial people distinguished their op-
position to the Spaniards by efforts of courage wor-

thy

thy of a better fate, great numbers fell in the field; B o o s
and there, as well as in Peru, still greater numbers .
peribied under the hardihips of attending the Spa-
nilh armies in their various expeditions and civil
wars, worn out with the incessant toil of carrying
their baggage, provisions, and military stores.

BUT neither the rage nor cruelty of the Spa- InNew

niards were so deftruaive to the people of Mexico pi".".
and Peru, as the inconsiderate policy with which
they established their new Settlements. The for-
mer were temporary calamities, fatal to individuals;
the latter was a permanent evil, which, with gra-
dual consumption, wafted the nation. When the
provinces of Mexico and Peru were divided among
the conquerors, each was eager to obtain a dilfriLt,
from which he might expect an initantaneous re-
compence for all his services. Soldiers, accustomed
to the careleffnef and diflipation of a military life,
had neither industry to carry on any plan of regu-
lar cultivation, nor patience to wait for its flow
but certain returns. Instead of fettling in the val-
lies occupied by the natives, where the fertility of
the foil would have amply rewarded the diligence
of the planter, they chore to fix their stations in
rome of the mountainous regions, frequent both in
New Spain and in Peru. To search for mines of
gold and silver, was the chief objec of their a&i-
vity. The profpets which this opens, and the
alluring hopes which it continually presents, corre-
fpond wonderfully with the spirit of enterprize and
adventure that animated the firIt emigrants to Are-

R 4 ric

B 0 0 K rica in every part of their condut. In order to
-.^-- pulh forward those favourite projets, so many

hands were wanted, that the fervicc of the natives
became indispensably requisite. They were ac-
cordingly compelled to abandon their ancient ha-
bitations in the plains, and driven in crowds to the
mountains. This sudden transition from the sultry
climate of the vallies, to the chill penetrating air
peculiar to high lands in the torrid zone; exorbi-
tant labour, scanty or unwholesome nourishment,
and the despondency occasioned by a species of op-
pression to which they were not accustomed, and
of which they saw no end, affc&ed them nearly as
much as their less industrious countrymen in the
islands. They funk under the united pressure of
those calamities, and melted away with almost
equal rapidity Z. In consequence of this, together
with the introduction of the small-pox, a malady
unknown in America, and extremely fatal to the
natives , the number of people both in New Spain
and Peru was so much reduced, that in a few years
the accounts of their ancient population appeared
almost incredible b.

Not the re- SUCH are the most considerable events and causes
fy(itarlo which, by their combined operation, contributed
polcy' to depopulate America. Without attending to

there, many authors, aftonilhed at the fuddennels

Torquemada, i. 613.
B. Diaz, c. 114. Herrcra, dec. 2. lib. x, c. 4. hUlo
Entreten. ao6.

b Torquem. 6i. 642, 643. See NOTE XL.

of

of the desolation, have ascribed this unexampled B o o
event to a system of policy no less profound than
atrocious. The Spaniards, as they pretend, con-
fcious of their own inability to occupy the valf
regions which they had discovered, and foreseeing
the impoflibility of maintaining their authority over
a people infinitely superior to themselves in num-
ber, in order to preserve the poffeflion of America,
resolved to exterminate the inhabitants, and by con-
verting a great part of the country into a desert, en-
deavoured to secure their own dominion overit*.
But nations seldom extend their views to obje&s so
remote, or lay their plans so deep; and, for the
honour of humanity we may observe, that no na-
don ever deliberately formed such an execrable
scheme. The Spaniih monarchs, far from aAing
upon any such system ofdeftruction, were uniformly
solicitous for the preservation of their new subje&s.
With Isabella, zeal for propagating the Chriftan
faith, together with the desire of communicating
the knowledge of truth, and the consolations of
religion, to people destitute of spiritual light, were
more than ostensible motives for encouraging Co-
lumbus to attempt his discoveries. Upon his fuc-
ces, The endeavoured to fulfil her pious purpol,
and manifested the most tender concern to secure
not only religious instruction, but mild treatment,
to that inoffensive race of men fubjeated to her
crown . Her fuccelfors adopted the fame ideas
and, on many occasions, which I have mentioned,

see NOT XI, ' See NOTE XLII.

their

o o li their authority was interposed in the mofR vigoroul
- ^ exertions, to protet the people of America from

the oppression ot't:cir Spanish subje&s. Their re.
gulations for thi: purpoli were nurncrcs, and ofr;t
iepeaed. They were frlnled wich wvildon, ain
ditated by humanity. After their poffifions ia
the New World became so extensive, as might have
excited some apprehensions of difficulty in retaining
iheir dominion over them, the spirit of their regu-
lations was as mild as when their settlements were
confined to the islands alone. Their solicitude to
protet the Indians seems rather to have augmented
as their acquisitions increased; and from ardour to
accomplish this, they enacted, and endeavoured to
enforce the execution of laws, which excited a for-
midable rebellion in one of their colonies, and spread
alarm and difaffefion through all the reit. But
the avarice of individuals was too violent to be con-
trouled by the authority of laws. Rapacious and
daring adventurers, far removed from the feat of
government, little accustomed to the refRraints of
military discipline while in service, and fRill kss
disposed to refpeat the feeble jurifdiftion of civil
power in an infant colony, despised or eluded every
regulation that set bounds to their exacions and
tyranny. The parent state, with persevering atten-
tion, issued edits to prevent the oppression of the
Indians; the colonists, regardless of there, or trult-
ing to their distance for impunity, continued to
confider and treat them as slaves. The governors
themfclves, and other officers employed in the co-
lonics, fcvcral of whom were as indigent and rapa-

cious

cious as the adventurers over whom they profidcd, B o o xK
were too apt to adopt their contemptuous ideas of _"
the conquered people; and instead of checking, en-
couraged or connived at their excffes, The defo-
lation ofthe New World should not then be charged
on the court of Spain, or be conlidered as the effect
of apy system of policy adopted there. It ought to
be imputed wholly to the indigent and often un-
principled adventurers, whose fortune it was to be
the conquerors and first planters of America, who,
by measures no less inconsiderate than unjust, coun-
teracted the edicts of their sovereign, and have
brought disgrace upon their country,

WITH still greater injuitice, have many authors northeef.

represented the intolerating spirit of the Roman lifgon.
Catholic religion, as the catfe of exterminatiug the
Americans, and have accused the Spanish ecclesias-
tics of animating their countrymen to the slaughter
of that innocent people, as idolators and enemies of
God. But the first mifijonaries who visited Ame-
rica, though weak and illiterate, were pious men.
They early espoused the defence of the natives, and
vindicated their charaAer from the afpcrfions of
their conquerors, who, dcfcribing them as inca-
pable of being formed to the offices of civil life,
or of comprehending the dotrines of religion, con-
tended, that they were a subordinate race of men,
on whom the hand of nature had let the mark of
servitude. From the accounts which I have given
of the humane and persevering zeal of the Spanilh
nifionarics, in protecting the helpless flock com-

mitted

B O O K mitted to their charge, they appear in a light which

vl't.f reflets lustre upon their fun&ion. They were mi-

nifters of peace, who endeavoured to wrest the rod
from the hands of opprcffors. To their powerful
interposition, the Americans were indebted for every
regulation tending to mitigate the rigour of their
fate. The clergy in the Spanish settlements, regu.
lar as well as secular, are still confidered by the
Indians as their natural guardians, to whom they
have recourse under the hard(hips and exations to
which they are too often exposcd e

The num. BUT, notwithstanding the rapid depopulation of
her of the
Indians fill America, a very confidrable number of the native
roeaining. race fill remains both in Mexico and Peru, efpe.

cially in those parts which were not exposed to the
first fury of the Spanish arms, or desolated by the
first efforts of their indufiry, fill more ruinous.
In Guatimala, Chiapa, Nicaragua, and the other
delightful provinces of the Mexican empire, which
firetch along the South-sea, the race of Indians is
fill numerous. Their settlements in some places
are so populous, as to merit the name of cities',
In the three audiences into which New Spain is
divided, there are at least two millions of Indians;
a pitiful remnant, indeed, of its ancient population,
but such as RLill forms a body of people superior in
number to that of all the other inhabitants of this
extensive country . In Peru several diltricts, par-
ticularly in the kingdom of Quito, are occupied

0 See NOTE XLIII. Sce NOTE XLIV.
s Sec NO'TE XLV.

almos~

limofl entirely by Indians. In other provinces they B o o KC
Ire mingled with the Spaniards, and in many of . V"a.j
their settlements are almost the only persons who
pratife the mechanic arts, and fill most of the in-
ferior stations in society, As die inhabitants both
of Mexico and Peru were accultomed to a fixed
residence, and to a certain degree of regular in-
duftry, less violence was requisite in bringing themt
to some conformity with the European modes of
civil life. But wherever the Spaniards fettled
among the savage tribes of America, their attempts
to incorporate with them have been always fruitless,
and often fatal to the natives. Impatient of re-
fraint, and disdaining labour as a mark offervility,
they either abandoned their original feats, and fought
for independence in mountains and forests inaccef-
lible to their oppressors, or perilhed when reduced
to a state repugnant to their ancient ideas and ha-
bits. In the diftriEfs adjacent to Carthagena, to
Panama, and to Buenos-Ayres, the desolation is
more general than even in those parts of Mexico
and Peru, of which the Spaniards have taken most
full pofelilon.

BUT the ellablifhments of the Spaniards in the General

ideas of tho

New World, though fatal to its ancient inhabit- polyof
ants, were made at a period when that monarchy SP'niltS
was capable of forming them to best advantage.
By the union of all its petty kingdoms, Spain was
become a powerful state, equal to so great an un-
dertaking. Its monarchs, having extended their
prerogative far beyond the limits which once cir-

cumfcribed

B o o K cumfcribed the regal power in every kingdom ot
a_ . Europe, were hardly fubjeEt to controul, either in

concerting or in executing their measures. In
every wide extended empire, the form of govern-
ment mufl be simple, and the sovereign authority
such, that its resolutions may be taken with promp-
titude, and may pervade the whole with sufficient
force. Such was the power of the Spanilh mo-
narchs, when they were called to deliberate concern-
ing the mode of eftablihing their dominion over
the most remote provinces, which had ever been
fubjeaed to any European slate. In this delibera-
tion, they felt themselves under no constitutional
restraint, and that, as independent masters of their
own resolves, they might issue the edicts requisite
for modelling the government of the new colonies,
by a mere aft of prerogative.

Eriyinter. THIS early interposition of the Spanilh crown,
thergal in order to regulate the policy and trade of its co-
unonty. lonies, is a peculiarity which distinguishes their

progress from that of the colonies of any other
European nation. When the P9rtugucfe, the Eng-
lifh, and French, took possession of the regions in
America which they now occupy, the advantages
which these promised to yield were so remote and
uncertain, that their colonies were suffered to
ltruggle through a hard infancy, almost without
guidance or protection from the paren't fate. But
gold and silver, the first producions of the Spanilh
settlements in the New World, were more alluring,
and immediately attracted the attention of their mo-

14 narchs.

inrchs. Though they had contributed little to the B o o o
discovery, and almost nothing to the conquest of . ;'
the New Witld, they initantly alfumed the furic-
don of its legislators; and having acquired a fpe-
cics of dominion formerly unknown, they formed
a pian for exercising it, to which nothing funilar
occurs in the history of human affairs.

THE fundamental maxim of Spanish jurifpru- Al polr
dence with refpet to America, is to confider what tdpropi,
has been acquired there as veited in the crown, ctrC
rather thin in the state. By the bull of Alex-
ander VI. on which, as its great charter, Spainr
founded its right, all the regions that had been,
orliould be discovered, were beltowed as a free
gift upon Ferdinand and Isabella. They and their
successors were uniformly held to be the universal
proprietors of the vast territories, which the armsn
of their fubjefts conquered in the New World.
From them, all grants of land there flowed, and
to them they finally returned. The leaders who
conduced the various expeditions, the governors
who presided over the different colonies, the offi-
cers of jultice, and the ministers of religion, were
all appointed by their authority, and removable at
their pleasure. The people who composed infant
settlements were entitled to no privileges inde-
pendent of the sovereign, or that served as a barrier
against the power of the crown. It is true, that
when towns were built, and formed into bodies
corporate, the citizens were permitted to elec
their own magiftr{tcs, who governed them by laws

which

B o o K which the community enated. Even in the molt

n 1_s despotic states, this feeble spark of liberty is not cx-

tinguifhed. But in the cities of Spanilh America,
this jurisdiction is merely municipal, and is con.
fined to the regulation of their own interior corn.
merce and police. In whatever relates to public
government, and the general. interest, the will of
the sovereign is law. No political power originates
from the people. All centers in the crown, and in
the officers of its nomination.

xnatenew WHEN the conquests of the Spaniards in Ame-

mJwninioans
aSpin rica were completed, their monarchs, in forming
me v.ie- the plan of internal policy for their new dominions
w~s-' divided them into two immense governments, one

subjet to the viceroy of New Spain, the other to
the viceroy of Peru. The jurifdition of the for.
mer extended over all the provinces belonging to
Spain in the northern division of the American
continent. Under that of the latter, was compre-
hended whatever The poIffeed in South America.
This arrangement, which, from the beginning, was
attended with many inconveniencies, became in-
tolerable when the remote provinces of each vice-
royalty began to improve in industry and popula-
tion. The people complained of their fubjetion
to a superior, whose place of residence was so dif-
tant, or so inacceslible, as almost excluded them
from any intercourse with the feat of government.
The authority of the viceroy over dilfrits so far
removed from his own eye and observation, was
unavoidably both feeble and ill dircted. As a

13 remedy

remedy for those evils, a third viceroyalty has been B , K
established in the present century,' at Santo FC de -^
Bogota, the capital of the new kingdom of Gra-
nada, the jurifdietion of which extends over the
whole kingdom of Tierra Firme, and the province
of'Qito b. Those viceroys not only represent the Their
person of their sovereign, but possess his regal pre- po"wers
rogatives within the precinEts of their own govern-
ments, in their utmost extent. Like him, they ex-
ercife supreme authority in every department ofgo-
vernment, civil, military, and criminal. They have
the sole right of nominating the persons who hold
many offices of the highest importance, and the oc.
cafional privilege of supplying those which, when
they become vacant by death, are in the royal gift,
until the successor appointed by the king ihall ar-
rive. The external pomp of their governmentis
suited to its real dignity and power. Their courts
are formed upon the model of that at Madrid, with
horse and foot guards, a household regularly efta-
blilhed, numerous attendants, and ensigns of com-
mand, displaying such magnificence, as hardly re-
tains the appearance of delegated authority'.

BUT as the viceroys cannot discharge in person Courts of

Audience.

the functions of a supreme magistrate in every part
oftheir extensive jurifdiltion, they are aided in their
government by officers and tribunals similar to those
in Spain. The conduct bs civil affairs in the va-
rious provinces and diftri&s, into which the Spa-

e Voy. deUlloa, i. z3, 25. Illoa,Voy..i.43z. ;age6'.
vOL. Ini, S nifh

B o 0 K nifh dominions in America are divided, is com-

- , u
* emitted to magiStrates of various orders and deno.

minations; some appointed by the king, others by
the viceroy, but all fubje& to the command of the
latter, and amenable to his jurisdiction. The ad-
ministration ofjuftice is vested in tribunals, known
by the name of Audiences, and formed upon the mo-
del of the court of Chancery in Spain. These are
eleven in number, and difpenfejuftice to as many dif-
tri&s, into which the Spanish dominions in Ame-
rica are dividedk. The number of judges in the
court of Audience is various, according to the ex-
tent and importance of their jurifdiaion. The fta-
tion is no less honourable than lucrative, and is
commonly filled by persons of such abilities and
merit as renders this tribunal extremely refpe&able.
Both civil and criminal causes come under their
cognizance, and for each peculiar judges are set
>,ir 3j;:if. apart. Though it is only in the most despotic go-

vernments, that the Sovereign exercises in person
the formidable prerogative of administering justice
to his subje&s, and in absolving, or condemning,
consults no law but what is deposited in his own
breast; though, in all the monarchies of Europe,
judicial authority is committed to magistrates, whofi
decisions are regulated by known laws and efta
blifhed forms, the Spanish viceroys have often at-
tempted to intrude themselves into the feat of jus-
tice, and with an ambition which their distance
from the controul of a superior rendered bold, have
aspired at a power which their master does not ven-

See NOTE XLVI.

turc

ture to aflume. In order to check an usurpation o o C.
which must have annihilated justice and security in _
the Spanish colonies, by fubje&ing the lives and
property of all to the will of a single man, the
viceroys have been prohibited, in the moRs explicit
terms, by repeated laws, from interfering in the ju-
dicial proceedings of the courts of Audience, or
from delivering an opinion, or giving a voice with
refpet to any point litigated before them'. In
some particular cafes, in which any question of ci-
vil right is involved, even the political regulations
of the viceroy may be brought under the review
of the court of Audience, which, in those instances,
may be deemed an intermediate power placed be-
tween him and the people, as a constitutional bar-
rier to circumscribe his jurifdietion. But as legal
restraints on a person who represents the sovereign,
and is clothed with his authority, are little suited to
the genius of Spanilh policy; the hesitation mad
reserve with which it confers this power on the
courts of Audience are remarkable. They may
advise, they may remonstrate; but, in the event of
a dired collision between their opinion and the will
of the viceroy, what he determines must be carried
into execution, and nothing remains for them, but
to lay the matter before the king and the council
of the Indiesm. But to be entitled to remonstrate,
and inform against a person, before whom all others

Recop. lib. ii. tit. xv. 1. 351.338. 44. lib. ii. tit. iii.

1. 36, 37.

" Solorz. de Jure Ind. lib. iv. c. 3. n, 40, 41. Recop. lib. ii.
tit. xv, 1. 36. lib. iii. tit. iii. 1. 34. lib. v. tit. ix. 1. a.

23 mutl

B o o K must be silent, and tamely submit to his decrees, is a
VIII.

v privilege which adds dignity to the courts of Audi-

ence. This is farther augmented by another cir.
cumftance. Upon the death of a viceroy, without
any provision of a successor by the king, the supreme
power is veiled in the court of Audience.refident in
the capital of the viceroyalty, and the senior judge,
assisted by his brethren, exercises all the funtions of
the viceroy while the office continues vacant". In
matters which come under the cognizance of the
Audiences, in the course of their ordinary jurifdic-
tion, as courts of juf-ice, their sentences are final
in every litigation concerning property of less value
than fix thousand pesos; but when the fubje& in
dispute exceeds that umn, their decisions are fubje&
to review, and may be carried by appeal before the
royal council of the Indies°.

bUnc¢;lo IN this council, one of the most considerable in
titc nd;:. the monarchy for dignity and power, is vested the

supreme government of all the Spanifh.dominions
in. America. It was frft eftablihed by Ferdinand,
in the year 151 , and brought into a more perfeat
ls power. form by Charles V. in the year 1524. Its jurif-

diction extends to every department, ecclesiastical,
civil, military, and commercial. All laws and ordi-
nlances relative to the government and police of the
colonies originate there, and must be approved of
by twd-thirds of the members, before they are
iflued' in the name of the king. All the officesA

n Recop. lib. ii. tit. xv. I. 57, &c.
* Recop, lib. v. tit. xiii. 1, &tc. ,

of which the nomination is reserved to the crown, B o o K
are conferred in this council. To it each person ,-_'
employed in America, from the viceroy down-
wards, is accountable. It reviews their condu&,
rewards their services, and inflits the punishments
due to their malverfationsP. Before it, is laid
whatever intelligence, either public or secret, is
received from America, and every scheme of im-
proving the administration, the police, or the com-
merce of the colonies, is submitted to its confider-
ation. From the sirs infitution of the council of
the Indies, it has been the constant objec of the
catholic monarchs to--maintain its authority, and to
make such additions from time to time, both to its
power and its splendor, as might render it formi-
dable to all their subje&s in the New World.
Whatever degree of public order and virtue fill
remains in that country, where so many circum-
fiances copfpire to relax the former, and to cor-
rupt the latter, may be ascribed in a great measure
to the wife regulations and vigilant infpeclion of
this refpetable tribunal q.
As the king is supposed to be always present in Caha de

Coitrat-

his council of the Indies, its meetings are held in. cion.
the place where he resides. Another tribunal has
been inflituted, in order to regulate such commer-
cial affairs as required the immediate and personal
infpetion of those appointed to superintend them.

P Recop. lib. ii. tit. ii . . , z, &c.
9 Solorz. de J8re Ind. lib. iv. 1. iz.

s3 This

B o o K This is called Casa de la Contratacion, or the houre
_--v. of trade, and was etlablilhed in Seville, the port to

which commerce with the New World was con.

Its func- fined, as early as the year 501. It may be con-
"io°. fidered both as a board of trade, and as a court of

judicature. In the former capacity, it takes cog-
nizance of whatever relates to the intercourse of
Spain with America, it regulates what commodities
lhould be exported thither, and has the infpe&ion
of such as are received in return. It decides'con.
cerning the departure of the fleets for the Weft
Indies, the freight and burden of the ships, their
equipment and destination. In the latter capacity,
it judges with refpe& to every question, civil, corn-
mercial, or criminal, arising in consequence of the
tranfafions of Spain with America; and in both
there departments, its decisions are exempted from
the review of any court but that of the council of the
Indies'.

SUCH is the great outline of that system of go.

vernment, which Spain has eftablilhed in her
American colonies. To enumerate the various
isbordinate boards and officers employed in the
4dminiftration of justice, in collecing the public
revenue, and in regulating the interior police of the
country; to describe their different funtions, and
to enquire into the mode and effect of their opera-
tions; would prove a detail no less intricate than
minute, and uninteresting.

* Recop. lib. ix. tit. i. Veiti Nortm do la Contratacion,
lib. i, c. ;.

THg

THE first obje& of the Spanish monarchs was. to B ao0 a

secure the productions of the colonies to. the paena
fate, by an absolute prohibition of any intescourfe ri^r,,ee
with foreign nations. They took polIeflion of ,'eX'^m^
America by right of conquest, and conscious not
only of the feebleness of their infant settlements,
but aware of the difficulty in eflablifling their do-
minion over regions so extensive, or in retaining
so many reluctant nations under the yoke, they
dreaded the incrusion of Rrangers; they even Ihunned
their infpe&ion, and endeavoured to keep them at
a distance from their coats. This spirit ofjealoufy
and exclusion, which at first was natural, and per-
haps necessary, augmented as their poTflions in
America extended, and the value of them came to
be more fully underfood. In consequence of it, a
system of colonizing was introduced, to which
there had hitherto been nothing similar among
mankind. In the ancient world, it was not uncom-
mon to fend forth colonies. But theypwere of two
kinds only. They were either migrations, which
served to di(burden a fate of its superfluous sub-
je&s, when they multiplied too sift for the terri
tory which they occupied; or they were military
detachments, Rationed as garrisons, in a conquered
province. The colonies of some Greek republics,
and the swarms of northern barbarians which fettled
in different parts of Europe, were of the first species.
The Roman colonies were of the second. In the
former, the connetion with the mother-country
quickly ceased, and they became independent tates.
In the latter, as the disjuncion was not complete,

s 4 the

BooK the dependence continued. In their American
S.-yu_ fetdements, the Spanish monarchs took what was
othaiont peculiar to each, and (tudied to unite them. By
puipoke. fending colonies to regions so remote, by establish-

ing in each a form of interior policy and adminifira-
tion, under diftint governors, and with peculiar
laws, they disjoined them from the mother-country.
By retaining in their own hands therights of legis-
lation, as well as that of imposing taxes, together
with the power of nominating the persons who
filled every department of executive government,
civil or military, they secured their dependence
upon the parent state. Happily for Spain, the fitua.
tion of her colonies was such, as rendered it poflible
to reduce this new idea into pracice. Almost all
the countries which she had discovered and occu-
pied, lay within the tropics. The produtions of that
large portion of the globe are different from those
of Europe, even in its most southern provinces.
The qualities of the climate and of the foil natu-
rally turn the industry of such as fettle there into
new channels. When the Spaniards first took pof-
session of their dominions In America, the precious
metals which they yielded, were the only obje& that
attracted their attention. Even when their efforts
began to take a better direction, they employed
themselves almost wholly in rearing such peculiar
productions of the climate, as, from their rarity
or value, were of chief demand in the mother-
country. Allured by vast prospects of immediate
wealth, they diflained to waste their industry on
what was less lucrative, but of filperior moment.

S

In order to render it impossible to corre& this error, B. o o K
and to prevent them from making any efforts in. V1
industry which might interfere with those of the
mother-country, the eltablifhment of several species
of manufa&ures, and even the culture of the vine,
or olive, are prohibited in the Spanish colonies',
under severe penalties'. They must trust entirely
to the mother-country for the objects of primary
neceflity. Their clothes, their furniture, their in-
ftruments of labour, their luxuries, and even a con-
fiderable part of the provisions which they consume,
were imported from Spain. During a great part ,
of the sixteenth century, Spain, poffefling an ex-
tensive commerce and flourinfling manufactures,
could fuipply with ease the growing demands of her
colonies, from her own stores. The produce of
their mines and plantations was given in exchange
for these. But all that the colonies received, as
well as all that they gave, was conveyed in Spanish
bottoms. No vessel belonging to the colonies was
ever permitted to carry the commodities of Ame-
rica to Europe. Even the commercial intercobfrfe
of one, colony with another, was either absolutely
prohibited, or limited by many jealous reftriEions.
All that America yields flows into the ports of
Spain; all that it consumes must issue from them.
No foreigner can enter its colonies without exprcsl
permifion; no vessel of any foreign nation is re-
ceived into their harbours; and the pains of death,
with confiscation of moveables, are denounced

See NOTE XLVII. . *
I B. Ulloa Retab. des MAnus. &c, p. 206.

.g..i n·,

B o K against every inhabitant who presumes to trade with

Vili. them". Thus the colonies are kept in a fate of

perpetual pupillage; and by the introdution of this
commercial dependence, a refinement in policy of
which Spain set the firfl example to the European
nations, the supremacy of the parent fate hath been
maintained over remote colonies during two cen-
turies and a half.

Slow pro- SUCH are the capital maxims to which the Spa-
srcf, of po. nifh monarchs seem to have attended in forming
pulation
rom cu. their new Settlements in America. But they could

not plant with the fame rapidity that they had de-
flroyed; and from many concurring causes, their
progress has been extremely flow, in filling up the
immense void which their devastations had occa.
sioned. As soon as the rage for discovery and ad-
venture began to abate, the Spaniards opened their
eyes to dangers and distresses, which at first they
did not perceive, or had despised. The numerous
hardships with which the members of infant colo-
nies have to struggle, the diseases of unwholesome
climates, fatal to the confitution of Europeans; the
difficulty of bringing a country, covered with so.
rcfts, into culture; the want of hands necessary for
labour in rome provinces, and the flow reward of
industry, in all unless where the accidental discovery
of mines enriched a few fortunate adventurers, were
evils universally felt and magnified. Discouraged
by the view of these, the spirit of migration was so

u Recopil. lib. ix. tit. xxvii. 1. i. 4, 7, &c.

much

much damped, that sixty years after the discovery B o o
of the New World, the number of Spaniards in all . v'l
its provinces is computed not to have exceeded
fifeen thoufanad.

THE mode in which property was distributed in Difcu,4

the Spanish colonies, and the regulations eftablilhed of ,o
with refpe& to the tranfiiflsion of it, whether by
descent or by sale, were extremely unfavourable
to population. In order to promote a rapid in-
crease of people in any new settlement, property in
land ought to be divided into small (hares, and the
alienation of it should be rendered extremely easy r.
But the rapaciousness of the Spanith conquerors of
the New World paid no regard to this fundamental
maxim of policy; and, as they possessed power,
which enabled them to gratify the utmost extrava-
gance of their wishes, many seized diftries of great
extent, and held them as encomiendas. By degrees
they'obtained the privilege of converting a part of
these into Mayorafgos, a fpccies of fief, introduced
into the Spanish system of feudal jurisprudence',
which can neither be divided nor alienated. Thus
a great portion of landed property, under this rigid
form of entail, is withheld from circulation, and de-
scends from father to son unimproved, and of little
value either to the proprietor or to the community.
In the account which I have given of the reduction
of Pcru, various examples occur of enormous trach

» See NOTE XLVIII. Dr. Smith's Inquiry, ii. 166.
r Recop, lib. iv. tit. iii .
1. 4.

of

B 0 0 K of country occupied by some of the conquerors'.

Viii.
."in ..j The excefles in other provinces were similar, for

as the value of the. lands which the Spaniards ac-
quired, was originally estimated according to the
number of Indians which lived upon them, Ame-
rica was in general so thinly peopled, that only dif-
trias of great extent could afford such a number of
labourers as might be employed in the mines with
any prospect of considerable gain. The pernicious
effects of those radical errors in the distribution and
nature of property in the Spanish settlements, are
felt through every department of industry, and may
be confidered as one great cause of a progress in
population so much flower than that which has
taken place in better constituted. colonies b.

and the na. To this we may add, that the support of the
ture of their
ecciefiafti- enormous and expensive fabric of their ecclesiastical

policy. eftablilhment, has been a burden on the Spanish

colonies, which has greatly retarded the progress of
population and industry. The payment of tithes
is a heavy tax on industry; and if the exacion of
them be not regulated and circumscribed by the
wisdom of the civil magistrate, it becomes intole-
rable and ruinous. But, initead of any restraint on
the claims of ecclesiastics, the inconsiderate zeal of
the Spanifl legislators admitted them into America
in their full extent, and at once imposed on their
infant colonies a burden which is in no flight degree
oppreflive to society, even in its most improved

a Book vi. p. 139. b See NO''E XLIX.

slate.

state.' As early as the year 1501, the payment of B o O i
tithes in the colonies was.enjoined, and the mode X -. _
of it regulated by law. Every article of primary
neceftity, towards which the attention of new fee-
ters must naturally be turned, is fubjeAed to that
grievous exation '. Nor were the demands of the
clergy confined to articles of simple and easy cul-
ture. Its more artificial and operose productions,
such as sugar, indigo, and cochineal, were soon de-
clared to be tithable d; and thus the industry of the
planter was taxed in every stage of its progress,
from its rudest essay to its highest improvement.
To the weight of this legal imposition, the bigotry
of the American Spaniards has made many volun-
tary additions. From their fond delight in the
external pomp and parade of religion, and from
superstitious reverence for ecclefiaflics of every de-
nomination, they have beflowed profuse donatives
on churches and monafleries, and have unprofitably
wafted a large proportion of that wealth, which
might have nourished and given vigour to pro-
ductive labour in growing colonies.

BUT so fertile and inviting are the regions of various or.

ders of !)eo-

America which the Spaniards have occupied, pl in the
that, notwithstanding all the circumstances which c"lonies.
have checked and retarded population, it has gra-
dually increased, and filled the colonies of Spain
with citizens of various orders. Among thcfc, the
Spaniards, who arrive from Europe, diflinguifhed

s Recop. lib. i. tit. xiv. 1. z.
Recop. lib. i. tit. xiv. l 3 and 4.

o o K by the name of Cbapetones, are the first in rank and
tLn power. From the jealous attention of the Spanilh
Chaptoncs court to secure the dependence of the colonies on

the parent state, all departments of consequence are
filled by persons lent from Europe; and, in order
to prevent any of dubious fidelity from being etn-
ployed, each must bring proof of a clear descent
from a family of Old Christians, untainted with any
mixture of Jewish or Mahometan blood, and never
disgraced by any censure of the inquisition'. In
such pure hands, power is deemed to be safely
lodged, and almost every public funtion, from the
viceroyalty downwards, is committed to them alone.
Every person, who by his birth, or residence in
America, may be fufpeted of any attachment or
interest adverse to the mother-country, is the ob-
jet of distrust to such a degree, as amounts nearly
to an exclusion from all offices of confidence or
authority '. By this conspicuous predilection of the
court, the Chapetones are raised to such pre-emi-
hence in America, that they look down with dif-
dain on every other order of men.

Creols the THE character and state of the Creoles, or de-
kcond. fcendants of Europeans fettled in America, the

second class of fubjeds in the Spanish colonies, have
enabled the Chapetones to acquire other advan-
tages, hardly less considerable than those which
they derive fiom the partial favour of government.
Though tome of the Creolian race are dercended
from the conquerors of the New World j though

Rccopil. lib. ix, it. xxvi. 1. 5, 16. See NOTE L.

5 others

others can trace up their pedigree to the noblelf B o 0 iX
families in Spain i though many are pofreffed of
ample fortunes, yet, by the enervating influence of
a sultry climate, by the rigour of a jealous govern-
ment, and by their despair of attaining that diftinc-
don to which mankind naturally aspire, the vigour
of their minds is so entirely broken, that a great
part of them waste life in luxurious indulgencies,
mingled with an illiberal superstition till more de-
bating. Languid and unenterprifing, the opera-
tions of an a&ive extended commerce would be to
them so cumbersome and oppreflive, that in almost
every part of America they decline engaging in it.
The interior traffic of every colony, as well as any
trade which is permitted with the neighbouring
provinces, and with Spain itself, are carried on
chiefly by the Chapetonest; who, as the recom-
pence of their industry, amass immenfc wealth,
while the Creoles, funk in sloth, are satisfied with
the revenues of their paternal eRfates.

FROM this stated competition for power and Rivahitip

wealth between those two orders of citizens, and ther,.
the various paflions excited by a rivalfhip so inte-
rcefing, their hatred is violent and implacable. On
every occasion, symptoms of this aversion break
out, and the common appellations which each be-
stows on the other, are as contemptuous as those
which flow from the most deep-rooted national an-
tipathy h. The court of Spain, from a refinement

g Vy. de Ulloa, i. 27. s51. Voy. de Frezier, 2z7.
h Gage's Survey, p. 9. Frezier, as6.

of

B o K of distrustful policy, cherishes those feeds of dif.

cord, and foments this mutual jealousy, which not
only prevents the two most powerful clalres of its
fubjecs in the New World from combining against
the parent state, but prompts each, with the most
vigilant zeal, to observe the motions and to coun-
tera&t the schemes of the other.

An;xtd THE third class of inhabitants in the Spanish co-
, ot orls lonies is a mixed race, the offspring either of an
she third
order of European and a negro, or of an European and In-

dian, the former called Alulattoes, the latter Mestizos.
As the court of Spain, solicitous to incorporate its
new valfals with its ancient subje&s, early encou-
raged the Spaniards fettled in America to marry
the natives of that country, several alliances of this
kind were formed in their infant coloniesI. But
it has been more owing to licentious indulgence,
than to compliance with this injun&ion of their
sovereigns, that this mixed breed has multiplied so
greatly, as to constitute a considerable part of the
population in all the Spanish settlements. The fe-
veral 1tages of descent in this race, and the gradual
variations of shade until the African black, or the
copper colour of America, brighten into an Euro-
pean complexion, are accurately marked by the Spa-
niards, and each diflinguiflied by a peculiar name.
Those of the firlt and fccond generations are con-
fidered, and treated as mere Indians and Negroes;
but in the third defctnt, the charateriftic hue of the

Recopil. lil. vi. tit. i, 1. z. lHerrera, dec. i. lib. v. c. I:,
Dec. 3. lib. vii, c, 2.

forme;

former disappears; and in the fifth, the deeper tint B o o
of the latter is so entirely effaced, that they can no ,
longer be diftinguilhed from Europeans, and be-
come entitled to all their privileges k. It is chiefly
by this mixed race, whose frame is remarkably
robust and hardy, that the mechanic arts are car-
ried on in the Spaniih settlements, and other active
funtions in society are discharged, which the two
higher classes of citizens, from pride, or from in-
dolence, disdain to exercise'.

THE negroes hold the fourth rank among the Negr,
inhabitants of the Spanish colonies. The intro- form thei
dution of that unhappy part of the human species der.
into America, together with their services and sus-
ferings there, shall be fully explained in another
place; here they are mentioned chiefly, in order
to point out a peculiarity in their situation under
the Spanish dominion. In several of their fettle-
mcnts, particularly in New Spain, negroes are
mostly employed in domeRic service. They form
a principal part in the train of'luxury, and are
(herifhed and carefled by their superiors, to whose
vanity and pleasures they are equally subservient.
Their dress and appearance are hardly less splendid
than that of their masters, whose manners they imi-
ate, and whose paflions they imbibe ". Elevated by
tis diftintion, they have afliumed such a tone of
luperiority over the Indians, and treat them with

Voy. de Ulloa, i. . p7.
lbid. i. 29. Voy. de Bouguer, p. o04. Melendez,
tforos Verdaderos, i. 354.
· Gage, p. 56, Voy. dc Ulloa, i. 4S5.
VOL. Il. T .fich

B O K such insolence and scorn, that the antipathy between
. _-_ the two races has become implacable. Even in

Peru, where negroes seem to be more numerous,
and are employed in field. work as well as domestic
service, they maintain their ascendant over the In-
dians, and the mutual hatred of one to the other
subsists with equal violence. The laws have in.
duftrioufly fomented this aversion, to which acci.
dent gave rife, and, by most rigorous injunctions,
have endeavoured to prevent every intercourse that
might form a bond of union between the two races,
Thus, by an artful policy, the Spaniards derive
strength from that circumitance in population which
is the weakness of other European colonies, and
have secured as associates and defenders, those veiy
persons who elsewhere are objetcs of jealousy and
terror ".

The Indians THE Indians form the last, and the most de-
form tie last
o-d r of ci- pressed order of men in the country, which be-

t . longed to their ancestors. I have already traced

the progress of the Spaniflh ideas with relipc to
the condition and treatment of that people, and
have mentioned the most important of their more
early regulations, concerning a matter of so much
consequence in the administration of their new do.
minionrf. But since the period to which I have
brought down the history of America, the informa.
tion and experience acquired during two centuriec
have enabled the court of Spain to make such iln
provements in this part of its American fyfenm, tha

" Recopil. lib. vii. tit. v. 1. 7,. Herrcra, dec, 8. lib. vi
c. 1i, Frezier, z44.

a 1ho0

a flort view of the prelnt condition of the Indians B o o K
may prove both curious and interesting. h -~

BY the famous regulations of Charles V. in 1542, Theirpre-

lent condi,

which have been so often mentioned, the high pre- tion.
tensions of the conquerors of the New World, who.
confidered its inhabitants as slaves, to whose service
they had acquired a full right of property, were
finally abrogated. From that period, the Indians
have been reputed freemen, and entitled to the
privileges of fubjets. When admitted into this
rank, it was deemed just, that they should contri-
bute towards the support and improvement of the
society which had adopted them as members. But
as no considerable benefit could be expeted from
the voluntary efforts of men unacquainted with re-
gular industry, and averse to labour, the court of
Spain found it necessary to fix and secure, by
proper regulations, what it thought reasonable to
exact from them. With this view, an annual tax Taxim.

pored on

was imposed upon every male, from the age of th°em.1
eighteen to fifty; and at the fame time, the nature
as well as the extent of the services which they
might be required to perform, were afcertairied
with precision. This tribute varies in different
provinces; but if we take that paid in New Spain
as a medium, its annual amount is nearly four
ihillings a head; no exorbitant fum in countries
where, as at the source of wealth, the value of
money is extremely low . The right of levying

* See NOTE LI. Recopil. lib. vi. tit. v. 1. 4, Hack.
luyt, vol. iii. p. 461.

T a this

B OO K this tribute likewise varies. In America, every
VI__. Indian is either an immediate vassal of the crown,

or depends upon tome subject to whom the diftri&
in which he resides has been granted for a limited
time, under the denomination of an encomienda.
In the former cafe, about three-fourths of the tax
is paid into the royal treasury; in the latter, the
fame proportion of it belongs to the holder of the
grant. When Spain first took possession of Ame-
rica, the greater part of it was parcelled out among
its conquerors, or those who first fettled there, and
but a small portion reserved for the crown. As
those grants which were made for two lives onlyP,
reverted fucceflively to the sovereign, he had it in
his power either to diffuse his favours by grants to
new proprietors, or to augment his own revenue
by valuable annexations q. Of these, the latter has
been frequently chosen; the number of Indians
now depending immediately on the crown, is much
greater than in the first age after the conquest, and
this branch of the royal revenue continues to extend.

The rerviKs THE benefit arising from the services of the In-
demanded.

dians accrues either to the crown, or to the holder
of the encomienda, according to the fame rule ob-
served in the payment of tribute. Those services,
however, which can now be legally exa&ed, arc
very different from the talks originally imposed
upon the Indians. The nature of the work which

P Recopil. lib. vi. tit. viii. 1. 48. Solorz. de Ind. Jutre
lib. ii. c. 16.

e Sce NOTE LII.

they

they must perform is defined, and an equitable re- B o o K
compence is granted for their labour. The stated v.^
services demanded of the Indians may be divided
into two branches. They are either employed in
works of primary necessity, without which society
cannot subsist comfortably, or are compelled to la-
bour in the mines, from which the Spanifi colo-
nies derive their chief value and importance. In
consequence of the former, they are obliged to
afllift in the culture of maize, and other grain of
necessary consumption; in tending cattle; in eret-
ing edifices of public utility; in building bridges;
and in forming high roads'; but they cannot be
constrained to labour in raising vines, olives, and
sugar-canes, or any species of cultivation, which has
for its objec the gratification of luxury, or com-
mercial profit '. In consequence of the latter, the
Indians are compelled to undertake the more un-
pklafant talk, of extracting ore from the bowels of
the earth, and of refining it by fuccellive pro-
ccffes, no less unwholfome than operose',

THE mode of exacting both these services is the Thc mord
fame, and is under regulations framed with a view thefc.
of rendering it as little oppreflive as possible to the
Indians. They are called out fucceflively in divi-
sions, termed Mitas, and no person can be com-
pelled to go but in his turn. In Peru, the num-

' Recopil. lib. vi. tit. xiii. 1. 19. Solorz. de Ind. Jure, ii.

lib, i. c. 6, 7. 9.

' Recopil. lib. vi. tit. xiii. 1. 8. Solorz. lib. i. . 7. No 41, &c.
'aec NOTE LIII.

T3 ber

B 0o K ber called out must not exceed the seventh part of
i_- the inhabitants in any district" In New Spain,

where the Indians are more numerous, it is fixed
at four in the hundred". During what time the
labour of such Indians, as are employed in agri.
culture, continues, I have not been able to learn'.
But in Peru, each Mita, or division, deflined for
the mines, remains there fix months; and while
engaged in this service, a labourer never receives
less than two fillings a day, and often earns more
than double that fumY. No Indian, residing at ,
greater distance. than thirty miles from a mine, is
included in the Mita, or division employed in
working it'; nor are the inhabitants of the low
country exposed now to certain destruction, as they
were at first, when under the dominion of the con-
querors, by compelling them to remove from that
warm climate, to the cold elevated regions where
minerals abound'.
How go. THE Indians who live in the principal towns,

rn. are entirely subjet to the Spanish laws and magi-

ftrates; but in their own villages, they are go-
verned by Caziques, some of whom are the de.
fceodants of their ancient lords, others are named
by the Spanish viceroys. These regulate the petty
affairs of the people under them, according to
maxims ofjuftice, transmitted to them by tradition

u Recop. lib. vi. tit. xii. 1. at. w Recopil. lib. vi. 1. 2.
' See NOTE LIV. Y Ulloa Entreten. 265, 266.
* Recopil. lib. vi. tit. xii . 1.3.
* Ibid. 1. 29. and tit. i. 1. 13. See NOTE LV.

from

from their ancestors. To the Indians, this jurif- P o o K
dic'ion, lodged in such friendly hands, affords some *-~
consolation; and so little formidable is this dignity
to their new matters, that they often allow it to de-
scend by hereditary rightb. For the farther relief
of men so much exposed to oppreflion, the Spanilh
court has appointed an officer in every diftrirt, with
the title of Protecor of the Indians. It is his
funEtion, as the name implies, to assert the rights of .,.
the Indians; to appear as their defender in the
courts of justice; and, by the interposition of his
authority, to set bounds to the encroachments and
exactions of his countrymen'. A certain portion
of the reserved fourth of the annual tribute, is def-
tined for the salary of the caziques and prote&ors;
another is applied to the maintenance of thec.lergy
employed in the inftrition of the Indians4. An-
other part seems to be appropriated for the benefit
of the Indians themselves, and is applied for the
payment of their tribute in years of famine, or when
a particular diftric is affc&ed by any extraordinary
local calamity*. Besides this, provision is made
by various laws, that hospitals ihall be founded
in every new settlement for the reception of Indi-
ans'. Such hospitals have accordingly been erected,
both for the indigent and infirm, in Lima, in Cuzco,

h Solorz. de Jure Ind. lib. i. c. a6. Recopil. lib. vi, tit. vii.
c Solorz. lib. i. 7.

. c o0.

p. ccop. lib. vi. tit. vi.

d Recop. lib. vi. tit. v. 1. 30. tit. xvi. 1. a -15.
* Ibid. lib. vi. tit. iv. 1. 13.
Ibid. lib. i. tit. iv. 1. 1, &c.

T4 and

B O 0 K and in Mexico, where the Indians are treated with
.i r-_ tenderness and humanity'.

SUCH are the leading principles in the jurifpru.

dence and policy by wlitc the Indians are now go.
verned in the provinces belonging to Spain. In
those regulations of the Spanish monarchs, we dif-
cover no traces of that cruel fyltem of extermina-
tion, which they have been charged with adopting;
and if we admit, that the neceflity of securing sub-
fiftence for their colonies, or the advantages de-
rived from working the mines, give them a right
to avail themselves of the labour of the Indians, we
must allow, that the attention with which they re-
gulate and recompence that labour, is provident and
Sagacious. In no code of laws is greater solicitude
displayed, or precautions multiplied with more pru-
dent concern for the preservation, the security, and
the happiness of the subjet, than we discover in the
colletion of the Spanilh laws for the Indies. But
those later regulations, like the more early edi&s
which have been already mentioned, have too often
proved ineffeual remedies against the evils which
they were intended to prevent. In every age, if
the fame causes continue to operate, the fame effc&s
must follow. From the immense distance between
the power entrusted with the execution of laws, and
that by whose authority they are enacted, the vigour
even of the most absolute government must relax,
and the dread of a superior, too remote to observe

' Voy. de Ulloa, i. 429. 5u9. Churchill, iv. 496.

with

with accuracy, or to puniih with dispatch, must in- 9 o o,
sensibly abate. Notwithstanding the numerous in- - ,'
juncions of the Spanish monarch, the Indians till
fufferon many occasions, both from the avarice of
individuals, and from the exactions of the magifrates,
who ought to have proteced them; unreasonable
talks are imposed; the term of their labour is pro,
longed beyond the period fixed by law, and they
groan under many of the insults and wrongs which
are the lot of a dependent peopleh. From some
information on which I can depend, such oppreflion
abounds more in Peru, than in any other colony.
But it is not general. According to the accounts,
even of those authors who are most disposcd to ex-
aggerate the sufferings of the' Indians, they, in fe-
veral provinces, enjoy not only cafe, but affluence;
they possess large farms; they are masters of nu-
merous herds and flocks; and, by the knowledge
which they have acquired of European arts and in-
dufry, are supplied not only with the necessaries,
but with many luxuries of life'.

AFTER explaining the form of civil government EccleCafli-

in the Spanifl colonies, and the itate of the various tutionofthe
orders of persons fubje& to it, the peculiarities in coto'
their ecclesiastical constitution merit consideration,
Notwithitanding the superstitious veneration with
which the Spaniards are devoted to the Holy See,
the vigilant and jealous policy of Ferdinand early
prompted him to take precautions against the in-

See NOTE LVI.
Ga ;gc's Survey, p. 90. 10. 104. 9, c.

troduction

B o o K troduction of the papal dominion into America.
A-d With this view, he solicited Alexander VI. for a

Rtfraint, grant to the crown of the tithes in all the newly.
on the papal
junrdition. discovered countriesk, which he obtained on con-

dition of his making provision for the religious in-
ftru&ion of the natives. Soon after Julius II. con-
ferred on him, and his successors, the right of pa-
tronage, and the absolute disposal of all ecclesiastical
benefices there'. But these pontiffs, unacquainted
with the value of what he demanded, bestowed
those donations with an inconsiderate liberality,
which their successors have often lamented, and
wished 'to recal. In consequence of those grants,
the Spanish monarchs have become in effect the
heads of the American church. In them the ad-
ministration of its revenues is veted. Their no-
mination of persons to supply vacant benefices is
inttantly confirmed by the pope. Thus, in all
Spanith America, authority of every species centers
in the Crown. There no collision is known be-
tween spiritual and temporal jurifdiftion. The
king is the only superior, his name alone is heard
of, and no dependence upon any foreign power has
been introduced. Papal bulls cannot be admitted
into America, nor are they of any force there, until
they have been previoufy examined, and approved
of by the royal council of the Indies"i and if any

k Bulla Alex. VI. A. D. 15o0, ap. Solorz. de Jure Ild. ii.
p. 498.

Bulla Julii, ii. 15o8, ap. Solorz. de Jure Ind. ii. 509.

m Recopil. lib. i. tit. . i. 1. 2 and Autas del Confejo do lai

Indias, cxi.
bu

bull

bull flould be furreptitioufy introduced, and cir- B oo KI
culated in America without obtaining that appro- vl l
bation, ecclesiastics are required not only to prevent
it from taking efcft, but to seize all the copies of
it, and trapfmit them to the council of the Indies".
To this limitation of the papal jurifdiaion, equally
singular, whether we confider the age and nation in
which it was devised, or the jealous attention with
which Ferdinand and his successors have itudied to
maintain it in full force9, Spain is indebted, in a
great measure, for the uniform tranquillity which
has reigned jn her American dominions.

THE hierarchy is eftablilhed in America in the Form an

fame form as in Spain, with its full train of arch- mcntsofthe
bishops, bishops, deans, and other dignitaries. The th'uh i,
inferior clergy are divided into three clafles, under colonic*-
the denomination of Curas, Dotrineros, and M/'-
fioneros. The first are parifh-priefts in those parts
of the country where the Spaniards have fettled.
The second have the charge of such diftrits as are
inhabited by Indians subjected to the Spanilh go-
vernment, and living under its protection. The
third are employed in inftru'ting and converting
those fiercer tribes, which disdain submission to the
Spanish yoke, and live in remote or inaccessible
regions, to which the Spanilh arms have not pe-
netrated. So numerous are the ecclesiastics of all
those various orders, and such the profuse liberality
with which many of them are endowed, that the

Recop. lib. . tit. vii. 1. S5.
e Ibid. lib. i. tit. vii. 1. 55. palia.

revenues

B o o K revenues of the church in America are immense.
_y_. The Romish superstition appears with its utmost

pomp in the New World. Churches and con.
vents there are magnificent, and richly adorned;
and on high festivals, the display of gold and silver,
and precious flones, is such as exceeds the con-
ception of an European P. An ccclefiafical efta-
blifhment so splendid and expensive, is unfavour-
able, as has been formerly observed, to the progress
of rising colonies; but in countries where riches
abound, and the people are so delighted with pa-
rade, that religion must assume it, in order to at-
tract their veneration, this propensity to ostentation
has been indulged, and becomes less pernicious.

rrrn;cous THE early institution of monasteries in the Spa-
-fleets of
monatnic nifh colonies, and the inconsiderate zeal in multi-

iltitut. plying them, have been attended with consequences

more fatal. In every new settlement, the first ob-
ject should be to encourage population, and to in-
cite every citizen to contribute towards augment-
ing the number and strength of the community.
During the youth and vigour of society, while there
is room to spread, and sustenance is procured with
facility, mankind increase with amazing rapidity.
But the Spaniards had hardly taken poffeflion of
America, when, with a most prcpolterous policy,
they began to eret convents, where persons of both
fixes were Ihut up, under a vow to defeat the pur-
pose of nature, and to counteract the first of her
laws. Influenced by a misguided piety, which

, Voy. de Vlloa, i. 430.

ascribes

ifcribes tranfcendant merit to a state of celibacy, n o o K
or allured by the profped of that listless cafe, which, ..
in sultry climates, is deemed supreme felicity, num-
bers crowded into those mansions of sloth and fu-
perrition, and are loft to society. As none but
persons of Spanish extract are admitted into the
monasteries of the New World, the evil is more
sensibly felt, and every monk or nun may be con-
lidered as an active person withdrawn from civil
life. The impropriety of such foundations in any
situation where the extent of territory requires ad-
ditional hands to improve it, is so obvious, that
some catholic fates have expressly prohibited any
person in their colonies from taking the monaiic
vows'. Even the Spanish monarchs, on some oc-
cafions, seem to have been alarmed with the spreading
ofa spirit so adverse to the increase and prosperity
of their colonies, that they have endeavoured to
check it'. But the Spaniards in America, more
thoroughly under the influence of fuperfition than
their countrymen in Europe, and directed by ec-
clefiaftics more bigotted and illiterate, have con-
ceived such an high opinion of monatic faneity,
that no regulations can restrain their zeal; and, by
the excess of their ill-judged bounty, religious
houses have multiplied to a degree no less amazing
than pernicious to society'.

1 Voy. de Ulloa, ii. 124.
' Herrera, dec. v. lib. ix. c. , a. Recop. lib. i. tit. iii.

1, . i. t iv. c. ii. Solorz. lib. iii. c. e 3.
'Sce NOTE LVII.

In

B o O K IN viewing the slate of colonies, where not only

VL i. the number but influence of ecclefiafics is so great,

Chtrlncro the character of this powerful body is an object that
in sp..mii merits particular attention. A considerable part of
America, the secular clergy in Mexico and Peru are natives

of Spain. As persons long accustomed, by their
education, to the retirement and indolence of acea
demic life, are more incapable of ative enterprize,
and less disposed to frike into new paths, than any
order of men, the ecclesiastical adventurers by whom
the American church is recruited, are commonly
such as, from merit or rank in life, have little pro.
ofthe fccu- spect of success in their own country. According.

l y, the secular priests in the New World, are fiill
less diftinguifled than their brethren in Spain, for
literary accomplishments ofany species; and though,
by the ample provision which has been made for the
American church, many of its members enjoy the
cafe and independence which are favourable to the
cultivation of science, the body of secular clergy
has hardly, during two centuries and a half, pro-
duced one author whose works convey such useful
information, or possess filch a degree of merit, as
to be ranked among those which attract the atten-
oftheregu. tion of enlightened nations. But the greatest part

of the ecclesiastics in the Spanish settlements are
regulars. On the discovery of America, a new
field opened to the pious zeal of the monaltic or-
ders; and, with a becoming alacrity, they imme-
diately sent forth miflionaries to labour in it. The
first attempt to inftrua and convert the Americans,
was made by monks; and, as soon as the conquft

of

of any province was completed, and its ecclefiafti- B o o
cal eftablifhmcat began to assume some form, the. _"
popes permitted the miflionaries of the four mendi-
cant orders, as a reward for their services, to ac-
cept of parochial charges in America, to perform
all spiritual fumncions, and to receive the tithes,
and other emoluments of the benefice, without de-
pending on the jurifdi&ion of the bishop of the
diocese, or being fubje& to his censures. In con-
sequence of this, a new career of ufcfulnefs, as well
as new objets of ambition presented themselves.
Whenever a call is made for a fresh filpply of mif-
fionaries, men of the most ardent and aspiring
minds, impatient under the restraint of a cloilter,
weary of its insipid uniformity, and fatigued with
the irksome repetition of its frivolous funtions,
offer their service with eagerness, and repair to the
New World in quest of liberty and diftintion. Nor
do they pursue diftintion without success. The
highest ecclesiastical honours, as well as the most
lucrative preferments in Mexico and Peru, are
often in the hands of regulars; and it is chiefly to
the monastic orders that the Americans are in-
debted for any portion of science which is culti-
vated among them. They are almost the only
Spanish ecclesiastics, from whom we have received
any accounts, either of the civil or natural history
of the various provinces in America. Some of
them, though deeply tinged with the indelible fu-
perftition of their profession, have published books
which give a favourable idea of their abilities. The
natural and moral history of the New World, by

a , * the

R O o K the Jesuit Acofta, contains more accurate obferv.
, -'_, ations, perhaps, and more found fcince, than are

to be found in any description of remote countries
publhhed in the sixteenth century.

;.fcrlute BuTr the fame difgulf with monaatic life, to which
ulaIlllnc r of
(ol, of America is indebted for some initrudtors of worth

and abilities, filled it with others of a very different
character. The giddy, the profligate, the avari-
cious, to whom the poverty and rigid discipline of
a convent are intolerable, confider a mission to
America as a release from mortification and bond-
age. There they soon obtain some parochial
charge, and far removed, by their situation, from
the inspection of their monastic fuiperiors, and ex-
empt, by their chara&er, from the jurifdidion of
their dioceldan", they are hardly futbject to any
contrcoul. According to the teftimcny of the mos
zt.loius catholics, many of the regular clergy in
thc Slt:nifh lticlements are not only dettitute of
the virtues becoming their profefion, but regard-
Irls of that external decorum and refped for the
opinion of mankind, which prefcrve a semblance
of worth where the reality is wanting. Secure
of impunity, some regulars, in cont'mpt of their
vow of poverty, engage openly in commerce; and
are to rapacioully eager in amalling wealth, that
they become the molt grievous oppressors of the
Indians, whom it was their duty to have proteced.
Others, with no leli flagrant violation of their vow

u Avcndano Thef. Indk; i. 3z3.

1I of

of chastity, indulge with little disguise in the mot n o o K
dissolute licentiousness '.

VARIOUS schemes have been proposed for re-

dressing enormities so manifest and so offensive.
Several persons, no less eminent for piety than dif-
cernment, have contended, that the regulars, in
conformity to the canons of the church, ought to
be confined within the walls of their cloisters, and
Ihould no longer be permitted to encroach on the
fun&ions of the secular clergy. Some public-
spirited magistrates, from convition of its being
neceflwry to deprive the regulars of a privilege be-
stowed at first with good intention, but of which
time and experience had discovered the pernicious
effects, openly countenanced the secular clergy in
their attempts to assert their own rights. The prince :r1s
D'Efquilache, viceroy of Peru under Philip III.
took measures so decisive and effe&ual for circum-
scribing the regulars within their proper sphere, as
struck them with general confterhation'. They
had recourse to their usual arts. They alarmed
the superstitious, by representing the proceedings
of the viceroy as innovations fatal to religion. They
employed all the refinements of intrigue, in order
to gain persons in power; and seconded by the
powerful influence of the Jesuits, who claimed and
enjoyed all the privileges which belonged to the
Mendicant orders in America, they made a deep
imprefflon on a bigotted prince, and a weak mi-

x See NOTE LVIII. r Sec NOTE LIX.

VOL. IIt. U niftry.

o iK niftry. The ancient praftice was tolerated. The
_y. abules which it occasioned continued to increase,

and the corruption of monks, exempt from the re-
ltraints of discipline, and the infpe&ion of any fu.
pcrior, became a disgrace to religion. At hft, as
the veneration of the Spaniards for the monastic
orders began to abate, and the power of the Jesuits

J,,.Ce3, was on the decline, Ferdinand VI. ventured to
57. iapply the only effetual remedy by ifiuing an edi&,

prohibiting regulars of every denomination from
taking the charge of any parilh with the cure of
fouls; and declring, that on the dcmifc of the
prefcnt incumbents, none but fccular priests, sub-
jec to the jurifiditon of their diocesans, shall be
presented to vacant benefices'. If this regulation
is carried into execution with steadiness in any de-
gree proportional to the wiilomr with which it is
framed, a very considerable reformation may take
place in the ecclesiastical fate of Spanish America,
and the secular clergy may gradually become a re-
fpcetable body of men. The deportment of many
ecclefialtics, even at present, seems to be decent
and exemplary, otherwise we can hardly suppose
that they would be held in such high cftimation,
and posiess such a wonu:rful ascendant over the
minds of their countrymen throughout all the Spa-
nifh fittlements.

S.all pro- BUT whatever merit the Spanih ecclesiastics in
g(iterincon.
vtrtingthle America may poffels, the success of their cndca-
Indians tu

* Real Ccdula MS. penes m,

youI .

yours in communicating the knowledge of true re- B o o K
ligion to the Indians, has been more imperfet than
might have been expe&ted, either from tht degree
of their zeal, or from the dominion which they had
acquired over that people. For this, various rca-
sons may be afligned. The first miflionarics, in
their ardour to make proselytes, admitted the peo-
ple of America into the chrifian church, without
previous inftru&ion in the doArines of religion,
and even before they themselves had acquired such
knowledge of the Indian language, as to be able to
explain to the natives the myiterics of faith, or the
precepts of duty. Refting upon a subtle diltin'ion
in scholastic theology, between that degree ofaffint
which is founded on a complete knowledge and
cQnvi&tion of duty, and that which may be yielded
when both therf are imperfect, they adopted this
strange pratice, no kef inconsistent with the spirit
of a religion which addrefles itself to the under-
standing of men, than repugnant to the diarces
ofreafon. As soon as any body of people, over-
awed by dread of the Spanilh power, moved by
the example of their own chiefs, incited by levity,
or yielding from mere ignorance, exprcefcd the
slightest dfire of embracing the religion of their
conquerors, they were infiantly baptized. While
this rage of conversion continued, a tingle clergy-
man baptized in one day above five thousand
Mexicans, and did not desist until he was so
exhausted by fatigue, that he was unable to lift
his hands . In the course of a few years, after the
* P. Torribio, MS. Torquem. Mnd.d I. lib. xni. c. 6.

v 2 rcduction

o O K reduction of the Mexican empire, the sacrament of
,i-._ baptism was administered to more than four mil-

lions b. Proselytes adopted with such inconsiderate
haste, and who were neither inftruted in the na-
ture of the tenets to which it was supposed they
had given assent, nor taught the absurdity of those
which they were required to relinquish, retained their
veneration for their ancient superstitions in full force,
or mingled an attachment to its dotrines and rites
with that slender knowledge of Christianity which
they had acquired. These sentiments the new
converts transmitted to their posterity, into whose
minds they have funk so deep, that the Spanish
ecclesiastics, with all their industry, have not been
able to eradicate them. The religious institutions
of their ancestors are still remembered, and held
in honour by many of the Indians, both in Mexico
and Peru; and whenever they think themselves out
of reach of infpe&ion by the Spaniards, they afecm.
ble and celebrate their idolatrous rites c.

BUT this is not the molt unsurmountable obstacle

to the progress of Christianity among the Indians,
The powers of their uncultivated understandings are
so limited, their observations and reflecions reach
To little beyond the mere objets of sense, that they
seem hardly to have the capacity of forming abstract
ideas, and poffels not language to express them.
To such men, the sublime and spiritual doctrines of

b. Torribio, MS. Torquem. lib. xvi c. 8.
c Voy. dc Ulloa, i. 341. Torquem. lib. xr. c. 23. lib. axvi

c. 8. Gage, 171
' - . ''Chrilsianit)

Christianity mut be, in a great measure, incom- B o 6 K
prehenfible. The numerous and splendid cere-
monies of the popith worlhip catch the eye, please
and interest them; but when their inftru&tors at-
tempt to explain the articles of faith, with which
those external observances are conne&ted, though
the Indians may liften with patience, they so little
conceive the meaning of what they hear, that their
acquiescence does not merit the name of belief.
Their indifference is still greater than their incapa-
city. Attentive only to the present moment, and
iirgrofTed by the objects before them, the Indians
to seldom reflet upon what is past, or take thought
for what is to come, that neither the promises nor
threats of religion, make much imprefilon upon
them; and while their foresight rarely extends so
far as the next day, it is almost impofrible to in-
spire them with solicitude about the concerns of a
future world. Astonished equally at their slowness
of compreheniorl, and at their insensibility, tome of
the early miflionaries pronounced them a race of
men so brutish, as to be incapable of understanding
the first principles of religion. A council held at
Lima decreed, that, on account of this incapacity,
they ought to be excluided from the sacrament of
the Eucharilft . Though Paul III. by his famot:s
bull, issued in the year 1537, declared them to be
rational creatures, entitled to all the privileges of
Christians'; yet, after the lapse of two centuries,

d Torquem. lib. xvi. c. so.
'Torquem. lib. xvi. c. aS. Garcia origin. 311.

u 3 during

Bo 0 0 during which they have been members of the

._._., church, so imperfect arc their attainments in know.

ledge, that very few possess such a portion of spiritual
difcrnment, as to be deemed worthy of being
admitted to the holy communion f. From this idea
of their incapacity and imperfect knowledge of re.
ligion, when the zeal of Philip II. eltablifhed the
inquisition in America in the year 1570, the Indians
were exempted from the jurisdiction of that revere
tribunals, and fill continue under the inlpetion of
their diocesans. Even after the most perfet in.
tru&ion, their faith is held to be feeble and du.
bious; and though some of them have been taught
the learned languages, and have gone through the
ordinary course of academic education with ap.
plause, their frailty is still so much fufpeaed, that
few Indians are either ordained priests, or received
into any religious order b.

Produaions FROM this brief survey, some idea may be formed
of tle Spa-
nihw colo- of the interior state of the Spanish colonies. The
niC. various producions with which they supply and

enrich the mother-country, and the fytRem of com-
mercial intercourse between them, come next in
order to be explained. If the dominions of Spain
in the New World had been of such moderate ex-
tent, as bore a due proportion to the parent Rate,
the progress of her colonizing might have been
attended with the fame benefit as that of other na-
tions. But whcn, in less than half a century, her

f Voy. dc Ulloa, i. 343. s Rccop. lib. vi. tit. i. 1. 35.
h ''orqluem. lib. xvii. c. 13. Sec NOTE LX.

inconsiderate

aconfiderate rapacity had seized on countries larger a o o

VIIL

than all Europe, her inability to fill such vast re- _ r
gions with a number of inhabitants sufficient for the
cultivation of them, was so obvious, as to give a
wrong dire&tion to all the efforts of the colonists.
They did not form compac settlements, where in-
duftry, circumscribed wirhin proper limits, both in
its views and operations, is condu&ed with that
fober persevering spirit, which gradually converts
whatever is in its poffefion to a proper use, and
derives thence the greatest advantage. Instead of
this, the Spaniards, seduced by the boundless pro-
spec which opened to them, divided their poflff-
sions in America into governments of great extent.
As their number was too small to attempt the re-
gular culture of the immense provinces, which they
occupied rather than peopled, they bent their at-
tention to a few objects, that allured them with
hopes of sudden and exorbitant gain, and turned
away with contempt from the humbler paths of
industry, which lead more slowly, but with greater
certainty, to wealth and increase of national strength.

Or all the methods by which riches may be ac- From thce

quired, that of searching for the precious metals is mnt
one of the most inviting to men, who are either
unaccustomed to the regular alliduity with which
the culture of the earth and the operations of com-
merce must be carried on, or who are so enterprifin
and rapacious as not to be satisfied with the gradual
returns of profit which they yield. Accordingly,
as Soon as the several countries in America were

v 4 fubjeted

B o O K fubjeaed to the dominion of Spain, this was almost
'I I. the only method of acquiring wealth which occur.

red to the adventurers, by whom they were con-
quered. Such provinces of the continent as did
not allure them to fettle, by the profpe& of their
affording gold and silver, were totally neglected.
Those in which they met with a dlfappointment of
the sanguine expectations they had formed, were
abandoned. Even the value of the islands, the
first-fruits of their discoveries, and the first objec
of their attention, funk so much in their estimation,
when the mines which had been opened in them
were exhausted, that they were deserted by many of
the planters, and left to be occupied by more in-
duftrious poffefrors. All crowded to Mexico and
Peru, where the quantities of gold and silver found
among the natives, who searched for them with
little industry and less skill, promised an unex-
haufted store, as the recompence of more intelli-
gent and persevering efforts,

Dircoveryr DURING several years, the ardour of their re-
those of oI'o.
tof and searches was kept tup by hope, rather than fuccei.
J5cotLil.. At kingth, the rich silver mines of Potofi, in Peru,

were acciucntally discovered in the year 1545', by
an Indian, as he was clambering up the mountain,
in pursuit of a Llama which had strayed from his
flock. Soon after the mines of Sacotccas, in New
Spain, little inferior to the other in value, were
opened. From that time, lucceflive diliovcrics

* Fernandez, p. i. lib. xi. c. i.

have

have been made in both colonies, and fiver mines B o K
are now so numerous, .that the working of them, .-
and of some few mines of gold in the provinces of
Tierra Firme, and the new kingdom of Granada,
has become the capital occupation of the Spaniards,
and is reduced into a system no lelf complicated
than interesting. To describe the nature of the
various ores, the mode of extrafting them from the
bowels of the earth, and to explain the several
processes by which the metals are separated from
the substances with which they are mingled, either
by the aCtion of fire, or the attra&ive powers of
mercury, is the province of the natural philosopher
or chymift, rather than of the historian.

THE exuberant profusion with which the moun- Riche

tains of the New World poured forth their trea- yim".
lures, aftonified mankind, who had been accustomed
hitherto to receive a penurious supply of the pre-
cious metals, from the more scanty stores contained
in the mines of the ancient hemisphere. Accord-
ing to principles of computation, which appear
to be extremely moderate, the quantity of gold and
silver that has been regularly entered in the ports a'
Spain, is equal in value to four millions sterling
annually, reckoning from the year 1492, in which
America was discovered, to the present time.
This, in two hundred and eighty-three years,
amounts to eleven hundred and thirty-two millions.
Imlnenfe as this fum is, the Spanifl writers con-
tend, that as much more ought to be added to it,
in consideration oftreafure which has been extraced

3 from

3 9 0 K from the mines, and imported fraudulently into
Vill.

*- Spain, without paying duty to the king. By this

account, Spain has drawn from the New World a
supply of wealth, amounting at least to two thousand
millions of pounds Rtcrling .

Sprit to TuE mines, which have yielded this amazing
which this
(ives riic. quantity of treasure, are not worked at the expencc

of the crown, or of the public. In order to en-
courage private adventurers, the person who dif-
covers and works a new vein, is entitled to the
property of it. Upon laying his claim to such a
discovery before the governor of the province, a
certain extent of land is measured off, and a certain
number of Indians allotted him, under the obliga-
tion of his opening the mine within a limited time,
and of his paying the customary duty to the king,
for what it ihall produce. Invited by the facility
with which such grants are obtained, and encou-
raged by some striking examples of success in this
line of adventure; not only the sanguine and the
bold, but the timid and diffident enter upon it with
astonishing ardour. With vast objecs always in
view, fed continually with hope, and expe&ing
every moment that fortune will unveil her secret
itores, and give up the wealth which they contain
to their wishes, they deem every other occupation
insipid and uninteresting. The charms of this pur-
suit, like the rage for deep play, are so bewitching,

k Uztaril Theor. y Pral. de Commercia, c. 3. Hcrrerti
dec. viii. lib. xi. c. I. See NOTEI LXI.

and

and take such full poffeflion of the mind, as even to B o o sc
give a new bent to the natural temper. Under its _
influence, the cautious become enterprising, and the
covetous profuse. Powerful as this charm natu-
rally is, its force is augmented by the arts of an
order of men known in Peru by the cant name of
searchers. These are commonly persons of defpe-
rate fortunes, who, availing themselves of some
ikill in mineralogy, accompanied with the infinu-
ating manner, and confident pretensions peculiar to
projecors, address the wealthy and the credulous.
By plausible descriptions of the appearances which
they have discovered of rich veins hitherto unex-
ploredi by producing, when requisite, specimens of
promising ore; by affirming, with an imposing
assurance, that success is certain, and that the ex-
pence must be trifling, they seldom fail to per-
luade. An association is formed; a small fum is
advanced by each copartner; the mine is opened;
the earcher is entrusted with the sole direction of
every operation; unforeseen difficulties occur; new
demands of money are made; but, amidf a fuccef-
sion ofdifappointments and delays, hope is never
extinguished, and the ardour of expe&ation hardly
abates. For it is observed, that if any person once
enter this reducing path, it is almost impoflible
to return; his ideas alter, he seems to be pofeflfed
with another spirit, visions of imaginary wealth are
continually before his eyes, and he thinks, and
speaks, and dreams of nothing else '.

i UUoa Entreten . p. 23.

SUCH

B o K SUCH is the spirit that must be formed, wherever

vi"
,A v_*, the active exertions of any society are chiefly cm.

it.ag s ployed in working mines of gold and silver. No

spirit is more adverse to such improvement in agri.
culture and commerce, as render a nation really
opulent. If the system of administration in the
Spanish colonies had been founded upon principles
of found policy, the power and ingenuity of the
legifature would have been exerted with as much
ardour, in restraining its fubjeas from such perni-
cious industry, as is now employed in alluring
them towards it. " Projefts of mining" (fays a
good judge of the political condu& of nations),
*' inffead of replacing the capital employed in
" them, together with the ordinary profit of flock,

commonly absorb both capital and profit. They
are the projects, therefore, to which, of all
" others, a prudent lawgiver, who desired to in-

crease the capital of his nation, would least choose
" to give any extraordinary encouragement, or to

turn towards them a greater flare of that capital

" than would go to them of its own accord. Such,
" in reality, is the absurd confidence which all men
' have in their own good fortune, that wherever
i' there is the least probability of 'uccefs, too great

a lhare of it is apt to go to them of its own ac-

" cord"." But in the Spanish colonies, govern-
ment is studious to cherish a fl)iit which it Ihould
have laboured to depress, and, by the ftaition of
its approbation, augments that inconliderate cre-

m Dr. Smith's Inquiry, &c. ii. 155.

ilulity,

dulity, which has turned the a&ive induftryoF Bao o
Mexico and Peru into such an improper channel. .
To this may be imputed the lender progress which
Spanilh America has made during two centuries
and a half, either in useful manufactures, or in those
lucrative branches of cultivation, which furnilh the
colonies of other nations with their ltaple commo-
dities. In comparison with the precious metals
every bounty of nature is so much defpilfd, that
this extravagant idea of their value has mingled
with the idiom of language in America, and the
Spaniards fettled there denominate a country, rich,
not from the fertility of its foil, the abundance of
its crops, or the exuberance of its pastures, but on
account of the minerals which its mountains con-
tain. In quest of there, they abandon the delight-
ful plains of Peru and Mexico, and retort to barren
and uncomfortable regions, where they have built
rome of the largest towns which they polfefs in the
New World. As the a&ivity and enterprise of the
Spaniards originally took this dire&ion, it is now
so difficult to bend them a different way, that al-
though, from various causes, the gain of working
mines is much decreased; the fascination continues,
and almost every person, who takes any active parr
in the commerce of New Spain or Peru, is still en-
gaged in some adventure of this kind ".

BUT though mines are the chief obje& of the O)l1 ,.-

[?lo(hit' n,0j>
Spaniards, and the precious metals which theCe this,..:

e
Src NOTE LXII.

yield,

s o K yield, form the principal artice in their commerce
t, . with America; the fertile countries which they

poflefs there, abound with other commodities of
such value or scarcity, as to attra& a considerable
degree of attention. Cochineal is a produ&ion al-
most peculiar to New Spain, of such demand in
commerce, that the sale is always certain, and it
yields such profit, as amply rewards the labour and
care employed, in rearing the curious inse&s of
which this valuable drug is composed, and prepar-
ing it for the market. Quinquina, or Jesuits Bark,
the most salutary simple, perhaps, and of most
restorative virtue, that Providence, in companion
to human infirmity, has made known unto man, is
found only in Peru, to which it affords a lucrative
branch of commerce. The Indigo of Guatimala i
-superior in quality to that of any province in Ame-
rica, and cultivated to a considerable extent. Ca-
coa, though not peculiar to the Spanish colonies,
attains to its highest state of perfcaion there, and
from. the great consumption of chocolate in Eu-
rope, as well as in America, is a valuable commo-
dity. The Tobacco of Cuba, of more exquifitc
flavour than any brought from the New World;
the Sugar raised in thatifland, in Hispaniola, and
in New Spain, together with drugs of various
kinds, may be mentioned among the natural pro-
ductions of America, which enrich the Spanish
commerce. To there muf be added, an article
of no inconsiderable account, the exportation of
hides; for which, as well as for many of those
which I have enumerated, the Spaniards are more

4 indebted

Indebted to the wonderful fertility of the country B o o K

VUL

than to their own foresight and industry. The -_
domestic animals of Europe, particularly horned
cattle, have multiplied in the New World with a
rapidity which almost exceeds belief. A few years
after the Spaniards fettled there, the herds of tame
cattle became so numerous, that their proprietors
reckoned them by thousands . Less attention
being paid to them, as they continued to increase,
they were suffered to run wild, and spreading over
a country of boundless extent, under a mild cli-
mate, and covered with rich pasture, their num-
ber bccpne immense. They range over the vast
plaiplWbich extend from Buenos Ayres, towards
the ApdAs, in herds of thirty or forty thousand;
and the unlucky traveller who once falls in among
them, may proceed several days before he can dif-
entangle himself from among the crowd that covers
the face of the earth, and seems to have no end.
They are hardly less numerous in New Spain, and
in several other provinces: they are killed merely
for the fake of their hides; and the slaughter
at certain seasons is so great, that the fcench of
their carcases, which are left in the field, would
infct the air, if large packs of wild dogs, and
vast flocks of gallinazos, or American vultures,
the most voracious of all the feathered kind,
did not instantly devour them. The number of
those hides'exported in every fleet to Europe is

O Ovicdo ap. Ramu. iii. ii, B. Hackluyt, iii.466. 5r .

very

B o o K very great, and is a lucrative branch of corn.

VIII.

merce P.

ALMOST all these may be confidered as fiaple

commodities peculiar to America, and different, if
we except that last mentioned, from the produc-
tions of the mother-country.

Advantagcs WHEN the importation into Spain of those va-

, .I esio, rious articles from her colonies, first became active
,crsolonics. and considerable, her interior industry and manu-

factures were in a fiate so prosperous, that with
the product of these ihe was able both to purchase
the commodities of the New World, and to an-
fwer its growing demands. Under the rehs of
Ferdinand and Isabella, and Charles V. Spain was
one of the molt induftrous countries in Europe.
Her manufa&tures in wool, and flax, and silk, were
so extensive, as not only to furnish what was fufi-
cient for her own consumption, but to afford a fur-
plus for exportation. When a market for them,
formerly unknown, and to which she alone had
access, opened in America, she had recourse to her
domestic fiore, and found there an abundant sup-
ply q. This new employment muff naturally have
added.vivacity to the spirit of industry. Nourilhed
and invigorated by it, the manufa&ures, the popu-
lation, and wealth of Spain might have gone on in-

P Acolha, lib. iii. c. 33. Ovallo Hill. of Chili. Church

Collca. iii. 47. fep. Ibid. v. p. 680. 692. Lettres Edif. xiii.
s35. Feuilli, i. 249.

' See NOTE LXII,.

creainng

treating in the fame proportion with the growth of B o K
her colonies. Nor was the state of the Spanish ..
marine at this period less flourishing than that of
its manufa6tutes. In the beginning of the fixtcenth
tentury, Spain is said to have poffefled above a
thousand merchant ships , a number probably far
fuperiot to that of any nation in Europe in that
age. By the aid which foreign trade and domestic
industry give reciprocally to each other in their
progress, the augmentation of both must have been
rapid and extensive, and Spain might have received
the fame accession of opulence and vigour from her
acquisitions in the New World, that other powers
have derived from their colonies there,

BUT various causes prevented this. The fame Why he
thing happens to nations as to individuals. Wealth, do drivi
which flows in gradually, and with moderate in- the rm'.
crease, feeds and nourishes that aativity which is
friendly to commerce, and calls it forth into vigor-
ous and well.conduaed exertions; but when opu-
lence pours in suddenly, and with too full a ifream,
it overturns all fober plans of industry, and brings
along with it a afte for what is wild and extrava-
gnt, and daring in business or in ation. Such
was the great and fudcen augmentation of power
and revenue, that the poffeflion of America brought
into Spain, and some symptoms of its pernicious
inluence upon the political operations of that mo-
narchy soon began to appear. For a confiderablc

t Cmipolana , . 1 40
'tL, IItr timer

B o O K time, however, the supply of treasure from the New

vIl.^ World was scanty and precarious, and the genius

of Charles V. conducld public measures with such
prudence, that the effe&s of this influence were
little perceived. But when Philip II. ascended the
Spanish throne, with talents far inferior to those of
his father, and remittances from the colonies be-
came a regular and considerable branch of revenue,
the fatal operation of this rapid change in the state
of the kingdom, both on the monarch and his
people, was at once conspicuous. Philip, po.
fessing that spirit of unceasing affiduty, which ofien
charaterifes the ambition of men of moderate ta-
lents, entertained such an high opinion of his own
resources, that he thought nothing too arduous for
him to undertake. Shut up himself in the solitude of
the Escurial, he troubled and annoyed all the nations
around him. He waged open war with the Dutch
mnd English; he encouraged and aided a rebellious
facion in France; he conquered Portugal, and
maintained armies and garrisons in Italy, Africa,
and both the Indies. By such a multiplicity of
great and complicated operations, pursued with ar-
dour during the course of a long reign, Spain was
drained both of men and money. Under the weak
administration of his successor, Philip III. the vi-
gour of the nation continued to decrease, and funk
A. D. iGz. into the lowest decline, when the inconsiderate bi-

gotry of that monarch expelled at once near a mil.
lion of his molt induftriouts filbjects, at the vcr
rine when the exhausted ifate of the kingdom re-
quired fomc extraordinary exertion of political v if

:-; ~~~~~dunI

dom to augment its numbers, and to revive its B oo
strength. Early in the seventeenth century, Spain i...-
felt such a diminution in the number of her people,
that from inability to recruit her armies, she was
obliged to contrat her operations. Her flourifih-
ing manufatures were fallen into decay. Her
fleets, which had been the terror of all Europe,
were ruined. Her extensive foreign commerce
was loft. The trade between different parts ofsher
own dominions was interrupted, and the ihips which
attempted to carry it on, were taken and plundered
by enemies whom the once despised. Even agri-
culture, the primary object of industry in every
prosperous state, was neglected, and one of the
most fertile cojtries in Europe hardly raised what
was fufficieng i othe support of its own inhabitats.

IN proportion as the population and. manufac- Rapidde.

o cline of iip

tures of the parent state declined, the demands of urdc.
her colonies continued to increase. The Spaniards,
like theii monarchs, intoxicated with the wealth
which poured in annually upon them, deserted the
paths of indgtry, to which they had been accuf-
tomed, ant repaired with eagerness to those regions
from which.this opulence ilfued. By this rage of
emgratio^".'another drain was opened, and the
strength of the colonies augmented by exhausting
that of the mother-country. All those emigrants,
as well as the adventurers who had at first fettled
in America, depended abfolutex upon Spain for
almost every article of necessary consumption. En-
gaged in more alluring and lucrative pursuits, or

x 2 prevented

B 0 0 K prevenred by restraints which government imposed

V-- _1. they could not turn their own attention towards

eflablilhing the manufactures requisite for comfort.
able subsistence, They received (as I have observed
in another place) their clothing, their furniture,
whatever ministers to the cafe or luxury of life,
and even their instruments of labour, from Europe.
Spain, thinned of people, and decreasing in indus.
try, was unable to supply their growing demands.
She had recourli to her neighbours. The manu.
facures of the Low Countries, of England, of
France, and of Italy, which her wants called into
cxiftence, or animated with new vivacity, furnished
in abundance whatever the required. In vain did
the fundamental law, concerning the exclusion of
foreigners from trade with America, oppose this
innovation. Necessity, more powerful than any
fatute, defeated its operations, and constrained
the Spaniards themselves to concur in eluding it.
The English, the French, and Dutch, relying on
the fidelity and honour of Spanilh merchants, who
lend their names to cover the deceit, fend out
their manufatures to America, and receive the
exorbitant price for which they are fold there, either
in specie, or in the rich commodities of the Nefw
World. Neither the dread of danger, hor the al-
lurement of profit, ever induced a Spanilh fator
to betray or defraud the person who confided in
him'; and that probity, which is the pride and
diftinnaion of the nation, contributes to its ruin.

Zavala Rcprfentacioq p, :6.

In

In a short time, not above a twentieth part of the aB o o
commodities exported to America was of Spanllh i tL
growth or fabric'. All the reft was the property
of foreign merchants, though entered in the name
of Spaniards. The treasure of the New World
may be said henceforward not to have belonged to
Spain. Before it reached Europe, it was antici-
pated as the price of goods purchased from so-
reigners. That wealth which, by an internal cir-
culation, would have spread through each vein of
industry, and have conveyed life and movement to
every branch of manufacure, flowed out of the
kingdom with such a rapid course, as neither en-
riched nor animated it. On the other hand, the
artizans of rival nations, encouraged by this quick
file of their commodities, improved so much in
hkill and industry, as to be able to afford them at
a rate so low, that the manufactures of Spain,
which could not vie with theirs, either in quality
or cheapness of work, were still farther deprefecd.
This deftru&ive commerce drained off the riches
of the nation fater and more completely, than even
the extravagant schemes of ambition carried on by
its monarchs. Spain was so much astonished and
distressed, at beholding her American treasures
vanih almost as soon as they were imported, that
Philip III. unable to supply what was requisite in
circulation, issued an cdi&t, by which he endea-
voured to raise copper money to a value in cur-
rency nearly equal to that of silver' I and the lord

t Campomnnes, ii. 138. * Utarcz, c. o04.

X3 of

B o O K of the Peruvian and Mexican mines was reduced

"' to a wretched expedient, which is the last resource

of petty impoverished states.

THUS the pofeflions of Spain in America have

not proved a source of population and of wealth
to her, in the fame manner as those of other na.
tions. In the countries of Europe, where the
spirit of industry subsists in full vigour, every per.
son fettled in such colonies as are similar in their
situation to those of Spain is supposed to give em-
ployment to three or four at home in supplying
his wants . But wherever the mother-country
cannot afford this supply, every emigrant may be
confidered as a citizen loft to the community, and
strangers must reap all the benefit of answering his
demands.

increafedby SUCH has been the internal slate of Spain from
the mode of
regulating the close of the sixteenth century, and such her in-
Cute with ability to supply the growing wants of her colo.
America. nies. The fatal effects of this disproportion be-

tween their demands, and her capacity of answer-
ing them, have been much increased by the mode
in which Spain has endeavoured to regulate the in-
tercourfe between the mother-country and the co-
lonies. It is from her idea of monopolizing the
trade with America, and debarring her fubjets
there from any communication with foreigners, that
all her jealous and fyfRematic arrangements have
arifcn, These are so singular in their nature and

Child on trade and colqnies.

con

consequences as to merit. a particular ,xplanation. B o k:
In order to secure the monopoly at which Ihe aiined, --.
Spain did not vest the trade with her colonies: if an
cxclufive company, a plan which his been adopted
by nations more commercial; and at a period when
mercantile policy was an obje& of greater atten-
tion, and ought to have been better understood. The
Dutch gave up the whole trade with their colonies,
both in the East and Weft Indies, to exclusive
companies. The English, the French, the Danes,
have imitated their example with refped to the
East Indian commerce ; and the twb former have
laid a similar restraint upon rome branches of their
trade with the New World. The wit of man
cannot, perhaps, devise a method for checking the
progress ofinduftry and population in a new colony
more effectual than this. The interest of the co-
lony, and of the exclusive company, must in every
point be diametrically opposite; and as the latter
poffefles such advantages in this unequal contest,
that it can prescribe at pleasure the terms of inter-
course, the former must not only buy dear and fell
cleap, but muff susser the mortification of having
the increase of its surplus Rock discouraged by those
very persons to whom alone it can dispose of its
produ&ions .

SPAIN, it is probable, was preserved from fall. Thiscn-

w . ,. -

. ,. . , .. , .. fined to one

ing into this error in policy, by the high ideas ort in
which Ihe early formed concerning the riches of p'n.

1 Smith's Inquiry, ii. 171.

x 4 the

B o o K the New World. Gold and silver were commo,

'U-La dities of too high value to vest a monopoly of

them in private hands, The crowa wished to retain
the direction of a commerce so inviting; and, in
order to secure that, ordained the cargo of every
Ihip fitted out for America, to be infpeted by the
officers of the Casa do Contrataioa in Seville, be.
fore it could receive a licence to make the voyage,
and that on its return, a report of the commodities
which it brought Ihould be made to the fame board,
before it could be permitted to land them. In con.
sequence of this regulation, all the trade of Spain
with the New World centered originally in the port
of Seville, and was gradually brought into a form,
in which it has been conduted, with little varia.
tion, from the middle of the sixteenth century al.
most to our own times. For the greater security of
the valuable cargoes lent to America, as well as for
the more easy prevention of fraud, the commerce
of Spain, with its colonies, is carried on by fieeu
which fail under strong convoys. These fleets con.
sifting of two squadrons, one distinguished by the
name of the Galeon, the other by that of the Flota,
arc equipped annually; Formerly they took their
departure from Seville; but as the port of Cadiz
has been found more commodious, they have failed
from it since the year 1720.

Carrie1 on THE Galeons destined to supply Tierra Firme,
by the Ga-

n, and the kingdoms of Peru and Chili, with almoRf

every article of luxury, or neceftary consumption,
that an opulent people can demand, touch sirs

Iz aC

at Carthagna, and then at Porto-bello. To the ^ oK x
former, the merchants of Santa Martha, Caraccas, .y
the New Kingdom of Granada, and several other
provinces, retort. The latter is the great mart for
the rich commerce of Peru and Chili. At the season
when the Gatlons are expected, the produf of all
the mines in these two kingdoms, together with
their other valuable commodities, is transported by
fes to Panama. From thence, as soon as the ap-
pearance of the fleet from Europe is announced,
they are conveyed across the isthmus, partly on
mules, and partly down the river Chagre to Porto-
bello. This paltry village, the climate of which,
from the pernicious union of excelfive heat, conti-
nual moisture and the putrid exhalations arising
from a rank foil, is more fatal to life than any per-
haps in the known world, is immediatelyfilled with
people. Fromn being the residence of a few negroes
and mulattoes, and of a mirerable garrison relieved
every three months, Porto-bello assumes suddenly a
very different aspel, and its streets are crowded
with opulent merchants from every corner of Peru.
and the adjacent provinces. A fair is opened, the
wealth of America is exchanged for the manufacures
of Europe and, during its prescribed term of forty
days, the richest traffic on the face of the earth is
begun and finilhed, with that simplicity of tranf-
a&tion and that unbounded confidence, which ac-
company extensive commerce'. The Flota holds ad tima
ij course to Vera Cruz. The treasures and com-

y S$e YOTE LXIV.

modifies

* o o K modities of New Spain, and the depending pro.

Vl_ . vinces, which were deposited at Puebla de los An-

geles in expectation of its arrival, are carried thither,
and the commercial operations of Vera Cruz, con-
du&ed in the fame manner with those of Porto-bello,
are inferior to them only in importance and value.
Both fleets, as soon as they have completed their
cargoes from America, rendezvous at the Havanna,
and return in company to Europe.

Baifeflss THE trade of Spain with her colonies, while
angmemnt. thus fettered and reftri&ed, came necessarily to be

conduated with the fame spirit, and upon the fame
principles, as that of an exclusive company. Be-
ing confined to a single port, it was of course
thrown into a few hands, and almost the whole of
it was gradually engrossed by a finall number of
wealthy houses, formerly in Seville, and now in
Cadiz. These by combinations, which they can
easily form, may altogether prevent that competi-
tion which preserves commodities at their natural
price; and by ading in concert, to which they are
prompted by their mutual interelt, they may raise
or lower the value of them at pleasure. In confe-
quence of this, the price of European goods in
America is always high, and often exorbitant. A
hundred, two hundred, and even three hundred
per cent. are profits not uncommon in the com-
merce of Spain with her colonies . From the
fame ingrofling spirit it frequently happens, that

B. Ulloa Bgetablif. part ii. p. 191.

traders

traders of the second order, whose warehouses do a· o oI
not contain a complete affortmcnt of commodities i
for the American market, cannot purchase from
the more opulent merchants such goods as they
want, at a lower price than that for which they
are fold in the colonies. With the fame vigilant
jealousy that an exclul&ve company guards against
the intrusion of the free trader, those overgrown
monopolists endeavour to check the progress of
every one whose encroachments they dread b. This
restraint of the American commerce to one port,
not only assets its domestic state, but limits its
foreign operations. A monopolist may acquire
more, and certainly will hazard less, by a confined
trade which yields exorbitant profit, than by an
extensive commerce in which he receives only a
moderate return of gain. It is often his interest
not to enlarg, but to circumscribe the -phere of
his activity; and, inftcad of calling forth more
vigorous exertions of commercial industry, it may
be the objc of his attention to check and Jet
bounds to them. By some such maxim, the mer-
cantile policy of Spain seems to have regulated its
intercourse with America. Instead of furnishing
the colonies with European goods in such quantity
as might render both the price and the profit mo-
derate; the merchants of Seville and Cadiz seem
to have supplied them with a sparing hand, that
the eagerness of competition amongst cuflomers
obliged to purchase in a scanty market, might en.

Smith's Inquiry, ii. 171. Campomanes, Educ. Popul.

able

VO1 able the Spanish fators to dispose of their cargoes
rY__ with exorbitant gain. About the middle of the lat

century, when the exclufiv trade to America from
Seville was in is mtoft flourishing state, the burden
of the two united squadrons of the Galeons and
Flota, did not exceed twenty-fevcn thousand five
hundred tons '. The supply which such a fleet could
carry, mufft have been very inadequate to the de-
mands of those populous and extensive colonies,
which depended upon it for all the luxuries, and
many of the necessaries of life.

<nenm SPAIN early became sensible of her declension
° from her former prosperity, and many refpe&abk

and virtuous citizens employed their thoughts in
devising methods for reviving the decaying in-
duftry and commerce of their country. From the
violence of the remedies proposed, ye may judge
how desperate and fatal the malady appeared.
Some, confounding a violation of police with cri-
minality againit the fate, contended, that in or-
der to check illicit commerce, every person con-
:icted of carrying it on, ihould be punished with
death, and confiscation of all his effets'. Others,
forgetting the distinCtion between civil offences and
aas of impiety, infifled, that contraband trade
Ihould be ranked among the crimes refrved for
the cognizance of the Inquisition; that filch as
were guilty of it might be tried and punifled, ac-
cording to the secret and firnmary form in which

c Campomanes, Educ. Popul. i. 43. ii. 1o0.
i M. de Santa Cruz Commercia Sulcto, p. i4z.

tillt

that dreadful tribunal exercises its jurifdiftiion'. o o s
Others, uninftrutd by observing the pernicious h _
cffcts of monopolies in every cqurtry where they
have been eftablibcd, have proptfed to ves the
trade with America in excJufive companies, which
interelt would render the most vigilant guardians of
the Spanish commerce against the incroachment of
the interlopers .

BESIDES these wild proje&s, many schemes, bet-

ter digested and more beneficial, were fuggctcd.
But under the feeble monarchs, with whom the
reign of the Austrian line in Spain closed, inca-
pacity and indecision are conspicuous in every de.
parment of government. Instead of taking for
their model the aftive administration of Charles V.
they affected to imitate the cautious procrastinating
wisdom of Philip JI. and destitute of his talents,
they deliberated perpetually, but determined no-
thing. No remedy was applied to the evils under
which the national commerce, domestic as well as
foreign, languished. These evils continued to in-
crease, and Spain, with dominions more extensive
and more opulent than any European fate, pof-
felhd neither vigour, nor money', nor indutry.
At length, the violence of a great national con-
vullion rouzed the fumbering genius of Spain.
The efforts of the two contending parties in the,
civil war, kindled by the dispute concerning the

* Moncada Reftauracion politics de Bfpnana, p. 41.
r Zavalla yAugnon Reprefentacion, &c. p. 190.
* See NOTE LXV.

fucccflion

0 0 R succession of the crown at the beginning of thi
h*-y century, called forth, in forme degree, the ancient

spirit and vigour of the nation. While men were
thus forming, capable of adopting sentiments more
liberal than those which had influenced the councils
of the monarchy during the course of a century,
Spain derived from an unexpected source the
means of availing itself of their talents. The va-
rious powers who favoured the pretensions either
of the Austrian or Bourbon candidate for the Spa.
nifh throne, sent formidable fleets and armies to
their support; France, England, and Holland re-
mitted immense fums to Spain. These were
spent in the provinces which became the theatr
of war. Part of the American treasure, of which
foreigners had drained the kingdom, flowed back
thither. From this era, one of the mot intelli-
gent Spanilh authors dates the revival of tbe mo-
narchy; and, however humiliating the truth may
be, he acknowledges, that it is to her enemies his
country is indebted for the acquisition of a: fund
of circulating specie, in some measure adequate to
the exigencies of the public '.

Step to- As. oon as the Bourbons obtained quiet poses-
roemcnt sion of the throne, they dircerned this change in
Bourbon the spirit of the people, and in the state of the na-
monarchs, tion, and took advantage of it; for although that

family has not given monarchs to Spain remark-
able for superiority of genius, they have all been

Campomanes, i. ao.

beneficent

beneficent princes, attentive to the happiness of B o o
their Fubjcs, and solicitous to promote it. It E- Y~
was, accordingly, the first object of Philip V. to
suppress an innovation which had crept in during
the courre of the war, and had overturned the
whole system of the Sparnif commerce with Ame-
rica. The English and Dutch, by their fupe- byecxdiud

foreignesr

riority in naval power, having acquired such corn- ron trrde
mand of the sea, as to cut off all intercourse be- itr' Pwt
tween Spain and her colonies, Spain, in order to
furnilh her fubjets in America those necessaries of
life, without which they could not exist, and as
the only means of receiving from thence any part
of their treasure, departed so far from the usual
rigour of its maxims as to open the trade with
Peru to her allies the French. The merchants of
St. Malo, to whom Louis XIV. granted the pri-
vilege of this lucrative commerce, engaged in ir
with vigour, and carried it on upon principles very
different from those of the Spaniards. They si.p-
plied Peru with European commodities at a mode-
rate price, and not in tfinted quantity. The goods
which they imported were conveyed to every pro-
vince of Spanish. America, in such abundance as
had never been known in any former period. If
this intercourse had been continued, the exportation
of European commodities from Spain must have
ceased, and the dependence of the colonies on the
mother-country have been at an end. The mo ,ft .
peremptory injuntions were therefore iflued, pro-
hibiting the admiflion of foreign vefrls into any

3 port

B oo K port of Peru or Chili k, and a Spaniih fquadro!

vv 1 was employed to clear the South Sea of intruder,

whose aid was no longer neceffiry.
by checking BUT though, on the ceiation of the war, which

trabnd was terminated by the treaty of Utrecht, Spain

obtained relief from one encroachment on her
commercial system, she was exposed to another,
which the deemed hardly less pernicious. As an
inducement that might prevail with Queen Anne
to conclude a peace, which France and Spain de.
fired with equal ardour, Philip V. not only con-

articularly veyed to Great Britain the Aiento, or contra& for
of the Eng-
tlhArlto supplying the Spanish colonies with negroes, which
m"Pny. had formerly been enjoyed by France, but granted

it the more extraordinary privilege of fending an-
nually to the fair of Porto-bello, a Chip of five
hundred tons, laden with European commodities.
In consequence of this, Britith facories were efta-
blifhed at Carthagena, Panama, Vera Cruz, Bue-
nos Ayres, and other Spanish settlements. The
veil with which Spain had hitherto covered the
slate and tranfacions of her colonies was removed.
The agents of a rival nation, residing in the towns
of most extensive trade, and of chief resort, had
the best opportunities of becoming acquainted with
the interior condition of the American provinces,
of observing their fated and occasional wants, and
of knowing what commodities might be imported

k Frezier Voy. 56. 3. UIIo Rebh. U. Io, & A. Ado
y Herrcra. Avifo, ic, 236.

into

into them with the greatest advantage. In confe- Ba K
quence of information so authentic and expedi- --
tious, the merchants of Jamaica and other Eng-
lilh colonies who traded to the Spanish main, were
enabled to assort and proportion their cargoes so
exa&ly to the demands of the market, that the
contraband commerce was carried on with a faci-
lity, and to an extent unknown in any former pe-
riod. This however was not the most fatal confe-
quence of the Afflento to the trade of Spain. The
agents of the British South-Sea Company, under
cover of the importation which they were autho-
rifed to make by the ship sent annually to Porto-
bello, poured in their commodities on the Spanilh
continent, without limitation or restraint. Inifead
of a ship of five hundred tons, as stipulated in the
treaty, they usually employed one which exceeded
nine hundred tons in burden. She was accom-
panied by two or three smaller vefftls, which,
mooring in some neighbouring creek, supplied her
clandeflinely with fresh bales of goods, to replace
such as were fold. The infpe&ors of the fair, and
officers of the revenue, gained by exorbitant pre-
sents, connived at the fraud '. Thus, partly by
the operations of the company, and partly by the
activity of private interlopers, almoR the whole
trade of Spanish America was engrossed by so-
reigners. The immense commerce of the Ga-
leons, formerly the pride of Spain, and the envy
of other nations, funk to nothing, and the fqua- '277.

See NOTE LXVI.
VOL. nl. Y dron

A

B o O K dron itself reduced from fifteen thousand to two

VIII

- thousand tons ", served hardly any purpose but to

fetch home the royal revenue arising from the fifth
on silver.

Guarda WHILE Spain observed those encroachments,
Coflas em-
ployed lor and felt so sensibly their pernicious effects, it was
this pu ob
p,.P"'` impossible not to make some effort to restrain

them. Her firit expedient was to station Ihips of
force, under the appellation of Guarda Costas, upon
the coalts of those provinces, to which interlopers
most frequently resorted. As private interest con.
curred with the duty which they owed to the pub-
lic, in rendering the officers who commanded those
vessels vigilant and a&ive, some check was given
to the progress of the contraband trade, though in
dominions so extensive, and so acceflible by sea,
hardly any number of cruisers was sufficient to guard
against its inroads in every quarter. This interrup-
tion of an intercourse, which had been carried on
with so much facility, that the merchants in the
British colonies were accustomed to confider it al-
most as an allowed branch of commerce, excited
murmurs and complaints. These authorised, in
some measure, and rendered more interefsing, by
several unjustifiable aAs of violence committed by
the captains of the Spaniih Guarda Costas, pre-
,,9. Ecipitated Great Britain into a war with Spain; in

consequence of which the latter obtained a final
release from the Afliento, and was left at liberty

" Alcedo y Ilerrera, p. 359. Campomanes, i. 436.

to

to regulate the commerce of her colonies, with- B oo K.
out being restrained by any engagement with a . -ij
foreign power.

As the formidable encroachments of the Englith Thet use
on their American trade, had discovered to the ips intro-

duced.

Spaniards the vast consumption of European goods
in their colonies, and taught them the advantage of
accommodating their importations to the occa-
fional demand of the various provinces, they per-
ceived the neceflity of devising some method of
supplying their colonies, different from their an-
cient one, of fending thither periodical fleets.
That mode of communication had been'found not
only to be uncertain, as the departure of the Ga-
leons and Flota was sometimes retarded by various
accidents, and often prevented by the wars which
raged in Europe; but long experience had Ihewn
it to be ill adapted to afford America a regular
and timely supply of what it wanted. The scar-
city of European goods in the Spanilh settlements
frequently became excessive; their price rose to an
enormous height; the vigilant eye of mercantile
attention did not fail to observe this favourable
opportunity, an ample supply was poured in by
interlopers from the English, the French, and
Dutch islands; and when the Galeons at length
arrived, they found the markets so glutted by this
illicit commerce, that there was no demand for the
commodities with which they wrere loaded. In
order to remedy this, Spain has permitted a con-
fiderable part of her commerce with America, to

Y a be

B o x be carried on by register Jhips. These are fitted

.-y- · out, during the intervals between the stated fe..

sons when the Galeons and Flora fail, by merchants
in Seville or Cadiz, upon obtaining a licence from
the council of the Indies, for which they pay a
very high premium, and are deflined for those ports
in America where any extraordinary demand is fore-
seen or expeted. By this expedient, such a re-
gular supply of the commodities, for which there
is the greatest demand, is conveyed to the American
market, that the interloper is no longer allured by
the fame profpe& of exceflive gain, or the people in
the colonies urged by the fame necessity to engage
in the hazardous adventures of contraband trade.

T&c Cale IN proportion as experience manifcfted the ad-
-%h abo.
hed. vantages of carrying on trade in this mode, the

number of register ships increased; and at length,
in the year 1748, the Galeons, after having been
employed upwards of two centuries, were finally
laid aside. From that period there has been no
intercourse with Chili and Peru but by single hips,
dispatched from time to time as occasion requires,
and when the merchants expet a profitable market
will open. These flips fail round Cape Horn, and
convey direcly to the ports in the South Sea the
produalions and manufactures of Europe, for which
the people fettled in those countries were formerly
obliged to repair to Porto-bello or Panama. These
towns, as has ben formerly observed, must gradu-
ally decline, when deprived of that commerce to
which they owed their prosperity. This difadvan,

rage

sage however is more than compensated by.the bone- B o o0
ficial effeCts of this new arrangement, as the whole '
continent of South America receives new supplies
of European commodities, with so much regularity,
and in such abundance, as muf not only contri-
bute greatly to the happiness, but increase the po-
pulation of all the colonies fettled there. But as
all the register (hips destined for the South Seas,
must still take their departure from Cadiz, and are
obliged to return thither%, this branch of the Ame-
rican commerce, even in its new and improved
form, continues fubjeLt to the restraints of a species
of monopoly, and feels those pernicious effe&s of
it, which I have already described.

NOR has the attention of Spainr been confined to Schemes or

reviving

regulating the trade with its more flourishing colo- commerce,
nies, it has extended likewise to the reviving com-
merce in those settlements where it was negleted,
or had decayed. Among the new taftes which the
people of Europe have acquired, in consequence of
importing the productions of those countries which
they conquered in America, that for chocolate is
one of the most universal. The use of this liquor
made with a paste, formed of the nut, or almond of
the cacao-tree, compounded with various ingredi-
ents, the Spaniards first learned from the Mexicans;
and it has appeared to them, and to the other Euro-
pean nations, so palatable, so nourishing, and'fo
wholefonie, that it has become a commercialarticle

" Campomaqne, i. 43. 440.

Y 3 of

B o o K of considerable importance. The cacao-tree grows

_,
- spontaneously in several parts of the torrid zone;

but the nuts of the best quality, next to those of
Guatimala, on the South Sea, are produced in the
rich plains of Caraccas, a province of Tierra Firme.
In corifequence of this acknowledged superiority in
the quality of cacao in that province, and its com-
munication with the Atlantic, which facilitates the
conveyance to Europe, the culture of the cacao
there is more extensive than in any diftrit of Ame-
rica. But the Dutch, by the vicinity of their set-
tlements in the small islands of Curazoa and Buen-
Ayre, to the coast of Caraccas, gradually ingrolled
the greatest part of the cacao trade. The traffic
with the mother-country for this valuable commo-
dity ceased almost entirely; and such was the fu-
pine negligence of the Spaniards, or the defe&s of
their commercial arrangements, that they were ob-
liged to receive from the hands of foreigners this
production of their own colonies, at an exorbitant
htena!'lii. price. In order to remedy an evil no less dif-

mpany of graceful, than pernicious to his subje&s, Philip V.
Caraca4. in the year, I728, granted to a body of merchants,

an exclusive right to the commerce with Caraccas
and Cumana, on condition of their employing at
their own expence, a sufficient number of armed
veflels to clear the coast of interlopers. This so-
ciety, distinguished sometimes by the name of the
Company of Guipufcoa, from the province of Spain
in which it is established, and sometimes by that of
the Company of Caraccas, from the diftrit of Ame-
rica to which it trades, has carried on its operations

az2~~~~~ with

with such vigour and success, that Spain has reco- a o o0
vered an important branch of commerce, which lhe _
had suffered to be wrested from her, and is plenti-
fully supplied with an article of extensive confump-
tion at a moderate price. Not only the parent
state, but the colony of Caraccas, has derived great
advantages from this institution; for although, at
the firif afpe&, it may appear to be one of those
monopolies, whose tendency is to check the spirit
of industry, instead of calling it forth to new exer-
dons, it has been prevented from operating in this
manner by several salutary regulations, framed upon
foresight of such bad effe&ts, and of purpose to
obviate them. The planters in the Caraccas are
not left to depend entirely on the company, either
for the importation of European commodities, or
the sale of their own produtions. The inhabit-
ants of the Canary islands have the privilege of
fending thither annually a register ship of confider-
able burden; and from Vera Cruz in New Spain,
a free trade is permitted in every port compre-
hended in the charter of the company. In confc-
quence of this, there is such a competition, that
both with refpecl to what the colonies purchase,
and what they fell, the price seems to be fixed at
its natural and equitable rate. The company has
not the power of raising the former, or of degra-
ding the latter at pleasure; and accordingly, since
it was established, the increase of culture, of popu-
lation, and of live stock, in the province of Carac-
cas, has been very considerable '.

Sec NOTE LXVII.

Y 4 BUT

B O K BUT as it is slowly that nations relinquish any
Jvi... system which time has rendered venerable, and as it
Enlarge- is ifill more slowly that commerce can be diverted
mnent of
commer.ial from the channel in which it has long been accuf.
ideas in
Spain. ftomed to flow; Philip V. in his new regulations

concerning the American trade, paid such deference
to the ancient maxim of Spain,' concerning the li-
mitation of all importation from the New World to
one harbour, as to oblige both the register ships
which returned from Peru, and those of the Gui-
pufcoan Company from Caraccas, to deliver their
cargoes in the port of Cadiz. Since his reign, fen.
timents more liberal and enlarged begin to spread
in Spain. The spirit of philosophical inquiry,
which it is the glory of the present age to have
turned from frivolous or abftrule speculations, to
the business and affairs of men, has extended its
influence beyond the Pyrenees. In the refearchto
of ingenious authors, concerning the police or
commerce of nations, the errors and defe&s of the
Spanilh fyflem with refpe6t to both met every eye,
and have not only been exposed with feveriry, but
are held up as a warning to other states. The Spa-
niards, Rtung with the reproaches of these authors
or convinced by their arguments, and admonifficd
by lcveral enlightencd writers of their own coun-
try, fine at length to have discovered the defiruc-
tive tendency of those narrow maxims, which, by
cramping commerce in all its operations, have lo
long retarded its progress. It is to the monard:
now on the throne, that Spain is indebted for the f il:
public regulation formed in conli-quelce of Il;cl1
enlarged ideas. A\ Hlli

WHILE Spain adhered with rigour to her an- X o o
cient maxims concerning her commerce with ^
America, The was f6 much afraid of opening any EZihr-
channel, by which an illicit trade might find ad- gula pa.k-
milion into the colonies, that Ihe almost shut her, bot.
felfout from any intercourse with them, but that
which was carried on -by her annual fleets. There
was no ellablifhment for a regular communication
of either public or private intelligence, between
the mother-country and its American settlements
From the want of this necessary institution, the
operations of the state, as well as the bufinefa of
individuals, were retarded or condu&ted un&kil-
fully, and Spain often received from foreigners her
firit information with refpet to very interesting
events in her own colonies. Rut though this de-
sect in police was fenibly felt, and the remedy for
it was obvious, that jealous spirit with which the
Spanifl monarchs guarded the -exclofiv trade,
restrained them from applying it. At length
Charles III. surmounted those considerations which
had deterred his predecessors, and in the year 1764
appointed packet-boats to be dispatched on the
firit day of each month, from Corugna to the
Havanna or Porto-Rico. From thence .letters are
conveyed in smaller velfels to Vera Cruz and
Porto.bello, and transmitted by post through the
kingdbms of Tierra Firma, Granada, Peru, and
New Spain. With no less regularity. packet-boats
fail once in two months to Rio de la Plata, for the
accommodation of the provinces to the e'alt of the
Andes. Thus provision is made for a speedy and

certain

B o o K certain circulation of intelligence throughout the
i., ... vast dominions of Spain, from which equal advan.

tages must redound to the political and mercantile
interest of the kingdom P. With this new arrange.
ment, a scheme of extending commerce has been
more immediately conneced. Each of the packet.
boats, which are vessels of some considerable bur-
den, is allowed to take in half a loading of such
commodities as are the produ& of Spain, and most
in demand in the ports whither they are bound.
In return for these they may bring home to Co-
rugna an equal quantity of American produ.tions9.
This may be confidered as the first relaxation of
those rigid laws, which confined the trade with the
New World to a single port, and the first attempt
to admit the reft of the kingdom to some share
in it.

Free trade IT was soon followed by one more decisive. In

"rmitted
to evera the year 1765, Charles III. laid open the trade to
~oinces the windward islands, Cuba, Hispaniola, Porto-

Rico, Margarita, and Trinidad, to his fubjets in
every province of Spain. He permitted them to
fail from certain ports in each province, which are
specified in the edict, at any season, and with what-
ever cargo they deemed most proper, without any
other warrant than a simple clearance from the
custom-house of the place whence they took their
departure. He released them from the numerous

P Ponz Viage de Efpagna, vi. Prol. p. 15.
' Append. ii. ala Educ. Pop. p. 31.

and

and oppreflive duties imposed on goods exported B o o K
to America, and in place of the whole, substituted
a moderate tax of fix in the hundred on the com-
modities sent from Spain. He allowed them to
return either to the fame port, or to any other
where they might h6pe for a more advantageous
market, and there to enter the homeward cargo,
on payment of the usual duties. This ample pri-
vilege, which at once broke through all the fences
which the jealous policy of Spain had been labour-
ing, for two centuries and a half, to throw round
its commercial intercourCe with the New World
was soon after extended to Louisiana, and to the pro-
vinces of Yucatan aad Campeachyr.

THE propriety of this innovation, which may be Bneicial
confidered as the most liberal effort of Spanilh le- cffcattit-
gilation, has appeared from its effecs. Prior to
the edi& in favour of the free trade, Spain derived
hardly any benefit from its negle6ted colonies in
Hispaniola, Porto-Rico, Margarita, and Trinidad.
Its commerce with Cuba was inconsiderable, and
that of Yucatan and Campeachy was ingroflcd al-
molt intirely by interlopers. But as soon as a ge-
neral liberty of trade was permitted, the inter-
course with those provinces revived, and has gone
on with a rapidity of progression, of which there
are few examples in the history of nations. In less
than ten years, the trade of Cuba has been more
than tripled. Even in those settlements where,

Append, H. a l Educ. Pop. 37. 54. 9'.

from

Bo o K from the langui(hing state of indultry, greater es.
V,1 .* forts were requisite to restore its acivity, their

commerce has been doubled. It is computed,
that such a number of ships is already employed in
the free trade, that the tonnage of them far exceeds
that of the Galeons and Flota, at the most flourilh.
ing era of their commerce. The benefits of this
arrangement are not confined to a few merchants,
established in a favourite port. They are diffused
through every province of the kingdom; and by
opening a new market for their various produc-
tions and manufa&ures, must encourage and add
vivacity to the industry of the farmer and artificer.
Nor does the kingdom profit only by what it ex-
ports, it derives advantage likewise from what it
receives in return, and has ,tlie profpec of being
soon able to supply itself with several commodities
of extensive confunptton, for which it formerly
depended on foreigners. The consumption offugar
'in Spain is perhaps as great in proportion to the
·nmnber of its inhabitants, as that of any European
kingdom. But though poffffed of countries in
the 'New World, whoce foil and climate are mol
proper for rearing the sugar cane; though the
dormeftic cnlture of that valuable plant in the king-
dom of Granada was once considerable; such has
been the fatal tendency of ill-judged institutions in
America, and fuich the pressure of improper taxes
in Europe, that Spain has loft almost entirely this
branch of industry, which 'has enriched other na-
tions. This commodity, which has now become
an article of primary neccfity in Europe, the Spl-

niardls

niards were obliged to purchaif of foreigners, and B o o K
lad the mortification to fee their country drained -...'.
anually of great fums on that account'. But if
that spirit, which the permilion of free trade has
put in motion, lhall perecvcre in its efforts with
the fame vigour, the cultivation of sugar in Cuba
and Porto-Rico may increase so much, that in
a few years, it is probable, that their growth of
4ugars may be equal to the demand of the king-
dom.

SPAIN has been induced, by her experience of Feetnde

permitted

the beneficial consequences resulting from having letwcen tht
relaxed somewhat of the rigour of her ancient laws coI
with refpe& to the commerce of the mother-coun-
try with the colonies, to permit a more liberal in-
ttrcourfe of one colony with another. By one of
the jealous maxims of the old system, all the pro-
vinces situated on the South Seas were prohibited,
under the most severe penalties, from holding any
communication with one another. Though each
of there yield peculiar produtions, the reciprocal
exchange of which might have added to the happi-
ness of their refpedive inhabitants, or have facili-
tated their progress in indufry, so solicitous was
the Council of the Indies to prevent their receiving
any supply of their wants, but by the period;cal
flcts fi-om Europe, that in order to guard against
this, it cruelly debarred the Spaniards in Peru, in
the southern provinces of New Spain, in Guatilnala,

Uztariz, c. c4.

and

a o o K and the New Kingdom of Granada, from such a

Vi i, correspondence with their fellow-fubjects, as tended

manifestly to their mutual prosperity. Of all the
numerous restrictions devised by Spain for securing
the exclusive trade with her American settlements,
none perhaps was more illiberal, none seems to
have been more sensibly felt, or to have produced
more hurtful effects. This grievance, coeval with
the settlements of Spain in the countries situated on
the Pacific Ocean, is at last redrifled. In the year
1774, Charles III. published an edi&, grantingto
the four great provinces which I have mentioned,
the privilege of a free trade with each other '. What
may be the effees of opening this communication
between countries destined by their situation for
reciprocal intercourse, cannot yet be determined
by experience. They can hardly fail of being be-
neficial and extensive. The motives for granting
this permission are manifestly no less laudable, than
the principle on which it is founded is liberal; and
both discover the progress of a spirit in Spain, far
elevated above the narrow prejudices and maxims
on which her system for regulating the trade, and
conducing the government of her colonies, was
originally founded.

New regu- AT the fame time that Spain has been intent on
ationt cor-
ccrning thl introducing regulations, suggested by more enlarged
fCtheiolE o views of policy, into her system of American
lics.

t Real Cedula penes me. Pontz Viage de Efpagna, vi.
Prologo. p.2. NOTE LXVIII.

commerce,

commerce, ihe has not been inattentive to the B o
O

Viia.

interior government of her colonies. Here too i<
there was much room for reformation and im-
provement, and Don Joseph Galvez, who has now
the dire&ion of the department for Indian affairs
in Spain, has enjoyed the best opportunities, not
only of observing the defects and corruption in the
political frame of the colonies, but of discovering
the sources of those evils. After being employed
seven years in the New World on an extraordinary
million, and with very extensive powers, as in-
fpe&or-general of New Spain; after visiting in
person the remote provinces of Cinaloa, Sonora,
and California, and making several important al-
terations in the slate of the police and revenue; he
began his ministry with a general reformation of
the tribunals of juRice in America. In confe- Rtfor~a-
quence of the progress of population and wealth courtscf
in the colonies, the business of the Courts of Au- i"f"c'
dience has increased so much, that the number of
judges of which they were originally composed,
has been found inadequate to the growing labours
and duties of the office, and the salaries fettled upon
them have been deemed inferior to the dignity of
the station. As a remedy for both, he obtained a
royal edict, establishing an additional number of
judges in each court of Audience, with higher titles,
and more ample appointments ".

To the fame intelligent minister Spain is in- New di;ra.
debted for a new distribution of government in its go'ro

m emt.
' Gazeta de Madrid, 19th March 1776.

An:eric.a

t

0 0 K American provinces. Even since the eftablihment
-. of a third viceroyalty in the New Kingdom of

Granada, so great is the extent of the Spanish do.
minions in the New World, that several places
fubje& to the jurifdiAion of each viceroy, were at
such an enormous distance from the capitals in
which they refidcd,'that neither their attention, nor
their authority, could reach so far. Some pro.
vinces subordinate to the viceroy of New Spain,
lay above two thousand miles from Mexico. There
were countries fubje& to the viceroy of Peru still
farther from Lima. The people in those remote
diftriats could hardly be said to enjoy the benefit of
civil government. The oppreflion and insolence
of its inferior ministers they often feel, and rather
submit to these in silence, than involve themselves
in the expence and trouble of resorting to the dif-
tant capitals, where alone they can find redress.

New vice. As a remedy for this, a fourth iceroyalty has been
royalty,
Aug. 1776, ereted, to the jurifdicion of which are fubje&ed
on Rio de la
PAta. the provinces of Rio de la Plata, Buenos-Ayrcs,

Paraguay, Tucuman, Potofi, St' Cruz de la Sierra,
Charcas, and the towns of Mendoza and St. Juan.
By this well-judged arrangement, two advantages
are gained. All the inconveniencies occasioned by
the remote situation of those provinces, which had
been long felt, and long complained of, are, in a
great measure, removed. The countries most
distant from Lima are separated from the viceroy-
alty of Peru, and united under a superior, whose
feat of government at Buenos-Ayres, will be com-
modious and acceflible. The contraband trade

g~~~~9 ~with

with the Portuguese, which was become so exten- B o o 1
five, as muf have put a final.ftop to the exportation -
of commodities from Spain to herfouthern colonies,
may be checked more thoroughly, and with greater
facility, when the supreme magiltrate, by his vi-
cinity to the places in which it is carried on, can
view its progress and effets with his own eyes.
Don Pedro Zevallos, who has been raised to this
new dignity, with appointments equal to those of
the other viceroys, is well acquainted both with
the slate and the interest of the countries over
which he is to preside, having served in them long,
and with dittinfion. By this dismemberment,
lucceeding that which took place at the ereaion of
the viceroyalty of the New Kingdom of Granada,
almost two-third parts of the territories, originally
fubje& to the viceroys of Peru, are now lopped off
from theirjurifdition.

THE limits of the viceroyalty ofNew Spain have Newgo-
likewise been considerably circumscribed, and with provinc
no less propriety and discernment. Four of its s5ooa",' &
most remote provinces, Sonora, Cinaloa, Califor-
lia, and New Navarre, have been formed into a
liparate government. The Chevalier de Croix, who
is intruded with this command, is not dignified with
the title of viceroy, nor does he enjoy the appoint-
ments belonging to that rank, but his jurifdition
is altogether independent on the viceroyalty of New
Spain. The erection of this last government seems
to have been suggested, not only by the confidera-
tion of the remote situation of those provinces from

'at, i. z Mexico 1

B 0o K Mexico; but by attention to the late discoveries made

,i * there, which I have mentionedx. Countries con.

taining the richest mines of gold that have hitherto
been difcovcred in the New World, and which pro-
bably may arise into great importance, required the
immediate infpe&ion of a governor, to whom they
flould be specially committed. As every confider-
ation of duty, ofintereft, and of vanity, must concur
in prompting those new governors to encourage
such exertions as tend to diffuse opulence and pro-
fperity through the provinces committed to their
charge, the beneficial effects of this arrangement may
be considerable. Many diftrits in America, long
deprefl'd by the languor and feebleness natural to
provinces which compose the extremities of an over-
grown empire, may be animated with vigour and
activity, when brought so near the feat of power, as
to feel its invigorating influence.

Afor'mnPt SUCH, since the acceflion of the princes of the
nftic po- House of Bourbon to the throne of Spain, has been

the progress of their regulations, and the gradual
expansion of their views with refpec to the com-
merce and government of their American colonies.
Nor has their attention been so entirely engrossed
by what related to the more remote parts of their
dominions, as to render them negletful of what was
still more important, the reformation of domestic
errors and defects in policy. Fully sensible of the
eaufes to which the declension of Spain, from her

B Book vii . a 29.

1 2 former

former prosperity, ought to be imputed; they have B o K
made it a great object of their policy, to revive a ,
spirit of industry among their fubjeds, and to give
such extent and perfection to their manufatures,
as may enable them to supply the demands of
America from their own flock, and to exclude so.
reigners from a branch of commerce which has been
so fatal to the kingdom. This they have endea-
voured to accomplish, by a variety of edi&s issued
since the peace of Utrecht. They have granted
bounties for the encouragement of some branches of
industry; they have lowered the taxes on others;
they have either entirely prohibited, or have loaded
with additional duties, such foreign manufactures
as come in competition with their own; they have
instituted societies for the improvement of trade
and agriculture; they have planted colonies of hus-
bandmen in some uncultivated diftri6ts of Spain,
and divided among them the waste fields; they have
had recourse to every expedient, devised by comr
mercial wisdom, or commercialjealoufy, for reviv-
ing their own industry, and difcountenancing that
of other nations. These, however, it is not my
province to explain, or to inquire into their pro-
priety and effecs. There is no effort of legifation
more arduous, no experiment in policy more un-
certain, than an attempt to revive the spirit of in-
dufry where it has declined, or to introduce it
where it is unknown. Nations, already polfeffed of
extensive commerce, enter into competition with
such advantages, derived fiom the large capitals
and cxtenfive credit of their merchants, the dexte-

: rity

B o o K rity of their manufaiturers, the alertness acquired

ll.' by habit in every department of business, that the

state which aims at rivalling, or supplanting them,
mutt expe&t to struggle with many difficulties, and
be content to advance slowly. If the quantity of
producive industry, now in Spain, be compared
with that of the kingdom under the last lifilefs mo-
narchs of the Auli ian line, its progress must appear
considerable, and is sufficient to alarm the jealousy,
and to call forth the molt vigorous efforts, of the
nations now in pofflffion of the lucrative trade
which the Spaniards aim at wresting from them.
One circumstance may tender those exertions or
Spain an object of move serious attention to tr:
other European powers. They are not be afcribei
wholly to the influence of the crown and its n;iin-
fters. The sentiments and spirit of the people feenl
to second the provident care of their monarchs,
and to give it greater effect. The nation lhs
adopted more liberal ideas, not only with refpec to
commerce, but domestic policy. In all the latec
Spanifl writers, dcfecs in the arrangements of thei;
country concerning both are acknowledged, and
remedies proposcd, which ignorance rendered tlleir
ancestors incapable of difccrning, and pride would
not have allowed them to confefsy. But after all thl:
the Spaniards have done, much remains to do
Many pernicious inltitutions and abuses, deeply in-
corporated with the vfftem of internal policy and
.axation, which has been long eftablited in Spain,

Y See NO'rE LXIX.

j3 rn.

;nuft be abolished, before industry and manufacures B o o K
can recover an extensive ativity. ,-v-,

STILL, however, the commercial regulations of Contraband

Spain with refpeEt to her colonies, are too rigid "'
and systematical to be carried into complete exe-
cution. The legislature that loads trade with im-
positions too heavy, or fetters it by restrictions too
[evere, defeats its own intention; and is only mul-
tiplying the inducements to violate its statutes, and
proposing an high premium to encourage illicit
traffic. The Spaniards, both in Europe and Ame-
rica, being circumscribed in their mutual intercourse
by the jealousy of the crown, or oppreired by its
exacions, have their invention continually on the
stretch how to elude its edicts. The vigilance and
ingenuity of private interet discover means of
effeding this, which public wisdom cannot foresee,
nor public authority prevent. This spirit counter-
acting that of the laws, pervades the commerce of
Spain with America in all its branches; and from
the highest departments in government, descends
to the lowelt. The very officers appointed to check
contraband trade, are ofte. employed as instruments
in carrying it on; and the boards instituted to re-
strain and punilh it, are the channels through which
it flows. The king is supposed, by the most in-
telligent Spanish writers, to be defrauded, by vari-
(us artifices, of more than one half of the revenue
which he ought to receive from Arnerica ; and as

Solorz. de Ind. Jure, ii, lib. v.

z3 long

Ba o K long as it is the interest of so many persons to screen

VIII.
* 1 « those artifices from deteetion, the knowledge of

them will never reach the throne. " How many
'" ordinances, fays Corita, how many inftruaions,

how many letters from our sovereign, are sent in

" order to corre& abuses, and how little are they
<' observed, and what fmalladvantage is derived from
" them! To me the old observation appears just,
" that where there are many physicians, and many
(c medicines, there is a want of health; where there
"( are many laws, and many judges, there is want
" of justice. We have viceroys, presidents, go-
" vernors, oydors, corrigidors, alcaldes, and thou-
' sands ofalguazils abound every where; but not-
c withstanding all there, public abuses continue to
" multiply'." Time has increased the evils which
he lamented as early as the reign of Philip II. A
spirit of corruption has infeCted all the colonies of
Spain in America. Men far removed from the
feat of government; impatient to acquire wealth,
that they may return speedily from what they are
apt to confider as a state of exile in a remote un-
healthful country; allured by opportunities too
tempting to be resifted, and reduced by the ex-
ample ofthofe around them; find their Sentiments of
honour and of duty gradually relax. In private
life, they give themselves up to a dissolute luxury,
while in their public conduct they become unmind-
ful of what they owe to their sovereign and to their
Country.

' MS. pence me.

BIFORE

BEFORE I close this account of the Spaniih trade B o o
o

VIIL

in America, there remains one detached, but im- -
portant branch of it, to be mentioned. Soon after twdee. w
his accession to the throne, Philip II. formed a n

ap d

scheme of planting a colony in the Philippine islands, pines
which had been negle&ed since the time of their
discovery; and he accomplished it by means of an
armament fitted out from New Spainb. Manila, 564.
in the ifand of Luconia, was the ltation chosen for
the capital of this new establishment. From it an
a&ive commercial intercourse began with the Chi-
nefe, and a considerable number of that induitrious
people, allured by the profpe& of gain, fettled in
the Philippine islands under the Spanish protection.
They supplied the colony so amply with all the
valuable produEtions and manufatures of the East,
as enabled it to open a trade with America, by a
course of navigation, the longest from land to land
on our globe. In the infancy of this trade, it was
carried on with Callao, on the coast of Peru; but
experience having discovered the impropriety of
fixing upon that as the port of communication with
Manila, the taple of the commerce between the
east and weft was removed from Callao to Acapul-
co, on the coast of New Spain.

AFTER various arrangements, it has been brought

into a regular form. One or two ships depart an-
nually from Acapulco, which are permitted to carry
out silver to the amount of five hundred thousand

b Torqucm. i. lib. v. c. 14.

z 4 pel93,

B 0 O K pesos', but they have hardly any thing else of value

V _sL on board; in return for which, they bring back

spices, drugs, china, and japan wares, calicoes, chintz,
muffins, silks, and every precious article, with which
the benignity of the climate, or the ingenuity of its
people, has enabled the East to supply the reft of
the world. For some time the merchants of Peru
were admitted to participate in this traffic, and might
fend annually a ship to Acapulco, to wait the arrival
of the vessels from Manila, and receive a propor.
tional share of the commodities which they import-
ed. At length, the Peruvians were excluded from
this trade by most rigorous edics, and all the com-
modities from the East reserved solely for the con-
fumption of New Spain.

Is consequence of this indulgence, the inhabitants

of that country enjoy advantages unknown in the
other Spanish colonies. The manufactures of the
East are not only more suited to a warm climate, and
more showy than those of Europe, but can be IJlJ
at a lower price; while, at the fame time, the profits
upon them are so considerable, as to enrich all those
who are employed, either in bringing them from
Manila, or vending them in New Spain. As the
interest both of the buyer and feller concurred in
favouring this branch of commerce, it has continu-
ed to extend in spite of regulations, concerted with
the molt anxious jealoify to circumscribe it. Un-
der cover of what the laws permit to be imported,

c Recop. lib. ix. c. 45 1. 6.

great

great quantities of India goods are poured into the B o o
i

VIII.

markets of New Spain', and when the flora arrives
at Vera Cruz from Europe, it often finds the wants
of the people already supplied by cheaper and more
acceptable commodities.

THERE is not, in the commercial arrangements
of Spain, any circumstance more inexplicable than
the permifflon of this trade between New Spain
and the Philippines, or more repugnant to its fun-
damental maxim of holding the colonies in perpe-
tual dependence on the mother-country, by pro-
hibiting any commercial intercourse that might
fuggelt to them the idea of receiving a supply of
their wants from any other quarter. This permif-
sion must appear still more extraordinary, from
confidering that Spain herself carries on no dire&
trade with her settlements in the Philippines, and
grants a privilege to one of her American colonies,
which The denies to her fubjeCs in Europe. It is
probable, that the colonists who originally took
poieffion of the Plilippincs, having been sent out
from New Spain, begun this intercourse with a
country which they confidered, in some measure,
as their parent state, before the court of Madrid
was aware of its consequences, or could eltablilh
regulations in order to prevent it. Many remon-
ftrances have been presented against this trade, as
detrimental to Spain, by diverting into another
channel a large portion of that treasure which

d Sce NOTE LXX.

ought.

B o o K ought to flow into the kingdom, as tending to

-^ '_j give rife to a spirit of independence in the colonies,

and to encourage innumerable frauds, against which
it is impoflible to guard, in tranfa&ions so far re.
moved from the infpetion of government. But
as it requires no flight effort of political wisdom
and vigour to abolish any practice which numbers
are interested in supporting, and to which time has
added the fantion of its authority, the commerce
between New Spain and Manila seems to be as con-
fiderable as ever, and may be confidered as one
chief cause of the elegance and splendor confpicu-
ous in this part of the Spanish dominions.

rUMicre. BUT notwithstanding this general corruption in
venue from
Aumeria. the colonies of Spain, and the diminution of the

income belonging to the public, occasioned by the
illicit importations made by foreigners, as well as
by the various frauds of which the colonists them-
selves are guilty in their commerce with the parent
slate, the Spanish monarchs receive a very confi-
derable revenue from their American dominion?.
This arises from taxes of various kinds, which
may be divided into three capital branches. The
first contains what is paid to the king, as fove-
reign, or lilperior lord of the New World: to this
class belongs the duty on the gold and silver raiftl(
from the mines, and the tribute exacted from the
Indians ; the former is termed by the Spaniards the
right of signiory, the latter is the duty of vffdlage,
The second branch comprehends the numerous du-
ties upon conmmcrce, which accompany and oppress

jt

it in every fep of its progress, from the greatef B o o
tranfations of the wholesale merchant, to the petty .--
traffic of the vender by retail. The third includes
what accrues to the king, as head of the church,
and administrator of ecclesiastical funds in the New
World. In consequence of this he receives the first
fruits, annates, spoils, and other spiritual revenues,
levied by the apostolic chamber in Europe j and is
entitled, likewise, to the profit arising from the fake
of the bull of Cruzado. This bull, which is pub-
lihed every two years, contains, an absolution from
past offences by the pope, and, among other immu-
nities, a permilion to eat several kinds of prohibited
food, during Lent, and on meagre days. The monks
employed in dispersing those bulls, extol their vir-
tues with all the fervour of interested eloquence;
the people, ignorant and credulous, litlen with im-
plicit assent; and every person in the Spanish colo-
nies, of European, Creolian, or mixed race, pur-
chafes a bull, which is deemed essential to his fal-
vation, at the rate set upon it by government'.

WHAT may be the amount of those various funds, tu Mount.
it is almost impoflible to determine with preci-
lion, The extent of the Spanilh dominions in
America, the jealousy of government, which ren-
ders them inaccellible to foreigners, the mysterious
silence which the Spaniards are.accuftomed to ob-
Lrve with rcfpec to the interior state of their colo-

See NOTE LXXI.

nies,

r. o o K nies, combine in covering this fuibjcct with a

veil, which it is not easy to remove. But an ac-
count, apparently no less accurate than it is cu-
rious, has lately been published of lhe royal re.
venue in New Spain, from which we may form
some idea with rctpee to what is collected in the
other provinces. According to that account, the
crown does not receive from all the departments of
taxation in New Spain above a million of our
money, from which one half must be deciucd
as the expence of the provincial establishment'.
Peru, it is probable, yields a fum not inferior to
this; and if we futppofe that all the other regions of
America, including the islands, furnish a third
share of equal value, we shall not perhaps be fir
wide from the truth, if we conclude, that the net
public revenue of Spain, raised in America, does
not exceed a million and a half feerling. This
falls far flort of the immense furns to which sup-
positions, founded upon conjeure, have railed
the Spanifll revenue in America . It is re:nark-
able, however, upon one account. Sp.ii, ail Por-
tugal are the only European powers, who derive
a direE revenue from their colonies. All the ad-
vantage that accrues to other nations, fiom their
American dominions, arises from the exclusive en-
joyment of their trade; but betide this, Spain
has brought her colonies to contribute towards in-
creating the power of the state; and in return for

f See NOTE LXXII. NOTE LXXllt.

protection,

protetion, to bear a proportional fiare of the. Ba o o
common burden. . V-

ACCoRDINGLV, the urn which I have computed
to be the amount of the Spanish revenue from
.merica, arises wholly from the taxes collected
there, and is far from being the whole of what
accrues to the king from his dominions in the
New World. The heavy duties imposed on the
commodities exported from Spain to America h, as
well as what is paid by those which she lends home
in return; the tax upon the negro-flaves, witl
which Afiica supplies the New World, together

seitlh lvcral lilallcr branchesof finance, bringlarge

lums into the trcalury, the precifc extent of which
I cannot pretend to ascertain.

BUT if the revenue which Spain draws from Exlpcrc oF

ad...iniRt a ·

America be great, the expence of administration tnUa.
il ler colonies bears proportion to it. In every
dtcpartment, even of her domefic police and
tinances, Spain has adopted a fyltem more com-
plex, and more encumbered with a variety of tri-
bunals, and a multitude of officers, than that of
any European nation, in which the sovereign pof-
Clt1es fichl extensive power. lFrom the jealous fpiric
with which Spain watches over her American fcttle-
mcnts, and her endeavours to guard againit fraud
in provinces ib remote from inlpesion; boards

' See NOTE LXXIV.

and

B o OK and officers have been multiplied there with still
- _· more anxious attention. In a country where the

expence of living is great, the salaries allotted to
every person in public office must be high, and
must load the revenue with an immense burden.
The parade of government greatly augments the
weight of it. The viceroys of Mexico, Peru, and
the New Kingdom of Granada, as representatives
of the king's person, among people fond of often-
tation, maintain all the state and dignity of royalty.
Their courts are formed upon the model of that
at Madrid, with horse and foot guards, a house-
hold regularly established, numerous attendants,
and ensigns of power, displaying such pomp, as
hardly retains the appearance of a delegated autho-
rity. All the expence incurred by supporting the
external and permanent order of government is
defrayed by the crown. The viceroys have besides
peculiar appointments suited to their exalted fta-
tion. The salaries fixed by law are indeed ex-
tremely moderate; that of the viceroy of Peru is
only thirty thousand ducats; and that of the vice-
roy of Mexico, twenty thousand ducats'. Of late
they have been raised to forty thousand.

THESE salaries, however, constitute but a small

part of the revenue enjoyed by the viceroys. The
exercise of an ablolute authority extending to every
department of government, and the power of dif.

t Recop. lib. iii. tit. iii. c. 7

poilng

posing of many lucrative offices, afford them B oo t
many opportunities of accumulating wealth. To i -ai
these, which may be confidered as legal and allowed
emoluments, large fums are often added by ex-
aftions, which in countries so far removed from
the feat of government, it is not easy to discover,
and impoflible to restrain. By monopolizing some
branches of commerce, by a lucrative concern in
others, by conniving at the frauds of merchants,
a viceroy may raise such an annual revenue, as no
subje6t of any European monarch enjoys k From
the tingle article of presents made to him on the
anniversary of his Name-day (which is always ob-
flrved as an high festival), I am informed that a
viceroy has been known to receive sixty thousand
pesos. According to a Spanish faying, the legal
revenues of a viceroy are known, his real profits
depend upon his opportunities and his conscience.
Sensible of this, the kings of Spain, as I have
formerly observed, grant a commiflion to their
viceroys only for a few years. This circumstance,
however, renders them often more rapacious, and
adds to the ingenuity and ardour wherewith they
labour to improve every moment of power which
they know is hallening salt to a period; and short
as its duration is, it ulially affords filfficient time
for repairing a lhattered fortune, or for creating a
new one. But even in situations so trying to hu-
man frailty, there are instances of virtue that re.

k See NOTE L.XV.

mains

B o o nmains unfeduced. In the year 1772, the Marquis
_, *1 de Croix finished the term of his viceroyalty in

New Spain with unfufpe&ed integrity; and in-
stead of bringing home exorbitant wealth, returned
with the admiration and applause of a grateful
people, whom his government had rendered
happy.

NO ' 1T,

# NOTES AND ILLUSTRATIONS.

NOTES

AND
ILLUSTRATION S

NOTE I. p. .
iN tracing the progress of the Spanish arms in New

Spain, we have followed Cones himself as our moit

certain guide. His dispatches to the emperor contain a
minute account of his operations. But the unlettered
conqueror of Peru was incapable of relating his own ex-
ploits. Our information with refpet to them, and other
tranfadions inPeru,is derived however from contemporary
and respectable authors.

THE most early account of Pizarrois traniacions id
Peru, was published by Francifo de Xerez, his secretary.
It is a simple unadorned narrative, carried down no far-
ther than the death of Atahualpa, in 1533; for the author
returned to Spain in 1534, and soon after he landed#
printed at Seville his (hort History of the Conquest of
Peru, addrefled to the emperor.

DoNr PEDRO SANCHO, an officesr ho fervtd under
Pizarro, drew up an account of his expedition, which was
translated into Italian by Ramufio, and inserted in his va.
luable colleaion, but has never been published in its ori-
gnal language. Sancho returned to Spain at the fame
time with Xerez. Great credit is due to what both these
authors relate concerning the progress and operations of
Pizarro; but the tefidence of the Spaniards in Peru had
been so short, at the time when they left it, and their iri-
tercourfe with the natives so slender, that their knowledgd
bs the Peruvian manners and customs is very impetfCtt

VOL, IImo A A 't

TIE next contemporary hiflorian is Pedro Cicza d1

Leon, who pubtifmcd his Cronica del Peru, at Seville, in
1553. If le had finilhed all that he proposes in the gc.
nierll division of his work, it would have been the mol
comip!ctc hillory which had been published of any region
in the New World. lie was well qualified to execute it,
l.avitig served during seventeen years in America, and
l.hvitn visited in person niofl of the provinces concerning
which he had occifion to write. Lut only the firit part
of Li:; Chronicle has been printed. It contains a defcrip.
tion of I'cr, and fcveral of the adjacent provinces, with
anI account of lic ii;ilitutions and culloms of the natives,
and is written wi:h io li;tlc art, and such an apparent re-
gard for trudi, tl;.t one inull regret the loss of the other
' parts of his work.

Tlin, los; is amply fitpplied by Don Augustine Zar:it,

who pu'iilied., in 1555, his Hifloria del 1)efcubrimitnto
y Conmucfta de la Provincia dcl Peru. Zarate was a man
of rank and education, and employed in Peru as comp-
trollcr-gencral of the public revenue. His history, whe-
ther we attend to its matter or composition, is a book of
considerable n:erit; as he hld an opportunity to be well in-
formed, and feecms to have been inquisitive with refpce to
the imanners and tranfa&iois of the Peruvians, great credit
is due to his teltimony.

DON DxIr:;o FERNANDr.Z publifled his Hifloria del

Peru, in 1571. His sole objet; is to relate the dilienfions
and civil wars of the Spaniards in that empire. As he
fcrved il a public ilation in Peru, and was well acquainted
both with the country, and with the principal alors in
those fingul.r fccnes which he describes, as he pofldlcd
found tuincrleanding and great impartiality, his work may
be ranked anmong those of the liltoriani molt dillinguiihed
for their indilttry in research, or their capacity in judging
with reJpcic to the events which they relate.

TiE

TIIE last author who can be reckoned among the con-
temporary historians of the conqucft of Peru, is Garci-
laflo de la Vega, Inca. For though the first part of his
work, intitled, Ccoiiintarios Reales del Oriten de loa Incas
Reief del Peru, was not publiflied sooner than the year
1609, fcvcnty-fix years after the death of Atahualpa the
las emperor, yet as he was born in Peru, and was the
son of an officer of diftinflion among the Slpnilli con-
querors, by a Coya, or lady of the royal race, on account
of which he always took the name of Inca; as he was
master of the language spoken by the Incas, and ac-
quainted with the traditions of his countrymen, his au-
thority is rated very high, and often placed above that of
all the other hiltorians. His work, however, is little
more than a commentary upon the Spanihb writers of the
Peruvian story, and composed of quotations taken from
the authors whom I have mentioned. This is the idea
which he himself gives of it, Lib. i. c. o1. Nor is it in
the account of fads only that he follows them servilely.
Even in explaining the institutions and rites of his an-
cellors, his information seems not to be more perfec than
theirs. His explanation of the Quipos is almost the fame
with that of Acofta. He produces no specimen of Peru-
vian poetry, but that wretched one which he borrows
from Bias Valera, an early missionary, whose memoirs
have never been published. Lib. ii. c. xS. As for com-
position, arrangement, or a capacity of diftinguifling be-
tween what is fabulous, what is probable, and what is
true, one searches for them in vain in the commentaries
of the Inca. His work, however, notwithstanding its
great defets, is not altogether destitute of use. Some
traditions which he received from his countrymen are
preerved in it. IHis knowledge of the Peruvian language
has enabled him to corret rome errors of the Spanifnl
Iriters, and he has inserted in it forne curious fats, taken
from authors whose works were never published, and arc
now loft.

A A a NOTE

NOTE II. p. 7.
0 NE may form an idea both of the hardships which they

endured, and of the unhealthful climate in the re.

gions which they visited, from the extraordinary mortality
that prevailed among them. Pizarro carried out 112 men,
Almagro 70. In less than nine months 130 of these died.
Few fell by the sword; most of them were cut off by dif.
cafes. Xerez, p. 180o.

NOTE III. p. lo.
THIs island, fays Herrera, is rendered so uncomfort

able by the unwholcfomenefs of its climate, its im.

penetrable woods, its rugged mountains, and the multi-
tude of infccts and reptiles, that it is seldom any softer
epithet than that of infernal is employed in describing it.
The fun is almost never seen there, and throughout thl
year it hardly ever ceases to rain. Dec. 3. lib. x. c. 3.
Dampier touched at this island in the year 1685; and his
account of the climate is not more favourable. Vol. i.
p. 172. He, during his cruise on the coast, visited mot
of the places where Pizarro landed, and his defcriptionof
them throws light on the narrations of the early Spanili
historians.

NOTE IV. p. 28.
BY this time horses had multiplied greatly in the Spaniffi

Settlements on the continent. When Cortes began

his expedition in the year i 51 8, though his armament was
more considerable than that of Pizarro, and composed of
persons superior in rank to those who invaded Peru, he
could procure no more than lixteen horses.

NOTE V. p.30.
IN the year 1740, D. Ant. UIloa, and D. George Jual,

travelled from Guayquil to Motupc, by the fame route
which Pizarro took. From the description of thcit jour

cey,

ney, one may form an idea of the difficulty of his march.
The sandy plains between St. Michael de Pieura and Mo-
tupe extend 90 miles, without water, without a tree, a
plant, or any green thing, on a dreary firetch of burning
and. Voyage, tom. i. p. 399, &c.

NOTE Vl. p. 35.
THIS extravagant and unseasonable discourse of Val-

verde has been censured by all historians, and with

justice. But though he seems to have been an illiterate
and bigotted monk, nowise resembling the good Olmedo,
who accompanied Cortes; the absurdity of his address to
Atahualpa must pot be charged wholly upon him. His
harangue is evidently a translation or paraphrase of that
form, concerted by a junto of Spanish divines and lawyers
in the year 1509, for explaining the right of their king to
the fovereignity of the New World, and for dircting the
officers employed in America how they mhould take poflef-
sion of any new country. See Vol. i. Note xxiii. The
sentiments contained in Valverde's harangue must not then
be imputed to the bigotted imbecility of a particular man,
but to that of the age. But Gomara and Benzoni relate
one circumstance concerning Valverde, which, if authen.
tic, renders him an objet, not of contempt only, but
of horror. They assert, that during the whole ation,
Valverde continued to excite the soldiers to slaughter,
calling to them to strike the enemy, not with the edge,
but with the points of their swords. Gom. Cron. c. 113,
Benz. Hiftor. Nov. Orbis, lib. iii c. 3. Such behaviour
was very different from that of the Roman Catholic clergy
in other parts of America, where they uniformly exerted
their influence to prote& the Indians, and to moderate
the ferocity of their countrymen.

AA3 NOTE

NOTE VII. p.36.
Two different systems have been formed concerning

the conduE of Atahualpa. The Spanish writers, in

order to jutify the violence of their countrymen, con.
tend, that all the Inca's profeflions of friendihip were
feigned; and that his intention in agreeing to an inter.
view with Pizarro at Caxamalca, was to cut off him and
his followers at one blow; that for this purpose he ad.
vanced with such a numerous body of attendants, who
had arms concealed under their garments to execute this
scheme. This is the account given by Xerez andZarate,
and adopted by Herrera. But if it had been the plan of
the Inca to destroy the Spaniards, one can hardly ima.
gine that he would have permitted them to march un.
molelled through the desert of Motupe, or have negleacd
to defend the pases in the mountains, where they might
have been attacked with so much advantage. If the Pe-
ruvians marched to Caxamalca with an intention to fall
upon the Spaniards, it is inconceivable, that of so great a
body of men, prepared for afion, not one should attempt
to make rcfltance, but all tamely ifufer themselves to be
butchered by an enemy whom they were armed to attack.
Atahualpa's mode of advancing to the interview, has the
aspect of a peaceable procelfioi, not of a military enter-
prize. He himfeif and his followers were, in their habits
of ceremony, preceded, as on days of solemnity, by un-
armed harbingers. Thpugh rude nations are frequently
cunning and false, yet, if a t heme of deception and
treachery must be imputed either to a monarch, that had
no great reason to be alarmed at a visit from firangers
who solicitcd admillion into Iis presence as friends, or to
an advlenturer so daring, and so little scrupulous as I'izarro,
one cannot lefitate in determining where to fix the pre-
fiu!lntion of guilt. Even amidst the endeavours of the
Salniilh writerj to palliato the proceedings of Pizarro,

one

one plainly perceives, that it was his intention, as well as
his interest, to seize the Inca, and that he had taken mea-
Jures for that purpose previous to any suspicion of that
monarch's designs.

GARCILASSO DE LA VEGA, extremely solicitous to

vindicate his countrymen, the Peruvians, from the crime
of having concerted the deftrufion of Pizarro and his fol-
lowers, and no less afraid to charge the Spaniards with
improper conduct towards the Inca, has framed another
system. He relates, that a man of majestic form, with
a long beard, and garments reaching to the ground, hav-
ing appeared in a vision to Viracocha, the eighth Inca, and
declared, that he was a child of the Sun, that monarch
built a temple in honour of this person, and ereEted an
image of him, resembling as nearly as polIible the singular
form in which he had exhibited himself to his view. In
this temple, divine honours were paid to him, by the
same of Viracocha. P. i. lib. iv. c. i. lib. v. c. 22.
When the Spaniards first appeared in Peru, the length of
their beards, and the dress they wore, struck every per-
son so much with their likeness to the image of Vira-
cocha, that they supposed them to be children of the
Sun, who had descended from heaven to earth. All con-
cluded, that the fatal period of the Peruvian empire was
now approaching, and that the throne would be occupied
by new pofleffors. Atahualpa himself, confidering the
Spaniards as messengers from heaven, was so far from en-
tertaining any thoughts of resisting them, that he deter-
mined to yield implicit obedience to their commands.
From those sentiments flowed his profeflions of love and
refpct. To those were owing the cordial reception of
Soto and Ferdinand Pizarro in his camp, and the filb.
miillve reverence with which he himfeff advanced to visit
the Spanihf general in his quarters; but from the gross
ignorance of Philipillo, the interpreter, the dccl.iruioii of

A ^ 4 thq

the Spaniards, and his answer to it, were so ill explained,
that by their mutual inability to comprehend each other's
intentions, the fatal rencounter at Caxamalca, with all its
dreadful confcquences, was occasioncd.

IT is remarkable, that no traces of this superstitious

veneration of the Peruvians for the Spaniards, are to be
found either in Xerez, or Sancho, or Zarate, previous
to the interview at Caxamalca; and yet the two former
served under Pizarro at that time, and the latter visited
Peru soon after the conquest. If either the Inca himself,
or his meiengers, had addressed the Spaniards in the
words which Garcilaffo puts in their mouths, they must
have been struck with such submissive declarations; and
they would certainly have availed themselves of them to
accomplish their own designs with greater facility. Gar-
cilaffo himself, though his narrative of the intercourse be.
tween the Inca and Spaniards, preceding the rencounter at
Caxamalca, is founded on the supposition of his believing
them to be Viracochas, or divine beings, p. ii. lib. i
c. 17, &c. yet with his usual inattention and inaccuracy
he admits, in another place, that the Peruvians did not
recollet the resemblance between them and the god Vira,
cocha, until the fatal disasters subsequent to the defeat
at Caxamalca, and then only began to call them Vira-
cochas. P. i. lib. v. c. 21. This is confirmed by Her.
rea, dec. 5. lib. ii. c. 12. In many different parts of
America, if we may believe the Spanith writers, their
countrymen were confidered as divine beings who had de-
scended from Heaven. But in this instance, as in many
which occur in the intercourse between nations whose
progress in refinement is very unequal, the ideas of thol
who used the expression were different from the ideas of
those who heard it. For such is the idiom of the Indian
languages, or such is the simplicity of those who speak
them, that when they fee any thing with which they were

formerly

formerly unacquainted, and of which they do not know
the origin they fay, that it came down from Heaven.
Nugnez. Ram. iii. 327, C.

THE account which I have given of the sentiments and

proceedings of the Peruvians, appears to be mpre natural
and confidfent than either of the two preceding, and is
better supported by the fads related by the contemporary
historians.

ACCOaDING to Xerez, p. 200, two thousand Peruvians

were killed, Sancho makes the number of the lain fix or
seven thousand. Ram. iii. 274, D. By Garcilaffo's ac-
count, five thousand were massacred. P. ii. lib. i. c. 25.
The number which I have mentioned, being the medium
between the extremes, may probably be nearest the truth.

NOTE VIII. p. 38.
NOTING can be a more flriking proof of this, than

that three Spaniards travelled from Caxamalca to

Cuzco. The distance between them is fix hundred miles.
In every place throughout this great extent of country,
they were treated with all the honours which the Peru.
vians paid to their sovereigns, and even to their divinities.
Under pretext of amassing what was wanting for the ran.
fom of the Inca, they demanded the plates of gold with
which the walls of the Temple of the Sun in Cuzco were
adorned and though the priests were unwilling to alienate
those sacred ornaments, and the people refused to violate
the (brine of their God, the three Spaniards, with their
own hands, robbed the Temple of part of this valuable
treasure; and such was the reverence of the natives for
their persons, that though they beheld this at of facri-
lege with altonilhment, they did not attempt to prevent or
disturb the commiflion of it. Zarate, lib. ii. c. 6. Sancho
up. Rgmnuf. iii. 375, D.

NOTE

NOTE IX. p. 5.
A CCORDING to Ilcrrera, the spoil of Cuzco, after setting

apart the king's Jfih, was divided among 480 per.

sons. Each reccived ,oco pvfos. This amounts to
1,920,000 pesos c..lb. De. 5. .

vi. c. 3ut as the ge-

neral, and other officers, were entitled to a flare far
greater than that of the private men, the fum total must
have risen much beyond what I have mentioned. Co.
mara, c. 123. and Zarate, lib. ii. c. 8. satisfy themselves
with aflfrting in general, that the plunder of Cuzco was
of greater value than the ranfor of Atahualpa.

NOTE X. p. 5S.

o expedition in the New World was conduted with
more persevering courage than that of Alvarado, and

In none were greater hardships endured. Manfof the
persons enggcd in it were, like their leader, veterans
who had served under Cortes, inured to all the rigour of
American war. Such of my readers as have not an op.
portunity of perusing the siriking description cf their sus-
ferings by Zarate or Herrera, may form some idea of the
nature of their march from the sea-coast to Quito, by
consulting the account which D. Ant. Ulloa gives of his
own journey in 1736, nearly in the fame route. Voy.
tom. i. p. 178, &c. or that of M. Bouguer, who pro-
cedede from Puerto Viejo, to Quito, by the fame road
whichAlvarado took. He compares his own journey
with that of the Spanish leader, and by the comparison,
gives a most striking idea of the boldness and patience of
Alvaradco, in forcing his way through so many oblticlcs,
Voyage du Pcrou, p. 28, &c.

NOTE

NOTE XI. . 54.
ACCORDING to Herrera, there was entered on account

of the king in gold, 155,300 pesos, and 5400 mark!

(each 8 ounces) of silver, besides several vessels and or-
naments, fomc of gold, and others of silver; on account
of private persons, in gold 499,000 pesos, and S4,ooo
marks of fil:cr. Dec. 5. lib. vi. c. 13.

NOTE XII. p. 64.
THE Peruvians not only imitated the military arts of the

Spaniards, but had recourse to devices of their own,

As the cavalry were the chief objed of their terror, they
endeavoured to render them incapable of acding, by means
of a long thong with a stone fattened to each end. This
when thrown by a skilful hand, twisted about the horse
and its rider, and entangled them so as to obllrua their mo-
tions. Herrera mentions this as an invention of their own,
Dec. 5. lib. vili. c. 4. But as I have observed, vol. ii.
p. 176, this weapon is common among several barbarous
tribes towards the extremity of South America; and it is
more probable, that the Peruvians had observed the dex-
terity with which they used it in hunting, and on this oc-
cafion adopted it themselves. The Spaniards were con-
liderably annoyed by it, Herrera, ibid. Another instance
of the ingenuity of the Peruvians deserves mention. By
turning a river out of its channel, they overflowed a valley,
in which a body of the enemy was poeted, so suddenly, that
it was with the utmoit difficulty the Spaniards made their
cfcape. Herrera, dec. 5. lib. viii. c. 5.

NOTE XIII. p. 84.
HERRERA'S account of Orellana's voyage is the molt

minute, and apparently the most accurate. It was
probably taken from the journal of Orcllana iiarifelf, But

I thq

the dates are not diftintly marked. His navigation down
the Coca, or Napo, begun early in February 1541; and
he arrived at the mouth of the river on the 26th of August,
having spent near seven months in the voyage. M. de la
Condamine, in the year 1743, failed from Cuenca,to
Para, a settlement of the Portuguese at the mouth of the
river, a navigation much longer than that of Orellana, in
less than four months. Voyage, p. 179. But the two
adventurers were very differently provided for the voyage.
This hazardous undertaking, to which ambition prompted
Orellana, and to which the love of science led M. de la
Condamine, was undertaken in the year 1 769, by Madame
Godin des Odonais, from conjugal affetion. The narra-
tive of the hardships which (he suffered, of the dangers
to which (he was exposed, and of the disasters which be.
fel her, is one of the mot singular and asseting stories in
any language, exhibiting in her conduct a firiking piapre
of the fortitude which diftinguilhes the one fcx, mingled
with the sensibility and tenderness peculiar to the other.
Lettre de M. Godin, a M. de la Condamine.

NOTE XIV. p. 88.
HRRiRA gives a striking picure of their indigence.

Twelve gentlemen who had been officers of diftinc.

tion under Almagro, lodged in the fame house, and hav.
ing but one cloak among them, it was worn alternately
by him who had occasion to appear in public, while the
Test, from the want of a decent dress, were obliged to
keep within doors. Their former friends and compa.
nions were so much afraid of giving offence to Pizarro,
that they durst not entertain or even converse with them.
One may conceive what was the condition, and what the
indignation of men once accustomcd to power and opu-
lence, when they felt tllemfelves poor and defpiled, with-
out a roof under which to shelter their neads, while they

beheld

beheld others, whose merit and services were not equal tO'
theirs, living with splendour in sumptuous edifices. Dec.6.
lib. viii. c. 6.

NOTE XV. p. ox.
HERRERA, whose accuracy entitles him to great cre-

dit, aflerts, that Gonzalo Pizarro poffefled domains in

the neighbourhood of Chuquefaca de la Plata, which
yielded him an annual revenue greater than that of the
archbilhop of Toledo, the best endowed fee in Europe.
Dec. 7. lib. vi. c. 3.

NOTE XVI. p. xI6.
ALL the Spanish writers describe his march, and the

diltreffcs of both patties, very minutely. Zarate ob-

serves, that hardly any parallel to it occurs in history,
either with refpet to the length of the retreat, or the
ardour of the pursuit. Pizarro, according to his compu-
tation, followed the viceroy upwards of three thousand
miles. Lib. v. c. 6. 26.

NOTE XVII. p. 132.

T amounted, according to Fernandez, the beR informed
historian of that petiod, to one million four hundred
thousand pesos. Lib. ii. c. 79.

NOTE XVIiI. p. 134.

ARVAJAL, from the beginning, had been an advocate
for an accommodation with Gafca. Finding Pizarro

incapable of holding that bold course which he originally
suggested, he recommended to him a timely fubmillion
to his fovcreign as the fareft measure. When the prefi.
dent's offers were first communicated to Carvajal, " By
our Lady (said he, in that strain of buffoonery which
was familiar to him) the priest issues gracious bulls. He

12 gives

gives them both good and cheap; let us not only accept
them, but wear them as reliques about our necks." Ser-
nandez, lib. ii. c. 63.

NOTE XIX. p. 140.

URTNG the rebellion of (onzalo Pizarro, seven hun-
drcd men were killed in battle, and three hundred

and eighty were hanged or beheaded. Herrcra, dec. 8.
lib. iv. c. 4. Above three hundred of these were cut off
by C;arvtj:;l. Fernandez, lib. ii. c. 91. Zarate makes the
number of thfee put to a violent death five hundred. Lib.
vii. c. r.

NOTE XX. p. 149.

'i my inquiries concerning the manners and policy of
the Mexicans, I have received much information from

a large manuscript of Don Alonfo de Corita, one of the
judges in the Court of Audience of Mexico. In the year
1553, Philip II. in order to discover the mode of levying
tribute from his Indian fubjeas, that would be most be-
neficial to the crown, and Icaft oppressive to them, ad-
drlrfied a.mandate to all the Courts of Audience in Ame-
rica, enjoining them to answer certain queries which he
proposcd to them, concerning the ancient form of govern-
mcet eltabliflled among the various nations of Indians, and
the mode in which they had been accustomed to pay taxes
to their kings or chiefs. In obedience to this mandate,
Corita, who had relided nineteen years in America, four-
teen of which he passed in New Spain, compored the
work of which I have a copy. Hc'acquaints his sovereign,
that he had made it an objedt during his residence in
America, and in all its provinces which he had visited, to
inquire diligently into the manners and cultoms of the na-
tives, that hc had conversed for this purpose with many
aged and intelligent Indians, and consulted fevcralof the
Spanifli ecclfialtics, who undcrftood the Indian languages

moR

mot perfcly, particularly some of those who landed Iti
New Spain soon after the conquest. Corita appears to
be a man of some learning, and to have carried on his
inquiries with the diligence and accuracy to which he
pretends. Greater credit is due to his testimony from
one circumrtance. His work was not composed with a
view to publication, or in support of any particular theory,
but contains simple, though full answers to queries pro.
posed to him officially. Though Herrera does not men'
tion him among the authors whom he had followed as
guides in his history, I should suppose, from fcveral faas
of which he takes notice, as well as from several expref-
sions which he uses, that this memorial of Corita was not
unknown to him.

NOTE XX p. p16i.
TxHE early Spanifl writers were so hafly and inaccurate

in ellimating the numbers of people in the provinces

and towns of America, that it is impo(fible to ascertain
that of Mexico irfelf with any degree of precision. Cortes
describes the extent a:nl populouflefs of Mexico in gene-
ral terms, which imply that it was not inferior to the
greatest cities in Europe. Gomara is more explicit, and
affirms, that there were 6o,ooo houses or families in
Mexico. Cron. c. 78. Herrera adopts his opinion,
Dec. 2. lib. vii. c. 13 ; and the generality of writers fol-
low them implicitly without inquiry or scruple. Accord-
ing to this account, the inhabitants of Mexico must
have been about 3,00000. Torquemada, with his usual
propensity to the marvellous, afllrts, that there were a
hundred and twenty thousand houfcs or families in Mexico,
and consequently about fix hundred thousand inhabitants.
1ib. iii. c. 23. But in a very judicious accouit of the
Mexican empire, by one of Cortes's ofliccrs, the popu-
lation is fixed at 60,0oo people. Ramu{io, iii. 309, A.
Even by this account, which probably is much nearcr

the

the truth than any of the foregoing, Mexico was i greaf
city.

NOTE XXI. p. 165S
1 is to P. Torribio de Benavente, that I am indebted for

this curious observation. Palafox, bishop of Ciudad

de la Puebla Los Angeles, confirms and illustrates it more
fully. The Mexican (fays he) is the only language in
which a termination indicating refcpe&,lavas reverentials
, de eortefia, may be affixed to every word. By adding
the final syllable zin or azin to any word, it becomes a
proper exprelfion of veneration in the mouth of an infe-
rior. If, in speaking to an equal, the word Father is to
be used, it is Tail, but an inferior fays Tatzin. One
priest speaking to another, calls him Teopixque; a perfen
of inferior rank calls him Teopixcatzin. The name of the
emperor who reigned when Cortes invaded Mexico, was
Montezuma, but his vafials, from reverence, pronounced
it Montezumazin. Torribio, MS. Palaf. Virtudes del
Indio, p. 65. The Mexicans had not only reverential
nouns, but reverential verbs. The manner in which
there are formed from the verbs in common use, is ex.
plained by D. Jos. Aug. Aldama y Guevara in his Mexican
Grammar, N" I88.

NOTE XXIII. p. 171.
FROM comparing several passages in Corita and Herten,

we may collea, with some degree of accuracy, the

various modes in which the Mexicans contributed towards
the support of government. Some persons of the sirs
order fecm to have been exempted from the payment
of any tribute, and as their only duty to the public, were
bound toperfonal service in war, and to follow the bannet
of their sovereign with their vaflals. 2. The immediate
vassals of the crown were bound not only to personal mili-
tary service, but paid a certain proportion of the produce of

theik

their lands in kind. 3. Those who held offices of honour
or trust, paid a certain flare of what they received in con-
sequence of holding these. 4. Each Capullt, or affocia-
tion, cultivated some part of the common field allotted to
it, for the behoof of the crown, and deposited the produce
in the royal granaries. 5. Some part of whatever was
brought to the public markets, whether fruits of the earth,
or the various producions of their artifst and manufac-
turers, was demanded for the public use, and the mer-
chants who paid this were exempted from every other tax.
6. The Mayeques, or adfcripti glebe, were bound to culti-
vate certain diftrits in every province, which may be
confidered as crown lands, and brought the increase into
public storehouses. Thus the sovereign received some
part of whatever was useful or valuable in the country,
whether it was the natural prodution of the foil, or ac-
quired by the industry of the people. What each contri-
buted towards the support of government, seems to have
been inconsiderable. Corita, in answer to one of the
queries put to the Audience of Mexico by Philip II. en-
deavours to estimate in money the value of what each
citizen might be supposed to pay, and does not reckon it
at more than three or four realh, about eighteen pence or
two shillings ahead.

NOTE XXIV. p. 172.
cORTES, who seems to have been as much astonished

with this, as with any initance of Mexican ingenuity,

gives a particular description of it. Along one of the
causeways, fays he, by which' they enter the city, are
conduced two conduits, composed of clay tempered
with mortar, about two paces in breadth, and raised
about fix feet. In one of them is conveyed a stream of
excellent water, as large a the body of a man, into the
centre of the city, and it supplies all the inhabitants plen-
tOL. ti. B tifully.

tifully. The other is empty, that when it is neceltlry
to clean, or repair the f.ormer, the ftream.of water may
be turned into it. As this conduit paflns along two of
the bridges, where there are breaches in the causeway,
through which the falt-watcr of the lake flows, it is con.
veyed over them in pipes as large as the body of an ox,
then carried from the conduit to the remote quarters of
the city in canoes, and fold to the inhabitants. Relat.
ap. Ranmuf. 2 i, A.

NOTE XXV. p. 174.
I the armoury of the royal palace of Madrid, are fliewn

suits of a:;ncur, xwhic are c;:lld Montezumas.

They are coinpofed of thin lacquered copper-plates. In
the opinion of vry intelligent judges they arc evidently
eaflern. The forms of the filvcr ornaments upon them,
teprefenting dragons, &c. may be confidered as a con-
firnation of this. They are infinitely superior in point of
workmanship to any effort of American art. The Spa.
niards probably received them from the Philippine islands.
The only unqucllionable specimen of Mexican art that I
know of in Great Britain, is a cup of very fine gold,
which is said to have belonged to Montezuma. It weighs
5 oz. i2 dwt. Three drawings of it were exhibited to
the Society of Antiquaries, June Io, 1765. A man's
head is reprcfented on this cup. On one fide the full face,
on the other the profile, on the third the back parts of the
head. The relievo is said to have been produced by
punching the inside of the cup, so as to make the repre-
lentation of a face on the outside. The features are gross,
but reprefcnted with some degree of art, and certainly too
rude for Spanifi workmaniflip. This cup was purchased
by Edward earl of Orford, while he lay in the harbour of
Cadiz with the fleet under his command, and is now in
the poifcffion of his grandson, Lord Archer. I am indebted

for

for this information to my refpeaable and ingenious friend
Mr. Barrington.-In the sixth volume of the Archaologia,
p. 107, is publifled an account of some marks of Terra
Cotta, brought from a burying ground on the American
continent, about seventy miles from the Britili settlement
on the Mosquito shore. They are said to be likenesses of
chiefs, or other eminent persons. From the description
and engravings of them, we have an additional proof of the
imperfee fate of arts among the Americans,

NOTE XXVI. p. 18o.
THE learned reader will perceive how much I have

been indebted, in this part of my work, to the gui-

dance of the Bilhop of Gloucester, who has traced the fuc-
celive steps, by which the human mind advanced in this line
of its progress, with much erudition, and greater ingenuity.
He is the first, as far as I know, who formed a rationn! and
confidtent theory concerning the various modes of writing
prafifed by nations, according to the various degrees of
their improvement. Div. Legation of Moses, iii. 69, &c.
Some important observations have been added by M. le Pre-
sident de Brofles, the learned and intelligent author of th6
Traits de la Formation Mechanique des Langucs, tom. i.
295, &c.

As the Mexican paintings are the molt curious monu-
ments extant of the earlierf mode of writing, it will not
be improper to give some account of the means by which
they were preserved from the general wreck of every work
of art in America, and communicated to the Public. For
the molt early and complete collection of these publiflled
by Purchas, we ar: indebted to the attention of that cu-
rious inquirer, Hakluyt. Don Antonio Mendoza, vicc-
roy of New Spain, having deemed those paintings a pro-
per present for Charles V. the ship in which they were
feat to Spain was taken by a French cruizer, and they

B a2 came

came into the possession of Thevet, the king's geographer,
who having travelled himself into the New World, and
described one of its provinces, was a curious observer of
whatever terded to illuitrate the manners of the Ame-
ricans. On his death, they were purchased by Hakluyt,
at that time chaplain of the English ambassador to the
French court; and, being left by him to Purchas, were
published at the desire of the learned antiquary Sir Henry
Spclman. Purchas, iii. Io65. They were translated
from English into French by Melchizedeck Thevenot, and
publiflcd in his collection of voyages, A. D. 1683.

THE second specimen of Mexican p;lture-writing, was

published by Dr. Francis Gemelli Carreri, in two copper.
plates. The first is a map, or representation of the pro.
grefs of the ancient Mexicans on their firit arrival in the
country, and of the various flations in which they fettled,
before they founded the capital of their empire in the lake
of Mexico. The second is a Chronological Wheel, or
Circle, representing the manner in which they computed
and marked their cycle of fifty-two years. He received
both from Don Carlos de Siguenza y Congorra, a diligent
colletor of ancient Mexican documents. But as it seems
now to be a received opinion (founded, as far as I know,
on no good evidence) thatCarreri was neveroutof Italy,and
that his famous Giro del Mundo is an account of a fictitious
voyage, I have not mentioned these paintings in the text.
They have, however, manifefily the appearance of being
Mexican prodluCions, and are allowed to be so by Bo-
turilli, who was well qualified to determine whether they
were genuine or fuplpofititious. M. Clavigero, likewise,
admits them to be genuine p:intings of the ancient Mexi-
cans. To nme they always appeared to be so, though, from
my desire to reft no part of my narrative upon qtneflionabk
authority, I did not refer to them. Thc fiyle of painting
in the former is considerably more perfect than any other
flecimen of Mexican design , but as the original is said to

4 have

lave been much defaced by time, I fufpet that it has been
improved by some touches from the hand of an European
artist. Carreri, Churchill, iv. p. 487. The chrono-
logical wheel is a just delineation of the Mexican mode of
computing time, as dcfcribed by Acoft, lib. vi. c. 2.
It seems to resemble one which that learned Jcfuit had
seen; and if it be admitted as a genuine monument, it
proves that the Mexicans had artificial, or arbitrary cha-
raters, which reprefcnted several things betides numbers.
Each month is there represented by a symbol expressive
of some work or rite peculiar to it.

THE third specimen of Mexican painting was disco-
vered by another Italian. In 1736, Lorenzo Boturini
Benaduci let out for New Spain, and was led by several
incidents to study the language of the Mexicans, and to
colleR the remains of their hiRforical monuments. He
perfiled nine years in his researches, with the enthusiasm
of a projecor, and the patience of an antiquary. In 1746,
he published at Madrid, Idea de una Nueva Hfloria Gene-
ral de la Aierica Septentrional, containing an account of
the result of his inquiries; and he added to it a catalogue
of his American Historical Museum, arranged under
thirty-fix different heads. His idea of a New Hillory
appears to me the work of a whimsical credulous man.
But his catalogue of Mexican maps, paintings, tribute-
rolls, calendars, &c. is much larger than one could have ex-
peed. Unfortunately a ship, in which he had sent a con-
ilderable part of them to Europe, was taken by an English
privateer during the war between Great Britain and Spain
which commenced in the year 1739; and it is probable that
they perilhed by faUing into the hands of ignorant captors.
Boturinihimfelfincurred thedifpleafure of the Spanish court,
and died in an hospital at Madrid. The history, of which
the Idea, &c. was only a prpfSluwr, was never publilhed.
The reniainderof his Museum seems to have been dispersed.
bome part of it came into the pofiffion of the presnt aroh-

B B 3 bishop

bishop of Toledo, when he was primate of New Spain, and
he publifled from it that curious tribute-roll which I have
mentioned.

THE only other collection of Mexican paintings, as

far as I can learn, is in the Imperial Library at Vienna.
By order of their Imperial Majesties, I have obtained such
a specimen of there as I desired, in eight paintings, made
with so much fidelity, that I am informed the copies could
hardly be diltinguiflhed from the originals. According to
a note in this Cldex Mexicanus, it appears to have been
a present from Emmanuel King of Portugal to Pope Cle-
ment VII. who died A. D. 1533. After palling through
the hands of several illufirious proprietors, it fell into those
of the cardinal of Saxe-Eifenach, who presented it to the
emperor Leopold. These paintings are manifestly Mexi-
can, but they are in a flyle very different from any of the
former. An engraving has been made of one of them, in
order to gratify such of my readers, as may deem this an
objec worthy of their attention. Were it an objet of
sufficient importance, it might, perhaps, be possible, by
recourse to the plates of Purchas, and the archbishop of
Toledo, as a key, to form plausible conjectures concern-
ing the meaning of this picture. Many of the figures are
evidently similar. A.A. are targets and darts, almof
in the fame form with those publishcd by Purchas, p. 1070,
107 , &c. B. B. are figures of temples, nearly resembling
those in Purchas, p. x 1o9 and I 13, and in Lorenzana,
Plate II. C. is a bale of mantles, or cotton cloths, the
figure of which occurs in almost every plate of Purchas
and Lorenzana. E. E. E. seems to be Mexican captains
in their war dress, the fantaltic ornaments of which re-
femble the figures in Purchas, p. x I o, I 1 1 , 2113. I
hfould suppose this picture to be a tribute-roll, as their
mode of noting numbers occurs frequently. D. 1). D.
&c. According to Boturini, the mode of computation
by the number of knots, was known to the Mlexicans as

well

well as to the Peruvians, p. 85. and the manner in
which the number of units is represented in the Mexican
paintings in my poffeifion, seems to confirm this opinion.
They plainly resemble a firing of knots on a cord or
slender rope.

SINCE I published the former Edition, Mr. Waddi-

love, who is flill pleased to continue his friendly attention
to procure me information, has discovered, in the Library
of the Escurial, a volume in folio, confifing of forty
sheets of a kind of pasteboard, each the size of a common
fleet of writing paper, with great variety of uncouth and
whimsical figures of Mexican painting, in very fresh co.
lours, and with an explanation in Spanifl to most of
them. The first twenty-two sheets are the signs of the
months, days, &c. About the middle of each theet are
two or more large figures for the month, surrounded by
the signs of the days. The last eighteen (leets are not
so filled with figures. They fcem to be signs of Deities,
and images of various objecs. According to this Calen.
dar in the Escurial, the Mexican year contained 286 days,
divided into 22 months of 13 days. Each day is repre-
sented by a different sign, taken from ofme natural ob-
jet, a serpent, a dog, a lizard, a reed, a house, &c.
The signs of days in the Calendatr of the Efcuridl are pre-
cifcly the fame with those mentioned by Boturini, Idea,
&c. p. 45. But, if we may give credit to that Author,
the Mexican year contained 360 days, divided into 18
months of 20 days. The order of days in every month
was computed, according to him, first by what he calls
a tridecennary progreflion of days from one to thirteen, in
the fame manner as in the Calendar of the Escurial, nd
then by afcptenary progression 6f days from one to seven,
making in all twenty. In this Calendar, not only the
signs which distinguish each day, but the qualities filp-
ppfed to be peculiar to each month, arc marked. There
are certain weakneflfs which fcem to accormpa;: y the liu-

B 13 4 ml;ll

man mind through every stage of its progress in obfernr
tion and fciance. Slender as was the knowledge of the
Mexicans in Altronomy, it appears to have been already
conneced with judicial Astrology. The fortune and cha.
raCter of persons born in each month are supposed to be
decided by some superior influence predominant at the
time of nativity. Hence it is foretold in the Calendar,
that all who are born in one month will be rich, in an-
ether warlike, in a third luxurious, &c. The pasteboard,
or whatever fubitance it may be on which the Calendar
in the Escurial is painted, seems, by Mr. Waddilore's
description of it, to resemble nearly that in the Imperial
Library at Vienna. In several particulars, the figures
bear some likeness to those in the plate which I have pub.
lifhed. The figures marked D. which induced me to
conjecure, that this painting might be a tribute-roll
similar to these published by Purchas and the Archbiflop
of Toledo, Mr. Waddilove supposes to be signs of days;
and 1 have such confidence in the accuracy of his obfer-
vations, as to conclude his opinion to be well founded.
It appears, from the charaters in which the explanations
of the figures are written, that this curious monument of
Mexican art has been obtained, soon after the conquest of
the empire. It is singular that it (hould never have been
mentioned by any Spanish Author,

NOTE XXVII. p. 182.

n E firt was called, the Prince of the deathful Lance;

- the second the Dividcr of Men; the third, the Shed-
dcr of Blood; the fourth, the Lord of the Dark.houfc.
Acofta, Lib. vi. c. 25.

NOTE XXVIII. p. 189.
TxtE Tcmple of Cholula, which was deemed more

holy than any in New Spain, was likewise the most
conflucrable. But it was nothing more than a mount of

solid

solid earth. According to Torquemada, it was above a
quarter of a league in circuit at the bale, and rose to the
height of forty fathom. Mon. Ind. Lib. iii. c. 19. Even
M. Clavigero acknowledges that all the Mexican temples
were solid ftrutures, or eathern mounts, and of confc-
queuce cannot be confidered as any evidence of their having
made any considerable progress in the art of building.
Clavig. II. 207.

FROM infpecing various figures of temples in the

paintings engraved by Purchas, there seems to be Come
rcafon for fufpeding that all their temples were con-
truEted in the fame manner. See Vol. iii. p. 1I09,
1110. 1113.

NOTE XXIX. p. 19.g

OT only in Tlafcala, and Tepeaca, but even in
Mexico itself, the houses of the. people were n,;re

huts built with turf, or mud, or the branches of trees.
They were extremely low, arid fight, and without any
furniture but a few earthen veifels. Like the rudest In-
dians, several families resided under the fame roof, with-
out having any separate apartments. Herrera, Dec. 2.
lib. vii. c. 13. lib. x. c. 22. Dcc. 3. lib. iv. c. 17.
Torquem. lib. iii. c. 23.

NOTE XXX. p. 191.
I AM informed by a person who resided long in New

Spain, and visited almost every province of it, that

there is not, in all the extent of that vast empire, any mo-
nument, or vestige of any building more ancient than
the conquest, nor of any bridge or highway, except
fonme remains of the causeway from Guadaloupe to that
gate of Mexico by which Cortes entered the city. MS.
Pret mne. The author of another account in manuscript
obeCrves, " That at this day there does not remain even

the

the smallest vcltige of the exiltcnce of any ancient Indian
building public or private, either in Mexico or in any
province of New Spain. I have travelled, fays he, throug!
all the countries adjacent to them, viz. New Galicia.
New Biscay, New l'Mexico, Sonora, Cinaloa, the New
Kingdom of Leon, a:nd New Santandero, without hav.
ing observed any mollment worth notice, except some
ruins near an ancient village in the v.lley de CGfas Grandes,
in lat. N. 30°. 46'. longit. 258-. 24'. from the island of
Tencriflc, or 460 leagues N. N. W. from Mexico." lie
describes these ruins minutely, and they appear to be the
remains of a paltry building of turf and stone, plastered
over with white earth or limie. A miiflonary informed
that gentleman, that he had difcovcred the ruins of ano.
thcr edifice similar to the former, about an hundred
leagues towards N. W. on the banks of the River St.
Pedro. MS. pencs me.

TutES testimonies derive great credit from one circum.

itance, that they were not given in support of any par-
ticular fyftcm or theory, but as simple answers to queries
which I had proposed. It is probable, however, that
when thcfc gentlemen aflert, that no ruins or monumentl
of any ancient work whatevei are now to be dilcovered
in the Mexican Empire, they meant that there were no
such ruins or monuments as conveyed any idea of gran-
deur or magnificence, in the works of its ancient inha-
bitants. For it appears from the tcllimony of several
Spanish authors, that in Otumba, Tlafeala, Cholula, &c.
some vclliges of ancient buildings are fill visible. Villa
Scgnor Theatro Amer. p. 143. 308. 353 D. Fran.
Ant. Lorenzana, formerly archbishop of Mexica, and
now of Toledo, in his introdualion to that edition of the
Cartas de Relacion of Cortes, which he publiflled at
Mexico, mentions some ruins which are still visible in
cfveral of the towns through wlich Cortes paired in his

way

way to the capital, p. 4, &c. But neither of these au-
thors give any description of them, and they seem to be
so very inconsiderable, as to (hew only that some build-
ings had once been there. The large mount of earth at
Cholula, which the Spaniards dignified with the name of
temple, still remains, but without any Iteps by which to
ascend, or any facing of (lone. It appears now like a
natural mount, covered with grass and (hrubs, and pof-
sibly it was never any thing more. Torquem. lib. iii.
c. 19. I have received a minute description of the re-
mains of a temple near Cuernavaca, on the road from
Mexico to Acapulco. It is composed of large stones, fitted
to each other as nicely as those in the buildings of the
Peruvians, which are hereafter mentioned. At the foun-
dation it forms a square of 25 yards; but as it rites in
height, it diminishes in extent, not gradually, but by being
contracdd suddenly at regular diltances, so that it must
have resembled the figure B in the plate. It terminated,
it is said, in a spire.

NOTE XXXI. p. 196.
THE exaggeration of the Spanisl historians, with re.

fpet to the number of human victims sacrificcd in

Mexico, appears to be very great. According to Go-
mara, there was no year in which twenty thousand human
vicims were not ofered to the Mexican Divinities, and
in ofme years they amounted to fifty thousand. Cron.
C. 229. The Ikulls of those unhappy persons were ranged
in order in a building ereced for that purpose, and two
of Cortes's officers who had counted them, informed Go-
mara that their number was an hundred and thirty-fix
tlouf.lnd. Ibid. c. 82. HIerrara's account is Itill more in-
credible, that the number of victims was so great, that
five thousand have been sacrificed in one day, nay, on
some occ;asions, no lefJ than twenty tllhuufad. D)c. iii.

6 hib

lib. ii. c. I6. Torquemada goes beyond both in extra.
vagance, for he aflerts,'that twenty thousand children, ex.
clufive of other victims, were slaughtered annually. Mon.
Ind. lib. vii. c. 21. The molt refpeaable authority in
favour of such high numbers is that of Zumurraga, the
first bishop of Mexico, who, in a letter to the chapter ge.
neral of his order, A. D. 1631, aflerts that the Mexicans
sacrificed annually twenty thousand vieims. Davila.
Teatro Eccles. 126. In opposition to all these accounts,
B. de las Casas observes, that if there had been such an
annual wane of the human fpecics, the country could never
have arrived at that degree of populousness, for whicl it was
remarkable when the Spaniards firflt landed there. This
reasoning is just. If the number of victims in all the pro-
vinces of New Spain had been so great, not only must po.
pulation have been prevented from increasing, but the lu-
man race must have been exterminated in a short time. For
befdes the waste of the species by such numerous sacrifices,
it is observable that wherever the fate of captives taken in
war is either certain death or perpetual slavery, as men can
gain nothing by submitting speedily to an enemy, they al-
ways refill to the uttermolt, and war becomes bloody and
dletruaive to the lalt degree. Las Casas positively aflcrts,
that the Mexicans never sacrificed more than fifty or a hun-
dred persons in a year. See his difputc with Sepulveda,
subjoined to his Brevifrima Relacion, p. 105. Cortes does
not specify what number of vistims was sacrificed an-
nually, but B. I)iaz del Caftello relates, that an inquiry
having been made, with refpeat to this, by the Franciscan
Monks, who were sent into New Spain immediately aftcr
the conquest, it was found that about two thousand five
hundred were sacrificed every year in Mexico. C, 2o7,

NOTE

NOTE XXXII. p. 197.
It is hardly necelTary to observe, that the Peruvian

Chronology is not only obscure, but repugnant to

conclulions deduced from the moit accurate and extensive
observations, concerning the time that elapses during each
reign, in any given fuccefion of princes. The medium,
has been found not to exceed twenty years. According to
Acofta and Garcilaflo tde la Vega, Huana Capac, who
died about the year 1527, was the twelfth Inca. Accord-
ing to this rule of computing, the duration of the Peruvian
monarchy ought not to have been reckoned above two
hundred and forty years; but they affirm that it had sub-
fired four hundred years. Acofta, lib. vi. c. r9. Vega,
lib. i. c. 9. By this account each reign is extended at a
medium to thirty-three years, instead of twenty, the num-
ber ascertaincd by Sir Isaac Newton's observations; but
so imperfef were the Peruvian traditions, that though the
total is boldly marked, the number of years in each reign
is unknown.

NOTE XXXIII. p. 20.
M ANY of the early Spanish writers assert, that the

I Peruvians offered human facrilices. Xercs, p. 19o.

Zarate, lib. i. c. I . Acofta, lib. v. c. 19. But Garci-
laflo de la Vega contends, that though this barbarous prac-
tice prevailed among their uncivilized ancestors, It was
totally abolished by the Incas, and that no human victim
was ever offired in any temple of the Sun. This nafer-
tion, and the plausible reasons with which he confirms it,
are fuilicient to refute the Spanilll writers, whose accounts
seem to be founded eltirely upon report, not upon what
they themselves had observed. Vega, lib. ii. c. 4. In
one of their fcstivals, the Peruvians oflcred cakes of bread
moiflencd with blood drawn from the arms, the eye-

brows,

brows, and noses of their children. Id. lib. vii. c. 6,
This rite may have been derived from their ancient prac-
tice, in their uncivilized tfate, of sacrificing human
victims.

NOTE XXXIV. p. 211.

HE Spaniards have adopted both those customs of the
ancient Peruvians. They have preserved some of

the aqueduas or canals, made in the days of the Incas,
and have made new ones, by which they water every field
that they cultivate. Ulloa Voyage, tom. i. 422. 477.
They likewise continue to use guano, or the dung of sea-
fowls, as manure. Ulloa gives a description of the almost
incredible quantity of it in the small islands near the coast.
Ibid. 481.

NOTE XXXV. . 213.
THE temple of Cayambo, the palace of the Inca at

Callo in the plain of Lacatunga, and that of Atun-

Cannar, are described by Ulloa, tom. i. 286, &c. who
infpe&ed them with great care. M. de Condamine pub-
lifed a curious memoir concerning the ruins of Atun-
Cannar. Mem. de 1'Academie de Berlin, A. D. 1746,
p. 435. Acofta describes the ruins of Cuzco, which he
had examined. Lib. vi. c. 14. Garcilaflo, in his usual
stile, gives pompous and confused descriptions of several
temples, and other public edifices. Lib. iii. c. i. c. 21.
lib. vi. c. 4. Don - Zapata, in a large treatise con-
cerning Peru, which has not hitherto been publifled, com-
municates some information with refpe& to several monu-
ments of the ancient Peruvians, which have not been men-
tioned by other authors. MS. peneds me, Articulo xx.
Ulloa describes some of the ancient Peruvian fortifica-
tions, which were likewise works of great extent and soli-
dity. Ton. i. 391. Three circumlntancc (truck all those

obfcrvcr:

observers: the vast fi'e of the stones which the Peruvians
employed in some of their buildings. Acofta measured
one, which was thirty feet long, eighteen broad, and fix in
thickness; and yet, he adds, that in the fortress at Cuzco,
there were flones confidcrably larger. It is difficult to
conceive how the Peruvians could move these, and raise
them to the height even of twelve feet. The second cir-
cumfiance is, the imperfection of the Peruvian art, when
applied to working in timber. By the patience and perse-
verance natural to Americans, stones may be formed into
any shape, merely by rubbing one against another, or by
the use of hatchets or other instruments made of stone
but with such rude tools, little progress can be made in,
carpentry. The Peruvians could not mortize two beams
together, or give any degree of union or flability to any
work compofied of timber. As they could not form a
centre, they were totally unacquainted with the use of
arches in building, nor can the Spanish authors conceive
how they were able to frame a roof for those ample firuc-
tures which they raised.

THE third circumflance is a striking proof, which all

the monuments of the Peruvians furnish, of their want
of ingenuity and invention, accompanied with patience
no less astonishing. None of the stones employed in those
works were formed into any particular or uniform (hapc,
which could render them fit for being compaaed together
in building. The Indians took them as they fell from the
mountains, or were raiscd out of the quarries. Some
were fqu;rc, some triangular, some convex, some concave.
Their art and industry were employed in joining them to-
gether, by forming such hollows in the one, as perfedly
correspondcd to the projecions or risings in the other.
This tedious operation, which might have been so cafily
abridged, by adapting the surface of the flones to each
other, either by rubbing, or by their hatchets of copper,

would

would be deemed incredible, if it were not put beyond
doubt by infpeaing the remains of thofc buildings. It
gives them a very singular appearance to an European
eye. There is no regular layer or firatum of building,
and no one stone resembles another in dimensions or form.
At the fame time, by the persevering, but ill-direted in.
duftry of the Indians, they arc all joined with that minute
nicety which I have mentioned. Ulloa made this obferva-
tion concerning the form of the stones in the fortress of
Atun-Cannar. Voy. i. p. 387. Pineto gives a similar
description of tie fortress of Cuzco, the most perfec of
all the Peruvian works. Zapata MS. penes me. According
to M. de Condaminc, there were regular strata of building
in some parts of Atun-Cannar, which he remarks as fin.
gular, and as a proof of fomc progress in improvement.

NOrE XXXVI. p. 216.
T HE appearance of those bridges, which bend with

their own weight, wave with the wind, and are con-

fiderably agitated by the motion of every person who pastes
along them, is very frightful at first. But the Spaniards
have found them to be the eafleft mode of pairing the tor-
rents in Peru, over which it would be difficult to throw
more solid ftruaures either of stone or timber. They
form tllofe hanging bridges so strong and broad, that
loaded mules pass along them. All the trade of Cuzco
is carried on by means of such a bridge over the river Apu-
rimac. Ulloa, tom. i. 358. A more simple contrivance
was employed in palling smaller streams: A balket, in
which the traveller was placed, being suspended from a
firong rope firetched across the 1iream, it was pulhed or
drawn from one fide to the other. Ibid.

NOTE

NOTE XXXVI. p.227.
M Y information with rcfpe& to those evehts is taken

from Noticia breve de la expedicion militar de Soi

nora y Cinaloa, fu exito feliz, y vantojofo etado, cn que
por confecuentia de ello, fe han puefto ambas provincias,
published at Mexico, June 7th, 1771, in order to satisfy
the curiosity of the merchants, who had furnished the vice.
roy with money for defraying the expence of the arma-
ment. The copies of this Noticia are very rare in Ma,
drid; but I have obtained one, which has enabled, me to
communicate tliefe curious fats to the public. Accord-
ing to this account, there was found in the mine Yccorato
in Cinaloa, a grain of gold of twenty-two carats, which
weighed lixteen marks four ounces four ochavas; this was
sent to Spain as a present fit for the king, and is now do.
posited in the royal cabinet at Madrid.

NOTE XXXVIII. p. 228.
THE uncertainty of geographers with respect to this

point is remarkable, for Cortes seems to have fur.

veyed its coasts with great accuracy. The archbiihop of
Toledo has published, from the original, in the poficffion
of the Marquis del Valle, the descendant of'Cortes, a
rlap drawn in 154x, by the pilot Domingo CaRillo, in
which California is laid down as a peninfila, firctching
out nearly in the fame direaion which is now given to it
in the bell maps, and the point where Rio Colorado en-
ters the gulf is marked with preclfion. Hist. de Neuva
l'iagna, 327.

NOTE XXXIX. p. 23.

Ai A indebted for this fai to M. L'Abbe Raynal,
tom. iii. 103. and upon consulting an intelligent per-
ton, long fettled on the Mosquito fliore, and who has been

vot.. il. c c engaged

engaged in the logwood trade, I find that ingenious author
has been well informed. The logwood, cut near the town
of St. Francis of Campeachy, is of mtch better quality
than that on the other fide of Yucatan, and the Englihf
trade in the Bay of Honduras is almost at an eid.

NOTE XL. p. 248.
P Torribio de Benevente, or Motolinea, has enumerated

ten causes of the rapid depopulation of Mexico, to

which he gives the name of the Ten Plagues. Many of
these are not peculiar to rhat province. I. The intro.
duetion of the small-pox. This disease was first brought
into New Spain in the year I520, by a negroe slave who
attended Narvaez in his expedition against Cortes. Tor-
iibio affirms, that one half of the people in the provinces,
visited with this distemper, died. To this mortality occa-
sioned by the small-pox, Torquemada adds the deftrutive
effeRts of two contageous distempers which raged in the
years 1545 and 1576. In the former 800o,000; in the
latter, above two millions perished, according to an exact
account taken by order of the viceroys. Mon. Ind. i. 642.
The small.pox was not introduced into Peru for several
ycars after the invasion of the Spaniards, but there too that
distemper proved very fatal to the natives. Garcia Ori-
gen, p. 88. 2. The numbers who were killed or died
of famine in their war with the Spaniards, particularly
during.the siege of Mexico. 3. The great famine that
followed after the reduction of Mexico, as all the people
teklcaged, either on one fide or other, had neglected the

cultivation of their lands. Something similar to this hap-
pcned in all the other countries conquered by the Spa-
niards 4. The grievous talks imposed by the Spaniards
upon the people belonging to their Repartimicntos. 5. The
oppressive burden of taxes which they were unable to pay,
and from which they could hope for no exemption. 6. The

9 nunmbcrs

numbers employed in collecting the gold, carried down
by the torrents from the mountains, who were forced
from their own habitations, without any provision made
for their subsistence, and fubjeEted to all the rigour of cold
in those elevated regions, 7. The immense labour of re-
building Mexico, which Cortes urged on with such preci-
pitate ardour, as deflroyed an incredible number of people.
8. The number of people condemned to servitude, under
various pretexts, and employed in working the filvcr
mines. These, marked by each proprietor with a hot
iron, like his cattle, were driven in herds to the moun-
t.iins. The nature of the labour to which they were sub.
jeeed there, the noxious vapours of the mines, the cold-
ness of the climate, and scarcity of food, were so fatal,
that Torribio affirms, the country round several of those
mines, particularly near Guaxago, was covered with dead
bodies, the air corrupted with their flench, and so many
vultures, and other voracious birds, hovered about for their
prey, that the fun was darkened with their flight. io. The
Spaniards, in the different expeditions which they under-
took, and by the civil wars which they carried on, de-
stroyed many of the natives whom they compelled to serve
them as Tamemes, or carriers of burdens. This lalt mode
of oppreflion was particularly ruinous to the Peruvians.
From the number of Indians who perished in Gonzalo
Pizarro's expedition into the countries to the east of the
Andes, one may form some idea of what they suffered in
limilar services, and how fast they were wafted by them.
Torribio, MS. Corita in his Breve y Summaria Relacion,
illustrates and confirms several of Torribio's observations,
to which he refers. MS. penir me.

c c 2 NOTE

NOTE XLI. p. 249.
EVEN Montesquieu has adopted this idea, lib. viii. c. lS.

But the palfion of that great man for system, some.

times rendered him inattentive to research; and from his
capacity to refine, he was apt, in Come instances, to over.
look obvious and just causes.

NOTE XLII. p. 249.
A STRONG proof of this occurs in the teltament of

Isabella, where she discovers the molt tender con.

cern for the humane and mild usage of the Indians. Thofc
laudable sentiments of the queen have been adopted into
the public law of Spain, and serve as the introduaion to
the regulations contained under the title of th good treat.
ment of the Indians. Recopil. lib. vi. tit. x.

NOTE XLIII. p. 252.

x the seventh Title of the first book of the Recopilarion,
which contains the laws concerning the powers and

functions of archbishops and biWhops, almofi a third part
of them relates to what is incumbent upon them, as
guardians of the Indians, and points out the various me-
thods in which it is their duty to interpose, in order to
dcfcnd them from oppression, either with refpet to their
persons or property. Not only do the laws commit to
them this honourable and humane office, but the ecclc-
fiaflics of America acually exercise it.

INNUMrRABLE proofs of this might be produced from

Spanilh authors. But I rather refer to Gage, as he was
not disposed to ascribe any merit to the popish clergy, to
which they were not fully entitled. Survey, p. 142, 192,
&c. Henry Hawks, an English merchant, who rcfided
five years in New Spain, previous to the year 1572j gives

1 the

the fame favourable account of the popish clergy. Hak-
luyt, iii. 466. By a law of Charles V. not only bishops,
but other ccclefiaftics, are impowered to inform and ad-
monish the civil magistrates, if any Indian is deprived of
his just liberty and rights: Recopilac. lib. vi. tit. vi.
ley 14; arid thus were constituted legal protetors of the
Indians. Some of the Spanish ecclesiastics refused to
grant absolution to such of their countrymen as poffefled
Encomiendar, and confidered the Indians as slaves, or
employed them in working their mines. Gonz. Davil.
Teatro. Eccles i. 1x7,

NOTE XLIV. p.252.

CCORDING to Gage, Chiapa dos Indos contains 4000
families, and he mentions it only as one of the
largest Indian towns in America, p. 104.

NOTE XLV. p. 252.

T is very difficult to obtain an accurate account of the

tate of population in those kingdoms of Europe where

the police is .loft perfet, and where science has made the
greatest progress. In Spanifli America, where knowledge
is still in its infancy, and few men have leisure to engage
in researches merely speculative, little attention has been
paid to this curious inquiry. But in the year 1741, Philip
V. enjoined the viceroys and governors of the several pro-
vinces in America, to make an atual survey of the people
under their jurifdition, and to tranfinit a report concern-
ing their number and occupations. In consequence of
this order, the Conde de Fuen.Clara, viceroy ps New
Spain, appointed D. Jos. Antonio de Villa Segnor y San-
chez, to execute that commission in New Spain. From
the reports of the magifirates in the several dillricts, as
well as from his own observations, and long acquaintance
with loft of the provinces, Villa Segnor published the

c c 3 result

result of his inquiries in his Teatro Amtricano. His re.
port, however, is imperfet. Of the nine dioceses, into
which the Mexican empire has been divided, he has pub,
lifled an account of five only, viz. the archbilhopric of
Mexico, the bishoprics of Puebla de los Angeles, Mechoa.
can, Oaxaca, and Nova Galicia. The bilhoprics of Yu.
catan, Verapaz, Chiapa, and Guatimala, are entirely omit-
ted, though the two latter comprehend countries in which
the Indian race is more numerous than in any part of
New Spain. In his survey of the extensive diocese of
Nova Galicia, the situation of the different Indian villages
is described, but he specifics the number of people only in
a small part of it. The Indians of that extensive pro-
vince, in which the Spanilf dominion is imperfetly efta-
blifhed, are not regiflered with the fame accuracy as in
other parts of New Spain. According to Villa Segnor, the
a&ual state of population in the five dioceses above men-
tioned is of Spaniards, negroes, mulattoes, and mestizos,
in the dioceses of

Families.

Mexico - -- 105,202
Los Angeles -- - 30,600
Mechoacan - - 30,840
Oaxaca - - 7,296
Nova Galicia - - 6,770

190,708

At the rate of five to a family, the total number is 953,540

Indian families in the diocese of Mexico 19,511
Los Angeles - - 88,240
Mechoacan - 36,196
Oaxaca - -. 44,222
Nova Galicia - - - 6,222

294,391

A;

At the rate of five to a family, the total number is
1,471,955. We may rely with greater certainty on this
computation of the number of Indians, as it is taken from
the Matriula, or tegifter, according to which the tribute
paid by them is colleaed. As four dioceses of nine are
totally omitted, and in that of Nova Galicia the numbers
are imperfealy recorded, we may conclude, that the
number of Indians in the Mexican empire exceeds two
millions.

THE account of the number of Spaniards, &c. seems

not to be equally complete. Of many places, Villa Seg-
nor observes in general terms, that several Spaniards,
negroes, and people of mixed race, reside there, without
Specifying their number. If, therefore, we make allow-
ance for these, and for all who reside in the four dioceses
omitted, the number of Spaniards, and of those of a
mixed race, may probably amount to a million and a half.
In some places, Villa Segnor distinguishes between Spa-
niards and the three inferior races of negroes, mulattoes,
and metlizos, and marks their number separately. But he
generally blends them together. But from the proportion
observable in those places, where the number of each is
marked, as well as from the account of the state of popu-
lation in NewSpain by other authors, it is manifest that the
number of negroes and persons of a mixed race far exceeds
that of Spaniards. Perhaps the latter ought not to be
reckoned above 500,ooo to a million of the former.

DEFECTIVE as this account may be, I have not been

able to procure such intelligence concerning the number
of people in Peru, as might enable me to form any con-
jeaure equally satisfying with refpe to the degree of its
population. 1 have been informed, that in the year 1 761,
the protetor of the Indians in the viceroyalty of Peru
computed that 612,780 paid tribute to the king. As all
females, and persons under age, are exempted from this

cc 4 tax

tax in Peru, the total number of Indians ought by that
account, to be 2,449,120. MS. penes me.

I SHALL mention another mode, by which one may

compute, or at leat form a guess, concerning the state of
population in New Spain and Peru. According to an ac-
count which I have reason to confider as accurate, the
number of copies of the bull of Cruzada, exported to Peru
on each new publication, is I,I71,953; to New Spain
2,649,326. I am informed, that but few Indians pur-
chafe bulls, and that they are fold chiefly to the Spanifli in-
habitants, and those of mixed race, so that the number of
Spaniards, and people of a mixed race, will amount by this
mode of computation to at least three millions.

THP. number of inhabitants in many of the towns in

Spanish America, may give us rome idea of the extent of
population, and corre& the inaccurate, but popular notion
entertained in Great Britain, concerning the weak and
desolate state of their colonies. The city of Mexico con-
tains at least 15o,ooo people. It is remarkable that Tor.
quemada, who wrote his Monarquia Indiana about the
year 161 2, reckons the inhabitants of Mexico at that time
to be only 7000 Spaniards and 8000 Indians. Lib. iii.
c. 26. Puebla de los Angeles contains above 60,ooo Spa-
niards, and people of a mixed race. Villa Segnor, p. 247.
Guadalaxara contains above 30,000, exclusive of Indians.
Id. ii. 206. Lima contains 54,00o. D. Cofme Bucno
I)efcr. de Peri, 1764. Carthagena contains 25,000.
Potori contains 25,000, Bueno, 1767. Popayau con-
tains above 20,000. Ulloa, i. 287. 'owns of a second
class are Itill more numerous. The cities in the nlolt
thriving settlements of other European nations in America
cannot be compared with these.

S UCl are the detached accounts of the number of people

in fcveral towns, which I found scattered in authors
vWlipm I thought worthy of credit. But I have obtained

q rl

an enumeration of the inhabitants of the towns in the
province of Quito, on the accuracy of which I can rely;
and I communicate it to the Public, both to gratify curio.
fity, and to rectify the mistaken notion which I have men-
tioned. St. Francisco de Quito contains between So and
60,oo000 people of all the differcnt races. Belides the city,
there arc in the Corregimiento 29 curat or parishes eft.
blilhed in the principal villages, each of which has smaller
hamlets depending upon it. The iihabitants of these are
mostly Indians and Mestizos. St. Juan de Padto has be.
tween 6 and 8000 inhabitants, utrides 27 dependent vil-
lages. St. Migucl dc Ibarra 7000 citizens, and ten vil-
lages. The difirict of Havala between i8 and 20,000
people. The diltrit of Tacunna between to and 12,000.
The diftrit of Ambato between 8 and io,ooo, besides
l6 depending villages. The city of Riobamba between
j6 and 20,000 inhabitants, and 9 depending villages.
The diftrit of Chimbo between 6 and 8000. The city
of Guyaquil from 16 to 20,000 inhabitants, and 14 de-
pending villages. The diftriC of Atuafi between 5 and
6ooo, and 4 depending villages. The city of Cuenza be-
tween 25 and 30,000 inhabitants, and 9 populous de-
pending villages. The town of L:xa from 8 to lo,ooo
inhabitants, and 14 depending villages. This degree of
population, though slender, if we confider the vast extent
of the country, is far beyond what is commonly fippofed.
I have omitted to mention, in its proper place, that
Qito is the only province in Spanish America that can
be denominated a manufaturing country; hats, cotton
Ituffs, and coarse woollen cloths, are made there in such
quantities, as to be funicient not only for the confump..
tion of the province, but to furnish a considerable article
for exportation into other parts of Spanifl America. I
know not whether the uncommon industry of this pro-
vince flould be confidered as the cause or the Cfft& of
!ts populousness. But among the ofentoatioua Inhabitants

of

of the New World, the paflion for every thing that
comes from Europe is so violent, that I am informed the
manufacures of Quito are so much undervalucd, as to
be on the decline.

NOTE XLVI. p. 258.
THESE are ecabliihed at the following places. St.

Domingo in the island of Hispaniola, Mexico in

New Spain, Lima in Peru, Panama in Tierra Firme,
Santiago in Guatimala, Guadalaxara in New Galicia,
Santa Si in the New Kingdom of Granada, La Plata in
the country of Los Charcas, St. Francisco de Quito,
St. Jago de Chili, Buenos Ayres. To each of these are
fubjeEed several large provinces, and some so far re-
moved from the cities where the courts are fixed, that
they can derive little benefit from their jurifdition. The
Spanish writers commonly reckon up twelve courts of
Audience, but they include that of Manila in the Philip.
pine Islands.

NOTE XLVII. p. 265.

N account of the distance of Peru and Chili from
Spain, and the difficulty of carrying commodities of

such bulk as wine and oil across the isthmus of Panama,
the Spaniards in those provinces have been permitted to
plant vines and olives. But they are ftri&ly prohibited
from exporting wine or oil to any of the provinces on the
Pacific Ocean, which are in such a situation as to receive
them from Spain. Recop. lib. i. tit. xvii. 1. I -18.

NOTE XLVIII. p. 267.
THTs computation was made by Betzoni, A. D. rSSo,

fifty-eight years after the discovery of America. Ilift.

Novi Orbis, lib. iii. c. 21. But as Benzoni wrote with
the spirit of a malcontent, disposcd to detraa from the

Spaniards

Spaniards in every particular, it is probable that his calcu-
lation is considerably too low.

NOTE XLIX. p. 268.

Y information with refpea to the division and tranf-
miflion of property in the Spanish colonies, is im-

perse&. The Spanish authors do not explain this fully,
and have not perhaps attended fuflficiently to the effcas
of their own inltitutions and laws. Solorzano de Jure Ind.
vol. ii. lib. ii. 1. I6. explains in some measure the intro-
dudion of the tenure of Mnyorafgo, and mentions some
of its effects. Villa Segnor takes notice of a singular con-
sequence of it, He observes, that in some of the best
situations in the city of Mexico, a good deal of ground is
unoccupied, or covered only with the ruins of the houses
once ere&ed upon it; and adds, that as this ground is
held by right of Mayorafgo, and cannot be alienated, that
desolation and those ruins become perpetual. Theatr.
Amer. vol. i p. 34.

NOTE L. p.270.
THiHRE is no law that excludes Creoles from offices

either civil or ecclesiastic. On the contrary, there

are many Cedulas which recommend the conferring
places of trust indiscriminately on the natives of Spain
and America, Betancurt y Figueroa Derecho, &c.
p. 5, 6. But notwithstanding such repeated recommend-
ations, preferment in almost every line is conferred on
native Spaniards, A remarkable proof of this is pro-
duced by the author lait quoted. From the discovery of
America to the year 1637, three hundred and fixty-nine
biflops, or archbishops, have been appointed to the differ.
ent dioceses in that country, and of all that number only
twelve wcre Creoles, p. 40. This prediletion for Euro-
peans seems till to continue. By a royal mandate, iflsued

ill

in 1776, the chapter of the cathedral of Mexico is dire&t.
ed to nominate European ecclesiastics of known merit and
abilities, that the king may appoint them to supply vacant
benefices. MS. pener me.

NOTE LI. p.275.
M ODERATE as this tribute may appear, such is the ex-

treme poverty of the Indians in many provinces

of America, that the exacting of it is intolerably opprcf-
five. Pegna Itiner. par Parochos de Indios, p. 192.

NOTE II. p. 276.

N N ew Spain. on account of the extraordinary merit
and services of the first conquerors, as well as the small

revenue arising from the country previous to the discovery
of the mines of Sacatecas, the encnomiendas were granted
for three, and sometimes for four lives. Recopil. lib. vi.
tit. ii. c. 14, &c.

NOTE LIII. p. 277.
D ANT. ULLOA contends, that working in mines is not

noxious, and as a proof of this informs us, that

many Mestizos and Indians, who do not belong to any
Repartimiento, voluntarily hire themfclves as miners;
and several of the Indians, when the legal term of their
service expires, continue to work in the mines of choice.
Entreten. p. 25j. But his opinion concerning the whole-
fomenefs of this occupation is contrary to the experience
of all agcs ; and wherever men are allured by high wages,
they will engage in any fpecics of labour, however fa-
tiguing or pernicious it may be. D. Hern. Carillo Alte-
miraino relates a curious fa& incompatible with this
opinion. Wherever mines are wrought, s.ys he, the num-
ber of Indians decrcafcs; but in the pruvince of Cam-
peachy, where there are no mines, the number of Indians

1X.1;

has increased more than a third since the conquest of Ame-
rica, though neither the foil nor climate be so favourable
as in Peru or Mexico. Colbert Colleit. In another
memorial presented to Philip III. in the year 1609, Cap-
tain Juan Gotnzalez de Azevedo afierts, that in every
diltri& of Peru, where the Indians are compelled to la-
bour in the mines, their numbers were reduced to the
half, and in some places to the third, of what it was
under the viceroyalty of Don Fran. Toledo in 1581.
Colb. Collc&.

NOTE LIV. p.278.

As labour of this kind cannot be prescribed with legal
A accuracy, the talks fecm to be in a great measure
arbitrary, and like the services exated by feudal superiors,
in vinsa prato ant men, from their vaflals, are extremely
burdensome, and often wantonly oppressive. Pegta Itincr.
par Parochos de Indios.

NOTE LV. p. 78.
Toss turn of service Inown in Peru by the name of

AMita, is called Tanda in New Spain. There it con-

tinues no longer than a week at a time. No person is
called to serve at a greater distance from his habitation
than 24 miles. This arrangement is less opprelllve to
the Indians than that eftablifled in Peru. Memorial of
Hern. Carillo Altamirano. Colbert Coiled.

NOTE IVI. p. 281.
T HE frongeft proof of this may be deduced from the

laws themselves. By the multitude and variety of

regulations to prevent abuses, we may form an idea of
the number of abuses that prevail. Though the laws have,
wifely, provided that no Indian ihall be obliged to fcrve
in any mine at a greater difance from his place of relidence

than

than thirty miles we are informed in a memorial of I)
Hernan Carillo Altamirano presented to the king, that the
Indians of Peru are often compelled to serve in mines at the
distance of a hundred, a hundred and fifty, and even two
hundred leagues from their habitation. Colbert Collea,
Many mines are situated in parts of the country, so bar-
ren, and so distant from the ordinary habitations of the
Indians, that the necessity of procuring labourers to work
there, has obliged the Spanifl monarchs to dispense with
their own regulations in several instances, and to permit
the viceroys to compel the people of more remote pro-
vinces to resort to those mines. Efealona Gazophyl.
Perub. lib. i. c. 16. But in ju(ice to them it flould be
observed, that they have been studious to alleviate this
oppression as much as possible, by enjoining the viceroys
to employ every method, in order to induce the Indians
to fettle in some part of the country adjacent to the mines.
Id. ibid.

NOTE LVII. p. 285.
ToORQJEMADA, after a long enumeration, which lias

the appearance of accuracy, concludes the number

of monasteries in New Spain to be four hundred. lon.
Ind. lib. xix. c. 32. The number of monasteries in the
city of Mexico alone was, in the year 1745, fifty-five.
Villa Scgnor. Thcat. Amer. i. 34. Ulloa reckons up
forty convents in Lima; and mentioning those for nuns,
he fays, that a small town might be peopled out of them,
the number of persons ihut up there is so great. Voy. i.
429. Philip III. in a letter to the viceroy of Peru, A. D.
1620, observes, that the number of convents in Lima was
so great, that they covered more ground than all the reft
of the city. Solorz. lib. iii. c. 23. n. 57. Lib. iii. c. 16.
Torquem. lib. xv. c. 3. The first monastery in New
Spain was founded A. I). S125, four years only after the
conqucet. 'orq. lib. xv. c. 16.

ACCORDING

ACCoRDNlG to Gil Gonzalez Davila, the complete

cftablifllment of the American church in all the Spanifli
settlements was, in thb year 1649, I patriarch, 6 arch-
bishops, 32 biihops, 346 prebends, 2 abbots, 5 royal
chaplains, 84o convents. Teatro Ecclefiaftico de las
Ind. Occidtkt. vol. i. Pref. When the order of Jesuits
was expelled from all the Spanish dominions, the colleges,
profffbd houses, and refidencies, which it polfeffed in the
province of New Spain, were thirty, in Quito sixteen, in
the New Kingdom of Granada thirteen, in Peru fcven-
teen, in Chili eighteen, in Paraguay eighteen; in all a
hundred and twelve. Colleccion General de Providencias
halta acqui tomadas fobre eftranamento, &c. de la Com-
pagnia, part i. p. 19. The number of Jesuits, prieftr
and novices in all these, amounted to 2245. MS. prie.

net.

IN the year r644, the city of Mexico presented a peti-

tion to the king, praying that no new monastery might
be founded, and that the revenues of those already efta-
blified might be circumscribed, otherwile the religious
lioufes- would soon acquire the property of the whole
country. The petitioners request likewise, that the biflops
might be laid under reftriaions in conferring holy orders,
as there were at that time in New Spain above fix
thousand clergymen without any living. Id. p. 16. These
abuses mult have been enormous indeed, when the super-
ftition of American Spaniards was flocked, and induced
to remonftratC against them.

NOTE LVIII. p. 289.
Tits lefcription of the manners of the Spanish clergy,

I Iflould not have ventured to give upon the telli-

mony of protestant authors alone, as they may be fufpeaed
of prejudice or exaggeration. Gage, in particular, who
had a better opportunity than any protestant, to view the

interior

interior state of Spanish America, describes the corrup,
tion of the church which he had forsaken, with so much
of the acrimony of a new convert, that I ihould have dif.
trusted his evidence, though it communicates some very
curious and striking fadts. But Benzoni mentions the
profligacy of 'eclefialics in America at a very early pe-
riod after thcit settlement there. HiRt. lib. . c. 19, 20.
M. Frezier, an intelligent observer, and zealous for his
own religion, paints the diflblute marners of the Spanifi
eccclfiatfics iin Peru, particularly the regulars, in fironger
colours than I have employed. Voy. p, 51. 215, &c.
M. Gentil confirms this account, Voy. i. 34. Correal
concurs with both, and adds many remarkable circum-
stances. Voy. i. 6I. I55. 16r. I have good reason to
believe, that the manners of the regular clergy, particu.
larly in Peru, are itill extremely indecent. Acofta him.
self acknowledges that great corruption of manners had
been the consequence of permitting monks to forsake the
retirement and discipline of the cloister, and to mingle
again with the world, by undertaking the charge of the
Indian parishes. De procur. Ind. Salute, lib. iv. C. 13,
&c. He mentions particularly those vices, of which
have taken notice, and confiders the temptations to them
as so formidable, that he leans to the opinion of those who
hold that the regular clergy should not be employed
as parish priests. Lib. v. c. 20. Even the advocates for
the regulars admit, that many and great enormities
abounded among the monks of different orders, when set
free from the restraint of monaflic difciplHne; and from
the tone of their defence, one may conclude that the
charge brought against them was not destitute of truth.
In the French colonies, the state of the regular clergy is
nearly the fame as in the Spanish settlements, and the
fame confequcnces have followed. M. Biet, superior ot
the secular pricfts in Cayenne, inquires with no lcfs ap-
I'ealaucc of piety thin of candour, into the caufcs of thil

corruptions

corruption, and imputes it chiefly to the exemption of
regulars from the jurifdiftion and censures of their dio.
cefans; to the temptations to which they are cxpofed; tand
to their engaging in commerce. Voy. p; 320. It is
remarkable that all the authors, who censure the licen.
tioufnefs of the Spanih regulars with the grateft severity,
concur in vindicating the condua of the Jesuits. Formed
under a discipline more perfea than that of the other mo-
nastic orders, or animated by that concern for the honour
of the society, which takes such full poflcflion of every
member of the order, the Jesuits, both in Mexico and
Peru, it is allowed, maintained a most irreproachable de-
cency of manners. Frezier, 223. Gentil, '. 34. The
fame praise is likewise due to the biihops and most of the
dignified clergy. Frez. ibid.

A VOLUEs of the Gazette de Mexico for the years
1728, 1729, 1730, having been communicated to me, I
find there a striking confirmation of what I have advanced
concerning the spirit of low illiberal superstition prevalent
in Spanish America. From the newspapers of any na-
tion, one may learn what are the objects which chiefly
engross its attention, and which appear to it molt interest-
ing. The Gazette of Mexico is filled almof entirely with.
accounts of religious functions, with descriptions of pro-
ceflions, consecrations of churches, beatifications of faints,
festivals, autos de fe, &c. Civil or commercial affairs,
and even the transactions of Europe, occupy but a small
corner in this magazine of monthly intelligence. From
the titles of new books, which are regularly inserted in
this Gazette, it appears that two-thirds of them are treao
tifes of scholastic theology, or of monkish devotion.

VOL. I, D D NOTZ

NOTE LIX. p. 289.
SoLeRZAto, after mentioning the corrupt morals of

some of the regular clergy, with that cautious re-

serve, which became a Spanilh layman, in touching on
a subjea so delicate; gives his opinion very explicitly,
and with much firmness. against committing parochial
charges to monks. He produces the taftimony of several
refpecable authors of his country, both divines and
lawyers, in confirmation of his opinion. De Jure Ind. ii.
lib. iii. c. 16. A firiking proof of the alarm excited
by the attempt of the Prince d'Efquilache to exclude the
regulars from parochial cures, is contained in the Col-
bert collection of papers. Several memorials were pre-
fcnted to the king by the procurators for the monatic
orders, and replies were made to there in name of the
secular clergy. An eager, and even rancorous, spirit it
manifest on both fides, in the conduc of this dispute.

NOTE LX. p. 294.

OT only the native Indians, but the Metlizos, or chil-
dren of a Spaniard and Indian, were originally ex-

cluded from the priesthood, and refused admifllon into
any religious order. But by a law ifued Sept. 28th,
1588, Philip HI. required the prelates of America to or-
dain such mestizos born in lawful wedlock, as they
should find to be properly qualified, and to permit them
to take the vows in any monastery where they had gone
through a regular noviciate. Recopil. lib. i. tit. vii. 1. 7.
Some regard seems to have been paid to this law in New
Spain; but none in Peru. Upon a representation of this
to Charles II. in the year 1697, he issued a new edit
enforcing the observation of it, and profefting his desire
to have all his fubjeas, Indians and mestizos as well as
Spaaiards, admitted to the enjoyment of the fame privi-

leges.

kges. Such, however, was the averGon of the Spaniards
in America to the Indians, and their race, that this seems
to have produced little effea; for, in the year 1725,
Philip V. was obliged to renew the injundtion in a more
peremptory tone. But so unfuriouatable arc the hatred
and contempt of the Indians among the Peruvian, Spa-
niards, that the present king has been constrained to en-
force the former edits anew by a law, publified Septem-
ber 1 , 1774. Real Cedula, MS. penes me.

M. CtAVGlERO has dontradited what I have related

concerning the ecclesiastical state of the Indians, particu-
larly their exclusion from the sacrament of the Eucharist,
and from holy orders, either as Seculars or Regulars, in
bfch a manner as cannot fail to make a deep imprelfion.
He, from his own knowledge, asserts, " that in New Spain
not only are Indians permitted to partake of the sacrament
of the altar, but that Indian priests are so numerous that
they may be counted by hundreds; and among these have
been many hundreds of retors, canons, and tdotors, and,
as report goes, even a very learned bishop. At present,
there are many priests, and not a few re&tors, among
whom there have been three or four our own pupils."
Vol. II. 348, &c. I owe it therefore as a duty to the
public, as well as to myself, to confider each of there
points with care, and to explain the reasons which induced
me to adopt the opinion which I have published.

I KNEW that in the ChrifRian church 'there is no dif-

tincion of perrons, but that men of every nation who
embrace the religion of Jesus, are equally entitled to
every Chriltian privilege which they are qualified to re.
ceive. I knew, likewise, that an opinion prevailed, not
only among most of the Spanish laity fettled in America,
but among " many ecclefiatics, (I use the words of
Herrera, Dec. ii. lib. ii. c. IS.) that the Indians were
not perfect or rational men, and were not poflfeed of

,D D 2 such

such capacity as qualified them to partake of the sacrament
of the altar, or of any other benefit of our religion." It
was against this opinion that Las Cas contended with
the laudable zeal which I have described in Books III. and
VI. But as the Bishop of Darien, Do&or Sepulvida,
and other refpec'able ecclesiastics, vigorously supported the
common opinion concerning the incapacity of the Indians,
it became necessary, in order to determine the point, that
the authority of the Holy Sec should be interposed; and
accordingly Paul III. issued a bull A. D. 1537, in which,
after condemning the opinion of those who held that the
Indians, as being on a level with brute beasts, Thould be
reduced to servitude, he declares, that they were really
men, and as such were capable of embracing the Christian
religion, and participating of all its blessings. My account
of this bull, notwithstanding the cavils of M. Clavigero,
must appear just to every person who takes the trouble
of perusing it; and my account is the fame with that
adopted by Torquemada, lib. xvi. c. 25. and by Garcia,
Orig. p. 311. But even after this decision, so low did
the Spaniards residing in America rate the capacity of the
natives, that the first council of Lima (I call it by that
name on the authority of the best Spanish authors) dif-
countenanced the admission of Indians to the holy con-
munion. Torquem. lib. xvi. c. 20. In New Spain, the
cxclufion of Indians from the sacrament was still more ex-
plicit. Ibid. After two centuries have elapsed, and not-
withftnnding all the improvement that the Indians may be
'iippofed to have derived from their intercourse with the
Spaniards during that period, we are informed by D. Ant.
Ulloa, that in Peru, where, as will appear in the sequel
of this note, they arc supposed to be better inflru&ed than
in New Spain, their ignorance is so prodigious that very
few are permitted to communicate, as being altogether
dcetitute of tje requifitc capacity. Voy. L 341, &C.
Solorz. Polit. Ind. I. 203.

WITH

WITH refpec to the exclusion of Indians from the

priesthood, either asSeculars or Regulars, we may observe,
that while it continued to be the common opinion that the
natives of America, on account of their incapacity, ihould
not be permitted to partake of the holy sacrament, we can-
not suppose that they would be clothed with that sacred
character which entitled them to consecrate and to dif-
penfe it. When Torquemada composed his Monarquia
Indiana, it was almost a century after the conquest of New
Spain; and yet in his time, it was still the general praAice
to exclude Indians from holy orders. Of this we have
the molt fatlsfying evidence. Torquemada having cele-
brated the virtues and graces of the Indians at great length,
and with all the complacency of a missionary, he starts as
an objeaion to what he had afterted, " If the Indians really
poflcfs all the excellent qualities which you have described,
why are they not permitted to aflume the religious habit?
Why are they not ordained priess and bishops, as the
Jewiih and Gentile converts were in the primitive church,
especially as they might be employed with such superior
advantage to other persons in the inftrution of their coun-
trymen?" Lib. xvii. c. 13.

IN answer to this obje&ion, which eftablifles, in the

most unequivocal manner, what was the general pra&ice
at that period, Torquemada observes, that although by
their natural dispositions the Indians are well fitted for a
subordinate situation, they are destitute of all the qualities
requisite in any station of dignity and authority; and that
they are in general so addiced to drunkenness, that, upon
the slightest temptation, one cannot promise on their bc-
having with the decency suitable to the clerical characer.
The propriety of excluding them from it, on these ac-
counts, was, he observed, so well justified by experience,
that when a foreigner of great erudition, who came from
Spain, condemned the praaice of the Mexican church,

D 3 he

he was convinced of his mistake in a public disputation
with the learned and mot religious Father D. Juan do
Gaona, and h. retradation is still extant. Torquemada,
indeed, acknowledges, as M. Clavigero obfcrves, with
a degree of exultation, that, in his time, some Indians
had been admitted into monasteries; but, with the art of
a disputant, he forgets to mention that Torquemada fpe.
cifies only two examples of this, and takes notice that in
both instances those Indians had been admitted by iuftake.
Relying upon the authority of Torquemada with regard
to New Spain, and of Ulloa with regard to Peru, and
confidering the humiliating depreflion of the Indians in all
the Spanihf settlements, I concluded that they were not
admitted into the ecclesiastical order, which is held in the
highest veneration all over the New World.

BuT when M. Clavigero, upon his own knowledge,

aflerted fa&s so repugnant to the conclusion I had formed,
I began to distrust it, and to with for further information.
In order to obtain this, I applied to a Spanlif nobleman,
high in office, and eminent for his abilities, who, on dif-
ferent occasions, has permitted me to have the honour and
benefit of corrcfponding with him. I have been favoured
with the following anfwcer: " What you have written
concerning the admission of Indians into holy orders, or
into monasteries, in Book VIII. efpccially as it is ex-
plained and limited in Note LXXXVIII. of the quarto
edition, is in general accurate, and conformable to the
authorities which you quote. And although the congre.
gatiotl of the council resolved and declared, Feb. 13, A. D.
1682, that the circumstance of being an Indian, a mulatto,
or mestizo, did not disqualify any person from being ad-
mitted into holy orders, if he was pofdlefed of what is re-
(quired by the canons to entitle him to that privilege; this
only proves such ordinations to be legal and valid (of
which SuloTzano, and the Spaniflh lawyers and hiflorians

quoted

quoted by him, Pol. Ind. lib. ii. c. 29. were persuaded),
but it neither proves the propriety of admitting Indians
into holy orders, nor what was then the common prac.
tice, with rcfpe&c to this; but, on the contrary, it (hews
that there was some doubt concerning the ordaining of
Indians, and some repugnance to it.

"S SICE that time, there have been Come examples of

admitting Indians into holy orders. We have now at
Madrid an aged priest, a native of Tlafcala. His name is
D. Juan Cerilo de Castilla Aquihual catehutle, descended
of a Cazique converted to Christianity soon after the con-
queRt. He studied the ecclefiatical sciences in a seminary
of Puebla de los Angeles. He was a candidate, never.
thelefs, for ten years, and it required much interell before
Bishop Abren would consent to ordain him. This ecclc-
fiaftic is a man of unexceptionable characer, models, self-
denied, and with a competent knowledge of what relates
to his clerical fun&ions. He came to Madrid above thirty.
four years ago, with the sole view of Soliciting admission
for the Indians into the colleges and seminaries in New
Spain, that if, after being well intruEted and tried, they
Should find an inclination to enter into the ecclesiastical
state, they might embrace it, and perform its funAionm
with the greatest benefit to their countrymen, whom they
could address in their native tongue. He has obtained va-
rious regulations favourable to his scheme, particularly that
the first college which became vacant in consequence of
the exclusion of the Jcfuits, (hould be set apart for this pur-
pose. But neither these regulations, nor any similar
ones inserted in the laws of the Indies, has produced any.
effet, on account of objteions and reprefcntations from
the greater part of persons of chief consideration employed
in New Spain. Whether their opposition be well founded
ar not, is a problem difficult to resolve, and towards the

DPD 4 folutioA

solution of which, several didtinctions and modifications
are requisite.

" ACCBDING to the accounts of this ecclefiatic, and

the information of other perSons who have rcfided in the
Spanish dominions in America, you may reft assured that
iu the kingdom of Tierra Firme no nuch thing is known
as either an Indian secular pries or monk; and that in New
Spain there are very few ecclcfiaftics of Indian race. In
Peru, perhaps, the number may be greater, as in that coun-
try there are more Indians who poflcfs the means of ac-
quiring such a learned education as is neceflary for persons
who aspire to the clerical character."

NOTE LXI. p. 298.
zZTARIZ, an accurate and cautious calculator, seems

to admit, that the quantity of fiver which does not

pay duty may be fated thus high. According to Herrera,
there was not above a third of what was extrated from
Potofi that paid the king's fifth. Dec. viii. lib. ii. c. 15.
Solorzano afierts likewise, that the quantity of filer
which is fraudulently circulated, is far greater than that
which is regularly fiamped, after paying the fifth. De Ind.
Jure, vol. ii, lib. v. p. 846.

NOTE LXII. p. 301.
'WX H EN the mines of Potofi were discovered in the year

1545, the veins were so near the surface, that the

ore was easily extraced, and so rich that it was refined
with little trouble and at a small expcnce, merely by the
ation of fire. This simple mode of refining by fusion
alone continued until the year 1574, when the use of mer-
cury in refining silver, as well as gold, was discovered.
Those mines having been wrought without interruption
for two centuries, the veins are now funk so deep, that the
cnpence of extracting the ore is greatly incrcafcd. Be.

rtd.o

fides this, the richners of the ore, contrary to what hap-
pens in most other mines, has become less, as the vein
continued to dip. The vein has likewise diminished to such
a degree, that one is amazed that the Spaniards ihould
persist in working it. Other rich mines have been fuc-
ceffively discovered, but in general the value of the ores
has dccreafed so much, while the expence of extrating
them has augmented, that the court of Spain, in the
year 1736, reduced the duty payable to the king from
a fish to a tunth. All the quicksilver used in Peru, is ex-
traaed from the famous mine of Guancabelica, discovered
in the year 1563. The crown has reserved the property
of this mine to itself; and the persons who purchase the
quicksilver, pay not only the price of it, but likewise a
0ifth, as a duty to the king. But, in the year 1761, this
duty on quicksilver was abolithed, on account of the in-
crease of expence in working mines Ulloa, Entreteni-
mientos, xii.-xv. Voyage, i. p. 05, 523. In confe-
quence of this abolition of thefifth, and Come subsequent
abatements of price, which became necessary on account
of the increasing expence of working mines, quicksilver,
which was formerly fold at eighty pesos the quintal, is
now delivered by the king at the rate of sixty pesos. Cam-
pomanes Educ. Popul. ii. 132, Note. The duty on gold
is reduced to a twrutieth, or five per cent. Any of my
readers, who are desirous of being acquainted with tle
mode in which the Spaniards condua the working of
their mines, and the refinement of the ore, will find an
accurate description of the ancient method by Acota.
Lib. iv. c. 1-13. And of their more recent improve-
ments in the metallurgic art, by Gamboa Comment. a la.
ordcnanz, de minas, c. 22.

NOTE

NOTE LXIII. p.304.

A N Y remarkable proofs occur of the advanced slate
of industry in Spain, at the beginning of the fix-

teenth century. The number of cities in Spain was con-
fidcrable, and they were peopled far beyond the propor-
tion that was common in other parts of Eorope. The
causes of this I have explained, Hilt. of Cha. V. i. I58.
Wherever cities are populous, that species of industry
which is peculiar to them increases, artificers and manu-
faturers abound. The effict of the American trade in
giving acivity to these is manifest, from a fngular fat.
In the year 1545, while Spain continued to depend on its
own industry, for the supply of its colonies, so much
work was bespoke from the manufacurers, that it was
supposed they could hardly finish it in less than fix years.
Campoi. i. 406. Such a demand must have put much
industry in motion, and have excited extraordinary es-
forts. Accordingly, we are informed, that in the begin-
ning of Philip II.'s /eign, the city of Seville alone, where
the trade with America centered, gave employment to
no fewer then 16,000 looms in silk or woollen work, and
that above 130,000 persons had occupation in carrying on
these manufacures. Campom. ii. 472. But so rapid and
pernicious was the operation of the causes which I shall
enumerate, that before Philip IIL ended his reign, the
looms in Seville were reduced to 400.' Uztariz, c. 7.

SINCE the publication of the first edition, I have the

fatisfacion to find my ideas concerning the early commer-
cial intercourse between Spain and her colonies confirmed
and illustrated by D. Bernardo Ward, of the Junta de
Comercio at Madrid, in his Proyelo Economico, Part ii.
c. i. " Under the reigns of Charles V. and Philip II." fJys
he, "( the manufa&urcs of Spain and of the Low Coun-
tries fubjeca to her dominion were in a most flouriflhing
state. Those of France and England were in their in-

fancy.

fancy. The republic of the United Provinces did not then
cxift. No European power but Spain had colonies of any
value in the New World. Spain could supply her fettlec
ments there with the produtions of her own foil, the fai
brics wrought by the hands of her own artizans, and all
[he received in return for thefc belonged to herself alone.
Then the exclusion of foreign manufactures was proper,
becauf¢ it might be rendered effedual. ThenSpain might
lay heavy duties upon goods exported to America, or
imported from it, and might impose what restraints Ihe
deemed proper upon a commerce entirely in her own
hands. But when time and successive revolutions had oc-
cafioned an alteration in all those circumstances, when the
manufactures of Spain began to decline, and the demands
of America were supplied by foreign fabrics, the original
maxims and regulations of Spain should have been accom-
modated to the change in her situation. The policy that
vas wife at one period, became absurd in the other."

NOTE LXIV. .p. 313.
N o bale of goods is ever opened, no cheR of treasure

is examined. Both are received on the credit of the

persons to whom they belong; and only one inltance of
fraud is recorded, during the long period in which trade
was carried on with this liberal confidence. All the
coined silver which was brought from Peru to Porto-bello
in the year 1654, was found to be adulterated, and to be
mingled with a fifth part of base metal. The Spaniih
merchants, with sentiments suitable to their usual inte-
grity, sustained the whole loss, and indemnified the so-
reigners by whom they were employed. The fraud was
detetecd, and the treasurer of the revenue in Peru, the
author of it, was publicly burnt. B, Ulloa Retablif. de
Ianuf. &c. liv. ii. p. lo..

NOTE

NOTE LXV. p. 37.

M A N striking proofs occur of the scarcity of money
l in Spain. Of all' the immense fums which have
been imported from America, the amount of which I
0hall afterwards have occasion to mention, Moncada as-
ferts that there did not remain in Spain, in x619, above
two hundred millions of pesos, one half in coined money,
the other in plate and jewels. Reflaur. de Efpagna, Dic.
iii. c. r. Uztariz, who published his valuable work in
1724, contends, that in money, plate, and jewels, there
did not remain an hundred million. Theor. &c. c. 3.
Campomanes, on the authority of a remonfirance from the
community of merchants in Toledo to Philip III. relates as
a certain proof how scarce cali had become, that persons
who lent money, received a third part of the tum which
they advanced as interest and premium. Educ. Popul.
. 417.

NOTE LXVI. p. 321.
T H E account of the mode in which the fators of the

South Sea company conducted the trade in the fair

of Porto-bello, which was opened to them by the Affiento,
I have taken from Don Dion. Alcedo y Herrera, prefi-
dent of the court of Audience in QOito, and governor of
that province. Don Dionyfio was a person of such re-
fpefable charater for probity and dicernment, that his
testimony, in any point, would be of much weight; but
greater credit is due to it in this cafe, as he was an eye-
witness of the tranfaftions which he relates, and was often
employed in deteacing and authenticating the frauds which
he describes. It is probable, however, that his reprc-
fentation, being composed at the commencement of the
war which broke out between Great Britain and Spain, in
the year 1739, may, in some inftancs, discover a por-

tion

tion of the acrimonious spirit, natural at that juncare.
His detail of fads is curious; and even English authors
confirm it in rome degree, by admitting both that va-
rious frauds were prafifed in the tranfations of the ai
nual ihip, and that the contraband trade from Jamnica,
and other British colonies, was become enormously groat.
But for the credit of the English nation it may be ob-
served, that those fraudulent operations are not to be
conidered as deeds of the company, but as the diflonour.
able arts of their fators and agents. The company itfeif
sustained a coniderable loss by the Afiento trade. Many
of its servants acquired immense fortunes. Anderfoa
Chronol. dedu&. ii. 388.

NOTE LXVII. p. 327,

QIVERAL fa&s with refpe& to the institution, the pro-
U grefs, and the effc&s, of this company, are curious,
and but little known to Engli4l readers. Though the
province of Venezuela, or Caraccas, extends four hundred
miles along the coast, and is one of the molt fertile in
America; it was so much negleted by the Spaniards, that
during the twenty years prior to the eitablifhment of the
company, only five {hips failed from Spain to that pro-
vincc.; and during 16 years, from r706 to 1722, not a
single (hip arrived from the Caraccas in Spain. Noticias
de Real Compania de Caraccas, p. 28.. During this period
Spain must have been supplied almost entirely with the
large quantity of cacao, which it consumes, by foreigners.
Before the cretion of the company, neither tobacco nor
hide swere imported from Caraccas into Spain. Id. p. 1 7.
Since the commercial operations of the company began it;,
the year 1731, the importation of cacao into Spain has
increased amazingly. During thirty years Cubfequent to
170 , the number of A^lig.t of cacao (each a hundred and
ten pounds)imported fromCaraccas, was 643,215. During

4 eighteen

eighteen years subsequent to i73 r, the number of Fanetga
imported was 869,247; and if we suppose the importation
to be continued in the fame proportion daring the re-
mainder of thirty-years, it will amount to 1,448,746
Famgas, which is an inereafe of 805,531 Fanegaj. Id.
p. 148. During eight years subsequent to 1756, there
has been imported into Spain by the company, 88,482
arrobas (each twenty-five pounds) of tobacco; and hides
to the number of 177,354. Id. 161. Since the publica-
tion of the Noticias de Campania, in 1765, its trade seems
to be on the increase. During five years subsequent to
1769, it has imported 179,156 Fanegas of cacao into
Spain, 36,208 arrobas of tobacco, 75,496 hides, and
221,432 pesos in specie. Campomanes, ii. 162. The last
article is a proof of the growing wealth of the colony.
It receives cafli from Mexico in return for the cacao,
with which it supplies that province, and this it remits to
Spain, or lays out in purchasing European goods. But,
besides this, the most explicit evidence is produced, that
the quantity of cacao raised in the province is double to
what it yielded in 1731; the number of its live flock is
more than treble, and its inhabitants much augmented.
The revenue of the bishop, which arises wholly from
tithes, has increased from eight to twenty thousand pesos.
Notic. p. 69. In consequence of the augmentation of
the quantity of cacao imported into Spain, its price has
decreased from eighty pesos for the Fanega to forty. ld.
61. Since the publication of the first edition, I have
learned that Guyana, including all the extensive pro-
vinces situated on the banks of the Orinoco, the islands
of Trinidad and Margarita are added to the countries
with which the company of Caraccas had liberty of trade
by their former charters. Real Cedula, Nov. 19, i776.
But I have likcwife been informed, that the in(titution
of this company has uot been attended with all the bene-

9 ficial

icial effe&s which I have ascribcd to it. In many of its
operations the illiberal and opprefive spirit of monopoly
is still conspicuous. But in order to explain this, it would
be necessary to enter into mihute detail, which arc not
suited to the nature of this work.

NOTE LXVIII. p 334.
THI first experiment made by Spain of opening a free

trade with any of her colonies, has produced effets

so remarkable, as to merit some farther illustration. The
towns to which this liberty has been'granted, are Cadiz
and Seville, for the province of Andalusia; Alicant and
Carthagena, for Valencia and Murcia; Barcelona, for
Catalonia and Arragon; Santander, for Castile; Co-
rugna, for Galicia; and Gijon, for Asturias. Append. ii.
a la Educ. Popul. p. 4x. These are either the ports of
chief trade in their refpe&ive diftri&ts, or those most con-
veniently situated for the exportation of their refpeative
produations. The following fa&s give a view of the in-
crease of trade in the settlements to which the new regu-
lations extend. Prior to the allowance of free trade,
the duties colleted in the custom-house at the Havannah
were computed to be 104,208 pesos annually. During
the five years preceding 1774, they rose at a medium to
308,000 pesos a year. In Yucatan, the duties have arisen
from ,ooo0 to 15,ooo. In Hispaniola, from 2,500 to
5,600. In Porto-Rico, from 1,200 to 7,000. The total
value of goods imported from Cuba into Spain, was
reckoned, in 1774, to be ,50o,00ooopfos. Educ. Popul.
i. 450, &c.

NOTE LXIX. p. 340.
TiHE two Treatises of Don Pedro Rodriguez Campo-

manes, Fiscal del ral confejo y Supremo (an office in
rank and power nearly funilar to that of Attorney General

in

in England), and Diretor of the Royal Academy of
History, the one intitled Difcurfo fobre el Fomento de la
Induftria Popular; the other, Difcurfo fobre la Educa-
cion Popular de loe Artefaios y fu Fomento; the former
publilhcd in 1774, and the latter in 1775, afford a frik.
ing proof of this. Almost every point of importance-
with refpca to interior police, taxation, agriculture, ma-
nufactures, and trade, domestic as well as foreign, is cxa-
mined in the course of these works; and there are not
many authors, even in the nations mofl eminent for com-
mercial knowledge, who have carried on their inquiries
with a more thorough knowledge of those various sub-
jeas, and a more perfdc freedom from vulgar and na-
tional prejudices, or who have united more happily the
calm researches of philosophy, with the ardent zeal of a
public-fpirited citizen. These books are in high eftima.
tion among the Spaniards, and it is a decisive evidence of
the progress of their own ideas, that they are capable of
rclifluing an author wholf sentiments are so liberal.

NOTE LXX . p.345.

t E galeon employed in that trade, inflead of the fit
hundred tons, to which it is limited by law, Rccop.

lib. xlv. 1. iS. is commonly from twelve hundred to two
thousand tons burden. The lhip from Acapulco, taken
by Lord Anson, inftcad of the 500,000 pesos permitted
by law, had on board 1,313,843 pesos, besides uncoined
silver equal in value to 43,611 pesos more. Anson's
Voyage, 384.

NOTE LXXI. p.347.
Tnap price paid for the bull varies according to the

rank of diflerent persons. Those in the lowes order,
who are servant3 or slaves) pay two reals of plate, or one

fiillinr i

filling t other. Spaniaids pay eig reals, and thoe. *i
public office, or who hold ecomicdu, fixteca ealb.
Solok. dc Jure Ind. vol ii,.lib. iii. caZ 1. Ac:oring:to
Chilton, an Enghih merchant who ];cfided long in ti
Spaii ftttlrments, the bull of Cruzado bore an higher
pricc in, tie year 1 i 7,.being then fold for lour reals at
the loweR. Hakluyt, iii. 461. The price seems to have
varied at different periods. That eadacd for the bulls
issued in the last Predjcacion, will appear from the ensuing
table, which will give folte idea of the proportional num-
bers of the diffcrent.claflfes of citizens in New Spain and
Per.

There were ificd sor-New Spain,
iBlls at 1 pesos each - 4
* at pefoseach - .a40ot

at i peso each - t4 o220
at 2 reias each " - 242,5oo

,»641,325

For Perui

at i6 pesos 41 reals each . - 3
at 3 peso* 3 reals each . i4,20z
at I peso 5S reals - - 78,8i
at 4 rea3i - - 410,325
at 3 reals . - 668,60

-17Tr,Y93

NOT E tXi; p. 348.
A tVilla Segnor, to whom we are indebted for thii id.

formation contained in his Theatro.Americano, pub-

flhed in Mexico, A. D. x 46, was ittomptadt.general in
one .Oftthe 'lioft onflderable departments óf the t6yal
tevefi, tndl by that means had accefl to proper iftsmi.a
tion, hi testimony- wih reiplet touthI pint imerit grt

VOL. 1t. a
I credit.

credit. No such acciftate detail of the Spanish revenues
in any part of America has hitherto been published in the
Englifi language, and the particulars of it may appear cu-
rious and interesting to some of my readers.

FROM the bull of Cruzado, published every two years,
there arises an annual revenue in pesos 50o00ooo

From the duty on silver - - 700000ooo
From the duty on gold - - 60,ooo
From tax on cards - - - 70,000
From tax on Pulque, a drink used by the

Indians x6-

- 1,ooo

From tax on stamped paper - - 41,000
From ditto on ice - .- . 15,522
From ditto on leather - - 2,$00
From.ditto on-gunpowder - - 7550
From ditto on salt - - 32,000
From ditto on sopper qs Mechochan - i,ooo
From ditto on alum - - - 6,Soo
Fron ditto on Juego de los gallos - 21,100
From the half of ecclefiafticg annats - 49,000
From royal ninths of bifhopricks, &c, - 68,800
From the tribute of Indians - - 650,000
From Alcavala, or duty ou sale of goods . 721,875
From the Almajorifafgo, custom-house - 373,333
From the mint . - - 357,S°

3,552,680

THIS fum amounts to 819,16 1. flerling; and if we

add to itthe profit accruing from the sale of 5000 quintals
of quicksilver, imported from the mines of Almaden, in
Spain, on tlh king's account, and what accrues from the
Awvtria, and some other taxes which Villa Segnor does not
eltimate, the public revenue in New Spain may well be
reckoned above a tnillion pounds Rlerling money. Theat.
Mex. vol. i. .p 38, &c. According to Villa Secnor, the

total

total produce of the Mexican mines amounts at a mediunk
to eight millions of pesos in silver annually, and to 59a1
marks of gold. Ib. p. 44. Several branches of.th reve.
nue have been explained in the course of the history;
some, which there was no occasion of mentioning, re-
quire a particular illustration. The right to the titli in
the New World, is vefed in the crown of Spain, by a
bull of Alexander VI. Charles V. appointed them to be
applied in the following manner: One fourth is allotted to
the bishop of the diocese, another fourth to the dean and
chapter, and other officers of the cathedral. The remain-
ing half is divided into nine equal parts. Two of these,
under the denomination of /0h do Nownos reales, arc paid
to the crown, and constitute a branch of the royal reve-
nue. The other seven parts are applied to the mainte-
nance of the parochial clergy, the building and support of
churches, and other pious uses. Recopil. lib. i. tit. xvi.
Ley. 23, &c. Avendano Thefaur. Indic. vol. i. p. 184.

THE Alcavala is a duty levied by an excise on the sale

,of goods. In Spain it amounts to ten per cent. In Ame.
rica, to four per cent. Solorzano Polit. Indiana, lib. vi.
c. 8. Avendano, vol. i. 186.

THE Almafiojfafgo, or custom paid in America on goods

imported and exported, may amount on an average to
fifteen per cent. Recopil. lib. viii. tit. xiv. Ley. I.
Avendano, vol. i. 188.

THi A.dria, or tax paid on account of convoys to

guard the lhips failing to and from America, was firit
imposed when Sir Francis Drake filled the New World
with terror by his expedition to the South Sea, It
amounts to two per cent. on the value of oods. Aven-
dano, vol. i. p. 189. Recopil. lib. ix. tit. i' Ley. 43, 44.

I HAVE not been able to procure any accurate detail

of the fcveral branches of revenue in Peru, later than the
year 1614. From a curious tnunuBrpt, containing a

aB. ftite

fate of that ticeroyalty in all its departments, presented
to the Marquis of Montes-Claros, by Fran. Lopez Carat
vantes, accomptant-general in the tribunal of Lima, it
appears that the public revenrue, as nearly as I can
compute the-value of the money in which Caravantes
Rates his accounts, amounted in ducats at 4s. d.,
to - - - 3372,768

Expcnces of government ,2 1,242,992

Net free evenuc z,129,776

The total in Rterling money - . 583.303
Expences of government - - 305,568

Net free revenue d77,735

BUT several articles appear to be omitted in this corn

putation, such as the duty on Ramped paper, leather, ec-
clefiaRical annats, &c. so that the revenue of Peru may
be well supposed equal to that of Mexico.

IN computing the expence of government in New

Spain, I may take that of Peru as a standard. There the
annual establishment for defrayitlg the charge of admini-
tration, teceeds one half of the revenue collected1 and
there is no teafon for supposing it to bc less in New
Spain.

I HAVE obtained a calculation of the total amount of

ihe public revenue of Spain from America and the Phlip-
pines, whdih, as the reader will ercelCr fiom the tw*
last articles, is more recent tharn iy of the forfhet.

Alcavalas (Excise) and Aduanas (Cut-

toms), &c. in pesos fLterte. - 2,500,006

Duties on gold and filvcr . - 0oo,oo00
Bull of Cruzado . . - 1,,000000
Tribute of the Indians - - 2,0oo,0b
By sale of quickfilvcr . 300,000

Papet

Paper eported on the king's account.

and fold in the royal warehouses 390,900
Stamped paper, tobacco, and other

small duties . ,

- - oo,ooQ,
Duty on coinage of, at the rate of one

real de la Plata for each mirk - 300,o00
From the trade of Acapulco, and the

coasting trade from prpiince to
province - . - - 590909

Affiento of negroes - - 200,000
From the trade of Mat/h&, or herb of

Paraguay, formerly monopolized
by the Jcfuits - - - - 00,000
From other revenues formerly be.

jonging to that order - - 40o0,oo

Total 1Ip009,0o

Total in Rerling money . 2,700o,00
Dcdu&t half, as the expence of ad-

ministration, and there remniz~
&et free revenue r t - -. i,3So0a0o

NOT LXXIII. p 348.
AN author, long conversant in commercial speculation

has computed, that from the mines of New Spain

alone, the king receives annually, as his fifth, the fiam
of two millions of our money. Harris COlleC. of Voy. ii.
p. 164. According to this calculation, the total produce
of'the mines rmuft be ten millions Rerlingi a fum so ex-
orbitant, and so little correfpcnding with all accounts of
the annual importation from America, that the informa-
tion on which it is founded must cvidently be erroneous.
According to Campomancs, the total produa of the Ame-

E 3 rica

rican mines may be computed at thirty millions of pesos,
which, at four shillings and sixpence a peso, amounts to
7,425,000o. itcrling, the king's fifth of which (if that
were regularly paid) would be ,48S,ooo000/. But from
this fumr mut be deduced what is loft by a fraudulent
withholding of the fifth due to the crown, as well as the
fum necessary for defraying the expence of administration.
Educ. Popular. vol. ii. p. 131. note. Both these fums
are considerable.

NOTE LXXIV. p. 349.
ACCORDING to Bern. de Ulloa, all foreign goods ex-

ported from Spain to America pay duties of various

kinds, amounting in all to more than 25 per cent. As
most of the goods with which Spain supplies her colonies
are foreign; such a tax upon a trade so extensive mudl
yield a conliderable revenue. Retablif. de Manus. & du
Commerce d'Efp. p. ISo. He computes the value of
goods exported annually from Spain to America, to bo
about two millions and a half terling, p. 97.

NOTE LXXV. p.351.
T HE Marquis de Serralvo, according to Gage, by

a monopoly of salt, and by embarking deeply in the

Manila trade as well as in that to Spain, gained annually
a million of ducats. In one year he remitted a million of
ducats to Spain, in order to purchase from the Conde
Olivares, and his creatures, a prolongation of his go-
vernment, p. 61. He was successful in his suit, and
continued in office from 1624 to 1635, double the usual
time.

INDEX.

# INDEX.

I N D E X.
N. B. The Roman Numerals refer to the Volume,

and the Figures to the Pase.:

A.
ABrSSrNIA, an embafly Sent to that country by

John II. king of Portugal, i. 71.
Acapulco, the nature of the trade carried on from thence to

Manila, iii. 344. Amount of the treasure on board the
ship taken by Lord Anson, 416.

4cefla, his method of accounting for the different degrees

of heat, in the old and new continents, ii. 197.
Adair, his account of the revengeful temper of the native

Americans, ii. 437.
Adanfon, his justification of Hanno's account of the Afri-

can seas, i. 313.
Africa, the western coast of, first explored by order ok

John I. king of Portugal, i. 52. Is discovered from
Cape Non, to Bojador, 54. Cape Bojador doubled,
59. The countries southward of the River.Senegal
discovered, 66. Cape of Good. Hope seen by Bartho-
lomew Dias, 71. Causes of the extreme heat of the
climate there, ii. so. Ignoranc'e f the ancient afrom
nomers concerning, i. 314.
Agriculture, the state of, among the native Americans, ii.

102. Two principal causes of the defets of, xo5.
Aguad is sent to Hispaniola, as a commiuioner to infpec

the conduc of Columbus, i. 166.
Aguilar, Jerom de, is relieved from a long captivity among

the Indians at Cozuiel, by Fernando Cortes, it; a4.
Albuquerque, Rodrigo, his barbarous treatment of the In.

dians of Hispaniola, i. 270.
Alcavaa, in the Spanish customs, the term explained,

i. 419.
Alexander the Great, his political charater, i. 18. His

motive in founding the city of Alexandria, 19. His
discoveries in India, ibid. 20.
Alexander VI. Pope, grants to Ferdinand and Ifabtlla of

C4fik, the right of all their wefern discoveries, i. 144.

s B 4 Sends

Bends miionaries with Columbus on his fccond voyage,
145. -
.lmagro, Diego de, his birth and charater, iii. 4. Afib-

ciates with Pizarro and de Luque, in a voyage of disco-
very, ibd. His unsuccessful attempts, 6. Is negleced
by lPistrro inhis Spanib negociation, i5. Is recon-
cikd to hba, a6. Brings reinforcements to Pizarro at
Peru, 38. -Beginning of difenfions between him and
Pizarro, g55 Invades Chili, 59. Is created governor
of Chili, and marches to Cuzco, 65. Seizes Cuzco,
out of the hands of Pizarro,? 66. 'Defeats Alvarado,
and takes him.prifoner, 68. Is deceived by the artful
negoclationA of Francis Pizarro, 69, Is defeated by
the Pisaros, 73. Is taken prisoner, 74. Is tried and
condemned, 76. Is put to death, 77.
.lmagra, the on, affords refuge to his father's followers

at Lima, iii. 87. His charater, 88. Heads a confpi-
racy against Francis Pizarro, fid. Pizarro agiffinated,
89. Is acknowledged as his successor, 91. His pre-
carious situation, 92. Is defeated by Vaca de Cafto,
95. Is betrayed and executed, 96.
AlMajcrifafga in the Spaniat American customs, the

amount of, iii. 419.
rwlrado, Alonzo, is sent from. Lima, by Francis Pizarro,
with a body of Spaniards to relieve his brothers at CUzco,
iii. 67. Is taken a prisoner by Almagro, 68. His
tfcape, 70.
.itarads, Pedro de, is left by Cortez to command at Mexi-

co, while he marched against Narvaez, ii. 309. He is
beficgcd by the Mexicans, 3 7. His imprudent con-
dut, 318. His expedition to Quito in Peru, iii 52.
;rmazons, a community of, said to exalt in South America,

by.Francis Orellana, iii. 85.
America, the continent of, discovered by Christopher Co-

lumbu, i. 176. How it obtained this name, 190. Ser-
dinand of Cafile nominates two governments in, 242.
The proppfitions offered to the native, 243. I11 recep-
tion of Ojcda aad Nicuefa among them, 244. The
South Sea diCcovered by Balboa, 258. Rip de Plata
ifcovered, 268. The natives of, injuriously treated
by the .Spaniards, 294. The vail extent of, ii. 2.
The grand obiects it presented to view, 3. The cir-
..riftances of, favourable for commerce and civiliza-
tiont . . The climates of, 617. Various causes of

the

the pecvliarity of its climates, 9. Its rude and un^
Cultivated state when firfR discovered, r3. Its animals,
:6. Its insets and reptiles, 18. Birds, 19. General
account of its foil, 20. Inquiry into the firit population
of, 2. Could not be peopled by civilized nations, 9.
Trhe northern extremity of, coutiguous to Asia, 3.
Probably peopled by Asiatics, 41. Condition and cha.
rafter of the native inhabitants inquired into, 43.
Were more rude than the natives of any other known
parts of the earth, 45. The Peruvians and Mexicans
*xcepted, 46. .The firt difcoverrs incapable of a judi.
cious speculative enmination, 47. The various fyfRem
of philosophers refpefing the natives, 49. Method
observed in the present review of their bodily conflitu,
tion and circumstances, 52. The venereal disease de-
rived from this part of the world, 76. 'Why so thinly
hihabited, 1 12. The country depopulated by continual
wanr, 148. Cause of the extreme coldness toward the
southern extremity of, 402. The natural uncultivated
state of the country described, 404. Bones of large ex.
tint species of animals discovered under ground near
the banks of the Ohio, 405. Why European animals
degenerate there, 406. Supposed to have undergone a
convulsive fepartion from Aria, 410. The vicinity of
the two continents of Asia and America clearly afcer-
tained, 412, 413, 414, 415, 416. Caufet of the de-
population of, traced, iii. 246. Thit depopulation not
the result of any intentional system of policy, 248.
Nor the result of religion, 25 . Number of Indian
natives still remaining in Mexico and Peru, 252. Al
the Spanish dominions there, fubjc6ted to two viceroys,
256. Its third viceroyalty lately established, 257. {ee
Mexico, Peru, Corte, 'Pizarro, &c.
tf4rricani, native, in Spaniih America, their bodily con-
litution and complexion, ii. 53. Their frength and
abilities, 54. Their insensibility with regard to theic
women, 56. No deformities in their frame, 62. This
circumitancc accounted far, 63. Uniformity of their
cplour, 65. A peculiar race of, described, 68. The
IFquimaux, 70. Patagonians, 71 The existence of
Patagonian giants yet remaining to be decided, 72.
Their diseases,, 74. The venereal disease peculiarly
theirs, 75. The powers and qualities of their minds,
76. Are only folicious to fupplyi imedate waitSS8.

The art of computation, scarcely known to them, 79,
Have no abftraft ideas, 80. The North Americans
much more intelligent than those of the South, 83.
Their aversion to labour, 84. Their social state, 87.
Domestic union, ibid. The women, 89. Their wo-
men not prolific, 92. Their parental affedion and final
duty, 94. Their modes of subsistence, 96. Fishing,
97. Hunting, 99. Agriculture, o10. The various
objets of their culture, 102. Two principal causes of
the defets of their agriculture, 105. Their want of
tame animals, io6. Their want of useful metals, o18.
Their political institutions, I z. Were divided into
small independent communities, ibid. Unacquainted
with the idea of property, t 2. Their high sense of
equality and independence, 114. Their ideas of fb-
ordination imperfea, 115. To what tribes there de-
scriptions apply, 1 17. Some exceptions, 19. Florida,
120. TheNatchez, ibid. The islands, 122. In Bo-
gota, ibid. Inquiry into.the causes of these irregulari-
ties, 124. Their art of war, 127. Their motives to
holtility, 128. Causes of their ferocity, x29. Perpe-
tuity of their animofities, 131. Their modes of con-
duting war, 132. Are not destitute of courage and
fortitude, 135. Incapable of military discipline, 136.
Their treatment of prisoners, 138. Their fortitude
under torture, 139. Never eat human flelh but to
gratify revenge, 142. How the South Americans
treated their prisoners, 143. Their military education,
144. Strange method of chufing a captain, among the
Indians on the banks of the Orinoco, 145. Their
numbers wafted by continual wars, 148. Their tribes
now recruit their numbers by adopting prisoners, 149.
Are never formidable in war, to more polished nations,
1S;. Their arts, dress, and ornaments, 152, 153.
Their habitations, 156. Their arms, 159. Their do-
meltic utensils, 160. Conftruaion of their canoes, 161.
The listlessness with which they apply to labour, 162.
Their religion, 164. Some tribes altogether destitute
of any, 165. Remarkable diversity in their religious
notions, 171. Their ideas of the immortality of the
foul, 174. Their modes of burial, 176. Why their
physicians pretend to be conjurors, 177. Their love of
dancing, 18 . Their immoderate pallion for gaming,
85. Are extremely addited to drunkenness, 186.

l'ut

Put their aged and incurable to dth, '90.' GOnca~
estimate of their charater, 192. Their intellenual
powmer, 193. Their political talents, i94. W f't Of
afetion, i95. Hardness of heart, 197. Thefrtiu-
sensibility, 198. Taciturnity, 2oo. Teir cunning'ib, .
Their virtues, 202. Their spirt of independence, bid.
Fortitude, 203. Attachment to their cnmunity,IfL.
Their fatisfadion with their own condition, 24. Ge-
neral caution with respeCt to this inquiry, 207.' 1iwo
distinguishable clafles of, 209. Exceptions as to'theti
charater, 211. Their charaneriftic features described,
417.. Iftancesof their persevering speed, 419. An
antipathy industriously encouraged between them 'and
the negroes in America, by the Spaniards, iii. 273.
Their present condition, 275. How taxed, ibid. Stated
services demanded from them, 276. Mode of exa&-
ing there services, 277. How governed, 278. Pro-
teator of the Indians, his function, 279. Reasons why
so frall a progress is made in their converfioh, i91.
4merigo Vespucci publishes the first written account of

the New World, arid hence gave name to America, i.
189. His claim as a difcovertr examined, 336.
.dnkona, a female cazique of Hifpanlola, her bate and

cruel usage by the Spaniards, i. 227.
,ndft, stupendous height and extent of that range of

mountains, ii. 4. Their height compared with oter
mountains, 395. Gonzalo Pizarro's remarkablexpce-
dition over, iii. 8j.
.dnimal, large, very few found in America at its first dlf-

covery, ii. 16.
Antihmtr, cause of the imperfedion of the art:of ntvigutio

aaong them, i. 5. Their geographical knowledgCerx-
tr ly confined, 312, 313, 314, 3tS 3 6.
Arp/ians peculiarly attached to the study f 'geogirahyp

1. 35.
frlMut#:, the expedition of, why so famous among the

Greeks, i. 14. 15.
dritbm/tic, or computation, the art of, hardly known to

the native Americans, ii. 79.

nAoafio, father, his extraordinary mifllon to the price of

the Tartars, i.;41. !' ) .''

A.fitic discoveries made by the Ruffians, ii. 33,
. Ajnto' trade, the. nature of, explained, iii. 320. The

frauds in, and how put an end to, 321, 322.

·* , Ataaunalfa

#ahu/p/a, is left by his father Huafcar his fucceflbr in

the kingdom of Qi;to, ii. 25. Defeats his brother
HIuafcar, and usurps the empire of Peru, 26. Sends
presents to Pizarro, 29. Visits Pizarro, 33. Is perfi.
cioufy seized by him, 36. Agrees with Pizarro on a
ranbfm, 37. Is rifaied his liberty, 41. His behaviour
during his confinement, 44. A form of trial bcftowed
oa him, 45. Is pt to death, 47. Comparison of au.
....thritis. relating to his tranfations with, and treat-
* .ment by, Pizarro, 358.
.udienct of New Spain, board of, eftablilhed by the Em,

peror CharlesV. ii. 391. Courts of, theirjurifdiion.
iii. 257.
j.dvri/ a Spanish tax for convoy to and from America,

when first iapofed, iii. 419. Its rate, ibd.
~'t:, thod(c islands difcocered by dth Portugofe, i, (4.

B
.Jalboa, Vasco Nugncz de, fettles a colony at Santa Maria,

in the gulph of Darien, i. 245. Receives intelligence
of the rich country of Peru, 253. His character, 255.
Idarches across the isthmus,' 26. Dircovcrs the
Southern ocean, 258. Returns, 259, Is superseded
in his command by the appointment of Pedrarias Da-
vila, 262. Is fined by Pedrarias for former tranfac-
tions, ibid. Is appointed lieutenant-governor of the
epuntries on the South Sea, and marries Pedrarias's
daughter, 265, Is arrested and put to death by pedra-
Tias, 267.

Bark, Jcfuits, a produaion peculiar to Peru, iii. 302.
Bartert, his description of the conftruótion of Indian

* ouse, ii. 444.
&tbaim, Martin, the honour of having discovered America

falsely afiribed to him by rome German authors, i. 328.
Account of him and his family, 329.
.B'brig and Tfchirikow, Ruffian navigators, thought to

have discovered the north-west extremity of America
from the eatward, ii. 36. Uncertainty of their ac-
counts, 410.
uMis4zda,, governors St. Michael, reduces the kingdom
of Quito, iii. 5 1. Is deprived of his command by Pi-
zarro, 82.
njfiamit the Jew of Tudcla, his extraordinary travels,
i. 41.

B r..al./.,

Bermtar , inifance Cf tihebravery o the Giarbb me*

tioned by him, ii. 450. , , .
Btrencr~t, John de, a Norman mtb coaqnam ad oso

fefuea the Canary

a ifla i. 48. , .. - ;
Bir, an account of those natual to Ameriia, ii. 19.IThe

fight of, often stretch to an immense diliakce.kom
land, i. 323. .. , . :.
Boga in America, some aecount of. the inhabitatm of,

iiL 24. Causes of their: tame fubmiffio, 'to: th
Spaniards, 228. Their religioUa. doQlaeaJ id
177~ 178 . . ..
Bojaer, cape) the first difcovery.o i. 54. Is doub by

the Portugucfc difcdvetcrs, 59. . .

Bo9u, his account of the American wartfong, ii. 43,.
Bovadilla, Francis de, i sent to EHifpanila to hiqnia'into

the coudua of Columbus,;i. 196. Sedn,.iColutus
home Id irons, g98. Is degraded, 200. 204.
Bouganvill¢, his defence of the Periples of Hanno, i.

Bouguer, M. his charater of the native Peuviansj ii. 424.
Blrdd, the coast of, difoovered by Alirez abandi i. t^zi

Remaiks on the climate of, ii. 400. . .

Bridgrs,Pcertvian, described, iii. 384. . : .
Bueno, Ayres, in South America fomae aooMmt f that

provine, ii 236. ....
Bult, paial, of no force in Spanish America, befotare ca

mined and approvd by the royal couacil of theJndlies
Uii 2z2. See Crfiad

Burial of the dead, American mode of, ii. 1 76,
CdOral, Alvarez, a Portigdefe commander, difcovais ith

coat of Brali, i.. t9g.
Cacao, the best in qality, produced ia the Sptniih Amec

rican colonies, ii. 3o0. The peparatioft.of chbocate
from, derived from the Mex ica, 2,3a5.

C.di; the galconc ad ofta, nemoved
t hither from Seville,

ili. 312.
Clifornia, the penlnfula of, discovered by Fernand Cor-

tes, ii. 392. The true state of this country long un-
known,, iii. a28. Why deprecieted by the Jcfuitn,
ibid. Favourable account of, giveu byDon Joseph Gal.
Vtt, 229.
C(lifirmiaiP , the chiraaer of, by P. Venrgas, ii. 427.

Cam/parck,'

CrMp~rch, difcovcred by Cordova, who is repulsed by thi

natives, i. 302.

Campemans, Don
Pedot Rodriguez, charnader of his p

litical and commertia. writings, iii. 416. His account
of the produceof the Spanmih American mines, 414.
CGr iiands creced into a kingdom by pope Clement VI.

i. 48. Are conquered by John de Bethencourt, 49
Cannibals, no peopleever found to eat human fle(h for sub-

fiftence, though often for revenge, ii. 141. 440.
zwrn, American, the conltruttioa of, described, ii. 16s.

araccal, eltablilhment of the company trading to that
coaf, iii. 326. Growth of the trade, 4o0.
Cari6bt ifands, discovercd by Columbus in his second

voyage, i. 146.
Caribbees, their spirit peculiarly fierce, ii. 211. Their

charaaer by M. de Chanvalon, 426. Probabl conjec-
ture as to the diftindion in clura&er between them
and the natives of the larger islands, 451.
Carpini, his extraordinary million to the prince of the

Tartars, i. 41.
Cathagena, the. harbour of, the afeft and bet fortified

of any in all the Spaniih American dominions, iii 239.
Carthaginians, state of commerce and navigation among,

i. i o. The famous voyages of Hanno and Himilco, I .
Carvajal, Francisco de, contributes to Vaca de Castor's

vicory over young Almagro, iii. 95. Encourages
Gonzalo Pizarro to assume the government of Peru,
114. Advises Pizarro to assume the sovereignty of the
country, 1 8. Is seized by Gafca, and executed, 136.
Caflillo, Bernal Diaz del, charater of his Hiftoria

Vardadera de la Couquifta de la Nucva Efpagna, ii.
453, 454.
Conttno, Diego, revolts from Gonzalo Pizarro to the vice-

roy of Peru, iii. x l6. Is defeated by Carvajal, and
secretes himself in a cave, 1 8. Sallies out and seizes
Cuzco, 131. Is. reduced by Pizarro, 132. Is em-
ployed by Gafca to make difcovcrics iu the regions
about the river Plata, 142.
Chanwlon, M. de, his charater of the native Caribbccs,

ii. 426.
Cbapetones, in the Spanish American colonies, who thus

dillinguihed, iii. 270.
Clcrles III. king of Spain, eftabliihes packet-boats be-

tween Spain and the colonies, iii,'32. Allows free

j~~~~5 ~trade

trade to the windward islands, 330. Grnts the bco-
nies a free trade with each other, 333.
Charles V. emperor, fends Roderigo de Figuetea to His-

paniola, as chief judge, to regulate the treatment'of
the Indians, i. 284. Causes this subject to be debased
before him, 29 . Equips a squadron at the solicitation
of Ferdinand Magellan, ii. 373. Rfigns his clain on
the Moluccas to the Portuguese, 379. Appoints Cortes
governor of New Spaih, 382. Rewards him on coming
home, 390. Establishes a board called the Audience:of
New Spain, 391. His consultations on American f-
fairs, iii. 96.. Efablifhes new regulations, 102.
Chili, is invaded by Almagro, iii. 59. How fubjdaed

by the Spaniards, 23 . Excellence of its climate and
:foil, 232. Cause of its being negleced, 233. Profpct
of its improvement, 234.
Chiqitos, political state of that people, from Fernandez,

ii. 436.

Cbockate, the use of, derived from the Mexicans, iii. 325.
Cholula, in Mexico, arrival of Cortes there, with some

account of the town, ii. 270. A conspiracy against
Cortes discovered, and the inhabitants deltroyed, 272.

Cicero inflUnce of his ignorance in geography, i. 317.
Cinaloa, political state of the people there, ii. 436. Their

mode of living, 443. Are destitute of all religion, 447.
Extraordinary large grain of gold found there, iii. 385.
Cineguilla, in the province of Sonora, late discoveries of

rich mines made there by the Spaniards, iii. 221.
Probable effecs of tlhefe discoveries, ibid.
Clavigero, M. several of his objecions answered, iii

403-408;
Clement VI. pope, ereas the Canary islands into a king-

dom, i. 48.
Climates, influenced by a variety of caufcs, ii. 7. Their

operation on mankind, 208. Inquiry into the cause of
the different degrees of heat in, 397.
Coekineal, an important producion, almost peculiar to

New Spain, ili. 302.
Cold, extraordinary predominance of, in the climate of

America, ii. 7. Causes of this peculiarity, 9.
Cdo/tr; Spanilh American, view of the policy and trade

of, iii. 245; Depopulation the first effe& of them,
ibid. Cau es of this depopulation, 246. The small-
pox very fatal to, 248. General idea of the Sp*hih

policy

tolicy in, 253. Early interpoftion of the tegal autho-
rity in, 254. An exclusive trade the firt objet in,
163. Compared with those of ancient Greece and
Rome, ibid. The great rce(ri&ions they are fubje&
to, 265. Slow progreft of their population from Ea-
tope, 266. Are difcoutrgod by the state of property
thete, d671 And by the nature of their ecclefiafical
polity, 269. The various elases of people in, ibid.
Ecckfiatical constitution- of, 281. Form and endow-
.nents of the church there, 2831 Pernicious eleds of
knonaftic institutions there, 284. Charader of the
ecclesiastics there, 286. ProduCions of, 294. The
mines, 295. Those of Potofi and Sacotecas, 296.
The spirit with Which they are worked, 2981 Fatal
effets of this ardourt 300. Other commodities that
tompofe the commnrce of, 301: Amazing inceafe of
horned cattle there, 303. Advantages which Spain
formerly derived from them, 304. Why the fame ad-
vantages are not still received, 305. Guarda Coitas
employed to check the contraband trade in, 312. The
tife of regiser ihips introduced, 323. And galeons
laid alide) 324. Company of the Caraccas instituted,
326. Establishment of regular packet-boats to, 329.
Free trade permitted between them, 333. New regu-
lations in the government of; 334. Reformation of
the courts of justice, ibid. New distribution of go-
verftnents, ibid. A fourth viceroyalty established, 336.
Attempts to reform domestic policy, 338. Their trade
with the Philippine islands, 343. Revenue derived
ftomn, by Spain, 346. Expence of administration there,
349. State of population in, 390. The number of
monasteries there, 398. See Mexico, Peru, &c,
oblumbuJ, Bartholomew, is sent by his brother Chtiftd.
pher to negociate with Henry VII. king of England,
i. 88. 'The misfortunes of his YvOyage, 93. Follows
his brother to Hispaniola, z56. Is vefied with the
administration of affirs there by his brother on his
return to Spain, 167. Founds the town of 8t> Do-
mingot 178.
Columbus, ChriRopher, birth and education of, i. 75.

His early voyages, 76. Marties and fettles at Lilbon,
77. His geographical refleions, 80. Conceives the
idea of making discoveries to the westward, 82. Oflers
hi fCervices to the Genoese senate, 85. Cause of his

i overturce

INDEX.

overtures being rcjeted ,in Portugal, 88. Applies to
the courts of Caftie and Engliani .. Hi propqfal,
how treated b1 the Spipih geo gphers, 90. I pa-
tronifed by Joan Perez, 94, H .propoals again
rejeted, 95. -Is invited by Ifaels, aid engaged in
the Spmnih frviot, oo. Prparatioa r hQisr vqge,
iol. The amount of his..eqipmntu, 103. Saa[,fpom
Spain, 10. His vigilnt attentin to all citeum-
iances daring his 'rye, r07. Apprchenfons es his
crew, 108. His addref in quieting theircabalbl, x2.
Indications of their apptoaching land, 14. An illand
difcoweed, ilS. He laods, I 6. His interiew with
the natives, ibid. Names the island San Salvadore,
19. Profecutos his difcveries fotthward, iao. Dif-
covers, and lands on, the iflatd of Cub, r21. Dif-
covers Hispaniola, 123. Suiers ftiptrock, but is
fhv by the ndians, r27. Build a fort, 130. Re-
turns to Europe, 133. His expedient to prcfrve'the
memory of his difcovcries during a lorm, 135. Ar-
rives at the Azores, 136. Arrives at Libonz, ibid.

is reception in Spain, 138. His audience with Ser-

dinand and Isabella, 139. His eqUipment for a second
voyage, 140. Discovers the Caribbec islands, 146.
Finds his colony on Hispaniola dftroyed, ibid. '47.
Builds a city, which he calls flabella, 149. Visits the in-
terior.prts of thecountry, ii. His men diSconteted
and fa&cious. 153, 154. Difcovcrs the island of Ja-
maica, 55. Meets his brother Bartholomew at Isabella,
1S6. The natives ill used by his men, and begin to
bealarmed, 157, 158. He defeats theIndians, 162.
Exats tribute from them, 163. Returns to Spain to
juRify his conduct, 167. Is furnished with a more
regular plan for coonization, 1569. His third voyage,
1i, Difcoverd theifland of Trinidad, 175. Discover
the' continent of America, 1.76. State of Hispaniola
on his arrival, 178. Composes the mutiny of Roldan
and his adherents, 181. Is difttefied by the faaious
behaviour of his ment 93. Complaints carried to
Spain against him, 194, 195. Is sent home in irons,
197. Clears his conduft, but is not restored to his
authority, 200. His oflicitations neglcted, 205.
Foams new fcliemes of discovery, 206. Engages in a
fourth voyage, 2o8 His treatment at Hispaniola,
209. Searches after a palage to the Indian ocean,
11. Is fhipwrccked on the coit of Jamaica, 1.
VOL. I1I. f p Btl

Hic artifice to focure the friedfhip of the Indians, 216.
Is delivered, and arrivq(sat I4jifaniola, 220 Returs
toSpain, 22 r. ,, is deathl, 222. His right to the ori-
'tinal difcoverv of America defended, 327.
Celumii.r, Don Diego, tues out his claim to lus father's

privileges, i. 237, Marries, and goes over. to Hifpa-
niola, 238,'239. El;ahlilhc a pearl fishery at Cubaga,
246. Projets, the conqiuef of Cuba, 248. His mea-
fures thwarted by. erdinand, 269. Returns to Spain,
270. Cmlliieree, the era from which its commencement is to

be'dated, i. 3. Motives to an intercourse among dif-
tant nations, 4. Still flourilhed in the eastern empire
after the fubverfon of the western, 33. Revival of,
in EuropP, 35.
Compa/f, marirner's navigation extended more by the in-

vcntion of, thin by all the efforts of preceding ages, i.
"45. By whom invented, 46.
Cs:,damine, M. his account of the country at the foot of

the'Andes, in South America, ii. 404. His remarks
on the characer cf the native Americans, 425,426.
Congo, the -kingdon} of, difcovcrcd by the Portuguefc,

i. 67. CoGianiitople, the consequence of removing the feat of

the Roman empire to, i. 31. Continued a commer.
cial city after the extinction of the western empire, 33.
'Became the chief mart of Italy, 36.
Pordlova, Francisco IIHrnandez, discovers Yucatan, i. 301.

Is rcpulfcd at Campeachy, and returns to Cuba, 303.
Corta, Alonzo, his observations on the contraband trade

of the Spanish colonies, iii. 341. CharaC6er of his
American riemoirs, 366.
Cortme, Fernando, his birth, education, and charaaer,

ii, 21 5. Is by Vclafqucz appointed commander of the
armament fitted out by h1im against New Spain, 216.
Vclafquez becomes jealous of lim, 219. Velasquez
fends orders to deprive him of hi's commission, and lay
lini underll an arrelf, 220. Is proteced by his troops,
222. 'Ihe amount of his forces, ibid. Reduces the
Indians at Tabasco, 25. Arrives at St. Juan de
Ultua, ibida. His interview with two Mexican com-
: manders, 228. .Sends prefcnts t,, Montezuma, 231.
Rcecivcs others in return, 232. Ilis fcllmcs, 236.
, "llabliflles a form of civil gove;.rinent, 241. Reiguls
Liii cmnuini0fion under Vclafqilez, and all'uinc thle coll-

liaili

mand in the king's name, 244. His friendship couftet
by the Zemposllans, 246. Builds a sot, 248. Con-
cludes a formal alliance with several cazi4hes, 249.
Discovers a conspiracy among his men, and deftroyi
his Ihips, 253. Advances into the country, 256. Is
opposed by the Tlafcalans, 258. Concludes a pacRe
with them, 265. His ralh zeal, 267. Proceeds to
Cholula, 270. Difcovcrs a conspiracy against him
here, and destroys the inhabitants, 272. Approaches
in fight of the capital city of Mexico, 273. His first
interview with Montezuma, 275. His anxiet at his
situation in the city of Mexico, 282. Seizes Monte-
zuma, 286. Orders him to be fettered, 290. Reasons
of his conduEt, ibid. Prevails on Montezuma to own
himself a vafral to the Spanish crown, 294. Amount
and division of his treasure, 296. Enrages the Mexi,
cans by his imprudent zeal, 300. An armament sent
by Velasquez to supersede him,304. His deliberatibns
on this event, 305. Advances to meet Narvaez, 31 1.
Defeats Narvaez, and takes him prisoner, 315. Gains
ovet the Spanish soldiers to his interest, 3 i6. Rcturna
to Mexico, 319. His improper conduc on his arrival,
320. Is resolutely attacked by the Mexicans, 321.
Attacks them in return without success, 322. Death of
Montezuma, 323. His extraordinary escape from death,
326. Abandons the city of Mexico, 327. Is attacked
by the Mexicans, 328. His great lolles in the en-
counter, 329. Difficulties of his retreat, 331. Battle
of Otumba, 333. Defeats the Mexicans, 335. Mu-
tinous spirit of his troops, 338. Reduces the Te-
peacans, 340. Is frengthened by fevcral reinforce-
ments, 342. Returns to Mexico, 343. Establishes
his head-quarters at Tezeuco, 346. Reduces or con-
ciliates the surrounding country, 347. Cabals among
his troops, 349. His prudence in fupprecling them,
35o. Builds and launches a fleet of brAgantines on the
lake, 353.. Besieges Mcico, 354. Makes a grand
assault to take the city by storm, but is repulscd, 359.
Evades the Mexican prophecy, 362. Takes Guati,
mozin prisoner, 366. Gains pofltffion of the city,
367. And of the whole empire, 37o. Defeats an-
other attempt to supersede him in his command, 380.
Is appointed governor of New Spain, 382. His
schemes and artangements, ibid. Cruel treatment of
the natives, 383. His condu t fubjetcd to inquiry,

F F 2 388.

388. Returns to Spain to justify himself, iia'. a re.
warded by the emperor Charles V. 390. Goes back
to Mexico with limited powers, 391. Discovers Ca-
lifornia, 392. Returns to Spain and dies, 393. In-
quiry into the nature of his letters to the emperor
Charles V. 452. Authors who wrote of his conquelt
of New Spain, 453, 454.

Coumcil of the Indies, its power, iii. 260.
Creols, in the Spanifli American colonies, character of,

in. 271.
Croglan, Colonel (:corge, lis account of the discovery of

the bones of a large extind fpecics of animals in North
America, ii. 405.
Crifades to the Holy Land, the great political advantages

derived from, by the European nations, i. 38, 39.
Cruzado, bulls of, publiflled regularly every two years in

the Spanish colonies, iii. 347. Prices of, and amount
of the sale at the lalt publication, 417.
Cuba, the island of, discovered by Chriftoplhei Columbus,

i. 121. Is failed round by Ocampo, 237. The con-
quest of, undertaken by Diego Velasquez, 247. Cruel
treatment of the cazique Hatuey, and his repartee to a
friar, 248. Columbus's enthufialtic description of a
harbour in, 323. The tobacco produced there, the
finest in all America, iii. 302.

Cubagtb, a pearl fishery cllabiifhed there, i. 240.
Clunano, the natives of, revelge their ill treatment by the

Spaniards, i. 295. The country desolatcd by Diego
Ocampo, 298.
Cuzco, tlce capital of the Pcruvian empire, fqunded by

Manco Capac, iii. 22. Is seized by Pizarro, 51. Is
besieged by the Peruvians, 63. Is surprised by Alma-
gro, 67. Is recovered and pillaged by the Pizarros, 75.
Was the only city in all lPeu, 220.

I)
Dancing, tlhe love of, a favourite padion among the Ame-

ricans, ii. i g I.
Darien, the ilthmns of, dcfLribed, i. 254. 'he increace

of fettlcmeiiit there, ol)fcltted by the noxioufuefs of
the climate, iii. 238.
De Solis, his unfortunate e:pedlition up the river Ilata, i

268.
Dt Soli, Antonio, charac¢r of lii Ilioifria de la Con-

quist d iP .Mxic'a , ii. 4 .1.

JD'Efqtlance, prince; viceroy of Peru, Iis vigorous mea-

fures for restraining the excesses of the regular clergy
there, iii. 289. Rendered ineffeclual, 29o.
Diaz, Bartholomew, discovers the Cape of Good Hope,

i. 70.
)Difoveries, the difference between those made by land,

and those by sea, ftnted, i. 316.
Dodwell, his objections to the Periplus of Hanno ex.

ploded, i. 31 .
Dcinigo, St. on the island of Hispaniola, founded by Bar-

tholomew Columbus, i. 178.
Dom.nicans, those in Hispaniola publicly remonltrate

against the cruel treatment of the Indians, i. 271.
See Lax Casa/.
DrunkenneJs, strong propensity of the Americans to iR-

dulge in, ii. 186.

E
]artl, the globe of, how divided into zones by the an-

cients, i. 29.
Egyptians, ancient, state of commerce and navigation

among them, i. 5.
El Dorado, wonderful reports of a country so called, made

by Francis Orellana, iii. 85.
iephantt, that animal peculiar to the torrid zone, ii. 406.
Lfiurial, curious calendar discovercd in the Library there

by Mr. Waddilove, iii. 375. Description of that va-
luable monument of Mexican art, ibid.
Ifyqiiinaux Indians, resemblance between them and their

neighbours the Greenlanders, ii. 40. Some accouik
of, 143. 445.
Eugene IV. pope; grants to the Portuguese an exclusive

right to all the countries they flould discover, from
Cdpe Non to the continent of India, i. 62.
,Erropr, how asseted by the difmembermemt of the Ro-

nman Empire by the barbarous nations, i. 31. Revival
of commerce and navigation in, 35. 'olitical advai.
t.iges derived from the crusades 38.

F
i(irdinand king of Castile. See Columbus and Vabell.

'urns his attention at length to the regulation of
American affairs, i. 232. Don Diego de Columbus
fucs out lis father's claims agailft him, 237. EreDs

rS 3 two.

two governments on the continent of America, 242.
Sends a fleet to Darien, and supersedes Balboa, 261.
Appoints Balboa lieutenant-governor of the countries
on the South Sea, 265. Sends Dias de Solis to discover
a western paifage to the Moluccas, 268. Thwarts the
measures of Diego Columbus, 269. His decree con-
cerning the treatment of the Indians, 273.
.Fernancdez, Don Diego, chara&er of his HiRoria del

Pru a, iii. 354.
,Fernandez, P. his description of the political Rate of the

Chiquitos, ii. 436.
'igsueroa, Roderigo de, is appointed chief judge of HiTs
paniola. with a comniffion to examine into the treat-
ment of the Indian natives, i. 284. Makes an expe-
riment to determine the capacity of the Indians, 296.
Florida, discovered by Juan Ponce de Leon, i. 249. The

chiefs there hereditary, ii. I I6. Account of, from Al.
vara Nugnez Cabeca de Vaca, 430.

FIota, Spanifi, some account of, iii. 312.
FonJeca, bishop of Badajos, minister for Indian affairs,

obstruCts the plans of colonization and discovery formed
by Columbus, i. 163. 173. Patronizes the expedition
of Alonzo de Ojeda, 188.

G
Glaonr, Spanish, the nature and purpose of there vefiels,

ii. 31 2. Arrangement of their voyage, 3 3.
Galvz, Don Joseph, sent to discover the true Rate of

California, iii. 229.
Gama, Vasco de, his voyage for discovery, i. 183. Dou-

bles the Cape of Good Hope, 185. Anchors before
the city of Mlinda, ibid. Arrives at Calecut in Mala-
bar, 186.

Gaming, rrange propensity of the Americans to, ii. 185.
Ganges, erroneous ideas of the ancients as to the position

of that river, i. 3 5.
Gasea, Pedro de la, sent to Pern as president of the Court

of Audience in Lima, iii. 123. His character and
moderation, 124. The powers he was vested with,
125. Arrives at Panama, 126. Acquires pouclliol
of Panama with the fleet and forces there, 129. Ad-
vances towards Cuzco, 134. Pizarro's troops desert
so him, 135. His moderate use of the vitory, 136.
Devises employment for his soldiers, 142. His di-
viio of the country among his followers, 143. The

discontents

discontents it occasions, 144. Restores order and go-
vernment, ibid. His reception at his reurn to 'Spain,
145.

Geminus, instance of his ignorance in geography, i. 318.
Geography, the knowledge of, extremely onjfined among

the ancients, i. 27. Became a favourite ftudy,.among.
the Arabians, 35. .
;iants, the accounts of in our early travellers, pncop

firmed by recent discoveries, i. 45. ii. 421, 422.
Gioia, Flavio, the inventor of the mariner's compass, i/

46.
;lobe, its division into zones by the ancients, i. 29.
Gold, why the first metal with which man was acquaint-

ed, iii. 233. Extraordinary large grain of, found in the
mines at Cinaloa, 385.
Gomara, charater of his Cronica de la Neuva- Efpagna,

ii 453-
Good Hope, Cape of, discovered by Bartholomew Diaz,

i. 71.
Government, no visible form of, among the native Ameri-

cans, ii.. 1.17. Exceptions, 12o.
Gran Chaca, account of the method of making war among

the natives of, from Lozano, ii. 438.
Granada, new kingdom of, in America, by whom re-

duced to the Spatiif dominion, iii. 242. Its.climate
and produce, 243. 'A viceroy lately cftablilUed there,
257.
Greeks, ancient, progress of navigation. ndJ discovery

among them, i. 14. Their commercial iuterciurfe
with other nations very limited, 16, 17.

Greenland, its vicinity to North America, ii. 39.
Grijalva, Juan de, sets o&t from Cuba on a voyage of dif-

covery, i. 304. Discovers and gives name to New
Spain, 305. His reasons for not planting a colony in
his newly discovered lands, 307.
G//arda Costas employed by Spain to check illicit trade in

the American colonies, iii. "'2.
Gualimala, the indigo there superior to any in America,

iii. 302.
Guatimozin, nephew and ob-in.law of Montbzuma, fiac-

ceeds Quetlivaca in the kingddhm of Mexico, ii. 345.
Rcpulfe the attacks of the Spaniards, in florming the
city of Mexico, 359. Is taken prisoner by Cortes,
366. Is tortured to discover his treasure, 369. Is
hanged, 385.

4 Guiana,

Guiana, Dutch, c'ufe of the excelive fertility of the foil

there, ii. 409.

H
Hanno, his Periplus defended, with an account of his

voyage, i. 3i. 1
Hatiut, a cazique of Cuba, Ris cruel treatment, and me-

morable repartee to a Franciscan friar, i. 248.
HvtJkefworh s voyages, account of New Holland, and

the inhabitants from, ii. 432.
IJtat, the different degrees of, in the old and new con-

tinents, accounted for, ii. 397. Estimated, 408.
Henry Prince of Portugal, his chariater and studics,

i. 5. Expeditions formed by his order, 57. Applies
for a papal grant of his new discoveries, 6z, His
death, 65.
Herrada, Juan de, affalinates Francis Pizarro, iii. 89.

Dies, 91.
Hirrera, the belt hitorian of the conquest of New

Spain, ii. 455. His aqcount of Orellana's voyage,
iii. 363.

Hispaniola, the island of1 discoverel by Chriftppher

-Columbus, i. I23. His tranfations with .the na-
tives, ibid. 124. A colony left there ly Columbus, 13 .
The colony destroyed, 147. Columbus builds a
-city called Isabella, 149. The natives ill-uscd,
and begin to be alarmed,' 157. Are defeated by
the Spaniards, 16o. Tribute cad6cd from them,
X62. They scheme to flarve the Spaniards, 164.
St. Domingo founded by Bartholomew Columbus,
178. Columbus sent home in irons by.Bovadilla,
x97. Nicholas de Ovando appointed governor, 201.
Summary view of the contdua of the Spaniards to-
wards the natives of, 225. Unhappy fate of Ana-
coana, 227. Great produce from the mines there,
230. The inhabitants diminiih, 233, The Spa-
niards recruit them by trepanning the natives of the
Lucayos, 234. Arrival of Don Diego de Columbus,
239. The natives of, almost extirpated by slavery,
247. 270. Controversy concerning the treatment
of them, 271. Columbus's account of the humane
treatment he received from the natives of, 324.
Curious instance of superstition in the Spanilh planters
there, ii. 405.

Helix,;,

HIgmi#, Pedro Alvate2s ere&s the royal flandard in Pert,

in opposition to the younger Almagro, iii. 94. Vaca
de Castro arrives and assumes the command, 95.
Hsmnr, his account of the navigation of the ancient Greeks,

i. iS.
Honduras, the value of that country, owing to its produc-

tion of the logwood tree, iii. 23 1.
lforned cattle, amazing increase of them in Spanilh Amea

rica, iii. 303.
Irort/s, aftonifhmetlt and mistakes of the Mexicans at the

firlt fight of them, ii. 461. Expedient of the Peru-
vians to render them incapable of a:tion, iii. 363.
Ruana Capac, Inca of Peru, his chraatcr and family,

iii. 24. '
HuaJcar Capac, Inca of Peru, disputes his brdthet Ata-

hualpa's fuccefflon to QUito, iii. 25. Is defeated aud
taken prisoner by Atahualpa, 26. Solicits the assistance
of Pizarro against his brother, .27. Is put to death by
order of Atahualpa, 39.

I

Jnmaiea, discovered by Christopher Columbus, i. r5;..
Jerome, St. three monks of that order sent by cardinal

Ximenes to Hispaniola, to regulate the treatment of the
Indians, i. 278. Their condul under this cominiffion
282. Are recalled, 284.
efu;tS, acquire an absolute dominion over California,
iii. 228. Their motives for depreciating the country,
ibid.
Juwr, ancient state of commerce and navigation among

them, i. 9.
Inca: of Peru, received .origin of their empire, iii. 23.

200. Their empire founded both in religion and po-
licy, 201. See Pmu.
India, the motives ,f Alexander the Great, in his expedi-

tion to, i. i . The commerce with, how carried on
in ancient timesó 24, 2 . And when arts began to re-
vive in Europe, 3 . The firit voyage made round the
Cape of Good Hope, 184.

Indiau. in Spanish America. See dmericans.
Indiie, Well, why Columbus's discoveries were so named,

i. 142.
Isnocent IV. pope, his extraordinary million to the prince

of the Tartats, i. 41, 42.

lnJitienjsis

Inqufttion, court of, when and by whom first introduced

into Portugal, i. 320.
l]se,7s and reptiles, why so numerous and noxious in

America, ii. 18.
John I. king of Portugal, the first who sent ships to ex-

plore the weitern coats of Africa, i. 52. His son prince
Hlenry engages in these attempts, 55.
John II. king of Portugal, patronises all attempts towards

tlifcovcrics, i. 67. Sends an embafly to Abyllinia, 72.
His ungenerous treatment of Columbus, 88.
Iron, the reason why savage nations were unacquainted

with this metal, ii. o19.

fabrlla, queen of CaRile, is applied to by Juan Perez in

behalf of Chriflopher Columbus, i. 94. Is again ap-
plied to by Qiintanilla and Santangel, 98. Is prevailed
on to equip him, 99. Dies, 221. Her real motives
for encouraging discoveries in America, iii. 249.'
Ifabilla, the city of, in Hispaniola, built by Chrifcopher

Columbus, i. 149.
Ita/y, the first country in Europe, where civilization and

arts revived after the overthrow of the Roman Empire,
i. 36. The commercial spirit of, adive and enterprif-
ing, 38.

L
Ladrone islands, discovered by Ferdinand Magellan, ii.

376.

Lakes, amazing size of those in North America, ii. 4.
Las Cafar, Bartholomew, returns from Hispaniola to so.

licit the cause of the enslaved Indians at the court of
Spain, i. 276. Is sent back with powers by cardinal
Ximenes, 278. Returns diffntisfied, 279. 283. Pro-
cures a pew commiflion to be sent over on this fubjclt,
284. Recommends the scheme of supplying the colo-
nies with negroes, 286. Undertakes a new colony, 287.
His conference with the bilhdp of Darien before 'the
emperor Charles V. 292. Goes to America to carry
his schemes into execution, 294. CircumRfances un'
favourable to him, 296. His final miscarriage, 297.
Revives his representations in favour of the Indians, at
the dcfire of the emperor, iii. 1oo. Composes a trea.
tife on the deftrution of America, tor.
LeNs, Pedro Cieza de, charater of his Chronica del Peru,

ii. 354.
Lery, his description of the courage and ferocity of the

Toupinambos, ii. 440.

5 /Linima

Lima, the city of, in Peru, founded by Pzarro, iii. 5ó.
.Lyon, Mr. the Britiih minister at Madrid, his anfwr to

several intereting inquiries relating to the admillion f
Indians into holy orders, iii. 406.
.Logwed, the commodity that gives importance to the pro-

vinces of Honduras and Yucatan, iii. 230. Policy of
the Spaniards to defeat the Englilh trade in, ibid.
Louir, St. king of France, his embassy to the chan of the

Tartars, i. 42.
Logano, his.account of the method of making war among

the natives of Gran Chaco, ii. 438.
Luque, Hernando de, a pries, afbciates with Pizarro in

his Peruvian expedition, iii. 4.

Madeira, the island of, first discovered, i. 58.
Madoc, prince of North Wales, story of his voyage and

discovery of North America examined, i. 330.
Magellan, Ferdinand, his account of the gigantic fizeof the

Patagonians, ii. 71. The exigence of this gigantic race
yet to be decided, 72. 421, 422. His introduction to
the court of Caflile, 37 1. Is equipped with a squadron
for a voyage of discovery, 37.3. Sails through the fa-
mous strait that bears his name, 376. Discovers the
Ladrone aud Phlilippine islands, ibid. Is killed, ibid.
Magnet, its property of attracing iron known to the an-

cients, but not its polar inclination, i. 14. Extraordi-
nary advantages resulting from this discovery, 46.
Jla4, St. account of its commerce with Spanifl America,

iii. 319.
,'anco Capac, founder of the Peruvian empire, account

of, iii. 22, 23. 200.
fandivillr, Sir John, his eastern travels, with a character
of his writings, i. 44.
.Manila, the colony of, ellablilhed by Philip II. of Spain,

iii. 343, Trade bctween, and South America, ibid.
Matiind, their disposition, and manners formed by their

situation, ii. 25. lience resemblances to be traced in
very distant places without communication, 26. Have
uniformly attained the greatef perfeaion of their nature
in temperate regions, 208.
.Marco Polo, the Venetian, his extraordinary travels in

the East, i. 43.

Ilarifl, Gabricl, his account of the country between the
Illinois and IIaclilimjkinac, ii. 433.

farina

Jnqufition, court of, when and by whom firfR introduced

into Portugal, i. 320.
Infeif and reptiles, why so numerous and noxious in

America, ii. 18.
John I. king of Portugal, the first who sent fiips to ex-

plore the western coasts of Africa, i. 52. His son prince
Henry engages in there attempts, 55.'
"elh IL king of Portugal, patronises all attempts towards
discoverics, i. 67. Sends an embafly to Abylfinia, 72.
His ungenerous treatment of Columbus, 88.
Iron, the reason why savage nations were unacquainted

with this metal, ii. o19.
.Iabella, queen of Castile, is applied to by Juan Perez in

behalf of Chriflopher Columbus, i. 94. Is again ap-
plied to by Quintanilla and Santangel, 98. Is prevailed
on to equip him, 99. Dies, 221; Her Teal motives
for encouraging discoveries in America, iii. 249.
1fabella, the city of, in Hispaniola, built by Christopher

Columbus, i. 149.
haly, the first country in Europe, where civilization and

arts revived after the overthrow of the Roman Empire,
i. 36. The commercial spirit of, ative and enterprif-
ing, 38.

L
Ladrone islands, discovered by Ferdinand Magellan, ii.

376.

Lakes, amazing size of those in North America, ii. 4.
La. Cafar, Bartholomew, returns from Hispaniola to so.

licit the cause of the enslaved Indians at the court of
Spain, i. 276. Is sent back with powers by cardinal
Ximenes, 278. Returns dilfatisfied, 279. 283. Pro-
cures a pew commiflion to be sent over on this subjed,
284. Recommends the scheme of supplying the colo-
nies with negroes, 286. Undertakesa new colony, 287.
His conference with the bilhdp of Darien before the
emperor Charles V. 292. Goes'to America to carry
his schemes into execution, 294. Circumstances un.
favourable to him, 296. His final miscarriage, 297.
Revives his representations in favour of the Indians, at
the dfire of the emperor, iii. Ioo. Composes a trea.
tife on the deftrution of America, rot.
Le.n, Pedro Cieza de, charaaer of his Chronica del Peru,

i. 354.
Lrry, his description of the courage and ferocity of the

'Toupinambos, ii. 440.

S ILima,

Lima, the city of, in Pteru, founded by Pizarro, iii. e.
Lj/lon, Mr. the Britifi miniser at Madrid, his anfwea to

several intereting inquiries relating to the admifion f'
Indians into holy orders, iii. 406.
Logwood, the commodity that.givesimportanceto the pro-

vinces of Honduras and Yucatan, iii. 230. Policy of
the Spaniards to defeat the English tracae in, ibid.
Louis, St. king of France, his embassy to the chan of the

Tartars, i. 42.
Logano, hisaccount of the method of making war among

the natives of Gran Chaco, ii. 438.
Luique, Hernando de, a priest, afifcites with Pizarro in

his Peruvian expedition, iii. 4.

M

Madeira, the island of, first discovered, i. 58.
Madec, prince of North Wales, story of. his voyage .and

dikovery of North America examined, i. 330.
Magellan, Ferdinand, his account of the gigantic size of the

Patagonians, ii. 7. The xiftence of this gigantic race
yet to be decided, 72. 421, 422. His introduction to
the court of CafRile, 371. Is equipped with a squadron
for a voyage of discovery, 37.3. Sails through the fa-
mous strait that bears his name, 376. Discovers the
Ladrone aud. Phiip.pine islands, ibid. Is killed, ibid.
Magnet, its property of attracting iron known to the an-

cients, but not its polar inclination, i. 14. Extraordi-
nary advantages resulting from this discovery, 46.
fa4, St. account of is commerce with Spauifh America,
ii. 319.
Manco Capao, founder of the Peruvian empire, account

of, iii. 22, 23. 200.
Mandev'ill, Sir John, his eatern travels, with a charater

of his writings, i. 44.
JManila, the colony of, ellablilhed by Philip II. of Spain,

iii. 343, Trade between, and SouthAmerica, iid.
Maniind, their disposition, and manners formed by their

situation, ii. 2;. IHence resemblances to be traced in
very ditant places without communication, 26. Have
uniformly attained the greateti perfe&ion of their nature
in temperate regions, 208.
.llarco Polo, the Venetian, his extraordinary travels in

the East, i. 43.
IIare/fl Gabriel, his account of the country between the
Illinois and Macliilimikinac, ii. 433.

A larinm

Ataria, Donni, a Metican save, her history, ii. 226.
Mkarinur, Tyrius, his erroneous position of China, i. 327.
Martyr, Peter, his sentiments on the first discovery of

America, i. 334.
lMeftizos, in the Spanish American colonies, diftin&ion be-

tween them and Mulattoes, iii. 272.
Mietals, useful, the original natives of America totally

unacquainted with, ii. o18.
alexicans, their account of their own origin, compared

with later discoveries, ii. 4r. Their paintings few in
number, and of ambiguous meaning, iii. i54. Two
collecions of them discovered, ibid. note. Defcrip.
tions of their historical pi&ures, 372. Various exag-
gerated accounts of the number of human victims fa-
crificed by them, 379. Their language furni(hed with
refpecful terminations for all its words, 368. How
they contributed to the support of government, 369.
ilexico, arrival of Fernando Cortes on the coast of, ii.

227. His interview with two Mexican officers, 228.
Information fcnt to Montezuma, with some Sp::nifli
presents, 229. Montezuma fends prcfents to Cortes,
with orders not to approach lhis capital, 231. State
of the empire at that time, 233. The Zcmpoallans
court the friendship of Cortes, 246. Several caziqucs
enter into alliance with Cortes, 249. Characer of
the natives of Tlafcala, 256. The Tlafcalans re-
duced to sue for peace, 265. Arrival of Cortes a;
the capital city, 275. The citydclcribed, 279. A1on-
tezuma acknowledges limfilf a vaflal to the Spanifll
crown, 294. Amount of the treasure collctted by
Cortes, 296. Reasons of gold being found in such
fnall quantities, 297. The Mexicans enraged by the
imprudent zeal of Cortes, 300. Attack Alv;ira;lo
duiirg tlhe abfcnce of Cortes, 317. Their refolutc
attack on Cortes when he returned, 321. Death of
Montezuma, 32s. The citv abandoned by Cortes,
327. Battle of Otumba, 33g. The Tepeacans rc-
duced, 34o. Preparations cf the Mexicans against
the return of Cortes, 343. Cortes besieges the city
with a fleet on the lake, 355. The Spani;rds repulfedl
in ftornling the city, 359. Gna;timozin taken prilincr,
366. Cortcs appointed governor, 382. Ilis fchemec
and arrangements, ibid. Inhuman treatment of the
natives, 383. Reception of the new regulations there,
iii. 104. A retrofped into the form of government,

policy,

policy, and arts in, 149. Our information concerning,
very imperfet, 152. Origin of the monarchy, 154.
Number and greatness of the cities, 160. Mechanical
profeflions there diftinguified from each other, 162.
Diftintion of ranks, I63. Political institutions, 165.
Power and splendor of their nonarghs, 169. .Order of
government, xyo. Provision for the support ofit, ibid.
Policc of, 17i. Their arts, 172. Their paintings,
175. Their method of computing time, iSo. Their
wars continual and ferocious, 181. Their funeral rites,
182. Inperfeaion of their agriculture, 183. Doubts
concerning the extent of the empire, 184. Little in-
tercourfe among its several provinces, ,85. Ignorance
of money, 187. State of their cities, 189. Temples
and other public buildings, ibid. Religion of, 195.
Causes of the depopulation of this country, 246. The
small-pox very fatal there, 248. Number of Indian
natives remaining there, 252. Lift and characer of
those authors who wrote accounts of the conquest of, ii.
450. Description of the aqueduct for the supply of the
capital city, iii. 370. See CoJontiir.
lichael, St. the gulph of, in the South Sea, discovered

and named by Balboa, i. 258. The colony of, efta-
bliflled by Pizarro, iii. 2o.

Mligtratio;s of mankind, why first made by land, i. I.
Mind, human, the efforts of it proportioned to the wants

of thel body, ii. 84.
lfinf.r of South America, the great inducement to popu.
lation, iii. 225. Some account of, 295. Their pro-
duce, 297. The spirit with which they are worked,
298. Fatal effects of this ardor, 300. Evidence of
the pernicious effects of labouring in them, 396. Of
Mexico, total produce of, to the Spdnilh revenue 420,
421, 422.
Moluclca Islands, the Spanifli claims on, fold by the Em-

peror Charles V. to the Portugucfe, ii. 379.
.Aomofl;c inf.itutions, the pernicious eff¢ts of, in the Spa-

nifh American colonies, iii. 284. Number of convents
there, 398.
Monfootn, the periodical course of, when discovered by

navigator:;, i. 24.
] fonteFio, a Dominican preacher at St. Domingo, pub-

licly remonstrates agaiinf the cruel treatment of the
Indians, i. 2 71.

_

,r.3
...

MafJZumna, the first intelligence received by the Spaniards

of this prince, i. 306. Receives intelligence of the
arrival of Fernando Cortes in his dominions, ii. 230.
His presents to Cortes, 23 . Forbids him to approach
his capital, 232. State of his empire at this time, 233.
His characer, 234. His perplexity at the arrival of
the Spaniards, 235. His timid negociations with
Cortes, 236. His scheme for destroying Cortes at
Cholula discovered, 27r. His irresolute condua, 275.
His first interview with Cortes, ibid. Is seized by
Cortes, and confined to the Spanish quarters, 287. Is
fettered, 290. Acknowledges himself a vassal to the
Spanish crown, 294. Remains inflexible with regard
to religion, 299. Circumstances of his death, 325.
Account of a gold cup of his, in England, iii. 370.
Mulattoes, in the Spanish American colonies, explanation

of this diftintion, iii. 272.

N
Narvaez, Pamphilo, is sent by Velafques with an arma-

ment to Mexico, to supersede Cortes, ii. 304. Takes
pofleffion of Zempoalla, 312. Is defeated and taken
prisoner by Cortes, 315. How he carried on his cor-
refpondence with Montezuma, 467.
Natchez, an American nation, their political intlitutions,

ii. 120, 12i. Causes of their tame fubmifllon to the
Spaniards, 125. Their religious dotrines, 126.
Navigation, the arts of, very slowly improved by mankind,

i. 2. The knowledge of, prior to commercial inter-
course, 3. ImperfeEions of, among the ancients, 5.
More improved by the invention of the mariner's com-
pass, than by all the efforts of preceding ages, 45. The
first naval discoveries undertaken by Portugal, 50.
Negroes , their peculiar situation under the Spanish domi-

nion in America, iii. 273.

Newfoundland, its situation describcd, ii. 396.
NVewHolland, fonme account of the country and inhabitants,

ii. 432.
New Spain, discovered and named by Juan de Grijalva,

i. 304. See AIlxic3.

Nigno, Alonfo, his voy;lge to America, i. 19t.
Norwegians might in ancient times have migrated to, and

colonized America, ii. 41.

Nr/gnes

Nwgnr Vela, Blafcoo appointed vic~woy of Per, to enfoice

the new regulations, iii. 104. His character, o19.
Commits Vaca de Castro to prison, ibid. Difienfions
between him and the court of audience, 11 2. Is con-
fined, 113. Recovers his liberty, 114. Resumes his
command, r15. Is pursued by Gouzalo Pizarro, 117.
Is defeated and, killed by Pizarro, . 18.

0
Orampo, Diego, sent with a squadron from Hispaniola to

desolate the country of Cumana, i. 295. 298.
Ocampo, Sebastian de, first fails round Cuba, and discovers

it to be an island, i. 237.
Ocean, though adapted to facilitate the intcrcourfe between

distant countries, continued long a formidable barri.-,
i. . S.ee C'mpa/s and Navigation.
Ojedla, Alonzo de, his private expedition to the Weft In-

dies, i. 18x. His second voyage, 202. Obtains a
government on the continent, 242.
Olhedo, Father 3artholomew de, checks the rafl zeal of

Cortes at TJafcala in Mexico, ii. 269. Is sent by Cortes
to negociate with Narvacz, 303.
Orellanai, Francis, is appointed to the command of a bark

built by Gonzalo Pizarro, and deserts him, iii. 83.
Sails down the Maragnon, 84. Returns to Spain witli
a report of wonderful discoverics, 83. Herrera's ac-
count of his voyage, 363.
Orgognez commands Almagro's party against the Pizarros,

and is defeated and killed by them, iii. 74.
Oritnoo, the great river of, discovered by Christopher Co.

lumlus, i. 175. The amazing plenty of fishing, ii. 429.
Strange method of choofing a captain among the Indian
tribes on the banks of, 145.
Otaheite, the inhabitants of, ignorant of the art of boiling

water, ii. 446.
Otumba, battle of, between Cortes and the Mexicans, ii.

333.
Ovando, Nicholas de, is sent governor to lIifpaniola, i.

203. HIis prudent regulations, 205. Refuses ad-
million to Columbus, on his fourth voyage, 209. His
ungenerous behaviour to Columbus, on his nhip-
wreck, 215. 218. Receives him at length, and fends
him home, 220. Engages in a war with the Indians,
224. His cruel treatment of them, 226. Encourages
cultivation and manufacturcs, 231. His method of

trepanning

*repanning the natives of the Lucayos, 234. Is e.
called, 239.

P

Pacifc ocean, why, and by whom Co named, ii. 376.
Packlt boats, first eftabliihment of, between Spain and her

American colonies,-iii. 329.

Panama is fettled by Pedrarias Davila, i. 267.
ParwmniJde, the first who divided the earth by zones,

i. 319.
Potaizians, some account of, ii. 70. The reality of their

gigantic size yet to be decided, 421, 422.
Pedrarias Davila is sent with a Feet to supersede Balboa

in his government of Santa Maria on the isthmus of
Daricn, i. 261. Treats Balboa ill. 262. Rapacious
conldut of his men, 264. Is reconciled to Balboa, and
gives him his daughter, 266 Puts Balboa to death,
267. Removes his settlement from Santa Maria to Pa-
nama, ibid.
Penguin, the name of that bird not derived from the Welch

language, i. 332.
Perez Juan, patronises Columbus at the court of Caflile,

i. 94. His solemn invocation for the success of Co-
lumbus's voyage, 105.
Periplhii of Hanno, the authenticity of that work justified,

i. 312.
Peru, the first intelligence concerning this country, re-

ceived by Vasco Nugnez de Balboa, i. 253. 259. The
coast of, firit discovered, by Pizarro, iii. I. Pizarro's
second arrival, 18. His hostile proceedings against
the natives, 19. The colony of St. Michael efta-
blifhed, 20. State of the empire at the time of this
invasion, 21. The kingdom divided between Huaf-
car and Atahuilpa, 25. Atahualpa uftirps the govern-
ment, 26. IHuafcar solicits afliftance from Pizarro, 27.
Atahutalpa visits Pizarro, 33. Is feizdt by Pizarro, 36.
Agreement for his ransom, 37. ' Is refused his liberty,
41. Is cruelly put to death, 47. CoinfifCiou of the
empire on this event, 48. Quito reduced by Benal-
cazar, S . The city of Lima founded by Pizarro, 58.
Chili invaded by Almagro, 59. Infurredion of the
Peruvians, 60. Almagro put to death by Pizarro, 77.
Pizarro divides the country among his followers, 8o.
Progress of the Spanifi arms there, St. Francis Pli-
?arro aflftiniated, 89. Reception of the new regula-
tions there, Io6. The viceroy confined by the court

of

of audience, 112. The viceroy defeated and killed by
Gonzalo Pizarro, 1 17. Arrival of Pedro de la Gafca,
126. Redusion and death of Gonzalo Pizarro, 136.
The civil wars there not carried on with mercenary fol-
diers, 137. But nevertheless gratified with immense
rewards, 139. Their profusion and luxury, ibid. Fe-
rocity of their contests, 140. Their want of faith,
J4. Instances, 142. Division of, by Gafca, among
hi. followers, 143. A retrospect into the original go-
vernment, arts, and manners of the natives, 149. The
high antiquity they pretend to, 197. Their records,
198.. Origin of their civil policy, 200. This founded
in religion, 20 . The authority of the Incas absolute-
and unlimited, ibid. All crimes were punished capitally,
203. Mild genius of their religion, 204. Its influ-
ence on their civil policy, 205. And on their military
system, 206. Peculiar state of property there, 207.
Diftin6ion of ranks, 208. State of arts, 209. Im-
proved state of agriculture, 210. Their buildings,
211. Thcir public roads, 214. Their bridges, 216.
Their mode of refining ilver ore, 217. Works of
elegance, 218. Their civilization, nevertheless, but
imperfne, 220. Cuzco the only place that had the
appearance, of a city, ibid. No perfea separation of
profefions, 220. Little commercial intercourse, 221.
Their unwarlike spirit, 222. Eat their fleth and fish
raw, 223. Brief account of other provinces under the
viceroy of New Spain, 224. Causes of the depopula.
tion of this country, 246. The small-pox very fatal
there, 248. Writers who gave accounts of the con-
quest of, 353. Their method of building, 354. State
of the revenue derived from, by the crown of Spain,
418. See Coloi~s.
Peter I. czar of Rulfia, his estenfive views in pofecuting

Asiatic discoveries, ii. 33.
Phtnician, ancient, state of commerce and navigation

among them, i. 7. Their trade, how conducted, 31 1.
Philip II. of Spain, his turbulent disposition aided by his

American treasures, iii. 306. Establishes the colony of
Manila, 343.
Philip III. exhauRs his country by inconsiderate bigotry,

iii. 306.
Philippine islands, discovered by Ferdinand Magellan, ii.

376. A colony cftablifhed there by Philip II. of Spain,
iii. 343. Trade between, and America, ibid.

VOL. III. G P0S

Pbyfc, the ;rt of, in America, why conne&ed with divi-

nation, ii. 178.
Pinto, Chevalier, his description of the charaderiftic sea-

tures of the native Americans, ii. 417.
Pitzon, Vincent Yanez, commands a vcffel under Co-

lumbus in his first voyage of discovery, i. 1o3. Sails
to America on a private adventure with four (hips, ios.
Discovers Yutacan, 237.
Pizarro, Ferdinand, is besieged in Cuzco by the Peru-

vians, iii. 64. Is surprised there by Almagro, 68.
Escapes with Alvarado, 70. Defends his brother at the
court of Spain, 78. Is committed to prison, 80.
Pizarro, Francifgo, attends Balboa, in his settlement on

the iftmus of Darien, i. 245. Marches under him
across the isthmus, where they discover the South Sea,
257. His birth, education, and character, iii. 3. As-
fociates with Almagro and De Luque, in a voyage of
discovery, 4. Iis ill success, 6. Is recalled, and de-
ferted by most of his followers, 8. Remains on the
illand of Gorgona for supplics, i. Discovers the coalt
of Peru, ibid. Returns to Panama, t2. Goes to Spain
to solicit reinforcements, 14. Procures the supreme
command for hinfelf, rS. Is affited with money by
Cortes, 16. Lands again in Peru, 18. His hostile
proceedings agaiaft the natives, 19. Efablifhes the
colony of St. Michael, o2. State of the Peruvian em-
pire at this time, 21. Cause of hiceafy penetration into
the country, 26. Is applied to by Htafcar for aflftance
against his vicorious brother Atahualpa, 27. State of
his forces, 28. Arrives at Caxamalca, 30. Is visited
by the Inca, 33. His perfidious seizure of him, 36.
Agrees to Atahualpa's offer for his ransom, 37. Divi.
sion of their plunder, 40; RefufcsAtahualpa his li.
berty, 41. His ignorance exposed to Atahualpa, 45.
Beltows a form of trial on the Inca, ibid. Puts him to
death, 47. Advances to Cuzco, 50. Honours con-
ferred on him by the Spaniih court, 54. Beginning
of diffenfiois between him and Almnagro, 55. His civi
regulations, 57. Founds the city of Lima, 58. In-
furreCtion of the Peruvians, 6o. Cuzco seized by Al.
pnagro, 67. Deludes Almagro by negociations, 69.
3Defeats Almagro, and takes him prisoner, 74. Puts
Almagro to death, 77. Divides the country among his
followers, 80. The impolitic partinlity of his allot-
pncnts, ibid. Iakes his brother Conzalo governor

of

of Qito, 82. Is assassinated by Juan de Herradi,
90.
Piarrre, Gonzalo, is made governor of Qito, by his bro.

ther Francis, iii. 82. His expedition over the Andes,
ibid. Is deserted by Orellana, 83. His ditrefs on this
event, 86. His disastrous return to Quito, 87. IS
encouraged by the people to oppose Nugnez Vela, the
new viceroy, x o. Aflumes the government of Peru,
1 4. Marches against the viceroy, 116. Defeats and
kills him, 17, 118. Is advised by Carvajal to aflume
the sovereignty of the country, 1 8. Choofes to nego-
ciate with the court of Spain, 121. Confukations of
the court on his condue, 122. His violent resolutions
on the arrival of Pedro de la Gafca, 127. Resolves to
oppose him by violence, 330. Marches to reduce Cen-
teno at Cuzco, 131. Defeats him, 132. Is deserted
by his troops on the approach of Gafca, 135. Surren-
ders and is executed, 136. His adherents men of no
principle, 14 1.
Plaa, Rio de, discovered by Dias de Soils, i. 268. Its

amazing width, ii. 395.
Plafair, Mr. Professor of mathematics in Edinburgh, the

result of his comparison of the narrative and charts given
in Captain Cooke's voyages, published in 1780; and Mr.
Coxe's account of the Ruffian discoveries, printed in the
fame year, in which the vicinity of the two continents of
Asia and America is clearly ascertained, ii. 41 2-417.
Pl/,, the naturalist, instance of his ignorance in geogra-

phy, i. 318.
Ponyr, de Leon, Juan, discovers Florida, i. 249. Romantic

motive of his voyage, 250.

Population of the earth, flow progress of, i. i.
Ports Bello, discovered and named by Christopher Co.

lumbus, i. 212.
Porte Rico, is fettled and fubje&ed by Juan Ponce de

Leon, i. 236.

Porto Santo, the first discovery of, i. 57.
Portugal, when and by whom the court of inquisition was

firt introduced into, i. 320.
Portugusfe, a view of the circumstances that induced them

to undertake the discovery of unknown countrics, i. 1.
53. First African discoveries of, 54. Maddira difeo-
vered, 57, 58. They double Cape Bojador, 9. Obtain
a papal grant of all the countries they Ihould discoVer,

G a 63.

63. Cape Verd Illands and the Azores discovered, 64.
Voyage to the East Indies by Vasco de Gama, 184.
Potoa, the rich silver mines there, how discovercd, iii.

296. The mines of, greatly exhaustcd and scarcely
worth working, 409.
PTrifo/ler of war, how treated by the native Americans,

11. 138.
Property, the idea of, unknown to the native Americans,

1i. 1 i2. Notions of the Brafillians concerning, 434.
Protector of the Indians, in Spanilh America, his func-

tion, iii. 279.
Ptolemy, the philosopher, his geographical descriptions

more ample and exa& than those of his predecessors,
i. 31. His geography translated by the Arabians, 35.
His erroneous position of the Ganges, 315.

Q.
-I._etlavaca, brother of Montezuma, succeeds him as-king

of Mexico, ii. 344. Conducts in person the fierce at-
tacks which obliged Cortes to abandon his capital, ibid.
Dies of the small-pox, 345.
Quevedo, Bilhop of Darien, his conference with Las Casas

on the treatment of the Indians, in the presence of the
Emperor Charles V. i. 291.
tidckJlver, the property of the famous mines of, at Gua-
nacabelica, reserved by the crown of Spain, iii. 409.
The price of, why reduced, ibid.
.tuinquina, or Jesuits Bark, a production peculiar to Peru,

iii. 302.
.uipoJ, or historic cords of the Peruvians, Come account

of, iii. 198.
tito, the kingdom of, conquered by Huana Capac, Inca
of Peru, iii. 24. Is left to his son Atahualpa, 25. Ata-
hualpa's general revolts after his death, 49. Is reduced
by the Spaniards under Beralcazar, 5 1. Benalcazar de-
prived, and Gonzalo Pizarro made governor, 82.

R
Ramuflio, his defence of Hanno's account of the coaf? of

Africa, i. 313.
A'gfler ships, for what purpose introduced in the trade

between Spain and her colonies, iii. 323. Supersede
the ufi of the galeons, 324.
Religion of the native Americans, an inquiry into, ii. 164.

Ribar,

Ribaj, .his account of the political state of the people of

Cinaloa, ii. 443. Of their want of religion, 447.
Rio de la Plata, and Tucuman, account of those province,

iii. 235.

Rivern, the amazing size of those in America, ii. 4.
Robio/n, professor, his remarks on the temperature of vari-

ous climates, ii. 397, 398, 399.
Roldan, Francis, is left chief justice; in Hifpanioia, by

Christopher Columbus, i. r67. Becomes the ringleader
of a mutiny, 178. Submits, 183.

Romans, their progress in navigation and discovery, i. 12.
- Their military spirit averse to mechanical arts and
commerce, 23. Navigation and trade favoured in the
provinces under their governmcnt, 24. Their extensive
discoveries by l.iid, 26.' 'heir empire and the sciences
.deflroyed together, 32.
Rubruquis, faither, his embafly. from France to the Chan

of the 'artars, i. 42.
RiJfns, Asiatic discoveries made by them, ii. 33. tlr-

certainty of, 410. ;- ..

. * .., S.. ....
SarPceat, the' rich silver mines th4eret!' l*l difcov'er(d,

iii. 296. ( ,

* ; !: !(; . .1' j
S n Sal/vadr, discovered and naMtd( by'Chiiftipther 0-

lumbus, i. 119. . .... :--:'i '!1

"

.
Sancho, Don Pedro, account-of his History of the Con-

quest of Peru, iii. 353.' r
Sandoval, the'fYocldng barbarities txecutct by, in Mxi

ii. 384. :
Sandoval, Francisco Tello de, is sent by the 'emt4ror

Charles V. to Mexico, as vifiador of America, iii; b64.
His moderation and prudence, ioS.

Savange life, a general estimate of, ii. 193.
Scalpr, motive of the native Americans 'for 'taing them

from their enemies, ii. 439. , ' '
Serralvo, marquis de, his extranrdlinary gains during' his

viceroyalty in America, iii. 422.
Seville, cxtraordihiary incrcafe of its manufactures by the

American trade, iii. 410. Its trade greatlyreduced,
41 1. The American trade removed to Cadi,1

: i: .
Silver ore, method bt refining It praftifd by the *ttlve

Peruvians, iii. 217.
Sonora, late difcovetie of rich miite'inmde therd'by"'td

Spaniards, iii. 217.. .'
Sow, American ideia of the immortality of, ii. 174.

2 Scutth

South Sea, firfl discovered by Vasco Nugnez de Balboa,

i. 258.
Spain, general idea of the policy of, with regard to the

American colonies, iii. 253. Early interposition of
the regal authority in the colonies, 254. All the Ame-
rican dominions of, fubjeted to two viceroys, 2s6. A
third viceroyalty lately cftablifhed, 257. The colonies
of, compared with those of Greece and Rome, 263.
Advantages flie derived from her colonies, 304. Why
The does not Itill derive tle fame, 305. Rapid decline
of trade, 307. This decline increased by the mode
of regulating the intercourse with America, 3to.
Employs guarda costas to check illicit trade, 322. The
use of register ships introduced, 323. Eltablifhment
of the company of Caraccas, 326. Enlargement of
commercial ideas there, 328. Free trade permitted to
several provinces, 33o. Revenue derived from America,
346. Specification, 418.
Spaniards, their curious form of taking poffeflion ofnew-

discovered countries, i. 338.
Strabo, a citation from, proving the great geographical

ignorance of the ancients, i. 315. His own want of
geographical knowledge, 319.
SuprrJtition always connecaed with a desire of penetrating

into the secrets of futurity, ii. 177.

T
Tapia, Chriftoval de, is sent from Spain to Mexico, to

supersede Cortes in his command, but fails in the
attempt, ii. 380.
Tartar, the poflibility of their migrating to America, ii.

38. Tlalfala, in Mexico, character of the natives of, ii. 257.

Oppose the paflage of the Spaniards, 258. Are reduced
to sue for peace, 264.
Tobacco, that of Cuba the best flavoured of any in all

America, iii. 302.
Toupinambos, account of their ferocious courage from Lery,

i. 440.
Trade, free, opened between Spain and her colonies, iii.

330. Increase of the Spanifi customs from this mea-
sure, 45.
Tradi winds the periodical courfc of, when difcovecrcd

by navigators, i. 24.

Travellkrs, ancient charactcr of their writings, i.45.
. Hi4 Trin;daJ,

~Trinidad, the island of, discovered by Chriftophcr Colum-

bus on his third voyage, i. 175.
lcumman, and Rio de la Plata, account of those provinces,
iii. 235.

Tyrt, the commerce of that city, how conducted, i. 31 1.
Tythex of Spanifli America, how applied by the court of

Spain, iii. 419.

V
yaca de Coafro, ChriRoval, is sent from Spain to regulate

the government of Peru, iii. 79. Arrives at QOito, 93.
Assumes the supreme authority, ibid. Defeats young
Almagro, 95. The severity of his proceedings, 96.
Prevents an infurrefion concerted to oppose the new
regulations, 1o8. Is imprisoned by the new viceroy,
109.
Valverde, father Vincent, his curious harangue to Atahu.

alpa, Inca of Peru, iii. 33. Gives his fanaion to the
trial and condemnation of Atahualpa, 47.
Vega, Garcilaffo de la, characer of his commentary on the

Spanih writers concerning Peru, iii. 355.
regetables, their natural tendency to fertilize the foil where

they grow, ii. 21, 22.
VFlafquez, Diego de, conquers the ifand of Cuba, i. 247.

299. His preparations for invading New Spain, ii. 213.
His difficulty in choofing a commander for the expedi-
tion, 214. Appoints Fernando Cortes, 215. Hismotives
to this choice, 217. Becomes suspicious of Cortes, 21 8.
Orders Cortes to be deprived of his commiflion, and
arrested, 219, 220. Sends an armament to Mexico
after Cortes, 302.
Yenegar, P. his character of the native Californians, ii.

426.
Venereal disease, originally brought from America, ii. 76.

Appears to be wearing out, ibid. Its first rapid pro-
grefs, 422.

Vetmutla, hifory of that settlement, iii. 241.
IsNice, its origin as a maritime tate, i. 38. Travels of
Marco Polo, 43.
erdl islands difcovcred by the Portuguese, i. 64.
I,'ieroys, all the Spaniih dominions in America fubjeled

to two, iii. 256. A third lately established, 257. Their
powers, ibid. A fourth cltabliflcd, 336.
I'sila Segnor, his account of the slate of population in

New Spain, iii. 390. His detail of the Spanish Ame
ricall revenue, 41g,

Villlsagla,

Vi/ligna, A:ntonio, one of Cortes's soldiers, foments a

mutiny among Iis troops, ii. 349. Is discovered by
Cortes, and hanged, 350.
U/koa, Don Antonio de, his description of the charaEter-

iltic features of the native Americans, ii. 417. His
rcafon for the Amcricans not being so sensible of pain
as the rcft of nmaiiil1, 44£ I. lis account of the goods
cxportc,! from Spain to America, with the duty on
thein, ii. 418.
Yolcanos, remarkable number of, in the northern parts of

the globe difcovcred by the Ruffians, ii. 411.

W
IrafIr, Lionel, his account of a peculiar race of diminu-

tive Americans, ii. 68. Compared w'ith firlilar pro-
duCtions in Africa, 69.
Y'ar-fong of the native Americans, the fcntiments and
terms of, ii. 439.
Women, the condition of, among the native Americans,

ii. 89. Are not prolific, 92. Are not permitted to
join in their drunken feasts, 93. Nor to wear orna-
ments, 443.

X
Xerez, Francisco de, secretary to Pizarro, the earliest

writer on his Peruvian expedition, iii. 353.
Ximenes, Cardinal, his regulations for the treatment of

the Indians in theSpanifh colonies, i. 277. Patronises
the attempt of Ferdinand Magellan, ii. 373.

Y
2'teatan, the province of, discovered by Pinzon and Dias

de Solis, i. 237. I)efcribed, 342. From whence that
province derives its value, iii. 229. Policy of the court
of Spain with refpcte to, 230.

z
Zarate, Don Augufltinc, charaaer of his Hiflory of the

Conqucft of Peru, iii. 3;.
Zoner, the earth how divided into, by the geography of the

ancients, i. 29. By lwhom first so divided, 319.
ZumIMNN.lrrTlna, Junn de, iirft biflsop of Mexico, the dl-

(trovcr of ali the anci:et records of the Mexican cm-
pire, iii. 153.

N!I) OF 'THi TIIRD vo.LiU'r,

J'T^
