THE

OF
SCOT L AN D

DURING THE REIGNS OF
Queen MARY and of King JAMES VI.

TILL
His ACcEssIoN to the Crown of ENGLAND.

WITH A
REVIEW of the SCOTTISHHISTORY previous to thatPeriod;

And an APPENDIX containing ORIGINAL PAPERS.

IN TWO.VOLUMES. /
By WILLIAM ROBERTSJ N, D. D.

Minister of LADY YESTER'S, Edinburgh.

VOLUME I.
A NEW EDITION.

LONDON:
Printed for T. CADELL, in the Strand.

M DCC LXXVI

# Published by the same Author,

Published by the fame Author,
T HE HISTORY of the RExON of the

EMPEROR CHARLES V. with a View

of the Progress of Society in Europe, from the
Subversion of the Roman Empire, to the Beginning
of the Sixteenth Century. In Three Volumes,
Quarto.

** Another Edition in 4 Vols. 8vo.

4 1
.

~~i~' ···: · `·
'·' ~ ~

# PREFACE.

PR E F A C E.

Deliver this book to the world with all the
diffidence and anxiety natural to an Author

on publishing his first performance. The time
I have employed, and the pains I have taken,
in order to render it worthy of the public ap-
probation, it is, perhaps, prudent to conceal,
till it be known whether that approbation shall
ever be bestowed upon it.

BUT as I have departed, in many instances,

from former historians, as I have placed fats
in a different light, and have drawn characters
with new colours, I ought to account for this
conduc to my readers; and to produce the evi-
dence, on which, at the distance of two cen-
turies, I presume to contradict the testimony of
less remote, or even of cotemporary hiflorians.

THE transactions in Mary's reign gave rife to

two parties, which were animated against each
other with the fiercest political hatred, embit-
tered by religious zeal. Each of these pro-
duced historians of considerable merit, who
adopted all their sentiments, and defended all
their actions. Truth was not the sole object
of these authors. Blinded by prejudices, and

A 2 , heated

heated by the part which they themselves had
aded in the scenes they describe, they wrote
an apology for a fadion, rather than the hifto-
ry of their country. Succeeding Historians
have followed these guides almost implicitly,
and have repeated their errors and mifrepre-
fentations. But as the fame passions which
inflamed parties in that age have descended to
their posterity; as almost every event in Mary's
reign has become the object of doubt or of
dispute; the eager spirit of controversy soon
discovered, that without some evidence more
authentic and more impartial than that of
Historians, none of the points in question could
be decided with certainty. Records have there-
fore been searched, original papers have been
produced, and public archives, as well as the
repositories of private men, have been ransack-
ed by the zeal and curiosity of writers of dif-
ferent parties. The attention of Cecil to col-
led whatever related to that period, in which
he aded so conspicuous a part, hath provided
such an immense store of original papers for
illufirating this part of the English and Scot-
tifh history, as are almost sufficient to satisfy
the utmost avidity of an Antiquarian. Sir Ro-
bert Cotton (whose library is now the pro-
perty of the public) made great and valuable
additions to Cccil's colledion; and from this
magazine, Digges, the compilers of the Cab-
bala, Anderson, Keith, Haynes, Sorbes, have
drawn moil of the papers which they have
printed. No hiltory of Scotland, that merits
any degree of attention, has appeared since

these

these colle&ions were published. By consult-
ing them, I have been enabled, in many in-.
flances, to corret the inaccuracies of former
Historians, to avoid their mistakes, and to de-
tet their misrepresentations.

BUT many important papers have escaped

the notice of those industrious Collectors, and
after all they have produced to light, much
still remained in darkness, unobserved or un-
published. It was my duty to search for these,
and I found this unpleasant talk attended with
considerable utility.

THE library of the honourable faculty of

Advocates at Edinburgh, contains not only a
large collecion of original papers relating to
the affairs of Scotland, but copies of others
no less curious, which have been preserved by
Sir Robert Cotton, or are extant in the Public
Offices in England. Of all these the Curators
of that library were pleated to allow me the
perusal.

THOUGI the Britilh Mufleum be not yet

open to the Public, Dr. Birch, whose oblig-
ing disposition is well known, procured me
access to that noble collection, which is wor-
thy the magnificence of a great and polished
nation.

TH AT vast and curious collection of papers

relating to the reign of Elizabeth, which was
Xnade by Dr. Sorbes, and of which he publish-

ed

ed only two volumes, having been purchased,
since his death, by the Lord viscount Royfton,
his Lordship was so good as to allow me the
use of fourteen Volumes in Quarto, containing
that part of them which is conneced with my
subjea.

SIR Alexander Dick communicated to me a

very valuable collection of original papers, in
two large Volumes. They relatechiefly to the
reign of James. Many of them are marked
with Archbishop Spotfwood's hand; and it ap-
pears from several passages in his history, that
he had perused them with great attention.

Mr. Calderwood, an eminent Presbyterian

Clergyman of the last century, compiled an
History of Scotland from the beginning of the
Reign of James V. to the death of James VI.
in fix large Volumes; wherein he has inserted
many papers of consequence, which are no
where else to be found. A copy of this hifto-
ry, which still remains in manuscript in the
possession of the church of Scotland, was put
into my hands by my worthy friend the Re-
verend Mr. George Wifhart, principal Clerk
of the Church,

SIR David Dalrymple not only communi-

cated to me the papers which he has collected
relating to Gowrie's conspiracy; but by ex-
plaining to me his sentiments with regard to
that problematical pafrage in the Scottish hifto-
ry, has enabled me to place that tranfaaion in

a light

a light which dispels much of the darkness
and confusion in which it has been hitherto
involved.

Mr. Goodall, though he knew my senti-

ments with regard to the conduct and charac-
ter of Queen Mary to be extremely different
from his own, communicated to me a Volume
of manuscripts in his possession, which con-
tains a great number of valuable papers copied
from the originals in the Cottonian Library
and Paper (tffice, by the late Reverend Mr.
Crawford, Regius Professor of Church History
in the university of Edinburgh. I likewise
received from him the original Rlegifter of let-
ters kept by the Regent Lennox during his
administration.

I HAVE consulted all there papers, as far as

I thought they could be of any use towards il-
luflrating that period of which I write the his-
tory. With what success I have employed
them to confirm what was already known, to
ascertain what was dubious, or to determine
what was controverted, the Public must judge.

I MIGHT easily have drawn, from the dif-

ferent repositories to which I had access, as ma-
ny papers as would have rendered my Appen-
dix equal in size to the most bulky collection
of my predecessors. But I have satisfied my-
self with publishing a few of the most curious
among them, to which I found it neceflary
to appeal as vouchers for my own veracity.

5 lNone

None of these, as far as I can recollec, ever
appeared in any former collection.

I HAVE added to the Appendix a Critical

DiJ2rtation concerning the murder of King Hen-
ry, and the genuinelnef of the Zueen's letters to
Bothwell. The fads and observations which
relate to Mary's letters, I owe to my friend
Mr. John Davison, one of the Clerks to the
Signet, who hath examined this point with
his usual acuteness and indufiry.

THE

# BOOK I. Containing a Review of the SCOTTISH History previous to the death of JAMES V.

THE

HIS TORY
SCO T L A N D

BOOK i-
CoNtaiiihg a Review of the SCOTTiSi Hi.ory pti-

viols to the deatb of JAMES V.
T lIE first ages of the Scoftilh history are BooK t.

dark and fabulous. Natiois, as well as '-'-

*

s

... .

h

j

The origin
imen, arrive at maturiiy by degrees, and ofa,,,ion

fAbulous

the events, which happened during their infancy or and cbfcure,
early youth, cannot be recollected, and deserve not
to be remembered. The gross ignorance, which an.
ciently covered all the North of Europe, the conti-
nual migrations of its inhabitants, and the frequent
and deftrustive revolutions which these occasioned,
render it impoflible to give any authentic account
of the origin of the different kingdomrs now efa-
blifled there. Every thing beyond that lhort
period, to which well attested annals reach, is ob-

VOL. IL B '< fcure

BOOK I. cutre an immense space is left for invention to
-u--' occupy each nation, with a vanity inseparable

from human nature, hath filled that void with
events calculated to display its own antiquity and
lustre. And history, which ought to record truth
and teach wifdotn, often sets out with retailing
fictions and absurdities.

Oriein of THE Scots carry their pretensions to antiquity as
the Scur,.

high as any of their neighbours. Relying upon
uncertain legends, and the traditions of their bards,
still more uncertain, they reckon up a series of kings
several ages before the birth of Christ; and give a
particular detail of the occurrences, which happened
in their reigns. But with regard to the Scots, as
well as the other northern nations, we receive the
earliest accounts on which we can depend, not from
their own, but-from the Roman authors. When
A. D. S the Romans under Agricola, first carried their arms

into the northern parts of Britain, they found it pof-
sessed by the Caledonians, a fierce and warlike peo-
ple; and having repulsed, rather than conquered
them, they ereced a strong wall between the firths
of Forth and Clyde, and there fixed the boundaries
of their empire. Adrian, on account of the diffi-
culty of defending such a distant frontier, contraa-
A. D. iz. ed the limits of the Roman province in Britain, by

building a second wall, which ran between New-
castle and Carlisle. The ambition of succeeding
Emperors endeavoured to recover what Adrian had
abandoned; and the country between the two walls
was alternately under the dominion of the Romans,

3 and

and the Caledonians. About the beginning of the BooK I.
fifth century, the inroads of the Goths and other -
Barbarians obliged the Romans, in order to defend
the centre of their empire, to recal those legions,
which guarded the frontier provinces; and at that
time they quitted all their conquests in Britain.

TuEIa long residence in the ifand had polished, A. D. 42.

in rome degree, the rude inhabitants, and the Bri-
tons were indebted to their intercourse with the Ro-
mans, for the art of writing, and the use of num-
bers, without which it is impoflible long to preserve
the memory of past events.

NORTH BRITAIN was, by their retreat, left un-

der the dominion of the Scots and Pi&s. The for-
mer who are not mentioned by any Roman author,
before the end of the fourth century, were probably
a colony of the Celta or Gauls: Their affinity to
whom appears from their language, their manners,
and religious rites; circumstances more decifivec
with regard to the origin of nations, than either fa-
bulous traditions, or the tales of ill-informed, and
credulous Annalits. The Scots, if we may believe
the common accounts, fettled at first in Ireland;
and, extending themselves by degrees, landed at
last on the coast opposite to that island, and fixed
their habitations there. Fierce and bloody wars
were, during several ages, carried on between them
and the Pids. At length, Kenneth II. the sixty- A.D. Sil,
ninthKing of the Scots (according to their own si.
bulous authors) obtained a complete vitory over

Ba the

BOOK I. the Pias, and united under one monarchy, the
_-»"-' whole country, from the wall of Adrian, to the

northern ocean. And his kingdom became' known
by its present name, which it derived from a people
who at first fettled there as strangers, and remained
long obscure and inconsiderable.

Hiftryof FROM this period the history of Scotland would
Scotland pcculliarly merit some attention, were it accompanied with any
oDIlcure.

certainty. But as our remote antiquities are invol-
ved in the fame darkness with thore of other nations,
a calamity peculiar to ourselves has thrown almost
an equal oblcurity over our more recent tranfations.
This was occasioned by the malicious policy of Ed-
ward I. of England. Towards the end of the thir-
teenth century, this monarch called in question the
independence of Scotland; pretending that that
kingdom was held as a fief of the crown of Eng-
land, and subjected to all the conditions of a feudal
tenure. In order to eflablilh his claim, he seized
the public archives, he ransacked churches and mo-
nafteries, and getting poiffelton by force, or fraud,
of many hitlorical monuments, which tended to
prove the antiquity or fieedom of the kingdom, he
carried some of them into England, and commanded
the reft to be burned *. An universal oblivion of
past tranladions might have been the effet of this
fatal event, but rome imperfec Chronicles had es-
caped the rage of Edward . foreign writers had re-
corded tome important sacs relating to Scotland;
and the traditions concerning recent occurrences were

* Innes, Eray 552.

frelh

fresh and worthy of credit. These broken fragments BooK I.
John de Fordun, who lived in the fourteenth cen-
tury, collected with a pious industry, and from them
picked out materials, which he formed into a regu-
lar history. His work was received by his country-
men with applause; and, as no recourse could be
had to more ancient records, it supplied the place of
the authentic annals of the kingdom. It was copi-
ed in many monasteries, and the thread of the nar-
rative wascontinued by differentmonks, through the
subsequent reigns. In the beginning of the sixteenth
century, John Majorand He&or Boethius publi(hed
their histories of Scotland, the former a fuccint and
dry writer, the latter a copious and florid one, and
both equally credulous. Not many years after, Bu-
chanan undertook the fame work; and if his accu-
racy and impartiality had been, in any degree, equal
to the elegance of his taste, and to the purity and
vigour of his style, h;s history might be placed on a
level with the most admired compositions of the an-
cients. Bur, inflead of rejecting the improbable
tales of Chronicle writers, he wasat theutmoft pains
to adorn them; and hath clothed with all the beau-
ties and graces of fiction, those legends, which for-
merly had only its wildness and extravagance.

THE history of Scotland may properly be divided Fo,,r re

into four periods. The first reaches from the ori-. i th,
gin of the monarchy, to the reign of Kenneth 11. sttih
The setond from Kenneth's conquest ofthe Piss, to
the death of Alexander III. The third extends to

B 3 the

BOOK I. the death of James V. The last, from thence to
--' the accession of James Vi. to the crown of England.

THE first period is the region of pure fable and

conjecture, and ought to be totally negleted, or be
abandoned to the industry and credulity of antiqua-
ries. Truth begins to dawn in the second period,
with a light; feeble at firR, but gradually increaf-
ing; and the events which then happened, may be
nightly touched, but merit no particular or labori-
ous inquiry. In the third period, the history of
Scotland, chiefly by means of records preserved in
England, becomes more authentic: not only are
events related, buttheir causes and effe&s explained;
the characters of the ators are displayed; the man.
ners of the age described; the revolutions in the
constitution pointed out: and here every Scotsman
ihould begin not to read only, but to study the his-
tory of his country. During the fourth period, the
affairs of Scotland were so mingled with those of
other nations, its situation in the political fate of
Europe was so important, its influence on the ope-
rations of the neighbouring kingdoms was fovifible,
that its history becomes an object of attention to
foreigners; and without some knowledge of the va-
rious and extraordinary revolutions which happened
there, they cannot form a just notion either of the
most illustrious events, or of the characters of the
most distinguished personages in the sixteenth cen-
tury.

THE

THE following history is confined to the las of BOOK I.

these periods: To give a view of the political flateA revew
of the kingdom, during that which immediately of he tiird
preceded it, is the design of this preliminary Book.
The imperfeEt knowledge which strangers have of
the affairs of Scotland, and the prejudices Scotsmen
themselves have imbibed with regard to the various
revolutions in the government of their country, ren-
der such an introduction equally necessary to both.

THE period, from the death of Alexander III.

to the death of James V. contains upwards of two
centuries and a half, from the year 1286, to the
year 1542.

IT opens with the famous controversy concern- Rire of the

controversy
ing the independenceof Scotland. Before the union conccrniig

the inde-

of the two kingdoms, this was a queltion of much pcndence of
importance. If the one crown had been confidered Sotland.
not as imperial and independent, but as feudatory
to the other, a treaty of union could not have been
concluded on equal terms, and rvery advantage
which the dependent kingdom procured, must have
been esteemed the conceflion of a Sovereign to his
vassal. Accordingly, about the beginning of the
present century, and while a treatyof union between
the two kingdoms was on foot, this controversy was
agitated with all the heat, which nacionalanimofities
naturally inspire. What was then a subjet of feii-
ous concern, the union of the two kingdoms hath
rendered a matter of mere curiosity. But though
the obje&ts, which at that time warmed and interest-

B 4 ed

BOOK I. ed both nations, exist no longer, a question which
'-v.-' appeared so momentous to our ancestors cannot be

altogether indifferent or uninftrutive to us.

SOME of the northern counties of England were

early in the hands of the Scottifi Kings, who, as
far back as the feudal cuRfoms can be traced, held
these poffeflions of the Kings of England, and did
homage to them on that account. This homage,
due only for the territories which they held in Eng-
land, was in no wife derogatory from their royal dig-
nity. Nothing is more suitable to feudal ideas, than
that the fame person htould be both a Lord and a
Vassal, independent in one capacity, and dependent
in another *. The Crown of England was without
doubt imperial and independent, though the Princes
who wore it were, for many ages, the vassals of tho
Kings of France; and, in consequence of their pof-
sessions in that kingdom, bound to perform all the
services, which a feudal Sovereign has a title to

*A very singular proof of this occurs in the French higory.

Arpin fold the vicomte of the city Bourges to Philip I. who
did homage to the count of Sancerre for a part of there lands,
which held of that Nobleman, A. D. I co. I believe that no
example, of a King's doing homage to one of his own fubjefts,
is to be met with in the hiltories either of England or Scotland.
Philip le Bel abolilhed this practice in France A. D. 1302. Hi.
naxt /bregi Cbrenol. Somewhat similar to this, is a charter of
the Abbot of Melrofs, A. D.. 1535, conflituting James V. the
Bailiff or Steward of that Abby, vefiing in him all the powers
which pertained to that office, and requiring him to be answer-
able to the Abbot for his exercise of the fame, Arcbiv. pEbl.

exac,

exaCt. The fame was the condition of the Monarchs Boot I.
of Scotland; free and independent as, Kings, but, as
poffefting English territories, vassals to the King of
England. The English Monarchs, satisfied with
their legal and uncontroverted rights, were neither
capable, nor had any thoughts of usurping more,
England, when conquered by the Saxons, being di-
vided by them into many small kingdoms, was in no
condition to extend its dominion over Scotland,
united at that time under one Monarch. And though
these petty principalities were gradually formed into
one kingdom, the reigning princes, exposed to con-
tinual invasions of the D4nes, and often fubjVfted
to the yoke of those formidable pirates, fildom turn-
ed their arms towards Scotland, and were utterly in-
capable of establishing new rights in that country.
The first Kings of the Norman race, buried with
introducing their own laws and manners into the
kingdom which they had conquered, or with main-
taining themselves on the throne which some of them
poffefled by a very dubious title, were as little soli-
citous to acquire new authority, or to form new
pretensions in Scotland. An unexpe&ed calamity
that besel one of the Scottish Kings first encouraged
the English to think of bringing his kingdom under
dependance. William King of Scotland being taken
prisoner at Alnwick, Henry 1I. as the price of his
liberty, not only extorted from him an exorbitant
ransom, and a promise to surrender the places of
greatest strength in his dominions, but compelled
him to do homage for his whole kingdom. Ri-
chard I. a generous Prince, solemnly renounced this

claim.

BOOK I. claim of homage, and absolved William from the
--v hard conditions which Henry had impofld. Upon

the death of AlexanderIII. near a century after, Ed-
ward I. availing himself of the situation of affairs in
Scotland, acquired an influence in that kingdom
which no English Monarch before him ever posses-
fed, and imitating the interested policy of Henry,
rather than the magnanimity of Richard, revived
the claim of sovereignty to which the former had
pretended.

Pretensions MARGARET of Norway, Grandaughterof Alex-
an Blil ander, and heir to his crown, did not long survive
examined. him. The right of succession belonged to the de-

fcendants of David Earl of Huntingdon, third son
of King David I. Among these, Robert Bruce,
and John Baliol, two illuifrious competitors for the
crown, appeared. Bruce was the son of Isabel, Earl
David's second daughter; Baliol, the grandson of
M1argaret the eldest daughter. According to the
rules of succession which are now established, the
right of Baliol was preferable, and notwithstanding
Bruce's plea of being nearer in blood to Earl David,
Baliols claim, as the representative of his mother
and grandmother, would be deemed inconteftible.
But in that age, the order of succession was not as-
certained with the fame precision. The question ap-
peared to be no less intricate, than it was important.
And though the prejudices of the people, and per-
haps the laws of the kingdom, favoured Bruce, each
of the rivals was supported by a powerful faction.
Arms alone, it was feared, must terminate a dispute
too weighty for the laws to decide. But, in order

to

to avoid the miseries of a civil war, Edward was'BooK I.
chosen umpire, and both parties agreed to acquiesce w-
in his decree. This had well nigh proved fatal to
the independence of Scotland; and the nation, by
its eagerness to guard against a civil war, was not
only exposed to that calamity, but almoR fubje&ed
to a foreign yoke. Edward was artful, brave, en-
terprifing, and commanded a powerful and martial
people, at peace with the whole world. The anar-
chy which prevailed in Scotland, and the ambition of
competitors ready to sacrifice their country in order
to obtain even a dependent Crown, invited him first
to seize, and then to fubje& the kingdom. The au-
thority of an umpire, which had been unwarily be-
stowed upon him, and from which the Scots dread-
ed no dangerous consequences, enabled him to exe-
cute his schemes with the greater facility. Under
pretence of examining the question with the utmost
solemnity, he femmoned all the Scottish Barons to
Norham, and having gained some, and intimidated
others, he prevailed on all who were present, not
excepting Bruce and Baliol, the competitors, to ac-
knowledge Scotland a fief of the English Crown,
and to swear fealty to him as their Sovereign or Liege
Lord. This Rep led to another till more impor-
tant. A s it was vain to pronounce a sentence which
he had not power to execute, Edward demanded
possession of the kingdom, that he might be able to
deliver it to him whose right should be found prefer-
able. And such was the pufllaniriity of the nobles,
and the impatient ambition of the competitors, that
both aternted to this strange demand, and Gilbert de
Umfraville, Earl of Angus, was the only man, who

refused

BooK I. refured to surrender the castles in his custody to the

enemy of his country. Edward finding Baliol the
most obsequious and the least formidable of the two
competitors, soon after gavejudgment in his favour.
Baliol once more professed himself the vasal of Eng-
land, and submitted to every condition, which the
Sovereign whom he had now acknowledged was
pleated to prescribe.

EDWARD, having thus placed a creature of his

own upon thethroneof Scotland, and compelled the
nobles to renounce the ancient liberties and indepen-
dence of their country, had reason to conclude that
his dominion was now fully established. But he be-
gan too soon to assume the master; his new vasals,
fierce and independent, bore with impatience a yoke,
to which they were not accustomed. Provoked by
his haughtiness, even the passive spirit of Baliol be-
gan to mutiny. But Edward, who had no longer
ufeforfuch a pageant King, forced him to resign the
Crown, and openly attempted to seize it as fallen to
himself by the rebellion of his vassal. At that cri-
tical period, arose Sir William Wallace, a hero, to
whom the fond admiration of his countrymen hath
ascribed many fabulous acs of prowess. though his
real valour, as well as integrity and wisdom, is such,
as needs not the heightenings of ficion. He, al-
most single, ventured to take arms in defence of the
kingdom, and his boldness revived the spirit of his
countrymen. At last, Robert Bruce, the grandson
of him whoftood in competition with Baliol, appear.
ed to alfert his own rights, and to vindicate the ho-
nour of his country. The nobles, ashamed of their

fo9nmy

formler baseness, and ejraged at the many indigni- BoorK 1.
ties offered to the nation, crowded to his standard. _
In order to crulh him at once, the Englilh Monarch
entered Scotland, at the head of a mighty army.
Many battles were fought, and the Scots, though
often vanquished, were not subdued. The ardent
zeal with which the nobles contended for the inde-
pendence of the kingdom, the prudent valour of
Bruce, and above all a national enthusiasm inspired
by such a cause, baffled the repeated efforts of Ed-
ward, and counterbalanced all the advantages which
he derived from the number, and wealth of his sub-
je&s. And though the war continued with little in-
termiflion upwards of seventy years, Bruce and his
posterity kept poffeflion of the throne of Scotland,
and ruled with an authority not inferior to that of
its former Monarchs.

BUT while the sword, the ultimate judge of all

disputes between contending nations, was employed
to terminate this controversy, neither Edward nor
the Scots seemed to difRruft thejuftice of theircaufe;
and both appealed to history and records, and from
these produced, in their own favour, such evidence,
as they pretended to be unanswerable. The letters
and memorials addrefled by each party to the Pope,
whowas then reverenced as the common father, and
often appealed to as the common judge of all Chri-
ftian Princes, are still extant. The fabulous tales
of the early Britilh history the partial testimony of
ignorantChroniclers; supposititious treaties and char-
ters; are the proofs, on which Edward founded his
title to the sovereignty of Scotland i and the homage

done

BooK I. done by the Scottilh Monarchs for their lands ir
'1- ' England is prepofterouny supposed to imply the

fubje&ion of their whole kingdom *. Ill founded,
however, as their right was, the English did not fail
to revive it, in all the subsequent quarrels between
the two kingdoms; while the Scots disclaimed it
with the utmost indignation. To this, we must im-
pute the fierce and implacable hatred to each other,
which long inflamed both. Their national antipa-
thies were excited, not only by the usual circumftan-
ces of frequent hostilities, and reciprocarinjuries;
but the English confidered the Scots as vassals who
had presumed to rebel, and the Scots, in their turn,
regarded the Englilh, as usurpers who aimed at en.
slaving their country.

1306. AT the time, when Robert Bruce began his reign

state of- the
-hi'gdom in Scotland, the fame form of government was efta-
bten u blifhed in all the kingdoms of Europe. And the

p surprising similarity in their constitution and laws

demonstrates that the nations which overturned the
Roman empire, and ereted these kingdoms, though
divided into different tribes, and distinguished by
different names, were originally the fame people,
When we take a view of the feudal system of laws
and policy, that stupendous and singular fabric
ereted by them; the first objec that strikes us is the
King. And when we are told that he is the sole
proprietor of all the landswithin his dominions, that
all his subje&s derive their poiffelons from him,

a Anderson's Historical Biray conceringthe Independency,
&c.

and

and in return consecrate their lives to his service; BOOK I.
when we hear that all marks of diftin&ion, and titles -v-*J
of dignity, flow from him as the only fountain of
honour; when we behold the most potent peers, on
their bended knees, and with folded hands, swear-
ing fealty athis feet, and acknowledging him to be
their Sovereign and their Liege Lord; we are apt to
pronounce him a powerful, nay an absolute Mo-
narch. No conclusion, however, would be more
rash, or worse founded. The genius of the feudal
government was purely ariftocratical. With all
the ensigns of royalty, and with many appearances
of despotic power, a feudal King was the most li-
mited of all Princes.

BEFORE they sallied out of their own habitations Origin of

the feudal

to conquer the world, many of the northern nations Covera.
seem not to have been subjea to the government of it arina
Kings*; and even where monarchical government c'ic1 'ee
was eftablilhed, the princepoffeffed but little autho-
rity. A general rather than a King, his military
command was extensive, his civiijurifdiaion almoit
nothing -. The army which he led was not com-
posed of soldiers, who could be compelled to serve,
but of such as voluntarily followed his standard j.
These conquered not for their leader, but for them-
selves; and being free in their own country, re-
nounced not their liberty when they acquired new
Settlements. They did not exterminate the ancient
inhabitants of the countries, which they subdued,

Cars lib. vi. c. 23. t Tacit. de Mor. Germ. c. 7. 1 I
Caf. ibid.

but

Boor I. done by the Scottilh Monarchs for their lands in
-v-. ' England is prepofteroufy supposed to imply the

fubjeaion of their whole kingdom *. Ill founded,
however, as their right was, the Englilh did not fail
to revive it, in all the subsequent quarrels between
the two kingdoms ; while the Scots disclaimed it
with the utmost indignation. To this, we must im-
pute the fierce and implacable hatred to each other,
which long inflamed both. Their national antipa-
thies were excited, not only by the usual circumftan-
ces of frequent hostilities, and reciprocarinjuries;
but the Englith confidered the Scots as vassals who
had presumed to rebel, and the Scots, in their turn,
regarded the English, as usurpers who aimed at en.
laving their country.

1306. AT the time, when Robert Bruce began his reign

kingdom in Scotland, the fame form of government was efta-
behn hst blifhed in all the kingdoms of Europe. And the

e"1ó surprising similarity in their constitution and laws

demonstrates that the nations which overturned the
Roman empire, and ereted these kingdoms, though
divided into different tribes, and diftinguiihed by
different names, were originally the fame people,
When we take a view of the feudal system of laws
and policy, that stupendous and singular fabric
ereted by them; the first object that strikes us is the
King. And when we are told that he is the sole
proprietor of all the landswithinhisdominions, that
all his subje&s derive their poflefflons from him,

· Andcrfon's HiRorical Eflay concearing theIndependancyE
&c.

and

and in return consecrate their lives to his service; BOOK I.
when we hear that all marks of diftin&ion, and titles -v-'
of dignity, flow from him as the only fountain of
honour; when we behold the most potent peers, on
their bended knees, and with folded hands, swear-
ing fealty athis feet, and acknowledging him to be
their Sovereign and their Liege Lord; we are apt to
pronounce him a powerful, nay an abfoluce Mo-
narch. No conclusion, however, would be more
rash, or worse founded. The genius of the feudal
government was purely ariftocratical. With all
the ensigns of royalty, and with many appearances
of despotic power, a feudal King was the most li-
mited of all Princes.

BEFOR E they sallied out of their own habitations Origin o

the feudal

to conquer the world, many of the northern nations Gover,.
seem not to have been subjef to the government of it,'rid.
Kings *; and even where monarchical government c.tc," .e'
was established, the princepoffefled but little autho-
rity. A general rather than a King, his military
command was extensive, his civiljurifdi&ion almost
nothing t-. The army which he led was not com-
posed of soldiers, who could be compelled to serve,
but of such as voluntarily followed his fandard :.
These conquered not for their leader, but for them-
selves; and being free in their own country, re-
nounced not their liberty when they acquired new
settlements. They did not exterminate the ancient
inhabitants of the countries, which they subdued,

Caf. lib. vi. c. 23. t Tacit. de Mor. Germ, c. 7. 1r i
$ Caf. ibid.

but

BoOK i. but seizing the greater part of their lands, they took

" their persons under protetion. And the difficulty

of maintaining a new conqueRt, as well asthe danger
of being attacked by nev invaders, rendering it
necessary to be always in a posture of defence, thd
form of government which they eRfablilhed was ai-
together military, andhearly refembledthattowhic!.
they had been accustomed in their native country.
Their general still continuing to be the head of the
colony, part of the conquered lands were allotted to
him the remainder, under the hame of beneficia or
fiefs, wasdivided amongst hisprincipal officers. As
the corn mon safety required that thefeofficers fiould,
upon all occasions, be ready to appear in arms, for
the common defence, and should continue obedient
to their general, they bound themselves to take the
field, when called, and to serve him with a number
of men, in proportion to the extent of their territo-
ry. These great officers, again parcelled out their
lands among their followers, and annexed the fame
condition to the grant. A feudal kingdom was pro-
perly the encampment of a great army; military
ideas predominated, military subordination was efta-
blifhed, and the poleffionof land was the pay which
soldiers received for their personal fervicc. In con-
sequence of there notions, the pofefflion of land was
granted during pleasure only, and Kings were elec
tive. In other words, an officer disagreeable to hit
general was deprived of his pay, and the perfob wh(
was mos capable of conducting an army, was cho
fen to command it. Such were the first rudiments
or infancy of feudal government.

Bu'

BUT long before the beginning of the fourteenth BooK I.

century, the feudal system had undergone many "
changes, of which the following were the molt con-
fiderable. Kings formerly eletive, were then here-
ditary; and fiefs granted at first during pleasure,
descended from father to son, and were become per-
petual. These changes, not less advantageous to
the nobles than to the prince, made no alteration in
the ariftocratical spirit of the feudal constitution.
The King, who at a distance seemed to be invested ceneral
with majesty and power, appears, on a nearer view, which limi.
to possess none of those advantages, which beftowon power of

the feuidal

monarchs their grandeur and authority. His reve- monarchs.
nues were scanty; he had not a standing army; and
he enjoyed no proper jurifdidion.

AT a time when pomp and splendor were un. Theirreve-

known, even in the palaces of kings; when the of- nues lere
ficers of the crown received little salary besides the
fees and perquisites of their office ; when embaflies
to foreign courts were rare; when armies were com-
posed of soldiers who served withoutpay; it was not
necessary that a king should possess a great revenue;
nor did the condition of Europe, in those ages, al-
low its princes to be opulent. Commerce made
little progress in the kingdoms where the feudal go-
vernmentwas etablifhed. Institutions, which had
no other objec but to inspire a martial spirit, to
train men to be soldiers, and to make arms the only
honourable profefflon, naturally discouraged the
commercial arts. The revenues, arising from the
taxes imposed on the different branches of com-
merce, were by consequence inconsiderable; and

VOL. . C the

BOOK I. the prince's treasury received little supply from a
'-' i source, which, among a trading people, flows with

such abundance, and is almost inexhaustible. A
fixed tax was not levied even on land ; such a bur-
then would have appeared intolerable to men who
received their estates as the reward of their valour,
and who confidered their service in the field as a full
retribution for what they poflefied. The King's
demesnes, or the portion of land which he fill re-
tained in his own hands unalienated, furnished sub.
fiftence to his court, and defrayed the ordinary ex-
pence of government *. The only fated taxes
which the feudal law obliged vassals to pay to the
king, or to those of whom they held their lards,
were three; one when his eldest son was made a
knight; another when his eldest daughter was mar-
ried; and a third in order to ransom him if he ihould
happen to be taken prisoner. Besides these, the
king received thefeudal casualties of the ward, mar-
riage, &c. of his own vaifals. And, on some ex-
traordinary occasions, his subjects granted him an
aid, which they distinguished by the name of a bene-
volence, in order to declare that he received it not in
consequence of any right, but as a gift, flowing
from their good-will -. All these added together,
produced a revenue, scanty and precarious, which,
far from enabling the king to attempt any thing that
could excite thejealoufy or fear of the nobles, kept
him in continual indigence, anxiety, and depend-
ence.

c Craig. de Feud. lib. i. Dieg. 14. Du Cange Gloi. voc.
Dominicum. t Da Cange voc. Auxilium.

NOR

NOR could the king supply the defet of his re- BOOK I.

venues, by the terrorof his arms. Mercenary troops Thiey ha
and standing armies were unknown, as long as the noftanding
feudalgovernment subsisted invigour. Europe was
peopled with soldiers. The vaffalsof theking, and
the fub-vaffals of the barons, were all obliged to carry
arms. And while the poverty of princes prevented
them from fortifying their frontier towns, while a
campaign continued but a few weeks, and while a
fierce and impetuous courage was impatient to bring
every quarrel to the decision of a battle, an army,
without pay, and with little discipline, was sufficient
for all the purposes both of the security and of the
glory of the nation. Such an army, however, far
from being an engine at the king's disposal, was
often no less formidable to him, than to his ene-
mies. The more warlike any people were, the
more independent they became; and the fame per-
sons being both soldiers andfubjecs, civil privileges
and immunities were the consequence of their victo-
ries, and the reward of their martialexploits. Con-
querors, whom mercenary armies, under our pre-
sent forms of government, often render the tyrants
of their own people, as well as the scourges of man-
kind, were commonly, under the feudal conflitu-
tion, the most indulgent of all princes to their sub-
je&s, because they stood most in need of their assist-
ance. A prince whom even war and vitories did
not render the master of his own army, pofleffed no
Ihadow of military power during times of peace.
His disbanded soldiers mingled with his other sub-
jets; not a tingle man received pay from him;
many ages elapsed even before a guard was appoint-

Ca ed

Booxr I. ed to defend his person ; and destitute of that great
G-V3 ' in(trument of dominion a sanding army, the au-

thorityof the king continued always feeble, and was
often contemptible.

Theirjlri... NOR were there the only circumstances, which
didio ws contributed towards deprefing the regal power. By
limited,

the feudal system, the king's judicial authority was
extremely circumscribed. At firit, princes seem to
have been the fupremejudges of their people, and,
in person, heard and determined all controversies
among them. The multiplicity ofcaufes soon made
it necessary to appoint judges, who, in the king's
name, decided matters, that belonged to the royal
jurifdition. But the Barbarians, who over-ran Eu-
rope, having destroyed most of the great cities, and
the countries which they seized being cantoned out
among powerful barons, who were blindly follow-
ed by numerous vassals, whom, in return, they
were bound to prote& from every injury; the ad-
ministration ofjuftice was greatly interrupted, and
the execution of any legal sentence became almost
impracticable. Theft, rapine, murder, and difor-
der of all kinds prevailed in every kingdom of Eu.
rope, to a degree almof incredible, and scarce com-
patible with the subsistence of civil society. Every
offender sheltered himself under the protecion of
some powerful chieftain, who screened him from
the pursuits of justice. To apprehend, and to pu.
nifh a criminal, often required the union and effort
of half a kingdom *. In order to remedy these

evils

A remarkable initance of this occurs in the following hit
tory, o late as the year i561. Mary, having appointed a cour

c

evils, many persons of diftin&ion were entrusted BOOK I.
with the administration of justice within their own
territories. But what we may presume was, at firit,
only a temporary grant, or a personal privilege, the
incroaching fpiric of the nobles soon converted into a
right, and rendered hereditary. The lands of some
were ereEted into Baronies, those of others into Re.
galities. The jurifdiaion of the former was exten-
five, that of the latter, as the name implies, royal,
and almost unbounded. All causes, whether civil
or criminal, were tried by judges, whom the lord
of the regality appointed; and if the king's courts
called any person within his territory before them,
the lord of regality might put a stop to their pro-

of jullice to be held on the borders, the inhabitants of no less
than eleven counties were summoned to guard the person, who
was to a& asjudge, and to enable him to enforce his decisions,
p. 234. The words of a proclamation, which afford such a con-
vincing proofof the feebleness of the feudal government, deserve
our notice.-" And because it is necessary for the execution of
her Highness' commandments and service, that her juflice be
well accompanied, and her authority sufficiently fortified, by the
concurrence ofa good power of herfaithfulfubjeas-Therefore
commands and charges all and sundry Earls, Lords, Barons,
Freeholders, Landed-men, and otherGentlemen, dwellingwith-
in the said counties, that they, and every one'of them, with
their kin, friends, servants, and houflholdmen, well bodin in
feir of war in the moll fubllantious manner, [i. e. compleatly
armed and provided,] and with twenty days victuals to meet
and to pass forward with him to the borough of Jedburgh, and
there to remain during the said fpaceof twenty days, and to re-
ceive such direction and commands, as shall be given by him to
them in our Sovereign Lady's name, for quietness of the coun.
try; and to put the fame in execution under the pain of losing
their life, lands, and goods." Keith's Hill of Scotland, 198.

C 3 ceedings,

BooK I. ceedings, and by the privilege of repledging, remove

S-** the cause to his own court, and even punish his

vassal, if he submitted to a foreign jurifdiaion*.
Thus almost every question, in which any person
who resided on the lands of the nobles, was inte-
relied, being determined by judges appointed by the
nobles themselves, their vassals were scarce sensible
of being, in any degree, subjet to the crown. A
feudal kingdom was split into many small principa-
lities, almost independent, and held together by a
feeble and commonly an imperceptible bond of
union. And the king was not only tripped of the
authority annexed to the person of a fupremejudge,
but his revenue suffered no small diminution, by the
loss of those pecuniary emoluments, which were, in
that age, due to the person who adminifteredjuftice.

IN the fame proportion that the king funk in

power, the nobles rose towards independence. Not
satisfied with having obtained a hereditary right to
their fiefs, which they formerly held during plea-
sure, their ambition aimed at something bolder, and
by introducing entails, endeavoured, as far as hu-
man ingenuity and invention can reach that end, to
render their poffefions unalienable and everlasting.
As they had full power to add to the inheritance
transmitted to them from their ancestors, but none to
diminish it; time alone, by means of marriages,
legacies, and other accidents, brought continual ac-
celions of wealth, and of dignity a great family,
like a river, became considerable from the length of

*Craig, lib. iii. Dieg. 7.

its

its course, and as it rolled on, new honours and new BOOK I.
property flowed successively into it. Whatever in- -
fluence is derived from titles of honour, the feudal
barons likewise possessed in an ample manner.
These marks of diftintion are, in their own nature,
either official or personal, and being annexed to a
particular charge, or bellowed by the admiration of
mankind upon illustrious chara&ers, ought to be
appropriated to these. But the son, however un-
worthy, could not bear to be diripped of that ap-
pellation, by which his father had been distinguish-
ed. His presumption claimed, what his virtue did
not merit; titles of honour became hereditary, and
added new lutlre to nobles already in pofeflion of
too much power. Something more audacious, and
more extravagant flill remained. The supreme di-
re&ion of all affairs, both civil and military, being
committed to the great officers of the crown, the
fame and safety of princes, as well as of their peo.
ple, depended upon the fidelity and abilities of these
officers. But such was the preposterous ambition
of the nobles, and so successful even in their wildest
attempts to aggrandize themselves, that in all the
kingdoms where the feudal institutions prevailed,
most of there offices were annexed to great fami-
lies, and held, like fiefs, by hereditary right. A
person whose undutiful behaviour rendered him odi-
ous to his prince, or whose incapacity exposed him
to the contempt of the people, often held a place of
power and trust, of the greatest importance to both.
In Scotland, the offices of Lord Justice General,
Great Chamberlain, High Steward, High Confta-

C 4 ble,

BOOK I. ble, Earl Marshal, and High Admiral, were all he-'

Y-"VV reditary; and in many counties, the office of Sheriff

was held in the fame manner.

NOBLES, whose property was so extensive, and

whose power so great, could not fail of being tur-
bulent and formidable. Nor did they want inftru-
ments for executing their boldest designs. That
portion of their lands, which they parcelled out
among their followers, supplied them with a nu-
merous band of faithful and determined vassals;
while that, which they retained in their own hands,
enabled them to live with a princely splendour. The
great hall of an ambitious baron was often more
crowded than the court of his sovereign. The
strong castles, in which they resided, afforded a fe-
cure retreat to the discontented and seditious. A
great part of their revenue was spent upon multi-
tudes of indigent, but bold retainers. And if at any
time they left their retreat to appear in the court
of their sovereign, they were accompanied, even in
times of peace, with a vast train of armed follow.
ers. The usual retinue of William the sixth Earl
of Douglas consisted of 2000 horse. Those of
the other nobles were magnificent and formidable
in proportion. Impatient of subordination, and
forgetting their proper rank, such potent and haugh-
ty barons were the rivals, ratherthanthefubjetsof
their prince. They often despised his orders, in-
fulted his person, and wrested from him his crown.
And the history of Europe, during several ages,
contains little else, but the accounts of the wars and

revo^

revolutions, occasioned by their exorbitant ambi- BOOK I.
tion.

BUT, if the authority of the barons far exceeded Theirpow-

er greater

its proper bounds in the othernations of Europe, we inScotland
may affirm that the balance which ought to be pre- other kini-
served between a king and his nobles was entirely loft dom
in Scotland. The Scottish nobles enjoyed, in com-
mon with those of other nations, all the means for
extending their authority which arise from the arif-
rocratical genius of the feudal government. Besides
these, they possessed advantages peculiar to them-
selves : The accidental sources of their power were
considerable; and singular circumstances concurred
with the fpiritof theconftitutiontoaggrandizethem.
To enumerate the most remarkable of these, will
serve both to explain the political state of the king- car c.uf,

of this.

dom, and to illustrate many important occurrences, of this
in the period now under our review,

I. THE nature of their country was one cause of The nature

the power and independence of the Scottilh nobility. ` til
Level and open countries are formed for servitude.
The authority of the supreme magistrate reaches
with ease to the most distant corners, and when na-
ture has ereted no barrier, and affords no retreat,
the guilty or obnoxious are soon detected, and
punished. Mountains, and fens, and rivers set
bounds to despotic power, and amidst these, is the
natural feat of freedom and independence. In such
places, did the Scottish nobles usually fix their refi-
dence. By retiring to his own castle, a mutinous
baron could defy the power of his sovereign, it be-

ing

BOOK J. ing impracicable to lead an army, through a bar-

ren country, to places, almost inacceflible to a single
man. The fame causes, which checked the pro-
grefs of the Roman arms, and rendered all the es-
forts of Edward I. abortive, often proteted the
Scottish nobles from the vengeance of their prince;
and they owed their personal independence, to those
very mountains and marshes, which saved their
country from being conquered.

The small II. THE want of great cities in Scotland contri-
gcmbt 's. buted not a little to increase the power of the nobi-

lity, and to weaken that of the Prince. Where-
evernumbers of men assemble together, order mutt
be established, and a regular form of government
instituted, the authority of the magistrate must be
recognized, and his decisions meet with prompt and
full obedience. Laws and subordination take rife
in cities; and where there are few cities as in Po-
land, or none as in Tartary, there are few or no
traces of any fort of police. But under the feudal
governments, commerce, the chief means of assem-
bling mankind, was neglected; the nobles, in or-
der to strengthen their influence over their vassals,
resided among them, and seldom appeared at court,
where they found a superior, or dwelt in cities,
where they met with equals. In Scotland, the rich
counties in the South lying open to the English, no
town situated there could rife to be great or popu.
lous amidt continual inroads and alarms: The re-
fidence of our monarchs was not fixed to any par-
ticular place many parts of the country were bar-
ren and uncultivated ; and in consequence of these

3 peculiar

peculiar circumstances, added to the general causes BooK L
flowing from the nature of the feudal inftirutions, -v-
the towns in Scotland were extremely few, and very
inconiderable. The vassals of every baron occupi-
ed a diftina portion of the kingdom, and formed
a separate and almost independent society. Instead
of giving aid towards reducing to obedience their
seditious Chieftain, or any whom he took under his
prote&ion, they were all in arms forhisdefence, and
obftruded the operations of justice to the utmost.
The prince was obliged to connive at criminals,
whom he could not reach; the nobles, conscious
of this advantage, were not afraid to offend; and
the difficulty of punishing almost assured them of
impunity.

III. THE division of the country into clans had The in i.

no small effect in rendering the nobles considerable. ca,,.
The nations, which over-ran Europe, were original-
ly divided into many small tribes; and when they
came to parcel out the lands which they had con-
quered, it was natural for every chieftain to bestow
a portion, in the first place, upon those of his own
tribe or family. These all held their lands of him;
and as the fafetyof each individual depended on the
general union, there small societies clung together,
and were distinguished by fomecommon appellation,
either patronymical, or local, long before the intro-
duation of surnames, or ensigns armorial. But when
these became common, thedefcendants and relations
of every chieftain assumed the fame name and arms
with him i other vassals were proud to imitate their
example, and by degrees they were communicated

to

BOOK I. to all those who held of the fame superior. Thus
L^^" clanfhips were formed; and in a generation or two,

that consanguinity which was, at first, in a great
measure, imaginary, was believed to be real. An
artificial union was converted into a natural one;
men willingly followed a leader, whom they regard-
ed both as the superior of their lands, and the chief
of their blood, and served him not only with the
fidelity of vassals, but with the affection of friends.
In the other feudal kingdoms, we may observe such
unions, as we have described, imperfectly formed;
but in Scotland, whether they were the production
of chance, or the effet of policy, or introduced by
the Irish colony above-mentioned, and strengthened
by carefully preserving their genealogies both ge-
nuine and fabulous, clanfhips were universal. Such
a confederacy might be overcome, it could not be
broken; and no change of manners, or of govern-
ment, has been able, in some parts of the kingdom,
to dissolve associations which are founded upon pre-
judices so natural to the human mind. How for-
midable were nobles at the head of followers, who
counting that cause juit and honourable which their
chief approved, were ever ready to take the field at
his command, and to sacrifice their lives in defence
of his person, or of his fame ? Against such men, a
king contended with great disadvantage, andthatcold
service, which moneypurchafes, or authority extorts,
was not an equal match for their ardour and zeal.

The mall IV. THE fmalnefs of their number may be men-
nnmbe of tioned among the causes of the grandeur of the
the nobles,

Scottish nobles. Our annals reach not back to the

first

first division of property in the kingdom; but so far BooK I.
as we can trace the matter, the original poffeflions v-
of the nobles seem to have been extensive. The an.
cient Thanes were the equals and the rivals of their
prince. Many of the earls and barons, who fuc-
ceeded them, were mailers of territories no less am-
ple. France and England, countries wide and ser-
tile, afforded settlements to a numerous and power-
ful nobility. Scotland, a kingdom neither extensive
nor rich, could not contain many such overgrown
proprietors. Butthepowerof an aristocracy always
diminishes, in proportion to the increase of itsnum-
bers; feeble if divided among a multitude; irre-
fiftible if centered in a few. When nobles are nu-
merous, their operations nearly refemblethofeof the
people, they are routed only by what they feel, not
by what they apprehend; and submit to many ar-
bitrary and oppressive ats, before they take arms
against their sovereign. A small body, on the con-
trary, is more sensible, and more impatient; quick
in discerning, and prompt in repelling danger; all
its motions are as sudden, as those of the other are
flow. Hence proceeded the extremejealoufy, with
which the Scottish nobles observed their monarchs,
and the fierceness with which they opposed their
incroachments. Even the virtue of a prince did not
render them less vigilant, or less eager to defend
their rights; and Robert Bruce, notwithstanding
the splendour of his vicories, and the glory of his
name, was upon the point of experiencing the vi-
gour of their resistance, no less than his unpopular
descendant James III. Besides this, the near alli-
ance of the great families, by frequent intermar-

riages,

BOOK I. riages, was the natural consequence of their small
L's-' number. And as consanguinity was, in those ages,

a powerful bond of union, all the kindred of a
nobleman interested themselves in his quarrel, as a
common cause, and every contest the king had,
though with a single baron, soon drew upon him
the arms of a whole confederacy.

Theiran V. THOSE natural connexions, both with their
leagues and
combina. equals and with their inferiors, the Scottish nobles
tions,

flrengthened by a device, which, if not peculiar to
themselves, was at leat morefrequentamongthem,
than in any other nation. Even in times of pro-
found peace, they formed afociations, which when
made with their equals, were called leagues of mu-
tual defence; and when with their inferiors, bonds of
manrent. By the former, the contrasting parties
bound themselves mutually to afift each other, in
all causes, and against all persons. By the latter,
protecion was itipulated on the one hand, and fide-
lity and personal service promised on the other *.
Self-prefervation, it is probable, forced men at first
into there confederacies, and while disorder and ra-
pine were universal, while government was unsettled,
and the authority of laws little known or regarded,
near neighbours found it necessary to unite in this
manner for their security, and the weak were ob-
liged to court the patronage of the strong. By de-
grees, these associations became so many alliances
offensive and defensive against the throne; and as
their obligation was held to be more sacred than any

e AQ3o. Parl. 1424. At 43.P. I5ss5.

tie

tie whatever, they gave much umbrageto our kings, BOOK I.
and contributed not a little to the power and inde. ^-
pendence of the nobility. In the reign of James II.
William the eighth earl of Douglas entered into a
league of this kind with the earls of Crawford, Ross,
Murray, Ormond, the lords Hamilton, Balveny,
&c. and so formidable was this combination to the
king, that he had recourse to a measure no less vio-
lent than unjust, in order to dissolve it.

VI. THE frequent wars between England and The Fre

quent w a-

Scotland proved another cause of augmenting the ;iti. Eag-
power of the nobility. Nature has placed no bar-
rier between the two kingdoms; a river, almost
every where fordable, divides them towards the east:
on the weft they are separated by an imaginary line.
The small revenues of our kings prevented them
from fortifying, or placing garrisons in the towns
on the frontier; nor would thejealoufy of their sub-
jets havepermitted such a method of defence. The
barons, whose eftateslay near the borders, confider-
ed themselves as bound both in honour and in inte-
reft to repel the enemy. The warden/hips of the
different marches, offices of great trust and dignity,
were always bestowed on them. This gained them
the leading of the warlike counties in the south ;
and their vassals, living in a state of perpetual hofti.
lity, or enjoying at best an insecure peace, became
more inured to war than even the reft of their coun-
trymen, and more vrilling to accompany their chief-
tain in his most hardy and dangerous enterprises.
It was the valour, no less than the number of their
followers, that rendered the Douglases great. The

nobles

BOOK I. nobles in the northern and midland counties were
i Am often dutiful and obsequious to the crown, but our

monarchs always found it impracticable to subdue
the mutinous and ungovernable spirit of the bor-
derers. In all our domestic quarrels, those who
could draw to their fide the inhabitants of the foutlh-
ern counties, were sure of vi&ory; and conscious of
this advantage, the lords who possessed authority
there, were apt to forget the duty which they owed
their sovereign, and to aspire beyond the rank of
fubjeats.

The fre. VII. THE calamities which besel our kings con-
Cuent mio
norities tributed more than any other cause to diminish the
which hap.
pened i royal authority. Never was any race of monarchs
Sotan. so unfortunate as the Scottish. Of fix successive

princes, from Robert III. to James VI. not one died
a natural death; and the minorities, during that
time, were longer, and more frequent, than ever
happened in any other kingdom. From Robert
Bruce to James VI. we reckon ten princes; and
seven of these were called to the throne, while they
were minors, and almost infants. Even the most
regular and best established governments feel fenfi-
bly the pernicious effects of a minority, and either
become languid and inactive, or are thrown into
violent and unnatural convulsions. But, under the
imperfect and ill adjusted system of government in
Scotland, there effects were till more fatal; and the
fierce and mutinous spirit of the nobles, unreftrain.
ed by the authority of a king, scorned all subjeCtion
to the delegated jurisdiction of a regent, or to the
feeble commands of a minor. The royal authority

was

was circumscribed within narrower limits thanever; BOOK rI
the prerogatives of the crown, naturally inconfider- '
able, were reduced almost to nothing; and the arif-
tocratical power gradually rose upon the ruinsof the
monarchical. Left the personal power of a regent
sh'ould enable him to a6t with too much vigour, the
authority annexed to that office, was sometimes ren-
dered inconsiderable, by being divided; or if a
single regent was chosen, the greater nobles, and
the heads of the more illustrious families, were fel-
dom raised to that dignity. It was often conferred
upon men, who possessed little influence, and excit-
ed nojealoufy. They, conscious of their own weak-
ness, were obliged to overlook some irregularities,
and to permit others; and in order to support their
authority, which was destitute of real firength, they
endeavoured to gain the most powerful and ative
barons, by granting them possessions and immuni-
ties, which raised them to still greater power. When
the king himself came to assume the reins of go-
vernment, he found his revenues wafted or alienat-
ed, the crown lands seized or given away, and the
nobles so accufltomed to independence, that, after the
flruggles of a whole reign, he was seldom able to
reduce them to the fame itate, in which they had
been at the beginning of his minority, or to wrest
from them what they had usurped during that time. R:.E;, of
If we take a view of what happened to each of our tvo.:.tle
kings who was so unfortunate as to be placed in : `,,.
this situation, the truth and importance of this ob- ni ci"h
servation will fully appear.

VOL . I. D THi

Bool I, THE minority of David IL the on of Robert

9-o Bruce, was disturbed by the pretensions of Edward
Davd u. Baliol, who, relying on the aid of England, and on

the support of fae difaffeced barons among the
Scots, invaded the kingdom. The success which
at first attended his arms, obliged the young king
to retire to France; and lkliol took possession of the
throne. A fmal body of the nobles, however, con-
tinuing faithful to their exiled prince, drove Baliol
out of Scotland, and after an absence of nine years,
David returned from France, and took the govern-
ment of the kingdom into his own hands. But
nobles, whowere thus wafting their blood and treat
sure in defence of the crown, had a right to the un-
disturbed poiffelion of their ancient privileges; and
even some title to arrogate new ones. It seems to
have been a maxim in that age, that every leader
might claim as his own, the territory which his
sword had won from the enemy. Great acquifi-
tions were gained by the nobility in that way: and
to there the gratitude and liberality of David added,
by distributing, among such as adhered to him, the
vast poffelions which fell to the crown by the for-
feiture of his enemies. The family of Douglas,
which began to rife above the other nobles, in the
reign of his father, augmented both its power and
its property, during his minority.

1405. JAMES L was seized by the Englilh, during the
Jmc« 1. continuance of a truce, and ungenerously detained

a prisoner, almost nineteen years, During that pe.
riod, the kingdom was governed, first by his uncle
Robert duke of Albany,, and then, by Murdohi!

son

ton. Both there noblemen aspired to the c'rown, BboR .
and their unnatural ambition, if we nlay believe -'~
most of our historians; not only cut short the days
of Prince David, the King's elder brother, but pro-
longed thecaptivityofJames. They Battered them-
selves, that they might ftep with left oppofltion in-
to a throne, when almost vacant: and, dreading
the King's return, as the extinction of their autho-
rity, and the end of their hopes, they carried dri
the negociations for obtaining his liberty, with ex-
treme remilTefs. At the fame tinme they neglec-.
ed nothing that could either sooth or bribe the no-
bles to approve their scheme. They slackened the
reins of government; they allowed the prerogative
to be encroached upon; they suffered the most ir-
regular ats of power, and even waricon instances
of oppression, to pass with impunity; they dealt
out the patrimony of the crown among those whose
enmity they dreaded, or whose favour they had
gained 1 and reduced the royal authority to a state
of imbecillity, from which succeeding monarchs la-
boured in vain to raise it.

DURItNt the minority of James tI. the adrmini- ,47,

ftration of affairs and the custody of the King's James
person were committed to Sir William Crichtonj
and Sir Alexander Livingston. Jealotify ard dif-
cord were the effets of their conjtun& atithority,
and each Of them, in order to strengthen himfelfo
bestowed new power add privileges upon the great
men, whose aid he courted. While the young earl
of Douglas, encouraged by their ditifioins efted
a fore of independent principality within the king-

D a donm

BOOK I. dom; and forbidding his vassals to acknowledge any
'L'" authority but his own, he created Knights, appoint-

ed a privy council, named officers civil and mili-
tary, assumed every ensign of Royalty, but the title
of King, and appeared in public with a magnifi-
cence more than royal.
.460. EIGHT persons were chosen to govern the king-

dom during the minority of James III. Lord
Boyd, however, by seizing the person of the young
King, and by the ascendant which he acquired over
him, soon engrossed the whole authority. He
formed the ambitious project of railing his family
to the fame pitch of power and grandeur with those
of the prime nobility; and he effe&ed it. While
intent on this, he relaxed the vigour of govern.
ment, and the Barons became accustomed, once
more, to anarchy and independence. The power,
which Boyd had been at so much pains to acquire,
was of no long continuance, and the fall of his
family, according to the fate of favourites, was
sudden and deftru&ive; but upon its ruins, the
family of Hamilton rose, which soon attained the
highest rank in the kingdom.
Jame, v. A s the minority of James V. was longer, it was

likewise more turbulent than those of the preced-
ing Kings. And the contending nobles, encou-
raged or protested either by the King of France, or
of England, formed themselves into more regular
fations, and disregarded more than ever the re.
ltraints of order and authority. The French had
the advantage of feeingone, devoted to their interet,

5 . raifec

raised to be regent. This was the duke of AIbany,BooK I.
a native of France, and a grandson of James II. .^--
But Alexander Lord Home, the most eminent of
all the Scottish peers, who survived the fatal bat-
tle of Flowden, thwarted all his measures, during
the first years of his administration; and the in-
trigues of the Queen Dowager, fifterof He ry VIII.
rendered the latter part of it no less feeble: Though
supported by French auxiliaries, the nobles despised
his authority, and regardlcfs either of his threats, or
his entreaties, peremptorily refused, two several
times, to eater England, to the borders of which
kingdom he had led them. Provoked by there re-
peated instances of contempt, the regent abandon-
ed his troublesome station, and retiring to France,
preferred the tranquillity of a private life, to an
office destitute of real authority. Upon his retreat,
Douglas Earl of Angus became master of the
King's person, and governed the kingdom in his
name. Many efforts were made to deprive him of
his usurped authority. But the numerous vassals
and friends of his family adhered to him, because
he divided with them the power and emoluments
of his office; the people reverenced and loved the
name of Douglas ; he exercised, without the title of
regent, a fuller and more abfoluteauthority than any
who had enjoyed that dignity; and the ancient, but
dangerous pre-eminence of the Douglases, seemed
to be restored.

To there, and to many, other causes, omitted or

unobserved by us, did the Scottish nobility owe that
exorbitant and uncommon power, of which instances

D 3 occur,

Boor I. occur, so frequently, in our history. Nothing hew-

- ever demonstrates so fully the extent of their power,

as the length of its duration. Many years fter the
declension of the feudal systems, in theother king-
doms of Europe, and when the arms or policy o(
Princes had, every where, lhaken, or laid it in
ruins, the foundations of that ancient fabric remain-
ed, in a great measUre, frma and untouched in Scot-
land.

The power THE powers, which the feudal institutions vest-
ds the fbe ed in the nobles, soon became intolerable to all the
became in. Princes of Europe, who longed to posess some.
to Prince. hing more than a nominal and precarious aut4q-

rity. Their impatience to obtain this, precipitated
Henry III. of England, Edward II. and some other
weak Princes, into rash and premature attempts
against the privileges of the Barons, in which they
were disappointed or perished. Princes, of greater
abilities, were content to mitigate evils which they
could not cure, they fought occupation for the tur-
bulent spirit of their nobles, in frequent wars; and
allowed their fiery courage to evaporate in foreign
expeditions, which, if they brought no other advan-
tage, secured at least domefic tranquillity. But
time and accidents ripened the feudal governments

Thr,. for dfeRru&ion. Towards the snd of the fifteenth
tmptate century, and beginning of the sixteenth, all the
humble the
,ebi, (uc. Princes of Europe attacked, as if by concert, the
crslmsu in
rnnce jd power of their nobles. Men of genius then under-
'n Aiwd. took with success, what $heir unlkilful predecelbors

had attempted in vain. Lewis l. of France, th
molt profound and the mot advcentrous genius of

At .

that age, began, and in a tingle reign, almit corn- Boo I.
ileted the scheme of their defiruction. The sure ''
but concealed policy of Henry VII. of England
produced the fame effec. The means, indeed, em-
ployed by these monarchs were very diffearet. The
blow, which Lewis struck, was sudden and fatal.
The artifices of Henry refembledthofe lowpoifons,
which waste tcconftitution, but become not mor-
tal till some dftant period. Nor did they produce
consequences less oppofit. Lewis boldly added to
the crown whatever he wrested from the nobles.
Henry undermined his Barons, by encouragingthem
to fell their lands, which enriched the commons,
and gave them a weight in the legislature unknown
to their predecessors. But while these great revolu- But the no.
tions were carrying on in two kingdoms, with btoe'"'
which Scotland was intimately conneted, no alter- th in
ation happened there; the King neither extended scotland.
his own prerogative, nor enabled the commons to
encroach upon the aristocracy; the nobles not only
retained their ancient privileges and possessions, but
daily made new acquisitions.

THIS was not owing to the inattention of our OurKlng

Princes, or to their want of ambition. They were endavour-
abundantly sensible of the exorbitant power of the tend the

loyal au-

nobility, and extremely solicitous to humble that thority.
order. They did not, however, posess means sus-
ficient for accomplihing that end. The resources
of our monarcs were few, and the progress which
they made inconsiderable. But as the number of
their followers, and the extent of theirjurifdi&ion, "ea to.

m eads this
were the two chief circumfances which rendered wnd.d

D 4 the

4k

BOOK I. the nobles formidable; in order to counterbalance

C-^ the one, and to restrain the other, all our Kings had

recourse to the fame expedients.

Encourage I. AMONG nobles of a fierce courage, and of un-
o'ng the polished manners, surrounded with vassals bold and
nobl:s. licentious, whom they were. bound by interest and

honour to protect, the causes of discord were many
and unavoidable. And as the contending parties
could seldom agree in acknowledging the authority
of any common superior or judge, and their impa-
tient spirit would seldom wait the flow decisions of
justice, their quarrels were usually terminatedbythe
sword. The offended Baron assembled his vassals,
and wafted the lands, or shed the blood of his ene-
my. To forgive an injury, was mean; to forbear
revenge, infamous or cowardly *. Hence quarrels

The spirit of revenge was encouraged, not only by the

manners, but what is more remarkable, by the laws of those
ages. If any person thought the prosecution of an injury offer-
ed to his family, too troublesome, or too dangerous, the Salique
laws permitted him publickly to desist from demanding venge-
ance; but the fame laws, in order to punish his cowardice, and
want of affecion to his family, deprived him of the right of fuc-
ceflion. Henault's Abrege Chronol. p. 81. Among the Anglo-
Saxons, we find afingularinllitutiondiftinguifhed by the name
of odalitiurn; a voluntary aflociation, the obje&t hereof was
the personal security of those who joined in it, and which the
feebleness ofgovernment at thattime rendered neceflary. Among
other regulations, which are contained in one of there fiill ex-
tant, the following deserves notice. " If any aflbciate (hall ei-
tlber eat or drink with a person who has killed any member of
thefodalitiutn, unless in the presence of the King, the Bilhop, or
the Count, and unless he can prove that he did not know the
person, let him pay a great fine. " Hicks Dissert. Epiflolar. a.
pud Thefaur. Ling. Septentr. vol, i. p. a.

were

were tranfmitred from father to son, and under the BOOR I.
name of deadlyfeuds, subsisted for manygenerations, -v
with unmitigated rancour. It was the interest of
the crown to foment rather than to extinguilh these
quarrels, and by scattering or cherilhing the feeds
of discord among the nobles, that union which
would have rendered the aristocracy invincible, and
which must at once have annihilated the preroga-
tive, was effecually prevented. To the fame cause,
our Kings were indebted for the success, with which
they sometimes attacked the mofl powerful chief-
tains. They employed private revenge to aid the
impotence of publick laws, and arming against the
person who had incurred their displeasure, those ri-
val families which wished his fall, they rewarded
their service, by sharing among them the spoils of
the vanquished. But this expedient, though it
served to humble individuals, did not weaken the
body of the nobility. Those, who were now the
instruments of their Prince's vengeance, became, in
a Ihort time, the objecs of his fear. Having ac-
quired power and wealth by serving the Crown,
they, 'in their turn, set up for independence: And
though there might be a fluctuation of power, and
of property; though old families fell, and new
ones rose upon their ruins; the rights of the arifto.
cracy remained entire, and its vigour unbroken.

II. As the administration of justice is one of the Extendthe

most powerful ties between a King and his subje&s, jutii"dio
all our monarchs were at the utmost pains to cir- King'*

court#.

cumfcribe the jurifdition of the Barons, and to
extend that of the crQwn. The external forms of

sub-

BOOK I. subordination, natural to the feudal system, favour
¶c'-m' ed this attempt. At appeal lay from the judge

and courts of the Barons, to those of the King.
The right, however, of judging in the first instance,
belonged to the nobles, and they easily found means
to defeat the effe&t of appeals, as well as of many other
feudal regulations. The royal jurifdition was al-
most confined within the narrow limitsof the King's
demesnes, beyond which his judges claimed indeed
much authority, but pofeffed next to none. Our
Kings were sensible of thee limitations, and bore
them with impatience. But it was impossible to
overturn in a moment, what was so deeply rooted;
or to strip the nobles, at once, of privileges which
they had held so long, and which were wrought al.
most into the frame of the feudal conftiution. To
accomplish this, however, was an obje& of uni.
form and anxious attention to all our princes.
James I. led the way, here, as well as in other in.
fiances, towards a more regular and perse& police.
He made choice, among the estates of parliament,
of a certain number of persons, whom he diftia-
guifhed by the name of Lards of S .on, and ap-
pointed them to hold courts for determining civil
causes, three times in the year, and forty days at a
time, in whatever place he pleased to name. Their
jurifdi&ion extended to all matters, which formerly
came under the cognizance of the King's council,
and being a committee of parliament, ther deci-
sions were final. James II. obtained a law, annex-
ing all regalities, which ihould be forfeited, tothe
crown, and declaring the right ofjurifdi&ion to be
unalienable for the future. Jamnc III. impofd fe-

1{i~ .T~Y.ve

yvre penalties upon those judges appointed by the BOOK It
Barons, whose decisions flould be found on a re- .'
view to be unjust; and by many other regulations,
endeavoured to extend the authority of his own
court . James IV, on pretence of remedying the
inconveniencies arising from the Ihort terms of the
court of Session, appointed other judges called
Lord of Daily Council. The SeFion was an ambula-
tory court, andmecteldom: the Daily Council was
fixed, and fat constantly at Edinburgh; and though
not composed of members of parliament, the fame
powers, which the Lords of Sefion enjoyed, were
veRsed in it. At last James V. ercted a new
court that fill subsists, and which he named the
College of Juflice, the judges or Scnators of which
were called Lords of Councilad SeFion. This court
not only exercised the fame jurifdition which for-
merly belonged to the Seflion and Daily Council,
but new rights were added. Privileges of great
importance were granted to its members, its forms
were prescribed, its terms fixed, and regularity,
power, and splendour conferred upon it. 'I he per-
sons conftitutedjudges in all these different courts,
had, in many refpeas, the advantage of thofc who
presided in the courts of the Barons; they were
more eminent for their skill in law, their rules of
proceeding were more uniform, and their decisions
more consistent. Suchjudicatories became the ob-
je&s of confidence, and of veneration. Men wil-
lingly submitted their property to their determina-
tion, and their encroachments on thejurifdidions of

A& 6 P. 169. A 9
. A 9 P 93. At 99 P. 1487.

2 the

BOOK I. the nobles were popular, and for that reason fucg

- -- cefsful. By devices of a imilar nature, thejurifdic-

tion of the nobles in criminal causes was restrained,
and the authority of the court of Justiciary extend-
ed. The crown, in this particular, gaining insen-
sibly upon the nobles, recovered more ample autho-
rity; and the King, whofejurifdi&ion once refem-
bled that of a Baron, rather than that of a fove.
reign *, came more and more to be confidered as

the

* The molf perse& idea of the feudal fyrfemof government

may be attained by attending to the Rate of Germany, and to
the hillory of France. In the former, the feudal institutions
fiill fubfiit with great vigour; and though altogether abolished
in the latter, the public records have been so carefully preserved,
thatthe French lawyers and antiquaries have been enabled, with
more certainty and precision, than those of any other country in
Europe, to trace its rife, its progress, and revolutions. In Ger-
many, every principality may be confidered as a fief, and all its
great Princes as vassals, holding of the Emperor. They possess
all the feudal privileges: their flefs are perpetual ; their jurif.
ditions within their own territories, separate and extensive; and
the great offices of the empire are all hereditary, and annexed
to particular families. At the fame time the Emperor retains
many of the prerogatives of the feudal monarchs. Like them,
his claims and pretensions are innumerable, and his power foall;
hisjurifdiaion within his own demesnes or hereditary countries,
is complete; beyond the bounds of these it is almost nothing,
and so permanent are feudal principles, that although the feu-
dal system be overturned in almoRf every particular fRate in Ger.
many, and although its Princes have all become absolute, the
original feudal constitution of the empire fill remains, and ideas
peculiar to that form of government, diret all its operations,
and determine the rights of all its Princes. Our observations,
with regard to the limited jurifdision of kings tinder the fu-
dal governments, are greatly illuflrated by what happened ia
France. The feebleness and dotage of the defcendantsof Char.
lemaine encouraged the Peers to usurp an'independent jurifdic.

ion,

the head of the community, and the supreme dif- BOOK L
penser of justice to his people. These acquisitions - -
of our Kings, however, though comparatively
great, were in reality inconsiderable; and notwith-
standing all their efforts, many of the separate ju-
rifdidions poffefled by the nobles remained in great
vigour; and their final abolition was reserved to a
distant and more happy period.

BUT besides there methods of defending their pre- Each or
rogative, and humbling the aristocracy, which may puuedfr

plan of

be confidered as common to all our Princes, we Pumbling
shall find, by taking a review of their reigns, that the aohbl
almost every one of our Kings, from Robert Bruce
to James V. had formed some particular system for
deprefling the authority of the nobles, which was
the 9bjet both of their jealousy and terror. This
conduEt of our monarchs, if we reft satisfied with
the accounts of their historians, must be confidered
as flowing entirely from their resentment against
particular noblemen; and all their attempts to hum-
ble them, must be viewed as the rallies of private
passion, not as the consequences of any general

tion. Nothing remained in the hands of the crown; all was
seized by them. When Hugh Capet ascended the throne, A. D.
987. he kept poffeflion of his private patrimony the Contc of
Paris, and all the jurifdilion, which the Kings his successors
exercised for some time, was within its territories. There wcic
only four towns in France, where he could eftablilh Grands
Baillit or royal judges; all the other lands, towns, and bail-
lages belonged to the nobles. The methods to which theFrench
monarchs had recourse for extending their jurifdition were
exacly similar to those employed by our Princes. Henault's
Abrege, p. 617, &c. De l'Efprit de« Loix, liv. 30, ch. zo. &c.

plan

BOOK I. plan of policy. But, though some of theiractions

may be imputed to thoie paflions, though the diffe-
rent genius of the men, the temper of the times,
and the state of the nation necessarily occasioned
great variety in their schemes, yet, without being
chargeable with exceflive refinement, we may as-
firm that their end was uniformly the fame. And

Thbs prov- the proje" of reducing the power of the aristocracy,
ed by a re.
iew of the ometimes avowed, and pursued with vigour; some-
events in
their reigns. times concealed, or seemingly suspended; was never

altogether abandoned.
Robert No Prince was ever more indebted to his nobles

than Robert Bruce.. Their valour conquered the
kingdom, and placed him on the throne. His gra-
titude and generosity bestowed on them the lands of
the vanquished. Property has seldom undergone
greater or more sudden revolutions, than those to
which it was fubje&, at that time, in Scotland.
Edward I. having forfeited the estates of most of
the ancient Scottilh Barons, granted them to his
English fubjeats. These were expelled by the Scots,
and their lands seized by new maflers. Amidst
such rapid changes, confusion was unavoidable)
and many possessed their lands by titles extremely
defective. During one of those truces between the
two nations, occasioned rather by their being weary
of war, than desirous of peace, Robert formed a
scheme for checking the growing power and wealth
of the nobles. He summoned them to appear, and
to {hew by what rights they held their lands. They
assembled accordingly, and the question being put,
they fiarted up, at once, and drew their swords,

!. By

"*By these, said they, we acquired our lands, and BOOK I.
with these we will defend them." The King, in- lv"
timidated by their boldness, prudently dropt the
projec. But so deeply did they resent this attack
upon their order, that notwithstanding Robert's po-
pular and splendid virtues, it occasioned a danger-
ous conspiracy against his life.

DAVID his son, at first an exile in France, after- D«id 11.

wards a prisoner in England, and involved in con-
tinual war with Edward III. had not leisure to at-
tend to the internal police of his kingdom, or to
think of retrenching the privileges of the nobility.

OUR historians have been more careful to relate RobertI.

the military, than the civil tranfaaions of the reign
of Robert II. Skirmishes and inroads of little con-
fcquence, they describe minutely, but with regard
to every thing that happened, during several years
of tranquillity, they are altogether silent.

THE feeble adminifiration of Robert III. mufl Robt lL

likewise be passed over slightly. A Prince, of a
mean genius, and of a frail and sickly constitution,
was not a fit person. to enter the lifts with active and
martial Barons, or to attempt wresting from them
any of their rights,

THE civil tranfas&ions in Scotland are better bm,. t

known since the beginning of the reign of James I.
and a complete series of our laws supplies the de-
sets of our historians. The English made some
amends for their justice in detaining that Prince a

prisoner,

BoOK I. prisoner, by their generous care of his educat;dtoi

-*" During his long residence in England, he had an.

opportunity ofobferving the feudal system in a more
advanced state, and refined from many of the im.
perfections which still adhered to it, in his own
kingdom. He saw there nobles great, but not in.
dependent; a King powerful, though far from ab.
solute; he saw a regular administration of goverh-
ment; wife laws enaced; and a nation flourishing
and happy, because all ranks of men were accuf.
tomed to obey them. Full of there ideas, he re-
turned into his native country, which presented to
him a very different scene. The royal authority4
never great, was now contemptible, by having been
so long delegated to regents. The ancient patri-
mony, and revenues of the crown, were almost
totally alienated. During his long absence, the
name of a king was little known, and less regard-
ed. The licence of many years had rendered the
nobles independent. Universal anarchy prevailed.
The weak were exposed to the rapine and oppref-
sion of the itrong. In every corner some barbarous
chieftain ruled at pleasure, and neither feared the
King, nor pitied the people*.

JAMES was too wife a Prince to employ open
force to correct such inveterate evils, Neither the

' A cotemporary Monkili writer describes these calamities

very feelingly, in his rude Latin. In diebus illis, non eratlex
in Scotia, fed quilibet potcntiorumjuniorem oppreffit; ettotum
regnum suit unum latrocinium ; homicidia, depraxdationes, in-
ccndia, ct c etcra maleficia rcmnanfcrunt impunita; ctjuflitia re-
legata extra terminos regni exulavit. Chartular. Moray. apud
InnesEflay, vol. i . 7. 7.

men,

mefi, nor the times would have born it. He ap- BbOK Im
plied the gentler, and less offensive remedy of laws '-
and statutes. In a parliament held immediately
after his return, he gained the confidence of his
people, by many wife laws, tending visibly to re-
establish order, tranquillity, andjuftice, in the king.
dom, But, at the fame time, that he endeavoured
to secure these bleflings to his fubjeas, he disco-
vered his intention to recover those possessions of
which the crown had been justly bereaved; and
for that purpose obtained an aft by which he was
impowered to summon those, who had. obtained
crown lands during the three last reigns, to produce
the rights by which they held them *. As this
latute threatened the property of the nobles, ano.
her which passed in a subsequent parliament, aimed
a dreadful blow at their power. By it the leagues
and combinations, which we have already described,
and which rendered the nobles so formidable to
thecrown, weredeclared unlawfult. Encouraged
by this success in the beginning of his en:erprife,
ames's next ftep was fill bolder and more decisive.
During the fitting of parliament, he seized at once,
is cousin Murdo Duke of Albany, and his sons
the Earls of Douglas, Lennox, Angus, March,
and above twenty other peers and barons of prime
rank. To all of them, however, he was imme-
diately reconciled, except to Albany, and his sons,
and Lennox. These were tried by their Peers, and
condemned; for what crime is now unknownm
Their execution struck the whole order with terror~
and their forfeiture added vast poffefions to thd

* AM 9 P. 1424. Aft 30 P. 14'4'
VOL. I E crown,

B]os I. crown. He seized, likewise, the earldoms of Biu
tY 'IU chan and Strathern, upon different petexts; and

that of Mar fell to him by inheritance. The pa-
tience and inativity of the nobles, *hile the King
was proceeding so rapidly towards aggrandizingthe
crown, are amazing. The only obftru&ion he met
with was from, a flight infurretion headed by the
Duke of Albany's youngest fonr and that was easily
fupprefied. The splendour and prefenceof a King,
to which the great men had been long unacc uftomed,
inspired reverence: James was a Prince of great
abilities, and conduted his operations with much
prudence. He was in friendlhip with England,
and closely allied with the French King: He was
adored by the people, who enjoyed unusual security
and happiness under his admrniftration: And all
his acquiftions, however fatal to the body of the
nobles, had been gained by attacks upon individu-
als ; were obtained by decisions of law ; and being
founded on circumstances peculiar to the persons
who suffered, might excite murmurs and apprehen-
sions, but afforded no colourable pretext for a ge.
neral rebellion. It was not so with the next attempt
which the King made. Encouraged by the facility
with which he had hitherto advanced, he ventured
upon a measure that irritated the whole body of the
nobility, and which the events shews either to have
been entered into with too much precipitancy, or
to have been carried on with too much violence.
The father of George Dunbar Earl of March had
taken arms against Robert Ill. the King's father;
but that crifme had been pardoned, and his lands
restored by Robert duke of Albany. James, on

I pr-e

pretext that the regent had exceeded his power, and BOOK r.
that it was the prerogative of the King alone to par- "--
don treason, or to alienate lands annexed to the
crown, obtained a sentence declaring the pardon to
be void, and depriving Dunbar of the earldom.
Many of the great men held lands by no other right
than what they derived from grantsof the two Dukes
of Albany. Such a decision, though they had rea-
son to expect it in consequence of the statute which
the King had obtained, occasioned a general alarm.
Though Dunbar was, at present, the only sufferer,
the precedent might be extended, and their titles to
poffiions, which they considered as the rewards of
their valour, might be fubjeted to the review of
courts of law, whose forms of proceeding, and ju-
rifdition, were in a martial age little known, and
extremely odious. Terror and discontent spread
fast upon this discovery of the King's intentions;
the common danger called on the whole order to
unite, and to make one bold stand, before they were
stripped fucceffivcly of their acquisitions, and re-
duced to a state of poverty and insignificance. The
prevalence of there sentiments among the nobles
encouraged a few delperate men, the friends or fol-
lowers of those who had been the chief sufferers
under the King's administration, to form a confpi-
racy against his life. The irft uncertain intelligence
of this was brought him, while he lay in his camp
before Roxburgh castle. He durlt not confide in
nobles, to whom he had given so many causes of
disgust, but instantly dismissed them and their vas-
fals, and retiring to a monastery near Perth, was
soon after murdered there, in the most cruel man-

E 2 ner.

BooK I. ner. All our historians mention, with astonish.
'- - ment, this circumstance of the King's disbanding

his army, at a time when it was so necessary for
his preservation. A King, fay they, surrounded
with his Barons, is secure from secret treason, and
may defy open rebellion. But those very Barons
were the persons whom he chiefly dreaded; and it
is evident, from this review of his adminiltration,
that he had greater reason to apprehend danger, than
to expet defence from their hands. It was the
misfortune of James, that his maxims and man-
ners were too refined for the age in which he lived.
Happy ! had he reigned in a kingdom more civi-
lized; his love of peace, of justice, and of ele-
gance, would have rendered his schemes successful;
and instead of perishing because he had attempted
too much, a grateful people would have applauded
and seconded his efforts to reform and to improve
them.
Janes i. CRICHTON, the most able man of those, who

had the direction of affairs during the minority of
James II. had been the minister of James I. and
well acquainted with his resolution of humbling the
nobility. He did not relinquish the design, and
he endeavoured to inspire his pupil with the fame
fcntiments. But what James had attempted to es.
feet slowly, and by legal means, his son and Crich.
ton pursued with the impetuosity natural to Scots,
men, and with the fierceness peculiar to tlat age
William the sixth Earl of Douglas was the sirs
victim to their barbarous policy. That young no
bleman (as we have already obfcrved) contemninJ

2 th

die authority of an infant prince, almost openly re- Book I.
nounced his allegiance, and aspired to independence.
Crichton, too high-fpirited to bear such an insult,
but too weak to curb or to bring to julfice so power.
ful an offender, decoyed him by many promises to
an interview in the castle of Edinburgh, and, not-
withstanding there, murdered both him and his
brother. Crichton, however, gained little by this
aft of treachery, which rendered him universally
odious. William the eighth Earl of Douglas was
no less powerful, and no less formidable to the
crown. By forming the league which we already
mentioned with the Earl of Crawfurd and other
Barons, he had united against his Sovereign almost
one half of his kingdom. But his credulity led
him into the fame 4nare, which had been fatal to
tle former Earl. Relying on the King's promises,
who had now attained to the years of manhood,
and having.obtained a fafe-condu&t under the great
feal, he ventured to meet him in Stirling caftie.
James urged him to dissolve that dangerous confe-
deracy into which he had entered; the Earl obfti.
nately refused; " If you will not," said the en-
raged monarch, drawing his dagger, "'this Ihall;"
and stabbed him to the heart. An acion so unwor-
thy of a King filled the nation with aftoniihment,
and with horror. The Earl's vassals ran to arms
with the utmost fury, and dragging the fafe-con-
du&, which the King had granted and violated, at
a horse's tail, they marched towards Stirling, burnt
tile town, and.threatened to besiege the castle. An
accommodation ensued, on what terms is not known.

E 3 But

BooK I. But the King's jealousy, and the new Earl's power

.-^, and resentment, prevented it from being of long

continuance. Both took the field, at the head of
their armies, and met near Abercorn. That of the
Earl, composed chiefly of borderers, was far fupe.
rior to the King's, both in number and in valour;
and a single battle mult, in all probability, have
decided whether the house of Stewart or of Douglas
was henceforth to possess the throne of Scotland.
But, while his troops impatiently expected the fig-
nal to engage, the Earl ordered them to retire to
their camp, and Sir James Hamilton of Cadyow,
the person in whom he placed the greatest confidence,
convinced of his want of genius to improve an op-
portunity, or of his want of courage to seize a
crown, deserted him that very night. This exam-
ple was followed by many; and the Earl, despised
or forsaken by all, was soon driven out of the king-
dom, and obliged to depend for his subsistence, on
the friendship of the King of England. The ruin
of this great family, which had so long rivalled
and overawed the crown, and the terror with which
such an example of unsuccessful ambition filled the
nobles, secured the King, for some time, from op.
position; and the royal authority remained uncon-
trolled and almost absolute. James did not susser
this favourable interval to pass unimproved ; he
procured the consent of parliament to laws more
advantageous to the prerogative, and more fubver-
five of the privileges of the aristocracy, than were
ever obtained by any former or fqbfCeuent monarch
of Scqtland,

By one of these, not only all the vait pofefions of BooR I.

the Earl of Douglas were annexed to the crown, but cr
all prior and future alienations of crown lands were
declared to be void, and the King was impowered to
seize them at pleasure, without any procefh or form
of law, and oblige the possessors to refund what-
ever they had received from them *. A dreadful
inftrumcnt of opprefinon in the hands of a Prince.

ANOTHER law prohibited the wardenship of the

marches to be granted hereditarily; reitrained, in
several instances, thejurifdiltion of that office; and
extended the authority of the King's courts t.

By a third, it was ena&ed that no Regality, or

exclusive right of admninifteringjufticewithin aman's
own lands, should be granted in time to come, with-
out the consent of parliaments, a condition, which
implied almost an express prohibition. Those no-
bleswho already possessed that great privilege, would
naturally be solicitous to prevent it from becoming
common, by being bestowed on many. Thoe,
who had not themrelves attained it, would envy
others the acquisition of fich a flattering diftintion;
and both would concur in rejecing the claims of
new pretenders.

BY a fourth aft, all new grants of hereditary of-

sices were prohibited, and those obtained since the
death of the last King were revoked i,

Aft 41 Pi. 145. f bid. An 43.
tbld. Aa 43. A6 44.

E 4 EACH

POQK I. EACH of there statutes undermined some of the
,-;-e-' great pillars, on which the power of the arifocracy

refted. During the remainder of his reign, this
-Prince pursued the plan which he had begun, with
.the utmost vigour; and had not a sudden death,
occasioned by the splinter of a cannon which burf
near him at the siege of Roxburgh, prevented his
progress, he wanted neither genius nor courage to
perfea it: And Scotland might, in all probabi-
lity, have been the first kingdom in Europe, which
would have seen the subversion of the feudal
system.
James hi. James III. discovered no less eagerness than his

father or grandfather to humble the nobility; but
farinferior to either of them in abilities and address,
he adopted a plan extremely impolitic, and his
reign was difa(trous, as well as his end tragical.
Under the feudal governments, the nobles were
not only the King's miniflers, and possessed of all
the great offices of power or of trust they were
likewise his companions and favourites, and scarce
any but them approached his person, or were en.
titled to his regard. But James, who both feared
and hated his nobles, kept them at an unusual dif.
tance, and bestowed every mark of confidence and
affection upon a few mean persons, of profeflions
so dishonourable, as ought to have rendered them
unworthy of his presence. Shut up with there, in
his castle of Stirling, he seldom appeared in public,
and amused himself with architecure, music, and
other arts, which were then little esteemed. The
nobles beheld the power and favour of theft mini.

ons with indignation. Even the sanguinary mea- BooK I,
lures of his father provoked them less than his L--.
negle&. Individuals alone suffered by the former
by the latter, every man thought himself injured,
because all were contemned. Their discontent was
much heightened by the King's recalling all rights
to crown lands, hereditary offices, regalities, and
every other conceflion, which was detrimental to
his prerogative, and which had been extorted during
his minority. Combinations among thcmfelves,
secret intrigues with England, and all the usual
preparatives for civil war, were the effects of their
resentment. AlexanderDukeof Albany, and John
Earl of Mar, the King's brothers, two young men
of turbulent and ambitious spirits, and incensed
against James, who treated them with the fame
coldness as he did the other great men, entered
deeply into all their cabals. The King detected
their designs, before they were ripe for execution,
and seizing his two brothers, committed the Duke
of Albany to Edinburgh castle. The Earl of Mar
having remonflrated with too much boldness against
the King's conduct, was murdered, if we may be-
lieve our historians, by his command. Albany,
apprehensive of the fame fate, made his escape out
of the cattle, and fled into France. Concern for the
King's honour, or indignation at his measures, were
perhaps the motives, which first induced him to
join the malecontents. But James's attachment to
favourites rendering him every day more odious to
the nobles, the profpet of the advantages which
might be derived from their general difaffetion,
added to the resentment which he felt on account

of

BooK I. of his brother's death, and his own injuries, fooa
I'.wv- -inspired Albany with more ambitious and criminal

thoughts. He concluded a treaty with Edward IV.
of England, in which he assumed the name of
Alexander King of Scots, and in return for the
afiftlance which was promired him towards dethron.
ing his brother, he bound himself, so soon as he
was put in pofliiflion of the kingdom, to swear
fealty and do homage to the English monarch,
to renounce the ancient alliance with France, to
contraa a new one with England, and to Surrender
some of the strongest castles, and most valuable
counties in Scotland*. That aid, which the Duke
so basely purchased at the price of his own honour,
and the independence of his country, was punau-
ally granted him, and the Duke of Gloucester with
a powerful army conduted him towards Scotland.
The danger of a foreign invasion obliged James to
implore the aliftance of those nobles whom he had
so long treated with contempt. Some of them were
in close confederacy with the Duke of Albany, and
approved of all his pretensions. Others were im.
patient for any event, which would restore their or-
der to its ancient pre-eminence. They took the
field, however, at the head of a powerful army of
their followers, but with a stronger disposition to
uedrefs their own grievances, 'than to annoy the ene.
my: an4 with a fixed resolution of punishing those
minions, whose insolence they could no longer to.
lerate. This resolution they executed, in the camp
near Lawder, with a military dispatch and rigour

0 Abercr. Mart. Atch. v, ii. p, 443,

Having

Having previously concerted their plan, the Earls Boos I.
of Angus, Huntly, Lennox, followed by almost all"-
the barons of chief note in the army, forcibly en-
tered the apartment of their sovereign, seized all
his favourites except one Ramsay, whom they
could not tear from the King, in whose arms he
took (helter, and, without any form of trial, hanged
them instantly over a bridge. Among the mot
remarkable of those who had engrofled the King's
affection, were Cochran a mason, Hommil a taylor,
Leonard a smith, Rogers a musician, and TorSfan
a fencing-mafter. So despicable a retinue discovers
the capriciousness of James's chara&er, and accounts
for the indignation of the nobles, when they be-
held the favour, due o them, bestowed on such
unworthy obje&ts.

JAMES had no reason to confide in an army so

little under his command, and difiniffing it, shut
himself up in the catle of Edinburgh. After va-
rious intrigues, Albany's lands and honours were
at length restored to him, and he seemed even to
have regained his brother's favour, by rome import-
ant services. But their friendship was not of long
duration. James abandoned himself, once more,
to the guidance of favourites; and the fate of those
who had ftifered at Lawder, did not.deter others
from courting that dangerous pre-eminence. Al-
bany, on pretext that an attempt had been made to
take away his life by poison, fled from court, and
retiring to his castle of Dunbar, drew thither a
greater number of Barons than attended on the
King himself, At the f4me time, he renewed his

former

BOOK I. former confederacy with Edward; the Earl of An.
^-r'- gus openly negociated that infamous treaty; other

Barons were ready to concur with it; and if the
sudden death of Edward had not prevented Alba-
ny's receiving any aid from England, the crown of
Scotland would probably have been the reward of
this unworthy combination with the enemies of his
country. But, instead of any hopes of reigning in
Scotland, he found, upon the death of Edward,
that he could not reside there in safety; and flying
fircf to England, and then to France, he seems from
that time to have taken no part in the affairs of his
native country. Emboldened by his retreat, the
King and his Miniiters multiplied the insults which
they offered to the nobility. A standing guard, a
thing unknown under the feudal governments, and
inconsistent with the familiarity and confidence
with which monarchs then lived amidst their nobles,
was raised for the King's defence, and the command
of it given to Ramsay, lately created Earl of Both.
well, the fame person who had so narrowly escaped
when his companions were put todeatb at Lawder.
And, as if this precaution had not been sufficient
a proclamation was issued, forbidding any person to
appear in arms within the precincs of the court*;
which, at a time, when no man of rank left his
own house without a numerous retinue of armed
followers, was, in effec, debarring the nobles from
all access to the King. James, at the fame time,
became fonder of retirement than ever, and funk
in indolence, or superstition, or attentive only to

Fcrrerius, 398.

amuse.

amusements, devolved his whole authority upon his BooK I.
favourites. So many injuries provoked the most i
considerable nobles to take arms, and having per-
fuaded or obliged the duke of Rothesay, the King's
eldest son, a youth of fifteen, to set himself at
their head, they openly declared their intention of
depriving James of a crown, of which he had dif-
covered himself to be so unworthy. Roused by
this danger, the King quitted his retirement, took
the field, and encountered them near Bannockburn;
but the valour of the Borderers, of whom the army
of the malecontents was chiefly composed, soon
put his troops to flight, and he himfclf was slain in
the pursuit. Suspicion, indolence, immoderate
attachment to favourites, and all the vices of a fee-
ble mind, are visible in his whole conduc ; but the
characer of a cruel and unrelenting tyrant seems
to be unjufily affixed to him by our historians.
His neglect of the nobles irritated, but did not
weaken them; and their discontent, the immoderate
ambition of his two brothers, and their unnatural
confederacies with England, were sufficient to have
disturbed a more vigorous administration, and to
have rendered a prince of superior talents un-
happy.

T'lE indignation, which many persons of rank

expreffedagaint thecondud of the conspirators, to-
gether with the terror of the sentence of excommu-
nication which the Pope pronounced against them,
obliged them to use their vi&ory with great mode-
ration and humanity. And being conscious how
detestable the crime of imbruing their hands in the

blood

BooK I. blood of their sovereign appeared, they endeavour.

-- ed to regain the good opinion of their countrymen,

and to atone for the treatment of the father, by
their loyalty and duty towards the son. They pla.
ced him instantly on the throne, and the whole king.
dom soon united in acknowledging his authority.
JamesIv. JAMES IV. was naturally generous and brave; he

felt, in an high degree, all the paflions which ani.
mate a young and noble mind. He loved magni.
ficence, he delighted in war, and was eager to ob.
tain fame. During his reign, the ancient and here.
ditary enmity between the King and nobles seems
almost entirely to have ceased. He envied not their
iplendor, because it contributed to the ornament of
his court; nor did he dread their power, which he
confidered as the security of his kingdom, not as an
objet of terror to himself. This confidence on his
part met with the proper return of duty and as-
feEtion on theirs; and, in his war with England,
he experienced how much a King, beloved by his
nobles, is able to perform. Though the ardour of
his courage, and the spirit of chivalry, rather than
the profpe6t of any national advantage, were the
motives of that expedition; such was the zeal of his
fubjets for the King's glory, that he was followed
by as gallant an army, as ever any of his ancestors
had led upon Englilh ground. But though James
himself formed no scheme dangerous or detrimen.
tal to the aristocracy, his reign was diftinguilhed by
an event, extremely fatal to it; and one accidental
blow humbled it more than all the premeditated at-
tacks of preceding KIgs. In the ralh and unfor-

tunate

tunate battle of Flowden, a brave nobility chose ra- BooK I.
ther to die than to dcfert their Sovereign. Twelve '.
Earls, thirteen Lords, five eldest sons of noblemen,
and an incredible number of barons, fell with the
King *. The whole body of the nobles, long and
sensibly, felt this disaster; and if a Prince of full
age had then ascended the throne, their confterna-
tion and feebleness would have afforded him advan-
tages, which no former monarch ever possessed.

BUT James V. who succeeded his father, was an Jam, v

infant of a year old ; and though the office of re-
gent was conferred on the duke of Albany, a man
of genius and enterprise, a native of France, and
accustomed to a government where the power of the
King was already great; though he made many
bold attempts to extend the royal authority, though
he put to death Lord Home, and banished the Earl
of Angus, the two noblemen of greatest influence in
the kingdom, the aristocracy loft no ground under
his administration. A stranger to the manners, the
laws, and the language of the people whom he was
called to rule, he ated, on rome occasions, rather
like a viceroy of the French King, than the gover-
nor of Scotland, but the nobles asserted their own
privileges, and contended for the interest of their
country with a boldness, which convinced him of
their independence, and of the impotence of his own
authority. After several unsuccessful struggles, he
voluntarily retired to France, and the King, being
then in his thirteenth year, the nobles agreed that

Aber. ii.t.

he

Boor I. he should assume the government; and that eight

vr--' persons ihould be appointed to attend him by turnsi

and to advise and assist him in the administration of
public affairs. The Earl of Angus, whowas one of
that number, did not long remain satisfied with such
divided power. He gained some of his colleagues,
removed others, and intimidated the reft. When
the term of his attendance expired, he still retained
authority, to which all were obliged to submit, be-
cause none of them was in a condition to dispute it.
The affection of the young King was the only thing
wanting, to fix and perpetuate his power. But an
active and high spirited Prince submitted, with great
impatience, to the restraint in which he was kept.
It ill suited his years, or disposition, to be confined
as a prisoner within his own palace; to be treated
with no refpet, and to be deprived of all power.
He could not, on some occasions, conceal his in-
dignation and resentment. Angus foresaw that he
had much to dread from these, and as he could not
gain the King's heart, he resolved to make sure of
his person. James was continually surrounded by
the Earl's spies and confidents; many eyes watched
all his motions, and observed every ftep he took.
But the King's eagerness to obtain liberty eluded all
their vigilance. He escaped from Falkland, and
fled to the castle of Stirling, the residence of the
Queen his mother, and the only place of strength
in the kingdom which was not in the hand of the
Douglases. ' The nobles, of whom some were influ-
enced by their hatred to Angus, and others by their
refpet for the King, crowded to Stirling, and his
court was soon filled Oh persons of the greatest dirf

tin&ionh

tiri&ion. The Earl, though astonished at this tin. BooK I.
expe&ed revolution, resolved, at sirs, to make one ---*
bold push for recovering his authority, by march.
ing to Stirling at the head of his followers; but he
wanted either courage or strength to execute this
resolution. In a parliament held loon after, he and
his adherents were attainted, and after escaping froni
many dangers, and enduring much misery, he was
at length obliged to fly into England for refuge.

JAM^S had now not only the name, but, though

extremely young, the full authority of a King. He
was inferior to no Prince of that age in gracefulness
of person, or in vigour of mind. His understand.
ing was good, and his heart warmn; the formet
capable of great improvement, and the latter fufl
ceptible of the bell impreflions. But according to
the usual fate of Princes who are called to the throne
in their infancy, his education had been negle&ed.
His private preceptors were more ready to flatters
than to inftrut him. It was the interest of those
who governed the kingdom, to prevent him from
knowing too much. And the Earl of Angus, in
order to divert him from business, gave him an early
taste for such pleasures, as afterwards occupied and
engrossed him more than became a King. Accord-
ingly we discover in James all the features of a
great but uncultivated spirit. On the one hand,
violent pafions, implacable resentment, an irnmmo
derate defre of powers and the utmobt rage atdif-
appointment. On the other, love to his people;
zeal for the punishment of private oppressors, con-

VOL. Il F fidtCe

BaoK I. fidence in his favourites, and the most engaging
'*Ai' openness and affability of behaviour.

WHAT he himself had suffered from the exor-

bitant power of the nobles, led him early to imitate
his predecessors, in their attempts to humble them.
The plan he formed for that purpose was more
profound, more systematic, and pursued with great.
er constancy and steadiness, than that of any of
his ancestors. And the influence of the events
in his reign upon those of the subsequent period,
render it necessary to explain his conduct at greater
length, and to enter into a more minute detail of
his actions. He had penetration enough to discover
those defeas in the schemes adopted by former
Kings, which occasioned their miscarriage. The
example of James I. had taught him, that wife laws
operate slowly on a rude people, and that the fierce
spirit of the feudal nobles was not to be subdued by
there alone. The effects of the violent measures of
James II. convinced him, that the oppreflion of one
great family is apt either to excite the suspicion and
resentment of the other nobles, or to enrich with its
spoils some new family, which would soon adopt
the fame sentiments, and becomeequallyformidable
to the crown. He saw, from the fatal end of
James III. that negle& was till more intolerable to
the nobles than oppression, and that the Ministry of
new men and favourites was both dishonourable and
dangerous to a Prince. At the fame time, he felt
that the authority of the crown was not sufficient to
counterbalance the power of the aristocracy, and
that without tome new accelion of strength, he

could

tould expe& no better success in the iruggle tban his BooX I.
ancestors. In this extremity, he applied himself td
the clergy, hoping that they would both relish his
plan, and concur, with all their influence, in en-
abling him to put it in execution. Under the feudal
government, the church being reckoned a third
estate, had its representatives in parliament; the
number of these was considerable, and they pofleffed
great influence in that assembly. The superstition
of former Kings, and the zealof an ignorant age,
had bestowed on ecclesiastics, a great proportion
of the national wealth, and the authority which
they acquired by the reverence of the people, was
superior even to that which they derived from their
riches. This powerful body, however, depended
entirely on the crown. The Popes, notwithstanding
their attention to extend their usurpations, had ne-
glected Scotland as a distant and poor kingdom, and
permitted its Kings to exercise powers, which they
difputedwith more considerable princes. The Scot-
tifh monarchs had the sole right of nomination to
vacant bishoprics and abbeys *; and James natu-
rally concluded, that men who expected preferment
from his favour, would be willing to merit it, by
promoting his designs. Happily for him, the nobles
had not yet recovered the blow which fell on their
order at Flowden, and if we may judge either from
their conduct, or from the chata&er given of them
by Sir Ralph Sadler the Englilh envoy in Scotlands
:hey were men of little geniuts, of no experience iri
jufinefs, and incapable of a&cing either with una.

Epi,. Reg. Scot, z. r19. ie. AAt li P. ir14.

F 2 imitry

BooK I. nimity, or with vigour. Many of the clergy on
<--r-* the other hand, were diftinguilhed by their great

abilities, and no less by their ambition. Various
causes of disgust had arisen between them and the
nobles, who despised their characer, and envied
their power, or their wealth. By ating in concert
with the King, they not only gratified him, but
avenged themselves, and hoped to aggrandise their
own order, by depressing those, who were their sole
rivals. Secure of so powerful a concurrence, James
ventured to proceed with greater boldness. In the
first heat of resentment, he had driven the Earl of
Angus out of the kingdom; and sensible that a per.
son, so far superior to the other nobles in abilities,
might create many obstacles, which would retard
or render ineffectual all his schemes, he solemnly
swore, that he would never permit him to return
into Scotland, and, notwithltanding the repeated
solicitations of the King of England, he adhered to
his vow with unrelenting obstinacy. He then pro.
ceeded to repair the fortifications of Edinburgh, Stir-
ling, and other caffles, and to fill his magazines
with arms and ammunition. Having taken these
precautions by way of defence, he began to treat
the nobility with the utmost coldness and reserve,
Those offices, which they were apt, from long polf
felffon, to confider as appropriated to their order,
were now bestowed on ecclesiastics, who alone pof.
efted the King's ear, and together with a few gentle.
men of inferior rank, to whom he had communi
cated his schemes, were intrudled with the manage
ment of all public affairs. These ministers were
chosen with judgment and Cardinal Beatoun, who

soo

Obon became the most eminent among them, was a BOOK I.
man of superior genius. They served the King with '-;
fidelity, they carried on his measures with vigour, -
with reputation, and with success. James no longer
concealed his contempt of the nobles, and suffered
noopportunityof mortifyingthem to escape. Slight
offences were aggravated into real crimes, and pu-
nifhed with fevcrity. Every accusation againit per-
sons of rank was heard with pleasure, every appear-
ance of guilt was examined with rigour, and every
trial proved fatal to those who were accused: the
banishing Hepburn Earl of Bothwell for reasons ex-
tremely frivolous, the beheading the Master of
Sorbes without sufficient evidence of his guilt, and
the condemning Lady Glamis, a filter of the Earl
of Angus, to be burnt for the crime of witchcraft,
of which even that credulous age believed her inno-
cent, are monuments both of the King's hatred of
the nobility, of the severity of his government, and
of the stretches he made towards absolute power.
By these aEts of authority, he tried the spirit of the
nobles, and how much they were willing to bear.
Their patience increased his contempt for them, and
added to the ardour and boldness with which he
pursued his plan. Meanwhile they observed the
tendency of his schemes with concern, and with re-
fentment; but the King's sagacity, the vigilance of
his ministers, and the want of a proper leader, made
it dangerous to concert any measures for their de-
fence, and impollible to aCt with becoming vigour.
James and his counsellors, by a false ftep which they
took, presented to them, at length, an advantage
which they did not fail to improve,

F 3 MOTIVES,

BOOK I. MOTIVES, which are well known, had prompted
e i_ . - Henry VIII. to disclaim the Pope's authority, and

to seize the revenues of the regular clergy. His
system of reformation satisfied none of his fubje&ts.
Some were enraged because he had proceeded sofar.
pthers murmured because he proceeded no farther;
and by his imperious temper, and alternate perfecu.
tions of the zealots for Popery, and the converts
to the Protefrant opinions, he was equally formi-
dable to both. Henry was afraid that this general
diffatisfaaion of his people might encourage his
enemies on the continent to invade his kingdom.
He knew that both the Pope and Emperor courted
the friendihip of the king of Scots, and endeavoured
to engage him in an alliance against England. He
resolved, therefore, to disappoint the effects of their
negociations, by entering into a closer union with
his nephew, and for that purpose sent ambassadors
into Scotland, to propose a personal interview with
him at York. It was plainly James's interest to
accept this invitation; the afiftance of so power.
ful an ally, the high honours which were promised
him, and the liberal subsidies he might have obtain-
ed, would have added no little dignity to his do.
meftic government, and must have geatly facilitat-
ed the execution of his favourite plan. On the
other hand, a war with England, which he had
reason to apprehend, if he rejeted Henry's offers of
friendship, was inconsistent with all his viewS. This
would bring him to depend on his barons an army
could not be raised without their assistance: To call
nobles incensed againRf their prince into the field,
was to unite his enemies, to make them sensible of

their

their own strength, and to afford them an opportu- BOOK I.
nity of revenging their wrongs. James, who was r
not ignorant that all there consequences might fol-
low a breach with England, listened at first to Hen-
ry's proposal, and consented to the interview at
York. But the clergy dreaded an union, which
must have been eftabliihed on the ruins of the
church. Henry had taken great pains to infuse into
his nephew his own sentiments concerning reli-
gion, and had frequently solicited him, by ambaf-
fadors, to renounce the usurped dominion of the
Pope, which was no less dibhonourable to princes,
than grievous to their fubjeas. The clergy had
hitherto, with great address, diverted the King from
regarding these solicitations. But, in an amicable
conference, Henry expected,. and they feared, that
James would yield to his entreaties, or be convinced
by his arguments. They knew that the revenues of
the church were an alluring obje&t to a Prince, who
wanted money, and who loved it; that the pride
and ambition of ecclesiastics raised the indignation
of the nobles; that their indecent lives gave offence
to the people; that the Protestant opinions were
spreading fast throughout the nation; and that an
universal defection from the established church,
would be the consequence of giving the smallest de-
gree of encouragement to these principles. For
these reasons, they employed all their credit with
the King, and had recourse to every artifice and in-
finuation, in order to divert him from a journey,
which must have been so fatal to their interest.
They endeavoured to inspire him with fear, by
magnifying the danger to which he would expose

F4 his

BOOK I. his person, by venturing so far into England, with.

out any security but the word of a Prince, who
having violated every thing venerable and sacred in
religion, was no longer to be trusted; and by way
of compensation for the fums which he might have
received from Henry, they offered an annual dona-
tive of 5o,coo crowns; they promised to contribute
liberally towards carrying on a war with England,
and flattered him with the profpet of immense
riches, arising from the forfeiture of persons, who
were to be tried and condemned as heretics. In-
fluenced by there considerations, James broke his
agreement with Henry, who, in expectation of
meeting him, had already come to York and that
haughty and impatient Monarch resented the affront,
by declaring war against Scotland. His army was
soon ready to invade the kingdom. James was oh.
liged to have recourse to the nobles, for the defence
of his dominions. At his command, they assembled
their followers: but with the fame dispositions,
which had animated their ancestors in the reign of
James III. and with a full resolution of imitating
their example, and by punishing those to whom they
imputed the grievances, of which they had reason
to complain; and if the King's Ministers had not
been men of abilities, superior to those of James III.
and of considerable interest even with their enemies,
whocould not agree among themselves what victims
to sacrifice, the camp of Fala would have been as
remarkable as that of Lawder, for the daring en-
croachments of the nobility on the prerogative of
the Prince. But though his ministers were saved by
this accident, the nobles had soon another opportu.

nity

pity of discovering to the King; their diffatisfa&ion Boos I.
with his government, and their contempt of his au- -v '
thority. Scarcity of provisions, and the rigour of
the season having obliged the English army, which
had invaded Scotland, to retire, James imagined
that he could attack them, with great advantage, in
their retreat; but the principal barons, with an ob-
tfinacy and disdain, which greatly aggravated their
disobedience, refused to advance a itep beyond the
limits of their own country. Provoked by this in-
fult to himself, and suspicious of a new conspiracy
against his ministers, the King instantly disbanded
an army, which paid so little regard to his orders,
and returned abruptly into the heartof the kingdom.

AN ambitious and high-fpirited Prince could not

brook such a mortifying affront. His hopes offuc-
cess had been rafl, and his despair upon a difap-
pointment was exceflive. He felt himself engaged
in an unnecessary war with England, which, instead
of yielding him the laurels and triumphs that he ex-
peted, had begun with such circumstances, as en-
couraged the info'ence of his subje&s, and exposed
him to the scorn of his enemies. He saw how vain
and ineffectual all his proje&s to humble the nobles
had been, and that, though in times of peace a Prince
may endeavour to depress them, they will rife, dur-
ing war, to their scrimer importance and dignity:
Impatience, resentment, indignation, filled his bosom
by turns. The violence of theef passions altered his
temper, and, perhaps, impaired his reason. He
became pensive, fullen, and retired. He seemed,
through the day, to be swallowed up in profound

meditation,

BooK I, meditation, and through the night, he was disturb.

k'*' ed with those visionary terrors which make impref.

sion upon a weak understanding only, or a disorder,
ed fancy. In order to revive the King's spirits, an
inroad on the western borders was concerted by his
ministers, who prevailed upon the Barons in the
neighbouring provinces, to raise as many troops as
were thought necessary, and to enter the enemy's
country. But nothing could remove the King's
aversion to his nobility, or diminilh his jealousy
of their power. He would not even intrust them
with the command of the forces which they had
ffembled; that was reserved for Oliver Sinclair
his favourite, who no sooner appeared to take
poiefiTion of the dignity conferred upon him,
than rage and indignation occasioned an universal
mnutiny in the army. Five hundred English, who
happened to be drawn up in fight, attacked the
Scots in this disorder. Hatred to the King, and
contempt of their general, produced an effed, to
which there is no parallel in history. They over,
came the fear of death, and the love of liberty; and
ten thousand men surrendered to a number so far
inferior, without ifriking a single blow, No man
was desirous of a vilory, which would have been
acceptable to the King, and to his favourite ; few
endeavoured to save themselves by flight; the EngT
lilh had the choice of what prisoners they pleased to
take; and almot every person of ditinction, who
was engaged in the expedition, remained in their
hands. This aftonilhing event was a new proof to
the King of the general difaffetion of the nobility,
and a new discovery of his own weakness, and want

of

of authority. Incapable of bearing these repeated BOOK I,
insults, he found himself unable to revenge them, "-
The deepest melancholy and despair ficceeded to
the furious transports of rage, which the first ac-
count of the rout of his army occasioned. All the
violent passions, which are the enemies of life,
preyed upon his mind, and wafted and consumed a
youthful and vigorous constitution. Some authors
of that age impute his untimely death to poison;
but the diseases of the mind, when they rife to an
height, are often mortal; and the known effects of
disappointment, anger, and resentment upon a fan-
guine and impetuous temper, fufliciently account
for his unhappy fate. " His death (fays Drum.
mond) proveth his mind to have been raised to an
high strain, and above mediocrity; he could die, but
could not digest a disaster." Had James survived
this misfortune, one of two things must have hap.
pened: Eithertheviolenceof his temper would have
engaged him openly to attack the nobles, who
would have found in Henry a willing and powerful
protector, and have derived the fame assistance from
him, which the rnalecontents, in the succeeding
reign, did from his daughter Elizabeth; in that
cafe, a dangerous civil war would have been the
certain consequence. Or, perhaps, necessity might
have obliged him to accept of Henry's offers, and
be reconciled to his nobility. In that event the
church would have fallen a sacrifice to their union,
a Reformation, upon Henry's plan, would have
been established by law, a great part of the tempo.
ralities of the church would havc been seized, and

the

BooK I. the friendship of the King and Barons would have
.."v been cemented by dividing its spoils.

SUCH were the efforts of our Kings, towards re.

ducing the exorbitant power of the nobles. If they
were not attended with success, we must not, for
that reason, conclude that they were not conduced
with prudence. Every circumstance seems to have
combined against the crown. Accidental events
concurred with political caufes,in rendering the best
concerted measures abortive. The aflaffination of
one King, the sudden death of another, and the
fatal dcfpair of a third, contributed no less than its
own natural strength, to preserve the aristocracy
from ruin,

AMIDST these struggles, the influence which our

Kings possessed in their parliaments, is a circum-
ftancefeemingly inexplicable, and which merits par.
ticular attention. As these assemblies were com-
posed chiefly of the nobles, they, we are apt to ima-
gine, must have ditated all their decisions; but,
instead of this, every King found them obsequious
to his will, and obtained such laws, as he esteemed

Theextra- necessary for extending his authority. All things
ordinlarv in-

,,,cnc,-f were conduaed there with dispatch and unanimity;
ings in and, in none of our hiltorians, do we find an in-
Pailial.ent. stance of any opposition formed against the court in

Parliament, or mention of any difficulty in carrying
through the measures which were agreeable to the
King. In order to account for this singular fact, it
is necessary to inquire into the origin and confitu.
tion of Parliament,

THE

THE genius of the feudal government, uniform BooK I;

in all its operations, produced the fame effects in Ther a
small, as in great societies; and the territory of a of it
Baron was, in miniature, the model of a kingdom.
He possesscd the right ofjurifdiiion, but those, who
depended on him, being free men, and not slaves,
could be tried by their Peers only; and, therefore,
his vassals were bound to attend his courts, and to
assist both in palling and executing his sentences.
When assembled on there occasions, they establish-
ed, by mutual content, such regulations, as tended
to the welfare of their small society; and often
granted, voluntarily, such supplies to their Superior,
as his necelfities required. Change now a single
name: In place of Baron, substitute King, and we
behold a Parliament in its first rudiments, and ob-
serve the first exertions of those powers, which its
members now possess as Judges, as Legislators, and
as dispensers of the public revenues. Suitable to
this idea, are the appellations of the King's Court *,
and of the King's Great Council, by which, Parlia.
ments were anciently distinguished; and suitable to.
this, likewise, were the constituent members of
which it was composed. In all the feudal king-
doms, those who held of the King in chief were
bound, by the condition of their tenure, to attend
and to aflift in his courts. Nor was this esteemed a
privilege, but a service. It was exacted likewise of
Bilhops, Abbots, and the greater ecclesiastics, who
holding vast poffellions of the Crown, were deemed
fubjct to the fame burden. Parliaments did not
continue long in this slate. Cities gradually acquir-
ed wealth, a considerable share of the public taxes

* Du Cange, voc. Curia.

were

BOOK I. were levied on them, the inhabitants grew into eifi-
'i"v amation, and being enfranchised by the Sovereign,

a place in Parliament was the consequence of their
liberty, and of their importance, But as it would
have been absurd to confer such a privilege, or to
impose such a burden on a whole community, every
burrough was permitted to chufe one or two of its
citizens to appear in the name of the corporation;
and the idea of representation was first introduced in
this manner. An innovation, still more important,
naturally followed. The vassals of the Crown were
originally few in number, and extremely powerful;
but as it is inpoflible to render property fixed and
permanent, many of their possessors came, gradu.
ally, and by various methods of alienation, to be
split and parcelled out into different hands. Hence
arose the diftin&ion between the Greater and the
Le/jer Barons. The former were those who retain-
ed their original fiefs undivided, the latter were the
new and less potent vassals of the Crown. Both
were bound, however, to perform all feudal services,
and, of consequence, to give attendance in Parlia,
ment. To the Lesser Barons, who formed no incon.
fiderable body, this was an intolerable grievance.
Barons sometimes denied their tenure, burroughs re.
nounced their right of electing, charters were ob-
tained, containing an exemption from attendance;
and the anxiety, with which our ancestors endea-
voured to get free from the obligation of fitting in
Parliament, is furpafled by that only,. with which
their posterity solicit to be admitted there. In order
to accommodate both parties, and, at once, to fe,
cure to the King a fufficicnt number of membert

a~~~~2 Hin

in his great council, and to save his vassals from an BooK I.
unnecessary burden, an easy expedient was found '-*
out. The obligation to personal attendance was
continued upon the Greater Barons, from which the
Lesser Barons were exempted, on condition of their
eleting, in each county, a certaih number of Re-
presentatives, to appear in their name. Thus a Par-
liament became complete in all its members, and
was compored of Lords Spiritual and Temporal, of
Knights of the shires, and of Burgesses. As many
causes contributed to bring government earlier to
perfe&ion in England, than in Scotland; as the ri-
gour of the feudal institutions abated sooner; and
its defe&s were supplied with greater facility in the
one kingdom, than in the other; England led the
way in all these changes, and Burgefies, and
Knights of the shire, appeared in the Parliaments of
that nation, before they were heard of in ours.
Burgesses were first admitted into the Scottish Parlia-
ments by Robert Bruce*; and in the preamble to A.D. r36.
the laws of Robert III. they are ranked among the
constituent members of that assembly. The Lefier
Barons were indebted to James I. for a statute ex- 14s7.
empting them from personal attendance, and per-
mitting them to elef representatives; the exemp-
tion was eagerly laid hold on, but the privilege was
so little valued, that, except one or two inRances,
it lay negleced during z60 years; and James VI.
first obliged them to fend representatives regularly
to Parliament -t,

* Abercromby, i. 635.
t Eflayr on Brit. Antiq. f. II. Dairytup. Hiil. of Feud.
Prop. ch. 8,

A ScoT-

BOOK I. A SCOTTISH Parliament, then, consisted iacia
'*--.- ently of Great Barons, of Ecclesiastics, and a few

representatives of burroughs. Nor were these divid.
ed, as in England, into two houses, but composed
one assembly, in which the Lord Chancellor prefid.
ed *. And, in rude ages, when the science of go.
vernment was extremely imperfe&, among a mar,
tial people, unacquainted with the arts of peace,
strangers to the talents which make a figure in de-
bate, and despising them, Parliaments were not held
in the fame estimation as at present; nor did haugh-
ty Barons love those courts, in which they appeared
with such evident marks of inferiority. Parliaments
were often hastily assembled, and it was, probably,
in the King's power, by the manner in which he
issued his writs for that purpose, to exclude thofa
who were averse from his measures. At a time
when deeds of violence were common, and the re-
ftraints of law and decency were little regarded, no
man could venture with safety to oppose the King
in his own court. The Great Barons, or Lords of

* In England, the Peers and Commons seem early to have

met in separate houses; and James T. who was fond of imitati
ing the Englilh in all their customs, had probably an intention
of introd ucing some considerable diftinftion between the Greater
and Lesser Barons in Scotland; at least he determined that their
consultations should not be carried on under the diretion of the
fame President; for by his law, A. D. 1327, it is provided,
" that out of the Commillioners of all the shires (hall be chofed
a wife and expert man, called the common Speaker of the Pats
liament, who Ihall propose all and sundry needs and caues, pert
taining to the Commons in the Parliament or general council."
No such Speaker, it would seem, was ever chosen ; and by a
subsequent law the Chancellor wa» declared perpetual President
of Parliament.

Paltria

Parliament, were extremely few; even so late as the BOOK I.
beginningof the reign of James VI. * they arniount-
ed only to fifty three. The Ecclesiastics equalled
them in numbers and being devoted implicitly to
the Crown, for reasons which have been already
explained, rendered all hopes of victory in any
firuggle desperate. Nor were the nobles themiflves
so anxious, as might be imagined, to prevent acts
of Parliament favourable to the royal Prerogative;
conicious of their own strength, and of the King's
inability to carry there ads into execution without
their concurrence, they trufied either to elude, or to
contemn them; and the statute revoking the King's
property, and annexing alienated jurifdiitions to the
Crown, repeated in every reign, and violated and
despised as often, is a tlanding proof of the impo-
tence of laws, when opposed to power. So many
concurring causes are sufficient, perhaps, to account
for the ascendant, which our Kings acquired in Par-
liament. But without having recourse to any of
there, a tingle circumstance, peculiar to the confli-
tution of the Scottish parliament, the mentioning
of which we have hitherto avoided, will abundantly
explain this fad, seemingly so repugnant to all our
realbnings concerning the weakness of the King,
and the power of the nobles.

As far back as our records enable us to trace the

conltitution of our Parliaments, we find a commit-
tee, distinguished by the name of Lords of Articles.
It was their business to prepare, and to digest all
matters which were to be laid before the Parlia-
ment; every motion for a new law was first made

· And. Coll. v. i. pref. 40.
VOL . . G Jhere,

Book I. there, and approved or rejeced by them at pleasure;

what they approved was formed into a bill, and pre.
sented to Parliament; what they rejected could not
be introduced into the house. This committee owed
the extraordinary powers veiled in it, to the military
genius of the ancient nobles; too impatient to sub-
mit to the drudgery of civil business, too impetu.
ous to observe the forms, or to enter into the details
necessary in conduting it, they were glad to lay
that burden upon a small number, while they them.
selves had no other labour than simply to give, or
to refuse their fantion to the bills, which were pre-
sented to them. The Lords of Articles, then, not
only directed the whole proceedings of Parliament,
but possessed a negative before debate. That com-
mittee was chosen and confituted in such a manner,
as put this valuable privilege entirely in the King's
hands. It is extremely probable, that the King once
had the sole right of nominating the Lords of Ar.
ticles *. They came afterwards to be ele&ed by

the

It appears from authentic records, that a parliament was

appointed to be held March 12, 566, and that the Lords of
Articles were chosen and met on the 7th, five days before the
assembling of Parliament. If they could be regularly elected f,
long before the meeting of Parliament, it is natural to conclude,
that the Prince alonepoffeffed the right of elecing them. There
are two different accounts of the manner of their election at that
time, one by Mary herself, in a letter to the archbilhop of
Glasgow; " We, accompanied with our nobility for the time,
"pall to the Tolbooth of Edinburgh, for holding of our Par.
" liament on the 7th day of this inflant, and eleced the Lords
"Articulars." If we explain these words, according to Arit
grammar, we nmul conclude that the Queen herself eleced
them. It is, however, more probable that Mary meant to fay,
that the nobles then present with her, viz. her privy counsellors,

and

the parliament, and confifed of an equal number BOOK r.
out of each estate, and most commonly of eight *
Temporal and eight Spiritual Lords, of eight repre-
fentatives of burroughs, and of the eight great offi-
cers of the Crown. Of this body, the eight eccle-
fiaftics, together with the Officers of the Crown,
were entirely at the King's devotion, and it was
scarce possible that the choice could fall on such
Temporal Lords and BurgeTles as would unite in
opposition to his measures. Capable eitherof in-
fluencing their eletion, or of gaining them when
elected, the King commonly found the Lords of
Articles no less obsequious to his will, than his own
privy council, and by means of his authority with
them, he could put a negative upon his Parliament
before debate, as well as after it; and what may
seem altogether incredible, the most limited Prince
in Europe actually possessed in one instance, a pre-
rogative which the most absolute could never at-
tain *.

To

and others, eleced the Lords of Articles. Keith'sHifl. of Scot-
land, p. 331. The other account is Lord Ruthven's, who ex-
prelly affirms that the Qjeen herself eleted them. Keith's
Append. 16. Whether we embrace the one or the other of
there opinions, is of no confcquence. If the privy counsellors
and nobles attending the court had a right to elect the Lords of
Articles, it was equally advantageous for the Crown, as if the
Prince had had the sole nomination of them.

Having deduced the history of the committee of Lords of

Articles, as low 4s the subjea of this preliminary book required,
it may be agreeable, perhaps, to some of my readers, to know
the fu bfequent variations in this fingularinftitution, and the po-
litical use which our Kings made of there. When Parliamenta
became more numerous, and more considerable by the admilfion
of the reprefentativesof the leirer Barons, the preserving their

G 2 influence

BOOK I. To this account of the internal constitution of
Stte sEScotland, it will not be improper to add a view of
State of Eu-
roe at the the political slate of Europe at that period, where
beginningof
the IIth the following history commences. A thorough
ntury. knowledge of that general fyflem, of which every

kingdom in Europe forms a part, is not less re.
quifite towards understanding the history of a na-

tion,

influence over the Lords of Articles became, likewise, an objet
of greater importance to our Kings. James VI. on pretence,
that the Lords of Articles could not find leisure to confider the
great multitude of affairs laid before them, obtained an ah,
appointing four persons to be named out of each estate, who
Ihould meet twenty days before the commencement of Parlia.
ment *, to receive all supplications, &c. and rejeaing what they
thought frivolous, should engross in a book what they thought
worthy the attention of the Lords of Articles. No provision i
made in the a& for the choice of this felea body, and the King
would, of course, have claimed that privilege. In 1633, whe
Charles I. was beginning to introduce those innovations which
gave so much offence to the nation, he dreaded the opposition
of his Parliament, and in order to prevent that; an artifice wa!
made use of to fccure the Lords of Articles for the Crown. Thi
Temporal Peers were appointed to chufe eight Bishops and ti
Eifthops eight Peers, these sixteen met together, and elected eigh
Knights of the (hire, and eight Burgesses, and to there thecrowl
officers were added as usual. If we can only suppose eight pe
sons of so numerous a body, as the Peers of Scotland were be
come, by that time, attached to the court, these, it is obviou
would be the men whom the Bishops would chufe, and of confi
quence, the wholeLords of Articles were the tools and creatur
of the King. This practice, To inconsistent with liberty, w
aboli(hed during the civil war: And the fiatute of James V
was repealed. After the Restoration, Parliaments became mo
servile than ever. What was only a temporary device, in t'
reign of Charles I. was, then, converted into a flanding laI
"For my part," fays the author from whom I have borrow

* A laz, P. 1594.

na

tion, than an acquaintance with its peculiar govern- BOOK I.
ment and laws. The latter may enable us to corn. --
prehend domestic occurrences and revolutions, but
without the former, foreign tranfacions must be al-
together mysterious and unintelligible. By attend-
ing to this, many dark pafages in our hiltory may
be placed in a clear light; and where the bulk of
historians have seen only the effct, we may be able
to discover the cause.

THE subversion of the feudal government in

France, and its declension in the neighbouring king-
doms, occasioned a remarkable alteration in the po-
litical state of Europe. Kingdoms, which were in-
considerable when broken, and parcelled out among
nobles, acquired firmness and flrength, by being
united into a regular monarchy. Kings became
conscious of theirown power and importance. They
meditated fchiemes of conquest, and engaged in wars
at a distance. Numerous armies were raised, and
great taxes imposed for their fubfiitence. Confider-
able bodies of infantry were kept in constant pay;
that service grew to be honourable; and cavalry, in
which the strength of European armies had hitherto
consisted, though proper enough for the ihort and
voluntary excursions of Barons who served at their

nmany ofthefe particulars, "I Ihould have thought it lets crimi-
' nal in our Resloration Parliament, to have openly bellowed
"upon the King a negative before debate, than, in such an un-
" derhand artificial manner, to betray their conltituents, and the
"nation." Essays on Brit. Antiq. ;. It Is probable, how-
ever, from a letter of Randolph's to Cecil to Aug. 1 56, print-
ed in the Appendix, that this Parliament had some appearance
of ancient precedent tojullify their unworthycondut,

G3 own

BOOK I. own expence, were found to be unfit either for
' Y making, or defending any important conquest.

IT was in Italy, that the powerful monarchs of

France and Spain and Germany first appeared to
make a trial of their new strength. The division
of that country into so many small states, the lux.
ury of the people, and their effeminate aversion to
arms, invited their more martial neighbours to an
easy prey. The Italians, who had been accustom.
ed to mock battles only, and to decide their quar.
rels by innocent and bloodless vitories, were afto.
niihed at the fight of real war; and as they could
not resist the torrent, they suffered it to take its
course, and to spend its rage. Intrigue and policy
supplied the want of strength; and neceflity and
felf-prefervation led that ingenious people to the
great secret of modern politics, by teaching them
how to balance the power of one Prince, by throw.
ing that of another into the opposite scale. By this
happy device, the liberty of Italy was long preserved.
The scales were poised by very ikilful hands; the
smallest variations were attended to, and no Prince
was allowed to retain any superiority, that could be
dangerous.

A SYSTEM of conduct, pursued with so much

success in Italy, was not long confined to that coun-
try of political refinement. The maxim of pre-
serving a balance of power is founded so much
upon obvious reasoning, and the situation of Eu-
rope rendered it so necessary, that it soon became a
matter of chief attention to all wife politicians

3 Ever)

Every ftep any Prince took was observed by all his BOOK I.
neighbours. Ambassadors, a kind of honourable 'v
spies, authorised by the mutualjealoufy of Kings,
resided almost constantly at every different court,
and had it in charge to watch all its motions. Dan-
gers were foreseen at a greater distance, and pre-
vented with more ease. Confederacies were formed
to humble any power which rose above its due pro.
portion. Revenge or felf-defence were no longer
the only causes of hostility, it became common to
take arms out of policy; and war, both in its com-
mencement, and in its operations, was more an
exercise of the judgment, than of the paflions of
men. Almost every war in Europe became gene-
ral, and the moit inconsiderable ifates acquired im-
portance, because they could add weight to either
scale.

FRANCIS I. who mounted the throne of France

in the year 1515, and Charles V. who obtained the
Imperial Crown in the year 1519, divided between
them the flrength and affections of all Europe.
Their perpetual enmity was not owing either to per-
fonal jealousy, or to the caprice of private passion,
but was founded so much in nature and true policy,
that it subsisted between their posterity for several
ages; and, notwithstanding their present acciden-
tal and unnatural union, must again revive. Charles
lucceeded to all the dominions of the house of Au-
firia. No family had ever gained so much by wife
and fortunate marriages. By acquisitions of this
kind the Austrian Princes rose, in a ihort time,
from obscure Counts of Hapfbourg, to be Arch-

G 4 dukes

BOOK I dukes of Auitria, and Kings of Bohemia, and were
- y --J in poffeflion of the imperial dignity by a fort of he.

reditary right. Besides these territories in Germany,
Charles was heir to the crown of Spain, and to all
the dominions which belonged to the house of Bur.
gundy. The Burgundian provinces engrossed, at
that time, the riches and commerce of one half of
Europe; and he drew from them, on many occa.
sions, those immense fums, which no people with.
out trade and liberty are able to contribute. Spain
furnilhed him a gallant and hardy infantry, to whose
discipline he was indebted for all his conquests.
And at the fame time, by the discovery of the new
world, a vein of wealth was opened to him, which
all the extravagance of ambition could not exhaust.
These advantages rendered Charles the first Prince
in Europe; but he wished to be more, and openly
aIpired to universal monarchy. His genius was of
that kind which ripens slowly, and lies long con.
cealed; but it grew up without observation, to an
unexpe&ed height and vigour. He possessed, in
an eminent degree, the charaóleriftic virtues of all
the different races of Princes to whom he was al-
lied. In forming his schemes, he discovered all
the subtlety and penetration of Ferdinand his grand.
father; he purlued them with that obitinate and in-
flexible perseverance which has ever been peculiar
to the Aultrian blood; and in executing them, he
could employ the magnanimity and boldness of his
Burgundian ancestors. His abilities were equal
to his power, and neither of them would have been
inferior to his designs, had not Providence, in pity
to mankind, and in order to preserve them from

the

the worst of all evils, Universal Monarchy, raised BOOK I.
up Francis I. to defend the liberty of Europe. His -
dominions were less extensive, but more united than
the Emperor's. His fubjeas were numerous, ac-
tive, and warlike, lovers of glory, and lovers of
their King. To Charles power was the only object
of desire, and he pursued it with an unwearied and
joyless industry. Francis could mingle pleasure and
elegance with his ambition; and though he neglect-
ed some advantages, which a more phlegmatic or
more frugal Prince would have improved, an acive
and intrepid courage supplied all its defecs, and
checked or defeated many of the Emperor's designs.

THE reft of Europe observed all the motions of

these mighty rivals, with a jealous attention. On
the one fide, the Italians saw the danger which
threatened Christendom, and in order to avert it,
had recourse to the expedient, which they had often
employed with success. They endeavoured to di-
vide the power of the two contending Monarchs
into equal scales, and by the union of several small
fiates to counterpoise him, whose power became
too great. But, what they concerted with much
wisdom, they were able to execute with little vi-
gour; and intrigue and refinement were feeble
fences against the incroachments of military power.

ON the other fide, Henry VIII. of England held

the balance with less delicacy, but with a stronger
hand. He was the third Prince of the age in dig-
nity and in power; and the advantageous situation
of his dom.inions, his domestic tranquillity, his

immense

BOOK I. immense wealth, and absolute authority rendered
s* ' him the natural guardian of the liberty of Europe.

Each of the rivals courted him with emulation; he
knew it to be his interest to keep the balance even,
and to restrain both, by not joining entirely with
either of them. But he was seldom able to reduce
his ideas to pra&ice; he was governed by caprice
more than by principle; and the paflions of the
man were an overmatch for the maxims of the
King. Vanity and resentment were the great springs
of all his undertakings, and his neighbours easily
found the way, by touching these, to force him
upon many rash and inconsistent enterprises. His
reign was a perpetual series of blunders in politics,
and while he esteemed himself the wisest Prince in
Europe, he was a constant dupe to those, who found
it necessary, and could submit to flatter him.

IN this situation of Europe, Scotland, which had

hitherto wafted her strength in the quarrels between
France and England, emerged from her obscurity,
took her station in the system, and began to have
Ibme influence upon the fate of distant nations.
Her assistance was, frequently, of consequence to
the contending parties, and the balance was often
so nicely adjusted, that it was in her power to make
it lean to either fide. The part assigned her, at
this junCture, was to divert Henry from carrying
his arms into the continent. That Prince, having
routed the French at Guinegat, and invested Te.
rouenne, France attempted to divide his forces, by
engaging James IV. in that unhappy expeditior
which ended with his life. For the fame reafor

Francis

Francis encouraged and assisted the Duke of Al- BOOK I.
bany, to ruin the families of Angus and Home,--~
which were in the interest of England, and would
willingly have persuaded the Scots to revenge the
death of their King, and to enter into a new war
with that kingdom. Henry and Francis having
united not long after against the Emperor, it was
the interest of both Kings, that the Scots mhould
continue inactive; and a long tranquillity was the
effeCt of their union. Charles endeavoured to break
this, and to embarrass Henry by another inroad of
the Scots. For this end, he made great advances
to James V. flattering the vanity of the young
Monarch, by electing him a Knight of the Golden
Fleece, and by offering him a match in the impe-
rial family white in return for these empty ho-
nours, he demanded of him to renounce his alliance
with France, and to declare war against England.
But James, who had much to lose, and who could
gain little by embracing the Emperor's proposals,
rejected them with decency, and keeping firm to
his ancient allies, left Henry at full liberty to a&
upon the continent with his whole strength.

HENRY himself began his reign, by imitating

the example of his ancestors with regard to Scot-
land. He held its power in such extreme contempt,
that he was at no pains to gain its frienduhip; but
on the contrary, he irritated the whole nation, by
reviving the antiquated pretensions of the crown of
England to the sovereignty over Scotland. But his
own experience, and the example of his enemies,
gave him a higher idea of its importance. It was

impossible

BOOK I. impossible to defend an open and extensive frontier,

'-"
-"' against the incursions of an acive and martial peo.

pie. During any war on the continent, this obliged
him to divide the strength of his kingdom. It
was necessary to maintain a kind of army of obfer-
vation in the north of England; and after all pre-
cautions, the Scottish borderers, who were superior
to all mankind in the practice of irregular war,
often made successful inroads, and spread terror and
desolation over many counties. He fell, at last,
upon the true iecret of policy, with refpeft to Scot-
land, which his predecessors had too little penetra.
tion to discover, or too much pride to employ.
The situation of the country, and the bravery of
the people made the conquest of Scotland impoffi-
ble; but the national poverty, and the violence of
faction rendered it an easy matter to divide, and to
govern it. He abandoned, therefore, the former
design, and resolved to employ the utmost address
in executing the latter. It had not yet become ho-
nourable for one Prince to receive pay from ano-
ther, under the more decent name of a subsidy.
But, in all ages, the fame arguments have been
good in courts, and of weight with ministers, sac-
tious leaders, and favourites. What were the argu-
ments by which Henry brought over so many to
his interest during the minority of James V. we
know by the original warrant still extant *, for re-
mitting considerable fums into Scotland. By a
proper distribution of these, many persons of note
were gained to his party, and a faction which held
secret correspondence with England, and received

* Burn. Hit. Ref. v. i. p. 7.

all

all its direcions from thence, appears henceforward BOOK I.
in our domefiic contests. In the sequel of the his- ,v-.
tory, we (hall find Henry labouring to extend his
influence in Scotland. His successors adopted the
fame plan, and improved upon it. The affairs of
the two kingdoms became interwoven, and their
interests were often the fame. Elizabeth divided
her attention almost equally between them, and the
authority, which {he inherited in the one, was not
greater than that, which (he acquired in the other.

# BOOK II.

THE
HISTORY

o F
SCOTLAND.

BOOK II,
M ARY Qneen of Scots was born a few days B o o

before the death of her father James V. iI.
The situation in which he left the kingdom alarmed

Dec. r4,.
all ranks of men, with the profpec of a turbulent s54r.

Birth of

and disastrous reign. A war against England had Mary, a,,
been undertaken without necessity, and carried on flkifmh
without success. Many persons of the first rank
had fallen into the hands of the Englilh, in the un-
fortunate rout near the firth of Solway, and were
fill prisoners at London. Among the reft of the
nobles there was little union, either in their views,
or in their affections; and the religious disputes oc-
cafioned by the opinions of the reformers, growing
every day more violent, added to the rage of thole
factions which are natural to a form of government
nearly ariftocratical.

THB

B o K THE government of a Queen was unknown in

11. Scotland, and did not imprint much reverence in

the minds of a martial people. The government
of an infant Queen was still more destitute of real
authority; and the profpeft of a long and feeble
minority invited to faction by the hope of irrpunity.
James had not even provided the common remedy
against the disorders of a minority, by committing
to proper persons the care of his daughter's educa.
tion, and the administration of affairs in her name.
Though he saw the clouds gathering, and foretold
that they would quickly burst into a itorm, he was
so littleable todifperfe them, or to defend his daugh.
ter and kingdom against the imminent calamities,
that, in mere despair, he abandoned them both to
the mercy of fortune, and left open to every pre-
tender, the office of Regent, which he could not
fix to his own fatisfaaion.

Pretcnfions CARDINAL Beatoun, who had for many years
es Cardinal
EBatoun to been confidered as prime minister, was the first who
the regency. claimed that high dignity; and in support of his

pretensions, he produced a testament*, which he
himself had forged in the name of the late King;
and without any other right, instantly assumed the
title of Regent. He hoped, by the aflifance of the
clergy, the countenance of France, the connivance
of the Queen Dowager, and the support of the
whole popish faction, to hold by force, what he
had seized on by fraud. But Beatoun had enjoyed
power too long to be a favourite of the nation.
Those among the nobles who wished for a Refor.

Sadlcr's Lett. G6i.

mation

mation in religion dreaded his severity, and others B o o Ic
confidered the elevation of a Churchman to the II.
highest office in the kingdom as a depression of OT-
hemfelves. At their infligation, James Hamilton
Earl of Arran, and next heir to the Queen, roused
himself from his inactivity, and was prevailed on
to aspire to that station, to which proximity of
blood gave him a natural title. The nobles, who 'ac ofAe.
were assembled for that purpose, unanimously con- Re'ent.
erred on him the office of regent; and the public
voice applauded their choice.

No two men ever differed more widely in difpo- characr
fition and character, than the Earl of Arran and tou.
Cardinal Beatoun. The Cardinal was by nature of
mmoderate ambition; by long experience he had
acquired address and refinement; and insolence
rew upon him from continual success. His high
tation in the church placed him in the way of great
employments; his abilities were equal to the great-
eft of these; nor did he reckon any of them to be
above his merit. As his own eminence was found-
d upon the power of the church of Rome, he was
zealous defender of that fuperflition, and for the
ame reason an avowed enemy to the doctrine of the
Reformers. Political motives alone determined him
to support the one or to oppose the other. His
arly application to public business kept him unac-
quainted with the learning and controversies of the
age; he gavejudgment, however, upon all points in

ripute, with a precipitancy, violence, and rigour,
which cotemporary historians mention with indig-
nation.
VOL. 1. H TSH

B o o K THE character of the Earl of Arran was, in al.

II. most every thing, the reverse of Beatoun's. He
o Aran. was neither infected with ambition, nor inclinedto

cruelty: The love of ease extinguilhed the former,
the softness of his temper preserved him from the
latter. Timidity and irresolution were his predo.
minant failings, the one occasioned by his natural
constitution, and the other arising from a conscious
ness that his abilities were not equal to his station.
With there dispositions he might have enjoyed and
adorned private life; but his public condu6t was
without courage, or dignity, or consistence. The
perpetual lave ofhisown fears, and, by consequence,
the perpetual tool ofthofe, who found their advan.
tage in praaifing upon them. But as no other per.
son could be set in opposition to the Cardinal, with
any probability of success, the nation declared in
his favour with so general a consent, that the arti-
sices of his rival could not withstand its united
strength.

Schemes of THE Earl of Arran had scarce taken possession
Henry VIII
withregard of his new dignity, when a negociation was opened
to Scotland. with England, which gave birth to events of the

most fatal consequence to himself, and to the king-
dom. After the death of James, Henry VIII.
was no longer afraid of any interruption from Scot.
land to his designs against France; and imme-
diately conceived hopes of rendering this security
perpetual, by the marriage of Edward his only fan
with the young Queen of Scots. He communi-
cated his intention to the prisoners taken at Solway,
and prevailed on them to favour it, by the prornift

roi

of liberty, as the reward of their success. In the B o o K
mean time he permitted them to return into Scot- II.
land, that, by their presence in the Parliament
which the Regent had called, they might be the
better able to persuade their countrymen to fall in
with his proposals. A cause, intruded to such able
and zealous advocates, could not well miss of com -
ing to an happy issue. All those who feared the
Cardinal, or who desired a change in religion, were
fond of an alliance; which afforded proteaion to
the doctrine which they had embraced, as well as to
their own persons, against the rage of that powerful
and haughty Prelate.

BUT Henry's rough and impatient temper was 11 condue.

incapable of improving this favourable conjuncture. ifelf.
Address and delicacy in managing the fears, and
follies, and interests of men, were arts with which
he was utterly unacquainted. The designs he had
iormed upon Scotland were obvious from the mar-
riage which he had proposed, and he had not dex-
terity enough to disguise, or to conceal them. In-
itead of yielding to the fear orjealoufy of the Scots,
what time and accidents would soon have enabled
him to recover, he, at once, alarmed and irritated
the whole nation, by demanding that the Queen's
person should be immediately committed to his cuf-
tody, and that the government of the kingdom
Ihould be put in his hands during her minority.

IIENRY could not have prescribed more ignomi- Odio,,,t
nious conditions to a conquered people, and it is no th',,OSht,
Wonlder they were rejeced, with indignation, by partaccept.

*~

~~H 2 men'~

°ed by them.
H 2 men

B o o K men who scorned to purchase an alliance with Eng.

11. land, at the price of their own liberty. The par.
' ' sliament of Scotland, however, influenced by the

nobles who returned from England; desirous of
peace with that kingdom; and delivered, by the

March z2, Regent's confining the Cardinal as a prisoner, from
'543.

any opposition to which he might have given rife;
consented to a treaty of marriage and of union, but
upon somewhat a more equal footing. And after
Iome dark and unsuccessful intrigues, by which his
ambassador endeavoured to carry off the young
Queen and Cardinal Beatoun into England, Henry
was obliged to give up his own proposals, and to
accept of theirs. On his fide, he consented that
the Queen should continue to reside in Scotland,
and himself remain excluded from any share in the
government of the kingdom. On the other hand,
the Scots agreed to fend their Sovereign into Eng-
land as soon as ihe attained the full age of ten
years, and instantly to deliver fix persons, of the
first rank, to be kept as hostages by Henry till the
Queen's arrival at his court.
Flvoured by THE treaty was ifill so manifeifly of advantage

te to England, that the Regent loft much of the pub.

lic confidence by consenting to it. The Cardinal,
who had now recovered liberty, watched for such
an opportunity of regaining credit, and he did not
fail to cultivate and improve this to the utmost.

Oppora by He complained loudly, that the Regent had be-
the Cardi-
·Ch i- (trayed the kingdom to its most inveterate enemies,

and sacrificed its honour to his own ambition. He
foretold the extinAtion of true catholic religion,

under

under the tyranny of an excommunicated heretic; B o o K
but above all, he lamented to fee an ancient king- II.
dom consenting to its own slavery, descending into "
the ignominious station of a dependent province;
and, in one hour, the weakness or treachery of a
tingle man surrendering every thing for which the
Scottish nation had struggled and fought during so
many ages. These remonstrances of the Cardinal
were not without effe&. They were addrefled to
prejudices and pailions which are deeply rooted in
the human heart. The fame hatred to the ancient
enemies of their country, the fame jealousy of na-
tional honour, and pride of independence, which,
at the beginning of the present century, went near
to prevent the Scots from consenting to an union
with England, upon terms of great advantage, did,
at that time, induce the whole nation to declare
againftthealliancewhich had been concluded. Inthe
one period, an hundred and fifty years of peace be-
tween the two nations, the habit of being fubje&ed
to the fame King, and governed by the fame max-
ims, had' considerably abated old animofities, and
prepared both people for incorporating. In the
other, injuries were still frelh, the wounds on both
fides were open, and, in the warmth of resentment,
it was natural to seek revenge, and to be averse from
reconcilement. At the Union in 1707, the wisdom
of parliament despised the groundless murmurs
occasioned by antiquated prejudices, but in 1543,
the complaints of the nation were better founded,
and urged with a zeal and unanimity, which it is
neither just nor safe to disregard. The rage of the
people rose to such an height, that the English am-

H 3 baffldor

B o o K baffador could hardly be protected from their in.

II. fults. The clergy contributed a great fum towards

preserving thechurch from thedominionofaPrince,
whose system of eformation was 1o fatal to their
power. The nobles, after having mortified the
Cardinal, to lately, in such a cruel manner, were,
now, readiy to applaud and to second him, as the
defender of the honour and liberty of his country.

Heexcites ARGYLL, Huntly, Bothwell, and other power.
walhoe io ful Barons declared openly against the alliance with
ti'enai'ns. England. JBy their aniftance, the Cardinal seized

on the persons of the young Queen and her mother,
and iadded to his party the splendor and authority
of the royal name*. He received, at the fame
time, a more real accefion to his strength, by the
arrival of Matthew Stewart Earl of Lennox, whose
return from France he had earnestly solicited. This
young nobleman was the hereditary enemy of the
house of Hamilton. He had many claims upon
the Regent, and pretended a right to exclude him,
not only from succeeding to the Crown, but to de-
prive lim of the possession of his private fortune.
The Cardinal flattered his vanity, with the profpet
of marrying the Queen Dowager, and asseted to
treat him with so much relpe&, that the Regent
became j.-alous of him as a rival in power.

THIS suspicion was artfully heightened by the

Abbot of Paisley, who returned into Scotland some
time before the Earl of Lennox, and adctd in con.
cert with the Cardinal. He was a natural brother

* Keith's Ilift. of Scotl. 30.

of

of the Regent, with whom he had great credit; a B o o K
warm partisan of France, and a zealous defender II.
of the established Religion. He took hold of the
Regent by the proper handle, and endeavoured to
bring about a change in his fentir.ents, by working
upon his fears. The desertion of the nobility, the
dillaffeaion of the clergy, and the rage of the peo-
ple; the resentment of France, the power of the
Cardinal, and the pretensions of Lennox, were all
represented with aggravation, and with their most
threatening aspet.

MEAN while, the day appointed for the ratifica-
tion of the treaty with England, and the delivery
of the hostages, approached, and the Regent was
still undetermined in his own mind. He acted to
the last, with that irresolution and inconsistence,
which is peculiar to weak men, when they are so
unfortunate as to have the chief part in the conduc
of difficult affairs. On the 25th of AuguR, heOblges the
ratified the treaty with Henry, and proclaimed the Regent tc
Cardinal, who still continued to oppose it, an ene- the friend.

ship with

my to his country. On the 3d of September, he Eugland.
Iccretly withdrew from Edinburgh, met with the
Cardinal at Callendar, renounced the friendship of
England, and declared for the interests of France*.

HENRY, in order to gain the Regent, had not
Ipared the most magnificent promises. H-e had of-
sered to give the Princess Elizabeth in marriage to
his eldest son, and to constitute him King of that
part of Scotland, which lies beyond the river Forth.

Sadler, 339, 356.

IH . But

B o o K But upon finding his interest in the kingdom to be

II. less considerable than he had imagined, the Englifl

' monarch began to treat him with little refpe&. The

young Queen was now in the custody of his ene.
mies, who grew every day more numerous and more
popular. They formed a separate court at Stirling,
and threatened to eleat another Regent. The French
King was ready to afford them his protection, and
the nation, out of hatred to the English, would
have united in their defence. In this situation, she
Regent could not retain his authority, without a
sudden change of his measures; and though he en.
deavoured, by ratifying the treaty, to preserve the
appearances of good faith with England, he was
obliged to throw himself into the arms of the party,
which adhered to France.

And to per- Soon after this sudden revolution in his political
fecute the
Icformtei. principles, the Regent changed his sentiments con-

cerning religion. The spirit of controversy was
then new and warm; books of that kind were ea-
gerly read by men of every rank; the love of no.
velty, or the convition of truth, had led the Re-
gent to express great esteem for the writings of the
Reformers; and having been powerfully supported
by those who had embraced their opinions, he, in
order to gratify them, entertained, in his own fami-
ly, two of the most noted preachers of the Protef-
tant do&rine, and, in his first Parliament, consented
to an ad, by which the laity were permitted to
read the Scriptures in a language which they under.
food. Truth needed only a fair hearing to be an
over-match for error. Absurdities, which had long

(in-

imposed on the ignorance and credulity of man- B o o R
kind, were detected and exposed to public ridicule; II
and under the countenance of the Regent, the Re-
formation made great advances. I he Cardinal ob-
served its progress with concern, and was at the ut-
most pains to obftru& it. He represented to the
Regent his great imprudence in giving encourage-
ment to opinions, so favourable to Lennox's preten-
sions; that his own legitimacy depended upon the
validity of a sentence of divorce, founded on the
Pope's authority; and that by suffering it to be
called in question, he weakened his own title to the
fuccefflon, and furnished his rival with the only ar-
gument, by which it could be rendered doubtful *.
These insinuations made a deep imprefflon on the
Regent's timorous spirit, who, at the profpeA of
such imaginary dangers, was as much startled as
the Cardinal could have wished; and his zeal for
the Protestant religion was not long proof againit
his fear. He publickly abjured the doctrine of the
Reformers in the Franciscan church at Stirling, and
declared not only for the political, but the religious
opinions of his new confidents.

* The pretensions of the Earl of Lennox to the fuccellion

were thus founded. Mary, the daughter of James II. was
married to James Lord Hamilton. Elizabeth, a daughter of
that marriage, was the wife of Matthew Earl of Lennox, and
the present Earl was her grandson. The Regent was likewise
the grandson of the Princess Mary. But his father having mar-
ried Janet Beaton the Regent's mother, after he had obtained a
divorce from Elizabeth Home his former wife, Lennox pretend-
ed that the sentence of divorce was unjust, and that the Regent,
being born while Elizabeth Home was Rill alive, ought to be
confidered as illegitimate. Crawf. Peer. 19z.

THe

B o o K THE Protestant dotrine did not susser much by

II. his apoftacy. It had already taken so deep root in
t.v... the kingdom, that no discouragement or severity

could extirpate it. The Regent indeed consented
to every thing, that the zeal of the Cardinal thought
necessary for the preservation of the established reli-
gion. The Reformers were persecuted with all the
cruelty, which superstition inspires into a barbarous
people. Many were condemned to that dreadful
death, which the church has appointed for the ptt-
nifhment of its enemies; but they suffered with a
fpiritfo nearly resembling the patience and fortitude
of the primitive martyrs, that more were converted
than terrified by such fpeEtacles.

Beatonn THE Cardinal, however, was now in poffeflion
th chlie of every thing his ambition could desire; and ex-
,f affar. ercifed all the authority of a Regent, without the

envy of the name. He had nothing to fear from
the Earl of Arran, who having by his inconstancy
forfeited the public esteem, was contemned by one
half of the nation, and little trusted by the other.
The pretensions of the Earl of Lennox were the
only thing Mwhich remained to embarrass him. He
had very successfully made use of that nobleman to
work upon the Regent's jealousy and fear, but as
he no longer flood in need of such an instrument,
he was willing to get rid of him with decency. Len-
nox soon began to lffpeet his intention; promises,
flattery, ant refpee were the only returns he had
hitherto received for substantial services; but at lafg
the Cardinal's artifices could no longer be conceal-
ed, and Lennox, infead of attaining power and

6 dig.

dignity himself, saw that he had been employed B o o K
only to procure these for another. Resentment and II-
disappointed ambition pulhed him on to seek revenge
on that cunning prelate, who, by sacrificing his in-
terest, had so ungenerously purchased the Earl of
Arran's friendship. He withdrew, for that reason,
from court, and declared for the party at enmity
with the Cardinal, which, with open arms, received
a convert, who added so much lustre to their cause.

THE two factions which divided the kingdom

were still the fame, without any alterations in their
views or principles ; but, by one of those itrange
revolutions, which were frequent in that age, they
had, in the course of a few weeks, changed their
leaders. The Regent was at the head of the par-
tifans of France and the defenders of Popery, and
Lennox in the fame station with the advocates for
the English alliance, and a reformation in religion.
The one laboured to pull down his own work,
which the other upheld with the fame hand, that
had hilherto endeavoured to destroy it.

LENNOX'S impatience for revenge got the start
of the cardinal's activity. He surprised both-him
and the regent by a sudden march to Edinburgh
v.'ith a numerous army; and might easily have
cruihed them, before they could prepare for their
decence. But he was weak enough to liften to pro-
pclils for an accommodation; and the Cardinal
amnufed him so artfully, and spun out the treaty to
such a length, that the greater part of the Earl'S
troops, who served, as is usual wherever the feudal

wini-

B o o K institutions prevail, at their own expence, deserted

II. him ; and in concluding a peace, instead of giving
'L -' the law, he was obliged to receive it. A second

attempt to retrieve his affairs ended yet more unfor.
tunately. One body of his troops was cut to pieces,
and the reft dispersed; and with the poor remains
of a ruined party, he must either have submitted
to the conqueror, or have fled out of the king.
dom, if the approach of an Englilh army had not
brought him a short relief.

aenryin. HENRY was not of a temper to bear tamely the
Wade, Scot-

'd.' indignity, with which he had been treated, both

by the Regent and Parliament of Scotland, who
at the time when they renounced their alliance with
him, had entered into a new and ftri&er confede.
racy with France. The rigour of the season retard.
ed for rome time the execution of his vengeance.
But in the spring, a considerable body of infantry
which was detined for France, received orders to
fail for Scotland, and a proper nuriber of cavalry
was appointed to join it by land. The Regent
and Cardinal little expeEted such a visit. They had
trusted that the French war would find employment
for all Henry's forces; and, from an unaccountable
security, were wholly unprovided for the defence
of the kingdom. The Earl of Hertford, a leader
fatal to the Scots in that age, commanded this ar-
my, and landed it, without opposition, a few miles
above Leith. He was quickly master of that place,
and marching diretly to Edinburgh, entered it
with the fame cafe. A fter plundering the adjacent
Fountryi the richest, and most open in Scotland, he

set

set on fire both these towns, and upon the approach B o o K
of some troops gathered together by the Regent, II.
put his booty on board the fleet, and with his land
forces retired safely to the Englith borders, deliver-
ing the kingdom, in a few days, from the terror of
an invasion, concerted with little policy, carried on
at great expence, and attended with no advantage.
If Henry aimed at the conquest of Scotland, he
gained nothing by this expedition; if the marriage
he had proposed, was fill in his view, he loft a
great deal. Such a rough courtship, as the Earl of
Huntly humorously called it, disgusted the whole
nation; their aversion for the match grew into ab.
horrence; and exasperated by so many indignities,
the Scots were never at any period more attached
to France, or more alienated from England.

THE Earl of Lennox alone, in spite to the Re-
gent and French King, continued a correspondence
with England, which ruined his own interest, with-
out promoting Henry's. Many of his own vassals
preferring their duty to their country before their
affetion to him, refused to concur in any design to
favour the public enemy. And after a few feeble
and unsuccessful attempts to disturb the Regent's
administration, he was obliged to fly for safety to
the court of England, where Henry rewarded ser-
vices which he had the inclination, but not the
power to perform, by giving him in marriage his
niece the Lady Margaret Douglas. This unhappy
exile, however, was destined to be the father of a
race of kings. He saw his son Lord Darnley
mount the throne of Scotland, to the perpetual ex-

clufion

B o o K clufion of that rival who now triumphed in his

II. ruin. And, from that time, his posterity have held

' the sceptre in two kingdoms, by one of which he

was cast out as a criminal, and by the other received
as a fugitive.

Apeace MEAN while hoRilities were continued by both
concluded.

nations, but with little vigour on either fide. The
historians of that age relate minutely the circum.
flances of several fkirmifiecs and inroads, which, as
they did not produce any considerable effec, at this
distance of time, deserve no remembrance*. At
last an end was put to this languid and inactive war,

by

Though this war was diflinguifled by no important or de-

cifive ation, it was, however, extremely ruinous to individuals.
There Itill remain two original papers, which give us some idea
of the mifcries, to which the moti fertile counties in the king.
dom were exposed, by the sudden and defirudive incursions of
the borderers. The fir1i feeems to be the report made to Henry
by the English wardens of the marches, for the year 1 44, and
contains their exploits from the 2d of July, to the i7th of No-
vember. 'The account it gives of the different inroads, or FAr-
rays, as they are called, is very minute; and in conclusion, the
fum total of mischief they did is thus computed:

Towns, towers, fledes, barnekyns, parifhe-churches,

balel houses cast down or burnt - 19:

Scots slain - - - - 403
Prisoners taken - - - 816
Nolt, i.e. horned cattle, taken - 0,3S6
Sheep - .. 1 2,492
Nags and geldings - - 1,296
Goats - - - 00
Bo!ls of corn . - 8;
Infight.gcar, i. e. houfhold furniture, not reckoned.

Haynes's State Papers, 43.

Thb

by a peace, in which England, France, and Scot- B o o K
land were comprehended. Henry laboured to ex- II
dude the Scots from the benefit of this treaty, and Ju- 546.
to reserve them for that vengeance, which his at-
tention to the affairs of the continent had hitherto
delayed. But although a peace with England was
of the last consequence to Francis I. whom the Em.
peror was preparing to attack with all his forces,
he was too generous to abandon allies, who had
served him with fidelity, and he chore rather to pur-
chafe Henry's friendship with disadvantage to him-
self, than to leave them exposed to danger. By
yielding some things to the interest, and more to
the vanity of that haughty Prince; by submission,
flatery, and address, he, at length, prevailed to
have the Scots included in the peace agreed upon.

AN event which happened a ihort time before the The mur-

conclusion of this peace, rendered it more accept- ,oun Be.-

The other contains an account of an inroad by the Earl of
Hertford, between the 8th and 23d of September, 1 545 ; the
narrative is more general, but it appears that he had burnt,
rated, and destroyed in the counties of Berwick and Roxburgh
enly,

Monasteries and Friar-houfes - 7
Catles, towers, and piles - 16
Market towns - 5
Villages - - - 243
Milns - - - 3
Hospitals - - - 3

All these were cast down or burnt. Haynes 52. As the Scots
.'ere no less skilful in the praatice of irregular war, we may
conclude that the damage which they did in England was not
inconfider.ible; and that their raids were no less wasteful, than
tilcforrays of the English.

able

B o o K able to the whole nation. Cardinal Beatoun had

II. not used his power with moderation, equal to the
"- .' prudence by which he attained it. NotwithRfand-

ing his great abilities, he had too many of the pas-
sions and prejudices of an angry leader of a fa&ion,
to govern a divided people with temper. His re-
fentment againit one party of the nobility, his info.
lence towards the rett, his severity to the Reformers,
and, above all, the barbarous and illegal execution
of the famous George Wifhart, a man of honour-
able birth, and of primitive fantfity, wore out the
patience of a fierce age; and nothing but a bold
hand was wanting to gratify the public wili by his
deftrution. Private revenge, inflamed and fan&i-
fled by a false zeal for religion, quickly supplied
this want. Norman Lefly, the eldest son of the
earl of Rothes, had been treated by the Cardinal
with injustice and contempt. It was not the temper
Ibf the man, or the spirit of the times, quietly to di.

gels an affront. And as the profefflon of his adver.
fary screened him from the effe&s of what is called
an honourable resentment, he resolved to take that
fatisfaEtion, which he could not demand. This re-
solution deserves as much censure, as the singular
courage and condut with which he put it in exe-
cution excite wonder. The cardinal, at that time,
resided in the castle of Saint Andrews, which he had
fortified at great expcnce, and in the opinion of the
age had rendered it impregnable. His retinue was
numerous, the town at his devotion, and the neigh-
bouring ocuntry full of his dependents. In this
situation, fixlren persons undertook to surprise his
caitle, and to aiiaffinate himself; and their fuccefi

was

was equal to the boldness of the attempt. Early in B o o K
the morning they seized on the gate of the calle, 1.
which was set open to the workmen who were em- May i3,
ployed in finishing the fortifications; and having s546
placed sentries at the door of the Cardinal's apart-
ment, they awakened his numerous domestics one by
one, and turning them out of the castle, they with.
out noise, or tumult, or violence to any other per-
son, delivered their country, though by a most un-
juiftifiable ation, from an ambitious man,whofe pride
was insupportable to the nobles, as his cruelty and
cunning were the great checks to the Reformation.

His death was fatal to the Catholic religion, and The re.

to the French interest in Scotland. The fame zeal pe'nt
for both continued among a great party in the na- "thn'eie
tion, but when deprived of the genius and authority derets-
of so skilful a leader, was of small consequence.
Nothing can equal the consternation which a blow
so unexpeEted occasioned among his adherents;
while the Regent secretly enjoyed an event, which
removed out of his way a rival, who had not only
eclipsed his greatness, but almost extinguilhed his
power. Decency, however, the honour of the
church, the importunity of the Queen Dowager and
her faction, his engagements with France, and,
above all there, the desire of recovering his clieft
son, whom the Cardinal had detained for some time
at St. Andrew's in pledge of his fidelity, and who,
together with the castle, had fallen into the hands
of the conspirators, induced him to take arms, in
order to revenge the death of a mian he hated.

VOL. 1. I H,

B o o R HE threatened vengeance, but was unable to exe

II. cute it. One part of military science, the art of at.
C^^^ tacking fortified places, was then unknown in Scot.

land. The weapons, the difc.lin!.;e, and impetuolty
of the Scots, rendered their armies as unfit for
sieges, as they were active in the field. An hun.
dred and fifty men, which was the greatest number
the conspirators ever assembled, resifted all the es.
forts of the Regent for five months *, in a place,
which a tingle battalion, with a few battering can.
non, would now reduce in a few hours. This tedi-
ous siege was concluded by a truce. The Regent
undertook to procure for the conspirators an abfo.
lution from the Pope, and a pardon in parliament;
and upon obtaining there, they engaged to surrender
the castle, and to set his son at liberty.

IT is probable, that neither of them were fncere

in this treaty. On both fides, they fought only to
amuse, and to gain time. The Regent had applied
to France for affiflance, and expected soon to have
the conspirators at mercy. On the other hand, if
Lefly and his associates were not at first incited by
Henry to murder the Cardinal, they were, in the
sequel, powerfully supported by him. Notwith-
flanding the silence of cotemporary historians, there
are violent presumptions of the former; of the lat-
ter there is undoubted certaintyt. During the
siege, the conspirators had received from England
supplies both of money and provisions; and as
Henry was preparing to renew his proposals con-

* Epift. Reg. Scot. 2; 379. tKeith, 60.

cerning

cerning the marriage and the union he had projea- B o o K
ed, and to second his negociations with a numerous II
army, they hoped, by concurring with him, to be
in a situation, in which they would no longer need
a pardon, but might claim a reward.

THE death of Henry blasted all there hopes. It a,,,,-
happened in the beginning of next year, after a '5
reign of greater splendour than true glory; buffling,
though not active; oppreflive in domestic govern.
ment, and in foreign politics wild and irregular.
But the vices of this Prince were more beneficial to
nmankind, than the virtues of others. His rapaci-
oufnefs, his profusion, and even his tyranny, by
depressing the ancient nobility, and by adding new
property and power to the Commons, laid the foun-
dations of the British liberty. His other pafions
contributed no less towards the downfal of Popery,
and the establishment of religious freedom in the na-
tion. His resentment led him to abolish the power,
and his covetousness to seize the wealth of the
church; and by withdrawing these supports, made
iteafy, in the following reign, to overturn the whole.
fabric of fuperRfition.

FRANCIS I. did not long survive a Prince, who
had been alternately his rival and his friend; but
his successor Henry II. was not negletful of the
French interest in Scotland. He sent a confider- Trop,
able body of men, under the command of Leon ri' from.
Strozzi, to the Regent's assistance. By their long
experience in the Italian and German wars, the
French had become as dexterous in the conduat of

I 2 fleges,

B o o K sieges, as the Scots were ignorant; and as the bold

II. ness and despair of the conspirators could not defend

them againit their superior art, they, after a fhon

Force the
caactof st. refiltance, surrendered to Strozzi, who engaged, in
Anfdrewn the name of the King his matier, for the fecurityof
to furren-
der. their lives; and as his prisoners transported theminto

France. The cattle itself, the monument of Bra.
toun's power and vanity, was demolished, in obedi.
ence to the canon law, which, with admirable po.
licy, denounces its anathemas even againit the houses
in which the sacred blood of a Cardinal happens to
be shed, and ordains them to be laid in ruins .

TH E archbiflloprick of St. Andrew's was bellow.

ed by the regent upon his natural brother John
Hamilton Abbot of Paisley.

Ntw breach THE delay of a few weeks would have saved the
,h Ens. conspirators. Those ministers of Henry VIII. who

had the chief direAion of affairs during the mino
rity of his son Edward VI. conducted themselves,
with regard to Scotland, by the maxims of theirlat
malfer, and resolved to frighten the Scots into
treaty, which they had not abilities or addrefsto
bring about by any other method.

BUT before we proceed to relate the events whicl

their invasion of Scotland occasioned, we hall fto
to take notice of a circumstance unobfsrved by cc
temporary historians, but extremely remarkablefi
the discovery it makes of the fintiments and fpir

' Burn. Hit. Ref. 1. 338.

whi
IJ.

Nhich then prevailed among the Scots. The con- B o o K
Ipirators against Cardinal Beatoun found the Re- II
gent's eldest son in the castle of St. Andrew's; and
as they needed the protection of the English, it was
to be feared that they might endeavour to purchase
it, by delivering to them this important prize. The
presumptive heir to the crown in the hands of the
avowed enemies of the kingdom, was a dreadful
profpel. And, in order to avoid it, the Parlia.
ment fell upon a very extraordinary expedient. By
an at made of purpose, they excluded " the Re-
, gent's eldest son from all right of succession,
, public or private, so long as he fl:huld be detain-

ed a prisoner, and fubitituted in hi) place, his
, other brothers, according to their seniority, and
"in failure of them, those who were next heirs to
" the Regent *." Succession by hereditary right
is an idea so obvious and so popular, that a nation
seldom ventures to make a breach in it, but in cafes
of extreme necefity. Such a necefity did the Par-
liament discover in the present situation. Hatred
to England, founded on the memory of part holti-
lities, and heightened by the smart of recent inju-
ries, was the national passion. This dictated that
uncommon statute, by which the order of lineal
fucceflion was so remarkably broken. 'I he modern
theories, which represent this right as divine and
unalienable, and that ought not to be violated upon
any consideration whatsoever, seem to have been
then altogether unknown.

Epift. Reg. Scot. 2. 359.

I 3

B o o K IN thebeginningof September, theEarl of Hert.

II. ford, now Duke of Somerset, and ProtecEorofEng.

Scotd land, entered Scotland at the head of 8,000 men,
ithvEandlby and, at the fame time, a fleet of 60 ships appeared

on the coast, to second his land forces. The Scots
had for some time observed this storm gathering,
and were prepared for it. Their army was almost
double to that of the enemy, and polled to thegreat.
eft advantage on a rifingground, above M uffelburgh,
not far from the banks of the river Efke. Both these
circumstances alarmed the duke of Somerset, who
saw his danger, and would willingly have extricated
himself out of it, by a new overture of peace on con.
ditions extremely reasonable. But this moderation
being imputed to fear, his proposals were rejected
with that scorn, which the confidence of success in-
spires; and if the conduat of the Regent, who comn
manded the Scottish army, had been in any degree
equal to his confidence, the deftruation of the Eng.
lilh must have been inevitable. They were in a si-
tuation, precisely similar to that of their countrymen
under Oliver Cromwell, in the following century.
The Scots had chosen their ground so well, that it
was impossible to force them to give battle; a few
days had exhausted the forage and provision of a
narrow country; the fleet could only furnish a scanty
and precarious subsistence; a retreat therefore was
necefary; but disgrace, and perhaps ruin, were the
consequences of retreating.

ON both these occasions, the national heat and

impetuosity of the Scots saved the English, and pre-
cipitated their own country into the utmolt danger.

The

rhe undisciplined courage of the private men be. B o o K
came impatient at the fight of an enemy. The Ge- II.
neral was afraid of nothing, but that the English Batl of
would escape from him by flight; and leaving his Pinkey.
firong camp, he attacked the Duke of Somerset
near Pinkey, with no better success than his rashness sP, e147b
deserved. The Protector had drawn up his troops
on a gentle eminence, and had now the advantage
of ground on his fide. The Scottish army consist-
ed almnot entirely of infantry, whose chief weapon
was a long spear, and for that reason their files
were very deep and their ranks close. They ad-
vanced towards the enemy in three great bodies, and
as they paired the river, were considerably exposed
to the fire of the English fleet, which lay in the
bay of Muflflburgh, and had drawn near the shore.
The English cavalry, flulhed with an advantage
which they had gained in a fkirmilh some days be-
fore, began the attack with more impetuosity than
good conduct. A body so firm and compa& as the
Scots, easily refited the imprefflon of cavalry, broke
them, and drove them off the field. The Englifi
infantry, however, advanced, and the Scots were at
once exposed to a flight of arrows, to a fire in flank
from 400 foreign fusileers who served the enemy,
and to their cannon which were planted behind the
infantry, on the highest part of the eminence. The
depth and closeness of their order making it impof-
fible for the Scots to stand long in this situation
the Earl of Angus, who commanded the vanguard,
endeavoured to change his ground, and to retire to-
wards the main body. But his friends unhappily
mistook his motion for a flight, and fell into con-

I 4 fusion.

B o o K fusion. At that very instant, the broken cavalry

II. having rallied, returned to the charge; the foot
-''- pursued the advantage they had gained; the pro.

Ipet of victory redoubled the ardour of both: And
in a moment, the rout of the Scottish army became
universal, and irretrievable. The encounter in the
field was not long, nor bloody; but in the pursuit,
the English discovered all the rage and fierceness,
which national antipathy, kindled by long emula-
tion, and inflamed by reciprocal injuries, is apt to
inspire. The pursuit was continued for five hours,
and to a great diltance. All the three roads, by
which the Scots fled, were strewed with spears, and
swords, and targets, and covered with the bodies
of the slain. Above 1o,ooo men fell on this day,
one of the mos fatal Scotland had ever seen. A few
were taken prisoners, and among there some persons
of diftinaion. And the Protecor had it now in
his power to become malter of a kingdom, out of
which, not many hours before, he was almost ob-
liged to retire with infamy *.

BUT

The following passage in a curious and rare journal of the

Proteflor's expedition into Scotland, written by W. Patten, who
was joined in commiflion with Cecil, as Judge Marshal of the
army, and printed in 1548, deserves our notice; as it gives a
juRt idea of the military discipline of the Scots at that time.
" But what after I learned, specially touching their order, their
armour, and their manner as well of going to offend, as of hand-
ing to defend, I have though: necessary here to utter. Hack-
butters have they few or none, and appoint their fight motl com-
monly always a foot. They come to the field well furnished all
with jack and lkull, dagger and buckler, and swords all broad
and thin, of exceeding good temper, and universally so made to

slice,

BUT this viEtory, however great, was- of no real B o o K

utility, for want of skill, or of leisure, to improve II.
it. Every new injury rendered the Scots more Thei, vic
averse from an union with England; and the Pro- Ietor o
tertor neglected the only measure, which would fit to the
have made it necessary for them to have given
their consent to it. IHe amused himself in waiting
the open country, and in taking or building several
petty caitles; whereas, by fortifying a few places
which were acceflible by sea, he would have laid
the kingdom open to the English, and, in a flort
time, the Scots must either have accepted of his

slice, that as I never saw none so good, so I think it hard to de-
vise the better. Hereto every man his pike, and a great kercher
wrapped twice or thrice about his neck, not for cold, but for
cutting. In their array towards joining with the enemy, they
cling and thrust so near in the fore rank, shoulder and (houlder
together,with their pikes in both their hands straight afore them,
and their followers in that order so hard at their backs, laying
their pikes over their foregoers ihoulders, that, if they do assail
undiscovered, no force can well withIfand them. Standing at
defence they thrust Ihoulders likewise so nigh together, the fore
ranks well nigh to kneeling, sloop low before, their fellows be-
hind holding their pikes with both hands, and therewith in their
left their bucklers, the one end of their pike against their right
foot, andtheotheragaint theenemy breall- high; their followers
crofling their pike points with them forward; and thus each with
other so nigh as space and place will susser, through the whole
ward, so thick, that as easily (hall a bare finger pierce through
the (kin of an angry hedge hog, as any encounter the front of
their pikes." Other curicus particulars are found in this jour-
nal, from which Sir John Hayward has borrowed his account of
this expedition. Life of Edward VI. z79, &c.

The length of the Scotch pike or spear was appointed by At
14 P. 1471. to be fix ells; i c, eighteen feet fix inches.

terms,

B o K terms, or have submitted to his power. By such an

lI. improvement of it, his vi&tory at Dunbar gave

Cromwell the command of Scotland. The battle
of Pinkey had no other effec but to precipitate the
Scots into new engagements with France. The
situation of the English court may, indeed, be plead-
ed in excuse for the Duke of Somerset's condut.
That cabal of his enemies, which occasioned his tra.
gical end, was already formed; and while he tri-
umphed in Scotland, they secretly undermined his
power and credit at home. Self-prefervation, there-
fore, obliged him to prefer his safety before his
fame, and to return without reaping the fruits of his
victory. At this time, however, the cloud blew
over; the conspiracy by which he fell was not yet
ripe for execution; and his presence suspended its
effet for some time. The supreme power frill re.
maining in his hands, he employed it to recover the
opportunity, which he had loft. A body of troops,
·rp;T, by his command, seized and fortified Haddingtoun,

a place, which, on account of its distance from the
sea, and from any English garrison, could not be
defended without great expence and danger.

Forces the MEAN while the French gained more by the de-
Sclr'tUion, feat of their allies, than the English did by their
Frth. viaory. After the death of Cardinal Beatoun,

Mary of Guise, the Queen Dowager, took a con-
fiderable ihare in the direction of affairs. She was
warmly attached by blood, and by inclination, to
the French interest; and, in order to promote it,
improved with great dexterity every event which
occurred. The spirit and strength of the Scots were

3 broken

broken at Pinkey; and in an assembly of nobles B o o K
which met at Stirling to consult upon the situation II.
of the kingdom, alleyes were turned towards France, .-'
no profpet of safety appearing but in afliftance
from thence. But Henry II. being then at peace
with England, the Queen represented that they
could not expet him to take part in their quarrel,
but upon views of personal advantage; and that
without extraordinary concessions in his favour, no
alfiftance in proportion to their present exigencies
could be obtained. The prejudices of the nation
powerfully seconded these representations of the
Queen. What often happens to individuals took
place among the nobles in this convention; they
were swayed entirely by their passions, and in order
to gratify them, they deserted their former prin-
ciples, and disregarded their true interest. In the
violence of resentment, they forgot that zeal for
the independence of Scotland, which had prompted
them to reject the proposals of Henry VIII. and by
offering, voluntarily, their young Queen in mar- Andtoffir
riage to the Dauphin eldet son of Henry II. and ih.i rul..
which was still more, by proposing to fend her to thcDu.
immediately into France to be educated at his court,
they granted, from a thirst of vengeance, what for-
merly they would not yield upon any consideration
of their own safety. To gain at once such a kingdom
as Scotland, was a matter of no fmallconfequence to
France. Henry, without hesitation, accepted the
offers of the Scottish ambafadors, and prepared
for the vigorous defence of his new acquilition. Six
thousand veteran soldiers, under the command of
Monsieur Defse, afflted by some of the best officers,

who

B o o K who were formed in the long wars of Francis I. ar.

1. rived at Leith. They served two campaigns in Scot-
L't' land, with a spirit equal to their former fame. But

their exploits were not considerable. The Scots
soon became jealous of their designs, and neglected
to support them with proper vigour; and the cau-
tion of the English, in acting wholly upon the de-.
fenfive, prevented them from attempting any enter-
prise ofconlequence; and obliged them to exhaust
their strength in tedious sieges, undertaken under
many disadvantages. Their efforts, however, were
not without Tome benefit to the Scots, by compel-
ling the Englifii to evacuate Haddingtoun, and to
filrrcndclcrifveral Imall forts, which they possessed in
cliPferent parts of the kingdom.

BUT the consequence of these operations of his

troops were still ofgreater importance to the French
King. The diversion which they occasioned en-
abled him to wrest Boulogne out of the hands of
the Englifll; and the influence of his army in Scot-
lind obtained the concurrence of Parliament with
the overtures made to him, by the assembly of no-
bles at Stirling, concerning the Queen's marriage
with the Dauphin, and her education at the court
of France. In vain did a few patriots remonfirate
against such extravagant concefions, by which Scot-

The treaty land was reduced to be a province of France; and
for that
purpose Henry, from an ally, raised to be master of the
concluded, kingdom; by which the friendship of France be-

came more fatal than the enmity of England; and
every thing was fondly given up to the one, that
had been bravely defended against the other. A

point

point of so much confiquence was hastily decided, B o o K
in a Parliament, assembled in the camp before Had- 1I.
dingtoun: The intrigues ofthe Queen Dowager, the June 5,
zeal of the clergy, and resentment against England, s4s.
had prepared a great party in the nation for such a
ftep; the French General and Ambassador, by their
liberality and promises, gained over many more.
The Regent himself was weak enough to ltoop to
the offer of a pension from France, together with
the title of Duke of Chatelherault in that kingdom.
A considerable majority declared for the treaty, and
the interest of a faction was preferred before the
honour of the nation.

HAVING hurried the Scots into this rash and fa- Mary sent

to b. ed*.

tal resolution, the fourceof many calamities to theml- cited in
selves, and to their sovereign, the French allowed France.
them no time for refletion or repentance. The
fleet, which had brought over their forces, was fill
in Scotland, and without delay, convoyed the Queen
into France. Mary was then fix years old, and by
her education in that court, one of the politest, but
most corrupted in Europe, she acquired every ac-
complifhment that could add toher charms as a wo-
man, and contra&ed many of those prejudices
which occasioned her misfortunes as a Queen.

FROM the time that Mary was put into their

hands, it was the interest of the French to susser
the war in'Scotland to languilh. The recovering
ofthe Boulonnois was the obje't Henry had most
atheart; -andia flight diversion in Britain was sus-
ficient to divide the attention and firength of the

5 Engliih,

B o o K English, whose domestic factions deprived both their

II. arms and councils of their accustomed vigour. The
,---. government of England had undergone a great re-

volution. The Duke of Somerset's power had been
acquired with too much violence, and was exercised
with too little moderation, to be of long continuance.
Many good qualities, added to great love of his
country, could not atone for his ambition in usurp.
ing the sole direction of affairs. Many of the mos
eminent courtiers combined against him; and the
Earl of Warwick their leader, no less ambitious,
but more artful than Somerset, conduEted his mea-
fures with so much dexterity, as to raise himself up.
on the ruins of his rival. Without the invidious
name of Protector, he succeeded to all the power
and influence, of which Somerset was deprived, and
he quickly found peace to be necessary for the efta-
blifhment of his new authority, and the execution
of the vast designs he had conceived.

Peace con- HENRY was no firanger to Warwick's situation,
Cluded. and improved his knowledge of it to good purpose,

in conducting the negociations for a general peace.
He prescribed what terms he pleated to the Englilh
Minister, who scrupled at nothing, however advan-

h tageous to that Monarch and his allies. England
asso. consented to restore Boulogne and its dependencies

to France, and gave up all pretensions to a treaty
of marriage with the Queen of Scots, or to the con-
quest of her country. A few small forts, of which
the English troops had hitherto kept poffeflion,
were rated; and peace between the two kingdoms
was established on its ancient foundation.

BOTH

BOTH the British nations loft power, as well as B o o .

reputation, by this unhappy quarrel. It was on II
both fides a war of emulation and resentment, ra-
ther than of interest; and was carried on, under the
influence of national animofities, which were blind
to all advantages. The French, who entered into
it with greater coolness, condu&ed it with more
skill; and by dexterously availing themselves of
every circumstance which occurred, recovered pof-
feflion of an important territory which they had loft,
and added to their monarchy a new kingdom. The
ambition of the English Minister betrayed to them
the former; the inconsiderate rage of the Scots
against their ancient enemies bestowed on them the
latter; their own address and good policy merited
both.

IMMEDIATELY after the conclusion of the peace, The SrO

the French forces left Scotland, as much to theirown beaoof
fatisfation, as to that of the nation. The Scots soon the Fre"h.
found, that the calling to their assistance a people
more powerful than themselves, was a dangerous ex-
pedient. They beheld, with the utmost impatience,
those who had come over to protect the kingdom,
taking upon them to command in it; and on many
occasions they repented the rash invitation they had
given. The peculiar genius of the French nation
heightened this disgust, and prepared the Scots to
throw off the yoke, before they had well begun to
feel it. The French were, in that age, what they
are in the present, one of the mos polished nations in
Europe. But it is to be observed, in all their expe-
ditions into foreign countries, whether towards the

south

*B o o K south or north, that their manners have been re.

I-. markably incompatible with the manners of every
'.-- - other people. Barbarians are tenacious of their own

customs, because they want knowledge and taste to
discover the reasonableness and propriety of customs
which differ from them. Nations, which hold the
first rank in politeness, are frequently no less tena-
cious out of pride. The Greeks were so in the
ancient world; and the French are the fame in the
modern. Full of themselves; flattered by the
imitation of their neighbours; and accustomed to
confider their own modes as the tfandards of ele-
gance, they scorn to disguise, or to lay aside the
diftinguiffing manners of their own nation, or to
make any allowance for what may differ from them
among others. For this reason, the behaviourof
their armies has, on every occasion, been infupport.
able to strangers, and has always exposed them to
hatred, and often to deftruEtion. In that age, they
over-ran Italy four several times by their valour,
and loft it, as often, by their insolence. The Scots,
naturally an irascible and high-fpirited people, and
who, of all nations, can least bear the most distant
insinuation of contempt, were not of a temper to
admit all the pretensions of such assuming guests.
The symptoms of alienation were soon visible; they
seconded the military operations ofthe Frenchtroops
with the utmost coldness, and their disgust grew in.
sensibly to a degree of.indignation that could hardly
be refirained; and on occasion of a very flight
accident, broke out with fatal violence. A pri-
vate French soldier engaging in an idle quarrel
with a citizen of Edinburgh, both nations took

arms,

armu, with equal rage, in deferce of their country- B o o
men. The Provost of Edinburgh, his son, and fc- 1
veral citizens ofdiftin&ion, were killed in the fray
and the French were obliged to avoid the fury of
the inhabitants, by retiring out of the city. Not-
withstanding the ancient alliance of France and Scot-
land, and the long intercourse of good offices be-
tween the two nations, an aversion for the French
took its rife at this time, among the Scots, the es.
feds whereof were deeply felt, and operated power:
fully through the subsequent period.

FROM the death of Cardinal Beatoun, nothing Proreft of

has been said of the ifare of religion. While the mation.
war with England continued, the clergy had no lei.
sure to molest the Protestants; and they were not
yet considerable enough to expeCt any thing more
than connivance and impunity. The new do&rineg
were till in their infancy; but during this short in-
terval of tranquillity, they acquired strength, and
advanced by large and firm steps, towards a full
eftablifhrnent in the kingdoms The first preachers
dgainft Popery in Scotland, of whom several had
appeared during the reign of James V. were more
eminent for zeal and piety, than for learning. Their
acquaintance with the principles of the Reformation
was partial, and at second hand; some of them had
been educated in England; all of *m had borrow.
ed their notions from the books published there;
and, in the first dawn of the new light, they did rot
venture far before their leaders. But, in a short
time, the doctrines and wrkings of the foreign Re-
formers became generally known; the inquisitive

VOL. IL K genius

B o o K genius of the age pressed forward in quest oftruth;

II. the discovery of one error opened the way to others;

the downfal of one imposture drew many after it;
the whole fabric, which ignorance and superstition
had ereaed in times of darkness, began to totter;
and nothing was wanting to complete its ruin, but a
daring and active leader to direct the attack. Such
was the famous John Knox, who, with better qua.
lifications of learning, and more extensive views
than any of his predeceflors in Scotland, poifeffed
a natural intrepidity of mind, which set him above
fear. He began his public ministry at St. An.
drew's in the year 1547, with that success, which
always accompanies a bold and popular eloquence.
Infteadofamufinghimfelfwith loppinggthe branches,
hefiruck directly at the rootof popery, and attacked
both the doctrine and discipline of the established
church, with a vehemence peculiar to himself, but
admirably suitable to the temperand wishes of the age.

AN adversary so formidable as Knox, would not

have easily escaped the rage of the clergy, who ob.
served the tendency and progrels of his opinions,
with the utmost concern. But, at firif, he retired
for safety into the castle of St. Andrew's, and while
the conspirators kept pofleflion of it, preached pub.
lickly under their protection. The great revolution
in England, which followed upon the death of
Henry VIII. contributed no less than the zeal of
Knox, towards demolishing the Popish church in
Scotland. Henry had loosened the chains, and
lightened the yoke of Popery. The Ministers of his
son Edward VI. caf them off altogether, and efta.

blifhed

blifhed the ProteRant religion upon almost the fame B o o K
footing, whereon it now flands in that kingdom. II
The influenceof thisexample reached Scotland, and
the happy effets ofecclefiaftical liberty, in the one
nation, inspired the other with an equal desire of re-
covering it. 'l he Reformers had, hitherto, been
obliged to conduct themselves with the utmoft-cau-
tion, and seldom ventured to preach, but in private
houses, and at a distance from court; they gained
credit, as happens on the first publication of every
new religion, chiefly among persons in the lower
and middle rank of life. But several noblemen of
the greatest distinction, having, about this time,
openly espoused their principles, they were no 1 rnger
under the neceflity of acting with the fame reserve;
and with more security and encouragement, they
had likewise greater success. The means of acquir-
ing and spreading knowledge became more com-
mon, and the spirit of innovation, peculiar to that
period, grew every day bolder and more universal.

HAPPILY for the Reformation, this spirit was

flill under some restraint. It had not yet attained
firmness and vigour, sufficient to overturn a system,
founded on the deepest policy, and supported by
the most formidable power Un.er the present cir-
cumfRances, any attempt towards action must have
been fatal to the Protestant dotrines; and it is no
small proof of the authority, as well as penetration
of the heads of the party, that they were able to
restrain the zeal of a fiery and impetuous people, till
that critical and mature junCture, when every Rep
they took was decisive and successful.

K 2 MEANs

B o o Ki MeANWHILX their cause received reinforcement

UI. from twodifferentquarters, whencethey nevercould
C"^V3 have expeCted it. The ambition of the house of

Guise, and the bigotry of Mary of England hae.
tened the subversion of the Papal throne in Scot.
land; and by a singular disposition of Providence,
the persons who opposed the Reformation in every
other part of Europe with the fiercest zeal, were
made instruments for advancing it in that kingdom.

T'l e Qoeen MARY of Guise pofleffed the fame bold and as.
fpireto piring Ipirit which diftinguiihed her family. But
Rg,,itof in her it was softened by the female character, and

accompanied with great temper and address. Her
brothers, in order to attain the high objets at which
they aimed, ventured upon such daring measures,
as suited their great courage. Her designs upon the
supreme power were concealed with the utmost care,
and advanced by address and refinements more na-
tural to her sex. By a dexterous application ofthofe
talents, ihe had acquired a considerable influence
on the councils of a nation, hitherto unacquainted
-with the government of women; and without the
smallest right to any (hare in the administration of
affairs, had engrossed the chief diretion of them
into her own hands. But (he did not long reft fa-
tisfied with the enjoyment of this precarious power,
which the fickleness of the Regent, or the ambition
of those who governed him, might so easily disturb;
and she began to set on foot new intrigues, with a
design of undermining him, and of opening to her-
self a way to succeed him in that high dignity.
Her brothers entered warmly into this fchemc, and

sup.

fipported it with all their credit at the court of Bo o K
France. The French King willingly concurred in II.
a measure, by which he hoped to bring Scotland
entirely under management, and in any future broil
with England, to turn its whole force upon that
kingdom.

IN order to arrive at the desired elevation, the

Queen Dowager had only one oftwo ways to chufe;
either violently to wrest the power out of the hands
of the Regent, or to obtain it by his content. Un-
der a minority, and among a warlike and factious
people, the former was a very uncertain and dan-
gerous experiment. The latter appeared to be no
iefs impra&cicable. To persuade a man voluntarily
to abdicate the supreme power; to descend to a lec
vel with those, above whom he was raised; and to
:be content with the fecondplace where he hath held
the first, may well pass for a wild and chimerical
proje&. This, however, the Queen attempted;
and the prudence of the attempt was sufficiently
justified by its success.

THE Regent's inconstancy and irresolution, toge.

ther with the calamities which had befallen the
kingdom under his administration, raised the pre-
judices both of the nobles and of the people against
him, to a great height and the Queen secretly
fomented there with much industry. All who wish-
td for a change met with a gracious reception in
her court, and their spirit of difaffefion was noun
rifhed by such hopes and promics, as, in every age,
impofc on the credulity of the fatious. The fa- Court, the

K 3 , vourers RcXftalmC

B o o K vourers of the Reformation being the most nume,

I. rous and spreading body of the Regent's enemies,

the applied to them, with a particular attention;
and the gentleness of her disposition and seeming
indifference to the religious points in dispute, made
all her promises of protection and indulgence pai
upon them for sincere. Finding so great a part of
the nation willing to fall in with her measures, the
Queen set out for France, under pretence of visit.
oa. 5so. ing her daughter, and took along with her thole

noblemen, who possessed the greatest power and
credit among their countrymen. Softened by the
plealures of an elegant court, flattered by the civi.
lities of the French King, and the caresses of the
house of Guise, and influenced by the seasonable
diltribution of a few favours, and the liberal pro.
mise of many more, they were brought to approve
of all the Queen's pretensions.

WHILE (he advanced by there flow but furefteps,

the Regent either did not' foresee the danger which
threatened him, or neglected to provide against it.
The firit discovery of the train which was laid,
came from two of his own confidents, Carnegie of
Kinnaird, and Panter Bishop of Ross, whom the
Qucen had gained over to her interet, and then
employed as the most proper instruments for obtain.
ing his content. The overture was made to him
in the name of the French King, enforced by pro-
per tlreatenings, in order to work upon his natural
timidity, and sweetened by every promise that could
reconcile him to a proposal so disagreeable. On the
pcn hand, the confirmation of his French title, t0,

s t4
»Ft!cs

getherwith a considerable pension, the parliamentary B o o t
acknowledgment of his right of succession to the i1.
Crown, and a public ratification of his conducl-'t
during his regency, were offered him. On the
other hand, the displeasure of the French King,
the power and popularity of the Queen Dowager,
the disaffection of the nobles, with the danger of an
after-reckoning, were represented in the strongest
colours.

IT was not possible to agree to a proposal so ex,

traordinary and unexpeed, without some previous
struggle; and had the Archbilhop of St. Andrew's
been present to fortify the irresolute and paflive fpi-
rit of the Regent, he would, in all probability, have
rejeted it with disdain. Happily for the Queen,
the sagacity and ambition of that Prelate could, at
this time, be no obftru&ion to her views. He was
lying at the point of death, and in his absence, the
influence of the Queen's agents on a flexible tem-
per counterbalanced several of the strongest pas-
sions in the human mind, and obtained his consent
to a voluntary surrender of the supreme power.

AFTER. gaining a point of such difficulty, with Dec. 's1.

so much ease, the Quegn retutned into Scotland, in
full expectation of taking immediate pofleflion of
her new dignity. But, by this time, the Archbi-
ihop of St. Andrew's had recovered of that diftem-
per, which the ignorance of the Scottish Physicians
had pronounced to be incurable. This he owed to
the afflftance of the famous Cardan, one of those
irregular adventurers in philosophy, of whom Italy

K 4 F-

B o o K produced so many about this period. A bold gca

II. nius led him to some useful difooveries, which me-
ILneJ rit the eftemr of a mote discerning age; a wild ima-

gination engaged him in those chimerical sciences,
which drew the admiration of his cotemporaries.
As a pretender to astrology and magic, he was re.
vered and consulted by all Europe& as a proficient
in natural philosophy, he was but little known. The
archbishop, it is probable, confidered him as a
powerful magician, when he applied to him for
relief; but it was his knowledge as a philosopher,
which enabled him to.cure his disease *'.

TOGETHER with his health, the archbishop re-

covered the entire government of the Regent, and
quickly persuaded him to recal that dishonourable
promise, which he had been seduced by the artifices
of the Queen to grant. However great her fur-
prise and indignation were, at this fresh instance of
his inconltancy, she was obliged to dissemble, that
!he might have leisure to renew her intrigues with
all parties; with the Protestants, whom Ihe favour.
ed and courted more than ever with the nobles, to
whom The rendered herself agreeable by various
arts; and with the Regent himself, in order to gain
whom, ihe employed every argument. But what.
ever imprefllons her emissaries might have made ot

Cardan himself was more desirous of being confidered as

an Afrologer than a Philofepher ; in his book Dot nirimi:, we
iind a calculation of the Archbil(op'i ativity, from which hi
pretends both to have predited his diebafe, and to have efft-
ed his cure. He received, from the Archbilhop, aewmrd Qo
'i oo crowns. A greatfum in that age, Di vita/ua, p. 32,

~~~~~2 ~the
/.~~~~~~~~~~~ iA*

the Regent, it was no easy matter to over-reach or B o o K
to intimidate the archbishop. Under his manage- I
ment, the negociations were spun out to a great -
length, and his brother maintained his station with
that address and firmness, which its importance so
well merited. The universal defetion of the no-
bility, the growing power of the Protestants, who
all adhered to the Queen Dowager, the reiterated
solicitations of the French King, and, above all,
the interposition of the young Queen, who was now
entering the twelfth year of her age, and claimed a
right of nominating whom the pleated to be Regent,
pbliged him, at last, to resign that high office,
which he had held many years. He obtained, PreCls on
however, the fame advantageous terms for himself, tto reg"bhis
which had been formerly stipulated. office.

IT was in the Parliament which met on the loth Shot,;ain,
of April 1554, that the Earl of Arran executed theRcgen-

cy.

this extraordinary resignation; and at the fame time
Mary of Guise was raised to that dignity, which
had been so long the obje&t of her withes. Thus,
with their own approbation, a woman and a stranger,
was advanced to the supreme authority, over afierce
and turbulent people, who seldom Submitted, with-
out reluctance, to the legal and ancient government
of their native Monarchs.

WHILE the Queen Dowager of Scotland contri- Reform..

buted so much towards the progress of the Refor- tio,'oti
mation, by the protecion which lhe afforded it, "make re

proateft.

from motives of ambition, the English Queen, by
her indiscreet zeal, filled the kingdom with persons

active

B o o aacive in promoting the fame cause. Mary ascended

11. the throne of England, on the death of her brother

Juy , Edward, and soon after married Philip II. of Spain.
WSS3 To the persecuting spirit of the Romish superstition,

and the fierceness of that age, she added the private
resentment of her own and of her mother's sus.
ferings, with which Ihe loaded the reformed Reli.
gion; and the peevishness and severity of her natu.
ral temper carried the acrimony of all these passions
to the utmost extreme. The cruelty of her perse.
cution equalled the deeds of those tyrants, who
have been the greatest reproach to human nature.
The bigotry of her clergy could scarce keep pace
with the impetuosity of her zeal. Even the unre,
lenting Philip was obliged, on some occasions, to
mitigate the rigour of her proceedings. Many
among the mioft eminent Reformers suffered for the
4dorines which they had taught; others fled from
the storm. To the greater part of these, Switzer,
land and Germany opened a secure asylum; and not
a few, out of choice or necessity, fled into Scotland,
What they had seen and felt in England, did not
abate the warmth and zeal of their indignation
against Popery. Their attacks were bolder and
more successful than ever; and their doEtrines made
g rapid progress among all ranks of men,

THESE do&rines, calculated to re&ify the opi-

nions, .and to reform the manners of mankind, had
hitherto produced no other efffects but they soon
began to operate with greater violence, and proved
the occasion, not only of subverting the eftablifhe4
religion, but of shaking the throne, and endanger.

in;

ing the kingdom. The causes which facilitated the B o o .
introduction of these new opinions into Scotland, II.
and which disseminated them so fast through theA view of
nation, merit, on that account, a particular and th^ fPi"o"
careful inquiry. The Reformation is one of the whibho,^
greatest events in the history of mankind, and in wrdsth,,
whatever point of light we view it, is inftru&ive
and interesting.

THE revival of learning in the 15th and z6th

centuries roused the world from that lethargy, in
which it had been funk for many ages. The hu-
man mind felt its own strength, broke the fetters of
authority by which it had been so long restrained,
and venturing to move in a larger sphere, pushed
its inquiries into every subject, with great boldness
and surprising success.

No sooner did mankind recover the capacity of

exercising their reason, than religion was one of the
firt objets which drew their attention. Long be-
fore Luther prblifhed his famous Theses, which
shook the Papal throne, science and philosophy had
laid open, to many of the Italians, the imposture
and absurdity of the eftabliihed superstition. That
subtle and refined people, satisfied with enjoying
those discoveries int secret, were little disposed to aft
fume the dangerous characer of Reformers, and
concluded the knowledge of truth to be the prero-
gative of the wife, while vulgar minds must be overr
awed and governed bypopularerrors. But, animat,
ed with a more noble and difinterefed zeal, the Ger-
mwa Theologian boldly ercted the ftandardof truth,

an

3 o o and upheld it with an unconquerable intrepidity,

II. which merits the admiration and gratitude of all
-TL uocceeding ages.

THE occasion of Luthelrs being first disgusted

with the tenets of the Romish church, and how,
from a small rupture, the quarrel widened into an
irreparable breach, is known to every one who has
been the least conversant in history. From the
heart of Germany, his opinions spread, with ato.
nifhing rapidity, all over Europe; and wherever
they came, endangered or overturned the ancient,
but ill founded system. The vigilance and address
of the court of Rome, and the power and bigotry
of the Austrian family, suppressed these notions on
their sirs appearance, in the southern kingdoms of
Europe. But the fierce spirit of the north, irritated
by multiplied impositions, could neither be molli-
sied by the fame arts, nor subdued by the fame force;
and encouraged by some Princes from piety, and by
others out of avarice, it easily bore down the feeble
opposition of an illiterate and immoral clergy.

The superstition of Popery seems to have grown

to the molt extravagant height, in those countries
which are situated towards the different extremitie
of Europe. The vigour of imagination, and fen-
ibility of frame, peculiar to the inhabitants of
southern climates, rendered them susceptible of the
deepest impressions of fuperfitious terror and cre.
dulity. Ignorance and barbarity were no less fa
vourable to the progress of the fame spirit, among
the northern nations. They knew litte, and were

dif.

disposed to believe every thing. The mot glaring B o o
absurdities did not shock their gross underltandings, II.
and the most improbable ficions were received with ' -
implicit assent and admiration.

ACCORDINGLY, that form of Popery, which pre-

vailed in Scotland, was. of the most bigotted and
illiberal kind. Those doctrines which are most apt
to shock the human understanding, and those legends
which fartbeft exceed belief, were proposed to the
people without any attempt to palliate or disguise
them; nor did they ever call in question the reason.
ablenefs of the one, or the truth of the other.

THE power and wealth of the church kept pace

with the progress of superstition; for it is the na-
ture of that spirit to observe no bounds in its re-
fpe& and liberality towards those, whole characer it
esteems sacred. The Scottish Kings early demon-
ftrated how much they were under its influence, by
their vast additions to the immunities and riches of
the clergy. The profuse piety of David I. who
acquired on that account the name of Saint, tranf-
ferred almost the whole crown-lands, which were at
that time of great extent, into the hands of eccle-
fiaftics. The example of that virtuous Prince was
imitated by his successors. The spirit spread among
all orders of men, who daily loaded the priesthood
with new pofefflions. The riches of the church all
over Europe were exorbitant but Scotland was one
of those countries, wherein they had farthest exceed-
ed thejuft proportion. The Scottih clergy paid one
half of every tx imlpofcd on land; and as there is

n ..

B o o K no reason to think that, in that age, they would be

II. loaded with any unequal ihare of the burden, we

may conclude, that, by the time of the Reforma.
tion, little less than one half of the property in the
nation had fallen into the hands of a society, which
is always acquiring, and can never lose,

THE nature too, of a confiderabie part of their

property, extended the influence of the clergy.
Many estates, throughout the kingdom, held of
the church; church-lands were let in lease at an easy
rent, and were poffefled by the younger sons, and
descendants of the best families *. The connexion
between superior and vassal, between landlord and
tenant, created dependences, and gave rife to an
union of great advantage to the church; and in
estimating the influence of the Popish ecclesiastics
over the nation, these, as well as the real amount
of their revenues, must be attended to, and taken
into the account.

THIS extraordinary {hare in the national property

was accompanied with proportionable weight in the
supreme council of the kingdom. At a time, when
the number of temporal Peers was extremely small,
and when the Lesser Barons and representatives of
Burroughs seldom attended Parliaments, the Ecclc.
fiaftics formed a considerable body there. And it
appears from the ancient rolls of Parliament, and
from the manner of chufing the Lords of Articles,
that the proceedings of that high court must have
been, in a great measure, under their dirediont.

*Keith, 21. Not. (b). t Spot rs Hipt. oftheCh. of Scot. 449.

THr

THE reverence due to their sacred character, B o o K

which was often carried incredibly far, contributed I.
not a little towards the growth of their power.
The dignity, the titles, and precedence of the Po-
pish clergy are remarkable, both as causes and es-
seas of that dominion, which they had acquired
over the reft of mankind. They were regarded by
the credulous laity as beings of a superior species
they were neither subjea to the fame laws, nor
tried by the fame judges. Every guard, that reli-
gion could supply, was placed around their power,
theirpofleffions, and theirperfons; andendeavours
were used, not without success, to represent them
all as equally sacred.

THE reputation for learning, which, however

inconsiderable, was wholly engroifed by the clergy,
added to the reverence which they derived from
religion. The principles of found philosophy, and
of ajuft tarte, were altogether unknown; in place
of these were substituted fludies, barbarous and
uninftrutive; but as the ecclesiastics alone were
conversant in them, this procured them esteem;
and a very little knowledge drew the admiration of
rude ages, which knew nothing. War was the
sole profession of the nobles, and hunting their chief
amusement; they divided their time between there;
unacquainted with the arts, and unimproved by
kcience, they disdained any employmentforeign from
military affairs, or which required rather penetra-
tion and address, than bodily vigour. Wherever
the former were necessary, the clergy were intrufled;
because they alone were properly qualified for the

trust.

B o o i truf. Almost all the high offices in civil govern.

II. ment devolved, on this account, into their hands.
*- -' The Lord Chancellor was the first fubje& in the

kingdom, both in dignity and in power. From
the earliest ages of the monarchy, to the death of
Cardinal Beatoun, fifty-four perfoibs had held that
high office; and of these, forty.three had been ec.
clefiaftics *. The Lords of Seltion were supreme
Judges in all matters of civil right; and by its ori.
ginal constitution, the President and one half of the
Senators in this court were churchmen.

To all this we may add, that the clergy being

separated from the reft of mankind by the law of
celibacy; and undiftra&ted by those cares, and un.
incumbered with those burdens which occupy and
oppress other men, the interest of their order be.
came their only objec, and they were at full leisure
to pursue it.

THE nature of their funcion gave them access to

all persons, and atall seasons. They could employ
all the motives of fear and of hope, of terror and
of consolation, which operate most powerfully on
the human mind. They haunted the weak and the
credulous; they besieged the beds of the tick and
of the dying. They suffered few to go out of the
world without leaving marks of their liberality to
the church, and taught them to compound with
the Almighty for their fins, by bellowing riches
upon those, who called themselves his servants.

C rwf. Ofic. of Stae.

WHIN

WHEN their own industry, or the superstition of B o o tc

mankind failed of producing this effec, the eccle- II.
fiaftics had influence enough to call in the aid of ""
law. Whoever died intestate, was presumed to have
destined his moveables to pious uses. The church
took poffeflion of them. The children, the wife,
the creditors of the person deceased were often ex-
cluded from any share, in what was esteemed a fa-
cred property*. As men are apt to trust to the
continuance of life with foolish confidence, and
childishly shun every thing that forces them to
think of their mortality, many die without fettling
their affairs by will; and the bold usurpation of the
clergy in this cafe, of which there are frequent
vestiges in our laws, though none in our historians,
may be reckoned among the most plentiful sources
of the wealth of the church.

AT the fame time, no matrimonial or teftamen-

tary cause could be tried but in the spiritual courts,
and by laws which the clergy themselves had framed.
The penalty, too, by which the decisions of these
courts were enforced, added to their authority. A
sentence of excommunication was no less formid.
able, than a sentence ofoutlawry. It sWas pronounced
on many occasions, and against various crimes: And
betides excluding those, upon whom it fell, from
Christian privileges, it deprived them of all their
rights as men, or as citizens; and the aid of the
secular power concurred with the superstition of
mankind, in rendering the thunders of the church
no less deftrufive than terrible.

Efays on Brit, Antiq. 174.
VOL I. L To

B o o K To these general causes, may be attributed the

II. immense growth both of the wealth and power of
LV3 the Popish church; and without entering into any

more minute detail, this may serve to discover the
foundations, on which a ftruture so fRupendous was
ereced.

BUT though the laity had contributed, by their

own superstition and profuseness, to raise the clergy
from poverty and obscurity to riches and eminence,
they began, by degrees, to feel and to murmur at
their encroachments. No wonder haughty and mar.
tial Barons ihould view the power and possessions
of the church with envy; and regard the lazy and
inative character of churchmen with the utmoRf
contempt. While, at the fame time, the indecent
and licentious lives of the clergy gave great and just
offence to the people, and considerably abated the
veneration, which they were accustomed to yield to
that order of men.

IMMENSE wealth, extreme indolence, gross igno.

rance, and, above all, the severe injunction of ce-
libacy, had concurred to introduce this corruption
of morals among the clergy; who, presuming too
much upon the fubmifflon of the people, were at
no pains either to conceal, or to disguise their own
vices. According to the accounts of the Reform.
ers, confirmed by several Popilh writers, the most
open and scandalous dissolution of manners pre.
vailed among the Scotti(h clergy*. Cardinal Bea-

* Winzet. ap, Keith Append. zoz. 205. Leds, de Reb. GcR
Scot. 232.

toun

toun, with the fame public pomp which is due to B o o K
a legitimate child, celebrated the marriage of his II.
natural daughter with the Earl of Crawfurd's son*;
and, if we may believe Knox, he publickly conti-
nued to the end of his days a criminal correspond-
ence with her mother, who was a woman of rank.
The other prelates seem not to have been more re-
gular and exemplary than their Primatet.

MEN of such charaters ought, in reason, to have
been alarmed atthe first clamours railed against their
own morals, and the doctrines of the church, by
the Protestant preachers; but the Popish ecclesias-
tics, either out of pride or ignorance, neglected
the proper methods for silencing them. Instead of
reforming their lives, or disguising their vices, they
affeced to despise the censures of the people. And
while the Reformers, by their mortifications and
aufterities, endeavoured to resemble the first propa-
gators of Christianity, the Popish clergy were com-
pared to all those persons who are moit infamous,

* The marriage articles subscribed with his own hand, in

which he calls her my daughter, are still extant. Keith, p. 4z.

t A remarkable proof of the dissolute manners of the clergy
is found in the public records. A greater number of letters of
legitimation was granted during the first thirty years after the
Reformation, than during the whole period that has elapsed
since that time. These were obtained by the sons of the Popish
clergy. The ecclefiafics, who were allowed to retain their be-
nefices, alienated them to their children; who, when they ac-
quired wealth, were desirous that the flainofillegitimacy might
no longer remain upon their families. In Keith's Catalogue of tb
S&cti / Bi/hops, we find several inflances of such alienations of
church lands, by the Popilh incumbents, to their natural child-
rcn.

L 2 in

B o o K in hiRory, for the enormity and scandal of their

lI. crimes.

ON the other hand, instead of mitigating the ri.

gour, or colouring over the absurdity of the efta.
blifhed doctrines; instead of attempting to found
them upon scripture, or to reconcile them to reason;
they left them without any other support or recom-
mendation, than the authority of the church, and
the decrees of councils. The fables concerning
purgatory, the virtues of pilgrimage, and the me.
rits of the faints, were the topics, on which they
insisted in their discourses to the people; and the
duty of preaching being left wholly to Monks of
the lowest and most illiterate orders, their compo.
fitions were frill more wretched and contemptible,
than the fubjeds on which they insisted. While
the Reformers were attended by crowded and ad-
miring audiences, the Popish preachers were either
universally deserted, or listened to with scorn.

THE only device which they employed in order

to recover their declining reputation, or to con-
firm the wavering faith of the people, was equally
imprudent and unsuccessful. As many doctrines
of their church had derived their credit, at first,
from the authority of false miracles, they now en-
deavoured to call in these to their aid*. But those
lying wonders, which were beheld with unfufpici-
ous admiration, or heard with implicit faith, in
times of darkness and of ignorance, met with a

Spotfwood, 69.

5 very

very different reception, in a more enlightened pe- B o o
riod The vigilance of the Reformers dete&ted II.
these impostures, and exposed not only them, but
the cause, which needed the aid of such artifices,
to ridicule.

As the popish ecclefaftics became more and more
the objects of hatred and of contempt, the dif-
courses of the Reformers were littened to as so many
calls to liberty; and besides the pious indignation
which they excited against those corrupt doctrines,
which had perverted the nature oftrueChriftianity;
besides the zeal, which they inspired for the know.
ledge of truth, and the purity of religion; they
gave rife also, among the Scottish nobles, to other
views and patfions. They hoped to flake off the
yoke of ecclesiastical dominion, which they had
long felt to be oppressive, and which they now dif-
covered to be unchristian. They expeced to re-
cover possession of the church revenues, which they
were now taught to confider as alienations made by
their ancestors, with a profusion no less undifcern-
ing than unbounded. They flattered themselves,
that a check would be given to the pride and lux.
ury of the clergy, who would be obliged, hence-
forward, to confine themselves within the sphere
peculiar to their sacred charater. An aversion for
the established church, which flowed from so many
concurring causes, which was raised by confidera-
tions of religion, and heightened by motives of po-
licy, spread fast through the nation, and excited a
spirit, that burst out, at last, with irresistible vio-
lence.

L 3 RELI:

B o 0 RELIGIOUS considerations, alone, were sufficient

II to have roused this spirit. The points in contro.

verfy with the church of Rome were of so much
importance to the happiness of mankind, and so
essential to Christianity, that they merited all the
zeal with which the Reformers contended in order
to eftablilh them. But the Reformation having
been represented as the effect of some wild and en.
thufiaftic frenzy in the human mind, this attempt
to account for the eagerness and zeal with which
our ancestors embraced and propagated the Protef-
tant doctrines, by taking a view of the political
motives alone which influenced them, and by
shewing how naturally there prompted them to aft
with so much ardour, will not, perhaps, be esteem-
ed an unnecessary digreflion. We now return to the
course of the history.
54 THE Queen's elevation to the office of Regent

seems to have transported her, at first, beyond the
known prudence and moderation of her character.
She began her administration, by conferring upon

.r~.E?" foreigners several offices of trust and of dignity; a
ns her ad. ftep, which both from the inability of firangers to
t'n wlith discharge there offices with vigour, and from the
some unpo-
i,.iir mea- envy which their preferment excites among the na-
fires. -
"

tives, is never attended with good consequences.
Vilmort was made Comptroller, and intrufed with
the management of the public revenues; Bonot
was appointed Governor of Orkney; and Rubay
honoured with the custody of the Great Seal, and
*the title of Vice Chancellor*. It was with the

*Lefly, de Reb. Gcft. Scot. 189. , .g

* ' ~~~highel

highest indignation, that the Scots beheld offices of B o o
the greatest eminence and authority, dealt out among II.
firangers. By these promotions they conceived the -lr
Queen to have offered an insult both to their under-
standings and to their courage; to the former, by
supposing them unfit for those fiations, which their
ancestors had filled with so much dignity ; to the
latter, by imagining that they were tame enough
not to complain of an affront, which, in no former
age, would have been tolerated with impunity.

WHILE their minds were in this disposition, an

incident happened which inflamed their aversion
from French councils to the highest degree. Ever
fnce the famous contest between the houses of Va-
lois and Plantagenet, the French had been accuf-
tomed to embarrass the English, and to divide their
firength by the sudden and formidable incursions of
their allies, the Scots. But, as there inroads were
seldom attended with any real advantage to Scot-
land, and exposed it to the dangerous resentment
of a powerful neighbour, the Scots began to grow
less tractable than formerly, and scrupled, any long -
er, to serve an ambitious ally at the price of their
own quiet and security. The change, too, which
was daily introducing in the art of war, rendered
the assistance of the Scottish forces of less import-
ance to the French Monarch. For these reasons,
Henry having resolved upon a war with Philip II.
and foreseeing that the Queen of England would
take part in her husband's quarrel, was extremely
solicitous to secure, in Scotland, the aflRftance of
some troops, which would be more at his command

L 4 than

B o o than an undisciplined army, led by chieftains who

II. were almost independent. In prosecution of this
C"^rh design, but under pretence of relieving the nobles

from the expence and danger of defending the bor.
55s5 ders, the Queen Regent proposed, in Parliament,

to register the value of lands throughout the king.
dom, to impose on them a small tax-and to apply
that revenue towards maintaining a body of regular
troops, in constant pay. A fixed tax upon land,
which the growing expence of government hath in,
troduced into almost every part of Europe, was
unknown at that time, and seemed altogether in.
consistent with the free and independent spirit of the
feudal government. Nothing could be more shock.
ing to a generous and brave nobility, than the in.
trusting, to mercenary hands, the defence of those
territories which had been acquired, or preserved,
by the blood of their ancestors. They received this
propcfal with the utmost indignation. About 300
of the lesser Barons repaired in a body to the Queen
Regent, and represented their sense of the intended
innovation, with that manly and determined bold.
ness which is natural to a free people, in a martial
age. Alarmed at a remonstrance delivered in so
firm a tone, and supported by such formidable
numbers, the Queen prudently abandoned a
scheme, which she found to be universally odious.
As the Queen herself was known perfectly to un-
derRfand the circumftanoes and temper of the na-
tion, this measure was imputed wholly to the fug-
geftions of her foreign counsellors ; and the Scots
were ready to proceed to the mos violent ex-
tremities gainft them.

Tiffs

THE French, instead of extinguishing, added B o o s

fuel to the flame. They had now commenced hof- I.
tilities againit Spain, and Philip had prevailed on Attempt,
the Queen of England, to reinforce his army with t,'ki
a considerable body of her troops. In order to de- dwar i t
prive him of this aid, Henry had recourse, as he England.
projeted, to the Scots; and attempted to excite
them to invade England. But, as Scotland had
nothing to dread from a Princess of Mary's charac-
ter, who, far from any ambitious scheme of dif-
turbing her neighbours, was wholly occupied in
endeavouring to reclaim her heretical subje&s; the
nobles, who were affeti-bled by the Queen Regent
at Newbottle, listentd to the solicitations of the
French Monarch with extreme coldness, and pru-
dently declined engaging the kingdom in an enter-
prise so dangerous and unnecessary. What she
could not obtain by persuasion, the Queen Regent
brought about by a stratagem. Notwithstanding
the peace which subsisted between the two king-
doms, she commanded her French soldiers to re-
build a small fort near Berwick, which was appoint.
ed, by the last treaty, to be rated. The garrison
of Berwick sallied out; interrupted the work; and
ravaged the adjacent country. This insult routed
the fiery spirit of the Scots, and their promptness
to revenge the least appearance of national injury
dissipated, in a moment, the wife and pacific refo-
lutions which they had so lately formed. War was
determined, and orders initantly given for raiLing a
numerous army. But before their forces could as-
femble, the ardour of their indignation had time to
cool, and the English having discovered no inten-

tion

B o o K tion to push the war with vigour, the nobles re.

II. fumed their pacific system, and resolved to stand al.
1556. together upon the defensive. They marched to the

banks of the Tweed, they prevented the incursions
of the enemy, and having done what they thought
sufficient for the safety and honour of their country,
the Queen could not induce them, either by her
entreaties, or her artifices, to advance another ftep,

WHILE the Scots persisted in their inactivity,

D'Oyfel, the Commander of the French troops,
who possessed entirely the confidence of the Queen
Regent, endeavoured, with her connivance, to en.
gage the two nations in hostilities. Contrary to the
orders of the Scottish General, he marched over the
Tweed with his own soldiers, and invested Werk,
a garrison of the English. The Scots, instead of
seconding his attempt, were enraged at his prefump.
tion. The Queen's partiality towards France had
long been fufpe&ed; but it was now visible that the
wantonly sacrificed the peace and safety of Scotland,
to the interest of that ambitious and assuming ally.
Under the feudal governments, it was in camps
that fubjets were accustomed to address the boldest
remonstrances to their Sovereigns. While arms
were in their hands, they felt their own strength;
and at that time all their representations of grievances
carried the authority of commands. On this occa-
sion, the indignation of the nobles broke out with
such violence, that the Queen, perceiving all at-
tempts to engage them in action to be vain, abrupt-
ly dismissed her army, and retired with the utmost
ihame and disgust; having discovered the impotence

. s

of her own authority, without effecting any thing B o o K
which could be of advantage to France. II.

IT is observable, that this first instance of con-

tempt for the Regent's authority can, in no degree,
be imputed to the influence of the new opinions in
religion. As the Queen's pretensions to the Re-
gency had been principally supported by those who
favoured the Reformation, and as the still needed
them for a counterpoise to the Archbilhop of St.
Andrew's, and the partisans of the house of Hamil.
ton; they were now treated by her with great re-
fpe&, and even admitted to no inconsiderable share
in her favour and confidence. Kirkaldy of Grange,
and the other surviving conspirators against Cardi-
nal Beatoun, were, about this time, recalled by her
from banishment; and, through her connivance,
the Protestant preachers enjoyed an interval of tran-
quillity, which was of great advantage to theircaufe.
Soothed by these instances of the Queen's modera-
tion and humanity, the Protestants left to others the
office of remonstrating; and the leaders of the op-
pofite fation set them the first example of disputing
the will of their Sovereign.

As the Queen Regent felt how limited and pre. The
carious her authority was, while it depended on the miage

with the

poise of these contrary factions, (he endeavoured to Dauphin
establish it on a broader and more fecurefoundation,
by hastening the conclusion of her daughter's mar-
riage with the Dauphin. Amiable as the Queen of
Scots then was, in the bloom of youth; and confi-
derable as the territories were, which he would have

added

B o o K added to the French Monarchy; reasons were not

II. wanting to dissuade Henry from completing his
L-vW-h firi plan of marrying her to his son. The con.

stable Montmorency had employed all his intereftto
defeat an alliance, which refleced so much lustre on
the Princes of Lorrain. He had represented the im.
polfibility of maintaining order and tranquillity
among a turbulent people, during the absence f their
Sovereign; and for that reason, had advised Henry
to bestow the young Queen upon one of the Princes
of the blood, who, by residing in Scotland, might
preserve that kingdom an useful ally to France,
which, by a nearer union to the Crown, would be.
come a mutinous and ungovernable province*.
But, at this time, the Constable was a prisoner in
the hands of the Spaniards, and the Princes of Lor-
rain were at the height of their glory; and their in-
fluence, seconded by the charms of the young
Queen, triumphed over the prudent, but envious
remonstrances of their rival,

"t. 14, THE French King accordingly applied to the Par-
s*5S7 liament of Scotland, which appointed eight of its

members t to represent the whole body of the nation,
at the marriage of the Queen. Among the persons
on whom the public choice conferred this honourable
character, were some of the most avowed and zeal-

Melv. Mem. 15,

t Viz. The Archbilhop of Glasgow, the Bilhop of Ross, the

Bishop of Orkney, the Earls of Rothes and Caffils, Lord Fle-
ming, Lord Secon, the Prior of St. Andrew's, and John Erikie
of Dun.

Otis

ous advocates for the Reformation; by which, may B o o £
be estimated the degree of refpeet and popularity, II.
which that party had now attained in the kingdom.
The inftru&ions of the Parliament to those Commis-
fioners still remainj-, and do honour to the wisdom
and integrity of that assembly. At the fame time
that they manifested, with refpee to the articles of
marriage, a laudable concern for the dignity and in-
terest of their Sovereign, they employed every pre-
caution which prudence could ditate, for preferv-
ing the liberty and independence of the nation, and
for securing the fuccefion of the Crown in the
house of Hamilton.

WITH regard to each of these, the Scots obtain. Artificeof

ed whatever fatisfaaion their fear orjealoufy could in the r.
demand. The young Queen, the Dauphin, and ti re'at
the King of France ratified every article with the
most solemn oaths, and confirmed them by deeds
in form, under their hands and feals. But on the
part of France, all this was one continued scene of
studied and elaborate deceit. Previous to thefepub.
lic tranfations with the Scottish deputies, Mary had
been persuaded to subscribe privately three deeds,
equally unjust and invalid; by which, failing the
heirs of her own body, ihe conferred the kingdom
of Scotland, with whatever inheritance or fucceflion
might accrue to it, in free gift upon the Crown of
France, declaring ill promises to the contrary, which
tile neceflity of her affairs, and the solicitations of
her fubjets had extorted, or might extort from her,

t Keith, Append, x3.

to

B o o K to be void and of no obligation*. As it gives us

II. a proper idea of the character of the French court
'^~v'* under Henry II. we may observe that theKing him.

self, the Keeper of the Great Seals, the Duke of
Guise, and the Cardinal of Lorrain, were the per.
sons engaged in conducting this perfidious and dif.
honourable proje&. The Queen of Scots was the
only innocent ator in that scene of iniquity. Her
youth, her inexperience, her education in a foreign
country, and her deference to her uncle's will
must vindicate her, in the judgment of every
impartial person, from any imputation of blame
on that account.

TH s grant, by which Mary bestowed the inhe.

ritance of her kingdom upon ifrangers, was conceal.
ed with the utmost care from her fubjeAs. They
seem, however, not to have been unacquainted with
the intention of the French to overturn the settlement
of the succession in favour of theDuke of Chatelhe-
rault. The zeal, with which the Archbishop of St.
Andrew's opposed all the measures of theQueenRe-
gent, evidently proceeded from the fears and fufpi.
cions of that prudent prelate, on this head t.
April 14, THE marriage, however, was celebrated with

*s8' great pomp; and the French, who had hitherto as-

feted to draw a veil over their designs upon Scot-

* Corps Diplomat. tom. v. 2z. Keith, 73.

-s About this time, the French seem to have had Come deign

of reviving the Earl of Lennox's pretensions to the fucceflion,
in order to intimidate and alarm the Duke of Chatelherault.
laynes, 2 15. z9. Forbes's Collea. vol. i. 189. ld,

land,

land, began now to unfold their intentions without B o o t.
any disguise. In the treaty of marriage, the depu- II.
ties had agreed that the Dauphin lhould aflume the '
name of King of Scotland. This they confidered
only as an honorary title; but the French laboured
to annex to it some solid privileges and power. They
insisted that the Dauphin's title ihould be publickly
recognised; that the Crown Matrimonial should be
conferred upon him; and that all the rights pertain-
ing to the husband of a Queen should be vested in
his person. By the laws of Scotland, a person who
married an heiress kept poffeflion of her estate dur-
ing his own life, if he happened to survive her and
the children born of the marriage*. This was call-
ed the courtesy of Scotland. The French aimed at
applying this rule, which takes place in private in-
heritances, to the succession of the kingdom; and
that seems to be implied in their demand of the
Crown Matrimonial, a phrase peculiar to the Scot-
tifl historians, and which they have negleted to
explain. As the French had reason to expeCt diffi-
culties in carrying through this measure, they began
with founding the deputies who were then at Paris.
The English, in the marriage articles between their
Queen and Philip of Spain, had set an example to
the age, of that prudent jealousy and reserve, with
which a foreigner should be admitted so near the
throne. Full of the fame ideas, the Scottish depu-
ties had, in their oath of allegiance to the Dauphin,
expressed themselves with remarkable cautiont.
Their answer was in the fame spirit, refpedful, but
firm; and discovered a fixed resolution of consent-

Reg. Maj. lib. ii. 58. t Keith, Append. zo.

6 ing

B o o t ing to nothing, that tended to introduce any alter.

II ation in the order of fuccefion to the Crown.

FOUR of the deputies t happening to die before

they returned into Scotland, this accident was uni.
verfally imputed to the effects ofpoifon, which ws
supposed to have been given them by the emissaries
of the house of Guise. The historians of all nations
discover an amazing credulity with refpet to stories
of this kind, which are so well calculated to please
the malignity of some men, and to gratify the love
of the marvellous which is natural to all, that in
every age they have been swallowed without exa.
mination, and believed contrary to reason. No
wonder the Scots should easily give credit to a sus-
picion, which received such strong colours of pro.
bability, both from their own resentment, and from
the known characer of the Princes of Lorrain, so
little scrupulous about the juifice of the ends which
they pursued, or of the means which they employ.
ed. For the honour of human nature, it must,
however, be observed, that as we can discover no
motive, which could induce any man to perpetrate
such a crime, so there appears no evidence to prove
that it was committed. But the Scots of that age,
influenced by national animofities and prejudices,
were incapable of examiningthe circumflancesof the
cafe with calmness, or of judging concerning them
with candour. All parties agreed in believing the
French to have been guilty of this detestable aAion;
and it is obvious how much this tended to increase

+ The Bi(hop of Orkney, the Earl of Rothes, the Earl of
Caffil, the Lord Fleming.

th,

the aversion for therm, which was growing among B o o K
all ranks of men. I.

NOTWITHSTANDING the cold reception which The jRent

their proposal concerning the Crowns Matrinonial theParlia.
met with from the Scottilh deputies, the French vran it.
ventured to move it in parliament. The partisans No.' 9.
of the house of Hamilton, suspicious of their de-
signs upon the succession, opposed it with great zeal.
But a party, which the feeble and urifteady condua
of their leader had brought under much difreputa-
tion, was little able to withstand the influence of
France, arndthe address of the Queen Regent, fe-
conded, on this occasion, by all the numerous ad-
herents of the Reformation. Besides, that artful
Princess dressed out the French demands in a less
offensive garb, and threw in so many limitations, as
seemed to render them of small consequence. These
either deceived the Scots, or removed their fcrupies:
and in compliance to the Queen, they passed an as,
conferring the Crown Matrimonial on the Dauphin;
and, with the fondetl credulity, trusted to the frail
security of words and statutes$ againlt the dangerous
encroachments of power *.

* The Aft of Parlianment is worded with the ttmof care,
with a view to guard against any breach of the order of fuccer-
sion. But the Duke, not relying on this alone, entered a solemn
protefRation to secure his own right, Keith. 76. It is plain,
that he ufpeted the French of having some intention to set aside
his right of fucefion; and, indeed, if they had ro design of
that kind, the eagerners with which they urged their demand,
was childilh,

VOL. I. M THa

B o o THE concurrence of the Protestants, with the

iI. Queen Regent, in promoting a measure so accept.

Cont;nue able to France, while the Popish clergy, under the
to court
the Prote. influence of the Archbiflop of St. Andrew's, oppof.
ftan". ed it with so much violence*, is one of those fingu.

lar circumstances, in the condu& of parties, for
which this period is so remarkable. It may be afcri.
bed, in some degree, to the dexterous management
of the Queen, but chiefly to the moderation of
those who favoured the Reformation. The pro.
teftants were, by this time, almost equal to the Ca.
tholics, both in power, and in number; and, con-
fcious of their own strength, they submitted with
impatience to that tyrannical authority, with which
the ancient laws armed the ecclesiastics against them.
They longed to be exempted from this oppreflive
jurisdiction, and publickly to enjoy the liberty of
profefling those opinions, and of exercising that wor.
ship, which so great a part of the nation deemedto
be founded in truth, and to be acceptable to the
Deity. This indulgence, to which the whole weight
of priefily authority was opposed, there were only
two ways of obtaining. Either violence mufd ex-
tort it from the reluEtant hand of their Sovereign,
or by prudent compliances, they might expet it
from her favour, or her gratitude. The former is
an expedient for the redress of grievances, to which
no nation has recourse suddenly; and futbje&s fel-
dorr venture upon refilfance, which is thei'r last re-
medy, but in cafes of extreme necessity. On this
occasion the Reformers wifely held the opposite
course, and by their zeal in forwarding the Queen's

* lclv. 47. de

de'igns,

designs, they hoped to merit her protetion. This B o o K
disposition the Queen encouraged to the utmost, II.
and amused them so artfully with many promises,
and some concelions, that, by their assistance, she
surmounted in Parliament the force of a national;
and perhaps a laudable jealousy, which would;
otherwise, have swayed with the greater number.

ANOTHER circumstance contributed somewhat

to acquire the Regent such confideiable influence in
this Parliament. In Scotland, all the bishoprics,
and those abbeys which conferred a title to a feat in
Parliament, were in the gift of the Crown*. From
the time of her accession to the Regency, the Queen
had kept in her own hands almost all those which
became vacant, except such as were, to the great
disgust of the nation, beflowed upon foreigners.
Among these, her brother the Cardinal of Lor-
rain had obtained the abbeys of Kelfo and Melrofs,
two of the most wealthy foundations in the king-
dom t. By this conduct, she thinned the ecclesias-
tical bench $, which was entirely under the influence
of the Archbishop of St. Andrew's, and which, by
its numbers and authority, usually had great weight
in the house, so as to render any opposition it could
give, at that time, of little consequence.

THE Earl of Argyll, and James Stewart Prior
of St. Andrew's, one the moit powerful, and the

See Book I. t Lefy, 202.
t It appears from the rolls of this Parliament, which Ledy

calls a very full one, that only seten Biflops and sixteen Abboti
Cere prcfcnt.

M other

B o o K other the most popular leader of the ProteRfants,

II. were appointed to carry the Crown and otherenfigns

- of royalty to the Dauphin. But from this they

were diverted by the part they were called to a&, in
a more interesting scene, which now begins to open.

El17a'eth BEFORE we turn towards this, it is necessary to
the Covn0 observe, that on the 17th of November, Maryof
of E 4. England finished her Ihort, and inglorious reign.

Her filter Elizabeth touk poffffion of the throne
without opposition; and the Protestant religion was,
once more, established by law in England. The
acceflion of a Qteen, who, under very dificultcir.
cumftances, had given strong indications of those
eminent qualities, which, in the sequel, rendered
her reign so illustrious, attraEted the eyes of all Eu-
rope. Among the Scots, both parties observed her
firlt motions withthhe urmoft concern, as they easily
foresaw that the would not remain long an indiffe.
rent fpectatcr of their tranfaltions.

UNDER many discouragements, and much op-

prefTion, the Reformation advanced towards a full
eltablilhienr in Scotland. All the low country, the
most populous, and, at that time, the most warlike
part of the kingdom, was deeply tinc-ured with the
Protefcant opini.ons; and if the fame imprellions
were not made in the more distant counties, it was
owing to no want o. the fime dispositions among
the people, but to the fcarcitv of preachers, whoft
molt indctazigable zeal could not satisfy the avidity
of those, wvho delirid their inflrutions. Among i
people bred to arms, and fl prone to mutiny as the

Scots

Scots; and in an age, when religious paflions had B o o K
taken such strong pofficfion of the human mind, II.
and moved and agitated it with so much violence,
the peaceable and regular demeanor of so numerous
a party is truly astonishing. From the death of
:r. Patrick lamilton, the firt who futfered in
Scotland for the Proteltant religion, thirty years
hd claptld, and during so long a period, no vio-
lation of public order or tranquillity had proceed-
cJ from that iLc: *; and though rouled and irritat-
ed by the molf crurl excfclcs of ccclfiallical ty-
ra:ny, they did, in no initance, trantirecs thole
!ounlds of duty which the law prelci-ibes to lib.
jcts. Betides the prudence of their own leaders,
and the protection which the Queen Regent, from
political motives, affordcd them, the moderation
of the Archb.fop of St Andrew's encouraged this
pacific disposition. That Prelate, whose private
litf cotemporary wri:ers tax with great irregulari-
tins -t, governed the church, for ioCme years, with
a temper and prudence of which there are few ex-
amplcs in that age. But forne time bfore the
meeting of last Parliamen:t, !te Archbishop de-
parted from those humane maxims, by whichi he
hlad hitherto regulated his conduct; and lwhrthr, in
spite to the Queen, who had entered into ob clole
an union with the Protcetants, or in compliance
with the importunities of his clergy, lhe let loofc all
the rage of persecution against the Retormed fen-

* The murder of Cardinal DPcatcun wvasoccafioned by private
revenge, and being contrived and executed by fixtecn perlons
only, cannot, with jullice, be imputed to the whole Proteltant
pr'y. t1 Kjnox, Buchanan, Keith, .o3.

MN 3 tenced

B o o K tenced to the flames an aged priest, who had been

II. conviAed of embracing the Proteflant opinions;
C"J -- and summoned several others, fufpecled of th6 fame

crime, to appear before a fynod of the clergy, which
was soon to convene at Edinburgh.

NorHING could equal the horror of the Proteit.

ants at this unexpeced and barbarous execution, but
the zeal, with which they espoused the defence ofa
cause, that now teemed devoted to deftruEtion.
They had immediate recourse to the Queen Regent;
and as her success in the Parliament, which was then
about to meet, depeded on their concurrence, she
not only sheltered them from the impending florm,
but permitted them the exercise of their religion,
with more freedom than they had hitherto enjoyed.
Unsatisfied with this precarious tenure, by which
they held their religious liberty, the Protestants la-
boured to render their possession of it more secure
and independent. With this view, they determined
to petition the Parliament for some legal protection,
against the exorbitant and oppressive jurifdi&ion of
the ecclesiastical courts, which, by their arbitrary
method of proceeding, founded in the canon law,
were led to sentences the most shocking to humani-
ty, by maxims the most repugnant to justice. But
the Queen, who dreaded the effect of a debate on
this delicate fubje&, which could not fail of exciting
high and dangerous paflions, prevailed on the lead-
ers of the party, by new and more solemn promifcs
of her proteftio:n, to defit from any application to
parliament, where their numbers and influence
would, in all probability, have procured them, if

4 not

not the entire redress, at least some mitigation ofB o o K
their grievances.

THEY applied to another assembly, to a convoca-

tion of the Popish clergy, but with the fame ill fuc-
cess, which hath always attended every proposal for
reformation, addressed to that order of men. To
abandon usurped power, to renounce lucrative error,
are sacrifices, which the virtue of individuals has,
on some occasions, offered to truth; but from any
society of men, no such effort can be expected. The
corruptions of a society, recommended by common
utility, and justified by universal praftice, are view-
ed, by its members, without shame, or horror; and
reformation never proceeds from themselves, but
is always forced upon them by some foreign hand.
Suitable to this unfeeling and inflexible spirit, was
the behaviour of the Convocation in the present
conjunaure. All the demands of the Proteltants
were reje6ted with contempt; and the Popish
clergy, far from endeavouring, by atny prudent
concessions, to tooth and to reconcile such a nu-
merous body, asserted the doctrines of their church,
concerning some of the most exceptionable arti-
cles, with an ill-timed rigour, which gave new
offence *.

Du R ING the fitting of the Convocation, the Pro-

teftants first began to fufpe&t some change in the
Regent's disposition towards them. Though joined
with them for many years, by intereR, and urited,
as they conceived, by the strongest ties of affe'tiorX

Keith, 81,

M 4 and

B o K and of gratitude, {he discovered, on this occasion,

II. evident symptoms, not only of coldness, btt of a
'559 growing disgust and aversion. In order to account

fpr this, our historians do little more than produce
the trite observations concerning the infuenceqf
prosperity to alter the chara&er, and to corrupt the
heart. The Queen, fay they, having reached the
utmost point to which her ambition aspired, no
longer preserved her accustomed moderation, but,
with an insolence ulual to the fortunate, looked
down upon those, by whose afiftance she had been
enabled to rife so high. But it is neither in the de.
pravity of the human heart, nor in the ingratitude
of the Queen's disposition, that we must search for
the motives of her present conduft. These were
derived from another, and a more remote source,
which, in order to clear the subsequent tranfa&ions,
we shall endeavour to open with lome care.

Ambitious T E ambition of the Princes of Lorrain had been
P'iS,,of no leis fuccefstul, than daring; but all their schemes
Lor!an. were diltinguifhed by being vast and unbounded.

Though strangers at the court of France, their emi-
nent qualities had raiscd them, in a lhort time, to
an htight of power, superior to that of all other
subje&s, and had placed them on a level even with
the princes of the blood themselves. The church,
the army, the revenue, were under their direripn.
Nothingbut the royal dignity remained unattained,
and they were elevated to a near alliance with it, by
themarriage of the Queen of Scots to the Dauphin.
In order to gratify their own vanity, and to render
their niece more worthy the heir of France, they set

.J P

pn foot her claim to the Crown of England, which B o o ga
was founded on pretences not unplaufible.

'559.

THE tragical amours and marriages of Henry
VIII. are known to all the world. Moved by the
caprices of his love, or of his resentment, that im-
Fatient and arbitrary Monarch had divorced, or be-
headed four of the fix Queens, whom he married.
In order to gratify him, both his daughters had been
declared illegitimate by Act of Parliament; and
yet, with that fantastic inconsistence which diftin-
guilhes his character, he, in his last will, whereby
he was impowered to fettle the order of succession,
called both of them to the throne, upon the death
of their brother Edward; and, at the fame time,
pafling by the posterity of his eldest filter Margaret
Queen of Scotland, he appointed the line of fuc-
cefflon to continue in the descendants of his younger
fiftcr, the dutchess of Suffolk.

IN consequence of this destination, the validity
whereof was admitted by the English, but never
recognized by foreigners, Mary had reigned in Eng-
land, without the least complaint of neighbouring
Princes. But the fame caules, which facilitated her
accession to the throne, were obstacles to the cleva-
tion of her fifler Elizabeth, and rendered her posses.
sion of it precarious and insecure. Rome trembled
for the Catholic faith, under a Proreftant Queen of
such eminent abilities, The fame fuperltitious fears
alarmed the court of Spain. And France beheld,
with indignation, a throne, to which the Queen of
* coSs could form so many pretensions, occupied by

a rival,

BoD- t a rival, whose birth, in the opinion of all good Ca.

}I. tholics, excluded her from any legal right of fuc.

cefflon. The impotent hatred of the Roman Pon.
tiff, or the flow councils of Philip II. would have
produced no sudden or formidable effeEt. The ar.
dent and impetuous ambition of the Princes of Lor.
rain, who, at that time, governed the court of
France, was more decisive, and more to be dread.

They per- ed. Instigated by them, Henry, soon after the
fuade MXry
to afume death of Mary, persuaded his daughter-in-law and
Qeenl of her husband, to afrume the title of King and Queen
Eng-an. of England. They affected to publish this to all

Europe. They used that style and appellation in
public papers, some of which dtill remain*. The
arms of England were engraved on their coin and
plate, and born by them on all occasions, No pre-
parations, however, were made to support this im-
politic and premature claim. Elizabeth was already
feated on her throne; she possessed all the intrepidi.
ty of spirit, and all the arts of policy, which were
necessary for maintaining that flation. England was
growing into reputation for naval power. The ma.
rine of France had been utterly negleced; and
Scotland remained the only avenue, by which the
.troiv to territories of Elizabeth could be approached. It

^snd was on that fide, therefore, that the Princes of Lor-

rain determined to make their attackt; and, by
using the name and preten sions of the Scottith Queen,
they hoped to rouse the Englilh Catholics, formi-
dable at that time by their zeal and numbers, and

Anders. Diplom. Scot. No. 68 and 164.
-t Sorbes, Collet. i. 25 3. 277,

exafpe

exasperated to the utmost against Elizabeth, on ac- B o o i-
count of the change which the had made in the II.
national religion.

IT was vain to expet the afliftance of the Scot- , o,,,to
tilh Protestants to dethrone a Queen, whom all Eu- this, neccf
rope esteemed the guardian and defender of the re- checkthe
formed faith. To break the power and reputation tion in
of that party in Scotland, became, for this reason, Scot"lnd.
a necessary ttep towards the invasion of England.
With this the princes of Lorrain resolved to open
their scheme. And as persecution was the only me-
thod for fupprefing religiousopinions, known in that
age, or ditated by the despotic and sanguinary fpi-
rit of tile Romilh l`uperitition, this, in its utmost
violence, they determined to enlploy. The Earl of
Argyll, the Prio; of St Andrew's, and other lead-
ers cf the party, were marked out by them for im-
rTmeiiat2 deitruCtion *; and thty hcped, by punish-
ini them, to intimidate their followers. Inlfruc-
tiuns tor this purpose were sent from France to the
Queen Regent. That humane and sagacious Prin-
ceis condemned a measure, which was equally vio.
lcnr and impolitic. By long residence in Scotland;
flie had become acquainted with the eager and im-
patient temper of the nation; she well knew the
power, the number, and popularity of the Protef-
tant leaders; and had been a witness to the intre-
pid and unconquerable resolution which religious
fervour could inspire. What, then, could be gain-
ed by rousing this dangerous spirit, which, hither-

* Sorbes, i. 152.

to,

B o o K to, all the arts of policy had scarce been able to re.

II. train ? If it once broke looses the authority of a

Regent would be little capable to subdue, or even
to moderate its rage. And if, in order to quell it,
foreign forces were called in, this would give the
alarm to the whole nation, irritated already a; the
excessive power which the French poffcfied in the
kingdom, and suspicious of all their dtfigns. A.
midst the {hock which this might occasion, far from
hoping to exterminate the Protestant dotrine, it
would be well if the whole fabric of the eftablilhed
church were not shaken, and perhaps overturned
from the foundation. These prudent remonstrances
made no impression on her brothers; precipitant,
but inflexible in all their resolutions, they infifed on
the full and rigorous execution of their plan. Mary,
passionately devoted to the interest of France, and
ready, on all occasions, to sacrifice her own opinions
to the inclinations of her brothers, prepared to exe.
cute their commands, with implicit fubmilifon;*
and, contrary to her own judgment, and to all the
rules of found policy, she became the instrument of
exciting civil commotions in Scotland, which ended
with the ruin of the French power, and of the 1'o
piih religion in that kingdom,

The Regent FROM the time of the Queen's competition for
altedher the Regency with the Duke of Chatelherault, the
with ,e-'Ad Popilh clergy, under the direaion of the Archbi-
tatntus. shop of St. Andrew's, had set themselves in oppo-

fition to all her measures. Her frft ftep toward

Mclv. 48. Mcm. de Catlenau, ap. Jcbb, vol. ii. 446.

the execution of her new scheme, was to regain their B o o K
favour. Nor was this reconcilement a matter of 11.
difficulty. The Popish eccleiaftics, separated from 5
the reft of mankind by the law of celibacy, the
boldest and most successful invention of human po-
licy; and combined among themselves in the closest
and most sacred union; have been accustomed, in
every age, to sacrifice all private and particular pas-
fionstothe dignity and interest of their order. De-
lighted, on this occaion, with the profpet of tri-
umphing over a faction, whose encroachments they
had long dreaded, and animated with the hopes
of re-eltablifhing their declining grandeur on a
firmer bails they, at once, cancelled the memory
of past injuries, and engaged to fccond the Queen
in all her attempts to check the progress of the Re-
formation. The Queen, being secure of their alllt-
ance, openly approved of the decrees of the Convo-
cation, by which the principles of the Reformers
were condemned; and at the fame time, Ihe issued
a proclamation, enjoining all persons to observe the
approaching festival of Easter, according to the
Ronmifh ritual.

As it was no longer pofible to mistake the Queen's

intentions, the Protestant., who saw the danger ap.
proach, in order to avert it, employed the Earl of
Glencairn, and Sir Hugh Campbell of Loudon, to
expostulate with her concerning this change to-
wards severity, which their former services had Co
little merited, and which her reiterated promises gave
them no reason to expet. She, without disguise or
apology, avowed to them her resolution of extirpat.
ing the Reformed religion out of the kingdom.

And,

B o o K And, upon their urging her former engagementsi

II. with an uncourtly, but honest boldness, she so fa
'-5v forgot her usual moderation, as to utter a.fentimenti
I559. which, however apt those of royal condition may be

to entertain it, prudence Ihould teach them to con.
ceal as much as possible. " The promises of Princes;
fays the, ought not to be too carefully remembered,
nor the performance of them exaced, unless it fuis
their own conveniency."

summons THE indignation, which betrayed the Queen into
preachers this rash expression, was nothing in comparison of
teforbr. that, with which she was animated, upon hearing

that the public exercise of the Reformed Religion
had been introduced into the town of Perth. At
once, she threw off the mask, and commanded all
the Protestant preachers in the kingdom to be fum.
moned to a court of justice, which was to be held
at Stirling on the tenth of May. The Proteffants,
who, from their union, began, about this time, to
bediftinguifhed by the name of the CONGREOATION,
were alarmed, but not intimidated by this danger;
and instantly resolved not to abandon the men, to
whom they were indebted for the most valuable of
all bleflings, the knowledge of truth. At that time,
there prevailed in Scotland, with respect to criminal
trials, a custom, introduced, at first, by the infti-
tutions of vassalage and clanfhip, and tolerated,
afterwards, under a feeble government; any person
accused of a crime was accompanied to the place of
trial, by a retinue of his friends and adherents, as.
fembled for that purpose, from every corner of the
kingdom. Authorised by this ancient pracice, the

Reformed

Reformed convened, in great numbers, to attend B o a
their pastors to Stirling. The Queen dreaded their lI.
approach with a train so numerous, though unarm-
ed, and in order to prevent them from advancing,
the empowered John Erskine of Dun, a person of
eminent authority with the party, to promise, in
her name, that she would put a stop to the intended
trial, on condition the preachers and their retinue
advanced no nearer to Stirling. Erskine, being con-
vinced himself of the Queen's sincerity, served her
with the utmost zeal. And the Protestants, averse
from proceeding to any aft of violence, listened
with pleasure to so pacific a proposition. The
preachers, with a few leaders of the party, remain-
ed at Perth; the multitude, which had gathered
from different parts of the kingdom, difper'ed, and
retired to their own habitations.

BUT, notwithstanding this solemn promise, the Breaks

* 0'- -~~ promise oa
Queen, on the tenth of May, proceeded to call to whichthey

had relied.

trial the persons who had been summoned, and upon
their non appearance, the rigour of justice took
place, and they were pronounced outlaws. By this
ignoble artifice, so incompatible with real dignity,
aid so inconsistent with that integrity which should
prevail in all transactions between Sovereigns and
their fubjets, the Queen forfeited the esteem and
confidence of the whole nation. The Protestants,
shocked no less at the indecency with which ihe
violated the public faith, than at the danger which
threatened themselves, prepared boldly for their
own defence. Erskine, enraged at having been
made the inftrumentfordeceivinghisparty, instantly

abans

B o o i abandoned Stirling, and repairing to Pefth, add.

II. ed to the zeal of his associates, by his reprefentationt
v-'- of the Qleen's inflexible resolution to suppress thei

I5s9. religion.

This oc- THE popular rhetoric of Knox powerfully second.
fuio ed his reprefentacions: He having been carried a
a Perth. prisoner into France, together with the other persons

taken in the castle of Sr. Andrew's, soon madehis
eicape out of that country; and residing sometimes
in England, sometimes in Scotland, had, at last,
been driven out of both kingdoms by the rage of
the Popish clergy, and was obliged to retire to Ge.
neva. Thence he was called by the leaders of the
Protestants in Scotland; and, in compliance with
their solicitations, he set out for his native country,
where he arrived a few days before the trial ap.
pointed at Stirling. He hurried instantly to ierth,
to share with his brethren in the common danger,
or to assist them in promoting the common cauf,
While their minds were in that ferment, which the
Queen's perfidiousness and their own danger occa.
sioned, he mounted the pulpit, and by a vehement
harangue against idolatry, inflamed the multitude
with the utmost rage. The indiscretion of a priest,
who, immediately after Knox's sermon, was.pre-
paring to celebrate mars, and began to decorate the
altar for that purpose, precipitated them into im.
mediate acion. With tumultuary, but irrefiltible
violence, they fell upon the churches in that city
overturned the altars, defaced the piAures, broke
irn pieces the images; and proceeding next to the
monasteries, they, in a few hours, laid those sump

tUOu

tuous fabrics almost level with the ground. This B o od
riotous infurre&ion was not the effect of any con- I
cert, or previous deliberation: Censured by the re-
formed preachers, and publicly condemned by the
persons of mot power and credit with the party, it
must be regarded merely as an accidental eruption
of popular rage .

BUT to the Queen herself, these proceedings ap- The Rege.t

matches

peared in a very different light. Besides their ma- against
nifefl contempt for her authority, the Protestants them.
had violated every thing in religion, which fre
esteemed venerable or holy; and on both these ac-
counts, she determined to inflict the severest venge-
ance on the whole party. She had already drawn
the troops in French pay to Stirling; with these,
and what Scottish forces she could levy of a sudden,
she marched direfly to Perth, in hopes of furprif-
ing the Protestant leaders, before they could assem-
ble their followers, whom, out of confidence in her
disingenuous promires, they had been rashly induced
to dismiss. Intelligence of these preparations and
menaces was soon conveyed to Perth. The Pro-
teftants would, gladly, have soothed the Queen, by
addresses both to herself, and to the persons of great-
eft credit in her court; but finding her inexorable,
they, with great vigour, took measures for their
own defence. Their adherents, animated with zeal
for religion, and eager to expose themfclves in so
good a cause, flocked in such numbers to Perth,
that they not only secured the town fronm danger,

Knox, Hit, 127, 128.
VOL.I. N but,

B o o K but, within a few days, were in a condition to take

IT. the field, and to face the Queen, who advanced

L~ W-J with an army 7000 firong.
1559.

NEITHER party, however, was impatient to en-

gage. The Queen dreaded the event of a battle
with men, whom the fervour of religion raised above
the sense of fear, or of danger. The Protestants
beheld with regret, the Earl of Argyll, the Prior
of St. Andrew's, and some other eminent persons
of their party, still adhering to the Queen; and
destitute of their aid and counsel, declined ha.
zarding an action, the ill success of which might
have proved the ruin of their cause. 'Ihe profpe&
of an accommodation was for these reasons highly
acceptable to both fides: Argyll and the Prior, who
were the Queen's commiffloners for conducting the
negociation, seem to have been sincerely desirous of
reconciling the contending factions; and the Earl
of Glencairn arriving unexpe&edly with a powerful
reinforcement to the Congregation, augmented the
Queen's eagerness for peace. A treaty was accord-
A treaty ingly concluded, in which it was stipulated, that

cocd.both armies should be disbanded, and the gates of

Perth set open to the Queen; that indemnity ihould
be granted to the inhabitants of that city, and to
all others concerned in the late infurretion; that no
French garrison should be left in Perth, and no
French soldier should approach within three miles
of that place; and that a Parliament should imme-
diately be held, in order to compose whatever diffe-
rences might still remain *.

Keith, 89.

THB

THe Leaders of the Congregation, difiruRfful of B o o K
the Queen's sincerity, and sensible that conceflions, II.
sowing not from inclination, but extorted by the 1559
neceflity of her affairs, could not long remain in May 9.
force, entered into a new association, by which they
bound themselves, on the first infringement of the
present treaty, or in the least appearance of danger
to their religion, to reassemble their followers, and
to take arms in defence of what they esteemed the
cause of God, and of their country *.

THE Queen, by her conduct, demonftratedthefe Broken by
precautions to be the result of no groundless or un 'th ReBnt.
necessary fear. No sooner were the Protestant forces
dismissed, than she broke every article in the treaty.
Sheintroduced French troops into Perth, fined some
of the inhabitants, banished others, removed the
Magifirates out of office, and, on her retiring to
Stirling, she left behind her a garrison of 600 men,
with orders to allow the exercise of no other reli-
gion than the Roman Catholic. The situation of
Perth, a place at that time of some strength, and
a town the most proper of any in the kingdom for
the station of a garrison, seems to have allured the
Queen to this unjustifiable, and ill-judged breach
of public faith; which (he endeavoured to colour,
by alleging that the body of men left at Perth was
entirely composed of native Scots, though kept in
pay by the King of France.

THE Queen's scheme began gradually to unfold;
itwas now apparent, that ngt only the religion, but

*Knox, 138.

N 2 the

B o o K the liberties of the kingdom were threatened and

Il. that the French troops were to be employed as in.

9 ftrumentsfo fubdruing the Scots, and wreahigthgi

yoke about their necks. Martial a the genius d
the Scots then was, the poverty of their county
made it impossible to keep their armies long assem.
bled; and even a very small body of regular troops
might have proved formidable to the nation, though
confiting wholly of soldiers. But, what number
of French forces were then in Scotland, at what
times, and under what pretexts they returned, after
having left the kingdom in 155o, we cannot
with any certainty, determine. Cotemporary his.
torians often feleE, with little judgment, thecir.
cumftances which they transmit to posterity; and
with refpe& to matters of the greatest curiosity and
importance, leave succeeding ages altogether in the
dark. We may conjeture however, from some
paifages in Buchanan, that the French and Scots in
French pay, amounted at least to 3000 men, under
the command of Mons. D'Oyfel, a creature of the
house of Guise; and they were soon augmented to
a much more formidable number.

THE Queen encouraged by having so confider.

able a body of well disciplined troops at her corn.
mand, and instigated by the violent counsels of
D'Oyfel, had ventured, as we have observed, to
violate the treaty of Perth, and, by that rath action
once more threw the nation into the most dangerous

ThePlo- convulsions. The Earl of Argyll and Priorof St
tenants A. Andrew's instantly deferte& a courr, where faith and
r'"m. honour seemed to themn .( be no longer regarded.

The

The Barons from the neighbouring counties repair- B o o 
ed to them, the preachers roused the people to II
arms, and wherever they came, the fame violent '
operations, which accident had occafiored at Perth,
were now encouraged out of policy. The enraged
multitude was let loose, and churches and menaf-
teries, the monuments ofecclefiaflic pride and lug.
ury, were sacrificed to their zeal,

IN order to check their career, the Queen, with-
out losing a moment, put her troops in motion;
but the zeal of the Congregation got the Rfart, once
more, of her vigilance and acivity. In that war.
like age, when all men were accustomed to arms,
and on the least profpe&t of danger were ready to
run to them, the leaders of the Protestants found
no difficulty to raise an army. Though they set
outfrom St. Andrew's with a slender train of an
hundred horse, crowds flocked to their standards
from every corner of the country through whichl
they marched, and before they reached Falkland, a
village only ten miles distant, they were able to meet
the Queen with superior force .

THE Queen, surprised at the approach of so for-
midable a body, which was drawn up by its leaders
in such a manner, as added greatly in appearance
to its numbers, had again recourse to negociarion.
She found, however, that the preservation of the
Proteflant religion, their zeal for which had at first
roused the leaders of the Congregation to take
arms, was not the only object they had now in

* Knox, 141.

N 3 view.

B o o K view. They were animated with the warmet love

II. of civil liberty, which they conceived to be in in.

minent danger, from the attempts of the French

559forces; and these two passions mingling, added re.

?'Jrh: ciprocally to each other's strength. Together with
ing civil more enlarged notions in religion, the Reformation
well at re-
ligious filled the human mind with more liberal and gene.
grie vance,.

rous sentiments concerning civil government. The
genius of Popery is extremely favourable to the
power of Princes. The implicit submission to all
her decrees, which is exacted by the Romish Church,
prepares and breaks the mind for political servitude;
and the dotrines of the Reformers, by overturning
the established system of superstition, weakened the
firmest foundations of civil tyranny. That bold
spirit of inquiry, which led men to rejet theologi.
cal errors, accompanied them in other sciences, and
discovered every where the fame manly zeal for
truth. A new study introduced at the fame time,
added greater force to the spirit of liberty. Men
became acquainted with the Greek and Roman au.
thors, who described exquisite models of free go-
vernment, far superior to the inaccurate and oppref-
five system established by the feudal law; and pro.
duced such illustrious examples of public virtue, as
wonderfully suited both the circumstances and fpi-
rit of that age. Many, among the most eminent
Reformers, were themselves considerable maRfers in
ancient learning; and all of them eagerly adopted
the maxims and spirit of the ancients, with regard
to government*. The most ardent love of liberty

accom-

* 'he excessive admiration of ancient policy was the occafio
of Knox's famous book concecning the Government of Women,

wherein,

accompanied the Protestant religion, throughout all B o o K
its progress; and wherever it was embraced, it II
roused an independent spirit, which rendered men
attentive to their privileges as fubjets, and jealous
of the encroachments of their sovereigns. Knox,
and the other preachers of the Reformation, infused
generous sentiments concerning governmentinto the
minds of their hearers, and the Scottish barons, na-
turally free and bold, were prompted to assert their
rights with more freedom and boldness than ever.
Instead of obeying the Queen Regent, who had en-
joined them to lay down their arms, they demand-
ed not only the redress of their religious grievances,
but, as a preliminary toward fettling the nation, and
securing its liberties, required the immediate expul-
ion of the French troops out of Scotland. It was
not in the Queen's power to make so important a
concession, without the concurrence of the French
Monarch; and as some time was requisite in order to
obtain that, she hoped, during this interval, to re-
ceive such reinforcements from France, as would
insure the accomplishment of that design, which
she had twice attempted with unequal strength.
Mean while, Ihe agreed to a cessation of arms for Ju.e 3.
eight days, and before the expiration of these,
engaged to transport the French troops to the south

wherein, conformable to the maxims of the ancient legislators,
which modern experience has proved to be ill founded, he pro-
nounces the elevation of women to the supreme authority, to
be utterly deftrulive of good government. His principles, au-
thorities, and examples were all drawn from ancient writers.
The fame observation may be made with regard to Buchanan's
Dialogue, Di JAre Regni apud SectoI. It is founded not on the
maxims of feudal, but of ancient government.

N 4 fide

B o o K fide of the Forth; and to fend commiofloners to

II. St.Andrew's, who should labour to bring all differ.

ences to accommodation. As the hoped, by means
of the French troops, to overawe the Protestants
in the southern counties, the former article in the
treaty was puncually executed; the latter having
been inferred merely to amuse the Congregation,
was no longer remembered.

A trewnd BY these reiterated and wanton instances of per.
teaty v. fidy the Queen loft all credit with her adversaries;

and no safety appearing in any other course, they
again took arms with more inflamed resentment,
and with bolder and more extensive views. The
remrpving of the French forces had laid open to
them all the country situated between Forth and
Tay. The inhabitants of Perth alone remaining
fubjeeed to the insolence and exations of the gar.
rifon which the Queen had left there, implored
the afiftance of the Congregation for their relief.
Thither they marched, and having, without effect,
required the Queen to evacuate the town in terms
of the former treaty, they prepared to besiege it in
form. The Queen employed the Earl of Huntly
and Lord Erikine to divert them from this enter-
prise. But her wonted artifices were now of no
avail; repeated so often, they could deceive no lon-
ger; and without listening to her offers, the Pro-
teltants continued the siege, and soon obliged the
garrison to capitulate.

AITER the loss of Perth, the Queen endeavour.
ed to ftize Stirling, a place of some strength, and,

from

from its command of the only bridge over the B o o '
Forth, of great importance. But the leaders of the If .
Congregation, having intelligence of her defign,"v
prevented the execution of it, by an hasty march apid
thither, with part of their forces. The inhabi. r cefro
tants, heartily attached to the cause, set open to^,'e P"
them the gates of their town. Thence they ad-
vanced, with the fame rapidity, towards Edinburgh,
which the Queen, on their approach, abandoned
with precipitation, and retired to Dunbar.

THE Protestant army, wherever it came, kin.
dled, or spread the ardour of Reformation, and the
utmost excesses of violence were committed upon
churches and monasteries. The former were spoiled
of every decoration, which was then esteemed fa.
cred; the latter were laid in ruins. We are apt, at
this distance of time, to condemn the furious zeal
of the Reformers, and to regret the overthrow of
so many stately fabrics, the monuments of our an-
ceftors magnificence, and among the nobleit orna-
ments of the kingdom, But amidst the violence
of a Reformation, carried on in opposition to legal
authority, some irregularities were unavoidable; and
perhaps no one could have been permitted more
proper to allure and interest the multitude, or more
fatal to the grandeur of the established church.
However absurd and ill-founded the speculative
errors of Popery may be, some inquiry and atten.
tion are requisite towards discovering them. The
abuses and corruptions, which had crept into the
public worship of that church, lay more open to ob-
lervatiQn, ano by triking the fenrcs, excited more

uni-

B o o K universal disgust. Under the long reign of Hea.

II. thenifm, superstition seems to have exhausted its ta.
IsJ 9lent of invention, so that when a superstitious spirit
1559' seized Chrifians, they were obliged to imitate the

Heathens in the pomp and magnificence of their
ceremonies, and to borrow from them the ornaments
and decorations of their temples. To the pure and
simple worship of the primitive Christians, there
succeeded a species of splendid idolatry, nearly re-
fembling those pagan originals, whence it had been
copied. The contrariety of such observances, to
the spirit of Chriflianity, was almof the first thing,
in the Romish system, which awakened the indig.
nation of the Reformers, who, applying to these
the denunciations in the Old Teftamentagainft ido-
latry, imagined that they could not endeavour at
suppressing them, with too much zeal. Notafk
could be more acceptable to the multitude, than to
overturn those feats of superstition; they ran with
emulation to perform it, and happy was the man
whose hand was most adventurous and successful in
executing a work esteemed so pious. Nor did their
leaders labour to restrain this impetuous spirit of
Reformation. Irregular and violent as its sallies
were, they tended dire&ly to that end which they
had in view; for, by demolilhing the monasteries
throughout the kingdom, and setting at liberty their
wretched inhabitants, they hoped to render it im-
possible ever to rebuild the one, or to reassemble
the other.

BUT amidst these irregular proceedings, a cir-
cumftance, which does honour to the conduct and

hurpas

humanity of the leaders of the Congregation, de- B o o K
serves notice. They so far restrained the rage of II
their followers, and were able so to temper their '.*
heat and zeal, that few of the Roman Catholics
were exposed to any personal insult, and not a single
man suffered death *.

AT the fame time, we discover, by the facility

with which these great revolutions were effected,
how violently the current of national favour ran to-
wards the Reformation. No more than 300 men
marched out of Perth under the Earl of Argyll
and Prior of St. Andrew's t; with this inconfider-
able force they advanced. But wherever they came,
the people joined them in a body; their army was
seldom less numerous than 5000 men; the gates of
every town were thrown open to receive them; and,
without striking a tingle blow, they took poIfeffion
of the capital of the kingdom.

THIS rapid and astonishing success seems to have juncs,

encouraged the Reformers to extend their views,
and to rife in their demands. Not satisfied with
their first claim of toleration for their religion, they
now, openly, aimed at establishing the Protestant
doctrine on the ruins of Popery. For this reason,
they determined to fix theirrefidence at Edinburgh;
and, by their appointment, Knox and some other
preachers, taking possession of the pulpits, which
had been abandoned by the affrightened clergy, de-
claimed against the errors of Popery, with such

efLyt, 231. t Keith, 94.

fervent

B o R fervent zeal, as could not fail of gaining many

IL proselytes,
155 IN the mean time, the Queen, who had pru-

dently given way to a torrent which ihe could not
resist, observed with pleasure, that it now began to
subside. The leaders of the Congregation had
been above two months in arms, and by the ex,
pences of a campaign, protracted so long beyond
the usual time offervice in that age, had exhausted
all the money, which a country, where riches did
not abound, had been able to supply. The multi,
tude, dazzled with their success, and concluding
the work to be already done, retired to their own
habitations. A few only, of the more zealous or
wealthy Barons, remained with their preachers at
Edinburgh. As intelligence is procured in civil
wars with little difficulty, whatever was tranfa&ed
at Edinburgh, was soon known at Dunbar. And
the Queen, regulating her own condu&t by the si.
tuation of her adversaries, artfully amused them
with the profpet of an immediate accommoda-
tion; while, at the fame time, she, by studied
delays, spun out the negociations for that purpose,
to such a length, that, in the end, the party dwin.
dled to an inconsiderable number, and, as if peace
had been already re-established, became careless of
military discipline. The Queeg, who watched for
such an opportunity, advanced, unexpetedly, by
a sudden march in the night with all her forces,
and appearing before Edinburgh, filledi that city
with the utmost conifernation. The Protestants,
weakened by the imprudent difpcrfion of their fol-

lowers,

lowers, durif not encounter the French troops in B o o x
the open field; and' were even unable to defend an II
ill fortified town, againfi their aftaults. Unwilling, -55,
however, to abandon the citizens to the Queen's
mercy, they endeavoured, by facing the enemies
army, to gain time for colle&ing their own aflro
ciates. But the Queen, in spite of all their resist-
ance, would have easily forced her way into the
town, if the seasonable conclusion of a truce had
not procured her admiflion, without the effusion of
blood.

THEIR dangerous situation easily induced the A thrd

Congregation to liften to any overtures of peace;. "at
and as the Queen was looking daily for the arrival
of a strong reinforcement from France, and ex-
pe&ed great advantages from a cessation of arms,
ihe also agreed to it upon no unequal conditions.
Together with a suspension of hostilities, from, the
24th of July to the ioth of January, it was ftipu-
lated, in this treaty, that, on the one hand, the
Protestants. hould open the gates of Edinburgh,
next morning to the Queen Regent; remain in du-
tiful fubjeAion to her government; abitain from all
future violation of religious houses and give no-
interruption to the established clergy, either in the
discharge of their functions, or in the enjoyment.
of their benefices. On the other hand, the Queen.
agreed to give no molestation to the preachers or
professors of the Protestant religion; to allow no
other form of worflip in Edinburgh but the Re.
formed; and to permit thefree and public.exercife
of it all over the kingdom. The Queen, by there

5 liberal

B o o K liberal conceflions in behalf of their religion, hoped

II. to tooth the Protestants, and expected, from indulg.

* ing their favourite passion, to render them more
1559. compliant with refpe& to otherarticles, particularly

the expulsion of the French troops out of Scotland.
The anxiety which the Queen expressed for retain.
ing this body of men, rendered them, more and
more, the obje&s of nationaljealoufy and aversion.
The immediate expulsion of them was therefore
demanded a-new, and with greater warmth; but
the Queen, taking advantage of the distress of the
adverse party, eluded the request, and would con-
sent to nothing more, than that a French garrison
ihould not be introduced into Edinburgh.

THE desperate slate of their affairs, imposed on

the Congregation the necessity of agreeing to this
article, which, however, was very far from giving
them fatisfaation. Whatever apprehensions the
Scots had conceived, from retaining the French
forces in the kingdom, were abundantly justified
during the late commotions. A small body of those
troops, maintained in constant pay, and rendered
formidable by regular discipline, had checked the
progress of a martial people, though animated with
zeal both for religion and liberty. The fmalleit
addition to their number, and a considerable one
was daily expeEted, might prove fatal to public
liberty, and Scotland might be exposed to the dan.
ger of being reduced from an independent king-
dom, to the mean condition of a province, annexed
to the empire of its powerful ally.

6

IN order to provide against this imminent ¢ala- B o o K
mity, the Duke of Chatelherault, and Earl of I.
Huntly, immediately after concluding the truce, 559
desired an interview with the chiefs of the Congre-
gation. These two noblemen, the most potent, at
that time, in Scotland, were the leaders of the party,
which adhered to the established church. They had
followed the Queen, during the late commotions,
and having access to observe more narrowly the
dangerous tendency of her councils, their abhor-
rence of the yoke which was preparing for their
country, surmounted all other considerations, and
determined them rather to endanger the religion
which they professed, than to give their aid to-
wards the execution of her pernicious designs.
They proceeded farther, and promised to Argyll,
Glencairn, and the prior of St. Andrew's, who
were appointed to meet them, that if the Queen
should, with her usual insincerity, violate any arti-
cle in the treaty of truce, or refute to gratify the
wilhes of the whole nation, by difmifing her French
troops, they would, then, instantly join with their
countrymen, in compelling her to a measure, which
the public safety, and the preservation of their li-
berties, rendered necessary .

ABOUT this time, died Henry II. of France; Julya.

just when he had adopted a system with regard to
the affairs of Scotland, which would, in all proba-
bility have restored union and tranquillity to that
kingdom t. Towards the close of his reign, the
Princes of Lorrain began visibly to decline in

Knox, 154. t Melv. 49.

favour,

B o o t faoour, ad the Constable .Montmorency, by the

I. assistance of the Dutchefe of Valentinois, recovered
L - ' tthat ascendant over the spirit of his matter, which

'59' his great experience, and his faithful, though often

unfortunate services, seemed justly to merit. That
prudent minister imputed the infurretions in Scot.
land wholly to the Duke of Guise and Cardinal of
Lorrain, whose violent and precipitant councils
could not fail of transporting, beyond all bounds
of moderation, men, whose minds were pollelied
with that jealousy, which is inseparable from the
love of civil liberty, or inflamed with that ardour
which accompanies religious zeal: And, in order
to convince Henry, that he did not load his rivals
with any groundless accusation, he prevailed to have
Melvil*, a Scottish Gentleman of his retinue, dif.
patched into his native country, with inftrufions
to observe the motions both of the Regent, and of
her adversaries; and the King agreed to regulate
his future proceedings, in that kingdom, by Mel.
vil's report.

DID history indulge herself in these speculations,

it would be amusing to inquire what a different
direcion might have been given, by this resolution,
to the national spirit; and to what a different issue,
Melvil's reports which would have set the condut
of the malecontents in the most favourable light,
might have conduted the public disorders. Per.
haps by gentle treatment, and artful policy, the
progress of the Reformation might have been
checked, and Scotland brought to depend upon

* The Author of the Memoir.,

France.

France. Perhaps, by gaining poffelfion of this B o o I
avenue, the French might have made their way into 1'*
England, and, under colour of supporting Mary's 559.
tite to the Crown, they might have re-establishcd
the Roman Catholic religion, and destroyed the li-
berties of that kingdom. But, into this boundless
field of fancy and conjelure, the historian rust
make no excursions; to relate real occurrences, and
to explain their real causes and effeas, is his pecu-
liar and only province.

TIHE tragical and untimely death of the French Accellion

of Francis

Monarch put an end to all moderate and pacific Ir. tothe
measures, with regard to Scotland. The Duke of c',n.
Guise, and the Cardinal his brother, upon the ac-
celiion of Francis II. a Prince void of genius, and
without experience, assumed the chief diretion of
French affairs. Allied so nearly to the throne, by
the marriage of their niece the Queen of Scots
with the young King, they now wanted but little
of regal dignity, and nothing of the regal power.
This power did not long remain inactive in
their hands. The fame vast schemes of ambi-
tion, which they had planned out under the for-
mer reign, were again resumed; and they were
enabled, by poffifing such ample authority, to pur-
sue them with more vigour, and greater probabi
lity of success. They beheld, with infinite regret,
the progress of the Protestant religion in Scotland;
and sensible what an unsurmountable obstacle it
would prove to their designs, they bent all their
firength to check its growth, before it rose to any
greater height, For this purpose, they carried on
VOL. I. 0 their

B o o K their preparations with all possible expedition, and

I*. encouraged the Queen their sifter, to expect, in a

hort time, the arrival of an army, so powerful, as
1559. the zeal of their adversaries, however desperate,

would not venture to oppose.

NOR were the Lords of the Congregation either

ignorant of those violent counsels, which prevailed
in the court of France since the death of Henry,
or careless of providing againif the danger, which
threatened them from that quarter. The fuccefsof
their cause, as well as their personal safety, depend.
ing entirely on the unanimity and vigour of their
own resolutions, they endeavoured to guard against
division, and to cement together more closely, by
entering into a ftriter bond of confederacy and
mutual defence. Two persons concurred in this
new association, who brought a great accefflon both
of reputation and of power to the party. These
were the Duke of Chatelherault, and his ldeft son
the Earl of Arran. This young nobleman, having
resided some years in France, where he command.
ed the Scottish guards, had imbibed the Protef
rant opinions concerning religion. Hurried along
by the heat of youth, and the zeal of a proselyte,
he had uttered sentiments, with refpe& to the pointi
in controversy, which did not suit the temper of a
bigotted court, intent, at that junaure, oh the ex-
tintion of the Protestant religion, in order to ac
complifh which, the greatest excesses of violence
were committed. The church was suffered towreak
its utmost fury upon all who were fufpeced of he.
refy. Courts were ereaed in different parts oi

France

France, to take cognizance of this crime, and by B o o K
their sentences, several persons of diftincion were II.
condemned to the flames. 9.

1559.

BUT, in order to inspire more universal terror,
the Princes of Lorrain resolved to feleet, for a fa.
crifice, some person, whose fall might convince all
ranks of men, that neither splendour of birth, nor
eminence in station, could exempt from punish-
ment, those who should be guilty of this unpar-
donable tranfgreflion. The Earl of Arran was the
person destined to be the unhappy vitim*. As he
was allied to one throne, and the presumptive heir
to another as he pofleffed the first rank in his own
country, and enjoyed an honourable station in
France; his condemnation could not fail of making
the desired impreflion on the whole kingdom. But
the Cardinal of Lorrain having let fall some ex-
prelflons, which raised Arran's suspicions of the
design, he escaped the intended blow by a timely
flight. Indignation, zeal, resentment, all prompt-
ed him to seek revenge upon there persecutors
of himself and of the religion which he pro-
sessed; and as he passed through England, on his
return to his native country, Elizabeth, by hopes
and promises, inflamed those passions, and sent him
back into Scotland, animated with the fame impla-
cable aversion to France, which possessed a great
part of his countrymen. lie quickly communi- Ear ofAs.
cated these sentiments to his father the Duke of n""J"jntbe
Chatelherault, who was already extremely disgusted

Thuan. lib. xxiv. p. 462. Edit. Ftancof.

0 2 with

B o o K with the measures carrying on in Scotland; and ae

II. it was the fate of that nobleman to be governed in

every instance, by those about him, he now suffered
himself to be drawn from the Queen Regent; and
having joined the Congregation, was confidered,
from that time, as the head of the party.

BUT with refpe&t to him, this diftincticn was

merely nominal. James Stewart, Prior of St. An.
drew's, was the person who moved and a&uated
the whole body of the Protestants, among whom,
he poffcffed that unbounded confidence, which his
strenuous adherence to their interest, and his great
abilities so justly merited. He was the natural
son of James V. by a daughter of Lord Erskine;
and as that amorous Monarch had left several
others a burden upon the Crown, they were all de.
flined for the church, where they could be placed
in stations of dignity and affluence. In consequence
of this resolution, the Priory of St. Andrew's had
been conferred upon James: But, during so bufyi
period, he soon became disgusted with the indolenc
and retirement of a monastic life; and his entrpri
ing genius called him forth, to at a principal pa
on a more public and conspicuous theatre. Th
scene, in which he appeared, required talents ofdi
ferent kinds: Military virtue, and political discern
ment, were equally necessary in order to render hi
illustrious. These he possessed in aneminentdegr
To the most unquestionable personal bravery, hi
added great skill in the art of war, and in everyen
terprife his arms were crowned with success. Hi
sagacity and penetration in civil affairs enabled hin

amid

anidt the reeling and turbulence of factions,tohold B o o K
aprofperous course. While his boldness in defence II
of the Reformation, together with the decency, and
even severity of his manners, secured him the repu-
tation of being sincerely attached to religidn, with-
out which, it was impossible, in that age, to gain
an ascendant over mankind.

IT was not without reason, that the Queen dread-
ed the enmity of a man, so capable to obftru&
her designs. And as (he could not, with all her
address, make the least impreflion on his fidelity to
his associates, Ihe endeavoured to lessen his influ-
ence, and to scatter among them the feeds of jea-
lousy and distrust, by insinuating that the ambition
of the Prior aspired beyond the condition of a
fubje&, and aimed at nothing less than the Crown
itself.

AN accusation so improbable gained but little
credit. Whatever thoughts of this kind, the pre-
fumption of unexpe&ed success, and his elevation
to the highest dignity in the kingdom, may be al-
leged to have in'pired, at any subsequent period,
it is certain that, at thisjunfure, he could form no
such vast design. To dethrone a Queen, who was
lineal heir to an ancient race of Monarchs; who
had been guilty of no a&tion, by which she could
forfeit the elteem and affection of her fubjeas; who
could employ, in defence of her rights, the forces
of a kingdom, much more powerful than her own;
and to substitute, in her place, a person whom the
illegitimacy of his birth, by the pra&ice of all

0 3 civilized

B o 0 K civilized nations, rendered incapable of any inherit.

II. ance, either public or private; was a project, so

J'5-' chimerical, as the most extravagant ambition would
1559. scarce entertain, and could never conceive to be

praticable. The promise too, which the Prior
made to Melvil, of residing constantly in France,
on condition the public grievances were redressed,;
the confidence reposed in him by the Duke of Cha.
telherault and his son, the presumptive heirs to the
Crown; and the concurrence of almost the whole
Scottish nobles, in promoting the meafurcs, by
which he gave offence to the French court, go far
towards his vindication from those illegal and cri.
minal designs, with the imputation of which, the
Queen endeavoured, at that time, to load him.

Troo0rs r- THE arrival of a thousand French soldiers comr
rive from
Franceand penfated, in some degree, for the loss which the
Leitth Q.ueen sustained by the defeaion of the Duke of

Chatelherault. These were, immediately, com-
manded to fortify Leith, in which place, on account
of its commodious harbour, and its situation in the
neighbourhood of Edinburgh, and in a plentiful
country, the Queen resolved to fix the head-quar-
ters of her foreign forces. This unpopular mea-
sure, by the manner of executing it, was rendered
fill more unpopular. In order to bring the town
entirely under their command, the French turned
out a great part of the ancient inhabitants, and
taking possession of the houses, which they had ob-
liged them to abandon, presented to the view of
the Scots, two objecs equally irritating and offen

* Mclvil, 4.,

five

five; on the one hand, a number of their country- B o o K
men expelled their habitations by violence, and II.
wandering without any certain abode; on the other, L%
a colony of foreigners, fettling with their wives 1559
and children, in the heart of Scotland, growing
into strength by daily reinforcements, and openly
preparing a yoke, to which, without some timely
exertion of national spirit, the whole kingdom must,
of necessity, submit.

IT was with deep concern that the Lords of the The Plote-

Congregation beheld this bold and decisive ftep, ",nt
taken by the Queen Regent: Nor did they hesitate a'inft this.
a moment, whether they (hould employ their whole
ffrength, in one generous effort, to rescue their re-
ligion and liberty from impending deftruAion. But,
in order to justify their own condu&, and to throw
the blame entirely on their adversaries, they resolved
to preserve the appearances of decency and refpe&
towards their superiors, and to have no recourse to
arms, without the moit urgent and apparent necef-
fity. They joined, with this view, in an address, set.29.
to the Regent, representing, in the strongest terms,
their diffatisfation with the measures she was pur-
suing, and beseeching her to quiet the fears and
jealousies of the nation, by defiting from fortifying
Leith. The Queen, conscious of her present ad-
vantageous situation, and elated with the hopes of
fresh succours, was in no disposition for listening to
demands, utterly inconsistent with her views, and
urged with that bold importunity, which is so little
acceptable to Princes.

0 4 THE

B o o K THE fuggettions of her French counsellors con.

11. tributed, without doubt, to alienate her Rill farther

'' ' from any scheme of accommodation. As the Queen
I159.
The Regent was ready on all occasions, to discover an extraor.
disregards
thiei re- dinarydeference for theopinionsof her countrymen,
monlran. her brothers, who knew her secret disapprobation of

the violent measures they were driving on, took
care to place near her such persons, as betrayed her,
by their insinuations, into many actions, which her
own unbiaffed judgment would have highly con.
demned. And as their success in the present junc.
ture, when all things were hafening towards a cri.
sis, depended entirely on the Queen's firmness, the
Princes of Lorrain did not trust wholly to the in.
fluence of their ordinary agents; but, in order to
add the greater weight to their councils, they called
in aid the Ministers of religion; and, by the autho-
rity of their sacred character, they hoped effectually
to recommend to their filter, that system offeverity
which they had espoused *. With this view, but
under pretence of confounding the Protestants by
the skill of such able mailers in controversy, they
appointed several French divines to reside in Scot-
land. At the head of thele, and with the charac-
ter of legate from the Pope, was Pelleve Bishop of
Amiens, and afterwards Archbishop and Cardinal
of Sens, a furious bigot t-, servilely devoted to the
huoufe of Guise, and a proper inltrument for re-
commending or executing the most outrageous
measures.

Lefy, 21Z. Cafllenau, ap. Jebb. vol. ii, 446,473.
I Davila, Brantome.

AMIDST

AMIDST the noise and danger of civil arms, these B o o K

Do&ors had little opportunity to display their ad- II.
dress in the use of their theological weapons. But T -~
they gave no small offence to the nation by one of
their ations. They persuaded the Queen to seize
the church of St. Giles in Edinburgh, which had
remained, ever since the late truce, in the hands of
the Froteftants; and having, by a new and solemn
consecration, purified the fabric from the pollution,
with which they supposed the profane ministrations
of the Protestants to have defiled it, they, in diret
contradicion to one article in the late treaty, re-
established there the rites of the Romish church.
'Ihis, added to the indifference, and even contempt,
withwhich the Queen received their remonstrances,
convinced the Lords of the Congregation, that it
was not only vain to expect any redress of their
grievances at her hands, but absolutely necessary to
take arms in their own defence.

THE eager and impetuous spirit of the nation, as They take

well as every consideration of good policy, prompt- thei ow,
ed them to take this bold ftep without delay. It d"fe'"
was but a small part of the French auxiliaries which
had as yet arrived. The fortifications of Leith,
though advancing fast, were frill far from being
complete. Under there circumstances of difadvan-
tage, they conceived it poflible to surprise the
Queen's party, and, by one sudden and decisive
blow, to prevent all future bloodihed and conten-
tion. Full of these expectations, they advanced
rapidly towards Edinburgh with a numerous army.
But it was no easy matter to deceive an adversary, aoobe 6

so

B o o K so vigilant and attentive as the Queen Regent.

I . With her usual sagacity, she both foresaw the dan.
559'. get, and took the only proper course to avoid it.

Instead of keeping the field against enemies, fupe.
rior in number, and formidable on a day of battle,
by the ardour of their courage, she retired into
Leith, and determined patiently to wait the arrival
of new reinforcements. Slight and unfinithed as the
fortifications of that town then were, she did not
dread the efforts of an army, provided neither
with heavy cannon, nor with military flores, and
utterly ignorant of the method of attacking any
place fortified with more art than those ancient
towers, erected all over the kingdom, in defence
of private property against the incursions of ban.
ditti.

NOR did the Queen, mean while, neglet to

have recourse to those arts, which she had often
employed, to weaken or divide her adversaries. By
private solicitations and promises, she shook the
fidelity, or abated the ardour of some. By open re.
proach and accusation, she blasted the reputation,
and diminished the authority of others. Her emif-
saries were every where at work, and, notwithftand.
ing the zeal for religion and liberty, which then
animated the nation, they seem to have laboured
not without success. We find Knox, about this
period, abounding in complaints of the lukewarm
and languid spirit, which had begun to spread a-
mong his party *. But if their zeal (lackened a lit.
tle, and suffered a momentary interniflion, it soon

· Knox, i8o.

blazed

blazed up with fresh vigour, and rose to a greater B o o
height than ever. .

1559.
THE Queen herfelfgave occasion to this, by the Renew

their re-

reply which she made to a new remonftranoe from monfran-
the Lords of the Congregation. Upon their arri- ces;
val at Edinburgh, they once more represented to
her the dangers arising from the increase of the
French troops, the fortifying of Leith, and her
other measures, which they conceived to be deftruc-
tive to the peace and liberty of the kingdom; and
in this address, they spoke in a firmer tone, and
avowed more openly than ever, their resolution of
proceeding to the utmost extremities, in order to
put a stop to such dangerous encroachments. To
a remonstrance of this nature, and- urged with so
much boldness% the Queen replied in terms no less
vigorous and explicit. She pretended that she was
not accountable to the confederate Lords for any
part of her conduc& and upon no representation
of theirs, would ihe either abandon measures, which
(he deemed necessary; or dismiss forces, which she ut withoet
found useful; or demolish a fortification, which fuccCI.
might prove of advantage. At the fame time, flhe
required them, on pain of treason, to disband the
forces which they had assembled.

THIS haughty and imperious fRyle founded harsh-
ly to Scottish nobles, impatient, from their national
charater, of the slightest appearance of injury;
accustomed even from their own Monarchs, to the
most refpe&ful treatment and pofefling, under an
ariftocratical form of government, such a share of

power

B o o K power as equalled, at all times, and often control.

II. led that of the sovereign. They were sensible, at
U-urm once, of the indignity offered to themselves, and
1559. alarmed with this plain declaration of the Queen's

intentions; and as there now remained but one ftep
to take, they wanted neither public spirit nor refolu-
tion to take it.

Deliherate BUT, that they might not seem to depart from
thcourre the established forms of the confiitution, for which,
which they

,giht to even amidst their most violent operations, men al-
tke ways retain the greatest reverence, they assembled

the whule Peers, 3B;rons, and Representatives of
°0& "' burroughs who adhered to their party. Thefc form.

ed a convention, which exceeded in number, and
equalled in dignity, the usual meetings of parlia-
ment. The leaders of the Congregation laid before
them the declaration which the Queen had given in
answer to their remonstrance; represented the un-
avoidable ruin, which the ineafures, file therein
avowed and justified, would bring upon the king-
dom; and requiring their direction with regard to
the obedience due to an administration so unjust and
oppreflive, they submitted to their decision, a quef-
tion, one of the most delicate and interesting that
can poflibly fall under the consideration offubje&s.

This assembly proceeded to decide, with no less

dispatch, than unanimity. Strangers to those forms,
which protrac business; unacquainted with the arts
which make a figure in debate; and much mor
fitted for a&tion, than discourse: A warlike people
always haften to a conclusion, and bring their de

liberation

liberations to the shortest issue. It was the work B o o K
but of one day, to examine and to resolve this nice II.
problem, concerning the behaviour of subje&s to- 559,
wards a ruler who abuses his power. But, however
abrupt their proceedings may appear, they were not
deflitute of solemnity. As the determination of the
point in doubt, was conceived to be no less the of-
fice of divines, than of laymen, the former were
called to afift with their opinion. Knox and Wil-
lox appeared for the whole order, and pronounced,
without hesitation, both from the precepts and ex-
amples in scripture, that it was lawful for fubjets
not only to resist tyrannical princes, but to deprive
them of that authority, which, in their hands, be-
comes an instrument for destroying those, whom
the Almighty ordained them to protect. The de-
cifion of persons, revered so highly for their sacred
character, but more for their zeal, and their piety,
had great weight with the whole affcmbly. Not
satisfied with the common indiscriminate manner of
signifying content, every person present was called
in his turn to declare his sentiments, and rising up
in order, all gave their suffrages, without one di-'Theyde-
senting voice, for depriving the Queen of the of- Qenof
fice of Regent, which she had exercised so much to'sffit'
the detriment of the kingdom *.

THIS extraordinary sentence was owing no less The r;ght

to the love of liberty, than to zeal for religion. Incund,&.
the aft of deprivation, religious grievances are
slightly mentioned; and the dangerous encroach-
ments of the Queen upon the civil constitution are

Knox, 184.

pro-

B oo K produced, by the Lords of the Congregation, in

II. order to prove their condu& to have been not only
< r - just, but necessary. The introducing foreign troops
1559. into a kingdom, at peace with all the world; the

seizing and fortifying towns in different parts of the
country; the promoting strangers to offices of great
power and dignity; the debating the current coin *;
the subverting the ancient laws; theimpofing of new
and burdeornoe taxes; and the attempting to sub-
due the kingdom, and to oppress its liberties, by
open and repeated aEts of violence, are enumerated
at great length, and placed in the strongest light.
On all these accounts, the Congregation maintained
that the nobles, as counsellors by birth right to their
monarchs, and the guardians and defenders of the
constitution, had a right to interpose; and there-
fore, by virtue of this right, in the name of the
King and Queen, and with many expressions of
duty and fubmiflion towards them, they deprived
the QOueen Regent of her office, and ordained, that,
for the future, no obedience Ihould be given to her
commands t.

Vio-

The fandardofmoney in Scotland was continually varying.

In the 16th of James V. A. D. 1529, a pound weight of gold,
when coined, produced soS pounds of current money. But
under the Queen Regent's administration, A. D. 556, a pound
weight of gold, although the quantity of alloy was confider.
ably increased, produced 1441. current money. In 1529, a
pound weight of silver, when coined, produced 91. z et; but in
1 5 6, it produced 13 1. current money. Ruddim. Prafat. ad
Andorf. Diplomat. Scotia, p. So, 81. from which it appears,
that this complaint, which the malecontents often repeated,
was not altogether defitute of foundation.

t M. CaRelnau, after condemning the dangerous councils of
the Princes of Lorrain, with regard to the affairs of Scotland, ac-

knowledges,

VIOLENT as this a&ion may appear, there wanted B o o K

not principles in the conflitution, nor precedents in HI.
the history of Scotland, tojuftify and to authorise it. 'C"
Under the ariftocratical form of government efta- 55
blifhed among the Scots, the power of the Sove-
reign was extremely limited. The more confider-
able nobles werethem flves petty princes, poffefling
extensive jurifditions, almost independent of the
crown, and followed by numerous vassals, who, in
every contest, espouscd their chieftain's quarrel, in
opposition to the King. Hence the many instances
of the impotence of regal authority, which are to
be found in the Scottish hifory. In every age, the
nobles not only claimed, but exercised the right of
controlling the King. Jealous of their privileges,
and eager to take the field in defence of them, every
error in administration wasobferved, every encroach-
ment upon the rights of the ariffocracy excited in-
dignation, and no prince ever ventured to transgress
the boundaries, which the law had prescribed to
prerogative,without meeting refiftance,w hich shook,
or overturned his throne. Encouraged by the spirit
of the conffitution, and countenanced by the ex-
ample of their ancestors, the Lords of the Con-
gregation thought it incumbent on them, at this
juncture, to inquire into the mal-adminifiration of
the Queen Regent, and to preserve their country
from being enslaved or conquered, by depriving

knowledges,with his usual candour, that the Scots declared war
against the Queen Regent, rather from a desire of vindicating
their civil liberties, than from any motive of religion. Mem.
446.

3 her

B o o K her of the power to execute such a pernicious

II. scheme *.
1559. * The a& of deprivation, and aletter from the Lords of the

Congregation to the Queen Regent, are flillextant, Knox, 184.
They discover not only, that masculine and undaunted spirit,
natural to men capable of so bold a resolution; but are remark-
able for a precision, and vigour of expreflion, which we are fur.
prifed to meet with in an age so unpolilhed. The fame obfer.
vation may be made with refpe& to the other public papers of
that period. The ignorance or bad taste of an age may render
the compositions of authors by profession obscure, or asseted,
or absurd; but the language of business is nearly the fame at
all times; and wherever men think clearly, and are thoroughly
interelted, they express themselves with perspicuity and force.

THE

# BOOK III.

THE
H ISTORY

F
SCOTLAND.

BOOK III.

HE Lords of the Congregation soon found, B o o K
that their zeal had engaged them in an under- III.

taking, which it was beyond their utmost ability to
accomplish. The French garrison, despising their Th¢Co.-
numerous, but irregular forces, refused to surrender nrvltin
Leith, and to depart out of the kingdom ; nor were diffitultie.'
they sufficiently skilful in the art of war to reduce
the place by force, or possessed of the artillery, or
magazines, requisite for that purpose; and their fol-
lowers, though of undaunted courage, yet being ac-
customed to decide every quarrel by a battle, were
firangers to the fatigues of a long campaign, and
soon became impatient of the severe and constant
duty which a siege requires. The Queen's emiffa-

VOL, 1. P ries,

B o o K ries, who found it easy to mingle with their coun.

III. trymen, were at the utmost pains to heightentheir
.- ' disgust, which discovered itself at first in murmurs
1559. and complaints, but on occasion of the want of mo.

ney for paying the army, broke out into open mu.
tiny. The most eminent leaders were scarce secure
from the unbridled insolence of the soldiers; while
some of inferior rank, interposing too rashly in or.
der to quell them, were torn in pieces by their rage.
Discord, conlternation, and perplexity reignedin the
camp of the Reformers. The Duke, their General,
funk, with his usual timidity, under the terror of
approaching danger, and discovered manifest fymp.
toms of repentance for his rathnefs, in espousing
such a desperate caule.

Apply to IN this situation of their affairs, the Congregation
for affit- had recourse to Elizabeth, from whose protetion

e they could derive their only reasonable hope of fuc.

cess. Some of their more sagacious leaders, having
foreseen that the party might probably he involved
in great difficulties, had endeavoured to secure a re.
source in any such exigency, by entering into a se.
cret correspondence with the court of England'.
Elizabeth, aware of the dangerous designs which
the Princes of Lorrain had formed against her
Crown, was early fenible of how much importance
it would be, not only to check the progress of the
French in Scotland, but to extend her own influence
in that kingdom t; and perceiving how effetually
the present infurreEipns would contribute to retard

e Burn. HiR.-Rof. 3. Append. 278. Keith, Append. 21.
t See Append. No. i.

0

or defeat the schemes formed against England, (he B o o K
listened with pleasure to these applications of the IIL
malecontents, and gave them private assurances of r-5-.
powerful support to their cause. Randolph', an
agent extremely proper for conducting any dark in.
trigue, was dispatched into Scotland, and residing
secretly among the Lords of the Congregation, ob-
served and quickened their motions. Money seem-
ed to be the only thing they wanted at that time;
and it was owing to a seasonable remittance from
England t, that the Scottish nobles had been enabled
to take the field, and to advance towards Leith.
But as Elizabeth was distrustful of the Scots, and
studious to preserve appearances with France, her
fubGfdics were bestowed at first with extreme fruga-
lity. The subsistence of an army, and the expen-
ces of a siege soon exhausted this penurious supply,
to which the Lords of the Congregation could
make little addition from their own funds; and
the ruin and dispersion of the party must have
instantly followed.

IN order to prevent this, Cockburn of Ormifton She en.ls
was sent, with the utmost expedition, to the gover.- hel u

foall fum

nors of the town and cattle of Berwick. As Ber- of money,
wick was, at that time, the town ofgreateft import-
ance on the Scottiff frontier, Sir Ralph Sadler and
Sir James Crofts, persons of considerable figure,
were employed to command there, and were intrust-
ed with a discretionary powerof supplying the Scot-
tilh malecontents, according to the exigency of their

Keith, Append. a9. t Knox, 214. Kcith, Append. 44,

P a affairs.

B o o K affairs. From them Cockburn received 4000 crowns,

III. but little to the advantage of his party. The Earl
u-v- of Bothwell, by the Queen's instigation, lay in wait

whichis. for him on his return, dispersed his followers,
intercepted. wounded him, and carried off the money.

THIS unexpected disappointment proved fatal to

the party. In mere despair, some of the more zeal.
ous attempted to assault Leith, but the French beat
them back with disgrace, seized their cannon, and
pursuing them to the gates of Edinburgh, were on
the point of entering along with them. All theter.
ror and confusion, which the profpeA of pillageor
of massacre can excite in a place taken by storm,
filled the city on this occasion. The inhabitants fled
from the enemy by the opposite gate; the forcesof
the Congregation were irresolute and dismayed; and
the Queen's partisans in the town openly insulted
both. At last, a few of the nobles ventured to face
the enemy, who, after plundering some houses in
the suburbs, retired with their booty, and delivered
the city from this dreadful alarm.

A SECOND skirmish, which happened a few days

after, wasnolefs unfortunate. TheFrench entouta
detachment to intercept a convoy ofprovifionswhich
was designed forEdinburgh. The LordsoftheCon-
gregation, having intelligence of this, marched in
all haste with a considerable body of their troops,
and falling upon the enemy between Reftalrig and
Leith, with more gallantry than good conduc, were
almofl surrounded by a second party of French, who
advanced in order to support their own men. In

this

this situation, a retreat was the only thing which B o o K
could save the Scots; but a retreat over marshy III.
ground, and in the face of an enemy superior in ' '
number, could not long be conduced with order. 559.
A small body of the enemy hung upon their rear, They retire
horse and foot fell into the utmost confusion, and it inonfion.
was entirely owing to the caution of the French,
that any of the party escaped being cut in pieces.

ON this second blow, the hopes and spirits of the
Congregation funk altogether. They did not think
themselves secure, even within the walls of Edin-
burgh, but inflantly determined to retire to some
place at a greater distance from the enemy. In vain
did the Prior of St. Andrew's, and a few others, op-
pose this cowardly and ignominious flight. The
dread of the present danger prevailed over both the
sense of honour, and zeal for the cause. At mid-
night they fee out from Edinburgh, in great con- Novemb. 6.
fusion, and marched without halting till they ar-
rived at Stirling.

DURING this last infurrecion, the great body of
the Scottish nobility joined the Congregation. The
Lords Seton and Borthwick were the only persons
of rank who took arms for the Queen, and assisted
her in defending Leith*. Bothwell openly favour-
ed her cause, but resided at his own house. The
EarlofHuntly, conformable to the crafty policy
which diftinguithes his character, amused the lead-
ers of the Congregation, whom he had engaged to

Keith, Append. 31.

P 3 assist,

B o o K assist, with many fair promises, but never joined.

III. them with a tingle man*. The Earl of Morton, a

member of the Congregation, fluEtuated in aitate
559 ofirrefolution, and did not a& heartily for the corn.

mon cause. Lord Erftine, Governor of Edinburgh
Castle, though a Protestant, maintained a neutrality,
which he esteemed becoming the dignity of his of.
fice; and having been intruded by Parliament with
the command of the principal fortress in the king.
dow, he resolved that neither faaion should get it
into their hands.

Matland A FEW days before the retreat of the Congrega.
revol, S from
the Quten tion, the Queen suffered an irreparable loss by the
Dowager. defecion of her principal Secretary, William Mait.

land of Lethington. His zeal for the Reformed re.
ligion, together with his warm remonftrancesagainft
the violent measures which the Queen was carrying
on, exposed him so much to her resentment, and
to that of her French Counsellors, that he, fufpe-t.
ing his life to be in danger, withdrew secretly from
Leith, and fled to the Lords of the Congregationt;
and they, with open arms, received a convert, whole
abilities added both fftrength and reputation totheir
cause. Maitlard had early applied to public bufi-
ness admirable natural talents, improved by an ac-
quaintance with the liberal arts; and, at a time of
life, when his countrymen of the fame quality were
following the pleasures of the chace, or serving as
adventurers in the armies of France, he was admit-
ted into all the secrets of the cabinet, and put upon

*Keith, Append. 33. Knox, 2zz. t Knox, 19i2

a leve

a level with perfots of the molf consummate expe. B o o K
rierce in the management of affairs. He pofefeTed, III.
in an emineint degree, that intrepid spirit, which-
delights in pursuing bold designs, and was no less
master of that political art and dexterity which is
neccffary for carrying them on with success. But
these qualities were deeplytirctured with the neigh-
bouring vices. His address sometimes degenerated
into cunning; his acuteness bordered upon excess of
subtlety and refinement; his invention, over fertile,
suggested to him, on some occasions, chimerical sys-
terns of policy, little suitable to the genius of the
age; and his enterprising spirit engaged him in pro-
jeds vati and splendid, but beyond his utmost
power to execute. All the cotemporary writers to
whatever faction they belong, mention him with
an admiration, which nothing could have excited
but the greatest superiority of penetration and abi-
lities.

THE precipitate retreat of the Congregation in.
created, to such a degree, the terror and confusion
which had fcized them at Edinburgh, that before
they reached Stirling, their army dwindled to an
inconsiderable number. The spirit of Knox, how-
ever, still remained undaunted and ere&, and
having mounted the pulpit, he addressed, to his
desponding hearers, an exhortation which wonder-
fully animated and revived them. The heads of
this discourse are inserted in his history *, and afford
a striking example of the boldhefs and freedom of

Knox, 193.

P 4 reproof

B o o K reproof assumed by the first Reformers, as well asa

III. specimen of his own skill in chufing the topics moR

fitted to influence and rouse his audience.

1559.

ThLnwrds A MEETING of the leaders being called, to con.
of the Con-
gresa on fider what course they Ihould hold, now that their
,Po Eiza own resources were all exhausted, and their deftruc.
bcth. tion appeared to be unavoidable, without foreign

aid; they turned their eyes once more to England,
and rcfolved to implore the assistance of Elizabeth
towards finishing an enterprise, in which they had
so fatally experienced their own weakness, and the
firengthoftheir adversaries. Maitland, as themoft
able negociator of the party, was employed inthis
embassy. In his absence, and during the inastive
season of the year, it was agreed to dismiss their fol-
lowers, worn out by the fatigues of a campaign,
which had so far exceeded the usual time of service.
But, in order to preserve the counties most devoted
to their interest, the Prior of St. Andrew's, with
part of the leaders, retired into Fife. The Duke
of Chatclherault, with the reft, fixed his residence
at Hamilton. There was little need of Maitland's
address or eloquence to induce Elizabeth to take his
country under her protecion. She observed the
prevalence of the French counsels, and the progress
of their arms in Scotland, with great concern; and
as she well foresaw the dangerous tendency of their
schemes in that kingdom, the had already come to
a resolution with regard to the part she herself would
a&, if their power there ihould grow fill more for:
midable.

IN order to give the Queen and her Privy Coun- B o o K

cil a full and diftint view of any important matter III.
which might come before them, it seems to have 155
been the pracice of Elizabeth's Ministers to prepare Motives

which de-

memorials, in which they clearly stated the point termined
under deliberation, laid down the grounds of the h^, a`l*
conduEt, which they held to be most reasonable,
and proposed a method for carrying their plan into
execution. Two papers of this kind, written by Sir
William Cecil with his own hand, still remain *;
they are intiled, " A fhortdifcuffion of the weighty
,' matter of Scotland," and do honour to the in.
duftry and penetration of that great Minister. The
motives, which determined the Queen to espouse so
warmly the defence of the Congregation, are repre-
sented with perspicuity and force; and the confe-
quences of suffering the French to establish them-
selves in Scotland, are predi&ed with great accuracy
and discernment.

HE lays it down as a principle, agreeable to the
laws both of God and of nature, that every society
hath a right to defend itself, not only from present
dangers, but from such as may probably ensue; to
which, he adds, that nature and reason teach every
Prince to defend himself by the fame means, which
his adversaries employ to distress him. Upon these
grounds, he establishes the right of England to in-
terpofe in the affairs of Scotland, and to prevent the
conquest of that kingdom, at which the French
openly aimed. The French, he observes, are the

Burn. vol. iii. Append. 283. Keith, Append. 24.

ancient

B o o K ancient and implacable enemies of England. Hof.

III. tilities had fubfifed between the two nations for
t-..-' many centuries. No treaty of peace, into which
1559. they entered, had ever been cordial or sincere. No

good effect was therefore to be expeted from the
peace lately agreed upon, which being extorted by
present necessity, would be negligently observed,
and broken on the slightest pretences. In a very
short time, France would recover its former opu-
lence; and though now drained of men and money
by a tedious and unsuccessful war, it would quickly
be in a condition for acting, and the restless and
martial genius of the people would render action
necefary. The Princes of Lorrain, who at that
time had the entire direction of French affairs, were
animated with the most virulent hatred against the
English nation. They openly called in question the
legitimacy of the Qleen's birth, and by advancing
tlhe title and pretensions of their niece the Queen of
Scotland, studied to deprive Elizabeth of her Crown.
With this view, they had laboured to exclude the
English from the treaty of Chateau en Cambrefis,
and endeavoured to conclude a separate peace with
Spain. They had persuaded Henry II. to permit
his daughter-in-law to assume the title and arms ot
Queen of England; and even since the conclusion
of the peace, they had solicited at Rome, and ob-
tained a bull, declaring Elizabeth's birth to be ille-
gitimate. And though the wisdom and moderation
of the Constable Montmorency had, for some time,
checked their career, yet there restraints being now
removed by the death of Henry II. and the disgrace
of his Minister, the utmof excesses of violence were

to

to be dreaded from their furious ambition, armed B o o K
with sovereign power. Scotland is the quarter, III.
whence they can attack England with most advan- 155

1559.

tage. A war on the borders of that country ex-
poses France to no danger, but one unsuccessful ac-
tion there may hazard the Crown, and overturn the
government of England. In political conduct, it
is childith to wait till the designs of an enemy be
ripe for execution. The Scottish nobles, after their
utmost efforts, have been obliged to quit the field;
and far from expelling the invaders of their liber-
ties, they behold the French power daily increaring,
and muff at last cease from struggling any longer in
a contest so unequal. The invading of England
will immediately follow the reduction of the Scot-
tih malecontents, by the abandoning of whom to
the mercy of the French, Elizabeth will open a
way for her enemies into the heart of her own king-
dom, and expose it to the calamities of war, and
the dangerof conquest. Nothing thereforeremained
but to meet the enemy while yet at a distance from
England, and by supporting the Congregation with
a powerful army, to render Scotland the theatre of
thewar, tocrufh thedefignsof thePrincesof Lorrain
in their infancy, and, by such an early and unex-
peted effort, to expel the French out of Britain,
before their power had time to take root, and grow
up to any formidable height. But as the matter
was of as much importance, as any which could
fall under the consideration of an Englih Monarch,
wisdom and mature counsel were necessary in the sirs
place, and afterwards vigour and expedition in con-

3 duet;

B o o K dut; the danger was urgent, and, by losing a

III. single moment, might become unavoidable*.
1559. THESE arguments produced their full effe& up.

on Elizabeth, who was jealous, in an extreme de-
gree, of every pretender to her Crown, and no less
anxious to preserve the tranquillity and happiness of
her fubjeds. From these motives she had ated, in
granting the Congregation an early supply of mo.
ney; and from the fame principles she determined,
in their present exigency, to afford them more es.
fetual aid. One of Maitland's attendants was in.
ftantly dipiatched into Scotland with the strongest
assurances of her protecion, and the Lords of the
Congregation were desired to fend commiflioners
into England to conclude a treaty, and to fettle
the operations of the campaign, with the Duke of
Norfolk t.

:Th ,OPen MEAN while, the Queen Regent, from whom
iowva&r no motion of the Congregation could long be con.
mean while
tenls her cealed, dreaded the success of this negociation with
French

atro.
a. the court of England, and foresaw how little she
he"mR would be able to resist the united effort of the two

kingdoms. For this reason she determined, if pof-
fible, to get the start of Elizabeth; and by ventur-
ing, notwithstanding the inclemency of the winter
season, to attack the malecontents in their present

* The arguments which the Scots employed, in order to ob-

tain Elizabeth's afliflance, are urged with great force, in apa-
per of Maitland's, See Appendix, No. II.

t Keith, 114.

difrperfed

dispersed and helpless situation, ihe hoped to put B o o xK
an end to the war, before the arrival of their En- 111.
glilh allies.

1559.

A CONSIDERABLE body of her French forces,
who were augmented, about this time, by the ar-
rival of the Count de Martigues, with a thousand
veteran foot, and some cavalry, were commanded to
march to Stirling. Having there crossed the Forth,
they proceeded along the coast of Fife, detroying
and plundering, with excessive outrage, the houses
and lands of those whom they esteemed their ene-
mies. Fife was the most populous and powerful
country in the kingdom, and most devoted to the
Congregation, who had hitherto drawn from thence
their most considerable supplies, both of men and
provisions; and therefore, besides punishing the dif-
affecion of the inhabitants, by pillaging the coun-
try, the French proposed to seize and fortify St. An-
drew's, and to leavein it a garrison sufficient to bridle
the mutinous fpiritof the province, and to keep pof-
session of a port situated on the main ocean.

BUT on this occasion, the Prior of St. Andrew's,
Lord Ruthven, Kirkaldy of Grange, and a few of
the most a&ive leaders of the Congregation, per-
formed, by their bravery and good conduct, a ser-
vice of the utmost importance to their party. Hav-
ing assembled fix hundred horse, they infested the
French with continual incursions, beat up their
quarters, intercepted their convoys of provisions,
cut off their straggling parties, and so harassed them

with

B o o K with perpetual alarms, that they prevented them for

IlI- more than three weeks from advancing*.
1560. AT last the prior, with his feeble party, was

conltrained to retire, and the French let out from
Kirkaldy, and began to move along the coast to.
wards St. Andrew's. They had advanced but a
january a3. few miles, when from an eminence they descried a

powerful fleet Pfeering its course up the Frith of
Forth. As they knew that the Marquis D'Elbeuf
was, at that time, preparing to fail for Scotland
with a numerous army, they hastily concluded that
there ships belonged to him, and gave way to the
most immoderate transports of joy, on the profpe&
of this long expected succour. Their great guns
were already fired to welcome their friends, and to
spread the tidings and terror of their arrival among
their enemies, when a small boat from the opposite
coast landed, and blasted their premature and thort.
lived triumph, by informing them, that it was the
fleet of England which was in fight, intended for
the aid of the Congregation, and was soon to be
followed by a formidable land army t.

The EngI. THROUGHOUT her whole reign, Elizabeth was
fle.t arrives cautious, but decisive; and by her promptitude in
to their ffinance. executing her resolutions, joined to the deliberation

with which she formed them, her administration
became remarkable, no less for its vigour, than for
its wisdom. No sooner did she determine to afford
her protection to the Lords of the Congregation,

*Knox. 202. 't Ibid. 203.

than

than they experienced the a&tivity, as well as the B o o r.
extent of her power. The season of the year would Ill.
not permit her land army to take the field; but left :*
the French should, in the mean time, receive new 156
reinforcements, she instantly ordered a strong fqua-
dron to cruise in the Frith of Forth. She seems,
by her inftruaions to Winter her Admiral, to have
beendefirous of prefervingthe appearances of friend-
Ihip towards the French*. But these were only ap.
pearances ; if any French fleet Ihould attempt to
land, he was commanded to prevent it, by every at
of hostility and violence. It was the fight of this
squadron, which occafoned at first so much joy
among the French, but which soon inspired them
with such terror, as saved Fife from the effecs of
their vengeance. Apprehensive of being cut off
from their companions on the opposite shore, they
retreated towards Stirling with the utmost precipi.
tation, and, in a dreadful season, and through roads
almost impassable, arrived at Leith, harassed and
exhausted with fatigue -.

THE Englifl fleet cast anchor in the road of

Leith, and continuing in that station till the con-
clufion of peace, both prevented the garrison of
Leith from receiving succours of any kind, and con-
fiderably facilitated the operations of their own
forces by land.

SOON after the arrival of the English squadron, Threyon.
the Commissioners of the Congregation repaired to trty with

England.
* Keith, Appendix 4. f Knox, 203. . s7.

Berwick,

B o o K Berwick, and concluded with theDuke of Norfolk,

1I. a treaty, the bond of that union with Elizabeth,

which was of so great advantage to the cause. To
give a check to the dangerous and rapid progress of
the French arms in Scotland, was the professed de.
sign of the contra&ing parties. In order to this,
the Scots engaged never to susser any closer union
of their country with France; and to defend them.
selves to the uttermost against all attempts of con.
quet ; and for their affitance, Elizabeth promised
to employ, in Scotland, a powerful army, which
the Scots undertook to join with all their forces; no
place in Scotland was to remain in the hands of the
English; whatever Ihould be taken from the enemy
was either to be rated, or kept by the Scots, at their
choice; if any invasion should be made upon Eng.
land, the Scots were obliged to assist Elizabeth with
part of their forces; and to ascertain their faithful
observance of the treaty, they bound themfelvesto
deliver hostages to Elizabeth, before the march of
her army into Scotland; in conclusion, the Scots
made many protestations of obedience and loyalty
towards their own Queen, in every thing not incon-
fiftent with their religion, and the liberties of their
country .

TheEng. THE Englilh army, confiding of fix thousand
i: fim foot, and two thousand horse, under the command
tyLeith. of Lord Gray of Wilton, entered Scotland early in

the Spring. The members of the Congregation as-
fembled from all parts of the kingdom to meet their

Knox, 217.

new

hew allies; and having joined them with great mul- B o o i
ticudes of their followers, they advanced together III.
towards Leith. The French were little able to keep 560.
the field against an enemy so much superior in num-
ber. A strong body of troops, destined for their
relief, had been scattered by a violent storm, and
had either perished on the coast of France, or with
difficulty had recovered the ports of that kingdom*.
But they hoped to be able to defend Leith, till the
Princes of Lorrain should make good the magnifi-
cent promises of assistance, with which they daily
encouraged them or till scarcity of provisions lhould
conatrain the Englifl to retire into their own coun-
try. In order to haften this latter event, they did
not negle&t the usual, though barbarous precaution
fordiftrefling an invading enemy, by burning and
laying waste all the adjacent country t. The zeal,
however, of the nation frustrated their intentions;
eager to contribute towards removing their oppref-
fors, the people produced their hidden stores to sup-
port their friends; the neighbouring counties sup-
plied every thing necessary, and far from wanting
iubfitence, the English found, in their camp, all
ibrts of provisions, at a cheaper rate than had for
some time been known in that part of the king-
dom r.

ON the approach of the English army, the Queen
Regent retired into the castle of Edinburgh. Her
health was now in a declining state, and her mind
broken and depressed by the misfortunes of her ad-

* Mem. deCaRfel. 450o. tKnox, 225. t1C ox, itid.
VOL. I. milid

B o o K miniffration. To avoid the danger and fatigue of

Ill. a siege, {he committed herself to the protetion of
óv' Lord Erskine. This nobleman still preserved his

. neutrality, and by his integrity, and love of his

country, merited equally the esteem of both parties.
He received the Queen herself with the utmost ho.
nour and refpe&, but took care to admit no such
retinue, as might endanger his command of the
cattle *.
Ap.in 6. A FEW days after they arrived in Scotland, the

Engliit inverted Leith. The garrison, shut up
within the town, was almost half as numerous as the
army which fat down before it, and by an obstinate
defence protracted the siege to a great length. The
circunftances of this siege, related by cotemporary
historians, men without knowledge or experience in
the art of war, are often obscure and imperfect, and
at this distance of time are not considerable enough
to be entertaining.

AT first the French endeavoured to keep pofcf-

sion of the Hawk -lill, a rising ground not far dir-
Anril 1;. tant fio: the town, but were beat from it with

great flaughler, chiefly by the furious attack of the
Scottish cavalry. Within a few days, the French
had their full revenge; having sallied out with a
fsrong body, they entered the English trenches,
broke their troops, nailed part of their cannon, and
killed at lealt double the number they had loft in
the former skirmish. Nor were the English more

Forbcs's Colle&. vol. i, 503. Keith, iz2.

fortunate

fortunate in an attempt which they made to take the B o o K
place by assault; they were met with equal courage, III.
and repulsed with considerable loss. From the de- 5.6.
tail of these circumstances by the writers of that age, May 7.
it is easy to observe the different characers of the
French and English troops. The former, trained
t) war, under the a&ive reigns of Francis I. and
IHenry 11. defended themselves not only with the
bravery, but with the fiill of veterans. The latter,
who had been more accuftorned to peace, flill pre-
lCrvedc the intrepid and desperate valour peculiar to
t:e nation, but discovered few marks of military
gcnius, or of experience in the practice of war.
Every misfortune or difa pointment during the siege
muit be imputed to manifest errors in conduct. The
f:cccls of the besieged in their sally was owing en-
tiirly to the security and negligence of the English:
riny of their officers were absent; their soldiers had
Ifr' their stations; and the trenches were almost
without a guard. The ladders, which had been
i rovided for the assault, wanted a great deal of the
necelfary strength; and the troops employed in that
f:rvice were ill supported. The trenches were open-
ed, at first, in an improper place; and as it was
found expedient to change the ground, both time
antl labour were loft. The weakness of their own
Generals, no less than the strength of the French
girrifon, rendered the progress of the English won-
drrfullyflow. The length, however, ofthefiege, and
t!!' loss of part of their magazines by an accidental
fre, reduced the French to extreme distress, which the

Q.2 profpe&

B o o K profpe& of relief made them bear with admirable

III. fortitude.
15 6o.

WHILE the hopes and courage of the French pro.

tra&ed the siege so far beyond expetation, the lead.
ers of the Congregation were not idle. By new as
fociations and confederacies, they laboured mor
perfe&ly to unite their party. By publickly ratify
ing the treaty concluded at Berwick, they endea.
voured to render the alliance with England firm an
indissoluble. Among the subscribers of theif pa
pers, we find the Earl of Huntly, and some other,
who had not hitherto concurred with the Con
gregation in any of their measures*. Several o
these Lords, particularly the Earl of Huntly, fill
adhered to the Popiih church; but on this occasion
neither their religious sentiments, nor their former
cautious maxims, were regarded; the torrent of na.
tional resentment and indignation against the French
hurried them on t.

Burn. vol. iii. 287. Knox, zzI.

t The dread of the French power did, on many occalor,:

surmount the zeal which the Catholic nobles had for their re.
ligion. Befidesthe presumptive evidence for this, arifingfrom
the memorial mentioned by Burnet, Hitl. of the Reformation
vol. iii. 281. and publithed by him, App. p. 278; the infiru
tions of Elizabeth to Randolph her agent, put it beyond all
doubt, that many zealous Papilts thought the alliance with Eng-
land to be necessary for preserving the liberty and indcpendence
of the kingdom. Keith, 158. Huntlyhimfelfbeganacorre
fpondcnce with Elizabeth's Ministers, before the march of the
English army into Scotland. Haynes's State Papers, s61, z63.
See Append. No. III.

THE

THE Queen Regent, the instrument, rather than B o o K
the cause of involving Scotland in those calamities, 111.
under which it groaned at that time, died during 56
the heat of the siege. No Princess ever possessed Death and

charaer of

qualities more capable of rendering her adminiftra. the Qeen
tion illuflrious, or her people happy. Of much Do"geo.
diicernment, and no less addreis; of greatintrepi.
dity, and equal prudence; gentle and humane, with-
ouit weakness; zealous for her religion, without bi-
gotry; aloverofjuftice, withoutrigour. Onecir-
cimilance, however, and that, too, the excess of a
virtue, rather than any vice, poisoned all these great
qualities, and rendered her government unfortunate,
and her name odious. Devoted to the interest of
France, her native country, and attached to the
Princes of I orrain her brothers, with most pafllon.
ate f;:d::cls; flhe departed, in order to gratify them,
from every maxim, which her own wisdom or hu-
manity would have approved. She outlived, in a
great meal ure, that reputation and popularity, which
had smoothed her way to the highest flation in the
kingdom; and many examples of falsehood, and
tome offeverity, in the latter part of her adminiltra-
tion, totally alienated from her the affections of a
people, who had once placed in her an unbounded
confidence. But, even by her enemies, these un-
justifiable actions were imputed to the facility, not
to the malignity of her nature; and while they taxed
her brothers, and French counsellors, with rashness
and cruelty; they frill allowed her the praise of pru-
dence and of lenity*. A few days before her death,

Buchan, 3.4.
Q3 fle

B o o K (he desired an interview with the Prior of St. An.

III. drew's, the Earl of Argyll, and other chiefs of the
^6r. Congregation. To them she lamented the fatal iffle

of those violent councils, which she had been obli.
ed to follow; and, with the candour natural to a
generous mind, confessed the errors of her own ad
ministration, and begged forgivenels of those, to
whom they had been hurtful; but, at the fame time,
she warned them, amidst their ifruggles for liberty,
and the Ihock of arms, not to lore fight of the
loyalty and fubje&ion, which was due to their fove.
reign*. The remainder of her time, fle employed
in religious meditations and exercises. She even in.
vited the attendance of Willox, one of the molt
eminent among the Reformed preachers, listened to
his inftruaions with reverence and attentiont-, and
prepared for the approach of death with a decent
fortitude.

Motvs of NOTHING could now save the French troops, fliut
theFrench up in Leith, but the immediate conclusion of a
apeac!dc peace, or the arrival of a powerful army from the

continent. The Princes of Lorrain amused their
party in Scotland, with continual expectations of the
latter, and had thereby kept alive their hopes and
their courage. But at last, the situation of France,
rather than the terror of the English arms, orthe
remonstrances of the Scottish malecontents, con-
strained them, though with reluctance, to turn their
thoughts towards pacific councils. The Protestant
in France were, at that time, a party formidable by

* Lefly, deRebus Gest. Scot. zzz. t Knox, 228.

their

their number, and more by the valour and enter- B o o K
prifing genius of their leaders. Francis II. had Il.
treated them with extreme rigour, and discovered, -,6.
by every ftep he took, a fettled resolution to extir-
pate their religion, and to ruin those who professed
it. At the prolpeC of this danger to them lelves,
and to their cause, the Protestants were alarmed,
but not terrified. Animated with zeal, and inflam-
eJ \'ith resentment, they not only prepared for their
own deitnce, but resolved, by so:ne bold ation, to
anticipate the schemes of their enemies; and as the
Princes of Lorrain were efteeined the authors of all
the King's violent measures, they marked them our,
to be the firit vitims of their indignation. Hence,
and no, si om any diaoyalty to the King, proceeded'
the famous conlpiracy of Amboise ; and tlho!lgh the
vigilance at.d good fortune of the Princes of Lor-

March Si .

rain ditcovcred and disappointed that design, it was
elfy to observe new storms gathering in every pro-
vince of the kingdom, and ready to burst out with
all the fury and outrage of civil war. In this ftua-
tion, the ambition of the house of Lorrain was c;l!-
ecI osl from the thoughts of foreign conquest s, to
(tcend the honour and dignity of the French clro'.vn,
and instead ofifending new reinforcements into Scot.
land, it became necessary to withdraw the veteran
troops already employed in that kingdom *.

IN order to conduct an affair of so much import- Tl,. ,;:c.

ance and delicacy, the Princes of Lorrain made ,t,,-0's'
choice of Monluc Bishop of Valence, and of the "',*

* Lefty, 224.

Q.4 Sieur

o K Sieur de Randan. As both these, especially the for.
IIl. mer, were reckoned inferior to no persons of that
85ó0. age, in address and political refinement; Elizabeth

opposed to them Ambassadors of equal abilities;
Cecil her Prime Minister, a man perhaps of the
greatest capacity who had ever held that office; and
Wotton Dean of Canterbury, grown old in the art
of negociating under three fucceirive Monarchs
The inrerefts of the French and English courts were
soon adjusted by men of so great dexterity in buff.
pess; and as France easily consented to withdraw
those forces, which had been the chief occasion of
the war; the other points in dispute, between that
kingdom and England, were not matters of tedi-
ous, or of difficult discussion.

THE grievances of the Congregation, and their

demands upon their own Sovereigns for redress, em-
ployed longer time, and required to be treated with
a more delicate hand. After so many open attempts,
carried on by command of the King and Queen,
in order to overturn the ancient constitution, and
to suppress the religion which they had embraced,
the Scottilh nobles could not think themselves fe-
cure, without fixing some new barrier againit the
future encroachments of regal power. But the le-
gal steps towards accomplishing this were not so ob-
vious. The French ambassadors confidered theen.
tering into any treaty with fubjefs, and with rebels,
as a condescension unworthy the dignity of a Sove-
reign; and their fcruplcs on this head might have
put an end to the treaty, if the impatience of both
parties for peace had not suggested an expedient,

which

which seemed to provide for the security of the sub. B o o r
jet, without derogating from the honour of the III.
prince. The Scottish nobles agreed, on this occa- X56.
sion, to pass from the point of right and privilege, Articls of
and to accept the redress of their grievances, as a the reay.
matter of favour. Whatever additional security
their anxiety for personal safety, or their zeal for
public liberty, prompted them to demand, was
granted in the name of Francis and Mary, as ats
of their royal favour and indulgence. And left
conceflions of this kind should seem precarious, and
liable to be retra&ed by the fame power which
had made them, the French ambassador agreed to
insert them in the treaty with Elizabeth, and there-
by to bind the King and Queen inviolably to ob-
serve them T.

IN relating this tranfadtion, cotemporary hiaori-

ans have confounded the concelfions of Francis and
Mary to their Scottish subjeCts, with the treaty be-
tween France and England; the latter, besides the
ratification of former treaties between the two king-
doms, and stipulations with regard to the time and
manner of removing both armies out of Scotland,
contained an article, to which, as the source of
many important events, we shall often have occa-
sion to refer. The right of Elizabeth to her crown
is thereby acknowledged in the strongest terms;
and Francis and Mary solemnly engage, neither to
aflume the title, nor to bear the arms of King and
Queen of England, in any time to come.

* Kcith, 134, &c.

Ho;

B o o K -HONOURABLE as this article was for Elizabeth

IIl. herself, the conditions (he obtained for her allies the
.-'' Scots cre no iefs advantageous to them. Mon.
July 6. luc and Randan consented, in the name of Francis

and Mar,, that the French forces in Scotland fihould
ini'ainly be itnt i back in.:o their own country, and
no foreign troops be hereafter introduced into the
kipldon: withut the knowledge and contentof
Paria..mert; rhat the lortifications of Leith and
Du. bar fhoulL; immediately be rafed, and no new
fort be erceed without the pcrmiflion of Parlia.
ment; that a Parliament should be held on the
firfc day of Augu;c, and that assembly be deemed
as valid, in all ref'pets, as if it had been called by
the expiefs commandment of the King and Queen;
that, conformable to the ancient laws and customs
of the country, the King and Queen fnould not de-
clare war, or conclude peace, without the concur-
rence of Parliament; that, during the Queen's ab-
fence, the adminifi:raion of government should be
veiled in a council of twelve persons, to be chosen
out cf twein, four named by Parliament, seven of
v;'n;cli cou'.cil to be eke-sed by tile Queen, and five
by the 'arliamcnt; that hereafter, the King and
Queen fliould not advance foreigners to places of
trust or dignity il the kingdom, nor confer the of-
sices of Trealfrcr or Comptroller of the Revenues
upon any ccclefiiflic; that an act of oblivion, abo-
linlid;l the guilt and memory of all offences, com-
mitted since the 6th of March, 1558, should be
pauscd in the ensuing Parliament, and be ratified by
the King and Queen; that the King and Queen
fliould not, under colour of punishing any violation

of

of their authority during that period, seek to de- B o o z
prive any of their fubjeds of the offices, benefices, 111.
or efates which they now held; that the redress '~--

I56o.

lue to churchmen, for the injuries which they had
sustained during the late infurreations, ihould be
left entirely to the cognizance of Parliament. With
regard to religious controverices, the Ambaffadora
dcclared that they would not presume to decide, but
permitted the Parliament, at their first meeting, to
examine the points in difference, and to represent
their sense of them to the King and Queen *.

To such a memorable period, did the Lords of the The effas

Congregation, by their courage and perseverance, of
condut an enterprise, which, at firit, promised a
very different ifile. From beginnings extremely
feeble, and even contemptible, the party grew by
degrees to great power; and being favoured by
many fortunate incidents, baffled all the efforts of
their own Queen, aided by the forcesof a more con-
fiderable kingdom. The sovereign authority was, by
this treaty, transferred wholly into the hands of the
Congregation; that limited prerogative, which the
Crown had hitherto pofleffed, was alnoft entirely
annihilated; and the ariflocratical power, which al-
ways predominated in the Scottish government, bc-
came supreme and incontrolable. By this treaty,
too, the influence of France, which had long been
of much weight in the affairs of Scotland, was
greatly diminished, and not only were the present
encroachments of that ambitious ally restrained, but,

Keith, 137, &c.

by

Bo o K by confederating with England, protetion was pro-

III. vided against any future attempt from the fame

quarter. A tihe fame time, the controversies in

J '
6 religion being left to the consideration of Parlia.

ment, the Protestants might reckon upon obtaining
whatever decision was most favourable to the opi.
nions which they professed.

A FEW days after the conclusion of the treaty,

both the French and English armies quitted Scot.
land.

A Parlia. THE eyes of every man in that kingdom were
pcent held.

turned towards the approaching Parliament. A
meeting, summoned it! a manner Io extraordinary,
at such a critical juncture, and to deliberate upon
matters of so much conlequence, was expeced with
the utmolt anxiety.

A SCOTTISH Parliament, suitable to the ariftocra-

tical genius of the government, was properly an
aflembly of the nobles. It was composed of Bi-
ihops, Abbots, Barons, and a few commifioners
of burroughs, who met all together in one house.
The Lesser barons, though possessed of a right to
be present, either in person, or by their reprefenta-
tives, seldom exercised it. The expence of attend-
ing, according to the fashion of the times, with a
numerous train of vassals and dependants;' the in-
attention of the age, to any legal or regular system
of government; but above all, the exorbitant au-
thority of the greater nobles, who had drawn the
whole power into their own hands, made this pri-

vilege

vilege of so little value, as to be almost negleced. B o o
It appears from the ancient rolls, that during times 1II.
of tranquillity, few commiflioners of burroughs, ~ 6
and almost none of the Lesser Barons appeared in
Parliament. The ordinary administration of go-
vernmentwas abandoned without scruple orjealoufy,
to the King and to the Greater Barons. But in ex-
traordinary conjunctures, when the struggle for li-
berty was violent, and the spirit of opposition to
the Crown rose to an height, the Burgefles and
Lesser Barons were routed from their inactivity,
and flood forth to vindicate the rights of their coun-
try. The turbulent reign of James III. affords ex-
amples in proof of this observation*. The pub-
lic indignation against the rash designs of that weak
and ill advised Prince, brought into Parliament,
betides the greater nobles and prelates, a confider-
able number of the Lesser Barons.

THE fame causes occasioned the unusual conflu-

ence of all orders of men to the Parliament, which
met on the first of Augufi. The universal passion
for liberty, civil and religious, which had seized the
nation, suffered few persons to remain unconcerned
1petators of an assembly, whose aCts were likely to
prove decisive with refpe& to both. From all cor-
ners of the kingdom, men flocked in, eager and
determined to aid, with their voices in the senate,
the fame cause, which they had defended with their
swords in the field. Besides a full convention of
Peers, Temporal and Spiritual, there appeared the
representatives of almost all the burroughs, and

Kicih, 147.

above

B o o K above an hundred Barons, who, though of the les.

III. ser order, were gentlemen of the first rank and
560. fortune in the nation .

THE Parliament was ready to enter on business

with the utmost zeal, when a difficulty was started
concerning the lawfulness of the meeting. No
Commifiioncr appeared in the name of the Kinr
* and Qeen, and no ignification of their content and
approbation was yet received. These were deemed,
by many, essential to the very being of a Parliament.
But, in opposition to this sentiment, the express
words of the treaty of Edinburgh were urged, by
which this afTembly was declared to be as valid, in
all refpets, as if it had been called and ap-
pointed by the express command of the King and
Queen. As the adherents of the Congregation
greatly out-numbered their adversaries, the latter
opinion prevailed. Their boldest leaders, and those
of most approved zeal, were chosen to be Lords of
the Articles, who formed a committee of ancient
uie, and of great importance in the Scottish Parlia-
ment. The deliberations of the Lords of the Ar-
ticles were carried on with the imoft unanimous and
ative zeal. The ad of oblivion, the nomination
of twenty-four persons, out of whom the council,
intruted with supreme authority, was to be elected;
and every other thing prescribed by the late treaty,
or which seemed necessary to render it effecual,

its pro. paired without dispute or delay. The article of re-
w;t r, glrd ligion employed longer time, and was attended with
tottel:io,. greater difficulty. It was brought into Parliament,

a by

by a petition from those who had adopted the prin- B o o K
ciples of the Reformation. Many doctrines of the III.
popish church were a contradiction to reason, and a .,56.
disgrace to religion; its discipline had become cor-
rupt and oppressive; and its revenues were both ex-
orbitant and ill applied. Against all these, the Pro-
teflants remonfirated with the utmost severity of
fiyle, which indignation at their absurdity, or expe-
rience of their pernicious tendency, could inspire;
and encouraged, by the number and zeal of their
friends, to improve such a favourablejuneture, they
aimed the blow at the whole fabric of Popery; and
beflught the Parliament to interpose their authority
for rectifying these multiplied abuses %.

S VERAL prelates, zealously attached to the an-

cient superstition, were present in this Parliament.
But during these vigorous proceedings of the Pro-
teltants, they flood confounded, and at a gaze;
and persevered in a silence which was fatal to their
caufle. They esteemed it impossible to resist or di-
vert that torrent of religious zeal, which was frill
in its full firength; they dreaded that their oppo-
fition would irritate their adversarics, and excite
them to new ats of violence; they hoped that the
King and Queen would soon be at leisure to put a
tfop to the career of their insolent subjeCts, and that,
after the rage and havock of the present florm, the
former tranquillity and order would be restored to
thie church and kingdom. They were willing, per-
hlaps, to sacrifice the doarine, and even the power

* Knox, 237.

of

B o o tc of the church, in order to ensure the safety of their

III. own persons, and to preserve the poffeflion ofthofe
56o. revenues, which were still in their hands. From

whatever motives they ated, their silence, which
was imputed to the consciousness of a bad cause,
afforded matter of great triumph to the Protestants,
and encouraged them to proceed with more bold.
ness and alacrity *.

THE Parliament did not think it enough to con.

demn those doctrines mentioned in the petition of
the Protestants; they, moreover, gave the fanqion
of their approbation to a Confeflion of Faith pre.
sented to them by the Reformed teachers -t, and
composed, as might be expected from such a per-
formance at thatjuncure, on purpose to expose the
absurd tenets and praEices of the Romilh church.
By another aEt, thejurifdiftion of the ecclesiastical
courts was abolished, and the causes, which for-
merly came under their cognizance, were tranf.
ferred to the decision of civil judges . By a third
flatute, the exercise of religious worlhip, according
to the rites of the Romish church, was prohibited.
The manner in which the Parliament enforced the
observation of this law discovers the zeal of that
assembly; the first tranfgreftion fubjeaed the offen.
der to the forfeiture of his goods, and to a corpo-
ral punishment, at the discretion ofthejudge; ba-
nifhment was the penalty of a second violation of
the law; and a third a& of disobedience was de-
clared to be capital §. Such strangers were men,

Knox, 2j3. t Id. Ibid. I Keith, 1Sz. S Knox, 2S4:

at

tt that time, to the spirit of toleration, and to the B o o K
laws of humanity; and with such indecent haste III.
did the very persons, who had just escaped the ri- 56o.
gour of ecclesiastical tyranny, proceed to imitate
those examples offeverity, of which they themselves
had so justly complained.

THE vigorous zeal of the Parliament overturned, With re.
in a few days, the ancient system of religion, which Fevd ,shes
had been established so many ages. In reforming the church.
the dofcrine and discipline of the church, the no-
bleskept pace with the ardourand expectations even
of Knox himself. But their proceedings, with re-
fpe& to there, were not more rapid and impetuous,
than they were flow and dilatory when they entered
on the consideration of ecclesiastical revenues.
Among the lay members, some were already en-
riched with the spoils of the church, and others
devoured in expectation the wealthy benefices which
Ifill remain untouched. The alteration in religion
had affbrded many of the dignified ecclesiastics
themselves, an opportunity of gratifying their ava-
rice or ambition. The demolition of the monafte-
rics, having set the Monks at liberty from their
confinement, they instantly dispersed all over the
kingdom, and commonly betook themselves to some
secular employment. The Abbot, if he had been
fotrtunate as to embrace the principles of the Re-
formation from conviction, or so cunning as to es-
poule them out of policy, seized the whole reve-
nues of the fraternity, and, except what he allowed
for the subsistence of a few superannuated Monks *%

Keith, 496. Append. 190, zig.
VOL. I. R applied

B o o K applied them entirely to his own use. The propo.

III. fal made by the Reformed teachers, for applying

G-'-' these revenues towards the maintenance of Ministers
156o. the education of youth, and the support of the

poor, was equally dreaded by all these ordersof
men. They opposed it with the utmost warmth,
andby their numbers and authority, ealfly prevailed
on the Parliament to give no ear to such a disagree.
able demand*. Zealous as the first Reformers
were, and animated with a spirit superior tothe
low considerations of interest, they beheld these
early symptoms of felfinlnefs and avarice among
their adherents, with indignation; and we findKnox
expressing the utmost sensibility of that contempt,
with which they were treated by many, from whom
he expected a more generous concern for thefuccefs
of religion, and the honour of its Minifterst.

rhevaldi- A DIFFICULTY hath been started, with regard to

rli thien the ass of this Parliament, concerning religion
cqalle i This difficulty, frivolous in itself, and at this dit-

tance of time of no importance, is founded on th
words of the treaty of Edinburgh. By that, th
Parliament was permitted to take into confideratio
the state of religion, and to signify their sentiment
of it to the King and Queen. But, infteadof pre
senting their desires to their Sovereigns, in the hunm
ble form or a supplication or address, the Parlia
ment converted them into so many ads; which
although they never received the royal assent, ob
tained, all over the kingdom, the weight and au

* Sec Append. No. IV. t Knox, 239' 256.

thorit

thority of laws. In compliance with their injunc- B o o K
tions, the established system of religion was every II!.
where overthrown, rnd that recommended by the , .
Reformers introd!iced in its place. The partiality 5
a.nd zeal of the pepie overlooked or supplied any
dci¥t in theform of these aas of Parliament, and
rendered the observance of them more universal
than ever had been yielded to the flatutes of the
molt regular or confritutional assembly. By those
proceedings, it must, however, be conelfIEd that
the Parliament, or rather the nation, violated the
lait article in the treaty of Edinburgh, and even
exceeded the powers which belong to subjects. But
when once men have been accustomed to break
through the common boundaries of fubjetion; and
their minds are inflamed with the passions which
civil war inspire; it is mere pedantry or ignorance
to measure their conduct by those rules, which can
be applied, only where government is in a slate of
order and tranquillity. A nation, when obliged to
employ such extraordinary efforts in defence of its
liberties, avails itself of every thing which can pro-
mote this great end; and the necessity of the calfe
and the importance of the objet, jufitfy any de-
parture from the common and established forms of
the constitution.

IN consequence of the treaty of Edinburgh, as Ambl.T.

well as by the ordinary forms of business, it became ,", en,.
neccflnry to lay the proceedings of Parliament be- I.'rncntto
fore the King and Queen. For this purpose, Sir
James Sandilands of Calder Lord St. John, was
,3ppointed to repair to the court of France. After

R 2 holding

B o o K holding a course so irregular, the nobles had no rea.

III. son to flatterthemfelvesthatFrancis and Mary would
560o ever approve their conduct, or confirm it by their

royalaflent. Thereception of their Ambassador was
no other than they might have expeced. He was
treated by the King and Queenwiththeutmoftcold.
ness, and difmifled without obtaining the ratifica.
tion of the Parliament's proceedings. From the
Princes of Lorrain and their partisans, he endured
all the scorn and insult, which it was natural for
them to pour upon the party he represented .

and to Eli- THOUGH the Earls of Morton, Glencairn, and
z'beth' Maitland of Lethington, the Ambassadors of the

Parliament to Elizabeth their Protecrefs, met with
a very different reception; they were not morefuc.
cefsful in one part of the negociation intrufled to
their care. The Scots, sensible of the security which
they derived from their union with England, were
desirous of rendering it indissoluble. With this
view, they empowered these eminent leadersof their
party to testify to Elizabeth their gratitude for
that seasonable and effe&tual aid which ihe had as-
forded them, and at the fame time, to beseech her
to render the friendlhip between the nations perpe-
tual, by condescending to marry the Earl of Arran,
who, though a subjet, was nearly allied to the
royal family of Scotland, and, after Mary, theun-
doubted heir to the Crown,

To the former part of this commiflion Elizabeth
listened with the utmost fatisfation, and encouraged

Knox, 255. Buch. 327.

the Scots, in any future exigency, to hope for the B o o K
continuance of her good offices; with regard to the 111.
latter, she discovered those sentiments to which she z560.
adhered throughout her whole reign. Averse from
marriage, as some pretend through choice, but
more probably out of policy, that ambitious Prin-
cess would never admit any partner to the throne;
but delighted with the entire and uncontrolled ex-
erciie of power, she sacrificed to the enjoyment of
that, the hopes of transmitting her Crown to her
own posterity. The marriage with the Earl of
Arran could not be attended with any such extra-
ordinary advantage, as to lhake this resolution; she
declined it therefore, but with many expressions of
good will towards the Scottish nation, and of re-
sped for Arran himself*.

TOWARDS theconclufion of this year, distinguish- Trldeath

*· CT~ ~~ of Irancis

ed by so many remarkable events, there happened n.
one of great importance. On the 4th of Decem-
ber, died Francis II. a Prince of a feeble conftitu-
tion, and of a mean understanding. As he did not
leave any issue by the Queen, no incident could
have been more fortunate to thole, who, during
the late commotions in Scotland, had taken part
with the Congregation. Mary, by the charms of
her beauty, had acquired an entire ascendant over
her husband; and as she transferred all her influence
to her uncles the Princes of Lorrain, Francis fol-
lowed them implicitly in whatever track they were
pleased to lead him. The power of France, under
such direction, alarmed the Scottish malecontents,

*Burn. 3. Append. 308. Keith, I5Z, &c.

R 3 with

B o o K with apprehensions of danger, no less formidable,

III. than well founded. The intestine disorders whkh
-_-- . raged in France, and the seasonable interposition of
'56. England in behalf of the Congregation, had hi.

therto pr\v: nrted the Princes cf Lorrain from carry.
in- their dcfigns upon Scotland into execution. But
under their vigorous and decisive administration, it
was impossible that the commoionls in France could
be of long continuance, and many thirns might
fall into divert Elizabeth's attention, for the future,
from the affairs of Scotland. In either of these
events, the Scots would stand exposed to all theven.
geance, which the resentment of the French court
could inflit. The blow, however long suspended,
was unavoidable, and must fall at lait with redou.
bled weight. From this profpet and expe&ation of
danger, the Scots were delivered by the death of
Francis; the ancient confederacy of the two king.
doms had already been broken, and by this event,
the only bond of union which remained was diffolv-
ed. Catherine of Medicis, who, during the mino-
rity of Charles IX. her second son, engrossed the
entire direEion of the French councils, was far
from any thoughts of vindicating the Scottifl
Queen's authority. Catherine and Mary had been
rivals in power during the reign of Francis II. and
had contended for the government of that weak
and unexperienced Prince; butas the charms of the
wife easily triumphed over the authority of the mo-
ther, Catherine could never forgive such a difap-
pointment in her favourite passion, and beheld now,
with secret pleasure, the difficult and perplexing
scene, on which her daughter-in-law was about tc

2 enter

:nter. Mary, overwhelmed with all the sorrow B o o K
which so fad a reverse of fortune could occaion; III-
flighted by the Queen-mother*; and forsaken by v6.
the tribe of courtiers, who appear only in the fun- Ma, ,e.

tes from

fline of prosperity, retired to Rheims, and there, th curtof
in solitude, indulged her grief, or hid her indigna- F"race.
tion. Even the Princes of Lorrain were obliged to
contra6t their views; to turn them from foreign to
domestic obje&s; and instead of forming vast pro.
jles with regard to Britain, found it necessary to
think of acquiring, and eftablifling an interest with
the new administration.

IT is impossible to describe the emotions of joy,
which, on all there accounts, the death of the French
Monarch excited among the Scots. They regarded
it as the only event, which could give firmness and
liability to that system of religion and government,
which was now introduced; and it is no wonder
cotemporary historians flould ascribe it to the irm-
mediate care of Providence, which, by unforeseen
expedients, can secure the peace and happiness of
kingdoms, in those situations, where human pru-
dence and invention woild utterly despair t.

ABOUT this time, the Proteltant church of Scot- EflIi..
land began to assume a regular form. Its princi. nenct of

Prefbyteri.

ples had obtained the sanction of public authority, an hurch.
and some fixed external policy became necessary for ment.
the government and preservation of the infant so-
ciety. The model introduced by the Reformers,
differed extremely from that, which had been so

Henault, 340. CaRlen. 454. t.Knox, 259.

R 4 long

B o o K long established. The motives, which induced thenm

III. to depart so far from the ancient system, deserve to

5 be explained.

As the vices of the clergy had, at first, excited

the indignation of mankind, and routed that spirit
of inquiry, which proved so fatal to the whole
Popish fyflem: As this disgust at the vices of ec.
clefiatfics was soon transferred to their persons, and,
shifting from them, by no violent transition, fettled
at last on the offices which they enjoyed; the efecis
of the Reformation would naturally have extended
not only to the doctrine, but to the governme2t
of the Popifhl church; and the fame spirit which
abolished the former, would have overturned the
latter. But, in a great part of Germany, in Eng.
land, and in the northern kingdoms, its operations
were checked by the power and policy of their Prin-
ces: and the ancient Epifcopaljurifdition, under
a few limitations, was still continued in those
churches. The episcopal hierarchy appears to be
more comformable to the pratice of the church, since
Christianity became the established religion oftheRo-
man empire. The ecclesiastical government was, at
that time, plainly copied from the civil; the firfI not
only borrowed its form, but derived its authority
from the latter; and the dioceses and jurisdictions of
Patriarchs, Archbishops, and Bishops, corresponded
with the division and conltitution of the empire. In
Switzerland, and the Low-countries, the nature of
the government allowing full scope to the genius of
the Reformation, all pre-eminence of order in the

churcih

church was destroyed, and an equality established B o o P,
more suitable to the spirit of republican policy. The 1i
situation of the primitive church suggested the '"""
idea, and furnished the model of the latter fylfem,
which has since been called PreJlyterian. The fir:st
Chriflians, oppressed by continual persecutions, and
obliged to hold their religious afemblies by stealth,
and in corners, were contented with a form of go-
vernment extremely simple. The influence of reli-
gion concurred, with the sense of danger, in ex-
tinguifling among them, the spirit of ambition, and
in preserving a parity of rank, the effet of their
ififerings, and the cause of many of their virtues.
Calvin, whose decisions were received, among the
Protefiants of that age, with incredible submission,
was the patron and restorer of this scheme of ec-
clefiaficalpolicy. The church of Geneva, formed
tnder his eye, and by his direction, was eftcemed
the most perfect model of this governm ient; and
Knox, who, during his refidcnce in that city, had
fludied and admired it, warmly recommended it to
the imitation of his countrymen.

AMONG the Scottith nobility, some hated the per-

sons, and others coveted the wealth of the dignified
clergy; and by abolishing that order of men, the
former indulged their resentment, and the latter hop-
ed to gratify their avarice. The people, inflamed
with the most violent aversion of Popery, and ap-
proving of every scheme that departed farthest from
the practice of the Romish church, were delighted
with a fyltem, so admirably suited to their predomi-
nant pafion. While the friends ofcivil liberty be-

held,

B o o K held, with pleasure, the Protestant clergy pulling

IIl. down, with their own hands, that fabric of ecclefi.
!560o afical power, which their predecessors had reared

with so much art and industry; and flattered them.
fclves, that by lending their aid to itrip churchmen
of their dignity and wealth, they might entirely de-
liver the nation from their exorbitant and opprcfhive
jurisdiction. The new mode of government easily
made its way among men, thus prepared, by their
various interests and pafTions, for its reception.

BUT, on the first introduAion of his system, Knox

did not deem it expedient to depart altogether from
the ancient form *. Instead of Bithops, he propos.
ed to establish ten or twelve Superintendants in dif-
ferent parts of the kingdom. These, as the name
implies, were empowered to infpe&t the life anddoc.
trine of the other clergy. They preided in the in-
ferior judicatories of the church, and performed fe.
veral other parts of the Episcopal funtion. Their
jurifdiEion, however, extended to sacred things
only ; they claimed no feat in Parliament, and pre-
tended no right to the dignity, or revenues, of the
former Bishops.

THE number of inferior clergy, to whom the care

of parochial duty could be committed, was till ex-
tremely small; they had embraced the principles of
the Reformation at different times, and from various
motives; during the public commotions, they were
scattered, merely by chance, over the different pro.

Spotfvood, 158.

vinces

vinces of the kingdom; and, in a few places only, B o, o .
were formed into regular classes or societies. The III.
firil general assembly of the church, which was held A
this year, bears all the marks of an infant and un. Decer. zq.
formed society. The members were but few in
number, and of no considerable rank; no uniform
or confitlent rule seems to have been obfcrved in
cleti'ng them. From a great part of the kingdom
no reprclentatives appeared. In the name of some
entire counties, bu: one person was present; while,
in other places, a tingle town or church fcnt several
members. A convention, so feeble and irregular,
could pofuefs no great authority; and conscious of
their own weakness, the members putarnend totheir
debates, without venturing upon any decision of
much importance *.

IN order to give greater strength and confiflence 156I.
to the Presbyterian plan, Knox, with the affilance
of his brethren, composed the first book of dilci-
pline, which contains the model or platform of the
intended policy t. They presented it to a conven-
tion of eflates, which was held in the beginning of
t:is year. Whatever regulations were propoled with jan. is.
e?'ard to cclefiaftical discipline and jurifdi6tion,
would have easily obtained the fanaion of that as-
fembly; but a design to recover the patrimony of
the church, which is there insinuated, met with a
very different reception.

IN vain did the clergy display the advantages
which would accrue to the public, by a proper ap-

Keith, 498. t Spotfw. 1z.,

plication

B o K plication ofecclefiaftical revenues. In vain did they

III. propose, by an impartial distribution of this fund,

to promote true religion, to encourage learning, and
. to support the poor. In vain did they even inter.

mingle threatenings of the divine difpleafureagainft
the unjust detainers of what was appropriated to a
sacred use. The nobles held fast the prey, which
they had seized; and bellowing upon the proposal,
the name of a devout imagination, they affected to
confider it as a projea altogether visionary, and
treated it with the utmoit scorn *.

The Queen THIs convention appointed the Prior of St. An.
invited to
return into drew's to repair to the Queen, and to invite her to
Scotland, return into her native country, and to assume the

reins of government, which had been too long corn.
mitted to other hands. And though some of her
subjects dreaded her return, and others forelaw dan-
gerous consequences with which it might be attend.
ed -, the bulk of them desired it with so much ar-
dour, that the invitation was given with the greaterf
appearance of unanimity. But the zeal of the Ro-
man Catholics got the start of the Prior in paying
court to Mary; and Lelly, afterwards bishop of
Ross, who was commiflioned by them, arrived be.
fore him at the place of her residence$. Lefly
endeavoured to infuse into the Queen's mind, fufpi-
cions of her Protestant fubjets, and to persuade hei
to throw herself entirely into the arms ofthofe whe
adhered to her own religion. For this purpose, he
insisted that she flould land at Aberdeen; and a!

* Knox, 256. - See Append. No. V. Lefly, 227.

Cth1

he Protestant do&rines had made no considerable B o o K
progress in that part of the kingdom, he gave her III.
assurance of beingjoined, in a few days, by 20,000 i561
men; and flattered her, that with such an army,
encouraged by her presence and authority, the might
easily overturn the Reformed church, before it was
firmly fettled on its foundations.

BUT at this j un&ure, the Princes of Lorrain were
not disposed to liften to this extravagant and dan-
gerous proposal. Intent on defending themselves
againif Catherine of Medicis, whose insidious policy
was employed in undermining their exorbitant pow-
er, they had no leisure to attend to the affairs of
Scotland, and wilhed their niece to take possession
of her kingdom, with as little disturbance as pof-
fible. The French officers, too, who had served
in Scotland, dissuaded Mary from all violent mea-
iures; and, by representing the power and number
of the Proteflants to be irresistible, determined her
to court them by every art; and rather to employ
the leading men of that party as her ministers, than
to provoke them, by a fruitless opposition, to be-
come her enemies *. Hence proceeded the confi-
dence and affection,with which the Prior of St. An-
drew's was received by the Queen. His repre-
fcntation of the fate of the kingdom gained great
credit; and Lefly beheld, with regret, the new
channel in which court favour was likely to run.

ANOTHER Convention of Estates was held in
May. The arrival of an Ambassador firom France,

Melv. 6t.

seems

B o o K seems to have been the occasion of this meeting,

III. i-e was inftruced to solicit the Scots to renew their
L-.-' ancient alliance with France, to break their new
I561. confederacy with England,and to restore the Popflh

ecclefialtics to the pofiltffion of their revenues, and
the exercise of their fundions. It is no easy matter
to form any conjecture concerning the intentions of
the French court, in making these extraordinary and
ill-timed propositions. They were rejected with
that scorn, which might well have been expeted
from the temper of the nation .

IN this convention, the Protestant clergy did not

obtain a more favourable audience than formerly,
and their prospect of recovering the patrimony ofthe
church frill remained as diflant and uncertain as ever,
But with regard to another point, they found the
zeal of the nobles in no degree abated. The book
of discipline seemed to require, that the monuments
of Popery, which frill remained in the kingdom,
flould be demolifhedt; and, though neither the
fame pretence of policy, nor the fame ungovernable
rage of the people, remained tojuflify or excuse this
barbarous havoc, the Convention, confideringevery
religious fabric as a relict of idolatry, passed fen-
tence upon them by an aft in form, and persons,
the most remarkable for the activity of their zeal,
were appointed to put it in execution. Abbies, ca-
thedrals, churches, libraries, records, and even the
sepulchres of the dead, perished in one common
ruin. The torm of popular infurreftion, though

* nox, 269, 273. t Spotfwood, 153.

impe'

impetuous and irresistible, had extended only to B o o K
a few counties, and soon fpentits rage; but now a III.
deliberate and universal rapine completed the de- 156
vaitation of every thing, venerable and magnifi-
cent, which had escaped its violence *.

IN the mean time, Mary was in no haste to re. Mary be-

gins t,, pre.

turn into Scotland. Accustomed to the elegance, par for it.
splendour, and gaiety of a polite court, he f ill fond-
ly lingered in France, the scene of all these enjoy-
ments, and contemplated, with horror, the barba-
riin of her own country, and the turbulence of her
subjects, which presented her with a very different
face of things. The impatience, however, of her
people, the persuasions of her uncles, but above all,
the studied and mortifying neglet, wi': which she
was treated by the Queen-mother, force-. her to
think of beginning this disagreeable voyage i-. But
while the was preparing for it, there were sown be-
tween her and Elizabeth, the feeds es that personal
jealousy and discord, which embittered the life, and
shortened the days of the Scottish Queen.

THe ratification of the late treaty of Edinburgh o,;g;n of

was the immediate occasion of this f#tal animosity; bhe dic'o,
the true causes of it lay much deeper. Almoll"nd1Eiza-
every article, in that treaty, had been executed by
both parties, with a scrupulous exatnefs. The for-
tifications of Leith were demolihfed, and the armies
of France and England withdrawn within the ap-
pointed time. The grievances of the Scottifi ma!e

Spotfwood, 17;. t Brantome,'Jebb, vol. ii. 482.

contents

B o K contents were redressed, and they had obtained

III. whatever they could demand for their future fecu.

ó-' rity. With regard to all these, Mary could have
136 . little reason to decline, or Elizabeth to urge, the

ratification of the treaty.

THE sixth article remained the only source of

contest and difficulty. No Minister ever entered
more deeply into the schemes of his Sovereign, or
pursued them with more dexterity and success than
Cecil. In the conduct of the negociation at Edin.
burgh, the found understanding of this able politi.
cian had proved greatly an overmatch for Monluc's
refinements in intrigue, and had artfully induced the
French Ambassadors, not only to acknowledgethat
the Crowns of England and Ireland did of right be-
long to Elizabeth alone, but also to promise, that in
all times to come, Mary flould abstain from using
the titles, or bearing the arms ofthofe kingdoms.

THE ratification of this article would have been

of the most fatal consequence to Mary. The Crown
of England was an obje6t worthy of her ambition.
Her pretensions to it gave her great dignity and im-
portance in the eyes of all Europe. By many, her
title was esteemed preferable to that of Elizabeth.
Among the English themselves, the Roman Catho.
lics, who formed, at that time, a numerous and ac-
tive party, openly espoused this opinion; and even
the Protestants, who supported Elizabeth's throne,
could not deny the Queen of Scots to be her imme-
diate heir. A proper opportunity to avail herself
of all these advantages, could not, in the course of

thingsJ

things, be far distant, and many incidents might B o o K
fall in, to bring this opportunity nearer than was III.
expeced. In there circumstances, Mary, by ra- 156I.
tifying the article in dispute, would have loft that
rank which she had hitherto held among neighbour-
ing Princes; the zeal of her adherents muff have
gradually cooled; and she might have renounced,
from that moment, all hopes of ever wearing the
English Crown.

NONE ofthefe beneficial consequences escaped the
penetrating eye of Elizabeth, who, for this reason,
had recourse to every thing, by which the could hope
either to tooth or frighten the Scottish _Queen into
a compliance with her demands; and if that Prin-
cess had been so unadvised as to ratify the rash con-
cefflons of her Ambassadors, Elizabeth, by that
deed, would have acquired an advantage, which,
under her management, muff have turned to great
account. By such a renunciation, the question,
with regard to the right of succession, would have
been left altogether open and undecided; and, by
means of that, Elizabeth might either have kept her
rival in perpetual anxiety and dependance, or, by
the authority of her Parliament, she might have
broken in upon the order of lineal succession, and
transferred the Crown to some other descendant of
the royal blood. The former conduct (he observed
towards James Vl. whom, during hiswhole reign, lhe
Iheld in perpetual fear and fubjedion. The latter,
and more rigorous method of proceeding, would, in
411 probability, have been employed against Mary,

VOL. i, S whom,

B oo whom, for many reasons, she both envied and

III. hated.
156t.

156. NOR was this ftep beyond her power, unprece.

dented in the history, or inconsistent with the con.
flitution of England. Though succession by here.
ditary right be an idea so natural and so popular,
that it Las been eflablified in almost every civilized
nation, yet England affords many memorable in.
stances of deviations from that rule. The Crown of
that kingdom having once been seized by the hand
of a conqueror, this invited the bold and enterprif.
ing in every age to imitate such an illustrious ex.
ample of fortunate ambition. From the timeof
William the Norman, the regular course ofdefcent
had seldom continued through three successive reigns.
Thole Princes, whose intrigues or valour opened to
then a way to the throne, called in the authority of
the great council of the nation to confirm their du.
bious titles. Hence, parliamentary and hereditary
right became in England of equal consideration,
That great assembly claimed and actually possessed a
power of altering the order of regal succession; and
even so late as Henry VIII. an at of Parliament
had authorised that capricious Monarch to fettle
the order of succession at his pleasure. The Eng-
lifh, jealous of their religious liberty, and averse
from the dominion of strangers, would have eager.
ly adopted the paFlions of their sovereign, and
might have been easily induced to exclude the Scot-
tilh line from the right of succeeding to the Crown.
These seem to have been the views of both Queens,

and

and these were the difficulties which retarded the B o o K
ratification of the treaty of Edinburgh. l

1561.

BUT, if the sources of their discord were to be
traced no higher than this treaty, an inconsiderable
alteration in the words of it, might have brought the
present question to an amicable issue. The indefinite
and ambiguous expression, which Cecil had inserted
into the treaty, might have been changed into one
more limited, but more precise; and Mary, inltead
of promising to abstain from bearing the title of
Queen of England in all times to come, might have
engaged not to assume that title, during the life of
Elizabeth, or the lives of her lawful posterity.

Sucii an amendment, however, did not suit the
views of either Queen. Though Mary had been
obliged to suspend, for some time, the prosecution
of her title to the Englifl crown, she had not how-
ever relinquished it. She determined to revive her
claim, on the first profpea of fuccels, and was un-
willing to bind herself, by a positive engagement,
not to take advantage of any iuch fortunate occur-
rence. Nor would the alteration have been more
acceptable to Elizabeth, who, by agreeing to it,
would have tacitly recognised the right of her rival
to ascend the throne after her decease. But neither
the Scottiff nor English Queen durst avow thete fe-
cret sentiments of their hearts. Any open discovery
of an inclination to diaturb the tranquillity of Eng-
land, or to wrest the sceptre out of Elizabeth's
hands, might have proved fatal to Mary. Any sus-
picion of a design to alter the order of succession,

S 2 and

B o o K and to set aside the claim of the Scottish Queen,

III. would have exposed Elizabeth to much and deferv.
561. ed cenfhre, and have raised up against her many and

dangerous enemies. These, however carefully
concealed, or artfully disguised, were, in all proba.
bility, the real motives which determined the one
Queen to solicit, and the other to refuse the ratifi.
cation of the treaty, in its original form; while nei.
ther had recourse to that explication of it, which to
an heart unwarped by political interest, and fin.
cerely desirous of union and concord, would have
appeared so obvious and natural.

BUT though considerations of interest first occa.

sioned this rupture between the Britilh Queens, ri-
valfhip of another kind contributed to widen the
breach, and female jealousy increased the violence
of their political hatred. Elizabeth, with all those
extraordinary qualities, by which fle equalled or
surpassed such of her sex, as have merited the great.
eft renown, discovered an admiration of her own
person, to a degree, which women of ordinary un-
derftandings either do not entertain, or prudently
endeavour to conceal. Her attention to dress, her
solicitude to display her charms, her love of flattery,
were all excessive. Nor were these weaknesses con-
fined to that period of life, when they are more par.
donable. Even in very advanced years, the wiset
woman of that, or perhaps of any other age, wore
the garb, and affted the manners of a girl*.

* Johnlon Hil. Rer. Britan. 3.16, 347. Carte, vol. iii. 6g9.
Catalogue of Royal and Noble Authors. Article Ei.x,

Though

Though Elizabeth was as much inferior to Mary, Bo o K
in beauty, and gracefulness of person, as she excel- IllI
led her in political abilities, and in the arts of go- 561
vernment, fle was weak enough to compare herself
with the Scottish Queen *; and as it was impossible
The could be altogether ignorant how much Mary
gained by the comparison, she envied and hated her
as a rival, by whom she was eclipsed. In judging
of the conduLt of Princes, we are apt to ascribe too
much to political motives, and too little to the pas-
tons which they feel in common with the reft of
mankind. In order to account for Elizabeth's pre-
sent, as well as her subsequent condut towards
Mary, we muff not always confider her as a Queen,
we must sometimes regard her as a woman.

ELIZABETH, though no firanger to Mary's diffi-
culties with respect to the treaty, continued to urge
her, by repeated applications, to ratify itt. Mary,
under various pretences, f ill contrived to gain time,
and to elude the request. But while the one Queen
solicited with persevering i portunity, and the other
evaded with artful delay, they both fludied an ex-
treme politeness of behaviour, and loadedeach other
with profcffions of fitterly love, with reciprocal de.
clarations of unchangeable esteem and amity.

IT was not long before Mary was convinced, that, El,;,.b,
among Princes, these expreflions of friendlhip are rfuics Mar

a sase-con-

commonly far diRant from the heart. In failing dua.
from France to Scotland, the course lies along the

Melvil, 98. t Keibh, 157, 16o, &c.

S 3 English

B o o K English coast. In order to be safe from the insult

III. of the English fleet, or, in cafe of tempestuous wea.
t..-' ther, to secure a retreat in the harbours of that king.
156 . dom, Mary sent M. D'Oyfel to demand of Eliza.

beth a fafe-condu&t during her voyage. This re.
quest, which decency alone obliged one Prince to
grant to another, Elizabeth rejected, in such a man-
ner, as gave rife to no flight suspicion of a design,
either to obstruct the passage, or to intercept the
person of the Scottish Queen *.

Mary he- THIS ungenerous behaviour of Elizabeth filled
,ygnhet Mary with indignation, but did not retard her de-

parture from France. She was accompanied to Ca-
lais, the place where she embarked, in a mannerfuit.
able to her dignity, as the Queen of two powerful
kingdoms. Six Princes of Lorrain her uncles, with
many of the most eminent among the French nobles,
were in her retinue. Catherine, who secretly re-
joiced at her departure, graced it with every circum-
stance of magnificence and refpe&. After bidding
adieu to her mourning attendants, with a fad heart,
and eyes bathed in tears, Mary left that kingdom,
the short but only icene of her life, in which for.
tune fiiled upon her. While the French coast con-
tinued in fight, she intently gazed upon it, and
muling, in a thoughtful polfure, on that height of
fortune whence lue had fallen, and presaging, per.
haps, the disasters and calamities which embittered
the remainder of her days, she sighed often, and
cried out, "Farewel France! Farewel beloved coun.

*Keith, 171. Camden. SeeAppendix, No.VI.

" tt

try, which I ihall never more behold!" Even B o o K
when the darkness of the night had hid the land III.
from her view, she would neither retire to the cabin, 6
nor tafe food, but commanding a couch to be pla-
ced on the deck, she there waited the return of day,
with the utmost impatience. Fortune soothed her
on this occasion; the galley made little way during
the night. In the morning, the coast of France
was still within fight, and she continued to feed her
melancholy with the profpe6t; and as long as her
eyes could distinguish it, to utter the fame tender
expressions of regret *. At last a brisk gale arose,
by the favour of which for some days, and after-
ward under the covert of a thick fog, Mary escaped
the English fleet, which lay in wait to intercept
her-; and on the i9th of August, after an absence Arrivesin
of near thirteen years, landed safely at Leith in her Scotlan'd
native kingdom.

MARY was received by her fubje6ts with shouts
and acclamations of joy, and with every demonflra-
tion of welcome and regard. But as her arrival was
unexpected, and no suitable preparation had been
made for it, they could not, with all their efforts,
hide from her the poverty of the country, and were
obliged to conduct her to the palace of Holyrood-
house with little pomp. The Queen, accustomed
from her infancy to splendour and magnificence, and
fond of them, as was natural at her age, could not
help obefrving the change in her situation, and
seened to be deeply affected with it j.

* Brantome, 483. He himself was in the fame galley with
the Queen. - Goodal, vol. i. 175. Caflen. 455. I Brant, 484.

S 4 NEVER

B o o K NEVER did any Prince ascend the throne at a

III. juncure which called for more wisdom in council,
,cI' or more courage and steadiness in acion. The rage
State of the of religious controversy was fill unabated. The
kingdom at
tha time. memory of past oppression exasperated the Protef.

tants; the smart of recent injuries rendered the Pa.
pifts desperate; both were zealous, fierce, and irre.
concilable. The absence of their Sovereign had
accustomed the nobles to independence; and dur.
ing the late commotions, they had acquired such an
increase of wealth, as threw great weight into the
scale of the aristocracy, which flood not in need
of any accefion of power. The kingdom had long
been under the government of Regents, who exer.
cifeda delegated jurisdiction, attended with little au-
thority, and which inspired no reverence. A fiate
of pure anarchy had prevailed for the two las
years,without aRegent, without a supreme council,
without the power, or even the form of a regulargo-
vernment*. A licentious spirit, unacquainted with
1Libordination, and disdaining the restraints of law
and juflice, had spread among all ranks of men.
The influence of France, the ancient ally of the
kingdom, was withdrawn or deipifed. The Engliih,
of enemies become confederates, had grown into
confidence with the nation, and had gained an as-
cendant over all its councils. The Scottilh Mo-
narchs did not derive more splendour or power from
the friendship of the former, than they had reason
to dread injury and diminution from the interpofi
tion of the latter. Every consideration, whether of

Keith, Appendix 2z.

intereftl

interest, or of felf-prefervation, obliged Elizabeth B o o K
to depress the royal authority in Scotland, and to III.
create the Prince perpetual difficulties, by foment-
ing the spirit of diffatisfacion among the people.

IN this posture were the affairs of Scotland, when
the administration fell into the hands of a young
Queen, not nineteen years of age, unacquainted
with the manners and laws of her country, a ftran-
ger to her fubjeas, without experience, without
allies, and almost without a friend.

ON the other hand, in Mary's situation we find
some circumstances, which, though they did not
balance these disadvantages, contributed, however,
to alleviate them; and, with. skilful management,
might have produced great effects. Her subjeCts,
unaccuffomed so long to therefidence of their Prince,
were not only dazzled by the novelty and splendour
of the royal presence, but inspired with awe and re-
verence. Besides the places of power and profit
bestowed by the favour of a Prince, his protection,
his familiarity, and even his smiles, confer honour
and win the hearts of men. From all corners of
the kingdom, the nobles crowded to testify ,their
duty and affection to their sovereign, and fludied,
by every art, to wipe out the memory of past mif-
condut, and to lay in a flock of future merit. The
amusements and gaiety of her court, which was
filled with the noft accomplished of the French no-
bility, who had attended her, began to soften and
to polifl the rude manners of tl:t nation. Mary
herself pofleffed many of theft qualifications, which

raise

B o o K raise affeAion, and procure efeem. The beauty

III. and gracefulness of her person drew universal ad-
56cl1 miration, the elegance and politeness of her man.

ners commanded general refpet. To all the charms
of her own sex, she added many of the accomplish.
ments of the other. The progress she had made in
all the Arts and Sciences, which were then esteemed
necessary or ornamental, was far beyond what is
commonly attained by Princes; and all her other
qualities were rendered more agreeable by a courte.
ous affability, which, without lessening the dignity
of a Prince, steals on the hearts of fubjets with a
bewitching insinuation.

FROM these circumRtances, notwithstanding the

threatening aspet of affairs at Mary's return into
Scotland, notwithstanding the clouds which gather-
ed on every hand, a political observer would have
predicted a very different issue of her reign; and
whatever sudden gufls of facion he might have
expected, he would never have dreaded the deftruc.
tive violence of that storm which followed.

WHILE all parties were contending who Ihould

discover the most dutiful attachment to the Queen,
the zealous and impatient spirit of the age broke
out in a remarkable inRtance. On the Sunday after
her arrival, the Queen commanded mass to be ce-
lebrated in the chapel of her palace. The sirs ru-
mour of this occasioned a secret murmuring among
the Protestants who attended the court; complaints
and threatenings soon followed; the servants belong-
ing to the chapel were insulted and abused; and, if

8 the

the Prior of St. Andrew's had not seasonably inter- B o o K
posed, the rioters might have proceeded to the III.
utnmoft excesses*. -

156X.

IT is impoflible, at this distance of time, and

under circumfrances so very different, to conceive
the violence of that zeal againfi Popery, which then
possessed the nation. Every instance ofcondefcenfion
to the Papists was esteemed an aa of apoftacy, and
the toleration of a tingle mars pronounced to be
more formidable to the nation than the invasion of
ten thousand armed men t. Under the influence of
these opinions, many Protestants would have ven-
tured to go dangerous lengths; and, without at-
tempting to convince their Sovereign by argument,
or to reclaim her by indulgence, would have abrupt-
ly denied her the liberty of worshipping God in that
manner, which alone Ihe thought acceptable to him.
But the Prior of St. Andrew's, and other leaders of
the party, not only restrained this impetuous spirit;
but, in spite of the murmurs of thl people, and
the exclamations of the preachers, obtained for
the Queen and her domestics the undisturbed exer-
cife of the Catholic Religion. Near an hundred
years after this period, when the violence of religi-
ous animofities had begun to subside, when time
and the progress of learning had enlarged the views
of the human mind, an English House of Com-
mons refused to indulge the wife of their Sovereign
in the private use of the mass. The Protiefr.t
leaders deserve, on this occasion, the praifi: both of
wiSdom and of moderation for conduct ib difierent.

* Knox, z28. *' Ibid. 227.

But,

B o o K But, at the fame time, whoever reflets upon the

III. encroaching and sanguinary spirit of Popery, will

'-ó' -be far from treating the fears and caution of the
156i' more zealous Reformers as altogether imaginary

and destitute of any real foundation.

THE protestants, however, by this compliance

.with the Queen's prejudices, obtained a proclama-
tion highly favourable to their religion. The Re.
formed doctrine, though established all over the
kingdom, had never received the countenance or
Aug. 25. fanaion of royal authority. On this occasion, the

Queen declared any attempt towards an alteration
or subversion of it, to be a capital crime *.

She em. THE Queen, conformable to the plan which had

oteftant been concerted in France, committed the admini.
in thead- ftration of affairs entirely to Protestants. Her
nfinifira-
tion. council was filled with the most eminent persons of

that party; not a single Papist wasadmittedintoany
degree of confidence f. The Prior of St. Andrew's
and Maitland of Lethington seemed to hold the
first place in the Queen's affection, and possessed
all the power and reputation of favourite MinifRers.
Her choice could not have fallen upon persons more
acceptable to her people; and, by their prudent ad-
vice, Mary conduted herself with so much mode-
ration, and deference to the sentiments of the na-
tion, as could not fail of gaining the affection of
her fubjeEts :, the firmest foundation of a Prince's
power, and the only genuine source of his happi-
ness and glory.

· j.eith, 504.. t Knox, 285, t Lefly, 235.

A coU-

A CORDIAL reconcilement with Elizabeth was B o o K
another objec of great importance to Mary; and II.
though she seems to have had it much at heart, in 56.
the beginning of her adminifiration, to accomplish Attempts

to gain Eli-

such a desirable conjun&ion, yet many events oc- ,ibgth'
curred to widen, rather than to close the breach. fvour'
The formal offices of friendship, however, are fel-
Jomr neglected among Princes, and Elizabeth, who
had attempted so openly to obftru& the Queen's
voyage into Scotland, did not fail, a few days after
her arrival, to command Randolph to congratulate
her safe return. Mary, that ihe might be on equal
terms with her, sent Maitland to the English court,
vith many ceremonious exprefions of regard for
Elizabeth *. Both the Ambassadors were received
with the urmoft civility; and, on each fide, the
professions of kindness, as they were made with
little sincerity, were lifened to with proportional
credit.

BOTH were intrusted, however, with something
more than mere matter of ceremony. Randolph
urged Mary, with fresh importunity, to ratify the
treaty of Edinburgh. Maitland endeavoured to
amuse Elizabeth, by apologizing for the dilatory
conduct of his Mistress with regard to that point.
The multiplicity of public affairs since her arrival in
Scotland, the importance of the question in dispute,
and the absence of many noblemen, with whom ehe
was obliged in decency to consult, were the pre.
tences offered in excuse for her conduct; the real

Keith, 18 , &c.

causes

B o o causes of it were chose; which have rtid ibeen

II. mentioned. But, in order to extricate hirfelfom

' of these difficulties, into which the treaty of Edia.
1 burgh had led her, Mary was brought to'yield a

point, which formerly ihe seemed determined never
to give up. She inftruced Maidand to signify her
willingness to disclaim any right to the crown of
England, during the life of Elizabeth, and the lives
of her posterity; if, in failure of these, she were
declared next heir by at of Parliameht*.

REASONABL\ as this proposal might appear to

Mary, who thereby precluded herself from disturb.
ing Elizabeth's possession of the throne, nothing
could be more inconsistent with Elizabeth's interest,
or more contradicory to a paflion, which predotni.
nated in the charater of that Princess. Notwith-
flanding all the great qualities which threw such
lustre on her reign, we may observe, that she was
tintured with ajealoufy of her right to the Crown,
which often betrayed her into mean and ungenerous
a&ions. The peculiarity of her situation heighten-
ed, no doubt, and increased, but did not infuse
this paflion. It descended to her from Henry. VII.
her grandfather, whom, in several features of his
chara&er, she nearly resembled. Like him, Ihe sus-
sered the title by which the held the Crown to re.
main ambiguous and controverted, rather than lub-
mit it to parliamentary difcufion, or derive any
addition to her right, from.fuch authority. Like
him, he observed every pretender to the fuccelion,
not only with that attention, which prudence pre.

Camden, 387. Buck. 329. fcibc'

scriber'

scribes i but withtat aversion, which suspicion in. B o 0at
spires. The present uncertainty with regard tohe III.
right of succession, operated for Elizabeth's advan- 1561
tage, both onher subjects, and on her-rivals. A-
mong the former, every lover of his country re-
garded her life as the great security of the national
tranquillity; and chose rather to acknowledge 'a
title which was dubious, than to search for one that
was unknown. The latter, while nothing was de-
cided, were held in dependence, and obliged to
court her. The manner in which she received this
ill-timed proposal of the Scottish Queen, was no
other than might have been expected. She reje&c
ed it in a peremptory tone, with many exprcffions
of a resolution never to permit a point of so much
delicacy to be touched.

ABOUT this time, the Queen made her public Sept. I.
entry into Edinburgh with great pomp. Nothing
was negleted, which could express the duty and as-
feftion of the citizens towards their Sovereign. But
amidst these demonstrations of regard, the genius
and sentiments of the nation discovered themselves,
in a circumftanoe, which, though inconsiderable,
ought not to be overlooked. As it was the mode
of the times to exhibit many pageants at every pub-
lic folemnicy; most of there, on this occasion, were
contrived to be representations of the vengeance
which the Almighty had inflicted upon idolaters *.
Even while they studied to amuse and to flatter the
Queen, her fibjecds could not refrain from tcftify.

*Keith, a19.

ing

B o :King their abhorrence of that religion which Ihe pro;

}I.I fcfled. : ; -

Meftnin, To restore the regular administration of justice,
the licence
ofthe boe. and to reform the internal policy of the country,

became the next objec of the Queen's care. The
laws enaaed for preservation of public. order, and
the security of private property, were nearly the,
fame in Scotland, as in every other civilized country.
But the nature of the Scottish constitution, the im.
potence of regal authority, the exorbitant.power of
the nobles, the violence of faction, and the fierce
manners of the people, rendered the execution of
these laws feeble, irregular, and partial. In the
counties which border on England, this defe& was
most apparent; and the consequences of it mol
sensibly felt. The inhabitants, strangers to indus.
try, averse from labour, and unacquainted with the
arcs of peace, subsisted entirely by spoil and pillage,
and, being confederated in septs or clans, commit.
ted there exceffis not only with impunity, but even
with honour. During the unsettled state of the
kingdom from the death of James V. this danger-
ous licence had grown to an unusual height; and
the inroads and rapine of those freebooters-were be-
come no less intolerable to their own colintrymen,
than to the Englilh. To retrain and punith these
outrages, was an aftion equally popular in both
kingdoms. The Prior of St. Andrew's was the
person chosen for this important service, rad extra*
Ordinary powers, together with the title of the
Queen's lieutenant, were veRed in him for this
purpose,

Qo.

NpTaion .nt ,oxrefuirprfiong (e,%,.yc^» .- B i

.9 c

3

tomedt orrcgulrgoloernnent, thanthIpreparatiPns ilI.
made onthis occasion.,. They w.ere pch as might .'V,-
be cxpectd in, the rudeR and mot imperfeftf Rate
of fociery. The freeholders of eleven-ieveral,coun-
ties, with all their followers completel ;armed, were
summoned to assist the.Lieutenant in; te discharge
of his office. Every thing resembled a military ex-
pedition, rather than the progress of a court ofjuf-
tice . The Prior executed his comminion, with
such vigour and prudence, as acquired him. a great
increafe.of reputation and ,popularity among his
countrymen. Numbers of, the banditti suffered the
punishment .due to their crimes; andi:by, the im-
partial and rigorous administration ofjuftice, order
and tranquillity were restored to that' part of the
kingdom. . .

DUR ING the absence of the Priorof St. Andrew's, The PapR't

attempt, In
the leaders of the Popish fation seem to have taken ain, to get

'

. ** .

*.

, into favour

some steps towards insinuating themselves into the with her.
Queen's favour and confidence t. But the Arch-
bilhop of St. Andrew's, the most remarkable per-
son in the party for abilities and political address,
was received with little favour at court; and what-
ever secret partiality the Queen might have towards
those who profcffed the fame religion with herself,
fle discovered no inclination, at that time, to take
the administration of affairs out of tle hands, to
which Ihe had 'already committed it. ',,

THE cold reception Of the.Artchbitiop. of St.
Andrew's was owing to, his onnexion, with the

* Keith, a98. t Ibid, houe
VOL. I. T hou

,~.$ IbM,

z

o$.
.~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

B b
' i houfc of Haipilton . som which tie '

ifi. much alienated. The iki 'bofGu- ife aifihend

6 -dinal could never foirgive the wal, with fWhidh t

Duke of Chatelherault and his son ti -E'irl o
Arran had espoused the cauie of the Congregation
Princes seldom view their fucceflors without jea.
lousy and distrust. The Prior of St. Anidrws,
perhaps, dreaded the Duke as a rival in power. A
these caures concurred in inifufing intothe Queen's
mind an aversion for that family. The Duke in.
dulging his love of retirement, lived a a distance
from court, without taking pains to ififinuate him.
self into favour; and though the Earl of Arran
openly aspired to marry the Queen, he, by a most
unpardonable ac of imprudence, was the only no
bleman of diftindion who opposed Mary's enjoying
the exercise of her religion and by ralhlyentering
a public protestation against it, entirely forfeited her
favour *. At the fame time, the fordid parsimony
of his father obliged him either to hide himself in
some retirement, or to appear i a manner unb-c
coming his dignity as first Prince of the blood, or
his high precenfions as suitor to the Queen.. His
love, inflamed by disappointment, and his impa-
tience exasperated by neglect, preyed gradually on
his reason; and, after many extravagances, broke
out at last in ungovernable frenzy.
Dc. zo. Towards the end of the year, a Convention of

Estates was held, chiefly on account of ecclesiastical
affairs. The afrembly of the church, lwhich. t at
the fame time, presented a petition, continingriniaY

Keaith, 201, 204. Knox, 286. .1 Kjh, o96.

diqmands

was now ond erably iancre. ae, BMany

more 'ere co.ry,.B.

the cnrtirp g the Pewctnr i the kaI in,,gnd. 'h, IhL.
provi4m pg h benevncf ne f their .pep'le. Tlo1' '
last wa .i, of

great)rp ,scip( anl·zthciepNs A
taken o.warls it defiikryvie oble trEcdd.

THovGif the numberoft toteftant preachers Anew

o .

was now conliedrably increased, many more were

w ncerng

still wanted, in every corner of the kpingdpom. o tf
legal provitioi having been made

o for them, they church

had hithert idrawn a scanty and precarious ofabfri
ence from the benevolence of their people. cTo
ufnler the Minitders of an e mfabliyhed churchto con-
tinue in this tate ofindigence atd dependence, was
an indecencyequally repugnant to the principles of
religions,and to the maxims of fiound policy, and
would have jutified all the imputations of avarice,
with which the.Reformtion was then loaded by its
enemies. Ther evenues of the Popilh church were
the only fund, which could be employed for their
relief; but during the three lait years, the Fiate of
these was.greatly altered. Agrecat nmajority of Ab-
bots, Priors, ,and other heads of religious houses,
had, either from a sense of duty, or from views ds
interest, renounced the errors of Popery; and not-
withstanding this change in their.. entiments, they
retained their ancient reyenues. Almost the ywhlc
order of bilhops, and several of the other digpta-
ries, fill adhered to the Romish fupeCftiiqoni And
though de arred. from. eyery ,fTritu'als funl&ion,
continued to enjoy the temporalities of ttir bene-
sices. Some laymen, efp.cialy thoe who'l had been
acive in promoting the lReormation,- al , under.

· !J h,- o.r '
o . . .' var

& qtl~ Plit.l ! m

B o oK various pretences, and:amidft the linceneof civi

III. wars, got into their hands p6fleffions, which te,
r561. longed to the church. And thus, before any'pan

of the ancient ecclesiastical revenues could be ap.
plied towards the maintenance of the Proteftam
ministers, many different intcrefts were to be ad.
justed; many claims to be examined; and the pre.
Judices and pafions of the two contending parties
required the application of a delicate hand. After
much contention, the following plan was approved
by a majority of voices, and acquiesced in even by
the Popilh clergy themselves. An exa& account of
the value of ecclesiastical benefices throughout the
kingdom was appointed to be taken. The present
incumbents, to whatever party they adhered,
were allowed to keep poflefion: Two thirds of
their whole revenue were reserved for their own use,
the remainder was annexed to the Crown; and out
of that, the Queen undertook to assign a sufficient
maintenance for the Protestant clergy .

As mos of the Bilhops and several of the other

dignitaries were still firmly attached to the Popilh
religion, the extirpation of the whole order, rather
than an a& of such extraordinary indulgence, might
have been expeted from the zeal of the peachers,
and from the spirit which had hitherto animaed the
nation. But, on this occasion, other principles ob.
struted the operations of such as were pudy reli.
gious. Zeal for liberty, and the lovre'f walth,
two paflions extremely opposite, conicurr'd in de
termiinig the Protestant leaders to fall L wi thth

Keith, Append. 175. Knox, 394. 1

pltnl

plan, which deviated fo.manifkftly from the max; B o o oK:
ims by which they had hitherto regulated. their III.
condua. 5

IF the Reformers hod been allowed to .at with-
out controul,; and to level all diftintions in the
church, the immense revenues annexed to ecclesias-
tical dignities could not, with any colour of jufiice,.
have been retained by those in whose hands they
now were but must either have been distributed
amongst the Protestant clergy, who performed all
religious offices, or must have fallen to the Queen,
from the bounty of whose ancestors, the greater
part of them was originally derived. The former
scheme, however suitable to the religious fpiric of
many among the people, was attended with mani-
fold danger. The Popish ecclesiastics had acquired
alhare in the national property, which far exceeded
the proportion that was consistent with the happi..
ness of the kingdom; and the nobles were deter-
mined to guard against this evil, by preventing the
return of those vast pofellions into the hands of the
church. Nor was' the latter, which exposed the
Ionititution to more imminent hazard, to. be avoid-
d with lescare.. Even that circumscribed prero.
gative, which. the Scottilh Kings poffefled. was the,
obje& of jealQufy, to .bhe nobles. If; they had al-l
owed the crown to seize th, spoils of the church,
Irch an increase of ppwcr mukft havefollowed that
Icceflion of proprt y, awouldha.ve raised the royal,
Uthority above .controul, and. have :endered thq
noft limited Princ .iht',o.qpce.t.he molt abfolutq
Ad independent. - Thbe rign of , Heinty YUI pre.

T 3 , fenotd

B o K sented a recentnd diainer amg* plexfthis nature,

III. The wtakh wkitch owit ii upon that Fnce,,from
c6ó the fupprellion of the monasteries, not only hanged

the maxims of his government, but the temper of
his mind; and he who had formerly submitted to
his Parliaments, and courted his people% difated,
frbm that time, to the former, with intolerable in.
folence; and tyrannized over the latter with unpre.
cedented severity: And if his policy had-not been
extremely short-sighted, if he had not squandered
what he acquired, with a profusion equal to his ra.
pacioufnefs, and which defeated his atibition, he
ittgkht hate established defpotifnm in England, on a
bifis so broad and trong, as all the efforts of the
fubje&ts wold never have been able t ihake. In
Scotland, where the riches of the clerg bore a
great a proportion to the wealth of thed kingdom,
the acquisition of church-lands would have been of
no lets importance to the Crown, and io leTs fatal to
the aristocracy. The no6es, for this +eafon, guard,
ed agairft such an increase 6f the royal poret, and
thereby secured their own iidependence.

AVARICE mingled itfeif with their coniern fort

iiihref of theif orde. The 're-unsiti thte ipff
froris of the church to the Ctowi, or th beftwi
them ot the Protefant clerdi, would hivt'been
fftal blow, bdth'io thofr eotlei, ihIiadbab frau
or violence, fcized part df'thtferecJd !d
those Ab6iti and Phib'iS ;6rhi tidttitt!ut nct
their ¢cclefiafticAl thiagate. 'But=i thg'l; 7Wh'
w*as propo6sed gavre bote Tari'cen itlouirpf
tinst they prmoted ilt'ihdh{cir hmbkitnbPflanc

. '. Th

The poplh 'ecclefiaRics, though the lopping off a B o o
third of their revenues was by no means.agreeable II.
to them, consented, under their present circum-
lances, to .crifice a part of their poefflions, in
order to purchase the secure enjoyment of the re.
mainder; and after deeming the whole irrecover-
ably loft, they confidered whatever they could re-
trieve as so much gain. Many of the ancient dig-
nitaries were men of noble birth; and as they no
longer entertained hopes of restoring the Popish
religion, they wished their own relations, rather than
the Crown, or the Protestant clergy, to be enriched
with the spoils of the church. They connived, for
this reason, at the encroachments of the nobles;
they even aided their avarice and violence; they
dealt out the patrimony of the church among their
own relations, and by granting.fous and perpetual
leafes of lands and tithes, gave, to the utmQft of
their power, some colour of legal poffeflion, to
what was formerly mere usurpation. Many vestiges
of such alienations still remain *. The nobles, with
the concurrence of the incumbents, daily extended
their encroachments, and gradually stripped tde
ecclesiastics of their richest and most valuable pof.
feflions. Even that third part, which was given up
in order to silence the clamours of the Protestant
clergy, and to be some equivalent to the Crown
for its claims, amounted to no considerable fum.
The thirds due by the more powerful:nobles, efpc-
cially by such as had embraced the Reformation,
were almost universally remitted. Others, by pro-
ducing fraudulent. rntals i by estimating the corn,

Keith, 507. Spotrw. 175.

T 4 and

B o o' and other :paymernts' in kiiid it ianrider value i

111 and by the connivance of 't6letor, greatly dimi.
56J nifhed the charge against themselves *: And the

nobles had much reafonr to be 'satisfied with A de.
vice which, at so small expcnce, secured to them
such vast poffeflons,

The Prote- NOR were the Protestant clergy considerable gain.
la at cl"rgy
no g'ncrs ers by this new regulation; they found it to be a

more easy matter to kindle zeal, than to extinguilh
avarice. Those very men, whom formerly they had
swayed with absolute authority, were now deaf to
all their remonRtrances. The Prior of St. Andrew's,
the Earl of Argyll, the Earl of Morton, and Mait.
land, all the most zealous leaders of the Congre.
gation, were appointed to assign, or, as it was
called, to modify their stipends. An hundred merks
Scottish was the allowance which their liberality
afforded to the generality of Ministers. To a few
three hundred merks were granted §. Abouttwenty.
four thousand pounds Scottiti appears to:have been
the whole fum allotted for the'm aintenance of a
nAtional church eftablilhed by law, and esteemed,
throughout the kingdom, the true churchof Godt.
Even this fum was paid with little exahnefs, and
the Ministers were kept in the fame poverty and
.dependance as formerly.

1562. THa gentleness of the Quecn's adminhitation,
Dillenfion, and the elegance of her court, had mitigated, in
among tha
rebiet. some degree, the ferocity of the noblesi and ac.

*Keith, Append. 188'pfw. 'S 'ot'w. '. K °,
t Keith, Append. 188. ;;

cutoQmed

4

customed them to greater mildnes: and humanity; B o o
while, at the fame time, her presence and authority III.
were a check to their factious and tumultuary fpi- .'
rit. But, as a state of order and tranquillity was not
natural to the feudal aristocracy, it could not be of
long continuance; and this year became remark.
able for the most violent eruptions of intestine dif.
cord and animoflty.

AMONG the great and independent nobility of
Scotland, a Monarch could poflefs little authority,
and exercise no extensive or rigorous jurifdition.
The interfering of interest, the unsettled state of
property, the frequency of public commotions, and
the fierceness of their own manners, rowed, among
the great families, the feeds of many quarrels and
contentions. There, as we have already observed,
were decided not by law, but by violence. The
offended Baron, without having recourse to the.
Monarch, or acknowledging his superior authority,
assembled his own followers, and invaded the lands
of his rival in an hofile manner. Together with
his estate and honours, every nobleman transmitted
some hereditary feud to his posterity, who were
bound in honour to adopt and to prosecute it with
the fame inveterate rancour.

. ,. . . * . :. · . ... . .~ ~" ,,~

..

SUCH a dissension had subsisted between the house

of Hamilton and the Earl of-Bothwell, ifid was
heightened by mutual injuriesduring the liteceomn-
motions *. Both the Earl of Arran and Wbthwell
happening to be in waiting at the fame time, tlifi

.' Kchb, 15, . .

fol.

B JiA

sowers quoarelledt
freqac y in the Lreets of

I!} . Edinburgh, an&dexcited dangerots tumult.in that

6 cuiy. At last the mediation of their friends, parti.
rbe mry. cularly of Knox,, brought about a reconcilement

but an unfortwnateone to botl thekf noblemen *.

A aw days after, Arran came to Knox, and,

with the utmost terror and confusion, confessed
first to him, and then to the Prior of St. Andrew's,
that, in order to obtain the sole dire&ion of affairs,
Bothwell and his kinsmen the Hamiltons, had con.
spired to murder the Prior, Maitland, and the other
favourites of the Queen. The duke of Chatelhe.
rault regarded the Prior as a rival, who had sup.
planted him in the Queen's favour, and who filled
that place at the helm, which he imagined to be
due to himself, as first Prince of the blood. Both-
well, on account of the personal injuries which he
had received from the Prior during the late corn.
motions, was no less exasperated against him. But
whether he and theHamiltons had agreed to cement
their new alliance, with the blood of their common
enemy, or whether the conspiracy existed only in
the frantic and disordered imagination of the Earl
of Arran, it is impossible, amidst the contradiction
of historians, and the defeaivenefs of records, po.
fitively to determine. Among men inflamed with
refcntmet, and impatient for revenge, ralhi prcf-
sions might be uttered, and violent and criminal
expedients proposed; and on that foundation, Ar-
ran's, distempered fancy might rear the whole fu-
perftructure of a conspiracy. All the pcrfons ac-

* nox, 305.

cUfcd,

cured, dniM.d their guilt with the utmot. confi- B oos
den&e. ut the known chaer&s of the meny an Il.d
the violent fpirAt of the age: ded greatly t;hes r:
probabilty iof ,the ac:ufation/ and abundantly jus
tify the coadud.of the Queens miniftess, who con-
fined Bothwel! Arran, and a few.of the ring-
leaders, in separate prisons,' and obliged the Duke
to surrender the strong cafle of Dumbarton, which
he had held ever since the time of his resigning
the office of Regent *.

THE designs of the Earl of Huntly against the The^', of
Prior of St. Andrew's were deeper laid, and pro- nmity to

the Queens

duced more memorable and more tragical events. Miniaea.
George Gbrdon Earl of Huntly, having been one
9f the nobles who conspired against JameslI,. and
who raised his soh James IV. to the throne, enjoy-
ed a great ihare in the confidence of that generous
Prince t. By his bounty, great accessions of wealth
and power were added to a family, already opulent
and powerful On the death of that Monarch,
Alexander the ,next Earl, being appointed Lord
Lieutenant of all the counties beyond Forth, left
the other nobles to contend ,for offices at court;
and retiring to the north, where his estate and in-
fluence lay, resided there, in a.,kind of princely .in.
dependeace,. The Chieftains in that par' ofthe
kingdom dreaded the growing dominion of such a
dangerous neighbour, but were unable to prevent
his encroachments. Some of :his rivals he secretly
undermined, others he subdued by open force. Hii

' Knox, ,07',8. Keith, tso. t Craw. OffieU
of Sate, 56. ' ',

B o o i ctate far exceeded that of any other.fubjt, 'and

It. hisrfuperioriiesa and jurifdi&ions extendedover.nany
.. s of the northern counties. With power and posies.

sions so immense, under two long and feeblek mino-
rities, and amidst the lhock of civil- commotions
the Earls of Huntly might have indulged the most
elevated hopes. But happily for the Crown, an
active and enterprising fpiritwas not the charater.
iftic of that family, and whatever objec their am.
bition might have in view, they chore rather to ac-
quire it by political address, than to seize it openly,
and by force of arms.

THE condut of George the present Earl, during

the late commotions, had been perfectly suitable
to the character of the family, in that age, dubi-
ous, variable, and crafty, While the success of
the Lords of the Congregation was uncertain, he
afifted the Queen Regent in her attempts to crush
them. When their affairs put on a better afpe&,
he pretended to join them, but never heartily fa-
voured their cause. He was courted and feared by
each of the contending parties; both connived at
his encroachments in the north; and, by artifice
and force, which he well knew how to employ al.
ternately, and in their proper places, he added every
day to the exorbitant power and wealth which:he
possessed.

HE observed the growing reputation and authy!

rity of the Prior of St. Andrew's with the greatest
jealousy and concern, and cqnfidered him asy rival
who had engrossed that share in the Queens conl

fidence

fidence, to:whickhis owp.zeal for the Popilh, eli- B o o s
gion feetied, to give him a preferable tide. -Per- IIL
fonal injuries soon increased the misunderstanding 156z.
occasioned by: rivallhip in power. The Queen hav.
ing determined. to reward the services of the Prior
of St. Andrew's, by creating him an Earl, Ihe
made choice of Mar, as the placewhence he ihould
take his title; and, that he might be better able to
support his new honour, bestowed upon him, at
the fame time, the lands of that name. These Sec. ,.
were part of the royal demesnes ', but.the Earls
of Huntly had been permitted, for several years,
to keep pofleflion of them t. On this occasion, the
Earl not only complained, with some reason, of
the loss which he fiftained, but had real cause to
be alarmed at the intrusion of a formidable neigh-
bour into the heart of his territories, who might
be able to rival his power, and excite his opprefled
vassals to mhake off his yoke.

AN incident, which happened soon after, in- June».

creased and confirmed Huntly's suspicions. Sir
John Gordon, his third son, and Lord Ogilvie
had a dispute about the property of an estate.
This dispute became a deadly quarrel. They
happened unfortunately to, meet in the freets of
Edinburgh, and being both attended with armed
followers, a scuffle ensued, in which Lord Ogilvie
was dangerously wounded by. Si John. 'The Ma-
giftrates seized both the offenders, -and the Queen
commanded them to be ftriAly confined. Under

* Crawf. Peet. 97 . .. + Buch. 334.

any

B o hn it tny argouerinaeo t
vachi ' behctbf publi

· I. peace and order womld expose the perf6n ffding
..~ tocertain punithment. At this time,, fmecfeverit

-was neeeflary, in order to vindicate:the ien'
authority from an infultl, the molt' heinous which
had been offered to it, since her reittn into Scot.
land. But, in an age accustomed to licence and
anarchy, even this moderate exercise of-her power,
in ordering them to be kept in custody, was deemed
an a& of intolerable rigour; and the friends of
each party began to convene their vassals and de-
pendants, in order to overawe, or to frustrate the
decisions of justice *. Mean while, Gordon made
his escape out of prison, and flying into Aberdeen.
shire, complained loudly of the indignity with
which he had been treated; and as all the Queen's
acions were, at this junture, imputed to the Earl
of Mar, this added not a little to the resentment,
which Huntly had conceived againftthat nobleman.

AT the very time when these pallions fermented,
August. with the utmost violence, in the minds of the Earl

of Huntly and his family, the'Queen happened to
set out on a progress into the northern parts of the
kingdom. Shewasattended bytheEarlsof'Marand
Morton, Maitland, and other leaders of thatparty.
The pretence of the queen, in a country where no
name greater than the Earl of Huntlyyshad been
heard of, and no power superior to his'had been
exercised, for many years, was an event; of itfeif,
abundantly mortifying to that haighty nobleman.

* Keith, 2z3.

But

But while the Queel was edtirely ncder the dre-

e o o o

tion of Mar, al her. iosons were Rrore

apt to ie {.

mifrprefentedi and construed into injuries; ianda a64,
thousand Ccirciltances could- Oat 'but occur to
awaken HRundts jealousy, to offend his pride, And
to inflame his n~*i ien t. -,Aiidft the agitations
of so many violent paiions, fomeceruption was un-
avoidable.

ON Mary's;arrival in the north, Huntlyemployed
his wife, a woman capable of executing the cam-
million with abundance of dexterity, to sooth the
Queen, and to intercede for pardon to their son.
But the Queen peremptorily required; that he should
again deliver himself into the hands ofjuftice, and
rely on her clemency. Gordon was persuaded to do
so; and being enjoined by the Queen to enter him-
self prisoner in the castle of Stirling, he promised
likewise to obey that command. Lord Erkine,
Mar's uncle, was, at that time, Governor of this
fort. The Queen's severity, and the place in which
the appointed Gordon to be confined, were inter.
preted to be new marks of Mar's rancour, and
augmented the hatred of the Gordons againt himi.

MEAN time, SirJohn Gordon set out towardsStir- Sept. s.
ling; but instead of performing his promise to the
Queen, made his escape from his guards, and re-
turned to takethe command of his followers, who
were rising in arms, all over the north... These wer4
destined to second and improve the blow, by which
his father proposed, secretly, and at once, to cut Qss
Mar, Morton, and Maitland, his principal adver-

saries.

Bo o c furies. The time and place for per:petrtig thi s

1!i. horrid deed were frequently a>poited but the exc.
1562. cuting of it was wonderfully prevented, by son)e of

those unforeseen accidents, which foboften occur to
disconcert the schemes, and to intimidate the hearts
of aflaffins *. His own house atStrathbogie was the
Aaft and most convenient scene, appointed for cor.
mitting the intended violence. But, on her journey
thither, the Queen heard of young Gordon's flight
and rebellion, and refusing, in the sirs tranrports of
her indignation, to enter under the father's roof, by
that fortunate exprefiion of her resentment, saved
her Ministers from unavoidable deftrution t.

Take arms THE ill success of there efforts of private revenge
against the
Qeen. precipitated Huntly into open rebelliop. As the

Queen was entirely under the diretionof his rivals,
it was inipoflible to work their ruin, without violat-
ing the allegiance which he owed his Sovereign.
On her arrival at Inverness, the commanding officer
in the castle, by Huntly's orders, shut the gates
against her. Mary was obliged to lodge in the town,
which was open and defenceless; but this too, was
quickly surrounded by a multitude of the Earl's
followers $. The utmost consternation seized the
Queen, who was attended by a very fiender train.
She every moment expeced the approach of the re-
bels, and Come ihips were already ordered into the
river to secure her escape. The loyalty of the Mon.
roes, Frazers, Mackintoshes, an4 some neighbour-

Keith, 230. t Knox, 318. Crawf. Oficnra
of State, 87, 8.

ing

forced the castle to furrenders.adinicted on the Go- : 6.
vernor the punifliment which his insolence deserved. '

THIS open a& of difopbedience .was the.occafion
of a measure nmore.galling to luntly'than any the
Queenhad hitherto take,. Lord Erikine, having
pretended a- right to the earldom of Mar, Stewart
resigned itin his favour;, and at the fame time Mary
conferred upbn him thetitle ofEarl of Murray, with
the elate annexed to that dignity, which had been
in the pofleffion of the Earl of Huntly since the year
1548 *. From this he concluded that his family
was devoted to deftruftion; and dreading ,to be
firipped, gradually, of those poffefions, which, in
reward of their services, the gratitude of the Crowrn
had bestowed on himself, or his ancestors, he no
longer disguised his intentions, but, in defiance of
the Qieen's proclamation, openly took arms. In,
stead of'yielding those places of flrength, which
Mary required him to surrender, his followers dif-
perfed or cut in.pieces the.parties which she dif-
patchedto take poffeflion of them-t; and he him-
self advancing with a considerable body of men to-
wards Aberdeen, to which place the Queen was
now returned, filled her small court with confterna,
tion. Murray had only a handful of men in whom
he could confide*. In order to form the appearance
of an army, he was. obliged to call in the afiftance
of the neighbouring baron«s but as modt of these

*Crawf. Peer.359, t Kox, 3'9. t Keith zo
VOL. I. U either

, II.o his powiet, from themiio cddieid al Fit&al ser.

i62. vice could bi ezpet.;d. - -
pab. 28. WITH these troops, however, Murray, who could

gain nothing by delay, marched briskly towards the
enemy, He found them at Corrichie, po6ied to
great advantage; he commanded his northern afl.
ciates inflantly to begin the attack; but on the firt
motion of the enemy,they treacherously turned their
backs; and Huntly's followers, throwing aside their
spears, and breaking their ranks, drew their swords,

Mejide- and rushed forward to the pursuit. It was then,
fested by
theErl of that Murray gave proof both of steady courage,
Murry" and of prudent conduct. He stood imnmovable,

on a rising ground, with the fmalf but trust bEdy
of his adherents, who presenting their spears to the
enemy, received them with a determined iefolution,
which they little expeced. The Highland'broad
sword is not a weapon fit to encounter tie Sotdih
spear. In every civil commotion, the fuperiorit
of the latter has been evident, and has altays de-
cided the contest. On this occasion the iirggilar
attack of Huntly's troops was elfily retuledby
Murray's firm battalion. Before they 'ieco6vred
from the confusion occafi6ned by this unf6redin re.
fiftahce, those who had begun the flight, iwiing to
regain their credit with the victorious'party, ll
upon them, and completed the rout. 'Huntly'hitt
self, who was extremely corpulent, was trodden to
death in the pursuit. His sons, Sir Johh aid Adim,
were taken, and Murray returned'in triumph to
Aberdeen with his priifnera.

ii"t

TH trial of nmentaken in atual rebllionagainfRB o o i
their Soveteign wasextremely short. ,Thlir.days III.
after the battle, Sir John Gordon was beheaded at ; 62
Aberdeen. *His brother Adam was pardoned on
account of his youth., Iord Gordon, who had been
privy to his father's defignsi was seized in the souths
and upon trial found'guilty oftreafon; but, through
the Queen's clemency, thepunihment was remit.
ted. The first Parliament proceedg againf this
great family, with the utmost rigour of law, and
reduced their power and fortune to the lowest ebb*.

As

' This conspiracy ofthe Earl of rantly isone ofthe molt in-
tricate and myflerious paifages in the Scottish hilory. As it was
a tranfaftion purely domestics and in which the Englilh were
little intertfied, few original papers concerning it have been
found in Cecil's Colleiflon, the great floreloufe of evidence
and information with regard to the affairs of this period.

Buchanan supposes Mary to have formed a design about this
time of destroying Murray, and of employing the power of the
Earl of Huntly for this purpose. But his account of this whole
tranfaaion appears to be so void of truth, and even of probabi-
lity, as to deserve no serious examination. At that time, Mary
wanted power, and Teems to have had no inclination to commit
any aft of violence upon her brother.

Two other hypotheses have been advanced, in order to ex-
plain this matter;' but they appear to be equally 'removed from
truth.

I. It cannot well be conceived, that the Queen't journey to
the north was a scheme concerted by Murray, in order to ruin
the Earl of Huntly. .' Huntly had resided at curt almoi
eer since the QOueen' returnt. Keth, tg8;. Append. 175,
c. Thie wu the proper place in which tod hTehed ihim
To attack him in Abiereenlilre,; teeatto of ', power, and

U a it

B o o k . As the fall of the Earl of Huntly ism;tlmosiil.

I11 portant event of this year,;itowould hayebe;nin.
.1562. in the idRt of his vassals, was a projea equalli aifiandi

hazardous. a. The Queen was not accomnpanied wiii i body
of troops, capable of attemptitng any thing against iutdyby
violence; her train was not more. numerous, than was.ufuali
times of greatef tranquillity, Keith, 230. 3.- The reremain
two original letters with regard to this conspiracy, one from
Randolph the English Resident, and another fromi'Maitand
both direted to Cecil. They talk of Huntly'sma m ures asno.
torioully treasonable. Randolph mentions his repeated at.
tempts to afiafinate Murray, &c. No hint is givenof any pr.
vious resolution, formed by Mary's Minifers, to ruin Handy
and his family. Had any such design ever exilted, it was Ran.
dolph's duty to have discovered it; nor would.Maitland have
laboured to conceal it from the Englilh secretary. Keith, 229.
Z3Z.

:I. To suppose that the Earl ofHuntly had laid any plan for

seizing the Queen, and her Miniters, teems to be nolefGim.
probable. i. On the Queen's arrival in the north, he laboured,
in good earnef, to gain her favour, and to obtain a pardon for
his son. Knox, 318. z. He met the Queen, firt atAberdeen,
and then at Rothemay, whither he would not have venturedto
come, had he harboured any such treasonable resolution. Knox,
318. 3. His condut was irresolute and wavering, like that of
a man disconcerted by an unforeseen danger, not like one cxe
cuting a concerted plan. 4. The most confiderableperfon of
his clan submitted to the Queen, and found surety to obyh
commands. Keith, 2a6. Had the Earl been prveiou0i euer.
nined to rife in arms againl the Queen, or to siei rl,,ini-
Rers, it is probable he would have imparted it to his principl
followers, nor would they have deserted him in this manner.

For there reasons, we have, on the one hand, vinniaer tl

Earl of Murray from any deliberate intention oftrinig the A.
mily of.GordonP and on. the other hand, we hve miputi t the
violentconduct of the Eal of Huntly, to a sudden ':of e
fentment, without charying him with any p
of rebellion.

props

proper to interrupt the narrative by:'taking :hotice B o. or
of lesser tranfations, which may now be related .II-
with equal propriety. 56

IN the beginning offummer, Mary, whowas de- An intr-
firous of entering into a more intimate correfpon- tween Ei.

zabeth and

dence and familiarity with. Elizabeth, employed Ma pro"
Maitland to desire a personal interview with her, posed'
somewhere in the north of England. As this pro-
pofal could not be reje&ed with decency, the time,
the place, and the circumstances of the meeting were
instantly agreed upon. But Elizabeth was prudent
enough not to admit into her kingdom, a rival,
who outrhone herself, so far, in beauty, and grace-
fulness of person; and who excelled, so eminently,
in all the arts ofinfinuation and address. Underprc-
tenceof being confined to London, by the attention
which she was obliged to give to the civil wars in
France, she put off the interview for that season *,
and prevented her subjects from feeing the Scottifhl
Queen, the charms of whose appearance and beha-
viour, Ihe envied, and had some reason to dread.

DURING this year, the Assembly of the. church Inne 2.
met twice.. In both there meetings, wereexhibited Decnt s.
manycomplaints ofthepovertyand dependence of the
church; and many murmursagainft the negligencF
or avarice of those, who had been appointed to col-
lect, and to distribute the small fund, appropriated
for the maintenance of preachersi f. A petition,
craving redress of their grievances, was presented to

· Keith, 16 ' . t Knox,3lli,32.3.

U3 the

B o o the Queen; butwithout any effec. There was h

II. reason to expec that Mary would discover any for.
L562' wardnefs to grant the requests of such supplicant.

And as her Ministers, though all most zealousPro.
teftams, were themselves growing rich on the inhe.
ritance of the church, they were equally regardle
of the indigence and demands of their brethren.

1563. MARY had now continued above two years in;
Negoca- state of widowhood. Her gentleadminifration had
tions with
regard to secured the hearts of her fubjets, who were impa.
the Queea's
marrage. tient for her marriage, and wished the Crown to de.

scend in the right line from their ancient Monarchs,
She herself was the moos amiable woman of theage,
and the fame of her accomplishments, togetherwith
the favourable circumstance of her havingone king.
dom already in her pofleffion, and the profpet& of
mounting the throne of another, prompted many
,different Princes to solicit an alliance o filluftrious.
Scotland, by its situation, threw so much weight
and power into whatever scale it fell, that all Eu.
rope waited with solicitude for Mary's determina.
tion; and no event in that age excited fronger po-
litical fears and jealousies; none interested more
deeply the passions of several Princes, or gave rife
to more contradictory intrigues, than the marriage
of the Scottiib Queen.

She is roli. THE Princes of the House Of Auftrla temember.
cited by
difft.t ed what vast projeCts the French had fbuntled on
riC'ae. their former alliance with the Queen of Scott and

though the unexpected death, fir ofHonryAndthen

of

of Frs~ans, hid and;d~ thfe frqomt ainag effe, B o o KC
ye if£a ,tiy oyu~l:ig a ./e hoice 9of ~hutband ITl.
among t F;rencpiPriws.es,. thefae efigns might 5=3
be revived and promfcuted wg h better success.

INorder oprevent jt1i, tEmprrre ntered into sy hhe
a negqciation with t ,ardinal of Loprrain, who Charis.
had proposed to marry .the Sc'ottish ,Queen to the
Archduke Charles, Ferdinand's third, son. The
matter was communicated to Mary; and Melvil,
who at that time attended the Elegor Palatine,
was commanded to-inquire into the charaster and
fiuation of the Archduke *.

PHILIP I,. though nopJ fs apprehensive of Mary's By Do.
falling once more into,the hands of France, envied of pin.
his uncle Ferdinand the acquisition of so important
a prize; and as his own in!'tiable ambition grafpe
at all the kingdoms of Europe, he employed his am-
baffador at the French court, to solicit the Princes
of Lorrain i behalf of his son Don Carlos, at that
time, the heir of all the extensive dominions, which
belonged to,the Spa.rilh monarchy t.

CATHERINE of Medicis, on the other hand, Bythe

dreaded the marriage of the Scottish Queen with ADuosu.
any of the Aufrian Princhs, whichwoul!d;have add-
ed so much to the ,power and prtepfi.ons f that
ambitious race. ,jer jealouy of the Princes of
Lorrain rendered her,,ol.. saf,,qfm an lRlijance,
which, by securing themp ;he proteeijn qs the Em-

*Mclv.63, 65. Keith, z39. See Append No.VII.
t CaRfcln. 61. Addita. bur.
; abor, .50

U 4 peror

' oo K, peror or'Ki'tigo Spairn woui givei^ild
*III. :therir <enttterp. iiat inib tha dste id

' ' powerof the Crown, whih ihey already rivalle
63at open defiances: And asifhe was ,afraiid tlit-rtef

splendid proposals of the Austrian family would
-dazzle the' youitg Queen, she instantly dispatched
Caftelnau into Scotland, to offer her in marriage the
Duke of Anjou, the brother of her former htfband,
who soon after mounted the throne of Frn'ce ,
Mary's dB. MARY attentively weighed the preteifiodis osso

noni~. many rivals. The Archduke had little to recom.
i' mend him, but his high birth. The example of

Henry. VIII. was a warning against contra&inga
marriage with the brother of her former husband;
nor could [he bear the thoughts of appearing in
France, in a rank inferior to that which he had for-
merly held in that kingdom. She listened therefore,
with partiality, to the Spanish propositions;, and the
profpet of such vast power and dominions'flattered
the ambition of a young and aspiring Priic'fs.

THREE several circumftahces, however, concur-

red to divert Mary from any thoughts of a foreign
alliance,

THe first of these was. the murder of ieri uncle

the Duke of Guise. The violence aindambitrin of
'that nobleman had involved his country iih'a 'civil
war; which was conduted with furious aniiimity,
and various success. At lat the Duke laid siec to

* CaRclnau, 461.

'" ' ' Orleans,

aibflerahit§iikark of ith'P ni'tetl'a s -id ;B

l to'k

he i'ad rcEi ai totH lat^ trem-iti

, ueh ' I I t.

he wasaaflassinatedby dhe xfiifidc -teal ' o^ Pblloit, ''--'
This bloii provd -fatatfo tic ut 6 of tbSc6ts!, rTh
young Duke. was a minorsiand;the Cardiral bs
Lorrain, thoughfiibtle and intriiuing, wanted that
undauntedtaidtditerprifingcou rage, 'hich rendered
the ambition of hiis brother so formidable. Cathse-
rine, inRead of 'encouraging 'he ambition, oe fur-
thering thepretenfions of her daughter-in-law, took
pleasure in mortifying the one, and In disappointing
the other. In this situation, and without' such a
proteetor, it became necefiary for Mary to contra&
her views, and to proceed with caution and:*hat-
ever profpe&t of advantage might,-aUire- her, fr; I
could venture- upon no dangerous or doubtful
measure.

THE second circumstance which' weighed with The .ic

Mary, was the opinion of the Queen of England. ' Ei.
The marriage of the Scotrifh Queen interested Eli-
zabeth more deeply than any other Prince; 'and she
observed all her deliberations;:concerning it with
the mos anxious attention. Sheherfelf feemsiearly
to have formed a resolution of living unmarried, and
Ihe discovered no small inliration to; impore the
fame lkw on the Queen.of' Scott., She had alieady,
experienced what, lfe: might beo made of Marys
power and pretensions, to invade her dominions, and
to disturb her pofiflion of the Crown. The !death
of Francis II. had happily delivered her from this
danger, which she determined to guard against for
the future, with the utmost a're. As the retlefs

3 nambi.

B o p 'jaabiti;oof thc daftian
Pri, ,, t.ic ^yod d

II. .bigotted pagfns o f tCb1e9aCatglol4cy nj jmadF

her, in a partrwaClar qBlWer,- 4 *?4dir4. ,ncghbpur.
hood, Ihe inftruced Randolph ito renspojtrate, in
the ftrmogeft terns, aggainst ,ny 4lince ,with them;
and to ,cquaipt Mary, that a she i e.felf would
,confider such a match to be a breafh of the perional
friendship, in which they were so happily united; so
the English nation would reard

. it, as the Sliolu.

tion of that confederacy which now rubfirted be.
tween the two .ingdoqms: That, i0 qorder.to pre.
serve their own religion and jiberties, .they would,
in all probability, take some -ftep prejudicial to
her right of-fucceffon, :hich, as fRhe we.ll hew,
they neither .wanted power nor ,prqtgeces !to in.
va.liate, and set aside, This threatening was ac.
companied with a promise, but expressed ,in very
ambigugus terms, that if Mary's choice of a hus.
,band;lhould prove agreeable to.the :Eng!lh nation,
Elizabeth would appoint proper perfons.o elxmine
-her title to the succession, and, if well fQuun.de,
.commaqd it to be .publickly.recognifed; She ob.
served, however, .a myterious silence :concerning
the person, on whom fie wishod the .hoicof.the
Scottish Queentoifall. The ree.aling of.this icrct
was reserved for some future,ncgociation. iMean
,while fhe.threw out fotne.obfcure hints, thata,na-
,'ive of Britain, or one notof princely ank, .would
ibe herfafeft andmoft jnoffenive choice *,. An
vice offered with fuch.an air, of fupiorjit.nd, com-
mand, mortified, no doubt, the pride of.the Sct-.

* Keith, 242,z, 24

tifh
'i

tifi Qucen.e ,, u: nder herpere t circumltafit, B 9 o s;
lhe was obliged tobear this indignity. Dcftite Of II-.
all foreign assistance, and intent upon the Engflif .

-

fucceflion, the great obje& of her wibhes and am-
bition, it became necessary to court a rival, whom,
without manifest imprudence, 'he could not ven-
ture to offind,

THE inclination of her own subje&s was another, The sent

meats of

and not theleaft considerable circumstance, which her own
called for Mary's attention at this conjun&cure. "bi
They had been taught, by the fatal experiment of
her former marriage, to dread an union with any
great Prince, whole power might be employed to
oppress their religion and liberties. They trembled
at the thoughts of a match with a foreigner; and
if the Crown lhould'be strengthened by new domi.
nions or alliances, they foresaw that the royal prep
rogative would soon be itretched beyond its ancient
and legal limits. Their eagemefs to prevent this
could scarce fail of throwing them into the arms of
England. Elizabeth would be ready to afford them
her aid, towards obftruting a measure so disagree.
able to herself. 'Twas easy for them to seize the
person of the'Sovereign, .By the aflftance of th '
English fleet,, they could render it difficult for any
foreign Prince to land in Scotland. The 'Romin
Catholics, now an inconsiderable party in the'king-
dom, and dispirited by the loss of the Earl of
Huntly, could give no obstruction to their deflgns,
To what violent extremes, the national abhorrence
of a foreign yoke might have been carried, is ma-

nifet~

, -_.I ieqiient to the present period'^ '
.. '

J

- ^ . -:- -,

.* ' ! , ' . ,- ' . ' '1

'tSo! these reasons, Mary laid aifde, at'that time,

all thoughts of foreign alliance, and.feemed willing
to sacrifice her own ambition, in order to remiove
thejealoufies of Elizabeth, and to quietthe fears of
herown subjects.

A .iu,. TH E Parliament met this year,, for the first time,
m.a 6.' since the Queen's return into Scotlard. Mary's ad.

ministration had hitherto been extremely popular,
,Her Ministers poflfeied the confidence of the na-
tion'; and, by consequence, the proceedings of that
aflembly were condu&ed with perfet unanimity.
The grant of the earldom of Murray to the Prior
of St. Andrew's was confirmed:. The Earl of Hunt.
ly, and several of his vassals and dependants, were
attainted: Theattainder against KirkaldyofGrange,
and some of his accomplices in the murder of Car-
dinal Beatoun, was reversed : The aCtof oblivion,
mentioned in the treaty of Edinburgh, received the
royal fancion. But Mary, who had determined
never to ratify that treaty, took care that this fane-
tion should not be deemed any acknowledgment
of its validity; ihe granted her consent merely in
condescension to the Lords in Parliament, who,'on
* their knees, besought her to allay thejealoufies and
apprehensions of her subje&s,; by such a graci6ui
,law t. '..

* Knox, 330, t. Spotfw. z8.. -.

..

procure ,the; ~Q;qeen's aflent to- the laws eftabi i g .1Ij
the Protestant r giQn

g HeMF.inifters, thoi® ? óa3

lous *.>roftn,the mfelvesi ',were, aware that

taw Nbiag

could not be. buged-.githout manifef danger and-lti,, with regard
prudence. Sheag aconfented, ,hro ugh .heir infgu t roli.ion
ence, to to.leatet and. protet:the reformed doarinet
They had cven7 prevailed. on her,to imprison and
profecut. the Archbiflopof St.,Andrew's, andPrior
of Whithorn, ,for .celebrating mas. contrary ,t her
proclamation*. Mary, however, was .ill paflIon-
ately devoted to the Romiff fuperrtition; and.tho',
from politicalmotives, he had granted a temporary
protection of opinions, which Ihe diapproved, there
were no grounds to hope thatfhe. would agree to
eftabliih them for perpetuity,. The moderation of
those who proefeffdeit, was the best method for re-
conciling the Queen to the Protestant religion.
Time might abate her bigotry. Herprejudices
might wear off gradually, and .at.laft she might
yield to the wishes of her people, what their impor.
tunity or their violence could never have extorted,
Many laws of importance were to be proposed in
Parliament; and to defeat all these, by such a fruit-
less and ill-timed application to the .Queen, would
have been equally-injurious to individuals, and de.
trimental to the public.

THE zeal of the Protefant clergy was deaf to all which of.

these considerations of policy. 'Eager and impa. ,,,:b."A
tient, it broolkd'no delay: Severe and' inflexible, it

* Keith, 239.

; ,' mnwould

B o o WK would condescend to no compliances.' The leading

III. men of that order insisted, that this opportunity of
563 eftablifling religion by law, was not to be neglect.

ed. They pronounced the moderation of the cour.
tiers, apoftacy; and- their endeavours to gain the
Queen, they reckoned criminal and servile. Knox
solemnly renounced the friendIhip of the Earl of
Murray, as a man devoted to Mary, and so blind.
ly zealous for her service, as to become regardless
of those obje&s which he had hitherto esteemed molt
sacred. This rupture, which is a strong proof of
Murray's sincere attachment to the Queen at that
period, continued above ayear and an half*.

THE preachers being disappointed by the men in

whom they placed the greatest confidence, gave
vent to their indignation in their pulpits. These
echoed more loudly than ever, with declarations
against idolatry; with dismal presages concerning
the Queen's marriage with a foreigner; and with
bitter reproaches against those, who, from interest-
ed motives, had deferred that cause, which they

andocca- once reckoned it their honour to support. The
uult a- people, inflamed by such vehement declamations,
mongthe which were dictated by a zeal more sincere than

prudent, proceeded to rash and unjustifiable atsof
violence. During the Queen's absence, on a pro-
grefs into the weft, mass continued to be celebrated
in her chapel at Holy-rood house. The multitude
of those who openly retorted thither, gave great
offence to the citizens of Edinburgh, who, being

*Knox, 331.

free from the retraint which the royal presence ii- B o o ic
posed, affermblid in a riotous manner, interrupted HI.
the service, and iilied such as were present, with the 53.
utrriof coiinftirnation. T'o of the ringleade'rs in
this tumult .we're seized, and a day appointed foi
their trial .

KNOX, who esteemed the zeal of these persons Kno tried
laudable, ard their conduct meritorious, cOnfidered out bct
them as fuffereri in a good cause; and in oi'er to oa, is,
fcree'i them fi6m danger, he issued circular letters,
requiringall who profc'fed the true religion, orwere
concerned f'r the preservation of it, to assemble at
Edinburgh on the day of trial, that by their 'pe-
fence, they might comfort and aifift their distressed
brethren t. One'of these letters'fell intotheQueen's
hands. To assemble the fubjets without the au-
thority of the Sovereign, was construed to be trea-
son, and a resolution was taken to prosecute Krox
for that crime, before the Privy Council. Happily D,:n. S.
for him, his judges were not only zealous 'Protest-
ants, but'the very men, who, during the latecom-
motiois, had o'penly resifted, and set dt defiance the
Queen's'authority. Itwas under precedents, drawn
from their own conduct, that Knox endeavoured to
lielter hiiifelf. Nor would it'have been an easy
matter 'f6r'ihfe 'Counsellors to have found out a
diftihnion, by which they could cenfute him, with-
out condemning themselves. After a longihearing,
he was unanimoifly acquitted. Sinclair iihop of
Ross, and'Prefident of the Court ofSenlion, a zea-

' Knox, 335. 't Ibid. 336.

4 10ous

B o o . lous Papist, heartily concurred with the other Cou~r

I fellors in this decision*, a remarkable fad, whicl
156;. shows the unsettled ifate of government in that age,

the low condition to which regal authority was then
funk; and the impunity with which fubjets might
inviade those rights of the Crown, which are now
held sacred.

I564. THE marriage of the Scottish Queen continued
Ngociah fRill to be the objea of attention and intrigue.
rgga°'to Though Elizabeth, even while ihe wished to direct
the Queen's
marriage. Mary, treated her with a disgustful reserve; though

The kept her, without necefity, in .a state of sus.
pence; and hinted often at the person, whom she
destined to be her.hufband, without directly men-
tioning his name; yet Mary framed all her ations to
express such a prudent refpe& for the English Queen,
that foreign Princes began to imagine she had
given herself up implicitly to her direciont. The
profpel of this union alarmed Catherine of Medicis.
Though Catherine had taken pleasure, all along, in
doing ill offices to the Queen of Scots; though soon
after the Duke of Guise's death, the had put upon
her a most mortifying indi nity, by flopping thepay-
ment of her dowry, by depriving her subje&t the
Duke of Chatelherault of his pension, and by be-
flowing the command of the Scottish Guards oh a
Frenchman :; the resolved, however, to' prevent
this dangerous conjuntion of the Britih' Qieens.
For this purpose, 'he now employed all her art to
appease Mary §, to whom she had given so rnany

Knox, 343, t Keith, 248. td. 244.
§ SeeAppepdix, No. VIII.

causes

causes of offencei The arrears of her dowryJwere Bo o o
instantly paid,; more puntual remittances were III.
promised for the future; and offers made, not x56
only to 'restore, but to extend the privileges of the
Scottilh nation in France. It was easy for Mary
to penetrate into the motivesof.this sudden change;
ihe well knew the charater of her mother-in-law,
and laid little stress upon profeflions of friendship,
which came .from a Princess of such a false and
unfeeling heart.

THE negociation with England, relative to the
marriage, suffered no interruption, from this appli.
cation of the French Queen. As Mary, in com-
pliance to her fubjets, and pressed by the strongest
motives of interest, determined speedily to marry,
Elizabeth was obliged to break that unaccountable
silence, which she had hitherto affeced. The fe- iaraeth
cret was disclosed, and her favourite Lord Robert ",mLei.
Dudley, afterwards Earl of Leicefer, was declared "a

to he"

to be the happy man, whom she had chosen to be band.
the husband of a Queen courted by so many
Princes *.

ELIZABETH'S wisdom and penetration were re-
markable in the choice of her Ministers; in diftin-
guifhing her favourites, those great qualities were
less conspicuous. She was influenced in two cafes
so opposite, by merit of very different kinds. Their
capacity for business, their knowledge, their pru-
dence, were the talents to which alone he attended,

* Keith, 251.
VOL. I. X in

B o o K in chufing her Ministers; whereas beauty and grace.

III. fulness of person, polithed manners, and courtly

óWV" address, were the accomplishments on which flh
i564. bestowed her favour. She acted in the one cafe with

the wisdom of a Queen, in the other, Ahe disco
vered the weakness Qs a woman. To this Leicester
owed his grandeur. Though remarkable neither
for eminence in virtue, nor superiority of abilities,
the Queen's partiality distinguished him on every
occasion. She raised him to the highest honours,
ihe bestowed on him the most important employ.
ments, and mnanifefted an affetion so difpropor.
tionate to his merit, that, in the opinion of that
age, it could be accounted for only by the power
of planetary influence *.

Mary of- THE high spirit of the Scottish Queen could not
tended at
rhis. t well bear the sirs' overture of a match with a sub-

jet. Her own rank, the splendour of her former
marriage, and the solicitations, at this time, of so
many powerfulPrinces, crowded into her thoughts,
and made her sensibly feel how humbling and dif.
refpeftful Elizabeth's proposal was. She diffem-
bled, however, with the Englifl Resident; and
though ihe declared, in strong terms, what a de-
gradation she would deem this alliance, which
brought along with it no advantage, that could
justify such neglect of her own dignity, Ihe men-
tioned the Earl of Leicester, notwithstanding, in
terms full of respect -.

* Camden, 549. 't Keith, st2.

L i'

EIZAETrH, we may presume, did not wish that B o o K
the proposal should be received in any other man- III.
ner. After the extraordinary marks she had given 564
of her own attachmrent to Leicester, and while he Elizabeth's

views in re.

was still in the very height of favour, it is not pro- commend-
bable she could think seriously of bestowing him in' him.
upon another. 'Twas not her aim to persuade, but
only to amuse Mary *. Almost three years were
elapsed since her return into Scotland; and though
solicited by her fubjeas, and courted by the great-
eft Princes in Europe, she had hitherto been pre-
vented from marrying, chielly by the artifices of
Elizabeth. And if, at this time, the English
Queen could have engaged Mary to liften to her
proposal in favour of Leicester, her power over
this creature of her own, would have enabled her
to protrat the negociation at pleasure; and by
keeping her rival unmarried, she would have ren-
dered the profped of her fuccefion less acceptable
to the English.

LEICESTER'S own situation was extremely deli-
cate, and embarrassing. To gain possession of the
most amiable woman of the age, to carry away this
prize from so many contending Princes, to mount
the throne of an ancient kingdom, might have flat-
tered the ambition of a subject, much more confi-
derable than him. He saw all there advantages,
no doubt; and, in secret, they made their full im-
preffon on him. But, without offending Elizabeth,
he durst not venture on the most distant discovery
of his sentiments, or take any ftep towards faci.

Mclv. 104, loi.

X 2 litating

B o o K litating his acquisition of: objeas so Wothyli of de.

111. ftre.
1564
165 4. ON the other hand, Elizabeth's partiality towards

him, which flie was at no pains to conceal-*,. might
inspire him with hopes of attaining the supreme
rank in a kingdom; more illustrious than Scotland.
Elizabeth had often declared, that nothing but her
resolution to lead a' single life, and his being born
her own subje6t, would have hindered her from
chufing the Earl of Leicester for a husband. Such
considerations of prudence are, however, often fur.
mounted by love; and Leicester might flatterhim-
self, that the violence of her affection would at!
length triumph both over the maxims of policy,
and the scruples of pride. These hopes induced
him, now and then, to conclude the proposal of his
marriage with the Scottiih Queen to be a project
for his deftruffion; and he imputed it-to the malice
of Cecil, who, under the specious pretence of do-
ing him honour, intended to ruin him in the good
opinion both of Elizabeth and Mary t.

A TREATY of marriage, proposed by one Queen,

who dreaded its success; listened to by another, who
was secretly determined againfi it ; and scarce de-
fired by the man himself, whose interest and repu-
tation it was calculated, in appearance, to promote;
could not, under so many unfavourable circum-
stances, be brought to a fortunate issue. Both Eli
zabeth and Mary continued, however, to aft with
equal dissimulation. The former, notwithstanding

Melv. 93, 94. t Ibid. 10l.

h>

her fears of losing Leicester, solicited warmly in B o x
his behalf. The latter, though she began about III.
this time to caf her eyes upon another subjet of 6.
England, did.not, at.once, venture finally to reject
Elizabeth's favourite.

THE person towards whom Mary began to turn Mtay en.

* - / o tertains
her thoughts, was Henry Stewart Lord Darnly, though, of

marrying

cldeft son of the earl of Lennox. That nobleman, Lrd Dara.
having been driven.aut.of Scotland under the re- ly
gency of the Duke of Chatelherault, had lived in
banishment ifor twenty years. His wife, Lady
Margaret -Douglas, was .Mary's most dangerous
rival in her claim upon the ;Englih fucceflion. She
was the daughter of Margaret, the eldest sifter of
Henry VIII. by the Earl of Angus, whom that
Queen married after the death of her husband
James IV. -In that age, the right and order of
succession was not fettled with.the fame accuracy,
.as at present. Time, and -the .decision of almost
every cafe that can possibly happen, have at last in-
troduced certainty into a matter, which, naturally,
is subjet. to all-the.variety, arifing.from the caprice
of lawyers, guided by obscure, and often imaginary
analogies. Lady Lennox, though born of a second
marriage, was.one degree nearer the royal; blood of
England,.than iMary. She was the daughter, Mary
only the grand-daughter.of.Margaret. This was not
the only advantage.over .Mary which;Lady Len-
nox enjoyed. :She.was!born in England, and .by a
*maxim.of law. in.thatcountry, iwith..regard to pri-
vate inheritances, " whoever is not born in Eng-
land, or at leaf of parents, who, at the time'of

X 3 his

.B o o K his birth, were in the obedience of the King ol

IlL. England, cannot enjoy any inheritance in the king.

ó^J ~ dom '." This maxim, Hales, an Englilh lawyer,
56. produced, in a treatise, which he publiffed at this

time, and endeavoured to apply it to the right of
succession to the Crown. In a private cause, these
pretexts might have given rife to a long and doubt.
ful litigation; where a Crown was at flake, such
nice disputes and fubtilties were to be avoided with
the utmoit care. If Darnly should happen to con.
tract an alliance with any of the powerful families
in England, or should publickly profess the Pro.
teftant religion, these plausible and popular topics
might be so urged, as to prove fatal to the prerep.
sions of a foreigner, and of a Papist.

MARY was aware of all this; and in order to

prevent any danger from that quarter, had early
endeavoured to cultivate a friendly correspondence
with the family of Lennox. In the year z562 t,
both the Earl and the Lady Margaret were taken
into custody by Elizabeth's orders, on account of
their holding a secret correspondence with the Scot-
tifh Queen.

Elizabeth FROM the time that Mary became fenfibleof the
secretly
pleased with difficulties, which would attend her marrying a so.
this. reign Prince, she entered into a still closer connexion

with the Earl of Lennox j, and invited him to re.
turn into Scotland. This ihe endeavoured to con-
ceal from Elizabeth; but a transaCtion of so much

* Carte, Hist. of Eng. vol. iii. 424, t Canid. 389.

Id. 306.

I )in?-

importance did not escape the notice of that dif-B o o K
cerning Princess. She observed, but did not inter- II.
rupt it. Nothing could fall in more perfectly 564.
with her views, concerning Scottith affairs. She
was pleased to fee the pride of the Scottish Queen
sloop, at last, to the thoughts of taking a sub-
jet to her bed. Darnly was in no situation to
excite her jealousy, or her fears. His father's
estate lay in England, and by means of this pledge,
ihe hoped to keep the negociatron entirely in her
own hands, to play the fame game of artifice and
delay, which she had planned out, if her recom-
mendation of Leicester had been more favourably
received.

As before the union of the two Crowns, no.fub-

je& of one kingdom could pass into the other with-
out the permiflion of both sovereigns; no sooner
did Lennox, under pretence of prosecuting his
wife's claim upon the earldom of Angus, apply to
Elizabeth for her licence to go into Scotland, than
he obtained it. Together with it, she gave him
letters, warmly recommending his person and cause
to Mary's friendihip and protection *. But at the
fame time, as it was her manner to involve all her
tranfaafions with regard to Scotland, in some de-
gree of perplexity and contradicion; she warned
Mary, that this indulgence of Lennox might prove
fatal to herself, as his return could not fail of re-
viving the ancient animosity between him and the
house of Hamilton.

Keith, z5S. 26g.

X 4 Tins

B O-O K TaIS admonition .gave umbrage .to.xary, .an

IIl. drew from her an angry reply, which occasioned,
x564. for some time, a total interruption of all corre.

fpondence between the two Queens *. Mary was
not a little alarmed at this; fihe both dreaded the
effects of Elizabeth's refentment,:andfelt sensibly
the disadvantage of being excluded from ia free in.
tercourfe with England, where her ambassadors had,
all along, carried on, with Come success, secret ne.
.gociations, which increased the number of her
partisans, and paved her way towards the throne,
.In order to remove the causes of theprefent diffi.
culty, Melvil was sent express to the court of Eng.
land. He found it no difficult matter.to bring
about a reconcilement; and soon re-eftablilhed the
appearance, but not-the confidence of friendship,
which was all that had fubfifed, for some time, be.
tween the two Queens.

DUR ING this negociation, Elizabeth's profeflions

of love to Mary, and Melvil's replies in name of his
Mistress, were made in the language of the warmest
and most cordial friendship. But what Melvil truly
observes, with refped to Elizabeth, may be ex.
tended, without injustice, to both Q3ueens. " There
was neither plain dealing, nor upright meaning,
but great-diffimulation, envy, and fear t."

Lennox sr. LENNOX, however, in confequenceof the licence
cotland. which he had obtained, set out for Scotland,,and was

received by the Queen, not only with the .refpe&
due to a nobleman, so nearly allied to the royal

Keith, 253. Melv. 83. t Melv. 104.

2 family,

family, but treatedwith a di'firfguiJled :flmiliarty,, B o o
which could not fail of infpiriqg him.with more H.
elevated hopes. The rumour'of his fon'smarriage '-.
to the Queen -began to spread o. er .the kinngdom,,
and the eyes of all Scotland were,turned upon him,
as the father of their future Maifer. The Duke-of
Chatelherault was the first to take the alarm. He
confidered Lennox, as the ancient and hereditary
enemy of the house of Hamilton; and, in hisgran-
deur, saw the ruin of himself and his friends. But
the Queen interposed her authority to preverntfany
violent rupture, and employed all her influence to
bring about an accommodation of the differences*.

THE powerful family of Douglas no less dreaded
Lennox's return,-from an apprehension, that he
would wrest the earldom of Angus out of their
hands. But the Queen, who well knew how dan-
gerous it would be to irritate Morton, and other
great men of that name, prevailed on Lennox to
purchase their friendihiip,,by allowing his Lady's.
claim upon the earldom of Angus to drop t.

AFTER these preliminary .steps, llary ventured Dcmbr.

to call a meeting of parliament. The a&t of for-
feiture, passed against Lennox in the ,year 1.545,
was repealed, and.he was publickly. reftored.to the
honours and estate.s .his ancetRors $.

THE eccleiticl tran ionsof

tnhis year iwere j'isnes.
not considerable. :In the altmblies of the church, Dcem' s

Keith,,z;g. t ad. 268;.otc (b'
'' See Appendix, No. IX.

the

. .L

B o o x the fame complaints of the increase of idolatry, the

III. fame representations concerning the poverty of the
564. clergy, were renewed. The reply which the Queen

The ccrgy made to there, and her promises of redress, were
u'fidioua
of the more satisfying to the Protestants than any they had
,lrfo, hitherto obtained *. But, notwithstanding her de
poc'ry. clarations in their favour, they could not help har.

bouring many suspicions concerning Mary's designs
against their religion. She had never once consented
to hear any preacher of the reformed dotrine. She
had abated nothing of her bigotted attachment to
the Romilh faith. The genius of that superstition,
averse, at all times, from toleration, was, in that
age, fierce and unrelenting. Mary had given her
friends on the continent repeated assurances of her
resolution to re-establish the Catholic church t.
She had industriously avoided every opportunity
of ratifying the ass of Parliament 1560, in favour
of the Reformation. Even the protection, which,
ever since her return, she had afforded the Prote-
ftant religion, was merely temporary, and declared
by her own proclamation to be of force, only " till
she should take some final order in the matter of
religion ." The vigilant zeal .of the preachers was
inattentive to none of these circumstances, The
coldness of their principal leaders, who were, at
this time, entirely devoted to the court, added to
their jealousies and fears. These they uttered to the
people, in language which they esteemed suitable
to the necessity of the times, and which the Queep
reckoned difrefpeafful, and insolent. In a meeting

Keith, 533. 539. t Carte, vol. iii. 45.
t Keith, 504. 5»o.

of the General Assembly, Maitland publickly ae- B o o K,
cufed Knox of teaching seditious - doctrine, con- III.
cerning the right of subje&s to resist those Sove- -.
reigns, who trespass against the duty which they
owe to the people. Knox was not backward to jus-
tify what he had taught. And upon this general
doctrine of resistance, fojuff in its own nature, but
so delicate in its application to particular cafes, there
ensued a debate, which admirably displays the ta-
lents and character of both the disputants; the
acuteness of the former, embellished with learning,
but prone to subtlety, the vigorous understanding
of the latter, delighting in bold sentiments, and fu-
perior to all fear .

Two years had already been consumed, in fruit- I565,
less negotiations concerning the marriage of the D ftmI,3-

t.on both of
Scottish Queen. Mary had full leisure and oppor- Elitle h

and Mary,
tunity to discern the fallacy and deceit of all Eliza. with re,>4,

to her mar-

beth's proceedings, with respect to that affair. But, niage.
in order to set the real intentions of the English
Quleen in a clear light, and to bring her to some
explicit declaration of her fenriments, Mary, at
last, intimated to Randolph, that, on condition her Feb. s,
right of fiuceTlion to the Crown of England were -;,
publick!y acknowledged, (he was ready to yield to
the solicitations of his Mistress in behalf of Leicef.
er t. Nothing could be farther than this from the
mind and intention of Elizabeth. The right of fuc-
cefionwas amyftery, which, during herwhole reign,
her jealoufy.preferved untouched, and unexplained.
She had promised, however, when she first bega

* Knox, 349. + jtith, 169.

-B oo. K to interest hefelf in ,the mRrriageof .the Scottinh

.L. Qnueen, -all that ,was now , odmn.ded,.. .tdw.v to re.
565. .treat with decency, how to ,elude ;her formeroffer,

wo$, .on that account, no.t . little perplexing.

THE facility, with .which LLord Darnly obtained

:permiRion to visit the court of-Scotland, was owing,
in all probability, to that embarrafrment. From
.the time of Melvil's embassy, Lady Lennox had
.warmly solicited this liberty for her.fon. 'Elizabeth
was no stranger to the ambitiQus'hopes, .with which
.that young nobleman flattered himfeli. She had
received repeated advices from'her Ministers of the
sentiments, which Mary began to entertain in his
favour *. It was entirely in her power, to pre-
vent his stirring out of London. .In .the present
conjun&ure, however, nothing could be of more
advantage to her, than Darnly's journey into Scot.
land. She had already brought.one a&or upon the
itage, who, under her management, had,.fora long
.time, amused the Scottish Queen. She hoped, no less
absolutely, to dire& the motions.of Darnly, .who
was likewise her fubje& ; .and again-to involve Mary
in.all the tedious,intricacies of negociation. These
motives determined Elizabeth and .her Ministers. to
,yield.to the solicitations of .Lady Lennox.

Dimly ar- BUT this deep-laid scheme was in a moment dif-
rivs in
Scotldd. concerted. Such unexpe&ed events, as the fancy

of poets ascribes to love, are, at some times, really
produced by that paflion. An affair, which had
'been the objefc of so many political intrigues, and

, Keith, 259. 261. 66. A

had

had moved and. interested o ni any'Princes,. was:at BiG o-Ko
last decided by: the sudden liking of the:two-young II .
persons. Lord: Danly was, at this time, in! the I 65.
first bloom andi vigour of youth. In. beauty and;
gracefulhefs of perfoni he surpassed all his-cotem-
poraries; he excelled, eminently, in such arts, as:
add ease and' elegance to external form,, and-which.
enable it not only to dazzle,t but to please. Mary Gains the
was of an ag,- aid of a- tetnper, to feel the full', hrt.
power of these accomnpliihments. The imprefflon-
which Lord Darnly- made upon her, was visible,
from the time-of their sirss interview. The whole Feb. 13.
business of the court was to amuse, and entertain-
this illustrious guest *; and in all those scenes of
gaiety, Darnly, whose qualifications were altoge-
ther superficial and fliowy, appeared to great ad-
vantage. His conquest of the Queen's heart be-
came complete; and inclination now prompted
her to conclude a marriage, the first thoughts of
which had been suggested by considerations merely
political.

ELIZABETH contributed, and perhaps not with.

out design, to increase the violence of this passion.
Soon after Darnly's arrival in Scotland, she, in re-
turn to that message, whereby Mary had signified
her willingness to accept of Leicester, gave an an-
fwer, in such terms, as plainly unravelled her orl.
ginal intention in that intrigue . She promifrd if
the Scottish Queen's marriage with Leicester Mhould
take place, to advance him to great honours bug,
with regard to her title to the Englihf fucceflion,

Knox, 369. t Keith, 27o. Append. 158.

she

B o o lhefe would neither susser any legal. inquiry to :be

III. madeconcerning it, nor permit it to be publickly re-
t'.v cognized, till she herself should declare her refolu.

tion never to marry. Notwithstanding Elizabeth5
former promises, Mary had reason to expe& every
thing contained in this reply; her high spirit, how.
ever, could not bear, with patience, such a cruel
difcoveryof the contempt, the artifice, and mockery
with which, under the veil of friendship, she had
been so long abused. She burst into tears of indig.
nation, and expressed, with the utmost bitterness,
her sense of that disingenuous craft, which had
been employed to deceive her *.

THE natural effec of this indignation was to add

to the impetuosity with which {he pursued herown
scheme. Blinded by resentment, as well as by love,
.he observed no defets in the man, whom she had
chosen, and began to take the necessary steps to.
wards accomplishing her design, with all the impa-
tience, natural to those passions.

As Darnly was so nearly related to the Queen,

the canon law made it necessary to obtain the Pope's
difpen fation, before the celebration of the marriage.
For this purpose, Ihe early set on foot a negociation
with the court of Rome t.

The French SHE was busy, at the fame time, in procuring the
pov aof content of the French King and his mother. Having
the match, communicated her design, and the motives which

determined her choice, to Caftelnau the French

Keith, Append. '59. t Caind. 396.

Am-r

Amnbaffador, fhe.employed him, as the mot proper B o o xK
person, to bring his court to fall in with her views. II.
Among other arguments to this purpose, Caftelnau ' jA
mentioned Mary's attachment to Darnly, which he
represented to be so violent and deep-rooted, that
it was no longer in her own power to break off the
match *. Nor were the French Ministers back-
ward in encouraging Mary's passion. Her pride
would never stoop to an alliance with a subjet of
France. By this choice, they were delivered from
the apprehension of a match with any of the Au-
ftrian Princes, as well as the danger of too close an
union with Elizabeth; and as Darnly professed
the Roman Catholic religion, this suited the bigot-
ted schemes which that court had adopted.

WHILE Mary was endeavouring to reconcile so- Darny da'-

gusts feve-

reign courts to a measure which she had so much at ral of the
heart; Darnly, and his father, by their behaviour,
were railing up enemies at home, to obftru& it.
Lennox had, during the former part of his life,
discovered no great compass of abilities, or political
wisdom; and appears to have been a man of a weak
understanding, and violent passions. Darnly was
not superior to his father in understanding, and all
his passions were till more impetuous t. To these,
he added that insolence, which the advantage of
external form, when accompanied with no quality
more valuable, is apt to inspire. Intoxicated with
the Queen's favour, he began already to aflume
the haughtiness of a King, and to put on that im-

* Caficln. 464. Keith, z7z, 273.

perious

B: oo i .perious air, which majely itself; c' scarce render

II. tolerablea
p,,rt;cul IT was by the advice, or at leafi with the consent

rrayn. of Murray, and his party, that Lennox had been

invited into Scotland-*; and yet no sooner did he
acquire a firm footing, in that kingdom, than he
began to enter into secret cabals with those noble.
men, who were known to be avowed enemies to
Murray, and with regard to religon, to be either
neutrals, or favourers of Popery t. Darnly, fill.
more imprudent, allowed some raih expressions con.
cerning those favours, which the Queen's bounty
had conferred upon Murray, to escape him $.

BUT, above all there, the familiarity which

Darnly cultivated with David Rizio the Idlian,
contributed to increase the suspicion and disgust of
the nobles.

Tb rfe o.f THE low birth and indigent condition of this
liizio's ft-
your. man, placed him in a station, in which he ought

naturally to have remained unknown to posterity.
But what fortune called him to- a, and to susser in
Scotland, obliges hiltory to descend from its dig-
nity,. and to record his adventures. He was the
son of a musician in Turin, and having accompa-
nied the Piedmontefe Ambassador into Scotland,
gained admiflion. into the Queen's family, by, his
skill in music. is, servile condition had taught,
him suppleness of spirit, and insinuating manners.,

Knox, 367. Keith, 274. t Keith, z72. 1, Id. 274.

He

He quickly crept into the Queen's favour, and her B o o K
French Secretary happening to return at that time III
into his own country, was preferred by. her to that '56.
office. He now began to make a figure in court,
and to appear as a man of weight and consequence.
The whole train of suitors and expetants, who
have an extreme sagacity in discovering the paths
which lead most direcly to success, applied to him.
His recommendations were observed to have great
influence over the Queen, and he grew to be con-
Ifidered not only as a favourite, but as a Minister.
Nor was Rizio careful to abate that envy, which al-
waysattends such an extraordinary and rapid change
of fortune. He studied, on the contrary, to dif-
play the whole extent of his favour. He affieted
to talk often, and familiarly, with the Queen in
public. He equalled the greatest and mot opulent
fubjets, in richness of dress, and in the number of
his attendants. He discovered, in all his behavi-
our, that assuming insolence, with which unmerited
prosperity inspires an ignoble mind. It was with
the utmost indignation that the nobles beheld the
power; it was with the utmost difficulty, that they
tolerated the arrogance, of this unworthy minion.
Even in the Queen's presence they could not for-
bear treating him with marks of contempt. Nor
was it his exorbitantpower alone, which exasperated
the Scots. They confidered him, and not without
reason, as a dangerous enemy to the Protestant re-
ligion, and fufpe&ed that he held, for this purpose,
X secret correspondence with the court of Rome +,

*Buchan. 340. Melv. 107.
VQL, I. . I

B O K IT was Darnly's misfortune to fall under the ma

III. nagemcnt of this man, who, by flattery and ass

5- duity, easily gained on his vanity and unexperience

DarInly8 Rizio's whole influence on the Queen was employ
with ed in his behalf, and contributed, without doubt

towards eftablilhing him more firmly in her assec
tions *. But whatever benefit he might reap fror
his patronage, it did not counterbalance the con
tempt, and even infamy, to which he was ex
posed, on account of his familiarity with such an
upstart.

THOUGH Darnly daily made progress in the

Queen's affections, she conducted herself, however
with such prudent reserve, as to impose on Ran
dolph the Englilh Resident, a man otherwise shrewd
and penetrating. It appears from his letters atthi
period, that he entertained not the least fufpicioi
of the intrigue which was carrying on; and gav
his court repeated assurances, that the Scottif
Queen had no design of marrying Darnly t. In
the midst of his security, Mary dispatched Mait
land to signify her intention to Elizabeth, and t
solicit her content to the marriage with Darnly
This enbaffy was the first thing which opened th
eyes of Randolph.

Apfil bh ELIZABETH affected the greatef surprise at th
declares sudden resolution of the Scottilh Queen, but with

1een' out reason. The train was laid by herself, and f
with Darn. had no cause to wonder when it took effec&. S

' expressed, at the fame time, her disapprobation

.
Melv 1. t Keith, 273. and Append. i59'

e~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~t

the match, in the strongest terms; and pretended B o o K
to foresee many dangers and inconveniencies arising III.
from it, to both kingdoms. But this, too, was 1565
mere affetation. Mary had often'and plainly de.
dared her resolution to marry. It was impossible
ihe could make any choice more inoffensive. The
danger of introducing a foreign interest into Britain,
which Elizabeth had fojuftly dreaded, was entirely
avoided. Darnly, though allied to both Crowns,
and possessed of lands in both kingdoms, could be
formidable to neither. It is evident from all these
circumstances, that Elizabeth's apprehensions of
danger could not possibly be serious; and that, in
all her violent declarations against Darnly, there
was much more of grimace than of reality *.

THERE were not wanting, however, political
motives of much weight, to induce that wife Prin-
cess to put on the appearance of great displeasure,
Mary, intimidated by this, might perhaps delay
her marriage; which Elizabeth defred to obstruCt
with a weakness that little suited the dignity of her
mind, and the elevation of her character. Besides,
the tranquillity of her own kingdom was the great
objet of Elizabeth's policy, and by declaring her

Even the Hiforians of that age acknowledge, that the

marriage of the Scottilh Queen with a subjeS was far from be-
ing disagreeable to Elizabeth. Knox, 369.373. Buchan. 339.
Cafielnau, who, at that time, was well acquainted with the in-
trigues of both the British courts, afterts, upon grounds of great
probability, that the match was wholly Elizabeth's own work:
Cafieln. 46z. and that Ihe rejoiced at the accomplilhmentof it,
appears from the letters of her own Ambassadors. Keith, z80.
188.

Y z diT-

B o o K diffatisfation with Mary's condu.t, she hoped to

III. alarm that party in Scotland, which was attached

6 to the Englilh interest, and to encourage such of

the nobles, as secretly disapproved the match, open.
ly to pppofe it. The feeds of discord would, by
this means, be scattered through that kingdom,
Intestine commotions might arise. Amidst these
Mary could form none of those dangerous schemes,
to which the union of her people might have
prompted her. Elizabeth would become the um.
pire between the Scottish Queen, and her contend.
ing fubjeEs. And England might look on, with
security, while a florm, which she had raised,
wafted the only kingdom, which could possibly dif.
turb its peace.
1Mayg, IN prosecution of this scheme, fle laid before

her Privy Council the meflage from the Scottilh
Queen, and consulted them with regard to the an-
fwer she should return. Their determination, itis
easy to conceive, was perfectly conformable to her
fecrgt views. They drew up a remonitrance against
the intended match, full of the imaginary dangers
with which that event threatened the kingdom*.

sadi Nor did fle think it enough, to signify her difap.
Throgmor. probation of the measure, either by Maitland,
Ion tO ob. '
ftruEtit. Mary's Ambassador, or by Randolph, her owp

Resident in Scotland; in order to add more dig'
nity to the farce which she chose to ac, lhe ap
pointed Sir Nicholas Throgmorton her Ambaffado
Extraordinary. She commanded him to declare, i!
the strongest terms, her diffatisfa&ion with the ftel

? Kcith, 274. See Append. No. X,

which Mary proposed to take; and, at the fame B o o K
time, to produce the determination of the Privy III.
Council, as an evidence that the sentiments of the '"T
nation were not different from her own. Not long 565
after, she confined Lady Lennox as a prisoner, first
in her own house, and then sent her to the Tower*.

INTELLIGENCE of ail this reached Scotland, be-
fore the arrival of the English Ambassador. In the
first transports of her indignation, Mary resolved,
no longer, to keep any measures with Elizabeth;
and sent orders to Maitland, who accompanied
Throgmorton, to return instantly to the English
court, and, in her name, to declare to Elizabeth,
that after having been amused so long to so little
purpose; after having been fooled, and imposed on
so grossly by her artifices; the was now resolved to
gratify her own inclination, and to ask no other con-
sent, but that of her own fubje&ts, in the choice of
an husband. Maitland, with his usual sagacity,
foresaw all the effects of such a rash and angry mef-
age, and ventured rather to incur the displeasure
of his Mistress, by disobeying her commands, than
to be made the instrument of tearing asunder, so
violently, the few remaining ties, which still linked
together the two Queens t.

MARY herself soon became sensible of her error.
She received the Englifl ambassador with refpet,
|ultified her own conduct with decency; and though
unalterable in her resolution, The affeEted a wonder-

Keith, Append. 161. t I4. 16o.

-Y 3 fu!

B o o K fl solicitude to reconcile Elizabeth to the measure;

hI. and even pretended, out of complaisance towards
C65. her, to put off the consummation of the marriage

for some months*. It is probable, however, that
the want of the Pope's dispensation, and theprofpeEt
of gaining the content of her own fubje6ts, were
the real motives of this delay.

Murray's THIS consent Mary laboured with the utmost in.
aversion to
Darty. duftry to obtain. The Earl of Murray was the

person in the kingdom, whose concurrence was of
the greatest importance; but she had reason to fear
that it would not be procured without extreme dif-
ficulty. From the time of Lennox's return into
Scotland, Murray perceived that the Queen's assec-
tions began gradually to be efiranged from him.
Darnly, Athol, Rizio, all the court favourites,
combined against him. His ambitious spirit could
not brook this diminution of his power, which his
former services had so little merited. He retired in-
to the country, and gave way to rivals, with whom
he was unable to contend t. The return of the
Earl of Bothwell, his avowed enemy, who had been
accused of a design upon his life, and who had refid-
ed for some time in foreign countries, obliged him
to attend to his own safety. No intreaty of the
Queen could persuade him t& a reconcilement with
that nobleman. He infiffed on having him brought
to a public trial, and prevailed, by his importunity,
to have a day fixed for it. Bothwell durst not ap-
pear in opposition to a man, who came to the place

* Keith, Append. 278. t- Id. 272. 274. Append. 159.

*~~~~~~~~s *- Ps

of trial, attended by 5ooo of his followers on horse- o o ' K
back. He was once more constrained to leave the III
kingdom; but, by the Queen's command, the fen- ,"1"
tence of outlawry, which is incurred by non-appear-
ance, was not pronounced against him *.

MARY, sensible, at the fame time, of how much May 8.
importance it was, to gain a fubjeft so powerful
and so popular as the Earl of Murray, invited him
back to court, and received him with many demon-
firations of refpe&t and confidence. At last she de-
fired him to set an example to her other fubjeas by
subscribing a paper,- containing a formal approba-
tion of her marriage with Darnly. Murray had
many reasons to hesitate, and even to with-hold his
aflent. Darnly had not only undermined his credit
with the Queen, but discovered, on every occasion,
a rooted aversion to his person. By consenting to
his elevation to the throne, he would give him such
an accession of dignity and power, as no man wil-
lingly bestows on an enemy. The unhappy confe-
quences which might follow upon a breach with
England were, likewise, ofconfiderable weight with
Murray. He had always openly preferred a confe-
deracy with England, before the ancient alliance
with France. By his means chiefly, this change in
the system of national politics had been brought
about. A league with England had been eftablilh-
ed; and he could not think of sacrificing, to a rash
and youthful paflion, an alliance of so much utility
to the kingdom; and which he and the other nobles

'* Keith, ibid. 16o.

Y 4 nycr

B o o were bound, by every obligation, to maintain*.

III. Nor was the interest of religion forgotten on this
1565' occasion. Mary, though surrounded by Protestant

Counsellors, had found means to hold a dangerous
correspondence with foreign Catholics. She had
even courted the Pope's protecion, who had sent
her a subsidy of 8000 crowns -. Though Murray
had hitherto endeavoured to bridle the zeal of the
reformed clergy, and to set the Queen's conduct in
&he most favourable light, yet her obstinate adhe.
rence to her own religion, could not fail of alarm-
ing him, and by her resolution to marry apapift,
the only hope of reclaiming her, which remained,
was for ever cut off. Each of these considerations
had its influence on Murray, and all of them deter-
mined him to decline complying, at that time, with
the Queen's request.

Mlay 14. THE Convention of nobles, which was assembled
tio ofthe a few days after, discovered a greater disposition to
nobles ap- gratify the Queen. Manyof them, without hefita.
themarri. tion, expressed their approbation of the intended

match; but as others were startled at the fame dan-
gers which had alarmed Murray, or were influenced
by his example, to refuse their consent, another
Convention was appointed at Pertht in order to de-
liberate more fully concerning this matter.S

MEAN while, Mary gave a public evidence of

her own inclination, by conferring upon Darnly
titles of honour peculiar to the royal family. The

Keith, 169. + Id. 295, Meld. 114.
: Keith, 283. Knox, 373.

oppóo

opposition she had hitherto met with, and the many B o o K
contrivances employed to thwart and disappoint her II.
inclination, produced their usual efFet on her heart, I56
they confirmed her passion, and increased its vJio-
lence. The simplicity of that age imputed an assec-
tion, so excessive, to the influence of witchcraft*.
It was owing, however, to no, other charm, than
the irresistible power of youth and beauty over a
young and tender heart. Darnly grew giddy with
his prosperity. Flattered by the love of a Queen,
and the applause of many among her subje&s, his
natural haughtiness and insolence became infupport-
able, and he could no longer bear advice, far less
contradiction. Lord Ruthven, happening to be
the first person who informed him that Mary, in
order to tooth Elizabeth, had delayed, for some
time, creating him Duke of Albany, he, in a fren-
zy of rage, drew his dagger and attempted to stab
him t. It required all Mary's attention, to pre-
vent his falling under that contempt, to which such
behaviour deservedly exposed him.

IN no scene of her life was ever Mary's own ad- Mary's ad.

dress more remarkably displayed. Love iharpened giinshe,
her invention, and made her study every method of f"bje'8,
gaining herfubje6ts. Many of the nobles ihe won
by her address, and more by her promises. On
some she bestowed lands, to others (he gave new ti-
tles of honour $. She even condescended to court
the Protestant clergy; and having invited three of
their fuperintendants to Stirling, she declared, in
*Keith, 283. t Ibid. Append. 160. I Ibid. z83.

strong

B o 6 K strong terms, her resolution to protet theirreligion

III. expressed her willingness to be present at a confer.
.56§5 ence upon the points in doctrine which were dif.

puted between the Protestants and Papists, and went
so far as to show some desire to hear such of their
preachers as were most remarkablefor moderation*.
By these arts, the Queen gained wonderfully upon
the people, who, unless their jealousy be raised by
repeated injuries, are always ready to view the ac-
tions of their Sovereign with an indulgent eye.

ON the other hand, Murray and his associates

were plainly the dupes of Elizabeth's policy. She
talked in so high a firain, of her displeasure at the
intended match; she treated Lady Lennox with so
much rigour; she wrote to the Scottiih Queen in
such strong terms; ihe recalled the Earl of Lennox
and his son, in such a peremptory manner, and with
such severe denunciations of her vengeance, if they
should presume to disobey t; that all these expref.
sions of aversion fully persuaded them of her fin.
cerity. This belief fortified their scruples with re-
spect to the match, and encouraged them to oppose
it. They began with forming among themselves
bonds of confederacy and mutual defence; they en-
tered into a secret correspondence with the Englilh
Resident, in order to secure Elizabeth's assistance
when it should become needful ; they endeavoured
to fill the nation with such apprehensions of dan-
ger, as might counterbalance the influence of those
arts, which the Queen had employed.

Knox, 373. ~ Keith, 285, z86.
t Ibid. 289. z2z. 298.

BESIDES

BESIDES there intrigues, there were secretly car- B o o K

ried on, by both parties, dark designs of a more cri- III.
minal nature, and more fuitableto the fpiritofthe age. 6
Darnly, impatient of that opposition, which he im- Schemes of

Darhly and

puted wholly to Murray, and resolving at any rate Murry a-
to get rid of such a powerful enemy, formed a plot ga""tea'c
to affaflinate him, during the meeting of the Con-
vention at Perth. Murray, on his part, despairing
of preventing the marriage by any other means,
had, together with the Duke of Chatelherault, and
the Earl of Argyll, concerted measures for seizing
Darnly, and carrying him a prisoner into England.

IF either of these conspiracies had taken effect,

this convention might have been attended with con-
sequences extremely tragical; but both were ren-
dered abortive, by the vigilance or good fortune of
those against whom they were formed. Murray, be-
ing warned of his danger by some retainers to the
court, who still favoured his interest, avoided the
blow, by not going to Perth. Mary, receiving intel-
ligence of Murray's enterprise, retired with the ut-
most expedition, along with Darnly, to theother fide
of Forth. Conscious, on both fides, of guilt, and in-
flamed with resentment, it was inipoffible they could
either forget the violence, which themselves had me-
ditated, or forgive the injuries, intended against
them. From that moment, all hope of reconcile-
ment was at an end, and their mutual enmity burst
out with every symptom of implacable hatred *.

ON

The reality of these tto opposite conspiracies has given
9cQafion to many disputes and much contradition. Some deny

that

B o o l ON Mary's return to Edinburgh, Ihe summoned

III. her vaflals by proclamation, and solicited them by
565. her letters, to repair thither in arms, for the pro-

Mary fum. teftion of her person against her foreign and do.
mons her
vatfals to metic
take arms
aainft that any design was formed against the life of Murray; others

call in question the truth of the conspiracy against Darnly.
There seem, however, to be good reasons for believing both;
though the zeal and credulity of party-writers have added to
each, many exaggerated circumstances. The following argu-
ments render it probable, that some violence was intended
against Murray.

I. This is pofitivelyaflierted by Buchanan, 34 . :. The Eng.

lilh Resident writes to Cecil, that Murray was assuredly inform-
ed that a design was laid to murder him at Perth, and describes
the manner in which this plot was to have been executed.
Keith, z87. 3. Murrayhimfelfconlantly and publicklyafirm-
ed, that such a design was formed against his life. Keith, App.
o08. And though he was called upon by the Queen to bring
legal evidence of his assertion, and a safe condu& offered him,
while he came to court for that purpose; ibid. yet whoever
confiders Murray's situation, and the spirit of those who ruled
in court at that time, will scarce deem it any proof of his guilt,
that he did not chufe to rii his person on such security. 4. The
furious paflions of Darnly, the fierceness of his resentment,
which scrupled at no violence, and the manners of the age, ren-
der the imputation of such a crime less improbable.

II. That Murray and his aflbciates had resolved to seize

Darnly's person, appears with Rill greater certainty; I. From
the express testimony of Melvil, 112. although Buchanan,
p. 341. and Knox, p. 377. asset, without any reason, to re-
present this as an idle rumour. a. The question was put to
Randolph, whether the Governor of Berwick would receive
Lennox and his son, if they were carried prisoners to that place.
This plainly fllews, that some such design wasin hand, and Ran-
dolph did not discourage it by tlcanfwerwhichhegave, Keith,
29o. 3. The precipitation, with which the Qjcen rttired,

and

peftic enemies . She was obeyed with all the B o o X
promptness and alacrity, with which fubjets run to III.

andthe reason Ihe gave for this sudden flight, are mentioned I565*
by Randolph, Keith, 291. 4. A great part of the Scottni
nobles, and among these the Earia of Argyll and Rothes, who
were themselves privy to the design, assert the reality of the
conspiracy. Good. vol. ii'. 358.

All these circumftancesleave little room to doubt of the truth

of both conspiracies. But we may observe how far this proof,
though drawn from public, records, falls short, on both fides, of
legal and formal evidence. Buchanan and Randolph, in their
accounts of the conspiracy against Murray, differ widely in al-
moR every circumfiance. The accounts of the attempt upon
Darnly, are not more confifent. Melvil alleges, that the de-
sign of the conspirators was to carry Darnly a prisoner into Eng-
land; the proposal made to Randolph agrees with this. Ran-
dolph fays, that they intended to carry the Queen to St. An-
drew's, and Darnly to Castle Campbell. The Lords, in their
declaration, affirm the design of the conspirators to have been
to murder Darnly and his father, toconfine the Queen in Loch.
leven during life, and to usurp the government. To believe
implicitly, whatever they find in an ancient paper, is a folly to
which Antiquaries are extremely prone. Ancient papers, how-
ever, often contain nothing more than the slanders of a party,
and the lie of the day. The declaration of the nobles referred
to, is of this kind; it is plainly rancorous, and written in the
very heat of faction. Many things asserted in it, are evidently
false or exaggerated. Let Murray and his confederates be as
ambitious as we can suppose, they mut have had some preten-
ces, and plausible ones too, before they could venture to impri-
son their Sovereign for life, and to seize the reins of govern.
ment; but, at that time, the Queen's conduct had afforded no
colourable excuse for proceeding to such extremities. It is,
likewise, remarkable, that in all the proclamations against
Murray, of which To mapy are published in Keith, Appendix
log, &c. neither the violent attempt upon Darnly, nor that
which he is alleged to have formed against the Queen herself,
ire ever once mentioned.

Keith, 298.

Jis,__

B o o K defend a mild and popular adminiflration. This

IlI. popularity, however, she owed in a great meafurc

to Murray, who had direaed her administration
1565. with great prudence. But the crime of opposing

her marriage, obliterated the memory of.his former
services; and Mary, impatient of contradiftion,
and apt to confider those who disputed her will, as
enemies to her person, determined to let him feel
the whole weight of her vengeance. For this pur.
pose {he summoned him to appear before her upon
a short warning, to answer to such things as should
be laid to his charge t. At this very time, Mur.
ray, and the Lords who adhered to him, were as.
fembled at Stirling, to deliberate what course they
should hold, in such a difficult conjunture. But
the current of popular favour ran so strongly
against them, and, notwithstanding some fears and
jealousies, there prevailed in the nation such a ge-
neral disposition to gratify the Queen, in a matter
which so nearly concerned her, that, without com-
ing to any other conclusion, than to implore the
Queen of England's protetion, they put an end
to their ineffeaual consultations, and returned
every man to his own house.

TOGETHER with this discovery of the weakness

of her enemies, the confluence of her fubje6ts from
all corners of the kingdom, afforded Mary an agree-
able proof of her own strength. While the Queen
was in this prosperous situation, the determined to
bring to a period, an affair, which had so long en-
grossed her heart, and occupied her attention. On

+ Keith, Append, o18.

T^~~~ tW~the

the 29th of July, she married Lord Darnly. The B oo K
ceremony was performed in the Queen's chapel, ac- HI.
cording to the rites of the Romish church; the 165.
pope's bull dispensing with their marriage, having 5el5bra,5t
been previously obtained*. She issued, at the ahe wri
fame time, proclamations, conferring the title of Darnly
King of Scots upon her husband, and command-
ing that henceforth all writs at law hould run in
the joint names of King and Queen t. Nothing
can be a stronger proof of the violence of Mary's
love, or the weakness of her councils, than this last
fep. Whether ihe had any right to chute a hus-
band, without consent ofParliament, was, in that
age, a matter of some dispute ; that fle had no right
to confer upon him, by her private authority, the
title and dignity of King; or, by a simple procla.
mation, to raise her husband to be the master of
her people, seems to be beyond all doubt. Fran-
cis II. indeed, bore the fame title. It was not,
however, the gift of the Queen, but of the nation;
and the consent of Parliament was obtained, before
he ventured to assume it. Darnly's condition, as a
fLibje&, rendered it still more neceflary to have the
concurrence of the supreme Council in his favour.
Such a violent and unprecedented stretch of prero-
gative as the substituting a proclamation in place
of an aa of Parliament, might have justly alarmed
the nation. But the Queen possessed so entirely the
confidence of her fubjeds, that, notwithstanding all
the clamours of the malecontents, no lymptoms of
general discontent appeared on that account.

Keith, 307. t Anderson, x. 33. See Append. No. XL
Buchan. 341.

Evzw

B o o I: EVEN amidst that scene of joy, which always ac.

IlI companies successful love, Mary did not susser the

c65' course of her vengeance against the malecontent

nobles to be interrupted. Three days after the
marriage, Murray was again summoned to court,
under the severest penalties, and upon his non-ap.
pearance, the rigour of justice took place, and he
was declared an out-law *. At the fame time, the
Kleen set at liberty Lord Gordon, who, ever since
his father's infurreftion in the year 1562, had been
detained a prisoner; she recalled the Earl ofSuther-
land, who, on account of his concern in that con-
fpiracy, had fled into Slanders; and she permitted
Bothwell to return again into Scotland. The firif,
and last of these, were among the most powerful
fubje&ts in the kingdom, and all of them animated
with implacable hatred to Murray, whom they
esteemed the enemy of their families, and the author
of their own sufferings. This common hatred be.
came the foundation of the ftriteft union with the
Queen, and gained them an ascendant over all her
councils. Murray himself confidered this confede-
racy with his avowed enemies, as a more certain
indication than any meafu.e the had yet taken, of
her inexorable resentment.

Marche a.. THE malecontents had not yet openly taken up
av and hs arms f. But the Queen having ordered her sub.
a focialcs.

* Keith, 309, 310.

+ After their fruitless consultation in Stirling, the Lords rev

tired to their own houses. Keith, 304. Murray was fill at St.
Andrew's on July 22. Keith, 306. By the place of rende-.

¥0itl

je&s to march against them, they were driven to B o o i
the last extremity. They found themselves unable III.
to make head againIt the numerous forces, which
Mary had assembled; and fled into Argylefhire, in 56
expeaation of aid from Elizabeth, to whom they
had secretly dispatched a messenger, in order to im-
plore her immediate aflifance *.

MEAN while, Elizabeth endeavoured to embar- Elizabeth

inerpoftc Ia

rafs Mary, by a new declaration of disgust at her their fa-
conduEt. She blamed both her choice of Lord
Darnly, and the precipitation with which she had
concluded the marriage. She required Lennox and
Darnly, whom she Itill called her subjects, to re-
turn into England; and at the fame time, she warm-
ly interceded in behalf of Murray, whose behaviour
she represented to be not only innocent, but laud-
able. This meflage, so mortifying to the pride of
the Queen, and so full of contempt for her husband,
was rendered frill more insupportable, by the petu-
lant and saucy demeanour of Tamworth, the per-
son who delivered it t. Mary vindicated her own
conduct with warmth, but with great strength of
reason; and rejected the interceflion in behalf of
Murray, not without signs of resentment at Eliza-

vous, appointed for the inhabitants of the different counties,
Augult 4, it appears that the Queen's intention was to march
into Fife, the county in which Murray, Rothes, Kirkaldy, and
otherchiefsofthemalecontentsrefided. Keith, 310. Their
fight into the well, Keith, 3 1 , prevented this expedition, and
the former rendezvous was altered, Keith, 310.

Keith, 312. Knox, 380. + Camd. 398.
VoL. I. Z beth.

Bo oK beth's pretending to intermeddle in the internal

H1I. government of her kingdom*.
1565.

SHE did not, on that account, intermit in the

leaf the ardour, with which lhe pursued Murray
and his adherentst. They now appeared openly in
arms; and having received a small supply in money
from Elizabeth j, were endeavouring to raise their
followers in the western counties. But Mary's vi.
gilance hindered them from assembling in any con.
fiderable body. All her military operations, at that
time, were concerted with wisdom, executed with
vigour, and attended with success. In order toen.
courage her troops, ihe herself marched along with
them, rode with loaded pistols it, and endured all
the fatigues of war with admirable fortitude. Her
alacrity inspired her forces with an invincible refo.
lution, which, together with their superiority in
number, deterred the malecontents from facingthem
in the field ; but having artfully passed the Queen's
army, they marched with great rapidity to Edin.
burgh, and endeavoured to rouse the inhabitants of
Auguf 31. that city to arms. The Queen did not susser them

to remain long unmolested; and, on her approach,
they were forced to abandon that place, and retire
in confusion towards the western borders §. .

Keith, Append. 99.

t The most considerable persons who joined Murray, were

the Duke of Chatelherault, the Earls of Argyll, Glencairnr
Rothcs; Lord Boyd and Ochiltree; the Lairds of Grange,
*Ctnninghamhead, I3alcomie, Carmylie, Lawers, Bar, Dreghorn,
Pittarrow, Comptroller, and the Tutor of Pitcur. Knox, 382.

Knox, 38o. 11 Keith, Append. 164. Id, 315.

As

As it was uncertain, for some time, what route B o o K
they had taken, Mary employed that interval in II.
providing for the security of the counties in the i565.
'heart of the kingdom. She seized the places of They ar
frength which belonged to the rebels; and obliged retire into
the considerable Barons in those shires, which the England.
most fufpe&ed, to join in associations for her de-
fence *. Having thus left all the country behind
her in tranquillity, (he, with an army 1 8,ooo frong,
marched towards Dumfries, where the rebels then
were. During their retreat, they had sent letters
to the Queen, from almost every place where they
halted, full of submission, and containing various
overtures towards an accommodation. But Mary,
who determined not to let flip such a favourable op-
portunity of crushing the mutinous spirit of her sub-
jets, rejected them with disdain. As she advanced,
the malecontents retired. And, having received
no effectual aid from Elizabeth t, they despaired of
any other means of safety, fled into England, and o0ao. 20.
put themselves under the protection of the Earl of
Bedford, Warden of the marches.

NOTHING, which Bedford's personal friendship Theymeet
for Murray could supply, was wanting to render ,~ih. -
their retreat agreeable. But Elizabeth herself treat- treament

. from Eia-

ed them with extreme neglect. She had fully gain- bcth.
ed her end, and, by their means, had excited such
discord and jealousies among the Scots, as would,
in all probability, long diftra& and weaken Mary's
councils. Her business now, was to save appear-

Kcitl, Appcnd. 11 3. See Appendix, No. Xli. XIIr.

Z a ances,

B o o K ances, and to justify herself to the Ministers o

11I. France and Spain, who accused her of fomenting

the troubles in Scotland, by her intrigues. Th
expedient the contrived for her vindication, strong.
ly displays her own character, and the wretchedcon.
dition of exiles, who are obliged to depend on a so.
reign Prince. Murray and Hamilton, Abbot of
Kilwinning, being appointed by the other fugitives
to wait on Elizabeth, inilead of meeting with that
welcome reception which was due to men, who,
out of confidence in her promises, had hazarded
their lives and fortunes, could not even obtain the
favour of an audience, until they had meanly con.
sented to acknowledge, in the prefenceoftheFrench
and Spanish Ambassadors, that Elizabeth had given
them no encouragement to take arms. No sooner
did they make this declaration, than the aftonihed
them with this reply, " You have declared the
truth; I am far from setting an example of rebel.
lion to my own fubjedts, by countenancing those
who rebel against theirlawful Prince. The treason,
of which you have been guilty, is deteftible; and
as traitors I banish you from my pretence*." Not.
withstanding this scene of farce and of falsehood, so
dishonourable to all the persons who aEed a part in
it, Elizabeth permitted the malecontents peaceably
to reside in her dominions, supplied them secretly
with money, and renewed her intercession with the
Scottifl Queen in their favour t.

THE advantage she had gained over them did not
satisfy Mary; she resolved to follow the blow, and

Melv. 1iz. + Knox, 389.

tU

to prevent a party, which (he dreaded, from ever B o o K
recovering any footing in the nation. With this III.
view, she called a meeting of Parliament; and in 'X
order that a sentence of forfeiture might be legally 1565
pronounced againls the banished Lords, the fum-
moned them, by public proclamation, to appear Decemb. i.
before it *.

THE Duke of Chatelherault, on his humble ap-
plication, obtained a separate pardon; but not with-
out difficulty, as the King violently opposed it. He
was obliged, however, to leave the kingdom, and
to reside for some time in France t.

THE numerous forces which Mary brought into
thefield, the vigour with which flie ated, and the
length of time she kept them in arms, resemble the
efforts of a Prince with revenues much more confi-
derable than those which she possessed. But armies
were then levied and maintained by Princes, at small
charge. The vasal followed his superior, and the
superior attended the Monarch, at his own expence.
Six hundred horsemen, however, and three com-
panies of foot, betides her guards, received regular
pay from the Queen. This extraordinary charge,
together with the deburfements occasioned by her
marriage, exhausted a treasury, which was far from
being rich. In this exigency, many devices were fal-
len upon forraifingmoney. Fines were leviedon the
towns of St. Andrew's, Per:h, and Dundee, which
were fufpeted of favouring the malecontents. An
unusual tax was imposed on the burroughs through-

*Keith, 320. t Knox, 389.

Z 3 out

B o o K out the kingdom; and a great fum was demanded

III. of the citizens of Edinburgh, by way of loan,

lm This unprecedented exacion alarmed the citizens,
65. They had recourse to delays, and started difficulties,

in order to evade it. These Mary construed to be
a&s of avowed disobedience, and instantly commit.
ted several of them to prison. But this severity did
not subdue the undaunted spirit of liberty, which
prevailed among the inhabitants. The Queen was
obliged to mortgage to the city, the fuperiorityof
the town of Leith, by which she obtained a con.
iiderable fum of money *. The thirds of ecclesias-
tical benefices proved another source, whence the
Queen derived some supply. About this time, we
find the Protestant clergy complaining more bitter.
ly than ever of their poverty. The army, it is
probable, exhausted a great part of that fund, which
was appropriated for their maintenance -.

THE assemblies of the church were not uncon.

Church as-
fairs. cerned fpeEtators of thecommotions of this turbulent

year. In the meeting June 24, several of the male-
content nobles were present, and seem to have had
great influence on their decisions. The high tfrain
in which the assembly addressed the Queen, can be
imputed only to those fears and jealousies, with re.
gard to religion, which they endeavoured to infuse
into the nation. The assembly complained, with
some bitterness, of the flop which had been put to
the progress of the Reformation by theQueen's arri-
val in Scotland; they required not only the total
suppression of the Popifl worship throughout the

t Knox, 383, 386. t Mait. Hit.ofgdinburgh, 27.

5 king-

kingdom, but even in the Queen's own chapel; and B o oK
besides the legal establishment of the Protestant re- III.
ligion, they demanded that Mary herself should '^ó
publickly embrace it. The Queen, after some de-
liberation, replied, that neither her conscience, nor
her interest, would permit her to take such a flep.
The former would for ever reproach her for a
change, which proceeded from no inward convic-
tion; the latter would susser by the offence, which
her apofltacy must give to the King of France, and
her other allies on the continent *.

IT is remarkable, that the prosperous situation of
the Queen's affairs, during this year, began to work
some change in favour of her religion. The Earls
of Lennox, Athol, and Cafils, openly attended
mass; ffe herself afforded the Catholics a more
avowed protection than formerly; and, by her
permilflon, some of the ancient Monks ventured to
preach publickly to the people t.

* Knox, 374. 376. t Id. 389, 390.

Z4

# BOOK IV.

THE
H I STORY

O F
SCOTL AND.

BOOK IV.
A S the day appointed for the meeting of Parlia- B o o K

ment approached, Mary and her Ministers IV.

were employed in deliberating concerning the course '--
which it was most proper to hold with regard to the My',
exiled nobles. Many motives prompted her to set liberatio.

' '

- r l- Concerning
po bounds to the rigour of justice. The malecon- the eiled

noble&

tents had laboured to defeat a scheme, which her
interest conspired with her pallions in rendering dear
to her; they were the leaders of a party, whose
friendship she had been obliged to court, while ihe
held their principles in abhorrence; and they were
firmly attached to a rival, whom the had good rea-
son both to fear and to bate.

BUT,

B O K BUT, on the other hand, several weighty confi.

IV. derations might be urged. The noblemen, whose
566. fare was in suspense, were among the most powerful

fubje6ts in the kingdom; their wealth great, their
connexions extensive, and their adherents nume.
rous. They were now at mercy, the objects of com.
palion, and suing for pardon with themoft humble
submission.

IN those circumstances, an at of clemency would

exalt the Queen's character, and appear no less fplen.
did among foreigners, than acceptable to her own
fubjets. Mary herself, though highly incensed,
was not inexorable; but the King's rage was im-
placable and unrelenting. They were solicited in
behalfof the fugitives, from various quarters. Mor.
ton, Ruthven, Maitland, and all who had been
members of the Congregation, were not forgetful
of their ancient union with Murray, and his fellow.
sufferers; nor negle&ful of their safety, which they
esteemed of great importance to the kingdom. Mel.
vil, who at that time possessed the Queen's confi-
dence, seconded their felicitations. And Murray,
having stooped so low as to court Rizio, that fa-
vourite, who was desirous of securing his prote&tion
against the King, whose displeasure he had lately
incurred, seconded the intercefflons of his other
friends, with the whole of his influience*. The
interposition of Sir Nicholas Throgmorton, who
had lately been Elizabeth's AmbalfadorinScotland,
in behalf of the exiles, was of more weight than all

' Melv. I uS.

these,

these, and attended with more success. Throgrnor- B o o l;
ton, out of enmity to Cecil, had embarked deeply IV.
in all the intrigues which were carried on at the 55
English court, in order to undermine the power and 66.
credit of that minister. He espoused, for this rea-
son, the cause of the Scottifl Queen, towards whose
title and pretensions the other was known to bear
little favour; and ventured, in the present critical
juncture, to write a letter to Mary, containing the
most salutary advices with regard to her condu&.
H-e recommended the pardoning of the Earl of
Murray and his associates, as a measure no less pru-
dent than popular. An acion of this nature, fays
he, the pure effet of your Majelty's generosity,
will spread the fame of your lenity and moderation,
and engage the English to look towards your accef-
sion to the throne, not only without prejudice, but
with desire. By the fame means, a perfec har-
mony will be restored among your own fubjeds,
who, if any rupture should happen with England,
will serve you with that grateful zeal, which your
clemency cannot fail of inspiring *.

THESE prudent remonstrances of Throgmorton, She resolve
to which his reputation for wisdom, and known at- them with
tachment to the Queen, added great authority, l'"menc
made a deep impreflion on her spirit. Her cour-
tiers cultivated this happy disposition, and prevailed
on her, notwithstanding the King's inflexible tem.
per, to sacrifice her own private resentment to the
intercession of her subjects, and the wishes of her
friendst. With this view, the Parliament, which

6 Mclv. 119. t Id. iz5.

had

B o K had been called to meet on the 4th of February, was

IV. prorogued to the 7th of April'; and in the mean
óLó-s' time, Ihe was busy in confidering the manner and
566' form in which ihe Mhould extend her favour to the

Lords who were under disgrace.

daierteed THOUGH Mary discovered, on this occasion, a

for this
resolution mind naturally prone to humanity, and capable of
by the soli-
etation of forgiving, she wanted firmness, however, to refif
France, and the influence, which was fatally employed to difap.
ber zeal for
Popery. point the effects of this amiable disposition. About

this time, and at no great distance from each other,
Ftbruary3. two envoys arrived from the French King, The

former was intrusted with matters of mere ceremony
alone; he congratulated the Queen on her mar-
riage, and invested the King with the ensigns of the
order of St. Michael. The inftrutions of the lat.
ter related to matters of more importance, and pro.
duced greater effects t.

AN interview between Charles IX. and his Siler

the Queen of Spain had been often proposed; and
after many obstacles arising from the opposition of
political interest, was at last appointed at Bayonne,
Catherine of Medicis accompanied her son; the
Duke of Alva attended his Miltrefs. Amidst the
scenes of public pomp and pleasure, which seemed
to be the sole occupation of both courts, a scheme
was formed, and measures concerted, for extermi-
nating the Hugonots in France, the Protestants in
the Low Countries, and for suppressing the Reforma-
tion throughout all Europe $. The active policy

* Good. vol i. 224. 1. Ieith, 3z5. Append, I67.
I Thuan. lib. 37.

^f

of Pope Pius IV. and the zeal of the Cardinal of B o o K
Lorrain, confirmed and encouraged dispositions, so IV.
suitable to the genius of the Romrifh religion, and '1 '
so beneficial to their own order.

IT was on account of this holy league which the

second French envoy brought to Mary, conjuring
her, at the fame time, in the name of the King of
France, and the Cardinal of Lorrain, not to restore
the leaders of the Protestants in her kingdom to
power and favour, at the very time when the Ca-
tholic Princes were combined to deflroy that sea,
in all the countries of Europe *.

POPERY is a species of false religion, remarkable

for the strong possession it takes of the heart. Con-
trived by men of deep infight in the human cha-
raEter, and improved by the experience and obfer-
vation of many successive ages; it arrived at last to
a degree of perfetion, which no former system of
fuperitition had ever attained. There is no power
in the understanding, and no paflion in the heart,
to which it does not present objects, adapted to
rouse, and to interest them. Neither the love of
pleasure, which, at that time, prevailed in the court
of France, nor the pursuits of ambition which qc-
cupied the court of Spain, had secured them from
the dominion of bigotry.. Laymen and courtiers
were agitated with that furious and unmerciful zeal,
which is commonly confidered as peculiar to eccle-
fiftics; and Kings and Ministers thought them-

** Melv. 16.

selves

B o o K selves bound, in conscience, to extirpate the Pro.

IV. teftant do&trine. Mary herself was deeply tinctured
vó - with all the prejudices of Popery; a paflonate at.

tachment to that fuperflition is visible in every part
of her character, and runs through all the scenes of
her life: She was devoted, too, with the utmost
fubmiflion, to the Princes of Lorrain, her uncles;
and had been accustomed, from her infancy, tolif.
ten to all their advices, with a filial respeCt. The
profpe& of restoring the public exercise of her own
religion, the pleasure of complying with her uncles,
and the hopes of gratifying the French Monarch,
whom the present ftuation of her affairs in England
made it necessary to court, counterbalanced all the
prudent considerations which had formerly weighed
with her. She instantly joined the confederacy,
which had been formed for the deftrution of the
Protestants, and altered the whole plan of her con.
du&, with regard to Murray and his adherents *.

To this fatal resolution may be imputed all the

subsequent calamities of Mary's life. Ever since
her return into Scotland, fortune may be said to
have been propitious to her, rather than adverse;
and if her prosperity did not rife to any great height,
it had, however, suffered no considerable interrup.
tion. A thick and fettled cloud of adversity, with
few gleams of hope, and none of real enjoyment,
covers the remainder of her days.

THE effecs of the new system, which Mary had
adopted, were soon visible. The time of the pro.

*Se Append. No. XIV.

rogation

rogation of Parliament was shortened; and by a Bo o o
new proclamation, the x2th of March was fixed IV.
for its meeting *. Mary resolved, without any fur- ' '
ther delay, to proceed to the attainder of the rebel A Parli.
Lords, and, at the fame time, determined totake ed tot-
some steps towards the re-establishment of the Ro. t ctidh
mifh religion in Scotland --. The Lords of the noble.
Articles were chosen, as usual, to prepare the bufi.
ness which was to come before the Parliament.
They were all persons in whom the Queen could
confide, and bent to promote her designs. The
ruin of Murray and his party seemed now inevita-
ble, and the danger of the Reformed Church im-
minent, when an event unexpeEtedly happened,
which saved both. If we regard either the barba-
rity of that age, when such ats of violence were

* Keith, 326.

1 It is not on the authority of Knox alone, that we charge

the Queen with the design of re-eflablilhing the Roman Catho-
lic religion. He, indeed, asserts that the altars, which should
have been ereaed in the church of St. Giles, were already pro-
vided, 394. i. Mary herfeif, in a letter to the Archbishop of
Glasgow, her Ambaflador in France, acknowledges, "that in
that Parliament, the intended to have done some good, with re-
spec toreftoring theoldreligion." Keith, 331. 2. TheSpi.
ritual Lords, i. e. the Popilhecclefiaftics, had, by.herauthority,
resumed their ancient place in.that assembly. Ibid. 3. Shehad
joined the confederacy at Bayonne. Keith, Append. 167. 4. She
allowed mass to be celebrated in different parts of the kingdom,
ibid. and declared that the would have mars free forallmen who
would hear it. Good. vol i. 274. 5. Blackwood, whowasfurir
niflied by the Archbishop of Glasgow with materials for writing
his Marlyre de Maite, affirms that the Queen intended to have
procured, in this'Parliament, if not the re-eflablinlthent ofth
Catholic religion, at Icaf fomething.for the cafe of Catholics.
Jcbb, vol. ii, 20+.

comn.

B o o x common, or the mean condition of the unhappy

IV. person who suffered, the event is little remarkable;
' ó"' but if we reflea upon the circumstances with which
!566.
An5pre. it was attended, or upon the consequences which
vented by
theonfp- followed it, it appears extremely memorable; and
racy oainf the rife and progress of it deserve to be traced with
Rizio,

great care.

Drnly lores DARNLY'S external accomplishments had excited
Lfaeion, that sudden and violent passion which raised him to

the throne. But the qualities of his mind corre-
fponded ill with the beauty of his person. Of a
weak underffanding, and without experience, con.
ceited, at the fame time, of his own abilities, and
ascribing his extraordinary success entirely to his dif.
tinguifhed merit. All the Queen's favour made no
impression on such a temper. All her gentleness
could not bridle his imperious and ungovernable
Spirit. All her attention to place about him
persons capable of directing his condu&, could
not preserve him from rash and imprudent ac-
tions *. Fond of all the amusements, and even
prone to all the vices of youth, he became, by
degrees, careless of her person, and a firanger
to her company. To a woman, and a Queen,
such behaviour was intolerable. The lower Ihe
had slooped in order to raise him, his behaviour
appeared the more ungenerous and criminal. And
in proportion to the strength of her first affetion,
was the violence with which her disappointed pafion
now operated. A few months after the marriage,

·Good. vol. i. 122.

their

.their dpneftic quarrels began to be observed. The B o o
extravagance .of Darnly's ambition gave rife to IV.
these. Instead of being satisfied with aflare inthe i66
administration of government, or with the title of' .
King, which Mary, by an unprecedented stretch
of power, had conferred og;him$ hCedemanded the
Crown Matrimonial with mnofl insolent importu-
nity *. And though Mary alleged that this gift
was beyond her power, and that the authority of
Parliament must be interposed to bestow it, he
wanted either uhderftanding to comprehend, ot
temper to admit so just a defence; and often re-
newed and 'rged his requefti

Rizio, whom the King had at first taken ihto Surpeae

Rizio to bt

great confidence, did not humour him in these fol- the cauC
lies. By this, he incurred Henry's displeasure;, it
and as it was impossible for-Mary to behave to-
wards her husband with the fame affe&tion, which
diltinguifhed the firft'and happy days of their union,
he imputed this coldness, not to his own behaviour,
which had, so well merited it, but to the infinua.
tions of Rizio. Mary's own condu& confirmed and
strengthened these suspicions. She treated this
firanger with a familiarity, and admitted him to a
ihare in her confidence, to which neither his first
condition, nor the office she had lately bestowed
upon him, gave him any title. He was perpetually
in her presence, intermeddled in every business, and,
together with a few favourites, was the companion
of all her private amusements. The haughty spirit
of Darnly could not bearlthe intrusion of such an

* Keith, 329. Knox, 404.
VOL. I. A a' upstart

-B o o 'r uptart, and iplatientI of any delay, a unr

IV. straried by any fcipte, :lie inftahtly recfolveIto ge
s66 rid of himrby violence..

Rizio hated. AT the fame time, another design, which took
by the
friends of its rife from ery differnt.motives,.was carrying n
nobsl against thelife of Rizio. Morton, Ruthven, Lind.

fay, and Maitland, were the contrivers of it. In
all former commotions they had been ftridly united
with Murray; though in the late infurresion they
had deserted him, for various reasons. [pton
was nearly allied to the family of Angus, and dMr.
ing the minority of the preferit Earl, ated as Chief
of the name of Dougias. Ruthven was married to
the King's aunt. Lindsay's wife was of the fame
blood. All these had warmly concurred with the
Queen in promoting a marriage which did so much
honour to the houfeof Douglas, and naturally ex-
pe6led, that under a King of their own JWood, the
chief management of affairs would be commiitted to
them. Maitland, with his ujfal sagacity, foresaw
that Murray's opposition to the match would prove
dangerous and ineffetual; but whoever fuld at
court, he hoped, by his dexterity and talents, to
render himself necessary and of importance. They
were all equally disappointed in their expesationS.
The King's headstrong temper rendered him inca.
pable of advice. The Queen could not help dif.
trusting men who had been so long and so inti-
mately connected with Murray, and gave hcfelf
up entirely to such Counsellors as complied with al
her inclinations. The return of that nobleman'and
his followers was, therefore the only eetdic which

2 ' r 'Mid

oulsdeflto Mortoin Maitlandi aid their afibiates B o o
to td.frormer afcezgtant over the .envi's; councils. IV.
For this reason, ,o¥hing could be nimore mortifying
to them, than the efoiution which Mary had takeni 56
to treat the exiles with rigodr. This they imputed
to Rizio, who, after he had engaged to aid Mirray
iwith all his interest, was now the most a&ive inftru-
ment in promoting the measures which were con.
certed fqahe ruin of that noblian. This offi-
cious zeal completed the disgust which they had
conceived 'agair.t him, and inspired them with
thoughts of vengeance, in no wisei suitable to
juRice, to humanity,. or to their own dignity,

WHILE they were ruminating upon their scheme, They cotr

blne in oro

theKingcommunicated his resolution to be avenged dcr to m,
of Rizio to Lord Ruthven, and implored his aflift- der him*
ance, and that of his friends, towards the execution
of this design. Nothing could be more acceptable
to them than this overture. ,They saw at once all
the advantages they. would !eap, by the concur-
rence of such a.n aflociate. T;heir own private re-
venge upbn Rizio would pass, they hoped, for an
aft of obedience to the King; and they did not
despair of obtaining .the restoration od their ba-
nilhed friends, and security for the Protestant reli-
gion, as the price of their compliance with his will.

BUT as Henry was hn less fickle than raf, "'they
hesitated for rome time, and determined.to advance
no farther, without taking avery pofible ,precaution
for their own safety. They did not, in the mean
time, susser the Kiig's refehtnetc to abate. .Mor,

A a^ tonl

B oo K upfart; and impatient of any delay, and unre

IV. strained by any fcriuple, ie inftahtly resolved to gel
5J66 rrid of him by violence.

Rizio hated AT the fame time, another design, which took
by the
friends of its rife from very different motives, was carrying on
the exiled

'nob,,. against the life of Rizio. Morton, Ruthven, Lind.

fay, and Maitland, were the contrivers of it. In
all former commotions they had been ftrialy united
with Murray, though in the late infurretion they
had deserted him, for various reasons. Morton
was nearly allied to the family of Angus, and dur.
ing the minority of the present Earl, acted as Chief
of the name of Douglas. Ruthven was married to
the King's aunt. Lindsay's wife was of the fame
blood. All there had warmly concurred with the
Queen in promoting a marriage which did so much
honour to the house of Douglas, and naturally ex-
peeed, that under a King of their own blood, the
chief management of affairs would be committed to
them. Maitland, with his usual sagacity, forefawv
that Murray's opposition to the match would prove
dangerous and ineffectual; but whoever ruled at
court, he hoped, by his dexterity and talents, to
render himself necessary and of importance. They
were all equally disappointed in their expe&ations.
The King's headstrong temper rendered him inca-
pable of advice. The Queen could not help dif-
trusting men who had been so long and so inti- '
mately connected with Murray, and gave herself
up entirely to such Counsellors as complied with all
her inclinations. The return of that nobleman and
his followers was therefore the only event which

2 ' cdld j

I

ould restore Morton, Maitland, and their associates Bo o o
to their former ascendant over the Queen's councils. IV.
For this reason, nothing could be more mortifying '^-
to them, than the resolution which Mary had taken 5
to treat the exiles with rigour. This they imputed
to Rizio, who, after he had engaged to aid Murray
with all his interest, was now the most aEtive inftru-
ment in promoting the measures which were con.
certed for,,the ruin of that nobleman. This offi-
cious zeal completed the disgust which they had
conceived against him, and inspired them with
thoughts of vengeance, in no wife suitable to
jufice, to humanity, or to their own dignity.

WHILE they were ruminating upon their scheme, They coni.

bine in oro

theKingcommunicated his resolution to be avenged der to mr
of Rizio to Lord Ruthven, and implored his affft- der him
ance, and that of his friends, towards the execution
of this design. Nothing could be more acceptable
to them than this overture. They saw at once all
the advantages they would reap, by the concur-
rence of such an associate. Their own private re-
venge upon Rizio would pass, they hoped, for an
aR of obedience to the King; and they did not
despair of obtaining the restoration of their ba-
nifhed friends, and security for the Protestant reli.
gion, as the price of their compliance with his will.

BUT as Henry was no less fickle than rafl, they
helitated for some time, and determined to advance
no farther, without taking every poflible precaution
for their own safety. They did not, in the mean
time, susser the King's refentmenc to abate. Mor-

A a 7 tonl
,, % .

B o o K ton, who was inferior to no man of that intriguing

IV. age, in all the arts of insinuation and addrefs,*otok
1566. the young Prince under his Management. He

wrought upon his ruling paflioni, ambition to ob.
tain the Matrimonial Crown. He represented Rizio's
credit with the Queen to be the chief and onlyob.
ftacle to his success in that demand. This minion,
alone, he said, possessed her confidence; and out of
complaisance to hi'm, her fubjefts, her nobility, and
even her husband, were excluded from any parti.
cipation of her secret councils. Under the appear.
ance of a confidence merely political, he insinuated,
and the King perhaps believed, that a familiarity
of quite a different and of a very criminal nature
might be concealed *. Such various and compli-

cated

* Of all our historians, Buchanan alone avowedly accuses

Mary of a criminal love for Rizio, 340. 344. Knox slightly
insinuates that such a suspicion was entertained, 391a, Melvil,
in a conversation with the Queen, intimates that he was afraid
her familiarity withRiziomightbe liable to mifcontruCtion, l to.
The King himself seems, both by Melvil's account, and by his
expollulation with the Queen, which Ruthven mentions, to
have given credit to these suspicions. Melv. 127. Keith, Ap-
pend. 123, 124. That the King's suspicions were strong, is
likewise evident from the paper published Append. No. XV.
B ut, in opposition to these suspicions, and they arenothingmore,
we may observe that Raulet the Queen's French Secretary was
dismissed from her service, and Rizio advanced to that office in
December 1564. Keith, 268. It was in consequence of this
preferment, that he acquired his great credit with the Queen.
Melv. 107. Darnly arrived in Scotland about two months as-
ter, Keith, 269. The Queen immediately conceived for him a
paflion, which had all the symptoms of genuine and violent
love. Rizio aided this paflion, and promoted the marriage with
all his interest, Melv. I i r. During some months after the mar-
riage, the Queelu' fondness for Darnly continued. She soon

proved
**4" .

cated patflons raged ini the King's bosom; with the B oo K
utmost fury. He became more impatient than ever IV.
of any delay, an, even threatened to itrike the in- ~566.
tended blow witkiis own hand. At last, prelimi-
naries were fettled on both fides, and articles for
their mutual feturity agreed upon. The King en-
gaged to prevent the attainder of the banished
Lords, to content to their return into Scotland, to
obtain for them an ample remiflion of all their
crimes, and to support to the utmost of his power,
the religion which was now eftablilhed in the king-
dom. On their parts, they undertook to procure
the Crown Matrimonial for Henry, to secure his
right of fuccefflon, if the Queen should die before
him, and to defend that right to the uttermost,
againif whatever person ihould presume to dispute
it; and if either Rizio, or any other person, should
happen to be killed in prosecuting of the design,
the King promised to acknowledge himself to be
the author of the enterprise, and to protect those
who were embarked in it *
NOTHING now remained but to concert the plan Perpetrate

that crime
of operation, to chufe the actors, and to aflign them in the

Queen's

their parts inaperpetrating this detestable crime. Palace.

proved with child. From this enumeration of circumflances,
it appears almoRt impofible that the Queen, unless we suppose
her to have been a woman utterly abandoned, could carry on
any criminal intrigue with Rizio. But the silence of Randolph
the English Resident, a manabundantly ready to mention, and
to aggravate Mary's faults, and who does not once infinuatc
that her confidencein Rizio concealed any thing criminal, is
in itself a sufficient vindication of her innocence.

*Good. vol. i. z66.

A a 3 Every

B o o K Everycircumftance here paints and charaterizes the

IV. manners and men of that age, and fills us with hor.
X6ó,T ror at both. The place chosen for committing such

a deed, was the Queen's bedcliimber. Though
Mary was now in the sixth month of her pregnincy,
and though Rizio might have been feizedilfewhere
Without any difficulty, the King pitched upoihis1
place, that he might enjoy the malicious pleafuie
reproaching Riziowith his crimes before the Queen's
face. The Earl of Morton, the Lord High Chan.
cellor of the kingdom, undertook to diret an en.
serprife, carried on in defiance of all the laws of
which he was bbund to be the guardian. The Lord
Ruthven, who had been confined to his bed for
three months, by a very dangerous distemper, and
who was fill so feeble that he could scarce walk, or
bear the weight of his own armour, wjs intrusted
with the executive part; arid while he himself need-
ed to be supported by two men, he camesabroad to
cQmmit a murder in the presence of his Sovereign.

ON the 9th of March, Mdrton entered the court

of the palace with an hundred and sixty men; and
without noise, or meeting with any refifance, seized
all the gates. While the Queen was"'it, supper with
the Countess of Argyll, Rizio, and ';few domes.
tics, the King suddenly entered the apartment, by
a private paflage. At his back was Ruthih, clad
in complete armour, and with that ghagly and hor-
rid look which long sickness had given ;lin, Three
or four of his most trusty accomplices followed
him. Such an unusual appearance alarmed those
who were present. Rizio instantly apprehended that

he

he was the vitim at whom the blow was aimed; B o o }c
and in the utmost consternation retired behind the IV.
Queen, of whom he laid hold, hoping that the re- 166'
verepc due to her person might prove some pro-
tetiosn to him. .The conspirators had proceeded
too far to be refrained by any consideration oóf that
kinds Numbers of armed men rushed into the
chamber./; Ruthven drew his dagger, and with a
furious mien and voice, commanded Rizio to leave
a place of which he was unworthy, and which he
had occupied too long. Mary employedtears, and
entreaties, and threatenings, to save her favourite.
But, notwithstanding all these, he was torn from
her by violence, and before he could be dragged
through the next,4partment, the rage of his ene-
mies put an end to 'his life,,piercing his body with
fifty-fix wounds *.

ATHOL, Huntly, Bothwell, and other confidents
of the Queen who lodged in the palace, were alarm-
ed at the uprqar, and filled with the utmoit terror
on their own account ; but either no violence was
intended against them, or the conspirators durit not
thed the noblest blood in the kingdom, in the famne
illegal manner with which they had ventured to
take the life of a firanger. Some of them were
dismissed, and others made their,.fcape.
THIE cpnfpiratqrs, in the mean time, kept pof- They ron-

fine the

feflion of the palace, and guarded the Queen with ,ecn her.
the utmost caret A proclamation was published
by the King, prohibiting the parliament to meet on

' See Appendix, No. XV.

A a 4 the

B o o K the day appointed; and measures were taken by

IV. him for preventing any tumult in the city '. Mur.
566 ray, Rothes, and their followers being informed of

every ftep taken againftRizib, arrived atEdinburgh
next evening. Murray was graciously received both
by the King and Queen. By the former, on ac.
count of the articles which had been agreed upon
between them; by the latter, because l h oped to
prevail on him, by gentle treatment, iot to take
part with the murderers of Rizio. Their power
The still felt, and dreaded; and the insult which they
had offered to her authority, and even to her per.
son, so far exceeded any crime she could impute to
Murray, that in hopes of wreaking her vengeance
on them, ihe became extremeli.'willing to be re-
conciled to him. The'obligations, however, which
Murray lay under to men, who had hazarded their
lives on his account, engaged him to labour for
their safety. The Queen,; who scarce had the li.
berty of choice left, was persuaded to admit Mor.
ton and Ruthven into her pretence, and to grant
them the promise of pardon in whatever terms they
Ihould deem necessary for their own security.

But the THE King, mean while, flood astonished at the
gains the
King, and boldness and success of his own enterprire, and un-
mnakes her
tccae.c certain what course to hold. The Queen observed

his irresolution, and availed herself of it. She em-
ployed all her art to disengage him from his new
aflbciates. His consciousness of the insult which he
had offered to so illustrious a benefacrefs, inspired
himn with uncommon facility and complaisance. In

* Keith, Append. 2?.

tpite

spite of all the warnings he received to distrust the B o o K
Queen's artifices, she prevailed on him to dismiss IV.
the guards which the conspirators had placed on
her person; and that fame night he made his escape
along with her, attended by three persons only, and
retired to Dunbar. The scheme of their flight had March li.
been communicated to Huntly and Bothwell, and
they were quickly joined by them, and several other
of the nobles. Bothwell's estate lay in that cor-
ner of the kingdom, and his followers crowded to
their Chief, in such numbers, as soon enabled the
Queen to set the power of the conspirators at de-
fiance.

THIS sudden flight filled them with inexpressible I recon-

consternation. They had obtained a promise of par- exid no.
don; and it now appeared from the Queen's con-
duct, that nothing more was intended by this pro-
mise than to amuse them, and to gain time. They
ventured, however, to demand the accomplishment
of it; but their messenger was detained a prisoner,
and the Queen advancing towards Edinburgh, at
the head of 8000 men, talked in the highest strain
of resentment and revenge. She had the address,
at the fame time, to separate Murray and his affo-
ciates from the conspirators against Rizio. Sensible
that the union of there parties,would form a con-
federacy, which might prove formidable to the
Crown, she expressed great willingness to receive
the former into favour; towards the latter the de-
clared herself inexorable. Murray and his followers N4rch ,9.

IThe confpi-

were no less willing to accept a pardon, on herrator.apaind
tcir.'. The conspirators against Rizio, deprived ofino Egi.

everyland.
every

B o K every resource, and incapable of resistance, fled

IV. precipitately to Newcastle, having thus changed
I566. situations with Murray and his party, who left that

place a few days before.

No man so remarkable for wisdom, and even for

cunning as the Earl of Morton, ever engaged in a
more unfortunate enterprise. Deserted basely by
the King, who now denied his knowledge of the
conspiracy, by public proclamations, and abandon.
ed ungenerously by Murray and his party *, he was
obliged to fly from his native country, to resign
the highest office, and to part with one of the mos
opulent fortunes in the kingdom.

ON her return to Edinburgh, Mary began to

proceed against those concerned in the murder of
Rizio, with the utmost rigour of law. But, in
praise of her clemency, it must be observed, that
only two persons, and there of no considerable rank,
suffered for this crime -.

IN this conspiracy there is one circumstance,

which, though somewhat detached, deserves not to
be forgotten. In the confederacy between the King
and the conspirators, the real intention of which
was aflafination, the preserving of the Reformed
Church, is nevertheless, one of the most confider.
able articles; and the fame men who were prepar-
ing to violate one of h.e first duties Qs mprility,
affe&ed the highest regard for religion. History re-
lates there extravagances of thehuman mind, with-

Melv. 130. t Keith, Appendix, 130. 334.

out pretending to justify, or even to account for B o o v
them; and regulating her own opinions by the IV.
eternal and immutable laws of justice and of vir- 166,
tue, points out such inconsistencies, as features of
the age which she describes, and records them for
the inftru&ion of ages to come.

As this is the second instance of deliberate afaf. An acoun;

of the fre-

fination which has occurred, and as we shall here- quency of
after meet with many other instances of the fame tions In
crime, the causes which gave rife to a prafice so that age.
shocking to humanity, deserve our particular at-
tention. Resentment is, for obvious and wife rea-
sons, one of the strongest passions in the human
mind. The natural demand of this paflon is, that
the person who feels the injury Should himself in-
flit the vengeance due on that account. The per-
mitting this, however, would have been deftrudive
to society; and ptlniliment would have known no
bounds, either in severity, or in duration. For this
reason, in the very infancy of the social state, the
sword was taken out of private hands, and coam
mitted to the Magistrate. But at first, while laws
aimed at restraining, they really strengthened the
principle of revenge. The earliest and molt fim.
pie punishment for crimes was retaliation; the of,
fender forfeited limb for limb, and life for life.
The payment of a .conpenfation to the person in-
jured, succeeded to the rigour of the former infdi-
tution. In both these, the gratification of private
revenge was the obje& of law; and he who suffered
the wrong, was the only perfqn who had a right to
pursue, to exat&, or to remit the punishment.

While

B o o K Whilejaws allowed such full scope to the revenge of

IV. one party, the interests of .the other were not neg.

66 leted. If the evidence of his guilt did not amount

to a full proof, or if he reckoned himself to be
unjustly accused, the person to whom a crime was
imputed had a right to challenge his adversary to
single combat, and on obtaining the vi&ory, vin-
dicated his own honour. In almost every confider.
able cause, whether civil or criminal, arms were ap.
pealed to, in defence, either of the innocence, or
the property of the parties. Justice had seldom
occasion to use her balance; the sword alone de.
cided every contest. The paflion of revenge was
nourished by all these means, and grew, by daily
indulgence, to be incredibly strong. Mankind be.
came habituated to blood, not only in times of war,
but of peace; and from this, as well as other
causes, contraced an amazing ferocity of temper,
and of manners. This ferocity, however, made it
necessary to discourage the trial by combat; to abo.
lifh the payment of compensations in criminal cafes;
and to think of some milder method of terminating
disputes concerning civil rights. The punishments
for crimes became more revere, and the regulations
concerning property more fixed; but the Princes,
whose province it was to inflit the one, and to
enforce the other, pofleffed little power. Great of-
fenders despised their authority; smaller ones fhel-
tered themselves under the jurifdiEtion of those,
from whose protection they expe&ted impunity. The
administration of justice was extremely feeble and
dilatory. An attempt to punish the crimes of a
Chieftain, or even of his vassals, often excited re-

bellions

bellions and civil wars. To nobles, haughty and B o o K
independent, among whom the causes of discord 1V.
were many and unavoidable, who were quick in L566.
discerning an injury, and impatient to revenge it;
who esteemed it infamous to submit to an enemy,
and cowardly to forgive him; who confidered the
right of punishing those who had injured them, as
a privilege of their order, and a mark of indepen-
dence; such flow proceedings were extremely unfa-
tisfaetory. The blood of their adversary was, in
their opinion, the only thing which could wash away
an affront; where that was not fled, their revenge
was disappointed, their courage became fufpefted,
and a stain was left on their honour. That ven-
geance, which the impotent hand of the Magistrate
could not inflict, their own could easily execute;
under governments so feeble, men assumed, as in a
state of nature, the right of judging, and redref-
sing their own wrongs. And thus assassination, a
crime of all others the mofl deftruEive to society,
came not only to be allowed, but to be deemed
lonourable.

THE history of Europe, during the 14th and
i5th centuries, abounds with detestable instances of
this crime. It prevailed chiefly among the French
and Scots, between whom there was a close inter-
course at that time, and a surprising resemblance in
their national characters. In 1407, the only brother
of the King of France was murdered publickly in
the streets of Paris; and so far was this horrible
action from meeting with proper punishment, that
an eminent lawyer was allowed to plead in defence

of

B o o t of It before the Peers of France, and avowedly tO

IV. maintain the lawfulness of affaflination. In r4it
66.^ it required all the eloquence and authority of the

famous Gerfon, to prevail on the Council of Con.
stance to condemn this proposition, " That there
are some cafes in which afafliriation is a virtue more
meritorious in a Knight than in a Squire, and more
meritorious in a King than in a Khight ." The
number of eminent persons who were murdered in
France and Scotland, on account either of private,
or political, or religious quarrels, during the i5th
and 16th centuries, is almost incredible. Even as.
ter those causes, which first gave rife to this barba.
rous practice, were removed; after thejurifdition
of Magistrates, and the authority of laws were bet-
ter established, and become more universal; after
the progress of learning and philosophy had polish-
ed the manners, and humanized the minds of men,
this crime continued in some degree. It was to-
wards the close of the i th century before it dif.
appeared in France. The additional vigour, which
the royal authority acquired by the acceflion of
James VI. to the throne of England, seens to have
put a stop to it in Scotland.

THE influence, however, of any national cuftim,

both on the understanding ahd on the heart, and
how far it may go towards perverting or etingiifh-
ing moral principles of the greatest importance, is
remarkable. The authors of those ages hate per-
fetly imbibed the feninfients of their cotempora-
ries, with regard to aifaflihation; and they, who

L'Enfatt, Hilt. Cone. dd Conat.

ha

had leifire to reflect and fojudge, appear to be no B o o i
more shocked at this crime, than the persons, whd IV.
committed it during the heat and impetuosity of 66
paffioa. Buchanan relates the murder of Cardinal
Beatoun, and of Riiio, without expressing those
feelings which are..natural to a man, or that indig-
nation which became ai historian *. Knox, whose
mind was fiercer and more unpolifhed, talks of the
death of Beatoun and of the Duke of Guise, not
only without censure, but with the utmost exulta-
tion t. On the other hand, the Bishop of Ross
mentions the assassination of the Earl of Murray,
with some degree of applause I:. Blackwood dwells
tpon it with the most indecent triumph, and as-
cribes it diretly to the hand of i] God. Lord Ruth-
ven, the principal :a&or in the conspiracy against
Rizio, wrote an account of it some short time be-
fore his own death, and in all his long narrative
there is not one expression of regret, or one fymp-
tor of comnpunCtion for a crime no less difho.
nourable than barbarous **. Morton, equally
guilty of the fame crime, entertained the fame fen-
timents concerning it; and in his lass moments,
neither he himself, nor the Ministers who attended
him, seem to have confidered it as an action which
called for repentance, even then he talks of Da-
vid's Jlaughter as coolly, as if it had been an inno-
cent or commendable deed tt. The vices of ano-
ther age aflonifh and ffock us-; the vices of our
own become familiar, and excite little'horror. I

R Buchan. 29.5 3+5 f Knox, 3.4. f 'Andess.

3. 84. "J8 J1b, 2. i63. * Keith, Append. 19g.
tt Crawf. Mert. Append.

return

B o o K return from this digrefion to the course of the

IV. history.

-1566.
The THE charm, which had at first attached the

eed t' QOueen to Darnly, and held them for some time in

Darnly i- an happy union, was now entirely dissolved; and
creascs.

love no longer covering his follies and vices with its
friendly veil, they appeared to Mary in their full
dimension and deformity *. Though Henry pub-
lithed a proclamation, disclaiming any knowledge
of the conspiracy against Rizio, the Queen was fully
convinced, that he was not only accessory to the
contrivance, but to the commission of that odious
crime t. That very power which, with liberal
and unfufpicious fondness, Ihe had conferred upon
him, he had employed to insult her authority, to
limit her prerogative, and to endanger her person.
Such an outrage, it was impossible any woman could
bear or forgive. Cold civilities, secret distrust, fre-
quent quarrels, succeeded to their former transports
of affection and confidence. The Queen's favours
were no longer conveyed through his hands. The
crowd of expetants ceased to court his patronage,
which they found to avail so little. Among the
nobles, some dreaded his furious temper, others
complained of his perfidiousness; and all of them
despised the weakness of his underltanding, and the
inconstancy of his heart. The people themselves
observed some parts of his conduct, which little
suited the dignity of a King. Addited to drunken-
ness, beyond what the manners of that age could
bear, and indulging irregular passions, which even

See Appendix, No. XVI. t Keith, 350.

the

the licentiousness of youth could not excuse, he, by B o o K
his indecent behaviour, provoked the Queen to the lV.
utmost; and the passions which it occasioned, of- 1566
ten forced tears from her eyes, both in public and
in private *. Her aversion for him increased every
day, and could be no longer concealed. He was
often absent from court, appeared there with little
splendour, and was trusted with no power. Avoid-
ed equally by those who endeavoured to please the
(Qleen, who favoured Morton and his associates, or
who adhered to the house of Hamilton; he was
left almost alone in a negleted and unpitied fuli-
uilde T
About this time a new favourite grew into great The rfe tof

Bitl;'a ell's

credit with the Queen, and soon gained an ascendant favour.
over her heart, which encouraged his enterprising
genius to form designs that proved fatal to himself,
and t':e occasion of all Mary's lubfequent misfor-
tunes. This was James Hepburn, Earl of Both-
veli, the head of an ancient family, and by his ex-
tenlive poffefions and numerous vasals, one of the
miol powerful noblemen in the kingdom. Even in
that turbulent age, when so many vast projects were
laid open to an alliring mind, and invited it to ac-
tion, no man's ambition was more daring than Both-
well's, or had recourse to bolder or more singular
expedients forobtainingpower. When almost every
peifon of diftinaion in the kingdom, whether Pa-
pilt or Protestant, had joined the Congregation in
opl)ofing the dangerous encroachments of the

* Keith, 329, f Mclv. 13i, &c.
Vol. I. 1 b French

B o o x French upon the liberties of the nation, he, though

1V. an avowed Protestant, adhered to the Queen Re.
5.6. gent, and acted with vigour on her fide. The fuc.

cess which attended the arms of the Congregation
having obliged him to retire into France, he was
taken into the Queen's service, and continued with
her till the time of her return into Scotland*. From
that period, every ftep of his condu& towards Mary
was remarkably dutiful; and amidst all the Ihift.
ings of faction, we scarcely ever find him holding
any course which could be offensive to her. When
Murray's proceedings with regard to her marriage
gave umbrage to the Queen, she recalled Bothwell
from that banishment into which the had with re-
luftance driven him, and confidered his zeal and:
abilities as the most powerful supports of her au.!
thority. When the conspirators against Rizio fciz.i
ed her person, he became the chief instrument of
recovering her liberty, and served her, on that oc.-
cation, with so much fidelity and success, as made'
the deepest impression on her mind, and greatly in-.
creased the confidence which the had hitherto placed'
in himt. Her gratitude loaded him with marks of0
her bounty; the raised him to offices of profit and)
of trust, and tranfafted no matter of importance
without his advice :. By complaisance and affil
duity, he confirmed and fortified these dispositions
of the Queen in his favour, and insensibly paved
the way towards that vail project, which his immo'
derate ambition had perhaps already conceived, and
which, in spite of manydifficulties, and at the cx.
pence of many crimes, he at last accomplished.

* Anders, i.. t Ib. 1. 9z, 93. : Mclv. 133, Knox, 96

'i l

Ti-E hour ofthe Quteen's deliverynow approach- B o o K

ed. As her palace was defended only by a slender IV.
guard, it seemed imprudent to expose her person, 1566.
at this time, to the insults she might susser in a
kingdom torn by factions, and prone to mutiny.
For this reason, the Privy Council advifedthe Queen
to fix her residence in the castle of Edinburgh, the
strongest fortress in the kingdom, and the most pro-
per place for the security of her person*. In order
to render this security more perfect, Mary laboured
to extinguilh the domestic feuds which divided some
of the principal nobles. Murray and Argyll were
exasperated against Huntly and Bothwell, by reci-
procal and repeated injuries. The Queen, by her
authority and entreaties, effeaed a reconcilement-
among them, and drew from them a promise to
bury their discords in everlasting oblivion. This
reconcilement Mary had so much at heart, that she
made it the condition on which she again received
Murray into favour t.

ON the I9th of June, Mary was deliveied of her Binrh of
only son James, a Prince whose birth was happy Jamcs Vl
for the whole Island, and unfortunate to her alone.
His accession to the throne of England united the
two divided kingdoms in one mighty monarchy,
and eltablifhed the power of Great Britain on a firrm
foundation. While she, torn early from her son by
the cruelty of her fate, was never allowed to in-
dulge those tender paflions, nor to tafe those joys
which fill the heart of a mother.

Keith, 335. t Ibid. 3j6. Apend. 139.

B b 2 MEL.

B o o K MELVILWaS inftantlydifpatched to London with

IV. an account of this event. It Itruck Elizabeth, at
"_T "
6 first, in a sensible manner; and the advantage and

superiority which her rival had acquired by the birth
of a son, forced tears from her eyes. But before
Melvil was admitted to audience, she had so far re.
covered the command of herself, as to receive him
not only with decency, but with excelfive cheerful.
ncls; and willingly accepted the invitation which
Mary gave her, to stand godmother to her son*

As Mary loved splendour and magnificence, 1e

resolved to celebrate the baptism of the young Prince
with great pomp; and for that purpose sent invi.
tations of the fame kind to the French King, and
to the Duke of Savoy, the uncle of her former
husband.

T'reQen TrE Queen, on her recovery, discovered na
.' oD.,1nly change in her sentiments with refpea to the Kingt,
frec- and The death of Rizio, and the countenance he had
ncglit. given to an a&ion so insolent and unjustifiable, were

!till freilh in her memory. She was frequently per,
five and dejected . And though Henry sometimes
attended at court, and accompanied her in her pro.
greffes through different parts of the kingdom, he
met with little reverence from the nobles, while
Mary treated him with the greatest reserve, and
did not susser him to poflifs any authority l. The
breach between them became every day more ap
parent §. Attempts were made towards a reconcile

* Mclv. 13?. 1- See Append. No. XVII. 1 Ibid. i.l
J Keilh, 350. Melv, 132. § Keith, Append. 169.

Pr,~~ ilemen

nient, particularly by Caftelnau the French Am-B o o
baffador; but after such a violent rupture, it was IV.
found no easy matter to bind the nuptial knot a-new; 1566.
and though he prevailed on the King and Queen to
pass two nights together *, we may, with great pro-
babi!ity, pronounce this appearance of union, to
vhich Caftelnau trusted, not to have been sincere;
we know with certainty that it was not lalting.

BOTI WELL, all this while, was theQueen'sprime Herattacl.
confident. Without his participation no bulinefsnothwc
was concluded, and no favour bestowed. Together incree.
with this ascendant over her councils, Bothvell, if
we may believe the cotemporary historians, acquired
no less sway over her heart. But at what precise
tine, this ambitious Lord first allowed the ienti.
mrents of a lover to occupy the place of that duty
and refpee which a fubje& owes his Sovereign ; or
w.hen Mary, instead of gratitude for his faithful ser-
vices, felt a paflion of another nature rising in her
boobm, it is no easy matter to determine. Such de-
licate transitions of paflion can be discerned only by
thole, who are admitted near the persons of the par-
ties, and who can view the secret workings of the
heart with calm and acute observation. N either K nox
nor Buchanan enjoyed there advantages. Their
humble station allowed them only a diflant access to
the Queen and her favourite. And the ardour of
their zeal, and the violence of their prejudices, ren-
der their opinions rafl, precipitate, and inaccurate.
it is by the effects of this reciprocal passion, rather

Keith, Append. 169.

B b 3 than

B o o K than by their accounts of it, that subsequent hilt.

IV. rians canjudge of its reality.
1566.

ADVENTROUS as Bothwells projec to gain the

Queen may appear, it was formed and carried on
under very favourable circumstances. Mary w.as
young, gay, and affable. She poffcffed great fen.
libility of temper, and was capable of the utmot
tenderness of affetion. She had placed her love on
a very unworthy objeEt, who requited it with ingra.
titude, and treated her with neglet, with inolence,
and with brutality. All these the felt, and resent.
ed. In this situation, the attention and complai.
fance of a man, who had vindicated her authority,
and protected her person; who entered into all her
views, who soothed all her passions, who watched
and improved every opportunity of insinuating his
design, and recommending his passion*, could
scarce fail of making an impression on a heart of
such a frame as Mary's.
T·re King THE haughty spirit of Darnly, nursed up in flat-

e Scot- tery, and accustomed to command, could not bear
land. the contempt under which he had now fallen, and

the state of insignificance to which he saw himself
reduced. But in a country, where he was univer.
rally hated or defpiled, he could never hope to form
a party, which would second any attempt he might
make torecoverpower. He addressed himself, there-
fore, to the Pope, and to the Kings of France and
Spain, with many profeflions of his own zeal for
the Catholic religion, and with bitter complaints

0 Anders. 1. 93, 94.

against

againt the Queen, for negle&cing to promote that B o o K
interest : And soon after, he took a resolution, IV.
equally wild and desperate, of embarking on board 566.
a ship, which he provided, and of flying into foreign
parts. It is almost impossible to form any fatisfac-
tory conjecture concerning the motives which influ-
ence a capricious and irregular mind. He hoped,
perhaps, to recommend himself to the Catholic
Princes on the continent, by his zeal for religion,
and that they would employ their interest towards
reinstating him in the poffeflion of that power which
he had loft. Perhaps, he expected nothing more
than the comfort of hiding the disgrace under which
he was now fallen, among strangers, who had
never been witnesses of his former prosperity.

HE communicated the design to the French Am- ;ims cp4.
baffador Le Croc, and to his father the Earl of ,our.
Lennox. They both endeavoured to dissuade him
from it, but without success. Lennox, who seems,
as well as his son, to have loft the Queen's con-
fidence, and who, about this time, was seldom at
court, instantly communicated the matter to her
by a letter. Henry, who had refused to accom-
pany the Queen from Stirling to Edinburgh, was
likewise absent from court. He arrived there, how-
ever, on the fame day she received the account of
his intended flight. But he was more than usually
wayward and peevish; and scrupling to enter the
palace, unless certain Lords who attended the Queen
were dismissed, Mary was obliged to meet him

Knox, 399.

1 b 4 with-

B o o K without the gates. At last he suffered her to con

1V. du:t him into her own apartment. She endeavou
166' ed to draw from him the reasons of the strange re

solution which he had taken, and to divert hii
from it. In spite however of all her arguments an
intreaties, he remained silent and inflexible. Nex
day the Privy Council, by her direftion, expofl
lated with him on the fame head. He perfilled
notwsihflanding, in his sullenness and obstinacy
and neither deigned to explain the mrotives of hi
condu&t, nor signified any intention of altering it
As he left the apartment, he turned towards t!i
Queen, and told her, that she fiould not fee hi
face again, for a long time. A few days after, he
wrote to Mary, and mentioned two things as groundL
of his diagnlt. She herself, he said, no longer ad
mitted him into any confidence, and had deprive.
him of all power; and the nobles, after her ex
ample, treated him with open negle&t, so that he
appeared in every place without the dignity an.
splendour of a King.

Mary en- NOTHING could be more mortifying to Mar),
d'avours t'o
pevnt his than this intended flight of the King's, which would

'lut.d h have spread the infamy of their domestic quarrel al

over Europe. Companion for a Monarch whi
would then: appear to be forced into exile by he
neglecl and ill usage, might have disposed inarikin,
to entertain fcntiments concerning the causes ofthei
discord, little to her advantage. In order, there
fore, to prepossess the minds of her allies, and t
fcrecn her reputation from any censure with whic
Darnly might endeavour to load it, the PrivyCoun

c

il transmitted a narrative of this whole tranfaci-on, B o o K
both to the King, and to the Queen Mother of IV.
rrance. It is drawn with great art, and sets Mary's t .
condu6t in the most favourable point of light *,

ABOUT this time, the license of the borderers call-

ed for redress; and Mary resolving to hold a court
ofjuftice at Jedburgh, the inhabitants of several ad-
jacent counties were summoned to attend theirSove-
reign in arms, according to custom t. Bothwell
was, at that time, Lieutenant or Warden of all the
nmarches, an office among the most important in the
kingdom; and though usually divided into three
(iilinIa governments, bestowed by the Queen's fa-
vcur upon him alone. In order to display his own
valour and aetivity in the discharge of this truit, he
aitcmpted to seize a gang of banditti, who, lurk-
ing among the marflhcs of Liddefdale, infested the
reft of the country. But while he was laying hold
of one of those desperadoes, he was wounded by O.lo1,r 6.
him in several places, so that his followers were ob-
liged to carry him to Hermitage castle. Mary in-
ftantly flew thither, with an impatiencewhich frong-
ly marks the anxiety of a lover, but little suited the
dignity of a Queen ,: Finding that Bothwell was

threatened

* Keith, 345. 347. i- Ibid. 353. Good. vol. i. 302.
1 Thediftancebetween Jedburgh and Hcrmitageis I S Scottili

niles, through a country almolt impaf'able. The season of the
year was far advanced. Bothwell seems to have been woutnlcd
in a scuffle, occasioned by the despair of a single man, Father
than any open insurrection ofthe borderers. It does not appear
that the Queen was attended thither by any considerable train.
lad any military operation been ncccfary, as is supposcd,

Good.

B o O K threatened with no dangerous symptom, she return

IV. ed that fame day to Jedburgh. The fatigue of fucl
1566. a journey, added to the anguish of mind Ihe hac

fulffred on Bothwell's account, threw her nex
morning into a violent fever*. Her life was despair
ed of, but her youth, and the vigour of her confti
tution, resifted the malignity of her disease. DurinE
the continuance of the Queen's illness, the King,
who resided at Stirling, never came near Jedburgh -;
and when he afterwards thought fit to make his ap.
Novemb. 5. pearance there, he met with such a cold reception,

as did not encourage him to make any long flay $
Mary soon recovered flrength enough to return
along the eastern borders to Dunbar.

WHILE she resided in this place, her attention

was turned towards England. Elizabeth, notwith.
Standing her promise, and even proclamations to the
contrary, not only allowed, but encouraged Mor.
ton and his associates to remain in England 1[. Mary,
on the other hand, afforded her proteEtion to several
English fugitives. Each Queen watched the mo.
tions of the other with a jealous attention, and fe-
cretly countenanced the practices, which were car-
rying on, to disturb the administration of her rival.

Good. vol. i. 304. it would have been extremely improper to
rifquc the Queen's perfonin an expedition againf thieves. Sc
soon as the Queen found Bothwell to be in no danger, she in-
flantly returned, and after this we hear no more of the infurreo
tion, nor have we any proof that the rioters took refuge in Eng.
land. Noother rcafon but that which we have produced, feemi
fuflicient to account for the Qecen's condut.

* Keith, 351, 352. t Ibid. Append. 133.

Knox, 400. II Cald. vol. ii. p. 15.

FoR
2

FOR this pirpofe, Mary's Ambassador, Robert B o o K

Mclvil, and her other emissaries, were extremely IV.
adtive and successful. We may impute, in a good - 5. '
degree, to their intrigues, that spirit which appear- The Eng-

li/h Parlia-

ed in the Parliament of England, and which raised mnt f -
a iform that threatened Elizabeth's domestic tran- y.pt'n
quillity, more than any other event of her reign, flocto the
and required all her art and dexterity to allay it.

ELIZABETH had now reigned eight years, with-

out discovering the least intention to marry. A vio-
lent distemper, with which (he had lately been feiz-
ed, having endangered her life, and alarmed the
nation*ith the profpeat of all those calamities which
are occasioned by a disputed and dubious succession;
a motion was made, and eagerly listened to in both
houses, for addrtefing the Queen, to provide against
any such danger in times to come, either by figni-
fying her own resolution to marry, or by consenting
to an aft, establishing the order of fucceflion to the
Crown *. Her love to her subjects, her duty to
the public, her concern for posterity, it was pre-
tended, not only called upon, but obliged her to
take one of there steps. The insuperable aversion
which (he had all along discovered for marriage,
made it improbable that she would chute the for-
mer; and if the complied with the latter requefr, rn
title to the crown could, with any colour ofj utlice,
be set in opposition to that of the Scottish Queen.
Elizabeth was sagacious enough to fee the remotefi
consequences of this motion, and observed them

* D'EwesJourn. ofParl. 1 o.

with

B o o K with the greatest anxiety. Mary, by refuting so

IV. often to ratify the treaty of Edinburgh, had plainly
'"5' " intimated a design of embracing the firt promiling

opportunity for prosecuting her right to the English
Crown; and by her secret negociations, Ihe had
gained many to favour her title *. All the Roman
Catholics ardently wished for her succession. Her
gentleness and humanity had removed many of those
apprehensions which the Proreftants entertained o;
account of her religion. The court faction, which
envied the power of Cecil, and endeavoured to wrest
the administration out of his hands, advanced the
pretensions of the Scottish Queen in opposition to
hilm. The union of the two kingdoms was a desire-
able object to all wife men in both nations; and the
birth of the young Prince was a security for the con-
tinuance of this blessing, and gave hopes of its
perpetuity.

EI'zatth's UNDER these circumstances, and while the nation
perpl'x;ty
on hiat ac. was in such a temper, a parliamentary declaration of
count, Mary's title would have been highly detrimental to

Elizabeth. The present unsettled Rate of the fuc-
ceTflon left much in her power. Her resentment
alone might have gone far towards excluding any
of the competitors from the Crown; and the dread
of this had hitherto reitrained, and overawed the
ambition of the Scottish Queen. But if this check
ihould be removed, by the legal acknowledgment
of her title, Mary would be at full liberty to pursue
her dangerous designs, and to a& without fear or
reserve. Her partisans were already meditating

* Melv. 136.

schemes

schemes for infurreEions in different parts of the B o o Ks
kingdom*; and anact of Parliament, recognising IV.
the rights of that Princess, whose pretensions they i 66.
favoured, would have been nothing less than a fig
nal to arms; and notwithstanding Elizabeth's just
title to the affeEtions of her fubjefts, might have
lhaken and endangered her throne.

WIl TI this matter remained in fufpence in both Aarv en-

deavours to

houles, an account of it was transmitted to Mary improv
by Mclvil her Ambassador. As she did not want thistPp'''
advocates for her right, even among those who were
near Elizabeth's person, hfle endeavoured to culti-
vane the disposition which appeared towards fettling
the right of succession in her favour, by a letter to
the Privy Counsellors of England. She expressed
in it a grateful sense of Elizabeth's friendship, which
fte ascribes chiefly to their good offices, with their
Sovereign, in her behalf. She declared her refolu-
tion to live in perpetual amity with England, with-
out urging or pursuing her claim upon the Crown,
any farther than should be agreeable to the Queen.
But, at the fame time, as her right of succession
was undoubted, she hoped it would be examined
with candour, andjudged of with impartiality. The
nobles who attended her,wrote to the English Privy
Council in the fame itrain -. Mary artfully gave
there letters the air of being nothing more than a
declaration of her own, and of her fubjecls gratitude
towards Elizabeth. But as fie could not be igno-
rant of thejealoufy and fear with which L lizabeth

M* elv. 147. 1 Ktith, 354. Append. 136.

ebfcrved

B o o K observed the proceedings of Parliament, a flep fc

IV. uncommon as this, of one Prince's entering intc
'56 public correspondence with the Privy Counfellorsoi

another, could not be otherwise confirued than as
taken with an intention to encourage the spirit which
had already been raised among the Englilh. In this
light it seems to have appeared to Elizabeth her-
seif*. But the disposition of her people rendering
it necessary to treat Mary's person with great de-
cency, and her title with much regard, she men.
tioned it to her only in the softest language.

ots andbet NOTHING, however, could be a more cruel mor-
pgins her tification to a princess of Elizabeth's charader,
m.nrt. than the temper which both houses of Parliament

discovered on this occasion. She bent all her policy
to defeat or elude the motion. After allowing the
first heat of their zeal to evaporate, the called into
her presence a certain number of each house. She
toothed and caressed them; ihe threatened and pro.
mifcd; she remitted subsidies which were due; and
refused those which were offered; and in the end
prevailed to have this formidable motion put offfor
that feflion. Happily for her, the conduct of the
Scottish Queen, and the misfortunes which besel
her, prevented the revival of such a motion in any
future Parliament t.

MEAN time, in order to preserve the reputation
of impartiality, and that Ihe might not drive Mary

Keith, 357.

t D'Eves Journ. Ic4--30o. Camd. 399. Mel,. 119.
IHynes, 446.

into

into any desperate measure, she committed to the B o o K
Tower one Thornton, who had published something IV.
derogatory to the right of the Scottish line *; and ó'

Ix566.

signified her displeasure against a member of the
house of Commons, who seemed, by some words
in a speech, to glance at Mary +.

AMIDST all her other cares, Mary was ever soli- Anextra.

citous to promote the interest of that religion which ep of
Ihe professed. The re-establishment of the Romish fary' iof
doctrine seems to have been her favourite pafion; Popery.
and though the design was concealed with care, and
conduEted with caution, she pursued it with a per-
fevering zeal. At this time, she ventured to lay
aside somewhat of her usual reserve; and the aid
which she expected from the Popilh Princes, who
had engaged in the league of Bayonne, encouraged
her to take a ifep, which, if we confider the temper
of the nation, appears to be extremely bold. Hav-
ing formerly held a secret correspondence with the
court of Rome, she now resolved to allow a Nun-
cio from the Pope publickly to enter her dominions.
Cardinal Laurea, at that time bishop of Mondovi,
was the person on whom Pius V. conferred this of-
fice, and along with him he sent the Queen a pre-
sent of 20,000 crowns j. It is not the character of
the Papal court, to open its treasury upon distant or
imaginary hopes. The business of the Nuncio in
Scotland could be no other, than to attempt a re-
conciliation of that kingdom to the Romish fee.
Thus Mary herself understood it; and in her an-,

*Camd. 401. t Haynes, 449.
4 Vita Card. Laur. ap. Burn. vol, iii. p. 325.

fwer

B o o K fwer to a letter which the received from the Pope,

IV. after expressing her grateful sense of his paternal

care and liberality, she promises thatfhe would bend
566. her whole strength towards the re-establishment and

propagation of the Catholic faith; that she would
receive the Nuncio with every possible demonitra.
tion of respect, and concur, with the utmost vigour,
in all his designs towards promoting the honour of
God, and restoring peace to the kingdom; that she
wvould celebrate the baptifin of the Prince, accord-
ing to the ceremonies which the Ronifil ritual pre.
scribes, hoping that her subjects would be taught,
by this example, again to reverence the lacraments
of the church, which they had so long treated with
contelmpt; and that fie would be careful to inflil
early into her son the principles of a sincere love
and attachment to the Catholic faith *. But though
the Nuncio was already arrived at Paris, and had
sent over one of his attendants with part of the mo-
ney, the Queen did not think the juncture proper
for his reception. Elizabeth was preparing to fend
a magnificent embassy into Scotland, againfl the
time of the Prince's baptism, and as it would have
been improper to offend her, fle wifely contrived,
under various pretences, to detain Laurea at Pa-
ris-I-. The couvulfions into which the kingdom
was thrown soon after, made it impofilblefor him
to purlue his journey any farther.

Ar the very time that Mary was secretly carrying
on thlcl negociations for subverting the Reform-

* Conai Vila Marix ap. Jebb, vol. ii. p. 1.
i Kiidh, Appcnd. 135.

ed

cdChurch, the did not scruple publickly to employ B o o K
her authority towards obtaining for its Ministers a IV.
more certain and comfortable subsistence *. Dur- L5r
ing this year, Ihe issued several proclamations and
aas of council for that purpose, and readily approv-
ed of every scheme which was proposed for the
more effectual payment of their fipends. This
part of her conduct does little honour to Mary's in-
tegrity; and though justified by the example of
Princes, who often reckon falsehood and deceit
among the necessary arts of government, and even
authorised by the pernicious cafuiitry of the Roman
Church, which transfers breach of faith to heretics,
from the lift of crimes, to that of duties, such dif-
fi!nulation, however, must be numbered among
those blemishes which never stain a truly great and
generous character.

As neither the French nor Piedmontefe Ambaf. December.

H-r vcrfion

fdors were yet arrived, the baptimin of the Prince fro the
was put off from time to time. Mean while Mary KFe"-
fixed her refilence at Craigmillar -. Such a re-
tirement, perhaps, utted the present temper of her
mind, and induced her to prefer it before her own
palace of Holy-rood-houfe. lHer aversion for the
King grew every day more confirmed, and was be-
come altogether incurable. A deep melancholy fuc-
celtcdd to that gaiety of spirit, which was natural to
licr. The rashness and levity of her own choice,
an:d the Kin;'s ingratitude and obstinacy, filled her
\\iil llamne and with despair. A variety of pafions

* Kl'ih, 561, 5062. Knox, 401. ' Keitl, 355.
VOL. I. C c preyed

B o o K preyed at once on a mind, all whose sensations were

IV. exquisite, and all its emotions strong, and often ex.

v torted from her, the last wish of the unfortunate,

that life itself would come to an end *.

A divorce Mu R R AY and Maitland observed all those work.
between
hem pro- ings of passion in the breast of the Queen, and
posed. conceived hopes of turning them to the advantage

of their ancient associates, Morton, and the other
conspirators against Rizio. They were still in ba-
nifhment, and the Queen's refentmentagainft them
continued unabated. Murray and the Secretary
flattered themselves, however, that her inclination
to be separated from Darnly would surmount this
deep-rooted aversion, and that the hopes of an event
so desirable might induce her to be reconciled to the
conflirators. It was easy to find reasons, inthe
King's behaviour, on which to found a sentence of
divorce. This sentence they had interest enough to
obtain, and to procure the ratification of it in Par.
liament. In return for this service, they proposed
to flipulate with the Queen to grant a pardon to
Morton and his followers. The design was first of
all communicated to Argyll, who, as well as Mur-
ray, owed his return into Scotland to the confpira-
cy against Rizio. Huntly and Bothwell, who at
that time directed all Mary's councils, were like.
wife admitted into the concert. They joined toge-
ther in making the overture to the Queen, and en.
forced it with all Maitland's eloquence -. But
Mary, however desirous of obtaining that deliverr
ance from Darnly's caprices, with which they en-

Keith, Pref. vii. Anders. vol. iv. Part ii. 18.

deavoured

deavoured to allure her, had nevertheless good rea- B o o K
fUns for rejecting the method, by which they pro. lV.
posed to accomplilh it. The birth of her son had L5ó"
greatly strengthened her claim upon the English
uccelfion, and encouraged the abettors of it to ap-
pear with greater boldnels, and to aft with more
vigour. She could scarce hope to be divorced from
her husband, without throwing some imputation on
her son. This might open a new dispute with re-
gard to the succession, and put it in the power of
Elizabeth and her Ministers to call in question the
Prince's legitimacy, or at least to subject it to all
the delays and cavils of a judicial inquiry. The
fear of these inconveniences weighed with Mary,
and determined her rather to endure her hard fate,
than to seek relief, by venturing on such a danger-
ous experiment.

THE Earl of Bedford, and the Count de Brienne,
the Englifl and French Ambassadors, being arriv-
ed, Mary set out for Stirling, to celebrate the bap-
tifm of her son. Bedford was attended by anumerous
and splendid train, and brought presents from Eli-
zabeth, suitable to her own dignity, and the refpea
with which she affc&ed, at that time, to treat the
Queen of Scots. Great preparations had been made
by Mary, and the magnificence displayed by her on
this occasion, exceeded whatever had been formerly
known in Scotland. The ceremony itself was per- Dc.cm. 17.
formed according to the rites of the Rcmifh Church.
But neither Bedford, nor any of the Scottilh nobles
who profefed the protestant religion, entered with-

Cc 2 in

B o o K in the gates of the chapel*. The spirit of that age,

IV. firm and uncomplying, would not, upon any in.
Ló"ó. ducement, condescend to witness an ation, which

it esteemed idolatrous.

The King's HENRY'S behaviour, at this j.undunre, perfetly
behavious discovers the excess of his caprice, as well as of his
at th'obap folly. He chose to reside at Stirling, but confined
Prince. himself to his own apartment; and as the Queen

distrusted every nobleman who ventured to converse
with him, he was left in absolute solitude. Nothing
could be more singular, or was less expeted, than
his chufing to appear in a manner, that both pub-
ifshed the centempt under which he had fallen, and
by exposing the Queen's domefltic unhappiness to
the observation of so many foreigners, looked like
a ftep taken on purpose to mortify and tooffend her.
Mary felt this insult fcnfibly; and notwithftandin
all her efforts to assume the gaiety which suited th
occasion, and which was necessary for the polite re
ception of her guests, flee was Sometimes obliged t
retire, in order to be at liberty to indulge her so
row, and give vent to her tears . The King fll
persisted in his design of retiring into foreign parts
and daily threatened to put it in execution $.

Ti

* Keith, 360. t Ibid. Pref. vii.
. Camden affirms, 401, that Bedford was commanded

Elizabeth not to give Darnly the title of King. As this w
an indignity, not to be borne, either by Mary or her hufban
it hath been aflerted to be the cause of the King's absence fro
the ccremony ofhis son's baptism. Keith, 360. Good. 31
But, i. No such thing is to be found among Bedford's inltru

tiolii

THE ceremony ofwitnefling the Prince's baptism B o o I:
was not the sole business of Bedford's embassy. His IV.
inftrulions contained an overture, which ought to "

566.

have gone far towards extinguishing thofejealoufies El;i.ahe;b
which had so long subsisted between the two Queens. to acco"d
The treaty of Edinburgh, which has been so often t" bc,'e
mentioned, was the principal occafionofthere. The with Mary.
fpirir, however, which had risen to such an height
in the late Parliament, the power of the party which
favoured the Scottish Queen's title, the number
and activity of her agents in different parts of the
kingdom, alarmed Elizabeth, and induced her to
forego any advantage, which the ambiguous and

tions, the original ofwhich fill remains. Keith, s56. 2. Bed-
ford's advice to the Queen by Melvil is utterly inconfillent with
Camden's assertion. Melv. 1 ,3. Melvil's account is confirmed
by Elizabeth's inflrucions to Sir Henry Norris, where flie as-
firms that the commanded Bedford to employ his belt offices
towards reconciling Mary to her hulband, which she had at-
tempted to no purpose. Digges's Compl. Ambaf. p. 13. A
paper published Append. No, XVIIT. proves the fame thin-.
3. Le Croc the French Resident mentions the King's abf:ncc,
but without giving that reason for it, which has been founded
on Camden's words, though, if that had been the real one, ie
would scarce have failed to mention it. His account of this
matter is that which I have followed, Keith, Pref. vii. 4. He
informs his court, that on account of the difference be-
twixt the King and the Queen, he had refused to hold any fur-
ther correspondence with the former, though he appears, in
many inflances, to have been his great confident. Ibid. 5. As
the King was not present at the baptism, he seems to have
been excluded from any share in the ordinary administration of
business. Two aas of Privy Council, one on the 2cth, and
the other on the zlit of December, are found in Keith, 562.
They both run in the Queen's name alone. The King seems
not to have been present. This could not be owing to Eliza-
bedl's inftrutlions to Bedfqrd.

C c 3 artfu

B o K artful expressions in that treaty might afford her

IV. Nothing was now demanded of Mary, but tore.
1566. nounce any title to the crown of England during

Elizabeth's life, and the lives of her posterity;
who, on the other hand, engaged to take no ftp,
which might prove injurious to Mary's claim upon
the fucccffion ".

MARY could not, withl decency, r(;je5t a propo.

fition ob equitable; she infiftd, however, thatEli.
zabeth fnould order the right upon which she cltim.
ed to belegallyexamined, and pu blicklyrecognilfd,
and particularly that the testament of Henry VI11,
whereby he had excluded the dcfcendants of his el.
etl sifter the Queen of Scotland, from the placedue
to them in the order of fucceflion, might b: pro
duced, and confidered by the English nobilit;
Mary's Ministers had credulously embraced an oi-
nion, that this testament, which they fojuftly con
ceivcd to be injurious to their mistress, was a mere
forgery; and on different occasions had urged :1i-
zabeth to produce it. Mary would have fuffcrced
coofiderably by gaining this point. The origiral
testament is still extant, and not the lcat- doubtcn
be entertained of its genuineness and authenticit.
But it was not Elizabeth's intention to weaken o
to set aside the title of the house of Stewart. She
aimed at nothing more, than to keep the quefion
concerning the fucceflion perplexed and undecided,
and by industriously eluding this request, fle did
real service to Mary's cause -.

Kcith, 356. - Ibid. 361. 358. Note (c) Murdin, 368

A FE'

APEW days after the baptism of the Prince, Mor- B o o K
ton and all the other conspirators against Rizio ob- 1V.
rained their pardon, and leave to return into Scot- 1566-

1566.

land. Mary, who had hitherto continued inexo-
rable to every entreaty in their behalf, yielded at last
to the solicitations of Bothwell *. He could hope
for no success in those bold designs on which his am-
bition resolved to venture, without drawing aid from
every quarter. By procuring a favour for Morton
and his associates, of which they had good reason
to despair, he expeced to secure a band of faithful
and determined adherents.

THE King still remained at Stirling, in solitude,
and under contempt. His impatience in this fitua-
tion, together with the alarm given him, by the
rumour of a design to seize his person, and confine
him to prifont, was the occasion of his leaving
that place in an abrupt manner, and retiring to his
father at Glasgow.

Two assemblies of the Church were held during june 25.
this year. New complaints were made, and upon Churchaf-
good grounds, of the poverty and contempt under fairs
which the Protestant clergy were suffered to lan-
guifh. Penurious as the allotment for their sub-
filfence was, they had not received the least part
of what was due for the preceding year $. Nothing
less than a zeal, ready to endure and to fufferevery
thing for a good cause, could have persuaded men
to adhere to a church, so indigent and so neglected.

* Good. vol. i. 140. Melv. 1 54. t Keith, lrcf. viii.
4 Ibid. 562.

Cc 4 The

B o o K The extraordinary expences, occasioned by the

IV. Prince's baptism, had exhausted the Queen's trea.
566' fury, and the fums appropriated for the fubfiltence

of the clergy were diverted into other channels.
The Queen was therefore obliged to prevent the
just remonstrances of the assembly, by falling on
some new method for the relief of the church. Some
symptoms of liberality, some firetch towards muni.
ficence might have been expeeted in an assignment
which was made with an intention of soothing and
silencing the clergy. But both the Queen and the
nobles held fast the riches of the church which they
had seized. A fum, which, at the highest compu-
tation, can scarce be reckoned equal to 90001. fter-
ling*, was deemed sufficient for the maintenance of
a whole national church, by men who had lately
seen single monaftcries ppffeffed of revenues far fupe.
rior in value.

THE ecclefiaflics in that age bore the grievances

which affeced themselves alone with aftonilhing pa-
tience; but wherever the reformed religion was threat-
ened, they were extremely apt to be alarmed, and to
proclaim, in theloudeft manner, their apprehensions
of danger. A just occasion of this kind was given
them, a short time before the meeting of the Assem-
bly. The usurped and oppreflivejurifdition of the
spiritual court had been abolilhed by the Parlia-
ment 1560, and commiflaries were appointed to
hear and determine the causes which formerly came
under their cognizance t. Among the few aAs of
that Parliament, to which Mary had paid any re-

? Keith, 56z. I- Id. ISz.

iard,

gard, this was one. She had confirmed the autho- B o o g
rity of the Commiffaries, and had given them in- IV.
fiructions for direting their proceedings*, which -6
are still of great authority in that court. From that
time there judges had continued in the uninterrupted
exercise of their function, when of a sudden the
Queen issued a proclamation, restoring the Arch-
bithop of St. Andrew's to his ancient jurifdicion,
and depriving the commiffaries of all authority -.

A MOTIVE, which cannot be justified, rendered

the Queen not unwilling to venture upon this ralt
aftion. She had been contriving, for tbme time,
how to re-eftablith the Popifi religion; and the re-
floring the ancient ecclesiastics to their former jurif-
(iltion, seered to be a considerable itcp towards
that end. The motive which promptecld !othwell,
to whose influence over the Queen this a: ic;n :;nuf
be chiefly imputed , was still more criminal. 1 lis
enterprising ambition had already formed th:it bold
:icfgn, which he soon after put in execution, and
the use which we mhall hereafter find him making
,.f that authority, which the Popish ecclesiastics re-
gained, discovers the reasons of his present conduct,
in contributing to revive their power. The pro-
tetant clergy were not unconcerned spectators of an
event, which threatened their religion with unavoid-
able deftrudion; but as they defpairecl of obtain-
ing the proper remedy from the Queen herself, they
addrefed a remonstrance to the whole body of the
Protestant nobility, full of that ardent zeal for re-
ligion, which the danger to which it was exposed at

" Keith, Ki. ( Knox, 4.03. t Id. ibid.

that

B O o K that time, seemed to require*. What effets this

IV. vehement exhortation might have produced, we
z 66' have no opportunity of judging, the attention of

the nation being quickly turned towards events of
another, and more tragical nature.

TheKing IMM.EDIATELY upon the King's leaving Stirling,
fails fiT k at
Galfio.v. and before he could reach Glasgow, he was seized
1367. with a dangerous distemper. The symptoms which

attended i; were violent and unusual, and in that
age it was commonly imputed to the efflets of poi.
son t. It is impoflible, amidst the contradictions
of historians, to decide with certainty concerning its
nature, or its caufet. His life was in the utmost

Keith, 567. t Melv. 154. Knox, 401.
: Buchanan and Knox are positive that the King had been

poisoned. They mention the black and putrid puflules which
broke out all over his body. Buchanan adds, that Abernethy
the King's physician plainly declared that poison was the cause
ofthefe fymptems, and that the Queen refused to allow herown
physician to attendhim,Buch. 349. Knox, 401 . . Blackwood
Caufin. &c. Jebb, vol. ii. 24. 59. assert, that the fmall-poxwas
the disease with which the King was seized. He is called a
PorifAi man in the Queen's letter, Good. vol. ii. 5. The rea.
son given by French Paris for lodging the King at the Kirk of
Field, viz. left the young Prince Ihould catch the infection if he
staid in the palace, seems to favour this opinion, Anders. vol.ii.
193. Carte mentions it as a proof of Mary's tenderness to her
huffland, that though lhe never had the finall-pox herself, she
ventured to attend him, vol. iii. 446. This, if it had been
trlc, would have afforded a good pretence for not visiting him
sooner; but Mary had the small-pox in her infancy, Sadler's
Letters. 3. Biflop Lefly aflirms, that the King's disease was
the Frrench pox, Kcith, 364. Note (/). In that age, this dif'
eace was celcemed so contagious, that pcrfons infected with it
were rcmoyed without the walls of cities.

da\l-

danger; but after languishing for some weeks, the B o o K
vigour of his constitution surmounted the malignity IV.
of the disease.

1567.

MARY'S negle&t of the King, on this occasion, Negleaed

was equal to that with which he had treated her dur- a
ing her illness at Jedburgh. She no longer felt
that warmth of conjugal affection which prompts to
sympathy, and delights in all those tender offices
which tooth and alleviate sickness and pain. At
this juncture, she did not even put on the appear-
ance of this passion. Notwithstanding the King's
danger, flle amused herself with excursions to diffe-
rent parts of the country, and suffered near a month
to elapse before she visited him at Glalgow. By
that time, the violence of the diltemper was over,
and the King, though weak and languishing, was
out of all danger.

THE breach between Mary and her husband was Thelreach

not occasioned by any of those flight disgusts, which hi,-
interrupt the domestic union, without dissolving it p'"ab.'
altogether. Almost all the paflions, which operate
with greatest violence on a female mind, and drive
it to the most dangerous extremes, concurred in
raising and fomenting this unhappy quarrel. Ingra-
titude for the favours she had beflowed, contempt
of her person, violations of the marriage-vow, en-
croachments on her power, conspiracies against her
favourites, jealousy, insolence, and obstinacy, were
the injuries of which Mary had great reason to com-
plain. She felt them with the utmost sensibility;
and added to the anguish of disappointed love, they

pro".

B o o K produced those symptoms of despair which we have

1V. already described. Her resentment against the King

,567 seems not to have abated from the time of his leav.

ing Stirling. In a letter written with her own hand,
to her Ambassador in France, just before she set out
for Glasgow, no tokens of sudden reconcilement ap.
pear. On the contrary, she mentions, with some
Jan. 20. bitterness, the King's ingratitude, the jealousy with

which he observed her actions, and the inclination
he discovered to disturb her government, and at the
fame time talks of all his attempts with the utmost
scorn *.

vifitsthe AFTER this discovery of Mary's sentiments, it
King at was scarce to be expeced that she would visit the

King, or that any thing but marks of jealousy and
distrust should appear in such an interview. This,
however, was far from being the cafe; she not only
visited Henry, but, by all her words and actions,
endeavoured to express an uncommon affecion for
him: And though this made impression on the cre-
dulous spirit of her husband, no less flexible, on
some occasions, than obstinate on others; yet, to
those who are acquainted with the human heart,
and who know how seldom and how slowly fich
wounds in domestic happiness are healed, this fud.
den transition will appear with a very suspicious
air, and will be confidered by them as the effect of
artifice.

c, rdifr- BUT it is not on suspicion alone, that Mary is
mulation. charged with dissimulation in this part of her con.

Keith, Pref. vii.

dud.

duc. Two of her famous letters to Bothwell were B o o K
written during her fiay at Glasgow, and fully lay IV.
open this scene of iniquity. He had so far succeeded ' '
in his ambitious and criminal design, as to gain an
absolute ascendant over the Queen; and in a fitua-
tion, such as Mary's, merit not so conspicuous, ser-
vices of far inferior importance, and address much
less insinuating than Bothwell's, may be supposed to
fieal imperceptibly on a female heart, and entirely
to overcome it. Among those in the higher ranks
of life, scruples with regard to conjugal fidelity are,
unhappily, neither many, nor strong: Nor did the
manners of that court, in which Mary had been
educated, contribute to increase or to fortify them.
The amorous turn of Francis I. and Henry II. the
wildness of the military charater in that age, and
the liberty of appearing in all companies, which be-
gan to be allowed to women, who had not yet ac-
quired that delicacy of sentiment, and those poliih-
ed manners, which alone can render this liberty in-
nocent, had introduced, among the French, a licen-
tioufnefs of morals that rose to an astonishing height.
Such examples, which were familiar to Mary from
her infancy, could hardly fail of diminishing that
horror of vice which is natural to a virtuous mind.
The King's behaviour would render the first ap-
proach of forbidden sentiments less shocking; resent-
ment, and disappointed love, would be apt to re-
present whatever soothed her revenge, as justifiable
on that account; and so many concurring causes
might, almost imperceptibly, kindle a new passion
in her heart.

~1~~~BUT

BUT

B o O K BUT whatever opinion we may form with regard

IV. to the rife and progress of this paflion, the letters
ó's tthemfelves breathe all the ardour and tenderness of

1567.
The mo. love. The affeation which Mary there expresses for
tives of it Bothwell, fully accounts for every subsequent part

of her conduct; which, without admitting this cir-
cumrfance, appears altogether mysterious, incon-
fiftent, and inexplicable. That reconcilement with
her husband, of which, if we allow it to be genuine,
it is impossible to give any plausible account, is dif-
covered, by the Queen's own confession, to have
been mere artifice and deceit. As her aversion for
her husband, and the suspicious attention with which
ihe observed hiscondu&, became universally known,
her ears were officiously filled, as is usual in such
cafes, with groundless or aggravated accounts of his
aAions. By some, she was told, that the King in.
tended to seize the person of the Prince his son, and
in his name to usurp the government; by others
flie was assured, that he resolved instantly to leave
the kingdom; that a vessel was hired for this pur-
pose, and lay in the river Clyde ready to receive
him*. The last was what Mary chiefly dreaded.
Henry's retiring into a foreign country must have
been highly diflonourable to the Queen, and would
have entirely disconcerted Bothwell's measures.
While he resided at Glasgow, at a difiance from
her, and in that part of the kingdom where the in-
terest of his family was greatest, he might, with
more facility, accomplish his dcfigns. In order
therefore, to prevent his executing any such wild
scheme, it was necessary to bring him to some place

Kehl, P'rcf viii.

where

where he would be more immediately under her own B o o K
eye. For this purpose, she first employed all her IV.
art to regain his confidence, and then proposed to ---.

5.67.

remove him to the neighbourhood of Edinburgh, Previlson
under pretence, that there he would have easier ac- c ,neo
cels to the advice of physicians, and that she her- Edl"nurgh.
self could attend him without being absent from
her son*. The King was weak enough to susser
himself to be persuaded; and being ifll feeble and
incapable of bearing fatigue, was carried in a litter
to Edinburgh.

THE place prepared for his reception was a house
belonging to the Provost of a collegiate church,
called Kirk of Field. It flood almost upon the
lame spot where the house belonging to the Princi-
pal of the University now flands. Such a situation,
on a rising ground, and at that time in an open
field, had all the advantages of healthful air to re-
commend it; but, on the other hand, the solitude
of the place rendered it extremely proper for the
commission of that crime, with a view to which, it
seems manifestly to have been chosen.

MA RY continued to attend the King with the He i mur-

ZD

t anidous care.dered there.

most assiduous care. She seldom was absent from
him through the day; she sept several nights in the
chamber under his apartment. She heaped on him
so many marks of tenderness and confidence, as, in
a great measure, quieted those suspicions which had
Jo long disturbed him. But while he was fondly
indulging in dreams of the return of his former

* Good. ol. ii. S.

hap-

Bo o Khappinefs, he flood on the very brink of deftruc.

IV. tion. On Sunday the ninth of February, about
567' eleven at night, the Queen left the Kirk of Field,

in order to be present at a masque in the palace.
At two next morning, the house in which the King
lay was blown up with gunpowder. The noise and
shock, which this sudden explosion occasioned,
alarmed the whole city. The inhabitants ran to
the place whence it came. The dead body of the
King, with that of a servant who slept in the fame
room, were found lying in an adjacent garden, with.
out the city wall, untouched by fire, and with no
bruise or mark of violence.

His charac- SUCH was the unhappy fate of Henry Stewart
ter. Lord Darnly, in the twenty-firft year of his age.

The indulgence of fortune, and his own external
accomplishments, without any other merit, had
railed him to an height of dignity, of which he
was altogether unworthy. By his folly and ingrati-
tude, he loft the heart of a woman who doated on
him to diftradtion. His insolence and inconstancy
alienated from him such of the nobles as had con-
tributed most zealqufly towards his elevation. His
levity and caprice exposed him to the scorn of the
people, who once revered him as the descendant of
their ancient Kings and heroes. Had he died a na-
tural death, his end would have been unlamented,
and his memory have been lbon forgotten; but the
cruel circumstances of his murder, and the remifl:
ness with which it was afterwards avenged, have
made his name to be remembered with regret, and

have

have rendered him the object of pity to which he B o o K
had otherwise no title. V.

1567.

EVERY one's imagination was at work to guess Bothwel

who had contrived and executed this execrable deth'ff-
deed. The suspicion fell, with almost a general perd of

the murder.

content, on Bothwell *; and some refle&ions were
thrown out, as if the Queen hexfelf were no firanger
to the crime. Of Bothwell's guilt there remains the
fullest evidence, that the nature of the action will
admit. The Queen's known sentiments with re-
gard to her husband, gave a great appearance of
probability to the imputation with which she was
loaded t.

Two days after the murder, a proclamation was
iflued by the Queen, offering a considerable reward
to any person who should discover those who had
been guilty of such a horrid and detestable crime ~;
and though Bothwell was now one of the greatest
tfbjests in the kingdom, formidable on account of
his own power, and protected by the Queen's fa-
vour, it was impoflible to suppress the sentiments
and indignation of the people. Papers were as-
fixed to the most public places of the city, accuf-
ing him of the murder, and naming his accom-
plices; pictures appeared to the fame purpose, and
voices were heard in the middle of the night, charg-
ing him with that barbarous action. But the au-

* Melv. 155. Andcrf. vol. i. 156.
i See Dissertation concerning the murder of Hcnry Darnly.
al;d the genuineness of Mary's letters to lothwcil. Appendix.

:i Anders. vol. i. 36.
XVOL. I. D d thors

B o o K thors of these rumours did not confine their acctr.

IV. fations to Bothwell alone, they insinuated that tht
1567. Queen herself was accessary to the crime *. This

bold accusation, which so diretly attacked Mary's
reputation, drew the attention of her council; and
by engaging them in an inquiry after the authors of
these libels, diverted them from fCarching for the
murderers of the King t. It could scarce be ex.
pe&ed that Mary herself would be extremely soli.
citous to discover those who had rid her of an hus.
band, whom flie had so violently hated. It was
Bothwell's interest, who had the fuipreme direcion
of this, as well. as of all other affairs, to ffifie and
suppress whatever evidence should be offered, and
to cover, if poflible, the whole tranfaEtion under
the veil of darkness and of silence. Some inquiry,
however, was made, and some persons called be.
fore the council; but the examination was con.
ducted with the most indecent remissness, and in
such a manner, as to let in no light upon that scene
of guilt $.

IT was not her own fubjets alone who fufpeted

Mary of having been accessary to this unnatural
crime; nor did an opinion, so dishonourable to her
character, owe its rife and progress to the jealousy
and malice of her factious nobles. The report of
the manner and circumstances of the King's mur-
der spread quickly over all Europe, and, even in
that age, which was accustomed to deeds of vio-
lence, it excited universal horror. As her unhappy

* Anderr. vol. ii. 156. -. Id. vol. i. 38. I Id.vol.

i'reach

breach with her husband had long been matter of B o o x
public discourse, the firfl conjectures which were 1V.
formed with regard to his death, were extremely to 567.
her disadvantage. Her friends, at a loss what apo-
logy to offer for her conduct, called on her to pro-
fecute the murderers with the utmost diligence, and
expccted that the rigour of her proceedings would
prove the best and fullest vindication of her inno-
cence *.

LENNOX, at the fame time, incited Mary to ven- Lennox ac.

cures Both-

geance with incessant importunity. This nobleman well of the
0 King'
had shared in his son's disgrace, and being treated murer.
by iMary with neglect, usually resided at a distance
from court. Roused, however, by an event no
le;s fliocking to the heart of a father, than fatal to
ali his schemes of ambition, he ventured to write
to the Queen, and to offer his advice with refpec Feb. 21.
to the most effectual method for discovering and
convicting those who had so cruelly deprived him
of a son, and her of a husband. He urged her
to prosecute those who were guilty with vigour,
and to bring them to a speedy trial; he declared
his own suspicion of Bothwell, and of those who
were named as his accomplices; he required that
out of regard to decency, and in order to encou-
rage evidence to appear againit them, the persons
accused of such an atrocious crime fliould be com-
mitted to custody, or at least excluded from her
court and presence 1-.

MARY was then at Seaton, whither she had re-
:ired after the burial of the King, whose body was

Keith, Prcf. ix. -I Id. 369.

D d 2 depo-

B o o K deposited among the Monarchs of Scotland, in a

IV. private, but decent manner *. The former part of
567' the Earl's demand, could not, on any pretence, be

eluded; and it was resolved to bring Bothwell im.
mediately to trial. But, instead of confining him

Marycon, to any prison, Mary admitted him into all her
tinucs to
Navour him, councils, and allowed a person, universally reputed

a murderer of her husband, to enjoy all the fccu.
rity, the dignity, and the power of a favourite
The offices which Bothwell already poffcffed, gave
him the command of all the south of Scotland,
The caffle of Edinburgh, however, was a place of
too much consequence, not to wish it in his own
power. The Queen, in order to prevail on the
Earl of Mar to surrender it, consented to put the
March 19. person of the young Prince inr his hands, and im-

mediately beflowed the government of that impor-
tant fortress upon Bothwell $. So many steps in her
condu0t, inconsistent with all the rules of prudence,
and of decency, must be imputed to an excess ei-
ther of folly or of love. Mary's known character
fully vindicates her from the former; of the latter,
many and firiking proofs soon appeared.

H.Tilns on No direcE evidence had yet appeared against
his 1zial .

Bothwell; but as time might bring to light the
circumilances of a crime, in which so many ac-
complices were concerned, it was of great import-
ance to hurry over the trial, while nothing more
than general suspicions, and uncertain surmises,
could be produced by his accusers. For this rea-

· Andcrf, vol. i. 23. t Id. ibid. 4o, &c. id,
ibid. Pref. 64. Keith, 379.

5 son,

ion, in a meeting of Privy Council held on the 28th B o o K
of March, the zth of April was appointed for the IV.
day of trial. And tho' the law allowed, and the 1567.
manner in which criminal caufcs were carried on in
that age required a much longer interval, it ap-
pears, from several circumstances, that this short
space was considerably contracted, and that Len-
nox had only eleven days warning to prepare for
accusing a person, so far superior to himself, both
in power and in favour *. No man could be less
in a condition to contend with an antagonist who
was thus supported. Though Lennox's paternal
estate had been restored to him, when he was re-
called into Scotland, it seems to have been confi-
derably impaired during his banishment. His val-
fals, while he resided in England, had been accuf-

* The aft of Privy Council, appointing the day of Bothwell's
trial, bears date March the z2th, which happened on a Tburf-
day, Anders. vol. i. 50. The Queen's warrant to the moJengers,
impowering them to summon Lennox to be present, is dated on
the zitlh, Anders. vol. ii. 97. He was summoned by public
proclamation at the cross of Edinburgh on the fame day. Ibid.
vc. He was summoned at his dwelling-houfes in Glasgow
and Dumbarton the 30th of March, the ill and zd days of
April. Ibid. Iol. He was summoned at Perth, April qft. Ibid.
1o2. Though Lennox resided at that time 40 miles from Edin-
burgh, the citation might have been given him sooner. Such
an unnecessary delay affords some cause for suspicion. 'Tis true,
Mary in her letter, March 24th, invited Lennox to come to
Edinburgh the ensuing week ; this gave him warning some days
sooner, that she intended to bring on the trial without delay.
But the precise time could not be legally, or certainly known
to Lennox sooner than I l or i z days, before the day on which
he was required to appear. By the law and practice of Scot-
land, at that time, parties were summoned in cafes of trcalon
4o days previous to the trial.

D d 3 tomed

B oo K tomed to some degree of independence, and he had

IV. not recovered that absolute ascendant over them,
I567. which a feudal chief usually pofflffed. He had no

reason to expect the concurrence of any of those
factions into which the nobles were divided. Dur.
ing the flort period of his son's prosperity, he had
taken such steps as gave rife to an open breach
with Murray and all his adherents. The partizans
of the house of Hamilton were his hereditary and
mortal enemies. Huntly was linked in the closet
confederacy with Bothwell; and thus, to the dil
grace of the nation, Lennox stood alone in a cause,
where both honour and humanity called so loudly
on his countrymen to fccond him.

IT is remarkable too, that Bothwell himself was

present, and fat as a member in that meeting of
Privy Council, which gave directions with regard
to the time and manner of his trial; and he fill
enjoyed not only full liberty, but was received into
the Queen's pretence with the fame distinguished
familiarity as formerly *.

irl.xcnO' NOTHING could be a more cruel disappointment
craze! a
"^'.y. sto the wishes and rcfentment of a father, than such

a premature trial; every ftep towards which seemed
to be taken by directions from the person who was
himself accused of the crime, and calculated on
purpose to conceal rather than to detect his guilt.
Lennox foresaw what would be the issue of this
mock inquiry, and with how little safety to himself,
or success to his cause, he could venture to appear

v Andeif. vol. i. 50. 52.

on

on the day prefixed. In his former letters, though B o o K
under expressions the most refpetful, some fymp- 1V.
toms of his distrusting the Queen may be disco- 1567
vered. He spoke out now in plain language. He
complained of the injury done him, by hurrying
on the trial with such illegal precipitation. He re-
presented once more the indecency of allowing
Bothwell, not only to enjoy personal liberty, but to
retain his former influence over her councils. He
again required her, as the regarded her own honour,
to give lome evidence of her sincerity in profecut-
ing the murder, by confining the person who was,
on good grounds, fufpeted to be the author of it;
and, till that were done, he signified his own refo-
lution not to be present at a trial, the manner and
circumstances of which were so irregular, and un-
ratisfatory *

HE seems, however, to have expeeted little fuc- APPe for

thi, pIirpole

cess from this application to Mary; and therefore, to Eliza-
at the fame time, besought Elizabeth to interpose,
in order to obtain such a delay as he demanded t.
Nothing can be a stronger proof, how violently he
suspected the one Queen, than his submitting to
implore the aid of the other, who had treated his
ion with the utmost contempt, and himself and fa-
mily with the greatest rigour. Elizabeth, who was
never unwilling to interpose in the affairs of Scot-
land, wrote instantly to Mary, advised her to delay
the trial for some time, and urged, in such ifrong
terms, the fame arguments which Lennox had used,
as might have convinced her to what an unfavour-

* Anders. vol. i. 52. t Good. vol. ii. 352.

D d 4 able

Bo o K able conftrudion her condut would be liable

IV. if the persisted in her present method of proceed
567. ing *.
J567·

The tral NEITHER her intreaties, however, nor those o0
proe~s.

ro. Lennox, could prevail to have the trial put off

On the day appointed, Bothwell appeared, but with
such a formidable retinue, that it would have been
dangerous to condemn, and impossible to punish
him. Betides a numerous body of his friends and
vassals afrtinbled, according to curtom, from diffe.
rent parts of the kingdom, he was attended by a
band of hired soldiers, who marched with flying
colours along the streets of Edinburgh -t. A court
of jufice was held, with the accuito!ned formali.
ties. An indictment was presented againftBothwell,
and Lennox was called upon to make good his ac.
cufation. In his name appeared Robert Cunning.
ham, one of his dependants. He excused his Maf-
ter's absence, on account of the shortness of the
time, which prevented his assembling his friends and
vassals, without whose aififtance he could not, with
safety, venture to set himself in opposition to such a
powerful antagonist. For this reason, he desired the
court to stop proceeding, and protested, that any
sentence which should be passed at that time, ought
to be deemed illegal and void. Bothwell, on the
other hand, insisted, that the court Ihould instantly
proceed to trial. One of Lennox's own letters,
in which he craved of the Queen to prosecute the
murderers without delay, was produced. Cun-

· Andcrf. Pref. 60. See Appendix, No. XIX. t Anders.
vol. i. 135.

ningham's

ningham's objections were over-ruled; and the B o o K
jury, consisting of Peers and Barons of the first IV.
rank, found Bothwell not guilty of the crime. r

1567.

No person appeared as an accuser, not a fingleBait:'ei'

witness was examined, nor any evidence produced
against him. The jury, under there circumstances,
could do nothing else but acquit him. Their ver-
diEt, however, was far from gratifying the wishes,
or silencing the murmurs of the people. Every cir-
cumfiance in the trial gave grounds for suspicion,
and excited indignation; and the judgment pro-
nounced, instead of being a proof of Bothwell's
innocence, was esteemed an argument of his guilt.
Pasquinades and libels were affixed to different
places, exprefling the sentiments of the public, with
the utmost virulence of language.

THE jury themselves seem to have been aware of

the censure, to which their proceedings would be
exposed; and, at the fame time, that they returned
their verdict acquitting Bothwell, the Earl of Caith-
ness protested, in their name, that no crime should
be imputed to them on that account, because no
accuser had appeared, and no proof was brought of
the indictment. He took notice, likewise, that the
ninth instead of the tenth of February was men-
tioned in the indi&tment, as the day on which the
murder had been committed. A circumstance,
which discovers the extreme inaccuracy of those
who prepared the indictment; and at a time when
men were disposed, and not without renfon, to be

sus-

B o oK suspicious of every thing, this small matter contri

IV. buted to confirm and to increase their suspicions .
J567' EVEN Bothwell himfelfdid not rely on the judg.

ment which he had obtained in his favour, as a full
vindication of his innocence. Immediately after
his acquittal, he, in compliance with a cuitom
which was not then obsolete, published a writing,
in which he offered to fight, in single combat, any
Gentleman of good fame, who flould presume to
accuse him of being accessary to the murder of the
King.

MARY, however, continued to treat him, as if

he had been cleared by the most unexceptionable
and satisfactory evidence. The ascendant he had
gained over her heart, as well as over her councils,
was more visible than ever; and Lennox, who
could not expect that his own person would be safe
in a country where the murder of his son had been
absolved, without regard to justice; and loaded
with honours, in contempt of decency; fled with
precipitation towards England t.

A Pallia. Two days after the trial, a Parliament was held,
ment hel&.

at the opening of which the Queen diftinguiffied
Bothwell, by appointing him to carry the sceptre
before her :. Most of the ads passed in this As-
fembly, were calculated on purpose to strengthen
his party, and to promote his designs. He ob-
tained the ratification of all the poffeflions and ho-

Bothw. Trial, Anders. vol. i. 97, &c. - Keith, 378,
Note (d). I ld. ibid.

nours

nours which the partiality of the Queen had con- B o o K
ferred upon him; and the a& to that effea con- IV.
rained the strongest declarations of his faithful ser- 'ó
vices to the Crown in all times past. The surrender 67
of the castle of Edinburgh by Mar was confirm-
ed. The law of attainder against Huntly was re-
pealed, and he, and his adherents, were restored to
the effates and honours of their ancestors. Several
of those who had been on the jury which acquit-
ted him, obtained ratifications of the grants made
in their favour; and as pasquinades daily multi-
plied, a law passed, whereby those, into whose hands
any pap:r of that kind fell, were commanded in-
ftantly to destroy it; and if, through their neglet,
it should be allowed to spread, they were fubjefted
to a capital punishment, in the fame manner as if
they had been the original authors -.

BUT the absolute dominion which Bothwell had Rb,'"ki

able law in
acquired over Mary's mind, appeared in the clearest faor of

the Refor-

manner, by an act in favour of the protestant reli- mation.
gion, to which, at this time, Ihe gave her assent.
Mary's attachment to the Romiih faith was uniform
and fuperltitious; fle had never laid aside the de-
sign, nor loft the hopes of restoring it. She had,
of late, come under new engagements to that pur-
pose, and, in consequence of these, had ventured
upon Ibme steps more public and vigorous than
any fie had formerly taken. But Bothwell was
prompted, by powerful motives, to promote this
law. He had been guilty of crimes, which rendered
him the objeet of just and universal detestation.

t Keith, 289.
4e He

B o o K He was meditating others, which he easily foresaw

IV. would heighten the public indignation against him.
1567^ By this popular law, he might hope to divert, or

to delay the resentment of the nation, and flattered
himself, that the obtaining this unexpected and le-
gal security for the Proteltant religion, would atone
for much guilt, silence the clamours of the clergy,
and induce the people to connive at, or to tolerate
his crimes. The at itself was so favourable to the
docrine of the Reformers, that the Parliament,
which met next year, under very different leaders,
could substitute nothing stronger or more explicit
in its place ; and thought it sufficient to ratify it
word for word *. To pals such an aft was utterly
inconsistent with all the maxims which Mary fol.
lowed in every other period of her life; but what
could never be extorted from her by the folicita-
tions of the Assemblies of the church, or by the
intreaties of the people, the more powerful influ-
ence of Bothwell now obtained t.

* Parl. I Jac. VI. c. 31.

t Buchanan, Hilt. 355, not only omits taking any notice of

this law, but affirts, that the Queen, though she had given pro-
mises in favour of the reformed religion, refused to permit any
as to pass in lupport of it, and even dismissed the deputiesof the
church with contempt. Spotfwood, 202. and Calderwood, vol.
iii. -;. both affirm the fane thing. It would not have been ne-
ceffary to observe this inliance of Buchanan's inaccuracy, but
that an author so conversant in our laws as Spotfwood, and one
so ind ufrious as Calderwood, should commit such an error, when
not only the original ftatutc was extant in the records of Mary's
Parliament, but even when the printed iat of Murray's Parlia-
ment was before their eyes, is remarkable. Even Buchanan
hinifelf has taken notice of this ;a. Deteólio, p. 8.

LVERY

EVERY ftep taken by Bothwell had hitherto been B o o K

attended with all the success which his most sanguine IV.
withes could expect. He had entirely gained the 'ó

z$67.

Queen's heart; the murder of the King had ex Botwell
cited no public commotion; he had been acquitted prevails o
by his Peers of any share in that crime; and their to recom-
decision had been, in tome fort, ratified in Parlia- as an hus-

band to the

ment. But in a kingdom, where the regal autho- Qcea 'he
rity was so extremely limited, and the power of the
nobles so formidable, he durst not venture on the
last action, towards which all his ambitious proje&s
tended, without their approbation. In order to fe-
cure this, he, immediately after the dissolution of April 19.
Parliament, invited all the nobles who were present
to an entertainment. Having filled the house with
his friends and dependants, and surrounded it with
armed men *, he opened to the company his inten-
tion of marrying the Queen, whose content, he told
thlem, he had already obtained; and demanded their
approbation of this match, which, he said, was no
lcts acceptable to their sovereign, than honourable
to himfelft-. Huntly and Seaton, who were privy
to all Bothwell's schemes, and promoted them with
the utmost zeal; the Popifli ecclesiastics, who were
absolutely devoted to the Queen, and ready to sooth
all her paflions, instantly declared their fatisfadtion
with what he had proposed. The reft, who dreaded
the exorbitant power which Bothwell lad acquir-
ed, and obfcrved the Queen's growing affection to-
wards him in all her afcions, were willing to make
a merit of yielding to a measure, which they could
neither oppose nor defeat. Some few were con-

* Good. vol. ii. 141. t Andrf. vol. i. 94.

founded

B o o k founded and enraged. But, in the end Bothwell,

IV. partly by promises and flattery, partly by terror
it arJ and force, prevailed on all who were present to

567 subscribe a paper, which leaves a deeper stain than

any occurrence in that age, on the honour and cha.
racer of the nation.

THIS paper contained the firongeff declarations

of Bothwell's innocence, and the most ample ac.
knowledgment of his good services to the kingdom,
If any future accusation ihould be brought against
him, on account of the King's murder, the sub.
scribers promised to stand by him as one man, and
to hazard their lives and fortunes in his defence.
They recommended him to the Queen, as the most
proper person fle could chufe for a husband; and
if she could condescend to bellow on him that mark
of her regard, they undertook to promote the mar-
riage, and to join him with all their forces, in op-
posing any person who endeavoured to obftruEt it *.
Among the subscribers of this paper, we find some
who were the Queen's chief confidents, others who
were strangers to her councils, and obnoxious to
her displeasure; some who faithfully adhered to
her through all the vicissitudes of her fortune, and
others who became the principal authors of her sus-
ferings; some passionately attached to the Romrifl
superstition, and others zealous advocates for the
Proteflant faith t. No common interest can be sup-
posed to have united men of such opposite princi-
ples and parties, in recommending to their Sove-
reign a ftep lb injurious to her honour, and so fatal

Andcrf. vol. i. 177. t' Keith, 382.

to

to her peace. This strange coalition was the effet B o o i
of much artifice, and must be confidered as the IV.
boldest and most masterly stroke of Bothwell's ad- '-
dress. It is observable, that amidst all the alterca-
tions and mutual reproaches of the two parties which
arose in the kingdom, this unworthy tranfadtion is
seldom mentioned. Conscious on both fides, that
in this particular, their condut could ill bear exa-
mination, and would redound little to their fame,
they always touch upon it unwillingly, and seem
dcfirous that it should remain in darkness, or be
buried in oblivion. But as so many perbfns, who,
both at that time, and ever after, possesed the
Queen's favour, iublcribed this paper, the fulpicion
becomes strong, that Bothwell's ambitious hopes
were neither unknown to Mary, nor disapproved
by her *.

THESE

* Of all the different fyflems with regard to this tranfation,

that of Camden seems to be the least accurate, and the wort
founded. He supposes that Bothwell was hated by Murray,
Morton, &c. who had been his associates in the murder of the
King, and that they now wanted to ruin him. He affirms, at
the fame time, that the subscriptions to this paper were obtained
by them, out of fear that Bothwell might fink in his hopes, and
betray the whole bloody secret, 404. But besides the absurdity
of supposing, that any man's enemies would contribute towards
raising him to such high dignity, on the uncertain hopes of as-
terwards depriving him of it; besides the impoflibility of ac-
complifhing such a marriage, if it had been either unknown to
the Queen, or disagreeable to her; we may observe that this
supposition is destroyed by the direa teltimony of the Queen
herself, who ascribes the content of the nobles to Bothwell's
artifices, ,who purchajed it ly giving them to under/iand that vwe
vtere content therqewtith. Anders. vol. i. 94. It would have been
no finall advantage to Mary, if flie could have represented the

content

B o o K THESE suspicions are confirmed by the most di-

IV. re& proof. Melvil, at that time, enjoyed a coni-
6? derable share in her favour. He, as well as his

brother, kept a secret correspondence in England,
with those who favoured her pretensions to that
Crown. The rumour of her intended marriage
with Bothwell having spread early in that kingdom,
excited universal indignation; and Melvil received
a letter from thence, which represented, in the
firongeft terms, what would be the fatal effecds of
such an imprudent ftep. He put this letter into
the Queen's hands, and enforced it with the utmost
warmth. She not only disregarded there remon-
ftrances, but communicated the matter toBothwell;
and Melvil, in order to save his life, was obliged to
fly from court, whither he durst not return, till the
Earl's rage began to abate *. At the fame time,

Eli-

consent of the nobles to have been their own voluntary deed.
It is still more surprising to find Lefly ascribing this paper to
Murray and his fation. Anders. vol. i. 26. The Bishop him-
self was one of the persons who subscribed it, Keith, 38;.
The King's.commifiioners, at the conference held at York 1 568,
pretended that none of the nobles, except the Earl of Huntly,
would subscribe this paper till a warrant from the Queen was
produced, by which they were allowed to do so: this warrant
they had in their cultody, and exhibited. Anders. vol. iv.
Part 2. 5. This differs from Buchanan's account, who fuppqfes
that all the nobles present subscribed the paper on the igth,
and that, next day, they obtained the approbation of what
they had done, by way of security to themselves, 25'.

Melv. 1i6. According to Melvil, Lord Herreis like-

wife reinonfirated againll the marriage, and conjured the
Queen, on his knees, to lay aside all thoughts of such a dif.
honourable alliance, 1 56. But it has been obfcrved, that iHer-
reis is one of the nobles who subscribed the bond, April 19.

Keith,

Elizabeth warned Mary of the danger and infamy B o o K
to which she would expose herself, by such an in- IV.
decent choice: but an advice from her met with fill ` `"
less regard *. 5 7

THREE days after the rifingof Parliament, Mary Bothwell

carries the
went from Edinburgh to Stirling, in'order to vfit Quecby

force to

the Prince her son. Bothwell had now'brought his Dunbar.
schemes tofull maturity, and every precaution being
taken which could render it safe to venture on thd
last and decisive ftep, the natural impetuosity of his
spirit did not susser him to deliberate any longer.
Under pretence of an expedition against the siee-
booters on the borders, he assembled his follow-
ers; and marching out of Edinburgh with a thou.
sand horse, turned suddenly towards Linlithgow, Apr1 4.
met the Queen on her return near that place, dif-
Serfed: her slender train without refilance, seized
on her person, and conduced her, together with a

Keith, 383. 2. That he is one of the witnesses to the mar-
riage articles between the Queen and Bothwell, May ,4. Good.
vol, ii. 6i. 3. That he satin council with B6thwell, May 17.
Keith, 386. But this remohftrance of Lord Herries againit the
marriage happened before these, made by Melvil himself, 157.
lielvil's remonstrance mult have happened some time before the
meeting ofparliament; for after offending Bothwell, he retired
from court; he allowed his rage time to subside, and had again
joined thtQieen, when the was seized, April 24, 158. The
lime which mufl have elapsed, by this account of the matter,
was perhaps sufficient to have gained Herries from being an
opposer to become a promoter of the marriage. Perhaps Mel-
vil may have committed rome miltake with regard to this fat,
so far as relates to Lord Herreis. He could not well be mif-
laken with regard to what himself did.

* Anders. vol. i. o16.
VOL. I. E e few

B o o I few of her courtiers, as a prisoner to his catle of

IV. Dunbar. She exprefred neither furprite, nor terror,

nor indignation, at fuchl an outrage committed on
her person, and such an insult offered to her autho-
rity, but ieemed to yield without ftruggleor regret*.
Mlelvil was, at that time, one of her attendants;
and the olicer by whom he was seized, informed
him, that nothing was clone without the Queen's
own c. nfent t. If we may rely on the letters pub-
illled in Mary's name, tie scheme had. been com-
municated to her, and every tRep towards it was
taken with her participation and advice .

DOTII the Queen and Bathwell thought it of ad-

vantage to employ this appearance of violence, It
alF.)rded h r a decent excutf for her conduct; and
while fie could plead thal it was owing to force ra-
tih:r thnln choice, she hoped that her reputation,

.nonlg foreigners at lcal[, would elc.ipe without
cCniutic, or be expoled to cLs reproach. Bothwell
c,)uld not help dillrulting all the methods which had
hithrrto been uiesi, for vindicating him from any
concc;rn in the mu:der of the King. Something
w\as flill wanting for hiis i-curity, and for quieting
his guilty fears This was a pardon under the Great
Sea.l. By the laws of Scotland, the mofl heinous

-;ml iut l!fll be Iicniiolned by name in a pardon, and
til,'n 1al lcliir oillnccs are deemed to be inclu:di

n:er thie genlral cl.auli, ern all olber crimes :wth/-

J.:,:cr '. To lfeize the person of the Prince, is liigh
tc ciiil; and Bothwell hoped, that a pardon oa-

* Klith, 3g8. I- Mclv. 158. 4 Good. vol. ii.37.
[I a1rl. 0 Jac. IV. c. 6:.

tained

tained for this, would extend to every thing of B o o K
which he had been accused *. IV.

I_
i567.
BOTHWELL, having now got the Q seen's person Is divorced

,. i , . 1,1 1 i * * from h:s

into his hands, it would have been unbecoming ei- own wite
ther a politician or a man of gallantry to have de-
lyed conlitimating his schemes. For this purpose,
he instantly commenced a suit, in order to obtain a
ftnrence of divorce from his wife Lady Jane Gor-
dr(n. the Earl of Hluntly's fifler. This process was April 29.
carried on, at the fame time, before Protestant and
Popish judges; before the former, in the court of
Commiffaries; and before the latter, in the fpirirual
court of the Archbilihop of St. Andrew's, whole
jtridiicion the Qneen had lately reflored. The
prctexts which he pleaded were trivial, or scandal-
ous. But his authority had greater weight than
thejuftice of his cause; and in both courts, sentence
of divorce was pronounced with the fame indecent
and suspicious precipitancy t.

WHILE this infamous tranfaiiion was carrying
on, the Queen resided at Dunbar; detained as a
p'iiner, but treated with the greatest respect. Soon
after Bothwell, with a numerous train of his de- May3
pendants, condueted her to Edinburgh; butinflead
of lodging her in the Palace of Holy-rood-houfe,
he conveyed her to the castle, of which he was go-
veinor. The discontent of the nation rendered this
precaution necessary. In an house unfortified, and
of easy access, the Queen might have been rescued
without difficulty out of his hands. In a place of

Anders. vol. iv. part ii. 61. 1- And. i. 132.

E e 2 frength,

B o o K strength, (he was secured from all the attempts'of

IV. his enemies.
1567·

ONE finall difficulty still remained to befurmount.

ed. As the Queen was kept in a fort of captivity
by Bothwell, a marriage concluded in that condi
tion might be imputed to force, and beheld inva.
May '* lid. In order to obviate this, Mary appeared in

the court of Seflion, and in presence of the Chan.
cellor, and other judges, and several of the nobility,
declared that she was now at full liberty; and though
Bothwell's violence in seizing her person had, at
first, excited her indignation, yet his refpedful be.
haviour since that time, had not only appeased her
resentment, but determined her to rails him to
higher honours *.
j Err ed WHAT these were soon became public. The title

of Duke of Orkney was conferred upon Bothwell;
QUeen.,

and on the i5th of May, his marriage with the
Queen, which had so long been the object of his
wilies, and the motive of his crimes,, was fole.m
nized. The ceremony was performed, in public
according to the rites of the Protestant Church, by
Adam Bothwell biihop of Orkney, one of the few
prelates who had embraced the Reformation, and
on the fame day was celebrated in private, accord.
ing to the forms prescribed by the Popish religiont.
The boldness with which Craig, the Minilter who
was commanded to publish the banns, testified
againR the design; the small number of the nobles,
who were present at the marriage; and the fullle

* And. i. 87. t Id. 136. ii. 276.

and

and difrefpeEtful silence of the people, when the B o Q g
Queen appeared in public; were manifest fymp- IV.
toms of the violent and general diflatisfaction of 6'
her own fubjests. The refusal of Du Croc the 67
French ambassador to be present at the nuptial cere-
mony or entertainment, discovers the sentiments of
her allies, with regard to this part of her conduct;
and although every other action in Mary's life could
brjuttified by the rules of prudence, or reconciled
to the principles of virtue, this fatal marriage would
remain an inconteftible proof of her rafhneis, if not
of her guilt.

MARY'S firlI care was to offer some apology for
her conduEt, to the courts of France and England.
TheinftruEtions to her ambaflndors still remain, and
are drawn by a masterly hand. But under all the
artificial and false colouring she employs, it is easy
todiicover not only that many of the fleps she had
taken were unjustifiable, but that flhe herfclf was
cunlcious that they could not be juitified *.

TrHE title of King was the only thing, which was
not bectowed upon Bothwell. Notwithstanding her
attachment to him, Mary remembered the in-
cnvien ences which had arisen from the rafl ad-
vancement of her former husband to that honour.
Shlc agreed, however, that he should sign, in token
of cunfcnt, all the public writs issued in her namne--.
This was nothing more than mere form, but, to.
gehller with it, he poffelred all the reality of power.
IThe Cieen's, pcrlon was.in his hands; (fie was filr-

* And. i. Y9. 1 Good. ii. 60.

E e3 rounded

B o o K rounded more closely than ever by his creatures;

IV. none of her fubjets could obtain audience without
-5-. his permiilion; and, unlcfs in his own prclencc,

none but his confidents were permitted to convcife
with her*. TlhcScottifi Monarchs were accullomed
to live among their subjects as fathers or as equals,
without diftrult, and with little stare; armed guards
flanding at the doors of the royal apartment, dilCl.
culty of access, distance and retirement, wert things
unknown, and unpopular.

Fdca- T-HEsr precauticns were necelary for fecuringto
he[,om Bothwel lhie power, which he had acquired. But,
the i,.e's without Leing master of the perlbn of the young
pcI ll. Prince, he etiemled all that he had gained to be

precarious and uncertain. The Queen had com-
mitred her i-n to the care of the Earl of Mar.
The fidelity and l).:ldy of that nobleman were too
well knownl to expetl th.t !c would be willing to
put the Prince inro the ;ands of the man, w\iio w.is
to violently fii;)petc of having nurdetcre his fa'l!r.
Both.vell, however, laburted to t.ht lte Prince ii:,)
his l'.vcr), \wilh an anxic'y, v;.i ia gave rile to the

altckent 1:'" ciO.:s- li iAls a..di-s as well as au-

tlii;i'y wv'ere c:Plli!oved to PlerLitad e or to lorcei.lr,
int;o a compliance witlh lis d:ea:nds -1'. Andi it is
no litgiht prof bc.th of tihe I:':n::efs and dexterily
of that nobleman, tlhlit lie prei:erve a life osso mucih
imlpoIltance to tile nlati n, irom ling at thei mercy
of a man, whom fear or ambitio mnight have
plomlpted to violent attempts againil it.

* A.d i. i36. t Mlv. 16o. Buch. 361.

THE

THEeyesof the neighbouring nations were fixed, B o o K
atthattime, upon the great events, which hadhap- IV.
pened in Scotland, during three months. A King 67.
murdered with the utmott cruelty, in the prime ot cen.iral in-
his days, and in his capital city; the perfbn fufp-cL- ,,;^;iie
ed of that odious crime fu'fered not only to ap- .' ,"-
iPar publickly in every place, but admitted into the '"extJ'
i!-cfcnce of the Queen, difi'ingui!hed by her favour,
an:d intrusted with the chief direction of her as-
fdrs; subjected to a trial which was carried on
,ith most fhamele!s partiality, and acquitted by a
llentence, which fcrved only to confirm the fufpi-
cins of his guilt; divorced from his wife, on pre-
tences frivolous, or indecent; and aftcr all this, in-
itead of meeting with the ignominy due to his ac-
tions, or the punifhinent merited by his crimes, per-
initted openly, and without opposition, to marry a
Q(.ueen, the wife of the Irince whom he had ailaf-
finated, and the guardian of thole laws vwhicl he
had been guilty (;f violating. Such a quick fuc-
cession of incidents, so firngular, and so dcteftable,
i, not to be found in any other hilfory. They left,
in thl opinion of foreigners, a mark of infamy on
tlhe characIer of the nation. The Scots were held
i abhorrence all over Europe; they duri: scarce
a,!i)car any where in public; and after illering so
mnany atrcOcious deeds to pals with imputiiy, they
v. crc :nive -!ally repreached as men voild oi( cuutragce,
or of hlumanivy, as ecually rcgardtlcs of the rcp.i
t:tli,n of their Qelccn, and the honour of tcIeir
colllntry *.

* Andlcrr vol. i. Iz.S. 13.t. Mc!v. lq3. ecc App, 'idix,
5No. EA.

E C 4 T&iESE

B o o K -'THESE reproaches roused the nobles, who had

IV. been hitherto amused by Bochwell's artifices, or in-
I67. timidated by his power. The manner in which le
1567.

The nobles exercised the authority which he had acquired, his
ibrnbine a-
gaixft her repeated attempts to become mailer of the Prince's
.andBoth perBon, together with some rash threatenings against

him, which he let fal *, added to the violence and
promptness of their resolutions. A considerable
body of theml assembled at Stirling, and entered into
an afltciation for the defence of the Prince's person.
Argyll, Athol, Mar, Morton, Glencairn, Home,
-Lindsay, Boyd, Murray of Tullibardin, Kirkaldy
,of Grange, and Maitland the Secretary, were the
heads of this confederacy't. Stewart Earl of Athol
was remarkable for an uniform and bigotted attach-
ment to popery, but his indignation on accountof
the murder of the King, to whom he was nearly
allied, and his zeal for the safety of the Prince,
overcame, on this occasion, all considerations of re-
ligion, and united him with the moll zealous Pro.
teflants. Several of the other nobles afted, with-
out question, from a laudable concern for the fafery
of the Prince, and the honour of their country.
But the spirit which some of them discovered, dur-
ing the fubfequcnt.revolutions, leaves little room
to doubt, thtat amb)ition or relentment were the
real motives of their condyt,; and that, on many
occasions, while they were pursuing ends just and
;ieccffary, they were actuated by principles and pas-
.ons altogether unjufifiable.

* Mrh'.;' ir,. +t Kcith, 394.

TflSB

THE first accounts of this league filled the Queen B o o x

and Bothwell with great consternation. They were IV.
Do strangers to the sentiments of the nation, with ,,-;

1567.

refpe&t to their conduc; and though their marriage
had not met with public opposition, they knew that
it had not been carried on without the secret dif-
gust and murmurings of all ranks of men. They
foresaw the violence with which this indignatibn
would burst out, after having been so long sup-
prefied; and in order to prepare for the storm,
Mary ifTled a proclamation, requiring her fubjets May,.
to take arms, and to attend her husband by a day
appointed. At the fame time, she published a fort
of manifesto, in which The laboured to vindicate
her government from those imputations with which
it had been loaded, and employed the strongest
terms to express her concern for the safety and wel-
fare of the Prince her son. Neither of these pro-
duced any considerable effet. Her proclamation
was ill obeyed, and her manifesto met with little
credit*.

THE confederate Lords carried on their prepara- Th- ,e,,n

.and Both-

tioris with no less activity, and with much more well r-,,
success.. Among a warlike people, men of so much to Dunba
power and popularity found it aneafy matter to raise
an army. They were ready to march before the
Quieen and Bothwell were in a condition to refillt
them. The castle of Edinburgh was the place
whither the Queen ought naturally to have retired,
and there her person might have been perfetly safe.
hut the confederates had fallen on means to Ihake,

* Keith, 387. 395. 596.

or

B o o K or corrupt the fidelity of Sir James Balfour the de.

1V. puty governor, and Bothwell durst not commit to
1567. him tfch an important trust. He conducted the
Je 6. Q.ueen to the castle of Brothwick, and on the ap.

pearance of Lord Home, with a body of his fol-
lowers, before that place, he fled with precipitation
to Dunbar, and was followed by the Qleen difguif:
ed in men's clothes. The confederates advanced to-
wards LEdinburgh, where Huntly endeavoured, in
vain, to animate the inhabitants to defend the town
against them. They entered without opposition,
and were instantly joined by many of the citizens,
whose zeal became the firmest support of their
cause *.

IN order to set their own conduct in the mofR fa-

vourable light, and to rouse the public indignation
againit Bothwell, the nobles publilhed a declaration
of the motives which had induced them to take
armis. All Bothweli's pa2l crimes were enumerated,
all his wicked intentions dilplayed and aggravated,
and every true Scoi-nan was called upon to join
them in avengilng the one, and in preventing ti.c
other -.

MEAN while, Bothwell afnembled his forces at

Dunbar, and as lie had many dependants in that
corner, lie toon gatihred fuich ftrcngth, that he ven-
tured to advance towards the confederates. Their
ti O)ps were not nuimerous the lfuLdenncci and k.-
cr::vy of their enterlpriie gave their friends at a dif-
taincc L: time to join them; and as it does not ap-

* I';cith, 39. -[ Andcrf vol. i. 12S.

pear

pear that they were supported either with money or B o o K
ted with hopes by the Queen of England, they IV.
could not have kept long in a body. But on the 16
other hand, Bothwell durst not rifle a delay *. 7
His army followed him with reluEtance in this quar-
rel, and served him with no cordial affetion; so
that his only hope of fucccfs was in surprising the
enemy, orin firiking the blow befbre his own troops
had leisure to recolledt themifelves, or to imbibe the
lame unfavourable opinion of his a&tions, which
had spread over the reft of the nation. These mo-
tives determined the Queen to march forward, with
an inconsiderate and fatal lpeed.

ON the firit intelligence of her approach, the The nobles

march a~

confederates advanced to meet her. They found her pinn twem.
forces drawn up upon the lame ground which the JulY 5.
Englifi had occupied before the battle of Pinkie.
The numbers on both fides were nearly equal; but
there was no equality in point of dilcipline. The
(ueen's army conlifed chiefly of a multitude, has-
ily alfembled, without courage or experience in
wair. The troops of the confederates were com-
poled of Gentlemen of rank and reputation, fol-
lowed by their molt trully dependants, who were
no lis brave than zealous-j-.

Du Croc the French Ambaflador, who was in An accom-
thc field, laboured, by ngtociating both with the modation

attempted.

Qleen and the nobles, to put an end to the quarrel
without the effusion of blood. He reprelented to
the confederates Lth QlMen's inclinations towards

' Keith, 401. i Cald. vol. ii. 48, 4.9.

peace,

go o K peace, and her willingness to pardon the offences

IV. which they had committed. Morton replied with
1567' warmth, that they had taken arms not against

the Queen, but against the murderer of her hus.
band; and if he were given up tojuftice, or banish-
ed from her preTence, she should find them ready
to yield the obedience which is due from subjects to
their Sovereign. Glencairn added, that they did
not come to ask pardon for any offence, but to pu.
nifh those who had offended. Such haughty anfwcrs
convinced the ambassador, that his mediation would
be ineffectual, and that their pafions were too high
to allow them to liften to any pacific propositions,
or to think of retreating after having proceeded so
far *,

THE Queen's army was potled to advantage, on

a rising ground. The confederates advanced to the
attack resolutely, but lowly, and with the caution
which was natural on that unhappy field. Her
troops were alarmed at their approach, and disco.
vered no inclination to fight. Mary endeavoured
to animate them; she wept, fie threatened, fhe-re-
proached them with cowardice, but all in vain. A
few of Bothwell's immediate attendants were eager
for the encounter; the reft flood wavering and irre-
solute, and some began to fleal out of the field.
Bothwell attempted to inspirit them, by offering to
decide the quarrel, and to vindicate his own inno-
cence in tingle combat with any of his adversaries,
Kirkaldy of Grange, Murray of Tullibardin, and
Lord Lindsay contended for the honour of enter-

* Keith, 401.

7 ing

ing the lifts against him. But this challenge Boo K
proved to be a mere bravade. Either the confci- IV.
oufnefs of guilt deprived Bothwell of his wonted 56
courage, or the Queen, by her authority, sorbad
the combat*.

AFTER the symptoms of fear discovered by her

followers, Mary would have been inexcusable,
had Ihe hazarded a battle. To have retreated in
the face of an enemy, who had already surrounded
the hill on which he stood, with part of their ca-
valry, was utterly impracicable. In this situation,
fihe was under the cruel necessity of putting her-
fclf into the hands of those fubjeats who had taken
arms against her. She demanded an interview
with Kirkaldy, a brave and generous man, who
commanded an advanced body of the enemy.
1-e, with the content and in name of the leaders
of the party, promised that, on condition she
would dismiss Bothwell from her presence, and go-
vern the kingdom by the advice of her nobles,
they would honour and obey her as their Sove-
reign t.

DuR INC this parley, Bothwell took his last fare- Bothw

well of the Qlueen, and rode off the field with a few obllged
followers. This difimal reverse happened exactly
one month after that marriage, which had colt him
to many crimes to accomplish, and which leaves
so foul a stain on Mary's memory.

Cald. vol. ii 50. t Good. vol. ii. 164. Melv. 165.

As

B o o K As soon as Bothwell retired, Mary surrendered

IV. to Kirkaldy, who conducted her toward the con.

ó^T., federate army, the leaders of which received her

x567.
Mary fur- with much refpet; and Morton, in their name,
theobls. made ample profeflions of their future loyalty and

obedience *. But The was treated by the common
f6ldiers with the utmost insolence and indignity.
As she marched along, they poured upon her allthe
opprobrious names, which are bestowed only on the
lowest and imof infamous criminals. Wherever
Ihe turned her eyes, they held up before her a stand-
ard, on which was painted the dead body of the
late King, firetched on the ground, and the young
Prince kneeling before it, and uttering these words,

j' udge and revenge my cause, O Lord !" Mary

turned with horror from such a shocking fight.
She began already to feel the wretched condition to
which a captive Prince is reduced. She uttered the
most bitter complaints, she melted into tears, and
could scarce be kept from finking to the ground,
The confederates carried her towards Edinburgh;
and in spite of many delays, and after looking
with the fondness and credulity natural to the unfor-
tunate for omeextraordinary relief, she arrived there.
The streets were covered with multitudes, whom
seal or curiosity had drawn together, to behold such
an unuflal scene. The Qieen, worn out with fatigue,
covered with dust, and bedewed with tears, wa sex-
posecd as a fpecacle to her own Ifbje9is, and led
to the Provost's house. Notwithstanding all her
arguments and intreaties, the fame standard was

· Good. vol. ii. i(.,

carried

carried before her, and the fame insults and re- B o o
proaches repeated. A woman, young, beautiful, IV.
and in diftrels, is naturally the object or compassion. 5
T'he comparison of their present misery with their
former splendour, usually softens us in favour of
illtltrious sufferers. But the people beheld the de-
1 lorable situation of their Sovereign with infenfibi-
liy ; and so itrong was their persuasion of her guilt,
.nd so great the violence of their indignation, that
the fiu{Ferings of their Queen did nor, in any de-
g'rte, mitigate their resentment, or procure her that
y'mtpathy, which is seldom denied to unfortunate
illrnces .

* Melvil, 66. Euch. 364.

THE

# BOOK V.

THE
HISTORY

OF
SCO T L AN D.

BOOK V.
T HE confederate Lords had proceeded to such B o o

extremities against their Sovereign, that it V.

now became almost impoflible for them either to '.-v-
stop short, or to pursue a course less violent. Ma- Delibera-
ny of the nobles had refused to concur with them tiob", of the

nobles con-

in their enterprise; others openly condemned it. etningthe
A finall circumstance might abate that indignation
with which the multitude were, at present, animat-
ed againrt the Queen, and deprive them of that po-
pular applause which was the chief foundation of
ltheir power. These considerations inclined some
of them to treat the Queen with great lenity.

VOL. I. F f BUT,

B o o K BUT, on the other hand, Mary's affecion for

V. Bothwell continued as violent as ever; he obfti-
567' nately refused to hearken to any proposal for dif.

solving their marriage, and determined not to aban-
don a man, for whose love ihe had already sacrificed
so much*. If they lhould allow her to recover the
supreme power, the firif exertion of it would be to
recal Bothwell; and they had reason, both from his
resentment, from her conduct, and from their own,
to expeA the severest effects of her vengeance. There
considerations surmounted everyother motive; and
reckoning themselves absolved, by Mary's incur.
able attachment to Bothwell, from the engage.
ments which they had come under when ihe yield.
ed herself a prisoner, they without regarding the
duty which they owed her as their Queen, and
without consulting the reft of the nobles, carried
her next evening, under a strong guard, to the

They im- castle of Iochlevin, and signed a warrant to Wil-
rin Lcher- liam Douglas the owner of it, to detain her as a pri-
vin. toner. This cattle is situated in a small island, in

the middle of a lake. Douglas, to whom it belong-
ed, was a near relation of Morton's, and had mar-
ried the Earl of Murray's mother. In this place,
under strict custody, witha few attendants, and
fubjeaed to the insults of a haughty woman, who
boasted daily of being the lawful wife of James V.
M ary suffered all the rigour and miseries of capti-
vity t.

Keith, 419. 41-6. 449. Melv. 167. See Append, No. XX.
't Keith, 403. Note (ó),

5 * IMME-

IMMEDIATELY after the Queen's imprisonment, B o o K
theconfederates were at the utmost pains to strength- V.
entheirparty; they entered intonew bonds ofaffocia- 567.-
tion; they assumed the title of Lords of the secret
Council, and without any other right, arrogated to
themselves the whole regal authority. One of their
first aas of power was to search the city of Edin-
burgh for those who were concerned in the murder
ofthe King. This show of zeal gained reputation
tothemfelves, and threw an oblique reflection on the
Queen for her remissness. Several fufpeted persons
were seized. Captain Blackadder and three others
were condemned and executed. But no discovery
of importance was made. If we believe some his-
torians, they were convicted by sufficient evidence.
If we give credit to others, their sentence was un-
just, and they denied, with their last breath, any
knowledge of the crime, for which they suffered*.

AN unexpeted accident, however, put into the
hands of Mary's enemies what they deemed the ful-
let evidence of her guilt. Bothwell having left in
the cafle of Edinburgh, a casket, containing several
sonnets and letters written with the Queen's own
hand; he now sent one of his confidents to bring
to him this precious depofite. But as his messen-
ger returned, he was intercepted, and the caflet
seized by Morton t. The contents of it were al-
ways produced by the party, as the most ample
julfificationoftheirownconducl, and the molt unan-

*Cald. vol. ii. 53. Crawf. Mem. 35.
t Anders. vol. ii. 92. Good. vol. ii. 9o.

F f z fwerable

B o o K fwerable proof of their not having loaded their S(

V. vereign with the imputation of imaginary crimes*

1567.
Some of the BUT the confederates, notwithitandingtheirextra

hnobles fa ordinary success, were fill far from being perfelc
Qoeen. at ease. That so small a part of the nobles should

pretend to dispose of the person of their Sovereig
or to assume the authority which belonged to her
without the concurrence of the reft, appeared t
many of that body to be unprecedented, and pre
sumptuous. Several of these were now assemble¢
at Hamilton, in order to deliberate what course the]
should hold, in this difficult conjunEure. Th<
confederates made some attempts towardsacoalitio
with them, but without effeat. They employe
the mediation of the assembly of the Church, tc
draw them to a personal interview at Edinburgh
but with no better success. That party, however,
though its numbers were formidable, and the powe
of its leaders great, soon loft reputation by the wani
of unanimity and vigour; all its confultationseva
porated in murmurs and complaints, and no fchemi
was concerted for obftrutiing the progress of th
confederates t.

Elizabeth THERE appeared some profpe:t of danger fror
i her be- another quarter. This great revolution in Scotlan
half. had been carried on without any aid from Eliza

beth, and even without her knowledgeS. An
though she was far from being displeased to fee tl
affairs of that kingdom embroiled, or a rival, who;

* ee Diflertation at the end of the Appendix.
t Keith, o07. Id. 415.

.6

the hated, reduced to distress;' The neither wished B o o K
that it should be in the power of the one fa&tion en- V.
tirely to suppress the other, nor could Ihe view the k--
steps taken by the confederates without great of- 567
fence. Notwithstanding the popular maxims by
which she governed her own fubjets, her notions
of royal prerogative were very exalted. The con-
federates had, in her opinion, encroached on the au-
tnority of their sovereign, which they had no right
to controul, and had offered violence to her person,
which it was their duty to elteem sacred. They had
set a dangerous example to other fubjefs, and
Mary's cause became the common cause of Princes *.
if ever Elizabeth was influenced with regard to the
affairs of Scotland, by the feelings of her heart, ra-
ther than by considerations of interest, it was on this
occasion. She instantly dispatched Throgmorton Junle30,
into Scotland, with power to negociate both with
the Queen, and with the confederates. In his in-
ftrudions there appears a remarkable solicitude for
Mary's liberty, and even for her reputationt. And
the choice of an ambassador, so devoted to the in-
terest of the Scottish Queen, proves this solicitude
to have been sincere. But neither Elizabeth's friend-
flhip, nor Throgmorton's zeal, were of much avail
to Mary. The confederates foresaw what would be
the effects of these good offices; and that the Queen,
elated by the profpeft of protection, would reject
with scorn the overtures which they were about to
make her. They, for that reason, peremptorily
denied Throgmorton access to theirprifoner; and

* Keith, 412. 415. t Id. 411.

f 3 what

B o O K what propositions he made to them in her behal

V. they either refused, or eluded*.
1567.
Schemes of MEAN while they deliberated with the utmof

eaonfe' anxiety, concerning the settlement of the nation
nobict. and the future disposal of the Queen's person. Eli

zabeth, observing that Throgmorton made no pro.
grefs in his negociations with them, and that they
would liften to none of his demands in Mary's fa.
vour, turned towards that party of the nobles who
were assembled at Hamilton, incited them to take
arms in order to restore their Queen to liberty and
promised to assist them in such an attempt, to the
utmost of her power t. But they discovered no
greater union and vigour than formerly, and behav.
ing like men who had given up all concern either
for their Queen or theircountry, tamely allowed an
inconsiderable part of their body, whether we confi.
der it with refpe&t to numbers, or to power, to fettle
the government of the kingdom, and to difpofeof
the Queen's person atpleafure. Many consultations
were held, and various opinions arose with regard
to each of there. Some seemed desirous of adher.
ing to the plan on which the confederacy was at first
formed; and after punishing the murderers of the
King, and dissolving the marriage with Bothwell;
after providing for the safety of the young Prince,
and the security of the Protestant religion; they
proposed to re-efablifh the Queen in the poffelion
of her legal authority. The success with which
their arms had been accompanied, inspired others

Keith, 417. 427. t Sec Appendix, No. XXII.

with

with bolder and moredefperate thoughts, and no- B o o .,
thing less would satisfy them than the trial, the con- V.
demnation and punifimenl of the Qileen herself, 'ó"

1567.

as the principal conspirator againfi the life of her
husband and the safety of her son *: the former was
Maitland's system, and breathed too much of a pa-
cific and moderate spirit, to be agreeable to the
temper or wilhes of the party. The latter was re-
commended by the clergy, and warmly adopted by
many laics; but the nobles durst not, or would not
venture on such an unprecedented and audacious
deed t.

BOTH parties agreed at lass upon a scheme, nei- They oblige

the Queen

ther so moderate as the one, nor so daring as tie to'relgn the
other. Mary was to be persuaded or forced to re- government.
sign the Crown; the young Prince was to be pro-
claimed King, and the Earl of Murray was to be
appointed to govern the kingdom during his mino-
rity, with the name and authority of Regent. With
regard to the Queen's own perion, nothing was de-
termined. It seems to have been the intention of
the confederates, to keep her in perpetual imprison-
ment; but in order to intimidate herself, and to
overawe her partisans, they still reserved to them-
tleves the power of proceeding to more violent ex,

tremes.

* Keith, 420, 4.21, 422. 582.
t The intention of putting the Queen to death seems to

have been carried on by some of her fubje6ts: At this time we
often find Elizabeth boalting that Mary owed her life to her
interposition. Digges's Compl. Amb. 14, &c. See Append.
No. XVIII.

Fs4 IT

B o o K IT was obvious to foresee difficulties in the exe.

V. cutionof this plan. Mary was young, ambitious,
' 7-, high-fpirited, and accustomed to command. To

induce her to acknowledge her own incapacity for
governing, torenounce thedignity and power which
she was born to enjoy, to become dependant on her
own fubjets, to consent to her own bondage, and
to invest those persons, whom the confidered as the
authors of all her calamities, with that honour and
authority of which the herself was stripped, were
points hard to be gained. These, however, the
confederates attempted, and they did not want
means to insure success. Mary had endured, for
several weeks, all the hard hfips and terror of a pri-
son; no profpe&t of liberty appeared; none of her
fubjeds had either taken arms, or so much as soli.
cited her relief*; no person in whom ihe could
confide was admitted into her presence; even the
Ambassadors of the French King and Queen of
England were refused access to her. In this solitary
slate, without a counsellor or a friend, under the
preflure of diftrcfs, and the apprehension of danger,
it was natural for a woman to hearken almolt to
any overtures. The confederates took advantage
of her condition, and of her fears. They employed
Lord Lindsay, the lierceft zealot in the party, to
communicate their scheme to the Queen, and to
obtain her fublcription to those papers which were
necci-ary for r-ndelring it felccLtual. He executed
his commiliion virth harnfnefs and brutality. Cer-
tain death was before Mary's eyes, if flie refulsed to
comply with his demands. At the Iame time, fle

X Keith, 425.

was

was informed by Sir Robert Melvil, in name of B o o K
Athol, Maitland, and Kirkaldy, the persons among V.
the confederates who were most attentive to her in- 5
terest, that a resignation extorted by fear, and grant-
ed during her imprisonment, was void in law, and
might be revoked so soon as she recovered liberty.
Throgmorton, by a note which he found means to
convey to her, suggested the fame thing *. Defe-
rence to their opinion, as well as concern for her
own safety, obliged her to yield to every thing
which was required, and to sign all the papers which
Lindsay presented to her. By one of there, fte re-
signed the Crown, renounced all share in the go-
vernment of the kingdom, and conrented to the
coronation of the young King. By another, the Jly z.
appointed the Earl of Murray Regent, and confer-
red upon him all the powers and privileges of that
high office. By a third, fie substituted some other
nobleman in Murray's place, if he should refute the
honour which was designed for him. Mary, when
fie subscribed these deeds, was bathed in tears; and
while she gave away, as it were with her own hands,
the sceptre which fle had swayed so long, she felt a
pang of grief and indignation, one of the severest,
perhaps, which can touch the human heart t.

THE confederates endeavoured to give this refig- Jams VI.

rowned,
nation all the weight and validity in their power, by and Mur-

· ray chofetn

proceeding without delay to crown the young Prince. Rgenft.
The ceremony was performed at Stirling, on the
29th of July, with much solemnity, in pretence of

* Keith, 425. Note (b). Melv. 169.
t Ibid. 430. Crawf. Mem. 38.

al

B o o K all the nobles of the party, a considerable number

V. of leser barons, and a great assembly of the people.
L"' From that time, all public writs were issued, and

the government carried on, in name of James VI *.

No revolution so great was ever effeted with

more ease, or by means so unequal to the end. In
a warlike age, and in less time than two months,
apart of the nobles, who neither poflefled the chief
power, nor the greatest wealth in the nation, and
who never brought 3000 men into the field, seized,
imprisoned, and dethroned their Queen, and with.
out shedding a single drop of blood, set her son, an
infant of a year old, on the throne.

Reasonings DURING this rapid progress of the confederates,
of both
piare the eyes of all the nation were turned on them, with

astonishment; and various and contradictory opi-
nions were formed, concerning the extraordinary
Ileps which they had taken.

EVEN under the ariftocratical form of govern-

ment, which prevails in Scotland, said the favour-
ers of the Queen, and notwithstanding the exorbi-
tant privileges of the nobles, the Prince possesses
considerable power, and his person is treated with
great veneration. No encroachments should be
made on the former, and no injury offered to the
latter, but in cafes where the liberty and happiness
of the nation cannot be secured by any other means.
Such cafes seldom exist, and it belongs not to any
part, but to the whole, or at least to a majority of

* Keith, 437.

the

the society to judge of their existence. By what B o o

p

aaion could it be pretended, that Mary had invad- V.
ed the rights or property of her fubjeds, or what' I '
scheme had Ihe formed against the liberty and con-
ftitution of the kingdom? Were fears, and fufpi-
cions, and surmises, enough tojuftify the imprikn-
ing, and the deposing a Queen, to whom the Crown
descended from so long a race of Monarchs ? The
principal author of whatever was reckoned culpable
in her conduc, was now driven from her presence,
The murderers of the Kingmight havebeenbrought
to condign punishment, the safety of the Prince
have been secured, and the Protestant religion have
been established, without wresting the sceptre out
of her hands, or condemning her to perpetual im-
prifonment. Whatever right. a free Parliament
might have had to proceed to such a rigorous con-
clufion, or whatever name its determinations .might
have merited, a sentence of this nature, passid by
asew nobles, without acknowledging or consulting
the reft of the nation, must be deemed a rebellion
against the government, and a conspiracy against
the person of their Sovereign.

THE partisans of the confederates reasoned very

differently. 'Tis evident, said they, that Mary
either previously gave content to the King's murder,
or did afterwards approve of that horrid action.
Her attachment to Bothwell, the powers and ho-
nours with which ihe loaded him, the manner in
which she suffered his trial to be carried on, and the
indecent speed with'which ihe married aran, slained
with so many crimes, raise strong suspicions .of the

former,

B o o K former, and put the latter beyond all doubt. To

V. have suffered the supreme power to continue in the
ó*7- hands of an ambitious man, capable of themoft

atrocious and desperate aaions, would have been
disgraceful to the nation, dishonourable to the
Queen, and dangerous to the Prince. Recourse
was, therefore, had to arms. The Queen had been
compelled to abandon a husband, so unworthy of
herself. But her affetion toward him still continu-
ing unabated; her indignation against the authors
of this reparation being visible, and often expressed
in the strongest terms; they by restoring her to
her ancient authority, would have armed her with
power to destroy themselves, have enabled her to
recall Bothwell, and have afforded her an opportu.
nity of pursuing schemes fatal to the nation, with
greater eagerness, and with more success. Nothing,
therefore, remained, but by one bold action to deli-
ver themselves and their country from all future fears.
The expedient they had chosen was no less refpeft-
ful to the royal blood, than necessary for the public
safety. While one Prince was set aside as incapable
of governing, the Crown was placed on his head
who was the undoubted representative of their an-
cient Kings.

WHATEVER opinion posterity may forna on com-

paring the arguments of the two contending parties,
whatever sentiments we may entertain concerning
thejuftice or necessity of that course which the con-
federates held, it cannot be denied that their con-
duEt, so far as regarded themselves, was extremely
prudent. Other expedients, less rigorous towards

Maryl

Mary, might have been found for fettling the na: B o o K
tion; but, after the injuries they had already offer- V.
ed the Queen, there was none so effectual for fe- ó-
curing their own safety, or perpetuating their own I567
power.

To a great part of the nation, the condu& of

the confederates appeared not only wife, but just.
The King's accession to the throne was every where
proclaimed, and his authority submitted to without
opposition. And though several of the nobles were
still afembled at Hamilton, and seemed to be entering
into some combination against his government, an
association for supporting it was formed, and signed
by so many persons of power and influence through-
out the nation, as entirely discouraged the attempt*.

THE return of the Earl of Murray, about this Murray a.

time, added strength to the party, and gave it fumnth'
a regular and finished form. Soon after the mur- mnt.
der of the King, this nobleman had retired in-
to France, upon what pretence historians do not
mention. During his residence there, he had held
a close correspondence with the chiefs of the confe-
deracy, and at their desire, he now returned. He
seemed, at first, unwilling to accept the office of
Regent. This hesitation cannot be ascribed to the
scruples either of diffidence, or of duty. Murray
wanted neither abilities to entitle him, nor ambition
to aspire to this high dignity. He had received the
first accounts of his promotion with the utmost fa-

* Anders. vol. ii. z3 1.

Aisfac-

B o o K tisfadion; but by appearing to continue for tome

V. days in fufpence, he gained time to view with at-
567' Rtention the ground on which hewas to a&; to ba-

lance the strength and resources of the two contend-
ing factions, and to examine whether the founda-
tion on which his future fame and success must reft,
were found and firm.

BEFORE he declared his final resolution, he wait-

ed on Mary at Lochlevin. This visit, to a lfiter, and
a Queen, in a prison, from which he had neither
any intention to relieve her, nor to mitigate the ri-
gour of her confinement, may be mentioned among
the circumstances, which discover the great want of
delicacy and refinement in that age.' Murray, who
was naturally rough and uncourtly in his manner*,
expoftulated so warmly with the Queen concerning
her palt condu&t, and charged her faults so home
upon her, that Mary, who had flattered herself
with more gentle and brotherly treatment from him,
melted into tears, and abandoned herself entirely to
despair t. This interview, from which Murray
could reap no political advantage, and wherein he
discovered a spirit so severe and unrelenting, may
be reckoned among the most bitter circumstances
in Mary's life, and is certainly one of the most un-
justifiable in his condut.

Soon after his return from Lochlevin, Murray
gn accepted the office of Regent, and began to a& in

that charater without opposition.

Keith, 96. t Ibid. 4-5, 446.

AMIDST

AMIDST so many great and unexpeted events, B o oK
the fate of Bothwell, the chief cause of them all, V.
hath been almost forgotten. After his flight from ', '

1567.

the confederates, he lurked for rome time among Fa5e of
his vassals in the neighbourhood of Dunbar. But Bothwell.
finding it impossible for him to make head, in
that country, against his enemies, or even to secure
himfielf from their pursuit, he fled for shelter to his
kinsman the bishop of Murray; and when he, over-
awed by the confederates, was obliged to abandon
him, he retired to the Orkney isles. Hunted from
place to place, deserted by his friends, and accom-
panied by a few retainers, as desperate as himself,
he suffered at once the miseries of infamy, and of
want. His indigenceforced him upon acourfe which
added to his infamy. He armed a few small ships,
which had accompanied him from Dunbar, and at.
tacking every vessel which fell in his way, endea-
voured to procure subsistence for himself and his
followers by piracy. Kirkaldy and Murray of Tul-
libardin were sent out againit him by the confede-
rates; and surprising him while he rode at anchor,
scattered his small fleet, took a part of it, and ob-
liged him to fly with a tingle /hip towards Norway.
On that coast, he fell in with a vessel richly laden,
and immediately attacked it; the Norwegians failed
with armed boats to its assistance, and after a def-
perate fight, Bothwell and all his crew were taken
prisoners. His name and quality were both un-
known, and he was treated at first with all the in-
dignity and rigour, which the odious crime of pi-
racy merited. His real characer was soon dilcover-
ed; and though it saved him from the infamous

death

B o o K death to which his aflociates were condemned, it

V. could neither procure him liberty, nor mitigate the
'57 hardships of his imprisonment. He languished ten

years in this unhappy condition; melancholy and
despair deprived him of reason, and at last he ended
his days, unpitied by his countrymen, and unaffift.
ed by strangers*. Few men ever accomplished
their ambitious projeCs by worse means, or reaped
from them less fatisfation. The early part of his
life was reflefs and enterprising, full of danger and
of vicillitudes. His enjoyment of the grandeur, to
which he attained by so many crimes, was extreme.
ly flort; imbittered by much anxiety, and disquiet.
ed by many fears. In his latter years, he suffercd
the molt intolerable calamities, to which the wretch.
ed are subject, and from which persons who have
moved in so high a sphere are commonly exempted.
Succef of THE good effets of Murray's accession to the

'he R-d. regency were quickly felt. The party forming for

gent's ad. z
zlinifra- thre Queen was weak, irresolute, and disunited; and

n6 sooner was the government of the kingdom in
the hands of a man, so remarkable both for his abi-
lities and popularity, than the nobles of whom it
was composed loft all hopes of gaining ground, and
began to treat feparatcly with the Regent. So many
of them were brought to acknowledge the King's au-
thority,that scarce any appearance ofoppofition tothe
eftablilhed government was left in the kingdom. Had
they adhered to the Queen with any firmness, it ispro-
bable, from Elizabeth's disposition at that time, that

* Mclv. 168.

Ihe

she would have afforded them such aflifance as B o o K
Light have enabled them to face their enemies in V.
the field. But there appeared so little vigour or i567.
harmony in their councils, that the was discouraged
from espousing their cause; and the Regent taking
advantage of their situation, obliged them to sub-
mit to his government, without granting any terms,
either to themnfelves, or to the Queen *.

THE Regent vwas no less ficcefsfil in his attempt

to Lct into his hands the places of strength in the
ikingdom. Balfour, the deputy governor, furren-
dered the castle of Edinburgh; and as the reward
of his treachery, in deferring Bothwell his patron,
obtained terms of great advantage to himself. The
Governor of Dunbar, who discovered more fidelity,
was loon forced to capitulate; some other small
forts surrendered without refilance.

THIs face of tranquillity in the nation encourag- A Par'i.
c l the Regent to call a meeting of Parliament. No- ment.

Decem. 15.

tling was wanting to confirm the King's authority,
and the proceedings of the confederates, except the
approbation of this supreme court; and after the
iuccels which had attended all their measures, there
could be little doubt of obtaining it. The num-
bers that resorted to an Assembly, which was called
to deliberate on matters of so much importance,
were great. The meeting was opened with the
utmost solemnity, and all its acts pased with much
unanimity. Many, however, of the Lords who

* Keith, 447. 450. 463.
VOL. I. G g had

Bo o K had discovered the warmed attachment to th

V. Queen, were present. But they had made thei
sv "peace with the Regent. Argyll, Huntly, an4

Herries acknowledged, openly in Parliament, tha
their behaviour towards the King had been undu
tiful and criminal*. Their compliance, in thi
manner, with the measures of the Regent's party
was either the condition on which they were ad.
mitted into favour, or intended as a proof of the
sincerity of their reconcilement.

confirms THE Parliament granted every thing the confe.
the pro-
ceedings of derates could demand, either for the safety of their
deratet. own persons, or the security of that form of govern.

ment which they had effablifhed in the kingdom,
Mary's resignation of the Crown was accepted, and
declared to be valid. The King's authority, and
Murray's election, were recognised, and confirmed,
The imprisoning the Queen, and all the other pro.
ceedings of the confederates, were pronounced law.
ful. The letters which Mary had written to Both.
well were produced, and she was declared to be ac.
ceffary to the murder of the King t. At the fame
time, all the ats of Parliament 1560, in favour of
the Protestant religion, were publickly ratified; new
statutes to the fame purpose were enacted. And
nothing that could contribute to root out the re.
mains of Popery, or to encourage the growth of
the Reformation, was negleIed.

Anders. vol. iv. 153. See Appendix, No. XXIII.
t Good. vol. ii. 66. Anders. vol. ii. 2o6.

Ll

IT is observable, however, that the fame parsi- B o o K
monious spirit prevailed in this parliament, as in V.
that of 1560. The protestant clergy, notwith- L567.
flanding many discouragements, and their extreme
poverty, had, for seven years, performed all reli-
gious offices in the kingdom. The expedients fal-
len upon for their subsistence had hitherto proved
ineffectual, or were intended to be so. But, not-
withstanding their known indigence, and the warm
remonstrances of the Assembly of the church, which
met this year, the Parliament did nothing more for
their relief, than prescribe some new regulations
concerning the payment of the thirds of benefices,
which did not produce any considerable change in
the situation of the clergy.

A FEW days after the diffolutionof Parliament, 68.
four of Bothwell's dependants were convicted of Janury3.
being guilty of the King's murder, and suffered
death as traitors. Their confessions brought to light
many circumstances relative to the manner of com-
mitting that barbarous crime; but they were per-
sons of a low rank, and seem not to have been ad-
mitted into the secrets of the conspiracy *.

NOTWITHSTANDING the universal fubmiflion to
the Regent's authority, there fill abounded in the
kingdom many secret murmurs and cabals. The
partisans of the house of Hamilton reckoned Mur-
ray's promotion an injury to the Duke of Chatel-
herault, who, as first Prince of the blood, had, in

* Anders. vol. ii. 165.

G g a' their

B o o K their opinion, an undoubted right to be Regent.

V. The length and rigour of Mary's sufferings began

8 to move many to commiserate her cafe. All who

leaned to the ancient opinions in religion dreaded
the effects of Murray's zeal. And he, tho' his abi.
lities were great, did not possess the talents requifia
for soothing the rage or removing the jealousies of
the different fadtions. By insinuation, or address,
lie might have gained or softened many, who had
oppoled him; but he was a itranger to these gentle
arts. His virtues were severe; and his deportment
towards his equals, eipecially after his elevationto
the regency, distant and haughty. This behaviour
offended lome of the nobles, and alarmed others.
The Queen's facion, which had been so easily dif.
perfed, began again to gather, and to unite, and
was secretly favoured by tome who had hitherto
zealously concurred with the confederates*.

^aw SUCH was the favourable disposition of the na
fro leochl tion towards the Queen, when the recovered her
Lvinl. liberty, in a manner no lei's surprising to her friends,

than unexpected by her enemies. Several attempts
had been made to procure her an opportunity of
clcilaing, which iome unforelien accident, or the
\igilance of her keepers, had hitherto disappointed,
At last, iMary employed all her art to gain George
Douglas her keeper's brother, a youth of eighteen.
As her manners were naturally alffble and infinuat.
ing, ilie treated him with the molt fattering dillinc-
tion; she even allowed him to entertain the most
ambitious hopes, by letting fall Ibme exprefion,, as

Mclv. 179.

if file would chufe him for her husband *. At his B o o K
age, and in such circumstances, it was impolfible V.
to refill such a temptation. He yielded, and drew I56.
others into the plot. On Sunday the 2d of May,
while his brother fat at supper, and the reft of the
family were retired to their devotions, one of his ac-
complices found means to steal the keys out of his
brother's chamber, and opening the gates to the
(queen and one of her maids, locked them behind
her, and then threw the keys into the lake. Mary
ran with precipitation to the boat which was prepar-
ed tor her, and on reaching the llore, was received
with the utmost joy, by Douglas, Lord Seaton, and
Sir James Hamilton, who, with a few attendants,
waited for her. She inflantly mounted on horse-
back, and rode full speed towards Niddrie, Lord
Seaton's feat in Weft-Lothian. She arrived there
that night, without being pursued, or interrupted.
After halting three hours, she set out for Hamil-
ton; and travelling at the fame pace, fle reached
it next morning.

ON the first news of Mary's escape, her friends, Arrives at

\v.-om, in their present dilpofition, a much lmi.ller jd ',lr ^
accielnc t would have roult-d, ran to arms. In a few num"erou

army.

La.vs, her court was filled with a great and plnclndid
l;';in of nobles, accom-panied by such numbers of
fLllowers, as formed an army above 6o00 firong.
In their pretence, file declared that the resignation
'f the Crown, and other deeds she had signcd dur-
:: her imprifunment, were extorted from her by

* Kithi, 469.

G g 3 fear.,

B o o K fear. Sir Robert Melvilconfirmed her declaration;

V. and on that, as well as on other accounts, a coun.

cil of the nobles and chief men of her party pro.

1568.
May s. nounced all these tranfations void and illegal. At

the fame time, an association was formed for the
defence of her person and authority, and subscribed
by nine Earls, nine Bishops, eighteen Lords, and
many gentlemen of distinction *. Among them,
we find several who had been present in the last
Parliament, and who had signed the counter-affo.
ciation in defence of the King's government; but
such sudden changes were then so common, as to
be no matter or reproach.

CcO-lErr- AT the time when the Queen made her escape,
o.rfn~' the Regent was at Glasgow, holding a court of ju.
ailienlis. tice. An event so contrary to their expectations,

and so fatal to their schemes, gave a great shock to
his adherents. Many of them appeared wavering
and irresolute ; others began to carry on private ne-
gociations with the Queen; and Ibme openly re-
volted to her fide. In lo difficult ajunEture, where
lhis own fame, and the being of the party depend-
ed on his choice, the Regent's noft faithful affoci.
ates were divided in opinion. Some advised him
to retire, without lots of time, to Stirling. The
Qleen's army was already strong, and only eight
miles dillant; the adjacent country was full of the
friends and dependents of tli hioufe of Hamilton,
and other Lords of the Queen's faction; Glalgow
was a large and unfortified town; his own train
confiled of no greater number than was usual il

'* 1chil, 4-5.

times

times of peace; all there reasons pleaded for a re- B o o K
treat. But on the other hand, arguments were V.
urged of no inconsiderable weight. The citizens of-'w
Glasgow were well affected to the cause; the vassals
of Glencairn, Lennox, and Semple lay near at
hand, and were both numerous, and full of zeal;
succours might arrive from other parts of the king-
dom in a few days; in war, success depends upon
reputation, as much as upon numbers; reputation
is gained or loft, by the first flep one takes; in
his circumstances, a retreat would be attended
with all the ignominy of a flight, and would at once
dispirit his friends, and inspire his enemies with
boldness. In such dangerous exigencies as this, the Hi prudent
superiority of Murray's genius appeared, and en- condua.
abled him both to chufe with wisdom, and to aft
with vigour. He declared against retreating, and
fixed his head quarters at Glasgow. And while he
amused the Queen for some days, by pretending to
hearken to some overtures, which she made for ac-
commodating their differences, he was employed,
with the utmost industry, in drawing together his
adherents, from different parts of the kingdom. He
was soon in a condition to take the field; and
though far inferior to the enemy in number, he
confided so much in the valour of his troops, and
the experience of his officers, that he broke off the
negociation, and determined to hazard a battle *.

AT the fame time, the Queen's generals had May 3.
commanded her army to move. Their intention

* Buchan. 369.

G g 4 was,

B o o K was, to conduct her to Dunbarton-caftle, a place of

V. great strength, which the Regent had not been able to
i5.-6 wrest out of the hands of Lord Fleming the gover.

nor; but if the enemy should endeavour to inter.
rupt their march, they resolved not to decline an
engagement. In Mary's situation, no resolution
could be more imprudent. A part only of her for.
ces was aflembled. Huntly, Ogilvie, and the nor-
thern clans were soon expeted; her sufferings had
removed, or dininilhed the prejudices of many
among her fubjets ; the address with which she
surmounted the dangers that obftruded her escape,
dazzled and interested the people; the sudden con.
fluence of so many nobles added luffre to her cause;
fie might assuredly depend on the friend2lsip and
countenance of France; she had reason to expect
the protection of England; her enemies could not
possibly look for support from that quarter. She
had much to hope from purfuiig flow and cautious
meafuires; they had every thing to fear.

BUT Mary, whole hopes were naturally sanguine,

and her pallions impetuous, was so elevated by her
sudden transition from the depth of distress, tofuch
an unusual appearance of prosperity, that she never
doubted of iuccefs. Her army, which was almost
double to the enemy in number, confifled chiefly
of the Haminltons, and their dependants. Of there
the Archbifiop of St. Andrew's had the chief di-
recion, and hoped, by a victory, not only to crufl
Murray, the ancient enemy of his house, but to get
the pcrlbn of the Queen into his hands, and tooblige
her, either to marry one of the Duke's sons, or at

8 lealf

least to commit the chief direction of her affairs to B o o K
himself. His ambition proved fatal to the Queen, V.
to himself, and to his family 1. 68

MARY'S imprudence, in resolving to fight, was Battleof

not greater than the ill conduct of her generals in Lae
the battle. Between the two armies, and on the
road towards Dunbarton, there was an eminence
called Langfide-Hill. This the Regent had the
precaution to seize, and polted his troops in a fmrall
village, and among tome gardens and inclofures ad-
jacent. In this advantageous 1ftuation he waited
the approach of the enemy, whole superiority in
cavalry could be of no benefit to them, on such bro,
ken ground. The Hamiltons, who compored the
vanguard, ran so eagerly to the attack, that they
put themselves out of breath, and left the main
battle far behind. The encounterof the ipearmen
was fierce and desperate; but as the forces of the
Hamiltons were exposed, on the one flank, to a
continued fire from a body of mufqueteers, attack-
ed on the other by the Regent's molt: choice troops, Th
and not iupported by tie reft of the Queen's army, Q."en's
they were loon obliged to give ground, and the rout feated.
immediately became univcrlil. Few victories, in
a civil war, and among a barbarous people, have
been pursued with leis violence, or attended with
lcIs bloodflied. Three hundred fell in the fietd: In
tl e flight scarce any were killd. The Regent and
Ins principal officers rode about, befceching the fol-
diers to spare their countrymen. The number of
prilbners was great, and among them many persons

* Anders. vol. iv. 32. Mclv. 181,

of

B o o K ofdiftincion. The Regent marched back to Glaf

V. gow, and returned public thanks to God for this
vó8o great, and, on his fide, almost bloodless victory *.
Her flight. DURING the engagement, Mary flood on a hill,

at no great distance, and beheld all that pased in
the field, with such emotions of mind as are not
easily described. When she saw the army, which
was her latl hope, thrown into irretrievable confu.
sion, her spirit, which all her past misfortunes had
not been able entirely to subdue, funk altogether.
In the utmost conflernation, Ihe began her flight,
and so lively were her impreflions of fear, that she
never closed her eyes till fle reached the abbey of
Dundrenan in Galloway, full sixty Scottilh miles
from the place of battle t.

THESE revolutions in Mary's fortune had been

no less rapid than singular. In the flort space of
eleven days, she had been a prisoner at the mercy
of her most inveterate enemies; she had seen a pow-
erful army under her command, and a numerous
train of nobles at her devotion: And now ihe was
obliged to fly, in the utmost danger of her life, and
to lurk, with a few attendants, in a corner of her
kingdom. Not thinking herself safe, even in that
retreat; her fears impelled her to an action, the
most unadvised, as well as the most unfortunate in
her whole life. This was her retiring into England,
a ftep, which, on many accounts, ought to have
appeared to her rash and dangerous.

* Keith, 477. -f Id. 481.

BEFORo

BEFORE Mary's arrival in Scotland, mutual dif- B o o K

trust andjealoufies had arisen between her and Eli- V.
zabeth. All their subsequent tranfastions had con- l5. 8
tributed to exasperate and inflame these passions. R6oi,

tn Rethsrin

She had endeavoured, by secret negociations and in- into En-
trigues to disturb the tranquillity of Elizabeth's land
government, and to advance her own pretensions to
the Englilh Crown. Elizabeth, who poffefied
greater power, and acted with less reserve, had
openly supported Mary's rebellious subjects, and
fomented all the dissensions and troubles in which
her reign had been involved. The maxims of po-
licy still authorized that Queen to pursue the fame
course; as by keeping Scotland in confusion, ihe
effeEtually secured the peace of her own kingdom.
The Regent, after his victory, had marched to
Edinburgh, and not knowing what course the
Queen had taken, it was several days before he
thought of puriuing her *. She might have been
concealed in that retired corner, among fubjets
devoted to her interest, till her party, which was
dispersed rather than broken by the late defeat,
flould gather such strength, that she could again
appear with safety at their head. There was not
any danger, which she ought not to have run, ra-
ther than throw herself into the hands of an enemy,
from whom the had already suffered so many inju-
ries, and who was prompted both by inclination,
and by interest, to renew them.

BUT, on the other hand, during Mary's confine-
ment, Elizabeth had declared against theproceedings

Crawf. Mem. 59.

of

B o o K of her fubjedts, and solicited for her liberty, with S

V. warmth which had all the appearance of sincerity.

I%*) She had invited her to take refuge in England, and
1568. had promised to meet her in person, and to give her

such a reception as was due to a Queen, and an
ally*. Whatever apprehension Elizabeth might
entertain of Mary's designs, while she had power
in her hands, Ihe was, at present, the objeet, not
of fear, but of pity; and to take advantage of her
situation, would be both ungenerous and inhuman.
The horrors of a prison were fresh in Mary's me-
mory, and if she should fall a second time into the
hands of her fubjecs, there was no injury to which
the presumption of success might not embolden
them to proceed. To attempt escaping into France,
was dangerous; and, in her situation, almost im-
poflible; nor could fie bear the thoughts of ap.
pearing as an exile, and a fugitive, in that king.
dom, where flhe had once enjoyed all the splendour
of a (Queen. England remained her only asylum;
and, in spite of the entreaties of Lord Herreis,
Fleming, and her other attendants, who conjured
her, even on their knees, not to confide in Eliza.
beth's promiies or generosity, her infatuation was
invincible, and fle resolved to fly thither. Herreis,
IHrriP- by her command, wrote to Lowther the deputy-

C.'at C" governor of Carlitle, to know what reception he

would give her; and, before his answer could re-
turn, her iear and impatience were so great, that
ihe got into a tilher-boat, and with about twenty
). attendants, landed at Wirkington in Cumberland,

* C'amb, 4.8. Aiidcrf. vol. iv. 99. 1zo. .Murdin, 369.

and
m

and thence she was conduted with many marksof B o o K
refpea to Carlille *. V.

1568.
So soon as Mary arrived in England, she wrote Elizabeth

.deiberatto

a long letter to the Queen, representing, in the concerning
flrongeft terms, the injuries which ihe had suffered the mann"e
from her own fubjeEts, and imploring that pity and hr.
afiftance which her present situation demanded -.
An event so extraordinary, and the condu& which
might be proper in consequence of it, drew the at-
tention, and employed the thoughts of Elizabeth
and her council. If their deliberations had been in-
fluenced by conliderations of justice or generosity
alone, they would not have found them long or in-
tricate. A Queen, vanquiifed by her own fubjeóts,
and threatened by them with the loTs of her liberty,
or of her life, had fled from their violence, and
thrown herlelf into the arms of her nearelt neigh-
bour and ally, from whom ihc had received repcat-
ed afiurances of friendihip and protection. These
circumfcances entitled her to refpe&t and to compaf-
Lion, and required that she should either be rellored
to her own kingdom, or at least be left at full li-
lwrty to feck aid from any other quarter. Bui with
Elizabeth and her couniellors, the qucteion was nor,
what was most jufl or generous, but what was most
beneficial to herlelf, and to the Englith nation.
Three different resolutions might have been taken,
with regard to the Queen of Scots. .' re-inflate
her in her throne, was one ; to allow lt r to retire
into France was another; to detain her in L:ngland,
was a third. Each of thelie drew confequcnces

? Keith, 483. Anderi. vol. iv. 2. 1| Id. 29.

after

B o o K after it, of the utmost importance, which were exa-

V. mined, as appears from papers till extant , with
1568 that minute accuracy, which Elizabeth's Ministers

employed in all their consultations upon affairs of
moment.

To restore Mary to the full exercise of the royal

authority in Scotland, they observed, would render
her more powerful than ever. The nobles who
were most firmly attached to the Englilh interest
would quickly feel the utmost weight of her re.
fentment. And as the gratitude of Princes is fel-
dom throng or lasting, regard to her own interest
might soon efface the memory of her obligations to
Elizabeth, and prompt her to renew the alliance of
the Scottish nation with France, and revive her own
pretensions to the English Crown. Nor was it pof-
fible to fetter and circumscribe the Scottish Queen,
by any conditions that would prevent these dangers.
Her party in Scotland was numerous and powerful.
Her return, even without any support from Eng-
land, would inspire her friends with new zeal and
courage; a tingle victory might give them the fu-
periority, which they had loft by a tingle defeat,
and render Mary a more formidable rival than ever
to Elizabeth.

THE dangers arising from suffering Mary to re-

turn into France, were no less obvious. The French
King could not refuse his assistance towards reftor-
ing his sifter and ally to her throne. Elizabeth
would, once more, lee a foreign army in the island,

Anders. vol. iv. 34. 99. lo2.

over-

overawing the Scots, and ready to enter her king- B o o K
dom; and if the commotions in France, on account V.
of religion, were fettled, the Princes of Lorrain .,ó
might resume their ambitious projecs, and the unit-
ed forces of France and Scotland might invade Eng-
land, where it is weakest and most defenceless.

NOTHING therefore remained but to detain her Refolresto

detain her

in England; and to permit her either to live at li- in Eng.
berty there, or to confine her in a prison. The land'
former was a dangerous experiment. Her court
would become a place of resort to all the Roman
Catholics, to the difaffeced, and to the lovers of in-
novation. Though Elizabeth affected to represent
Mary's pretensions to the English Crown as altoge-
ther extravagant and ill-founded, she was not igno-
rant that they did not appear in that light to the na-
tion, and that many thought them preferable even to
her own title. If the activity of her emissaries had
gained her so many abettors, her own personal in-
fluence was much more to be dreaded; her beauty,
her address, her sufferings, by the admiration and
pity which they would excite, could not fail of
making many converts to her party *.

IT was indeed to be apprehended, that the treat-

ing Mary as a prisoner would excite universal in-
dignation against Elizabeth, and that by this unex-
ampled severity towards a Queen, who implored,
and to whom ihe had promised her protection, she
would forfeit the praise of justice and humanity,
which was hitherto due to her administration. But

*Anders, vol. iv. 56. 60.

6 the

B o o K the English Monarchs were often so solicitous to fe.

V. cure their kingdom against the Scots, as to be little
'óS' scrupulous about the means which they employed
J563' for that purpose. Henry IV. had seized the heir

of the Crown of Scotland, who was forced, by the
violence of a storm, to take refuge in one of the
ports of his kingdom; and, in contempt of the
rights of hospitality, without regarding his tender
age, or the tears and intreaties of his father, de-
tained him a priobner for many years. This aftion,
though detested by posterity, Elizabeth resolved
now to imitate. Her virtue was not more proof
than Henry's had been, againfi the temptations of
interest; and the poflefion of a present advantage
was preferred to the prospe2ct of future fame. The
fatisfaLion which she felt in mortifying a rival,
whose beauty and accomplishments flie envied, had,
perhaps, no less influence than political confidera-
tions, in bringing her to this resolution. But, at
the fame time, in order to screen herself from the
censure which this ccnduct merited, and to make
her treatment of the Scottilh Queen look like the
effeEt of necessity, rather than of choice, she deter-
mined to put on the appearance of concern for her
interest, and of deep fyinpathy with her sufferings.
nMay ao. WITII this view, she instantly dispatched Lord

Scroope warden of the weft marches, and Sir Fran-
cis Knollys her vice-chamberlain, to the Queen of
Scots, with letters full of expressions of kindness
and condolence. But, at the fame time, they had
private inftrucions to watch all her motions, and to
take care that fle fliould not escape into her own

king-

kingdom *. On their arrival, Mary demanded a B o o K
personal interview with the Queen, that she might V.
lay before her the injuries which she had suffered, i 68
and receive from her those friendly offices which she Mary de-
had been encouraged to expect. They answered, mitdace-
that it was with relutance this honour was at pre- ibo Elz'
fcnt denied her; that while she lay under the impu- frci.
ration of a crime so horrid, as the murder of her
huiband, their Miflrefs, to whom he was so nearly
allied, could not, without bringing a stain upon her
own reputation, admit her info her presence; but
as soon as she had cleared herself from that asper-
sion, they promised her a reception suitable to her
dignity, and aid proportioned to her distress t.

NOTHING could be more frivolous than this pre. She ffirs

tence. It was the occasion, however, of leading the tovindi
Queen of Scots into the fnalr in which Elizabeth c"odua.
and her Ministers wished to intangle her. Mary
expressed the utmoit furprize at this unexpected
manner of evading her request; but as she could
not believe so many profeflions of friendship to be
void of sincerity, she frankly offered to submit her
cause to the cognizance of Elizabeth, and under-
took to produce such proofs of her own innocence,
and of the falsehood of the accusations brought
against her, as should fully remove the scruples,
and satisfy the delicacy of the English Queen. This
was the very point to which Elizabeth laboured to Elilbeth

.tkes sd.

bring the matter. By this appeal of the Scottih vantge of
Queen, she became the umpire between her and this offer
her fubjeds, and had it entirely in her own power

* Anders. vol. iv. 36. 70. 92. t Ibid. vol. iv. 8. 55.
VoL. I H h to

B o o K to protrad the inquiry to any length, and to per

V. plex and involve it in endless difficulties. In the
1568. mean time, she was furnished with a plausible pre.

tence for keeping her at a distance from court, and
for refuting to contribute towards replacing her on
the throne. As Mary's condu& had been extremely
incautious, and the presumptions of her guilt were
many and strong, it was impossible her fubjets
might make good their charge againft'her; and if
this should be the result of the inquiry, she would,
thenceforth, cease to be the object of regard, or of
compaflion, and the treating her with coldness and
negleEt would merit little censure. In a matter so
dark and mynterious, there was no probability that
Mary could bring proofs of her innocence, so in-
contested, as to render the conduc of the Englilh
Queen altogether culpable. And perhaps, her im.
patience under restraint, her suspicion of Elizabeth's
partiality, or her discovery of her artifices, might
engage her in such cabals, as would justify the
using her with greater rigour.

ELIZABETH early foresaw all those advantages,

which would arie from an inquiry into the condut
of the Scottish Queen, carried on under her direc-
tion. There was some danger, however, that Mary
might discover her secret intentions too soon, and
by receding from the offer which he had made, en-
deavour to disappoint them. But even in that event,
she determined not to drop the inquiry, and had
thought of several different expedients for carry-
ing it on. The Countess of Lennox, convinced
that Mary was accessory to the murder of her son,

and

and thirsting for that vengeance which it was ratu- B o o
ral for a mother to demand, had implored Eliza- V.
beth'sjuftice, and solicited her, with many rears, in 15X)8
her own name, and in her husband's, to bring the
Scottish Queen to a trial for that crime *. The pa-
rents of the unhappy Prince had a just right to pre.
ser this accusation; nor could the, who was their
nearest kinswoman, be condemned for listening to
so equitable a demand. Besides, as the Scottilh
nobles openly accused Mary of the fame crime, and
pretended to be able to confirm their charge by sus-
ficient proof; it would be no difficult matter to pre-
vail on them, to petition the Queen of England to
take cognizance of their proceedings against their
Sovereign; and it was the opinion of the English
council, that it would be reasonable to comply with
the request -. At the fame time, the obsolete claim
of the superiority of England over Scotland began
to be talked of; and, on that account, it was pre-
tended that the decision of the contest between
Mary and her fubjedts belonged of right to Eliza-
beth. But though Elizabeth revolved all there ex-
pedients in her mind, and kept them in reserve to
be made use of as occafon might require, ihe wish-
ed that the inquiry into Mary's conduct should ap-
pear to be undertaken purely in compliance with
her own demand, and in order to vindicate her in-
nocence; and so long as that appearance could be
preserved, none of the other expedients were to bd
employed.

Card 41z. Haynes, 469. t And. vol. iv. 37.

H h a WHaN

B o o K WHEN Mary consented to submit her cause to

V. Elizabeth, ihe was far from fufpefting that any bad
5óS consequences could follow, or that any dangerous

pretensions could be founded on her offer. She ex-
pected that Elizabeth herself would receive, and
examine her defences *; she meant to confider her
as an equal, for whose fatisfadion she was willing
to explain any part of her conduct that was liable
to censure, not to acknowledge her as a superior,
before whom she was bound to plead her cause. But
Elizabeth put a very different fenie on Mary's of-
ser. She confidered herself as chosen to be judge in
the controversy between the Scottish Queen and her
subjects, and began to a&t in that capacity. She
proposed to appointcommiffioners to hearthe plead-
ings of both parties, and wrote to the Regent of
Scotland to impower proper persons to appear be-
fore them, in his name, and to produce what he
could allege in vindication of his proceedings
against his Sovereign.

Mary MAY.,, had, hitherto, relied with unaccountable
greatly of-
fcnded iL credulity on Elizabeth's professions of regard, and
Elizabe'h's
conduct, expeced that so many kind speeches would, at last,

be accompanied with tome ifuitable acions. But
this proposal entirely undeceived her. She plainly
perceived the artifice of Elizabeth's condut, and
aw .what a diminution it would be to her own ho.
nour, to appear on a level with her rebellious sub-
jeats, and to stand together with them at the bar of
a superior and a judge. She retra&ed the offer
which she had made, and which had been perverted

Anders. vol, iv. o1.

to

to a purpose so contrary to her intention. She de- B o o K
manded, with more earnestness than ever, to be ad- V.
mitted into Elizabeth's presence;, and wrote to her x568
in a strain very different from what the had for- june 3o.
merly used, and which fully discovers the grief and
indignation that preyed on her heart. " In my
" present situation, fays she, I neither will, nor can

reply to the accusations of my fubjeas. I am
" ready, of my own accord, and out of friendship
' to you, to satisfy your scruples, and to vindicate
" my own conduct. My fubjecs are not my equals;
" nor will I, by submitting my cause to a judicial
" trial, acknowledge them to be so. I fled into

your arms, as into those of my nearest relation,

" and most perfec friend. I did you honour, as
" I imagined, in chufing you, preferably to any
" other Prince, to be the restorer of an injured
" Queen. Was it ever known that a Prince was
"blamed for hearing, in person, the complaints of
"those who appealed to his juflice, against the
"false accusations of their enemies ? You admitted

into your presence my bastard brother, who had
" been guilty of rebellion ; and you deny me that

honour! God forbid that I hiould be the occa-
"lion of bringing any Rain upon your reputation,
" I expected that your manner of treating me
" would have added lustre to it. Suffer me either
" to implore the aid of other Princes, whole deli-
"cacy on this head, will be less, and their resent-
' ment of my wrongs greater; or let me receive
"from your hands that assistance, which it becomes
! you, more than any other Prince, to grant; and

H h 3 " by

B o o K "by that benefit, bind me to yourself in the indif.

V. "' soluble ties of gratitude '."

1568.
June to. THIS letter somewhat disconcerted Elizabeth's
precationn plan, but did not divert her from the prosecution
gainft her. of it. She laid the matter before the Privy Coun.

cil, and it was there determined, notwithstanding
the intreaties and remonfirances of the Scottifi
Queen, to go on with the inquiry into her condudi,
and till that were linifhed, it was agreed that Eliza-
beth could not, consistently with her own honour,
or with the safety of her government, either give
her the assistance which she demanded, or permit
her to retire out of the kingdom. And left fle
Ihould have an opportunity of escaping, while fie
resided so near Scotland, it was thought advifeable
to remove her to some place, at a greater diilance
from the borders -.

Proce;Arings WHILE the Englifl court was occupied in these
of the Re-
gentagainf deliberations, the Regent did not negleft to improve
the Queen's
adherents. the vitory at Langfide. That event was of the

utmost importance to him. It not only drove the
Queen herself out of the kingdom, but left her
adherents dispersed, and without a leader, at his
mercy. He seemed resolved, at first, to proceed
against them with the utmost rigour. Six persons
of fonme diftindion, who had been taken prisoners
in the battle, were tried and condemned to death,
as rebels against the King's government. They
were led to the place of execution, but by the pow-
erful interceflion of Knox they obtained a pardon.

* Anders. vol. iv. 94. t Id. ibid. loz.

Ha-
/

Hamilton of Bothwellhaugh was one of the num- B o o K
ber, who lived to give both the Regent and V.
Knox reason to repent this commendable aft of
lenity *.

SOON after, the Regent marched with an army,

conrifting of 4000 horse and 0ooo foot, towards
the weft borders. The nobles in this part of the
kingdom were all of the Quecen's fadtion; but as
they had not force uffitcient to obftrut his progress,
he mufft either have obliged them to submit to the
King, or would have laid waste their lands with fire
and sword. But Elizabeth, whose interest it was to
keep Scotland in confusion, by preserving the ba-
lance between the two parties, and who was endea-
vouring to sooth the Scottilh Queen by gentle treat-
ment, interposed at her desire. After keeping the
field two weeks, the Regent, in compliance to the
English Ambassador, dismissed his forces; and an
expedition, which might have proved fatal to his
opponents, ended with a few ads of severity t.

THE resolution of the English Privy Council with Mary ,cr-

rrd Io Bo.

regard to Mary's person, was soon carried into exe- ton.
cution; and, without regarding her remonstrances
or complaints, she was conducted to Bolton, a castle
of Lord Scroop's, on the borders of Yorkshire $. July ,3
In this place, her correspondence with her firiends in
Scotland became more difficult, and any profped
of making her escape was entirely cut off. She
now felt herself to be entirely in Elizabeth's power,
and though treated as yet with the refpEt due to a

' Cald, vol. ii. 99. 1 Ibid. 4 And. vol. iv. 14.

H h 4 Qtieen,

Bo o K Queen, her real condition was that of a prisoner,

V. Mary knew what it was to be deprived of liberty,

and dreaded it as the worst of all evils. While the
remembrance of her late imprisonment was still
lively, and the terror of a new one filled her mind,
Elizabeth thought it a proper junEture to renew
JU"y25. her former proposition, that she would susser the

Regent and his adherents to be called into Eng.
land, and con{ent to their being heard in defence
of their own conduct. And on her part lhe pro-
mifed, whatever should be the issue of this inquiry,
to employ all her power and influence towards re-
placing Mary on her throne, under a few limita-
tions, which were far from being unreasonable.

Atesthat Fear, impatience, despair, as well as this soothing
an inqmity
he Iadhe promise, with which the proposition was accom-
into her
ro. ,u. panied, induced the Scottish Queen to comply *.

Her dif. IN order to persuade Elizabeth that she desired
w;ti regard nothing so much as to render the union between
to rcig.on. them as close as possible, flie {hewed a difpqfition to

relax somewhat in one point, with regard to which,
during all her past and subsequent misfortunes, she
was uniformly inflexible. She expressed a great
veneration for the liturgy of the church of Eng-
land; mfe was often present at religious worlhip,
according to the rites of the reformed churchi
made choice of a Protestant clergyman to be her
chaplain; heard him preach against the errors of
Popery with attention and seening pleasure; an4
discovered all the symptoms of an approaching con-
verfiont. Such was Mary's known and bigoted at-

Anders. vol. iv. 109. Haynes, 468.
t Anders. voli. r3. Haynes, 509.

tachment

tachment to the Popish religion, that it is impof- B Q o

Q

fible to believe her sincere in this part of her con- V.
dut; nor can any thing mark more strongly the 568
wretchedness of her condition, and the excess of
her fears, than that they betrayed her into diffi-
piulation, in a matter concerning which her fen-
timents were, at all. other times, scrupulously de-
licate.

AT this time the Regent called a Parliament, in Augurft i

A Parlia-

order to proceed to the forfeiture of those who re- met in
fused to acknowledge the King's authority. The sotan
Queen's faction was alarmed, and Argyll and
Huntly, whom Mary had appointed her lieute-
nants, the one in the south, and the other in the
north of Scotland, began to aflemble forces to
obftru&t this meeting. Compaflion for the Queen,
and envy at those who governed in the King's
name, had added so much strength to the party,
that the Regent would have found it difficult to
wirhftand its efforts. But as Mary had submitted
her cause to Elizabeth, ihe could not refute, at her
desire, to command her friends to lay down their
arms, and to wait patiently till matters were brought
to a decision in England. By procuring this cef-
fation of arms, Elizabeth afforded as seasonable re-
lief to the Regent's fadion, as she had formerly
given to the Queen's *.

THE Regent, however, would not content, even

at Elizabeth's request, to put off the meeting of
Parliament. But we may ascribe to her influence,

*Anders. vol. iv. 125.

as

B o o K as well as to the eloquence of Maitland, who la

V. boured to prevent the one half of his countrymei
687 from exterminating the other, any appearances o:
568. moderation which this Parliament discovered in it'

proceedings. The moit violent opponents of the
King's government were forfeited; the reft were
allowed still to hope for favour *

Elizabeth No sooner did the Queen of Scots fubmic her
requires the
regent to cause to her rival, than Elizabeth required the Re-
cdLtuda. gent to fend to York deputies properly inftruted

for vindicating his condud, in orefence of her com-
missioners. It was not without hesitation and
anxiety, that the Regent consented to this measure,
His authority was already eftabliihed in Scotland,
and confirmed by parliament. To susser its vali.
dity now to be called in question, and fubjeded to
a foreign juridiEtion, was extremely mortifying.
To accuse his Sovereign before itrangers, the an.
cient enemies of the Scottish name, was an odious
task. To fail in this accusation was dangerous;
to succeed in it was disgraceful. But the strength
of the advcrfe fatdion daily increased. He dreaded
the interposition of the French King in its behalf.
In his situation, and in a matter which Elizabeth
had so much at heart, her commands were neither
to be disputed, nor disobeyed t.
Rnth the TIE necefrity of repairing in person to York

"ppe an added to the ignominy of the ftep which he was
r'omrnc, obliged to take. All his associates declined the

office; they were unwilling, it would seem, to

* Buch. 371. - Buch. 37z2 See Append, No. XXV.

expose
2

expose themselves to the odium and danger with B o o K
which it was easy to foresee that the discharge of it V.
would be attended, unless he himself consented to

1568.

thare these in common with them, The Earl of Sep. 1S.
Morton, Bothwell Bishop of Orkney, Pitcairn Com-
niendator of Dunfermling, and Lord Lindsay, were
joined with him in commission. Macgill of Ran-
keilor and Balnaves of Hallhill, two eminent Civi-
lians, George Buchanan his faithful adherent, a
man whole genius did honour to the age, Maitland,
and several others, were appointed to attend them
as affilfants. Maitland owed this diftin&ion to the
Regent's fear, rather than to his affeCtion.. He had
warmly remonstrated against this measure. He
wiflied his country to continue in friendship with
England, but not to become dependant on that na.
tion. He was desirous of re-establishing the Queen
in some degree of power, not inconsistent with that
which the King possessed; and the Regent could
not, with safety, leave behind him a man, whose
views were so contrary to his own, and who, by his
superior abilities, had acquired an influence in the
nation, equal to that, which others derived from
the antiquity and power of their families *.

MARY impowered Lefly Bishop of Ross, Lord

Livingston, Lord Boyd, Lord Herries, Gavin Ha-
milton Commendator of Kilwinning, Sir John
Gordon of Lochinvar, and Sir James Cockburn
of Skirling, to appear in her name t.

* Buch. $71. Anders. vol. iv. 35. Melv. 186. i88.
f Anders. vol. iv. 33.

ELIZA-

B O O K ELIZABETH nominated Thomas Howard Dukt

V. of Norfolk, Thomas Ratcliff Earl of Suffex, and

'-b-' Sir Ralph Sadler, her Commissioners to hear both
1568.

parties.

The con- THE fourth of Otober was the day fixed for
ccrence at
york. opening the Conference. The great abilities of the

deputies on both fides, the dignity of the judges
before whom they were to appear, the high rank
of the persons whose cause was to be heard, and
the importance of the points in dispute, rendered
the whole tranfastion no less illustrious, than it was
singular. The situation in which Elizabeth ap-
peared, on this occasion, strikes us with an air of
magnificence. Her rival, an independant Queen,
and the heir of an ancient race of monarchs, was
a prisoner in her hands, and appeared, by her am-
baffadors, before her tribunal. The Regent of
Scotland, who represented the majesty, and pof.
sessed the authority of a King, stood in person at
her bar. And the fate of a kingdom, whose power
her ancestors had often dreaded, but could never
subdue, was now absolutely at her dispo!sal

Views of THE views, however, with which the several
the difle-
ent partics. parties consented to this conference, and the iflle

to which they expected to bring it, were extremely
different.

MAR v'S chief obje& was the recovering her for?

mer authority. This induced her to content to a
measure against which Ihe had long firtuggled.
Elizabeth's promises gave her ground for entertain-

ing

ing hopes of being restored to her kingdom; in B o o
order to which, she would have, willingly, made V.
many conceflions to the King's party; and the in- 1568.
fluence of the English Queen, and her own impa-
tience under her present situation, might have led
her to many more *. The Regent aimed at nothing
but securing Elizabeth's prote&ion to his party, and
seems not to have had the most distant thoughts of
coming to any composition with Mary. Elizabeth's
views were more various, and her schemes more in-
tricate. She seemed to be full of concern for Mary's
honour, and Solicitous that {he should wipe off the
aspersions which blemished her character. This
file pretended to be the intention of the confer-
ence; amusing Mary, and eluding the folicita-
tions of the French and Spanifi ambassadors in
her behalf, by repeated promises of assisting her, as
loon as she could venture to do so, without bring-
ing disgrace on herself. But, under this veil of
friendship and generosity, Elizabeth concealed fen-
timents of a different nature. She expected that the
Regent would accuse Mary of being accessory to
the murder of her husband. She encouraged him,
as far as decency would permit, to take this defpe-
rate ftep t. And as this accusation might termi-
nate two different ways, fle had concerted measures
for her future conduct suitable to each of these. If
the charge against Mary fli)uld appear to be well
founded, she resolved to pronounce her unworthy
of wearing a Crown, and to declare that the would

* Anders. vol. iv. 33. Good, vol. ii. 337. f Anders.
vol. iv. I . 45. Haynes, 487.

never

B o o K never burden her own conscience with the guilt of

V. an action so detestable, as the restoring her to her
568 kingdom *. If it hould happen, that what her

accusers alleged, did not amount to a proof of
guilt, but only of mal-adminiitration, she deter.
,mined to set on foot a treaty for restoring her, but
on such conditions, as would render her for ever
dependant on England, and the save of her own
fubjeds t. And as every ftep in the progress of
the conference, as well as the final result of it, was
in her own power, ihe would still be at liberty to
chufe which of these courses flhe would hold; or if
there appeared to be any danger or inconveniency
in pursuing either of them, she might protract the
whole cause by endless delays, and involve it in in.
extricable perplexity.

Complaint TH E conference, however, was opened with much
of the
Qeen's solemnity. But the very first ftep discovered it to
commils-
fioners a- be Elizabeth's intention to inflame, rather than to
feent. extinguish the dissensions and animosities among the

Scots. No endeavours were used to reconcile the
contending parties, or to mollify the fierceness of
their hatred, by bringing the Queen to offer pardon
for what was past, or her fubjeas to promise more
dutiful obedience for the future. On the contrary,
Mary's commiflioners were permitted to prefer a
oaober 8. complaint against the Regent and his party, con-

taining an enumeration of their treasonable a&ions,
of their seizing her person by force of arms, com-
mitting her to prison, compelling her to resign the
Crown, and making use of her son's name to colour

* Anders. vol. iv. 1 . ' Id. ibid. 16.

their

their usurpation of the whole royal authority. And B o o K
of all these enormities, they required such speedy V,
and effectual redress, as the injuries of one Queen 568
demanded from the justice of another *.

IT was then expeated that the Regent would have

disclosed the whole circumstances of that unnatural
crime, to which he pretended the Queen had been
accessory, and would have produced evidence in
support of his charge. But far from accusing Mary,
the Regent did not even answer the complaints
brought againfthimfelf. Hedifco,-creda reluctance
at the undertaking that office, and started many
doubts and scruples, with regard to which, he de-
manded to be resolved by Elizabeth herself f. His
reserve and hesitation were no less surprising to the
greater part of the Engliih commissioners than to
his own associates. They knew that he could not
vindicate his own conduct without charging the
murder upon the Queen, and he had not hitherto
shown any extraordinary delicacy on that head.
An intrigue had been secretly carried on, since his
arrival at York, which explains this mystery.

THE Duke of Norfolk was, at that time, the Tntriieteof

Norfolk

most powerful and molt popular man in England. with the
His wife was lately dead; and he began already to Re'nt'
form a project, which he afterwards more openly
avowed, of mounting the throne of Scotland, by a
marriage with the Quleen of Scots. He saw the
infamy which would be the consequence of a pub-
lic accusation against Mary, and how prejudicial it

Anders. vol. iv. z. t Haynes, 4: 8.

might

B o o it might be to her pretensions to the English fuccef

V. sion. In order to save her this cruel mortification,
3568. he applied to Maitland, and expressed his astonish.

ment at feeing a man of so much reputation for
wisdom, concurring with the Regent in a measure
so dishonourable to themselves, to their Queen, and
to their country; submitting the public tranfations
of the nation to the judgment of foreigners; and
publishing the ignominy, and exposing the faults
of their Sovereign, which they were bound, in good
policy, as well as in duty, to conceal and to cover.
It was easy for Maitland, whole sentiments were the
fame with the Duke's, to vindicate his own con.
ductt. He affiured him, that he had employed all
his credit, to dilfuade his countrymen from this
measure; and would {till contribute, to the utmof
of his power, to divert them from it. This encou-
raged Norfolk to communicate the matter to the
Regent. He repeated and enforced the fame argu.
ments which he had used with Maitland. Hewarned
him of the danger to which he must expose himself,
by such a violent aEtion as the public accusation of his
Sovereign. Mary would never forgive a man, who
had endeavoured to fix such a brand of infamy on her
character. If she ever recovered any degree of
power, his deftrution would be inevitable, and he
would justly merit it at her hands. Nor would Eliza-
beth screen him from this, by a public approbation
of his conduct. For whatever evidence of Mary's
guilt he might produce, fle was resolved to give no
definitive sentence in the cause. Let him only de-
mand that the matter should be brought to decision,
immediately after hearing the proof, and he would

6 be

be fully convinced how false and insidious her in. B o o K
tentions were, and, by consequence, how improper V.
it would be for him to appear as the accuser of his '"
own Sovereign *. The candour which Norfolk
seemed to discover in there remonstrances, as well
as the truth which they contained, made a deep im-
preefon on the Regent. He daily received the
itrongeft assurances of Mary's willingness to be re-
conciled to him, if he abstained from accusing her
offuch an odious crime, together with the denuncia-
tions of her irreconcilable hatred, if he aóed a con-
trary part t. All these considerations concurred in
determining him to alter his purpose, and to make
trial of the expedient which the Duke had fug-
gested.

HE demanded, therefore, to be informed, before Oobcr g.

he proceeded farther, whether the English commis-
fioners wereempowered to declare the Queen guilty,
by a judicial ac:; whether they would promise to
pass sentence, without delay; whether the Queen
flhould be kept under such restraint, as to prevent
her from difurbing the government now eftablilhed
in Scotland; and whether Elizabeth, if she approv-
ed of the proceedings of the King's party, would
engage to protect it for the future :. The paper
containing these demands was signed by himself
alone, without communicating it to any of his at-
tendants, except Maitland and Melvil §. Nothing
could appear more natural than the Regent's fulici-

Melv. 187. Hayncs, 573. t Andeif. vol. iv. 77,
Good. vol. ii. 157. Sec Append. No. XXVI.

:1 Anders. vol. iv. 55. § Ibid. 56. M¢lv. 19.g
VOL. 1. 1 i tude,

B o o K tude, to know on what footing he stood. Tb have

V. ventured on a ftep so uncommon and dangerous, as
568. the accusing his Sovereign, without previously as.

certaining that he might take it with safetys would
have been unpardonable imprudence. But Eliza-
beth, who did notexpe&t that he would have tfrov.
ed any such difficulty, had not empowered her com.
missioners to give him that fatisfation which he de.
manded. It became necessary to tranfnit the arti.
cles to herself, and by the light in which Norfolk
placed them, it is easy to fee that he wilhed that
they flould make no flight impreiifon on Elizabeth
and her miniPers. " Think not the Scots, said
" he, over-fcrupulous orprecife. Let us View their
" condua as we would wilh our own to be viewed

in a like ituation. The game they play is deep;
t their estates, their lives, their honour are at itake.
" I is now in their own power to be reconciled to
" their Q3ueen, or to offend her irrecoverably, and
"in a matter of lo much importance, the utmost
;' degree of caution is not excessive*."

W iL E theEnglifh cor.nmiffloners waited forfuller

infiruciions with regard to the Regent's demands,
lhe gave in an aniwer to the complaint, which had
bern offered in name of the Sco;rill (Qeen. It was
cxpreflfd in terms perfc&iy conformable to the sys
tern which he had at that timeadopted. It contained
no intinuation of the Qyueen's being accessory to the
murder of her husband; the bitterness of style
peculiar to the age was considerably abated;
and though he pleaded, that the infamy of the

# Anders. vol. iv. 77.

mnar-

marriage with Bothwell, made it necessary to take B o o K
arms in order to dissolve it; though Mary's attach- V'
ment to a man so odious justified the keeping her C"

1568.

for some time under restraint; yet nothing more
was said on there fubjeats than was barely requisite in
his own defence. The Queen's commissioners did
not fail to reply *. But while the article with re- oaober 17.
gard to the murder remained untouched, these were
only skirmishes at adiftance, of no consequence to-
wards ending the contest, and were little regarded
by Elizabeth or her commissioners.

THE conference had, hitherto, been conduted in The confer

a manner which disappointed Elizabeth's views, and mrenledr
produced none of these discoveries which she had ,eftin.
expected. The distance between York and Lon-
don, and the necessity of consulting her upon every
difficulty which occurred, consumed much time.
Norfolk's negociation with the Scottish Regent,
however secretly carried on, was not, in all probabi.
lity, unknown to a princess so remarkable for her
sagacity in penetrating the designs of her enemies,
and feeing through their deepest schemes t. In-
stead, therefore, of returning any answer to the Re-
gent's demands, the resolved to remove the confe-
rence to Westminster, and to appoint new commis-
fioners, in whom she could more absolutely con-
fide. Both the Scottinl Queen and the Regent
were brought, without difficulty, to approve of this
resolution $.

* Anders. vol. iv. 64. 80. - Good. vol. ii. 16o.
And. vol. iii. z4. 1 Haynes, 484. Anders. vol. iv 94.

Ii Ws

B o o K WE often find Mary boasting of the superiority

V. of her commissioners during the conference at York,
--,. and how, by the firength of their arguments, they

confounded her adversaries, and silenced all their
cavils *. The dilpute flood, at that time, on a
soo ing, which rendered her victory not only appa-
rent, but ealy. Her participation of the guilt of
theKing's murder was the only circumflance, which
coulld j uitify the violent proceedings of her fubjeets,
And while they indultrioully avoided mentioning
that, her cause gained as much as that of her advcr.
saries loft by fiipprefling this capital argument.

ELIZABETH resolved that Mary should not enjoy

the fame advantage in the conference to be held at
Weitminifer. She deliberated with the utmost anxi-
ety, how the might overcome the Regent's scruples,
and persuade him to accuse the Queen. She confi.
dered of the most proper method for bringing Mary's
commissioners to answer such an accusation; and as
the foresaw that the promises with which it was ne-
ceiTary to allure the Regent, and which it was im-
po!fible to conceal from the Scottilh (Q een, would
naturally exasperate her to a great degree, she de-
tcrmined to guard her more narrowly than ever;
and thoagh Lord Scroop had given her no reason
to lifirufi his vigilance or fidelity, yet because he

;was the Duke of Norfolk's brother-in-law, file
thoc::;ht it pioper to remove the Queen as soon as
pollib!e to Tuthbury in Staffordlhire, and commit
h _r to the keeping of the Earl of Shrewsbury, to
vholo that caitle belonged t-

Good. v.l. i. iS6. 2843. . - Haynes, 487.

MARY

MA R Y began to suspect the derign of this second B o o K

conference; and notwithstanding the fatisfa&ion he V.
expressed at feeing her cause taken more immediately óo
under the Queen's own eye*, she framed her in- i.ly's rur-

pi ion, of

ftrudions to her commiffibners, in such a manner, rE.izbel 's
as to avoid being brought under the necessity of (..i ,:.I.
answering the acculation of her fubjccts, if they
lhould be so desperate as to exhibit one againf hert.
These suspicions were loon confirmed by a circum-
stance extremely mortifying. The Regent having
arrived at London, in order to be present at the
conference, was immediately admitted into Eliza-
beth's pretence, and received by her, not only with
refpet, but with affeEtion. This Mary justly con-
fidered as an open declaration of that Queen's par-
tiality towards her adversaries. In the first emo-

Krov. ~.

tions of her resentment, the wrote to her commis- (li rns a
fioners, and commanded them to complain in the aid,.rceof
presence of the Englilh nobles, and before the am- Ei'izab':h
baffadors of foreign Princes, of the usage she had
hitherto met with, and the additional injuries which
she had reason to apprehend. Her rebellious iub-
jets were allowed access to the Queen, she was ex-
cluded from her pretence; they enjoyed full liberty,
ihe languished under a long imprilbnment; they
were encouraged to accuse her, in defending herself
fle laboured under every disadvantage. For thefl
reasons she once more renewed her demand, of be-
ing admitted into the Qiueen'sprefence; and if that
were denied, fie inflrutced them to declare, that
flie recalled the content the had given to the con-

* Anders. vol. iv. 9g. + Good. vol. ii, 349.

I 3 ference

B o o K ference at Westminster, and protested, that what.

V. ever was done there, should be held to be null and
V-i invalid*.

THIS, perhaps, was the most prudent resolution

Mary could have taken. The pretences on which
the declined the conference were plausible, and the
juneture for offering them well chosen. But either
the Queen's letter did not reach her commissioners
in due time, or they suffered themselves to be de-
ceived by Elizabeth's professions of regard for their
Mistress, and consented to the opening of the con-
ference -.
Ov. 25, To the commiffoners who had appeared in her

name at York, Elizabeth now added Sir Nicholas
Bacon, Keeper of the Great Seal, the Earls of Arun-
del and Leicester, Lord Clinton, and Sir William
Cecilt. The difficulties which obftruted the pro.
ceedings at York were quickly removed. A satis-
fying answer was given to the Regent's demands;
nor was he so much dilpofed to hesitate, and raise
objetions as formerly. His negociation with Nor-
folk had been discovered to Morton by some of
MIary's attendants, and he had communicated it to
Cecil (1. His personal safety, as well as the conti-
nuance of his power, depended on Elizabeth. By
favouring Mary, she might at any time ruin him,
and by a queflion which she artfully started, con-
cerning the person who had a right, by the law of

Gcod. vol. ii. S84. t Anders. vol. iii. z;.
I Id. vol. iv. 99, 1I Mclv. 191.

Scot-

Scotland, to govern the kingdom during a minority, B o oK
ihe let him fee, that even without restoring the V.
Queen, it was an easy matter for her to deprive him 1568
of the supreme direCtion of affairs *. These con-
fiderations, which were powerfully seconded by most
of his attendants, at length determined the Regent
to produce his accusation against the Queen.

HE endeavoured to leflen the infamy, with TheRe-

which he was sensible this action would be attend- cures the
ed, by protesting, that it was with the utmost re- Qbenafe
luEtance he undertook this disagreeable talk; that soy to her
his party had long suffered their conduct to be mif- murder.
conitrued, and had borne the worst imputations
in silence, rather than expose the crimes of their
Sovereign to the eyes of itrangers; but that now
the insolence and importunity of the adverse faction,
forced them to publish, what they had hitherto,
though with loss to themselves, endeavoured to con-
cealt. These pretexts are decent; and had the par-
ty discovered any delicacy or reserve, with regard to
the Queen's ations, in the reft of their condut,
might have passed for the real principles by which
they were influenced. But their former treatment
of the Queen renders it impossible to give any credit
to these profeflions. And the Regent, it is plain,
was drawn by the necessity of his affairs, and Eli-
zabeth's artifices, into a situation, where no liberty
of choice was left him; and was obliged either to
acknowledge himself to be guilty of rebellion, or to
charge Mary with having committed murder.

P Haynes, 484. t Anders. vol. iv. 1 15.

Ii4 TBil

B o O TH E accusation itself was conceived in the frong

V. eft terms. Mary was charged, not only with hav
6S.' ing conrented to the murder, but with being accef

iory to the contrivance and execution of it. Both.
well, it was pretended, had been screened from the
purtuits ofjuftice by her favour; and flie had form-
ed designs no less dangerous to the life of the young
Prince, than subversive of the liberties and confti.
tution of the kingdom. If any of there crimes
should be denied, an offer was made to produce
the most ample and undoubted evidence in confir.
mation of the charge *.
NOV. 29. AT the next meeting of the commissioners, the

Earl of Lennox appeared before them; and after
bewailing the tragical and unnatural murder of his
son, he implored Elizabeth's justice against the
Queen of Scots, whom he accused, upon oath, of
being the author of that crime, and produced pa-
pers, which, as he pretended, would make good
what he alleged. The entrance of a new astor on
the stage, so opportunely, and at ajuncture so cri-
tical, can scarce be imputed to chance. This con-
trivance was manifestly Elizabeth's, in order to in-
crease, by this additional accusation, the infamy of
the Scottifl Queen t.

Her com- MARY'S commiflioners expressed the utmost fur-
miliioncrs
rcfure 0 prise and indignation at the Regent's presumption,
pccnb. 4. in loading the Queen with calumnies, which, as they

affirmed, she had so little merited. But, instead of
attempting to vindicate her honour, by a reply to

* Anders. vol. iv. i 19. t Id. ibid, 1zz.

the

the charge, they had recourse to an article in their B o o K
inftrutions, which they had formerly neglected to V.
mention in its proper place. They demanded an 1
audience of Elizabeth; and, having renewed their
Mistress's request, of a personal interview, they pro-
telted, if that were denied her, against all the fu-
ture proceedings of the comrminfioners*. A pro-
teftation of this nature, offered just at the critical
time, when such a bold acculation had been prefer-
red against Mary, and when the proofs in support
of it were ready to be examined, gave reason to u'lf-
peck that she dreaded the event of that examination.
This iffpicion received the strongest confirmation
from another circumstance; Ross and -Herreis, be.
fore they were introduced to Elizabeth, in order to
make this protestation, privately acquainted Leicef-
ter and Cecil, that as their Mifirefs had, from the
beginning, discovered an inclination towards bring.
ing the differences between herself and her subjects
to an amicable accommodation, ib fle was fill de-
firous, notwithifanding the Regent's audacious ac-
cufation, that they should be terminated in that
manner t.

SUCH moderation is scarce compatible with the

strong resentment, which calumniated innocence na-
turally feels; or with that eagerness to vindicate it-
self, which it always discovers. In Mary's fitua-
tion, an offer so ill-timed mutt be confidered as a
confefilon oftheweaknefsofher cause. The known

* Anderson, vol i. iv. 133. I.
t Ibid iv, 134, Cabbala, 157.

cha-

B o o K chara&terof hercommiffioners exempts them from

V. the imputation of folly, or the suspicion of trea-
5<68. chery. Some secret conviction, that the conduct of

their Mistress could not bear so firic a scrutiny,
seems to be the moss probable motive of this im.
prudent proposal, by which they endeavoured to
avoid it.
icC12..4. IT appeared in this light to Elizabeth, and as-

forded her a pretence for rejecting it. She told
Mary's commissioners, that, in the prefentjuncture,
nothing could be so dishonourable to their Mistress,
as an accommodation; and that the matter would
Jeem to be huddled up in this manner, merely to
suppress dilcoveries, and to hide her ihame; nor was
it pofflble that she could be admitted, with any de-
cency, into her pretence, while she lay under the
infamy of such a public accusation.

UPON this repulse, Mary's commifflioners with-

drew; and as they had declined answering, there
leemed now to be no further reason for the Regent's
producing the proofs in support of his charge. But
without getting theie into her hands, Elizabeth's
schemes were incomplete; and her artifice for this
purpose was as mean, but as successful as any she
had hitherto employed. She commanded her corn.
missioners to teltify her indignation and displeasure
at the Regent's presumption, in forgetting so far
the duty of a fuljec't, as to accuse his Sovereign of
sich atrocious crimes. He, in order to regain the
good opinion of such a powerful protefrefs, offered
to flhew that his accusations were not malicious, nor

ill

ill.grounded. Then were produced and delivered B o o K
to the English commiflioners, the ads of the Scot- V.
tifh Parliament in confirmation of the Regent's au- t6
thority, and of the Queen's resignation; the con-
sessions of the persons executed for the King's mur-
der; and the fatal casket which contained the let-
ters, sonnets, and contra&s, that have been already
mentioned.

ELIZABETH having got these into her poffeflion, Elizabeth

began to lay aside the expressions of friendfbip and whgreat m
refpe&t which she hatd hitherto used in all her letters er "igour
to the Scottish Queen. She now wrote to her in
such terms, as if the presumptions of her guilt had
amounted almost to certainty; fie blamed her'for
refuting to vindicate herself from an accusation
which could not be left unanswered, without a ma-
nifeft injury to her character; and plainly intimat-
ed, that unless that were done, no change would be
made in her present situation*. She hoped that such
a discovery of her sentiments would intimidate Mary,
who was scarce recovered from the shock of the Re-
gent's attackon her reputation, and force herto con-
firm her resignation of the Crown, to ratify Murray's
authority as Regent, and to content that both herself
and her son should reside in England, under her
protetion. This scheme Elizabeth had much at
heart; she proposed it both to Mary and to her
commillioners, and negleEted no argument, nor ar-
tifice, that could possibly recommend it. Mary
saw how fatal this would prove to her reputation,
to her pretensions, and even to her personal safety.

Anderson, vol, iv. 179, 83. Good.vol, ii. a6o,

She

o o K She reje&ed it without hesitation. " Death, said
V. " me, is less dreadful than such an ignominious
^ óS " ftep. Rather than give away, with my own

56 " hands, the Crown, which descended to me from

" my ancettors, I will part with life; but the last
" words I utter, ihall be those of a Queen of Scot-
' land *."

AT the filme time flei eems to have been sensible

hcw open her reputation lay to censure, while she
fui -red such a public accusation to remain unan-
-.vered; :--.d though the conference was now dif-
si . d, i-me empowered her commiTnifoners to present
a r.. .o t;.e allegation. -r. her enemies, in which
fle G,;.-.', in the strongest terms, the crimes im-
Decem. ;i. put;c to her; arcd recriminated upon the Regent

an,' his p.-rcy, by accusing them of having devised
and executed the murder of the Kingt. The
Ret-eent and his associates asserted their innocence
with creatc v.rmth. Mary continued to infit on
a perlbnal interview, a condition which she knew
· ould neve- bt Elraited

. Elizabeth urged her

to , jicate her own honour. But it is evident
from the de1.'s, the evasions, and subterfuges, to
-.i:ch both Q3ueens had recourse by turns, that
Mary avoided, and Llizabeth did not desire to
make any further progrels in the inquiry.

1;69. THE Regent was now impatient to return into
Fcs. :. Scotland, where his adversaries were endeavouring,
ti:e ';cnt in his abs'ence, to raise rbme commotions. Before

,ith ut t el-
th.r .1D-

c";°;, or ·* I-nes, 497. See Appendix, No. XXVII. Good. vol.
t ii. z-4. 3o0. ' Good. ii, . t Ibid. zS3.
dO."' , Cabbala, 15-.

he

he set out, he was called into the Privy Council, B o o K
to receive a final declaration of Elizabeth's senti- V.
ments. Cecil acquainted him, in her name, that 569
on one hand nothing had been objected to his con-
duEt, which ihe could reckon detrimental to his
honour, or inconsistent with his duty; nor had he,
on the other hand, produced any thing against his
Sovereign, on which flie could found an unfavour-
able opinion of her aclions; and for this reason, she
refblved to leave all the affairs of Scotland, precisely
in the fame situation, in which she had found them,
at the beginning of the conference. The Queen's
commissioners were difmiffd much in the fame
manner

AFTER the attention of both nations had been

fixed so earnestly on this conference, upwards of
four months, such a conclusion of the whole ap-
pears, at firif fight, trifling and ridiculous. No-
thing, however, could be more conformable to
her future schemes. Notwithstanding her seeming Bat fecletly
impartiality, {he had no thoughts of continuing neu- p,'" s h"
ter; nor was she at any loss on whom to bestow her
protetion. Before the Regent left London, the
supplied him with a considerable fum of money, and
engaged to support the King's authority, to the ut-
mnoft of her powert. Mary, by her own conduct,
fortified this resolution. Enraged at the repeated
inflances of Elizabeth's artifice and deceit, which
(he had discovered during the progress of the con.
ifrence, and delpairing of ever obtaining any fuc-

Good. ii. 35. 333. t Id. 213. Carte, iii.478.

cour

B o o K cour from her, She endeavoured to rouse her owrt

V. adherents in Scotland to arms, by imputing such

^T^ designs to Elizabeth and Murray, as could not
a569.

fail to inspire every Scotchman with indignation.
Murray, fle pretended, had agreed to convey the
Prince her son into England; to surrender to Eli.
zabeth the places of greatest itrength in the king-
dom; and to acknowledge the dependance of the
Scottilh upon the English nation. In return for
this, he was to be declared the lawful heir of the
Crown of Scotland; and, at the fame time, the
question with regard to the English fuccellion was
to bedecided in favour ofthe Earl of Hartford, who
had promised to marry one of Cecil's daughters.
An account of these wild and chimerical projects was
spread induftriounly among the Scots. Elizabeth,
perceiving it was calcutlated of puirpofe to bring her
government into difreputation, laboured to deitroy
its effets, by a counter-proclamation, and 'became
more disgusted than ever with the Scottish 'Qeen.

Pfforts of TSE Regent, on his return, found the kingdom
birst- in the utmoit tranquillity. But the rage of the
j-12:Li.T. Queen's adherernts, which had been suspended in

expec&ation that the conference in England would
terminate to her advantage, was now ready to break
out with all the violence of civil war. They were
encouraged, too, by the appearance of a leader,
whofc high quality and pretensions entitled him to
great authority in the nation. This was the Duke
ot Chatelherault, who had rcfided for rome years in

I Haynes, 5cc. 503. See Append. No. XXVIII.
8 France,

France, and was now sent over by that court, with B o o K
a small supply of money, in hopes that the pretence V.
of the first nobleman in the kingdom would 156-'
strengthen the Queen's facion. Elizabeth had de-
tained him in England, for some months, under
various pretences, but was obliged at last to susser
him to proceed on his journey. Before his depar-
ture, Mary invested him with the high dignity of
her Lieutenant General in Scotland, together with Feb. 15.
the fantastic title of 'her adopted father.

THE Regent did not give him time to form his His v;o-

party intoany regular body. Heaffembled anarmy, ru beaks
with his usual expedition, and marched to Glasgow. her party.
The followers of Argyll and Huntly, who cornm-
posed the chief part of the-Queen's facion, lying
in very distant 'corners of the kingdom, and many
of the Duke's dependants having fallen, or having
been taken in the battle of Langfide, the Ipirit and
strength of his adherents was totally broken, and
an accommodation with the Regent was the only
thing which could prevent the destruction of his
estate and vassals. This was effected without diffi-
culty; and on no unrealonable terms. The Duke
promired to acknowledge the authority both of the
King and of the Regent; and to claim no jurif-
diction in consequence of the commission, which
he had received from the Queen. The Regent
bound himself to repeal the a& which had passed
for attainting several of the Queen's adherents; to
reltore all who would submit to the King's govern-
ment, to the poffeflon of their eftares and honours;
and to hold a Convention, wherein all the d:inrcnccs

between

B o o it between the two parties should be fettled by mutual

V. consent. The Duke gave hostages for his faithful
1569 performance of the treaty; and, in token oftheirfin.

cerity, he and Lord Herreis accompanied the Regent
to Stirling, and visited the young King. The Re.
gent fct at liberty the priboners taken at Langfide.

ARGYLL and Huntly refused to be included in

this treaty. A secret negociation was carrying on,
in England, in favour of the captive Queen, with
so much success, that her affairs began to wear a
better aspec, and her return into her own kingdom
seemed to be an event not very diltant. The French
King had lately obtained such advantages over the
_H-ugonots, that the extinction of that party appear-
ed to be inevitable, and France, by recovering do-
meftic tranquillity, would be no longer prevented
from protecting her friends in Britain. Thee cir-
cumfiances not only influenced Argyll and Huntly,
but made lb deep an impression on the Duke, that
he appeared to be wavering and irresolute, and
plainly dilcovered that he wished to evade the ac-
complifilnent of the treaty. The Regent saw the
danger of allowing the Duke to shake himfelfloofe,
in this manner, from his engagements; and instant-
ly fornied a rebolution equally bold, and politic.
HIe commanlded his guards to seize Chatelherault in
his own houle in Edinburgh, whither he had come,
inorder to attend the Convention agreed upon; an:,
rea.irilels either of his dignity as the firfl nobleman
in the kingdom, and next heir to the Crown, or of
the promilcs of pcrlbnal kccurity, on which he had

Cabbala, 16i. Crwvf. N1em. 105.

relied,

relied, committed him and Lord Herries prisoners B o oK
to the castle of Edinburgh *. A blow so fatal and V.
unexpetaed, dilpirited the party. Argyll submitted 5i59
to the King's government, and made his peace with April 16.
the Regent, on very easy terms; and Huntly, be-
ing left alone, was at last obliged to lay down his
arms.

SOON after, Lord Boyd returned into Scotland, J^UYr z
and brought letters to the Regent, both from the in favo,"

~~~~~~~~~~0 0 ' of Mjry

English and Scottish Queens. A Convention was rcjeaed.
held at Perth, in order to confider them. Eliza-
beth's letter contained three different proposals with
regard to Mary; that flhe should either be restored
to the full possession of her former authority; or be
admitted to reignjointlywith theKing her son; or at
least be allowed to reside in Scotland, in some decent
retirement, without any hare in the administration
of government. These overtures were extorted by
the importunity of Fenelon the French ambassador,
and have some appearance of being favourable to
the captive Queen. They were, however, perfectly
suitable to Elizabeth's general system with regard to
Scottish affairs. Among propositions so unequal
and disproportionate, Ihe easily saw where the choice
would fall. The two former were rejeted; and
long delays must necessarily have intervened, and
many difficulties have arisen, before every circam-
fiance relative to the last could be finally adjusted t.

t Crawf. Mein. xi . Melv. 202.
1 Spotfw. 230.
VO LI. K k MAR Y,

B o O K MARY, in her letter, demanded that her marri-

V. age with Bothwell fiould be reviewed by the pro-
1560. per judges, and if found invalid, should be dilf

solved by a legal ientence of divorce. This fatal
marriage was the principal source of all the cala-
mities she had endured two years; a divorce was
the only thing which could repair the injuries, her
reputation had lufflred by that ftep. It was her in.
terelt to have proposed it early; and it is not eal,
to account for her long lilence with relpect to this

N'orfolk' point. Her particular motive for proposing it, at
scheme for
marrrving this time, began to be so well known, that the
the Queen
of ScoCs, demand was rejected by the Convention of cftates.

They imputed it not io much to any abhorrence of
BothwJll, as to her eagerness to conclude a mar-
riage With the Duke of Norfolk.

THls marriage was the objea of that secret ne-

gociation in England, which we have already men-
tioned ; but, like all those concerted for the relief
of the Queen of Scots, it ended tragically. The
fertile and projecting genius of Maitland first con-
ceived this scheme. During the conference at York,
he communicated it to the Duke himself, and to
the Bishop of Ross. The former readily closed
with a Icheme, lo flattering to his ambition. The
latter conlidcrcd it as a probable device for reftor-
ing his MIiilrefs to liberty, and replacing her on
her throne. Nor was Mary, with whom Norfolk
held a correspondence, by means of his filler Lady
Scroop, averie from a measure, which would have
reltored her to her kingdom, with lo much fplen-

dour.

dour*. The sudden removal of the conference from B o o K
York to Wefminfter suspended, but did not break V.
off this intrigue. Maitland and Ro's were till he 569.
Duke's prompters, and his agents; and many let-
ters and love tokens were exchanged between hini
and the Queen of Scots,

BuT as he could not hope, that under an admi- Conceals it

nitiration so vigilant as Elizabeth's, such an intrigue ,ozbeth.1
could be kept long concealed, he attempted to de-
ceive her by the appearance ofopennefs and candour,
an artifice which fcldom fails of success. He men-
tioned to her the rumour, which was spread of his
marriage with the Scottifhl ueen; he complained
of it as a groundlcfs calumny; and difclaimied all
thoughts of that kind, with many expressions full
or contempt, both for Mary's charater, and domi-
nions. Jealous as Elizabeth was of every thing re-
lative to the Queen of Scots, flie teems to have cre-
dited these profefiions t-. But, initead of difconti-
nuing the negociation, he renewed it with greater
vigour, and admitted into it new associates. Among
these was the Regent of Scotland. He had given
great offence to Norfolk, by his public accusation
of the Qujeen, in breach of the concert into which
he had entered at York. He was then ready to re-
turn into Scotland. The influence of the Duke, in
the North of England, was great. The Earls of
Northumberland and Westmorland, the most
powerful noblemen in that part of the kingdom,

* Camd. 419. Haynes, 573. State Trials, 1, 73.
t Hayncs, 574. State Trials, 1. 79, 80.

K k 2 threat-

B o o K threatened to revenge upon the Regent, the injuries

'. 'which he had done his Sovereign. In order to fe-
1569. cure his fate retreat, he addrelied himself to Nor-

folk, and after obme apology for his past conduct,
he insinuated that the Duke's scheme of marrying
the Qleen his filer was no less acceptable to him,
than beneficial to b)thkingdoms; and that he would
conctr with the utmolt ardour, in promoting so de.
firablte an event *. Norfolk heard him with the cre.
dulire, natural to thole, who are paflionately bent
upon any delign. He wrote to the two Earls to
defiit from any hostile attempt againift Mrray, and
to that he owed his palfage through the Northern
counties, wi:hiout dilturbance.

Can; the EXCOURACGED by his luccefs in gaining the Re-

.t F:: ilh ygent, he next attempted to draw the Englilh nobles
no"";'s to approve his design. The nation began to despair

of Elizabeth's marrying. Her jealousy kept the
question with regard to the right of fucceflion un-
decided. The memory of the civil wars, which
had desolated England for more than a century, on
account of the disputed titles of the houses of York
and Lancaster, was fiill recent. Almost the whole
ancient nobility had perilhed, and the nation itlelf
had been brought to the brink of deftruAtion, in
that unhappy contest. The Scottish Queen, though
her right of fuccefion was generally held to be un-
doubted, might meet with formidable competitors.
She might marry a foreign and a Popish Prince,
and bring both liberty and religion into danger.

Anders. iii. 34.

But,

But, by marrying her to an Englishman, a zealous B oo K
Proteflant, the molt powerful and moR universally V.
beloved of all the nobles, an effe&ual remedy seem. ,
cd to be provided againit all there evils. The greater
part of the Peers, either direftly, or tacitly, ap-
proved of it, as a salutary projec. The Earls of
Arundel, Pembroke, Leicester, and Lord Lumley,
subscribed a letter to the Scottish Queen, written
with Leicester's hand, in which they warmly re-
commended the match, but insisted, by way of
preliminary, on Mary's promifc, that she should at-
tempt nothing, in consequence of her pretensions to
the English Crown, prejudicial to Elizabeth or to
her posterity ; that Ihe should content to a league
offensive and defensive between the two kingdoms;
that she should confirm the pretsnt establishment of
religion in Scotland; aiid receive into favour such
of her subjects as had appeared in arms against her.
Upon her agreeing to the marriage, and ratifying
these articles, they engaged that the English nobles
would not only concur in restoring her, immediate-
ly, to her own throne, but in securing to her that
of England, in reversion. Mary readily contented
to all there proposals, except the second, with re-
gard to which she demanded tome time for consult-
ing her ancient ally the French King *.

THE whole of this negociation was indultriouly

concealed from Elizabeth. Her jealousy of the
Scottish Queen was well known, nor could it be ex-
pected, that she would willingly come into a nica.

' Andarf. vol. iii. 51. Camd. 420.

K k 3 sure,

B o o rfure, which tended so visibly to save the reputation,

V. and to increase the power of her rival. But, in a

ó.
6 matter of so much consequence to the nation, the
~r569.

taking a few lteps without her knowledge; could
scarce be reckoned criminal; and while every per-
son concerned, even Mary and Norfolk themselves,
declared, that nothing should be concluded without
obtaining her content, the duty and allegiance of
fubje£cs Icerned to be fully preserved. The greater
part of the nobles regarded the matter in this light,
Those who conducted the intrigue, had farther and
more dangerous views. They saw the advantages
which Mary procured by this treaty, to be prefer,:
and certain; and the execution of the promises
which fie came under, to be distant and uncertain.
They had early communicated their scheme to ctl
Kings of France and Spain, and obtained their ap-
probation *. A treaty concerning which they con.
fulted foreign Princes, while they concealed it fromi
their own Sovereign, could not be deemed innocent.
They hoped, however, that the union of so man!
nobles would render it neceflary for Elizabeth to
comply; they flattered themselves, that a combina-
tion so itrong would be altogether irrefifLible ; and
such was their confidence of success, that when a
plan was concerted, in the North of England, for
rescuing Mary out of the hands of her keepers,
Norfolk, who was afraid that if file recovered her
liberty, her sentiments in his favour might change,
used all his interest to dissuade the conspirators from
attempting it t.

' Anders. vol. iii. 6,. t Camd. 420.

IN

IN this situation did the affair remain, when Lord B o o K

Boyd arrived from England; and, besides the let- V.
ters which he produced publickly, brought others z569
in cyphers from Norfolk and Throgmorton to the
Regent, and to Maitland. These were full of the
most sanguine hopes. The whole nobles of Eng-
land concurred, said they, in favouring the design.
Every preliminary was adjusted; nor was it polible
that a scheme so deep laid, conduEted with so much
art, and Supported both by power and by numbers,
could miscarry, or be defeated in the execution.
Nothing now was wanting, but the concluding ce-
remony. It depended on the Regent to halten that,
by procuring a sentence of divorce, which would
iemove the only obstacle that stood in the way.
This was expected of him, in confcquence of his
promise to Norfolk; and if he regarded either his
interest or his fame, or even his safety, he would
not fail to fulfil there engagements *.

BUT the Regent was now in very different cir-

cumifances, from those which had formerly induced
him to asset an approbation of Norfolk's schemes.
He saw that the downfal of his own power mult be
the first consequence of the Duke's fucceis. And
if the Queen, who confdered him as the chief au-
thor of all her misfortunes, should recover her an-
cient authority, he could never expe& favour, nor
Scarce hope for impunity. No wonder he declined
g siep so fatal to himself, and which would have

* Hayncs, so0. Spotfw. z30. Sec Appendis, No. ;XXIX.

Kk 4 efta

B o o K eftablilhied the grandeur of another on the ruins of

V. his own. This refusal occasioned a delay. But, as
i569. every other circumstance was fettled, the Bilhop of

Ross, in name of his Mistress, and the Duke, in
person, declared, in presence of the French Ambaf-
fador, their mutual consent to the marriage, and a
contract to this purpose was signed, and intrllted
to the keeping of the Ambalfador *.

EAugu h3 THE intrigue was now in so many hands, that
difco.ers it could not long remain a secret. It began to be
the Duke's
design, and whispered at court; and Elizabeth calling the Duke
defcats it.

into her presence, expressed the utmost indignation
at his condu&, and charged him to lay alide all
thoughts of prosecuting Iuch a dangerous design.
Soon after Leicester, who perhaps had counte-
nanced the projeEt with no other intention, revealed
the whole circumstances of it to the Queen. Pem-
broke, Arundel, Lumlcy, and Throgmorton were
confined and examined. Mary was watched more
narrowly than ever; and Hastings Earl of Hun.
tingdon, who pretended to dispute with the Scot-
tifh Queen, her right to the fucceflion, being joined
in commiflion with Shrewsbury, rendered her im-
prifonment more intolerable, by the excess of his
vigilance and rigour t. The Scottifl Regent,
threatened with Elizabeth's displeasure, meanly be-
trayed the Duke; put his letters into her hands;
and furnished all the intelligence in his power:.
The Duke himself retired first to Howard-houfe,

* Carte, vol. iii. 436. t Haynes, 525, 526. 53v. 532.
+ See Append. No. XXXY.

and

and then, in contempt of the summons, to appear B o o K
before the Privy Council, fled to his feat in Norfolk. V.
Intimidated by the imprisonment of his associates; .~
coldly received by his friends in that county; un-
prepared for a rebellion; and unwilling perhaps to
rebel; he hesitated for some days, and at last obeyed
a second call, and repaired to Windsor. He was oa. 3.
first kept as a prisoner in a private house, and then
sent to the Tower. After being confined there up-
w.rids of nine months, he was relealed upon his
humble submission to Elizabeth, giving her a pro-
nife, on his allegiance, to hold no farther corre-
fpondence with the Scottish Queen *. During the
progress of Norfolk's negociations, the Queen's
partisans in Scotland, who made no doubt of their
ifnfing in her restoration to the throne, with an in-
crease of authority, were wonderfully elevated.
Maitlan.d was the foul of that party, and the per- Maitland

impriioned

son, whose activity and ability the Regent chiefly by the
dreaded. He had laid the plan of that intrigue, Reget.
which had kindled such combustion in England.
He continued to foment the spirit of difaffction in
Scotland, and had seduced from the Regent Lord
Home, Kirkaldy, and several of his former affoci-
ates. While he enjoyed liberty, the Regent could
not reckon his own power secure. For this reason he
employed Captain Crawfurd, one of his creatures,
to accuse him of being accessory to the murder of
the King; and under that pretence carried him a
prisoner to Edinburgh. He would soon have been
brought to trial, but was saved by the friendship of

' Hayncs, 525. 597.

Kirk-

B o o K Kirkaldy, governor of the castle, who, by pretend.

V. ing a warrant for that purpose from the Regent,
1569. got him out of the hands of the person, to whose

care he was committed, and conducted him into the
castle, which, from that time, was entirely under
Maitland's command. The lots of a place of so
much importance, and the defection of a man so
eminent for military skill as Kirkaldy, brought the
Regent into some difreputation, for which, how-
ever, the fiiccefs of his ally Elizabeth abundantly
compensated.

A rscbri'iT THE intrigue carried on for restoring the Scottilh
M.ibeh by Qlcen to liberty having been discovered, and dif.
Mary's ad-
hecnts. appointed, an attempt was made, to the fame pur-

pole, by force of arms; but with no better success.
The Earls of Northumberland and Westmorland,
though little diftinguifled by their personal merit,
were two of the moil ancient and powerful of the
Englilh peers. Their eftatcs in the northern coun-
ties were great, and they poifefled that influence
over the inhabitants, which was hereditary in the
popular and martial families of Percy and of Nevil.
They were both attached to the Popish religion, and
discontented with the court, where new men, and a
new system prevailed. Ever since Mary's arrival in
England, they had warmly espoused her interelt,
and zeal for popery; opposition to the court, and
commiseration of her sufferings, had engaged them
in different plots for her relief. Notwithstanding
the vigilance of her keepers, they held a close cor-
refpondence with her, and communicated to her all

their

their designs *. They were privy to Norfolk's B o o K
schemes; but the caution with which he proceeded V.
did not suit their ardour and impetuosity. The 56
liberty of the Scottish Queen was not their sole ob-
ject. They aimed at bringing about a change in
the religion, and a revolution in the government of
the kingdom. For this reason, they solicited the
aid of the King of Spain, the avowed and zealous
patron of Popery in that age. Nothing could be
more delightful to the refllefs spirit of Philip, or
more necessary towards facilitating his schemes in
the Netherlands, than the involving England in the
confusion and miseries of a civil war. The Duke of
Alva, by his direcion, encouraged the two Earls,
and promised, so soon as they either took the field
with their forces, or surprised any place of strength,
or rescued the Queen of Scots, that he would sup-
ply them both with money, and a firong body of
troops. La Mothe, the Governor of Dunkirk, in
the difguite of a sailor, founded the ports where it
would be most proper to land. And Chiapini Vi-
telli, one of Alva's ablest officers, was diipiatched
into England, on pretence of fettling some com-
mercial differences between the two nations; but
in reality, that the rebels might be sure of a leader
of experience, as soon as they ventured to take
arms t.

TH E conduct of this negociation occasioned many D:re,,,d.
meetings and messages between the two Earls. Eli-

* Hayncs, hc. Murdin, 44. 62, &c.
t Carte, vol. iii. 489, +40. Camd. 4Z1.

zabeth

B o o K zabeth was informed of these; and though she sus-

V. pe&ed nothing of their real design, (he concluded

that they were among the number of Norfolk's
confidents. They were summoned, for this reason,
to repair to court. Conscious of guilt, and afraid of
discovery, they delayed giving obedience. A fe-
cond, and more peremptory order was issued. This
they could not decline, without ihaking off their
allegiance. And as no time was left for deliberation,
Nov . 9 they instantly ere&ed their itandard against their

Sovereign. The re-establishing the catholic religion;
the fettling the order of fucceflion to the Crown;
the defence of the ancient nobility; were the mo-
tives they alleged to justify their rebellion -. Many
of the lower people focked to them with such arms
as they could procure; and had the capacity of the
leaders been, in any degree, equal to the enterprise,
it must have loon grown to be extremely formida-
ble. Elizabeth acted with prudence and vigour; and
was servcd by her fubjedts with fidelity and ardour.
On the firil rumour of an infurreftion, Mary was
removed to Coventry, a place of strength, which
could not be taken without a regular siege; a de-
tachment of the rebels, which was sent to rescue her,
returned without success. Troops were assembled in
different pa;rts of the kingdom; as they advanced,
the malecontents retired. In their retreat their num-
bers dwindled aw;:y, and their fpirirs funk. Despair
and uncertainty whither to direct their flight, kept
together for fcnc time a small body of them among
the mountains of Northumberland; but they were

Stry)pc, vol. i. 547.

at
3

at length obliged to disperse, and the chiefs took B o o K
refuge among the Scottish borderers. The two V.
Earls, together with the Countess of Northumber- 15

I569.

land, wandering for some days in the waftes of Dcc. a.
Liddifdale, were plundered by the banditti, ex-
posed to the rigours of the season, and left defti-
tute of the necessaries of life. Westmorland was
concealed by Scot of Buccleugh and Ker of Ser-
niherft, and afterwards conveyed into the Nether-
lands. Northumberland was seized by the Regent,
who had marched with orme troops towards the
borders, to prevent any impreflion the rebels might
make on those mutinous provinces *

AMIDST so many surprising events, the affairs of Chch

the church, for two years, have almost escaped our
notice. Its General Assemblies were held regu-
larly; but no business of much importance em-
ployed their attention. As the number of the
Protestant clergy daily increased, the deficiency of
the funds, set apart for their subsistence, became
greater. Many efforts were made towards reco-
vering the ancient patrimony of the church, or at
least so much of it as was poffefled by the Popish
incumbents, a race of men, who were, now, not
only tfelefs, but burdensome to the nation. But
though the manner in which the Regent received
their addrefles and complaints, was very different
from that to which they had been accustomed, no
effectual remedy was provided; and while they
suffered intolerable oppression, and groaned under

* Cabbala, x71. Camd. 422.

extreme

B o o K extreme poverty, fair words, and liberal promises

V. were all they were able to obtain *

1570.
Elizabeth ELIZABETH now began to be weary of keeping.
give upt such a dangerous prisoner as the Scottish Queen.
RMar to the During the former year, the tranquillity of her go-

vernment had been disturbed, firit by a secret com-
bination of some of her nobles, then by the rebel.
lion of others; and she often declared, not with-
out reason, that Mary was the hidden cause of both.
Many of her own fubjeEts favoured, or pitied the
captive Queen; the Roman Catholic Princes on
the continent were warmly interested in her cause.
The detaining her any longer in England, she fore-
saw, would be rmade the pretext or occaficn of
perpetual cabals and insurrections among the for-
mer; and might expose her to the hostile attempts
of the latter. She relblved, therefore, to give up
Mary into the hands of the Regent, whose security,
no less than her own, depended on preventing her
from reafcending the throne. The negociation for
this purpose was carried some length, when it was
discovered by the vigilance of the Bishop of Ross,
who, together with the French and Spanish Am-
baffadors, remonstrated against the infamy of such
an action, and represented the surrendering the
Queen to her rebellious fubjeats, to be the fame
thing, as if Elizabeth should, by her own autho-
rity, condemn her to instant death. This procured
a delay ; and the murder of the Regent prevented
the revival of that design t.

' Cald. vol. ii. 80, &c. t Carte, vol. iii. 491. An-
derf vol. iii. 84. HA

TA.

HAMILTON of Bothwellhaugh was the person B o o K

who committed this barbarous action. He had been V.
condemned to death soon after the battle of Lang- .-.

I57o.
fide, as we have already related, and owed his life Bu he is

]*murde¢ed,

to the Regent's clemency. But part of his estate
had been bestowed upon one of the Regent's fa-
vourites, who seized his house, and turned out his
wife naked, in a cold night, into the open fields,
where, before next morning, ihe became furiously
mad. This injury made a deeper imprefflon on him
than the benefit he had received, and from that mo-
ment he vowed to be revenged upon the Regent.
Party-rage strengthened and inflamed his private re-
fentment. His kinsmen the Hamiltons applauded
the enterprise. The maxims of that age juflifice
the most desperate course he could take to obtain
vengeance. He followed the Regent for some time,
and watched for an opportunity to strike the blow.
He resolved at lafi to wait till his enemy Ihould ar-
rive at Linlithgow, through which he was to pass in
his way from Stirling to Edinburgh. He took his
stand in a wooden gallery, which had a window to-
wards the street; fprcad a feather-bed on the floor,
to hinder the noise of his feet from being heard;
hung up a black cloth behind him, that his shadow
might not be observed from without; and after all
this preparation, calmly expected the Regent's ap-
proach, who had lodged during the night in a house
not far distant. Some indiatinft information of the
danger which threatened him had been conveyed
to the Regent, and he paid so much regard to it,
that he resolved to return by the fame gate through

I which

B o o K which he had entered, and to fetch a compass round

V. the town. But as the crowd about the gate was
570c. great, and he himself unacquainted with fear, he

proceeded diredtly along the fireet; and the throng
of the people obliging him to move very slowly,
gave the affaflin time to take so true an aim, that
he shot him with a tingle bullet through the lower
part of his belly, and killed the horse of a gentle-
man who rode on his other fide. His followers in-
ftantly endeavoured to break into the house whence
the blow had come, but they found the door strong-
ly barricaded; and before it could be forced open,
Hamilton had mounted a fleet horse, which flood
ready for him at a back-paffage, and was got far
beyond their reach. The Regent died the fame
night of his wound *.
is charac. THERE is no person, in that age, about whom

historians have been more divided, or whose chara&er
has beendrawn with such opposite colours. Personal
intrepidity, military skill, sagacity and vigour in
the administration of civil affairs, are virtues, which
even his enemies allow him to have possessed, in an
eminent degree. His moral qualities are more du-
bious, and ought neither to be praised, nor cenfur-
ed, without great reserve, and many diffinftions.
In a fierce age, he wag capable of using vicory
with humanity, and of treating the vanquished with
moderation. A patron of learning, which, among
martial nobles, was either unknown or despised.
Zealous for religion, to a degree, which distinguish-

* Buchan. 385. Crawf. Mem. iz4,

ed

ed him, even at a time when professions of that B o o K
kind were not uncommon. His confidence in his V.
friends was extreme, and inferior only to his libe-
rality towards them, which knew no bounds. A 5
difnterefled passion for the liberty of his country,
prompted him to oppose the pernicious system, which
the Princes of Lorrain had obliged the Queen-mo-
ther to pursue. On Mary's return into Scotland,
he served her with a zeal and affection, to which he
sacrificed the friendship of those who were most at-
tached to his person. But, on the other hand, his
ambition was immoderate; and events happened
that opened to him vast projeEts, which allured his
enterprising genius, and led him to aEtions incon-
fiftent with the duty of a fubjeEt. His treatment
of the Queen, to whose bounty he was so much in-
debted, was unbrotherly and ungrateful. The de-
pendence on Elizabeth, under which he brought
Scotland, was disgraceful to the nation. He de-
ceived and betrayed Norfolk, with a baseness un-
worthy of a man of honour. His elevation to such
unexpected dignity, inspired him with new pafTions,
with haughtiness and reserve; and instead of his na-
tural manner, which was blunt and open, he as-
sected the arts of diflimulation and refinement.
Fond, towards the end of his life, of flattery, and
impatient of advice, his creatures, by soothing his
vanity, led him affray, while his ancient friends
flood at a distance, and predicted his approaching
fall. But, amidst the turbulence and confusion of
that factious period, he dispenscd justice with so
much impartiality, he reprcffed the licentious bor-

VOL, . L 1 derers
'04

B o o K derers with so much courage, an&deftabli(hed such

V. uncommon order and tranquillity in the country,
'*' that his administration was extremely popular, and

he was long and affe&ionately remembered among
the commons, by the name of the Good Regent.

END O THZ FIRST VOLiMEt.

( : 67
