p - -~~~~:4;

-~~ ~ ~~~~~ ~
- ---- I "I

;4~
11 ~

/- /..
-

/ /~~~-

T H1 E
THE
H S TO RY

0 F
SCOT L AND

DURING TI-IE REIGNS OF
Queen MARY, and of King JAMES VI,

TILL
His AccEssION to the Crown of ENGLAND.

WITHI A
REVIEW of the SCOTTISH HISTORY previous to that Period;

And an APPENDIX containing ORIGINAL PAPERS.

IN T WO VOL U M E S.
By W IL L I A M RO B E R T S ON, D.D.

PRINCIPAL OF THE UNIVERSITY OF EDINBURGH, 'AND

HISTORIOGRAPHIER TO H-IS MAJESTY FOR SCOTLAND.

VOLUME I.

THE TWELF TH EDITION,
WITH ALTERATIONS AND ADD ITIONS.

L O N D O N:
PRINTED FOR T. CADELL, IN THE STRAND.

M DCC XCI.

# PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION.

E Ji j4 A

T' TII E

FIRST EDIT I0 ON,
T DELIVERS this book to the world with all the difi-

. dencc and anxiety natural to an author on pub-
lifliing his sirs- performance. The time I have
employed, and thei pains I have taken, in order to
render it worthy of the public approbation, it is,
perhaps, prudent to conceal, until it be known
vwhcther that approbation flall evcr be bestowed
upon it.

Bur as I have departed, in many inflances, from

former lhiforians, as I have placcd fasts in a difteirent
igilt, and have drawn characrcrs with new colours, ]
oughIt to account for this conduc to my readers; and
to produce the evidence, on which, at the dif-ance of

A 2 two

two centuries, I presume to contradict the tefimony
of less remote, or even of contemporary hiitorians.

THE tranfadtions in Mary's reign gave rife to two

parties, which were animated againfi each other with
the fiercest political hatred, cmbittered by religious
zeal. Each of these produced historians of confider-
able merit, who adopted all their sentiments, and
defended all their ations. Truth was not the sole
objec& of these authors. Blinded by prejudices, and
heated by the part which they themselves had acted
in the fccncs they describe, they wrote an apology for
a facion, rather than the hillory of their country.
Succeeding Historians have followed these guides
almost implicitly, and have repeated their errors and
misrepresentations. But as the fame paflions which
inflamed parties in that age have descended to their
posterity; as almofl every event in Mary's reign has
become the objed of doubt or of dispute; the eager
spirit of controversy soon discovered, that without
some evidence more authentic and more impartial than
that of such Historians, none of the points in quefiion
could be decided with certainty. Records have there-
fore been searched, original papers have been pro-

duced,
l^.;. .

duced, and public archives, as well as the repositories
of private men, have been ransacked by the zeal and
curiosity of writers of different -};rties. The attention
of Cecil to collect whatever related to that period, in
which he acred so conspicuous a part, hath providced
such an immense fore of original papers foi ilhi-uraning
this part of the English and Scottifil hiitory, as are
almof: sufficient to satisfy the utmofR av-idity ol an
Antiquarian. Sir Robert Cotton (whose library is
now the property of the Public) made great and va-
luable additions to Cecil's collection; and from this
magazine, Digges, the compilers of the Cabala, An-
derfon, Keith, Haines, Sorbes, have drawn i-mol of
the papers which they have printed. No History of
Scotland, that merits any degree of attention, has
appeared since these colleions were published. By
consulting them, I have been enabled, in many in-
flances, to corre& the inaccuracies of former -ifto-
rians, to avoid their mirtakes, and to detect their
misrepresentations.

BUT many important papers have escaped the notice

of those industrious Colledors, and after all they have
produced to light, much flill remained in darkness,

5 ~ i-iunobferved

unobfcrved or unpublifced. It was my duty to
fcarch for these, and I found this unpleasant task
attended with considerable utility.

THE library of the Faculty of Advocates at Edin-

burgh, contains not only a large collection of original
papers relating to the affairs of Scotland, but copies
of others no less curious, which have been preserved
by Sir Robert Cotton, or are extant in the Public
Offices in England. Of all these the Curators of
that library were pleased to allow me the perusal.

THOUGH the Britifi Mufxzum be not yet open to

the Public, Dr. Birch, whose obliging disposition is
well known, procured me access to that noble col-
lesaion, which is worthy the magnificence of a great
and polished nation.

THAT vant and curious colledion of papers relating

to the rcign of Elizabeth, which was made by Dr.
Sorbes, and of which he published only two volumes,
having been purchased Lince his death by the Lord
Viscount Royflon, his Lordflip was so good as to
allow me the use of fourteen volumes in quarto, con-

taining

taining that part of them which is conneted with
my fubje&.

SIR Alexander Dick communicated to mc very

valuable colledion of original papers, in two large
volumes. They relate chiefly to the reign of James.
Many of them are marked with Archbishop Spotif-
wood's hand; and it appears from several paflages
in his history, that he had perused them with great
attention.

MR. Callerwood, an eminent Presbyterian Clergy-

man of the last century, compiled an liitory of Scot-
land from the beginning of the reign of James V. to
the death of James VI. in fix large volumes: wherein.
he has inserted many papers of consequence, which
are no where else to be found. This I-ficory has not
been publiflled, but a copy of it, which Rill remains
in manuscript, in the poffefion of the church of
Scotland, was put into my hands by my worthy friend
the Reverend Doctor George Wifhart, principal Clerk
of the church.

SIR David Dalrympile not only communicated to rme
dte papers whiclh Ie has colleced relating to Gowric's

conf3iracy v

cons'piracy; but, by explaining to me his sentiments
with regard to that problematical pafiage in the
Scottish hifory, has enabled me to place that tranf-
an-ion in a light which dispels much of the darkness
and confusion in which it has been hitherto involved.

MR. Goodall, though he knew my sentiments with

regard to the condu& and characer of Queen Mary
to be cxtremely different from his own, communicated
to me a volume of manuscripts in his pofiefion,
which contains a great number of valuable papers
copied from the originals in the Cottonian Library
and Paper office, by the late Reverend Mr. Crawford,
Regius Profeifor of Church Hiflory in the University
of Edinburgh. I likewise received from him the
original Register of letters kept by the Regent Lennox
during his administration.

I HAVE consulted all these papers, as far as I

thought they could be of any use towards illuslating
that period of which I write the history. With
what success I have employed them to confirml what
was already known, to ascertain what was dubious,
or to determine what was controverted, the Public
must judge.

I MIGHT

I lMIGHT cafily havc drawn, iflrom the difi7rc'nt rcpo-

fitorics to which I had accef,, as many papers as
would have rcndcced my Appendix cqual in fizc to
the mofI bulky collieioni ors ry prcdcccflors. iBut
I have fatislied myself \with publifilin; a ifew of thle
imofi curious among tlelm, to whiich I found it nc-
ceflary to appeal as vouchlers for my own veracity.
None of1 tlihci, as flr as I cal recollcC, cver appeared
in anry former collcdiion.

I HAVE. added a C/itica/ DiL'lrtfitioJz concecrn-;zi iLe

muwrtdcr of 0;,i/. C H ,j', and l ge2/i ze/ILJsJ of /he
oi/,e-;'s I'ifsc/ts /lo Bothwv..//. The facds and obferva-
tions which relate to vMary's letters, I owe to my
ifiend Mr. John Davidson, one of the Clerks to the
Signet, who hatll cexamined this point with his usual
acutencfs and indufry.

VOL. I. a

# PREFACE TO THE ELEVENTH EDITION.

P R E F A C E

TO THE

ELEVENTH EDITION°
IT is now twenty-eight years since I publifed the

Hiflory of Scotland. During that time I have

been favoured by ny friends with several remarks
upon it; and various ftridures have been made by
persons, who entertained sentiments different from
mine, with rel)ct to thle tranfaiions in the reign
of Qucen Mary. From whatever quarter information
came, in whatever mode it has been commlunicated, I
have confidcred it calmly and with attention. Wherc-
evcr I perceived that I had erred, either in relating
events, or in delineating cha-racers, I have, without
hesitation, correcld those errors. Wherever I am
satisfied that my original ideas were just and well-

6 founded,

foundlcd, I adhere to them ; and rerling upon their
conformity to evidence already produced, I enter
into no difcuifion or controversy in order to support
them. Wherever the opportunity of consulting ori-
ginal papers either in print or in manuscript, to which
I had not formerly access, has enabled me throw new
light upon any part of the I-iilcory, hlave made
alterations and additions, which, I flatter myself, will
be found to be of tome importance.

COLl.EGE OF l.l)INUIrGHC,

AIRCII 5th, 1737.

# BOOK I. Containing a Review of the SCOTTISH History previous to the death of JAMES V.

THE
H S TR Y

o F
S -C 0 T L A N L)

B O K I.
ConIl/ainig a Review of the SCO'r'iTsI-I Hif¥-oOy previozus

to the death of JAMES V.
I H- E si irfl ages of the Scottifll history are dark and fabulous. 1 o K

Nations, as well as men, arrive at maturity by degrees,

and the events, which happened during their infancy or early iatl,,h'rl'o-l
youth, cannot be recolledced, and dfcllrve not to be remember- lus u1nd ob-
ed. The gross ignorance which anciently covered all the Nortl
of Europe, the continual migrations of its inhabitants, and the
frequent and deftrutive revolutions vwhich these occasioned, render
it impoflible to give any authentic account of the origin of the
different kingdoms now eftablifled there. Every thing beyond
that fliort period to which well-attefted annals reach, is obscure;
an immense space is left for invention to occupy; each nation,
with a vanity infreparable from humaln nl.ature, hath filled that void

VOL. T. 1. ith

1 0 0 K with events calculated to dif)pay its own antiquity and lu'tre.
L------ -Iifiory, which ought to record truth and to teach wifdoom, often

ilts out -vith retailing fitions and abflrdities.

Origin of th TIlE Scots carry their pretcnfions to antiqitiy as high as any- of
S'OS'" th-eir neighlbours. Relying up1on Lunccrtain legends, and the tradi-

tions of their bards, f.ill more uncertain, they- reckon up a ferice
of kings ieveral ages before the birth of Chlriit; and give a parti-
cular detail of the occurrences wlich happened in their reigns.
But with regard to tlie Scots, as w-ell as the other noithelrn nation-,
w\e receive tle earlie:i accounis on which we can depend, not from
A.D. s. their own, but f-oi'm the Roman autihors. M\len the Romans,

under Agricola, lirft carried their arms into the northern parts of
Britain, they found it pofTefled by the Caledonians, a fierce and
warlike people; and having repu!ll;el, rather than conquered them,
they erected a firong wall between the firths of Forth and Clyde,
and there fixed the boundaries of their empire. Adrian, on ac-
count of the difficulty of defending fucl a difant frontier, con-
A. D. ,t=. traded the limits of the Roman province in Britain, by building a

Iecond wall, which ran between Newcafile and Carliflc. The
ambition of fuccceding Emperors endeavoured to recover what
Adrian had abandoned; and the country between the twvo walls was
alternately under tle dominion of the Romans,; and that of the
Caledonians. About the beginning of the fifth century, the in-
roads of the Goths and other Barbarians obliged the Romans, in
order to defend the centrc of their empire, to recal those legions
vwhich guarded the frontier provinces; and at that time they quitted
all their conquests in Britain.
A. D. 421. TIIEIR long residence in the island had polifiled, in somni degree,

the rude inhabitants, and the Britons were indebted to their inter-

course
\4V.,.

course with the Romans, for tihe art of writing, and tlhe ue of nun- B 0O
bers, without which it is iinpo!Iiblc lolng to prefcrvc the !memory

.I ..l,._:,
of pass cvents.

NORTTII BRITAIN Wvasl, th ir rctreat, left under the donin;lion

of the Scots and P'its. iThe ilrmer, who are not mincitionci1d by
any Roman author before the end of tle lourth century, w\ere prto-
bably a colony of the Cclt.e or Ciauls: Their alinity to v.hloI
appears flom their language, tihir mailnners, andl reiigiois rites;
circumfiances more decisive, with regard to the origin of nationa,
thar either fabulous traditions, or the talcs of ill-inforied and crc-
dulous Annalif-s. The Scots, if we may believe the common ac-
counts, iettled at firfl ill Ireland; alnd, extending themifelves by
degrees, landed at last on the coast: opposite to that island, and
fixed their habitations there. Fierce and bloody wars wcre, (uring
several ages, carried on between them and the Pids. At length,
Kenneth II. the iixty-ninth King of the Scots (according to their A.. 5). .
own fabulous authors) obtained a complete victory over the PiCts,
and united under one monarchy, all the country, from the wall of
Adriian, to the northern ocean. The kintgdom, enceforward, be-
came known by its preIlcit name, whiich it derived from a people
who at lirfl ifttlel there as firangers, and remained long obscure
and inconliierable.

j'lo.M this periotl tie hihLory of Scotland wSould merit some l[ifiorv of

attention, were it accompalnied with any certainty. But as our re-
mote antiqulities are involved ill the sinCe (arknefs with thole of

o 'sll:'''-

other nations, a calamity peculiar to ourtilves has thrown aimofl
an equal (blcurity over our more recent tranfictions. This was
occalioncd by the nmalicious po)licy of dwvardl I. of England. 'o -
wards the cld, ofthe thl irteenth century, this monarch called in

B 2 qucfion

B 0 I0 queltion the independence of Scotland; pretending that the king-
- dar ndom was held as a fief of the crown of .ngland, and fibjc'ced to

all the conditions of a feudal tenure. In order to elablifh his
claim, he seized the public archives, he ransacked churches and
molnafleries, and getting poecfilon, by force or fraud, of many
hiflorical monuments, which tended to prove the antiquity or free-
dolm of the kingdom, he carried some of them into England, and
commanded the reft to be burned Z. An universal oblivion of
past tranfadtions might have been the effed of this fatal event, but
rome imperfect Chronicles had escaped the rage of Edward;
foreign writers had recorded olme important fads relating to Scot-
land; and the traditions concerning recent occurrences wvere frefli
and worthy of credit. These broken fi-agments John de Fordun,
who lived in the fourteenth century, colleted with a pious industry,
and from them gleaned materinis vwilch he formed into a regular
history. His work was received by his countrymen with applause;
and, as no recourfc could be had to more ancient records, it sup-
plied the place of the authentic annals of the kingdom. It was
copied in many monasteries, and the thread of the narrative was
continued by different monks, through the subsequent reigns. In
the beginning of the sixteenth century, John Major and Hector
Boethius published their histories of Scotland, the former a fuccint
and dry writer, the latter a copious and florid one, and both equally
credulous. Not many years after, Buchanan undertook the fame
work; and if his accuracy and impartiality had been, in any de-
gree, equal to the elegance of his taste, and to the purity and vigour
of his style, his history might be placed on a level with the
most admired compositions of the ancients. But, instead of
rejecting the improbable tales of Chronicle writers, he was at the

a Innes, Efay 552.

utmoff

utmost pains to adorn them; and hath clothcd, with all the beauties B 0 0 K
and graces of filion, thlfe legends, which formerly had only its
wvldnef! and extravagance.

TH'E history of Scotland may properly be divided into four Fourl re-
ecriods. The iirft reaches from the origin of the monarchy, to .I,-;II ill

Scottilh

the reign of Kenneth II. IThe fccond fiom Kenneth's conqucif of hillory.
tlhe Picls, to the death of Alexander III. The third extends to the
death of James V. The lafl, from thence to the acccfion of
James-VI. to the crown of England.

TIHE first period is the region of pure fable and conjeature,

and ought to be totally neglcct ed, or abandoned to the industry
and credulity of antiquaries. Truth begins to dawn in the fccond
period, with a light, fccble at fritl, but gradually increasing; and
the events which then halppened may be llightly touched, but
merit no particular or laborious inquiry. In the third period, the
history of Scotland, chiefly by means of records preserved in Eng-
land, becomes more authentic: not only are events related, but
their caulfs and efflcts explained; the charadcrs of the actors
are displayed ; the manners of the age dcfcribed; the revolutions
in the conflitution pointed out: and here every Scotfinan should
begin not to read only, but to fludy the history of his country.
During the fourth period, tlhe afairs of Scotland were so mingled
with those of other nations, its ,ituation in the political state of
Europe was so important, its influence on the operations of the
neighbouring kingdoms was so visible, that its history becomes an
objeC of attention to foreigners; and without some knowledge of
the various and extraordinary revolutions which happened there,
they cannot form a just notion with refpear either to the moif

8 illuifrious

B3 00 1 illlftrious events, or to the cliaraClers of the most diftilnirtfcd
--v--- - T personages in the fi.,tccilnt ceCntury'.

.A ,'.,';..-;-.r ' TIr following iintoriy is confined to the laR. of tlihci periods:
r!c hlic'.hd. r :.

To give a view of the political slate of the kingloin during tlhat
which immediately precedecc it, is the dcfign of this prclilinalr-y-
Book. The ilpcrflfcz knowledge vhiclh flrallgers have o theic
atfi.iirs of Scotl;nid, alld the prejullices Scottfincn thciclvcs have
i:';ibed Vlwith Cregard to the various revolutions in tihe gOVCn'ilillC
of their country, render inch an introdulion equally ncccfi?,'a
!-o botlh.

'ITHE period fromI the death of Alexander III. to the death of

James VT. contains upwards of twvo centuries and a half, from the
year one tilouiand two hundred and eighty-fix, to the year one
thoLuind five hundred and forty-two.

Rf<ir ..4h- IT' opens with the famous controversy concerning the indepen-
lte;'nii1' sdcncc of Scotland. 3Bfore the union of the two kingdoms, this
llle htl)CC1'- as al queFion of mucl importance. If the one crown had been
;cltla2Il. confidered not as imperial and independent, but as feudatory to

the other, a treaty of union could not have been concluded on
equal terms, and every advantage which the dependent kingdom
procured, mufl have been deemed the conceflion of a Sovereign to
his vaflal. Accordingly, about the beginning of the present
century, and while a treaty of union between the two kingdoms was
negociating, this controversy was agitatedl wlith all the heat which
national animofities naturally infiire. VWhat was then the ftubljca
of serious concern, the union of the two kingdoms had rendered
a niatter of mere curiosity. But though the objeets which at that

time

line warmed and interi cled both nations, cxiti no longer, a queflion 1' o 0 K
swliicli appeared so monic ntous to our anuccil.ors, cannot be altogc- _--
:-1er indi'l'Cert or un'infl'ii ve to us.

SoMUin of the northlern coutic; of I. nglandt \ere carly in tle

I hands of the Scomttifl l ings, \];o, a' ilr IbaI as the fitudal cilslolns
cti ble liaced, litld tlhel i poliiliti)S tle Ki of lngland, and
did homlage to them on that a.Ccounlt. 1'ti I holllage, due onll) for the
territorics \which tlicy held in l.ng!iill, was in no wist del-ogatori
from their royal dignity. Nothlin; is Inorc lfitable to feudal ideas,
than ti tia he lame pcl Ollitild l> i 1hoth a Lord and a Vailsl,
i(depcndent in one capacity, and (detenCdc t in another '. The
Crown of iEnglanld was, v.itihot (doult, ilmpe'rial and independent,
thiougl thie Princes \vlo wore it were, tlr nalnv ages, tlhe vafiial
of tihe Kings of Francel; anld, in coIlciI(icaice of their p)oilL{fioiS
in that killndoml, 1ouilln to er.flormi all th1e erv\ies whlich a feuCdal
Sovcreign lias a title to cxaCi. Tle L i Ce was the condition of tlh
MIlonarchs of Scotland ; free and ilndependenll t as K-ings of their
own country, )but, as pollclnig lEnglili territories, valals to tieC
K}ing of lEglandll. The l.ng;lifh Monarclis, Fatitlied xith

lthcir

legal and unlcont,-overcd rights, were, during a long period,
neithier capable, nor had alny thoughts of ufurnintg more. Eng-
i!d, wlcnl conlquered l)y tlie Saxoins, bcinl divided by them into

' A verV singular proif of this occurS ill the Frenchl hiflory. Arpin fold the

vicointó oS the city liou.rcs to Philip i. v.iho dii ioiiate to the coiunt of Sancerrc for
a part of t het knds, w hi hil of that ?1obl A. . 1 Too. I believe that no
c::lnplc, of a i ig's loi il lomla c to

I orl of hlis owvn fubjci ts, is to be met with in the

historiesc itlhcrof iighnl <or S cotlaI:d. h' i hip !lcL'! aiboliflled this praclicc in France
A. 1). 302. -i',az:t A;'rge Cbr.r',::. Scn:ewhnat timilar to this, is a charter
of the Abbot of l.'clrofs, A.. a 155, co(Itititiitig James V. the Bailiff or Stew-
ard of that Abby, vcfinj il himi, ,lI the powers which pertained to that office, and
requiring him to b anvto bc t' i'c Ablbot for his excrcife of the fame. A.rchiv.

many

B 0O I0 many finall kingdons, -was in no condition to e-:tend its dnLminon
t---i--' over Scotland, united at that time undler one l o-iazrch. And

though theec petty principalities -ierc gradually formed into one
kingdoim, lte reignlilg princes, expo'd to continual invasions of
the Daines, and ofi'cn Lubjectldd to the yokle of thore formidable
pirates, feldoin turned their arms towards Scotland, and were little
able to eftablilh new rights in that country. The first Kings of the
Norman race, bufled with introducing their own laws and man-
ners into the kilngdom which they had conquered, or with main-
taining thcmfelvcs on the throne which some of them pofleffed
by a very dubious title, were as little iblicitous to acquire new
authority, or to form new pretensions in Scotland. An unexpe&-
ed calamity that besel one of the Scottish Kings first encouraged
the Englill to think of bringing llis kingdom under dependence.
William firnamed the Lion beling takeen prisoner at Alnwick,
-Henry II. as the price of his liberty, not only extorted from him
an exorbitant ransom, and a promise to surrender the places of
grcateft Ilrength in his dominions, but comp)elled him to do
homage for his whole kingdom. Richard I. a generous Prince,
solemnly renounced this claim of homage, and absolved William
fiom the hard conditions which Henry had imposed. Upon the
death of Alexander III. near a century after, Edward I. availing
himself of the situation of affairs in Scotland, acquired an influ-
ence in that kingdom which no Englifl Monarch before him ever
pofllned, and, imitating the interested policy of Henry, rather
than tle magnanimity of Richard, revived the claim of Ibvcrcignty
to which the former had pretended.

F.r * .;.o MR.MARGlARET of Norway, Grandaughter of Alexander, and heir
.n L ,lcc : to hi's crovwn, did not long lirvive him. The right of sic-

.n;;cj. ccitio belonged to the descendants of David Earl of Huntingdon,

third

,hird son of King David I. Among these, Robert Bruce, and John B 0 0 K
Baliol, two illustrious competitors for the crown, appeared. Bruce ,-- ~
was the son of Isabel, Earl David's second daughter; Baliol, the
grandson of Mv-rgaret the eldest daughter. According to the rules
of succession which are now established, the right of Baliol was
preferable, and, notwithstanding Bruce's plea of being nearer in
blood to Earl David, Baliol's claim, as the rcprcicntativc of his
mother and grandmother, would be deemed inconteflable. But in
that age, the order of fucceflion was not ascertained with the fame
precision. The question appeared to be no lcfs intricate, than it
wras important. Though the prejudices of the people, and perhaps
the laws of the kingdom, favoured Bruce, each of the rivals was
supported by a powerful fa&Eion. Arms alone, it was feared, mu:ll
terminate a dispute too weighty for the laws to decide. But, in
order to avoid the miseries of a civil war, Edward was chotfen
umpire, and both parties agreed to acquiesce in his decree. This
had well nigh proved fatal to the independence of Scotland; and
the nation, by its eagerness to guard against a civil war, was not
only exposed to that calamity, but almost iubjeded to a foreign
yoke. Edward was artful, brave, entcrprifing, and commanded a
powerful and martial people, at peace witl the whole world. The
anarchy which prevailed in Scotland, and the ambition of com-
petitors ready to sacrifice their country in order to obtain even a
dependent Crown, invited him first to feizc, and then to fubjecl
the kingdom. The authority of an umpire, which had been un-
warily bellowed upon him, and from which the Scots dreaded no
dangerous consequences, enabled him to execute his schemes with
the greater facility. Under pretence of examining the queflion
with the utmost solemnity, he summoned all the Scottifil Barons
to Norham, and having gained some, and intimidated others, he
prevailed on all who were present, not excepting Bruce and Baliol,

VOL. I. C the

B 010 li the competitors, to acknowledge Scotland to be a fief of the

'-- - ' Englifi Crown, and to swear fealty to hitn as their Sove;reign or

Lige Lord/. This ftep led to another fsill more important. As it
was vain to pronounce a sentence which lie had not power to
execute, Edward demanded pofleffion of the kingdom, that lie
might be able to deliver it to him whose right flould be found pre-
ferable ; and fitch was the pusillanimity of the nobles, and the
impatient ambition of the competitors, that both afientcd to this
firange demand, and Gilbert de Umfi-aville, Earl of Angus, was
the only man wlho refused to fiurrender the cafiles in his custody to
the enemy of his country. Edward finding Baliol the moPs obfc-
quious and the leafl formidable of the two competitors, soon after
gave judgment in his favour. Baliol once more profcefed himfell
the vaflal of England, and submitted to every condition which the
Sovereign whom lie had now acknowledged was pleased to prc-
fcribc.

EDWARD, having thus placed a creature of his own upon the

throne of Scotland, and compelled the nobles to renounce the
ancient liberties and independence of their country, had reason to
conclude that his dominion was now fully eftablified. But he
began too soon to aflume the master; his new vafials, fierce and in-
dependent, bore with impatience a yoke, to which they were not
accustomed. Provoked by his haughtiness, even the paflive
spirit of Baliol began to mutiny. But Edward, who had no longer
use for such a pageant king, forced him to resign the Crown, and
openly attempted to seize it as fallen to himself Ly the rebellion
of his vassal. At that critical period arose Sir William Wallace, a
hero, to whom the fond admiration of his countrymen hath as-
cribed many fabulous ads of prowess, though his real valour, as
well as integrity and wisdom, are such as need not the heightenings

of

of fi&ion. I-Ie, almost tingle, ventured to take arms in defence of '3 01°0 K
the kingdom, and his boldness revived the spirit of his country-
men. At last, Robert Bruce, the grandson of him who flood in
competition with Baliol, appeared to affcrt his own rights, and to
vindicate the honour of his country. The nobles, afliamcd of
their former bafcnefs, and enraged at the many indignities offlcred
to the nation, crowded to his standard. In order to crush him at
once, the Englilh Monarch entered Scotland, at the head of a
mighty army. Many battles were fought, and the Scots, though
often :anquified, were not subdued. The ardent zeal with which
the nobles contended for the independence of the kingdom, the
prudent valour of Bruce, and above all a national enthuliafin in-
-ipircd by such a caufc, bafflcd the repeated efforts of Edward, and
counterbalanced all the advantages which he derived from the
number and wealth of his fulbjcls. Though the war continued
with little intermiflion upwards of fevcnty years, Bruce and his
poftcrity kept pofeifflion of the throne of Scotland, and reigned
with an authority not inferior to that of its former Monarchs.

BUT while the sword, the ultimate judge of all difputcs between

contending nations, was employed to terminate this controversy,
neither Edward nor the Scots seemed to diflruft the justice of their
cause; and both appealed to history and records, and from there
produced, in their own favour, such evidence as they pretended to
be unanfwcrablc. The letters and memorials addressed by each
party to the Pope, who was then reverenced as the common
father, and often appealed to as the common judge of all Christian
Princes, are fill extant. The fabulous tales of the early British
history; the partial testimony of ignorant Chroniclers; filppofiti-
tious treaties and charters; are the proofs on which Edward found-
ed his title to the sovereignty of Scotland; and the homage done

C 2 by

C 0 10 1 by the Scottilh monarchs for their lands in England is prepofle-
'--v-- Iroufly supposed to imply the fubjecion of their whlole kingdomc.

Ill-founded, however, as their right was, the Englifl did not fail
to revive it, in all the subsequent quarrels between the two king-
doms; while the Scots difciairned it with the utmost indignation.
To this we mutt impute the fierce and implacable hatred to each
otler, which long inflamed both. Their national antipathies were
excited, not only by the usual circumstances of frequent holfilitics,
and reciprocal injuries; but the Englifi confidered the Scots as
vaflals who had presumed to rebel, and the Scots, in their turn,
regarded the Englill as usurpers who aimed at enslaving thci
country.

30o6. AT the time when Robert Bruce began his reign in Scotland,

kingdom the fame form of government was established in all the kingdoms
-when Bruce
hcal his 1 of Europe. This surprising similarity in their conflitution and
reign. laws demonitrates that the nations wvhich overturned the Roman

empire, and ereced these kingdoms, though divided into different
tribes, and diflinguifhcd by different names, were either derived
originally from the fame source, or had been placed in similar
situations. TWhen we take a view of the feudal fyftemi of laws and
policy, that stupendous and singular fabric ereated by them, the
first object that strikes us is the King. And when we are told that
he is the sole proprietor of all the lands within his dominions,
that all his fubjeas derive their pofTeflions from him, and in re-
turn coniecrate their lives to his service; when we hear that all
marks of diflinCion, and titles of dignity, flow from him as the
only fountain of honour; when we behold the most potent peers,
on their bended knees, and with folded hands, swearing fealty at his

Anderson's Hiiiorical Efray concerning the Independency, &c.

feet,

feet, and acknowledging him to be their Sovercisgn and their LiLge B 0o 0 K
Lord; we are apt to pronounce him a powerful, nay an abfclute _.
monarch. No concluflon, however, would be more rafll, or
worse founded. The genius of the feudal government was purely
ariftocratical. \Vith all the cnfigns of royalty, and with many
appearances of dcfpotic power, a fcudal king was the mofl limited
of all princes.

BEFORE they sallied out of their own habitations to conquer the Originof tle

world, many of the northern nations seem not to have been Itl)- Fi.'.ncgo
jcc to t(le government of kinigs d; and even where monarchlical nd itsl:rillo-

0J~~~~~~~~~~ n"~~~~~~~~~~ _cr. atical ge-

government was estab)lished, the Prince poflcflcd but little authlc- .ius.
rity. A General rather than a King, his military command was
extenfivc, his civil jurifdiaion almo{t nothing c. The army whlich
he led was not composed of toldiers, who could be compelled to
fcrvc, but of fich as voluntarily followed lis fl-andard '. Trhefl
conquered not for their leader, but for tlhmc nllvcs; and lcin-
free in their own country, renounced not their liberty when they
acquired new settlements. They did not exterminate the ancicnt
inhabitants of the countrics which they ftbdued, Ibut seizing the
greater part of their lands, they took their pcrfons under protc&ion.
The difficulty of maintaining a new conqucft, as well as the danigcr
of being attacked by new invaders, rendering it ncceffary to be
always in a posture of defence, the form of government which they
citablifledl was altogether military, and nearly resemblcd tlat to
which they had been accuflomed in their native country. Their
Gcneral still continuing to be the head of the colony, part of the
conquered lands were allotted to him ; the remainder, under the
name of benqizcia orfiefs, was divided amongst his principal of-
ficers. As the common safety required tlat these officers should,

' Cxf. lib.vi. c. 23. c Tacit, de Mor. Germ. c. 7. 1I. ' Csr. ibid.

uC.oid

B o o K upon all occasions, be ready to appear in arms, for the common
_ -_ defence, and should continue obedient to their General, they

bound themselves to take the field, when called, and to serve him
with a number of men, in proportion to the extent of their ter-
ritory. These great officers again parcelled out their lands among
their followers, and. annexed the fame condition to the grant. A
feudal kingdom was properly the encampment of a great army;
military ideas predominated, military subordination was efta-
bliflhed, and the possesSion of land was the pay which soldiers re-
ceived for their personal fcrvice. In consequence of these notions,
the pofieflion of land was granted during pleasure only, and Kings
were elective. In other words, an officer disagreeable to his Ge-
neral was deprived of his pay, and the person who was most
capable of conduciing an army was chosen to command it. Such
were the firfl rudiments, or infancy of feudal government.

BUT long before the beginning of the fourteenth century, the

feudal fyfltcmi had undergone many changes, of which the fol-
lowing were the most considerable. Kings, formerly eleaive, were
then hereditary; and fiefs, granted at first during pleasure, de-
icendcd from father to son, and were become perpetual. These
changes, not less advantageous to the nobles than to the prince,
made no alteration in the ariftocratical spirit of the feudal confti-

General tution. The king, who at a distance seemed to be invested with
c:aufLs vwhich
limnited the majefly and power, appears, on a nearer view, to possess almost
po,,er of the
'tlllal oio- none of those advantages which bestow on monarchs their gran-
narchs. deur and authority. His revenues were scanty; he had not a

standing army; and the jurifdidion he poifeffed was circumscribed
within very narrow limits.

Their revc- AT a time when pomp and splendor were little known, even
nues were
Imall. in the palaces of kings; when the officers of the crown received

" I scarcely

scarcely any salary besides the fees and perquisites of their office; B o

0 K

vwhen embaflies to foreign courts were rare; when armies were -
composed of soldiers who fcrved witlout pay; it was not ncceflary
that a king flould pofieTs a great revenue; nor did the condition
of Europe, in those ages, allow its princes to be opulent. Com-
merce made little progress in the kingdoms where the feudal go-
vernment was eftablilhed. Institutions, which had no other obje&c
but to inspire a martial spirit, to train men to be soldiers, and to
make arms the only honourable profeflion, naturally dilfouraged
the commercial arts. The revenues, arising from the taxes im-
posed on the different branches of commerce, were by confrc-
quence inconsiderable; and the prince's trcafury received little
supply, from a source, which, among a trading people, flows with
such abundance, and is almost inexhaustible. A fixed tax was
not levied even on land; such a burthen woulld have appeared
intolerable to men who received their cfates as the reward of
their valour, and who confidered their service in the field as a full
retribution for what they possessed. The king's ilchfi(ics, or the
portion of land which he fill retained in his own hands unalien-
ated, furnifhled fubfiflence to his court, and defrayed the ordinary
expence of government g. The only stated taxes which the feudal
law obliged vassals to pay to the king, or to those of whom they
held their lands, were three; one when his eldefi ton was made
a knight ; another when his eldest daughter was married ; and a
third in order to ranfomn him if he fiould happen to be taken
prisoner. Besides these, the king received the feudal casualties of
the ward, marriage, &c. of his own vafials. And, on romne extra-
ordinary occasions, his subjects granted him an aid, which they
diftinguifed by the name of a be;icvolezce, in order to declare
that he received it not in consequence of any right, but as a gift,

r Craig de Feud. lib. i. Dicg. 14. Du Cange Glof.; voc. Dominicum.

flowing

OOI 0 K flowing from their good willh. All these added together, pro-
_- ---' duced a revenue, so scanty and precarious as naturally incited a

feudal Inonarch to aim at diminishing the exorbitant power and
wealth of the nobility, but instead of enabling him to carry on
his fchlcmes with full cffect, kept him in continual indigence,
anxiety, and dependence.

They hnd NOR could the king supply the defea of his revenues, by the
no ltanding
armies. terror of his arms. Mercenary troops and flanding armies were

unknown, as long as the feudal government subsistcd in vigour.
Europe was peopled with soldiers. The vassals of the king, and
the fub-vafials of the barons, were all obliged to carry arms.
\Vhile the poverty of princes ipl .:red them from fortifying
their frontier towns, whliile a campaign continued but a few weeks,
and while a fierce and impetuous courage was impatient to bring
every quarrel to the decision of a battle, an army, without pay
and with little discipline, was fuflicient for all the purposes both of
the security and of the glory of the nation. Such an army, how-
ever, far from being an engine at the king's disposal, was often
no less formidable to him, than to his enemies. The more war-
like any people were, the more independent they became; and
the fame persons being both soldiers and fubjeds, civil privileges
and immunities were the consequence of their victories, and the
reward of their martial exploits. Conquerors, whom mercenary
armies, under our present forms of government, often render the
tyrants of their own people, as well as the scourges of mankind,
were commonly, under the feudal conflitution, the most indulgent
of all princes to their subjects, because they flood most in need
of their aftfiance. A prince, whom even war and vitories did
not render the master of his own army, possessed hardly any

h Du Cange, voc. Auxilium.

hladow

shadow of military power during times of peace. I-Is disbanded c o0o X
soldiers mingled with his other fubjeas; not a tingle man received -_-.
pay from him; many ages elapsed even before a guard \wass ap-
pointed to defend his person; and destitute of that great inflru-
ment of dominion, a ifanding army, the authority of the king
continued always feeble, and was often contemptible.

NOR were these the only circumflances which contributed to- Their jurlf-

wards depressing the regal power. By the feudal fyftcm, as has di.tiou wia
been already observed, the king's judicial authority was extremely
circumscribed. At firfi, princes seem to have been the supreme
judges of their people, and, in person, heard and determined all
controversies among them. The multiplicity of causes soon made
it necessary to appoint judges, who, in the king's name, decided
matters that belonged to the royal jurifdiaion. But the Barba-
rians, who over-ran Europe, having detfroyed most of the great
cities, and the countries which they seized being cantoned out
among powerful chiefs, who were blindly followed by numerous
dependants, whom, in return, they were bound to protea from
every injury; the administration of juflice was greatly interrupted,
and the execution of any legal sentence became almofi impracicable.
Theft, rapine, murder, and disorder of' all kinds, prevailed in every
kingdom of Europe, to a degree almost incredible, and scarce com-
patible with the fubfifence of civil focicty. Every offender fhel-
tered himself under the protection of some powerful chieftain,
who screened him from the pursuits of juflice. To apprehend,
and to punish a criminal, often required the union and effort of
half a kingdom i. In order to remedy there evils, many persons

of

A remarkable iriftance of this occurs in the following hiflory, so late as the

year one thousand five hundred and fixty-one. Mary, having appointed a court of
justice to be held on the borders, the inhabitants of no less than eleven counties

VOL. I. D were

B 0o oK of diftinlion were entrusted with the administration of justice
----- ' within their own territories. But what we may presume was, at

first, only a temporary grant, or a personal privilege, the incroach-
ing spirit of the nobles gradually converted into a right, and ren-
dered hereditary. The lands of some were, in process of time,
erected into Baronoies, those of others into Regalities. The jurif-
diaion of the former was extensive; that of the latter, as the
name implies, royal, and almost unbounded. All causes, whether
civil or criminal, were tried by judges, whom the lord of the
regality appointed; and if the king's courts called any person
within his territory before them, the lord of regality might put
a flop to their proceedings, and by the privilege of replrnizsgg, re-
move the cause to his own court, and even punish his vafatl, if
he fiiubmittd to a foreign jurisdiction ". Thus almost every question,
in which any person who resided on the lands of the nobles was
interefled, being determined by judges appointed by the nobles
thcimfelves, their vaifals were hardly sensible of being, in any
degree, fubje to the crown. A feudal kingdom was split into

were fuimmoned to guard the person, who was to aCt as judge, and to enable him
to enforce his decisions. The words of a proclamation, which afford such a con-
vincing proof of the fceblenefs of the feudal government, deserve our notice.-
" And because it is necessary for the execution of her Highness' commandments
and service, that her justice be well accompanied, and her authority sufficiently
fortified, by the concurrence of a good power of her faithful fubjects--Therefore
commands and charges all and sundry Earls, Lords, Barons, Freeholders, Landed-
men, and other Gentlemen, dwelling within the said counties, that they, and every
one of them, with their kin, friends, servants, and houfehold-men, well bodin in
feir of war in the moi fubftantious manner [i. e. completely armed and provided],
and with twenty days victuals to meet and to pass forward with him to the borough
of Jedburgh, and there to remain during the said space of twenty days, and to receive
such direction and commands, as shall be given by him to them in our Sovereign
Lady's name, for quietness of the country; and to put the fame in execution under
the pain of losing their life, lands, and goods." Keith's Hist. of Scotland, 198.

Craig, lib. iii. Dieg. 7.

many

many small principalities, almost independent, and held together B o0 K
by a feeble and commonly an imperceptible bond of union. The ,-
king was not only firipped of the authority annexed to the person
of a supreme judge, but his revenue suffered no finall diminution,
by the loss of those pecuniary emoluments, which were, in that
age, due to the person who administered juflicc.

IN the fame proportion that the king funk in power, the nobles

rose towards independence. Not satisfied with having obtained a
hereditary right to their fiefs, which they formerly held during
pleasure, their ambition aimed at fomcthing bolder, and by intro-
ducing entails, endeavoured, as far as human ingenuity and in-
vention can reach that end, to render their pofleffions unalienable
and everlasting. As they had full power to add to the inherit-
ance tranfinitted to them from their anccflors, but none to diminill
it; time alone, by means of marriages, legacies, and other acci-
dents, brought continual acceflions of wealth and of dignity; a
great family, like a river, became considerable from the length
of its course, and as it rolled on, new honours and new property
flowed fucceflively into it. Whatever influence is derived from
titles of honour, the feudal barons likewise pofieffed in an ample
manner. These marks of diftinlion are, in their own nature,
either official or personal, and being annexed to a particular
charge, or bestowed by the admiration of mankind upon illus-
trious characters, ought to be appropriated to these. But the son,
however unworthy, could not bear to be stripped of that appella-
tion by which his father had been diftinguifked. His prefump-
tion claimed, what his virtue did not merit; titles of honour be-
came hereditary, and added new lustre to nobles already in pol-
feflon of too much power. Something more audacious and more
extravagant fdill remained. The supreme direction of all affairs,

D 2 both

B 0 K ) both civil and military, being committed to the great officers of
3-t the crown, the fame and safety of princes, as well as of their

people, depended upon the fidelity and abilities of these officers.
lBut such was the preposterous ambition of the nobles, and so fuc-
cefsful even in their wildest attempts to aggrandize themselves,
that in all the kingdoms where the feudal institutions prevailed,
imoi of the chief offlces of slate were annexed to great families,
and held, like fiefs, by hereditary right. A person whose undu-
tifil behaviour rendered him odious to his prince, or whose inca-
pacity expoicd him to the contempt of the people, often held a
place of power and trust of the greatest importance to both. In
Scotland, the offices of Lord Jultice General, Great Chamber-
lain, High Steward, High Conflable, Earl Marshal, and I-igh
Admiral, were all hereditary; and in many counties, the office
of Sheriff was held in the fame manner.

NOBLES, whose property was so extensive, and whose power

was so great, could not fail of being turbulent and formidable.
Nor did they want instruments for executing their boldest designs.
That portion of their lands, which they parcelled out among
their followers, supplied them with a numerous band of faithful
and determined vassals; while that which they retained in their
own hands, enabled them to live with a princely splendor. The
great hall of an ambitious baron was often more crowded than
the court of his sovereign. The strong castles in which they
resided, afforded a secure retreat to the discontented and seditious.
A great part of their revenue was spent upon multitudes of indi-
gent, but bold retainers. And if at any time they left their re-
treat to appear in the court of their sovereign, they were accom-
panied, even in times of peace, with a vast train of armed fol-
lowers. The usual retinue of'William the sixth Earl of Douglas

consisted

consisted of two thousand horse. Those of the other nobles were B 0 0 i'
magnificent and formidable in proportion. Impatient of fubor- -,--
dination, and forgetting their proper rank, tich potent and
haughty barons were the rivals, rather than the fllljeds, of their
prince. They oftcn despised his orders, inifltcd his person, and
wrcftcd from him his crown. The history of Europe, during
several ages, contains little else but the accounts of the wars and
revolutions occasioned by their exorbitant ambition,

BUT, if the authority of the barons far exceedcd its proper 'IThirpower

bounds in the other nations of Europe, we may affirm tlhat the bgreater
balance which ought to be prcferved between a king and'his nobles thla il; any
was almost entireiy loft in Scotland. The Scottish nobles enjoyed, don-.
in common with those of other nations, all the means for cxtending
their authority which arise from the ariftocratical genius of the
feudal government. Belides thcfe, they poflenficd advantages pe-
culiar to themselves: the accidental lourccs of their power were
considerable; and singular circumstances concurred with the iiirit
of the conflitution to aggrandize them. To enumerate the mofl The parti-

cular caulcs

remarkable of thefc, will fcrve both to explain the political slate of this.
of the kingdom, and to illufirate many important occurrences
in the period now under our review.

I. TIEI nature of their country was one cause of the power The nature
and independence of the Scottish nobility. Level and open coun- .C' tl,e

country.

tries are formed for servitude. The authority of the Ifprcme
magistrate reaches with ease to the most distant corners ; and when
nature has ereced no barrier, and affords no retreat, the guilty or
obnoxious are loon detected and puniflied. Mountains, and fens,
and rivers, fct bounds to despotic power, and amidst there is the
natural feat of freedom and independence. In such places did the

i Scottitlf

B 01 0 K Scottilh nobles usually fix their residence. By retiring to his own
---- --i castle, a mutinous baron could defy the power of his sovereign,

it being almost inpracticable to lead an army, through a barren
country, to places of difficult access to a ingle man. The fame
causes which checked the progress of the Roman arms, and ren-
dered all the efforts of Edward I. abortive, often protected the
Scottish nobles from the vengeance of their prince; and they owed
their perbsnal independence to those very mountains and marshes
which saved their country from being conquered.

Tie 'imall II. TIIE want of great cities in Scotland contributed not a little
number of
great cities. to increase the power of the nobility, and to weaken that of the

prince. Wherever numbers of men assemble together, order muff
be established, and a regular form of government instituted; the
authority of the magistrate muff be recognized, and his decifio-ls
meet with prompt and full obedience. Laws and subordination
take rife in cities; and where there are few cities as in Poland,
or none as in Tartary, there are few or no traces of a well-arranged
police. But under the feudal governments, commerce, the chief
means of aflembling mankind, was negleced; the nobles, in order
to ftrengthcn their influence over their vafials, resided among
them, and seldom appeared at court, where they found a superior,
or dwelt in cities, where they met with equals. In Scotland, the
fertile counties in the South lying open to the Englilh, no town
situated there could rife to be great or populous amidst continual
inroads and alarms: the residence of our monarchs was not fixed
to any particular place; many parts of the country were barren
and uncultivated; and in consequence of there peculiar circum-
frances, added to the general causes flowing from the nature of
.the feudal inflitutions, the towns in Scotland were extremely few,
and very inconsiderable. The vassals of every baron occupied a
.diftinC portion of the kingdom, and formed a separate and almost

independent

independent society. Instead of giving aid towards reducing to B 0 0

° 1

obedience their seditious chieftain, or any whom he took under his _
protection, they were all in arms for his defence, and obftruQed
the operations of juitice to the utmost. The prince was obliged to
connive at criminals whom lie could not reach ; the nobles, con-
fcious of this advantage, were not afraid to offend; and the difli-
culty of punifhingt almost assured them of impunity.

III. THiE division of the country into clans had no finall cffcc The ifnitu.

tion ts

in rendering the nobles considerable. The nations which over- clans.
ran Europe were originally divided into many small tribes ; and
when they came to parcel out the lands which they had conquered,
it was natural for every chieftain to bestow a portion, in the firti
place, upon those of his own tribe or family. Theie all held
their lands of him ; and as the safety of each individual ldelpctlccd
on the general union, thcie finall societies clung together, and
were distinguished by tome common appellation, either patrony-
mical or local, long before the introduLd'ion of i;Lr-namcs, or c'-
figs armorial. But when there became common, the dcicclndaiits
and relations of every chieftain assumed the fame name and arms
with him; other vafiils were proud to imitate their example,
and by degrees they were communicated to all those who held of
the fame superior. Thus clanhiips were formed; and in a ge-
neration or two, that consanguinity, which was at first in a great
measure imaginary, was believed to be real. An artificial union
was converted into a natural one; men willingly followed a leader
whom they regarded both as the funerior of their lands and the
chief of their blood, and served him not only with the fidelity of
vaflals, but with the afiecion of fiiends. In the other feudal king-l
doms we may observe such unions as we have described imperfctly
formed; but in Scotland, whether they were the produltion of

chance)

B 0o 0 chance, or the effec of policy, or introduced by the Irish colony
t_-<-- above mentioned, ald firengthened by carefully preserving their

genealogies both genuine and fabulous, clanfhips were universal.
Such a confederacy might be overcome, it could not be broken; and
no change of manners, or of government, has been able, in some
parts of the kingdom, to dissolve associations which are founded
upon prejudices so natural to the human mind. How formidable
were nobles at the head of followers, who, counting that cause
jufi and honourable which their chief approved, rushed into the
field at his command, ever ready to sacrifice their lives in defence
of his person or of his fame ? Against such men a king con-
tended with great disadvantage; and that cold service which
money purchaics, or authority extorts, was not an equal match
for their ardour and zeal.

hc fInail lrIV. THE smallness of their number may be mentioned among
number of
tle nobles. the caufcs of the grandeur of the Scottish nobles. Our annals

reach not back to the first division of property in the kingdom;
but so far as we can trace the matter, the original poffeflions of
the nobles seem to have been extcnfive. The ancient Thanes
were the equals and the rivals of their prince. Many of the
earls and barons who succeedcd them, were matters of territories
no lces ample. France and England, countries wide and fertile,
afforded fettlcmcnts to a numerous and powerful nobility. Scot-
land, a kingdom neither extensive nor rich, could not contain many
tich overgrown proprietors. But the power of an aristocracy always
diminiflhes in proportion to the increase of its-numbers; feeble
if divided among a multitude, irresistible if centered in a few.
When nobles are numerous, their operations nearly refemblethofe
of the people; they are routed only by what they feel, not by
what they apprehend; and submit to many arbitrary and opreflive

aas,

ads, !)efore thcy take: arml-s ,against their fovercign. A fiall boldy, B 0 o K

on the coi

tntary. is imoe ore ilefibl

and e i ent;

i quick in '--.u---

. -

ilcernilt,, anld prompt in repelling dI r ; all its motions are as
ftluddncl as lthol of tlie other are 1ow. I Lrccc proceeded the
extrrciec jcaloiiy wlitlh wvlhiclh tlle Seottinl nobles o)fcrsvctd thcir
nolnarcls, :anld i:h!c icrccicis w\ith whichl tli cl opofcd tlieir iin-
c-lnt. ''ini"nc-. Jiveii ti-:c virtue of a prince (d`i noi renlder the lllc 1c
vi'il'tilt or lcel eager to defend their rights; and I'ol)ert Ih'ucc,
notwitlillandiln tlh ticendor of his victories and the glory of hi:;
name, was upon the point of experiencing the vigour of their
refilance, no lels than his unpopular dciccnldant James III. 13c-
idles this, tle near alliance of the great families, by fi-equenlt interlnar-
riages, was tlhe natural confcquencce of thcir linall number ; and as
confainguinity was, in those ages, a powerful bond of union, all the
kindred of a nobleman interested thcinmlclvcs in his quarrel, as a coin-
mon cauf ; and every contell the king had, though with a lingle
baron, soon drew upon: him the arms of a whole confederacy.

V. Tiiosr. natural connexions, both with their equals and with 'Tleir

lecagues acd

thcir inieCriors, the Scnttifhl noblles fircngithencd b)y a dcv,

ev ic; , cer,,:n~,

if not peculiar to tllcmlelves, was at leaps more frcqutentl anm onsg °

l

them, than in any othIer nation. E ven in times of profound
peace, they formed afhbciations, which, when made with their
equals, were called l'?(gu's .'f rl/i/zt!l ,l/fIjct; and wlheli with
their inferiors, boznd oj' nirUen zl. 1By the former, ile contradling
parties bound tlhemfelves mutually to afillf eachi other, in all causes
and against all persons. By the latter, protection was stipulated
on the one hand, and fidelity and pcrfonal service promised on
the other'. Sclf-prcfervation, it is probable, forced men at firfl

z Ac 30. Pa!. 1124. Act 43 Parl. 1555.
VOL. I. I' into

B 0o0 K into these confederacies; and while disorder and rapine were uni-
-- ---- versal, while government was unsettled, and the authority of

laws little known or regarded, near neighbours found it necessary
to unite in this manner for their security, and the weak were
obliged to court the patronage of the strong. By degrees, theef
anociations became so many alliances offensive and defensive againLf
the throne; and as their obligation was held to be more sacred
than any tic whatever, they gave much umbrage to our kings,
and contributed not a little to the power and independence of the
nobility. In the reign of James II. \William the eighth earl of
Douglas entered into a league of this kind with the earls of Craw-
lbrd, Ross, Murray, Ormond, the lords -Hamilton, Balveny, and
other powerful barons; and so formidable was this combination to
tle king, that he had rccourfe to a measure no lets violent than
unjult, in order to dissolve it.

The frequent VI. TnrE frequent wars between England and Scotland proved
wars with
England. another cause of augmenting the power of the nobility. Nature

has placed no barrier between the two kingdoms; a river, almost
every where fordable, divides them towards the cafl: on the weft
they are separated by an imaginary line. The slender revenues
of our kings prevented them from fortifying, or placing garrisons
in the towns on the frontier ; nor would the jealousy of their sub-
jces have permitted such a method of defnlce. The barons,
whole eflates lay near the borders, confidered themfclves as bound
both in honour and in interest to repel the enemy. The 'varden-
f.Jips of the different omarckes, offices of great power and dignity,
were generally bcflowcd on them. This gained them the leading
of the warlike counties in the south ; and their vatfals, living in
a Rate of perpetual hofility, or enjoying at bell an insecure peace,
became more inured to war than even the rect of their country-

men, and more willing to accompany their cl-ieftain in his moSt I ,°
hardy and dangerous entcrprifes. It was the valour no le-s than ---.-J
the number of their followers, that rendered the Doullafes great.
The nobles in the northern and midland counties were ofteln duti-
ful and ob(lquious to the crown, but our monarchi s as found
it inmpracicable to lfbduc the mutinous and undgovernable liriti of
the borderers. In all our domeflic quarrels, tliole vho could draw
to their lide the inhabitants of the ibutlrn counrties, wesre al-
lmof filr- of victory ; and conscious of this advantage, the lords
wh1o poflhcfiedl authority thcre, were apt to forget the dut)y which
lhyc owed their forercign, and to aliire beyond the rank of
fubjicets.

VII. Tni- calamities whilch besel our kings contributed more I'he requent

miiorities

than any other caule to climiiiflh the royal authority. Never was which hap-
any race of monarchs so unfortunate as the Scottifl. Of fix fuc- pencd in
ceflive princes, from Robert III. to James VI. not one died a na-
tural death; and the mlinorities, during that time, were longer,
and more frequent, than ever happened in any other kingdom.
From Robcrt Bruce to James VI. we reckon ten princes; and
ficven of there were called to the throne while they were minors,
and alinofl infants. Even the moil: regular and bcfl: cflablied
governments feel enTfibly the pernicious efrlcts of a minority, and
either become languid and inactive, or are thrown into violent
and unnatural convulsions. But, under the ilnperfecL- and ill-
adjutled tfflem of government in Scotland, there eflecQs were fill
more fatal; the fierce and mutinous spirit of the nobles, unrc-
firained by the authority of a king, feorned all fubjecdion to the
delegated jurifdiCion of a regent, or to the feeble commands of
a minor. The royal authority was circumferibed within narrower
limits than ever; the prerogatives of the crown, naturally incon--

E 2 fideral)le,

B 0 0 K fdlerablc, were reduced almost to nothing; and the ariftocratical

i.. .---,--; lpower gradually rose upon the ruins of tlh monarchical. I.eft

the personal power of a regent Ihould enable him to acl with too
much vigour, the authority anncxed to that office was sometimes
rendered inconsiderable, by being diviled ; or, if a iingle regent
was cholcn, the greatcr nobles, and the heads of the more illus-
trious families, were seldom raiscd to that dignity. It wvas often
conerr-cd upon men who poffeflcd little influence and excited no
jcaloulfy. They, conscious of thcir own weaknces, were obliged
to overlook iome irregularities, and to permit others; and
in order to support their authority, which was destitute of real
Ilrength, tllcy endcavoured to gain the nmoft powerful and acqive
barons, by granting them lpofneflions and nlimnunitics, which raised
theml to still greater power. \;lhen the king himielf came to
afTume the reins of government,, he found his revenues walled or
alienated, the crown lands seized or given away, and the nobles
so accustomed to independence, that, after the struggles of a whole
reign, he was seldom able to reduce them to the fame state in
which they had been at the beginning of his minority, or to wrest

ileview of froin them what they had uilrped during that time. If we take
the events fia-
vouran'le to a view of what happened to each of our kings, who was so un-
the nobles fortunate as to be placed in this situation, the truth and importance
during cachi
minority. of this obfcrvation will fully appear.

1329.
navid 11. TIIE minoriy of David II. the son of Robert Bruce, was dif.

turbcd lby the pretensions of Idward Baliol, who, relying on the
aid of Ingl:nd, and on time fipplort of fomnec diflTfilcld barons
among the Scots, invaded the kingdom. The fuccels which at
first attended his arms, obliged the young king to retire to France;
and Baliol took possession of the throne. A finall body of the
nobles, however, continuing faithful to their exiled prince, drove

13aliol

Baliol out of Scctland; and after an albfcice of nine years, 5axvid B C ' '
returned froin l:'iance, and tookt tie governmcent of the kingdom i .
into llis own1 hands. Itut nobles, who wvre thus watning their
blood and treCafn.: ill dcence of tlhe crowl, had a rilght to the un-
diturlcdtl lpofeio of the1ir ancient privileges ; and even lrlnc title
to arrogate ncw ones. It Icemis to have been a 1maxim inl tlat
age, that every l eader might claim as his own, the tcrritorl'' wxlch
his ivord had vlon from the enemy. Grca:t 'ce(iliio is vclcr
gained by the neOility ill that way : and t thof: the gratitu Ic and
liberality, of ;David aldded, by cifliilhuting among fichi as adliiered
to him, tlhe vail piollL] ini; wll1ich 11 to the clro vn by the so,'-
fciture of his cnemicle. Tle Ilmily of i)Domlas, v.liiclh lc<ali to
rile above tihe oliher nobles, in the rcig-n of his father, auglniited
both its power and its property during his minority.

JA-mIizs I. was fbiz-cd by the EILlilh dlrilg the contilnuticc of Jul: i,

a truce, and ungc:lcerounly dctalined a pi'iionr aloil iiinteccn
years. lDuring tihat pereiod, the kingdomn wvas governed, hIril by
his uncle Robert duke of itAlbany, and then by lMurdo the fln
of Robert. Ioth these noblemen afliredl to the crown ; and theiir
unnatural ambition, if we may believe moll of our hiilorianls, not
only cut flort the days of prince David, the king's elder brother,
but prolonged the captivity of James. They flattered thcifelves
that tlicy might ftep with le's oppolition into a throne, when
almofl vacant: and, dreading the king's return as thie extindion
of their authority and the end of their hopes, they carried on
the negociations for obtaining his liberty with cxtrcrec rcmiillTes.
At the fame time, they neglctled nothing that could either sooth
or bribe the nobles to approve of their fchImce. They slackened
the reins of government; they allowed the prerogative to be en-
croached upon; they fuficrcd the most irregular acds of power,

and

.B O K and even wanton ins-ances of oppression, to pass with impunity;

5._ they dealt out the patrimony of the crown anong thofc whose

.enmity they dreaded or hose favtour tihey hlad gained ; and re-
duced the royal authority to a Rlate of imbecility, from which
succeeding monarchs laboured in vain to raile it.
James I1. DURI1NG the minority of James II. the admniiifiration of alFairs

as well as the cuftoly of tlhe king's person were committed to Sir
\Villiam Crichton and Sir Alcxander Livinguon. Jealousy and
discord were the eCfOist

of their ojun atit, ad each of

them, in order to flrcngthcn hluilfci, lbet'oved new power and
privileges upon the great men wlvhofe aid lie courted. While the
young carl of Douglas, encour;.l.gocld by their divisions, cre-lcc a
fort of independent principality ,'ii;in)

the l:ingdtloni ; and forbil-

ding his vafFils to acknowledge any authority but his (-. he
created knights, appointed a privy council, named oilicoin LvIvil
and militairy, afrfulnd every cnfign of royalty but the title of
king, and appeare in public with a maglnificcen more than
royal.
-;tjlaes l. EIIIGT persons were chosen to govern the kingdom during the

minority of James III. Lord Boyd, however, by fcizing the per-
ion of the young king, and by the afccndant which lie acquired
over him, ioon cngrofled the whole authority. I-Ie formed the am-
bitious projctl of rairing his family to the fame pitch of power
and grandeur with tholf of the prime nobility; and he efleted it.
While intent on this, lie relaxed the vigour of gox-ernment, and
tlhe barons bccame accufomncd, once more, to anarchy and indc-
pendcnce. The power, which Boyd had been at lb much pains
to acquire, was of no long continuance, and the fall of his family,
according to thc fate of favourites, was fildden and deilrudive ;

~~I~~~~~ but

but upon its ruins the family of Hamilton rose, which soon B 0°o F
attained the hlighefl rank in the kingdom.

As the minority of James V. was longer, it was likewise more James V,

tubulent, than thlofe of the prccding kings. And the contend-
i:n nobles, encouraged or protcrecd either by tlle king of France,
or of l. ugland, formed theimlelves into more regular factions, and
diliecgarldcd nmore than ever the relt-aints of order and authority.
Tle French had the advantage of secing one, devoted to their
inlteril,, r:aied to be regent. This was the duke of Albany, a
native of France, and a grandson of James II. But Alexander
Lord H-Iome, the inotll cminienlt of a;ll the Scottifil peers who fur-
vivcd the fatal battle of lI\ov'. t i1, tlivarlted all his nmeafiires durin-;
the sirs ),cars of

hia s

O adiniilnaltiol ; antd the intrigues of the queen

dowager, fiRetr of Iienry VIl. renl(dered tlle latter part of it no
lcIs ieecl c. Though u;Iq)ortcc by French auxiliaries, the nobles
deliificd his authority, and, regardlcf cither of his threats or his
intreaties, peremptorily refuiled, two fevcral times, to enter Eng-
land, to the borders of which kingdom lie had led them. Pro-
voked by thee repeated inflanccs of contempt, the regent aban-
doned his troublesome flation, and, retiring to France, 1referred
the tranquillity of a private life, to an olfice dcsitute of real
;iuthor-ity. Upon his retreat, Douglas earl of Angus became
nmafer of the king's pcrlbn, and goverllc the kind;i om in his
name. Many efforts were made to de-prive lilln o Ilis uirll-ped
authority. But the numerous vafi.lds and friends of his iamily
adhered to him, becautl le divided with them tle power and
emoluments of his oflice; the people reverenced and loved the
name of Douglas; lie excrcifcd, without the title of regent, a
fuller and more absolute authority than any who had enjoyed tlha

digiity;.

B o o IK dignity; and the ancient, but dangerous, pre-eminencc of tile

1.
,----i Douglasles fccmcd to be reltored.

To tlicrc, and to many other causes, omitted or unolblrerved by

us, did the Scottish nobility owe that exorbitant aid uncoinmnon
1owver, of which inllanccs occur Jo) frcqiuclltly in our hiRfory.
Nothiing however dcmonlfirates lo fully the cxtcnt of their powe-cr,
us the length of its duration. Mlany years after the dcclenfion of

lte ceudal lyftems in the other kingdonms of Europe, anld when.
tlhe arms or policy of princes had, every where, fllken, or laid
it in ruins, the foundations of that anciellt ilbric rcmained, iLn
a great incafure, firm and untouched in Scotland.

Ihepowerof TIl poweTrs llih tlhe feudal inflitutions veled in the nobles,
tihe f'cudal
nobles Ie.- soon became intolerable to all the princes of Europe, who longed
l ,!" tS

to poflifs something more than a nominal and precarious authority.
lepri n eti .

Their impatience to obtain this, precipitated H-enry III. of Eng-
land, Edward II. and tome other weak princes, into rafil and pre-
mature attempts againit the privileges of the barons, in which
they werc difippointed or perilied. Princes, of greater abilities,
were content to mitigate evils which they could not cure; they
fought occupation for the turbulent spirit of their nobles, in fre-
qluent .wars; and allowed their fiery courage to evaporate in so-
reign expeditions, which, if they brought no other aclvantage,
lecurcd at ceaft domeIric tranquillity. But time and accidents

' Ihcattre-pts ripened the feudal governments for dellruclion. Towards the end
;'n lumlb!c the
,iItc lnCes of the fifteenth century, and beginning of the sixteenth, all the
1r:,ice allnd princes of Europe attacked, as if by concert, the power of their

in I nd. nobles. Men of genius then undertook, with success, what tleir

unikilful predeceflors had attempted in vain. Lewis XI. of France,

the

tic imofi profound andI the mol: adv-cturous genius of that age, bcean, B o o Ki
and ill a lingle reign allioil complcted, the lkhcmc of their dcll-ruc- ........-
tion. 'I'he li'ue blut concealed policy of e- Icny VII. of 1nliGlail
pnrodluccdl the llamc ecfict. The means, indeed, ciimploycd by thcle
nonarclls were very diflercnt. The blow whlich Lcwis tihuck
was luddetl alnd fatal. The artifices of Henry rcflmbled tlhof
flow poilbns, wliicli waste the conflitution, but become not mortal
till foine dillant period. Nor did tllcy produce confcquenccs lcts
oppolite. Lewis boldly added to the crown whatever lie wrestcd
firom the nobles. Henry undermined his Barons, by encouraging
them to'fell their lands, which enriched the commons, and gave
them a weight in tlhe legillature untnown t their predcccflors.
But while tlicfe great revolutions wer carrying on in two kingdoms But the no-
with which Scotland was intimately connlectd, little alteration ,,, o,,tther

Iltreigth i i.

happened there ; our kingll could neither extend their own prero- Scotl'ad.
gative, nor enable the commons to cncroach upon the ariflocracy;
the nobles not only retained rmofl of their ancient privileges and
poneflfions, but continued to make new acquisitions.

Ti s was not owing to the inattention of our princes, or to Our kings
their want of ambition. They were abundanltly fenlble of tlhe nlvu

to extend lihe

exorbitant power of the nobility, and extremely solicitous to hu mble roy'l atlio-
that order. They did not, however, peoflcfs means ftificient for
accomplifling this end. The resources of our monarlcls were
xxrw, and tlhe progrcfs which they made was of course inconfidcr-
able. 3iut as the number of their follower-s, and the extent of General

menans to-

ticir j rifdliccion, were the two chief circumnflLmces which rendered wad; this
the nobles formidable ; in order to counterbalance the one, and to cin.
rceP-raill the other, all our kings had recourse to nearly the faime
expedients.

TVOL. I.. F I. AMIONGC

B O O K I. AMONG nolles of a fierce courage, and of unpolisied man-

--.-.. ners, surrounded witli vafials bold and licentious, whom they vwere

·l n coul lrae

discord a- bound by interefl and honour to protec-, tile caufc3 of discord
mong the
nobles. were many and unavoidable. As the contending parties could

ftldom agree in acknowledging the authority of any common
filperior or judge, and their impatient spirit would seldom -vait
the ilow decisions of jufticc, their quarrels were usually terminated
by the sword. The offended baron afFcmbled his vafrals, and vwated
the lands, or sied the blood of his enemy. To forgive an injury,
was mean; to forbear revenge, infamous or cowardly '". Hence
quarrels were transmitted from father to son, and, under the name
of deadcly fl/iz , Ibfiflc(d lor many generations with unmitigated
rancour. It was the intcrefi of the crown to foment rather than
to extinguish tliefe quarrels; and by scattering or cherishing the
feeds of discord among the nobles, that union, which would have
rendered the aristocracy invincible, and which must at once have
annihilated the prerogative, was effectually prevented. To the
famc caufc, our kings; were indebted for the success with vhicl
they fometimcs attacked the most powerful chieftains. They em-

: The spirit of revenge was encouraged, not only by the manners, but, what

is more remarkable, by the laws of those ages. If any person thought the prose-
cution of an injury offered to his family too troublefomc, or too dangerous, the Sa-
lique laws permitted hini publicly to desist from demanding vengeance; but the
fame laws, in order to puniflh his cowardice, and want of affecSion to his family,
deprived him of the right of succession. Henault's Abrege Chronol. p. 8I. Among
the Anglo-Saxons, we find a singular inflitution distinguished by the name of fa-
litium ; a voluntary allbciation, the objec whereof was the personal security of
those who joined in it, and which the feebleness of government at that time rendered
neccflary. Among other regulations, which are contained in one of these still ex-
tant, the following defervcs notice: ' If any afiociate fihall either eat or drink with
a person who has killed any member of the folaltitum, unless in the presence of the
king, the bishop, or the count, and unless he can prove that he (lid not know the
person, let him pay a great fine." HIicks Dilfert. Epifiolar. apud Thefaur. Ling.
Septcntr. vol. i. p. 21.

ployed

ployed private revenge to aid the impotence of public laws, and n 0 0 K-
arming againfl the pcrfbn who had incurrcd their dilfpleafure thole
rival familics lwhicli wiihed his fall, they rewarded their iervice by
fiharing among them the spoils of the vanqriilhedl. But this expe-
dient, though it served to humble individuals, did not weaken the
body of the nobility. Thofi whio were now the inflruments of
their prince's vengeance became, in a ihort time, the olbjcas of
his fear. I-aving acquired power and wcealth l)y serving the
crown, they, in their turn, set up for independence: and thl ugh
there might be a ftuituation of power and of property; though
old families fell, and new ones role upon their ruins; the rights
of the ariflocracy remained entire, and its vigour unbroken.

II. As the administration of justice is one of the most powerful Extcnd the

juiltieti on

ties between a king and his fubljcts, all our molnarchs were at the of the king's
utmost pains to circumtcribe thec juriifidion of tle barons, and courts.
to extend that of the crown. The external sorns of fubordi-
nation, natural to the feudal yfcircm, favoured this attempt. An
appeal lay fi-om the judges and courts of the barons, to tlhot of
the king. Tle right, however, of judging in tlle liilf inlance
belonged to the nobles, and they cafily found means to defeat the
eflQca of appeals, as well as of many other feudal regulations. T'he
royal jurisdiction was almofl confined within the narrow litnits of
the king's demesnes, beyond which his judges claimed indeed mIuch
authority, but pooll:lcld next to none. Our kings were (cnllibllc eo
thelic limitations, and blore them with impatience. But it was
imnpofliblc to overturn in a moment, what 'was I deeply rooted;
ori' to i:'Vip tle nobles, at oilce, of privileges which tlhey had hldld
1, lonl;, and whlich wee V-'iougit ahllnoi into the frame of the
fe:udall contll'ttion. Tlo accon-lliil tiis, however, was an obl)jet
(f unilborlm ad anxious attelntion to all our prinues. James I. led

F 2 tlic

B O O K- the way here, as well as in other inflances, towards a more regular
t--. __, and perfect police. HIe made choice, among the estates of par-

liament, of a certain number of persons, vwhom he difiinguifled
1)y the name of Lords of Scjion, and appointed them to hold
courts for determinining civil causes three times in the year, and
forty days at a time, in whatever place he pleased to name. Their
jurisdiCtion extended to all matters which iormerly came under the
cognizance of the king's council, and being a committee of par-
liament, their decisions were final. James II. obtained a law,.
annexing all regalities, which should be forfeited, to the crown,
and declaring the right of jurifdition to be unalienable for the
future. James III. imposed severe penalties upon those judges
appointed by the barons, whlofe decisions flhould be found on a
review to be unjust ; and, by many other regulations, endeavoured
to extend the authority of his own court . James IV., on pre-
tence of remedying the inconveniencies arising from the filort
terms of the court of Scflion, appointed other judges called Lords'
of Dajil Cozoiuil. The Sjfionz was an ambulatory court, and met
seldom: the Daildj C'ouncil was fixed, and fat constantly at Edin-
burgh; and though not composed of members of parliament, the
fame powers which the Lords of Seflion enjoyed were veiled in it.
At last James V. erected a new court that still fubtifts, and which
he named the Co/lr'e of 7iJlZice, the judges or Senators of which
were called Lords of Coouncil and ,S/iol. This court not only
exercised the fame jurifdilion which formerly belonged to the
Session and Daily Council, but new rights were added. Privileges
of great im!-ortance were granted to its members, its forms were
prefeiibed, its terms ficdl, and regularity, power, and fiplendour
conferred upon it°. The persons constituted judges in all these

As 26 P, 1469. Aft 9+ P. 1493. AQ:99 P. 1487. 0 Keith, App. 74, &c.

different

difilercnit courts had, in many relfiiccs, the advantage of those who 11 00 1
presided in tllc courts of the barons; they wvcre more eminent - ,^
for their -iill in law, their rules of proceeding were more uniform,
and tllthr decilions mnore con fillent. Such judicatories became thl
ol1jecis of confidence, and ot vencration. v/Icn. willingly fib-
mittcd their property to their detelrminiation, t andl their encroach-
nmints 01 tilh juit-iFilidilio Is oI the nollE2 wecre popular, and for that
reafoLln liccelsistl l. By decvices oi a .ai:.lar nature, thel jur ilidicon
of the noble(cs ill crililnal caulcs was -rcPiraincd, and the authority
of thec court of 'i//?iiio' extendedl The crown, in this parti-
cular, galninig inlfllnilyl) upon thle nobles, recovered mlore ample
authority ; and the king, whllolC jturillicdlio once reCIebled that
of a baron, ratler tlan that of a fbvcrcign ', canme more and

111nOrC

P Thel molt porl-Tcr idea of tile fcid;:l fylciRc of.govcrnmerict tmy be attnincd by

attendlinlg i tihc late of (;crln;n!, ;ncld to tle hi iory of lirallce. Il tle former,
the fctid Jil i lititiiionis ilill Iullfiil \i itlh igeat vigour; ;and thoiilgh altogethelr ;iliolfnlcd
in the lilttlr, the pItblic recordlS ldvIc blcn s-o cairefully prcleivcdl, that tlhc lIrcich
lawyers anlid ai-itiquarics have iccen enllblld, with 1more certainty a1nd precision thaill
those of any other C(llltrv ill i1 utropc, to trace its rifb, ils progrcf., ;and revolutions.
In ,Cern.Ulay, cvc'y princiiallity nay bc conlfilecil a; a fief, ;id al all its great prilncci
as vX ail h, ioldiirg of thie enilp ro;r. 'lhcy , ili:fl; all tiCe LIfeudal piriviei,cs : their
fiefs ::ric p)rplctuil ; tlcir j urilt.iCtions wi thin tllcir own tl:ritoriLes Ifparat l ;nld cx-
tenIve; itand thie rc;'.t riflices of the empire are all ilcredit;lrvy andl ailnexcd to par-

,tc'll.r f:annilics. At t he Cinill

t'i the e 'mp ir rit.ains im.:' of tile prerogatives of

'ihc fetiudal inolllrclis. Like t mlill, lls cl.iiins alld prCteci ns are iilnuncrabl', aid
his power fIiall ; his juriilitioi, wiltini his ovril demclhcis or h erdit.ary cotitrics
is colp'ceC ; beyond rhe bounds of le' it is ;Il;ilolt iotiiili; itll s(i pcr;t;lncne
;'are f-ttd;al rii;cipcs, til;t ;:lth.' [lg thie ftlidal fyiLcm be ovecrtiirnced in aliiiofc every
p,:'.aicular glate in (crmnany, ;nd aitlioulgl til- ,re1 rcr part of its princes Iave bc-
C(,n'c alibilute ttle oigilnal ifeudtll coittittion of thic cI'i:U tlill rClinairlS, and
idjeas pcculiar to that form of government iirce all it;s oierations, and detcrmilne
thi :-ights of all it: prilnces. ()r obfbrvations with regard to th'i limitcd ju il dli6tion
of iings tinder the Ic;id;l goverinllmners are greatly illult'rated by what h;ippeled
in Irance. 'lic febleeis land do tage of tie dfndts of Ch-r'lenlai ge cn-
couraged thlc pc:rs to anile'p an independent jurifuiiclion. Notlirng remained in tih
i:lnds of tl;. crc.i ; a!! was fcized by thclta, Whllen IItugh Capnt aifccnded the

throne,

B 0 O K more to be confidered as the head of the community, and the
_ _-.w- iIfupreme dispenser of jultice to his people. Thele acquisitions of

our kings, however, though comparatively great, were int reality
inconsiderable; and, notwithfl-hding all their efibrts, many of the
separate jurifdi&ions pofieffcd by the nobles remained in great
vigour; and their final abolition was rclerved to a diflant and
more happy period.

Eachof our BUT betides these methods of defending their prerogative and
kings pur-
sucd rome humbling the aristocracy, which may be confidered as common
plan of
hurnblingtlh to all our princes, we shall find, by taking a review of their reigns,
lnobles. that almost every one of our kings, fiom Robert Bruce to James V.

had formed some particular system for depreflfng the authority of
the nobles, which was the objc& botl of their jealousy and terror.
This condud: of our monarchs, if we reft satisfied with the ac-
counts of their hifiorians, must be coufidered as flowing entirely
from their rcfentment againfl particular noblemen ; and all their
attempts to humble tlhemn muf be viewed as the iallies of private
passion, not as the conicqucnces of any general plan of policy.
But, though some of their aclions may be imputed to those paflions,
though the diffcrent genius of the men, the temper of the times,
and tle slate of the nation, neceflarily occasioned great variety

This lrrncd in their schemes ; yet without bcing chargeable with exccffive
by arcrie" of
tilh cvents in relClliecnt, we may affirm that their end was uniformly the fame;

thl ;. and t hat the projep of reducing the ower of tlle aritlocracy,

throne, A. D. 9 7. he kept poflefFion of his private patrimony the Cont6 of Paris;
and all the jurifdicAion which the kings his fticccfeors exercised for sone time, was
within its territories. T'here were only four towns in France where he could
eftablifli G;-rands Bt-illis, or royal judges; l11 the other lands, towns, and baillagcs
belonged to the nobics. The methods to which the French monarchs had rccourfe
for extending their juriMdilion were exadly fimuilar to tholf employed by our
princes. Hc-nault's Abregc, p. 617, &c. De l'Efpritdes Loix, liv . 30, ch. 20, &c.

some-
.5

fornetilncs avowed, and pursued with vigoul; sometimes con- B 0°0 K
ccaled, or ifccmingly filfpcndcd ; was never altogether aban- -----
lonccld.

No prince was ever more indebted to lis nobles than Robert RInloel

I3ruce. Their valour coniuicrlcd the ingcdom, and placed himll ru
on the throne. IIis gra.titude and gcncrofity bellowed on tlicie
the Ilads of the vanlquiflhcd. Property lhas leldom undergone
greatcr or m1orc fIuddcii rcvolutions, than thofl to whiicli it
was fulbjeCt at that time in Scotland. FIdward I. having for-
feited tlhe eflates of most of the ancient Scottilf barons, granted
thlm to lhis Englifil fuill)j s. 'h['lefe were expelled by the Scots,
and their lands fcizcd by new masters. Amnidtl fiUch rapid changcs,
confitl'on was unavoidable ; and many ponleftled their lands by
titlcs extremely dcefielivc. IDuring one of tliole truccs betwccn
the two nations, occasioned rather by their being weary of war
than desirous of peace, Robert formed a lfhclme for checcking
the growing power and wvcalth of the nobles. H-e Uinmmoned
thcin to appear, anid to ihew by what rights they held their lands.

hliey ailclnblcd accordiiy, andi the qittclioii ieCilg put, they

!:artcd up at once, and dlrew their flor:ds, " li' tlilc , tlid they,
we acquired our lands, and with thclb e mwill defend tllcm."
The king, intimidated by their boldncrf, prudently dropt the pro-
jcL. Bnt so deeply did they relint tnis attack upon their order,
tlhat, nottvithfianding Robert's popular and flplendicl virtues, it
occafioed a dangerous conipiracy against his life.

DA)VID his son, at firfl an exile in France, afterwards a priRoner David rI.

in England, and involved in continual war with Edward II. had
not leifnre to attend to the internal police of his kingdom, or to
think of retrenching the privileges of the nobility.

OuR

B 0 10 : OUR hlitorians have been milore careful to rClate the mIiitary,
.---- . than tlle civil tran!hsiio.s of ite reign of Robert IF. Skirlniflies

and inroads of little conlfctucnc tlhei dufcribl iniutcly ; but with
reoard to every tiling tl:at ii ppenCed ,duilg

J cvc'ial;.' y s of trail-

Lquillity; they arc altogtiler iilcnt-.
IRobert II. T'iE feeble admt!iii l;latilon of ORobert i :! hke-ife

pafled over slightly. A prince of a mean genius, and of a fiail
and iickly ccnl-itulion, was not a fit peribn to enter the lii^s withl
acivc and martial barons, or to attiempt wrcfl:ing from thenm any
of their rights.
James I. TIIE civil tranf1ci'ons in Scotland are better knownl since the

beginning of the reign of Jamcs I. and a complete series of our
laws iupplies the clefcSts of our historians. The Englilf made
some amends for their illiuflice in detaining that prince a prisoner,
by their generous care of his education. During his long refidencc
in E ngland le had an opportunity of observing the feudal fyficm
in a more advanced flatc, and refined fromn many of the imper-
feicions which /lill adhered to it in his own kingdom. I-Ie wrv
thlcir nobles great, but not independent; a king powcrfil, though far
ifom ablute: lie iiaw a regular adminiflration of government; nwif
laws elnacted ; and a nation {iouliliing and happy, because all ranks
of men were accufiomcd to obecy them. Full of thele ideas, he re-
turned into his native country, which presented to him a very differ-
ent icene. The royal authorlity, never great, was now contemptible,
by having been ;) long- dlcgated to regents. The ancient patri-
mony and revenues of the crown were almnc:l totally alienated.
During his long ablenc: ;cne name of king was little known, and less
regarded. The licence of nianly years ai!:d rcindered the nobles
independent. Uni'vclerl anlarchyr preoilce. ''he weak were ex-
poled to the rapine and opprcilion of the lron&. In every corner

8 tome

itome barbarous chieftain ruled at pleasure, and neither feared the l' 0 o T
king nor pitied the people'', I.,

jA-iLs was too wife a prince to employ open force to correlc

liculh inveterate evils. Neither the mIen nor the times \ou:id
have borne it. IHe applied the gentler and lets ocftlenli e rem;ndy
of laws andl llatutcs. In a parliament held immediateiy alficl- hiq
return, lie gained the confidence of Ils people, by maly v-ilaf laws,
tending vilibly to re-eltablillt order, tran(quillity, and juilice in the
kingdom. liBut, at the ifme time th tt lie cendeavoured to ifcuIc
thlct b!ci! igs to llis fu bje1, he dlicovercd his intenCtion to recover
tihole oiellhions oi' \hich tihe crown had been ulnjufily bereaved;
and Ibr that purpole obtaiied an adl, by which he was imlpowcrcd
to i.immon f;ich as had obtained crown lands during the three laif
reigns, to produce the rights by whicl they held them '. As this
flatute thriatcenedl e l)ltt

the e nobles, another which palled

ill a fbllic( ,ucnt parliament aliled a dreadful blow at thlei power.
By it the Icagules and iconbkil ttionis v w; e ha;ve a'ready de-
ke-diled, anla i itch rencdlered tlie nobles lo lormnid c to tolhe rown,
~were declaiecld uniawfvll ne. I('uerai( ;d )by this ftlec.ci il tie he-
gin!ing ol ( i,; cii rle-ii, J amc:-'s neCt siep wvas still loklder all
more dci (I"i-.c. l)m-iitn; the fittllinT of parlaet lie

li'ziedi ai Oince
Iis cen'.a M'!urdo duke of' Alblanl, all(l his tIns; tle earl's (.

.grlas, Le nnc>:, An!g:;, M.a.r-chl, and above twenty other peers

anId ibait'on!; o" pri'ilme rainkl. 'To all o" tl'iemn, iho-,.'v;r. he w::'.

at-i:c:!te:lv reconciled, e:x( pt to ab,!iy a:d 1Ii
'ibn;, and I,,l.-

\" c'.:-:i;:o -:u l' n ni:if{l :vih cr d.!.ri',s [ht'; c;:!:nilict.s very ifclinigl-, in hii

r!.c J.ntia: In (t'ickms il'is, 11 1 ,ri -t Irt:.: ill ,; o i., 1'.;!d ilt!:;c l ,t iti,:u:-um a juiiio]cn
c.pic:iit; c't t';1uiin 1."-11'1m itlit unuiit ];.lr~'cil i!Ul:n- h*')11icildia, d, pr?:t ;;Liones, ill-
C'l'iiil, Ct C::te't;l ii Cii;chi rcI,:-'ll iul: i l-l tiipL!ii; t i, j!liti;:i r]c,',ta e; ;ixIa; i tr-

\
OL P. ( 3oP. x4.

B3 O I; no.. These were tried l) thc-v pecers, alnd condemned ; for what
_----<.- criine is nov.- unlknown. '-cir execution flruck the .whole order

wvith terror, :1d h(1c- --orfe,

ure. added vail pofief(Tons a tlhe crown.

]-Ie fCized lil. c1-iei. , thl caik]lns of i nlan and Strathern, upon
cdicirent pr'etcxis ; and that of AlLar fell to h ln )y inhiritaice,
'I he patience a;nd ina-tiity of the nobles, while the king was
procceeling io iralidly. towards aggraitdiczing the croawn, are
amiazinll. Tlie onl! obfillc.lion le met wiitlh was

h i-'Ol1 al fliigh

inlfurrreclion laded l W

b the duke of Albany's yoLnilgefr son, and

that was easily fippri eticd. r'le fplcndour and prl-cnce of a Ii:ng,
to which the oreat men had Iben aonog unacctlftonleti ip icred
reverence : Jamnes was a prince of great aLiiities, and condudled
Ilis operations with much lprudence. I-Ie was in friendfhiip with
England, and clotely allied vith the French king: he was adored
by the people, wlo c enjoyed unusual security and happiness under
llis adminiitlration: and all his acquisitions, however fatal to the
body of the nobles, had been gained by attacks upon individuals ;
were obtained by lcciiIons of law ; and being founded on circum-
flances peculiar to the jerlblos Wvlho u-liced, might excie murmurs
;ad apprehliclons, but aflbrircd no colourable prete:t ifr a g eneral
rebellion. It was not o withl the next attempt wrhich the king made.
Ejncouragcd by the facility with -hiich lie had hitherto advanced,
lie ventured upon a meailre that irritated the whole body of the
nobility, and which the events fhLewv either to have been. entered
inlto with too much precipitancy, or to have been carried on with
too much violence. Tlhe father of Gcorge Dunbar earl o0' MIarch
had taken arms against Robert III the king's fathter; Iut tliat
crime Iiad been pardoned, and his lands restored by Robert duke
of Albany. James, on pretext tlat the regent had exceeded his
power, and that it was the prerogative of the king alone to pardon
treason, or to alienate lands annexed to the crown, obtained a

sentence,

-.-i.tc':cC, c;c!iE!iian : the pardon to be void, and depr:ivin Dun1bar 3B O I K
(i. I. c;-.l.;. i. .nLmy of til great men hli d l .

11 ,s iby no other .-.-.--
;:'iit tan.l whalt they derived iro;. g-rants c f lic te,1o tukes of

itnv. iSulch a dccilion, toug tlicy had rcaonll to cxpcic it
in coiill;.(l;c:lic c;i' the iatutc vwhich tle king hIadl obtained, occa-

incd a genc;l alrm. Tilough Dunbar was, at prcfent, the

only tluncrec, the precedent nlight be extenlded, and their titles to
po!iellions lwhich they confidcered as; the rewards of tlieir valour,
might be iubljcic-l to the review of courts of law, wlhofe forms
of proceeding,, and jurifdiiion, were in a martial age little known,
and extremely odious. Tl'error and (lifioltcent l read faiit upon
this diicovcry o' tle king's intentions ; the common da-nger called
on the lwhole order to unite, and to make one bold Litnd, before
they were frlipped fucccflively of their acquisitions, and rcduced
to a Hiate of poverty and infignificancL. The prevalence of these
eintimcnts amnon- the nobles cncouragcl a Ier delpci-ate menl, the
friends or followers of tlhole who had been the chiecf fillferers
under the king's adiiniirl-ationl, to formi a confiiiracy against Iis
life. The firfl uncertain intelligcnc of this wa:s blrought himn,
whilc he lay in his calmp bciore Ro.xburlgh canflc. Pr- dluit not
confide in nobles, to whom he had givenl lb lmanl eaures of dif-
gult, but infiantly Cliflliniled them an their vaflils, and, rctiring
lo a monanfery near Perth, w5as soon after murdered there in the
rilofL cruel manner. All our hiil or-ians mention with afonifhmcnt
t.1is circrn ni ic:e, of tle 1ing's c(ii haitJing hIis ayt a time

h.lien it was io leccillry

c ;;r hisi prel'rvationi. A kiin, Iay they,

fiurrouiidLd vL l wiL li s aroils, is c:lure fronl ftcret treason, and may
dlefyr open -rebe)llio a. 13ut t'i,;; very :i-ons vwere tie perfolns
viom

i lie chiefly dtreaded; :l.i i i:; Crident i;rom1 tllis review of

his a:liniifilatioln, that lic lu.:! ;grea:ter rcaobn to applrchend dan-
gler, than to expec defence, r;,mn their hands. It was tle mif-

C 2 fortune

B 0 K fortune of James, that his maxims and manners were too refined

<-..----' for the ge in v-hich he lived. Happy ! had he reigned in a king.-

dom nlore civilizecd; his love of peace, of justice, and of ele-
gance, would have rendered his schemes successful ; and infiead
of perinliing bccaul i e had attempted too mnuch, a grateful people
would have alpplauded and seconded his ciForts to reform and to
imrnrovc them.
jailes lI. CRcCIITON, the most able man of those who had the clireclion

of afrairs during the minority of James II. had been the minifler
of James 1. and well acquainted witl his resolution of humbling
the nobility. HIe did not relinquifl the design, and he endea-
voured to inlpire his pupil with the fame sentiments. But what
James had attempted to eflel: slowly, and by legal means, his son
and Criclton pursued with the inpetuofity natural to Scotrmen,
and with the 1iercenefs peculiar to that age. William the sixth
earl of Douglas was the firl- victim to their barbarous policy.
That young nobleman (as we have already oblerved), contemnin-
the authority of an infant prince, almnof openly renounced his
allegiance, and afplired to independence. Criclton, too high
spirited to bear ucll an insult, but too weak to curb or to bring
to justice so powerful an offender, decoyed him by many promises
to an interview in the castle of Edinburgh, and, notwithstanding
thcfe, murdered both him and his brother. Crichton, however,
gained little by this a&c of treachery, which rendered him uni-
verfally odious. WJilliam the eighth earl of Douglas was no
less powerful, and no lels formidable to tlhe crown. By form-
ing the league which wve already mentioned with the earl of'
Crawford and other baronrs, lie had united against his fovcrreign.
alhnof one half of hiis kingdom. 13ut his credulity led him
into the fame snare -which had been fatal to the former carl.

8 Relying

Reclning on tlh king's proinifes, w-lo had now attained to the B 0O K
years o: malnhlood, and haIving obtaiined a tiie-co(nduc under the
g'reat feal, lie venturcd to mIet him in Stirling caflle. James
Lr'.cd him to difiolvc tha;t ldangous conlfeder(acy into which ie
had entered ; the earl oblninatcly refuced; C" If you will not," 'ltid
tlhc enraged monalrch, drawing h.is ldagr,- , '" This flall ;" aind
tlabbed hlin to the licart. An. action o Ilnworthy of a king filled
dllc nation with afnonifimlcnt and \xilt lIo-lorror. The carl's vafills
ran to armls with the utniloPI fury, alnd draggin thle firc--condul,
which tllc king hadl granted andl violated, at a horse's tail, tlhey
marched towards Stirling, burnt the ton, and threatecned to
bcfiegSe the carfil. An accolInnodatlio, 1however, enflted; on
vihat terms is not knowntl. Bt te king' jliouly, and the new
carl's power and rclentnicnt, prevented it fironi beingl of long
continuance. Bothl toolk the 11fil at the head of their armies,
andl met near Abrcorn. '1T1at of the earl, composcd chiefly of
B'olrderers, was far lilperior t the king's bothll in nuI;iber and in
valoiur; and a ingle battle mnufl, in all probability, have decided

lvhietlIr tlhe lhou! of Stewart or of Doxuglas was henceforth to

;poiTes the tihrone of Scotland. But, while his troops imi-patiently
-;xplcdcl the signal to e. ;age, thle carl ordered thlcil to retire to
thcir camp ; and Sir lames Hamilton of Cadl.ow, the person in
whom lie placed the greatest confidence, convinced of his want of
genius to improve an opprtunity, or of his want of courage to
iL ize a crowni, deserted hlim that very night. lThis CxmpllC was
follwed vby ma ll ,; andl the earl, ciclfeicd or f-1r',ikcn by all, -as
:cn Criven ' out of the kingdom, and obliged to (depend for ihis
f:!lbiiLcice on the fricndfiip of tile klii of E.nglalnd. Te rulin
c,-' :tis great ftamily, wXlich had l lo ngl ri-'alled and overawec
(hwe cro.:n, and the terror witl whic1h iiel an example of uni-uc-
cefsfll amb:ition . illedt the nobles, secured the king, for some time,

fro i..

B 0 o I. from opposition ; and the royal authority retnaincd uncontrolled
...-a aind aliinofI absolute. James did not iuflcr this ilivourable i!;tcrval

to pals unillproved; l ;,ic podur. i tllc collelnt of )pa.liament to
laws imore advant"ag-cris to tl!c prerogative, and more lill.verfive
of the privileges o' the -ariiLocracy, than were c'rcr obtainedl by
.nly fvirer or UlblqiLcnI: mni;arch or Scotland.

BY one of these, not only all the vafi pofFefTions of the earl of

Douglas were annexed to the crown, but all prior and future
alienations of crown ;lnd wcre declared to be void, and the king
was ilnlpowered to fcize them at plcalure, without any procels or
form of law, and oblige the pofTeffors to refund whatever they had
rececived from thenm . A dreadful iPrirument of oppression in tile
lands of a prince !

ANOTIIER law prohibited the wardenflip of the marches to be

grantdl hereditarily; rfcraiined, in fevcral inflances, the jurif-
didiion of that ollicec and extended the authority of the king's
courts ".

_Yi a third, it was cnaced that no Reg/.liy, or cxclufive rigl'

of a(lminiftering jutiicc within a man's own lands, flhould be
granted in time to come, without the consent of parliament ;
a condition which implied almosl an express prohibition. Those
nobles who already poflefled that ,reat privilege, would naturally be
solicitous to prevent it firom becoming common, by being bellowed
on many. Those who had not themselves attained it, would cnvy
others the acquisition of Iucli a flattering ldillindion, and both would
concur in rejcading the claims of new pretenders.

; A41 P. 1455. Ibid. AL 42. 2. Ibid. Al 43.

33x

BY a fourth at, all new gralns of hereditary offices were pro- B 0I. K

hibitcd, andl those obtained tince the death of the lafl king werec r -.-
revoked y.

.ACII of thlC flattcs undermi d Ii of the

lTreat pillars oii

which the power of the ariflocracy relied. During the re-
maidc of his roeign, tlis; p:i-'iCcc pu'll-ed thle plan which he had
be-,iun \ith the utmioi' v;irollr; and iid.t no; a fuddclnu i.(tl, oc-
c.!ioi;il(d liy the 1ili:it'r of a cannon l which bl)urs near him at tihe
iiCe, of Roxbirgi, preveltced his progrei's, lie wante neitller
geCnius nor conlaeC to poi'ed. it': and Scotla d inight, in all pro-
h..;':lit-, 1,have lec;, !he I;.''i lcii¥iol in ''.lurope which VULild hatvc
fce;l ticl sI verlltn o- tlhe le-tu d f'yflein.

JA .1 r.s III. dilcoverld no lci' cageCncisi than his falthr or grand- J'inmcs lr.
f-.thlcr to hunimble lie nobilit,, ; hut latr iis eriol to either of tlcinr

1'

iil :a1ilitici and( a ci *., ls hc '.td)ptCd a

plad C:tremc ly i p,)oalitic,

anl lls rei' was di lt'o s, a'; vcll ;a lli' end tragictl. UndtI
tlc fiCudl ': ovIillncit%:, ti'e 1moldCs \wre not onlily the king's mi-
:.!'iC-s, and posihd O' apl ll the r:at o-filc: o: power or of trufL ;

they .'ere Aliele

lisi:hi eo'n11OuuIin'- a d tt1iVO ittc, and hardly any

l)ut tilheln :apro:lched his l, perlon,, or were c ltitie to lis regard.
Li.t l 'ames, v.ho loth i feared and Iiated lls nol)i s, ke.:t them at

;"'. lual iilncc, and1 lePcOe- ever-y mra- of coilid kce and

a l.. ion u'.oi' a 'e\e ilelin ii'losl,

ner ln-O felio''ln o

i l 0ditluon a ii)lc

i!'i oi.g, lt to ihaveC rendered tlhem Iunv:or ., ( ' lles 'iC ...L.. blit
,? wiIti tlc i oe

ihi c,:oinl al}c.eared in

public, and 'r.,aud '' "in 'dl with arc.hutcc'Lure, rn the, and other
arts Vliil were thleni littll et ciecled. 'lhe nobles belleld the
power and favour of thele minlions with iidJgr;ation. Even the

Y A&t 44.

.Canguinary

B 0 0 1K I llLuinarly nafturell; of his f.ather provoked them less than his
___' _._ ncglcl. Individuals alone lilered by the former ; by the latter,

cvery ma in tholugclit :iincii injurcd, becauil all were colntemnd.
'l'Their diicolitclt was lmuch lieightenle by the kinr's recalling all
riglhts to crow-n !lands:, h

Il- itary oflfces, regalities, and cvcry

otiecr ccnccieionl w:icl wa' detrimental to his prerogative, and
whicth ad bccin e:tortc.d during1 his minority. Combinations
a:ngn;e; t! ,infelves, tfcrlCt intriglcs with England, and all the ufial
'r;,r;;:l_\jvc ;s Ir civil vwar, v:cre the efie-ts of their relimtmlcnt.
Alexanr!lder dlicc of Albany, and John e arl of iVar, the king's
broth'erI, two young men of turbulent and ambitious spirits, and
i.lcc!:sI! againfi TLimes, w.lho treated them with the fame coldness

I.; . (ilid tlci other a;grt men, entcered deeply into all their cabals.

Tl'e kinlg dcetedd tthir dcigis before they were ripe for exe-
cutionl, and, !ci.ing his two brotlers, committed the duke of

lbany to I'dlinlbuirgitI calle. The earl of Mar having rcmonfiratcd
v.lti too muclh oldnief; agailnfi tle king's condcluiC, was nmurdlcrcd
if \wc may lblieve our hiitorians, by his conmmand. Albany, ap-
prclicniivc of Llie fitme fate, made his elcaple out of the cafllc, and
lel iltto 'rancl . Concern lor the kin-'s honour, or indigniaion
at lii Iu;caf!'cs, ' were\ pcrial's the motives lwhiclh liri in(duccld himi
to join tie malecontcnts. Buit James's attachment to favourites
renderiCn him every day more odious to tile nolles, the prnolic
of tlie advantages vwhiclh miigltt be derived fl-oll tileir general diL-
afsiclion, a!dded to the relncitment which lie ielt on account of li.-;
iro;licr's dea:ith' and hiis o n injurics, Iooll ilnfircd Albany with
more ambitious and criminal thoughts. He concliuded a treaty
it-h Edward IV. of iEngland, in which lie aflmlied the name of
Alecxandlcr king of Scots; and in return for tihe aifflfancc which
was prornitied hiil towardl nin his

ethrobnin 1 rother, he bound him-
fill' as loon as he was put in pclreilion of the kingdom, to fwcar

fcalty

ifealty and do homage to the Englili monarch, to renounce tile P o o 1.
ancicnt alliance with France, to contraad a new one with England, , .__._
and to filrrcndler fomc of tlie firongell caRlcs and moil valuable
counties in Scotland '. That: aid, whicll the duke ib baeb!y pur-
chlafed at the price of his own honour and the ilndependence of lhis
country, was punillually granted him, and the dukc'of Gloucester
twEith a powerful army conduled him towards Scolland. The
danger of . foreign invalion olliged Jalecs to implore the afsllt-
ancc of thole nobles whom lie had to long treated with con-
tempt. Some of them were in clofc confederacy with the duke of
Albany, alnd approved of all his pretcnllons. Others Cwre im-
patient for any event which would reloorc their order to its ancient
pre-cminncei. They fcmced, however, to enter with zeal into
the mcafurcs of their obvrccign for the defence of the kingdomln
againil its invaders :', and took the field at the head of a powerful
army of their followers, but with a itronger difpolition to rcdtrcs
their own grievanccs than to annoy the enemy; and with a fixed
relolution of punlilling thnfle minions wllofe insolence they could
no longer tolerate. Thlis rcfolution they executed in the camp
near Lauder, with a military dispatch and rigour. IIaving pre-
vioufy concerted their plan, the earls of Angus, I-unly, Lcnnox,
followed by almost all the barons of chief note in tie army,
forcibly entered the apartment of their fovcrcign, seized all his
favourites except one Ramsay, whom they could not tcar from
the king, in wrlofe arms he tool flielter, and, without any form
of trial, lhanged them instantly over a bridge. Among the modl
remarkable of those who had eingrofied the king's alTclion, were
Cochran a mason, IHorlmil a taylor, Leonard a finitl, Rogers a
musician, and Torfifani a fcncing-maflcr. So deipicable a retinue

Abercr. Mart. Atch. v. ii. p. 443. Black Ats, fol. 65.
VOL. I1 II dicovcrg

B 0 o K discovers the capriciousness of James's charater, and accounts for
t_- __ the indignation of the nobles, when they beheld the favour due to

them, beitowed on such unworthy objeas.

JAMES had no reason to confide in an army so little under his

command, and, dismissing it, shut himself up in the cafile of Edin-
burgh. After various intrigues, Albany's lands and honours were
at length restored to him, and he seemed even to have regained
his brother's favour by some important services. But their friend-
Thip was not of long duration. James abandoned himself once
more to the guidance of favourites; and the fate of those who
had suffered at Lauder did not deter others from courting that
dangerous pre-eminence. Albany, on pretext that an attempt
had been made to take away his life by poison, fled from court,
and, retiring to his castle at Dunbar, drew thither a greater number
of barons than attended on the king himself. At the fame time
lhe renewed his former confederacy with Edward; the earl of
Angus openly negociated that infamous treaty; other barons were
ready to concur with it; and if the sudden death of Edward had
not prevented Albany's receiving any aid from England, the crown.
of Scotland would probably have been the reward of this unworthy
combination with the enemies of his country. But, instead of
any hopes of reigning in Scotland, he found, upon the death of
Edward, that he could not reside there in safety; and, flying first
to England and then to France, he seems from that time to have
taken no part in the affairs of his native country. Emboldened
by his retreat, the king and his ministers multiplied the insults
which they offered to the nobility. A standing guard, a thing
unknown under the feudal governments, and inconsistent with the
familiarity and confidence with which monarchs then lived amidif
their nobles, was raised for the king's defence, and the command

7 of

of it given to Rainfay, lately created earl of Bothwell, the fame 'B 0o O
person who had so narrowly escaped when his companions were -
put to death at Lauder. As if this precaution had not been sus-
ficicnt, a proclamation was ifIued, forbidding any person to appear
in arms within the precincts of the court '; which, at a time
lwhenc no man of rank left his own houfc without a numerous
retinue of armed followers, was, in efFet, dcbarring the nobles
from all acccfs to the king. James at the fame time became
fonder of retirement than ever, and, fink in indolence or super-
ftition, or attentive only to amufcments, devolved his whole
authority upon his favourites. So many injuries provoked the
most contiderable nobles to take arms, and having pcrfuadcd or
obliged the duke of Rothesay, the king's eldest son, a youth of
fifteen, to set himself at their head, they openly declared their
intention of depriving James of a crown of which he had dif-
covered himself to be so unworthy. Roused by this danger, the
king quitted his retirement, took the field, and encountered them
near Bannockburn; but the valour of the Borderers, of whom
the army of the malccontents was chiefly composed, soon put his
troops to flight, and he himself was slain in the pursuit. Sufpi-
cion, indolence, immoderate attachment to favourites, and all the
vices of a feeble mind, are visible in his whole conduct ; but the
character of a cruel and unrelenting tyrant seems to be unjustly
affixed to him by our historians. His negle& of the nobles irri-
tated, but did not weaken them ; and their discontent, the immo-
derate ambition of his two brothers, and their unnatural confe-
deracies witl England, were sufficient to have disturbed a more
vigorous administration, and to have rendered a prince of superior
talents unhappy.

b Ferrerius, 398.

Ha Tux

B1 o0 K TI-IH indignation which many persons of rank expresscd againfr
--v,-... the conduct of the conspirators, together with the terror of the

fentcncc of excommunication wnhich the pope pronounced againfi
them, obliged them to use their vidcory with great moderationl
and Ihumanity). Being conscious how detclcable the crime of im-
bruing, their hands in the blood of their foyercign appeared, they-
endeavourcd to regain the good opinion of their countrymen, and
to atone for the treatment of the fathcr, by their loyalty and duty
towards the son. They placed him inflantly on the throne, and
the rwhole kingdom soon united in acknowledging his authority.
James IV. JAMES IV. was naturally generous and brave; he felt, in an

high degree, all the pallons which animate a young and noble
mind. He loved magnificence, he delighted in war, and was
eager to obtain fame. During his reign the ancient and here-
ditary nmiity between the king and noble es ems almost entirely
to have ceafcl. I-Ie envied not their fplcndor, because it contri-
buted to the ornlal.it of his court ; nor did 11c dread their power1,
;v'hich he confidered as the security of his kingdom, not as an
object of terror to himficlc. This confidence on his part met with
the proper return of duty and ai-cCion on theirs; and, in his
war with England, lie experienced how much a king beloved by
his nobles is able to perform. Though the ardour of his courage
and the spirit of chivalry, rather than the profpcct of any national
advantage, were the motives of that expedition, such was the zeal
of his fubjels for the king's glory, that lie was followed by as
gallant an army as ever any of his anccf'ors had led upon Englifi
ground. But though James himself formed no scheme dangerous
or detrimental to the aristocracy, his reign was diflinguilled by an
event extremely fatal to it; and one accidental blow humbled it
more than all the premeditated attacks of preceding kings. In

the

thle rash and unfortunate battle of Flowden, a brave nobility choce B 0 0 K
rather to die t:an to Cdfert their fovcreCign. Twelve earls, thirtccn ,-----,

'lord', five c'lfl ions of noblecilin, and an incredilble number of
L:'Irns, fc'l with the kini; . Tle whole body of the noibles long
anl(l fcnlill.v felt this dialler ; and if a prince of full age had then
alceiidcd the throie, their conflerni-ation and feeblcncs would
Ilave aflorded him advantages which no former monarlch ever
polilc:dl.

13UT Ja.muCs\r who tifccecddc Is father, was an infalnt of a Janic V.

ycar old ; and tho llig the o(licc of rgienit w-as confiIerredC upon lls
couiinll the cduke ol All>lny, a man of genius and cntcrprisi, a
n;itiv\ of lrancc, and accuflomicd to a government vwhere the
po\er o(f the king was; already great; thoutgh lie made niany bol:l
attlempts to extend tle royal authority ; tlhough lih put to clcath
lord l loin, and aniilhed ithie earl of Am,-us, tlie two nob)lcmlln
of grcatcf: influence ill the kingdom, the alritocracy loft no
groimid ulnder his Aadliinilllratio

n. A firanger to tlic Imnnaers, the

laws, a:dl tle language of the people vwhom lie was called to
·rule, lie alted, oln !ome occaliolns, rather like a viceroy of the
.}reiich lking, than the governor of Scotland ; but the nobles as-
Jcrted lheirl own privileges, and contended for thei inlterel of tihci
country wih at b)oldn'le, which convillncd him of their ilndepend-
ence, and of tlie impotence of his own authority. After fcveral
unrIucccfsful Urulgles, he voluntarily retired to France ; and the
king l)ing then il his thirteenth year, the nobles agrced that he
Ilould ailLime the government, and that eight persons should be
appointed to attend him by turns, and to advise and affli him in
lhe admiinillration of public affiairs. The carl of Angus, wh.o.

Aber. ii. 5.0o.

wBas.

B 0 0 KC -as one of that number, did not long remain fati;fied with such

I-v ' divided power. He gained some of his colleagues, removed

others, and intimidated the reft. When the term of his attend-
ance expired, he fill retained authority, to which all were obliged
to submit, because none of them was in a condition to dispute it.
The affedtion of the young king was the only thing wanting, to
fix and perpetuate his power. But an adive and high-fpirited
prince submitted, with great impatience, to the restraint in which
he was kept. It ill suited his years, or disposition, to be confined
as a prisoner within his own palace; to be treated with no refpeC,
and to be deprived of all power. lie could not, on some occa-
sions, conceal his resentment and indignation. Angus foresaw
that he had much to dread from these ; and as he could not gain
the king's heart, he resolved to make sure of his person. James
was continually surrounded by the earl's spies and confidents;
many eyes watched all his motions, and observed every ftep he
took. But the king's eagerness to obtain liberty eluded all their
vigilance. I-Ic escaped from Falkland and fled to the castle of Stir-
ling, the reiidence of the queen his mother, and the only place of
strength in the kingdom which was not in the hand of the
Douglases. The nobles, of whom some were influenced by their
hatred to Angus, and others by their refped for the king, crowded
to Stirling, and his court was soon filled with persons of the greatest
diftinetion. The earl, though astonished at this unexpected
revolution, resolved, at first, to make one bold puih for recover-
ing his authority, by marching to Stirling at the head of his fol-
lowers; but he wanted either courage or strength to execute this
resolution. In a parliament held soon after, he and his adherents
were attainted, and after escaping from many dangers, and en-
during much misery, he was at length obliged to fly into Eng-
land for refuge.

JAMES

JAMES had now not only the name, but, though extremely B oo I0

I.

young, the full authority of a king. I-e was inferior to no prince <--
of that age in gracefulness of person or in vigour of mind. I-Iis
undcrflanding was good, and his heart warm ; the formcr capable
of great improvement, and the latter iufceptible of the best im-
pressions. But, according to the usual fate of princes who are
called to the throne in their infancy, his education liad been ne-
glcQed. Flis private preceptors were more ready to flatter than
to instruct hlim. It was the intcreft of those who governed the
kingdom, to prevent him fiomn knowving too much. The earl of
Angus, in order to divert him from bulmclfs, gave him an early
taste for iluch plcafiires as afterwards occupied and engroflsed him
more than became a king. Accordingly we difcovcr in James all
the features of a great hut uncultivated spirit. On the one hand,
violent pailions, implacable resentment, an immoderate desire of
power, and the utmofl rage at dilappointmcnt. On the other,
love to his people, zeal for the puniflinent of private oppressors,
confidence in his favourites, and the most engaging openness and
affability of behaviour.

WIIHA he himfclf had suffered from the exorbitant power of

the nobles, led him early to imitate his predeccffors in their
attempts to humble them. The plan he formed for that purpose
was more profound, more systematic, and pursued with greater
conflancy and steadiness, than that of any of his ancefiors: And
the influence of the evcnts in his reign upon those of the fublE-
quent period render it necefary to explain his conduct at greater
length, and to enter into a more minute detail of his aCtions. He
had penetration enough to dilcover those defects in the schemes
adopted by former kings, which occalioned their miscarriage. The
example of James I. had taught him,. that wile laws operate slowly

on.

D o0 o K on a rude people, and that the fierce spirit of the feudal nobles
,--y--- , was not to be subdued by these alone. The effects of the violent

meafilres of James II. convinced hlin, that the oppression of one
great family is apt either to excite the suspicion and resentment of
the other nobles, or to enrich with its fipoils some new frimily,
which would foort adopt the me entirnents, and become equally
formidable to the crown. He fhw, froln the fatal end of James III.
that neglet was itill more intolerable to the nobles than opprclion,
and that the miniltry of new men and favourites was both dii-
honourable and dangerous to a prince. At the fame time he felt
that the authority of the crown was not fuficient to counterbalance
the power of the ariflocracy, and that without Ibmne new accecfion
of strength he could expcc no better success in the struggle than
his anceflors. In this extremity he applied himIelf to the clergy,
hoping that they would both rclilllhis plan, and concur, with all
their influence, in enabling him to putt it in execution. Under
the feudal govc-rnmcnt the church, being reckoned a third efrate,
had its reprcfentativcs in parliament; the number of these was
considerable, and thely poflclfcd great influence in that assembly.
The fuperflition of former Ikings, and tlce zeal of many ages of
ignorance, had ecfowed

l on ccclcliafics a great proportion of the

national wealth; and the authority which they acquired by the
reverence of the people, was fulperior even to that which they
derived from their ricles. This powerful body, however, de-
pended entirely on the crown. The popes, notwithstanding their
attention to extend their uflrpations, had neglected Scotland as a
dillant and poor kingdom, and permitted its kings to exercise
powers which they difltutcd with more considerable princes. The
Scottifi monarchs had the sole right of nomination to vacant
bilhoprics and abbeys '; and James na.urally concluded, that men

Epift. Rcg. Scot. 1. 197, &c. Aae 25. P. I540.

who

lwho cxpcSced lpreferment from his favourr, would bc willilng to B 0 0 IC

1.

merit it, by promotingh his designs. Happily for him, the nobles -_
liad not yet recovered the blow which fell oil their order at Flow-
den ; and if we may judge cither from their conldul, or from
the cha raletr given of tihcm ly Sil Ralph Sadlcr, thle iinilifi envoy
in Scotland, tlhe were men of little genius, of no experience in
bu!inels, and incapable of ading cither with unanimity, or with
vigour. l/Ianv of tli clergy, onl the odiCr liind, were: ditinguiflch
bv their great abilities, and no lels by their ambition,. Tarious
causes of dliiuft liad ariicii between them and the nobles, lwho
defpif-d( their charaecr, and envied tleir power or their wealth.
IBy atln in concert with the king, tlicy not only wvould gratify
him, but avenge tlicmlclvcs, and hoped to aggrandiie their own
order, lb deprcfnlg thole whro were their sole rivals. Secure of
s0i poerful a concurrence, James ventured to proceeld with greater
bloldncts. In the li-rt heat of resentment, lie liad driven the eari
of Angus out of the kingdom ; and, lenfible that a pcerfon io far
superior to the other nobles in abilities, might create man)- ob-
flacles whvich would retard or render ineflTcual all his felccies,
lie Iolenly Iwore, tlat lie would never permit himn to return into
Scotland ; and, notwilhflanding the repeated fblicitations of the
king of IEngland, he adlered to his vow with unrelentilng ol)fi-
nacy. H-Ie then lproceede(l to repair the fortifications of E dinburgh,
Stirling, and otlier cafldes, and to fill his magazines with arlms and
amlmulnition. -laving taken thelfe precautions by way of defence,
lie began to treat the nobility withl the utinof: coldn(cfs and reserve.
'Thole ofhiccs, whlich they were apt, from long pofl'flion, to con-
lidlr as appropriated to their order, were now bellowed on ccclcfi-
alic s, who alone poflefld the king's car, and, together with a
few gentlemein of inferior rank, to whom he had communicated his
fe!lcmes, were intl'lUed withl the management of all publlic a iatir.

V'OL, [. Tlheie

B 0 0 1K Theie nii-nl{crs were chosen with judgment; and cardinal Ecatoun,

I.
t.--...i wlho soon became the moflt eminent among them, was a maln of

fuLpcCrior gcnlus. They tcrvcd the king with fidelity, they carried
on his meaiir-cs with vigour, with reputation, and witl iuccefs.
James no longcr concealed his diflrufi of the nobles, and fuifered
no opportunity of mortifying them to efcapc. Slight offenccs
-were aggravated into real crimes, and punifhd with severity.
Every accusation against pcrfons of rank was heard with pleasure,
every appearance of guilt was examined with rigour, and every
trial proved fatal to those who vwere accused: The banishing I-iep-
burn carl of Botlhwcll for rcafons extremely frivolous, the bchead-
ing the cldcPi son of lord Sorbes without fuflicient evidence of his
guilt, and the condemning lady Glamis, a filser of the earl of
Angus, to be burnt for the crime of witchcraft, of which even
that credulous age believed her innocent, are monuments both of
the king's hatred of the nobility, of the fevcrity of his government,
and of the 'lrctches he made towards abfolutc power. By these
a©s of authority, he tried the flirit of the nobles, and how much
they were willing to bear. Their patience increased his contempt
for themi, and added to the ardour and boldncfs with which lie
pursucd his plan. Mleanwhile they obfcrvcd the tendency of his
schemes with concern, and with rcfcntment; but the king's ftga-
city, the vigilance of ills miniflers, and the want of a proper
leader, made it dangerous to concert any mcafures for theihr de-
fence, and impoflible to act with becoming vigour. james and
his counsellors, by a false siep which they took, presentcd to them,
at length, an advantage which they did not fail to improve.

lM4OT'IVES, which are well known, had prompted Henry VIII.

to disclaim the pope's authority, and to fcize the revenues ofi the
regular clergy. His system of reformation satisfied none of his

Ifubl ecs,

lubjce&s. Sonic w-cre CnIra'ged bccaufe le hlad proceeded fb Ji., o0 K
othe1rs m1urmnured bccautc lie proceeded no fartlher. 1By his impl- -
rlo3:; tempelr, ,and alterlnatc peribcuions of the zealots for popcry'
and thle converts to the protc lhiit opinions, 11 was equally loLmli-
dablc to hol1. l-Icnry w-.s 'raid that tlii. generacl difllisl'acion.
of his people mIlil;lt cncragc lis Cenemies oil the continent to
invade lhis linl",Jom. lie k;lC' that Iothl the pop e

and the clm-

peror courted tile friendlhi) of the ki g; (f Scots, and endea-
voired to engage him in an alliance .lain.fi '.ngladl. I-e.
rclolved, thelrefore, to diai[ppoint tlh eflects of their negocia-
tions, by entering into a clol-r union \withi Is nephew. In
order to acconmpliih this, he tranlinitted to Ja.ncs an elablorate
memorial, riprcfi lnthgl tlie numerous cncroachments of the ice of
Rome upon tlie rights of Ifovrcirgns ; and that h1C mighl t induce,
him more certainly to adopt the tame mcani.res fior abolilhing
papald uftrpation, which had proved lb cficacious in F.ngland, he
lint aimballfdors into Scotland, to propose a plcronlal interview
withl hi.an at York. It was plainly James's interest to accept this
invitationl; the affliiancc of ol powerful an anlly, the h1igh hlonours
whicll were prominifd him, and the liberal fitblidics he might have
obltaincdl , vo-ol : have added no little dignity to his donmellic go-
vernmcint, and inmu have Crcatly facilitated thc execution of his
favoturite plan. On the other hand, a war with England, which
lie had rcaobn to apprehend, if lie rcjclcld Henry's ofeLrs of friend-
fhil., was inlconfillent viti all his views. ' his would bring him
to depend on his barons ; an army could not be raiscd without
lteir aEl fianc: To call nobles incensed ag.;ilnt their prince into
tlhe fiell, was to unite his cncmics, to make them fcnfible of their
iwn !ilrngth, and to afiord theml an opportunity of revenging

' Strypc, EclcCf. I\Tcn. i. App, 155.

I 1*
t

L oo 0 thcir wrongs. Tamcs, who was not ignorant that all tlhci' confe-
t----._c. quenccs might follow a breach with lngland, liellend at first to

I-Icnry's proposal, and consented to tile interview at York. But
tiCe clergy dreaded an union, which mufi: have been eftabli.'lcd on
tlhe ruins of the church. HI-enry had taken great pains to infufc
into his neplhew his own1 fenltiincnts concerning religion, and had
frequently solicited hiimi, by abadors, to renounce the Utlliirped
dominion of the pope, which was no lets dilhonourable to princes
than grievous to their fiubjcecs. The clergy had hitherto, with
great addrets, diverted thie king from regarding these solicitations.
But, in an amicable conference, Henry exlpeeced, and they feared,
that James would yield to his entreaties, or be convinced by his
arguments. They knew that the revenues of the church were an
alluring objecQ to a prince who wanted money, and who loved it;
that tlhe pride and ambition of ccclefiafiics raised the indignation
of the nobles ; that tleiir indecent lives gave offence to the people;
that the proteffant opinions wvere 1preading fast throughout the
nation; and that an univcrfal defcdtion from the eflablilhed church
would be the coniequence of giving the finalleft, degree of encou-
ragement to thcfc principles. Por these reasons, they employed
all their credit with the king, and had recouric to every artifice
and insinuation, ill order to divert him from a journey, wvhich mnuP:
have been so fatal to their intere. They endeavoured to illnfire
him with fear, by magnifying- the danger to whicl he would ex-
pofc his person, by venturing so far into England, without any
security but the word of a prince, who having violated every thing
venerable and sacred in religion, was no longer to be trulted;
and by way of compensation for the fiins which he might have
received from Henry, they offered an annual donative of fifty
thousand crowns; they promised to contribute liberally towards car-
rying on a war with England, and flatteled him with the profIpeC

of

of inmmenfe riches, arlihng from the forlciture of persons who were CB oo :
to be tried and condemned as heretics. Influenced by thecle con- -----.
fiderations, James broke his agrccmcnt with I-Icnry, who, in cx-
peCLation of meeting him, had already come to York ; and ttha:
haughty and impatient monarch rcfinted the affront by decla-ing
vwar agaift Scotland. -lis army was soon ready to iinvad te:
kingdom. James was obliged to have rccourfL to the noblce, si r
thc idefnce of his dominions. At his c'inn:and, tlhey alml
their followers; but with tle famne difi)lltiaons which !;ad ani-
mnated their ancestors 1i1 the reign of Jales 111. and lithl a flll
rIclblutiuon of rinitating tiheir example, by tpniihing tlimle to whlm
thley implutedl the 'ricvancs or wlIichl they had realol to compla.in;
and if thle kingl's miltilers hlad not bIjcc meIn of abilities, iLlpcrlor
to tihofe of James III. and of conlidcrable intercltl even with their
cncemies, 1who could not agree amnong thlemhil'ves whallt vidcims to
iclril;ce, the camp of Fala would liave been as -emlarkable as tlhat
of Lauder, for the daring encroachmenlts of the nolility on the
prerogative of the prince. But thoughi Ilis mniniliers vwere laved
by this accident, the nobles hlad soon another op,portuniity of dii-
covering to tle king their diflhtisfaclion wit-h l;;s governnent, and
tleir contempt of his authority. Scarcity of' proxifions, and the
rigour of the season, having obliged the Ingliil army, which lad
invaded Scotland, to retire, James imagined that lie could attack
them, with great advantage, ill their retreat ; but the principal
barons, with an obstinacy and dilfdain wlhich greatly aggravated
their difobeliencc, refused to advance a ftep beyond the limits of
their own country. Provoked by this insult to hiiifelf, and sus-
picious of a new con(piracy agailit his miniiifers, the king infClantly
diflbandedl an army which paid ol little regard to his orders, and
returned abruptly into the heart of the lkingdom,

AiJr

ji 0 ;0; A>, amlitious and high-fpiritcd prince could not brook su-ch a
<---~--* mor!tifying aftront. I-lis hopes of success had been rafl, and his

dcfipair upon a difilppointment was cxceflive. II felt limLtlf
cle.nga,-cd in all unncceffary war with linland , whlich , ineadc of
yielding him the laurels and triumphs that he expcctdl, had be-
gun with fuichi circumftanccs, as encouraged the infolcnce cf his
Iful)jccl: , anl expTGid himi to the scorn of lis enemies. EI-c iaw
lhow vaiin and inL'TLCLual all his projeCds to llumble the nobles lia
been, andi that, thlou tl in times of peace a prince may endcavour
to deCprCl thelm, they wrill rife, during war, to their former im-
portance and dignity. Iinpatience, relcntmlcnt, indignation, filled
his boIoi;n lyV turns. The violence of thelf pafllons altered his
temper an, an, perCas, impaired his rcafon. le becamrne pcnive,
h'i1lcj, andc retired. HIe fmclc(l, through the day, to be flvallovecd
uii] in lproloinld nmcditationl, and, through the night, ie- wavs dil-
turbcd will thiojl visionary terrors which make impreflion upon a
wcalC uiindcrfra ndin .g only, or a diftrdered fancy. In order to
revive he lc !,,g' ipirits, an inroad on the wcecern borders weas con-
certecd by Iris iniitcrs, who prevailed upon tle barons in the
nciui1ihOlnring prov\'iC"s to ralic as many troops as were thoulght
nIcccfi' r., alnd tO Center the lienemly's country. But nothing could
rc!movc tilc king's avcrllon to Ills nobility, or diminifli his jealousy
of tlicnr po,.;cr. ITe would not even entrif'l thecn with the com-
m; a :i 1 il. c sOi-cs hxl!icll tlC lard

l afii)embld ; that was rcfcrr ec

-lor Oliver Sipclir h]is Iavouriie, 1wo no sooner appeared to take
pofifironl o tlie dignity conferred upon him, than rage and indig-
nation occalioncd an univcrfll mutiny in the army. Five hundred

nglifil, vwho h appened to be drawn up in light, attacked tlh Scots
in this diforcr. I-atred to the kling, and contempt of their ge-
neral, pr-oduced an eflbcl to vwhich there is no parallel in hliRor-.
'They overcamce the fear of death and the love of libcrty; and ten

thousand

thousand men fled before a number so far inferior, without striking B 0o I
a ingile blow. No man was desirous of a victory, vlhich would -
have been acceptable to the king, and to his favourite ; few endcea-
.oured to lave thlcmfelves by flight ; the Englifl had the choice
of what priioncrs they pleased to take ; and almloft every pcr!bn
of difinction, who was engaged in tli expcdition, remained i
their hands '. This aftonifling event was a new proof to the king
of the general dialfllCeion of the nobility, and a new difiovcry of
hii ov:.n wcaknlefs and want of authority. Incapable of bearin-gl
tliefe repeated infilts, he founld Iiimifblf tilable to revenge tlhicim.
The decpc: melancholy and deftpair lilccclded to the furious tra. I;-
ports of r:gc, which the hirf account of the route of hlis arny
occa:lioned. All the violent pafiions, whiich a:re the enemies o
life, preyed upon Iris mind, and wafled and cell!umed a youilil'ti
and vigorous conllitution. Some authors oi tliat age im pute hi;
,iitinmly death to poiton ; but the difales o( the mind, whclli
they rile to an height, arc often mortal ; and tlhc ic;ilo cf'e'ts of
difltppointmncnt gr, and rc'ntment, upon a l '.nginc and inle-
tuous temper, fufliciently account for Iis tunhaiy latiC. "' i:
death (1(lys Drummond) provcth his mindi to have been r li 'e
to an high firain, and above mediocrity; lie co;!i! die, Ib:ut c:,ld
not digefcl a difalftcr. Had James Ifjrvived tlis Inisfortulc, onec
Of two tilings mufi have happened: eithcr the violence of his
temper would have engaged himi open ly to attack tie noblecs, v.ho
would have found in -lenry a willing and powervful lprotcetor, and
have derived the laune afTiflance fron hlim, vich the malecontents
in the fucceedingi reign did from his daughter Eliza!bthl in that

f Accor.:in: to nn account of this event in tlic Tamilton M?,SS. :bout thirly

were killed, above a tlioufi(lnd were t:iacii p)if oiirs, and rmo:g hllcin, a hiul;cred
and ixty prrfoll of condlition, V\ol. ii. 280. T' f'h :lll imilbur of thc E:,;l li!
prevented tlheir talking morc priloners.

6 cafe,

1i o O; cafe, a dangerous civil war mufn have bccn the certain consequence.
~,-d-. Or, perhaps, nccefCity might have obliged him to accept of Henry's

olfers, and be reconciled to his nobility. In that event the church
,woulcl have fallen a facrificc to their union; a Rcformation, upon
Ilcnry's plan, -vould have been cflabliflicd by laxw ; a great part
of tlhe temporaltics of the church would have been seizcd ; and
the fiiendfhip of the king and barons would have been cemented
by dividing its Ifoils.

Suicii were the effiortls of our kings towards reducing tLe cxor-

bltant lpower of thc nobles. If they were not attended with tfc-
cess, v.'c mulf not for that reason conclude that they were not
conductel d w ith prudence. Every circumnftance teems to have com-
biiedl againfil hie crown. Accidental events concurred with political
caul;cs, ill rclcdcring the lbelt concerted mcairlcs abortive. T'hc
a-ffliiiationi of onle king, the fuddenl death of another, and tlc
fatal deslpair of a third, contributed no lets tlhan its own natural

llrcngth, to prleClrve the ariPfocracy fromn ruin.

AMIDS r tiillc ru e, tile influence which our kings pofliflcdl

in tlcir parliaillents, is a circiuilance iccmingly inexplicable,
and wich mli merits particular attention. As theie alfemblicS were
conmpolcd cidelry of the nobles, the), we are apt to imagiine, Inurf
''Ihl c\ra- have dicatedt all their decisions; but, inilead of this, every kling

foil lco t'olund them oblcqlnious to his will, and obtained fucli laws as lhe

,k SCil d(clnlemd necellchy for extending lis authority. All things were
Jianicnt. condnli&cd there wi ith dispatch and unanimiity ; and, in none of

our hi.florians, d(o wCe ind an ilnlance of any opposition formiedl
againlR tihe court in parliament, or mention of any dlilfculty in
carrying thronllgh thlCe Ilali'-s which were agreeable to the li:i,-.
In order to accouIt for this lingular sac:, it is nccellhry to inquire
into the origin and conflitution oi parliament.

T.';

Tirl gcnius of the feudal govcrnmcnt, unifor in all its opc- B 0o rK

rations, produced tlhe fiamnc ccins iil linall as in grcat fbcictio:s; ._-

..'

andi the territory of a baron was, il mi.niaturle, tlhe mIodel of at of i °.
kilngdom. IIe poflel'fed the right of juril(lidion, but tliofe who
depcnded on 1im lbillng free menI , and not slaves, could be tried
by their peers only ; and, tch-reforc, his vaills were bound to
attend his courts, and to aflift botl in palling and executiing hi
fentcncs. \lhcn ailTiibled oni thciC occasions, they cfalblilhed,
b1y n-utual collntnt, Inchl regulations as tended to the wclfarc of
their finall society; and often granted, voluntarily, iclh fuipplies
to their ,'S/pc'ior, as his necccfities required. Change now a tingle
name: Iii place of baron, fublitute king, and we behold a par-
liament in its firll rudiments, and obfirve the firfl exertions of
tlhoc powers, which its members now posiess as judges, as legis-
lators, and as ditfpenfers of the public revenues. Suitable to this
idea are the appellations of the Ki/g's Coz'l- ':, and of the Ki'ig's
Gract Cizl./, by lwhich parliaments were anciently diflinguifihcd;
and suitable to this, likewise, vcre the constituent members of
which it was composed. In all the feudal kingdoms, fuclh as held
of the king in cbitf wcrc bound, by the condition of their tenure,
to attend and to assist in his courts. Nor was this ccfcemed a
privilcge, but a service '. It was exadcd likewise of bilhops,
abbots, and the greater ccclcfiaflics, who, holding vail poreiffions
of the crown, were deemed fubjca to the fame burden. Parlia-
ments did not continue long in tllis ftatc. Cities gradually acquired
vvealth, a considerable share of the public taxes were levied on
them, the inhabitants grew into cftimation, and, being enfran-
chifed by the fovcreign, a place in parliament was the consequence
of their liberty, and of their importance. But as it would have

r Du Cange, voc. Curia. h Id. voc, Placitum, col. .519. Magna
Charta, art. 14. Aa. Jac. 1. 1425. cap. 52.

VOL I. .K been

B 0o 0 been absurd to confer such a privilege, or to impose such a burden

.---- - on a whole community, every borough was permitted to chufe

one or two of its citizens to appear in tlle name of the corporation;
and the idea of rcprfezntalio?2 was fiift introduced in this manner.
An innovation till more important naturally followed. The
vaifals of the crown were originally few in number, and extremely
powerful; but as it is impoflible to render property fixed and per-
manent, many of their poflefiions came, gradually, and by va-
rious methods of alienation, to be split and parcelled out into
different hands. -Iencc arose the diftincion betwecen the Greater
and the LcrTcr .arons. The former were those who retained their
original fiefs undivided; the latter were the new and less potent
vassals of the crown. Both were bound, however, to perform all
feudal services, and, of confequencc, to give attendance in Par-
liament. To the lefier barons, who formed no inconsiderable
body, this was an intolerable grievance. Barons fometilmes denied
their tenure, boroughs renounced their right of elefting, charters
were obtained containing an exemption from attendance; and the
anxiety with which our anceflors endeavoured to get siee from
the obligation of fitting in parliament, is furpafted by that only
with which their posterity solicit to be admitted there. In order
to accommodate both parties, at once, to secure to the king a sus-
ficient number of members in his great council, and to ihve his
vassals from an unneceflary burden, an easy expedient was found
out. The obligation to personal attendance was continued upon
the greater barons, from which the lesser barons were exempted,
on condition of their eleCting, in each county, a certain number
.of rcprf;jta/ives, to appear in their name. Thus a parliament
became complete in all its members, and was composed of lords
spiritual and temporal, of knights of the flires, and of bur-
gefles. As many causes contributed to bring govrnment earlier

to
.7

to perfection in England than in Scotland; as the rigour of the 1 i
feudal inrfitutions abated foolnc;, and its dcfeds were fiipplied witlh - --
greater facility in the one kingdom than in tlle other; England
led the way in all these changes, and burgefies and knights of the
fllire appcared in the parliaments of that nation, before they
were hcard of in ours. Bulrgeics were first admitted into the A. D. .;:',
Scottish parliamcnts by R.obcrt Bruce '; and in tlie preamble to tle
laws of Robert III. they are rankled among the conPlitucnt Inclu-
bers of that aflcmbly. The Icfle r barons were indebted to James I. 1i.:,-
for a ftatltc exempting them from pcrlonal attendance, and per-
mitting them- to clct rcprefentatives: the exemption was eagerly
laid hold on ; but the privilege was so little valued, that, except
one or tw.o inflances, it lay negleCed during one hundred and sixty
years; and James VI. firftc obliged them to fend rcprefentativcs
regularly to parliament '.

A SCOTTISI parliament, then, confitted anciently of great

barons, of ecclesiastics, and a few representatives of boroughs.
Nor were thefc divided, as in England, into two lioufes, but com-
posed one assembly, in which the lord chancellor prcfidcd '. In

Ablcrcomby, i. 635.

k Eflys on Brit. Antiq. Eff. II. Dalrymp. Hist. of Feud. Prop. ch. 8.
J In England, the peers and commons seem early to have met in separate houses;

and James I. who was fond of imitating the Englifil in all their customs, had pro-
bably an intention of introducing some considerable difliincion between the greatcr
and leflfr barons in Scotland; at least he determined that their consultations should
not be carried on under the direction of the fame president; for by his law, A. D.
1327, it is providlcd, " that out of the commiffioncrs of all the flires shall bc
chofrc a wife and expert man, called the common speaker of the parliament, who
shall propose all and sundry needs and causes pertaining to the commons in the par-
liamlnt or general council." No fulch speaker, it would seem, was ever cholen;
and by a fubfcqucnt law the chancellor was declared perpetual prcfident of par-
liament.

K z m-ude

B o0 K rude ages, when the science of government was extremely irnper-

L~ - rsed among a martial people, unacquainted with the arts of peace,

itrangers to the talents which make a figure in debate, and despising
them, -parliaments were not held in the fame estimation as at pre-
sent; nor did haughty barons love those courts, in which they
appeared with such evident marks of inferiority. Parliamentswere
often haitily assembled, and it was, probably, in the king's power,
by the manner in which he issued his writs for that purpose, to
exclude such as were averse from his measures. At a time when
deeds of violence were common, and the reflraints of law and
decency were little regarded, no man could venture with safety
to oppose the king in his own court. The great barons, or lords
of parliament, were extremely few ; even so late as the beginning
of the reign of James VI. they amounted only to fifty-three.
The ecclefiailics equalled them in number, and being devoted im-
plicitly to the crown, for reasons which have been already ex-
plained, rendered all hopes of vitory in any struggle desperate.
Nor were the nobles themselves so anxious as might be ima-
gined, to prevent ads of parliament favourable to the royal pre-
rogative; conscious of their own strength, and of the kling's ina-
bility to carry these ads into execution without their concurrence,
they trusted either to elude or to contemn them; and the statute
revoking the king's property, and annexing alienated jurifdidions
to the crown, repeated in every reign, and violated and tde1pifed
as often, is a standing proof of the impotence of laws, when op-
posed to power. So many concurring causes are sufficient, perhaps,
to account for the ascendant which our kings acquired in parlia-
ment. But, without having recourse to any of there, a single
circumstance, peculiar to the constitution of the Scottifl parliament,

' And. Coll. v. i. pref. 40.

the

the mentioning of which we have hitherto avoided, will abundantly B o K
explain this fact, seemingly so repugnant to all our reasonings con- ---- '
cerning the weakncfs of the king, and the power of the nobles.

As far back as our records enable us to trace the constitution of

our parliaments, we find a committee, distinguished by the name
of L sr,'s f Art/icl's. It was their business to prepare and to di-
gcti all mattcrs which were to be laid belore the parliament. There
was rarely any business introduced into parliament, but what had
rpafld through the channel of this committee; every motion for a
new law was ilrft made there, and approved of, or rejeced by t1e,
members of it ; what they approved was formed into a bill, and
presclntcd to parliament ; and it seems probable, that what they
rcjctced could not be introduced into the hoult. This committec
owed the extraordinary powers vested in it, to the military genius
of the ancient noblels; too inpatient to filubmit to the druclldgery oc:
civil bulinelf, too impetuous to obfcrvc the forms, or to cltcr inio
the details nccelliry in conduting it, they wcre glad to lay that
burdein upon a finall number, while they thenifllves had no othc:
Iabour than ftinply to give, or to refuse, their nilaflit to the bi!l'
which wcere preclnted to them. The lords of articles, then, inr
orly dircecd all the proceedings ol parliament, lbut pofeflhd ;
:negative before debate. That committee was cliofen and confLi-
tutcd in fich a manner, as put this valuable privilege entircly in
the king's liands. It is extremely probable, that our klings once
had the folc right of nominating the lords oi articlcs ". T!ey

c atllc

It appears from authentic records, that a parlialent .was eppointed to be held

March 12, 1566, and that the lords of articles were chosen and met on the 7th,
live days before the assembling of parliament. If they could be regularly celetctc
so long before the meeting of parliament, it is natural to conclude, that the prince
alone po0fcnicd the right of clitCing them. There are two diieirent accou.nts of the

I'.:a ~. ?'

B o o 0K came aftcrwards to be elctcd by the parliament, and consisted of

..-I,--.., an equal number out of each estate, and molt commonly of eight

temporal and eight spiritual lords, of eight reprefcntatives of bo-
roughs, and of the eight great officers of the crown. Of this
body, the eight eccclefiaiics, together -with the officers of the
crown, were entirely at the king's devotion, and it was scarce
poflible that the choice could fall on such temporal lords and bur-
gcfls as would unite in opposition to his meafurcs. Capable
either of influencing their elction, or of gaining them when
elected, tle king commonly found the lords of articles no lets ob-
fcquious to his will, than his own privy council, and, by means
of his authority with them, he could put a negative upon his
parliament lefore debate, as well as after it; and what may feemc
altogether incredible, the most limited prince in Europe actually
poflnield, in one infLuice, a prerogative which the mofl- abfolutc
could never attain °

To

manner of their election at that time, one by Mary herself, in a letter to the arch-
bishop of Glasgow: " le, accompanied with our nobility for the time, past to

the Tolbooth of Edinburgh, for holding of our parliament on the 7th day of

" this inflant, amn clclted the lords articulars." If we cxplain these words,
according to the ftJli grammar, we mufr conclude that the queen herself elected
them. It is, however, more probable that Mary meant to fay, that the nobles then
prfelnt with her, viz. her privy counsellors, and others, elected the lords of ar-
ticles. Keith's Hist. of Scotland, p. 331. The other account is Lord Ruthven's,
who expressly aflrms that the queen hcrfelf elec'ed them, Keith's Append. 126.
Whether we embrace the one or the other of there opinions, is of no consequence.
If the privy counsellors and nobles attending the court had a right to elce the lords
of articles, it was equally advantageous for the crown, as if the prince had had the
folc nomination of them.

° Having deduced the history of the committee of lords of articles as low as

the s'ubjec of this preliminary book required, it may be agreeable, perhaps, to some
of my readers, to know the fuibfcquent variations in this singular inflitution, and
the political use which our kings made of these. XVhen parliaments became more
numerous, and more considerable by the admiflion of the reprcfentatives of the lefllr

bronsll

To this account of the internal conftitutioll of Scotland, it v ill B (0° I
not be improper to add a view of the political state of Europe at '-----

State of Eu-
that period, where the following history commences. A tho- rope at tile

beginning of
tile fixtecnth

barons, the prefcrving their influence over the lords of articles became, likewise, ccntury.
a;l object of greater importance to our kings. James VI. on pretence that the lords
of articles could not find leisure to confider the great multitude of aftairs lnid before
them, obtained an ah, appointing four perfbns to be named out of eachli /a/, wiho
should meet twenty days before the commencemeni of parliamcent ', to receive all
supplications, &c. and rcjcling what they thought frivolou, fliould cngrcfs inl .
book whalt they thought worthy the attention of the lords of articles. No pro-
viSion is ml.lde in the a&t for the choice of this felcct body, and the king would, of
coiarle, have claimed that privilege. In I633, when Charles I. was beginning to
introduce those innovations which gave lb much oiffence to the llation, lie dreaded
tile opposition of his paulialment, and in order to prevent that, all artifice was nmade
une of to secure the lords of articles for the crown. TIhe temporal peers were
appointed to choose cight biliops, and the bishops eight peers; thci l fxtcen met
togethcr, and eleiced eight knights of the shire, and cight hburgcels, andl to thcf
the crown officcrs were atded as ufuial. if we can only fuppole cight perlbns of tb
,!iUalc;tois a body as the peers of Scotland, were bo e

bec eby, that tinie atta.clicd to

the court, tthle,, it is obvious, would be the men wlhom the biillops would chooti,
and of conficquence the whole lords of articles were the tools andl creatucule of the-
king. This practice, To inconifirent with liberty, was abolifned dur-in; the ci.'il
war: and the statute of James VI. was repealed. After the reltoarti')n, par-
liaicents became more fcrvile than ever. What was only a temporary device, irn
ilie ieigni of Charles I. was then converted into a fanditgr lw . 1 '' or l l,, p:rr",'
(liys tl;e author from whoin I have borrowed many of thcie pa;:rticulars, *' I lhould

have thought it less criminal in our rceforation parliament, to have openly be-

'' llowcd upon the king a negative before debate, than ill Iflch an underliandl arti-
" ficial mannier to betray their conitituents and the nation." Eflays on Erir.
Antiq. 55. It is probable, however, from a letter of Randolph's to Cecil, Io Aug.
I56o, printed in the Appendix, that this parliament had tome appearance of ancicjit
precedent to jufiify their unworthy conduiS. Various tul.fiions concerning the
conftitucnt members of the Scottifhl parliament ; concerning tile cra at which the
rcprefentatives of boroughs ,were introduced into that ;!inmbly ; an(d collcrcnti-:
the origin and power of the committee of lords of articles, occur, and lh;. been
agitatcd wvilh great warnrth. Since the first publication of this work, all thele
diIfplted points haIve been confidered with calmnenfs and accuracy in AI r. Wrigr i's
Inquiry into the Riic and Progress of Parliament, &c. 4to Edit. p. 17, cc.

A.a -z-. P, 259.;
6 m I

J 0 0 K rough knowledge of that general system, of which every kilngldonr
_ ....... in Eiurope forms a part, is not less requisite towards understanding

the liiftory of a nation, than an acquaintance with its peculiar go-
vcrlnment and lasws. The latter niay enable us to comprehend
domelftic occurrences and revolutions; but without the former,
foreign tranfations mufi be altogether myf-crious and unintel-
ligible. By attending to this, many dark passages in our hifiory
may be placed in a clear light; and where the bull of historians
havc fcen only the effcE, we may be able to discover the cauce.

TH-E fubvc-rion of the feudal government in France, and its

declension in the ncighbouring kingdoms, occasioned a remarkable
alteration in the political ifate of Europe. Kingdoms, which
were inconsiderable when broken, and parcelled out among nobles,
acquired frninefs and ilrength, by being united into a regular
monlarchy. Kings became conscious of their own power and
importance. They meditated schemes of conquest, and engaged
in wars at a distance. Numerous armies were raised, and great
taxes imposed for thcir subsistence. Considerable bodies of in-
fantry were kept in constant pay; that service grew to be honour-
able; and cavalry, in which the strength of European armies had
hitherto consisted, though proper enough for the short and volun-
tary excursions of barons who served at their own expence, were
found to be unfit either for making or defending any important
conquest.

IT was in Italy, that the powerful monarchs of France and Spain

and Germany first appeared to make a trial of their new strength.
The division of that country into many frall flates, the luxury of
the people, and their effeminate aversion to arms, invited their
more martial neighbours to an easy prey. The Italians, who had

been
7

been accufrtolmd to mock battles only, and to decide their interior B 0 0 K
quarrels by innocent and bloodless vidtories, were aftoniillcd, _, .
\lwhnc the Prench invadcd their country, at the light of real war;
andl as they coult not refrif the torrent, they 'uflfercd it to take its
courfc, and to fpeind its rage. Intrigue and policy supplied the
vwant of ftrcngthl. Ncceflity and fclf-prc1ervation led tliat ingenious
people to the great iccret of modern politics, by teaching them how
to balance tlhe powcr of one pi-iucc, by tlrowing tliat of another
iito the oppoflte fealc. By this happy device, the liberty of Italy
was long plrclcrvcd. The feales were poiled by very fkilfl hands;
the fiiallflt variations were attended to, and no prince was allowed
to retain any fupcriority, tlat could be dangcrous.

A SYSTEiI of conlduc- , pursucd with so much success in Italy,

was not long confined to that country of political refinement. The
maxim of preserving a balance of power is founded so much upon
obvious rcafoning, and the situation of Europe rendered it so ne-
cefl.iry, that it soon became a matter of chief attention to all wife
politicians. Every flep any prince took was observed by all his
neighbours. Ambafiadors, a kind of honourable spies, authorised
by the mutual jcaloufy of kings, resided almost constantly at every
differcnt court, and had it in charge to watch all its motions.
Dangers wvcre forefcen at a greater distance, and prevented with
more cale. Confederacies were formed to humble any power
whlich role above its due proportion. Revenge or felf-defence were
no longer the only causes of hostility, it became common to take
arms out of policy; and war, both in its commencemc nt and in
its operations, was more an exercise of the judgment, than of the
paflions of men. Almost every war in Europe became general,
and the most inconsiderable states acquired importance, because
they could add weight to either scale,

Vo0L 1. 1, FRANCIS

B o o I: FRANCIS I. who mounted the throne of France in the year one

_--- _ thouland five hundred and fifteen, and Charles V. who obtained

the Imperial Crown in the year one thousand five hundred and
nineteen, divided between them the firength and afifccions of all
Europe. Their perpetual enmity was not owing solely either to
perfonlal jeioufy, or to the caprice of private paffon, but was
founded so much in nature and true policy, that it subsisted be-
tween their pofl erity for several ages. Charles succeeded to all the
dominions of the houfi of Auflria. No family had ever gained
so muchl by wiie and fortunate marriages. By acquisitions of this
kind the Au.ilrianl princes rose, in a short time, fromn obfciure
counts of r'Hap-boulr, to be archdukles of AuPiria and kinlgs of
i3ohemia, and Iwere in poffiLfion of the Imperial dignity by a sori
of hereditary right. Becfides these territories in Germany, Charles
was heir to the crown of Spain, and to all the dominions which
belonged to the lioufe of Blurgundy. The Burgundian provinces
cungroiled, atthat time, the riches and commerce of one half of
-urope ; and lie drew from then, on many occasions, tlofe ini
-nmerl fums, which no people itlout trade and liberty are able
to contribute. Spain flrnil'ied lhm a gallant and hardy infa;trly
to whose discipline he was indebted for all his conqu.elis. At
the fame time, by the dliscovery of the new world, a vein of
wealth ,was opened to him, which all the extravagance of anl.i-
tion could not exhaufn. Trhec advantages relndered Charles the
Irrft prince in Eu;rc1pe; but he wished to be more, and opcly
ai;ired to univerlil monarchy. H-is genius was of that kind
v.:hich ripens foowly, and lies long concealed ; but it grew up,
withlout ocbfer-vatioo, to an unexpectd height and vigour. i-e
poiLefitd, in an eminent degree, the cha-raleriftic virtues of all
tle different races of princes to whom lie was allied. In forming
his fchcmes, he disco-verec all the subtlety and penetration of Ser-

0 u iiian·llln

' ';.'.'il; 11he prfucdit thei wh that olflillnatc and B o

o 0 .

"icxi' I I-r cvc: -.CC : c \-. ilh iias ever been peculiar to the Aulifian .--l--
lI{o:! ; and iil executing them, lie could employ the magnanimity
:;1ind 1, ol(':ic1 o0 h Eurgundlian:l aniccRoos. HI-s abiitles were ecual
to hiis povclr, and nlcithl- of them would have ben infcrior to
Id's dclins, .ihad not Providence, in pity to inlnlkin,l and in order
t)o preclrvc them i'rin the worll of all evils, Univcril rIonarchy,
raiied ulp Fi-ral is 1. to d:flnd the lI'bert- of' Europe. 1-is domi-
iions \vCer lc{s cxti'tdvc, b'lt more ui.ited, thanl tie eincmpror's.
lis ilbjcc-is wVcrc numll rotlu, aclive, and warlike, lovers of glory,
anld lovcrs of thei' king. To Clinrlcs, power was the only objcl C
of dcfirc, and he purfuicd it with an unwearied and joylcfs illrlll,
F:rancis could mingle pleafuire and elegance with his ambition;
and though lie ncglcaccd Itme advantages, which a more phleg-
matic or more fiugal prince would have improved, an acnive and
intrepid courage fuipplicd all his defcts, and checked or defeated
many of the emperor's designs.

TIIE retU of Europe obfcrvcd all the motions of these mighty

rivals with a jealous attention. On the one fidc, tlh Italians fawr
the dianger which threatened Chriflendom, and in order to avert
it, had rccourfe to the expedient which they had often employed
with success. They cndeavoured to divide the power of the two
contending monarchs into equal scales, and, by the union of several
small states, to countcrpoife him whose power became too great.
But whlat they concerted with much wisdom, they were able to
execute with little vigour; and intrigue and refinement were feeble
fences against the incroachments of military power.

ON the other fide, HenryVIII. of England held the balance
with lcs delicacy, but with a stronger hand. He was the third

L 2 prince

B 0 0 I prince of the age in dignity and in power; and the advantageous
"^- - situation of his dominions, his domestic tranquillity, his immenfc

wealth, and absolute authority, rendered him the natural guardian
of the liberty of Europe. Each of the rivals courted him with
emulation; he knew it to be his interest to keep the balance even,
and to restrain both, by not joining entirely with either of them.
But he was seldom able to reduce his ideas to pracice; lie was
governed by caprice more than by principle; and the pallions of
the man were an overmatch for the maxims of the king. Vanity
and resentment were the great springs of all his undertakings, and
his neighbours easily found the way, by touching tlefe, to force
him upon many rafli and inconfiften enterpriiis. I-is. reigrn was
a perpetual series of blunders in politics; and while he esteemed
himself the wisest prince in Europe, he was a constant dupe to those
who found it neceflary, and could fuibmit, to flatter him,

IN this situation of Europe, Scotland, which had hitherto waftcc

her strength in the quarrels between France and England, emergce
from her obscurity, took her Peation in the system, and began to
have oime influence upon the fate of distant nations. -Ier afitl-
ance was frequently of consequence to. the contending parties, and
the balance was often so nicely adjufled, that it was in her power'
to make it lean to either fide. The part assigned her, at this junc-
ture, was to divert Henry from carrying his arms into the con-
tinent. That prince having routed the French at Guinegat and
invested Teroucinne, France attempted to divide his forces, by
engaging James IV. in that unhappy expedition which ended with
his life. For the fame reason Francis encouraged and afiflted the
duke of Albany to ruin the families of Angus and IHome, which
were in the interest of England, and would willingly have per-
fuaded the Scots to revenge the death of their king, and to. enter

into

into a new war with that kingdom. Henry and Francis having 1B IO I
united not long after against the emperor, it was the interest of ---
both kings, that the Scots flhould continue inactivc; and a long
tranquillity was the cfucl- of their union. Charles endeavoured
to break this, and to cmbarrafis Henry by another inroad of the
Scots. For this end he made great advances to [ames V. flatter-
ing the vanity of the young monarch, by clctcing himii a knight
of the Golden Fleece, and by otffrin hinim a match in the Imperial
family ; while, in return for thefl elmpty honours, he demanded
of him to renounce his alliance vwihi Franlcc, and to declare war
agnaiinfl England. !But James, who hadl mIuch to lol, and who
could gain little by closing with the emperor's prol:oltls, rcjcicd
them with decency, and keeping firm to his ancient allies, left
Icnry at full liberty to al upon tlhe continent with his whole
firength.

HIE NR:lY himself began his reign by imitating the example oY

his anccifors with regard to Scotland. HIe held its power in l:fic
extreme contempt, that he was at no pains to gain its fricndflip;
but, on the contrary, he irritated the whole nation, by reviving
the antiiquattcd pretcnfions of the crown of England to the lovc--
lcignty over Scotland. But his own experience, and the example
of his enemies, gave him a higher idea of its importance. It was
impofiible to defend an. open and extenfivc frontier against the
incursions of an aclive and martial people. During any war on the
continent, this obliged him to divide the strength of his kingdom.
It was nccefiary to maintain a kind of army of observation in the
North of England ; and after all precautions, the Scottish borderers,
who were superior to all mankind in the practice of irregular war,
often made liccefsful inroads, and spread terror and desolation over
many counties. He fcll, at last, upon the true secret of policy,

with

, 0 o with lrcfpedr to Scotland, which his predecefllbrs had too little pc-
Lc_.. . net-ration to difcovcr, or too muchl pride to employ. The fitua-

tion of the country, and the bravery of the people, made the
conoluct of Scotland iinpoilible; but the national poverty, and
the violence of fadion, rendered it an easy matter to divide,
and to govern it. He abandoned, therefore, the former design,
and resolved to employ his utmost address in executing the
latter. It had not vet become honourable for one prince to receive
pay from another, under the more decent name of a subsidy.
But in all ages the fame arguments have been good in courts, and
of weight with miniflers, fadtious leaders, and favourites. M/hat
were the arguments by which Henry brought over so many to his
intcrefl during the minority of James V. we know by the original
warrant flill extant P, for remitting considerable funms into Scotland.
By a proper dillribution of there, many persons of note were gained
to his party, and a facion which held secret correspondence with
England, and received all its directions from thence, appears hence-
forward in our domeflic contests. In the fcquel-of the history, we
flall find Henry labouring to extend his influence in Scotland.
His fucceflors adopted the fame plan, and improved upon it. The
affairs of the two kingdoms became interwoven, and their interests
were often the fame. Elizabeth divided her attention almost
equally between them, and the authority which she inherited in the
one, was not greater than that which she acquired in the other.

P Burn. Hil. Ref. vol. i. p. 7.

# BOOK II.

T -1I E
H I STOR

o F

BO O K Il.

i ''AP>Y Y queen of Scots, the daughter of James V. andc of C1 °O

0 :
-. '. /Iary of C;uifL, was born a v days bonore the death of ----

Bi;'th of ?,ia-.

licr fatlher. 'The ituation in which he left the kingdom alarmed ry, D)c;. 1:,
,;I, ra'iks of men vith the profpioC of a turbulent and dliltrous ilet[ouflrhl
r1';;i. A war againf Englalnd had been undertaken without ne- I:in]S'Li -
CLlivy, and carried on without success. Mlany perlbns of the lirif
rankii liad fa llen into the hands of the nginfh, in the unfortunate
r!out n11,ar the fithl of Solway, and were rill pri:onrs at London.
\inongil Ell of tIhe nobls theC re was little union either in tleiir
vir3ews or iln tlhci a:uCsions; and the religious diipulcs occafionc(l
by the opinions of the reformers, growinS every day more violent,
:aLddd tlo tl:c 'lrge of tlhfo facions which1 arce natlural to a fortm of
gv';ri 'n,! '.n t early arif.Locatictl.

'>:: :f,;-:vr'nricit of a (lncen vwas unklnow in iScotland, and did
not i;:nlrnt muclh reverence in the minds of a martial people.

The

B 10
o I Tle government of an infant queen was still more destitute of real

-v' authority; and the profpedt of a long and feeble minority invited

to faCtion by the hope of impunity. James had not even pro-
vided the common remedy against the disorders of a minority, by
committing to proper persons the care of his daughter's education,
and the adminifhration of affairs in her name. Though lhe saw
the clouds gathering, and foretold that they would quickly burst
into a storm, he was so little able to disperse them, or to defend
his daughter and kingdom against the imminent calamities, that,
in Imere dcfpair, he abandoned them both to the mercy of fortune,
and left open to every pretender, the office of regent, which he
could not si to his own latistfacion.

Pretentions of CAIDINAxL Beatoun, who had for many years been confidcred
Card-inlal
:ieatounl to as prime minilcir, was the first who claimed that high dignity;
tilcregcncy. and il f upport of his prctenfions, he produced a teftanient

which he limfelf had forged in the name of the late king; and
without any other right, instantly afihumed the title of regent.
-Ie hoped, by the afliftance of the clergy, the countenance of
France, tle connivance of the queen dowager, and the support
of the whole popish falCion, to hold by force, what he had seized
on by fiaud. But Beatoun had enjoyed power too long to be a fa-
vourite of the nation. Those among the nobles who wished for a
reformation in religion dreaded his severity, and others confidered
the elevation of a churchman to the highest office in the kingdom
as a depression of thenfelves. At their instigation, James Hamilton
earl of Arran, and next heir to the queen, rouled himself from
his inacdivity, and was prevailed on to aspire to that flation, to
which proximity of blood gave him a natural title. The nobles,

Sadler's Lett. 16r. Haynes, State Papers, 486.

who

lwho were afsicmbled for that purpose, unanimously conferred on B o0 K
him the office of regent; and the public voice applauded their ,[-----

Earl ofArran
choice . choefn re-

gent.
No two men ever differed more widely in difofition and cha- Charaaerof

~BcatotJ! ;

ra&er, than the earl of Arran and cardinal Beatoun. The cardinal
was by nature of immoderate ambition; by long experience he had
acquired address and refinement; and infolcnce grew upon him
from continual Iiiccefs. His high station in the church placed him
in the way of great civil employments; his abilities were equal to
the greatelt of thcfe; nor did he reckon any of them to be above
his merit. As his own eminence was founded upon the power of
the church of Rome, he was a zealous defender of that superstition,
and for the fame reason an avowed enemy to the doctrine of the re-
formers. Political motives alone determined him to support the
one, or to oppose the other. His early application to public bufi-
ness kept him unacquainted with the learning and controversies of
the age; he gave judgment, however, upon all points in dispute,
with a precipitancy, violence, and rigour, which contemporary
hiflorians mention with indignation.

TIIE character of the earl of Arran was, in almost every thing, of Arran,

the reverse of Beatoun's. IHe was neither infected with ambition,
nor inclined to cruelty: The love of cafe extinguished the former,
the gentleness of his temper preserved him from the latter. Ti-
midity and irresolution were his predominant failings, the one occa-
sioned by his natural constitution, and the other arising from a con-
:cioufnefs that his abilities were not equal to his Ration. With these
dilfofitions he might have enjoyed and adorned private life; but

b Epift. Reg. Scot. vol. ii. p. 308.
VOL. I. M his

B O 1I his public conducl was without courage, or dignity, or confifi-
.-=---i ence. The perpetual slave of his own fears, and, by consequence,

the perpetual tool of those who found their advantage in pradcif-
ing upon them. But as no other person could be set in opposition to
the cardinal, with any probability of success, the nation declared
in his favour with fucli general content, that the artifices of his
rival could not withstand its united strength.

:;clhnclms or TII earl of Arran had scarce taken poflCTion of his new dignity,
Henry VIIllI.
with regard 'when a negociation was opened with England, which gave birth
to Scotland.

to events of the mort fatal consequence to limfelf, and to the
kingdom. After the death of James, I-Ienry VIII. was no longer
afraid of any interruption from Scotland to his designs against
France; and inimediately conceived hopes of rendering this fe-
curity perpetual, by the marriage of Edward his only son with the
young queen of Scots. I-Ie communicated his intention to the
prisoners taken at Solway, and prevailed on them to favour it, by
the promise of liberty, as the reward of their success. In the
mean time he permitted them to return into Scotland, that, by
their prefcnce in the parliament which the regent had called, they
might be the better able to persuade their countrymen to fall in
with his proposals. A cause, intrufled to such able and zealous
advocates, could not well miss of coming to an happy issue. All
those who feared the cardinal, or who desired a change in religion,
were fond ofan alliance, vwhich afforded prote&cion to the dorine
which they had embraced, as well as to their own persons, againfi
the rage of that powerful and haughty prelate.

Ilt-conduacd BUT -IHenry's rough and impatient temper was incapable of
by iimlkllf.

by Ji imf. irro;ing this favourable conjuncture. Address and delicacy in

ln ';ig'ing, the fears, and follies, and interefcs of men, were arts

7 with

with whlliclh le was utterly unacquainted. Tile designs he hadl B ° K
formed upon Scotland were obvious from the marriage which he ---
had proposcd, and he had not ldexterity enough to dilguife or to
conceal them. Inftcad of yielding to the fear or jealousy of the
Scots, what time and accidents would soon have enabled him to
recover, he at once alarmed and irritated the whole nation, by
demandingi that the qucen's perbin should be immediatcly con'.-
miittd to his custody, and that the governmcnt of the kingdom
fhnould be put into his hands during her minority.

IHENRY .could not have prescribed more ignominious conditions Ojioul tothl
to a conquered people, and it is no wonder they were rejecled, pc; thoug'.'"

in part ac-
with indignation, by men who hcorned to purclhaft an alliance with cepted by

c)0~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ ' *' tthem.

England at the price of their own liberty. The parliament of
Scotland, however, inlluenced by the nobles who returned fromn
England; desirous of peace with tlat kingdom; and delivered,
by tlhe regent's confining the cardinal as a prisoner, from any op- March :,
polition to which he might have given rile; consented to a treaty 'l3
of marriage and of union, but upon terms bomewhat more equal,
After some dark and unfucccfsful intrigues, by which his amibait
falor endeavoured to carry off the young queen and cardinal
Beatoun into England, IHenry was obliged to give up his own pro-
pofals, and to accept of theirs. On his fide, he coniented that the
queen lhould continue to reside in Scotland, and himself remain
excluded fiomn any flare in the government of the kingdom. On
the other hand, the Scots agreed to fend their sovereign into England
as soon as ime attained the full age of ten years, and infcantly to
deliver fix pcrfons of the firil rank, to be kept as hostages by Henry
till the queen's arrival at his court.

TIIE treaty was frill lo manifcftly of advantage to England, that Favoured by
the regent loft much of the public confidence by consenting to it. th regent.

IM 2 The

B 0

o K The cardinal, who had now recovered liberty, watched for such an
A d__ .__, opportunity of regaining credit, and he did not fail to cultivate and

Opposed by improve this to the utmost. He complained loudly that the regent
the cardinal.

had betrayed the kingdom to its molt inveterate enemies, and
sacrificed its honour to his own ambition. He foretold the ex-
tinction of the true catholic religion, under the tyranny of an
excommunicated heretic; but above all, he lamented to fee an
ancient kingdom consenting to its own servitude, descending into
the ignominious station of a dependent province; and, in one hour,
the wcaknefs or treachery of a single man surrendering every thing
for which the Scottish nation had struggled and fought during so
many ages. These remonstrances of the cardinal were not withi-
out effet. They were addressed to prejudices and pafions which
are deeply rooted in the human heart. The fame hatred to the
ancient enemies of their country, the fame jealousy of national
honour, and pride of independence, which, at the beginning of
the present century, went near to prevent the Scots from con-
senting to an union with England, upon terms of great advantage,
did at that time induce the whole nation to declare against the
alliance which had been concluded. In the one period, an hun-
dred and fifty years of peace between the two nations, the habit
of being fubjeted to the fame king, and governed by the fame
maxims, had considerably abated old animofities, and prepared
both people for incorporating. In the other, injuries were still
frcfh, the wounds on both fides were open, and in the warmth
of resentment, it was natural to seek revenge, and to be averse from
reconcilement. At the Union in one thousand seven hundred and
seven, the wisdom of parliament despised the groundless murmurs
occasioned by antiquated prejudices; but in one thousand five
hundred and forty-three, the complaints of the nation were better
founded, and urged with a zeal and unanimity, which it is neither

just

just nor safe to diliregard. A rafl measure of tle king of England 13B o K
added greatly to the violence of this national animosity. The
Scots, relying on the treaty of marriage and union, fitted out
several ships for France, with which their trade had been inter-
rupted for some time. These were driven by stress of weather to
take refuge in different ports of England; and Henry, under
pretext that they were carrying provisions to a kingdom with
which he was at war, ordered them to be leized and condemned
as lawful prizes . The Scots, aflonifhed at this proceeding of a
prince, whose intcrefl it was manifefIly, at tlat juncture, to court
and to sooth them, felt it not only as an injury, but as an insult,
and exprcfelcd all the rcfentment natural to an high-fpirited people ".
Their rage rose to such an height, that the English ambaflador
could hardly be protected from it. One spirit fcbmed now to

Kcith, 32, 34. Epift. Reg. Scot. ii. App. 311. Hamilton MISS. vol. i. 389.
d In the MS. Collclion of Papers belonging to the Duke of IHamilton, Sir

Ralph Sadler def-ribes the spirit of the Scots as extremcly outrageous. In his letter
from Edinburgh, September i, I5o 3, he fays, " The Ilay of the ships has brought the
people of this town, both men and v.omen, and especially the merchants, iiito such
a rage and fury, that the whole town is commoved agaiinii me, and swear great
oaths, that if their ships are not restorcd, that they would have their amends of me
and mine, and that they would Iet my house here on fire over my lhed, lb that one
of us flould not escape alive; and allo it hath much incensed and provoked the
people againif the governor, faying, that he hath coloured a peace with your lIa-
jefty only to undo them. This is the unreasonableness of the people, which live here
infuch a beastly liberty, that they neither regard God nor governor ; nor yetjuftice,
or any good policy, doth take place among them; alluring your highness that,
unless the ships be delivered, there will be none abiding here for me without danger."
Vol. 451. In his letter of September 5, he writes, that the rage of the people
flill continued so violent, " that neither I nor any of my folks dare go out of my
doors; and the provost of the town, who hath much ado to stay them from assault-
ing me in my house, and keepeth watch therefore nightly, hath sent to me sundry
times, and prayed me to keep myself and my folks within, for it is scant in his
power to rcprcfs or resist the fury of the people. They fay plainly, I shall never pars
out of the town alive, except they have their ships restored. This is the rage and
beaft!inefs of this nation, which God keep all honel men from." Ib. 471.

animate

1 o o0 K anilate all orders of men. The clergy offered to contribute a

~-...J.. gr-cat rum towards prcferving the church from the dominion of a

princc, whose Iyflemr of reformation was so fatal to their power.
The nobles, after having mortified the cardinal so lately in fuclh a
cruel manner, were now ready to applaud and to fccond him, as
the defender of the honour and liberty of his country.

I: excites ARGYLL, I-Iuntly, Bothwell, and other powerful barons, declar-
ilioll tlhe
vlho,!i nation cd openly againllf the alliance with England. By their assistance:

,i:;!i. the cardinal ibized on the persons of the young queen and her

mother, and added to his party the splendour and authority of the
royal name . He received, at the ifame time, a more real accession
to his ftrcngth, by the arrival of Matthew Stewart earl of Lennox,
whose return from France he had earnestly solicited. This young
nobleman was the hereditary enemy of the house of Hamilton. IHe
had many claims upon the regent, and pretended a right to cx--
elude him, not only from succeeding to the crown, but to deprive
him of the poffIffion of his private fortune. The cardinal flattered
his vanity with the profplet of marrying the queen dowager, and
aftifced to treat him with to much refiecc, that the rceent became
jealous of him as a rival in power.

Tins suspicion was artfully heightened by the abbot of Paisley

who returned into Scotland some time before the earl of Lennox,
and aced in concert with the cardinal. He was a natural brother
of the regent, with whlom he had great credit; a warm partisan of
IFrance, and a zealous defender of the eftablifiled religion. He took
hold of the regent by the proper handle, and endeavoured to bring
about a change in his Ientiments, by working upon his fears. The
desertion of the nobility, the cdilfhfetion of the clergy, and the

' Keith's HilL of Scotl. 30.

rage

rage of the people; the resentment of France, the power of the I' 0 Ki
cardinal, and the pretensions of Lennox; were all represented -
with aggravation, and with their moil threatening aspec.

JMEANWHIILE, the day appointed for the ratification of the

treaty with England, and the delivery of the heftages, approached,
and the regent was still undetermined in his own mind. He acted
to the last witli that irresolution and inconfillcence which is peculiar
to wveak men when they are so ulnfortunate as to have the clicf
part in tlei coIduct of difficult aRairs. On the 25th of August
lie ratified the treaty with Henry f, and proclaimed the cardinal,
who fill continued to oppole it, an enemy to his country. On Obliges tie

rrgcuet to re-
tlhe third of Septemlber he fccretly withdrew friom Edinburgh, met nouncc the

{Yi cnf..i p

with the cardinal at Callendar, renounced the friendihip of Eng- with Eng-
landc, and declared for the intercfts of France. land

I-IENIY, in order to gain the regent, had not spared the mofi

magnificent promises. He had offercd to give the princess Eliza-
beth in marriage to his eldest tbn, and to conflitute hlim king of
that part of Scotland which lies beyond tlhe river Forth. lut,
upon finding his interest in the kingdom to be less conlfidcrable than
lhe had imagined, the Engliih monarch began to treat him with
little rcfpecL. The young queen was now in the cuflody of hil
enemies, who grew every day more numerous and rore popular.
Thicy formcd a separate court at Stirling, and threatened to c1c.^
another regent. The French king was ready to afford them his
proteaion, and the nation, out of hatred to the Englifl:, would
have united in their defence. In this situation, the regent could

Rymer, Feed. xv. p. 4.
c Sadlcr, 339. 356. I-milton MSS. i. 470, &-c,

liot

B 0 0 K not retain his authority, without a sudden change of his meafurles;

11.
,_ ._ and though he endeavoured, by ratifying the treaty, to preserve

the appearances of good faith with England, he was obliged to
throw himnfelf into the arms of the party which adhered to

lrance.

aiid to porfC- .SOON after this sudden revolution in his political principles, the
forc he rze regent changed his sentiments concerning religion. The spirit of

controversy was then new and warm; books of that kind were
eagerly read by men of every rank ; the love of novelty, or the
conviction of truth, had led the regent to express great esteem for
the writings of the reformers; and having been powerfully sup-
ported by those who had embraced their opinions, he, in order to
gratify them, entertained in his own family two of the most noted
preachers of the protestant doctrine, and in his first parliament,
consented to an act, by which the laity were permitted to read
the scriptures in a language which they understood h. Truth
needed only a fair hearing to be an over-match for error. Ab-
furdities, which had long imposed on the ignorance and credulity
of mankind, were detected and exposed to public ridicule; and
under the countenance of the regent, the reformation made great
advances. The cardinal observed its progress with concern, and
was at the utmost pains to obftrud it. He represented to the
regent his great imprudence in giving encouragement to opinions
so favourable to Lennox's pretensions; that his own legitimacy
depended upon the validity of a sentence of divorce, founded
on the pope's authority; and that by suffering it to be called in
queflion, he weakened his own title to the succession, and fur-
nifhed his rival with the only argument by which it could be ren-

h Keith, p. 36, 37.

dered

dclred dolubtfl'i!l' Tlice i-iilnuations made a deep imprcllion on l 00 K
the regenl's tiimorous ifrtit, who; at the proolebQ of luch imaginary .--v---
dan.gers, was as much flartlced as the cardinal could have wiflhcd;
and hlis ac:l for the protefllnt religion was not long proof againfl
lis fear. I-I ptublicly abjured the doCl'inc of tllc reformers in
the l;ran:cilcan church at Stirling, anl declared not only for the
political, but the religious opit)nios of lis new conlidents.

Tlir protestant doE-riic did not ftiuier much by his apoftacy.

It had al-eady5 takeln to deep root in the kingdom, that no dif-
couragcment or severity could extirpate it. Thel regent indeed
conifnted to every thing tlat the zeal of the cardlinal thought
necessary for the prctfrvati on of the cflkalbliflchd religion. 'The
reformers were perfbcutcd witl all the cruelty vlhiclh iiperflitioln
inlpirles into a barbarous people. MIany were condemned to that
dreadful death, which tic church has appointed tfor the punillhlnent
of its enemies; but they ifuclrecd with a fl)irit il) nearly reclml)bling
the patience and fortitude of the primitive martyrs, that more were
converted than terrified by iclli flpcc clcs.

TIuE cardinal however was now in poflcnfion of every thing his Bcatoun en-

ambition could dlcier ; and cxcrcifed all the authority of a regent, grofi1, the
without the envy of the nlame. --Ic had nothing to fear fron the tion of as-

0Z71~~~~ ~fairs.

The pretensions of the earl of Lcnnox to the fuccefcion were thus founded.

Mary, the dalughter of James II. was married to James lord H-amilton, whom
James III. created earl of Arran on that account. Elizabeth, a daughter of that
marriage, was the wife of A.attihew earl of Lennox, and the prelent earl was her
grandson. 'The regent was lilkcwi i the -,ranidfon of tih princuls Mi;Iary. Iut his fhther
having married Janet IBeatoun the regent's motlier, after he had obtained a divorce
from Elizabeth Home his former wibc, Lcnnox pretended that the sentence of
divorce was unjust, and that the icgent being born while Elizabeth Home was
flill alive, ought to be confidered as illegitimate. Crawf. Peer. 192.

VOL. 1. N earl

B 0 i earl of Arran, who having by his inconstancy forfeited the public
t-.J-- esteem, was contemned by one half of the nation, and little trusted

by the other. The pretcnfions of the earl of Lennox were the
only thing which remained to embarrass him. I-Ie had very fuc-
cefsfuliy made use of that nobleman to work upon the regent's
jealousy and fear, but as he no longer stood in need of such an
infirumcnt, le was willing to get rid of him with deccncy,
Lennox soon began to suspect his intention; promises, flattery,
and rcfpcd-, were the only returns he had hitherto received for
fubllantial ferviccs; but at last the cardinal's artifices could no
longer be concealed, and Lennox, instead of attaining power and
dignity himlflf, llw that he had been employed only to procure
thcfc for another. Refcntmcnt and disappointed ambition urged
him to fcek rev-enge on that cunning prelate, who, by sacrificing his
intereli-, had ib ungenerously purchased the earl of Arran's fiiend-
:ship. Ie vithdrew, for that reason, from court, and declared
for the party at enmity with the cardinal, which, with open arms,
received a convert who added so much luftrc to their cause.

Ti'II two Ilacions iwhich divided the kingdom were flill the fame,

without any alterations in their views or principles; but by one of
tlofic flrange revolutions which were frequent in that age, they
had, in the course of a few weeks, changed their leaders. The
regent was at the head of the partisans of France and the defenders
of popery, and Lennox in the fame station with the advocates for
the Englifli alliance, and a reformatiou in religion. The one
laboured to pull down his o\;wn work, lwhich the other upheld
with the fame hand that had hitherto endeavoured to defiroy it.

LENNOX's impatience for revenge got the flart of the cardinai's
ativlty. I-Ic surprised both him and the regent by a itdden march

L4-. to

to rei i!);_.'il -..it!1 a numerous armly; and mlighlt cafily have E 0 O1

i.

crLullt:- t, cvl, i.,efore tchey could preclare for their defncel . But: ....
lie was \-::- lengougl to li'.':l o l propolais ,i a11 accommodatiolln
and thle carci:l I amuld 1him l artfully, and sp)un out the treaty
to ifucl a len,_:h, th:t itc greater part of the cari's troops who.
fcrved, as i:; uL'erl wvlircev the feudal Li ililttions pirevail, at their
ownli expcncc, dcLcrtcdl hin ; and in concluding a peace, inilead of
giving the law. iec was obliged to receiv: it. A Iccoiid attempt:
to retrieve his aflilir ended ycl more unfortunately. One body ots
his troops was cut to lpicccs, and the rcfl diliprfled ; and with the
poor remains of a ruined party, he mull either have fubiitted to
the conqLueror, or havc lied out of the kingdom1, if the approach of
an Englifi arlmy had not broughlt him a fllort relief,

I-I, N R v was not of a temper to bear tamely the indignity with Henry iii..

which lie had bccn treated, both by the regent and parliament of las rd.
Scotland, who, at tlhe tiie when they relnonnced their alliance
witli him, had entered into a new and flrit&r colnfederacy wiith
Flrancc. The rigour of the Ibafonl retardecd fo-r ibm time tlhe
execution of his vengeance. But in the ls rilng a conliderable body
of inrintry, which w\xa: deliined for Francc, receiv-cd o-dcrs to tllil
i;r Scotland, anl a proper number of cavalry was appointed to
join it by The regent and cardinal little cxpecced iuch a vilit,
They had taruftcid that tle French war would find employment for
all -lcnry's forces ; and, ifoml an unlaccountable Iccurity, were
wholly unprovided ior the defence of tle kingdom. The earl of
Hlertford, a leader fatal to the Scots in that age, commanded this
army, and landled it, wvithout opposition, a few miles above Leith.
1-1c was quickly macler of that place ; and marching direclly to MAiay
Edinburgh, entered it with the fime cafe. After plundering the I5+{
:cilj;cent country, the ricelll and most open in Scotland, he ict on

N 2

si"are

B 0 0 K fire both these towns, and upon the approach of folne troops
_-_.--i ,gathered together by the regent, put his booty on board the flect,

and with his land forces retired safely to the English borders, de-
livering the kingdom, in a few days, from the terror of an invasion,
concerted with little policy, carried on at great expencc, and at-
tended with no advantage. If Henry aimed at the conquefi of
Scotland, he gained nothing by this expedition; if the marriage
lhe had proposed was flill in his view, he loft a great deal. Such
a rough courtship, as the earl of Huntly humorously called it, dif-
gustcd the whole nation; their aversion for the match grew into
abhorrence; and, cxafperated by so many indignities, the Scots
were never at any period more attached to France, or more alien-
ated from England.

TrIE carl of Lennox alone, in spite to the regent and French

king, continued a corrcfpondence with England, which ruined
his own interefl, without promoting I-Ienry's '. Many of his
own vassals, preferring their duty to tleir country before their
affcetion to him, refuted to concur in any design to favour the
public enemy. After a few feeble and unsuccessful attempts to
disturb the regent's adminifiration, he was obliged to fly for safety
to the court of England, where Henry rewarded services which
he had the inclination, but not the power to perform, by giving
him in marriage his niece the lady Margaret Douglas. This
unhappy exile, however, was deflined to be the father of a race
of kings. I-e ma his son lord Darnley mount the throne of Scot-
land, to the perpetual exclusion of that rival who now triumphed
in his ruin. From that time his posterity have held the sceptre
in two kingdoms, by one of which he was cast out as a criminal,
and by the other received as a fugitive.

k Rymer, xv. p. 22.

NMlA NA

MTvE A n- xii I. rl hoflilities were continued by both nations, but witlh B O O K

11.
little vigour on either fide. The hiflorians of that age relate mi- '-----

A peace con..

nutcly the circumstances of several skirmishes and inroads, which, as cludcd.
they did not produce any considerable e Teal, at this diflance of time
decervc no remembrance'. At lafl an end was put to this languid

t Though this war was diftinguiied by no important or dccifive ailion, it was,,

however, extreiilly ruinous to individuals. There flill remain two original papers,
which give us fume ideia of the mnilerics to which some of the most fertile counties in
the kingdom were cxpoicd, by the sudden and dcftruelive incurrfons of the bordrer-s.
The firll icens to be the report made to Henry by the ]Engliflh wardens of the
malclhes for the ycar 1 544, and contains their exploits from the 2d of July to the 1 7th
of November. 'Ihe account it gives of the dificrcnt inroads, or Florrays, as they are
called, is very minute ; and in conclusion, the fuml total of miichief they did is thus
computed :

Towns, towers, fledcs, barnckyns, pariflecchurchcs,

baftel-houfcs, cast down or burnt - 92

Scots lain - - -03
P'riloncrs taken - 8I 6
Nolt, i. c. horned cattle, taken o,386
Sheep - - 12,492
Nags and geldin;s - 1,296
Goats - - - 200
Bolls of corn - - - 850
Infight-gear, i. c. houfhold furniture, not reckoned.

Iaynes's State Papers, 43.

The other contains an account of an inroad by the earl of Hcrtford, between tlle

8th and 231 of September, I545 ; the narrative is more general, but it appears that
he had burnt, rafcd, and d(cflroycd, in the counties of Berwick and Roxburgh only,

Mionliftcries and Friar-hofes - - 7
Cafi-les, towers, and piles - - 16
Market towns -
Villages - - 243
Milns - .- - 3
lloFpitals - - 3

All there were cast down or burnt. Hayncs, 52. As the Scots were no lei'
ililful i;l tlic pratice of irregular war, we may conclude that the d'mage vwhich they
did in England was not inconsiderable ; and that their raids were no lei's wasteful than
tIhe f/rrIs of the Englifil,

andi

; o 0o i and inactive war, by a peace, in which England, France, and Scot-
i.',_J.. land were comprehended. Henry laboured to exclude the Scots

from the benefit of this treaty, and to reserve them for that venge-
ance which his attention to the afltirs of the continent had hitherto
delayed. But although a peace with England was of the lafc con-
sequence to Francis I. whom the emperor was preparing to attack
with all his forces, he was too generous to abandon allies who had
Icrvcd him with fidelity, and he chose rather to purchase Henry's
fi-iendfiip with difadcvantage to himself, than to leave them exposcd
to danger. By yielding some things to the interest, and more to
the vanity of that haughty prince ; by submission, flattery, and
address, he at length prevailed to have the Scots included in the
peace agreed upon.

hie murdcr AN event which happened a short time before the conclusion of
ot lI;etoun.

this peace, rendered it more acceptable to the whole nation. Car-
dinal Beatoun had not uscd his power with moderation, equal to
the prudence by whichl he attained it. Notwithitanding his great
abilities, he had too many of the paIlions and prejudices of an
angry leader of a fadcion, to govern a divided people with temper.
-lis relentmcnt againfl one party of the nobility, his inollence to-
wards the reft, his fevcrity to the reformers, and, above all, the
barbarous and illegal execution of the famous George WVifhart, a
man of honourable birth and of primitive fandity, wore out the
patience of a fierce age; and nothing but a bold hand was wanting
to gratify the public wish by his deflruCtion. Private revenge,
inflamed and fanicificd by a false zeal for religion, quickly flipplied
this want. Norman Lefly, the cldfcr son of the earl of Rothes,
had been treated by the cardinal with injuitice and contempt. It
was not the temper of the man, or the spirit of the times, quietly
to digest an affront. As the profeflion of his adversary fIreened

h~imr

him fromI the efltc's of what is called an honourable rcteiutmcnt, Cn 0 ° K
he rciflved to take that fatisfadlion which he could not demand. ·-- ---
This rclolution defervcs as much censure, as the singular courage
and conductL with which he put it in CxCcution excite wonder.
The cardinal at that time rcfided in tlic caflce of Saint 'Andrcw's,
whichll he had fortilied at -great ex-pncc, andt in the opinion of the
age had rendcrced it impregnable. H-Iis retinue was numerous, the
to.wn at his devotion, and thi neighbourling country full of his de--
pendents. In tlis litnation, fixtceni pcrbl'ns undertoolk to furprifc
his caflIc, and to afhildinatc lhimfilf; alnd their ifuccct was

v equal to

the boldncl; of the attempt. Early in the morning they Icized Ir,.a.I
on tile gate of the caflle, which was iet open to the workmen Vwho I '1
were employed in lininfing the fortifications ; and having placed
sentries at the door of the cardinal's apartment, they awakened his
numerlous domneflics one by olle, and turning them out of the caflec,
they, without noilf or tumult, or violence to any other pecrfor,
delivered their country, though by a mos uinjtflifiable aclioil,
from an ambitious man, wholfe pride was intllpportable to tile
nobles, as his cruelty and cunning were great chccks to the rc-
ormnatio0n.

I-Is death was fatal to the catholic religion, and to tlic French Tiie rechi,

intcrerc in Scotlanid. The ialme zeal for both continued among a I'li, t, .
great party in the nation, but when deprived of the

e genius anld , ut-

authority of lo flilfill a leader, operated withl lels ctll. Nothing
can cqual the consternation which a blowv tI unexpeCtd occasioned
among fitch as were attached to him; while the regent fecrctly
enijoced an event, which removed out of his way a rival, who had
not only cclipfcd his ,reatunets, but alimoi cxtinguifi-edt his power.
jDecency, however, the honour of tlhe clrchi, the inmportunity of
the lueen doilwager, and her adhlerents, his engagemcnts wilth France,

and

B 0 0 K and above all thcfe, the desire of recovering his eldest lon, wiom
'-- ----' the cardinal had detained for some time at Saint Andrew's, in

pledge of his fidelity, and who, together with the castle, had allen
into the hands of the conspirators, induced him to take arms, in
order to rcvcnge the death of a man whom he hated.

I-IE threatened vengeance, but was unable to execute it. One

part of military fcicncc, the art of attacking fortified places, was
then imperfctly underrfood in Scotland. The weapons, the dif-
ciplinc, and irmpctuofity of the Scots, rendered their armies as
unfit for ficges, as they wcre acive in the field. An hundred
and fifty ncn, which was the greatcft numnber the conspirators
ever aflcinbled, refited all the efforts of the regent for five
months :, in a place which a single battalion, with a few battering
cannon, would now reduce in a few hours. This tedious liege
was concluded by a truce. The regent undertook to procure for
the conspirators an absolution from the pope, and a pardon in par-
liament; and upon obtaining theti, they engaged to surrender the
cafilc, and to cft his son at liberty.

IT is probable, that neither of them were finccre in this treaty.

On both fides they fought only to amufc, and to gain time. The
regent had applied to France for affiftancc, and cxpected soon to
have the conlpirators at mercy. On the other hand, if Lcfly and
his affociatcs were not at firfl incited by H-enry to murder the car-
dinal, they were, in the sequel, powerfully supported by him.
Notwithstanding the silence of contemporary hiflorians, there are
violent presumptions of the formcr; of the latter there is un-
doubted certainty ". During the siege, the conspirators had received
from England supplies both of money and provisions; and as

m Epift. Rcg. Scot. 2. 379. " Keith, 60.

Ienry

1-Ienl'ry was preparing to renew his proposals concerning the mir- 1 °0° K
ri;'.!e antl tile union he had projedecd, and to second his nego- '-------
ci:inio,-,i w-ith a numerous army, they hoped, by concurring w\i'th
him, to be in a litua;tion in whichl. they would no longer need a
pardon, but might claim a reward.

T'iE death of Heniry blaflcd all thele hopes. It happened in Janu:-y zs,

the beginling of next year, after a reign of greater illendour thalln 4
true glory; bufllinlg, though not act.ive; oppreflive in domcltic
governmenlt, and in foreign politics wild and irregular. But the
vices of this 'prince were more benelicial to mankind, than the
virtues of others. His rapaciouliiefs, his profusion, and even his
tyranny, by deprehing the ancient nobility, and by adding new
property and power to the commons, laid or ftrcetgthcned the
foundations of the British liberty. His other passions contributed
no less towards the downfhl of popery, and the efiablihlinent of
religious freedom in the nation. His refcntmcnt led hiln to abolifli
the power, and his covctouftefs to seize the wealth, of tile church;
and by withdrawing tlheic supports, made it easy, in the following
reign, to overturn the whIole fabric of ihperflition.

FRANCIS I. did not long survive a prince, who had been alter-

nately his rival and his friend; but his fucceflbr Henry II. was
not neglectfil of the French interest in Scotland. H-e sint a con- Troopsar-ive

from F"rance.

liderable body of men, under the command of Leon Sitozzi, to
the regent's aflillancc. By their long experience in the Italian and
Gcerman wars, the French had become as dexterous ill tlie con duC
of fiegcs, as the Scots were ignorant ; and as the boldness and
dlefiair of the conl-lirators could not defend them agailnt the liupc-
rior art of tlhcic new Lafailants, they, after a Ihort refiftacce, fur- Force tl,
rendered to Strozzi, who engageld, in the name of the king his Antdre,, o t

VYo. J1-' 0 maf
[elr, furlender.

1 0 0o K master, for the security of their lives; and, as his prisoners, tranf-
*.-, ported them into France. The castle itself, the monument of Bca-

toun's power and vanity, was dcmolfiled, in obedience to the
canon law, which, with admirable policy, denounces its anathe-
mas even againit the houses in which the sacred blood of a cardinal
happens to be filed, and ordains them to be laid in ruins ".

TnE archbiflopric of St. Andrew's was bcflowed by the regent

upon his natural brother John Hamilton, abbot of Paisley.

NCew breach TIE delay of a few weeks would have saved the conspirators.
with Eng-
~innd. g Those ministers of -Henry VIII. who had the chief direction of

affairs during the minority of his son Edward VI. condutled them-
selves, w ith regard to Scotland, by the maxims of their late master,
and resolved to fiigllten the Scots into a treaty, which they had
not abilities or address to bring about by any other method.

BUT before we proceed to relate the events which their invasion

of Scotland occasioncd, we filall stop to take notice of a circum-
fance unobfcrvcd by coteinporary hifiorians, but extremely remark
able for the difcovcry it makes of the fentimcnts and spirit which
then prevailed among the Scots. The conspirators againit cardinal
Beatoun found the regent's eldest son in the castle of St. Andrew's;
and as they needed the protecion of the English, it was to be
scared that they might endeavour to purchase it, by dclivering to
them this important prize. The presumptive heir to the crown in
the hands of the avowed enemies of the kingdom, was a dreadful
profpct. In order to avoid it, the parliament fell upon a very
extraordinary cxpcdient. By an act made on purpose, they ex-
eluded "( the regent's eldest son from all right of fucceflion, public

° Burn. Hist. Ref. I. 338.

" or

'" c i -lx\;ic, fb losi', as he llculd be detained a prisoner, and 1B 0 o l
" til !i: L. t_:l' ii hi.; place hisi oiller brothers, according to thelir ,_----
, Cllniolit', ant! i'l tfilure (;i tChel, thoic wVho were ne:xt heirs to

" tie Sc:
<e~ :.(

the re'gtn ;.K ,> Sccj:-'ion by hereditary right is an idea lb ob-

vious and ib ) ;ia !lr-, that a nration Icldo. ventures to make a
breach in it, hut in ca.c:; oif xtreme lcccelElt,. S'luch a nIcceifri did
the parliament dilc,,v.r ii the 1prcin iuain. catre to ,lLnd
iiunldetd oil tle ln'_;ory ol ipatl Jii!lilii(i, , and lhcightened by the
linart of recent ii: ui.:--, c'has; lhe i. ation'.:! pailion. This didated
that iluncommon fl lttu,,: i hich the order of' lineal tluccefhonl was
to reinarl-ablly lirokc. Ile modelrn thcorlics, lwhiich reprlcent this
right as divine and lnaiciiabll and tlhat oult t to be violated.
upon any conlideraltion whatibever, Iccm to have been then alto-
.etllcr unlknon.

IN the beginning of SeptemberCi , tlh carl of -Hertford, now duke Scotland in-

of Somcinrlt, and protedor of F.ngland, entered Scotland at the Englilh
hicad of cightccn thouhand men, and, at the iame time, a fleet of
lixty hlips appeared on the coall to fccond his land forces. The
Scots had for foi- b time oblervcd this ftorin gathering, and were
prepared for it. Their armly was almofl: double to that of the
cncey, and potled to the greatest advantage on a rising ground,
above lMuftIlburgh, not far from the banks of the river IEfe.
Both there circuifl-ances alarmed the duke of Somerset, wlho fai
his dallner, and would willingly have extricated himself out of it,
by a new overture of peace, on conditions extremely rea[onable.
But this moderation being ilmputed to fear, his propoflils were
rejecctd with that scorn which tihe confidence of success inl)fircs ;
and if the conduct of the regent, who commanded the Scottish

"' Epifl, Reg. Scot. 2. 359o

0 2 army,

B 0 0 K army, had been in any degree equal to his confidence, the de-
_-.-.-- fltruition of the English must have been inevitable. They were

in a situation precisely similar to that of their countrymen under
Oliver Cromwell in the following century. The Scots had chofcn
their ground so well, that it was impoflible to force them to
give battle; a few days had exhausted the forage and pro-
vilion of a narrow country; the fleet could only firnifil a
tcanty and precarious subsistence ; a retreat therefore was ne-
cefary; but disgrace, and perhaps ruin, were the consequences of
retreating.

ON both these occasions, the national heat and impetuosity of

the Scots saved the Englifli, and precipitated their own country
into the utmofl danger. The undifciplilnd courage of the private
men became impatient at the fight of an enemy. The general
-was afraid of nothing, but that the Englifl might escape from

Battle of himi by flight; and leaving his flrong camp, he attacked the duke
Pinkecy, September of Somerset near Pinkey, with no better success than his rashness
10, 547. deservcd. The protcc1or had drawn up his troops on a gentle

eminence, and had now the advantage of ground on his fide.
The Scottifi army confited almost entirely of infantry, whose
chief weapon was a long spear, and for that reason their files were
very deep and their ranks close. They advanced towards the
enemy in three great bodies, and, as they pafied the river, were
considerably exposcd to the fire of the English fleet, which lay in
the bay of Muffelburgh, and had drawn near the shore. The
English cavalry, fluffhed with an advantage which they had
gained in a skirmish some days before, began the attack with
more impetuosity than good conduc. A body so firm and com-
pa& as the Scots easily resifted the impreflion of cavalry, broke
them, and drove them off the field. The English infantry, how-

ever,

ever, advanced, and the Scots were at once exposed to a flight of B °0 0
arrows, to a fire ill flankl fiom four hundred forcign fufilccrs who L-v----0
servcd the enemy, and to their cannon, which were planted be-
hind the infantry on the highcll part of the eminence. 'The depth
and clofenclis of their orderl making it impofible for the Scots to
fland long in this situation, thc carl of An s, wh-lo commanlded
the vang:it'd, cndleavourcd to change hiis ground, and to 1rtire
towards the main body. But lis fiiends unhappily miloolk his
motion for a flight, and fell into confusion. At that very inflant,
the broken cavalry, having rallied, returned to the charigc; the foot
purl-ut the advantage they liad gained ; lie pirof]ic of vicctory
redoubled the ardou11r of both : And in a moment the rout of tlhe
Scottili army became univcrfal and irretrievable. The encounter
in the siecl dwas not long nor bloody; but in the purfiit, the Enllifl
dilcovered all the rage and ficrcenefs whicl national antipathy,
kinidlcdc by loln emulation, and inflamcd by reciprocal injuries, is
apt to infllire. Tic piurlit was continued for five hours, and to
a great dlillance. All the three roads by which the Scots fled, were
ircvecd witlh pears, and fiords, and targets, and covcrcd wtith
the bodies of the slain. Above ten thouland men fell on this day,
one of tlhe most fatal Scotland had ever fene. A few were taken
prisoners, and among thlefe lomc pcrfons of diflindion. The
protccdor had it now in his power to become mafcer of a kingdom,
out of which, not many hours before, he was almost obliged to
retire with infamy'i

Bur

' The following pafl.gc in a curious and rare journal of the protector's expedition

into Scotland, written by V. P.attcn, who was joined in colniflmiion with Cecil, as
judge imarfllal of tlh army, and printed iin 5I 48, dccervcs our notice; as it grics :;i lC
idea of the military difciplinc of the Scots at that time. 4: L3ut what after 1 learlu d,
Ipccinlly touching their order, theirarlnourl, and their manner as well of going to oflfcld,
as of Randing to dcfcld, I have thought ncccfiiry here to utter. I-ackbuttcrs have they

(cb;.

B oo 0 3BuT tllis viclory, however great, was of no real utility, for
,--- - . .walnt of flkill or of Iciifure to improve it. Every new injury
']'heir vido-
ry ',t' litti - rendered thc ,Scots more averse from an union with England; and
h:nefit to the

",,,:3i t;c protecdor ncgltecd the onlly mealurc which would have made

it ncceflhry for them to have given their conlent to it. IHe amuscd
liinelf in walling tlhe open country, alnd in taking or building
fevcral petty castles; whereas, by fortifying a few places which
were acceflible by ita, he would have laid the kingdom open to
the l nglifh, and, in a flort time, the Scots muI t either have
accepted of his terms, or have submitted to his power. By such
anl improvement of it, tle viaory at Dunbar gave Cromwell the
command of Scotland. The battle of Pinkey had no other effect
but to precipitate the Scots into newv engagements with France.
'lic' situation of the Engliifh court may, indeed, be pleaded in

few or none, and appoint their fight most commonly always a-foot. They come to the
field well furniflicd all with jack and skull, dagger and buckler, and swords all broad
niid thil, of exceeding good temper, and universally so made to slice, that as I nctcr
lawv none so good, lb I think it halrd to devise the better. Hereto every man his pike,
.and a great kcrcher wrapped twice or thrice about his neck, not for cold, but for
crllting. In their array towards joining with the enemy, they cling and thrust so
.near in the fore rank, fiouldicr and fbouldcr together, with their pikes in both their
hands llraihlt aore them, and their followers in that order so hard at their backs,
laying their pikes over their forcgoers floulders, that if they do afilil undifcovcied,
no force can well withstand them. Standing at defence they thrust floulders likewise
so nigh together, the fore ranks well nigh to kneeling, tfoop low before, their fellows
behind holding their pikes with both hands, and therewith in their left their bucklers,
the one end of their pike against their right foot, and the other against the enemy
breaft-high; their followcrs crofling their pike points with theml forward ; and thus
each with other so nigh as fpacc and place will fuflcr, through the whole ward, so
thick, that as cafily lhall a bare finger pierce through the flcin of an angry hedge-hog,
as any encounter the front of their pikes." Other curious particulars are found in
this journal, from which Sir John I-ayward has borrowed his account of this ex-
pedition. Life of Edward VI. 279, &c.

The length of the Scotch pike or ficar was appointed by ac'S4. P. 1471, to be fix
.ells; i.e. eighteen feet lixinches.

excufc

excuse for the duke of Somerset's conducL. That cabal of Ils B 0 0 K
enemies, which occailoncd his tragical end, was already formed; .
and while he triumphed in Scotland, they Iccrctly undermined
his powcr and credit at athome. Self-prefervation, therefore, obliged
71him to prl-ler his Safety before his fame, and to return without
rceiunmi, the s;'uits of his viclory. At this time, however, the cloud
tlew over; 't11 c(niltiracy I)y which he full was not yet ripe Ibr-
executionl; and Iis prcflnce ulll)cndcdl its cli:Ct ior folme time.
The supreme power flill remaiing in hlis lhands, he employed it
to rccov'r the olpportunity which hle hadC Ic.l. A body of troops, Aprl, 1,.;3.
iy hi; command, fli:.:ed and fortified !acliiangtoun, a place wlich,
on account of its diflance fiom the lea, and from any Englilh
garrison, could not be, defended without great cxpcnce and danger.

MIEA:-wIiLF
r LE thie French gained more by the defeat of their Forcc; thl

Scots into a
allies, than the .i'yglifl by their victory. After the death of car- clorr uLnion

with I,'' ancc

dinal Beatoun, Mary of Guise, the queen doswager, took a con-
fiidcerable lhare in the dire&ion of aftairs. She was warmly attached
by blood, and by inclination, to the Frcench interefl; and, in order
to promote it, improved with great dexterity every event which
occurred. 'The I)irit and flrength of tih Scots were broken at
Pinkcy; and in an afnembly of nobles which met at Stirling to
consult upon the situation of the kingdom, all eyes were turned
towards France, no prolipcc of fafcty appearing but in afiflancc
from thence. But I-Icnry II. being then at peace with England,
the queecn rcprefented that they could not cxpedc: him to take part
in their quarrel, but upon views of personal advantage ; and that
w'itlhout extraordinary coiccflions in hi]: li vour, no afliri'ane, ill
proportion to their prcefn' cexigencies, could be obtained. T'he
prejudices of the nation towcrfilly fIeconded tlhel rcprfelatjions
of the queen. What often happens to individuals, took place

4 lam ono-

B o IK among the nobles in this convention; they were slvayed en-
·---.--. tirely by their paflions; and in order to gratify them, they dc-

ferted their former principles, and disregarded their true intercit.
In tlhe violence of rcfentment, they forgot that zeal for the inde-
pendence of Scotland, which had prompted them to rejet the

nnd to oiFcr proposals of IIenry VIII.; and by offering, voluntarily, their
their quc, n
in mnarrige young ,queen in marriage to the dauphin, cldef soon of Henry II.,
to the dau-
phin. and, which was flill more, by propoling to fend her immediately

into France to be educated at his court, they granted, fi-om a
thirLf of vengeance, what formerly they would not yield upon
any consideration of their own safety. To gain at once such a
kingdom as Scotland, was a matter of no small consequence to
France. IHenry, without hesitation, accepted the offers of the
Scottilh ambassadors, and prepared for the vigorous defence of his
new acquisition. Sis thousand veteran soldiers, under the cornm-
mand of Monsieur Defse, assisted by tome of the best officers who
were formed in the long wars of Francis I. arrived at Leith. They
:frved two campaigns in Scotland, with a spirit equal to their
.orlmer fame. But their exploits were not considerable. Tle
Scots, soon becoming jealous of their designs, negle-ed to support
tlhem with proper vigour. The caution of the Englilh, in acing
wholly upon the dcfenfive, prevented the French from attempting
nny enterprise of coniequence; and obliged them to exhaust their
firclgth in tedious fiegcs, undertaken under Iany dilidvantages.
Their efforts, however, -were not without iOme benefit to the
Scots by compelling the Englith to evacuate I-Iaddingtoun, and to
surrender fevcral finall forts, which they possessed in different parts
of the kingdom.

BUT the effcts of these operations of his troops were flill of
greater importance to the French king. The divcrfion which they

occasioned

'-:,,,:';l,!i, . e'.ClUled iuhim to wrenc Boulotnc out of tile hands; oL the i O ()

Ji.

'i ,'i'A ; 8:l !;J ilhiluC nce of his army ill Scotland obtained the ---.i

<i'i,,l _ic II;u.:c (T i 1.' iialmnl t '. itli tlhe ov Cture ,- lic had l beenCI
lmade to lin, l).- the aliembly ol nobles at Sirlilg, colncerCin
the (ucc:'s ii-riage; with thl l dauphin, nd lher cdi ucatlon at tl c
coilirt 01 ]"'allce. Il. vaiH, did a l vv l):atliuts rcnlonti:rate agaiill

n .i',r o' t(' _!C lki o

' (1 1ci by whticl. the iriii dlhip

11 :

l rarnc lIc- pose coiiclcd

cat'i. mI(oir'e i'tl;1 thill nit olgland and

ever}' tling was

tlic (,ti. A point (i' o 1liilh L nC b LllcitIice was haliilv decided
il a pl.al-i 1amc:0 t a elicibled in tle cam p bciorc -liadingtoun: The . J,,,-.
hiitrigscs of the (1Cqueen dowager, tlhe xcal oL tle clergy, andt 1c1 ;'
rjelitnien;lt againll .l'ngland, liad prepared a great party in the
ln.ltio ici lo 1il a e'Lt ; tlic l;rnch general tdl aibaf'lltdoi, by
tlliIr ' libcrality and promlils, gained over Illany more. 'The rce'get
i;nnil cl, was vC;eakl enough110 to stoop to the oler of a peclf ion firom
ranClle, together with the title of duke of Chatcllcrault in that
:ingloIn. A, confihdertable majority declarcd for the treaty, and
tlhe ilLtCciLc ol a ifalion was 1)preflrred befire tlle honour ol'
th.e ntailon.

Il.xVINc; hiurried the Scots into this rafli and fatal rcfolution, Mars Ccnt tc,

be c cuc:utc'j

tl'a: ot'.reec ol many calaillies to tlhcmtilvcs and to their fovcrcign, in lraiic.
lllxe FrcIncl allo-wed til 1no time for rcflldlion or repentance.
rl jC ' 'Let 'vh'li hil had l>-ougit over their ifrccs was itill in Scot-
land, and without delay coInvoyed the queell into France. MIary

C-as tlhn l1x yearls old, and by her education in that court, one of

tlic p:!iteft: but moil corl'uptc in. ELurope), the acquired every
accoimp.ilininlclnt that could add to lici charms s a woman, and

Vo^ r. I. !' contraacdc

B 0 0 K contra&ed manly of those prejudices which (ccafionec !er misfor--
"-"-" tlturce as a queen.

FROM the time that Mary was put Into their hand:', it was the

interefl of the French to surFer the war ii cotl;.lc to Ianguifih
The recovery of the 13oulonnois was the oljct l'Uich tlc Irench
king had most at heart ; but a flight diverficn in Lr;tain was sus-
ficient to divide the attention and itrcrngti of the Englil, vwhofc
domeflic facions deprivcd both tlhir arms and councils of their
accufiomcnd vigoir. 'The government of iEglaind had undergone
a great revolution. The duke of Somcirfet's power Ilad been
acquired with too much violence, and was cxerciccl with too little
moderation, to be of long continuance. Many good qualities,
addcd to grcat lovc of lis country, could not atone for his ambition
in usurping the Ible dircclion of atiairs. MAany of the most emi-
nent courtiers combin ind gaif him ; and the earl of Warwick,
their leader, no lIcs ambitious but more artful than Someirft,
condudtcd his mc.ani.rcs with l mulch dexterity as to raise iimifelf
*upon the ruins of his rival. ¥Vithout the ilnlidious namel of pro-
·tc lIor, he cccc to all tlihe power and influence of which
Somerlbet was deprived, and lie quickly found peace to be ncceflary
for the cfablliflhient of his new authority, and the execution of'
the vail dcligns ihe had conceived.
Pcacc con- -IENRY was no firanicr to W\arwick's situation, and ilnprlovcd

his kno;ledg of it to good purpofc, in conductiing the negoci-
ations for a general leace. IIe prcfcribcd iwhat terms he plcalbd
to di 1thlenliihl miniller, who scrupled at nothing, however advan-
M.irci 2, r t;tagcous to that monarch and his allies. England consented to re-

flore ioulogne and its dependencies to France, and gave up all
prctcn[ionls to a treaty of marriage with the queen of Scots, or to

tlhe

tile conquicfl of her country. A few finall forts, of which the In C oK

i:n'i!i ll t-oops had hitilhrto kept pofcflion, were rafcd ; and --..--..
picecc betweetn tihe two kingdoms was cilabliihed on its ancient

:
' .ndalioln.

B3OT I the Brlitihn naltions loft power, as well as reputation, by

tlisIt as

unhaiy th

(u.ldl. It was o

otf demulation

and riefntcil nt rather tllal of interefl ; anld was carried on under
lthe inlnucncc or naition:ll aniUoliticS, whlih were blind to all ad-
vat.gCpe,;. Tlie Frencll, wllo cntered into it witl greater coolncs,
coi-iuCII d it vithi more lkill 3 and by dextcroully availino thein-
iclive; c(.: every circuinfllancc wliCch occurreed, recovered pofltllioll
of an implortant territory which they had lofl, and added to their
monarcliy a new kingdom. The ambition of the Englifil mini-
e1r lctrayed to them tih former; the inconlidcratc rage of the
Scuts a ',iiill tlecir ancient encmics beclowecl on them tice latter;
tlieir own addrels and good policy) meritcd both.

|I?." ,DIATEIZ.Y after the conclulion of the peace, tlic French The Scot;

beconicjea-

irc.-cs Iclt Scotland, as imnuch to their own latisfaLcion, as to that lois of tlre
of tile liaion. Tlle Scots Loon found, tliat the calliln to their rch
allitfance a people more powerful than thlcmfilvcs was a dangerous
expelli.elt. 'licy beheld, with the utimoit: inmpatience, tthore who
thad com-ec over to protec tie kingdlom, taking upon them to com-
iland il It ; and ui many occasions they repented the rafl in-
vmilation w.liichl they had

1 ;t i . Tlic peculiar genius of tlie French

n:IioIn }'cigllt'ICt d ltlii diuilll, and prepared tlie Scots to throw oil

the yoke, )Cc they :had vwll begun to fieel it. Tle French were,
,i: ia'e?. ...C., w.lhat they arc in the prelcnt, one of tlic moll
:l.2cdlil nations iln Elurope. ittt it is to be ob)lrvedl in all their
e:;d ;clitio1s into forcic n countries, vhetllier towards the bouth or

' -' north,

E 0 0 K north, that their mn:nncs have bcen re n arkably incori'itibic wili
Xt.----,-' tie mannI Cers of every oitler people. Barbarians are tenacious of thcir

own cufloms, because they want knowledge and tafle to difcovcr
the reasonableness and propriety of cufomns which dificr f:rom thcm..
Nations, which hold the fn-Rf rank in politencfs, are frequently no leis
tenacious out of pride. The Greeks were so in the ancient world;
and the French arc the fame in the modern. Full of thenilelvcs
flattered by the imitation of their ncighbours ; and accuflomed to
confider their own modes as the standards of elegance; they scorn
to difguifc, or to lay aiide, the diflinguifhing manners of their own
nation, or to make any allowance for what may diser from them
among others. For this rcafon, the behaviour of their armies
has, on every occalfon, been inflpportalle to ftraiigcrs, and has
always exposcd theml to hatred, and ofci'E to deflrucioon. In that
age, they over-ran Italy four several times by their valour, and lofr
it as often by their inibIlnc. The Scots, naturally an irascible
and hilh-fpiritcd people, and who, of all nations, can least beac
the mofi diiflant ilfinLuation of contempt, were not of a temper to
admit all the prctllnfions of iich afiTmin- g gutcs. T'he lc lptoms
of alienation wcie ioon vifibl)le; y econded tdecl military ope-
rations of the French troops with the utmofl coldness; their diilfuft
grew inifnfibly to a degree of indignation that could hardly be
reflrained ; and on occasion of a very flight accident, broke out
with fatal violence. A private French soldier engaging in an idle
quarrel with a citizen of Edinburgh, both nations took arms, with
equal rage, in defence of their countrymen. The provost of
Edinburghl, his hl, anld fiveral citizens of diltilncion, were killed
in the fray ; and the French were obliged to avoid the fi:.ry of the
inhabitants, by retiring out of the city. Notwithfiandintg the
ancient alliance of France and Scotland, and thle long iintcrcourib
of good ofices between tlhe two nations, an avcrlion for the French

took!

took its rife at this time among the Scots, the cffices whereof 3 0 o K

ere dcccply felt, and opcratcd powerfully through trhe fubfcqcieni .t--,-.
period.

FiRowM the clcath of cardinal Bcatoun, nothingl has been :ald of p'og.erc. o

i* ' the kcformi-

hic slate of rcligioi. \ Vtilc the war with Engiaid continued, tlhe atiun.
cler gy had no lliure to InolCfl tile protcfants; and thcy wcre not
vet confideilraileC cnoulgh to lexpeC any thling more thian connivance
land imlpulniv.. liIc new docdrines were flill ill their infancy; but
during this Jliort inierval ,if tranquillity, tlhcy acquired fircngillt
and advanced by hrge and fii-in fleps towards a full ciallblifnient
ii the killtdo. 'I'li filrfl prcachers againll plopery ill Scotl:nd,
c. wr;- lioi fecrrl ladl appeared during the reign of Jaies V. \vcrc
moir c iillcntl o or zeall and piety, than for learning. Their a'cqcuanlnt-
a-c: , -i-t tihe principles of the rcforma.ion was p:'tlial, and aL
(co(:OI l nd ; ill c of them iad b)een edutcated in ln' lfrlnd; all of
theim iId b)orrowtl l

their llnotions fom the iooks

l p .ll:.cd t[ l

:-w.;
;.:ud inl the firSt dawn of the new light, they did iot vlCltut !.;:

-hfrl-e ilti it leide'. iBut ill a fllort time the ldocrielcs andi v-ri-.

rnr'3i (o tle o 'cig:n rcformes Ibecame generalS known ; thc in-
illt:i-te 'ci'ius of tile age prcil;.cd forwa:d inll ;:c'L (.1 f rutll iil
cicuiOVCi'c O' o!C n error opened tlhe way to ot hcrs; lc (:.(2n0 1 (..;'
one ilnpiilurc dIrew man aafter it; tlic whole fab:ic, which igni-
rance and i ;l',tihioii had erc.lcd in times of d

. .-.s2 bCetzan to

tttler; and nthlng was wanil to co lct its r, ;ut a ri:g'
a.d ac)tive leatdce to tdrecC tlhe attack. 'tmch was th;; :nlou'r ;o.l
iK;'.ex, who, wi,'h blttcr (I:'lifiltions of iea rmi:ig, ain mIlore : -

^l; iive iC\VS, tolil ()a ]l '- ' I c,

'p(>qa_

,% ,-

li.:tii;al i;ntrlc'! liy of :lidcl, hlalice ft lllll I ,ovc ica:. I-ic

c';:a,

S.i ,]i:'lc mni:lr:y at St. Aidrev 'is in tChe :car one thooiad! ve
Ituiii'drcd t.d ;ir iJl'S -lcv':l'', \Wiith lltat 1'1(2i(2 wIilC iavVy. a'eci'-

I-1 E -Ul _

'1 0 R ¥
Pi O O K panies a bold and popular eloquence. Iftl-cad of amnufing himself

I[.

,__ _.-_. with lopping the branches, lie firuck dirccly at tile root of popery)

and attacked both tll do'--rinc and discipline of the cflabliflled
church, with a vehemence peculiar to himinelf, but admirably suitcd
to the temper and wifthes of the age.

AN advcrfiary so rmidablle as Knox, would not have cafily

creapcd the rage of the clergy, who observed the tendency and
nprogrlef of Iiis opinions with the utmofit concern. But, at firfl,
ic rctilcd for ftfety into tlh catlec of St. Andrew's, and whlile the
consiilator-s :ecpt poCii/ilon of it, preached publicly under tlheir
.rotccLion. The great revolution in England, which followed
lponl tec death of Henry VIII. contributed no less than the zeal
of Klnox towards dcmolifiing the popilli church in Scotland.

-lenry hadl loofcncd the chains, and lightened the yoke of popery.
Thle miliniiers of hlisiblp Edward VI. cafl theml of altogethcr, and
elabllilced the protcflant religion upon allnofl the fame footingl
whereoin it novw iands in that kingdom. The influence of this
example reached Scotland, and the iappy cf'eclts of ccclefiaftical
liberty in tlle one nation, inqiuircd tlc other with an equal desire of
recovering it. The reformers hiad, hitherto, been obliged to con-
dut.c thenifelvcs with the utmost caution, and seldom ventured to
p!reach, but in private houses, and at a diflance from court; they
gaillned crclit, as happens on tlhe firi-f publication of every new
religion, chiefly among perlons in the lower and middle rank of
liif. IBut ibveral noblemen, of the grcatcfl' diftincsion, having,
about this time, openly efpouled their principles, they were no
longer under the ncceiity of aling with the tame r-cfrve; and
witlh more securi'ty and encoulragement, they iadl likewise greater
kfuccels. The means of acciilrhng and fpIrcading knowledge be-

came

camc more common, and the spirit of innovation, peculiar to i:tt : ° Ts
ncriod, grew every day bolder and more univcrfhal.

HA PPILY i'or thic Rcformation, this fi)prit was r.ill under fomc

rcftraint. It had not yet attained flrinecss and vigour fuilicielt to
overturn a seinc-m f-oundedc on the decpefl policy, and fuprported
by the moll formidable power. Under the prel nt circtin ll aiincs,
n;v attempt towards aclion mufl hIave becen :.ta[l to the protefrant
tloctrines; and it is no finall proof of tle authority, as -ell as
penetration, of the headl of the party, that they were able to l--
tir.ni the zeal tof a fiery and impetuous peoprle, until that critical
:-.!d mature juiindtiur, when every tfcp they took vwas dccifivc and

I'.lEA N'wIItLE their caufr received rcilifoccmc:;'.t ilm tw.o i

.crcnt quarters whence they never could ive expc ed ii. T'-c
amil)ltion of tlie house of Guise, and the bigotry of Mar1y of 1. ng-
la;nd, h:itclened the fubvcrfion of the papal throne in Scotland; all
by ;a :ingular disposition of Providence, the pcrolns who oppco!cd
*ra: Rcscormation in every other part of uEm-cre wv itl tlhe ficrc'LJ
.':aI, v.ecre made inflruments for advaincing it in thlat .ri.,daoin.

'.'.nix oi C;uife poltfled the fame bold and alfpiring i irt

..i- li i cll' .;i

..iti. ;llhed her 1ftmily. hut in her it. was lftencd by the o- ''

... '

c-::al chlaraclci-r, and accompan i ied with grecat tern lcr and ad..r'i'c. ' :'c," (' '.-
ier rothers, in order to attain thle high otbjctls at ',icl t: y
ai -mcd, ventured upon fi.ch daring m.efa'cs as i itcd tlhclir '-'.r t
c'raogC. -icr dcil',1Ss t!poni the f;Lplrcmlc povwer were c:'CIce
wikl ile uitmolt c-are, and ladvanced y addfsll and l-esllIcCinl'Lt;
i-more natural to lier ic . I'y a dexterous application of tlhcf:
ti:i;ts, Iic 1h: acquired a conaiderablc influence oil the counCeils

6 ,

' 0 0 K of a lnation hitherto uiacquainted with the governrncn 0
of w.omen,

I!.
- ---* and, without the fmnallefi right to ally flare in tlhe adlninifration

of affairs, had cngroficd the chief dirceLioll of them into iher ownl
lhnds. But flc did not long reft satisficd wlith the enljoym3ent of
;lhis precarious poweri, \'ihich the ficklencfs of tlie r'c-cni, or the

lambition of tihof who governcic him, might to c3a]ly- dciflurb ; and
flic bc-gta to fct oln sot new intrigues, with a delign of uniermin-
ing hiim, and of opening to herf'lf a way to ficcecd llini in that high-
di. Iity.. T-Ier l)rot'hcrs entered warmlly into tilis clilce, and
filp.ortlcid it with all thlii credit at the court of France. The
I.recnchl I. iing willingly concurred in a meaurc, by whliich hle hoped
to bring, Scotland entirely under managncment, and, in any future
broil witli England, to turn its whole force upon that kingdom.

IN order to arrive at tle dcfircd elevation, the cqueen dowager

hadc only one of tw1o ways to chinfc; eit:her violently to wrecf the
powcr out oftlle hands of the regent, or to obtain it by his con-I
Icnt. Uiidcr a minority, and among a lwarlike and faclious
people,i the former was a vcry uncertain and dangerous experi-
ilent. T'lie latter ap)Carld to be no lel's ilmplradcicable. To per-
tlicade a man volu ltiarilyv to abdicate the iuLpreme power; to dic-
Itccnd to a level with thole, above whom he was railed ; and to
lbe cointeni: with the second place where he hath hleld the firfl, may
well pats for a wild and chimierical projec. This, however, the
(lquen attemlptcd; and the lprudence of the attemcnt was iliicicntly
juLlfiicd by its fucccfs.

T-ru regent's inconflancy and irrcellution, together with the

calamities which had befallen the kingdom under his adminirlifa-
tion, raild tlhe prejudices both of the nobles and of the people
againfi him, to a great height; and the queen l ecrctly fomented

tlhele

tlhce with much induflry. All who willicd for a change mect with 1 °00 K
a gracious reception in her court, and their ipirit of clilaffclion ------
was nourifiled by ficli hopes and promises, as in every age iinpore
on the credulity of the factious. Tile favourers of thc Reformation Courts i,,
being the most numerous and ii'rcading body of the regcnt's cne-
mics, fhc applied to them with a particular attcntion and the
gentleness of her diflpohtion, anld ieemingi indifierence to the re-
ligious points in clilpute, made all her promises of protcLtioii and
indulgence pass upon them for fincerc. Finding to great a part
of the rtation willing to fall in with her mcaflires, tlhe queen lcet
out for France, under prctcnce of visiting her daughter, and took oa. 15o.
along with her thole noblemcn whio poltiflcdi the greatct I power and
credit among their countrymen. Softened by the plcatircs of an
clcgant court, flattered by the civilitics of the rcench king and the
carclies of the lioufe of Guiii, and influenced by tle fcalonablc
dillribution of a cfwv favours, and the liberal promiic of mnany
more, they were brought to approve of all the queen's prc-
tenlions.

VnrIIIr. flhe advanced by tlhcf flow but sure Rcps, the regent

cither did not foresee the danger wliicli threatened him, or nc-
gllccled to provide againfl it. The firll dicovery of the train which
was laid, came from two of his own1 confidents, Carncgie of Kin-
naird, and Panter biihop of Rols, whom the queen had gained
over to her intecrct, and then cmployed) as the imofl proper inliru-
mients for obtaining his conficnt. The overture was made to him
in the name of the French king, enforced by proper thrcatenings,
in order to work upon his natural timidity, and fwxeetened by
evcry proinife that could reconcile him to a proposal so dihfgrecable.
On the one hand, the confirmation of his French title, together
with a considerable pcenfion, tile parliamcntary acknowledglment

V'ol . 1. of

B O O 1K of his right of succession to the crown, and a public ratification of

his conduCt during his regency, were offered him. On the other
hand, the displeasure of the French king, the power and popularity
of the queen dowager, the difaffecion of the nobles, with the
danger of an after-reckoning, were repreicntcd in the firongefi
colours.

Ir was not poflible to agree to a pr-oposal so extraordinary and
lncxpe¢led, without some previous struggle; and had the arch-
bilhop of St. Andrew's been prefcnt to fortify the irresolute and
pafive spirit of the regent, he, in all probability, would have
r-ejcted it with didlain. Happily for the queen, the sagacity and
ambition of that prelate could, at this time, be no obftrudion to
her views. IIe was lying at the point of death, and in his absence
the influence of the queen's agents on a flexible temper counter-
balanced several of the firongef paflions in the human mind,,
and obtained his content to a voluntary surrender of the supreme

power.
Dec. 1551. AFTER gaining a point of such difliculty with so much ease,

the queen returned into Scotland, in full expectation of taking
immediate poffefion of her new dignity. But by this time the
archbishop of St. Andrew's had recovered of that diflemper, which
the ignorance of the Scottifli phyllcians had pronounced to be
incurable. This he owed to the afliftance of the famous Cardan,
one of those irregular adventurers in philosophy, of whom Italy
produced so many about this period. A bold genius led him to
some uleful discoveries, which merit the esteem of a more discern-
ing age; a wild imagination engaged him in those chimerical
sciences, which drew the admiration of his coterporaries. As a
pretender to astrology and magic, he was revered and consulted

5 by

by all Europe; as a proficient in natural philofopih, he vwas but 010 k
liiLle known. Thle archbishop, it is probable, conlficderci him as a ---^
1p)owerful magician, elicn lIe applied to him for relief; but it was his
knowledge as a pliilofolpher, which enabled himn to cure his difcafi '.

TOGETIIER Vwith his health, the archbiiihop recovered the entire

government of the regent, and (quickly pcri.U:cicd him to recal that
dishonourable promise, which he hadl been f'duced by the artifices
of the queen to grant. IIowever great her 1iilprilc and iindigna-
tion were, at this frefi inllance of hlis inconilancy, Iihe was obliged
to difllnblc, tliat fle mitght have leiilr to renew icr intrigues
with all parties; with tle protcPtants, 'lwhonl flic favoured and
courted more than ever; with the nobles, to wiomn flhe rendered
licriclf agreeable by various arts; and with the regent himself, ia
order to gain lwhom, fihe employed every argument. Bult what-
ever impreflions her emifaries night have miade on tile regent, it
was no easy matter to over-reach or to intimidate the arcihbifhiop.
Under ilis management, the negociations were spun out to a great
length, and his brother maintained his fLation with that address and
lirnncfs, vwhich its importance so well merited. The univerlal
decfccion of the nobility, the gcrowing powver of the protestants,
who all adhered to the queen dowager, the reiterated solicitations
of the French king, and, albove all, the interposition of the young
queen, who was now entering the twelfth year of her age, and
claimed a right of nominating whom fle plealted to be regent ', Preva.ils on

the rceent to
obliged him at lal: to rcfign that high- officc, which he had held rcfi^ is

oliice.

Cardan hinfelf was more desirous of being confidcred as an astrologer than a

pililofophlcr; in his book Do Ge'ituris, we find a calculation of the archbiflilp's
nativity, from which he pretends both to have prcdied( his disease, and to have
cfi-ceted his cure. IHe received from the archbifliop a reward of Igoo crowns:
aglcat fum i tlhat ngc. De vitanfua, p. 32.

Leflcy, de Rcb. Get. Scot. ap. Jcbb. i. 187.

() 2 Imany

B 0 0 I many years. I-Ie obtained, however, the fame advantageous terms

11.

_ 1-'- _- for himself, which had been formerly flipulated.

She obtains IT was in the parliament wliich met on the tenth of April one
tile regency. thousand five hundred and fifty-four, tha thte earl of Arran executed

this extraordinary resignation; and at the fame time Mary of
Guile was raised to that dignity, which had been so long the
ob)jec of her wifhcs. Tlus, with their own approbation, a
woman and a ftianger was advanced to the supreme authority,
over a fierce and turbulent people, who seldom submitted, with-
out relucaance, to the legal and ancient government of their na-
tive monarchs.

Reformation VIIILE the queen dowager of Scotland contributed so much,
continues to
maake great towards the progress of the Reformation, by the protecaion whicl
progrcf. flhe afforded it, from motives of ambition ; the English queen,

by her indiscreet zeal, filled the kingdom with persons active in
July 6, 1553. promoting the fame cause. Mlary alcended the throne of Eng-

land on the death of her brother Edward, and soon after married
Philip II. of Spain. To the persecuting spirit of the Romish fu-
perflition, and the fiercencfs of that age, fle added the private re-
fentment of her own and of her mother's sufferings, with which
flie loaded the reformed religion ; and the peeviflnefs and severity
of her natural temper carried the acrimony of all there pafiions to
the utmo-f extreme. The cruelty of her persecution equalled the
deeds of those tyrants who have been the greateftl reproach to,
human nature. The bigotry of her clergy could scarce keep pace
witl the impetuosity of her zeal. Even the unrelenting Philip
was obliged, on some occasions, to mitigate the rigour of her
proceedings. Many among the mosl eminent reformers fufferedt
for the docrines which they had taught; others fled from the
> Rfloxormb

storm. To tile greater part of tliefe, Switzerland and Germany B 0O K

11.

opencd a iecure afylui ; anm? not a few, out of choice or ncceflity, -
fled into Scotland. Wllat they had seen and felt in England, did
not abate the warmth and zeal of their indignation against popery.
Thlir attacks were bolder and more iLlccefssiiul than ever; and their
dlocdines made a rapid progrcfs among all ranks of men.

T'LIESI: do&rines, calculated to rcEify lhc opinions, and to

rclform the mannlers, of mankind, hlad hitllerto produced no other
ctifC:;; but tlhev oon began to operate with greater violence, and
proved the occasion, not only offlibverting the cftablifhed religion,
but of filaking the throne and lendangering tie kingdom. The A view of the

political

caules which facilitated tlhe introdu(tion of thece new opinions into caures which
Scotland, and which diflniinated them io fatl through the nation, towardLs tha.
llclit, on tlhat account, a particular and careful inquiry. The
Refbormation is one of the grcateft events in thec history of man-
kilnd, and, iln whatever point of liglit we view it, is infiruclive
and intcrcfling.

TiE revival of learning in the fifteenth and fixteenthl centuries

roiued the wvorldl from that lethargy in which it liad been Ifunk for
nmany ages. The human mind felt its own strength, broke the
fttters of authority by which it had been lo long rcifraincd, and
Clenturing to move in a larger fllhere, puflled its inquiries ilitc
cC)-ery tiibjec with great boldncis and flurprifing fucceis.

No tooncr did mankind recover tile capacity of exrcifing their

rcaton, than religion was one of the firfi oljeCts which drew thcir
:attcntion. I.ong before Lutler publificd his famous Theses

liichll fookc the papal throne, cicence and philosophy had laid.
oenl, to inaniy of the Italians, the impofliure and. absurdity of the

el-abliflled

B1 0 0 established superstition. That subtle and refined people, satisfied

»..-, _ with enjoying thole discoveries in secret, were little dilpofcd to

assume the dangerous charadcer of reformers, and concluded tile
knowledge of truth to be the prerogative of the wife, while vulgar
minds must be overawed and governed by popular errors. But,
animated with a more noble and dilintercfed zeal, the German
theologian boldly erected the fiandard of truth, and upheld it with
an unconquerable intrepidity, which merits the admiration and
gratitude of all succeeding ages.

TIiE occasion of Luther's being firfl disgusted with the tenets of

the Romish church, and howv, from a fnIall rupture, the quarrel
.widened into an irreparable breach, is know.rn to every one who
has been the least conversant in hiPfory. From the heart of Ger-
many his opinions spread, with altonilfing rapidity, all over
Europe; and, wherever they came, endangered or overturned the
ancient, but ill-founded system. The vigilance and address of the
court of Rome, co-operating with the power and bigotry of the
Aunfrian family, fupprefTed these notions on their firfl appearance,
in the ibuthern kingdoms of Europe. But the fierce spirit of the
north, irritatcd by multiplied inpofitions, could neither be mollified
by the fame arts, nor subdued by the fame force; and encouraged
by ibme princes fiomn piety, and by others out of avarice, it
cafily bore down the feeble opposition of an illiterate and immoral
clergy.

TIE fupelrfition of popery seems to have grown to the most

extravagant height in thoie countries which are situated towards
the different extremities of Europe. The vigour of imagination,
and sensibility of frame, peculiar to the inhabitants of ibuthern
climates, rendered them susceptible of the deepest impreflions of

filperilitious

fiiperifiticus tcrror and credulity. Ignorance and barbarity were B 0 0 I
no Icts favourable to the progress of thmesMe ifpirit among the ._.,
northern nations. They knew" little, and were dilfofc,1l to believe
evcrv thing. The nmolt glaring abfiudities cli not shock their
grols undcrtlandings, and the motl improbable fiicions wcre re-.
ccived with imllicit aic nt and admiiration.

ACCORDINGLY, tliat form of popery wlich prevailed in Scot-

land was of the nof bigolltted and illiberal kind. Thoce docrinhes
wh1ich arc moil apt to shlock the human ulndfleltand(ling, and tlhoe
legends which fiarthlc exceed belief, were proposed to tho people
wirhout any attempt to palliate or difguiif them; nor did they
ever call in queflion the rcafonablcnefs of the one, or the truth of
the other.

Tll;. power and wealth of the church Iept pace with the pro-

grels of il pcrfittion ; for it is the nature of that fiirit to olbfcrve
no bounds in its ref eE: and liberality towards tliore whoie cha-.
racir it eficems lacred. The Scottifl kings early demonrflratec
how muchl they were under its influence, by their vast: additions
to the immunities and riches cf the clergy. The profuse piety of
David I. who acquired on that account tile name of Saint, tranf-
fcrr-cd alinofi the whole crown lands, lwhich were at that time of
-;reat extcnt, into the hands of eccleiaftics. The example of
that virtuous prince was imitated by his successors. The spirit

rwread among all, orders of men, who daily loaded the pricfliood

with new pofeifionis. The riches of the church all over Europe
were exorbitant ; but Scotland was one of those countries, wherein
they ihad fartlhen: exceeded the just proportion. The Scottish
clergy paid one half of every tax imposed on land ; and as there
;s no realon to think that in that age they would be loadcd with

aai -\r

B 0 0 Ir any unequal share of the burden, we may conclude that, by the

_a- time of the Reformation, little less than one half of the property in

the nation had fallen into the hands of a society, which is always
acquiring, and can never lose.

THE nature, too, of a confilerable part of their property ex-

tended the influence of the clergy. Many estates, throughout the
kingdom, held of the church ; church-lands were let in lease at an
cafy rent, and were poffefied by the younger tbns and defeend-
ants of the best families '. The connelion between fi/pcrior and
vJcilz/, between landlord and tenant, created dependences, and
gave rife to an union of great advantage to the church; and in
cftimating the influence of the popifil ecclefaftics over the nation,
tliefe, as well as the real amount of their revenues, rnuft be at-
tended to, and taken into the account.

TISs extraordinary share in the national property was accom-

panied with proportionable weight in the fupi-cme council of the
kingdom. At a time when the number of the temporal peers
was extremely small, and when the lcf lr barons and represent-
atives of boroughs fekloi attended parliaments, the ecclefiaflics
formed a confidcrable body lthlre. It l sppcars fromn the ancient
rolls of parliament, and friom the nanner of chilfing the lords of
articles, that the proceedings of that higb court mnufi have been, in
a great mcalurc, under their ditreion ".

Tlll reverence dlue to their iacied cllra_2cr, which was often

carriced incredibly far, contributed not a littic towards the growthl
of their power. The dignity, the titles, and precedence of the

; KI'cith , .Not. ( ,So. I
no l. li.of tlhe C ;u:'ch of Sccll'm , 449.

popinf

popish clergy arc remarkable, both as causes and effeas of that B oI° K
dominion which they had acquired over the reft of mankind.
They were regarded by the credulous laity as beings of a superior
fpecics; they were neither subject to the fame laws, nor tried by
the fame judges'. Every guard that religion could fipply, was
placed around their power, their possessions, and their persons;
and endeavours were used, not without fucceis, to rcprefent them
all as equally sacrcd.

TIrE reputation for Icarning, which, however inconsiderable,

was wholly cngrofied lby the clergy, added to the reverence which
they derived from religion. The principlcs of found philosophy,
and of a jflt taste, were altogether unknown ; in place of tlefe
lwerce fil)flitlutcd fludics barbarous and uninifrudtivc; but as the
ecclcriaftics alone were converfallt in them, this procured them
clteein; and a very flcnder portion of knowledge drew the admi-
ratiol of rutde agcs, which klnewv little. War was the sole pro-
fenlion of the nobles, and hlnting their chief amusement; they
divided their time betwecl thle le unacquainted with the arts, and
unimproved by icicnlce, they disdaincd any employment foreign
from military aftiirs, or xwhich -required rather penetration and
addrcfl , than bodily vi gour. \Vherever the former were neceflary,
the clergy were intruicd b; bccaule they alone were properly qua-
lified for the trufl. AlmloPi all the higlh offices in civil government'

How far this claim of the clergy to exemption fiom lay-jurifdiifion extended,

appears from a remarkable tranfalCtion in the parliament held in I546. When that
court was proceeding to the forfeiture of the murderers of cardinal Bcatoun, and
were about to include a priest, who w:s one of the afflifis, in the general sentence
of condemnation, odious as the crime was to ccclelfiatics, a delegate appeared in
their name, and r cir.hc'dl or claimtild c.xemption of himn from the judgment of par-
liament, as a TjJir,'iua!

,.iaI. This claim was sustained; and his name is not inserted
in the Aft of F"orfeiture. £pifl. Reg. Scot. ii. 350. 36I..

VOL. I. R. devolved

.B o0 oK devolved; on this account, into their hands. The lord chancellor

--.' was the firfl f-ubjce: in the kingdom, both in dignity and in power.

From the earliest ages of the monarchy, to the death of cardinal
Beatoun, fifty-four pcrfons had held that high office; and of
these, forty-three hlad been ecclefiaRicsY . The lords of iCflion
wvere supreme judges in all matters of civil right; and by its ori-
ginal conflitution, the president and one lhail of the senators in this
court were churchmen.

To all this we may add, that the clergy bein lfelparated from

.the refL of mankind by the law of celibacy, and undifiraced by
those cares, and unincunllercd with thofie burdens, which occupy
and oppreis other men, the intelell of their order became their
only olbjec, and they were at full lcifure to purife it.

TJIE nature of their funcllion gave tlnem access to all persons,

and at all leafons. They could employ all the inotives of fear
and of hope, of terror and of consolation, which operate mofr
powerfully on tlce human mind. They haunted tlie weak and
tlhe credulous; they besiegcd the beds of the lick and of the dying;
they flufflred few to go out of the wlorld without leaving marks
of their liberality to the church, and taught them to compound
with the Almighty for their fins, by befcowing riches upon those
who called themselves his servants.

\VII: N their own indutlry, or the superstition of mankind, failed

of producing this efced-, the ecclefiaflics had influence enough to
call in the aid of law. When a person died iitCrt7/lc, the difiofal
of his effects was vefced in the bifliop of the diocese, after pay-
ing his funeral charges and debts, and distributing among his

Y Crawf. Offic. of State.

kindred

kindred the iims to which they were refpedqivcly entitled; it being BI o 0 I

11.

pricltlmed that no C!lril'tian would have chosen to leave the world -. ---.
wkithout ldeflining/ tfme part of his fubflance to pious uless'. As
men are apt to trufi to the continuance of life with a fond confi-
dence, and cli!ldilhly flun every thing that forces them to think
of their mortality, many die without fettling their afftirs by will;
and the ri!iht of admni:iifnration, in that event, acquired by the
clec'y -, mull have plrove.d a conlidcrable source both of wealth and
of lpowvcr t tohe church.

AT the falme time, 11o mnatri-uonial or tefuamentary cause could

be tried but in llthe iiritual courts, and by laws w'hich tile clergy
thcll lves hadl flramed. The penalty, too, b1y vhiich the decilions
of thecl. courts v.c-Ce enfiorced, addedlc to their authority. A fen-
tencc of excomllin iic ttion was no Icse formidable than a fclntcnce
of outlawry. It was pronounccl on many occasions, and againfl
varioul: crinmes: a-nd bl lidcs excluding tliof, upon\ whom it fell,
'rom C'hlriialn )privilseg,, it depri-vcd them of all their rights as
men, or as citizens ; and the aid of the Iecular power concurred
witlh tlhe liLperlition o mankind, in rcendering the thunders of
tle church no lels dcrL'.Clive than terrible.

To thefc general causes may be attributed the immense growth

both of the wealth and power of the popifl church; ancd without
enitering into any more minute detail, this may fcrve to (lifcover
the foundations on whnich a itrudcure so fiupendous was crcclcd.

1 UT though the laity liad contrilbuted, by their own fuperflitioll

andt profifeiefs, to raise the clergy fromi poverty and obscurity to

· Efllys on B3rit. Antiq. 174. Annals of Sco.tind, by Sir David Dalrymp!e,
Vol. i. Append. No. ii.

P .?2, riches.

0o IK riches and eminence, they began, by degrees, to feel and to mur-
se _- mur at their encroachments. No wonder haughty and martial

barons should view the power and poflefions of the church with
envy; and regard the lazy ard inative charaser of churchmen
with the utmost contempt; while, at the fame time, the indecent
and licentious lives of the clergy gave great and just offence to the
people, and considerably abated the veneration which they were
accustomed to yield to that order of men.

IMMENSE wealth, extreme indolence, gross ignorance, and,

above all, the severe injunction of celibacy, had concurred to in-
troduce this corruption of morals among many of the clergy, who,
presuming too much upon the submission of the people, were at
no pains either to conceal or to disguise their own vices. Accord-
ing to the accounts of the reformers, confirmed by several popish
wrriters, the most open and scandalous difiolution of manners pre-
vailed among the Scottill clergy " Cardinal Beatoun, with the
fame public pomp which is due to a legitimate child, celebrated
the marringe of his natural daughter with tle earl of Crawfurd's
on b; and, if we may believe Knox, lhe publicly continued to
the end of his cays a criminal corrcfpondence with her mother,
who was a woman of rank. The other prelates fene not to have
been more regular and exemplary than their prinate '

WME N

W linzet. ap. I eith, Append. 202. 205. Lefl. de Reb. GeiC. Scot. 232.
b The marriage articles, subscribcd with his own hand, in which he calls her my
daughter, arc fill extant. Keith, p. 42.

' A remarkable proof of the dissolute manners of the clergy is found in the public

records. A greater number of letters of legitimation was granted during the first
thirty years after the Reformation, than during the whole period that has elapsed
since that time. Thefc were obtained by the sons of the popifli clergy. The cccle-
fiaftics, who were allowed to retain their benefices, alienated them to their children;

whlo,

1MEN of such characers ought, in reason, to have been alarmed 1O Io K

stt the first clatnours raised against their own morals, and the doc- - .
trincs of the church, by the protcftant preachers; but the popifi
ecclcfiaftics, cither out of pride or ignorance, neglected the proper
methlods for silencing them. Inflead of reforming their lives, or
disguising their vices, they affetced to despise the censures of the
people. WThile the reformers, by their mortifications and aufte-
rities, endeavoured to resemble the firi; propagators of Chrilsianity,
the popifil clcrgy were compared to all those persons who are
noilt infamous in hiilory for the cnormity and scandal of thein
crimes.

ON the other hand, instead of mitigating the rigour, or colour-

ing over the absurdity of the eflablinled doctrincs; inflead of at-
tempting to found them upon scripture, or to reconcile them to
reason; they left them wNithout any other support or recommend-
ation, than the authority of the church and the decrees of
councils.' The fables concerning purgatory, the virtues of pil-
grimage, and the merits of the flints, were the topics on which
they infife(l in their difcouries to the people; and the duty of
preaching being left wholly to monks of the lowest and most illi-
terate orders, their compositions were lill more wretched and con-
temptible, than the fuljecs on which they insistcd. While the
reformers were attended by crowded and admiring audiences, the
popiflh preachers were either universally dcfcrted, or liflencd to
with scorn.

who, when they acquired wealth, were dcfirous that the slain of illegitimacy might no
longer remain upon their families. In Keith's Catalogue of the Scottij/] BEi/Jops, we find
several initances of such alienations of church lands, by the popish incumbents, to
their natural children.

'TII'

B o o K TIr only device which they cil;loyed in order to recover tlicir
,---,---- decliing rcput l otion, or to confli; thc waverin g faith of tie peol':.

was equally implr-:dcr.t andl uniccefi.ful. As many do2rill s of

tllc urc d tir

cc rive tci credit at ifrl': from the autlhoityi o'

faliI mira:cles, tlhcy now CIedeavoured to call in thcfe to their aid.
BIut tlhof ]jing wondlers, which, were behell with unllsjiicious
adl:il-iition, or lheard with implicit ':iti, in times of darkneIs and
of ignoralnc, inet wvith a ve:y ciifirecnt receltion in a more en-
liightcened period. Th e vigilance of the reformers dctccd tlie!c
iinpofLurcs, and expoihd not only thell, but the cauic vhliicli
needed the aid of iucl arliiiccS, to ridicule.

As the popiil ecclcfiaflics became nore and more the oljccts of

hatred and of contempt, the cdi!cotirls of the reformcrs were liflencc
to as so many calls to liberty; and besides the pious indignation
which they excited against those corrupt docrincs which had
perverted the natu-r of true Chriflianity ; betides the zeal which
they inflired for the knowlcdge of truth and the purity of reli-
gion ; they gave rife also, amongi the Scottinl nobles, to other
views and paflions. They hoped to fnlI:e o'3 the yoke of ecclc-
fiaflical dominion, which they had long felt to be opprcflive, and
which tlicy now discovered to be unchrilfian. They expe&ted to
recover pofllefion of the church revenues, which they were now
taught to confider as alienations made by their anccRors, witl a
profution no lcfs undifccrning than unbounded. They lattered
themfclves, that a check would be given to the pride and luxury of
the clergy, who would be obligcd, henceforwarid, to confine them-
selves within the iPhere peculiar to their sacred charaCtcr. An
avcrfion for the cftabliflcd church, which lowcd from tb many

a Spotrwood, 69.

concurring

concurring caules, whicih was railcd by considerations of reliion, 1 0

11.

and heighitened by motives of policy, 1frcad siss through the i-v-,.
nation, and excited a lfpirit, thatl buril out, at lafi, wkith irrceiflible
violence.

RrEL rGIOUS conI;tLdraIiols alone were fuicnci Cnt to havCe routed

thhi; Iirirt. The points in controvcrty v.'ith thlie church of Rome
virc of lio muchI importance to tlhe ppincl s (of n i;il nd, and to
cillential to Chiltlianity, tilat thelicy c-itied iall the e;'.l \with which
the reformler' contendcedi in ordecr to elt;li)iill tlhcnl. hltth the Rc-
formation havin<-bceu rCprelsnted as the c2ftic& of fomc wild and
cntlhu!iaftic frenzy in the hulnmat mind, this attlenpt to account fur
tle cagrnlcfs and z cal with which our ancCftors Cm.raCCed and
propligatcd the protcfil:nt doclrines, by taking a view of thc 1poli-
tical motives alone which iiluciniccd t hem, and by lich]I\l Iiov
naturally thcfl promlpted tiheli to ac willith f much ardour, will not,
peria:aps, be deemed an unniccilary digreliioin. \\' now return
to the courLl of the lhifory.

TIlE quen's elevation t tti office of regent fcem:; to have

tr:anilporteld her, at i-Ilt, beyoll the known p-ruc:(:ce and modera-
tion of her chara&cer. She began her :admiiifl'ation, by confer- Tlc queen
ring upon foreigners f\veral oiliccs of tlrfl and of dignity; a flep h,.ad'ini ~
whliclh, belth fi-oml tihe inability of fl-angers to dilcllarlg thele of- Ilome unpoi
sices with viogur, and friom tile envy which their preferment cx-- Plul1rme1t-
cites among the natives, is never attendcd with good conllfeuenccs.
Vilmort was made comptroller, and intrufld with tlce manage-
mceit of the public revenues; Bonot wals appointed governor of
Orkney; and Rubay honoured with the cullody of the great feal,
and the title of vice chancellor'. It was with the highest indig-

Lefly de Reb. Gcft. Scot. 89.

nation

B3 0 K nation, that the Scots beheld oflfces of the greatest eminence and

11.
<------- authority dealt out among itrangers'. By these promotions they

conceived the queen to have offered an intilt both to their un-
derftandings and to their courage; to tle formler, by fIlppofing
them unlfit for thole flations vwhich their anceRlors had filled with
so much dignity; to the latter, by imagining that they were
tame enough not to complain of an affront, which, in no former
age, would lhave been tolerated witli imlpunity.

\rWHILE their minds Rwere in this dlifpofition, an incident hap-

pened which inflamed their aversion fiom French councils to
the highef: degree. Ever since the famous contest between the
houses of Valois and Plantagenct, the French had been accuflomed
to embarrass the English, and to divide their strength by the fud-
den and formidable incursions of their allies, the Scots. But, as
these inroads were seldom attended with any real advantage to
Scotland, and cxpofed it to the dangerous resentment of a power-
ful neighbour, the Scots began to grow less traclable than for-
merly, and scrupled any longer to serve an ambitious ally at the
price of their own quiet and security. Tlhe change, too, which
was daily introducing in the art of war, rendered the affiflance of
the Scottifi forces of less importance to the French monarch. For
these rea:tons, Henry having resolved upon a war with Philip I.
and forefecing that the queen of England would take part in her
husband's quarrel, was extremely solicitous to secure in Scotland
the afiflance of tome troops, which would be mrore at his command
than an unditfiplined army, led by chieftains who were almost
independent. In prosecution of this design, but under prctence

f The refentmcnt of the nation against the French role to fich a height, that

an act of parliament was pafled on purpose to restrain or moderate it. Parl.
.b Q Mary, c. 60.

3 of

of relieving the nobles from the cxpence and danger of defending 00 K
the borders, the queen regent proposed, in parliament, to regiftcr .---..-
the value of lands throughout the kingdom, to impoie on them a 55
finall tax, and to apply that revenue towards maintaining a body
of regular troops in conrfant pay. A fixed tax upon land, which
the growing expence of government hath introduced into alinofl
every part of Europe, was unknown at that time, and teemed
altogether inconfiPfent with the genius of feudal government.
Nothing could be more flocking to a generous and brave nobility,
than the intrusting to mercenary hands, the defence of those ter-
ritories which had been acquired, or preserved, by the blood of
their ancestors. They received this proposal with the utmost: dif-
fatisfacion. About three hundred of the leier barons repaired in
a body to the queen regent, and represented tleir sense of the
intended innovation, with that manly and determined boldness
which is natural to a free people in a martial age. Alarmed at a
remonstrance delivered in so firm a tone, and supported by such
formidable numbers, the queen prudently abandoned a scheme,
which flhe found to be universally odious. As the queen herself
was known perfecly to underfland the circuinfances and temper
of the nation, this mcafure was imputed wholly to the suggestions
of her foreign counsellors; and the Scots were ready to proceed
to the most violent extremities againfl them.

TIIE French, inlecad of extinguifing, added fuel to the flame. Attempts.to

They had now commenced dhoflilities againfl Spain, and Philip kingdom ina
had prevailed on the queen of England to reinforce his army with ,Englari
a co:iiilerable body of her troops. In order to deprive him of
this aid,' Henry had recourse, as he projeCted, to the Scots;
and attempted to excite them to invade England. But, as Scot-
land had nothing to dread from a princess of Mary's charaaer-,

VOL. L S who,

B o0 OK who, far from any ambitious scheme of disturbing her neighbours,

ii.
--v-- was wholly occupied in endeavouring to reclaim her heretical

fubjeEts; the nobles, who were affelnbled by the queen regents
at Newbattle, listened to the solicitations of the French monarch
with extreme coldness, and prudently declined engaging the king-
domn in an enterprise so dangerous and unneceflary. What ihe
could not obtain by persuasion, tlh queen regent brought about by
:a flratagein. Notwithfltanding the peace which fubfiPed between
the two kingdoms, she commanded her French soldiers to rebuild
a finall fort near Bcrwick, which was appointed, by the last treaty,.
to be rafed. The garrison of Berwick sallied out; interrupted the
vwork ; and ravaged the adjacent country. This insult roused the
fiery spirit of the Scots, and their promptness to revenge the leaP,
appearance of national injury, diflipated, in a moment, the wife
and pacific resolutions which they had so lately formed. XWar
was determined, and orders inPfantly given for raising a numerous
army. But before their forces could assemble, the ardour of their
indignation had time to cool, and the Englifli having discovered no
intention to pufl the war with vigour, the nobles resumed their
pacific fyflem, and rcfolved to stand altogether upon the defensive.
1556. They marched to the banks of the Tweed, they prevented the

incursions of the enemy; and hallving done what they thought
tuflicient for the fafcty and honour of their country, the queen
could not induce them, cither by her entreaties or her artifices, to
advance another ftcp.

'WIIILE the Scots persisted in their inativity, D'Oyfel, the

commander of the French troops, who poffefled entirely the conli-
dence of the queen regent, endeavoured, with her connivance, to
engage the two nations in hostilities. Contrary to the orders
of the Scottifi general, he marched over the Tweed with his own

soldiers,

foldiclrs, and invetced WVcrk, a garrison of the Englifi. lTe B 0Co)
Scots, inflead of seconding his attempt, werc enraged at hiss prc-
fumption. The queen's partiality towards France had long been
fufhlpecd ; but it was now vibl)le that fhc wantonly sacrificcd the
peace and tffcty of Scotland, to the intcrcf: of that ambitious and
aflfuming ally. Under the feudal governlments, it was in camps
that fubjcE-s were accustomed to address the boldest ricionftranccs
to their sovereigns. While arms were in their hands, they felt
their own strength; and at that time all their reprefcntations olf
grievances carried the authority of comm-ands. On this occasion,
the resentment of the nobles broke out with such violence, that
the queen, pcrceiving all attempts to engage them in acion to be
vain, abruptly difiniflced her army, and retired with the utmost:
shame and disgust; having difcovcred the impotence of her own
authority, without effec.ing any thing which could be of advantage
to France ::o

IT is observable, that this first inl-ance of contempt for the re-

gent's authority can, in no degree, be imputed to the influence of
the new opinions in religion. As the queen's prctenfions to the
regency had been principally fulpported by those who favoured the
Reformation, and as fllc fill needed them for a countirpoife to the
archbishop of St. Andrew's, and the partilans of the houcf of

-Hamilton; sic continued to treat them with great rcipcd, and
admitted them to no inconsiderable fliare in her favour and con-
lidence. Kirkaldy of Grange, and the other surviving conspirators
against cardinal Bcatoun, were, alout this time, recalled by her
from baniflment; and, through her connivance, the priotefta,.t
preachers clnjoyed an interval of tranquillity, which was of great
advantage to their cause. Soothed by these inflanccs of the quecn.',

g Strype's Memor. iii. Append. 274, Lefley, .196.

S 2 modcramio:n

B 0 0 K moderation and humanity, the proteflants left to others the offlcz

i of remonstrating; and the leaders of the opposite facion set them

the first example of disputing the will of their sovereign.

The qucen's As the queen regent felt how limited and precarious her authlo-
nnarriage
with tihe rity was, while it depended on the poilc of these contrary fa&lions,
da1uphin. ilC cndeavc-:oted to cfil.blifl it on a broader and more secure found-

ation, by hlaficning the conclulion of her daughter's marriage
with the dauphin. Amiable as the queen of Scots then was, in
the bloom ¢f youth, and considerable as the territories were, which
she wvould hrve added to the French monarchy; reasons were not
wanting to difiuade HIenry from completing his first plan of marry-
ing her to his son. The constable Montmorency had employed
all his interest to defeat an alliance which refleced so much lustre
on the princes of Lorrain. He had represented the impossibility
of maintaining order and tranquillity among a turbulent people,
during the absence of their sovereign; and for that reason had
advised I-lenry to bestow the young queen upon one of the princes
of the blood, who, by residing in Scotland, might preserve that
kingdom an useful ally to France, which, by a nearer union to
the crown, would become a mutinous and ungovernable province''
But at this time the conflable was a prisoner in the hands of the
Spaniards; the princes of Lorrain were at the height of their power;
and their influence, seconded by the charms of the young queen,
triumphed over the prudent, but envious, remonstrances of their
rival.
Dec. 14, Ti- French king accordingly applied to the parliament of Scot-

15 land, which appointed eight of its members' to represent the

h Melv. Mei. 15.
iViz. The archbifliop of Glasgow, the bishop of Ross, the bishop of Ork-

ney, the carls of Rothes and Caffils, lord Fleming, lord Seton, the prior of St,
Aindrew's, and John. Erifline of Dun.

whole

whole body of the nation, at the marriage of the queen. Among B o0 K
the persons on whom the public choice conferrcd this honourable ,-_
charater, were some of the oioft avowed and zealous advocates for
the Reformation ; by which may be estimated the degree of refpcci
and popularity which that party had now attained in tie kingdom.
The inftrudtions of the parliament to thoIl comnilniioncrs till re-
main k, and do honour to the witlom and intcgrit) of that atlemlbly.
At the itme time that they imaniifcflcd, witl rclpccO: to the articles
of marriage, a laudable concern for the dignity and intcref of
their sovereign, they employed every precaution which prudence
could ditate, for preserving the liberty and independence of the
nation, and for securing the fucccflion of the crown in the houle
of Hamilton*

WVITII regard to each of these, the Scots obtained lwhatever Artifices of

the Frenchin

satisfaCtion their fear or jealousy could demand. The young queen, the marriage
the dauphin, and the king of France, ratified every article with trcaty.
the most Iblemn oaths, and confirmed them by deeds in fornm
under tleir hands and feals. But on the part of France, all this
was one continued scene of fludicd and elaborate deceit. Pre-
vious to these public tranfasEions with the Scottilh deputies, Mary
had been persuadcd to subscribe privately three deeds, equally
unjufi and invalid ; by which, failing the heirs of her own body,
hei conferred the kingdom of Scotland, with whatever inleritance
or iucceiTion might accrue to it, in free gift upon the crown of
France, declaring all promifcs to the contrary, which the neceflity
of her affairs, and the solicitations of her fubjecls, had extorted, or
might extort from her, to be void and of no obligation '; As it
gives us a proper idea of the charater of the French court under

Keith, Appcnd. 13. Corps Diplomat. tom, v. 2I. Keith, 73.

He nry

B o0 K Henry II. we may obfervc that the king himself, the keeper of
t---.-- tile great feals, the duke of Guifc, and the cardinal of Lorrain,

were the persons engaged in conduting this perfidious and dif-
honoural)le projec. The queen of Scots was the only innocent:
aCtor in that scene of iniquity. Her youth, her inexperience, her
education in a foreign country, and her deference to the will of her
uncles, muftl vindicate her, in the judgment of every impartial
person, from any imputation of blame on that account.

Tills grant, by which Mary beflowed the inheritance of her

lingdom upon firangers, was concealed witl the utmost care from
her fubjecs. They Icenm, howrever, not to have been unacquainted
with the intention of the French to overturn the settlement of the
fuccellion in favour of the duke of Chatellerault. The zeal with

hllich the archbishop of St. Andrew's opposed all the measures of
the queen regent, evidently proceeded from the fears and suspicions
of that prudent prelate on this head "'.
April l4, TIIE marriage, however, was celebrated with great pomp; and

51 3'5 the French, who had hitherto affeEted to draw a veil over their

designs upon Scotland, began now to unfold their intentions with-
out any dilguife. In the treaty of marriage, the deputies had agreed
that the dauphin should aflumc the name of King of Scotland.
This they conlidrced only as an honorary title; but the French
laboured to atnex to it flmec solid privi.!eges and power. They
insisted that the dauphin's title Ihould be publicly recognised; that
the Croin &/atlrimoniall flould be conferred upon him ; and that
all the rights pertaining to the huifbnd of a queen should be vefled

= About this time the French seem to have had tome design of reviving the earl of

Iennox's pretensions to the fucceflion, in order to intimidate and alarm the duke of
Chatelherault. Haynes, 215. .19. Forbes's Colle&-. vol. i. I89.

in

in his pcrfon. By the laws of Scotland, a person who married an B °0o K
heircfs kept poffeflion of her estate during his own life, if he hap- *----
pencd to flrvyive her and the children born of the marriage ".
This was called the coulr/ti' of Scotllnd. The French aimed at
applying this rule, which takes place in private inheritances, to
the fucceflion of the kingdom ; and that Icems to be implied in
their demand of tlhe Crowln .Z,/rio/lli//, a phrafltc peculiar to the
Scottifll hinorians, and which they have lncG.,ccd to explain '.
As the Frcnch had rcafon to cxpcE dillicultics ill carrying through
this meafutrc, they began .-itll founding the dleputics who wcre
then at Paris. Tlic Eglifh, in the marrliagc-aritilcls betwccn thcir
queen and lPl ilip of Spain, had i-t an examlll c to the, age of that
prudent jcalofly and refervc with which a forcigner should be
admitted lo near the throne. Full of the lfine ideas, the Scottifil
deputies had, in their oath of allegiance to tle dauphin, cxprcflcl
thlemfelvcs with remarkable caution ''. Their anlvcr was in the
:fimnc spirit, rcfpl)cfill, but sinn ; and difcovcrcld a fixed rcfolltiol
of consenting to nothing that tended to introduce any altcration-
in the order of flcceflion to the crown.

* Reg. Maj. lib. ii. 58.
° As far as I can judge, the hunffand of the queen, by thc grant of the C'rn, ;

-ra'n!rionnl/t, acquired a right to ailinmc the title of king, to h:ve his namnC isanaped
upon the current coin, and to sign all public infriuimcnts tocether with the (lleen.
In conlfcqueice of this, the ful, jcts took .l o:.th of fidelity to iiinm. I cit, Appc:J.
20. I-is authority becamie, in lome nmcai('rc, co-ordinate with that of tile qucen;
andi without his concurrence, rm:iilfcflcd by signing hiis name, no public lded Ifccins
to have been conlidercd as valid. ly the oalth of fidelity of the Scottifl comin iionlrs
to the dauphin, it is cvidenit th;t, in theiropinion, the rights belonging to the Crow;z
AJltrimsnroial fubfiflcd only duting the continuance of the marriage. Keith, Ap-
pind. 20. But the conrpirators againiL Rizio bound thlemllv es to procure a grant
of the Crowzn Matrimniial to Darnlcy during all the (lays of his life. Keith, Ap-
pend. 120. Good. i. 227.

K Icith, Append. 20.

9 FouR

B O 0 I Fo-uR of the deputies q happening to die before they returned

11.
L.,_ -- , into Scotland, this accident was universally imputed to the effects

of poison, which was supposed to have been given them by the
emifl'ries of the house of Guise. The historians of all nations
discover an amazing credulity with refped to rumours of this kind,
which arc so well calculated to please the malignity of some men,
and to gratify the love of the marvellous which is natural to all,
that in every age they have been 1iPallowed without examination,
and believed contrary to reason. No wonder the Scots should
easily give credit to a suspicion, which received such firong co-
lours of probability, both fiom their own resentment, and from
the known charadcer of the princes of Lorrain, so little scrupulous
about the juflice of the ends which they pursued, or of the means
which they employed. For the honour of human nature it
mufft, lhowever, be observed, that as we can discover no motive
which could induce any man to perpetrate such a crime, so there
appears no evidence to prove that it was committed. But the
Scots of that age, influenced by national animofities and prejudices,
were incapable of examining the circumstances of the cafe with
calmness, or of judging concerning them with candour. All
parties agreed in believing the French to have been guilty of this
detefrable aclion; and it is obvious how much this tended to
increase tle aversion for them, which was growing among all
ranks of men.

The regent NOTWITHSTANDING the cold reception rwhich their proposal
prevails on
the parlia- concerning the Crown iaatsrimonia met with fiom the Scottish
menttogrant deputies, the Irench ventured to move it in parliament. The
Nov. 29. partisans of the house of -Iamilton, suspicious of their designs

q The bilhop of Orkney, the earl of Rothes, the earl of Caflils, and lord
iFleming.

uponr

-upc1 tile 'pcccn.:, o ;ppolfed it w-ith g-rc;t zeal. But a party, i o0 K
x\vl.:1 lc f;,c!,lc a~nd unfl.ead. cond:u,.Ct of their i .-adcr had broughlt : --,--.

unider

l luchl diircputation, was little able) to wii;ialnd the illitu-
ence of irancc, alnd the addrels of the (iquee regent, secondcd,
on tlis occaeon, by all the numerous acllhrcents of the Rcform-
atLion. Ielfide's, thllt artful princefls drcfeld out the French demands
in a li;ds oflfelive garl) and threw iln l many limitations, as
fecined to render them of finall conflceucnce. Theic cither de-
ceived the Scots, or removed thir eir ruplcs: andl in compliance to
the lquccn, they pafied an adl , conerrilng tle r(,o 'ot/i lll/rimoiazl
on the ldaphin ; ahdi , with the folndel credulity, trufled to the
frail lCcurity of words and ilatutes, againit the dangecrous encroach-
ments of power .

TIiE concurrence of the prctretants with tle queen regent, ill pro- Continues to
motilng a imeal'rire l ace)tal)C to alrance, whic tile popifl clergy, co, t the pro-

teltan is.

under the influence of the airclhbiilhop o( St. AIndrcw's, opp)oid
it wilh ib muchi v\iolence ', is one of thol: filguLlar circumltances
in the condtlu of parties, for which this period is lo relmarkal)le.
It may be atcribcd, ill lome degree, to the dexterous mlanagecment
of tlc queen, but cieiciy to the moderationi of tlhoie -ho ivoured
the 1Reforimation. The protcfialts were by this time allmoft e(qual
to the catllolics, both iil poneri ad ill number; and, confeious of
their own lrength, they lbintted with imrpatience to tlhat tyran-
nical autlority with whlicl the ancient ltas arlned the ccclel'iaflicS
againlt them. 'Ihey longed to be exempted fiomi this olpr-clive

The aet of parlial-nent is wonrdcd with the litmo tro care, with a viev to'gui.rd

ng.aini r any bhrcacl of the ordti r cf fiicccCiion. Bt the (dulIk, not rclying on: this
:,!'in, cntercd a Iblemn protcftati.il to fccurc lis o\wn ri lit. Keith, 76. it is
pl.ain, that h1. furt)c.'cd the French of hIlivinig foi;e iiLniition to set alide his right of
lilccclirill; and indeed, if they had no dcfign of thl :kiinl, tihe agernelis w iLth whlicl
they urged theici demani, was chiludin. * Mcl. 47.

Vol. 1. T jurifdiLlion,

B oI K jurisdiction, and publicly to enjoy the liberty of professing those
' --"-~- opinions, and of exercising that worship, which so great a part of

the nation deemed to be founded in truth, and to be acceptable to
the Deity. This indulgence, to which the whole weight of
prieflly authority was opposed, there were only two ways of ob-
taining. Either violence must extort it from the relutant hand
of their sovereign, or by prudent compliances they might expecl it
from her favour or her gratitude. The former is an expedient
for the redress of grievances, to which no nation has recourse fid-
denly; and fuilje&s seldom venture upon refitance, which is their
laIc remedy, but in cafes of extreme necessity. On this occasion
the Reformers wifely held the opposite course, and by their zeal
in forwarding the queen's designs, they hoped to merit her pro-
tecion. This disposition the queen encouraged to the utmost,
and amused them so artfully with many promises, and some con-
ceflions, that, by their aflfilance, she surmounted in parliament
the force of a national and laudable jealousy, which would other-
vwife have swayed with the greater number.

ANOTHER circumstance contributed somewhat to acquire the

regent such considerable influence in this parliament. In Scotland,
all the bishoprics, and those abbeys which conferred a title to a feat
in parliament, were in the gift of the Crown '. From the time
of her accession to the regency, the queen had kept in her own
hands almost all those which became vacant, except such as were,
to the great disgust of the nation, betlowed upon foreigners.
Among these, her brother the cardinal of Lorrain had obtained
the abbeys of Kelfo and Melrofs, two of the molt wealthy found-
ations in the kingdom ". By this conduct, she thinned the ec-

See Book I. " Lefly, 202.

clefialtical

clefiaflical bench, ,which was entirely under the influence of 1B O O K
the arclhl)bhol of St. Andrew's: and w.rhich, by its numbers and ------
authority, ulually had great weight in the houfc, bo as to render
any oppofiltion it could give at that time of little consequence.

Tii:i earl of Argyll, and James Stcwart prior of St. Andrew's,

one the most powerful, and the other the mofil popular leader
of the proteflants, were appointed to carry tle crown and other
cnfigns of royalty to the dauphin. But from this they were
diverted by the part they vwere called to aa in a more interesting
fcenc, which now -begins to open.

BEFORE we turn towards this, it is necefary to observe, that on Elizabeth

succeeds to

the feventecntl of November, one thousand five hundred and fifty- the crown of
eight, Mary of England finified her flort and inglorious reign. England.
I-Icr filter Elizabeth took pofieflion of the throne without oppo-
fition; and the protellant religion was, once more, established by
law in England. The acceflion of a queen, who, under very dif-
ficult circumstances, had given strong indications of those eminent
qualities, which, in the sequel, rendered her reign so illustrious,
attracted the eyes of all lurope. Among the Scots, both parties
obcerved her first motions with the utmost solicitude, as they easily
foresaw that fle would not remain long an indifferent fpedator of
their tranl-actions.

UNDER many discouragements and much opprefion, the Re-

formation advanced towards a full cftablilhment in Scotland. All
the low country, the most populous, and at that time the moll
warlike part of tlhe kingdom, was deeply tinLured with the pre-

It appears from the rolls of this parliament, which Lefly calls a very full one,
that only Ieven biflops and sixteen abbots were present.

T 2 teltant

L o o K tceRant opinions; and if the flame ilmprefflons were not made in

!11. -....... tlhe more liflant counties, it was owing to no want of the fame

dif)ofiltions among the people, but to the scarcity of preachers,
w.-hoe mofl indcfttigable zeal could not latisfy the avidity of thofc
who deftred their inrhruclions. Among a people bred to arms,
and as prompt as the Scots to aci with violence; and in an age
when religious paflions had taken such firong pofioofficn of the
hulmall mind, and moved and agitated it with so much violence,
the peaceable and regular demeanor of tb numerous a party is
aflonifhiing. 'irom the death of. Mr. Patrick Hamilton, the firaf
who fuflured in Scotland for the protestant religion, thirty years
had clapsed, and during so long a period no violation of public
order or tranquillity liad proceeded from that set Y ; and though
routed and irritated by the most cruel excefies of ecclefiafical
tyranny, they did, in no instance, tranfgrcfs those bounds of duty
lwhich the law prelcribes to fubjecas. Betides the prudence of
their own leaders, and the protection which the queen regent,
from political motives, afforded them, the moderation of the arch-
bishop of St. Andrew's encouraged this pacific disposition. That
prelate, whoLe private life cotemporary writers tax with great irre-
gulairities , governed the church, for ibme years, with a tcmper
and prudence of which there are few examples in that age. BIut
oime time before the meeting of last parliament, the archbilhop
departed from thofc humane maxims by whlichl he had hitherto
rcgulated his condu ; and lwhether in lfite to the queen, who
had entered into bo close an union with the protestants, or in com-
pliance with the importunities of his clergy, he let loose all the
rage of per!ccution against the reformed ; sentenced to the flames

Y The mulrdr of cardinal Beatoun was occasioned by private rcvcnge, and being

contrived and executed by sixteen persons only, cannot with jufiice be imputed to
the whole protestant party. Kniox, Buchanan, IKcith, 208.

an

an agcc pi-iel:, who had been convilcd of embralcing tle pro- Bn O IK
teclant op-inions; and ftimmoncd fcvcal othcrs, fuithlpeed of tile C.--,----
fiamel crime, to appear before a fynod of tlie clergy, which was
toon to coinvcnc at Edinburgh.

NOTJINCG could ccual the horror of tlhe protcftlnts ant this 1n-

ex'-cc''I and llt :ararouts execution, but the .zeal wil; which they
clfoulcd tl.e dcirefnce of a catlic that now iccincd t(lcoted( to dc--
litr"lLioLn. '1'iiey hlad immlcdiate recou!rli to tlie lqueen, rclent;
and ;as I-er lfuccelt in the parliament, iich was .ihen a)bout to Imcet
dcpclndcl on thcir -concurrence, fne not only flickered thc;n firom
thec imicinii, ilorm, blit ermiitted tlici the .Ci of tlheir l.e-
ligion with imore firccdoin than tliey had hithlcrto cnjoycd. Un-
lhtislicd wit ll tis prccarious tenure by which they lield their reli-
gious liberty, the proteflants laboured to rendler their ipo{CiiOll of
it m1orce ifecureC and icnd'epend)ent. \Vith tilis viCw tlhey determined
to petti,'io the parliament for fomc legal protection ag;in f the
cxorliitant ancid oplrciTiv juriiliclioi of tllC ecclCffllical couCrts,
which, by their arbhia;ry nmethod 0o p)roceedin:g, founded in thlc
canon la\V\, wre led t to tlntcnccs t o fhoclhing to humanity,
by maIims thlc nmofc i-pugnant to juificc. IBut the (oCCi, who
dreaded tie el.c;, f of a (ldebte on this dclic;te jlhljcOi, which could
not fail of exciting high and langerous p;:filo l, prevailed on the
leaders of tlh party, by new and mIore oc!mn liromuifics of her
ipotcdlion, to idcilt Iroin aly application to larliamncit, vw]hre their
inumbers and inlluncc would, in all probability, have procured.
them, if not the cntire rcdrcls, at Icaf.i; foe uiitigaion, of their
grievances.

TiiEY applied to another afrelmbly, to a co(vor'tionl of the
(popifi clergy, but with the fame ill Ihr:cc-.. \\i: . a.Iath always

aLltsc u(cd

B 0 IK attended every proposal for reformation, addrcffed to that order of
.. men. To abandon usurped power, to renounce lucrative error,

are sacrifices, which the virtue of individuals has, on tome oc-
cafions, offered to truth; but from any society of men no ilchl
effort can be expecRed. The corruptions of a society, recom-
mended by common utility, and juflified by universal practice,
are viewed by its members without shame or horror; and reform-
ation never proceeds from themselves, but is always forced upon
them by some foreign hand. Suitable to this unfeeling and in-
flexible spirit was the behaviour of the convocation in the present
conjuncture. All the demands of the protestants were rejeted with
contempt; and the popifib clergy, far from endeavouring, by any
prudent conceflions, to sooth and to reconcile such a numerous
body, asSertcd the doctrines of their church, concerning some
of the most exceptionable articles, witll an ill-timed rigour, which
gave new offence '.
-9e*· DURING the fitting of the convocation, the protestants firit be-

gan to ifpect tfome change in the regent's disposition towards
them. Though joined with them for many years by interest, and
united, as they conceived, by the strongest ties of affection and of
gratitude, fle discovered, on this occasion, evident symptoms, not
only of coldneis, but of a growing disgust and aversion. In order
to account for this, our hiflorians do little more than produce the
trite observations concerning the influence of prosperity to alter
the character and to corrupt the heart. The queen, fay they,
having reached the utmost point to which her ambition aspired, no
longer preserved her accustomed moderation, but, with an info-
lence usual to the fortunate, looked down upon those by whose

Kcith, 8i.

assistance

assistance fle had been enabled to rife so high. But it is neither B O 0 K

I1.

in the depravity of the human heart, nor in the ingratitude of the
queen's disposition, that we must search for the motives of her 'I59-
prcfcnt condut. These were derived fiom another, and a more
remote fourcc, which, in order to clear the fubfcquent tranfaaions,
wve shall endeavour to open with some care.

TH-E ambition of the princes of Lorrain had been no less sic- Ambitiou,

iews of the

cefsful than daring; but all their fchcllls were diflinguiflcd by princes of
being v;ft and unbounded. Though i-rangers at the court of Lorain.
France, their cminent qualities had raised them, in a fiort time,
to an height of power, superior to that of all other iubjccs, and had
placed themn on a level even with the princes of the blood them-
selves. The church, the army, the revenue, were under their
diretion. Nothing but the royal dignity remained unattained,
and they were elevated to a near alliance with it, by the marriage
of the queen of Scots to the dauphin. In order to gratify their
own vanity, and to render their niece more worthy the heir of
France, they set on foot her claim to the crown of England, which
was founded on prctences not unplaufiblc.

T-IE tragical amours and marriages of Henry VIII. are known

to all the world. Moved by the caprices of his love, or of his
refentmcnt, that impatient and arbitrary monarch had divorced
or behiadcd four of the fix queens whom he married. In order
to gratify him, both his daughters had been declared illegitimate
by aSI of parliament; and yet, with that fantastic inconfiflence
which diRinguiincs his charater, he, in his lafi will, whereby he
was empowered to fettle the order of succession, called both of
them to the throne upon the death of their brother Edward; and,
at the fame time, pafling by the posterity of his eldest filter Mar-

4 garet

I O, I;

0 garet queen of Scotland, he appointed the line of fucceflion to
..... - continue in the dcfccndants of his younger filler, the duchcfs of

is* 59 Suslolk.

IN confcquencc of thllis defination, the vlidity whereof was

admitted by the English, but never recognized by foreigners,
iMary had irigned in Enlland without the leaf complaint of
neighbouring princes. But the fame causes which facilitatcd her
accejcion to the throne, were obstacles to the elevation of her sifter
Eliz-iabcth, and rendered her poficseion of it precarious and infe--
cure. Rome trembled for the catholic faih, under a proteflant
queen of fuich eminent abilities. The fame ulperficitious fears
alarmed the court of Spain. France beheld with concern a throne,
to whlich the queen of Scots could form so many pretcnfions,
occup)ied by a rival, hitoe birth, i the opion f all good catholis,
excluded her from any legal right of succession. The impotent
hatred of the Roman pontiff, or the flow councils of Philip II.
would have produced mo lllddcnl or formidable esic l. The ardent
andl ilnpetuous ambition oi tlh princes of Lorrain, who at that
time govc-rned the court of France, v\as more decisive, and more

They per- to be dreaded. Iifiigatcd by them, I-Ienry, soon after the death
to ifluune t f

her ary, perfLuadcd his ldatter-in-lnaw, and her huiband, to
til l'os qu aflime the title of I-,ing and queen of England. They affeeccd

to publiflh this to all rEurope. They used that Plyle andc appellation
in public papers, some of .which still remain ''. The arms of Eng-
land were engraved on tlheir coin and plate, and borne by them
on all occasions. No preparations, however, were made to ilup-
port this impolitic and premature claim. Elizabeth was already
feated on her throne; she polcflsd all the intrepidity of ipirit,

Andcrf. Diplom. Scot. No. 68 and I64.

al dl

and all tle arts of policy, which were nccefl;ry for maintaiiiin g I0 o 1C
that f:ation. England was grovilng into reputation for naval\,.t-.
powerC. The marine of France had been utterly neglcacLd; and .'
Scotland remained tlh only avenue by which the territories of Eli-
zabetli could be approached. It was on that fide, thcreiorc, that Refrlvectoin-

VaI C E ng-

the princes of Lorrain determined to mnake their attack'; and, l;,nd.
by using the name and prctenfions of tlh Scottifli queen, they
hoped to roulc the Englifli catholics, formidable at that time by
their 7.zal and numbers, and exalfpcrated t to tle utlmofi againit
Elizabeth, on account of tlhe change which lme lhad made in thl
national religion.

IT was vain to expc the afliftancc of the Scottifli proteflants In olde to

this, ecvc12-

to dethrone a queen, whom all Europe clcemled the guardian and filry to chcl(C
defender of the reformed iaith. To break the power and rclputa- 'lhe Ricfrnc-

;iliol] in Scot-

tion of that party in Scotland became, for this rcafon, a neccilury lUlld.
flcp towards the inva;ion of England. \Vitll this the princes of
Lorrain resolved to open their ficieiec. And as pcrlecutioll was
the only method for flupprefling religious opinions known in that
age, or dictated by the delpotic and 11tng-liinary i)irit of the
Romnifl fiiperftition, this, in its utmofi violence, they determined
to employ. The earl of Argyll, tle prior of St. Andrew's, and
other leaders of the party, were marked out by them for imme-
diate deftrution d; and they hoped, by puniflling them, to inti-
midate their followers. Inftrudions for this purpoif2 were sent
from France to the queen regent. That humane and sagacious
princess condemned a incafure which was equally violent and
impolitic. By long residence in Scotland, she had become ac-
quainted with the eager and impatient temper of the nation; fiie

c Sorbes, Colle&. i. 253. 269. 279. 404. d Sorbes, i. 152.
VOL, I. U well

B 00 vwell knew the power, the number, and popularity of the pro-

II.
*- .--- tefant leaders; and had been a witness to the intrepid and un-

I>1559. conquerable resolution which religious fervour could inspire. WVhat

then could be gained by routing this dangerous spirit, which
hitherto all the arts of policy had fcarccly been able to restrain ? If
it once broke loose, the authority of a regent would be little ca-
pable to fubduc, or even to moderate, its rage. If, in order to
quell it, foreign forces were called in, this would give the alarm
to the whole nation, irritated already at tlle excefivc power which
tlh French po2c{flicl in the kingdom, and itlhicious of all their
tlclgI;'lS. Amidfn the ihock which this might occasion, iar fiom
hloin.ll to e:terminate the protestant dolirine, it would be w-ell if
the whole I'biric of the eftablilhed church wlere not shaken, and
lperlalps overturned fi-om tle foundation. These prudent remon-
fihanccs mIade no inpreflion on her brothers; precipitant, but
inflexible in all their rclolutions, they infitcld on the full and
rigorous execution of their plan. Mary, pafionatcly devoted to
the intcircil of lrance, and ready, on all occalions, to sacrifice her
own opinions to the inclinations of her brothers, prepared to
cxccutc their commands iwith implicit imilllion ,o and, contrary
to her owIt judgment and to all the rules of iIund policy, Ihe
became the inllrument of exciting civil commotions in Scotland,
the fatal tcrmination of whlich flhe foreiasw and dreaded.

The rogent F1ROM the time of the queen's competition for the regency with
:d ters her.
condu&t \iih thle duke of Chatelhcrault, the popish clergy, under the direction
p'rtla'nts.te of the archblihop of St. Andrew's, had set themselves in oppo-

fition to all her measures. Her firfl ftep toward the execution of
her new fchcme, was to regain their favour. Nor was this recon-

Mclv. 48. Mem. dc Ciftlenau, ap. Jebb, vol. ii. 446.

cilement

cilemcnt a matter of difliculty. The popifl cccleiiaftics, fclaratcd C BO K
fiom tlhe reft of mankind by the law of celibacy, tlhe boldlcl and _---.
moll fcceflCsfuil i-nventioni of human policy; and combined amolngl
tlhemlclvcs in the cloitf and moot Ilcrcd union ; hIave been ac-
cuiiomled, in every age, to facrilic all private and particLlahr
pa;lions to the dignity and interell of their order. Delighted on
this occasion witl tlhe proliecO of triumphing over a ftILIion, tlhe
encroachments of which they had long dreaded, and aniilnated
-ith the hopes of rc-efiablifhing their declining grandeur on a
firmer basis ; they, at once, canccllcd tlhe memory of pafl injuriec,
and enrgaged to f condl the queen in all her attempts to check the
progre.l: of tlCe Refolrmatlion. 'Ic queen, being secure of their
aftllnncc, openlyc alpproved of the decrees of the convocation, by
whlich thic prin Cilcs of tle reforamers were condemned ; and at

tile i i:m.

l 'i te lI niLced a proclamation, cnjoliiini all pcrlons

to "l;. ;vc tlhe ap,;roaching festival of Eaflcr aiccordinl to the
Iomihli itual.

As it ;:as no loigler ( fcble to miflake tle queen's intcntions.,

the prot!lant,, \who t'v · (tla;(e. :'; !.-oa1Cli, in order to avert
it, cillloyO' .' , ;'

i ,;-'; i,' .1 .id 'I- ugh Campbell of

Londoil, to ' ,:

. : i'iccrnilng tli:; change to ads

fevcritv-., .hi ;

hi '-- . .:: icc.: I ',cld so little merited, and

vwhich her .'. oi, ) I':ve them no rcafon to ce:pcclo
Slhe, v':tholtt c 'i0i or ailology, avowed to them lher rcofltion
of extirpatilg the re1olrmcl religion out of the kiindom. And,
upon their urging hlci i-i rner engg,,ements with an uncourtly,
but lioneft boldncifs, [he so far forgot her uiial modcraticn, as to
utter a sentiment, which, however apt those of royal condition
may be to entcrtain it, prudence flould teach them to conceal as
much as poflible, " The promises of princes, fays hec, ought

U 2 not

B 0 0 K not to be too carefully rcmembered, nor the performance of them

11.

----.--- eexadced, unless it suits their own conveniency."
1559.

Summons Tr-HE indignation which betrayed the queen into this rafl cx-
their prcach-
crs 5to appear prcflion, was nothing in comparison of that with which she was

borc h. animated, upon hearing that the public exercise of the reformed

religion had been introduced into the town of Perth. At once
she threw off the mafkl, and iflued a mandate, summoning all
the protcftant preachers in the kingdom to a court of justice, which
was to be held at Stirling on the tenth of May. The protestants,
who, fron their union, began about this time to be diftinguifled
by the name of the CONGREGATION, ,were alarmed, but not
intimidatcd by this danger; and instantly rcfolved not to abandon
the men to whom they were indebted for the inoft valuable of
all bleflings, the knowledge of truth. At that time there prevailed
in Scotland, with rcfpe- to criminal trials, a cuftorm, introduced
at firil by the inllitutions of vafalage and clanfllip, and tolerated
afterwards under a feeble government; pcrfons accused of any
crime were accompanied to the place of trial by a retinue of their
fiiends and adherents, aflcmbled for that purpose from every quarter
of the kingdom. Authorised by this ancient pratice, the reformed
convened in great numbers, to attend their pallors to Stirling.
The queen dreaded their approach with a train so numerous, though
unarmed; and in order to prevent them from advancing, she
cmpovered John Erskine of Dun, a person of eminent authority
with the party, to promise in her name, that flhe would put a
flop to the intended trial, on condition the preachers and their
retinue advanced no nearer to Stirling. Erskine, being convinced
himself of the queen's sincerity, served her with the utmost zeal;
and the protestants, averse fiomn proceeding to any ad of violence,
Jiftened with pleasure to so pacific a proposition. The preachers,

with

with a few lcaders of the party, remained at Perth ; the multi- i.0
tudce wlhich had gathcrecl from diflrrcntt parts of the kingdomll ..
dilperfcd, and retired to their own habitations.

BUT, notwithlflinding ti s Iolemn proniif, tile queen, on the icn: 1 pao

tenth of nlay, procceded to call to trial the perfonl; whvo hadl been tl ad .i
iinmmnoned, and upon thcir non-aIppearance tlhe rigourl(- of jluflice
tool; place, and they were pronounced outlaws. iBy this ig;noble
artifice, fb incompatible with real dignity, and so inconliflcl.n with
that integrity which should prevail in all trantitions bctwccnl
sovereigns andt tllir'tillbjels, the queenC forfeited tlh cftccne and
confidence of the whole nation. l'hc p)rotcfnallt, ihocked no leis
at the indecency with whiclh 1he violated the public fitill, thian at
the danger which threatened tlicmlclvcs, prepared boldly for their
own defence. Erfkinc, enraged at having been made the initru-
mcnt for dccciving his party, inflantly abandoned Stirling, and
repairing to Perth, added to the zeal of his aflbciatcs, by his re-
preIntations of the queen's inflexible rc'olution to llpprefs their
religion.

TIIE popular rhetoric of Knox powerfully seconded his rcprc- This occa-

sions an in-
fentations: IHe having been carried a prisoner into France, to- furrclion at

>Perth.

getlier with the other persons taken in the castle of St. Andrlewv's,
soon made his cfcape out of that country; and residing fomctimes
in England, fomctiincs in Scotland, had at last been driven olt. of
both kingdoms by the rage of the popifl clergy, and was obliged
to retire to Geneva. Thence he was called by the leaders of
tle protestants in Scotland; and, in compliance with their soli-
citations, he set out for his native country, where he arrived a
few days before the trial appointed at Stirling. I-He hurried in-
ftantly to Pcrth, to share with his brethren in the common danger,

or

& 0o C) or to aflift them in promoting the common cause. While their
_------ i minds Vwere in that Icrmenrt, which the queen's perfidioufhcfs and

1Si . their owi. danger occasioned, lie mounted tle pulpit, and by a ve-

hcment harangiue againif idolatry, inflamed tlie multitude with the
utinoll rage. The in(lifcretion of a prielt, who, immediately after
Knox's sermon, was preparing to celebrate mars, and began to
decorate the altar for that purpolC, precipitated them into imme-
diate action. With tumultuary, but irrelflcible violence, they fell
upon tie churches in that city, overturned the altars, defaced the
picur.e, broke in pieces the images; and proceeding next to the
monafllrics, they in a few hours laid tllofc lumptuous fabrics
almoil level with the ground. This riotous insurrection was not
the effeCR oJ any concert, or previous deliberation: censured by
the reformed preachers, and public lycondemned by the persons of'
mofl power and credit with the party, it must be regarded merely
as an accidental eruption of popular rage .

The regent BUT to the queen dowager these proceedings appeared in a

Illma zchics .-
gainit them. very dilTlrcnt light. I3Beidcs their manifel: contempt for her au-

thority, the protcllants had violated every thing in religion which
she eflccmed venerable or holy; and on both these accounts she
determinedi to infliR the Icvcrcfi vengeanc on the whole oparty.
She had already drawn the troops in French pay to Stirling ; with
these, and what Scottish forces fle could levy of a fiuddcn ihe
marched dire&ly to Perth, in hopes of surprising tie protestant
leaders before they could alfemble their followers, whom, out of
confidence in her disingenuous promises, they had been rashly in-
duced to dismiss. Intelligence of these preparations and menaces was
soon conveyed to Perth. The protestants would gladly have soothed

KInox, HiT. Iz7, 128.

9 thle

the queen, by addl-cflcs both to herllf and to the pcrlbns of B 0 0 K
greatefl credit in her court; but linding her inexorable, they, with --_.---
great vigour, took nmcailurcs for their own dlclccc. 'Thir ad-
hcirnts, animatcd with zeal for religion, and cager to cxpolf
tlhcinclvrcs in lo good a canlc, flocklcd in fiuch numbers to Perth,
that tlhey not only secured the tow-n from danger, but withiln a
few days were in a condition to take the field, and to face the
queen, who advanced with an army Ievcn thlouI' iid il'ong.

Nl'iITIIEER party, however, was impatient to cngage. lhe

queen dreaded the even t of a battle with men xvlionll the fervonr
of religion railed above the Ibnlf of fear or of cdnger. 'The pro-
tcfanits beheld with regret the carl of Argyll, the Prior of St, An-
drew's, and obme other eminent persons of their party, flill ad-
hering to the q(ucn ; anl d(eflitttc of their aid and coiifel, de-
clined hazarding an action, the ill fluccefs of whicl might have
proved the ruin of their caufic. Thel p;ro[cc of anl accommo-
dation was for thlcl' realons highly acceptable to botlh ides: Argyll
and the prior, wlio were the quen's conmiilioncrs for conlduaicng
the negociation, Icce to have been linccrely delirous of reconciling
the contending failions; and thc carl of Glencairn arriving unex-
pelctdly with a powerful reinlforcemlcnt to the Congregation, aug-
mented the queen's cagernefs forpeace. A treaty was accordingly A trcaty con-

cluded.

concluded, in which it was flipulated, that both armies flould be
dilbalnded, and the gates of Perth set open to the queen; that in-
demnity fliould be granted to the inhabitants of that city, and to all
others concerned in the late infurrectlion; tlat no French garrison
should be left in Perth, and no French soldier flould approach
within three miles of that place; and that a parliament should im-
mediately be held, in order to compose whatever differences might
fill remain '.

g Keith, 89.

Tn rE.

B 0 0 TH-IE leaders of the Congregation, difiruittfil of the queen's fin-

II.
I__._--._ cerity, and sensible that conccilfons, flowing not from inclination,

.May 9. but extorted by the nccefity of her affairs, could not long remain in

force, entered into a new aflbciation, by lwhich they bound thcm-
felvcs, on the firit infringement of the present treaty, or in the
least appearance of danger to their religion, to re-aflemnble their
followers, and to take arms in deflnce of what they deemed the
cause of God and of their country '

Errcl:c by the TIlE queen, by lier conducl, dcmnonfiratcd thece precautions to
cge t". be the refu lt of no groundless or uniiccefl-lry fear. No fooncr were

the protcflant forces difinifcd, than file broke every article in the
treaty. She introduced Ircnch troops into Perth, fined onic of
the inhabitants, banishnd others, rem.oved the magiflrates out of
office, and, on her retiring to Stirling, she left behind her a gar-
rifon of fix hundred men, with orders to allow the exercise of no
other religion than the Roman catholic. The situation of Perth,
a place at that time of foine st-rength, and a town among the molt
proper of any in the kingdom for the station of a garrison, seems
·to have allured the queen to this unjutifiable and ill-judged breach
of public faith; which she endeavoured to colour, by alleging that
the body of men left at Perth was entirely composed of native Scots,
though kept in pay by the king of France.

ThnE queen's scheme began gradually to unfold; it was now

apparent, that not only the religion, but the liberties of the king-
dom were threatened ; and that the French troops were to be em-
ployed as inflrumcnts for subduing the Scots, and wreathing the
yoke about their necks. Martial as the genius of the Scots then
was, the poverty of their country made it inpoifible to keep their

h Knox, 138.

armies

armies long aflembled; and even a very frnall body of rcgular E 00 K
troops might have proved formidable to the nation, though con- I .- -j
filling wholly of soldiers. But what number of French forces 5j9'
were then in Scotland, at what times, and under what pretext
they returned, after having left the kingdom in one thousand live
lhmndred and fifty, we cannot with any certainty determine.
Contemporary hifiorians often ielea with little judgment the
circumftanccs which they tranfinit to posterity; and with relfpel
to matters of the greatefn curiosfty and importance, leave succeed-
ing ages altogether in the dark. \Vre may conjecture however,
from fomc pafllgcs in Buchanan, that the French and Scots in
Frcnch pay amounted at lcafn to three thousand men, under the
command of Moniteur D'Oyfcl, a creature of the house of Guifc;
and they were soon augmented to a much morc formidable
1numlber.

TuE queen, encouraged by having so considerable a body of

wcll-difciplined troops at her command, and infligated by the
:-iolcnt counsels of D'Oyfcl, had ventured, as we have observed,
to -iolate the treaty of Perth, and, by that rafl ation, once more
threw the nation into tlhe most dangerous convulsions. The earl The pro:crf

'lanilts n:an11

of Argyll and prior of St. Andrew's inflantly deserted a court, take arNs.
where faith and honour seemed to them to be no longer regarded;
and joined the leaders of the Congregation, who had retreated to
the eaflern part of Fife. The barons from the neighbouring
countics rcpaired to them, the preachers roused the people to arms,
aind wherever they came, the fame violent operations which acci-
dent had occasioned at Perth, were now encouraged out of policy.
The enraged multitude was let loose, and churches and mona-
ftcries, the monuments of ccclefiaftic -pride and luxury, were
lacrificed to their zeal.

VO... I. X I

B 0 0 K IN order to check their career, the queen, wvithout losing a nlo-

If.

m--- ent, put her troops in motion; but the zeal of the Congrc-
I;59' gation got the flart once more of her vigilance and aativity. In

that warlike age, when all men were accuflomed to arms, and on
the leafl profpc of danger were ready to run to them, the leader;
of the protestants found no difficulty to raise an army. Though
they set cut from St. Andrew's with a slender train of an hundred
horse, crowds flocked to their standards from every corner of the
country through which they marched; and before.they reached
Falkland, a -village only ten miles distant, they were able to meet
the queen with superior force'..

THE queen, surprised at the approach of so formidable a bod)y,

which was drawn up by its leaders in such a manner as added
greatly in appearance to its numbers, had again recourse to nego-
ciation. She found, however, that the preservation of the pro-
teftant religion, their zeal for which had at first roused the leaders
of the Congregation to take arms, was not the only object they had
now in view. They were animated with the warmest love of
civil liberty, which they conceived to be in imminent danger from
the attempts of the French forces; and these two patfons min-

Theyamig at gling, added reciprocally to each other's ftrcngth. Together with
vil as c:l as more enlarged notions in religion, the Reformation filled the
reigiious
griev.irCs, human mind with more liberal and generous sentiments concern-

ing civil government. The genius of popery is extremely favour-
able to the power of princes. The implicit fubmiflion to all her
decrees, which is cxaaed by the Romish church, prepares and
breaks the mind for political servitude; and the doctrines of the
Reformers, by overturning the established 1ltem of superstition,

i IKnox, 141.

weakened

sweakencd the firlncll foundations of civil tyranny. That bold B 0

o I;

fi)irit of inquiry, whlich led men to rejct theological errors, ac- --
companied them in othcr I:ienccs, and diicovcred every-where the d-le
Ilme manly zeal for truth. A ncew itudy, introduced at the fame
time, added greater force to the spirit of liberty. Men became
more acquainted with the G(reek and Rooman authors, who deiribed
exquiiite models of free governmenlt, far superior to the inaccurate
and oppressive system eflabliilced by tlte feudal law; and produced
filch illustrious examples of public virtue, as wonderfully suited
both the circumstances and spirit of tlat age. Many amo!ng the
nmof eminent reformers were thcifelves considerable mnailers in
,ancient learning; and all of them eagerly adopted the maxims
and spirit of the ancients, with regard to government . The
most ardent love of liberty accompanied the proteflant religion
throughout all its progress ; and wherever it was embraced, it
routed an independent spirit, which rendered men attentive to
their privileges as fubjecs, and jealous of the encroachments of
their sovereigns. IKnox, and the other preachers of the Reform-
ation, infiued generous sentiments concerning government into
the minds of their hearers ; and the Scottinl barons, naturally free
and bold, were prompted to afcert their rights with more freedom
and boldncfs than ever. Inftcad of obeying the queen regent,
who had enjoined thenm to lay down their arms, they demanded
not only the rcdrefs of their religious grievances, but, as a prc-

: The excessive admiration of ancient policy was the occasion of Knox's famous

book concerning the Government of Jomcnn, wherein, conformable to the max-
irns of the ancient legislators, which modern experience has proved to be ill founded,
he pronounces the elevation of women to the supreme authority, to be utterly
deftrucRive of good govcrnment. I-is principles, authorities, and examples, were
all drawn fiom ancient writers. The lfame obfcrvation may be made with regard
to Buchanan's Dialogue, De 7rure Regni ap:d Scotos. It is founded, not on the
maxims offeudal, but of ancient republican government.

X 2 liminary

B 0 0 K litninary toward fettling the nation, and securing its liberties, re-
-----. quired the immediate expulsion of the French troops out of Scot-

1559. land. It was not in the queen's power to make so important a

conccffion without the concurrence of the French monarch ; and
as tome time was requisite in order to obtain that, she hoped,
during this interval, to receive such reinforcements from France,
as would insure the accompliflhment of tlat dclign which she had
June 13. twice attempted with unequal strength. Meanwhile, she agreed

to a ceiattion of arms for eight days, and before the expiration
of these, engaged to transport the French troops to the south fide
of the Forth ; and to fend commiflioners to St. Andrew's, who
should labour to bring all differences to an accommodation.
As ic hoped, by means of the French troops, to overawe the
proteflants in the southern counties, the former article in the
treaty was punEtually executed ; the latter, having been insertcd
merely to amuse the Congregation, was no longer remembered.

.A ,connl I3BY tllcfe reiterated and wanton instances of perfidy, the queen
trea!ty violat-
ed. loft all credit witl her adversaries; and no safety appearing in

any other course, they again took arms with more inflamed resent-
mcnt, and with bolder and more extensive views. The removing
of the French forces had laid open to them all the country situated
between Forth and Tay. The inhabitants of Perth alone remain-
ing flbjceted to the iniblencc and exaaions of the garrison which
the quecn hadI left there, implored the aliflance of the Congre-
gation for their relief. Thither they marched, and having with-
out cflect required the queen to evacuate the town in terms of tle
former trcaty, they prepared to besiege it in form. The queen
employed the earl of Huntly and lord Erskine to divert them from
this enterprifi. But her wonted artifices were now of no avail;
repeated so often, they could deceive no longer; and witliou.

listening

Iiftening to her offers, the protestants continued tle siege, and B 0 0 K
soon obliged the garrison to capitulate.

1559,

AFTER the lols of Perth, the queen endeavoured to seize Stir-

ling, a place of tome strength, and, fromn its command of the only
brildge over the Forth, of great importance. But the leaders of
the Congregation, having intelligence of her design, prevented the
execution of it, by an liafty Inarch thither with part of their Rapid march

and luccefs of
forcese The inhabitants, heartily attached to the caule, tet open the protell-

ants.

to them the gates of their town. Thence they advanced, with the
lame rapidity towards Edinburgh, which the queen, on their ap-
proach, abandoned with precipitation and retired to Dunbar.

TiE, proteflant army, wherever it came, kindled or spread the

ardour of Reformation, and the utinolt exceIes of violence were
committed upon churches and monafltries. The former were
ipoilcd of every decoration, which was then eflnecled ihcrcd ; the
latter were laid in ruins. Ve arc apt, at this diflance of time, to
condemn the furious zeal of the reformers, and to regret the
overthrow of to many flatcly fabrics, the monuments of our an-
cclors magnificence, and among the noblest ornaments of thle
kingdom. But anmidft the violence of a Relormation, carried on
in opposition to legal authority, tome irregularities were unavoid-
able; and perhaps no one could have been permitted more proper
to allure and intercit the multitudc, or more fatal to the grandeur
of the efabllihedc church. IHow abfird vr and ill-founded the
fieculative errors of popery may be, iomle enquiry and attention
are requisite towards difovering them.. The abuies and. corrup-
tions which had crept into the public worlip of that church, lay
more open to obfervatiorn, and by ittiking the senses, excited more
univcrtlla diitguLl. Under the long reign of hcatlenifin, fupcr-

ftition!

B 0 0 ; flition seems to havc exhauflcd its talent of invention, si tiiha

I1.
L---.- when a superstitious spirit tiized Chriflians, they were obligcd t3t

'J59' imitate the hcathens in the pomp and maglificence of their CLic-

n-onies, and to borrow from them the ornaments and decoration,.
of their temples. To the pure and simple worfnlip of the pri-
mitive Christians, there fuccceded a species of ifilendid idolatry,
nearly resembling those pagan originals whence it had been copied.
The contrariety of such olbfcrvances to the spirit of Chriflianilt",
was almolt the firnf thing, in the Romish system, lwhich awakened
the indignation of tlle reformers, who, applying to these the de-
nunciations in the Old Teflament againlt idolatry, imagined tlat
they could not endeavour at fupprefing themn with too much 7zeaL
No talk could be more acceptable to the multitude, than to over-
turn those feats of superStition; they ran with emulation to per-
form it, and happy was the man whose hand was molt adven-
turous and successful in executing a work deemed so pious. Nor
did their leaders labour to refIrain this impetuous spirit of reform-
ation. Irregular and violent as its sallies were, they tended direcly
to that end which they had in view; for, by demolitliing the
monasteries throughout the kingdom, and setting at liberty their
wretched inhabitants, they hoped to render it impossible ever to
rebuild the one, or to r-e-assemble the other.

BUT amidst these irregular proceedings, a circumstance which

does honour to the conduct and humanity of the leaders of the
Congregation deserves notice. They so far restrained the rage of
their followers, and were able so to temper their heat and zeal,
that few of the Roman catholics were exposed to any personal
insult, and not a single man suffered death '

Lefly, ap. Jebb, vol. i. 231.

A'T

Ar the fame time we discover, by the facility with which these B 0 0 K

I1.

great rcvoliUtions were cffeled, how violcntly the current of _-.-
national favour ran towards the Reformation. No more than 559'
three hundred men marched out of Perth under the earl of
Argyll and prior of St. Alndrew's m; with this inconsiderable force
they advanced. But wherever they came, the people joined them
in a 1)odY!; their army was fcldom less numerous than five thou-
sand men; the gates of every town were thrown open to receive
them; and, without striking a single blow, they took pofieflion June 29
of the capital of the kingdom.

T7I1s rapid and astonishing success seems to have encouraged the

reformers to extend their views, and to rife in their demands.
Not fatislicd with their irit. claim of toleration for their religion,
they now openly aimed at cftablihling the protestant docrine on
the ruins of popery. For this reaion they determined to tix their
rclidcnce at Edinburgh; and by their appointment Knox, and
some other preachers, taking- poffellion of thle pulpits, which Iiad
been abandoned by the afirightened clergy, declaimed against the
errors of popery with ficlh fervent zeal as could not fail of gaining
many profcly tes.

IN the mean time the queen, who had prudently given way to

a torrent which flie could not rcfiR', obfcrved with pleasure that it
now began to fubfidc. The leaders of the Congregation had been.
above two months in arms, and by the expences of a campaign
protracted so long beyond the usual time of service in that age,.
had cxhaulled all the money which a country, where riches did
not abound, had been able to supply. The multitude, dazzled.
with their ;fuccels, and concluding the work to be already done,

"' Keith, 94.

5 retired

io 0 0 retired to their own habitations. A fev only of the more zealous
.- ------i or wealthy barons remailled with their preachers at Edinblrgh.

i-. As intelligence is procured in civil wars with little difliculty, what-

ever was tranlated at Edinburgh was soon known at Dunlbar.
The queen, regulating her own conducl by the fituationl of her
advcrlaries, artfully amulcd thenm with the profipec of an immlediate
accommodation ; while, at the fame timle, Che by fiudicd delays
(pun out.the negociations for that purpose to fuchl a length, that,
in the end, the party dwindled to an inconsiderable number; and,
as if peace had been already re-cflablifhed, became careless of mili-
tary difeipline. The queen, ,who watched for such an opportunity,
advanced unexpcctedly, by a sudden march in the night with all
her forces, and appearing before Edinburgh, filled that city with
the utmost conflernation. The proteflants, weakened by the in-
prudent difierfion of their followers, durst not encounter the
French troops in the open field ; and were even unable to defend
an ill-fortified town against their assaults. Unwilling, however;
to abandon the citizens to the queen's mercy, they endeavoured,
by facing the enemy's army, to gain time for colleccing their oiwn
asSociates. But the queen, in spite of all their refiflance, would
have easily forced her way into the town, if the seasonable con-
clufion of a truce had not procured her adminFion without the
effusion of blood.
A third trei- TH-EIR dangerous situation easily induced the leaders of the Con-

ty. gregation to lifnen to any overtures of peace.; and as the queen

was looking daily for the arrival of a strong reinforcement from
France, and expected great advantages from a cefllation of arms,
flhe also agreed to it upon no unequal conditions. Together with
a suspension of hostilities, from the twenty-fourth of July to the
tenth of January, it was ilipulated in this treaty, that, on tlhe

0110

one hand, the proteflants flould open the gates of Edinburgh next 13 °0 TX
morning to the queen regent; remain in duLtifill fubjeCion to her ---
government; abflain from all future violation of religious lioufes;
and give no interruption to the eftabliihcd clergy, either in the
dilcharge of their fuincions, or in the enjoyment of their benefices.
On tlic other hland, the queen agreed to give no molestation to
the preachers or profcfbors of the protrefant rcligion ; to allow the
citizens of Edinburgh, during the cclation of hollilities, to enjoy
the exercise of religious worllip according to the form most agree-
able to the confcicncc of each individual; and to permit the free
and public profeflion of the protcflant faith in every part of the
kinlcldoin". The queen, by these liberal conceflions in behalf of
their religion, hoped to sooth the proteflants, and expected, from
indulging their favourite paflion, to render them more compliant
with refcp&c to other articles, particularly the expulsion of the
French troops out of Scotland. The anxiety which the queen
exprefcid for retaining this body of men, rendered them more and
more the objects of national jealousy and aversion. The imme-
diate expulsion of them was therefore demanded anew, and with
greater warmh l; but the queen, taking advantage of the diflrefs
of the advcrfi party, eluded the request, and would content to
nothing more, than that a French garrilon should not be intro-
duced into Edinbur.l i.

THiE dcftpcratc sPate of their anrairs imposed on the Congregation

the niecellity of agreeing to this article, which, lhowever, was
very far from giving themn fatisftLion. \lhatever apprehensions
the Scots had conceived, from retaining the French forces in tlie

: Kcitlh, 9S. HIIaitllnn, Hft. of Edinb. 16, i7.
TVTU. I. Y king dom,

B OO 1K kingdom, were abundantly juflified during the late commotions.

It.
_L-.--. A small body of those troops, maintained in constant pay, and

'5S9' rendered formidable by regular discipline, had checked the progress

of a martial people, though animated with zeal both for religiod
and liberty. The finalleft addition to their number, and a con-
fiderable one was daily cxpeEled, might prove fatal to public
liberty, and Scotland might be exposcd to thec danger of being re-
duced from an independent kingdom, to the mean condition of a
province, annexed to the dominions of its powerful ally.

IN order to provide against this inminent calamity, the duke of

Chatelherault, and earl of I-Iuntly, immediately after concluding
the truce, desired an interview with the chiefs of the Congregation.
These two noblemen, the most potent at that time in Scotland,
were the leaders of the party which adhered to the eflablifhed
church. They had followed tlhe queen, during the late commo-
tions, and having access to observe more narrowly the dangerous
tendency of her councils, their abhorrence of the yoke which was
preparing for their country surmounted all other considerations,
and determined them rather to endanger the religion which they
professed, than to give their aid towards the execution of her per-
nicious designs. They proceeded farther, and promiscd to Argyll,
Glencairn, and the prior of St. Andrew's, who were appointed to
meet them, that if the queen should, with her usual inlinccrity,
violate any article in the treaty of truce, or refute to gratify the
wilhes of the whole nation, by difmnifing her French troops, they
would then inflantly join with their countrymen in compelling her
to a measure, which the public faifety, and the preservation of
their liberties, rendered necessary °.

° Knox, r54.
6 ABOUT

ABOUT this time died I-INR Y II. of France; jufl when he had B 0 0 I;

adopted a fyficm with regard to the aftairs of Scotland, which ---
wvould, in all probability, have reflored union and tranquillity to July ''
that kingdom ". Towards the close of his reign, the princes of
Lorrain began visibly to decline in favour, and the constable Mlont-
l0orency, by the afiifance of the duclices of Valcntinois, recovered
that alccndant over the spirit of his mafler, vwhlich his great expe-
riencc, and his faithfitl, though often unfortunate, ferviccs seemed
juflly to merit. That prudent minifrer imputed the infurrctions in
Scotland wholly to tli duke of Guise and the cardinal of Lorrain,
xvhofc violent and p'rccipitant councils could not fail of tralf-
porting, beyond all bounds of moderation, men wliole minds
wsere poflieflcd with that jcaloufy -wlich is inseparable from the love
of civil liberty, or inflamed with that ardour wliicli accompanies
religious zeal. Montmlorency, in order to convince Henry that
he did not load his rivals with any groundlcls accusation, prevailed
to have Mclvil' , a Scottifli gentleman of his retinue, dispatched
into his native country with infkruclions to obfcrve the motions
both of the regent and of her adverfairies; and the king agreed
to regulate his future proceedings in that kingdom by Melvil's
report.

DID hiflory indulge herself in there fieculations, it would be

amufingl to inquire what a different direction might have been
given by this rcbolution to the national spirit; and to what a dif-
frcent iffie Mclvil's report, which would have fct the condud- of
the inalecontcnts, in the inoflt favourable light, might have con-
dutced the public diirclcirs. Perhaps by gentle treatment, and
art'ul policy, the progress of the Reformation might have been

P Mclv 4. 149 The Author of the Memoirs.

Y checked,

B O I K checked, and Scotland brought to depend upon France. Perhaps,

by gaining poffeflion of this avenue, the French might liavc made
1559. their way into England, and, under colour cf fiipporting IMary's

title to the crown, they might not only have defeated all Eliza-
beth's measures in favour of the Reformation, but have re-efla-
blifled the Roman catholic religion, and dcftroycd the liberties of
that kingdom. But, into this boundless field of fancy and con-
jc&ure, the historian mufl make no excurionrs; to relate real
occurrences, and to explain their real caufcs and eftiets, is his
peculiar and only province.

Accession of TIIE tragical and untimely death of the French monarch put
IFrancis 1I.
to the crown an end to all moderate and pacific measures with regard to Scot-
of Irance. land. The duke of Guise, and the Cardinal his brother, upon

the acceflion of Francis II. a prince void of genius and without
experience, assumed the chief diretion of French affairs. Allied
lo nearly to the throne, by the marriage of their niece the queen
of Scots with the young king, they now wanted but little of regal
dignity, and nothing of regal power. This power did not long
remain inaaive in their hands. The fame vafl: fiemes of am-
bition, which they had planned out under the former reign, were
again resumed; and they were enabled, by poflefing such ample
authority, to pursue them with more vigour and greater proba-
bility of success. They beheld, with infinite regret, the progress
of the proteflant religion in Scotland; and, sensible what an un-
surmountable obstacle it would prove to their designs, they bent
all their strength to check its growth, before it rose to any greater
height. Ior this purpose they carried on their preparations with
all poffllble expedition, and encouraged the queen their sifter to
cxpc:t, in a short time, the arrival of an army so powerful as

tlhe

the zeal of their adverlaries, however dcfperatc, would not Yen- L: c o K.
turc to oppose. ,-- -

NoR were the lords of the Congregation cither ignorant of tlicAC

violent couniels, which prevaiicl in the court o' I'ralnce lince the
death of I-Ienry, or carclefs of providing againfi the danger which
tlhreatened then fiom that quarter. The ifccclS of their caulc,
as well as their personal ahfer),, dependiling entirly on the utna-
nimity and vigour of their own relollutions, tlhey cdcavouled to
guard against division, and to cement together more clolily, by
entering into a ftri-cer bond of col'nfedracy and mnutual ldeence.
Two persons concurred in this new allbciation, who brought a
great acceflion both of reputation and of power to the party.
Thcfe were the duke of Chatellirault, and his clelcll oii the earl
of Arran. This young nobleman, having refielcd tome years in
irance, where lie commanded the Scottilli guards, had imbibct
the protcflant opinions concerning religion. Iu/rried along by
tlhe heat of youth and the zeal of a proilyte, he had uttered
sentiments with rcip eC: to the points in controversy, which did
not suit the temper of a bigottcd court, intent at tlnt jllunture
on the extinction of the protestant religioln; in order to accoinplilh
which, the grcatcfl ccceflcs of violence wcre committed. The
church was suffercd to wreak its utmost fury upon all who -were
fuLfptcaed of hcrefly. Courts were erelctd in diiTr-cnt parts of
France, to take cognizance of this crime, and by tlcir fentcnces
several persons of diflincion were condemned to the i]alics.

BUT, in order to inspire more univcrfal terror, the princes cf

Lorrain resolved to felc&, for a sacrifice, some perifn whose iaM
might convince all ranks of men, that neither fplcndour of birth,
nor eminence in rfation, could exempt from punifhmcnt those who

flould

B 0o o; K fould be guilty of this unpardonable tranfgrcflion. The earl of
.;-----~- Arran was the person destined to be the unhappy vi&in r. As

1s'9' he was allied to one throne, and the presumptive heir to another;

as he ponelffed the firCl rank in his own country, and enjoyed an
honourable flation in France; his condemnation could not fail of
making the desired impression on the twhole kingdom. But the
cardinal of Lorrain having let fall some expreflions, which raifedl
Arran's fuNflicions of tile design, he escaped the intended blow by
a timely flight. Indignation, zeal, refentmenr, all prompted hin
to seek revenge upon tlhee persecutors of himself and of the
religion whxich lhe profeflcd ; and as he pafIed through England,
on llis return to his native country, Elizabeth by hopes and pro-
miles inflaimed those paflions, and sent him back into Scotland,
animated xvith tihe anme implacable aversion to France, vhlih polf

.:itl of Ar- ICfced a great part of his countrymen. IIe quickly communicated
ranjo'ns the
prot:ctaL;s. theftc iUntimcnts to his father the duke of Chatelhcrault, who was

already extremely dilgullled with the measures carrying on in
Scotland; and as it was the fate of that nobleman to be governed
in every infitance by those about him, he now fulered himself to be
drawn from the queen regent; ancd, having joined the Congrega-
tion, was confidered, from that time, as the head of the party.

BUT mwith refpccL to him, this diftin[ion was merely nominal.
iames Stewart, prior of St. Andrew's, was the person who moved
and acluated the whole body of the protestants, among whom he
pofrcflucd that unbounded confidence, which his fircnuous adherence
to their interert and his great abilities lb jufily merited. I-e was
the natural son of James V. by a daughter of lord i rfline; and
as that amorous monarch had left ieveral others a burden upon

Thluan. lib. xxiv .
p. 462. Edit. Francof.

the

tlhe crown, they were all dcflinced for the church, where thecy 1 °' 0 Ki
could be placed in flations of dignityr and alliunc. In co lC- ----
quence of this rcfolution, the priory of St. Andrew's h1:d bee'.
conferred upon James: but, during 1) bhufy a period, lie iboo
became clifgurfed with the indolence and 'rtirl'cicnt olf a motaflic
life; and his cntcrplrifing genius called hill forlh, tO ad a prinlcipal
part on a mori public and coinliicuous tlheatre. The ifence in
which he. appeared requircd talents of (difCrent kinds : military
virtue, and political difcerrinent, were equally ncccflnry in order
to render himn illustrious. These lhe ponclhcd in an emninent degree.
To the mofi unquestionable pcrfonal l)ravery, lhe added great tfill
in the art of war, and in every entcrprilf his arms were crowned
with success. I-Iis sagacity and penetration in civil affairs enabled
him, amidlf the reeling and turbulence of factions, to hold a
prolf erous couri'; vwhile his boldness in defence of the Reform-
ation, together with the decency, and even severity, of his man-
ners, fccured him the reputation of being inlcercly attached to
religion, without which it was impossible in that age to gain an
a!cendant over mankind.

I'r was not witlhout rcafon that the queen dreaded the enmlity

of a man io capable to obstruct her dcligns. As she could not,
witi all her address, make the leafl impreflion on his fidelity to
his aflbciates, ihle endeavoured to lessen his influence, and to icattcr
amlong tlhemi the feeds ofjcaloufy and diflruft, by insinuating tiat
the ambition of the prior aspircd beyond tie condition of a fubjedt,
and aimed at nothing lcfs than the crown itself.

AN accuiation so improbable gaincd but little credit. What-

ever thoughts of this kind the presumption of unexpeted f'ihccefs,
and his elevation to the hliglhci dignity in the kingdom, may be

alleged

B o0 K alleged to 1a-ve inlired at any fubfequcnt period, it is certain

--.--j thai .;t this juncture le could form no such vast design. To

dlctlhr.iic a queen, who was lineal heir to an ancient race of mo-
narlcls; v, ho liad been guilty of no action by which flie could
forfeit the eftcein and aflfetion of her fubjets ; who could em-
ploy, in defence of helr rights, the forces of a kingdom much
more pov-e'eri thian her own ; and to ftbiftitute in her place, a
pcrfon sxiwhom the illegitimacy of his birth, by the praclice of all
civilized nations, rendered incapable of any inheritance either
public or private, was a projc t b chimerical as the niofP extra-
vagant almbition would hardly entertain, and could never conceive
to l)e I'racicable. The promile too, which the prior made to
Milclvil, of rcfiding conLlantly iln Irance, on condition the public
grievances were redrelcid' ; the confidence reposed in him by
tic duke of Chlatclhcrault and his son, the presumptive heirs to
the crown; and the concurrence of almost all the Scottish nobles,
in promloting the mcanibrcs by wihich he gave offence to the French
curtI, go far towards his ivindication from tliofe illegal and crimi-
nal designs, with the imputation of which the queen cndeavoured
t: that time to load Iliml.

'i'up arivc THEIE arrival of a thoufanid French soldiers compensated, in

1 l;l F;rancce
ni:d fortify oC n e degree, for the lols which the queen fuflaincd by the de-

CKith. fedLion of the dulke of Chatellerault. These were immediately

*commanded to fortify Leitli, in wllicll place, on account of its
commnodious harbour, and its situation in the ncighbourhood of
Edinburgh and in a plentiful country, thic queen resolecd to fix
the head-quarters of her foreign forccs. Tills unpopular mcafurc,
by the malncer of executing it, was rendered f.ill more unpopular.
h1 order to bring the town entirely under their command, the

Mdlclvil, 54.

Frcncli

French turned out a great part of the ancient inhabitants, and B 0 o li
taking poffiotlon of the houles, which they had obliged them to -----
abandon, presented to tle view of the Scots two objedts equallyy I
irritating and offnfive; on the one hand, a number of their coun-
trymen expelled their habitations by violence, and wandering
without any certain abode; on the other, a colony of foreigners,
fettling with their wives and children in the heart of Scotland,
growing into strength by daily reinforcements, and openly pre-
paring a yoke, to which, without oime timely exertion of national
spirit, the whole kingdom nmuit of necessity iubmit.

IT wvas with deep concern that the lords of the Congregation ''he rrotef-

nits rcinon-
beheld this: bold *and decifivc ftcp taken by the queen regent: Nor ilrate againil

this.

did they hesitate a moment, wethetr they flould employ their l
whole strength, in one generous effort, to rcfcu their religion and
liberty from impending dcftrution. But, in order tojuftify their
own conduc-, and to throw the blame entirely on their adversaries,
they resolved to prelerve the appearances of decency and refpcce
towards their fupcriors, and to have no recourse to arms without
the most urgent and apparent neccflity. They joined, witll this Sept. z9,
view, in an addreis to the regent, representing, in the flrongefl
terms, their diflatisfaclion with the meafurcs lile was pursuing,
and beseeching her to quiet the fears and jealousics of the nation
by desisting from fortifying Leith. The queen, conscious of her
present advantageous situation, and elated with the hopes of frefli
succours, was in no disposition for liltcning to demands utterly
inconfiftcnt with her views, and urged with that bold importunity
which is so little acceptable to princes'.

Hlayncs, 21 1.
VOL. I. Z Til

:3 o 0 K TIE fluggeftions of her French counsellors contributed, withouc

... . doubt, to alienate her fill farther fiomn any scheme of accom-

The rtcgnt modation. As the cucen was ready on all occasions to discover
dhirfregon an extraordinry deference for the opinions of her countrymen,
flr.nces. her brotlers, who knew her secret disapprobation of the violent

mcafures they were driving on, took care to place near her such
persons as betrayed her, by their insinuations, into many aaions,
which her own unbiaffed judgment would have highly condemned.
As their fucccfs in the present junCture, when all tlhigs were
hafcening towards a crisis, depended entirely on the queen's firm-
ncfs, the princes of Lorrain did not trust wholly to the influence
of their ordinary agents; but, in order to add the greater weight
to their councils, they called in aid the ministers of religion
and, by the authority of their sacred character, they hoped effec-
tually to recommend to their filter, that system of severity which
they had espoused". ` With this view, but under pretence of
confounding the protestants by the skill of such able masters in
controversy, they appointed several French divines to reside in
Scotland. At the head of there, and with the charaEter of legate
from the pope, was Pclleve bishop of Amiens, and afterwards
archbiflop and cardinal of Sens, a furious bigot ", servilely devoted
to the house of Guise, and a proper instrument for recommending
or executing the most outrageous measures.

AMIDST the noise and danger of civil arms, these dodcors had

little opportunity to display their address in the use of their theo-
logical weapons. But they gave no finall offence to the nation by
one of their actions. They persuaded the queen to seize the
church of St. Giles in Edinburgh, which had remained, ever since

Lefly, 215. Caftlenau, ap. Jcbb, vol. ii.. 446. 473. Davila, Brantome.

the

the la'te truce, in the hands of the protcfl: ls;; ;anld having, 01 0 ;
by a new and lolcmnI colifecration, puri led

tII f .Obic from tlhe ' ---

pollution with which they fillppoidc tile proflanc nii:l-ations of
tle protctanlits to have defiled it, they, in lir'etC contradiction to
one article in tlie late treaty, rc-tefablliid thcre the rites of
the Romill church. This, added to the indiilerence, anld even
contenllpt, with wlhich the lueen rcecived their rclion ctrances, con-
vinceel the lords of the Congregation, that it was not only vain to
cxpeL alny rcdrccfs of their grievances at her hands, but abbolutely
ncceilary to take arms in their own. defence.

'Tur eager and impetuous spirit of tle nation, a1 well as every Tiley takec

nrim in thici:

consideration of good policy, prompted them to take this bold ovn dclincce
fcep without delay. It was but a finall part of the Frencl auxiliaries
which had as yet arrived. The fortifications of Leithl, though ad-
vancing fain, were still far fronl being complete. Under thicft
circumniflanccs of difiadvantage, they conceived it poflible to ihlrprile
the qu(Cen's party, and, by one iddelen and dccifive blowv, to pre-
vent all future bloodflcd and contention. l'ull of thefic expcEtations,
they advanced rapillly towards Edinurgh with a numerous army.
IBut it 'as no cafy 1latter to deceive an avcrryas vigilant and Oaolcri.
attentive as the queen regent. \Vith hcr iuual faigacity, ihe bothl
foricfliw the danger, and took the only proper courle to avoid it.
Inflcad of keeping the field againfl: enemies fulperior in number,
anld Iormidable on a day of battle by the ardour of their courage,
fie retired into Leith, and determined patiently to wait the arrival
of new reinforcemenlts. Slight and unfiniihcd as the fortificaLions
of that town tlhen were, lhe did not dread the ieforts of an a'rm'y,
provided neither with heavy cannon, nor with military i1ores, and
little acquainted with the methodc of attacking any 1lace fortified
with more art tihan tihofi ancient towers crc'cetl all over the

Z 2 kingdom

B o0 0 kingdom in defence of private property againfl the incursions

1I. .---...,- of banditti.
'559.

NOR did the queen mean while neglec to have recourse to

those arts which flhe had often employed to weaken or divide her
advcrfarics. Br private iolicitations and promises lhe /hook the
fidelity, or abated the ardour, of fomie. By open reproach and
accusation she blalecl the reputation, and diminifled the authority
of others. Her emiflaries were every where at work, and not-
withstanding the zeal for religion and liberty, which then ani-
mated the nation, they seem to have laboured not without success.
WVe find Knox, about this period, abounding in complaints of the
lukewarm and languid spirit which had begun to spread among
his partyY. But if their zeal slackened a little, and iuffered a
momentary intermiflion, it soon blazed up with freih vigour, and
rose to. a greater height than ever.

Renewv their TIE queen herself gave occasion to this, by the reply which.
remnontfran-
ces; the made to a new remonstrance from the lords of the Congre-

gation. Upon their arrival at Edinburgh, they once more repre-
lented to her the dangers arising from the increase of the French
troops, the fortifying of Leith, and her other measures, which
they conceived to be destructive to the peace and liberty of the
kingdom; and in this address they spoke in a firmer tone, and
avowed, more openly than ever, their resolution of proceeding to
the utmofl extremities, in order to put a flop to such dangerous
encroachments. To a remonfirance of this nature, and urged
with so much boldness, the queen replied in terms no less vigorous.
ut without and explicit. She pretended that lie was not accountable to the

Y Knox, So.

co nfederate

confederate lords for any part of' her conduct; and upon no re- B 0 O K
prcfcntation of theirs would £he either abandon measures which .--- --,
flhe deernedl neccfllry, or diminis forces which file found useful, 5
or decmolifh a fbrtification which might prove of advantage. At
the ftame time she required them, on pain of treason, to disband
the forces which they had affemblcdc

THIS haughty and imperious ityIe founded harshly to Scottifk

nobles, impatient, from their national charaELer, of the slightest
appearance of injury; accuftolnel even from their own mo-
narchs to the most refjiectful treatment; and pofllcing, under
an ariflocratical form of government, i1ch a share of power, as
equalled, at all times, and often controlled that of the sovereign.
They were sensible, at once, of the indignity offered to themselves,
and alarmed with this plain dcclaration of the queen's intentions;
and as there now remained but one flep to take, they wanted
neither public spirit nor resolution to take it.

BUT, that they might not seem to depart from the eflablifecd Deliberate

CO nc 'lC i 11
forms of the constitution, for which, ieven amidst their most violent the colui

.Li

~~~~~~~~~ *ti n , ^~ which tley

operations, men always retain the greatelt reverence, they afiembled oighlt toy
all the peers, barons, and reprcfentatives of boroughs, who adhered. tket.
to their party. These formed a convention, which exceeded in
number, and equalled in dignity, the uflial meetings of parlia-
ment. The leaders of the Congregation laid before them the de-
claration which the queen had given in anwver to their remon-
irance; reprcefcnted the unavoidable ruin which the mcafures ihe
therein avowed and juftlied would bring upon the kingdom ; and
requiring their direcLion with regard to the obedience due to an
admililiration so unjunf and oppreflive, they submitted to their

decilion

1 00 0 cldecifion a qucltion, one of the nioft delicate and interefling tlat

1!.
-.------ can pollibly fall under the consideration of iubjeQs.
5 59.

Tuis allimbly proceeded to decide with no lefi; dicatch tlan

unanimity. Strangers to those forms which protraa bufincfs;
unacquainted with the arts whichl mal;e a figure in debatc; and
much more ittccd for acion than difcourfle: a warlike pcople al-
ways haflen to a conclusion, and bring their deliberations to the
fhlorteft iflfe. It was the work but of one day, to examine and
to rcfolvc this nice problem, concerning the behaviour of fubjces
towards a ruler who abuses his power. But lhowever abrupt their
proceedings may appear, they were not deflitute of Iblemnity. As
the determination of the point in doubt was conceived to be no
leis the office of divines than of laymen, the former were called
to aflifl with their opinion. Knox and Willox appeared for the
xwhole order, and pronounced, without hesitation, both from the
lprecepts and exacmples in Icripture, that it was lawful for fuiijecs
not onily to re-fic tyrannical princes, but to deprive them of that
authority which, in their hands, becomes an inftrumciit for dc-
f:r-oying l tlof! w1hom the Almighty ordained them to protec.
'The dcsiiion of pcrfons revered so highly for their sacred cha-
racter, but more for their zeal and their piety, had grcat weight
with the wliole afinmibly. Not ftisfied with the commonl indif-
criminate manner of signifying consent, every perio prcfent wras

Tlhicy dprive called in his turn to declare his fclntilcnits, and r'ilng 1 p in order,
the ,(]i',c' of all gave their ifufligcs, -without one (lillelltiing voice, for depriving
"'.cit. tile (lucen of the olice of regent, which she had exercilcd lb much

to the detriment of the kingldom :

:; KnoX 1S.
75 ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~~~~Tl

TIIls extraordina.ry sentence was owing no lcet to the love of C o K

iiberty, than to zeal for religion. In the act of deprivation, rcli- ~_.
gious grievances are slightly mentioned; and the claingcrous en- Th},e ,,lic.
croacihmcnts of the queen upon the civil conflitution arc prolduced, .i :'rC
by the lords of the Congregation, in ordcr to prove their conduc
to have becn not only jtit but nlceeffary. The introducing so-
reilgn troops into a kingdom at peace with all the world ; the
lcizin, and forlilsying towns in ldifcrent parts of the country;
the promoting firangers to ofiices of great povwer and dignity; the
(CdebaiIg thle current coin a'; tlihe ibverting the ancient laws; the
imipofing of new and burdlerlomc taxCes; andl tle attempting to
subdue the kingdom, and to opprcfs its liberties, by open and
repeatcd acts of violence, are enumerated at great length, and
placed in the firongeft light. On all these accounts, the Congre-
gation maintained, that the nobles, as counfillors by birth-right
to their monarchs, and the guardians and defenders of the
confituti on, had a right to intcrpotc ; and therefbre, by virtue
of this right, in the name of the king and queen, and with
many exprellions of duty and flibmiffion towards them, they
deprived the queen regent of her office, and ordained that, for
the future, no obedience flould be given to her commands '.

The flandard of money in Scotland was continually varying. In the I6th of

James V. A. D. 1529, a oud v,,ci',t of ll, xvhci coined, produced o8 pounds
of curnClt money. !:ut under t!c l.:cel i- tcnt's :alminiftratiozi, A. D. 1556, a
pound weight of gcld, :lhcilouh thi ql u:lsity of aliov wa, conlidlerably increascd,
produced L441. curinlt noncy. I1! 2z9, a pound weiglht of filvcr, when coined,
produced I9. 2s.; bui in 1556, it proiluced [31. current monicy. Ruddiman.
P'lrtfat. ad Anders. Diplomat. Scotie, p. 80, 81, from which it appears, that this
complaint, which the malecontents often repeated, was not altogether deflitute of
foundation.

b IM. Caftelnau, after condemning the dangerous councils of the princes of Lor-

rain, with regard to the arffairs of Scotland, acknovwledgcs with his ulual candour,.
that the Scots declared wvar against the queen regent, rather from a desire of vindi-
cating their civil liberties, than from any motite of religion. AMem. 446.

4. VIO.LENoT

B3 0 O0 VIOLENT as this adion may appear, there wanted not prin-

--- ' ciples in the constitution, nor precedents in the history of Scotland,

55 to justify and to authoriic it. Under the ariftocratical form of

government established among the Scots, the power of the fove-
reign was extremely limited. The more considerable nobles were
themselves petty princes, poiTefling cxtenfive jurisdiCtions, alnoft
independent of the crown, and followed by numerous vassals,
who, in every contest, espoused their chieftain's quarrel, in oppo-
fition to the king. HI-ence the many instances of the impotence
of regal authority, which are to be found in the Scottifl history.
In every age, the nobles not only claimed, but cxercifed, the right
of controlling the king. Jealous of their privileges, and ever
ready to take the field in defence of them, every error in admi-
niftration was observed, every encroachment upon the rights of
the aristocracy excited indignation, and no prince ever ventured
to transgress the boundaries which the law had prescribed to pre-
rogative, without meeting resistance, ,which shook or overturned
his throne. Encouraged by the spirit of the conflitution, and
countenanced by the example of their ancestors, the lords of the
Congregation thought it incumbent on them, at this juncture,
to inquire into the mal-administration of the queen regent,
and to preserve their country from being enslaved or con-
quered, by depriving her of the power to execute such a per-
nicious scheme.

TIIE a& of deprivation, and a letter from the lords of the

Congregation to the queen regent, are flill extant . They dif-
cover not only that macfuline and undaunted spirit, natural to
men capable of so bold a resolution; but are remarkable for a

c Knox, 184.

precision,

preciionl and vigour of cxprceion, which we are surprised to r K
Inect with in an age so unpolilhcd. The fame observation may _
be made with reflpcc to tlie other public papers of that period. 'c;
The ignorance or bad taste of an age may render the compositions
of authors by profeflion obscure, or afle-edl, or abillrd; but the
language of Lbufinefc is nearly the lahme at all times ; and wherever
menl think clearly, and are thoroughlly intcrel-led, tlhey cxprefs
tLcmlnfclvcs with pcrfi)ictity and force.

VOL. L A a

# BOOK III.

THE
H I S T O R Y

0 F
S C O 'T "1

o ^ ^ .np """~""""----_ T

TL U 1 I- A it !2o

B O OK II.
.-i-,HE Lords of the Congrcgation soon found, tllat thcir zcal

_ h lad engaged them in an undertaking, which it was beyond

hlcir utmofl ability to accomplill. The French garrilon, dcftiiling ,I,' iJg-
their numerous but irregular forces, refilfed to filrri nder Lcith, 'tlo i,',il-
and to depart out of the kingdoml; nor wcre they fililicienlty fkil- ficyljti.
ful in the art of wvar to reduce tle placc by force, or ,ofcileild of
the artillery, or magazines, requiiflrc for that purpofc ; and tlicit'
followers, though of undaunted courage, yet being accnltomed
to decide every quarrel by a battle, were hlrangcrs ro the fatiguc ,
of a long campaign, and soon became inlatl. t of the fevcrc a1n
constant duty which a siege requires. The quccn'sr clnifu'ric:, w ho
found it eaiy to mingle with their countrymen, were at tlhe utlnoft
pains to heighten their difgui, iwhich dilfovcrcd itf:lf at ih'fl: ii
inurinurs and complaints, but or- occasion of the want of Ioney for

A a z p in

11 o ) lK paying the ari-nj, broke out into open Imutilny. The nmof cinli-

.i........ nclnt leaders were hardly itcure fioml tile unbridled infoleicc of
'9 '' the soldiers; while fonme cf inlerior rank, interpofring too rafily

in order to quell them, icll viltims to their rage. Discord, con-
itcrnatio;l, aind perplexity, reigned in tihecamp of the rcol'rmcrs.
Thec duke, their general, Jlun, with his usual timidity, under the
terror of appr-oaching danger, and dilcovcrcd maCIIlil Jl iiptomns
of relpentance for his ralhlncfs in eli)ouling such a dle/li)erate
cause.

.Ap; Ct.. kli IN this fi'Cuation of their aflairs, the Congregation had rccourli
u,,,,1tl.' to Elizabeth, frinom whose protcC&ion tlhey could derive their only

rcafonable hope of ftlcccfs. Some of tlleir more sagacious leaders,
hvingl flrcfecn that the l arty migllt probably be involved in great
difficulties, had early endcavoured to secure a rcfource in any iluch
exigency, by cntering i'nto a iccrct correlCpondcnce with the cou t
of England '. ].lizalbtlh, aware of the dangerous designs which
the princes of I orrain Iiad formed gainfit her crown, was early
funfilbi of how much importance it wvould be, not only to check
the prog rcls of the French in Scotland, but to extend her own
influence in that kinigdom l; and perceiving how cfisclually tlhe
prc!bnt infurireclions would contribute to retard or defeat the
fchemcs formed against IEngland, flic liflcned witll pleafurc to
these applications of the mialcontenls, and gave them private
afliranccs of powerful iupport to tlleir cause. Randollph , an
agent extremely proper for conduciding any dark intrigue, was dil-
patched into Scotland, and rcliding secretly among the lords of the
Congregation, oblcrved and quickened their motions. Money
seemed to be the only thing they wanted at that time ; and it was

a Burn. Hifi. Rcf. 3. Append. 278. Kcith, Append. 21.
.See Append. No I. ' Keith, App-end. 29.

ow ing

o-,winS to a icaolnable -remitta nce rom l'.nla nd ', t

that ti-cohii 13 0 0

K.

nobles liad blccn enabled to take the licld, an to advance towards
Leith. BIut as Elizabcth was (ldiftrufifrIl of t1he Scols, and !ldious ';' '
to prcfcrvi apperanccs with France, licr liihbIics were befiowcd
at iirfl with cxtrmcn e

rualt. 'he flbtilitence of an arinv, and
the cxpencces of a liege, loon exll0nflcd ti1i elnurious frpply, to

lwhich the lords of lle Congregation coulld 1make little addition
fioml their own fLiiids; and the ruin and (dilicrlion of the party
mu f have inflant!l followed.

IN order to prevent this, Cocllkurn of £Ormiflon was sent, witlh slie ,:ls

tlle utmofl expedition, to t!ei governors of the town and caitle furl, of iiu
of Iecrwiclk. As Icrwick was at tlhat timc llie town of greatell: nt)
importance on tlhe Scottifli frontier, Sir Ralph Sadler anu SirJaincs
(rofts, persons of colniderablc Figure, swcre cmployed to command.
there, and were cntrufted with a dlircrctionary power of supplying
the Scottill male contents, according to the exigency of their afilrs.
From theml Cockburn received four thoulfand crowns, but little to
the advantage of his party. The earl of Botliwell, by the qucen's :h.icl is i;,n
instigation, lay in wait for him on his return, dilieried Ilis fol- tcrccptel.
lowers, wounded him, and carried off the money.

lTiis unexpcqlcd difiappointmcnt proved fatal to the party. In

mere dcfpair some of the more zealous attempted to aflatult Leith ;
but the French beat them back with disgrace, fcizecl their cannoii,
and pursuing tllem to the gates of Edinburgh, were on tle point
of entering along with them. All the terror and confusion wliich
the profiect: of pillage or of maflacre can excite in a place taken
by storm, filled the city on this occalion. The inhabitants fled

d Knox, 2;4-. Keith, Append. 44.

from

B () I K from the enemy l)y he oppiofite gate; the forccs of the Congre-

Iln.
.- -_--- gatiion were irrellIute and clifayed ; and the quccn's partilans il

thc town openly inullcdc both. At last, a few of the nobles yen-
turcd to face the enemy, who, after plundering rome houlcs in
tlic fubl>tul, retired wiith their booty, and delivered the city from.
this dreadful alarm.

A SEICONDT flirmifli, vwhich happened a few days after, was no

less unfortunate. The FIrench sent out a detachment to intercept
a convoy of proviitons which was designed for Edinburgh. TIle
lords of the Congregation, having intelligence of this, marclhed
in all Ilafle with a considerable body of their troops, and fall-
ing upon the enemy betwecn Rcflalrig and Leith, with more
gallantry than good conduct, were almofP surrounded by a second
party of French, who advanced in order to support their own
mec. In this situation a retreat was the only thing which could
lave the SCots; Ibut a retreat over marshy ground, and in the
face of an cnemy superior in number, could not long be conducied

They retire with order. A finall body of the enemy lhung upon their rear,
from Lrith in
confliion. horse and foot fell into tlic utmost corifufion, and it was entirely

owing to the over-caution of the French, that any of the party
efcapled being cut in pieces.

ON this second blo\w, the hopes and spirits of the Congregation

liunk altogetler. They did not think themfelvbes secure even within
the walls of Edinburgh, but inflantly determined to retire to fomc
place at a greater distance from the enemy. In vain did the prior
of St. Andrewl's, and a few others, oppose this cowardly and igno-
minious flight. The dread of the present dlanger prevailed over
Nove:nb. 6. both the fenfc of honour and zeal for the cause. At midnight

7~~~~~' j ~5 they

lhey set out fiom Edinburgh in great confusion, and marched ~ 0 o0 1'
w-itllout halting till they arrived at Stirling, C. ...

DURING; this lafl infurrcaion, the great body of the Scottiiih

nobility joined the Congregation. The lords Scton and 13ortlhV.'icl
werc the only perobns of rank who took arms ior thle (1cquee, and
allifted her in defending Leith'. B1othwcll openly favoured her
caufc, but rcfided at his own houlc. The earl of 1-Iuntly, con-
formable to the crafty policy whlich dilinguifhls his charaller,
amused the leaders of the Congregation, whom lie had cngaged to
assist, with many fair promises, but never joined them with a tingle
man''. The carl of AI\orton, a member of the Congregation,
fluctuated in a ftatc of irrcfolution, and did not act heartily for
the common cause. Lord Erskine, governor of Edinburgh cafllc,
though a protestant, maintained a neutrality, which he (Ieemed
becoming the dignity of his office ; and having been entrtlled by
parliament with the command of the principal fortrcfs in the
kingdom, he resolvcd that neither faction ifhould get it into their
nhands.

A rFIW days before the retreat of the Congregation, the queen M;aitl:and re

~-.

- vohs from

:uflcred an irreparable loss by the defction of her principal Iecre- the qIuCei
tary, W\illiam Maitland of Lethington. His zeal for the reformed dowager
religion, together with his warm remonstrances againfl: the violent
measures which the queen was carrying on, exposed him tl much to
her resentment, and to that of her French counfcllors, that he, ful-
)pecing his life to be in danger, withdrew iccrctly from Lcith, and
lled to the lords of the Congregation '; and they with open arms
received a convert, whose abilities added both strength and rcputa-

Keith, Appcnd. 2I-4.5. f Keith, Append. 3r.
: Keith, Append. 33. Knox, 222. ' IKTnox, g1z.

tion

B o o K tion to their cauif. Maitland had early applied to public bufinc fs
_ ----. admirable natural talents, improved by an acquaintance with the

' ;9' liberal arts; and at a time of life whin his countrymen of tlhe lamne

quality were following tlic pleafurcs of the chacc, or serving as ad-
venturers in the armiei of France, he was admitted into all the
secrets of the cabinet, and put uponl a level with persons of the
most confummatc experience in the management of afitirs. He
pofieffcd, in an eminent degree, that intrepid spirit which delights
;l pursuing bold deligns, and was no lets master of that political
dexterity which is neccetllry for carrying them on with success.
But these qualities were deeply tindiured with the neighbourn-
vices. I-s address fonctimes degenerated into cunning; his
acuteness bordered upon exces ; his invention, over-fertile, fug-
gefed to him, on bime occasions, chimerical systems of policy, too
refined for the genius of his age or country; and his enterprifinl
3pirit engaged him in projcEs vanl and filendid, but beyond his
-ttmofL power to execute. All the cotemporary wvriters, to /what-
evcr lfaCion they belong, mention him with an admiration which
notling could have excited but the grcatcfe superiority of penceration
and abilities.

Tunr precipitate retreat of the Congregation increascd to fich a

degree the terror and confusion which had seized the party at Ediin-
burgh, that, before the army reached Stirling, it dwindled to an in-
conliderable number. The jfpirit of Knox, howeevr, still remained
undaunted and ercl, and having mounted the pulpit, he addreiehd,
to his delponding hearers, an exhortation which wonderfully ani-
mated and revived them. The heads of this discourse are inserted
in his history ', and afford a flriking example of the boldness and
fr-eedom of reproof afumned by the iirft reformers. as wvell as a

' Knox..
103.

fpiecimen of his own skill in chufing the topics mofl fitted to infiu- L o () i
clnc and routi hIis audience. ...-..-

A ME.ETIN':G of the leaders being called, to confider what course T'he o i, cl'

tle Congit:

thlcy ihould hold, now that their own rcfources were all cxhlauflcd, g:iticil p;I!
and their defruLcion appeared to be unavoidable without forcign ai hct
aid, they turned their eyes once more to England, and rcfolved to
implore the assistance of Elizabeth towards finiilling an enterplrile,
in which they had so fatally experienced their own wcakncis, and
the ftrcngth of their adversaries. MIaitland, as the mofl able nc-
groeiator of the party, was employed in t!is embafly. In lhis ab-
ience, and dluring- the inaCtive Icafon of the year, it was agreed to
ditinifs their followers, worn out by the fatigues of a campaign
which had lo far exceeded the usual time of service. But, in or-
der to preserve tlie counties mofi: devoted to their interest, the
prior of St. Anlrew's, with part of the leaders, retired into IiilC.
The (luke of Chatelherault, with the reit, fixed his refidcnce at
Hamilton. There was little need of Mlailand's addrels or elu-
quence to induce Elizabeth to take his country under her protecdion.
She obl)irvcd the prevalence of tle French counfls, and the pro-
grcfs of their arms in Scotland, with great concern ; ald as ilie
well foref1iw the dangerous tendency of their fchlicies ill that king-
dom, lc hadl already come to a resolution with regard to the part
ihe herlelf would ad, if their power there ilould grovw fill more
formidable.

IN order to give the queen and her privy council a full and Jotives

v. hiich d -

diflindc view of any important matter which might conme before tu.,.,,i,,,ilI.c
them, it fieins to have been the praice of Elizabethl's miniflers toait;itl t!'".
to prepare memorials, in which they clearly flated the point undcr
deliberation, laid down the grounds of the conduce which they

VOL. I. I3 b held

B 0 0 K held to be most reasonable, and proposed a method for carrying
_ .I-_ their plan into execution. Two papers of this kind, written by Sir

;559 \ William Cecil with his own hand, and fulbmitted by the queen to

the consideration of her privy council, still remain';; they are
entitled, " A short difcuflion of the weighty matter of Scotland,"
and do honour to the indulsry and penetration of that great mi-
niflcr. The motives which determined the queen to cfpoure so
warmly the defence of the Congrcgation, arc represented with per-
fpiicuity and force; and the consequences of fulrfering the French
to eftablifl themfclves in Scotland, arc preldiaccd with great accu-
racy and discernment.

-IE lays it down as a principle, agreeable to the laws both of

God and of nature, that every focicty hath a right to defend itlelf,
not only from present dangers, but from ifch as may probably
cnfue; to which he adds, that nature and rcalon teach every
prince to defend himfllf by the Ihme means vlhich his adversaries
employ to ilifirefs him. Upon tlicel grounds he cflabliflies the
right of England to interpose in the affairs of Scotland, and to
prevent the colnqulcf of that kingidom, at which the French openly
aimed. The French, hle obfervcs, are the ancient and implacable
enemies of England. I-Ioilities had ihbfiifled between the two
uations for many centuries. No treaty of peace into lwhich they
entered had ever been cordial or sincere. No good cflcd. was there-
fore to be expcled from the peace lately agreed upon, which, being
extorted by prefcnt neceflity, would be negligently observcd, and
broken on the slightest pretences. In a very short time, France
would recover its former opulence; and though now drained of
necn and money by a tedious and unliccfsftil war, it would
quickly be in a condition for accing, and the refllefs and rnartial

k Burn. vol. iii. Append. 283. Forbcs, i. 387, &c. Keith, Append. 24.

genius

gcrlius of the people would render aclion ncceflary. Teic princes ° ,0 K
of Lorrain, who at that time had the entire dirciion of Frc!lh l --

..

affairs, were alimnated with the mofl: virulent hatred againfi the :5
English nation. Tlhey openly called in qucflion the legitimacy of
the cqueen's birth, and by advancing the title and lprctcnlions of
their niece the queen of Scotland, studicd to deprive lElixabcth of
her crown. WVith this view, they had labourcd to exclude the
E:nglish from the treaty of Chateau en Cambrifis, and cndcavourcd
to conclude a feparatc peace with Spain. They had pcrluatdcd
I-lenry It. to permit his dauglter-in-law to afulnmc the title and
arms of queen of England ; and even since the conclusion of the
peace, they lhad solicited at Rome, and obtained, a bull declariii,
I lizabctl's birth to be illegitimate. Though thle wvitom and mo-
dcration of the Conflable Montmorency had for foine tine cleckcd
their career, yet there refiraints being now rc:noved by the death
of Henry II. and the dilgrace of his minificr, the utmoil exccfle'-
of violence were to be dreaded from their inrious amlbition,
armed with fovcreign power. Scotland is the quarter wlhence
they can attack England wvith most advantage. A war on the
borders of that country cxpofis France to no danger, but one un-
hiccelisful alcion there may hazard the crown, and overturn tlle
government, of England. In political conduct, it is childlii to
wait till the dcfigns of an enemy be ripe for execution. The
Scottifil nobles, after their utmost cfforts, have been obliged to
quit the field ; and far from cxpclling the invadcrs of their liberties,
they behold the French power daily increasing, and lmut at last
cease from ifruggling'any longer in a contefl so unequal. Tlce invad-
ing of England will immediately follow the reduction of the Scottish
malecontents, by the abandoning of whom to the mercy of the
French, Elizabcth will open a way for her enemics into the heart
cf her own kingdom, and cxpofc it to the calamities of war, and

B b 2 the

B 0 0 K the dangcr of conqucRt. Notliing thcirore rcmailncd but to mect
------j the enemy whilc yet at a diflancc fiom England, and by support-

I ing the Congregation with a powerful army, to render Scotland

the theatre of the war, to crufll the designs of the princes of
Lorrain in their infancy, and, by fichi an early and unexpecied
effort, to expel the French out of 3ritain, before their power had
time to take root and grow up to any formidable height. But as
the mattcr was of as 1much importance as any which could fall
under the consideration of an Lnglilh monarcih, wisdom and ma--
ture counsel were neccfFary in the first place, and afterwards vigour
and expedition in conduc' ; the danger was urgent, and, by losing
a single moment, might become unavoidable'.

TI-IESE arguments produced their full effCcl upon Elizabcth,

who was jealous, in an extreme degree, of every pretender to her
crown, and no less anxious to pircflrve the tranquillity and hap-
pineis of her fubijeccs. Prom tliclf motives she llad aded, in
granting the Congregation an carly fulpply of money; and from
the fame principles ile determined, in their prclent exigency, to
afford thcel more cilcthual aid. One of ' aitland's attendants
was inflantly dial.tclied into Scotland with tlie lrongefi afiuranccs
of her protection, and the lords of the Congregation were de-
fired to fend commissioners into England to conclude a treaty,
and to fettle the operations of the campaign with the duke of
Norfolkl '

'he queen MEANW'I,1LE, the queen regent, from whom no motion of the
mdiangchi Congregation could long be concealed, dreaded the fucccs of this
lends her
Frenchi troops
againtl thcm, The argumcnts whicl the Scots employed, in order to obtain El.-.bleth's

assistance, aic urgcd with great force, in a paper of lI.:itl:nd's. See Append.
No I. II. ithi, 114. Rymer, xv. p. 569.

negociatio:

ncg''clntion with the Court of England, and foreflw how little fhic 0 0 K
\vould be able to rcfifl tic unitcd effort of the two kingdoms. '-----
For tlis rcafon ilic determinied, if pofliblc, to get the flart of IEli-
zabeth; and by venturing, notvwithftalnlding the incleimency of the
winter season, to attacl the malcecontents in their prent (lilcrferd
and hclplcfs ituation, she hloped to put an end to the war before
the arrival of their Englifl allies.

A CON-SIDERABLE body of her French forces, -who were aug;-

mented about this time )by the arrival of the count lde iNarttiucs,
with a thousand veteran Foot lld fibll cavalry, Cwer comIande d
to march to Stirling,. IHaving there crofcid tlie Iorth, tlyc pro-
ccedcd along the coafc of Fife, clefioying and plunderin[5, with
cxccflive outrage, the houfcs and lands of those iwhom thcy deemed
their enemies. Fife was the mor e populous and powerful county
in the kingdom, and moll: devoted to thle Clongregl;:tion, who had
hithcrto drawn from thece tlicir most colni.!erabl- ilp-pllie;, hoth
of men and provisions ; and therefore, Lefides lunilliiiig the dif-
a-ficion of the ilhaitants, by pillaging te countr'y, thie French
propoled to ifizc anld foitify St. Anlldr(cv'.', and to clave in it a
garriloil fullliciiCn to bridle tle Imutinouts ipirit of the lrovince, an(d
to kcc : poffeflion of a port iltuated on t-le main occa ".

BUT on tlis occnaioi, tlie O-ior of St. Andrwc's, lord Rutlhven,

'l;Kikaldy of Crange, andI a I.w of the mo1l adlive leaders of the
Congregationi, periormned, by their bravery al: good conducL, a
;trvice of the utmoll importance to their party. I-laving afiinbied
lix hundred horfc, they infeiced the :rench with continual in-
curlfons, beat up their quarters, ilntercclted their convoys of pro-

" I-In)rcs, .2r, iS c.

vi ions,

B (o o vifiol;, cut off tleir firagglill parties, and so harafled them wvitl
.--.-- - p)erpetual alarms, that tlhey prevented them for more than three

weeks froml advancing .

AT lail the prior, with his feeble party, was constraincd to

retire, and the French set out from Kirkaldy, and began to move
Iu,:ury ^3. along the coafl towards St. Andrew's. They liad advanced but a

few niles, whcii, fiom an eminence, they delcried a powerful
fleet cleering its couric up the Frith of Forth. As they knew that
the marq-cuis D'Elbeuf w-as at that time preparing to ftil for Scot-
land with a numerous army, they haflily concluded that thllc
ihlips belonged to him, and gave way to the mofi immoderate
transports of joy, on the profpc& of this long-expeced tilccour.
'Their great guns were already fired to welcome their fiiends, and
to fiprcad the tidings and terror of their arrival among their ene-
ilics, wv]hen a finall boat firom the opposite coafl landed, and blasted
tlceir premature and fliort-lived triumph, by informing them, that
it was the lecet of England vwhlich was in fight, intended for the aid
o( ilhe Conlgregation, and -was boon to be followed by a formidable
land army'.

'rhc En.gl.if Ti-iROUGIIOUT her rwhole reign Elizabeth was cautious, but
-Icct arrives to ,
tlheir anibt- dcciive ; and by ler promptitude in exccuting her rcfolutions,
5i1ncC. joined to the deliberation witl which fim formedl them, her admi-

niliration became remarkable, no less for its vigour than for its
-wilfdom. No looner did flie determine to afford her protccEion to
the lords of the Congregation, than they experienced the aciivity, as
well as the extent of her power. The leafon of the year would not
permit her land army to take the field ; but left the French £ihould,

K Enox, 202. r Ibid. 203.

in

in the mean time, receive new reinforcements, she infiantly I 0 0 9
ordered a llrong s(quadron to cruifi in the Frith ofForth. She seems, .
by her inltrucions to \Vinter her admiral, to have been delirous of
prcferving the appearances of friendship towards the French '.
But thefc were only appcarances; if any French fleet flouild at-
tempt to land, he was commlanded to prevent it, by every a&l of
hoflility and violence. It was the 1fght of this ifuadron, whicl
occasioned at firfl ib much joy among- the French, but which soon
inspired them with uclh terror, as laved FiTi f.rom the cribdls cf
their vengeance. Apprehcnfive of being cut ol' frlom tleir conm-
panions on the oppofit flibre, they rCtrLate d town.ats itirlillg with
the utmort precipitation, and in a dreadful icafbi, and tlhrouglh
roads almioft impaflible, arrived at Leitll, harallcd and exhaufed
with fatigue r.

TuE Englilh fleet cafl: anchor in the road of Lctli, and con-

tinuing in that station till tlic conclusion of pic.te, l)hi:h preventedl
the garrison of Leith iroil rccciving lIiiSccursl o any i.iiidc, :ni
conftierably facilitated the operations of tlilir ow\n frces by
land.

SOON after the arrival of the Fl nglifhl lflualdron, thel comniiliioncrs Tiicy cr-.

of the Congregation repaired to Berwick, altn concluded with the it in ii
duke of Norfolk a treaty, the bond of that union with Eliz:abeth, /"'' I1'.
which was of so great advantage to tlic cauil. To give a check
to the dangerous and rapid progrcfs of the French arins ill Scot-
land, was the profcffed dehign of the contracing parties. In order
to this, the Scots engaged never to filbcr any clolfr union of their
country with France and to defend thcnielves to tle uttermoil

' Kecith, Appendix 45. IInynes, 23r. i [Fnox, 203.

6 acgai lit

0 0 K against all attempts ofconqucfl. Elizabctll, on er part, promiscd
----_,. to employ in Scotland a powerful arnl-y for their aflaitancc, which

the Scots undertook to join with all their forces; no place in Scot-
land was to remain in the hands of the English ; whatever fhiould
be taken from the enemy was either to be rafed, or kept by the
Scots, at their choice; if any invasion fhlould be made upon Eng-
land, the Scots vere obliged to aflift Elizabeth with part of their
forces; and to ascertain their faithful oblervance of the treaty,
they bound themselves to deliver hoflages to Elizabeth, before the
march of her army into Scotland ; in conclulion, the Scots made
nmany protcitations of obedience and loyalty towards their own
qucen, in every thing not inconfiflcnt with their religion, and the
liberties of their country '.

'h'e ]T.nglfli HE EnI llish army, conlifliin of fix thousand foot and two
armry In\ s
ic getocithl. thoulfnd horlc, under the command of lord Gray of Wilton, en-

l ' tcrc( Scotland early in the Spring. The members of the Congre-

gation allcmblcd irom all parts of the kingdom to meet their new
allies ; and having joined them, with great multitudes of their
followers, they advanced together towards Leith. The French
were little able to keep the field againfl an enemy so much superior
in number. A firong body of troops, dcftined for their relief,
had been scattered by a violent storm, and had either perished on
the coast of France, or with difficulty had recovered the ports of
that kingdomn'. But they hoped to be able to defend Lcith, till
the princes of Lorrain should make good the magnificent promiies
of afiftance, wxith which they daily encouraged them ; or till
Ecarcity of provisions fliould conflrain the Englinl to retire into their
own country. In order to haften this latter event, they did not

Kniox, 217. Ilnlyne, 253, &c. L MIci. ld C.,ftcl. 450.

neglect

negleg t the usual, though barbarous precaution for diitreffing an B o o

0

invading enemy, by burning and laying waftc all the adjaccnt ----
country " The zeal, however, of the nation frustrated their I 6.
intentions ; eager to contribute towards removing their opprefiors,
the people produced their hidden flores to support their friends;
the neighbouring counties supplied every thing neceflary, and far
from wanting fubfifience, the Englilh found in their camp all
forts of provisions at a cecaper rate than had for fobne time been
known in that part of the kingdom x.

ON the approach of tlle Englilh army, tlic queen regent re-

tired into the caflle of Edinburgh. I-Ier health was now in a
declining slate, and her mind broken and deprellcd by the mif-
fortunes of her adminiiftratin. To avoid the danger and fatigue
of a fiegc, fll committed herself to the protection of lord Erfkinc.
This nobleman fill preserved his neutrality, and by his integrity,
and love of his country, merited equally the eftcem of both
parties. He received the queen herself with the utmost honour
and refpcl-, but took care to admit no such retinue as might en-
danger his command of the cafle Y.

A FEW days after they arrived in Scotland, the Englifli invefled April 6.

Leith. The garrison slut up within the town was almost half
as numerous as the army which fat down before it, and by an
obstinate defence protrad-ed the siege to a great length. The cir-
cumftances of this siege, related by contemporary hifiorians, mnen
without knowledge or experience in the art of war, are often
obscure and imperfcl&, and at this diflance of time are not con-
fiderable enough to be entertaining.

IKnox, 225. x Knox, ibid. Y Forbcs's Collccl. vol. i. 503.
IKcit, 122.

VTOL. I. C c AT

r 0 0 K AT first the French endeavoured to keep poflefion of the Hawk
ill
- Hill, a riling ground not far distant from the town, but were beat

156o.
April 15. from it with great slaughter, chiefly by the furious attack of the

Scottish cavalry. Within a few days the French had their full
revenge; having rallied out with a strong body, they entered the
English trenches, broke their troops, nailed part of their cannon,
and killed at least double the number they had loft in the former
fkirmiih. Nor were the English more fortunate in an attempt
which they made to take the place by aflault; they were met with
May 7. equal courage, and repulsed with considerable loss. From the de-

tail of these circumstances by the writers of that age, it is easy to
observe the different charaCters of the French and English troops.
The former, trained to war under the a&tive reigns of Francis 1.
and Henry II. defended themselves not only with the bravery but
with the skill of veterans. The latter, who had been more ac-
customed to peace, still preserved the intrepid and desperate valour
peculiar to the nation, but discovered few marks of military genius,
or of experience in the practice of war. Every misfortune or
disappointment during the siege must be imputed to manifest errors
in conduct. The success of the besieged in their sally was owing
entirely to the security and negligence of the Englifl: many of
their officers were absent; their soldiers had left their stations;
and the trenches were almost without a guard '. The ladders,
which had been provided for the assault, wanted a great deal of
the necessary length; and the troops employed in that service were
ill supported. The trenches were opened at first in an improper
place; and as it was found expedient to change the ground, both
time and labour were loft. The weakness of their own generals,
no less than the strength of the French garrison, rendered the pro-

2 Haynes, 294. 298. 305, &c.

grefs

grefs of the Englifll wonderfully flow. The long continuance, B o o K
however, of the siege, and the loss of part of their magazines by --.-
an accidental fire, reduced the French to extreme difirefs for want
of provisions, which the profpea of relief made them bear with
admirable fortitude.

WHIILE the hopes and courage of the French protraaed the siege

so far beyond expecation, the leaders of the Congregation were
not idle. By new aflbciations and confederacies, they laboured to
unite their party more perfecly. By publicly ratifying the treaty
concluded at Berwick, they endeavoured to render the alliance with
England firm and indissoluble. Among the fulfcribers of thcfe
papers we find the earl of Huntly, and ibme others, who had not
hitherto concurred with the Congregation in any of their lmea-
fures ". Several of these lords, particularly the earl of Huntly,
itill adhered to the popifll church ; but on this occasion neither
their religious fentinents, nor their former cautious maxims, were
regarded; the torrent of national resentment and indignation
againfl the French hurried them on b.

TIIE queen regent, the inflrument, rather than the cause, of eatlh and

charaicer of
involving Scotland in tlhof calamities under which it groaned at the queen

dowager.

' Burn. vol. iii. 287. Knox, 22r. Haynes, 261. 263. J
b The dread of the French power did on many occasions surmount the zeal which

the catholic nobles had for their religion. Beicdes the presumptive evidence for this,
arising from the memorial mentioned by Burner, Hist. of the Reformation, vol. iii.
28r. and publifled by him, App. p. 278; the inftrucqions of Elizabeth to Ran-
dolph her agent, put it beyond all doubt, that many zealous papiffs thought the
alliance with England to be neceflary for preserving the liberty and independence
of the kingdom. Keith, 158. IIuntly himself began a correspondence with Eli-
zabeth's ministers, before the march of the Englifn army into Scotland. Haynes's
State Papers, 261. 263. See Append. No. IlI.

Cc 2 that

B 0OO i that time, died during the heat of the siege. No princess ever

III.
.---.--- poffelTed qualities more capable of rendering her administration

illustrious, or her people happy. Of much discernment, and no
less addrers ; of great intrepidity, and equal prudence; gentle and
humane, without wcaknefs; zealous lbr her religion, without
bigotry; a lover of juflice, without rigour. One circumstance,
howcvc'c, and that too the exccls of a virtue, rather than any
vice, poisoncd all these great qualities, and rendered her govern-
mcnt unfortunate , and hcr name odious. Devoted to the interefl
of France, her native country, and attached to the princes of
Lorrain, her brothers, with moit pafilonate fondness; she departed,
in order to gratify them, fiom every maxim which her own wis-
dom or humanity would have approved. She outlived, in a great
meafurc, that reputation and popularity which had smoothed her
way to the highcft flation in the kingdom; and many examples of
falsehood, and some of severity, in the latter part of her admini-
firation, alienated from her the affec&ions of a people who had
once placed in her an unbounded confidence. But, even by her
enemies, these unjustifiable aCtions were imputed to the facility,
not to the malignity, of her nature; and while they taxed her
brothers and French counsellors with rashness and cruelty, they
flill allowed her the praise of prudence and of lenityc. A few-
days before her death, she desired an interview with the prior of
St. Andrew's, the earl of Argyll, and other chiefs of the Congre-
gation. To them fle lamented the fatal issue of those violent:
councils which she had been obliged to follow; and, with the can-
dour natural to a generous mind, confessed the errors of her own
adminifiration, and begged forgiveness of those to whom they had
been hurtful; but at the far.e time she warned them, amidfl their-

Buchan. 324.

struggles.

fitruggles for liberty and the flock of arms, not to lose light of the B i K
loyalty and fulbjctior- which was due to their fovercign d. The I,--
remainder of her time flie employed in religious meditations and
exercifis. She even invited the attendance of \Villox, one of the
molt eminent among the reformed preachers, liflened to his in-
ftruE'lions with reverence and attention , and prepared for the
approach of death with a decent fortitude.

NOTirIING could now save the Irench troops fliut up in Leith, R\l,,tci cf

the French to

but the immediate conclusion of a peace, or the arrival of a power- (ocl,,u ;,
fi.l army from the continent. The princes of Lorrain anifled C C"'11
their party in Scotland with continual expectations of tle latter,
and had thereby kept alive their hopes and their courage; but at
lafl, the situation of France, rather than the terror of the English
arms, or the remonirances of the Scottifl malecontents, constrained
them, though with reluctance, to turn their thoughts towards
pacific councils. The protcftants in France were at that time a
party formidable by their number, and more by the valour and
enterprising genius of their leaders. Francis II. had treated them.
with extreme rigour, and discovered, by every ftep he took, a
fettled resolution to extirpate their religion, and to ruin those who
profcfcd it. At the prolpect of this danger to themfcelves and to
their cause, the proteflants were alarmed, but not terrified. Ani-
mated with zeal, and inflamed with resentment, they not only
prepared for their own defence, but resolvcd, by binm bold ation,
to anticipate the Ichemes of their enemies; and as the princes of
Lorrain were deemed the authors of all the king's violent mcaluircs,
they marked them out to be the firli vicims of their indignation.
Hence, and not from any disloyalty to the king, proceeded the.

Lefley, de Rebus Gefl. Scot. 222. c KIOX, 228.

fai mous

B oo I0 funous conspiracy of Amboise; and though the vigilance and good

Ill.
------ fortune of the princes of Lorrain discovered and disappointed that

56o.
March 1,. dcfign, it was cafy to observe new storms gathering in every pro-

vince of the kingdom, and ready to burst out with all the fury
and outrage of civil war. In this situation, the ambition of the
house of Lorrain was called off from the thoughts'of foreign con-
qucfs, to defend the honour and dignity of the French crown,
and instead of fending new reinforcements into Scotland, it be-
came neceflary to withdraw the veteran troops already employed
in that kingdom f.

The negoci. IN order to conduCt an affair of so much importance and deli-
ailons for
that puipOrfc cacy, the princes of Lorrain made choice of Monluc bishop of

Valence, and of the fieur de Randan. As both there, especially
the former, were reckoned inferior to no persons of that age in
address and political refinement, Elizabeth opposed to them ambaf-
fadors of equal abilities; Cecil her prime minister, a man perhaps
of the greatest capacity who had ever held that office; and Wotton
dcan of Cantercury, grown old in the art of negociating under
three tiicccfl.vc monarchs. The interests of the French and Englifl
courts were soon adjulted by men of so great dexterity in business;
and as France calily consented to withdraw those forces which had
been the chief occasion of the war, the other points in diipute
between that kingdom and England, were not matters of tedious
- r of diflicult discussion.

TIIE grievances of the Congregation, and their demands upon

their own sovereigns for redress, employed longer time, and re-
quired to be treated with a more delicate hand. After so many

fLefly, 224.

open

open attempts, carried on by command of the king and queen, in B 0 0 ;
order to overturn the ancient constitution, and to fupprels the reli- --

156o.

gion which they had embraced, the Scottish nobles could not think
themselves secure, without fixing some new barrier againtf tile
future encroachments of regal power. But the legal fleps towards
accoimplifhing this were not so obvious. The French ambafildors
confidered the entering into any treaty with fubjeds, and with
rebels, as a condescension unsuitable to the dignity of a sovereign;
and their fcrtiples on this head might have put an end to the
treaty, if the impatience of both parties for peace liad not 1tig-
gefled an expedient, which seemed to provide for the iecurity of
the ubljed, without derogating from the honour of the prince.
The Scottifi nobles agreed, on this occasion, to pass from the Articles of

lhe treaty.

point of right and privilege, and to accept the redress of their
grievances as a matter of favour. WVhatever additional fccurity
their anxiety for personal fafcty, or their zeal for public liberty,
prompted them to demand, was granted in the name of Francis
and Mary, as acts of their royal favour and indulgence. And
left conceflions of this kind fioulld seem precarious, and liable to
be retracted by the fame power which had made them, the French
ambafillor agreed to inelrt them in the treaty with Elizabeth,
and thereby to bind the king and queen inviolably to oblerve
them '.

IN relating this tranaitiion, contemporary Ihiflorians have con-

founded the concelflons of Irancis and Mary to their Scottish 'lmb-
jecs, with the treaty between Irance and England ; the latter.
besides the ratification of former treaties between the two king-
doms, and fiipulations with regard to the time and manner of re-

Keith, 34, &-c.
A moving

B 0 0 K moving both armies out of Scotland, contained an article to which,
__.___, as the fourcc of many important events, we fllall often have occa-
i560. flon to refer. The right of Elizabeth to her crown is thereby

acknowledged in the firongeft terms; and Francis and Mary
solemnly cngage neither to assume the title, nor to bear the arms
of king and queen of England in any time to come .
Tuly 6. OI-INOURABLE as this article was for Elizabeth herself, the con-

ditions she obtained for her allies the Scots were no less advan-
tageous to them. Monluc and Randan consented, in the name of
Francis and Mary, that the French forces in Scotland should in-
ilantly be sent back into their own country, and no foreign troops
be hereafter introduced into the kingdom without the knowledge
and confcnt of parliament; that the fortifications of Leith and
Dunbar fllould immediately be rafed, and no new fort be erected
without the permission of parliament; that a parliament flould
be held on the first day of August, and that aflembly be deemed
as valid in all re-fpctes as if it had been called by the express com-
mandment of the king and queen; that, conformable to the an-
cient laws and customs of the country, the king and queen should
not declare war or conclude peace without the concurrence of
parliament; that during the queen's absence, the admiinifration
of governmcnt flould be vested in a council of twelve persons,
to be cholen out of twenty-four named by parliament, seven of
which council to be elected by the queen, and five by the parlia-
ment; that hereafter the king and queen thould not advance so-
reigners to places of trust or dignity in the kingdom, nor confer
the offices of trcafurer or comptroller of the revenues upon any
ccclefiiatic; that an act of oblivion, abolishing the guilt and me-

IKcith, 134. Rymer, xv. p. 58I. 591, &c. Haynes, 325-364.

mOry

imory of all offences committed since the sixth of March ohe thou- E 00C K
sand five hundred and fifty-eight, should be pafled in the ensuing .--.--.
parliament, and be ratified by the king and queen; that the king
and queen fhlould not, under colour of punifling any violation of
their authority dutring that period, seek to deprive any of their
subjecTs of the oflices, benefices, or estates which they now held;
that the redress due to churchmen, for the injuries which they had
sustained during the late infurreelions, filould be left entirely
to the cognizance of parliament. With regard to religious con-
troverfies, the ambassadors declared that they would not presume
to decide, but permitteJ the parliament, at their first meeting, to
examine the points in diflerence, and to repre`ent their fenfi of
th-cm to the king and queen .

To such a memorable period did the lords of the Congregation, Tle cffcdtsof

by their courage and perseverance, conduct an enterprise which at it.
firfi promised a very dif'erent iflue. From beginnings extremely
feeble, and even contemptible, the party grew by degrees to
great power ; and being favoured by many fortunate incidents,
baffled all the eflbrts of their own queen, aided by the forces of
a more considerable kingdom. The sovereign authority was by
this treaty transferred wholly into the hands of the Congregation;
that limited prerogative, which the crown had hitherto pofeiffcd,
was almost entirely annihilated; and the ariftocratical power,
which always predominated in the Scottish government, became
supreme and incontrolable. By this treaty too the influence of
France, vhich had long been of much weight in the affairs of
Scotland, was greatly diminilhed ; and not only were the present
encroachments of that ambitious ally restrainel, but, by confe-

Keith, 137, &c.
VOL. L, D d derating

BOO K derating with England, protetion was provided agalnft any fu-

l-- .--- ture attempt from the fame quarter. At the fame time, the con-

troverfies in religion being left to the consideration of parliament,
the protestants might reckon upon obtaining whatever decision was
most favourable to the opinions which they professed.

A rEW days after the conclusion of the treaty, both the French

and Englilh armies quitted Scotland.

A parili.aert 'FTIE eyes of every man in that kingdom were turned towards
",hld.

the approaching parliament. A meeting, summoned in a manner
so extraordinary, at such a critical junlcure, and to deliberate
upon matters of so much consequence, was expeced with the
utmost anxiety.

A SCOTTISH parliament, suitable to the ariflocratical genius of-

the government, was properly an aflembly of the nobles. It was.
composed of bishops, abbots, barons, and a few commifloners of
boroughs, who met all together in one house. The lesser barons,
though possessed of a right to be present, either in person, or by their
repreIentatives, seldom exercised it. The expence of attending,
according to the fashion of the times, with a numerous train of
vassals and dependants ; the inattention of a martial age to the
forms and detail of civil government ; but above all, the exorbi-
tant authority of the greater nobles, ,whlo had drawn the whole
power into their ovwn hands, made this privilege of so little value,.
as to be almost neglected. It appears from the ancient rolls, that
during times of tranquillity, few commi1fioners of boroughs,. and
almost none of the lesser barons, appeared in parliament. The
ordinary administration of government was abandoned, without
scruple or jealousy, to the king and to the greater barons. But

13 in

in extraordinary conjuncaures, when the flruggle for liberty was IB 0I°
violent, and the spirit of opposition to the crown rose to an height, --
the burgeftcs and lefler barons were routed from their inaftivity, 56
and fiood forth to vindicate the rights of their country. The tur-
bulent reign of James III. affords examples in proof of this ob-
servation k. The public indignation against the rafli designs of
that weak and ill-advifed prince, brought into parliament, besides
the greater nobles and prelates, a considerable number of the lecfer
barons.

TInE finme causes occasioncd the unusual confluence of all or-

ders of men to the parliament, which met on the firll of AugufLt
The universal paflion for libcrty, civil and religious, which had
seized the nation, fifliered few persons to remain unconccrned
fpedators of an aflembly, whole ads were likely to prove decisive
with refpe&l to both. From all corners of the kingdom men.
flocked in, eager and determined to aid, with their voices in the
senate, the fame cause which they had defended with their swords
in the field. Betides a full convention of peers, temporal and
spiritual, there appeared the repreftntatives of almo:f all the bo-
roughs, and above an hundred barons, who, though of the lcil.r
order, were gentlemen of the first rank and fortune in the nation '.

THi- parliament was ready to enter on btfinefs writh the utlrmon

zeal, whlen a difficulty was started concerning the lawfilncls of the
meeting. No commiifioner appeared in the name of the king and
queen, and no signification of their content and approbation was
yet received. These were deemed by many efential to the very
being of a parliament. But, in opposition to this sentiment, the

h Kcith, 147 ' Ibid. x146.

D d a exprtcs

B 0 0 K express words of the treaty of Edinburgh were urged, by whichl

this assembly was declared to be as valid, in all refpeds, as if it had
1O.5 been called and appointed by the express command of the king

and queen. As the adherents of the Congregation greatly out-
numbered their adversaries, the latter opinion prevailed. Their
boldest leaders, and those of most approved zeal, were chosen to
be lords of the articles, who formed a committee of ancient use9
and of great importance in the Scottish parliament "'. The deli-
berations of the lords of the articles were carried on with the
most unanimous and acive zeal. The aa of oblivion, the nomi-
nation of twenty-four persons, out of whom the council, intrusted
with supreme authority, was to be ele-ed; and every other thing
preferibed by the late treaty, or which seemed ncceffary to render

Its proceed- it effecual, patsed without difi)ute or delay. The article of rcli-
ings with re-
gard to reli- gion employed longer time, and was attended with greater dif-
S1"'. ficulty. It was brought into parliament by a petition from those.

who had adopted the principles of the Reformation. Many
doctrincs of the popilh church were a contradidcion to reason
and a difgracc to religion ; its discipline had become corrupt and
opprellive; and its revenues were both exorbitant and ill-applied,
Against all these the proteflants remonPfrated with the utmost
asperity of style, which indignation at their absurdity, or. expe-
rience of their pernicious tendency, could infl.ire; and encouraged,
by the number as well as zeal of their friends, to improve such
a favourablejunaure, they aimed the blow at the whole fabric of
popery; and besought the parliament to intcrpolc its authority for
rclifying these multiplied abuses

m From an original letter of Hamilton, archbishop of St. Andrew's, it appears,

that the lords of articles were chosen in the manner afterwards appointed by an at of
parliament, 1633. Keith, p. 487. Spottifwood seems to confider this to have
been the common practice. Hist. 149.

n Knox, 237.

SEVER AL

SEVERAL prelates, zealously attached to the ancient fuperlition, n o o K
were present in this parliament. But during thcle vigorous pro- --,-

56o,

ceedings of the proteftlnts, thcy flood confounded and at gaze;
and persevered in a silence which was fatal to their cauli:. They
deemed it impossible to rcfift or divert that torrent of religious
zeal, iwhiclh was still in its full firength; they dreaded that their
opposition would irritate their adverlfries and excite them to new
acts of violence; they lopcd that the king and queen would soon,
be at leisure to put a flop to the career of their insolent fuljcds,
and that, after the rage and havoc of the present storm, the former
tranquillity and order wduld be reflorcd to the church and king-
dom. Tliey were willing, perhaps, to iacrilice the dodrine, and
even the powver of the chrceh, in order to cnfure the safety of
their own persons, and to preserve the ponlcflion of those revenues
which were Rill in their hands. From whatever motives they
acted, their silence, vlwhich was imputed to tlhe confcioufncfs of
a bad cause, afiorded matter of great triumphl to the prote tants,
and encouraged them to proceed with more boldness and ala-
crity .

THrE parliament did not tlhink it enough to condemn tlhof

doctrines mentioned in the petition of the proteflants; they
moreover gave tlie lfition of their approbation to a Confeclion of-
iaith presented to them by the reformed teachers ", and compoecd,
as might be expcctedl fiomn uch a performance at thatjuncure,
on piupoie to cxpo!C tlie al)iurd tenets and praCtices of the Romish
church. By another adc, the juriLilicion of the ecclefiaf.ical courts
was abolisixed, arnd the causes which formerly came under their
cognizance, were transferred to the decision of civil judges ". By a
third statute, the exercise of religious worship, according to the rites

· Ktiwjx, .2.. P Ild. ibid, '1 Keith, 152.

of£

_ o 0 KI of the Romifll church, was prohibited. The manner in which

IIl.

------. .the parliament enforced the observation of this law discovers the
1560. zeal of that assembly; the first tranfgreiffon fubjeEed the offender

to the forfeiture of his goods, and to a corporal punifinment, at
the discretion of the judge; banishment was the penalty of a
second violation of the law; and a third ac of disobedience was
declared to be capitalr. Such firangers were men at that time to
the spirit of toleration, and to the laws of humanity; and with
iuch indecent haste did the very persons who had just escaped the
rigour of ecclesiastical tyranny, proceed to imitate those examples
of severity of which they thenfelves had so justly complained.

Vitlh regard TIIE vigorous zeal of the parliament overturned in a few
to tile reve-
nltesofthe days the ancient fyltem of religion, which had been eftabliflld so
ch urch.

many ages. In reforming the docrine and diicipline of the church,
the nobles kept pace with the ardour and expectations even of
Knox lim'felf. But their proceedings, with respect to these, were
not more rapid and impetuous, than they were flowand dilatory when
they entered on the consideration of ccclefiaftical revenues. Among
the lay members, some were already enriclled with the fjloils of
the church, and others devoured in expccation the wealthy be-
neficcs which 1ill remained untouched. The alteration in religion
had aflorded many of the digniied ecclefiaflics themselves an op-
portunity of gratifying their avarice or ambition. The denio-
lition of the monaflcrics having set tlhe monks at liberty from their
coniincment, they infiantlv diliperfed all over the kingdom, and
connmonly betook tlhemfelves to some secular employnment. The
abbot, if he had been to fortunate as to embrace the principles of
.lle Reformation fiom conviction, or so cunning as to clfpoule tlhem

rKnox, 254,

cut

out of policy, seized the whole revenues of the fraternity, and, B 1° l
except what he allowed for the subsistence of a few superannuated --
monks', applied them entirely to his own use. The propofial
made by the reformed teachers, for applying these revenues towards
the maintenance ofminifters, the education of youth, and the Ifupport
of the poor, was equally dreaded by all these orders of men. They
opposed it with the utmolft warmth, and by their numbers and
authority easily prevailed on the parliament to give no ear to fitch
a disagreeable demand '. Zealous as the Iirfl reformers were, and
animated with a spirit fupcrior to the low considerations of intei'efit
they beheld thele early symptoms of felfiflnefs and avarice among.
their adherents with amazement and sorrow; and we Iind Knox
exprefling tle utmofl sensibility of that contempt with whiclh
they were treated by many from whom he expcted a more generous
concern fbr the success of religion and the honour of its.
ministers ".

A DIFFICULTY hath been started with regard to the acs of ThevaliJity

of this parlia-

this parliament concerning religion. This difficulty, which at ment called
such a distance of time is of no importance, was founded on the " queon
words of the treaty of Edinburgh. By that, the parliament was
permitted to take into consideration the state of religion, and to-
signify their sentiments of it to. the king and queen. But, inflead
of presenting their defr-es to their sovereigns in the humble forrn
of a supplication or addrels, the parliament converted them into
so many ads; which, although they never received the royal
afient, obtained, all. over the kingdom, the weight and authority
of laws. In compliance with their injunCtions,. the eftablilhed
system of religion was every where overthrown, and that recon--

' Ieith, 496. Appcid. 190, 191. See Append. No. IV.
KI-nox, 239. 256.

mended'

o0 o K mended by the reformers introduced in its place. The partiality
----- .-r- and zeal of the people overlooked or supplied any defet in the
15 *0. form of these ads of parliament, and rendered the observance of

them more universal than ever had been yielded to the statutes of
the most regular or conflitutional assembly. By those proceedings
it must, however, be confessed that the parliament, or rather the
nation, violated the last article in the treaty of Edinburgh, and
even exceeded the powers which belong to fubjecs. But when
once men have been accustomed to break through the common
boundaries of fubjecion, and their minds are inflamed with the
paflions which civil war inspires, it is mere pedantry or ignorance
to measure their conduaE by those rules, which can be applied only
vwhere government is in a state of order and tranquillity. A nation,
when obliged to employ such extraordinary efforts in defence of
its liberties, avails itself of every thing which can promote this
great end; and the neceflity of the cafe, as well as the importance
of the objet-, juflify any departure from the common and efta-
blifled rules of the conflitution.

Ani-bat.idors IN consequence of the treaty of Edinburgh, as well as by the
tent by the
parlinment to ordinary forms of business, it became neceflary to lay the pro-
.'rancec, ceedings of parliament before the king and queen. For thlis pur-

pose, fir James Sandilands of Calder lord St. John, was appointed
to repair to the court of France. After holding a course so irrc-
gular, the leaders of the Congregation had no reason to flatter
themselves that Francis and Mary would ever approve their con-
dua, or confirm it by their royal assent. The reception of their
ambassador was no other than they might have expecled. He
was treated by the king and queen with the utmost coldness, and
difinifTed without obtaining the ratification or the parliament's
proceedings. From the princes of Lorrain, and their partisans, lie

end ured

pour uponz the party he rcprcln;cl d h -
x.

_ T o) U :;1 ii i (crl-!-

ofC I or.t cl, lunc lin a and i , L.ilnd of ai:

a o:.

LctlhinltonI t':e ainsai0flldors of

thle parlitilnun!t Lt I"'.LI.,cctll ilthe

protcdlrefs, met l ih

l 1t very

l illi!lrcilc 'recplioi; ti:cv ' *.'c re no^t:

110more 1 hccl 4il ini olle p:u't o'fl the n.c:'ci}:!liot . Liu:;- llc i'tl th llci: CaIL ,
Tlf c uacots. fin!lible of thlc icCtt ri;' \\'!i ]h til'u.: cl il t ifroll tlcit-r

*lin ?Ioi svitil iL l!''.ii^;h'.i;(.t ,; RVL'!'C d .;,_ '-i :

.1 '..rj lil .; i1: i.'iiid.....'i bl_.

0111011 \Vlttl 1.nti~iai~. 1

Wic IL, o nl- aL

CI. Ii'

W'ithl thlis vilc' th.:l uilpowcitd ilic cinii;i:;' i'nL ::L ic"ir' ;-rt-'
to tcf'[ii' to '.liI'.abcutl tliu- t';:i Til' (_' 1 lc; thl'i) lti lu ': ;Il .': 1i 'L . ol;.l. L

·0t tile !

L

C l l l L t l(iellid a t_

htihi

ilt r i') rc d.t:' rlic f' i' . il, ?'i.\',e 't cct thl e 'lItt-lo':; p:.il :'cILl:t, l

coiiclcltcclin'' t10 Inarry thl carl! of

Ai'i: xvh of a

1li. ,' ' l ll 'i,

\was 1ic.rily allied to imL iLr :al

c i. ni!y, ([ Scut!:; l and, ailltc . I \<

tlic -indoLubicd
hi!' to thni: crle av!t.

To the fo!nllr ?pa't of' tillS co ntlifliOl! ''li;'l'beth lillcl 'cd vilt-

thle toft cfattisa'. lion, ln'id el:c )UILirgCd tlle ill

c

, iy i lltUI

Cxi g ecy, to hope Jor the (:cO',i :11i:1ncC o: ]c'v '.;od) C'li'cs:; w ith
r ,arcl to t2he latter, 3Ii2e tlictevc d tl'l!i. fl lti ci L tstl; to whi l. i,
;T.iOLlcd tlil ;.:'1 t i r 18 Vignl. A/l' rc iiln mil)lri:geC, as
Iomne Inaintaii tlluonlei cloiccc, >uit moreC probably out of l)olicy,
that ambl)itioulls princcilL would never admit alnyr partner to the
t,'lon' j btt de(iC'_liteld vith the entire and uncolntrolled c::c''rcifc
o P)Owr-CI, ihe fcr'iliiccd to the cnljoymenit of tllit, timc hIopeCs of
tranfinittiing her crown to her o CnI poflerity. 'Thic marriage withl
'.he carl of A/rran could not lbe attenlded with any Inch extraor-
dinary advantage, as to hakec this reIolutioni; lhe declinedi it there-

'l Knox, 255. Buch, 327. Statc papers publishel by LotJ [':n'!\vicke, vol. i,
P. 125, &c.

VOL. 1. E e fore,

B 0 0 K fore, but witl many expressions of good-will towards the Scotti.h
L----. nation, and of rcf-pccie for Arran himielf '.

I 56o.

'iAhe death of TOWARDS the conclusion of this year, difilnguilhed by so.
'[rancit 11.

many remarkable events, there happencd one of great importance.
On Ihe fourth of December died Francis II. a prince of a feeble
conllitution, and of a mean underflanding. As he did not leave
any ifice by the queen, no incident could have been more for--
tunate to thofc wvho, during thc late commotions in Scotland, liha
taken part with the Congregation. n ary, by the charms of her
beauty, had acquir-cd an entire aiccndant over her lhufand ; and-
as flie transfcrred all her influence to her uncles the princes of
Lorrain, Francis followed them implicitly in whatever track they
were pleaccl to lead him. 'The power of France, under fuchl
direclion, alarmned tlhe Scottilil malecontents wit apprehensions of
danler, no c lets ;irmidalle than well founded. The intefline dill
orlder:; which raged in France, and the frafonable interpolktion. of
F. ngland in behalf of the aCongregation, had hitherto prevented
thei princes of Lorrain from carrying their designs upon Scotland
into cxccutlion. But under their vigorous and decisive admini--
.lration, it was iilpofliblc tliat the commotions in France could be.
oi long continuance, and many things might all in to divert Eliza-
ibet!'s attention, for the future, from the atllirs of Scotland. In
'-ither of thcfe eventi, the Scots would fiand exposed to all tlii
vc:-ig. ance which the r1clfntmct of the I1r1nch court could inl ic.
The blowl, however lon1g iuiufpcdcd(, was unavoidable, and ;ni
ftll at last with redoubled weight. From this protijcCt and ext-
pccElation of danger, the Scots were dclivcred by the death of
Francis ; the ancient confederacy of the two kingdoms had already

Burn. . Append. 308. Keith, 154, &c,

l.~ccn

been blroken, and by this event the chief bond of union which 0
remained was dissolv'ed. Catherinc of M/edicis, who, during the -.
minority of Charlcs IX. her second tln, cnglroftcd the entire
lircCiion of the French councils, vwas far ifrom any thouglllhts of
vindlicating the Scottilfh qunccn's autllority. Cathcrice and Iarv
liad been rivas in power during the reig-n of lrancis II. and liad
contended for the government of that wea k and uIiexpericnced
prince ; but as the charms of the "vifl calily triumphed over tlh
antihorlit of the mother, (Catherine could never i';lb'veC ic'll a

a.lilippohlntmcnt in her favourite pai'ion, a'nd heleld 1. wv, it'

Icr!'et pleaslirc, the diflici!t aild )cpIeIcxil ig iczle on which ller
daughter-in-law -waas alout to cnter. X\ary, overwhelmed w'iih
all the sorrow which fb lad a reveril of fortune could occatllon;
lightced by the quccn-mothler ; and fori.cilkn by tihe tribe ol
courtiers, Ewho appear only in the filtifiine of iroficrity, retireld I;\''y rrtic
to Rhcilns, and there iln folitudel ilndullgdl her grifl or Ilid iher of lrancc.
indignation. Lvcen tlc princes of Lorrain Cwere obligcd to con-
trall their vlcvws; to turn them from fblocign to clomenicic oljcs;
and inifcadc of fornin vaall prijcLs witli regard to r-itain, tlicy
found it neccCllary to tllinlk i acqulilrinG andl clltablilhiiS-- an interlct
willi thle new- administration.

IT is imIpofliblc to dcfclCe the ciotions of joy wnliic, on all

thecfe accounts, the deathl of thle Frencll monarclh excited among
the Scots. They regarded it as tlie only event which could give
li-mnincll; and liability to that i 'fclim of lreligion and government
wlich was no-. introdulccm ; and it is no wonder cotemlporary
h;llorians flhuld atrlibe it to tlhe immediate care of Providence,
w-,hich, by unifcrcleeni expedicnts, can iccure the peace and hap-

llciault, 340. Catcln. 454.

E e 2 piness

B o o K piness of kingdoms, in those situations where human prudence

Ill.

-^------- and invention would utterly dcefair '

56o.

E.ablinirmcnt ABOU' this time the protcftant clurch of Scotland began to
of prclbvec-
rian churcI al]iin a regular form. Its principies had obtained tlie fandiion
govcrninen t.
govcrnmet. of public authority, and ibnec fixed external policy becamc ne-

ccfiary for the government and ircfervation of tlh infant focicty.
'The model introduced by thle lRefrlers differed extremely froml
that which had been long cflablinlcd. The motives which i!i-
duced them to depart so far ifom the ancient fy1cm dcfcrve to.
be cxplained.

Tnri licentious lives of the clergy, as has been already obfcrved,.

fcem to have been among the firfl things that excited any suspicion
concerning the truth of the doctrines whlich they taught, and
rouscd that spirit of inquiry which proved fatal to the popish
fyllnen. As this dif:uft at the vices of cccleiaRfics was lbon tranf-
ferrcd to their persons, and flifiing fromn them, by no violent
transition, fettled at laflt upon tlic o!ices which they njoyeCd ; the
cIfets of lthe rcforjna'ion \vould ina:trally have extended not only
to the doclrine, but to the fioln of government in the popil"'
churcth ; and tie fname firi t which abolilcd the forcer, wAould
have overturned the latter. isnt in the arrangements which took
place in the (li£1criet kl ;gdoms and states of Europe in confc-
quence of the ' Reformation, we may observe fomcthing filmilar to
wvhat happcned upon the frift enabliflment of Chriflianity in the
Roman empire. In both periods, the formn of ccclcfiallical policy
was modelled, in fonmc measure, upon that of the civil govern-
ment. When the Christian church was patronied and eftablinied

a KnoX, 255.
7 iij'j

By thc state, thel jirifdition of tl 'aios orders of eccleticn, 1) 0
diflinguliiCd by1) tle nalils of 1atri:achs, Arclibilhops, a1d ... -_J
Bihlops, wV-Ias nlmde to cor'rcplond wit the various divitions of tile IS:
cmpire ; and the cclcefialic of chiCf cmineIce ICC i C:c!l of1 tllei:
pofcficdl authority more or0 Iefl ctcniCe ill iprc'r; lio ' 1o that
of the civil in:,iltratc whlo ,r-cidecd over tlic I!inC (lisilri. Vh'IiciE
tihe Reform atioll toolk Ill:a,', itic cpciltclp:ll to'i o' c:o,'CCnnicn,
wit its varlious rans and cle-iccsf o ibcrdiialni:, :;lp jC:';i,!p to
be most confiriclt with the gClitls cf .loniarcly, it vaq contiinutied
with a few liimitatioii., i, i; 1'val l )rOvlncc2; o C(1crmany, iiln. g-
landl, and in thil northern h;ingdonaS. llitt il t lSwitz rland alnd
ibmc parts of tlie Low Countries, vheliCCe e pl)Cilar ifoi1i of go-
vcrnlmenct allowed more full i opc to the innlovati n: gelnius of
the Reform ation, all pre-cmininenlc ci orr ill the c1hurch was
eflroyed, anid an cqtlciuty

le Lal u'd nolilc' .ore abil to the Jl irii

cf rcpuhiican pCi'ol:;. As t'.c ::aoad1'I GL C ' Ll'(i',::i! o '1'.eI \ lli t xva1i
co'il-edi :onl

r that of tile Cihrli ca ch :'_ a;s cSil;l- i:' a in tihe R(--
man CnlilCrc, the iliatl i of tile piir1n' v'Ce C' !lir }I, liOli to its

.lblinblflnqcnt by civil aiithority, c l'iS to l- vi ti

? fcild the idea,

and1 fti-n-ilh the m-ioi' of il'e LC .t.tc .' l in, v-li l haIs ec iee;

d ,

e iii iinitcd Jr i'i'7 /.Ui'-,. a. 'The j._ 1

C 1i'-i.! i'l.;, O'll /lb'lt u )y con-

tinual pecleutlons, a. nd obli;cd t'o hold theilr rclirilons a:.ilibliies by
ilcalth and i, corn'rs, 'v.'er ccntentdc' \:.'itli a l'orm O;' govlcrnlilnt
extremely simple. The inilt'enc of rehligion nc:clirrcd with the
'fci;,: of canger, in ex tilngluilling amoiig tlilcn ti Ce I lit ofambilitioIl,
and in preicrvlin a parity of rank, the eflcd: of their slC'i' ings,
and the cause of mainy of thieir virtlcs. C:lvin, Vwhiofe dcciions
'wcre received almonmg Inany p:rteriants of that age with incredible
ihnll.ion,) x-,s tie patron ald .lre:orcr of this fclicme of ccclefi-
aftical policy. The cliurchI of' Gencva, formled Lunder his eye

~~~~7 ;1!1(1~~and
7

i: 0 0o aind b y his dlirclion, was deemcd the motC perfet model of thlis
t----J gOViermelllCllt; and Knox, who, during his rclicdencc in that city,

i60. ahad
i .udicd and admired it, warmlly recommended it to the imi-

tation of Ills coulltr'ymcn.

AMaONG the Scottiih nobility, I/nCe lhated the peirons, and

others coveted the \xeaoll,, of ,lie dignifiedclergy; and by aho-
liliing tlhat order of mcn, the forlmer indulged their relfntncnt,
and the lattcr loped to gr1atit thlcir a;:,ri ce. Thle people, inflamed
with thle moilt ioienit avcrfliol to popry), and approving of every
Iclcnme that departed fiarthc!l from the pracdice of the Romiflh
clurcli, vwere cllighted with a 'ftlem i) admirably suitcd to their
.redominant paflion: while the fricnds of civil liberty beheld
with pl easure the protcftant clergy pulling down withl their own
liands that fabric of cccleliaftical power which their predeceflors
had reared with to much art and induifry; and flattered tlhen-
felvcs, that by lending their aid to flrip churchmen of their dig-
nity an1d xwealth, they mighlt entirely deliver the nation from thei.:
cxorblitanlt and opp)rcfhive jiirilfliclionl. The nclew mode of govern-
mcnt calily made its \way among men thus prepared, by their va-
rious intcrcfis and palfiois, for its reception.

B3UT, on the fir-' in.trod.uclion of Ilis fyfiem, Knox cdid not

cleem it expedient to depart altogether from the ancient forml '.
Tnflcad of bishops, he proposed to cPLblifil ten or twelve fupcrin-
tcndants in diffircnt parts of the kingdom. Thlife, as the name
implies, were empowered to inlied& tle life anld docrin of the
other cler[gy. Th'1y pr'efecl in the inferior jutdicatories of tlhe
.church, and performed several other parts of the cpifcopal fiuncQion,

b Spotfwood, 1 5S.

Their

Their jurifdil'ion, however, extecnded to sacred thingis only ; tlhey E 0 0

1

claimed no Ieat in parliament, and pretendcd no right to tile *- --..
dignity or revcnucs of tile former bifiops.

TrE number of inferior cl-rgy, to whom the care of parocliial

duty could be committed, was Rill extremely tinall; they had
embraced tle principles of the Reformation at diifircit times, and
friom various motives; duriln the public conmmotion, they werc
scattered, necrely by chance, over the diflfereit provinces of thc
kingdon; and in a few places only were formed into regular
clalfes or societies. The firfl' gnceral anlmhily of thle churchl, Dcc.
wlicich was held this year, bcars all tlic marks of an iflintl anlld
unfo:llmed fbcicty. The members were but jexv in numbller, and
of no considerable rank ; no uliform or conli.ent rule fcems to
have been cbfcrvcd in elcLingl thm. Ftrom a

F grcat part of the

iking'dom no rcilrefentatiscs appeared.c I;i Lthe nlame of fbioc entire
counties, bu;t one perloln wats 1preicnt; whil ill otier placcs, a
lai;ile town or churclh lent lvcral irebers. A COllventioln, lo
feeble and irregular, could not poillc:s cxtenlivc autitorit)r; and,
conicious of their own \waknclt, thle nmil ers put an endl t ltheir
debates, mwithout vcentutrini upon ;::. ic.,l': ok

: inmcl i :niort-
ance

INr ordcr to give grecier flrengt anL! :::,a[lcne

t. ii p-rclv- ,-,;,

tcrian plan, Knox, withl the afiluilcc nec lisi brethrcl, e'.: n obd
tilc firfl book of difciplinle, which co;:tt;i: i; the roidcl or platformi'

1o the intenided policy . Tlhey prcic: tcl d i: to a convcItioln of

eflates, whictl was held in the beginningll o this year. V,'atever Jn.

j ..
:,'cgulations were proposed wnithl regard to ccclci-'iical dilillinc

c .Kcith, 498. Spotl; 152

a;il

B o 0 I and jurifdi.tion, would have easily obtained the ihn&ion of thaL

.---, aflembly; but a design to recover the patrimony of the churcli,
561 whVllich is there insinuatcd, met with a vcry different reccption.

IN vain did the clergy display the advantages wxviichl woold

accrue to the public, by a proper application of eccleclallicaJ re-

Civenues. In vai did they propose, by an impartial diftlibution oi
this fund, to promnote true religion, to enlcorllae I.!.iTn n.,
to hfupport tlic poor. In vain (id they even intcn',ringl:' t1 reat-
cnillgs of' the divine diol)lc:iure agaill te lii unju!l dl:',':in..: ol
.lwha.'t Vwas iappropriated to a tsared ufio!. lTe nobles he'ld

.A1 tLii

prey which they lhad flcicd , and be1 Io\'inl' upon thle prp'oial the
lname of a t'volUt// i.'l:,,ii, lo/ / tlley aic' Lcd to conliidec' it a:; '.
projec& altogclthtr 'vifio.ll', and treated it w;_ ith , tliut'iCot.
fcornl

'tlhc (,fr, t, clls nvctlo; :a slc0

Iilto d tie prior of St. A/ndrc'.s to rclaih

in vhcd t rc.

.n -ic tO tohe (1<iu Ci, and to ii-it l .l'r

Lio Iii r

,native ou litri>
ci.: .iJ. a\nd to aftlume tlhe reins o govellrn ment, whrich had betl cn too lolln

comnimtted to other hands. T11ou(1'1 Ibin of Iher fuljecs deaded.
.er return, and othirls ilbrciar dangerous confiqucncCcs wvvli
which it might be attended ', the bulk of thel (tlfired it with so

much ardour, that the invitation was given Cwith the

1 reateil a1-

.pearance ol' ulnalinituY. r'i: tlic te.al of tlhe Rolman catholics got
t.he start of the prior .il pay ing court to llm'y; and .1eily, afLcr-
wards bifliop of Rol:', iwho was conmriiiTionci tly m, arrived
before hlili at the place of her residence %. Lefly cendeavoured to
.iifiuic into the quccn's mind iilpicions of her protefiant ilhjcCts,
:and to persuade her to throw hirfellf entirely into the arms oL'

t Inox, 256. r Sec Append. No. V. 7
Icll5, 227.

thoic

those who adhered to her own religion. For this purpose, he 1 0 0 IC

II[.

infitlcd that fie should land at Aberdeen; and as the protestant -l--
doErines lhad made no considerable progrcl in that part of the 156
kingdom, he gave her aliurrance of bcing joined in a few days by
twenty thousand men; and flattered her, that with lilch an army,
encouraged by lier presence and authority, ihe might cafily over-
turn the reformed church, before it was firmly fettlcd on its
foundations.

BUT at this junLture, the princes of Lorrain wcre not dijlpofcd

to liflcn to this extravagant and dangerous propoll. Intent on
defetnding themlflvcs againfl Catherine of ledicis, whose insidious
policy was employed in undermining their exorbitant power, they
had no Iciturc to attend to the afiaiis of Scotland1, and wiflcd
their niece to take poflucion of her kingdom wlith as little dif-
turbance as poliblc. The French oflicers too, who had served in
Scotland, difluadcd NMary from all violent incafurcs; and, by re-
prfclentiln the power and number of tlie protcflants to he irre-
fiftible, determined her to court tlicm by every art; and rather
to employ the leading men of that party as miniftcrs, than to pro-
oke them,, by a fruitlcfs opposition, to become her enemies .
I-lence procccldd the confidence and afiCedion wit whichi tllh prior
of, St. Andrew's was received by the Lqueen. HIis rcprc!lntlt;.lo
of thle tate of the kingdom gained great credit; and Lefiy belield
with regret tle new channel ill which court ft.vour was' likely
to run.

AN-OTIHER convention of eflates was held in May. Tlie arrivra
,of an ambaflhdor fromn France seems to lhaec been the occasion of

h Melv. 61.
VOL. . Fs this

B o O K this meeting. He was inflirulcd to solicit the Scots to renew their
--- --. ancient alliance with France, to break their new confederacy with

England, and to reflore tlhe popifli ecclefiafiics to the poffeifion of
their revenues and the exerciif of their funcdions. It is no easy
matter to form any conjecQure concerning the intentions of the
French court in making these extraordinary and ill-timed propofi-
tions. They were rejeEedl with that scorn which might well have
been expecqed from the temper of the nation '.

IN this convention, the protcftant clergy did not obtain a more

favourable audience than formerly, and their profpeac of recover-
ing the patrimony of the church still remained as diflant and
uncertain as ever. But, with regard to another point, they found
the zeal of the nobles in no degree abated. The book of discipline
feemeed to require that the ronouments of popery, which frill re-
mained in the kingdom, fliould be dcmolifhed':; and, though neither
the fame prctcence of policy, nor the fame ungovernable rage of the
people, remained to jiftify or exlcne this barbarous havoc, the con-
vention, confidering every religious fabric as a relic of idolatry,
pasTed fcntence upon then by an acd in form; and persons the most
remarkable for tlhe acivityof their zeal, were appointed to-put it in
execution. Abbies, cathedrals, churches, libraries, records, and even
the fepulchrcs of the dead, pcrifhcdl in one common ruin. The
florm of popular infurlrciion, though impetuous and irrefifiible, had
extended only to a few counties, and soon spent its rage; but now
a deliberate and universal rapine completed the devaflation of
every thing venerable and magnificent which had escaped its
violence .

k noox, 269. 273. k Spotfwood, 153. ' Ibid. 174.

IN

IN the mean tilne, Mary was in no lafle to return into Scot- B °° K

land. Accustomcd to the clcg-lnce, tllcndoul, and gaiety of a ~---.
polite court, flie still ondly iiinered in France, tlh fecne of all M:.,ry begins'
these enjoyments, and contcm!platd with horror the barbari fin of it CP;tC ors
her own country, and tle turbueince of her li!ljccs, which pre-
sented her with a ve'y disere nt !-tce of thlilg. ITle impatience,
however, of her people, the pcrlllafiois of her uncles, but above
all, the tudiedl and mortifying ncle wsith llicll fle wvas treated
by the queen mother, forced her to think of begilnnll this dif-
agreeal)le voyage But lwhile ilhe was

' rclarnn o ibr it, there

were fovn between her and ]Elizabeth tlec tCeds oi that pcrlbnal
jealouly an(l dilcord, whlich cmbittered tlc life and h{lortencd the
days of the Scottilh oquccn.

TIE ratiication of the late treaty) of Edilurghl was the ni- o ;.,, oi-,he

mediate occasion of this fatal animiolityl; the true cauf s of ii lay dif^,,d be-
much deeper. Almoift every article in that treaty had been cxc- a"ld EliZa-

beth.

cuted by both parties wkitl a icltirullous exacllls. The fbrtifi-
cations of Leith were demolified, and the armies of France and
England withdrawn wit hin tlhe appointed time. The grieivances
of the Scottish malccontints were rc'(lrcleJ, and they had obtained
whatever tlicy could dmcnandi for their fiuture l urity. \Vith 1regard
to all tlielb, Mary could have little rcafon to dcclinc, or Elizabeth
to urge, the ratification of the treaty.

T-lE sixth article remained the only source of conteit and dif-

ficulty. No miniifler ever entered more deeply into the Ifhlencs
of his fovcreign, or pursued them with iore dexterity and fliccefS,
than Cecil. In the conlduc of the negociationI at Edinburgi the

'" Brantome, Jcbb, vol. ii. ,I82.

F f 2 lnli

B' o o K found understanding of this able politician had proved greatly an

iII. li---. overmatch for Monluc's refinements in intrigue, and had artfully
1561. induced the French ambaiaadors, not only to acknowledge that

the crowns of England and Ireland did of right belong to Eli-
zabeth alone, but albo to promise, that in all times to come MIary
ihould abstain from using the titles, or bearing the arms, of those
kingdoms.

TInE ratification of this article would have been of the most

fatal consequence to Mary. The crown of England was an objea
worthy of her ambition. Her pretensions to it gave her great
dignity and importance in the eyes of all Europe. By many,
her title was esteemed preferable to that of Elizabeth. Among
the English themfelvcs, the Roman catholics, who formed at that
time a numerous and active party, openly cfpoufed this opinion;
and even the proteflants, who fuppiorted Elizabeth's throne, could
not deny the queen of Scots to be her immediate heir. A proper
opportunity to avail hericlf of all these advantages could not,
in the course of tliings, be far difltant, and many incidents might
fall in, to bring this opportunity nearer than was expedted. In
these circumftanccs Mary, by ratifying the article in diiputc, would
have loft that rank which flhe had hitherto held among neighbour-
ing princes; the zeal of her adherents muil have gradually cooled;
and fie might have renounced, from that moment, all hopes of
ever wearing the Englifl crown.

NONE of these beneficial confcquences escaped the penetrating

eye of Elizabeth, who, for this realon, had recourse to every thing
by which file could hope either to sooth or frighten the Scottifi

" Haynes, 373, &c.

queen

queen into a compliance with her demands; and if that princess B 0 O I

1i.

had been to unadvised as to ratify the rash concefflons of her am- ,
bafFadors, Elizabeth, by that deed, would have acquired an ad- i561.
vantage, which, under her management, mLiuft have turned to
great account. By ifch a renunciation, the quefrion with regard
to the right of fuccefion would have been left altogether open
and undecided ; and, by means of tlat, Elizabeth mi ght cither
have kept her rival in perpetual anxiety and dependell ce, or, by
the authority of her parliament, the might have broken in upon
the order of lineal isucceiion, and transferred the crown to some
other descendant of the royal blood. The former conducL fle ob-
iervcd towards James VI. whom, during his whole reign, ihe
held in perpetual fear and ifubjeaion. h'lie latter and mnore
rigorous mnetliod of proceeding would, in all probability, have
been employed againlt RMary, lwhom, for many realons, lhe both
elvied and hated.

NoR was this fltp beyond her power, unprecedented in the

iiftory, or inconfifent wititl the conflintion, of nglalnd. Though
fucceflion by hereditary right be an idea io natural and bs popular,
that it has been cftlabliflced in almoi;: every civilized nation, yet
England affords many memorable inllances of deviations from
that rule. The crown of that kingdom lhaving once been fleied by
the hand of a conqueror, this invited the bold and ilnterprifilig in
every age to imitate such an illustrious example of fortunate am-
bition. From the time of William tlie Norman, the regular
course of dcfccnt had seldom continued through three fuccelsive
reigns. Those princes, whole intrigues or valour opened to them
a way to the throne, called in tlhe authority of tle great council
of the nation to confirm their dubious titles. Hence parliamentary
and hereditary right became in England of equal confidcration.

That

B 0 0 KT That great aflTebly claimed and atually pofleflcd a power of
i_--. --- altering thle order of regal fucceflion; and even so late as

15 Henry VIII. an aa of parliament had authorircd that capricious

monarch to fettle the order of fucceflion at his picafure. The
Englifi, jealous of their religious liberty, and averse fiom the
dominion of strangers, would have eagerly adopted the paflions of
their sovereign, and might have been cafily induced to exclude
the Sccttifli line from the right of licceeding to the crown. These
seem to have been the views of both queens, and these were the
difficultics which retarded the ratification of the treaty of Edin-
burgh.

I3uT, if tle sources of their discord were to be traced no higher

tihan this treaty, an inconsiderable alteration in the words of it
might have brought the present quetlion to an amicable iiTle.
The irdefinite and atnbiguous exprlcfion which Cecil h]ad inserted
into the treaty, might have been changed into one more limited
but more precisee; and AMIary, inflead of promising to abstain from
bcaring the title of QLecn of England in all times to come, might
have lengaged, not to afnume that title during the life of Elizabeth,
or the lives of her lawful pofcrity .

Sucii

'lhis expedient for termin:tinlg the difl-rcntcc betvccn Elizabeth and Mlary

was so obvious, that it could not fail of presenting itself to the view cf the Enlifll
minfiters. " There hath been a ma.ttr fccrctly thought of (fays Cecil in a letter to
Throkmorton, July 14, 1561), which I dare communicate to you, although I
mcan never tobcean author thereof; and that is, if an accord might be made betwixt
our miflirefs and the Scottish queen, that this should by pailiament.in Scotland, &c.
iurrendcr unto the quccn's n:ajeity a'l matter cf claim, and unto the licirs of her
body; and in consideration thereof, the Scottifi queen's intcict ihouuld be ac-
lnowledged ill default of heirs ofthe body of the queen's majeily. \Vcl God fend
ourmiflrcfs a husband, and by time a ion, that we may hope cur pofierity hiall
have a masculine fucceflion. This matter is too big for weak folks, and too deep
for fiiple. The queen's majesty knoweth of it." I-Iardw. State Pap. i. 174.

But

SucII an amendment, however, did not suit the views of BOO

]II.

either queen. Though i\lary had bleen obliged to iiifpend for ----
iome time t he profccution of her title to the Englilh crown, flte
had not however relinquiihel it. Sihe detcrmilned to revive her
claim on the fi-ll profpecL of ficccfs, and was unwilling to bind
herself, by a pofitivc engagenccnt, not to take advantage of any
such fortunate occurrence. Nor would tlec alteration have been
more acceptable to Elizabeth, vhc, by agreeing- to it, would have
tacitly recognised the right of her rival to acentd the throne after
her deceale. But neither the Scottili nor Englifi queen durnf
avow these fccrct sentiments of their hearts. Any open dilcovevy
of an inclination to disturb tice tranquillity of England, or to wrl'e
the sceptre out of Elizabeth's hands, might have proved fatal to
NMary. Any fiufpicion of a dcfign to alter the order of tfcccfflon,
and to set aside the claim of the Scotifli queen,, would have cx-
poscd Elizabeth to much and deserved censure, and have raised iup
againfl her many and dangerous cnemies, Thelf, however care-
fully concealed or artfully dislguiicd, were, in all probablility, tlhe
real motives which determined thle one queen to solicit, and
the other to refuse, the ratification of the treaty in its original
form; while neither had recourlf to that cxlplication of it, which
to an heart unwarpcd by political intercfl, and iimccrely dclfirous
of union and concord, would have app!ared io obvious and
natural.

But with regard to every point relating to the fucceflion, Elizabeth was to jea-
lous, and lb apt to take ofiene, that hcr molt confidential mniniiers durfl not
urge her to advianc one o tle p fLL)Cartr th.lan flc hcr'lt chorl to go. Cecil,
mIcnt]i9lnilii f ime lle ih e about tlic fuicc'lio ii i the tlccl n fihould not niarry or
leave iltc, adds, with his ufiA.! cauti.al: '" 'fij l ag ihath manily parts; but,
for my part, I have no skill but in plain fonr." Ibid. 178.

BUT
B u -r

B O O K 'BUT though considerations of interest sirs: occasioned this rup-

Ill.
. ~-- ture between the Britifhl quecns, rivalfliip of another kind contri-

butcd to widenl the breach, and female jcaloufy increased the vio-
lence of their political hatred. Elizabeth, with all those extraor-
dinary qualities by which she equalled or furpanficd such of her sex
as have merited the greatef renown, discovercd an admiration of
her own person, to a degree which women of ordinary under-
flandings either do not entertain, or prudently endeavour to conceal.
I-Icr attention to dress, her solicitude to display her charms, her love
of flattery, wvcrc all exceflixe. Nor were the weaknesses con-
fined to that lpriod of life wheni they are more pardonable. Even
ill very advanced years, the wvile;: women of that, or perhaps of
any other age, wore the garb, and affc&ed the manners, of a girl'.
Though E lizabeth was as much inferior to Miary in beauty and
graccfulllnes of pelrfon, as ile excelled her in political abilities and
in the arts of government, flie was weak enough to compare her-
self with the Scottifl queen "; and as it was impoflible file could
be altogether ignorant how much Mary gained by the comparifonr

ihe envied and hated her as a rival by whom nie was eclipsed. In
judging of the conducl of princes, we are apt to ascribe too much
to political motives, and too little to the pailions which they feel
in common with the reft of mankind. In order to account for
Elizabeth's present, as well as her iubfcquent condu& towards
.Iary, we mullf not always confider her as a queen,.we must some.-
times regard her merely as a woman.

ELIZABETII, though no stranger to Mary's difficulties with re-
speCt to the treaty, continued to urge her, by repeated applications,

P Johniton Hill. Rer. Britan. 346, 347. Carte, vol. iii. 699. Catalogue of
Royal and Noble Authors, article Eje.x. q Melvil, 98.

to

to ratify it'. Mary, under various pretences, still contrived to B (o I0

ill.

gain time, and to elude the request. But while the one queen v-~.
solicited with persevering importunity, and the other evaded with 56'
artful delay, they both fludied an cxtrcme politencfs of behaviour,
and loaded each other with profcfsions of filterly love, with reci-
procal declarations of unchangeable efleem and amity.

IT was not long before Mary was convinced, that among princes Elizabeth re

fures Mary a

these exprefflons of friendihip are commonly far distant from the ~fre-condut.
heart. In failing from France to Scotland, the courie lies along
the Englifl coast. In older to be safe from the insults of the
Englili fleet, or, in cafe of telnpeftuous weather, to secure a re-
treat in the harbours of that kingdom, Mary sent M. D'Oyfel to
demand of Elizabeth a fafe-conduCt during her voyage. This
request, which decency alone obliged one prince to grant to
another, Elizabeth rejected, in such a manner as gave rife to no
flight suspicion of a design, either to obfftru the passage, or to
intercept the person, of the Scottifl queen '.

MARY, in a long conference with Throkmorton, the English

ambassador in France, explained her sentiments concerning this
ungenerous behaviour of his mistress, in a strain of dignified ex-
postulation, which conveys an idea of her abilities, address, and
spirit, as advantageous as any transaCtion in her reign. M\iary
was at that time only in her eighteenth year; and as Throk-
morton's account of what passed in his interview with her, is ad-
dressed directly to Elizabeth , that dexterous courtier, we may
be well assured, did not embellifli the discourse of the Scottifi
queen with any colouring too favourable.

· Keith, I57. 6o, &c. Keith, 171. Camden. See Appendix, No. V1,
' Cabbala, p. 374. Keith, X70, &c.
VOL. 1. G g \WHATEVER

E O O K WIIATEVER rcfentment Mary might feel, it did not retard her

i1l.

_-.-_, departure from France. She was accompanied to Calais, the
MAar'y begins place where she embarked, in a manner suitable to her dignity,
er voyage, as the queen of two powerful kingdoms. Six princes of Lorrain

her uncles, with many of the most eminent among the French
nobles, were in her retinue. Catherine, who secretly rejoiced at
her departure, graced it with every circumstance of magnificence
and rcfpca. After bidding adieu to her mourning attendants,
vith a fad heart, and eyes bathed in tears, Mary left that king-
dom, the flhort but only fcenc of her life in which fortune fililed
upon her. While the French coast continued in fight, she in-
tently gazed upon it, and muting, in a thoughtful posture, on that
height of fortune whence fie had fallen, and preflging, perhaps,
the disasters and calamities which embittered the remainder of her
days, flie sighed often, and cried out, " Farewel France! Farewel
" beloved country, which I shall never more behold !" Even
when the darkness of the night had hid the land from her view,
she would neither retire to the cabin, nor taste food, but com-
manding a couch to be placed on the deck, she there waited the
return of day with the utmost impatience. Fortune soothed her
on this occasion ; the galley made little way during the night. In
the morning, the coast of France was frill within fight, and she
continued to feed her melancholy with the profpcct; and as long
as her eyes could difliingutil it, to utter the fame tender exprefflons
of regret U. At last a brifi gale arole, by the favour of which for
some days, and afterwards under the cover of a thick fog, Mary
cfcaped the English fleet, which lay in wait to intercept her ; and

on

Brantome, 483. HIe hirnfelf was in the fame galley with the queen.

X Goodall, vol. i. . . Camden insinuates, rather than affirms, that it was

the object of the Englith fleet to intercept Mary. This, however, ifems to be
doubtful. Eliabeth politively aflcrts, that at the request of the king of Spain she

had

on the nineteenth of Auguflf, after an absence of near thirteen B o o K
ycars, landed safely at Leith in her native kingdom.

1561.

Arrives in

I\/liA was rcceived by her fubjc&s with fllouts and acclamations Scotlard.

of joy, and witl every demoniflration of welcome and regard.
1But as her arrival was unexpelctd, and no suitable preparation
had been made for it, they could not, with all their cfforts, hide
from t

her the poverty of tlhe country, and were obliged to con-

duc her to the palace of IHolyrood-houfc with little pomp. The
queen, accuitomed from her infancy to fiplendour and magnii-
cencc, and fond of thenm, as was natural at her age, could not
help obfcrving the change in her situation, and ifecmed to be deeply
affegted with it '.

N.vER did any prince ascend the throne at a junQiure which Statcoftlic

called for more wiidom in council, or more courage and lceadinefs tiat tiime.
in acltion. The rage of religious controversy was flill unabtccd.
The memory of past opprcilion cxalierated the protellants ; the
smart of recent injuries rendered the papifs deiperatc; I)otlh were
zealous, fierce, anld i-rcconcilable. The absence of their fovc-
rcign hadl accuflomcd the nobles to independence; and during the
late commotions, they had acqtlired such an incrcafc of wcalti,
by the lfpoils of the church, as threw great weight into the scale

had fitted out a few ilips of slender force, in order to clear the narrow fc;.a of
pirates, which infected them; and she appeals for the truth of this to Mary's cnvi
niiniiters. App. No. VI..p. 403. Cecil, in a letter to Throkmorton, 1Aug. 26,
1561, informs him, that " the queen's ships, which were upon the seas to cleanse
them of pirates, saw her [ i.e. MaryJ and saluted her galleys, and flaying her llips,
examined them of pirates, and difmifled them gently. One Scottish ship they detain
as vehemently fuflec'ted of piracy." Hard. State Papers, i. 176. Calteln:u, who
accompanied IMary in this voyage, confirms the circumstance of her galleys bcini in
fight of the English fleet. Mern. ap. Jebb, xi. 4-55.

Y Brant. 484.

Gg 2 of

B 0 o K of the aristocracy, which stood not in need of any accession of
-_ ---J power. The kingdom had long been under the government of

regents, who exercised a delegated juridiclion, attended with
little authority, and which inspired no reverence. A state of pure
anarchy had prevailed for the two last years, without a regent,
without a supreme council, without the power, or even the form,
of a regular government Z. A licentious spirit, unacquainted with
subordination, and disdaining the refiraints of law and justice, had
spread among all ranks of men. The influence of France, the
ancient ally of the kingdom, was withdrawn or despised. The
English, of enemies become confederates, had grown into confi-
dence with the nation, and had gained an ascendant over all its
councils. The Scottish monarchs did not derive more splendour
or power from the friendship of the former, than they had reason
to dread injury and diminution from the interposition of the
latter. Every consideration, whether of interest or of felf-prefer-
vation, obliged Elizabeth to depress the royal authority in Scot-
land, and to create the prince perpetual difficulties, by fomenting
the spirit of diffatisfation among the people.

IN this posture were the affairs of Scotland, when the admini-

firation fell into the hands of a young queen, not nineteen years
of age, unacquainted with the manners and laws of her country,
a firanger to her fubjess, without experience, without allies, and
almflt without a friend.

ON the other hand, in Mary's situation we find some circum-

flances, which, though they did not balance these difadvantagcs,
contributed however to alleviate them; and, with skilful manage-

Keith, Appendix 92.

ment9

ment, might have produced great effeets. Her fuLjects, unac- B O O K
cufomccnd oi long to the residence of their prince, were not only -
dazzled by the novelty and splendour of the royal presence, but
inspircd with awe and reverence. Besides tle places of power
and profit beltowed by the favour of a prince, his protection,
his familiarity, and even his smiles, confer honour and win the
hearts of men. From all corners of the kingdom, the nobles
crowded to testify their duty and affedion to their fovcreign, and
studied by every art to wipe out the memory of pafi milcon-
duc&, and to lay in a stock of future merit. The anmulcmcntsand
gaiety of her court, whicl was filled with the molt accomplilhcd
of the French nobility, who had attended her, began to ioften and
to polinl the rude manners of the nation. Mary herself poflfTeed
many of those qualifcatios icctio raifc affetion and procure
esteem. The beauty and gracefilncis of her person drew universal
admiration, the elegance and politeness of her manners com-
manded general respect. To all the charms of her own fcx, fle
added many of the accompliflhments of the other. The progrcfs
she had made in all the arts and sciences, which were then deemed
necessary or ornamental, was far beyond what is commonly at-
tained by princes; and all her other qualities were rendered more
agreeable by a courteous affability, which, without lefrening the
dignity of a prince, Reals on the hearts of fubjcts witl a be-
witching insinuation.

FROM these circumstances, notwithfIanding the threatening

afpe of affairs at Mary's return into Scotland, notwithstanding
the clouds which gathered on every hand, a political observer would'
have predicted a very different issue of her reign; and whatever'
sudden gults of fadcion he might have expeced, he would never

have:

B o 0 KI have drcaded the dcfh'uctive violence of that florin which foi-

Il.

_- ....._ lowed.
156r.

W\IIILE all parties were contending who should difcovcr the

mofl dutiful attachment to the queen, the zealous and impatient
ipirit of the age broke out in a remarkable inflance. On the Sun-
day after her arrival, the queen commanded mass to be celebrated
in the chapel of her palace. The lfrft rumour of this occasioned a
secret murmuring among the proteflants who attended the court;
complaints and threatcnings toon followed ; the servants belonging
to the chapel were infilted and abused ; and, if the prior of
St. Andrew's had not fcafonably interposecd, the rioters might have
proceeded to the utmofti cxcefcs '.

lr is iinpoflible, at this distance of time, and under circum-

sianccs so very dificrent, to conceive the violence of that zeal
againlft popery, which then pofltficfd the nation. Every inf;ance
of condelccnfiol to the papilrs was deemed an aC of apoflacy, and
the toleration of a iingle mass pronounced to be more formidable
to the nation than the invasion of ten thousand armed men b
Under the influence of thcfe opinions, many proterfants would
have ventured to go dangerous lengths; and, without attempting
to convince their sovereign by argument, or to reclaim her by
indulgence, would have abruptly denied her the liberty of wor-
shipping God in that manner which alone lhe thought acceptable
to him. But the prior of St. Andrew's, and other leaders of the
party, not only restrained this impetuous spirit, but, in spite of
the murmurs of the people and the exclamations of the preachers,
obtained for the queen and her domestics the undisturbed exercise

3 Knox, 284. Haincs, 372. b lnox, 287.
i7v ~I of

of the catholic religion. Near an hundred years after this period, B 0O K

1II.

when the violence of religious animositics had begun to fubfidc, _ .--
when time and the progress of learning had enlarged tle views of 16
the human mind, an Engliflil houc of commons refilfcd to indulge
the wife of their fovercign in the private use of the mass. The
proteflant leaders defcrvc, on this occasion, the praifc both of
vwifiomn and of moderation for colnduct lb difilelnt. But, at the
fane time, whoever rclleets upon the ncroaching and ilonguinary
spirit of popery in that age, will be far fiom treating thel fears and
caution of the more zealous reformers as altogether imaginariy and
deflitute of any real foundattion.

TIlE leaders of the proteflants, however, by this prudent com-

pliance with the prejudices of their fovcrcign, obtained from hler
a proclamation highly favourable to their religion, which w-as
issued fix days after her arrival in Scotland. The reformed doclrinc, ,\ug. 2j.
though eflabliflhed over all the kinlgdom by the parliament, which
met in confequcnce of the treaty of pacification, had never re-
ceived the countenance or fancion of royal authority. In ordcr
to quiet the minds of tholc who had embraced that doclrine, and
to remove any dread of molcftation wliicli they might entertain,
Mary declared, " that until fhle should take final orders concerning
religion, with advice of parliament, any attempt to alter or Iubvert
the religion which she found universally praaifed in the realm,
lhould be deemed a capital crime c." Next year a fccond procla-
mation to the fame effcct was publishcd '.

TIlE queen, conformable to the plan which had been concerted She c, mploys

only prutelt-
in France, committed the adminifiration of affairs entirely to pro- -,its in the

artii niltr:.-
lion.
c Kcith, 504. ' Ibid. 510.

tcl ants.

B 0 0 K teflants. I-Ier council was filled with the most eminent persons of
-~--- .-- that party; not a single papist was admitted into any degree of

' confidence . The prior of St. Andrew's and Maitland of Le-

thington feerned to hold the firfl place in the queen's affection, and
poSfefied all the power and reputation of favourite ministers. e-cr
choice could not have fallen upon persons more acceptable to her
people; and, by their prudent advice, Mary conduced herself
with so much moderation, and deference to the sentiments of the
nation, as could not fail of gaining the affetion of her lfubje& ss,
the firmest foundation of a prince's power, and the only genuine
source of his lhappinefs and glory.

Attempts to A CORDIAL reconcilement with Elizabeth was another objec
gain l'liza-
becih'favour. of great importance to Mary; and though she seems to have had

it much at heart, in the beginning of her adminifriation, to ac-
complifh such a desirable conjuncion, yet many events occurred
to widen, rather than to clofc, the breach. The formal offices of
friendflip, however, are seldom neglected among princes; and
Elizabeth, who had attempted so openly to obftrud the queen's
voyage into Scotland, did not fail, a few days after her arrival, to
command Randolph to congratulate her safe return. Mary, that
she might be on equal terms with her, sent Maitland to the Eng-
lifh court, with many ceremonious expressions of regard for Eli-
zabeth 6. Both the ambafladors were received with the utmofl
civility; and on each fide the professions of kindness, as they
were made with little sincerity, were listened to with proportional
credit.

BOTH were intrusted, however, with something more than
mere matter of ceremony. Randolph urged Mary, with frefl

Knox, 285. ' Lefly, 235. s Keith, x81, &c.

impor-

rimportunlit'-, to ratify the treaty of Edhdinburgh. I.laitland clidca- B ( ) KT
voured to anulllt Elizabeth, by apologizing for tlic dilatory coniduc -L --l
of his iniflrcls with regard to that point. Tlhe multiplicity oCl
public aflairs fincc her arrival in Scotland, the importance of the
question in difijutc,, and the abfencc of many noblemen, with
mwhom fle rwas obliged in decency to consult, were the pretencll
ofqirel in cxcufe for her conduCt;L tile real caulis of it were tholt
which hlave already been mentioned. But, in order to extricate
herself out of these difficulties, intn which the treaty of Edinburght
had led her, Mary was brought to yield a point, which formerly
flic teemed determined never to give up. Slic inlt-rucLcd Maitland
to iignify her willingncls to dilclaimn any righlt to the croiwn of
England, during the life of liz h, nd the lives of her poflc-
rity; if, in failure of thefec, sei were ldclarecd next heir by acl of
parliament ".

REA soNABLEs r as this propolal might appear to \iarx-, who

thereby precluded hcrfelf from dilituirbing Elizabcth's poflfllionl of
the throne, nothing- could be more inconfiftcnt with liz.lcablct's
intcrcef, or more contrad icory to a palliolln v.-icl predominated
in the character of that iUrinccls. Notwithstanding all the great
qualities which threw iuch lufLre on her reign, we may oblervc,
that flic was tincQurcd with a jealousy of licr right to the crown,
which often betrayed her into mcan and ungenerous actions. The
peculiarity of her situation heightened, no doubt, and increalld,
but did not infuse this pafion. It delcended to her froim Henry VIL
Iter grandfather, whom, in fvceral features of his charaCler, file
nearly relhmbled. Like lhim, fme sufFered the title by which flH
hecld tle crown to remain ambiguous and controverted, rather

Camden, 387. Buch. 329.
VOL. I. -I 1 t ian

B o11° l than tfulbuit it to parliamentary cdifcufion, or derive any addition to

IIl. I'----- her right from ifch aulhority. Like him, flie ofcr-ved cvery

prctentdcr to thle ifccefion, not only with that attention which
prudence prescribes, but with that aversion which fiuficion in-
spires. The present uncertainty with regard to the right of fuc-
ceflion operated for Elizabeth's advantage, both onr her ifuhjects
and on her rivals. Among the former, every lover of his country
regarded her life as the great fccurity of the national tranquillity;
and chose rather to acknowledge a title which was dubious, than
to search for one that was unknown. The latter, while nothing
was decided, rwere held in dcpendcnce, and cbliged to court her,
The manner in which flhe received this ill-timed propoflt! of the
Scottif qlueen, was no other than minght have been expccei,
She rejectdi it in a peremptory tone, wVitlh mlany eCprelions of
a resolution never to permit a point of lo mluch dclicacy to be
touched.
s'*p, T. A BOU'r thlis time tile queen ma'de her public entry into Ed in-

burgih vit l great pomp. Notling was neglecCtd, which could
c-xpre!s thAc duty and aflcclin of the citizens towards their bfoc-
reign. I3ut amiidl tlhefc (emonfratilons$0 of regard, the genius
and fentilcents of the nation dilfovcred themselves, in a circum-
{lancc, vllicll, though inconllderable, ought not to be overlooked,.
As it was the mode of the times to cxhibit imany pageants at every
ipbliic 1ulcmnity, mnont of thcf!, on thils occasion, wer-e contrivc'
to be rcprcfentations of the vengeance which the Almighty had
nfliced 'uponll idolaters '. IE.ven while they fudiccl to amuse andl
to flatter the oucen, her fiubjeC(s could not refr-ain from teRLifviin-
their abhorrence of that religion whlich she profcfefld.

i Keithl, ISo9.

To rciLore the regular admiiniriratiion of juRlicc, and to -reormll B 0O

Ii.

tlic internal policy of the country t, )becaCme the next objc& of tlic t__---
queen's care. The lavws enacled o pre Irv.!tion of public order,

pr1t.: I.,

and tlie fccurity of iprivate property, were nearly the li!me in L,,''
Scotland as in every other civilized country. ulnt the nature of
the Scottihl conlUitution, the fceblcnc;;s of rcgal authority, the
exorbitant power of the nobles, the violence of faClion, and the
fierce manners of tie Ipco!le, rendered tlic execution of tlhre
laws feel!c, irregular, and partial. In the counties whlich border
on Fngland, this delede was imoi: apparent ; and the 'onicteinces
of it most fenfiblly fclt. Tle inlabitants, ilrangers to induf[ry,
averlf firom labour, annd unacqcuaintcd with tlh arts of ieacc, sub-
fil:cd cliclly by If1oil and pillage, and, being COnledcrated iil septs
or clans, commlitted thelbe xcefics not only with ilnl!ilt , but
even with lhonour. 1During tle iunlltlcd a.te of the kiin'oli
fr-oi tlic death of James V. this dl cros licence lad gdrow to
an unusual height; and the inroads and raiine oftlicile flreebootrs
were become no lcls intolerable to their own counltrymcn than to
the Englinh. To refnrain and punli tlicc ou' rages, was an adclio
equally popular in both kingdoms. 'I'lic prior of St. Andrew's
was the person cliofen or this important ifeivic, and extraor-
(dinary powers, together with the titlc of thc queen's lieutclnant,
were veiled in him for this purpolc.

NOTHING can be more furprillng to Inen accuftoincd to rc-

cular government, than tlhe preparations made on tills occalion.
They were fuchl as might be explcted in tile ruIdef alld imoie
iilperfleC slate of focicty. Tlie freellolders of eleven several
counties, with all their followcrs completely armed, were flin-
l(oncd to anlib the lieutenant in the disCharge of hlis O'liic.
F'.-ery thing recenbled a mlilitary expedition, rather than the pro-

l~-~I h~l~
2 grcls

c 0 0 K -grefs of a court of jutice ':. The prior csecuted his commifflon
I_ ..v .with such vigour and prudence, as acquired him a great incrcafe

5"ij of reputation and popularity among his countrymen. Nuimbers

of the banditti fiffiered the punifhmcnt due to their crimes; and,
by the impartial and rigorous adminifIration of jufticc, order and
tranquillity were rcflored to that part of the kingdom.

The lpi(.lls DuRING the abfcnce of the prior of St. Andrew's, the lead(er
tain, Pto get of the popish faction Itlem to have taken some steps towards infiu--
into fvour ating thctmfclvcs into the queen's favour and confidence'. But

the arclibifhlop of St. Andrew's, the moll remarkable pcrfon in the
party for abilities and political addreis, was received with little
favour at court; and whatever fccret partiality the queen might
have towards thofc who profefed the fame religion with hcrfelf,
ilie dilcoverec no inclination at that time to take the admni-
niftration of afairs out of the hands to which fhec had already
committed it.

TIIE cold reception of the archbifliop of St. Andrew's was

owing to hlis conniclion with tlie hloufe of H-amilton ; from which.
the queen was much alienated. The duke of Guise and the car-
dinal could ncvcr forgive the zeal with which the duke of Cha-
telherault and his son the earl of Arran had cfpoufed the cause of
the Congregation. Princes fcldom view their fucceflbrs without
jealousy and distrust. The prior of St. Andrew's, perhaps, dreaded
the duke as a rival in power. All thelf caules concurred in
infusing into the queen's mind an aversion for that family. The
duke, indulging his love of retirement, lived at a diflance from
court, without taking pains to insinuate himself into favour ; and

" Ieitb, 198. ' Ibid. 203.

thougl

though the earl of Arran openly aspircd to marry the queen, lie, B 0C0 K
by a most unpardonable ad of imprudence, was the only noble ----
man of diftinlion who opposed l\Mary's enjoying tlhe cxcrcilc of x56;
her religion; and by rashly entering a public proteilation againlt
it, entirely forfeited her favour"'. At the fame time, the ordlid
parsimony of his father obliged him citlhr to hid( himniclf in some
retirement, or to appear in a manner unbecomiiig l:is dignity as
first prince of the blood, or his high pretensions as 'liitor to tlhe
queen". His love inflamed by dilhlppointment, and Iis iimpa-
tience exasperated by neglc&ct, preyed gradually on his reainn;
and, aftecr many extravagancies, broke out at laR in ungovernable
frenzy.

TOWARDS the end of the year, a convention of estates was Dec. .o.

held, chiefly on account of cccleliaflical aflirs. Thlle alnlmblv) of
the church, which fat at the fame time, prctlntede a petition, con-
taining many demands with reflpcc to tile fupprelling of popery,
the encouraging the protefant religion, and tle providing ilr the
maintenance of the clergy °. The lari was a matter of great im-
portance, and the fleps taken towards it deserve to be traced.

THI-OUGoI the number of protestant preachers was now confider- A nev rnc;-

] tioti con-

ably increaled, many more rwere 1ill wanted, in every corner of cerni,,g tic
the kingdom. No legal provision having been made for them, rthe'cn'urch
they had hitherto drawn a scanty and precarious fl)biiflence ifom
the benevolence of their people. To fiifier the ininillers of an
eftablillhed church to continue in this fatc of indigence and de-
pendence, was an indecency equally repugnant to the principles
of religion, and to the maxims of found policy ; and would have

Keith, 201. 204. Knox, 286. "Keith, I96. ° Ibid. 2io.

jultified

J. 0 0
c juftiicd all tlhe imputations of avarice with which the Rcformation

-- ----. was then loaded by its enemies. The revenues of the popilhi

church were tlie only fund which could be employed for their
relief; but during the three last years the Itate of these was greatly
altered. A great majority of abbots, priors, and other lieads of
religious hlouics, had, cihlcr from a sense of duty, or fr-om views
of interefi, renounced the errors of popery ; and, notwithitand-
ing tlis change in their fcntiments, they retained their ancient
revenues. Anioft thle whole order of bishops, and fevcral of the
other dignitaries, frill adhered to the Romifli fuperRition; and
though debarrcd from every spiritual function, continued to enjoy
the temporalities of their benefices. Some laymen, especially thole
whlo had been ac2cive in promoting the Reformation, had, under
various pretences, and amidftl.the licence of civil wars, got into
their hands pofiffions vwhich belonged to the church. Thus,
before any part of the ancient ecclefiaflical revenues could be
applicd towards tlie nmaitenance of the protcftant miniitcrs,
malny diflrcnt interccfs were to be adjuled l; many claims to
be examined ; and the p'r"judices and pailions of the two con-
tencling parties required the application of a delicate hand.
After much contention, the following plan was approved by a
majority of voices, and acquiciccd in ven by the popifli clergy
ticlnielves. An crxacA account of the value of ecclefia'tical bene-
sices throughout the kingdcln was appointed to be taken. The
present incumbents, to whatever party they adhered, were allowed
to keep pofilion: two-thirds of their whole revenue were re-
served for their own ule, the remainder was annexed to the crown;
and out of that, the queen undertook to assign a fuflicient main-
tcnancc for the proteflant clergy '.

P Keith, Append. 175. Knox, 19+.

Ats

As imoi: of the bishops and fevcrael of the other dignitarieis were B O O K

still firmly attached to the polpil religion, the cxtirplatiol of tlhe -----
whole order, rather than an adc of iuch cxtraolrdinty iidtullcgnce,
might have been expeed from the zeal of tlhe prcachers, and i' om
the spirit which had hitherto animated the nation. But, on this
occasion, other principles obfl-rulCcd the opcrations of lf;ch as were
purely religious. Zeal for liberty, and the love of vwealth, two
pallions extremely opposite, concurred in detlcriniling thel prio-
teftant leaders to fall in with this plan, which deviated l ma nai-
fefly from the maxims by ic they had hitherto regulated
their conldule.

It the relurimers had been allowed to a': wlithout controul, and

to level all dilicinfions in the church, tlhe iinineic r'Cevcnues an-
nexed to ccclcliaflical dignities could nlot, xv.illj anll c)lour
jullice, liave been retained by tllofe iln who:.: hI.1nd. tliey 'now
were ; but mu1f either liave been dillibultd anliOg:li the protCilant
clergy, who performed all religious olliccs, or ml uft lave fallen to
the queen, fioml thle bounlty oLf h-ol ancilo t!le

i C1-atIer par.

of tliem xvas originally derived. The iolllncr fcleimc, however
suitable to thec religious 11irit of 1anly among tlic peoplel, was :t-
tended with manitfld danger. The popili ecclclallics hlad ac-
quired a share in the national property, whlich far ,excc!ded the
proportion that vwas confillcnt -with tlhe happineis of the kingdorm;
and tile nobles were determined to guard againrf' tiis evil, by pre-
vcnting the retu-rn of tihofe vaL pofilii:ns into the hands of the
church. Nor was the latter, lwhichl c:poled tlc coillitulion to
more immllinent Ilaz/ard, to be avoidcd with lels care. Even that
circml'ciil)rid prerogative, which tli Scott'hlI kings Ipowlflcd, was
the objeCt of jealolfy to the nobles. If they had allowed the
crown to fcize the 1i)ils of the church, fucl i incrcai:f of power

9 mrius;

pB oIo I mutt have followed that acceflion of property, as would have

Ill.
e----- raiscd the royal authority above controul, and have rendered the

most limited prince in Europe the moPC abfolutc and independent.
The reign of IIenry VIII. prelcnted a recent and alarming ex-
ample of this nature. The wealth which flowed in upon that
prince, from the fupprefcion of the nmcnafleries, not only changed
the maxims of his government, but the temprc of his mind ; and
he who had formerly fuiimitted to his parliaments and courted
liis people, dictated from that time to the former with intolerable
infolcnicc, and tyrannized over the latter with unprecedented Ie-
verity. And if his policy had not bccen extremely short-sightcd,
if lie htad not squandered what he acquired, with a profusion
equal to his rapacioufncfs, and wlich defeated his ambition, he
night lave cflabliflcd defpotiii in England, on a basis so broad
a!ld firong, as all the efibrts of the subjects would never have been
able to lhakc. In Scotland, where the riches of the clergy bore
as great a proportion to the wealth of the kingdom, the acquisition
of church lands would have been of no lcfs importance to the
crown, and no lecs fatal to the aristocracy. The nobles, for this
r-cafon, guarded againfl such an incrcafe of the royal power, and
thereby iecurcd their ownl independence.

Av.ARICE mingled itself with their concern for the intercft cf

their order. The re-uniting the polsilions of the church to the
crown, or the bellowing them on the protcflant clergy, would
have been a fatal blow, both to those nobles who had, by fraud
or violence, seized part of these revenues, and to those abbots and
priors who had totally renounced their eccclcfiaPical claradcr.
But as the plan which was proposed gave some fanccion to their
usurpation, they promoted it with their utmost influence. Tlie
popifli ccclefiaflics, though the lopping off a third of their revenues

¥, P.s

was by no means agreeable to them, consented, under their present B o o r1
circumstances, to sacrifice a part of their poTfefflons, in order to -_-.-
purchase the secure enjoymcnt of tle remainder; and after deeml I6y.
ing the whole irrecoverably loft, they confidered whatever they
could retrieve as so much gain. Many of the ancient dignitaries
were men of noble birth ; and as they no longer entertained hopes
of restoring the popifli religion, they wifhled their own relations,
rather than the crown, or the protcelant clergy, to be enriched
with the spoils of the church. They connived, for this reason,
at the encroachments of the nobles; they even aided their avarice
and violence; they dealt out the patrimony of the church among
their own relations, and by granting fews and perpetual leafes of
lands and tithes, gave, to the utmost of their power, tome colour
of legal poffeflion to what was formerly mere usurpation. Many
vestiges of such alienations Rill remain '. The nobles, with the
concurrence of the incumbents, daily extended their encroach-
ments, and gradually stripped the ecclcfiaftics of their riclheft and
inoft valuable poffiefions. Even that third part, which was given
up in order to silence the clamours of the protestant clergy, and to
be some equivalent to the crown for its claims, amounted to no
considerable fum. The thirds clue by the more powerful nobles,
especially by such as had embraced the Reformation, were almost
universally remitted. Others, by producing fraudulent rentals;
by estimating the corn, and other payments in kind, at an under-
value; and by the connivance of collectors, greatly diminiflled
the charge against themselves r: and the nobles had much reason
to be satisfied with a device which, at so small expence, secured to
them such vast possesSions.

q Keith, 507. Spotfw. i75. ' Keith, Append. 188. Spotfw. 183.
VOL. I. 1 i Nor.

B 0 0 IK NOR were the protestant clergy confidcrable gainers by this new

Ill.

.-.---j regulation; they found it to be a more easy matter to kindle zeal,

1561.

The protet- than to cxtinguifhl avarice. Those very men, whom formerly
ant clergy no
g iners by it. they had twayecd ith ablolute authority, were now deaf to all

their remonifrances. The prior of St. Andrew's, the earl of Argyll,
the earl of Mlorton, and Maitland, all the most zealous leaders
of the Congregation, were appointed to assign, or, as it was
called, to 1doj/;3, their flipends. An hundred merks Scottiflh was
the allowance which their liberality afforded to the generality
of ministers. To a few three hundred merks were granted'.
About twenty-four thousand pounds Scottiih appears to have
been the whole fuln allotted for the maintenance of a national
church cflablifled by law, and cftcemcd throughout the kingdom
the true church of God '. Even this fum was paid with little exa&c-
ncfs, and the minifcrs vwere kept in the iame poverty and depend-
ence as formerly.

1562. Tnl gentleness of the queen's administration, and the elegance

Dissensions
among the of her court, had mitigated, in some degree, the ferocity of the

nobles, and accustomed them to greater mildneis and humanity;
while, at the faime time, her pretence and authority were a check
to their fadious and tumultuary spirit. But, as a state of order
and tranquillity was not natural to the feudal ariflocracy, it could
not be of long continuance; and this year became remarkable
for the most violent eruptions of intefline dilcord and animofityr

AMONG the great and independent nobility of Scotland, a mo-

narch could poffcfs little authority, and cxercife no extensive or
rigorous juriliion. The interfering of interest, the unsettled
7 I'- Knox, 301, t Keith, Append. 188.

4 rfate

fiate of property, the frcquency of public commnotions, and the 3 O K
licrcenclis of their own manners, sowed among the great families .-----
the feels of many quarrels and contentions. These, as we have
aliready obfcrved, were ifrequcntly decided not by law, but by.
violcicc. The oflcndcdl baron, without having rccourfe to the
moniaclh, or acLnowledgin - his fupcrior authority, aiflmbled his
ownr fullouwers, and invaded the lands of his rival in an hofile
manner. Together with his elate and honours, cvc;--y nobleman.
tranfimittecd imoe hereditary feud to his posterity, who were bound
in honour to adopt and to procfcute it with the amte inveterate
rancour.

SuceI a difenfion had ilfbfifed between tle house of Hamilton

and the carl of Bothwell, and was heightened by mutual injuries
during the late commotions ". The earl of Arran and Botliwell
happening to attend the court at tlhe Iame time, their followers
quarrelled frequently in the firects of Edinburgh, and excited
dangerous tumults in that city. At lafl, the mediation of their February,
friends, particularly of Knox, brought about a reconcilement, but
an unfortunate one to both thefc noblemen x.

A rFE days after, Arran came to Knox, n, and, witl thle tmoi

terror and confulion, confeiTed firfl to himn, and then to the prior
of St. Andrew's, that, in order to obtain the sole direition of
affairs, Bothwell, and his kinfinen the H-Iamiltons, had conspired
to murder the prior, Maitland, and the other favourites of the
queen. The duke of Chatelhcrault regarded the prior as a rival,
who hlad supplanted him in the queen's favour, and who filled
that place at the helm, which he imagined to be due to himfclf,
as first prince of the blood. Bothwell, on account of the personal

Kcith, 215. i Knox, 305.

I i 2 injuries

B OoI K injuries which he had received from the prior during the late

-----' commotions, was no less exasperated against him. But whether
i56z.

he and the Hamiltons had agreed to cement their new al-
liance with the blood of their common enemy, or whether the
conspiracy existed only in the frantic and disordercd imagination
of the earl of Arran, it is impossible, amidst the contradiction of
hiiforians and the defedivenefs of records, positively to de-
termine. Among men inflamed with resentment and impatient
for revenge, rash expreimions might be uttered, and violent and
criminal expedients proposed; and on that foundation, Arran's
diftempcred fancy might rear the whole superstruCture of a
conspiracy. All the persons accused, denied their guilt with
the utmost confidence. But the known characters of the men,
and the violent spirit of the age, added greatly to the probability
of the accusation, and abundantly justify the conduc of the
queen's ministers, who confined Bothwell, Arran, and a few
of the ringleaders in separate prisons, and obliged the duke to
surrender the strong castle of Dumbarton, which he had held ever
since the time of his resigning the office of regent Y.

The earl of THE designs of the earl of Huntly against the prior of St. An-
Hluntly's en-
mity to the drew s were deeper laid, and produced more memorable and more

cier. 5 tragical events. George Gordon earl of Huntly, having been

one of the nobles who conspired againit James III. and who raised
his son James IV. to the throne, enjoyed a great share in the
confidence of that generous prince Z. By his bounty, great ac-
cessions of wealth and power were added to a family already opu-
lent and powerful. On the death of that monarch, Alexander
the next earl, being appointed lord lieutenant of all the counties

/
r Knox, 307, 308. Crawf. Officers of State, 56.

beyond

beyond Forth, left the other nobles to contend for offices at coirf t;,
and retiring to the north, ,where his eslate and influncce lay, re-
fided there in a kind of princely independence. The chieftains in
that part of the kingdom dreaded the growing dominion of fucli
a dangerous neighbour, but were unable to prevent his encroach-
ments. Somc of his rivals he secretly undermined, others he
subducd by open force. H-is eflate far exceeded that of any other
subject, and hisJfiS'rioriticss and juritliLions extended over many
of the northern counties. \With 1power and pofReffions so iimmenlfe,
under two long and feeble minorities, and amidfl: the shock of
civil commotions, the carls of I-Iuntly might have indulged the
molt elevated hopes. But happily for the crown, an a&live and
enterprising spirit was not the charatceriftic of that family, and
whatever object their ambition might have in view~, they chose
rather to acquire it by political address, than to lcizc it openly,
and by force of arms.

THE- conduct of George the present earl, during the late conm-

motions, had been perfectly fultable to the characer of the family
in that age, dubious, variable, and crafty. While the success of
the lords of the Congregation was uncertain, he aitif-ed the queen
regent in her attempts to crush them. When their affairs put on
a- better aspeQ, he pretended to join them, but never heartily fa-
voured their cause. He was courted and feared by each of the
contending parties; both connived at his encroachments in the
north; and, by artifice and force, which lie well knew how to
employ alternately, and in their proper places, he added every day
to the exorbitant power and wealth which he poffefled.

I-IE observed the growing reputation and authority of the prior
of St. Andrew's with the greatest jealousy and concern, and con-

fidered

Il 0o IK fiderlcd him as a rival who had cngrofced that flare in the queen's

...---. confidence, to which his own zeal for the popilll religion seemed
i62. to give him a preferable title. Personal injuries toon increased

the mifunderflanding occasioned by rivalihip in povwer. The
queen having determined to reward the services of the prior of
St. Andrew's, by creating him an carl, flie made choice of Mar,
as the place whence he flould take his title; and, that he might
Feb. I. be better able to support his new honour, bestowed upon him at

the fame time the lands of that name. These were part of the
royal demefines ', but the earls of I-Iuntly had been permitted, for
fcveral years, to keep poifeffion of them '. On this occasion the
carl not only complained, with tonme reason, of the loss which
he fusained, but had real'caufe to be alarmed at the intrusion of
a formidable neighbour into the heart of his territories, who might
be able to rival his power, and excite his oppressed vaflals to shake
off his yoke.
June 27. AN incident, which happened soon after, increased and con-

firmed I-luntly's suspicions. Sir John Gordon, his third son, and
lord Ogilvic, had a dispute about the property of an cftate. This
difputc becamea deadly quarrel. They happened unfortunately to
meet in the fireets of Edinburgh, and being both attended with armed
followers, a scuffle ensued, in which lord Ogilvie was dangerously
wounded by Sir John. The magistrates seized both the offenders,
and the queen commanded them to be ftritly confined. Under
any regular government, such a breach of public peace and order
would expose the person offending to certain punifliment. At this
time some severity was necessary, in order to vindicate the queen's
authority from an insult, the most heinous which had been offered

Crawf. Peer. 297. b Buch. 334.

to

to it since her return into Scotland. But, in an age accuflomcd E 3 ° IK
to licence and anarchy, even this moderate exercise of her power, '----
in ordering them to be kept in custody, was deemed an ace of 56
intolerable rigour; and the friends of each party began to convene
their valfals and dependants, in order to overawe, or to friufrate,
the decisions ofjuftice '. Meanwhile Gordon made his escape out
of prilbn, and flying into Abcrdeenihire, complained loudly of the
indignity wvith which he had been treated; and as all the queen','s
ations were, at this jun&turc, imputed to the carl (cf Miar, this'
added not a little to the rcfcitment which I-Iuntly had conceived
against that nobleman.

AT the very time when there panfions fermented, with the utmost Auguti

violence, in the minds of the earl of I-Huntly and his family, the
queen happened to set out on a progrclf into the northern parts
of the kingdom. She was attended by the carls of Mlar and
Morton, Maitland, and other leaders of that party. The precence
of the queen, in a country where no name greater than the carl
of Huntly's had been heard of, and no power superior to his
had been exercised, for many years, was an event of itself abun-
dantly mortifying to that haughty nobleman. But while the queen
was entirely under the (lirecion of Mar, all her adions were more
apt to be miifreprefented, and coni'rued into injuries; and a thou--
land circumftalnces could not but occur to awaken Huntly'sjea-
loulf, to offend his pride, and to inflame his reientlenlt..
Amidst the agitations of so many violent paflions, some eruption
was unavoidable.

ON Mary's arrival in the north, Huntly employed his wife, a
woman capable of executing the commiflion with abundance of

c Keith, 223.

dexterity,

B O 0 K dexterity, to sooth the queen, and to intercede for pardon to their
i_--.- ton. But the queen peremptorily required that he should again

16 deliver himself into tie hands of juilice, and rely on her cle-

mency. Gordon was persuaded to do so; and being enjoined by
the queen to enter himself prisoner in the castle of Stirling, he
promised likewise to obey that command. Lord Erskine, Mar's
uncle, was at that time governor of this fort. The queen's fe-
verity, and the place in which she appointed Gordon to be con-
fined, were interpreted to be new marks of Mar's rancour, and
augmented the hatred of the Gordons againit him.
Sept.*. MEANTIME, Sir John Gordon set out towards Stirling; but

instead of performing his promise to the queen, made his escape
from his guards, and returned to take the command of his followers,
who were rising in arms all over the north. These were destined
to second and improve the blow, by which his father proposed,
secretly and at once, to cut off Mar, Morton, and Maitland, his
principal advcrfaries. The time and place for perpetrating this horrid
deed were frequently appointed; but the executing of it was won-
derfully prevented, by some of those unforeseen accidents, which
so often occur to disconcert the schemes, and to intimidate the
hearts, of aflaffins d. Huntly's own house at Strathbogie was the
last and most convenient scene appointed for committing the in-
tended violence. But, on her journey thither, the queen heard of
young Gordon's fight and rebellion, and refuting, in the first
transports of her indignation, to enter under the father's roof, by
that fortunate expreflion of her resentment saved her ministers
from, unavoidable deftruetion .

d Keith, 230. Knox, 318.

TIIE

TUE ill fucccfs of these fflorts of private revenge precipitated B c) o

ill

I-Iuntly into open rebellion. As tile queen was cntirely under the ---.
direclion of his rivals, it was impofiible to compass their ruin, Tal,,,.e ama..
'without violatilng the allcgiance which he owed his fovercign. '.l"

qU C'qII.

On her arrival at Inivcrincl, the commanding onliccr in tle caflle,
by HIuntly's orders, fliut the gates against her. Mary was obliged
to lodge in the town, which was open and dcfencelcls ; but this
too was quickly flrrounded by a multitude of the earl's followers o.
The utmnolt conflternation seized the queen, who was attcnded by
a very slender train. She every momentt expeQced the approach
of the rebels, and tbnme flips were already ordered into the river
to secure her cfcape. The loyalty of tlie Monrocs, Frazers,
Tlacl;inLtofhes, and ibmei neighbouring clans, lwho took arms in
licr defence, aved lier fiom this danger. By tclr afliflance, lile
even forced tie caffle to iurrelldcr, and inflicted on the governoir
tlic punifliment which his iniolciece dcfcrvced.

Tiiis open a&t of difobedienee was the occasion of a measure

more galling to Hluntly than any the queen had hitherto taken.
Lord Erlfkine having pretendd(l a right to the earlldom of Mar,
Stewart rcfigned it in his favour; and at the fanm time Iniary con-
ferred upon him the title of earl of MI/Iurray, with the eilate an-
nexed to that dignity, which had been in the poltcilon of the carl
of H-untly since the year I54F8 . From this encroachment upon his
domains he concluded that his family was devoted to deltirucion;
and dreading to be flripped gradually of those poiisiTions which, il
reward of their services, the gratitude of the crown had be!lowed on
himself, or his anceflors, he no longer dilguifed his intentions, but,

fCrawf. O3iiccrs of State, 87, 88. - Crawf. Peer. 359.
VOL. L K k il

B 0 0 K in defiance of the queen's proclamation, openly took arms. Inflead

III.
_----. of yielding tlofe places of strength, which Mary required him to
5G62. surrender, his followers dispersed or cut in pieces the parties whichl

the dispatched to take pofIeflon of them '; and lie himself ad-
vancing with a considerable body of men towards Aberdeen, to
which place the queen was now returned, filled her finall court
with confRernation. Murray had only a handful of men in vwhom
he could confide . In order to form the appearance of an army,.
he was obliged to call in the affiflance of the neighbouring barons;.
but as met of thclfe either favoured Huntly's designs, or flood in
awe of his power, fromn them no cordial or effe.tual service could.
be expcccd.
Oatob. 28. 'WITII these troops, however, Murray, who could gain notliin.-

by delay, marched briskly towards the enemy. He found them
at Corrichic, pofled to great advantage; he commanded his
northern afTbciates infiantly to begin the attack; but on the firfl:
motion of the enemy, they treacherously turned their backs ; and
H-Iuntly's followers, throwing aside their spears. and breaking their
ranks, drew their lfvords, and ruiled forward to the pursuit. I:

lie is defeat- wlas then that In4urray gave proof, both of steady courage and cI
ed by the
c:-rlofMur- prtdent condut. I-Ie food immovable on a rising ground, with
T'aY' the finall but trufly body of his adherents, who prefcnting tliieb

spears to the enemy, received them with a determined resolution,.
which they little expecled. The Highland broad fsvord is not a
weapon fit to encounter the Scottifli spear. In every civil cotn-
motion, the fupeiorioty of the latter has been evident, and h1as
always decided the contelt-. On this occasion the irrcgu!Tr attack
of Huntly's troops was easily repulscd by MAurray's firm battalion.

'I Knox, 319. i KCith, 230.

B1efore

Before they recovered from the confusion occasioncd by this unl- 3B 0 o T
foreiecn rcfiftance, those who had begun the flight, willing to ----
regain tlleir credit with the vitorious party, fell upon them, and
completed the rout. I-untly himself, who was extremely corpu-
lent, was trodden to death in the pursuit. His soris, fir John
and Adam, were taken, and Murray returned in triumlph to Aber-
deen with his prisoners.

TIE trial of men taken in actual rebellion againfl their fovcreigbn

was extremely short. Three days after the battle, fir John Gor-
don was beheaded at Aberdeen. His brother Adam was pardoned
on account of his youth. Lord Gordon, who had been privy to
his father's designs, vwas fcized in the south, and upon trial found
guilty of treason ; but, through the queen's clemency, the punish-
ment was remitted. The first parliament proceeded againlnf this
great family with the utmoil rigour of law, and reduced their
power and fortune to the lowefli ebb .

As

k This conspiracy of the catl of Huntly is one of the most intricate andl myflcrioius

paflages in the Scottish hifiory. As it was a tranfai:ion purely domeffic, and in
which the English were little intereflcd, few original papers concerning it have
been found in Cecil's Collection, the great ftorchoiul of evidence and information
with regard to the affairs of this period.

Buchanan supposes Mary to have formed a design about this time of deftroyiing

Murray, and of employing the power of the earl of H-untly for this purpose. 13utl
his account of this whole tranifarion appears to be so void of truth, and even of pro-
bability, as to deserve no serious examination. At that time MIary wanted power,
and leems to have had no inclination to commit any adt of violence upon her
brother.

Two other hypothefcs have been advanced, in order to explain this matter; but
they appear to be equally removed from truth.

I. It cannot well be conceived, that the queen's journey to the north was a scheme

concerted by \Murray, in order to ruin the earl of Huntly. r. Huntly had resided
at court almost ever since the queen's return. Keith, 198. Append. 175, &c.

K k: . Th:i

I 0 0 K As the fall of the earl of H-untly is the moit important event of
IiI.

this year, it would have been improper to interrupt the narrative
i5 ó' by taking notice of lesSer tranfaQ ions, which may now be related

with equal propriety.

An interview IN the beginning of ifummer, Mary, who was desirous of en-
between Eli-
z: bch and tering into a more intimate correspondence and familiarity with
Mary propos- Elizabeth, employed Maitland to desire a personal interview with.

her, fomcewhere in the north of England. As this Eropofal could

This was the proper place in which to have seized him. To attack him in Aberdeen-
lhire, the feat of his power, and in the midfl of his vafials, was a projec equally
absurd and hazardous. 2. The queen was not accompanied with a body of troops,
capable ofattempting any thing against luntly by violence; her train was not more
numerous than was usual in times of greatcft tranquillity. Keith, 230. 3. There
remain two original letters with regard to this conspiracy, one from Rando!ph the
English resident, and another from Maitland, both directed to Cecil. They talk
of Huntly's mcafures as notoriously trcafonable. Randolph mrentions his repeated
attempts to afnliffnate Murray, &c. No hint is given of any previous resolution;
formed by IMary's miniftcrs, to ruin Huntly and his family. Ilad any such defigQ
ever existed, it was Randolph's duty to have discovered it; nor would Maitland
have laboured to conceal it from the English secretary. IKeith, 229. 232.

II. To fuppofu that- the carl of Huntly had laid any plan for-feizing the queen and

her ministers, seems to be no lets improbable. i. On the queen's arrival in the
north, he laboured, in good earnefr, to gain her favour, and to obtain a pardon
for his son. Knox, 318. 2. He met the queen, firfl at Aberdeen, and then at
Rothemay, whither he would not have ventured to cone, had he harboured aly
such treasonable resolution. Knox, 318. 3,. His conduct was irrcfolute and
wavering, like that of a man disconcerted by an unforeseen danger, not like one
executing a concerted plan. 4. The most considerable perlbns of his clan tlb-.
mitted to the queen, and found surety to obey her commands. Keith, 226. Had
the earl. bten previously determined to rife in arms against the queen, or to Icize
her miniflers, it is probable he would have imparted it to his principal followers,
nor would they have deserted himn in this manner.

For these reafors we have, on the one hand, vindicated the earl of AMurray

from any deliberate intention of ruining the family of Gordon ; nnd on the other
hand, we have imputed the violent conduct of the earl of Huntly to a sudden start-
of' relcntmlent, without charging hinl with any premeditated purpofc of rebcllion.

not.

not be rejeeted with decency, the time, the place, and the cir- B o0 KI
cumftances of the meeting, were inflantly agreed upon. But Eli- -
zabeth was prudent enough not to admit into her kingdom a
rival who outshon.e herlclf so far in beauty and gracefulness of
person ; and who excelled so eminently in all the arts of infinu-
ation and address. Under pretence of being confined to London,
by the attention which she was obliged to give to the civil wars
in IFrance, flhe put off the interview for that itafon ', and pre-
vented her subjects from feeing the Scottifli queen, the charms of
whose appearance and behaviour flhe. envied, and had foImc reason
to dread.

DURING this year, the aflcmbly of the cllhurch met twice. In June z.

lDccem. z5,

both these meetings were exhibited many complaints of the poverty
and.dependence of. the church ; and many Inurniur s agailnf the
negligence or. avarice of t.hofi who had been appointed to collct
and to distribute the finall fund, appropriated lor the maintenance
of preachers.'. A petition, craving redrcfs of their grievances,
was presented to the queen; but without any cftccI-. There was
no reason to expca that Mary would discover any forlwardnefs to
grant the rcquefts of such fipplicants. As her niinillcrs though
all mofl zealous protcflants, were themselves growing rich ol
the inheritance of the church, they were equally rcgardlefs of the
indigence and demands of their brethren.

MARY ladl now continued above two years in a hate of widow- ,r,.

hood. Her gentlc adminiirllation had lccured the hearts of her witorgcardn
fl bljets, who were impatient for her marriage, and wificd the t tht;j:qcen'k
crown to delcclll in the righlt line from their ancient monarchs.

c:.i;th, 716. " Knox, 311. 3?3.

She

' o o
0 She herlfclf was the most amiable woman of the age, and tli

IIJ.

.__._.., fame of her acconpiilnfimcnts, together with the favourable cir-
j5 3. cumlefancc of hcr having one kingdom already in her possession,

tund the proli)cEL of mounting the throne of another, prompted
many different princcs to solicit an alliance so illustrious. .Scot-
land, by its fitnation, threw so much weight and power into what-
ever scale it fell, that all Europe waited with solicitude for Mary's
detcrmination ; and no event in that age excited stronger political
fears and jealousies; none intcrefled more deeply the passions of
several princes, or gave rife to more contradictory intrigues, than
the marriage of the Scottifli queen.

She is solicit- TH-E princes of the house of Aufiria remembered what vail pro-
ed by diffkcr-
cnt princes. jees the French had founded on their former alliance with the

queen of Scots; and though the unexpected death, first of Henry
and then of Francis, had hindered these from taking efiecT, yet
if M/ary flould again make choice of a husband among the French
princes, the fame designs might be revived and prosecutcd with
better fuccefso

By the arch- IN order to prevent this, the emperor entered into a negociation
dukeCharles.

with the cardinal of Lorrain, who had proposed to marry the
Scottifhl queen to the archduke Charles, Ferdinand's third son.
The matter was communicated to Mary; and Mclvil, who at that
time attended the elector palatine, was commanded to inquire into
.lhe charadcer and situation of the archduke ".

vivd~n Ca~r- PSI.L-T I I. though no lcfs apprehensive of Mary's falling once
'os o. Spain.

o Spinmore ito the hands o France, envied his uncle Ferdinand the

' .' ... : 3. 65. Keith, 239. See Append. No, VII.

acquisition

acquisition of so important a prize; and as his own infaablce C °O ° K

iLi.

ambition grasped at all the kingdoms of Europe, lie employed his ~
ambafaclor at the French court, to solicit the princes of Lorrain in '
behalf of his son don Carlos, at that time the heir of all the cx-
tensive dominions which belonged to the Spanifn monarchy °.

CATIHERINTE of 'Mclicis, on tlle other hand, dreaded the mar- Ey tlIc aouk

riage of the Scottish queen with any of the Anulrian princes, which l- 1 Aou
would have added so much to the power and prctcnlions of that
ambitious race. Her jealousy of the princes of Lorrain rendered
her no les averse from an alliance which, by securing to them the
protetion of the emperor or king of Spain, would give ncew
boldness to their cnterpriing ii)irit, and enable themi to lct the
power of the crown, which they already rivalled, at open defiance
and as she was afraid that tllere fplcndidi proposals of the Auililain
family would da/zz.Il the young queen, fhle inflantly diipatchcd
Caftelnau into Scotland, to onlcr her in marriage the duke of An-
jou, the brother of her former hutfbsand, wlio soon after mlountecd
the throne of France ".

MARY attentively weighed the pretensions of so many rixval . ,.,' dcii.

The archduke had little to recommnend him, but his high birth. oc'e'nling
The example of Henry ViIl. was a warning againi'L contraCLing
a marriage with the brother of her former husband; nor could fih
bear the thoughts of appearing in France, in a rankl inirior to
that which -'ec had fo:merly held in that kingdom. Sle lilcened,
thereore, withi partiality to the Spanifi pIrolpoitio;:s, and the prco--
(iect of fitch vafit power and dominions tflattcred the ambition of a
young and aspiring princea.

C inc].j. 46 ;. Aliit. aL:tboulr. 0oi 50S ' CazlrInnaq, 41z.

C Tli sEE

I O OK T'I'IRE si el.vral circitiniances, however, concurred to diver.

HII.

- ---- lMary from any thoughts of a foreign alliance.
156j.

TiirE sirs of these was the murder of her uncle the duke of

Guise. The violence and ambition of that nobleman had in-
volved his country in a civil war; which was conducted with
furious animiofity and various success. At la-st tie duke laid
Ilege to Orleans, the bulwark of thle protestant cause; and he
had reduced tlat city to the last extremity, when he was
aflhffinated by the frantic zeal of Poltrot. This blow proved fatal
to the quecn of Scots. Tlhe young duke was a minor; and the
cardinal of Lorrain, though lubtle and intriguing, wanted that
undaunted and cnterpriinlg courage, which rendered the ambition
of hllis brother so formidable. Cathcrine, inilead of cncouraging
the ambition, or furthering the pretensions, of her daughter-in-law,
took pleailre in mortifying the one, and in dialppointing tile other.
In this fittation, and without fucli a protector, it became necefl'ry
for MIary to contract her views, and to proceed with caution; and

lwhatcver prospect of advantage might allure her, flie could ven-

ture upon no dangerous or doubtful measure.

Tla views of TIIE fccolnd circumnfance which weighed wnith Mary, was the
Elizabeth. opinion of the queen of England. The marriage of the Scottish

queen interciled Ilizabeth more deeply than any othcir prince;
a;nd flhe oblfervcd all her deliberations concerning i. with the nlofl
anxious attention. She herself leenls carly to have formed a rclb-
lution of living unmarried, and I.c dilcovered no small inclination
to impofc the faine law on the queen of Scots. She had alrcald
experienced what uie might be made of Mary's power and p;re-
tensions to invade Ier dominions, and to dil-urb her po)fciion of
te crowi. The t .deat: of 'rancis I*, had happily dei--cred hei

Ir-.;O'.I

from this danger, awhich fhle determined to guard against for the B o0 o K

11I.

future with the utmofi care. As the reftleis ambition of the _-_---
Austrian princes, tle avowed and bigoted patrons of the catholic 563
superstition, made her, in a particular manner, dread their neigh-
bourhood, she inflrul:ed Randolph to remonstrate, in the strongest
terms, against any alliance with them; and to acquaint Mary,
that as flc herlelf would confider such a match to be a breach of
the personal friendfuip, in which they were so happily united;
so the EngliflT nation would regard it as the dissolution of that
confederacy which now subsisted between the two kingdoms:
that, in order to preserve their own religion and liberties, they
would, in all probability, take obme ftep prejudicial to her right of
succession, which, as ihe well knew, they neither wanted power
nor pretences to invalidate and set aside. This threatening was
accompanied with a promise, but exprefed in very ambiguous
terms, that if Mary's choice of a husband should prove agreeable
to the Englifl nation, Elizabeth would appoint proper persons to
examine her title to the succession, and, if well founded, com-
mand it to be publicly recognised. She observed, however, a
mysterious silence concerning the person on whom The wiflcd
the choice of the Scottifl queen to fall. The revealing of this
secret was reserved for lome future ncgociation. Meanwhile
flle threw out fomne obscure hints, that a native of Britain, or
one not of princely rank, would be her safest and imoft inof-
fenfive choice '. An advice offered with such an air of superiority
and command mortified, no doubt, the pride of the Scottifl
queen. But, under her present circumstances, she was obliged
to bear this indignity. Destitute of all foreign assistance, and intent
Npon the English Iucceffion, the great objec of her wishes and

'1 Keith, 242. 245.
VOL. I. L I ambition,

B O0 0K ambition, it became necessary to court a rival, whom, without

ill.
x x..---. manifest imprudence, she could not venture to offend.

1563.

The senti- TIIE inclination of her own fubjets was another, and not the
ments of her
own fubjets. leafi considerable circumstance, which called for Mary's attention

at this conjuncture. They had been taught, by the fatal experi-
ment of her former marriage, to dread an union with any great
prince, whose power might be employed to oppress their religion
and liberties. They trembled at the thoughts of a match with a
foreigner; and if the crown should be strengthened by new do-
minions or alliances, they foresaw that the royal prerogative would
soon be firetched beyond its ancient and legal limits. Their eager-
ness to prevent this could hardly fail of throwing them once more
into the arms of England. Elizabeth would be ready to afford
them her aid towards obftruding a measure so disagreeable to
herself. It was easy for them to seize the person of the sovereign.
By the aiftance of the Englifli fleet, they could render it difficult
for any foreign prince to land in Scotland. The Roman catholics,
now an inconsiderable party in the kingdom, and dispirited by the
loss of the earl of Huntly, could give no ohftrusion to their designs.
To what violent extremes the national abhorrence of a foreign yoke
might have been carried, is manifest from what the had already
seen and experienced.

FOR these reasons Mary laid aside, at that time, all thoughts of

foreign alliance, and seemed willing to sacrifice her own ambition,
in order to remove the jealousies of Elizabeth, and to quiet the
fears of her own fubjeds.

A parliament T-IE parliament met this year, for the first time since the
hedayz. *queen's return into Scotland. Mary's adminicfration had hitherto

been

been extremely popular. Her miniflers poffelfed the confidence B O IC
of the nation; and, by consequence, the proceedings of that *-- --
assembly were condulted with perfec unanimity. The grant of the 63
earldom of Murray to the prior of St. Andrew's was confirmed:
the earl of I-untly, and several of his vafltls and dependants,
were attainted: the attainder against Kirkaldy of Crange, and
some of his accomplices in the murder of cardinal Beatoun, was
reversed : the aa of oblivion, mentioned in the treaty of Edin-
burgh, received the royal fanaion. But Mary, who had deter-
mined never to ratify that treaty, took care that this ianrion
should not be deemed ahy acknowledgment of its validity; fle
granted her content merely in condescension to the lords in par-
liament, who, on their knees, besought her to allay the jealousies
and apprehensions of her fubjeds, by such a gracious law .

No attempt was made, in this parliament, to procure the queen's Nothing de-.

assent to the laws eftablithing the proteflant religion. Her mini- wthernerdt
fiers, though zealous protestants tlhenfelves, were aware that this rcligion"
could not be urged without manifest danger and imprudence. She
had consented, through their influence, to tolerate and protect the
reformed doctrine. They had even prevailed on her to inlprifon
and prolecute the archbishop of St. Andrew's, and prior of WhVit-
horn, for celebrating mass contrary to her proclamation'. Mary,
however, was fiill paflionately devoted to the Romifli church; and
though, from political motives, fle had granted a temporary
proteCtion of opinions which lle diSipproved, there were no
grounds to hope that Ihe would agree to establish them for
perpetuity. The moderation of thol`e who professed it, was the
best method for reconciling the queen to the protestant religion.

' nox, 330 Parl. 9 Q Mary, c. 67. Spotfw. 188. Kt eith, 239.

Li Time

B ° 0 K Time might abate her bigotry. Her prejudices might wear off
t.-..--a gradually, and at last ihe might yield to the wishes of her people,

;63. what their importunity or their violence could never have extorted.

Many laws of importance were to be proposed in parliament;
and to defeat all these, by such a fruitless and ill-timed application
to the queen, would have been equally injurious to individuals,
and detrimental to the public.
which offends THE zeal of the protestant clergy was deaf to all these confider--

e ations of policy. Eager and impatient, it brooked no delay:

severe and inflexible, it would condescend to no compliances.
The leading men of that order insisted, that this opportunity of
establishing religion by law, was not to be neglecded. They pro-
nounced the moderation of the courtiers, apoitacy; and their en-
deavours to gain the queen, they reckoned criminal and fervileo
Knox solemnly renounced the friendfhip'of the earl of Murray, as
a man devoted to Mary, and so blindly zealous for her service, as
to become regardless of those objeEts which he had hitherto esteemed
nmolt sacred. This rupture, which is a strong proof of Murray's
sincere attachment to the queen at that period, continued above a.
year and an half".

THE- preachers being disappointed by the men in whom they

placed the greatest confidence, gave vent to their indignation in
their, pulpits. These echoed more loudly than ever, with decla-
rations against idolatry; with dismal presages concerning the queen's

and occasions marriage with a foreigner; and with bitter reproaches against those
a tumult a-
mong the who, from intcreftcd motives, had deserted that cause which they
people. once reckoned it their honour to support. The people, inflamed

u Knox, 331.

by

'by fuich vehement declamations, which were dictated by a zeal B O 0 K

lIt.

more sincere than prudent, proceeded to raffi and unjuflifiable a'ts '----
of violence. During the queen's absence, on a progress into the 563
weft, mass continued to be celebrated in her chapel at Holyrood-
houle. The multitude of thole who openly resorted thither, gave A:ug!n.
great offence to the citizens of Edinburgh, who, being free fIorn
the refiraint which the royal prelence ilnpoled, aftlebled in a
riotous manner, intcrrupted the service, and filled iich as were
preferit with the utmost conflcrnation. Two of the ringlc-aders
in this tumult were seized, and a -day appointed for t hir tlrrial

KNox, who deemed the zeal of these persons laudable, and Knoxt'ied on

tlhaIt accou :t,

their condudt meritorious, confidered them as fuflcrers in a good. bitlc(cicted.
cause; and in order to screen them from danger, lie iflued circular
letters, requiring all who profefned the true religion, or were con-
cerned for the preservation of it, to alfelnble at Edinburghl , on
the day of trial, that by their presence they might comfort and
aflift their distresscd brethren Y. One of these letters fell into the
queen's hands. To aflcmble the fubljeas without the authority of
the fovcrcign, was colnfrued to be treafln, and a resolution was
taken to prosecute Knox for that crime, before the privy cotncil.
Happily for him, his judges were not only zealous proteftints, Dec. 1j.
but the very men who, during the late commotions, had opcnly
resifted and set at defiance the queen's authority. It was uider
precedents, drawn fiom their own concdut, that Knox endea-
voured to shelter himfclf. Nor would it have been an easy matter
for these counsellors to have found out a diftindtion, by Twhich they
could censure him, without condemning thcmellvxes. After a long
hearing, to the aftoniflment of Lethington and the other courtiers :,

" Knox, 335' Y Ibid 336. 36 Calderw. MS. HIift. i. 832.

he

B 0 O K he was unanimously acquitted. Sinclair bishop of Ross, and pre-
I------' sident of the court of session, a zealous papist, heartily concurred

1563. with the other counsellors in this decision a; a remarkable faCr,

which ihows the unsettled state of government in that age; the
low condition to which regal authority was then funk; and the
impunity with which subjeCts might invade those rights of the
crown which are now held sacred.

1564. THE marriage of the Scottifl' queen continued Ilill to be the

Negociations
with regard objea of attention and intrigue. Though Elizabeth, even while
to the queen's
ma rriage. tfhe wished to direct Mary, treated her with a disgustful reserve;

though fie kept her, without neceflity, in a Rate of suspense; and
hinted often at the person whom fle deflined to be her husband,
without direEly mentioning his name; yet Mary framed all her
actions to express such a prudent refpet for the English queen, that
foreign princes began to imagine she had given herself up implicitly
to her direction b. The profpea of this union alarmed Catherine of
Medicis. Though Catherine had taken pleasure all along in doing ill
offices to the queen of Scots; though, soon after the duke of Guise's
death, fle had put upon her a most mortifying indignity, by stopping
the payment of her dowry, by depriving her subjed the duke of
Chatclllerault of his pension, and by beflowing the command of
the Scottilh guards on a Frenchman C; flie resolved, however, to
prevent this dangerous conjunction of the Britifl queens. For this
purpose fle now employed all her art to appease Mary d, to whom
fle had given so many causes of offence. The arrears of her
dowry were inflantly paid ; more puncual remittances were pro-
mifed for the future; and offers made, not only to restore, but
to extend the privileges of the Scottilh nation in France. It was
-' Knox, 343. b Keith, 248. c Ibid. 244. '' See Appendix, No. VIII.

4 ealy

easy for Mary to penetrate into the motives of this sudden change; B 0
° K

111.

file well knew tile character of her mother-in-law, and laid little -
ltrefs upon profefions of friendship which came from a princcfs of 1564
such a false and unfeeling heart.

TIHE ncgociation with England, relative to the marriage, sus-

fcred no interruption from this application of the French queen.
As Mary, in compliance with the wilhcs of her fuibjeds, and
pressed by the firongefl motives of interclt, determined liecedily to
marry, Elizabeth was obliged to break that unaccountable lilence
which lhe had hitherto affle-cd. The secret was dilkclofid, and her M'rch.

'l];izabeth
favourite lord Robert Dudley, afterwards earl of Leiccftcr, was recommends

Leiccller to
declared to be the happy man whomn ile had choien to be the her surra

hulbind .
husband of a queen courted by so many princes .

ELIZABETIIS wisdom and penetration were remarkable in the

choice of her ministers; in diflinguihing Iier favourites, tlofie
great qualities were less conspicuous. She was influenced in two
cafes so oppolite, by merit of very different kinds. Their ca-
pacity for buiinefs, their knowledge, their prudence, were tlih
talents to which alone Ihe attended in cllufing her minillers
whereas beauty and gracefullnefs of person, poliihed malnecrs,.
and courtly addrcfs, were the accomplishments on whlich ihe
bcftowed her favour. She aeed in the one cafe witl the wnilloi
of a queen, in the other fie difcovcred the wveakncls of a womian.
To this Leicester owed his grandeur. Though remarkable
neither for eminence in virtue nor lfperiority of abilities, the
queen's partialiaty diflinguifhed him on every occalion. Slie
raised him to the highest honours, she beflowed on him the moll

Keith, 25 r.

important

B 0 0 important employments, and manifeited an affecQon so difpro-

Il.
,__---. portionate to his merit, that, in the opinion of that age, it could

156 . be accounted for only by the power of planetary influence .

Mary offcnd- TIHE high spirit of the Scottish queen could not well bear the
ed at this.

first overture of a match with a fubje&. Her own rank, the
splendour of her former marriage, and the solicitations at this time
of so many powerful princes, crowded into her thoughts, and
made her sensibly feel how humbling and difrefpeElful Elizabeth's
proposal was. She dissembled, however, with the English refl-
dent; and though she declared, in strong terms, what a degra-
dation she would deem this alliance, which brought along with it
no advantage that could justify such neglect of her own dignity,
lhe mentioned the earl of Leicester, notwithstanding, in terms full
of rcfpel n.

Elizabeth's ELIZABETH, we may presume, did not with that the proposal
conmencding fliould be received in any other manner. After the extraordinary
him. marks ihe had given of her own attachment to Leicester, and while

he was still in the very height of favour, it is not probable lihe
could think seriously of beflowing him upon another. It was not
her aim to persuade, but only to amuse Mary". Almost three
years were clapsed since her return into Scotland; and though
solicited by her fubjecds, and courted by the greatefl princes in
Europe, she had hitherto been prevented from marrying, chiefly by
the artifices of Elizabeth. If at this time the English queen could
have engaged Mary to liflen to her proposal in favour of Leicefler,
her power over this creature of her own would have enabled her
to protrat the ncgociation at plcaiurce; and by keeping her rival

fCamden, 549. g Keith, 252. b Mclv. 104, 105.

unmarried,

unmarried, flie would have rendered the profpcaC of her fuccefflon B o o x
less acceptable to the Engliflh. , _

15;64.

LrICESTER'S own situation was extremely delicate and embar-

raffing. To gain poffefilon of the most amiable woman of the
age, to carry away this prize from so many contending princes, to
mount the throne of an ancient kingdomn, might have flattered
the ambition of a fubjca much more confidcrable than him. He
saw all these advantages, no doubt; and, in fccrct, they made
their full impreflion on him. But, without offending Elizabeth,
he durst not venture on the molt distant difcovcry of his senti-
ments, or take any ftep towards facilitating his acquisition of ob-
jcets so worthy of desire.

ON the other hand, Elizabeth's partiality towards him, which

she was at no pains to conceal ', might inf)ire him with hopes of
attaining the supreme rank in a kingdom more illustrious than
Scotland. Elizabeth had often declared that nothing but her refo-
lution to lead a single life, and his being born her own fiubjea,
would have hindered her from chufing the earl of Lcicefler for a
husband. Such considerations of prudence are, however, often
surmounted by love; and Leicester might flatter himself, that
the violence of her affection would at length triumph both
over the maxims of policy and the scruples of pride. Tefce
hopes induced him, now and then, to conclude the propofll of
his marriage with the Scottish queen to be a project for his defRruc-
tion; and he imputed it to the malice of Cecil, who, under the
specious pretence of doing him honour, intended to ruin him in tle
good opinion both of Elizabeth and Mary '.

i Mel'. 93, 9. Ibid. 1oI.
VOL, I. M m A 'rR.AT.

B O O I A TREATY of marriage, proposed by one queen who dreaded

ill.
' -----' its success; listened to by another, who was secretly determined

1 64. against it; and scarcely desired by the man himself, whose interest

and reputation it was calculated, in appearance, to promote
could not, under so many unfavourable circumstances, be brought
to a fortunate issue. Both Elizabeth and Mary continued, how-
ever, to act with equal difimulation. The former, notwithftand-
ing her fears of losing Leicester, solicited warmly in his behalf.
The latter, though fle began about this time to cast her eyes upon
another fubjc:c of England, did not at once venture finally to reject
Elizabeth's favourite.

Mary entcr- T-HE person towards whom Mary began to turn her thoughts,
tainsthoughts
of mnrrying was Henry Stewart lord Darnly, eldest son of the earl of Lennox,
ord Darnly. That nobleman, having been driven out of Scotland under the

regency of the duke of Chatelherault, had lived in banifhlment for
twenty years, His wife, lady Margaret Douglas, was Mary's moot
dangerous rival in her claim upon the Engiifhs fucceflion. Sle
was the daughter of Margaret, the eldeRl sifter of Henry VIII. by
the earl of Angus, whom that queen married after the death of
her husband James IV. In that age, the right and order o f
succession was not fettled with the fame accuracy as at present.
Time, and the decision of almost every cafe that can possibly
happen, have at last introduced certainty into a matter, whicl
naturally is Iubjedt to all the variety arising from the caprice c
lawyers, guided by obscure, and often imaginary analogies. Tlic
countess of Lennox, though born of a second marriage, was one
degree nearer the royal blood of England than PMary. She was
the daughter, Mary only the grand-daughter, of Margaret. This
was not the only advantage over Mlary which the countess of
Lennox enjoyed. She was born in England, and by a maxim of

law

iaw in tiat country, with regard to private inheritances, " who- B o

o

ever is not Lborll in IEngland, or at leant of parents who, at thie -----_
time of his birth, were in tle obedience of the king of England, 564
cannot enjoy any inheritance in the kingdom '." This maxim,
Hales, an Englif lawyer, pro(duced in a trcaiic which he pub-
lijled at this time, and endeavoured to apply it to the right of
succession to the crown. In a private cauic, thele pretexts might
have given rife to a long and doubtful litigation ; where a crown.
was at flake, such nice diiputes and subtiltics were to be avoided
with the utmost care. If Darnly ihould happen to contraa an
alliance with any of the powerful families in England, or should
publicly profess the protcltant religion, tllcec plaulible and popular
topics might be so urged, as to prove fatal to the pretensions of a
foreigner and of a papist.

MArRY was aware of all this; and, in order to prevent any

danger from that quarter, had early endeavoured to cultivate a
friendly correspondence with the family of Lcnnox. In the year
one thousand five hundred and fixty-tw o % botll the carl and the
lady Margaret were taken into custody by Elizabeth's orders, on
account of their holding a secret corrcfpondencc with the Scottifil
queen.

FROM the time that Mary became sensible of the difficulties Elizabeth e-

cretly pleated

which would attend her marrying a foreign prince, fil entered citlYhis
into a still closer connexion with the earl of Lcnnox ", and invited
him to return into Scotland. This ie endeavourcd to conceal
from Elizabeth; but a tranfadion of so much importance did nor
escape the notice of that discerning princcfs. She obfervcdl, but

Carte, Hil., of Eng. vol. iii. 422. 'I Carlnd, 389. ' Ibid, 396,

MI m 2 dli

Bo o K did not interrupt it. Nothing could fall in more perfelly with

IIl.
t.i.- ., her views concerning Scottish affairs. She was pleased to fee the

1564. pride of the Scottish queen sloop at last to the thoughts of taking

a subjed to her bed. Darnly was in no situation to excite her
jealousy or her fears. His father's estate lay in England, and by
means of this pledge she hoped to keep the negociation entirely
in her own hands, to play the fame game of artifice and delay,
which she had planned out, if her recommendation of Leicester
had been more favourably received.

As before the union of the two crowns, no subjec of one king-

dom could pass into the other without the permiflion of both so-
vereigns; no sooner did Lennox, under pretence of prosecuting
his wife's claim upon the earldom of Angus, apply to Elizabeth
for her licence to go into Scotland, than he obtained it. To-
gether with it, flie gave him letters, warmly recommending his
person and cause to Mary's friendship and protection °. But at the
fame time, as it was her manner to involve all her tranfaaions
with regard to Scotland in some degree of perplexity and contra-
diction; she warned Mary, that this indulgence of Lennox might
prove fatal to herfcif, as his return could not fail of reviving the.
ancient animosity between him and the house of Hamilton.

Ti-s admonition gave umbrage to Mary, and drew from her

an angry reply, which occasioned for some time a total interruption
of all correspondence between the two queens P. Mary was not a
little alarmed at this; the both dreaded the effecs of Elizabeth's
resentment, and felt sensibly the disadvantage of being excluded
from a free intercourse with England, where her ambaflidors had. J

Keith, 255. 268. P Keith, 253. Melv. 83.

all

all along carried on, with some success, fccret negociations, which D o O ..
increased tile number of her partilans, and paved her way towards ---
the throne. In order to remove the causes of the present dif-
siculty, Mlelvil was sent express to the court of England. II
found it no difficult matter to bring about a reconcilement; and
ibon re-established the appcarance, but not the confilence of fiicnd-
ship, which was all that had subsisted for some lime between the
two queens.

DURING this negociation, Elizabeth's profeflions of love to

Mary, and Melvil's replies in the name of his miitrefs, were made
in the language of the warmest and most cordial friendlhip. But
what Melvil truly olfcrves with refpea to Elizabeth, may be ex-
tended, without injustice, to both queens. " There was neither
plain dealing, nor upright meaning, but great diflimulation, cnvy,
and fear '."

LENNOX, however, in consequence of' the licence which lie Lcnnoxar-

had obtained, set out foi Scotland, and was rcceivcd by the queen, ivC in SCO:
not only with the refpc& due to a nobleman so nearly allied to the
royal family, but treated with a diftinguiflcd familiarity which
could not fail of inspiring him with more elevated hopes. The
rumour of his son's marriage to the queen began to fprcad over
the kingdom; and the eyes of all Scotland were turned upon him
as the father of their future master. The duke of Chatclierault
was the sirs: to take the alarm. I-Ie confidered Lennox as the
ancient and hereditary enemy of the house of Iamialton; and, in
his grandeur, saw the ruin of himself and Iis friends. But the
qcieen interposed her authority to prevent any s iolent rupture, and

°- Mc1v. 104.

employed

p, o o I; employed all her influence to bring about an accommodation of
^---->--.J the dif'ercnccs '.

156,1.

TIIE powerful family of Douglas no less dreaded Lennox's re-

turn, from an apprehension that he would wrest the earldom of
Angus out of their hands. But the queen, who well knew how
dangerous it would be to irritate Morton, and other great men of
that name, prevailed on Lcnnox to purchase their friendship, by
allowing his lady's claimi upon the earldom of Angus to drop 5.
December. AFTER tlhee preliminary fieps, Mary ventured to call a meet-

ing of parliament. The a&: of forfeiture paifed against Lennox in
the year one thousand five hundred and forty-five -was repealed,
and lie was publicly refored to the honours and estate of his
anceflors '.

julle 25. TlE- ecclefiailical tranfaaions of this year were not considerable.
''lh, clergy In the afncmblies of the church, the fame complaints of the increase
sulpicious of
the quccn's of idolatry, the fame representations concerning the poverty of the
r.al forpopc- clergy, were renewed. The reply which the queen made to these, and

her promises of redress, were more satisfying to the proteflants than.
any they had hitherto obtained u. But, notwithstanding her declara-
tions in their favour, they could not help harbouring many suspicions
concerningMlary's designs against their religion. She had never once
consented to hear any preacher of the reformed docrine. She had
abated nothing of her bigotted attachment to the Romifli faith.
The genius of that superstition, averse at all times from tole-
ration, was in that age fierce and unrelenting. Mary had given
her friends on the continent repeated assurances of her rceolution

r Keith, 259. s Ibid. 268. Note (b),
t See Appendix, No. IX. " Keith, 533. 539.

y. .to

to re-establish the catholic church ". She had indullrioufy avoided B 0 K
every opportunity of ratifying the aCts of parliament one thoufiand - ---.--J
five hundred and sixty, in favour of the Rcformatioi. E'ven the
proteclion which, cver since her return, she had aflbrded the pro-
teflant religion, was merely temporary, and declared, by her own
proclamation, to be of force only " till she fhouild take Iome final
order in the matter of religionY." The vigilant zeal of the
preachers was inattentive to none of these circumst:ances. The
coldness of their principal leaders, who were at this tine entirely
devoted to the court, added to their jcaloufies and fears. Thcel
they uttered to the people, in language which they dccmced suitable
to the necessity of the times, and which the queen reckoned dif-
recpeCtful and insolent. In a meeting of the general afinimbly,
Maitland publicly accused Knox of teaching ficditious doctrinc.
concerning the right of fubjecLs to reilft those fovereigs who tref-
pass against the duty which they owe to the people. Knox was not
backward to justify what he had taught; and upon this general
doctrine of refiflance, so just in its own nature, but so delicate ill
its application to particular caies, there ensued a debate, which
admirably difp!ays the talents and chara cr of both the dilputants;
the acuteness of the former, embcllifhed with learning.- ut prone
to subtlety ; the vigorous underlanding of thl' latter, delighting in
bold fentinents,. and fupc-ior to all fear :

Two years had( already been confumned in fiuitlefls ncgociations , 1;ó.

concerning the marriage of the Scottish queen. i lary had fell lbothof lli-
ieihure and opportunity to difeern the fallacy and deceit of all i"'ry!, with
Elizabeth's proceedings with refplec to that aflair. But, in order :re,"i1 to tlcr

Li;mairiage.
to set the real intentions of the English queen in a clear light, and

" Carte, vol, iii. 4;. "' Keid,: 504., .,
5 Kinox, 349.

to

B 0 0 K to bring her to tome explicit declaration of her sentiments, Mary
L-v---iJ at last intimated to Randolph, that, on condition her right of
F'b. 5. fucceflion to the crown of England were publicly acknowledged,

The was ready to yield to the solicitations of his mistress in behalf
of Leicester a. Nothing could be farther than this from the mind
and intention of Elizabeth. The right of succession was a imyftery,
which, during her whole reign, her jealousy preserved untouched
and unexplained. She had promised, however, when she first
began to interest herself in the marriage of the Scottish queen, all
that was now demanded. How to retreat with decency, how
to elude her former offer, was, on that account, not a little
perplexing.

THEi facility with which lord Darnly obtained permifilon to

visit the court of Scotland, was owing, in all probability, to that
embarrafiment. From the time of Melvil's embassy, the countess
of Lennox had warmly solicited this liberty for her son. Elizabeth
was no firanger to the ambitious hopes with which that young
nobleman flattered himself. She had received repeated advices
from her ministers of the sentiments which Mary began to enter-
tain in his favour ". It was entirely in her power to prevent his
flirring out of London. In the present conjuncture, however,
nothing could be of more advantage to her than Darnly's journey
into Scotland. She had already brought one aQor upon the stage,
who, under her management, had, for a long time, amuscd the
Scottiffi queen. She hoped, no less absolutely, to direcl the
motions of Darnly, who was likewise her subject; and again to
involve Mary in all the tedious intricacies of negociation. These
motives determined Elizabeth and her ministers to yield to the soli-
citations of the countess of Lennox.

" Keith, 269. b Keith, 259. 261. 266.

BUT

BUT this deep-laid scheme was in a moment disconcerted. Such B 0 0 K

11i.

unexpeaed events, as the fancy of poets ascribes to love, are at fonme
times really produced by that paflion. An aflair which had been Darnly ar-

rives in Scot-

the objecl of so many political intrigues, and had moved and inte- land.
refted so many princes, was at last decided by the sudden liking of
two young persons. Lord Darnly was at this time in tle firfl
bloom and vigour of youth. In beauty and gracefulness of person
he fiirpafled all his cotemnporaries; he excelled eminently in fucl
arts as add ease and elegance to external form, and which enable it
not only to dazzle, but to please. Mary was of an age, and of a CGains the
temper, to feel the full sower of these accomplishments. The
impreflion which lord Darnly made upon her was visible from the
time of their first interview. The whole business of the court was Feb. T3.
to amuse and entertain this illustrious guest ; and in all those
scenes of gaiety, Darnly, wllofe qualifications were altogether fu-
perficial and ihowy, appeared to great advantage. His conquest
of the queen's heart became complete; and inclination now
prompted her to concludie a marriage, the first thoughts of which
had been suggested by confidcrations merely political.

ELIZABETHI contributed, and perhaps not without design, to

increase the violence of this paflion. Soon after Darnly's arrival
in Scotland, she, in return to that mefcage whereby Mary had
significd her willingneis to accept of LeicePfer, gave an answer, in
such terms as plainly unravelled her original intention in that in-
trigue d. She promised, if the Scottifl queen's marriage with
Leicester flould take place, to advance him to great honours; but
withl regard to Mary's title to the Englifhll icceffion, she would
neither susser any legal inquiry to be made concerning it, nor

c Knox, 369. d Keith, 270. Append. X58.
VOL. I. N ni permit

B OO K permit it to be publicly recognised, until flie herself flould de-

III. -.l--.--' dare her resolution never to marry. Notwithflanding Elizabeth's

15t'5. former promises, Mary had rcafon to expccQ every thing contained

in this reply; her high iirit, lhowever, could not bear with pa-
tience fich a cruel discovery of the contempt, the artifice, and
mockery, with which, under the veil of fiienldflip, lhe had been
so long abused. She burti into tears of indignation, and exprefled,
with the utmolf bittcrne4's, her sense of that dililgcnuous crafe
which had been employed to deceive her c

TiIE natural effeL t

of this indignation was to add to the impe-

tuofity with which she purlbed her own scheme. B!indcd by re-
fentinent as well as by love, fie oblervcd no dcfcds in the man
whom fle had chosen; and began to ta!e the nccefilay steps to-
wards accomplilhing her design, with all tle impatience natural to
those paiflons.

As Darnly was so nearly related to the queen, the canon law

made it neceIfary to obtain the pope's dilpenfthtion before the cele-
bration of the marriage. For this purpose ilce early Jet on foot a
negociation with the court of Rome .

The French S-l E was busy, at the r-ame time, in procuring the consent of
Cofthe matcjP the French king and his mother. -Haing communicated her de-

sign, and the motives which determined her choice, to Caltelnau
the French ambaflador, the employed him, as the most proper
person, to bring his court to fall in with her views. Among other
arguments to this purpose, Caftelnau mentioned Mary's attachment
to Darnly, which he reprefcnted to be so violent and deep-rooted,

Keith, Append. 159, ' Camd. 396.

that

that it was no longer in her own power to break off the match .. B O O Ic
Nor were the French minifllers backward in encouraging Mary's *.-.-
paflion. Her pride would never sloop to an alliance with a fubjc& '56
of France. 1By this choice they were delivered from the apprc-
henfion of a match wvitl any of the Auflrian princes, as well as
the danger of too clofc an union with Elizabeth ; and as D1arnly
profefled the Roman catholic religion, this ftikted the bigotted
ichemes which that court ladl adopted.
¥\HIIILE Mary was endeavouring to recocile fore cots to a Darnly dif-

*

, 0 '-'

. gulLt; fireral

measure which flhe had io much at heart; Darnly and his father, ot lthi noblc,.
by their behaviour, were railing up enemies at home to obfiriu
it. Lennox had, during the former part of his life, difiovered
no great comrpafs of abilities or political wisdom ; and appears to
hlave been a man of a wealk underflanding and violent paflions.
Darnly was not fupcrior to his father in understanding, and all his
passions were frill more impetuous .' To thfc l he added that info-
lence, which the advantage of external f)mr, when accompanied
with no quality more valuable, is apt to infpirc. Intoxicated with
the queen's favour, lie began already to aflume the haughtiness of
a king, and to put on that imperious air, which majesty itielf can
scarce render tolerable.

IT was by the advice, or at least with the content, of Murray particularly

and his party, tlhat Lennox had been invited into Scotland ; and Murray.
vet, no sooner did he acquire a firm footing in that kingdom, than
lie began to enter into fecrct cabals with those noblemen who were
known to be avowed enemies to Murray, and, with regard to
religion, to be either neutrals or favourers of popery . Darnly,

r, Caflcln. 464. ' Keith, 272, 273.

Kinox 3 Iit, 27367. Keith,
272..

Nn 2 fill

B O 0 K still more imprudent, allowed some rash expreflions concerning
_-----_ those favours which the queen's bounty had conferred upon Mur-

i565- ray, to escape him .

BUT, above all these, the familiarity which Darnly cultivated

with David Rizio, contributed to incrcaef the suspicion and dif-
gust of the nobles.

The rlfeof TIHE low birth and indigent condition of this man placed him
Rizio's fa-
vour. in a itation in which he ought naturally to have remained unknown

to posterity. But what fortune called him to at and to susser in
Scotland, obliges history to dcfcend from its dignity, and to record
his adventures. He was the son of a musician in Turin, and
having accompanied the Piedmontefe ambassador into Scotland,
gained admission into the queen's family by his flill in music. As
his dependant condition had taught him ifupplenefs of spirit and
insinuating manners, he quickly crept into the queen's favour, and
her French secretary happening to return at that time into his own
country, was preferred by her to that office. I-I now began to
make a figure in court, and to appear as a man of consequence.
The whole train of suitors and expedants, who have an extreme
sagacity in dilcovering the paths which lead most directly to fuc-
cess, applied to him. His recommendations were observed to
have great influence over the queen, and he grew to be confidered
not only as a favourite, but as a miniRer. Nor was Rizio careful
to abate that envy which always attends such an extraordinary and
rapid change of fortune. He studied, on the contrary, to display
the whole extent of his favour. He affected to talk often and
familiarly with the queen in public. He equalled the greatest and

Keith, 274,

12lOs

mofl opulent ful)jecs, in richness of dress, and in the number of B °l0 K
his attendants. He discovered, in all his behaviour, that assuming -----
infolcnce, with which unmerited protiperity inspires an ignoble
mind. It was with the utmost indignation that the nobles beheld
the power; it was x ith the utmof: difficulty that they tolerated
the arrogance, of this unworthy minion. Even in the queen's prc-
fence they could not forbear treating him with marks of con-
tempt. Nor was it his exorbitant power alone which cxatferated
the Scots. They conlidcred him, and not without rcafon, as a
dangcrous enemy to the protcftant religion, and fulpeaed that he
held, for this purpofc, a secret correfpondcnce with the court of
Rome m.

IT was Darnly's misfortune to fall under the management of Darnly'scon-

this man, wllo, by flattery and afiduity, eafiiy gained on his hi vl
vanity and unexperience. Rizio's whole influence on the queen
was employed in his behalf, and contributed, without doubt, to-
wards eflablifhing him more firmly in her affclions n. But what-
ever benefit Darnly might reap fiom his patronage, it did not
counterbalance the contempt, and even infamy, to which he was
exposed, on account of his fmliliarity witlh ich an uplart.

THOUGH Darnly daily made progress in the queen's affetions,

file conducted herself, however, with such prudent reserve, as to
impose on Randolph the English resident, a man otherwise shirewd
and penetrating. It appears from his letters at this period, that
he entertained not the least suspicion of the intrigue which was
carrying on; and gave his court repeated assurances, that the
Scottifl queen had no design of marrying Darnly0. In the midst

m Buchan. 340. Melv. 107. " Mclv. Kl. o Keith, 273,and Append. 159,

of

B OI° R °of this fccurity, Mary dispatched Mlaitland to signify her intcn-

5"- 6 tion to Elizabeth, and to solicit her confcnt to the marriage with

Darnly. This embaflir was the 1irll't thing which opened the eycs
of Randolph.

April 18. ELIZAB7ETri alficlccd thle

g rcatcl irife at thiis fli icn refo-

Ellz,-ibeth de- - 1

s1

claics against lution of the Scottil queen, but witihout reaCon). Te train was
the queen' lald by herfilf, andl filc ha1d no caifc to wonder v.hcil it tooli
Mal rglcge
wih D)arnly. cffeeLt. She cxprcieed at the fame time her diiaipprobation of the

match, in the ftrongcfi tcrms; and pretended to forfce many
dangers and inconvcniencies arising firom it, to both kingdoms.
But this too was mere afldtation. MIary had often and plainly
declared her rcfolution to marry. It was impoflible ile could
make any choice more inoflenive. The danger of introducing a
foreign interest into Britain, which Elizabeth had so jufily dreaded,
was entirely avoided. Darnly, though allied to both crowns, and
poffieced of lands in both kingdoms, could be formidable to neither.
It is evident from all these circumflances, that Elizabeth's apprc-
henfions of danger could not pofibly be fcrious; and that in all
her violent declarations against Darnly, there was much more of
grimace than of reality P.

TrIERE were not wanting, however, political motives of such
weight, to induce that wvife princess to put on the appearance

P Even the hiflorians of that age acknowledge, that the marriage of the Scot-

tifl queen with a fubjecl was far from being dilagreeable to Elizabeth. Knox,
369. 373. Buchan. 339. Caflelnau, who at that time was well acquainted
with the intrigues of both the Britifl courts, aflerts, upon grounds of great pro-
bability, that the match was wholly Elizabeth's own work: Cafleln. 462. and
that fle rejoiced at the accomplifliment of it, appears fiono the letters of her own
ambassadors. Keith, 280. 288.

12 of

of great lifpleafure. Mary, intimidated by this, might perhaps
delay her marriage; which Elizabeth detired to obfl-ruCt with a-- -
weakncfs that little luited tlhe dignity of her mind and the elevation 1 '
of her charaier. tlelides, lhe tranquillity of her own kingdom:
was the grcat objct of Elizabeth's policy; and by declaring her
dillatisfittion with Mlary's conducl, lic ]hoped to al:lirm that party
in Scotland, whilich was attached to the iEglilh intclretl, and to
encourage such of the nobles as ficrctljy diflpprovedthe matcl
ouenly to oppose it. Thie ifccs of diicorld would Iy this mca1:s
be fcattcred thl:ough tihat kingdom. Inteftile commotions migiht
arse. Amirdc thelf2 I:.ary could iorm none of tlioi: dangerous'
fchemcs to which thie nion of her people mlighlt have prompted
her. Elizabeth would become the umpiie bctween tile Scottlifh
queen and her contending lfbjccs; and lngl;and might look on
with {iecuritv, il o,

wilc a oicli file h1ad1 rail;d, waftcd the
only kingdom -which could poloflly diflLi)b its pcace.

IN prosecution of this fchcmc, fhl laid before her privy council r.'.y

1 .

the mcnlaec from the Scotlii qucen, and conilted tlicm with realrd
to the anfver hfc Ihould return. Thcir cdrcrmlinaton, it is ealy
to conceive, was perfectly conformable to her fccrct views. Ti'ey
drew vup a remionfirancc against the intended match, fill of the
imaginary dangers with which that event threatened the kingdom ".
Nor did lhe think it enough, to itgnify her disapprobation of the Sends Throg-
meafire, either by; Maitland, MIary's ambanfaclor, or by Randolph, It 'it".b-
her own resident in Scotland ; in order to add more dignity to the
farce which ilhe chose to aCd, she appointed fir Nicholas Throg-
morton her ambasSador extraordinary. She coimmanded him to
declare, in the firongeft terms, ler diflttisfactlion with the rsep
,whicll Mary proposed to take; and at the lcame time to produce

' Keith, 274. See Append. No. X,

the

B o0 O the determination of the privy council, as an evidence that the

lIl.
A---- sentiments of the nation were not different from her own. Not

long after, she confined the countess of Lennox as a prisoner, first
in her own house, and then sent her to the Towerr.

INTTELLIGENCE of all this reached Scotland before the arrival

of the English ambaf'ador. In the first transports of her indig-
nation, Mary resolved no longer to keep any measures with Eli-
zabeth; and sent orders to Maitland, who accompanied Throg-
morton, to return instantly to the English court, and in her name
to declare to Elizabeth, that after having been amused so long to
so little purpose; after having been fooled, and imposed on so
grossly by her artifices; fihe was now resolved to gratify her own
inclination, and to ask no other consent, but that of her own sub-
jeds, in the choice of an husband. Maitland, with his usual
sagacity, foresaw all the effeEts of such a rash and angry meflage,
and ventured.rather to incur the displeasure of his miflrefs, by dif-
obeying her commands, than to be made the initrument of tearing
asunder so violently the few remaining ties which Rill linked to-
gether the two queens .

MARY herself soon became sensible of her error. She received

the English ambassador with refpe& :; juflified her own conduc
with decency; and though unalterable in her rcfolution, she as-
fedted a wonderful solicitude to reconcile Elizabeth to the measure;
and even pretended, out of complaisance towards her, to put off the
consummation of the marriage for some months '. It is probable,
however, that the want of the pope's dispensation, and the pro-
spect of gaining the content of her own fubjecs, were the real
motives of this delay.

7 Keith, Append. 16X. ' Ibid. x60. ' Keith, 278.

THI S

Tiiis consent Mary laboured with the utmost industry to obtain. B o o Ki

'The earl of iMlurray was the person in the kingdom, whol'c con- ~---
currcnce was of the greatest importance; but she had rcafon to Iuarrnay's
fear that it would not be procured without extreme dilliculty. Di,,b.c'
From the time of Lcnnox's return into Scotland, MIIurray per-
ceived that the queen's affctions began gradually to be estrangcd
from him. Darnly, Athol, Rizio, all the court favourites, com-
bined againflt him. His ambitious itirit could not brook this
diminution of his power, which his former firviccs had tl little
merited. He retired into the country, and gave way to rivals,
with whom lie was unable to contend". The return of the earl
of Bothwell, his avowed enemy, who had been accused of a de-
sign upon his life, and who had rclidcd for tome time in foreigi,
countries, obliged him to attend to his own iafcty. No intreaty
of the queen could periuade him to a reconcilement with that
nobleman. He infifled on having him tbrought to a public trial,
and prevailed, by his importunity, to have a day fixed for it.
Bothwell durst not appear in oppolition to a man, lwho came to
the place of trial attended by five thouflnd of his followers on
horfcback. He was once more conflraincd to leave the kingdom;
buL, by tle queen's command, the ifntence of outlawry, which is
incurred by non-appearance, was not pronounced againfl him -.

MVARY, sensible, at the fame time, of how much importance it Mays.

was to gain a fulbjed so powerful and tb popular as the earl of
Murray, invited him back to court, and received him with many
dcmonftrations of refpe& and confidence. At last she desired himn
to let an example to her other fubjedis by fuilLcribing a paper, con-
taining a formal approbation of her marriage with Darnly. Murray
liad many reasons to hcfitatc, arid even to withhold his assent.

" Keith, 272. 274. Append. J59. ' Keith, ibid. i6o.
VOL. I. 0 o Darnly

B o o I Darnly had not only undermined his credit with the queen, but

III.
t--_-- discovercd, on every occasion, a rooted aversion to his pcrfon. By

15ó. s consenting to his elevation to the throne, he would give him fucl.

an acceflion of dignity and power, as no man willingly befcows on
an enemy. The unhappy confequenccs which might follow upon a
blreach witlh Englaind were likewilf of considerable weight with
Murray. I-Ic had always openly preferred a confederacy wVitl:
lngland, before the ancient alliance with F:rance. BIy his means
chicily, this change in the cm of national politics lhad been
brought about. A league with ingland had blen cflallifled;
and lie could not think of jhcrlicin, to a rafli and youthful
paflion, an alliance of so much utility to the kingdom ; and whicl
he and the other nol)Ik were bouind, by every obligation, to main-
tain '.

y Nor was the intcrcfl o(f rcligion fcrgotten on this occasion.

3.lary, thlo'gh n-r'ouindd by lprotcnant counilllors, had found
means to hold a dangerous correfponldencc swith foreign catholics.
She had even' courted the pope's protcelion, who had sent her a
fubIfidy of eight thouflnd crowns '. Though M.urray lad hitherto
endcavoured to bridle tlle zeal of tlhe rclormcdclergy, and to set
the queen's conduic in the moil javourable light, yet her obiiinatc
adherence to her own religion could not fail of alarming him, an
by her refolutioll to marry a papiPi, the hope of reclaiming her,
by an union with a protesiant, was for ever cut oi'". Each of
thcfe coni!dcratiols had its influcnce on Iiurray, and all of thcn
clctc-rmincd him to decline complying at that time wv.iih the luccn'eI
r-ccquet.

,Iiy .. ThE Convention of nobles, which was anfembled a few days
_\Convcntlon c
otCll nl' (ltub aitcr, dliflovcrcd a greater difpolition to gratihy tile queen. an'-
'np'y':Lrs f of them, without hesitation, exprre!bd their ap-probaton of the in-

Y Keith, 169. ' Ibid.. 7.95 .. AI4. Kit, A end. 6]C.

tended

tend(ed matchl; but as others were fla;tel at tih te culme al;:S ,''a')'
whlsich lhad alarmed 'intlrav, or awere in Lueic cc, by lls *e -n:,:Ic .o -----.
rctsle' their connfent, another Con;vtenition was

. .;po

l ted at !,'l':'
in ordncr to dcliberate more fullv concerningl tlis nattc''.

I\L.:r:AK\ r;r;Lr: rvZary gave a 'ublic evidence of :I; i own i In-

clinaltion, by' conrfrrinil upoin Di).rly tit!es of l:on'!ur pIcctiliar
to thle royal lainily. '1'lc opposition tic hlad lliithel!o i \\'eithl,
and the many11 contrivances emploved to thwart and diilppoint lcr
inclination, produced their ulal efTeil on her heart, thel confirmed
I cr pailion, and increa1ld its violence. The Fmpliity f that tage
hlnpl.tcd an aslhcion lo excc!;ve, to thli ilnflenU e Ol' \w'.tClalft
Ft wvas owing, o]l0\von

cr too ot her carml, trllnl tlh il rrc!iilil

powser of youth and Icautv over a yci;ng al tender hetr't. Dart)ly
grcvew giddy willi his prolCcrity. Flattcercd )' the love of a (]Itcei,o
and the applaull of many among her I'nlhj ods, Iis; natural ]atlgh-
tinief and infolcnce becamei ilnfllpportabll , and ie could 1o iongcr
bear advice, far less contratdictiont Lord Rtliven, hapiplening to
be the firfl pcrfln who illformel d him that iMIary, in order to looth
Eliizabeth, had delayed for some tilc creating hilmn dt:kc of Al-
bany, lie, in a frecnzy of rage, drew his dagger, and attcnpted to
talb him .i It required all Mlary't; attention, to prevent i s falling
under that contempt to which ftlch behaviour delrvedly cxpofed

IN no feene of her life was ever lIary)'s olwn atldrce more Miry's.l;-

reinarlkably difplayd. Love fiarpenecd lier invention, and made in, 1, erub-
elr ftludy every method of gaining her tfbjeEls. MIlany of the jcis.
nobles {he won by her addrels, and more by lher promifs. On
' Kciei, 23. K th, 283. ' IKeitl, Append. J6o.

o 2 fomc

^ 84 T 1 I-I I I-I I S T 0 R Y

o o0 K some fe bellowed lands, to others {he gave new titles of honour '
111.
^ .-- She even condescended to court the proteflant clergy ; and having
x565'

invited three of their fupcrintendants to Stirling, fle declared, in
strong terms, her resolution to protecQ their religion, exprelfcd her
willingncfs to be present at a conference upon the points in do&rine
-which were disputed between the protestants and papists, and went
so far as to fliow bvme dcfire to Ihear such of their preachers as
were rcoft remarkable for moderation '. By thcfe arts the queen
gained wonderfully upon the people, who, unless their jealousy
l)e raised by repeated injuries, are always ready to view the ations
of their forereign with an indulgent eye.

ON the other hand, Murray and his associates were plainly the

dupes of Elizabeth's policy. She talked in so high a flrain of her
difpleafilrc at the intended match ; she treated lady Lennox with
lb much rigour; flhe wrote to the Scottish queen in such tlrong
terms; she recalled the earl of Lennox and his fbn in such a per-
emptory manner, and with such severe denunciations of her venge-
ance if they fiould prcfume to disobey g; that all these expressions
of avcrfion fully persuaded them of her sincerity. This belief for-
tified their scruples with refpet to the match, and encouraged
them to oppose it. They began with forming among themselves
bonds of confederacy and mutual defence; they entered into a
iccrct correftiondence with the Englifil resident, in order to secure
Elizabeth's assistance when it should become needful "; they en-
deavoured to fill the nation with such apprehensions of danger, as
might counterbalance the influence of those arts which the queen
had employed.

Keith, 283. Knox, 373. ith, ith85, 286. 1 Keith, 289. 292. 298.

BESIDES.

IBESIDES these intri-gues, there were secretly carried on, by both B 0 0 K

Iprties, dark deigns of a more criminal nature, and Imore ;itcd *------'
to the Jilirit of the age. Darnly, impaticlnt of that opollitioli, Scl,',l.,ofc

Db , lily a;nd

which he imputed wholly to lMurray, and resolving at any rate i\l,'l. a-
to get rid of such a powerful enemy, formed a plot to afTl'- gail.Cl c'ac

otther.

finate him, during the meeting of the Convention at Perth. IMur-
ray, on his part, del'airing of preventing the marriage by any
other means, had, together with the duke of Chl.aclhlcraul, audl
the earl of Argyll, concerted measures for seizing L'arnly, and
carrying him a prisoner intp England.

IF either of thcfe confpriracies had taken cflc t, this Convention

might have been attended worith confcqluences extremely tragical
but both were rendered abortive, by the vigilance or good oirtlne
of those againlt whom they were formed. lMurray, blinlg warned
of his danger by some retainers to the court, w'ho fiill fa vourcd
his interest, avoided the blow by not going to Perth. AM ary,
receiving intelligence of Murray's cntc-rprie, retired with the ut-
nmof expedition, along with Darnly, to the other fide of Forth.
Conscious, on both fides, of guilt, and inflamed with rcelntment, it
was impoiTible they could either forget the violence which them-
selves had meditated, or forgive the injuries intended against tlhcm.
From that moment all hope of reconcilement was at an end, and
their mutual enmity burst out with every fynmptom of implacable
hatred'.

ON

The reality of there two oppoflte conspiracies has given occasion to many dif-

putes and much contradiEl'ion. Some deny that any design was formed againflt
the life of Murray; others call in queflion the truth of the conspiracy againhf
Darnly. There feemn, however, to be plausible reasons for believing that there
is some foundation for what has been afrerted with regard to both ; though the zeal
and credulity of party-writers have added to each many exaggerated circumflances.

The

iJ; o o I: ON iMarv's return to i.i!:blur'h, (ie fiu moncd ICe vadils Ob

IJi.

, . .-. proclamation, and iolicitcd thcm by her letters, to rcpair thitherl :!
M'l\ ry iumi- al ill,

i! r v;s-

it.nls ta)!;; The fillo or

i;g arglumcts renlder it probable Lh:tt fomc violence v.:s i:tended n,:ii:ifL

:mns

i g:I inft
M.l urray.

I. 'I Thi1 is positively afbLrted by IuchlI.;:i'., 3) I 2. The E glifhl reCidcnt

writes to Cecil, th:lt tuurr;:y was aflilrdly ii.for.lld that a design v. ws ioi.:ied of
noiriTlerilg lim ;it Perth, land mentions various circuniital;ccs conccrni:,i the nl:i-
ncriin which the crine was to be conmminittel. If thie wh!C i;i(! bcel: a ti.ion of
Lis )wil, or of Murray, it is i :-

olpioble thll.t could h:. Ve ,'rit.l ill thlis

f1rain to sic' ;a clircirning ii!iielr. Kei!th, S. 7. 3. turraiy liililf eon1;:3it;y
:ind llliicly pelrliiltei in afirililig that luch a dicl;zn twas fornltd ;giaitf hlis liie.
Ecilli, i\pp). a'uo. lc wa.s rcmUircd by the' qiieci to tr;anfiiit in wivitinig in :2Ctoun!t
ofl the cnnfpira ch' celicle pretended had be cii lorn,,m agaiiilt his life. 'l'his he diJ
:icco di(:ly; but '; when it was blouzghit to herI- M jefiy by her servants sent for that
plrofirp ', it :ippears l,' l;er highii'es ald her council, th:it his purgation in that behalf
wa':'s !not i) f'iificicIt as the inatter rcquirci." Keith, Appi. C9. il!c was tlhere-
fO'r'e (imnli'ncl to :apptar within thr-e dLiys before the quc in

ill ol'rood. house;

::ii in rric-r to cnci.lc(l'ac liie to do ro, a fCfe-conduct was odtrced to him. Ibid.

i'is.o !e!i he Iha:d on ce contfentced to app.ir, he afterwards declined to do so. But who-

ever c.n1ii'dcr s

fiitu'.ir s f ion, dtl the characiter of tliofe whlo dcircted a'lary's

cou;.cils at that time, wi!l hi;rdl !cceem it a dccifive proof of his guilt, that ie did not
cO ,:sI to il! s hais perf'ii oil fuilc Cculitiy. 4. 'Tle firious paliions of Darnlly, the
;circcncsi of his rc!ebntnlcnt, vhliich fcrtiplcd at nio violence, and the manners of the
;a,g lendeir the iimpltition of firch a ci ilC lets improbable.

II. Th.at Iiurray and his .IfioCidtCs had rc rolvcd to fcize Da;rnly in his return from

Pcrth, appears withi ill greater certainty; r . From thle cxprefs tefcimony of Melvil,
, T2.; iltholgh l rcl'

h ana, p. ':; . and I-Inox, p. 377. ;flcit, without rcafoln, to

Ii Ficlcnt this s s an idle rumour. 2. The ilueclion was put to Randolph, Whether the
-:overnor of Berwick wvould receive Lennox anid his ton, if they were delivered at that
II::lce ? Ih is anlfver was, " that tilcy vould not refutf their own, i. e. their own Iubjeccts,
in whatlfocvcr fort they came tiuto us, i.e. whether they returined to England voluntarily,
:as they b.id bren Crquired, or were brought thither by force." This plainly shews,
tl;ht ionme fuchl d;'iin \vwas in ihand, and Ralndolph (lid not discourage it by tlie answer
w.hicih lie C;ave. Keith, 290. 3. The precipitation with w hit ich the queen retircd,
:;.n the IcAion flie gave for this flddcn flihlt, arc mcntioned by Randolph. Keith,
2ar r . A great part of the Scottish nobles, and among these the earls of Argyll
:iad iRotilcs, who were thicnihlvcs privy to the dcfign, aflert the reality of the conlfii-
iracy. G(ood. vol. ii. 358.
, -All

9

arm1s, for the

l protcetion of her person ag'Kinfl her r(orciL and do- r . 0 k

imcflic enemic''. Shc wvas obeyled v'it al! thle ploml'tl c' ni:! - :

..

. -

crity with wi.-ch fubjelt.; 1-tll to deecnd a .: :,' :nd p,,;': :- :, ';) -
niRration. This populaiity, however, fhl oed in a

o;r;.e' mt 1ia-

sure to Murray, who had dircclcd her adiilnl.ation ;"i Trat
pr'udnceC. 3But the crime ofopp'oling hr

l n;trri:i;?c obliteratcd the

memiory o-f Ils formelr ielrviccs; and r'. y, ii).;;. l ' c(

'

i-

didi)o, an d

a pt to conrider thoie l'tilo ini}t,'.l i. t'_ \; '.l, ta,; ci:'-

Inics to cher pcrlon, dctcr-inlcd to l,:t ' hin sccel the v;'..ilc v-..i;llt
of her vengcance. For this pi-1pofc lie lnmnloncd

liih lto ;i;pear

befor her upon a flior-t warlni.;, to tns.vcrir to l! t!ill:;;; a';
tllould be laidl to his cil:;i '. A tls ver

t

' imie ,i
ill .iy', n;lil

All tlhee circumftl ia ccs ren.ld r tie tri:lth of oloth corlfii lr:

: chs i,: Zi.'. I , t ' c-

may bllclrve how flar this proof, tlnonli; ciralv;w ifrom Iltil:li' I l";.

.,:: ,

i; ':, o

both fi!d s, of leg;al and fbrinl cviJ:nrcC. lIIci:;t:In ;:I:] ! .!OiI'l, iUl t'l' ii ;iC-
Co')tUnts of the conlll)iracy a:liillt

s'Jir ,?, d(il'lcr . i(lr ly i:l ;li at ev eriL', ' ytirui:,l ?,i.l .l'
'lihe nccounlts of the attrempt upon 1):lrnly ire not inllO (:c;i iin riiI.lvl a!l-

t ( ol

thie' Fth coi)n(iir,iutrs \'o;S to carry ,urlyi): a prii)l ll: illo .'.!1',,". :':;

:}.:'

I)rui'oiil miadLe to R andolilp l ;!-iec.s wit!; this. J.iti.!il Ihys, tl.t tlu(- il!;,l '
carry tilhe queen to St, Andrew's, :iand Darnil ts Q;.;Slc (.';iiipi 'l.

h U '. () o:-, i:i

their declaration, a'iirm the defi t f-the Conlir)r:t to h,.l'.'_.':'i to mIrilr.i tin'
anld his father, to confine the I

qu ' in Lh ocl iie''cn durinn l i(g ., .i(u to til.';) l;, :.O ,'' i-:l-

Ilient. 'io believe implicitly wlia'cv lr they .il l it) ;: !i 'i,

i

: is a '' ,' to

which, in eer'y :agc, :lnti:lt:uries arc cxtiei'r'l' iie. /Aicivn p.:i:'s, ho\,p:.."r',
often contain notiiiii IllorC thi.in the flandcrs or a partl, :en t!i lel oi ith! ii i.'. 'il
(lecliartion of the nobleCs referred to, is of this kilnd; it is pl.iiny lrillcolrout , :ind
\'wiitten in the very lceat oi f alio. t' ,iy tigs ;ilttL'. in , ;reC ('t!;' i
or e:t.l-', cr.tted. LeCt li;ll';rr' a'ld iI conlt'.'d r;;(:s be a.t aIu.lihtiO,-. ;:a. \ t ca li -i)if'e,
tilhe' n. illt ha: e h;,dl flic !;-rclitc CC , . : ;i;:' n:':

i ;.), !'s .'. ti':'. cor!l rcuti'tc

to in;l):ilii tl i r s.i ' n

i.)i tl '" i r l;' .; , :..d t(, 'L ''; i_' -rc;i.t u!

. '

. '.:':!.';,i't; I)(t', at Pt;itt

time, ti quCee 's cS !d:tili!.r i: ! ;.:i. ) i.l i: :, ,.:; ,i,i, ..;.,t:;i Il r pruocecit C t o ft ch
extre'Cn: itics. it is lii-:v.- l'

r-i n:;t ';:l;'.; :, that ii :il

: tie prt icl.eiiatiolis iag hitiii iItrr:;',

of whlich so many are publilLill in: Ke.it!, A,'"ti'TJix oo', &,:c. ncitlici thle 'iuiC.'t
;t.teinapt ponll J)a:it;l , ilO t!;:t '.;'i:ich h' i:: al ic cd! to fiave ijr:n'd ;l,:,iilf thlle c t!'i.

_,
liers'e:, tire ccr o1nce ;:iclitiollc .!,

" ICitih, 2398. I Keith, Ap;pend. ioS.

dhe

B O O IK tle lords who adhered to him, were afilmbled at Stirling, to deli-

_ .- l berate what courfc they fiould hold in such a difficult conjunQture.

5 But the current of popular favour rall o flrongly againfi them,

and, notwithstanding some fears and jealousies, there prevailed in
the nation fucl a general disposition to gratify the queen in a
matter which so nearly concerncd her, that, without coming to
any other conclusion, than to implore the queen of England's pro-
teclion, they put an end to their inefceaual consultations, and
returned every man to his own house.

TOGErlIERt with this dilcovery of the weakness of her ene-

mies, the confluence of her fubjedts fiom all corners of the king-
dom afforded Mary an agreeable proof of her own firength.
WVhile the queen was in this prosperous situation, she deter-
mined to bring to a period an affair which had so long engrossed

Celcbrcate her heart- and occupied her attention. On the twenty-ninth of
her mnarringe
with ])arnly. July, lhe married lord Darnly. The ceremony was performed in

the queen's chapel, according to the rites of the Romifi church;
the pope's bull dispensing with their marriage having been pre-
vioufly obtained n'. She iffiued at the iiume time proclamations,
conferring the title of King of Scots upon her husband, and com-
manding that henceforth all writs at law flhould run in the joint
names of king and queen ". Nothing can be a stronger proof of the
violence of Mary's love, or the weakness of her councils, than this
last ftep. Whether fie had any right to chufe a husband without
content of parliament, was, in that age, a matter of some dif-
pute ; that flhe had no right to confer upon him, by her private
authority, the title and dignity of king, or by a simple procla-
mation to raile her lhufand to be the mailer of her people, fterms
to be beyond all doubt. Francis II. indeed, bore the fame title.

Keith, 307. ' Anderson, i. 33. See Append. No. XI. o Buclan. 341.

It

It was not, however, the gift of the queen, but of the nation; B O O I
and the content of parliament was obtained, before he ventured -.--.--
to aflume it. Darnly's condition, as a fuljedt, rendered it fill
more necessary to have the concurrence of the filprcme council in
his favour. Such a violent and unprecedented firetch of prerc-
gative, as the substituting a proclamation in place of an act of
parliament, might have justly alarmed the nation. lBut at that
time the queen pofleffed so entirely the confidence of her fuijeds,
that, notwithstanding all the clamours of the malecolntents, no
symptoms of general discontent appeared on that account.

EVEN amidst that scene of joy which always accompanies fitc-

cefsful love, Mary did not susser the course of her vcngeance
againit the malecontent nobles to be interrupted. Three days
after the marriage, Murray was again fuimmoned to court, under
the severest penalties, and upon his non-appearance the rigour of
justice took place, and he was declared an out-law . At tlc liame
time the queen set at liberty lord Gordon, who, ever fincc his
father's infurretion in the year one thousand five hundred and
fixty-two, had been detained a prisoner; she recalled the carl of
Sutherland, who, on account of his concern in that collfiiracy, lihad
fled into Slanders; and the permitted Botllwell to return again
into Scotland. The first and last of these were among the moflt
powerful fubjeds in the kingdom, and all of them animated with
implacable hatred to Murray, whom they deemed the enemy
of their families and the author of their own fiffeings. Thlis
common hatred became the foundation of the flricteft union with
the queen, and gained them an ascendant over all her councils.
Murray himself confidered this confederacy with his avowed enc-

P Keith, 309, 310.
VOL. I. P p mics,

1 0 0 K rmies, as a more certain indication than any mcaiiure flic had yce
I-_-- taken, of her inexorable rcfcntlmcnt.

15?;-

]Marches a- TII. E malccontents had not yet openly takcn up arlns ;. But the
iad his al-y queen having ordered her fuiljedes to march against them, they
CiaLCs. s were driven to the last extrclity. They found theemnflvcs unable to

make head againfl the numerous forces which Alary had affenblcd;
and fled into Argylefhire, in expecation of aid fiom Elizabeth,
to whom they had secretly dispatched a mnclenger, in order to
implore her immediate afliflance .

E:izibcth in- MEANWIILE, Elizabeth endeavoured to cmbarrafs Mary, by
terpofes in
their flvour, a newlrC declaration of disgust at her conduc-. She blamed both her

choice of lord Darnly, and the precipitation with which lhe had
concluded the marriage. She required Lcnnox and Darnly, whom
fle still called her subjeCts, to return into England ; and at the
fame time fihe warmly interceded in behalf of Murray, whose
behaviour flle represented to be not only innocent but laudable.
This message, so mortifying to the pride of the queen, and so full
of contempt for her husband, was rendered still more infup-
portable by the petulant and saucy demcanour of Tanmworth, the
person who delivered it'. Mary vindicated her own condudt with
warmth, but with great strength of reason; and rejected the in-
terceflion in behalf of Murray, not without signs of resentment

'i After their fruitless consultation in Stirling, the lords retired to their own houses.

Keith, 304. Murray was flill at St. Andrew's on July 22. Keith, 306. By the
places of rendezvous, appointed for the inhabitants of the different counties,
August 4, it appears that the queen's intention was to march into Fife, the county
in which Murray, Rothes, Kirkaldy, and other chiefs of the malecontents resided.
Keith, 310. Their flight into the weft, Keith, 312. prevented this expedition,
and the formerrendezvous was altered. Keith, 310.

Keith, 312. Knox, 380. 5 Camb. 398.

7 at

at Elizabeth's pretending to intcrmcddle in the internal govcrnment : o o K
of her kingdom . ', .-._

SuE did not, on that account, intermit in the leans the ardour

with which sic pursucd Murray and his adhcrents ". They now
appeared openly in arnms; and having received a finall lfpply in
money from Elizabeth x, were endeavouring to raifc their followers
in the western counties. IBut M\Aary's vigilance hindered them
firom aifembling in any considerable body. All her nilitary ope-
rations at that time were concerted with wisdom, cxccutcd wll il
vigour, and attended willi f-cccfs. In order to cnourage her
troops, she hrcrfelf marched along with them, rode with loaded
piflols ', and endured all the fttigucs of war witl admirable for-
titude. Her alacrity inspired her forces with an invincible refo--
lution, which, together witli thcir luperiority in number, deterred
tile malccontents from facing them in the field ; but having artfully
passed the qucen's army, they marched with great rapidity to
Edinbur-gh, and endeavoured to rouse the inhabitants of tlat city
1o arms. Tile queen did not fuitfr them to remain long un- Auguf13i.
moleftcld ; and on her approach, they were forced to abandon that
place, and retire ii confiulion towards the wcl-crn borders '.

As it was uncertain, for some time, vlihat route tlicy had taken, They are

MIary employed that interval in providing for the lecurity of th ire rin oJ),nj;-
counties in the heart of the kingdom. She seizcd the 'paces of ; ad.

' Keith, Append. 99.
UThe nmol confidlrable pcrfons who joined Murray, were, the duke of Chatcl-

hcrlilt, the earls of Argyll, Glencairn, Rothes; lord Boyd and Ochiltrec; tlhe
lairds of (grnngc, ClliilBghilu cad, Balcomie, Carnylic, Lawers, Bar, Drcg-
horn, Pittarrow, Conptroli-r, and the tutor of Pitcur. Inox, 382.

' Knox, 380. Y' Iith, Append. 164. Ibid. 3r5.

P p 2 strength

B 0 0 yK strength which belonged to the rebels; and obliged the confiderabfe
--,-- barons in those shires which {he most fufpeaed, to join in affocia-

tions for her defence . Having thus left all the country behind her
in tranquillity, she, with an army eighteen thousand firong,
marched towards Dumfries, where the rebels then were. During
their retreat, they had sent letters to the queen, from almost every
place where they halted, full of fubmiflion, and containing various
overtures towards an accommodation. But Mary, who deter-
mined not to let flip such a favourable opportunity of crushing the
mutinous spirit of her fubjeds, rejeced them with disdain. As
the advanced, the malecontents retired. And, having received no
effectual aid from Elizabethb, they despaired of any other means
oaober 20. of safety, fled into England, and put themselves under the pro-

teclion of the earl of Bedford, warden of the marches.

They meet NOTHING, which Bedford's personal friendhiip for Murray
wvith unex-
pceed ill- could supply, was wanting to render their retreat agreeable. But
frm Elizat Elizabeth herself treated them with extreme neglect. She had
beth. fully gained her end, and, by their means, had excited filch discord

and jealousies among the Scots, as would, in all probability, long
difiraat and weaken Mary's councils. Her business now was to
save appearances, and to justify herself to the ministers of France
and Spain, who accused her of fomenting the troubles in Scotland
by her intrigues. The expedient she contrived-for her vindication
strongly displays her own character, and the wretched condition of
exiles, who are obliged to depend on a foreign prince. Murray
and Hamilton, abbot of Kilwinning, being appointed by the other
fugitives to wait on Elizabeth, instead of meeting with that wel-
come reception which was due to men, who, out of confidence in

* Keith, Append. 113. b See Appendix, No. XII. XIII.

] her

her promises, and in order to forward her designs, had hazarded C 2 o xK
their lives and fortunes, could not even obtain the favour of an t--
audience, until they had meanly consented to acknowledge, in the
presence of the French and Spanifl ambafTadors, that Elizabeth
had given them no encouragement to take arms. No fooncr did
they make this declaration, than The aftoniflled them with this
reply: " You have declared the truth; I am far from eitting an
example of rebellion to my own subjects, by countenancing those
'who rebel against their lawful prince. The trcafon, of which you
have been guilty, is detestable; and as traitors I banilh you from
my prefencec." Notwithstanding tllis scene of farce and offalfe-
hood,. so diflonourable to all the persons who a&ed a part in it,
Elizabeth permitted the malecontents peaceably to reside in lier
dominions, supplied them secretly with money, and renewed her
interceflion with the Scottifll queen in their favour ".

TrE advantage she had gained over them did not l'atisfy Mary;

the rcfolved to follow the blow, and to prevent a party, which fimc
dreaded, from ever recovering any footing in the nation. With
this view ime called a meeting of parliament; and in order that
a sentence of forfeiture might be legally pronounced againif the
baniflhed lords,. fle fuinmoned them, by public proclamation, to
appear before it .

TIE duke of Chatelherault, on his humble application, obtained Dec. z,.

a separate pardon; but not without difficulty, as the king vio-
lently opposed it. He was obliged, however, to leave the king-
dom, and to reside for some time in France .

TI.E numerous forces which Mary brought into the field, the
vigour with which she aded, and the length of time ihe kept them

' Melv. 112. " Knox, 389. c Keith, 320. f Knox, 389,.

in.

B O O K in arms, resemble the efforts of a prince with revenues much more

III.
<e^ -J considerable than those which flle pofleffed. But armies were then

,s65. levied and maintained by princes at finall charge. The vafial

followed his superior, and the superior attended the monarch,
at his own expence. Six hundred horlemen, however, and three
companies of foot, besides her guards, received regular pay from
the queen. This extraordinary charge, together with the de-
burfements occasioned by her marriage, cxhaufted a treasury which
was far from being rich. In this exigency, many devices were
fallen upon for raising money. Fines were levied on the towns
of St. Andrew's, Perth, and Dundee, which were futlpeed of
favouring the malecontcnts. An unusual tax was imposed on the
boroughs throughout the kingdom ; and a great fulm was demanded
of the citizens of Edinburgh, by way of loan. This unprece-
dented exacion alarmed the citizens. They had recourse to de-
lays, and flarted diflicultics in order to evade it. Thce Mlary
construcd to be ads of avowed ditfobedicnce, and infiantly com-
mritted c vcral of them to prilbn. But this icvcrity did not ful)luc the
undaunted ipirit of liberty which prevailed among the inhabitants.
The queen was obliged to mortgage to the city tlleJi/cprio-'is of the
towni of Lcith, by which fle oblt:incd a confidetrable sinn of mo-
ney '. The thirds of eccletiafiical benefices proved anotlicr Iource
'wecnce the queen deivtled ibme fuppliy. About this time we lid
the protcflant clergy comp)laining more bitterly than ever of their
povcrt'y. The army, it is probable, exhauficd a great part of that
fund vwicih w as aippropriated for their maintenance ".
(iuirJh as. 'l'is n asTcmblies of tlle church were not unconceined fiecdators

of tihe commotions of this turbulent year. In the meeting held
the twenty-fourth of June, previous to the queen's marriage,

1 Knox, 3S3. 386. ' Mitl. Hist. of Edinburgh, 27.

several

several of the malecontent nobles were pricfint, and seem to have ° K
had great influence on its dccilions. Tile high firain in which '-----.
the assembly addressed tile queen, can be imputed only to tihofe
fears and jealoulles with regard to religion, which they endea-
voured to infule into the nation. The airecnbly complained, with
folnc bittcrnefs, of the flop which had been put to the progrcif of
the Reformation by the queen's arrival in Scotland l; they required
not only the total fuppreclion of the popill worfi-i throughout the
kingdom, but even in the queen's own chapel ; and betides the legal
eftablifhmcnt of the protestant religion, they (lemandetl that IlMary
herself ihould publicly cmurace it. The queen, after ioine dlli-
beration, replied, that neither her conscience nor her intcrell would
permit her to take fucl a Rfcp. The former would for ever re-
proach her for a change which proceeded from no inward con-
viaion, the latter would fufler by the offence which her apoftacy
must give to the king, of France, and her other allies on the
continent '.

IT is remarkable, that the prof)crous situation of the queen's

affairs during this year, began to work some change in favour of
her religion. Tle carls of Lcnnox, Athol, and Calils, openly
attended mass ; fice herself afforded the catholics a more avowed
protcceion than formerly; and, by her permiflion, tome of the
ancient monks ventured to preach publicly to the people '

i Knox, 374 376. k Ibid. 389, 390.

# BOOK IV.

T II E
H I S T O R Y

0 F
COT L A N D.

B OO ITV.

S the day appointed for the meeting of parliament ap- B o o ;.
proached, Mary and her iniftcrs were employed in dc- lV

liberating concerning the course which it was moist propcr to hold Mi,' de66i-
'with regard to the exiled nobles. Many motives prompted her to berations

concerning
let no bounds to the rigour of justice. The malecontents had theexiledno-

bles.

laboured to defeat a scheme, which her intcrcft conspired with her
paflions in rendering dear to her; they were the leaders of a
party, whole friendship the had been obliged to court, vwhile ihe
held their principles in abhorrence; and they were firmly attached
to a rival, whom she had good reason both to fear and to hate.

BUT, on the other hand, several weighty considerations might

be urged. The noblemen, whofc fate was in suspense, were
among the most powerful subjects in the kingdom; their wealth
great, their connexions extensive, and their adherents numerous.

VOL. I. Q_q They

Is o o K They were now at mercy, the ol)jeds of compafllon, and suing

Iv.
---- -- - for pardon with tile moll humble fubmillion.

1566.

IN those circumflances, an ad of clemency swould exalt the

queen's character, and appear no less splendid arong foreigners,
than acceptable to her own fubjeds. Mary hcrfelf, though highly
incensed, was not inexorable; but the king's rage was implacable
and unrelenting. They were solicited in behalf' of the fugitives.
from various quarters. Morton, Ruthven, Maitland, and all who
had Leen members of the Congregation, were not forgetful of their
ancient union with Murray and llis fcilow-fufferers; nor negledful
of their fiifety, which they deemed of great importance to the
kingdom. Melvil, who at that time poffelfed the queen's con-
fidence, seconded their solicitations. And Murray having stooped
so low as to court Rizio, that favourite, who was desirous of fe-
curing his protection against the king, whose displeasure he had
lately incurred, seconded the intercessions of his other friends with
the whole of his influence . The interposition of fir Nicholas
Throgmorton, who had lately been Elizabeth's ambassador in Scot-
land, in behalf of the exiles, was of more weight than all there,
and attended with more success. Throgmorton, out of enmity to
Cecil, had embarked deeply in all the intrigues which were carried
on at the English court, in order to undermine the power and
credit of that minifler. I-Ie espoused, for this reason, the cause
of the Scottish queen, towards whose title and pretensions the other
was known to bear little favour; and ventured, in the prefcnt
critical junCture, to write a letter to Mary, containing the mofl
salutary advices with regard to her conduc. He recommended
the pardoning of the earl of Murray and his associates, as a
measure no less prudent than popular. " An aCtion of this

Melv. 125.

nature,'

nature," fays he, " the pure efMCL: ofy our IMjecfy's generosity, will B 0 0 K
spread the fame of your lenity and moderation, and engage the _ ---.

1566.

Englif to look towards your acceflion to their tlihone, not only
without prejudice, but with deflre. 3By the iame means, a perl'cc:
harmony will be rcflored among your own fbiljecLs, who, if any
rupture should happen with lEngland, will serve you with that
grateful zeal which your clemency cannot fail of inafiring "."

THESE prudent remonfl-rances of Throgmorton, to wilich his Shercrolhve

to treat t!icll!

reputation for wisdom, and known attachment to the queen, added ,wi, clelcr-
great authority, made a deep impreflion on her 1pirit. Her cour- cy.
tiers cultivated this happy dilpofition, and prevailed on her, not-
withstanding the king's inflexible temper, to facrilice her own
private refentinclt to the intercfflion of her iubjects and the
wiflies of her friends C. With this view, the parliament which
had been called to meet on the fourth of February, was prorogued
to the seventh of April J; and in the mean time she was bury in
confidering the manner and form in which fle fllould extend her
favour to the lords who were under disgrace.

THOUGII MVary difcovcred on this occasion a mind naturally is deverted

from this re--

prone to humanity and capable of forgiving, ihe wanted firmness, solution by
however, to resist the influence which was fatally employed to tin ofCita-
disappoint the effets of this amiable disposition. About this time, France, and

her zeal for

and at no great distance from each other, two envoys arrived from Popery.
the French king. The former was intrustcd with matters of mere February 3.
ceremony alone; he congratulated the queen on her marriage,
and investcd the king with the cnfigns of the order of St. Michael.

'lMclv,. 19. C Ibid. 125. d Good. vol. i. 224.

Qq 2 The

13 o o K The instructions of the latter related to matters of more import-

IV.

-- ance, and produced greater effeets .
1566.

AN interview between Charles IX. and his fifler the queen of

Spain had been often proposed; and after many obstacles, arising
from the opposition of political interest, was at last appointed at
Bayonne. Catherine of Medicis accompanied her son; the duke
of Alva attended his miflrefs. Amidst the scenes of public pomp
and pleasure, which leemed to be the sole occupation of both
courts, a scheme was formed, and measures concerted, for exter-
minating the I-Iugonots in France, the Protestants in the Low
Countries, and for suppressing the Reformation throughout all
Europe f. The ative policy of pope Pius IV. and the zeal of the
cardinal of Lorrain, confirmed and encouraged dispositions so suit-
able to the genius of the Romish religion, and so beneficial to their
own order.

IT was an account of this holy league which the second French

envoy brought to Mary, conjuring her at the fame time, in the
name of the king of France and the cardinal of Lorrain, not to
restore the leaders of the protestants in her kingdom to power and
favour, at the very time when the catholic princes were combined
to destroy that ifet in all the countries of Europe g.

POPERY is a species of false religion, remarkable for the strong

poffefiion it takes of the heart. Contrived by men of deep infight
in the human character, and improved by the experience and
obfcrvation of many successive ages; it arrived at last to a degree
of perfecion, which no former system of fupcrftition had ever

' Keith, 325. Append. 167. f Thuan. lib. 37. g Me!v. 126.

attainedl

attained. There is no power in the underflanding, and no pai on B ° K
in the heart, to which it does not preisnt objects adapted to rouse --
and to interest them. Neither the love of pleasure which at that 566
time prevailed in the court of France, nor the purIuits of ambition
'which occupied the court of Spain, had secured them from the
dominion of bigotry. Laymen and courtiers were agitated with
that furious and unmerciful zeal which is commonly confidercd as
peculiar to ecclesiastics; and kings and miniftcrs thought theim-
selves bound in conscience to extirpate the protestant doc'trine.
Mary herself was deeply tindured with all the prejudices of
popery; a passionate attachment to that iuperftition is vilible in
every'part of her character, and runs through all the fccnes of hcr
life: fle was devoted too with the utmost fubinillion to the princes
of Lorrain, her uncles; and had been accultomcd from her infancy
to liften to all their advices with a filial relpect. The prolpeet of
restoring the public exercise of her own religion, the pleasure of
complying with her uncles, and' the hopes of gratifying the French
monarch, whom the present situation of her affairs in England
made it neceiary to court, counterbalanced all the prudent con-
fiderations which had formerly weighed with her. She inrialtly
joined the confederacy, which had been formed for tlhe dciltuicioa
of the protestants, and altered the whole plan of her condudt with
regard to Murray and his adherents ".

To this fatal resolution may be imputed all the subsequent cala-

mities of Mary's life. Ever since her return into Scotland, fortune
may be laid to have been propitious to her, rather than adverc ;
and if her prosperity did not rife to any great height, it had, how-
ever, fuflered no considerable interruption. A thick and fettled cloud

h Se Append. No. XIV.

of

B 0V 0 1 of adversity, vith few gleams of hope, and none of real enjoy-

IV.
'----- ment, covers the remainder of her days.

15/6.

A parlia- THE cffeds of the new system which Mary had adopted were
nent cilltte soon visible. The time of the prorogation of parliament was
to attaint the
xlied lno- fhiortened; and by a new proclamation the twelfth of March

was fixed for its meeting . MIary resolved, without any further
delay, to proceed to the attainder of the rebel lords, and at the
fame time determined to take some fIeps towards the re-eftablifil-
nient of the Romifl religion in Scotland '. The Lords of tle
Articles were cllofcn, as usual, to prepare the business rwhicl was
to come before the parliament. They were all persons in whom
the queen could confide, and bent to promote her designs. The
ruin of iMurray and his party seemed now inevitable, and the
danger of the reformed church imminent, when an event unex-
pe&edly happened which saved both. If we regard either the
barbarity of that age, when such acs of violence were com-

Keith, 326.
It is not on the authority of Knox alone, that we charge the queen with the

design of re-establishing the Roman catholic religion, or at Icaft of exempting the pro-
fcfolrs of it from the rigour of those penal laws to which they were subjected. He
indeedl afi'rts that the altars, which should have been cercted in the church of St.
Giles, were already provided, 394. I. Mary herself, in a letter to the archbishop
of Glafgowv, her ambal'ador in France, acknowledges, " that in thatparliament she
intended to have done some good, with rcfpec to refloring the old religion."
Keith, 33r. 2. The spiritual lords, i. e. the Popih ecclefiaflics, had, by her
authority, resumed their ancient place in that aflinbly. Ibid. 3. She had joined
the confederacy at Bayonne. Keith, Append. I67. 4. She allowed mass to be
celebrated in difierent parts of the kingdom, ibid.; and declared that she would have
mass free for all men who would hear it. Good. vol. i. 274. 5. Blackwood,
who.was furnished by the archbilhop of Glasgow with materials for writing his Mar-
tyre de AJla;ie, affirms that the queen intended to have procured, in this parliament,
if not the re-eftablifliment of the catholic religion, at leafl something for the cafe of
catholics. Jebb, vol. ii. 204.
*7 6 mon,

mon, or the mean condition of the unhappy person who fuilrcd, 1B 0 I

IV.
the event is little remarkable; but if we reilea upon the circurn- -----

15 66.
ftanccs with which it was attended, or upon the consequences antd prevcnt-

cd by tile

which followed it, it appears extremely memorable ; and the rife con'!ircy a-
and progress of it defcrve to be traced with great care. gainll Rizio.

DARNLY'S external accomplifhmcnts had cxcited that fiidden Darnlyl IcL;

thile (1ucci i'

and violent paflron which raised himi to the throne. But the al:;iloi.
qualities of his mind correlponded ill with the beauty of his person.
Of a weak understanding, and without experience, conceited, at
the fame time, of his own abilities, and ascribing his extraor-
dinary fucccfs entirely to his diltinguillied merit. All the queen's
favour made no imprefiion on such a temper. All her gentleneis
could not bridle his imperious anl ungovernable plirit. All her
attention to place about him prerfons capable of direling his con-
ducl-, could not preserve him from rails and imprudent aclions
Fond of all the amusements, and even prone to all the vices of
youth, he became by degrees carclefs of her person, and a stranger
to her company. To a woman, and a queen, fullc behaviour was
intolerable. The lower flie had stoopcd in order to rails him, his
behaviour appeared the more ungenerous and criminal: and in
proportion to the strength of her rftir afrc&ion, was the violence
with which her disappointed paflion now operated. A fie inontihs
after the marriage their domefic quarrels began to be observcd.
The extravagance of Darnly's ambition gave riic to thcfe. Instead
of being satisfied with a share in the aiminitration of govern-
ment, or with the title of king, which Mary, by an unprecedented
stretch of power, had conferred on him, he demanded thle Crown

t GcoJ. vol. i. 122.

lMatri-

B 0 0 K Matrimonial with most insolent importunity . Though Mary

Iv.

alleged that this gift was beyond her power, and that the authority
;566. of parliament mutf be interposed to bestow it, he wanted either

underflanding to comprehend, or temper to admit, so just a de-
fence; and often renewed and urged his request.

starpes Ri- RIzzO, whom the king had at first taken into great confidence,
zio to be the
cause ofit. did not humour him in there follies. By this he incurred Henry's

difplcaftire; and as it was impoitble for Mary to behave towards
lher husband with the fame affetion which distinguished the first
and happy days of their union, he imputed this coldness, not to
his own behaviour, which had so well merited it, but to the infi-
nuations of Rizio. Mary's own conduEt confirmed and strength-
.ened these suspicions. She treated this stranger with a familiarity,
and admitted him to a share in her confidence, to which neither
his firlt condition, nor the office fle had lately bestowed on him,
gave him any title. I-Ie was perpetually in her presence, inter-
meddled in every business, and, together with a few favourites,
was the companion of all her private amusements. The haughty
spirit of Darnly could not bear the intrusion of fuich an upstart;
and impatient of any delay, and unrestrained by any scruple, he
inflantly resolved to get rid of him by violence.

R;izI hated AT the fame time another design, which took its rife from very
hb\ the ftie'nds
,f ihe xiled different motives, was carrying on against the life of Rizio.

lQ-US I~Morton, Ruthven, Lindsay, and Mlaitland, were the contrivers of

it. In all former commotions they had been flridly united with

"' Kcith, 329, Id. App. 165, 166. Knox, 404. The eagerncfs of the king

to obtaill the Crogun AMat-imonial is not surprising, when the extent of the powers
which that title conveyed, as explained in the text and note p. 135, is taken into
ccnfid.cr.ation.

Murray, though in the late infurredion they had deserted him, E °0 K
for various rcatons. Morton was nearly allied to the family of -----
Angus, and, during the minority of the present earl, aaed as chief
of the name of Douglas. Ruthven was married to the king's aunt.
Lindsay's wife was of the fame blood. All there had warmly
concurred with the queen in promoting a marriage which did so
much honour to the house of Douglas, and naturally expctied,
that, under a king of their own blood, the chief manaagement of
affairs would be committed to them. Maitland, with his usual
sagacity, foresaw that Murray's opposition to the match would
prove dangerous and ineffeAual ; but whoever ruled at court, he
hoped, by his dextcrity and talents, to render hilnielf ncceflary
and of importance. They were all equally dilappointcd in their
expeaations. The king's hcadftrong temper rendered him in-
capable of advice. The queen could not help difirutling men
who had been so long and so intimately conneced witlh Murray,
and gave herself up entirely to fucli counsellors as complied with
all her inclinations. The return of that nobleman and his fol-
lowers was therefore the only event which could restore Morton,
M4aitland, and their afrociates, to their former ascendant over the
qucen's councils. For this reason, nothing could be more mortify-
ing to them, than the rciolution which Mary had taken to treat the
exiles with rigour. This they imputed to Rizio, who, after he had
engaged to aid Murray with all his interest, was now the mofl active
inflrumcnt in promoting the measures which were concerted for
the ruin of that nobleman. This officious zeal completed the
difgufl which they had conceived against him, and inspired them
with thoughts of vengeance, in no wife suitable to jultice, to hu-
manity, or to their own dignity.

VOL. IL R r W SIL

B3 0 IK WMIILrE 1i -v,, ; :.e ruminating upon their scheme, the king con-

Iv.
-----* municated ]is ! clltiuon to be avenged of Rizio to lord Ruthven,

They con- and implored his aiiiflance, and that of his friends, towards the
bto 'inrderC execution of this design. Nothing could be more acceptable to
1him. theem than this overture. They saw at once all the advantages

they would reap, by the concurrence of such an aflbciatc. Their
own private revenge upon Rizio would pass, they hoped, for
an aCt of obedience to the king-; and they did not dcfpair of
obtaining the restoration of their baniihed friends, and fccurity
for the protestant religion, as the price of their compliance with
his will.

BUT as Henry was no less fickle than rafli, they hesitated for

some time, and determined to advance no farther, without taking
every pollible precaution for their own safety. They did not, in
the mean time, inffcr the king's resentment to abate. AMorton,
who was inferior to no man of tlat intriguing age in all the arts
of insinuation and address, took the young prince under his ma-
nagement. I-Ic wrought upon his ruling paflion, ambition to obtain
the Matrimonial Crown. I-Ie rprelfented Rizio's credit with
the queen to be the chief and only ol)ftacle to his success in that
demand. This minion alone, he laid, poflsieed her confidence;
and out of complaisance to him, her subjects, her nobility, and
even her husband, were excluded from any participation of her
lccret councils. Under the appearance of a confidence merely
political, he insinuated, and the king perhaps believed, that a
familiarity of a quite different and very criminal nature might be
concealed ". Such various and complicated paflions raged in the

king's

Of all our hiflorians, Buchanan alone avowedly accuses Mary of a criminal love
ior Rizio, 340. 344. Klnox flighlly insinuates that such a suspicion was entertained,

7*»,~~ .:~ I~
* ~-~39L

killg's bosom with the utmofl: fury. ie became more impatient °0 \ K
than cver of any delay, and even threatened to firike the inl- ~ --
tended blow with his own hand. At last, preliminaries were
fettled on both fides, and articles for their mutual fiecurity agreed
upon. The king engaged to prevent the attainder of the banificd
lords, to consent to their return into Scotland, to obtain for theni
an ample rcmilion of all their crimes, and to fIpport, to the ut-
,nofi of his power, the religion which was now eflablifhed il the
;ingdloml. On their parts, they undertook to procure the Crown
Matrimonial for -Ienry, to secure his right of lfcceflion, if the.
queen should die before him, and to defend that right to the utter-
moif, againif wlatever perloii ihould presume to dispute it; and
if either Rizio, or any other perion, fhlould happen to be killed in.
prosecuting the delign, the king promised to acknowledge him-

391. i\4elvil, in a converfaition with the qucen, intimates that he was afraid her
tlmiliarity with Rizio might be liable to mi/coniftruction, I to. T'hi king hilnifill
seems, both by Mclvil's account, and by his expoflulation with the queen, which
Ruthvcn mentions, to have given credit to there suspicions. Melv. 127. Keith,
Append. 123, x?.4. That the king's suspicions were firong, is likewicf evident
from the paper publifiled Append. No. XV. But in opposition to thcfe fLluicions,
and they arc nothing more, we may observe that Raulct, the queen's French fecre-
tary, was difinificd from her ferricc, and Rizio advanced to that office in December
1564S. Kcith, 268. It was in confequcnce of this preferment, that he acquired his
great credit with the queen. Melv. 107. Darnly arrived in Scotland about two
nonths after. Keith, 269. The queen immediately conceived for him a paflion,
which had all the symptoms of genuine and violent love. Rizio aided this paflion,
and promoted the marriage with all his intcreft, Melv. ini. D)uring some months
after the marriage, the queen's fondilefs for Darnly continued. She soon proved
with child. From this enumeration ofcircumnfances, it appears almost impofilble
that the queen, unless we suppose her to have been a woman utterly abandoned, could
carry on any criminal intrigue with Rizio. But the silence of Randolph, the Eng-
lifl resident, a nan abundantly ready to mention and to aggravate Mary's faults,
znd who does not once insinuate that her confidence in Rizio concealed any thing
criminal, is in itlclf a fiuficicnt vindication of her innocence.

R r a self

B13 0 0 self to be the author of the enterprise, and to protec those who

Iv.
.- --.-- were embarked in it

1566.

Perpetrate NOTHING now remained but to concert the plan of operation,
that crime in
the; qweuC' to chulc the acors, and to aflign them their parts in pcrpetrating

p;lac this detefPable crime. Every circumstance here paints and charac-

tcrifes the mann-rs and men of that age, and fills us with horror
at both. The place chosen for committing such a deed, was the
queen's bedchamber. Though IMary was now in the sixth monthl
of her pregnancy, and though Rizio might have been fcized else-
where without any difficulty, the king pitched upon this place,
that lie might enjoy the malicious pleasure of reproaching Rizio
with his crimes before the queen's face. The earl of Morton, the
lord high chancellor of the kingdom, undertook to direc an enter-
priic, carried on in defiance of all the laws of which he was bound
to be the guardian. The lord Ruthvcn, who had been confined to
his bed for three months by a very dangerous distemper, and who
was frill so feeble that he could hardly walk, or bear the weight
of his own armour, was intrusted with the executive part; and
while he himself needed to be supported by two men, he came
abroad to commit a murder in the presence of his sovereign.

ON the ninth of March, Morton entered the court of the palace

with an hundred and sixty men; and without noise, or meeting
with any resistance, seized all the gates. While the queen was
at supper with the countess of Argyll, Rizio, and a few donmeftics,
the king suddenly entered the apartment by a private pafiage. At
his back was Ruthven, clad in complete armour, and with that
ghastly and horrid look which long sickness had given him. Three

Good, vol. i, 266.
7'3 or

or four of his inol triify accomplices followed him. Such an B o ) ,

IV.

unusual apnara nce alarlmdcl thlolc who were precfnt, Rizio iufli:ally .-
apprehen:dled that ie iwas the x icim at x hon tlc blol was ainmed;
and in the uttnofl ccticirnation retired Clhiuld the queen, of whom
he laid hold, hoping that the revercinc due to her pcrlfon might
prove some protccion to him. The coniiirlators had procededc
too far to be restrained by any consideration of that kind. N utm-
bers of armed men rulled into the chamber. Ruthvcn drew his
dagger, and with a furious mienI and voice commanded Rlizio to
leave a place of which he was unworthy, and which lie had oc-
cupied too long. Mary imployed tears, and entreaties, and
threatcnings, to iave her favouritc. But, notwitlhfanding all thelcx,
he was torn from her by violence, and before he could be dragged
through the next apartment, the rage of his enemies put an cndl
to his life, piercing his body with fifty-fix wounds '.

ATIIOL, Iuntly, Bothwell, and other confidents of the queen

who had apartments in the palace, were alarmed at the uproar,
and filled with the utmost terror on their own account; but either
no violence was intended againfl them, or the conspirators durflt
not flicd the noblelf blood in the kingdom in the fnme illegal
manner with which they had ventured to take the life of a
_tranger. Some of them were difmlifled, and others made their
elcape.

TI-IE conspirators, in the mean time, kept pofelion of the They confine

the queen

palace, and guarded the queen with the utmost care. A procla- herrelf,
:mation was published by the king, prohibiting the parliament to
meet on the day appointed; and measures were taken by him for

See Appendix, No. XV.

p.cventing

B OOV K preventing any tumult in the city q. Murray, Rothes, and theil
L_- .~-_ followers, being informed of every ftep taken againfl Rizio, arrived

1G56. at Edinburgh next evening. Murray was graciously received both

by the king and queen : by the former, on account of the articles
wlhich had been agreed upon between them ; by the latter, becaufc
fle hoped to prevail on him, by gentle treatment, not to take part
with the murderers of Rizio. Their power she fill felt and
dreaded; and the insult which they had offered to her authority,
and even to her person, so far exceeded any crime she could impute
to Murray, that in hopes of wreaking her vengeance on them,
lhe became extremely willing to be reconciled to him. The obli-
gations, however, which Murray lay under to men who had
hazarded their lives on his account, engaged him to labour for
their safety. The queen, who scarce had the liberty of choice
left, was persuaded to admit Morton and Ruthven into her pre-
ience, and to grant them the promise of pardon in whatever terms
they .hould deeim neceflary for their own security.

E:it fhc gains THE king, meanwhile, flood aftonilhed at the boldness and
thekingl , and
makes hler fuccels of his own enterprise, and uncertain what course to hold.
fca(cpe. The queen observed his irresolution, and availed herself of it. She

employed all her art to disengage him from his new associates.
His consciousness of the insult which he had offered to so illufirious
a benefadrefs, inspired him with uncommon facility and com-
plaifance. In spite of all the warnings he received to distrust the
queen's artifices, she prevailed on 'him to dismiss the guards which
the conspirators had placed on her person; and that fame night he
made his escape along with her, attended by three persons only,
AIarch x. and retired to Dunbar. The scheme of their flight had been con-

s Keith, Append. 126.

municated

municatcd to I-Iuntly and lBotlhwcll, and they were quickly joined ] 0 0 K
by them and ieveral other of the nobles. 13otlwell'l estate lay in ----
that corner of the kin-dlom, and his followers crowded to their
chief in such numbers, as soon enabled tlhe qcclen to clt tlhe power
of the conspirators at deliance;

TIns sudden flight filled them with ine:prefiiblle consternation. Is rcconcile.

to the exilec

They had obtained a promili of parldon; and it now appeared nobles.
from the quecn's conducCtt, that nothing more was intended by this
proniie than to animfe them, and tIo ,gain time. They ventured,
however, to demand the aceompilihmeint of it; but their ncflengcr
was detained a prifoncr, and the queen advancilng- toxwards Edin-
burgh, at the head of eight thoutfad enic, talked in the hIigliefl
I'rain of relentment and revenge. She lhad the addrelfs, at the
Iame time, to separate Murray and his albciates fiom the con-I
Ipirators againfi Rizio. Scnfiblc that the union of these parties
would form a confederacy which might prove formidable to the
crown, she exprefied great willingncfs to receive the former into
favour; towards the latter she declared hcrfelf inexorable. Murray
and his followers were no less willing to accept a pardon on her
terms. The conipirators againfi Rizio, deprived of every reiource, March ,

1~ ~ ~

~~1 G0)~~~~~~~~ -*'Tihlic coilji..
and incapable of refiflance, fled precipitately to Ncwcaflle, having rattors lgalill

Rizio \ly into

tlhus changed situations with Murray and his party, who left that England.
place a few days before.

No man so remarkable for wisdom, and even for cunning, as

the earl of Morton, ever engaged in a more unfortunate enterprile.
Deserted balely by the king, who now denied his knowledge of
the conspiracy by public proclamations, and abandoned unge-
nerouny by Murray and his party', he was obliged to fly from

r Mclv. 130o

his

B 0 0 K his native country, to resign the highcft office, and to part with

Iv.

-- --- one of the most opulent fortunes, in the kingdom.
,566.

ON her return to Edinburgh, AMary began to proceed againfl

those concerned in the murder of Rizio, with the utmost rigour of
law. But, in praise of her clemency, it muff be observed, that
only two persons, and these of no considerable rank, suffered for
this crime s.

IN this conspiracy there is one circumflance which, though

somewhat detached, deserves not to be forgotten. In the confe-
deracy between the king and the conspirators, the real intention of
which was aflaffination, the preserving of the reformed church is,
nevertheless, one of the most considerable articles; and the fame
men who were preparing to violate one of the first duties of mo-
rality, affeEed the highest regard for religion. History relates
these extravagances of the human mind, without pretending to
justify, or evexi to account for them; and regulating her own
opinions by the eternal and immutable laws of justice and of vir-
tue, points out such inconsistencies, as features of the age which she
dcfcribes, and records them for the inflrua'ion of ages to come.

An account As this is the second instance of deliberate assassination which
of the fie-
quency of has occurred, and as we flall hereafter meet with many other
affaflifnations
in that age. instances of the fame crime, the causes which gave rife to a

pratice so flocking to humanity deserve our particular at-
tention. Resentment is, for obvious and wife reasons, one
of the strongest panions in the human mind. The natural
demand of this passion is, that the person who feels the injury
ihould himself inflice the vengeance due on that account. The

Keith, Appendix, 130. 334.

permitting

CerIn-ittihg' tthis, iPhowever, wOtldl have been dc(li[,i \ to so-
ciet; and uniihilnl. iiltould hal've ovi', bo:;-,

'iel . :'

i..d in

fcverity or in cduratioil. }'or this rca,!i!n, il the vier infncy O i
the iocil ate thlc iv-o'.l ci vas t;Inkcl o;In priv ;ati-

;i.ds, a i'

contiiitcd to thoe

t aic tien:.l atc. lit at fil l: vIc; la.: iL1. ilnc (i t

rclra'inLing', they rcali l rici:ttii:iicd the pliinie:ilC o i-

r cvei'.'.

Tlie cardlicrc aiIn moil lntilnpe 1)Uiilllilcilt i)1r clrilC niv es an rctIli.iti
the ofiender forfeited limlb for limb, and life for life. 'I'le pay-

ment o1 a coinpeniltionl to the perlbn injtnred, fuccecCcd to tlic
rigour of the former inflitution. In both tihte, tle gratifclatio:l' ti
private revcnge was the objci of law; and lie whvo tflflrcdl tliL
wron7i was the only pcrlion vwho iadc a right to pl)rle11, to c:acl,
or to remit the pUniiihmlint. While laws allowed lich Ifilll icopl tol
*the revenge of one party, the interests of the other xere lol
negleted. If the evidence of his guilt (did not amount to a f-ltt
-eprof, or if le reckoned hnilfcilf to be lnjillly acculicd, tlie perin
to lwhom a crime was imputed had a right to challenge llis adver--
Iary to single combata, and, on- obtailing the victory, v'idic ted
lis own honour. In almioft every conficdeable cauif, whetier
civil or criminal, arms were appealed to, in dIefeince, eiher of tlic
innocence, or the property, of the parties. Juflice had fe10do
occasion to ufc her balance ; the f\vord alone dciexdil every contefi.
The pafnion of revenge was nouritcd by all thiel means, and grew,
by daily indulgence, to be increcdibly firong. Mankind became
habituated to blood, not only in times of war, biut of peace; and
from this, as cwell as other causes, contracted an amazing fcrocity
of temper and of manners. Thllis ferocity, hIoweer, madc it nc-
ceiary to cdifcourage the trial by combat; to abolish the payment of
compenlftions in criminal cafcs; and to think of fomc milder
method of termitiating dillptcs concerning civil riglhts. The pu-
nifhments for crimns became miore fevcre, and tlh regulations con-

VoL. I. S r ccrnilg

B 0 K cerninig property more fixed; but the princes whose provincl i'

1 V.
t-.--- was to iiinfllC the one, and to enforce the other, polleflcd littl-

power. CGreat ofeltndcrs dellilfed their authority; finaller o0-C'S
ihcltercd tlemnflcves unider the jurifdicion of those fiom wholse pro-
tcOion they expected impunity. The administration of juPlice
was extrei-lcy feeble and dilatory. An attempt to punifi the
crilems of a chieftain, or even of his v.afill, often excited rcbel-
lions and civil wars. To nolles, haughty and independent, among
xv.inmn the causes of discord were many and unavoidable, who were
(luick in dilcerl-ing an injury, and impatient to revenge it; who
deemed it infiamous to lfbinit to an enemy, and cowardly to for-
give him ; who confidered' the right- of punifling those who had
injured them, as a privilege of their order and a mark of inde-
pendence ; such flow proceedings were extremely unsatisfactory.
The blood of their adverifry was, in their opinion, the only tlling
which could wafli away an affront; where that was not hecd,
their revenge -was dilppointed, their courage became fjllfpeeed,
and a stain was left on their honour. That vengeance, lwhich the
impotent hand of the magiitrate could not inflicE, their own could
easily execute. Under governments so feeble, men, aflu.med, as in
a state of nature, the right of judging, and redressing their own
wrongs; and thus affilination, a crime of all others the most de-
firutive to focicty, came not only to be allowed, but to be rec-
koned honourable.

'ITE lhifory of Europe, during the fourteenth and fifteenth

centuries, abounds with detestable instances of this crime. It pre-
vailed chiefly among the French and Scots, between whom there
was a close intercourlf at that time, and a furpriling resemblance
in their national characters. In one thousand four hundred and
seven, the only brother of the king of France was murdered pub-

licly

I'cly in the flrcets of Paris; and so far was this horrible acion dii 1 o .
,roin Imeeting witlh l'roper punilihment, that an eminent lawyer --- --
was allowed to plead in defence of it before the peers of France,
and avowedly to maintain the lawfilncfs of aflhfl;nation. In one
tioul'tlnd four hundred and feventccn, it required all the eloquence
and authorii- of tle famous Gerlbon, to prevail on the coutncil of
Constance to condemn this propolition, ''lThat there are Iloie c;ies
in wlhich aflailnation is a virtue more meritorious in a knii.;lt tllan

in a lfquire, and more meritorious in a king than in a kighl ."
The number of eminent perbons who were murdered in France
and Scotland, on account cither of private, or political, or religious
quarrels, during the fifteenth and lixteenthl centuries, is almofl
incredible. IEvcn after those caufcs, whiclh fl-r gave riiI to this
barbarous practice, were removed ; after tlhe jouril.liaion of inagi-
ftrates, and the authority of laws, were better ellablilhcd, and
become more universal; after the progress of learning and philo-
sophy had poliihed the mtanners, and humanized the minds of
men, this crime continued in some degree. It was towards the
close of the seventeenth century before it difappcarcd in France.
The additional vigour, which the royal authority acquired by the
acceflion of James VI. to the throne of England, seems to have
put a flop to it in Scotland.

TI-E influence, however, of any national cu lnom, both on the

inderflandling and on the heart, and how far it may go towards
.perverting or cxtinguifhing moral principles of the grcateft import-
ance, is remarkable. The authors of tlhof ages have pcrfectly
imbibed the sentiments of their cotemporaries, with regarrd to
atfltination; and they, who had leiliire to reflet and to judge,

L'Enfiat, Ilift. Cone. de Conit.

S f 2 appear

i; o ? ap)pear tno l- no more

n toclkcd at this crilc, than the pcrfons wvho
--.-- ' commuittcd it (lurino the heat and impetuosity of pafflon. Iu-

t;66..

chanan dclcribes the murder of cardinal Bcatoun and of Rizio,
without expreiTlng tlofe feclings which are natural to a man, or
that indilnation v.ricli becamne an hiflorian". Knox, whose mind
was fiercer and more unplolifhcd, relates the death of iBatoun and
of the duke of Guile, not only wiithout ccnflre, but with the
utmofl exulltliorn. On the other hand, the biliopj of Ross men-
tions the aflEination of the earl of Murray with obme degree of
applause . I)lackv.ood dwells upon it with the most indecent tri-
iumph, and alcrbles it diretly to the hand of God '. Lord Ruth-
yen, the principal aq:or in the conspiracy against Rizio, wrote an.
account of it fomei flort time before his ov>n death, and in all his
long narrative there is not one cxpreffion of regret, or one fympl
toin of compuncllion, for a crime no les difhlonourable than barba -
rous". Mor-ton, equally guilty of the fame crimle, entertained the
itinc fcntincnlis concerning it; and in his last moments, neither he
iuimclft nor the nlinlfers wvlho attenlded him, fecm to liave con-
idcrcd, it as an action which called for repentance; even then lie
talks of D..i's/'.rJrligitcr as coolly as if it had been an innocent or
ccninreledal)! deed ". The viccs of another age aflonifh and ffiock
us; the vices of our own become familiar, and excite little horror'.
i return from this digrcilion to the course of the history.

THiE
': Icha-n. 295. 3-5. x Knox, 334. Y Anders. 3. 84.

Jcbb, 2. 263. ' Keith, Append. 119. `' Crawf. Merm. Append.
' In the fil fl accounts of Rizio's murder sent to England, there seem to have been

.ni;ilcl (a- is tifilal in relating extraordinary events) fomn circum{fances, which
afcs;warlds appc::red to be f'.lle: among others, that a friar, named Black, had been
llain at the faine time with Rizio. Parkhui4t biflop of Norwich, in cominunicating
tius intclligelrce to his correspondent Bullinger, an eminent reformed divine oi-
,'.urich, expre;.eis no condemnation of the murder of Rizio, and exults over the
ti;iic'ld f (iaUih of the friar, in terms which, in our times, will appear as fllockini-

ias

Tii: . charm, w!hich h liad a' !flrfl attached the queen to D).t:1;y, B 0 c IK
atnd !hld theill for ii time in an happy union, was now ent'llrcy -----

....... .

cillvcd; and love ltO loniger coveri; nlls -ollies a .l vices with T'i'iecs
i. frieindly veil, tliey appiearcd to Ma;ry in their full dimlinfio and D.,.]'ni in-
dlef!.rmity:'. Thuhli li -Cuenry publif:lcd a proclamation, dilclaim- c'-lces.
ing any knowledge of the conlIpiracy a.gail! i RiL.o, the (ciicen vwas
full1r convinced, that lie was not only accefii-ry to the contrivance,
but to the comInlflkono of that odiou; crime'. That very power
wlhich, witl liberal and unfiilpicious ifondinc, hle had conferrcd
upon him, be had cmployed to infilt her authority, to lilmit ler
prcrolativc, and to endanger her person. Suchl an outrage it
wa:s inimpoill)le any v-oman could I-ear or forgive. Cold civilitlec,
clcret difllhrn, fr'quent quarrels, licceeded to thcir former tranf-
ports of afisclion and confidence. The queeIn's favours swere no
longer conveyed throulgh his hands. The crowd of cxpectants
ccalcd to court his patronage, w thich tley foundl to avail io liitle.
Among the nobles, some dreaded his furious temper, others coin-
plained of his pec-idioufncls; and all of them dclififed the weakncfs
of his understanding and the inconflancy of his heart. The
people themlc lves olbfcrved some parts of his condutC, 'which little
luitcd the dignity of a king. Addicd to drunkcnnlci,, beyond
what the manners of that age could bear, and indulging irrcgular
passions, which even the licentioufnifs of youth could not excufc,
he, by his indecent behaviour, provoked the queen to the utmoif;.
and tlhe paIions which it occasioncd, often forced tears from her
eyes, both in public and in private. Her aversion for him in-

as they are puerile: ' Fratcrctulus quidam, nomine Black, Papiftarum antefignanus,
eodem tempore in aula occiditur : Sic nigcr hic nebulo, nigra quoque morte peremp-
tus, invitus nigrum subito defccndit in Orcum."' Burn. Hist. of Reform. iii.
App. 360 -

' See Appcndix, No. XVI. c Kcith, 350. f Ibid. 329.

S crcalcd;:

B 0 0 K ccreafcd every day, and could be no longer concealed. He w?,s

IV. *-----' often absent from court, appeared there with little filendoulr,

. and was trufled with no power. Avoided equally by tliofe who

endeavoured to please the queen, lwho favoured /Morton and his
afrociates, or who adhered to the house of H-amilton; he was left
almoit alone in a ncglcted and unpitied solitude '.

The rife of ABOUT this time a new favourite grcw into great credit with
Bothwell's
f.ivour. the queen, and soon gained an ascendant over her heart, whicl

encouraged his enterprising genius to form designs tlat proved
fatal to himself, and the occaion of all Mary's fulfequent misfor-
tunes. This was James Hepburn, earl of lBothwell, the head of
an ancient family, and, by his extcxnfive pofilEions and nlumerous
vaflals, one of the moif powerful noblemen in the kingdom. Even
in that turbulent age, when so many vafl projecs were laid open
to an aspiring mind, and invited it to ation, no man's ambition
was more daring than Bothwell's, or had recourse to bolder or
more singular expedients for obtaining power '. \When alnimol
every person of diftintion in the kingdom, whether papist or pro-
teftant, had joined the Congregation in opposing the dangerous
encroachments of the French upon the liberties of the nation, he,
though an avowed proteflant, adhered to the queen regent, and
acted with vigour on her fide. The fucccfs which attended the

t. Melv. 13r, &c.
h The enterprising spirit of Bothwell was so conspicuous as to procure him fcvcrl

marks of diflinaion during his residence in France. Hardvicke's State Papers, .i.
143. Throkmorton, the English Ambaflador at Paris, and one of the molc saga-
cious minificrs employed by Elizabeth, points him out as a person who was to be
dreaded and observed. " The carl of Bothwcll," fays he in a letter, Nov. 28,
1560, " is departed to return into Scotland, and hath made boast that he will do great
things, and live in Scotland in defpitc of all men. He is a glorious, rafli, and ha-
zardous young man; and therefore.it were meet that his adversaries should both have
an eye to him, and allb keep him fihort." Ibid. p. I49.

arms

arnl of the Congregation having obligcd him to retire into France, B O O Ki
he was taken into the queen's fervicc, and continued witlh her till ----
the time of her return into Scotland '. lroin that period, every
ftepl of his conduct towards Mlary was relmarkablly dutiful ; and
amnid.t all the lfif'tings of faction we flarcclv ever lind him hold-
ing any cou'th which couuld be oflentiv te to lher. \Vhien /Murray's
proceedings with regard to her marriage gave umblrage to the
queen, fie recalled Bothw;ell from that lb:ifliihent into whichl ilhe
had with reluctance driven him, and confidcred his zeal and abi-
lities as the moos powerful supports of her authority. When the
conspirators against Rizio 'sizcd ller perCfon, he became the clief
iinfirument of recovering lher liberty, andd Ived her,. on that occa-
sion, with so much fidelity and tuccefs, as made the deepefi: im-
prelion on her mind, and greatly incretael the confidence lwhich
flie had hIitierto placed in hilm ;. I-er gratitude loaded him wXith
marks ofher bounty; she railedi him to oilices of profit :and oftrusi,
and tranfatcd no matter of importance without his advice'. Ily
comrplaiflace and afliduity he confirmed and fortiiecd thlcle dil-
positions of the queen in his favour, and iniflcibly paved tli way
towards that vast projed, which his immoderate ambition hadl per-
haps already conceived, and which, in spite of many dilliculties,
and at the expence of many crimes, he at last accomplished.

TIE liour of the queen's delivery now approached. As her

palace was defended only by a slender guard, it teemed imprudent
to cxpofe her person, at this time, to the. insults she might fiufir in
a kingdom torn by factions and prone to mutiny. For this rca-
ion, the privy council adviicd the queen to fix her residence in the
caflle of Edinburgh, the strongest fortress in the kingdom, and thl

' Andcrf. I. . k Ibid. 92, 93. ' Muclv. r33. Knox, 396.

moil

BJ 0 0 k most proper place for the security -of licr pcrfoi '". In order !:.

Iv.
..---..-- render this fccurity more perfec, Mary laboured to CetinLlifhi tih

domeflic feuds which divided bome of the principal !lobles. 'ur-I-
ray and Aigyll were exaflieratcd against -Iuntly and Botihwell
by reciprocal arid repeatcd i juries. The qucen, by her autlio-
rity and entrcatics, cbci icd a rcconcilcmein t amiong tll m, and
drccw from them a promnli to bury their diiccrds in cvcrla ing
oblivion. This rcconcilcment N/ary had so much at heart, tlha
she made it the condition on wvhich fli again received Murray into

favour ".

lnrli of\1 ON the nineteenth of Junc, Mlary was delivered of her only iOn
lanmes V\/JI.

James, a prince vholfe birth was happy for the whole island, and
unfortunate to her alone. His acccflion to tle throne of Eng!:nd
united tlietwo divided kingdoms in one mighlty monarchy, and
cflablifled the power of Great Britain on a firm foundation:
while fie, torn early fiom her son by the cruelty of her fate, was
never allowed to indulge those tender pafiions, nor to tale tholl
joys which fill the heart of a mother.

'IELVIL was infiantly dliflatchlcd to London with an account:

of this event. It struck Elizabeth, at first, in a tfnfible lmanner,
and the advantage and filperiority which her rival had acquired by
the birth of a son, forced tears from her eyes. But before Mielvil
was admitted to audience, flic had so far recovered the command of
herself, as to receive him not only with decency, but with excefive
cheerfulness; and willingly accepted the invitation which Mary
gave her, to stand godmother to her son°.

"* Keith, 335, n Ibid. 336. Append. 139.. ° Mclh. 138.

As

As M\ary loved ifplendour and magnificence, fie resolvcd to 1 (o 0 K

1V.

cclebrate the baptifin of the young prince with great pomp; -- -
and for that purpose sent invitations of the llmne kind to tihe 66
French king, and to the duke of Savoy, the uncle of her former
huibantd.

T-IE queen, on her recovery, discovered no change in her senti- The qucen

'mcnts w~ith r n th

" ing *-i-'i~ i~coiitLinluea to

ments with refpel to the king, . The death of Rizio, and the treat Dl)rnly
countenance he had given to an action so iliolcnt and un!jufLliablec, wcnc aid f.-
were frill fresh in her memory. She was frequently penlive and git.
dejeced". Though Henry Ibmetimes attended at court, and
accompanied her in her progrcfies through different parts of the
kingdom, he met with litle reverence from the nobles, while
Mary treated him with the greatest refervc, and did not stifler hinm
to polifTc any authorityr The breach between them became
every day more apparent'. Attempts were made towards a recon-
cilement, particularly by Caftelnau the French ambaflador ; but
after such a violent rupture, it was found no easy matter to bind
the nuptial knot a-new; and though he prevailed on the king and
queen to pass two nights together', we may, with great proba-
bility, pronounce this appearance of union, to which Caltelnau
trusted, not to have been sincere; we know with certainty that
it was not lasting.

BOT.IIWELL, all this while, was the queen's prime confident. 1cr attach-

mcnt to

Without his participation no business was concluded and no Iothwell in
favour bestowed. Together with this afccndant over her councils, creases.
Bothwcll, if we may believe the contemporary historians, acquired
no lels sway over her heart. But at what precise time this am-
P Sec Append. No. XVII. q Melv. 148. Keith, 350. IClv. 132.

Keith, Append. 169. ' Ibid. 169.
VOL. I. T t bitious

B o o K bitious lord first allowed the sentiments of a lover to occupy the

iv.
...-- place of that duty and refpe& which a fubje& owes his sovereig;n

'5 or when Mary, infLead of gratitude for his faithful services, felt a

paflion of another nature riling in her bosom, it is no cafy matter to
determine. Such delicate tranlitions of paflion can be diicerned only
by those who arc admitted near the persons of the parties, and who
can view the secret workings of the heart with calm and acute
obfervationi. Neither Knox nor Buchanan enjoyed these advan-
tages. Thleir humble fRation allowed them only a distant acccs to
the queen and her favourite. And the ardour of their zeal and
the violence of their prejudices rendered their opinions rash, prc-
cipitate, and inaccurate. It is by the efc;iCs of this reciprocal
palion, rather than by their accounts of it, tliat fublequent hiftori-
ans can judge of its reality.

ADVENTUROUS as Bothwell's projc& to gain the queen may

appear, it was. formed and carried on under very favourable
circumstances. Mary was young, gay, and affable. She pof-
feTled great sensibility of temper, and was capable of the utmofi
tenderneis of affc1-ion. She had placed her love on a very un-
worthy objec, who requited it with ingratitude, and treated hcr
writh negleCt, with insolence, and with brutality. All these flh
felt and reicntcd. In this situation, the attention and complaisance
of a man who had vindicated her authority and proteced her
person, who entered into all her views, who soothed all her
passions, who watched and improved every opportunity of infi-
nuating his design and recommending his paflion ", could hardly
fail of making an irnpreflion on a heart of such a frame as
Mary's.

U Anders. i. 93, 94.

THE

TI'E lhaughlty spirit of Darnly, nursed up in flattery, and ac- r o o I;

cufloned to' command, could not bear the contempt under which , --
he had now fallen, and the state of insignificance to which liec 'rh kii r-

bl·vcs to,:lave.

saw himielf reduced. But in a country where he was univerlitlly Scotlii.a"
hated or def)ilfed, he could never hope to form a party, whicl
would second any attempt lie mightl make to recover power. Ile
addretled himnlclf, therefore, to the pope, and to the kings of France
and Spain, witl many professions of Iis own zeal for the CathLolic
religion, and with bitter complaints againfl thle queen, for ncglcd-
ing to promote that intere-:: and toon after, he tool a relo-
lution, equally wild and dcliperate, of emblarking on board a Ithil,
wvlich he provided, and of flying into forcign parts. It is almoll
impossible to form any fatisfaclory colnjeture concerningl tlhe mo-
tives which influence a capricious and irregular mind. I-Ie hoped,
perhaps, to recommend hiimfelf to the Catholic princes on the
continent by his zeal for religion, and that they would employ
their interest towards reinstating him in the poflflion of that
power which he had loft. Perhaps he expedtcd nothing more than.
the comfort of hiding the disgrace under which he was now
fallen, among flrangers, who had never been witncefls of his
former prosperity.

I-IE communicated the dcfign to the French ambassador Le Croc, His capri-

cious bcha-

and to his father the earl of Lennox. They both endcavoured viour.
to difliiade him from it, but without success. Lennox, who seems,
as well as his son, to have loft the queen's confidence, and lwho,
about this time, was lcldlom at court, inflantly communicated the
matter to her by a letter. en-Icry, who had refi.ifd to accompany
the queen fiom Stirling to Edinburgh, was likcwife abfcnt from

X Knox, 399.

Tt 2 court.

B o0 I court. He arrived there, however, on the fame day The received

IV.
. ---- the account of his intended flight. But he was more than usually
i 6. wvayward and peevish; and scrupling to enter the palace unless

certain lords who attended the queen were dismissed, Mary was
obliged to meet him without the gates. At last he suffered her to
conduc him into her own apartment. She endeavoured to draw
from him the reasons of the firange resolution which he had
taken, and to divert him from it. In spite however of all her
arguments and intreaties he remained silent and inflexible. Next
day the privy council, by her direction, expoftulated with him on
the fame head. He persisted, notwithfianding, in his sullenness
and obstinacy; and neither deigned to explain the motives of his
conduct, nor signified any intention of altering it. As he left the
apartment, he turned towards the queen, and told her that she
lhould not fee his face again for a long time. A few days after,
he wrote to Mary, and mentioned two things as grounds of his
tlifguft. She herself, he said, no longer admitted him into any
confidence, and had deprived him of all power; and the nobles,.
after her example, treated him with opena neglect, so that he
appeared in every place without the dignity and fplcnclour of
a king.

Mary endea- NOTHING could be more mortifying to Mary, than this:
voursto pre-
vent his in- intended flight of the king's, which would have spread the in-
tenddflight. famy of their domestic quarrel' all over Europe. Companion far

a monarch who would then appear to be forced into exile by
her negled and ill usage, might have disposed mankind to en-
tertain sentiments concerning the causes of their discord, little to
her advantage. In order, therefore, to prepossess the minds of
her allies, and to screen her reputation from any censure with

which

which Darnly might endeavour to load it, the privy council tranf- E ° I

1V.

mitted a narrative of this whole transaCtion both to the king and '------
to the queen mother of France. It is drawn with great art, and
sets Mary's conduR in the most favourable point of light .

ABOUT this time the license of the borderers called for redress;

and Mary resolving to hold a court of justice at Jedburgh, the
inhahitants of several adjacent counties were summoned to attend
their fovcreign in arms, according to custom '. Bothwell was a,
that time lieutenant or warden of all the marches, an office among
the most important in the kingdom; and though usually divided
into three diflin& governments, bestowed by the queen's favour
upon. him alone. In order to display his own- valour and activity
in the difsharge of this trust, he attempted to ieizc a gang of ban-
ditti, wlo, lurking among the marshes of Liddellfdlc, infcfted the
rcef of the country. But while he was laying hold upon one of Onlober 16.
those desperadoes, he was wounded by him in several places, so
that his followers were obliged to carry him to Hermitage catilc.
MIary inftantry flew thither, with an impatience which has been
confidered as marking the anxiety of a lover, but little tiited the
dignity of a queen a. Finding that Bothwcll was threatened with.

Y Keith, 345. 347. z Keith, 353. Good. vol. i. 302;

The diflance between Jedburgh and Hcrmitage is eighteen Scottish miles,

through a country alioft impafTable. The season of the year was far advanced.
Bothwell seems to have been wounded in a fcuflTe, occasioned by the detf:iir of a
single man, rather than any open infurrecion of the borderers. It does not appear
that the queen was attended thither by any considerable train. Had any military
operation been necessary, ns is supposed, Good. vol. i. 304. it would have heen
extremely improper to rifque the queen's person in an expedition againfl thieves..
As loon as the queen found Bothwell to be in no danger, flie inflantly returned,
and after this we hear no more of the infurrecion, nor have we any proof that the
)ioters took refuge in England. As there is no farther evidence with, respect to the
motives of this extraordinary journey, the reader must judge what degree of credit
i. due to Knox and Buchanan,. who ascribe it to the queen's love of Bothwell.

nob

! o o K no1 dalingerous ilnpltom, she returned that fame day to Jedburgh.

l V.
_- .--- 'I The fatigue of fucl a journey, added to the anguifil of mind fie

',G. had lufircd on Bothwcll's account, threw her next morning into
a violent feverl. Her life was despaired of, but her youth, and
the vigour of her conflitution, resifted the malignity of her dif-
cafi:. During the continuance of the queen's illness, the king,
November . Lwho resided at Stirling, never came near Jedburgh ; and when

lie afterwards thought fit to make his appearance there, he met
with such a cold reception, as did not encourage him to make any
long flay d. Mary soon recovered flrength enough to return along
the eastern borders to Dunbar.

\IIILE fie resided in this place, her attention was turned to-

wards England. Elizabeth, notwithstanding her promise, and
even proclamations to the contrary, not only allowed, but encou-
raged, Miorton and his afbociates to remain in England c. Mary,
on the other hand, afforded her proteiion to several Englifil
fugitives. Each queen watched the motions of the other with a
jealous attention, and secretly countenanced the practiccs which
vwre carrying on to disturb the administration of her rival.

The Englilh IFOR this purpose Mary's ambaflador, Robert Melvil, and her
parliament
favours Ma. other emifiarics, were extremely aAive and 1iccefslul. *TVe may
riys toeicn- impute, in a good degrec, to their intrigues, that spirit which
lions to ir tr . h
fucccfiion. appeared in the parliament of England, and whlich railed a florn

that threatened Elizabeth's doneitic tranquillity more than any
other event of her reign, and required all her art and dexterity
to allay it.

'' Ftcith, 35., 352. : Ibid. Append. 133.

KnOx.; 40-o. ' Call. vol. ii. p. 15.
'7E

E, i z.

ELI'rZAB'TII lhadi now r eigned cght ye-ars without difcovring ) 0

the leafC illtention to marry. A violent diftempcr, with vhlliclh .- -.
ihe hlidl 1htcly been /izc.d, having endlanllgecrd her lide, and alarmed
the nation withi the prolfpc of all thole calamities \which arc oc-
calioned by a dilputed and dubious lilcccllion ; a motion was
made, and eacgrly liflcncd to in both houfIs, for addrci'lIii the
queen l to provide any f i times to come, cither
lby )ignifying her own rclflution to marry, or by conienting to an
ac', ectabliifing the order of ficccilion to the cro\Vn f. 11cr love
to her fntbjeCs, her duty to the public, her concern for poflcrit)y,
it was affcrted, not only called upon, lbut obliged her to take one
of these flcps. Thie infulpcrable averion whicll llic had all alonii
liicov-ced for marriage, made it improbable that fle would cliuiiL
the former; and if flic complied with the latter rcqucfl no title
to the crown could, with any colour of juflice, be set in oppc-
fition to that of the Scottish queen. Elizabeth was llgacious cnough
to fee the rcmotefi confcqucnccs of this motion, and obfcrved
theim witl the greatest anxiety. Mary, ly refuling io ofloten to
ratify the treaty of Edinburgh, had plainly intimated a detign of
embl)racing the firnf promiling opportunity for prolccutilg hlr right
to the Englilh crown ; and by her fecrct ncgociations, lhe had
gained many to favour her title g. All the Roman catholics ar-
dently wished for her fuccefion. Her gentlenels and humanity
had removed many of thole apprehcnlions wlich the proteflants
entertained on account of her religion. The court fat&ion, which.
envied the power of Cecil, and endeavoured to wrefl: the admini-
lfration out of his hands, advanced the pretensions of the Scottfil
queen in opposition to him. The union of the two kingdoms
was a desirable objec to all wife men in both nations; and the

D'Ewscs Journ. of Pa.rl. o15, ; Melv. 136,

.~ ~~~5 1~7~~~~l) r th

j o 0o K bilth of t1 e young prince was a security for the continuance of tlis

---- .blefling, and gave hopes of its perpc:uity.

FlizaibetlI's UNDER these circumfianccs, and while the nation was in fuic
'th' ;ecunt. a temTlper, a parliamentary declaration of Mary's title would have

been highly detrimental to Elizabeth. The present unsettled itate
of the fucceflion left much in her power. Her resentment alone
might have gone far towards excluding any of the competitors
from the crown; and the dread of this had hitherto restraincd and
overavwed the ambition of the Scottifhl queen. But if this check
should be removed by the legal acknowledgment of her title, Mary
would be more at liberty to pursue her dangerour dcfigns, and to
ad without fear or refcrve. Her partifarls were already meditat-
ing fihemnes for iniirrections in different parts of the kingdom';
and an ac of parliament, recognising the rights of that priiiccls,
whose pretensions they favoured, would have been nothing Ics
than a signal to arms; and notwithstanding Elizabeth's just title to
the affeCtions of her ubjedCt, might have shaken and endangered
her throne,

Mary endea- VIIILE this matter remained in fufpcnfe in botl houses, an
yours to im-
provethisop- account of it was transmitted to aryy by Melvil her amnbaflador.
portunity. As flie did not want advocates for her right, even among those

who were near Elizabeth's person, file endcavoured to cultivate the
dlifpofition which appeared towards fettling the right of succession
in her favour, by a letter to the privy counsellors of England. She
exprefled in it a grateful sense of Elizabeth's friend(lip, which flle
ascribes chiefiy to their good offices with their sovereign in her
behalf. She declared her resolution to live in perpetual amity
wv.:h England, without urging or pursuing her claim upon the

' Melv. 147.

CI'O~,VD,

crown, any farther thanl fllould be agrecable to the quelen. nat, I 0o0 oc
at the iamc time, as her right of _ticccfion .wa; ndiloubtcd, lic

'-----_

hoped it would be examined with candlour, an ii judtcdl of wit
inipzartiality. The nobles who atte:ln.dei lIc-, v.rote to tlite Ipl .,!:
privy council in the sLime Il':ii . ,l:,' ! artiLl! gave titcl Ic ltter>S
the air of being notliing more than a dcciarai.on of ihr ov:tn
and of her fuijcdcs gratitude towards; Elizabeth. t als ie could
not be i]norant of the j ca'ou!' ancd lc:ir wl .ih \ hil'i El!il'.. bci
obiC-rved tllC proceedinfs oF p'.riiamcnl, a ilrLp lo( ulicotniio, a;;
this, of one prilnce's cntciril i; ;lo iplblic collCiipondlncce witl tlc
privy counllllors of another, could not be otllhrwilc con; lLred
than as takcn with an inciention to encourage tile wiirit \which ld
already been raiscd among tle l .n lilh. In tilli li lgt it icci1ns to
have appearel to Elizabeth lerclilf'. B3ut the diliolition of hcr
people rendering it neccflary to treat lAary's; pertnlii with g'rea:
decency, andl her title witlh much regard, 1ec nlClltionled it to hcr
only in the foftelt language.

NOTIHING, however, could be a more cruCI Ilmortlilcaion to

lF.;zc-. ,L!

a princcfs of Elizabctl's clharaclcr, than tlle temlpe1r which bothll :,il(.r;,r-
liouibs of parlialaict ldilcoverd-c on this occalion. Slic bent all liailCt.
lier policy to defbat or ctlde thc motion. After allowing the ii1'[f
heat of tlhir zeal to evacTorate, ihel called into her prcilncc a
certain number of cach houfc. Sihe iothd a(nd carclcl tihemi;
lhic threatened and prolmicd ; lei relnitted filblidics which were
ldle; and refufced tllofc l which were oC)iirci ; 1and in the end pre-
\vailed to have tilis formidable motion put lorl' or tlhat fc:l'!n.
:appily sori heIr, tlic conduItC of the Scottiih (lUeen, and the i:ii-

I Kcih, "354-. Apiped. 136. I Kiti, 357.
VoL.o I. U u fortu:ic.>

I' -o i

K fortuns which bcfcl her, prevented the revival of such a motion
---- -J in any future parliament '.

1566.

MEANTIME, in ordcr to pref, rvee e reputation of impartiality,

and that fle might not drive Mary into any desperate meailrc,
ihc committed to the Tower one Thornton, who had publil.ed
Jiomcthing derogatory to the right of the Scottifil line"'; and
figniiled her diif)leafure against a member of the house of com-
mons, who seemed, by time words in a fpecch, to glance at Mary "

An cxrnrvor- AMIDST all her other cares, Mary was ever solicitous to pro-
dinary bllp of
MnIary's in fa- mote the intcreft of that religion which she profefied. The re-
our clu eablifilmcnt of the Romish doELrine fecms to have been her fa-

vourite plafion; and though the design was concealed with care
and condutcd with caution, file pursued it with a persevering zeal
At this time she ventured to lay aside somewhat of her usual
rcferve; and the aid which lfie expeced from the popish princes,
wlho had engaged' in the league of Bayonne, encouraged her to
take a ftlp, which, if we confider the temper of the nation, ap-
pears to be extremely bold. Having formerly held a fccrct cor-
rclpondcnce with the court of Rome, mhe now resolved to allow a
nuncio from the pope publicly to enter her dominions. Cardinal
Laurca, at that time bifshop of Mondovi, was the person on whom
Pius V. conferred this oflice, and along with him he sent the
queen a prelent of twenty thouIand crowns . It is not the cha-
racer of the papal court to open its treasury upon distant or
imaginary hopes. The business of the nuncio in Scotland could
be no other, than to attempt a reconciliation of that kingdom

D'Ewes Journ. 104-130. Camd. 399. Melv. 119. Haynes, 446.
' Camd. 401, n Haynes, 449. ° Vita Card. Laur. ap. Burn. vol. iii. p. 325.

to

to the Romish fee. Thus MIary hcrfelf underflood it; andl in hlcr 0 o K'

I V.

answer to a letter which fie received from the pope, after cxpreli C ---
ing her grateful sense of his paternal care and liberality, flhe pro-
mises that flic would bend her whole flrcngtlh towards the rc-eila-
lifliment and propagation of the catholic fiithl; that Ihe would
receive the nuncio with every poiTible dclmonflat.ationi of refpci,
and concur, with the utmoit vigour, in all his designs tos ards
promoting the honour of God, and refloriig pecacc to ttle king-
dom ; that nle would celebrate tlic l):ptilin of the plritnc accord-
ing to the ceremonies which the Roinifi ritual prCellibes, hopinl
that her fubjec3s would )be'taught, by this example, again to re-
vcrence the iacraments of the church, which they had l b long
treated with contempt; and that ihe would be careful to inllil
early into her son the principles of a sincere love and attacllhent
to the catholic faithl". But though the nuncio was already ar-
rived at Paris, and had cfnt over one of his attendants witl part
of the money, the queen did not think the junclurI proper Ifor is
reception. Elizabeth was preparing ro fend a magnificcnt cm-
baffy into Scotland, againfi the time of tle prince's baptism, and
as it would have been improper to offend her, fe wilCfly contrived,
under various prctcnces, to detain Laurca at Paris '. The con-
vulfions into lwhich tle kingdonm wras thrown soon atelr, made it
impossible for him to puriUc his journey any farther.

AT the very time that Mary was fecrctly calrryiln on tlhefe

ncgociations for filbvcrting the refor med c hurchi, lie did not tcicrplIc
publicly to employ her authority towards o)taliing for)l ii Is niii-
fiers a more certain and comfortable flibliflencci'. Duringr tlis
year, fim ifiued fcveral proclamations and alIs of council for tllat

P Conxi Vita Marir, ap. Jcbb, vol. ii. . 5S. q Kcitih, A,'pnd. 135.
IKeith, 561, 5:. IKnox, 4-o1.

IJ u 2 1Llpurport ,

BOO v K

I ipurpofc, aid readily approved of every fchcmle wvlicl as pro-
_- .---- posed for the more eiTccliul payment of their flipcnCds. Tlls [art

of ier conduclt does little honour to Mary's intCgrity: and though
jufilicd by tic example of princes, who often reckon falilhood
anil deceit ainoiig the nccleihry arts of governmcnt, and even
autlorifcd by tlhe pernicious cafuifiry of the RIomIan clhurch- , which
transfers bIreach of faith to hcretics from the lifl of criines to that

of duties, Iich difimulation, however, mufi be numbered among
tliofe blemifhcs which never stain a truly great and generous
chara-cer.

D.:cenmbcr. As neither the French nor Piedmontefe ambassadors were yet
i,,r the Lkin arrived, tlic lhaptifl of the prince was put off from time to time-.
e.icc!ivc. sMcanwhile lary fixed her rclidence at Craigmillar . Such a

retirement, perhlaps, ifited the present temper of her mind, and
induced her to prefer it before her own palace of Holy-rood-houfe.
IIer aversion for tlic king grew every clay more confirmed, and

ewas become altogether incurable. A deep melancloly succeeded to

that gaiety of lbirit .which wa; natural to her. The raIllnefs and
levity of her own choice, and the !ing's ingratitude and obflinacy,
filled her with shame and with despair. A variety of passions
preyed at once on a mind, all wvhofe sensations were exquisite
and all its emotions firong, and often extorted from her the
last vilrh of the unfortunate, that life itielf might come to an
end '.

BUT as the earl of Bediord, and the count de Brienne, tire

Flnglifn and French ambanladors, whom Thle had locng expcaed,
arrived about this time, Mary was obliged to suppress what pafied

' Kcith, 355 ' Keith, Pref. vii.

- ~~~~~~~~~~~~~iG

in her bolfoi, and to set out for Stirling, in order to celebrate the C,
baptifim of her ion. Bedford was attended by a numerous andl ---
fplcndid train, and brouglit prelents fro:n I'lizabcth, suitable to
her own dignity, and the rcfpedl with whic the aflected, at that
time, to treat the queen of Scots. Grcat preparations had been
made by Mary, and tihe magnifiicence difl laycd by her on this oc-
cafion exceeded whatever had been formerly known in Scotland.
The ceremony itself was performed according to the riltes of the Dec 17-
Romilh church. But neither iedford nor any of the Scottill.
nobles nwho pr-ofeifidl the protellant rcligion, entered within the
gates of thc chapel". Tlc'fiirit of tlhat a.s, irin and uncomply-
ing, -wowuld n-t, iupoon ;lil.n inducement, conldCecend to witlnefs an
ai ion s which it deer:ed idolatrous.

H-IENNRz'S blcha ;ourLi .t t-lsi: j' ncrc, cfclly discovers the Thel.:"'s

exccls of his caprice, as well as of Ilis Loll) . lJe clole to reside wvtirioult l-
at Stirling, but confined liin'm Icl to his oiiwn apartmlet; and as the "bpti'" ^f
queen difirucled every nobleman lwho ventured to converce wiith
him, he \was left in allolute solitude. Nothliig could be more
lingular, or was leIs cpeced, tlian hIis chulng to appear in a
manncr that both publiflicd the contempt under whlich lie ad
fallen, and, by exposing the queen's domeilic unhappiness to the
oblervation of so many foreigners, looked like a flep taken on
purpose to mortify and to offend her. Mary felt this intult enfibly;
and notwithilanding all her efforts to aftilne the gaiety which
suited the occasion, and which was neccefary for the polite reception
of her guests, flhe was sometimes obliged to retire, in order to be
at liberty to indulge her sorrow;, and give vent to her tears X

Keith, 360. Ke"Iith, Pref. vii.

T he

B O0 KI Tlc king lill pcrfifled in his design of retiring into foreign parts,

I V.
t_.----.' and daily threatened to put it in execution Y.

I566.

F:lizabethen- TIE ceremony of witlefling the prince's baptism was not
cdeavours to
accomlmodate the fule bufincls of Bedford's embafly. His instructions con-
her d! fl rcn-
-, ,wli taincd an overture, which ought to have gone far towards extin-

aguifiinig those jealousies iwhich lad tbo long subsisted between
tle tw.o queens. The treaty of Edinbur! g, which lias been
so often mentioned, was the printcipal occasion of these. The

Y Camdcn afims, 401or, that Bcdbfrd was commanded by Elizabeth not to give

Darnly the title of king. Ais this was an indignity not to be borne either by MIary
orher husband, it hath been af'Trted to be the cause of the king's absence from the
ceremony of his son's baptifni. Keith, 360. Good. 3r9. But, i. No fich
thing is to be found among Bedford's initruefions, the original of which flill
remains. Keith, 356. 2. Bedolrd's advice to the queen by M1iclvil is utterly
inconfifient with Camden's afilrtion. Mciv. 153. Mclvil's account is confirmed
by E:lizabeth's infirucions to Sir Hlenry Norris, where she afirms that fl.c com-
manded Bedford to employ Iiis best offices towards reconcilinhg AMary to her
husband, which Ihe hlad attempted to no purpose. Digges's Compl. Ambaf.
p. 13. A paper publiflicd Append. No. XVIII. proves the fame thing. 3. Le
Croc the French resident mentions the king's ablence, but without giving that
reason for it, which has been founded on Camdcn's words, though, if that had been
the real one, it is h:adly poflible to conceive that he ffiould have nclcelcd to
mention it. Le Croc's first letter is dated December 2, some time prior to the
arnival of the earl of Bedford in Scotland; and when his infhtua.ions, either
public or fecrct, could hardly be known. Le Croc plainly fuppcfes that the
dilcord between the Icing and queen was the cause of his absence from the baptifn,
and his account of this matter is that which I have followed, Keith, Pref. vii.
4. IHe informs his court, that on account of the difference betwixt the king and the
queen, he had refused to hold any further correspondence with the former, though
he appears, in many inflances, to have been his great confident. Ibid. 5. As the
king was not present at the baptifmi, he seems to have been excluded from any
ihare in the ordinary adminifiration of business. Two acis of privy council, one
on the 20th, and the other on the 21 t of December, are found in IKeith, 562.
They both run in the queen's name alone. The king feets not to have been prc-
sent. This could ilot be owing to Elizabeth's inftruCions to Bedford.

fpiiit,
,

fpilit, however, 'lcwhiclh had risen to such an height in thle late E 0 0 K

1 V.

larliament, tile power of tlie party which favoured thl Scottish l'-----
quecn's title, the number and acivity of her agents ill differcent
parts of the kingdom, alarmcd Elizabeth, and induced her to
forcgo any advantage swhich the ambiguous and artful exprcfilons
in that treaty might aflord ler. Nothing was now demanded of
MIary, but to renounce any title to the crown of England during
Elizabeth's life and tihe licvs of her posterity; who, on the
other hand engaged to take no flep which might prove injurious
to Mary's claim ulpon tlhe fuccefion '.

A.T ,11- could not, withl dccencyc , rje: a propolition so cqit-

tablc; !1;e irnilncd, Ihowever, that ilizabeth should order the i-i',li:
upon lwhich ihe clained, to be lcgally examined and publicly
-ecogn;icd, and pa;'lcutlar! tlhat the tcflamcnt of H-Ienry VIIL
.!;ercbvy e had c. xciu.ccdi the dic!ndants of his eldelt filcr tile
(i'ccna of Scotland, ifom tlhe place due to them in the order of
l'uccrionl, mi:,,t. be prodticcdl, and confidcred by the .ugrlifh
oobility. M'lary's miniletrs had crcdulouily embraced an opinioli,
tliat tilis telalncnt, which they ob jufily conceived to be i-njurious
to their mini-re'f, was a mere forgery; and on di'ercnt occasions
had urged Elizabeth to produce it. Mary would have fLffercd
considerably by gaining this point. The original letament is flill
extant, and not the least doubt can be entertained of its genuine-
ness and authcnticity. But it was not Elizabeth's intention to
weaken or to set aside the title of the house of Stcswart. She aimed
at nothing more, than to keep the qucion concerning tlhe -ic-
ceflion perplexed and undecided, and by indufhrioufly eluding this
requcft, Ihe did real fervicc to Mary'a cause la
- Kcith, 756. · Rylncr, xv. p. io. Keith, 361. 358. Note (c). AMlrdin, 368.

8 A Fr Ew

BO 0 IK A rnwr cays aftcr tiLc Ibaptifn of thel prince, Morton and all the

I V.

--- -----' other conf}irators againfi: Rizio obtained their pardon, and leave
1566.

to return into Scotland. MRlary, who had hitherto continued in-
exorable to every entreaty in their behalf, yielded at last to the
blicitations of Irothwcll ''. I-Ic could hone for no filccels in those
bull Ldellsns oil lwhic1h lis almbiticn rcfolvcd to vcilture, without
drawing aid irom every quarter. By lprocuring a favour for
i.Ilortol and his afi'i;tcs, of £which they had good reason to
dclpair, ie ce';pcltcd to Iecurc a ban.d of faithful and determined
: .i I l'rc'lts.

Tn E king fLill remained at Stirling in solitude and under con-

tempt. I-lis impatience in this jituation, together with the alarm
given him by the rumotur of a dcfign to fiize his person, and coii-
iine him to priobn ', was the occasion of his leaving that place in
an abrupt manner, ancl retiring to his father at Glasgow.

bie zF. s'Two aflinmblics of the church were lield during this year. New
Dec. z~.
chcth as- complaints were lmaCde, and 111)upon od goo rounds, of the poverty

and contemnlpt under wiich the protellant clergy were fiirercd to
]arnuihl. Plclulrious as the allotment for their ifubliflccc was,
tlely lhad not received the lcafl part of what was due for the pre-
ceding, year . Nothing less than a zeal, ready to endure and to
fliiTr every thing for a good cause, could lhave perfuaided men to
adhere to a church bo indigent and so ncglcced. The extraordi-
nary cxpences occalioned by the prince's baptifil had cxhaufted the
queen's treasury, a-nd the fulms appropriated for the filfiftcnc of
thlc clergy were diverted into other channels. The queen was
therefore obliged to prevent the juPl remonitranccs of the ailfembly,

" Good. vol. i. 40o. Melv. 54. Kcith, Pre iii. viibi. 562.

by

by falling on some new method for the relief of the church. Some B 0 0 K

I'V.

symptoms of liberality, some stretch towards munificence, might
have been cxpeLted in an assignment which was made with an 15
intention of oiothing and silencing the clergy. But both the queen
and the nobles held fast the riches of the church which they had
feizcl. A fum which, at the highest computation, can hardly be
reckoned equal to nine thousand pounds fterlingc, was deemed
sufficient for the maintenance of a lwhole national church, by men
vwho had lately seen single monaftcrics poffcfied of revenues iar
filpcrior in value.,

THrE ecclcliaflics in that age bore the grievances which affcacd

thcmlflves alone with aftonifluing patience; but wherever the
reformed religion was threatened, they were extremely apt to
be alarmed, and to proclaim, in the loudest manner, their ap-
prehensions of danger. A just occasion of this kind was given
them, a short time before the meeting of the aflcmbly. The
uiSrpcd and oppressive juriiifdiion of the spiritual courts had
been aboliflhed by the parliament in the year one thousand five
hundred and sixty, and comiifltrics were appointed to hear and
detcrmine the caufcs which formerly came under their cognizance s.
Among the few a'ts of that parliament to which Mary had paid
any regard, this was one. She had confirmed the authority of
the commifaries, and had given them inftrudions for direcing
their proceedings ', which are still of great authority in that court.
From the time of their first appointment, there judges had con-
tinued in the uninterrupted exercise of their fundion, when of a
sudden the queen ifrucd a proclamation, rcftoring the archbishop

* Keith, 562. f Ibid. I52. g Ibid. 251.
VOL. I. X of

B O 0 K of St. Andrew's to his ancient jurifdidion, and depriving the com-

Iv. .---.--i miffaries of all authorityh
1566.

A MOTIVE, which cannot be justified, rendered the queen not

unwilling to venture upon this rash ation. She had been con-
triving for some time how to re-establish the popish religion; and
the restoring the ancient ecclesiastics to their former jurifdiition
seemed to be a considerable flep towards that end. The motive
which prompted Bothwell, to whose influence over the queen this
action mufi be chiefly imputed ', was flill more criminal. His en-
terprifing ambition had already formed that bold design, which he
soon after put in execution; and the uife which we shall hereafter
find him making of that authority which the popifl ecclesiastics
regained, discovers the reasons of his present conduc, in con-
tributing to revive their power. The protestant clergy were not
unconcerned fpedators of an event which threatened their reli-
gion with unavoidable deftruCion; but as they despaired of ob-
taining the proper remedy from the queen herself, they addressed
a remonPtrance to the whole body of the protestant nobility, full
of that ardent zeal for religion, which the danger to which it was
exposed at that time, seemed to require '. What effects this ve-
hement exhortation might have produced, we have no opportu-
nity of judging, the attention of the nation being quickly turned
towards events of another and more tragical nature.

The king IMMEDIATELY upon the king's leaving Stirling,. and before he
falls tick at
Glasgow. could reach Glasgow, he was seized with a dangerous diflemper.

31567. The symptoms which attended it were violent and unusual, and

h Knox, 403. i Id. ibid. k Keith, 567.

1&2r~.~~ .in.

in that age it was commonly imputed to the effecs of poison'. B °v°
It is impoffiblc, amidfl the contradictions of historians, to decide '----

1567,

with certainty concerning its nature or its cause c. Hi-s life was
in the utmost danger; but after languifling for some weeks,
the vitour of his confitution surmounted the malignity of the
disease.

MARY'S negled& of the king on this occasion was equal to that Negledte by

].Vlary.

with which he had treated her during her illncfs at Jedburgh.
She no longer felt that warmth of conjugal affection which prompts
to sympathy, and delights in all thole tender offices which sooth
and alleviate sickness and pain. At this junture, file did not even
put on the appearance of this pafjion. Notwithstanding the king's
danger, ihe amused herself with excurlions to different parts of
the country, and suffered near a month to elapfc before she visited

' Mclv. 154. Knox, 401.
'" Buchanan and Knox are positive that the King had been poisoned. They

mention the black and putrid pustules which broke out all over his body. Bu-
chanan adds, that Abernethy the king's physician plainly declared that poison was.
the cause of these fymptons, and that the queen refuced to allow her own phyficial
to attend him. Buch. 349. Knox, 401. 2. Blackwood, Caulin, &c. Jcbb,
vol. ii. 59. 214. assert, that the finall-pox was the dilfeae with which the king was
seized. Heis called a Pockifji ian in the queen's letter. Good. vol. ii. 15. The
rejfon given by French Paris for lodging the king at the Kirk of Field, viz. left
the young prince should catch the infection if he ffaid in the palace, seems to favour
this opinion. Anders. vol. ii. 193. Carte mentions it as a proof of Aifary's ten-
derncls to her huband, that though she never had the small-pox hcrielf, fie ventured
to attend him, vol. iii. 446- This, if it had been true, would have affordcd a
good pretence for not visiting him sooner; but nT;lry had the finall-pox in her in-
faincy. Sadler's Letters, p. 330. An additional proof of this is produced from
a poem of Adrian Turnebus, by the publifhcr of ancient Scottifil poems, p. 308.
3. Bishop L,efy affirms, that the king's dilcafe was the French pox. Keith, 364.
Note (b). In that age, this disease was etletmed so contagious, that persons
infected with it were removed without the walls of cities.

X x2 Ihim

B 00 o i him at Glasgow. By that time the violence of the diflemper was

IV.
----' over, and the king, though weak and languishing, was out of all
1567.

danger.

The brcach THE breach between Mary and her husband was not occasioned
betweel
them irre- by any of those flight disgusts which interrupt the domeflic union,
parablc. without difiblving it altogether. Almost all the passions which

operate with greatest violence on a female mind, and drive it to
the most dangerous extremes, concurred in raising and fomenting
this unhappy quarrel. Ingratitude for the favours flie had be-
flowed, contempt of her perlbn, violations of the marriage-vow,
encroachments on her power, conspiracics against her favourites,
jealousy, insolence, and obflinacy, were the injuries of which
Mary had great reason to complain. She felt them with the ut-
mofl sensibility; and added to the anguish of disappointcd love,
they produced those fymptons of despair which we have already
described. Her rqfentment againfl the king seems not to have
abated from the time of his leaving Stirling. In a letter written
with her own hand to her ambassador in France, on the day be-
fore she set out for Glasgow, no tokens of sudden reconcilement
Jan. zo. appear. On the contrary, fie mentions, with some bitternefe, the

king's ingratitude, the jealousy with which he observcd her a&ions,
and the inclination he discovered to disturb her government, and
at the fame time talks of all his attempts with the utmost scorn .

Virits the AFTER this discovery of Mary's sentiments, at the time of her
king at las- departure from Edinburgh to Glasgow, a visit to the king, which

had been negleced when his situation rendered it most necefrary,
appears singular, and it could hardly be expeted that any thing

"Keith, Pref. viii.
, but

but marks of jealousy and diftrufi fliould appear in such an inter- B o
0

iV.

view. This, however, was far friom being the cai ; flhe not -----
only visited Henry, but, by all her words and aaions, cndca-
voured to express an uncommon affSetion for him:: and though
this made iinpreffion on the credulous ipirit of her huiband, no
less flexible on some occasions, than obflinatc on others; yet,
to thole who are acquainted with the human heart, and wlio
know how seldom and how slowly tiLch wounds in domcltic
happiness are healed, this fuddcn transition will appear with a
very suspicious air, and will be contidered by them as the effic
of artifice.

BUT it is not on suspicion alone, that Mary is charged with 1Hm. di inmu-

diflimulation in this part of her conduct. Two of her famous
letters to Bothwell were written during her flay at Glasgow,
and fully lay open this scene of iniquity. I-e had lo far
succeeded in his ambitious and criminal delign, as to gain an
absolute ascendant over the queen; and in a situation fitch as
Mary's, merit not so conspicuous, fcrviccs of far inferior import-
ance, and addrels much lels inlmuating than Bothwecll's, mlay
be fuippofed to steal imperceptibly on a female heart, and entirely
to overcome it. Unhappily, among those in the higher ranks
of life, scruples with regard to conjugal fidelity are, often, neither
many nor strong: nor did the manners of tlat court in which
Mary had been educated, contribute to increase or to fortify
them. The amorous turn of Francis I. and -lHenry 11. the
wildncfs of the military character in that age, and the liberty of
appearing in all companies, which began to be allowed to women,
who had not yet acquired that delicacy of sentiment, and those
polified manners, which alone can render this liberty innocent,
had introduced, among the French, a licentioufiefs of morals that

role

B O 0 K rose to an aflonifhing height. Such examples, which were fami-

Iv.
.--.--. liar to Mary from her infancy, could hardly fail of diminishing

7 that horror of vice which is natural to a virtuous mind. The

king's behaviour would render the first approach of forbidden
Sentiments less shocking; resentment, and disappointed love,
would be apt to represent whatever soothed her revenge, as jufti-
fiable on that account; and so many concurring causes might,
almost imperceptibly, kindle a new passion in her heart.

Tie motives BUT whatever opinion we may form with regard to the rife
CEit.

and progress of this passion, the letters thlemfcles breathe all the
ardour and tenderness of love. The affection which Mary there
exprcffcs for Bothwell, fuilv accounts for every ublfequent part of
her conduct; which, without admitting this circumstance, appears
altogether mysterious, inconsistent, and inexplicable. That re-
concilement with her husband, of which, if we allow it to be
genuine, it is impossible to give any plausible account, is discovered
by the queen's own confeflion to have been mere artifice and deceit.
As her aversion for her husband, and the suspicious attention with
which she observed his conduCt, became universally known, her
ears were officiously filled, as is usual in such cafes, with ground-
less or aggravated accounts of his actions. By tome mhe was told,
that the king intended to seize the perlon of the prince his Ion,
and in his name to usurp the government; by others she was
assured that he resolved inflantly to leave the kingdom; that a
vessel was hired for this purpose, and lay in the river Clyde ready
to receive him°. The last was what Mary chiefly dreaded.
Henry's retiring into a foreign country must have been highly
dishonourable to the queen, and would have entirely disconcertcd

o Keith, Pref. viii.

1 othwecll's

Bothwell's measures. WVhile he resided at Glasgow, at a diflance B OO 0

IV.
from her, and in that part of the kingdom where the interest of - -

t567.

his family was greatest, he might with more facility accompillifh
his designs. In order, therefore, to prevent his cxecuting any
such wild fchcmc, it was necessary to bring him to some place
where he would be more immcdiately under her own eye. For
this purpose, she first employed all her art to regain his confidence,
and then propocfd to remove him to the neighbourhood of Edin- Prevails on

him to coniO

burgh, under pretence that there he would have cafler acccfs to to lin
the advice of physicians, and that she herfclf could attend him with- burgh.
out being absent from her son ". Tle king was weak enough to
susser himfclf to be persuaded ; and being still feeble, and incapable
of bearing fatigue, was carried in a litter to Edinburgh.

TIIE place prepared for his reception was a house belonging

to the provost of a collegiate church, called Kirk of Field. It
fiood almost upon the tfame i}pot where the house belonging to the
principal of the univcrfity now flands. Such a situation, on a
rising ground, and at that time in an open sicld, had all the ad-
vantages of healthful air to recommend it; but, on the other
hand, the solitude of the place rendered it extremely proper for
the commifflon of that crime, with a view to which it tCems ma-
nifeflly to have been chosen.

MARY continued to attend the king with the most assiduous 1Te is mur-

clred thre-c

care. She fcldom was absent from hima through the day; she
slept two nights in the chamber under his apartment. She heaped
on him so many marks of tenderness and confidence, as in a great
measure quieted those fuli4icions which had lo long diflurbed him.

' Good. vol. ii. 8.

But

B 0 O K But wlile lie was fondly indulging in dreams of the return oi

IV.
---..,-- his former happiness, he ltood on the very brink of defirucdion.

567-. On Sunday the ninth of February, about eleven at night, the

queen left the Kirk of Field, in order to be present at a masque
in the palace. At two next morning, the house in which the king
lay was blown up with gunpowder. The noise and flock which
this sudden explosion occasioned, alarmed the whole city. The
inhabitants ran to the place whence it came. The dead body of
the king, with tlat of a servant who slept in the fame room, were
found lying in an adjacent garden without the city wall, un-
touched by lire, and with no bruise or mark of violence.

His charac- SUCII was tle unhappy fate of H-lenry Stewart lord Darnly, in
ter.

the twenty-fir.f year of his age. The indulgence of fortune, and
his own external accompliihments, without any other merit, had
raised him to an height of dignity of which he was altogether un-
worthy. By his folly and ingratitude, he loft the heart of a
woman who doateci on him to diftradcion. His insolence and in-
constancy alienated from him such of the nobles as had contributed
most zealously towards his elevation. His levity and caprice ex-
posed him to the scorn of the people, who once revered him as
the descendant of their ancient kings and heroes. IHad he died a
natural death, his end would have been unlamented, and his me-
mory have been forgotten; but the cruel circumstances of his
murder, and the shameful remissness in negleLting to avenge it,
have made his name to be remembered with regret, and have
rendered him the objet of pity, to which he had otherwilc no
title.

Bothwell ana E.VIRY one's imagination was at work to guess who had con-
thequeen sus-
pcaedof the trived and executed this execrable deed. The suspicion fell, rith
murder.

almoIt

alm-of a general consent, on Bothwell ; and tome rcefllions were G °o o
thrown out, as if the queen ler-felf wcre no ftrangcr to the crime. - - ---
Of Bothwcll's guilt there remains tlec fullest evidence that the
nature of the action will admit. The qucen's known fentimcnts
with regard to her husband, gave a great appearance of probability
to the imputation with which fle was loaded '

Two days after the murder, a proclamation was ificld by the

queen, offering a conliderable r-eward to any person wlio fiould
dilcover those who had been -guilty of flich a horrid and dctcflable
crime ; and though Botliwcll was now one of the greatest lifbjeLs
in the kingdom, formidable on account of lhis own power, and
proteced by the queen's favour, it was impoflible to fiipprcls the
fcntiments and indignation of the people. Papers were aflixed to
the moll public places of the city, accusing him of tile murder,
and naming his accomplices; picurcs appeared to tile ime pur-
pole, and voices were heard in tle middle of tlc night, charging
him with that barbarous action. But the authors of theie rumours
did not confine their accusations to Bothwell alone; they inlinu-
ated that the queen licrfelf was acceflary to the crime '. Tiis
bold accufition, which tb dircclly attacked MIary's reputation,
drew the attention of her council; and by engaging theml in an
inquiry after the authors of tlicl libels, diverted them fi;oi
searching for the murderers of the king " It could icarce be ex-
pected that Mary herself would be extremely solicitous to dil-
cover thole who had rid her of an lhufbalnd, wlom flie hcad so
violently hated. It was Bothwcll's interefl, who had the fulprcee

s Melv. 155 Anders. vol. ii. 156.
r See Difiertation concerning the murdcr of Eenry Darnly, and the geniiinctnef
of 1Mary's lettcrs to Bothwell, Appendix.

' Andcrf. vol. i. 36. . Id. vol. ii. 156. u Id. vol. i. 38.
VOL. I. Y y diredion

B 0 O K direction of this, as well as of all other affairs, to Rifle and sup-

JV.
.--.--. press whatever evidence ihould be offered, and to cover, if poffiblc,

57 the whole transaction under the veil of darkness and of silence.

Some inquiry, however, was made, and some pcrfons called be-
fore the council; but the examination was conduded with the
most indecent remiffnels, and in such a manner as to let in no
light upon that scene of guilt x

IT was not her own subje&s alone who fufpeted Mary of

having been acccflury to this unnatural crime; nor did an opinion,
so diflhonourable to her charadcer, owe its rife and progress to the
jealousy and malice of her fadious nobles. The report of the
manner and circumstances of the king's murder spread quickly
over all Europe, and, even in that age, which was accustomed to
deeds of violence, it excited universal horror. As her unhappy
breach with her husband had long been matter of public discourse,
the first conjectures which were formed with regard to his death,
were extremely to her disadvantage. Her friends, at a loss what
apology to offer for her conduct, called on her to prosecute the
murderers with the utmost diligence, and expeted that the rigour
of her proceedings would prove the best and fullest vindication of
her innocence Y

Lennoxac- LENNOX at the fame time incited Mary to vengeance with
cures Both-
well of tie inceflant importunity. This nobleman had shared in his son's
der. mur- dilgrace, and being treated by Mary with neglect, usually resided

at a dilfance from court. Roused, however, by an event no less
shocking to the heart of a father, than fatal to all his schemes of
Feb. zi. ambition, lie ventured to write to the queen, and to offer his

x Anders. vol. iv. part ii. I67, 168. Keith, Prcf. ix.

advice

advice with rcfpc& to the most cffetiual method for diisovering B 0o rK
and convicting thofc who had to cruelly deprived him of a son, ---
and her of a hiuflband. -Ie urged her to prosecute tliofe who 15G7
were guilty with vigour, and to bring them to a fieedy trial; lie
declared his own itupicion of Bothwell, and of those who were
named as his accomplices; he rcquired that, out of regard to
decency, and in order to encourage evidence to appear against
them, the persons accuscd of such an atrocious crime fiould be
committed to custody, or at least cxcluded from her court and
presence .

M\IARY wa: thlen nt Scnton, whither flie had retired after the

burial of the king, wlhoie body was deposited among the imo-
narchs of Scotland, in a private but decent manner ". The for-
mer part of the earl's demand could not on any pretence be
eluded ; and it was rcfolved to bring Bothwcll immediately to
trial. But, inftcad of conlining him to any prison, Mary admitted M4ary cor

tinues to .a-

him. into all her councils, and allowed a pcrlon, univerlally re- vourhim.
putcd the murderer of her husband, to enjoy all the security, the
dignity, and the power of a favourite b. The offices which Both-
well already pofiefuid, gave him the command of all the south of
Scotland. The castle of Edinburgh, howevcr, was a place of so
much consequence that he wished earnetfly to have it in his own
power. The queen, in order to prevail on the carl of Mar to
fLrrender it, consented to put the person of the young prince in March rS.
his hands, and immediately beflowed the government of that
important fortrcs upon Bothwell c. So many steps in her con-
dunc, inconsistent with all the rules of prudence and of decency,

z Keith, 369. , Anders. vol. i. 23.
b ld. ibid. 40, &c; c Anders. vol. i. Prcf. 64. Keith, 379.

Y y 3 must

B 0o0 K must be imputed to an excess either of folly or of love. Mary's

IV.
_- -.--j known charader fully vindicates her from the former; of the

567. latter, many and ftrilcing proofs soon appeared.

Halens on No dlircf evidence had yet appeared against Bothwell; but as
his tial. time might bring to light the circulmflances of a crime in which

so many accomplices were concerned, it was of great importance
to hurry over the trial, while nothing more than general sus-
picions, and uncertain surmises, could be produced by his ac-
culers. For this rcafon, in a meeting of privy council held on
the twenty-cilghth of MIarch, the twelfth of April was appointed
for the day of trial. Though the law allowed, and the manner
in which criminal causes were carried on in that age required, a
much longer interval, it appears from several circumflances that
this fiort space was considerably contraced, and that Lennox
had only eleven days warning to prepare for accusing a person so
far fiperior to hinifelf both in power and in favour '. No man
could be less in a condition to contend with an antagonist who

' The aat of privy council, appointing the day of Bothwell's trial, bears date

Mlarch the 28th, which happened on a Thursday. Anders. vol. i. 50. The queen's
warrant to the m1effengcrs, impowering them to summon Lennox to be present, is
dated on the 2gth. Anders. vol. ii. 97. He was summoned by public proclamation
at the cross of Edinburgh on the fame day. Ibid. Ioo. He was summoned at his
dwelling-houfcs in Glasgow and Dumbarton the 3oth of March, the i f and 2d days
of April. Ibid. ior. He was summoned at Perth, April lft. Ibid. 1o2. Though
Lennox resided at that time forty miles from Edinburgh, the citation might have
been given him sooner. Such an unneceflary delay affords some cause for suspicion.
It is true, Mary, in her letter, March 24th, invited Lennox to come to Edinburgh
the ensuing week; this gave him warning some days sooner, that she intended to
bring on the trial without delay. But the precise time could not be legally or
certainly known to Lennox sooner than ten or twelve days before the day on which
he was required to appear. By the law and practice of Scotland, at that
time, parties were summoned, in cafes of treason, forty days previous to the
trial.

?,7~~~~~ ~~was

was thus supported. Though Lcnnox's paternal eflate had been B °0 K
rcRored to him when he was called into Scotland, it seems to
have been considerably impaired during his banifhmcnt. I-Iis
afi-als, whilc lie reSidcd in England, had been acculomecd to fomc
degree of independence, and he had not recovered that afccndant
over them, which a feudal chief usually poflcfcd. I-e had no reason
to expect the concurrence of any of those fatlions into which the
nobles were divided. During the flort period of lis son's pro-
fpcrity, he had taken such ftcps as gave rife to an open breach
with Miurray and all his adherents. The p)artitlans of the houtf
of Hamilton were his hcreditary and mortal enemies. Huntly
was linked in the clofcft confederacy with Bolhowell ; and thus,
to the disgrace of the nation, Lennox flood alone in a cause where
both honour and humanity called so loudly on his countrymen to
fccond him.

IT is remarkable too, that Bothwell himself was prefcnt, and

fat as a member in that meeting of privy council, which gave
directions with regard to the time and manner of his trial; and
he fill enjoyed not only full liberty, but was received into
the queen's prelence with the fame diflinguiflcd familiarity as
formerly c.

NOTHING could be a more cruel disappointment to the wiflls Lennox

crnves ' tic-

and resentment of a father than such a premature trial; every lay.
tfep towards which seemed to be taken by direaions from the
person who was himself accused of the crime, and calculated
on purpose to conceal rather than to detect his guilt. Lennox
forefiw what would be the issue of this mock inquiry, and with

c Anders. vol. i. 50. 52.

11 O1V

B 0o 0 how little safety to himself, or success to his cause, lie could ven-

IV.
---- ture to appear on the day prefixed. In his former letters, though
I567.

under exprefions the most rcfpeclful, fomc symptoms of his dif-
trLfting the queen may be difcovcred. I-e fioke out now in
plain language. I-e complained of the injury done him, by hur-
rying on the trial with iuch illegal precipitation. I-Ic rcprcfcntcd
once more the indecency of allowing Bothwell not only to enjoy
personal liberty, but to retain his former influence over her
councils. He again required her, as she regarded her own ho-
nour, to give tome evidence of her sincerity in profccuting the
murder, by confining the person who was on good grounds sus-
petcd to be the author of it; and till that were done he lignified
his own resolution not to be present at a trial, the manner and
circumfianccs of which were Io irregular and unfatisfaEory F.

Applies for 1-E seems, however, to have expeEled little ficcefs from this ap~
this purpose
to Elizabcth. plication to Mary; and therefore at the fame time besought Eliza-

beth to intcrpofe, in order to obtain such a delay as he demanded '
Nothing can be a frrongcr proof how violently he fufpeIed the
one queen, than his submitting to implore the aid of the other,
who had treated his son with the utmost contempt, and himself
and family with the greareft rigour. Elizabeth, who was never
unwilling to interpose in the affairs of Scotland, wrote instantly
to Mary, advised her to delay the trial for some time, and urged
in such firong terms the fame arguments which Lennox had used,
as might have convinced her to what an unfavourable conflruaion
her condut would be liable, if fle pcrfifted in her present method
of proceeding ".

f Anrdcrr. vol. i. 52. c Good. vol. ii. 352.
h Anders. Pref. 60. See Appendix, No. XIX.

NEITH-ER

NEITHIER her intreaties, however, nor those of LIennox, could B 0 0o ;

Iv.
prevail to have the trial put ofFi On the day appointed Bothwell -

1567.

appeared, but with such a formidable retinue, that it would have The trial
been dangerous to condemn, and impoflible to punilh him. Be- procees.
fides a numerous body of his friends and vaflails assemblcd, ac-
cording to cuiom, fiom different parts of the kingdom, he was
attended by a band of hired bfldiers, who marched with flying
colours along the fireets of Edinburgh '. A court of juLlce was
held with the accustomcd formalities. An indiLtment was pre-
sented againfit Bothwell, and Lennox was called upon to make good
his accuiation. In his namne appeared Robert Cunningham, one
of his dependants. I-Ie cxcufcd his nmafer's ablence, on account
of the fliortnefs of the time, which prevented his aflhmbling his
friends and vaCfals, without whore afliftanee he could not with
safety venture to set hirniclf in opposition to fuich a powerful an-
tagonifi. For this reason, he delircd the court to ilop proccedling-,
and protested, that any ientence which lhould be pafled at that
time ought to be deemed illegal and void. Botlhwell, on the
other hand, insisted that the court fiould inflantly proceed to trial.
One of Lennox's own letters, in which he craved of the queen
to prosecute the murderers without delay, was produced. Cun-
ningham's objections were over-ruled ; and the jury, confifling of
peers and barons of the first rank, found Bothwell not guilty of
the crime.

No person appeared as an accuser, not a single witness was Botlhwell ;

examined, nor any evidence produced againf- him. The jury, aquid.
under there circumftanccs, could do nothing else but acquit him.
Their verdict, however, was far from gratifying the wishes,

Anderl; vol. i. 135.

or·

r O IK or filcncing the murmurs of the people. Every circumrfance i:

IV.
._.. the trial gave grounds for suspicion, and excited indignation;
15 )' and the judgment pronounced, inflcad of being a proof of Both-

wcll's innocence, was esteemed an argument of his guilt. Pafqui-
nades and libels were affixed to different places, exprcfling the fen-
timents of the public with the utmost virulence of language.

TIE jury themfclves seem to have been aware of the censure

to which their proceedings would be exposed ; and, at the fame
time that they returned their verdic acquitting Bothwell, tle earl
of Caithness protested, in their name, that no crime should be
imputed to them on that account, because no accuser had appeared,
and no proof was brought of the indicment. He took notice
likewise, that the ninth inftcad of the tenth of February was
mentioned in the indicment, as the day on which the murder
had been committed : a circumstance which dilcovers the extreme
inaccuracy of those who prepared the indictment; and at a time
when men were disposcd, and not without reason, to be suspicious
of every thing, this small matter contributed to confirm and to
increase their ifufpicions '

EVEN Bothwell himself did not rely on the judgment which

he had obtained in his favour, as a full vindication of his inno-
cence. Immediately after his acquittal, he, in compliance with a
cuf0om which was not then obsolete, publilhed a writing, in which
he offered to fight in single combat any gentleman of good fame
who fihould presume to accuse him of being accelary to the
murder of the king.

" Bothw. Trial, Anderr. vol. ii. 97, &c.

7 MARY,

MARY, however, continued to treat him as if lie had been B 0 C)

il.

cleared by the molft unexceptionable and fatisfacloryr evidence. V--.---
The afccndant he had gained over her heart, as well as over h'er
councils, was more vifiblC than ever; and Lennox, vwho could
not expect that his own pcerlln vwould be itfe in a country lwcere
the murderer of his ron had been absolvcd, without regard to
jufice; and loaded witlh honours, in contempt of decency ; fled
'witli precipitation towards England '

Two days after the trial a parliament was held, at tlie opening A panliamc:.

of which the queen diflinguiihcd Iothwlll, by appointing hiii to Il, p.
carry the fccptre before her"'. MoRs of the aics pasl'd in this
aficmbly were calculated on pulrpole to flrcngthen his lparty, and
to promote his dcfigns. I-Ie obtained the ratification of all the
pofleflions and honours which tlhe partiality of the queCCn had
conferred upon him; and the act to that eclte contained the
ftrongefi declarations of his faithful iervices to the crown in all
times past. The surrender of tile caRle of Edinburgh by Mar was
confirmed. The law of attainder againfl I-Iuntly was repealed.,
and he and his adherents were reflored to the cfRates and honours
of their ancestors. Several of those who had been on the jury
iwhlich acquitted Bothwell, obtained ratifications of the grants
made in their favour; and as pasquinades daily multiplied, a law
pasTed, whereby those into whose hands any paper of that kind
fell were commanded inflantly to deft-oy it; and if, thlrough their
neglec, it flould be allowed to spread, they were iibjlcccd to a
capital punishment, in the iame manner as if they hlad been tle
original authors .

' Keith, 378. Note (d). m Id, ibiJ, " Ibld, 380.
VOL. L Z z T'r

B 0 0 BUT the abfolnte dominion which Bothwell had acquired over
-------J MIary's mind appeared in the clearest manner, by an ad in favour

1567.

Rcm: rk-)lc Of tile proteflant religion, to xwhich at this time fle gave her
of th, Ief- aflcnt. Mary's attachment to the Romifli faith was uniform and.
formtRion. 1

Ma-
formation. fperftitious; flei had never laid aside the lefign, nor loft the hopes,

of rcfloring it. She had of late come under new engagements
to that purpose, and in confcuence of theif had ventured upon
some lfeps more public and vigorous than any ihe had formerly
taken. But though none of thefc circumflances were unknown
to Bothwell, there were powerful motives lwhich prompted himi
at this junEture to conciliate the good-will of the protestants, by
exerting himself in order to procure for them some additional
security in the exercise of their religion. That which they en-
joyed at present was very precarious, being founded entirely on
the royal proclamation ifiued soon after the arrival of the queen
in Scotland, which in express terms was declared to be only a
temporary regulation. From that period, neither the solicitations
of the general aflemblies of the church, nor the intreaties of her
people, could extort from Mary any concession in favour of the
protestant religion, on which the professors might reft with greater
confidence. This, however, by the more powerful influence of
Bothwell, they now obtained. An a&t was passed in this parlia-
ment, repealing all the laws, canon, civil, and municipal, adverse
to the reformed religion, and exempting such as had embraced it
from the penalties to which they might have been fubjeded by
these laws, either on account of their past conduCt or present
profession; declaring at the fame time that their persons, estates,
honours, and benefices were taken under public protection against
every court, civil or ecclesiastical, that might attempt to molelt
them on account of their religious sentiments. Thus the protest-

ants%

ants, inftcad of holding their sacred rights by no better tenure PO 0O0 R

1V.

than a declaration of royal indulgence, which might be revoked '------
at pleasure, obtained legal and parliamentary protecion in the
exercise of their religion. By prevailing on the queen to assent
to this law, Bothwell seems to have flattered himfcif that he would
acquire such merit both with the clergy and with the people, as
might induce them to favour his ambitious fchem s, and to connive
at what he had done, or might do, in order to accomplifli them.
The protestants accordingly, though this aa was far from amount-
ing to a legal eftabliflhlent of the reformed faith, Iecm to have
coniidered it as an additional .ccurity of filch iniportance, that it
was publiflied among the laws enacted in a parliament held to-
wards the clofc of this year, under very different leaders ".

EVERYR

° I am indebted to the accuracy of Sir David Dalrymple, for pointing out

(Remarks on the I-Iiftory of Scotland, ch. 9.) a considerable error into which 1
had fallen with rcfpct to this act, by fuppoiing it to bc so favourable to the (docline
of the Reformation, that the parliament which met Dec. 15, could fubflitute
nothing fi-ronger or more explicit in its place, and thought it fullicicnt to ratify it
word for word. This error I have now corrected; but after confidcring the act with
particular attention, though I am satisficd that it neither eflablifcd the rcfbrmcd
religion or the religion of the flatc, nor aboliflicd popery, yet it granted uich new
and legal fccurity to the protefiants, as was deemed, in that age, an accliifition
of great value. The framers of the law fee marnaifeflly to have viewed it in that
light; after reciting " that the queen, firnce her arrival, had attempted nothlilg
contrary to the slate of religion which ihe found publicly and iunivcrfally stand-
ing, on which account (lie was most- worthy to be 1crvcd, honoured, and obeyed,
&c."--the a ct goes on, " that as ffic intends to contitilue the fT.ne goond ne antl
governmcnt ill all times coming, the profell;u's of tlil leigi; afilrefaild may and
iha!l have occifion to praise God for her happy and gracious overnmenti &Cc.: and
to the effcCt that the professors of the religion aforefiaid rmay afllre tilemfclvcs to be in
full surety thereof, and of their lands, lives, &c. and inlay with the better will jeo-
pard and hazard their lives and goods in her i' liglincrs frviec, againi all enemies
to her, and to the commonwell of this realmI, &'c. therefore our fIvercign, with the
advice of the whole estates in parliament, .&c. :" lten follow thl flttutory claufcs
mentioned in the text. The intention of pa ning thie act is appi-rcnt, and it is drawn

Z z . 2 with

B O O K EVERY siep taken by Bothwvell had hitherto been attended wi'th

IV.
', ----*-- a.ll the filcccfs which his moit ianguine wiflecs could expet. I-Ie

15ó7. o:lil.'c;!lec- liad e nitirely gained the queccn's heart; the murder of the king had

,';ilnc. - t

i.c c:icd o p ublic comlnoton; he liad been acquitted by his peers
C;ii".~I sl any la,.re in that crime; and tlheirldeciiion had been in ilonc

Ibrt ratified in parliament. .3ut in a lzingdoim whVere the regal
authority was IO e:trlcmcy limited, and the Ipower of the nobles
io formidlable, he durlft not vecnture on the lafi aclion, towards
-whicl all his ambitious projcts tendcd, without their approbation.
In order to secure this, he, immediately after the diflblution of
parliament, invited all the nobles who were present to an enter-
April 19. tainment. Having filled the house with his friends and depend-

ants, and fuirroulldd it with armed men , he opened to the
company his intention of marrying the queen, wliofc consent, he

-;ith great art. This art is peculiarly manifest in the concluding clause. In her

first proclamation the queen lhat declared, thatt ithould continue in force only until
The fiould take final order concerning religion with the advice of parliament. In
this adt the intention of taking further order concerning religion is mentioned,
probably with a view to plcafc the queen ; but it is worded with such fludicd dcxterity,
that the protection granted by this law is no longer to be regarded as temporary, or
icpending, upon the queen's taking such final order. Parl. I K. Ja. VI. c. 3r.
Jn tlhe flme light of an important acquisition of security to the reformed religion, this
ancq is reprcfented by the privy council in a proclamation issued May 23, 1567,
Keith, 571. M\Iary's principal adherents, in a paper filbfcribed by them Sept. 12,
I 568, declare, that file, " by the advice of the three cftates, had satisfied the defirc
of the whole nobility in ani a concerning all the points of religion paifed in the par-
liament held April 1567." Goodal, ii. 357. The fame is afierted to be the
intention and cffect of this adn in another public paper in the year 1570. Haynes,
62r. From confidering all these particulars, one need not wonder that a law
" anent cafling (as its title bears), annulling, and abrogating of all laws, ads, and
constitutions, canone, civile, and municipal, with other conflitutions, contrare to
the religion now profeflit within the rcalmc," confirmed by the royal afnent of the
queen, fihould be publiflied among the flatutes securing the proteflant religion. WVe
find accordingly, in a very rare edition of the ads of parliament, imprintit at Edin-
burgh by Robert Lekprevik, printar to the king's majeflie, 6 day of April i568, the
at of April 19 insertcd among the ads of the Regent's parliament in December.

P'Good, vol. ii. 14I.

told

told them, he had already obtained; and demanded their appro- °

o

b.btion of th;is match, ic, lie

i id, , was no leisa acceptablel to their ._ ---

fo-veciiln, titan honourable to himliflf'. IIuntly and I;caton, lwho
were prirvy to all Iotlhwell's i;lemles, and promoted theml w'ith
the utimof' zeal; the popifli eclclaf/ecs, \ho were a'!iifutcly
devoted to the queen, and ready to sooth all her pallions; intilantly
(dcltclar d their fatisf ;clioi witi whallt lie hIad propofd. 'c reit,
x.'o dreaded tile cxOrbiiant power w' lhlic i3otlV-cll lhad acquired,
and ollcr-ved the queeil's groi . ing a"lc ion towards liinll i all ler
adkions, were willing to make a merit of yielding to a mealhre
which they could ncither.oppolf nor d(I'cat. ,Some fcew were
confounded and enraged. B3ut in the end 1,owliell, partly by
promiles and flattery, partly by terror and ioree, prevailed on all
who were present to fuhllcribe a paperc, which leavtes a deeper
tfain than any occurrence in that a1e on the ]!onour anld cll--
rad-er of the nation,

Tiis paper contained the llrongcef declarations of Botlhwcll's

innocence, and the moil ample acknowledgment of his good lcr-
vices to the kingdonm. If any future accufaition fliould be brogllht
against llim on account of the king's murder, tle iibfi-Cribels pro-
miied to stand l)y him as one man, and to hazard their lives and
fortunes in his defcnlce. They recommendled hin to the queen as
the most proper pertfn the could chufc for a husband ; and if flhe
flould cond,-lcenc to bcelow on him that mark of her regard,
they undertook to promote the marriage, and to join him withi all
their forces in opposing any perfoln whlo cdeavoured to obftrul:
it . Among the lllbfcribers of tis paper we find fomle who were
the quccn's chief confidelts, othcrs who were ftrangcrs to lher

Andrdcr. vol. i. 94. r Ibid. I77.

couIincil,

B 0 0 K councils, and obnoxious to her displeasure; some who faithfully

IV.
--.----- aldhered to her through all the viciffitudcs of her fortune, and

5 others who became the principal authors of her sufferings; some

paflionately attached to the Romifhi superstition, and others zealous
advocates for the protestant faitll'. No commonl interest can be
supposed to have united men of iuch opposite principles and
parties, in recommending to their fovercign a fltp lo injurious to
her honour, and so fatal to her peace. This firange coalition was
the effet of much artifice, and must be confidered as the boldest
and lmolt masterly stroke of Bothwell's address. It is observable,
that amidfl all the altercations and mutual reproaches of the two
parties which arole in the kingdom, this unworthy tranfadion is
fcldom mentioned. Conscious on both fides, that in this parti-
cular their conduct could ill bear examination, and would redound
little to their fame, they always touch upon it unwillingly, and
witll a tender hand, Ieeming dcfilous that it should remain in
darkness, or be buried in oblivion. 13ut as so many persons who,
both at that time and ever after, possessed the queen's favour sub-
fcribcd this paper, the Lufpicion becomes firong, that Botlin cll's
ambitious hopcs were neither unknownr to MIary nor dilapproved
by her '.

TIIrSE
' Keith, 392.

()f all the difircnt fyflcms with regard to this tranfiLtion, that of Camden

fiems to be the least accurate, and the worst founded. ITe filppores that Bothwell
was hated by) liurray, Mlorton, &c. who had been his associates in the murder of the
king, and that they now wanted to ruin him. He affirms, at the famle time, that the
subscriptions to this paper were obtained by them out of fear that roth'rell might fink
in his hopes, and betray the whole bloody fccrct, 404. But besides the absurdity of
fippofing that any man's enemies would contribute towards raising him to fulch high
dignity, on the uncertain hopes of being able aftelrwards to deprive him of it; bfcides
the impossibility of accomplishing such a marriage, if it had been either unknown to
the queen, or dilfagrccable to her; we may obfcive that this supposition is defltroved
by the direct tfllimony of the queen herself, who ascribes the content of the nobles

to
7?

TiIESE fiufnicions arc confirmed by the miofl direc proof. G O o K

iV.

Melvil at that time enjoyed a conlidcrable fliare in lcer favour. ' --
LHe, as well as his brother, kept a tfccrt correfLCondcnce in 1' n';-
land vwith thofC whslo ifavoured her plretenlfions to that crovwn. The
ruiour) of h1er inltcnded marriage wviih 13l]oicli lhaving ilread
early il that kingdom, cxcited uiiivcrflal indignation ; and Mvelvil
received a ltte-r froin thence, which reprefleitcd, in tlie firongelt
telms, wn1:t w-ould lhe thl f;atal cl'eC2s of fittch a ill)npriident flCp.
I-lJ put this letter into the qccen's lhalnd;, and .Crlior1ccd it \viti tihe
utmofl warmith. She not only dilf-'arldcd tliefe remonflranccs
but communicated the lnatter to Bothiwell;; and M\elvil, in order
to save his life, was obliged to 11y) froil court, iwhither hle dclul
not return till the earl's rage began to abate " At the tllme

tilme

to Bothwell's artifices, zvlu prt.icbaf'/it lby gi'lnSg th,:I to Itueli:j',, lz.iiil t w ;'at ev ,'r C:,,-
tcuzt thcrwevth. Anderr. vol. i. 94. 99. It would hIave beeLn ino filall ldviiu;tge to
Mary, iffihe could have reprcfcnted the conlcnt of the nobles to ha.ve beci their owin
voluntary dced. It is still more furpriling to find lcfly acfribing this paper to
Murray and his faflion. Anderr. vol. i. 26. The liifhlop himlflf was one of tle
persons who subscribed it. Keith, 383. Tlhe king's commissioners, at the confer-
ence held at York i568, pretended that none of the nobles, except the earl of
Huntly, would fubfcrihe tiis paper till ;a warrant from the queen was produced,
by which they were allowed to d(o o: this warrant they had in their cutl}dy, and
exhibited. Anders. vol. iv. part 2. 5. This differs fiom Buchanan's account, wvho
supposes that all the nobles prcfent subscribed the paper on the igth, and that next
day they obtained the approbation of what they had done, by way of security to
themselves, 355.

u Melv. 156. According to Melvil, Lord Herries likewise remonrfrated againl:

the marriage, and conjured the queen, on his knees, to lay aside all thoughts of
fucha diflonourable alliance, 156. But it has been observed, that Herries is one of
the nobles who subscribed the bond, April 19. Keith, 383. 2. That he is one
of the witnellcs to the marriage articles between the queen and Bothwell, May 14.
Good. vol. ii. 6r. 3. That he fat in council with Bothwell, May 17. Keith, 386.
But this remonstrance of Lord Herrics againit the marriage happened be-
fore those made by Melvil himself, 157. Melvil's remonfl-r;icc muif have hap-

pened

1 0 v0 K tillme Llizabcth warlned ary of the ldanger and infamy to which

IV.
-- - ---J i fc would cxpo)f lherfelf by such an indecent choice : but an

advice from Iicr met with flill ]els regard ;.

Boihwcllc.,r,- TrRElE days aftcr the riling of parliamlent IMary went from
by ob,'ce.! .j dinblu rgh to Stirling, in ordcr to visit the )prin-ic her son. Both-
euzibar~ . vell ihad now brought his 'c'cmcs to full nmaturity, and every

precalution being taken whlich could render it fa'e to enter on the
!itl and decisive ficp, the natural impctuofiry of his spirit did not
fiillr himn to deliberate any longer. Under prctrcnc of an expe-
dition against the frccbootcrs on the borders, lic afllenbled his
followers; and imarchingl out of Edinburgh with a thousand horse,
April z.2,. turned uddecnl y towards Linhlithgov, mnct the queen on her re-

turn near that place, disperscd her slender traill without refifl-
ance, icized on her pcrfon, and conduLeld her, togethler with a
few of her courtiers, as a prisoner to his castle of Dunbar. She
expressed neither furprifc, nor terror, nor indignation, at such an
outrage committed on her pcrfon, and filch an insult oflcred to
hcr authority, but fccmcd to iceld whithout struggle or regret'y.
rlclvil was at that time one of her attendants; and the officer by

lIhom hlie was feiedl illnfored himn, that nothing was done with-
out teic queen's own content ;:. If we may rely on the letters pub-
lificdl in Mary's name, the fchemc had been communicated to

lncicd fime time before the meeting oF parliament; lor after oficnding lBothwell,
he rctired from court; he allowed his rage time to fubdi(l, and had giaiin joined the
luccIn, when flle was seizcd, April 24. 158. The timc v.'hich nmu{t hi:ac clapscd,
by this account of the matter, was perhaps ifflicicnt to hare gained 'cirrics from
being an oppofcr to become a promoter of the marriage. Perhaps IMclvil may
have committed some mistake with rcgard to this fal, io far as relates to lord
IIerrics. He could not well be mistaken with regard to what himself did.

X Andcrf. vol. i. 106. Keith, 383. M AJclv. 158

Ix - her,

her, and Cvery fleop towards it was taken v.' Iler participationl s ) ;
and advicc:'. -

B7o'Ii the queen and Lothlwcll thought it of advantage to em-

ploy this appearance of violence. It aiordlcd her at dccnt cxculc.
for her condnt&l ; and v.hiile Ihc couldl :!cad that it was owinl
to forc ratllcr than choice, ihc hoped that hicr reputaltion, almoi
blreigncr;-s .at eIafl, Awould cc:p1)c witlhot ccilurct, or b,. CXlci t
to 1 .s r1-eroacl. Iothwll could not 1C1lp dillrulling all the lie-
thec!s ihicl hd liitllcrto hecn used il,) v.indicatini- Iiim fioni anl,
concern in the nmurdcr of the king. Somcthliig as lill \anting
for01 lis Icc'urli-, alld for quieting; IIs guiltv fears. Thiis was :a

ardon ulnder tihe great 1al. ly tlhe aws. of Scotland the molli
heinous crime mullt be mentioned by name in a pardon, and tihci
all lller offlnces are deemed to be included under the gencrai
clauife, t/Z / l// o//9'C c'ih.ics Tcht/zf/cc.r

'. To feizc the pcrlon o0

thec prince is high trealon; and lotliwcll hoped tlat a pardon
obtained for this would cxtend to every thing of whlich lie had
bccn accullcd .

BOTIIWELL having now got tlIe queoen's person l ito ;hi: IIhanIS, Is i.Occ

Ifrom hlL (:. ti

it would have been ulnbecomlli ng either a politician or a mall Cf ,it..
gallantry to have delayed coninummating llis fclhmes. Tlhc si r-
siep towards this was to have his marriage with lady Jane Gordoln,
the earl of IIuntly's fifler, diflblvcd. In order to accoimlilf
that, in a manner confiflent vitll tle ideas of the cquccn on one
hand, and with the fcntiments of his countrymen on tlhe othcr,
two different processes became necenffry: one founded on the
maxims of the canon law, the other accommodated to the tenets

' Good. vol. ii. 37. ' Parl. 6 Jac. IV. c. 6?.. ' Andcrf. vol. iv. pnrtii. 6I.
VOL. I. 3 A f

B 0 0 K of the reformed church. Botliwell accordingly commenced a

IV.

----- - llit, in his own name, in the spiritual court of tle archbifliop of
April z7. St. Andrew's, the jtirifdicLion of which thle queen had rcitorcd,

by a fpccial corm iffion granted for this purpose, and pleaded,
that lady Jane and himself being cousins within the prohibited
degrees, and having married without a papal dispensation, their
union was null from the beginnilng . At the fame time lie pre-
vailed with lady Jane to apply to the proteflant court of com-
nifllaics for a divorce, on account of his having been guilty of
adultery. The influence of Bothwell 1was of equal wei1ght in
both courts. 1n tlhe courIe of four days, with tIle fame inldcccnI
and ifufticious prccipitancy, the one declared the marriage to be
illegal and null, the otlcer pronounced a sentence of divorce .

WVIIIrI tllis infamous tranfaclion was carrying on the queen

resided at Dunbar; detained as a prisoner, but treated with the
May 3. greatell rcfepca. Soon after Bothwcll, with a numerous train of

d* In her own time, it was urged as an aggravation of the queen's guilt,

that file gave her consent to marry the hufiband of another woman; and the charge
has been often repeated since. But, according to Miary's own id:as, consonant
to the principles of her religion, the marriage of lothwell with lady Jane Gordon
was unlawful and void, and she confidered them as living together not in the
hallowed bonds of matrimony, but in a slate of criminal intercourse. Bothv.ell's
addrcflcs, which firuck her proteflant fubje(ls not only as indecent but flagitious,
could not appear in the fame light to her; and this may be pleaded in extenuation of
the crime imputed to her of having liftcncd to them. But it will not exempt her from
the charge of great imprudence in this unfortunate flep. Mary was well acquainted
with the ideas of her fubjets, and knew what they would think of her giving
car for a moment to the courtflhip of a man lately married under her own eye,
in the church of her palace. Appendix, No. XX. Every consideration should
have restrained her from forming this union, which to her people must have
.ppeared odious and shocking. Remarks on the History of Scotland, p. 199, &e.

c Anders. i. 132. Append, No. XX.

his
7

Iris dependanll ts, concluded hIer to Eldinburigh; but, iiliteadL or' -

1b (0) K

loclging her ill the palace of I-Iolyrood-houll , he conveycd her

. --c.--

to the cafilc, of which he was governor. The dilfontent of the
nation rendcered tlihs prccaution necccfary. In an houfc unforti-
siel, and of eaify accefls, the qcuen might have bccn reicuc(d with-
out dilficulty out of his hands. In a place of fircnlgth ihe was
iccurc d friom all the attempts of his enemies.

AONE ftiall difficul ty Piill remained to be lilirnotunlted. As the

(quecn was kept iln a1 fort of captivity )by Bothwell, a r:lriage
concluded in that condition' might be imputed to force, and be
held invalid. In order to obviate this, Mary appeared in the
ccLr-t of Icilion, and, inl prelence ol the chancellor and other
judges, and f vcral of the nobility, declared that ihe was now at
full liberty; and though Bothwlell's violence in seizing her per-
Iobn had at firl't excited her indignation, yet his refe-liefl lbcha-
viour since that time had not only appeased her relcntment, but
determined her to raise himt to higher honours t.

\VI;AT ther we re soon became public. Tic title of duke of Is marric to

Orkney was conferred upon Bothwvcll; and on tlie fifteenth of e
3lIay his marriage with the queen, wliici had io long been the
objet of his wililcs, and the motive of his crimes, was iblcnluizd.
The ceremony was performed in public, according) to the rites of
the proteflant church, by Adam Botell, ifp of O rkncey, C :e
of the few prelates who had embraced tl:e Reformation, and on
the fame day was celebrated in private, according to tlic sorn;
prcfiribed by the popilfh religion' . The boldnefsi,; witlh which\
Craig, the ninifter who was commanded to publith the banns,

And. i. 87. d. 136 ii.
ii 76.

3 A tcifie

B o o ; tefiificd aainf tlhe design; the small number of the nobles who

IV.
-_----' wvere present ,:t the marriage; and the fullen and diLfefpc-ful

5'67. silence of the people when the queen appeared in public; were

manifest symptoms of the violent and general difhttisfa-ion of
her own fubjeCLs. The refusal of Du Croc, the French amnbaf-
fador, to be present at the nuptial ceremony or entertainment,
discovers the fcntimcnts of her allies with regard to this part of
her condu( ; and although everry other action in MAary's life could
be justified by the rules of prudence, or reconciled to the prin-
ciples of virtue, this fatal marriage would remain an incontcliablc
proof of her ratfines, if not of her guilt.

MIARY's firtl care was to ofler some apology for her conduc',

to the courts of Flrance and England. The inftruc(lions to her
ambassadors fill remain, and are drawn by a maflerly hand. But
unlder all the artificial and falfi colouring fie employs, it is cafy
to discover, not only ,that many of the steps she had taken were
unjustifiable, but that fle herfclf was conlcious that they could
not be jutilicd !.

TrI title of king was the only thing which was not beitowed

upon Bothwell. Notwitllianding her attachment to him, Mary
remembered the inconveniences which had arisen from the rafli
advancement of her former husband to that honour. She agreed,
however, that he should sign, in token of content, all the public
writs issued in her name '. But though the queen withheld from
him the title of king, lie pofleffed, neverthelels, regal power in
its full extent. The queen's person was in his hands; she was
.irrounded more closely than ever by his creatures; none of her

'l And. i. 89. i Good. ii. 60.
5.,t illubje&ts

fllbjels could obtain audience without lis icrnliniion; andl, un- ° 1 :.

I V.

letI inl his own pIreence, 1non1C l)t his coniic1de;t were plr

- initCcd '----

to convicrifc with her k. The Scottifhl monarchs were acculom-cd
to livc among their {ilbjceIs as fatlhers eor as c(quI als, iilit (diI-
Irl-II, and with litle flitc; armed ;lnrds !:andinr5 at the dc:n::s o
the royal apartt;cnt, dificulty of aeccfi, difl.anc atid rctircan.clt,
were tlings unklnown and unlpopular.

THIESi pr-cautions wvcreI ncccfiliu or Iccurin-; to l.Iletwcll tic l'l,:l.(,lr.

to i'"cc;; n-

power whichl h had acque ed. blut, without 1bCI- inafilr of ]i..:,'

,-,

thc person of the young prince, ie cftcremed all that lie had gaincd L.
to be precarious and uncertain. The (juccn had committed her
son to the care of the earl of M'ar. The idellity andl loyalty of tllt
nobleman were too well known to expct¢' that hc would be willini;g
to put the prince into the hands of the man w-lo was so violenlIy
Ifulpeede of havrig murdered his father. Eothwcll, however,
laboured to get the prince into his power, with an anxiety

whli:I,

gave rife to the blackest suspicions. All his addrcls, as well
as authority, were employed to perualde, or to force MIar into a
compliance with his demands '. And it is no flight proof, both
of the firmness and dexterity of that nolleman, that lie prcfcrvcd
a life of so much importance to the nation, from being in the
power of a man, whom fear or ambition might have prompted to
violent attempts against it,

TII eyes of the neighbouring nations were fixed, at that time, Genieral in-

digmation
upon the great events which had happened in Scotland duringp whichi the

qucen's con-
three months: a king murdered with the utmofl cruelty, in thec due c.cited.

And .
i. 136. Melv. 6o. Bucl. 36.,

priim c

o 1K pirinm of hlisl d:)'as, and iln his caIpital city; the person flufpcC'ed

'- ---- .
of tlat odious crime suffercd not only to appear publicly in every

~5r, 7.

plicc, but admitted into the pretence of tle queen, dielii'guilhcd
by Ier ftavou-r, and inlrutlld withl the chief direcic o of ler affairs;
fuljcjced to a trial \whiclh was carried on with mont fthainlefs
-.altitlity, andl acqlu!itted by a fentcnce vlwhich served only to
colllir-nl the flilidions of his guilt; divorced from0 Iis wife, on
prretCLccs fiivolous, or indecent; and af:tr all this, inflead of
inacclng wVith thl ignominy rluc to his actions, or the puniflimcnt
i'ri'rdi l)y liis climis, peCrittted open!l, and witlhot oli-fitio',
t) nlarri) a (clCucn, the -wifl of the prince om lie had atlllldi;:ted,
andl tile Sgarclian of those laws which le l had been guilty of violat-
*Ji.?;. i'.ich a (quicl Iu:cccfion of incidenlts, so lingular and lb
del.eabl l ill the fllacc of thrice monlths, is not to be found inl
any other hiflory. Tlhey left, in the opinion of foreigners, a mark
of inflamy on the ciara3ccr of the nation. Tlie Scots were held
in abhorrence all over Europe; they durlt hardly appear any
vherec in public; and after luflfe ing so many atrocious deeds to
pa;is wilh imnpunity, they were univcrfally reproached as men
void of conrage, or olf lIhumanity , as equlally regarllels of the repu-
tation ofC tlhir (quccn alnd the hlonour of their country '.

'Th:e nollcs 'ITI'ESE reproaches roused the nobles, who ad l been hitherto
combine agaiit heri amuifed by Bothwell's artifices, or intimidated by his power.
and 'uith-
well. The manner in which he exerciled the authority which he

liadc acquired, his repeated attempts to become master of the
prince's person, together with sone rash rthireatenings againlt
him, which he let fall", added to the violence and promptitude

m Andcrf. vol. i. 128. 13 . Mclv. 163. See Appcndix, No. LXI.

M Mclv. I6x.

C

of their resolutions. A confidcrable body of them afnemblcd C 0 K
at Stirling, and entered into an afiociation for the dcifclce of ----
tlhe prince's person. Argyll, Atliol, Mliar, ?\I,;ton, Glcncairn, 'S~/7'
1ion;;c', Li ndfil', lBoyd, ilurray of Tullibardin, Kirkaldy of Grangc,
and 1Maitlanti the fccrctary, were the heads of this confederacy".
Stewarit earl of Athol was remarkalle for an uniliril andl
h)i-ottedt attacllmnent to popeCry'; but his indlignation on account
of tlhe mnurdeCr of t!ic king, to v1ioin 11e wa;S I!a.1-ly allied, alld
his zeal for the (al<;ty of the prince cam, ovecac o tlis occafio!:,
all conliderations of religion, and unitctd himni with the moll
zealous protcflants. Several of the other nobles accl, wvitlhout
queflion, i-omn a laudilable conccrn for tlhe ifcty of the prince
and the Ilonour of their country. But the fpihit which some
of tlhcn dilcovercd during tlle ihbfq:luent revolutions, leaves little
room to doubt, that ambition or rel: i :nent were thl real Imiotives
of their conduct; and that, on many occasions, while they were
pursuing ends jult and nlcce!Tt-r, thiey L- ere actuated by pri:ciples
and paflions altogether unj lllifiable.

TIE firfl accounts of this league filled the queen and Bothlwc!l

with great conftcrnation. They were no strangers to tle lienti-
ments of the nation with reiipeL to their conduct; and thoughi
their marriage had not met with public opposition, they knew that
it had not been carried on without the iecret disgust and niurnur-
ings of all ranks of men. They forcfeiw the violence with which
this indignation would burst out, after having been so long fiqp-
presscd; and in order to- prepare for the storm, M/ary iflcied
a proclamation, requiring her subjects to take arms, and to attend lI ay 2s,

" Keith, 394,

I1er

B 0o I0 K er hIufbandl by a lay appointed. At thec fame lime, file publilfcd

Iv.
-- --..J' a fort of manifcflo, in wShich flic labourcd to vindicate her govern-.

meut from tlioie input:;.' ons whichl it had been with loaded,
andl employed the ilrongcft terms o cxprcis her concern for the
f:;sel: anlld weluc of the prince her son. Neither of thele pro-
duccd ,any confidcrablc cfied. I:cr proclamation was ill obeyedl,

anxd II cr

1 lanifcio mIet i iit ll till creldii''

,l,,in'!d"', Tnll. coiifderate lords cariied on, their preparations w\ith no
,/ir~ctoD.in- leis adivi d ith much more fuiccefs. Among- a warlike

!,clneopl, ien;l of J; much power and popularity found it an easy
_matter to raiilc an a rmy. They were ready to march before the
lquen and l3othwcll were in a condition to resist them. The cafile
of Idinburgl was the place whither the queen ought naturally to
have retired, and there her pcrfon might have been perfecly safe.
But the confederates had fallen on means to liake or corrupt the
ldclity of fir James Balfour, the deputy governor, and Botlhwell
;,h ,. nrcluf not commit to him ficlh an important trufc. H-e conduclcd

the (luicen to hc cailc of lortlhwlicc , and on the appearance of
lord Iioomn, with a body of his followers, before that place, he
j'id with precipitation to Dunbar, and was followed by the queen
difguicld in men's clothes. The confederates advanced towards

dinlburgh, where Huntly endeavoured, in vain, to animate
7he inhabitants to defend the town-i againf them. They en-
tered without opposition, and were infl-antly joined by many of
the citizens, wrhofe zeal becamne the firmest support of their
cause '.

IKeith, 387. 395, 396. s Keith, 398.

IN

TIN -! i..- to) ict their own coldulS ill the molt favourable light, B) 0 0
O K

IV.

aind to ro',l

tLCe Pl'lblic indignation againli3 Bothwell, the nobles - --

pnl,:il -:d a dcclari.tion of tli. motives which had induced themC

l ) t.lle arims. All Uotlhwll';s pi;ft crimels werc enumerated, all
ilis \'icked! ilntenltiols ciiiplayed anid aggravatcl, and every true
Scot!kn:-n ;was c;iled lupon to join them in avenging tlic one and in
irev'eiitinS tlic other

'!.\ . N\.:VIII ;.'. Btir'iwcell afiembled his; forces at Duibar, and

as le had Iany deptndlants in that corner, he tfon gathered fucli
nlrgthi, tla' li ,e venturCed ae

to advance lowards the confederates.

' hicr troops vwere not iilnmcrolus; tlhc I(dtdcIlnells and secrecy of
their cntcrprifc gave their friends at a diflance no timn to join
them ; and as it does not appear that they were lfppoirted
either with money or fed with hopes by the queen of England,
they could not have kept long in a body. Iut on the other hand,
Botlhwell durfi not rifl. a delay '. JHis army followed him with
reluccance in this quarrel, and fcrved him with no cordial aficclion;
so that his only ilope of success was in surprising the enemy, or
in striking tle blow before hiis own troops had leifilre to recollcc;
themselves, or to imbibe the f nmae unfiorUable opinion of
his actions, which lhad plread over the ref: of the nation. These
motives determined the queen to march forward, with an incon-
fiderate and fatal 1i)ecd.

ON the sirs intelligence of her approach, the confederates Thenobles

advanced to meet her. Thcy found her forces drawn up almofl on t'hem.l'ainfi
the fame ground which the Englihl had occupied before the battle July 15.

' Andcrf. vol. i. I28. ' Keith, 401.
VOL. I1 3 B of

B 0 o) K of Pinkie. The numbers on both fides were nearly equal; but

'V.
-. -.. there was no equality in point of discipline. The queen's army

' 7' confited chiefly of a multitude, hastily assembled, without

courage or experience in war. The troops of the confederates
were composed of gentlemen of rank and reputation, followed
by their most trusty dependants, who were no less brave than
zealous'.

An accom- LE CROC the French Ambassador, who was in the field,
rnodation at-
tempted. laboured, by negotiating both with the queen and the nobles, to put

an end to the quarrel without the cffufion of blood. He representcd
to the confederates the queen's inclinations towards peace, and
her willingness to pardon the offences which they had committed.
Morton replied with warmth, that they had taken arms not
against the queen, but againfl the murderer of her husband;
and if he were given up to juflice, or banished from her pretence,
flie should find them ready to yield the obedience which is due
from fubjets to their fovcreign. Glencairn added, that they did
not come to afl pardon for any offence, but to puniflh those who
had offended. Such haughty anifwers convinced the ambassador,
that his mediation would be incffeatual, and that their pafflons
were to high to allow them to liften to any pacific propositions,
or to think of retreating after having proceeded so far".

Ti-i queen's army was posted to advantage, on a rising ground.

The confederates advanced to the attack resolutely, but slowly,
and with the caution which was natural on that unhappy field.
Her troops were alarmed at their approach, and discovered no

Cald. vol. ii. 48, 49. Keith, 401.

8 inclina-

inclination to fight. Mary cndeavoured to animate them ; ile o 0o K

IV.

wept, Ihe threatened, flhe reproached them with cowardice, but
all in vain. A few of Bothwell's immediate attendants were eager 1567.
for the encounter; the reft flood wavering and irresolute, and foimc
began to fleal out of the field. Bothwell attermpted to infjiirit
them, by offering to decide the quarrel, and to vindicate his own
innocence, in single combat with any of Ihis advcrfarics. Kirkaldy
of Grange, Murray of Tullibardin, and lord Lindsay, contended
for the honour of entering the lifts against him. But this chal-
lenge proved to be a mere bravade. Either the confcioufncfs of
guilt ,deprived Bothwcll of his wonted courage, or the queIen, )by
her authority, sorbad the combat .

AFTER the s-ymptoms of fear discovered by her followers, Mary

would have been inexcutfable had she hazarded a battle. To
have retreated in tle face of an enemy Xvho hlad alrcady ) lihr-
rounded the hill on which the flood, with part of their cavally,
was utterly impracticable. In this situation, fil was under tli
cruel necessity of putting hlcrflf into the hands of tllolfe lfhjcdt
who had taken arms against her. She demanded an iitcrvicxv
with Kirkaldy, a brave and genirous mlan, v.ho colni;:nn.lLld an
advanced body of the enemy. lIe, with the conlfent andA il tile
name of tlie leaders oft the party, promiscd tl'a,- , ont contitio
fie would dilinils Botlhwcll from iher presence, l.d

, goveCr the

kingdom by the advice of her nobles, tlhicv \old

.ctl no.lu and
obey her as their fovcrecin '.

DURING tlls pis arlewel of thle .:!...
.queen, and( rode o0f1 the tield
1 ith at fC. 5lewcrs. This; J;! 'nai li* nlv.y

Cald. vol. ii. So. ' oo d. vol .
i. j4. Mc!v. 165

i3 - rcvBc",

.5- ~1 I-I l II I S T O R Y
B o C Js rcvcrie happened exaaly one month after that marriage which

Iv. .-.-,-- hadl cost him so many crimes to accomplish, and which leaves so

567. foul a slain on Mary's memory.

?,nrv fuJrrc.n - /S soon as Bothwell retired, MIary surrendered to Kirkaldy,
ders to the
nobler. vwho concduted her toward the confederate army, the leaders of

which received her with much refp)et; and Morton, in their
name, made ample profeillons of their future loyalty and obe-
dience c. But she was treated by the common soldiers with
the utmofl insolence and indignity. As she marched along, they
poured upon her all the opprobrious names vwhich are bellowved
only on the lowveft and moll ilnfamouts criminals. Wherever she
turned her eyes, they held up before her a flandard, on which
was painted the dead body of the late king, firetched on the
ground, and the young prince kneeling before it, and uttering
these words, " Judge and revenge my cause, 0 Lord !" Mary
turned with horror from flclh a flocking fight. She began al-
ready to feel the wrctcled condition to lwhich a captive prince is
reduced. She uttered the most bitter complaints, flhe melted
into tears, and could hardly be kept from finking to the ground.
Tlhe confederates conducted her towards Edinburgh; and in
spite of many delays, and after looking, with the fondness and
credulity natural to the unfortunate, for some extraordinary relief,
flle arrived there. The streets were covered with multitudes,
whom zeal or curiosity had drawn together, to behold such an
unusual scene. The queen, worn out with fatigue, covered with
dust, and bedewed with tears, was exposed as a fpeaacle to her
own fubjeds, and led to the provost's house. Notwithstanding

Z Good. vol. ii. I65.

all

all her arguments and intreaties, the fime standard was carried B OK
before her, and the fame inllits and reproaches repeated A A .-. ..
woman, young, beautiful, and in diflhreis, is naturally the ob- 1567.
jes of compassion. The comiparifon of their preflnt mifcry
w\ith their former fplcndour, usually softens us in favour of
illustrious fufFcrrs. But the people beheld the deplorable situ-
ation of their fovcrcign witli infenfilility; and so strong was
their pcriiafion of her lguilt, and so great the violence of their
indignation, that the fil!csrings of their (luccl did not, in any
degree, mitigate their rcielntment, or procure her that fympatlhr-
which is fcldom denied to unfortunate princes.

,Ih: I 6\' , B 1uci. 364.

# BOOK V.

T I E
H I S T 0 R

0 F
S OT L A ND

BOOK V.

HE confederate lords had proceeded to such cxtremities o o oI

a against their sovereign, that it now became almofl- im- i .

poflible for them cither to stop fixort, or to pursue a course less D 6lil7'i
violent. Many of the nobles had refused to concur with them of the llloblts

concerniing

in their entcrprife; others openly condemned it. A finall cir- the queen.
cumflrance miglt abate that indignation with which tlce multitude
were at present animated against the queen, and deprive them of
that popular applause which was the chief foundation of their
power. Thelac considerations inclined some of them to treat the
queen with great lenity.

BUT, on the other hand, Mary's affecion for Bothwell con-

tinued as violent as ever; fle obltinately refused to hcarken to
any proposal for dissolving their marriage, and determined not to
abandon a man, for whose love she had already sacrificed so

much.

B o0 K much '. .If they fiould allow her to recover the supreme power,

'-- .i tlhe first cxertion of it would be to recal Bothwell; and they had

reason, both froom lis rclfntment, from her conduel, and from
their own, to expeet the Ievere.l cfects of her vengeance. These
considerations surmounted every other motive; and reckoning
themlflves ablbolved, by Mary's incurable attachment to Bothwell,
from the engagements which they had come under when hie
yielded hercflf a prisoner, they, without regarding the duty which
they owed her as their queen, and without contllting the reft of

They imri- ilc

h nobles, carried lier nec.t evening, under a firong guard, to the

foi her in
Lochlcvn. caflie of JLochlcvin, and flgned a warrant to WTilliam Douglas,

the owner of it, to dctain her as a priboner. This castle is
f1uiat.ed in a fiall illand, in the middle of a lake. Douglas, to
;whom it belonled, was a near relation of Mnorton's, and had
married the carl of Murray's mother. in this place, under firinl
,clfiody, vithl :t fewv attendants, and fuljeitced to the insults of
,t h,-u-ghty \woman, who b1oasled daily of being the lawful
wisel of armcs V. i la-y filfered all the rigour and miseries of
':rptiv;itv :'.

lM,;IEDLTL.r:D ' l:.;\ after the queen's imprisonment, the confe-

tc-dertes ere at the utmlofl pains to firengthen their party; they
entered into new blonds of afociation; they aflumed the title of
Lords (i' i/.te /rct Colluci/, anld without any other right, arrogated
to themlelves the whole regal authority. One of their Iirft
,aes of power was, to search the city of Edinburgh for such as had
been concerned in the murder of the king. This flow of zeal
gained reputation to themselves, and threw an oblique reflecion
on the queen for her remissness. Several fufpeeed persons were

Keith, 419. 446. 449. lMelv. 167. Sec Appendix, No. XXII.
b IKeith, 403. Note (b).

seized.

seizcd. Captain Blackadder and tilrce others were condemned n °o lK
and executed. But no dicoveryv of ilportance vas Imade. 11' --
we believe bome hiflorians, tlicy were convidled by Ifilicient cvi-
dcncc. If we give credit to others, their lcnltcnce wals unjiuf:, and
they denied, -with their last breath, any knowledge of (lie crimel 1ir

lwhich they iiffercd '.

AN unexpelcd accident, however, pu) ino the liands ;.if .,ary's

enelmies rwhat they deemed the fullellt evidence of her- ;il.
,-ell having left in the castle of Edinbulrgh a cakilct, contai iiiii
fivcral sonnets and letters vrrittcn with tlie qu'ee's ov lia liaiJ
lie now tent one of his coniidents to bring to hini this lreciiou:
depolftc. But as his mceflnger returned, lie was intrcctepted,
and tlhe casket se-ized by M\orton . The conitcents of it were
always produced by the party as the mofl amplle julifition t o
their own condua ; and to theic they continually appealed as the
moll unanswerable proof of their not having loaded their Iovcrcign
with the imputation of imaginarly crimes "

EBUT the confcdcratecs, notwithflancling thllr c-traordinary fli'c- nmc f tic

nua'r

£uc s <moosth

ccls, were flill far fromi being perf'eQly at cafe. That ob finall a part r.l: .!;...
of the nobles flould pretend to dispose of the person of tlhei ibvc-
reign, or to afliime the autthority which belonged to her, wirliert
the concurrence of tlie refl, appeared to many of that body to h,
unprecedented and preiuilnlptous. Several of tlicii were n-;v
aflembled atHlamiltonl in order to deliberate what courib they t!ihld
hold in this difficult conjuncuire. The confederLaes lmade l,;nc
attempts towards a coalition with them, but wiithout ciT&. ''hey.

C Cald. vol. ii. 53. Crawf. Mlem. 35' . I Alndct. vol. ii. 92. Good. vol. ii. 9o.
c See Diflirtation at the end of the Hiflory,
VOL. I. 3 C: mployed

B Oo Ki employed the mediation of the aflembly of the church, te

draw them to a personal interview at Edinburgh, but with no
J567' better success. That party, however, though its numbers were

formidable, and the power of its leaders great, soon loft reputation
by the want of unanimity and vigour; all its consultations eva-
porated in murmurs and complaints, and no scheme was concerted
for obflruding the progress of the confederates .

Elizabeth in- T-lERE appeared some profpe'1 of danger from another quarter.
tcrpo iet in her
bchal'. 'This great revolution in Scotland had been carried on without any

aid fr-om Elizabeth, and even without her knowledge %. Though
she was far from being displeased at feeing the affairs of that
kingdom embroiled, or a rival, whom Ihe hated, reduced to diftrels;
flci neither wished that it fiould be in the power of the one fation
cntirely to fupprcfs the other, nor could fle view the fleps taken
by the confederates without great offence. Notwithstanding the
popular maxims by which she governed her own ful)jeas, her
notions of royal prerogative were very exalted. The confederates
had, in her opinion, encroached on the authority of their fove-
reign, which they had no right to control, and had offered
violence to her person, which it was their duty to cftcem sacred.
They had set a dangerous example to other fubjcd-s, and Mary's
cause became the common caute of princes '. If ever Elizabeth
was influenced with regard to the affairs of Scotland by the feelings
of her heart, rather than by considerations of interei, it was on
this occasion. Mary, in her present condition, degraded from
her throne, and covered with the infamy attending an accusation
of such atrocious crimes, could be no longer the cbJct& of
Elizabeth's jealousy, either as a woman or as a queen. Sym-

f Keith, 407. * Id. 4r5. ' Keith, 412. 415.

7 f pathy

pathy with a sovereign in (dil-refs seems, for a moment, to have o 0o K.

V.

touched a heart not very fulceptible of tender sentiments; and, -
while these were yet warm, file dilpatched Throkmorton into Jneo 30.
Scotland, wvith power to negotiate both with tle (lueen and witl
the confederates. In his inftrucions there appears a remarkable
solicitude for MIary's liberty, and even for her reputation ; and
the terms upon which she proposed to rc-eftablifl concord between
the queen and her ulb)jes, appcar to be so rcafbnable and Swell
digested, as might have cnfured the safety and happinef of both.
Zcalous as Throkmorton was to accomplish this, all his cndea-
Yours and addrcfs proved inefTciual. He found not only the
confederate nobles, but the nation in general, io fair alienated
from the queen, and so much ofltnded wkith the indecent pre-
cipitancy of her marriage with the reputed murderer of her
former husband, as to be incapable of listening to any propoftion
in her favour.

DURING the state of anarchy occasioncd by the impritbnmcnt

of the queen, and the difolution of the cltablifhcd govcrniment,
which afforded such ample scope for political fpeculatioi, four
different schemes had been proposed for the lfttlement of the
nation. One, tlat Mlary flould be replaced upon the throne,
but under various and ftrie limitations. The second, that ihe
hould resign the crown to her son, and retiring out of the king-
dom, should reside, during the remainder of her days, either in
England or in France. The third, that Mary flould be brought
to public trial for her crimes, and after convition, of which no
doubt was entertained, fiould be kept in perpetual imprilonment.
The fourth, that after trial and condemnation, capital puniflmenti
sfould be inflicied upon her. Throkmorton, though difioofcd, as
well by his owr inclination as in conformity to the spirit of his

3 C 2 illnTruCons;

B 0 0 K infnruaions, to view matters in the lighll t t favourable to i\Iary,

V.
---- informed his court, that the milder lihemes, recommended by

7. Maitland alone, would undoubtedly be reprobated, and one of

the more rigorous carried into execution.

IN justification of this rigour, the confederates maintained that

Mary's afFcc ion for Bothwell was flill unabated, and openly
avowed by her; that she rejected with disdain every proposal for
dissolving their marriage ; and declared, that file would forego
every comfort, and cndure any extremity, rather than give her
consent to that measure. *While tlielf were her sentiments, they
contended, that concern for the public welfare, as well as attention
to their own safety, rendered it necefary to put it out of the queen's
power to restore a daring man, exasperated by recent injuries, to
his former fiation, which muff needs prove fatal to both. Not-
w-ithfanding their solicitude to conciliate the good-will of Eliza-
beth, they foresaw clearly what would be the effet, at this junc-
ture, of Throknorton's interposition in behalf of the queen, and
that flic, elated with the proipicd- of protclion, would refule to
liften to the overtures 1which they were about to make to her.
For this reason they peremptorily denied Throkmorton acccfs to
their prisoner; and what propositions he made to them in her
behalf they either refutbd or eluded'..

Schemes of MIEANWIIILE they deliberated with the utmost anxiety con-
the confede-
ratc nobles. cerning the settlement of the nation, and the future difporal of

the queen's person. Elizabeth, obfcrving that Throkmorton made
no progress in his negotiations with them, and that they would
liften to none of his demands in Mary's favour, turned towards

Keith, 417. 427.

that
*?

that party of the nobles -who were afleinbled at 1-lamiilton, incitedI ° i
them to take arms in order to refcorc their queen to liberty, and '-----'
promnifcd to alift: them in fuicl an attempt to the utmoflt of her
power . But tlicy difCovecrcd no greater union and vigour than
torn-mcrlvv,and, ichavi l meii who had giciven uip all concern
either for their queen or tlelir countr-, tam:cl allowel an icoin-
lidcerable part cf their body, whether we conlider it w\ith rclI)CpcL
to numbers or to power, to lt'tle the goocrnmcnt of the kingdoml
and to diflofte of the C(ueen's perlon at pleasure. Many confili -
ations were held, ,and varius opinions aroe witlh rcgard to teacl
of these. SCome fe:ned defirui' s of ailleing to the plan on vwhich
the confederacy was at ifll1 f±rn!icd ; atnd after punllhinig thie mu:-
derers of the king, and diltllving the marriage with Botllhell ; aiter
providing for the fitfcty of the youn, prince, and lie tfc urii y of
the proteinant religjion ; they propoed to rc-ctlablill tlhe queen in
the pcfieiiecn of her legal authority. Tic iucccfs xvith wlic i
their arms had been accompanied,, lnfpired others xvithl bolder and
more dcifperatc thoughts, and nothing lets would Iatisfy them ithan
the trial, the condemnation, and punillhment of tlle queen hcr-
ielf, as the principal confjirator againil the life of her husband
and the safety of her son : the former was Maitland's fyflcii,
and breathed too much of a pacific and moderate li'irit, to be
agrccable to the tempcer or wifihcs of the party. The lattcr v..::;
recoimmended by the clergy, and wvarmly adopted by many laics
but the nobles durfl not or would not venture on ftch an unarc--
cedented and audacious deed "'

k Sec Appendix, No. XXIII. ' Keitl, 420, 421, .22. 58.
*" The intention of putting the queen to dtileah ccms to havc been carried on by

bomc of ihr fuhijeas: at this time we often find Etliz.ibcth boU;ning tl;t if .l'
owed her life to her intcrpofition. Dig.gs's Compl. Aiab. 14, &c. Sec Appcild,
No. XVIII.

1I> o'' 3r

B O 0 K BOTH parties agreed at last upon a scheme, neither so moderate

V.
--"'---' as the one, nor so daring as the other. Mary was to be persuaded

1567.

They oblige or forced to resign the crown; the young prince was to be
the queen to
resign the go- proclaimed king, and the carl of Murray was to be appointed to
vernnent. govern the kingdom, during his minority, with the name and

authority of regent. With regard to the queen's own person,
nothing was determined. It seems to have been the intention
of the confederates to keep her in perpetual imprisonment; but
in order to intimidate herself, and to overawre her partisans, they
still reserved to themfelvcs the power of proceeding to more
violent extremes.

IT was obvious to ibrefee difficulties in the execution of this

plan. Mary was young, ambitious, high-fpirited, and accuflomed
toco mmand. To induce her to acknowledge her own incapacity
for governing, to renounce the dignity and power which she
was born to enjoy, to become dependant on her own fubjeQs,
to consent to her own bondage, and to invest those persons whom
flie confidered as the authors of all her calamities with that honour
and authority of lwhich he herself was stripped, were points
hard to be gained. These, however, the confederates attempted,
and they did not want means to insure success. Mary had endured,
for several weeks, all the hardflips and terror of a prison; no pro-
fpe& of liberty appeared; none of her fubjets had either taken
arms, or to much as solicited her relief "; no person in whom she
could confide was admitted into her presence; even the ambaf-
iadors of the French king, and queen of England, were refuied
access to her. In this solitary ftatc, without a counsellor or a
friend, under the pressure of difrrcfs and the apprehension of danger,

- Keith, 425.

it

it was natural for a woman to hcarken almofi to any overtures. l ° iK
The coinfederates took advantage of her condition and of her ----
scan-s. They employed lord Lindsay, tlhe fiercel -z.ealot in the '
party, to coinmunicate their fecheme to the queen, and to obtain
her fnbi- ription to those papers which were neceli'ry for rendering
it iefcCfual. -Ie :executcd his com!niflion with harlihnefl and
brutality. Certain death was before MIary's eyes if she refilld to
comply with his demands. At the fame time hlle was inforimed
by Sir Robert Mclvil, in name ofAthol, iMaitland, and Kirkaldy,
the peribns among the confederates who were most attcltive to
her intcrefl, that a resignation c.xtortcd by fear, and granted during
her imprifonmlent, vwas void in laws, and might be revoked as
loon as file recovered liberty. Throkmorton, by a note which
he found means of conveying to her, ilggcfted the fame thing °
Deference to their opinion, as well as concern for her own Ilacty,
obliged her to yield to every tling which was required, and to
sign all the papers which Lindlih.y prefbntcd to her. By one of
these, Ihe resigned the crown, renounced all nlare in the govern-
ment of the kingdom, and conrented to the coronation of the
youn" king. By another, file appointed the earl of rvlurr.ay Jily .
regent, and conferred upon him all the powers and privileges of
that high office. By a third, fle fubflituted tome other noblemen
in Murray's place, if he flould refuse tle honour which was
designed for him. Mary, when flie subscribed these deeds, was
bathed in tears; and while she gave away, as it were with
her own, hantls, the sceptre whic h I

e hi ad swayed so long, ihe

f.lt a pang of grief and indignation, one of the feverelt, perhaps,
wvhich can touch the human heart .
P Keitlh, 4.5. Note (b). Melr. 169. P Keith, 430. Crawf. Mem. 38;

TIIE

0 0 K TIIE confederates endeavoured to give this refignai- on all the

V.
--' wreight and validity in their power, by proceeding without delay

Janmc vI. to crown the young prince. The ceremony was performed at
ciowned, and
Murray co- Stirling, on the twenty-ninth of July, with muchl lolcmnity, in
iCi regent. pretence of all the nobles of the party, a considerable number

of leflcr barons, and a great aflembly of the people. From that
time all public writs were inucd, and the government carried on, in
irame of James VI '

No revolution so great was ever effeelcd with more ease, or

by means io unequal to the end. In a warlike age, and in less
time than two months, a part of the nobles, vho neither pofledfed
the chief power nor the greatcfl wcaltl in the nation, and who
never brourght three thoullnd men into the field, seized, imprisoned,
and dethroned their queen, and without fhcdding a single drop of
blood, set her son, an infant of a year old, on the throne.

eaf.oningsof DURING this rapid progress of the confederates, the eyes of all
,baLi parties.

the nation were turned on them with aftoniflmcnt; and various
and contradiicory opinions were formed concerning the extraordi-
nary steps which they had taken.

EVEN under the ariflocratical form of government which pre-

vails in Scotland, Iaid the favourers of the queen, and notwith-
flanding the exorbitant privileges of the nobles, the prince pof-
Ifeles considerable power, and his person is treated with great ve-
neration. No encroachments mhould be made on the former, and
no injury offered to the latter, but in cafes where the liberty and
lhappinefs of the nation cannot be secured by any other means.

q Keith, 437.

Such.

Sucli c.ileA , ftldonm cxi:, and it bcloj;>. not to ato p u-t but tho tl 3

r 0 o K

w.,hlole, or at least to a minjority c' i ie if;cict, to jidge oi' their ------
c;xifence. By what adion could it be preten le( tn IMay-v Ii; ( Ill-

5 .

vaded the rights or proper ty of -i,'"!i)j :, or what inc

1 ilc ha

l d i.>:.

formedil againll1 the lil)ertya ;l lit.!iiOl (;a'

tllo

tlll c Ile i o ? V r

fleaIrs and Itliuicions, ainl I1111eim I. , Cno C.1 t , 'ijufli",i Iic inllili:lli_;
and the dcpofing a queen, to v'lho:n tlic crowln csie l

d! dc'id romll ,

long a race of monarchs ? 'The principal autlior of wlitc-cr -a;
reckoned culpable in her condutl, was now di-ivcli

Sfroom iicr prc-

cfncc. The murderers of teli king light ihave been brougiht to
condign punilhfmcnt, the fafct.y of the prilce have been Icctulcl,
and the protcliant religion have been clabilflhcl, V;-ithlout wre].ilng
tile fccptrc out of lier liands, or condemning heri to lperoetnl
impribnmcnt. VWhatcver right a free parliament might have liad
to proceed to fuclh a rigorous conclusion, or whatever name is';
determinations might have inerited, a icntence of tils nature,
palsed by a finall part of the nobility, without acknowledging or
consulting the reft of the nation, muif be deemed a rebellion
igainft the government, and a conspiracy againfl the pecrobn of
their fovercign.

TIE parti'llias of the confederates reasoned very d(Iffrently. It

is evident, laid they, that MarIy either previoully gave conlinct to
the king's murder, or did afterwards approve of that horrid a-tion.
-Ier attachment to Bothwell, the powers and honours with whlich
ihe leaded him, thle manner in which the lI'ilhreld his; tri::l to he
carried on, and the indecent fticed witlh wlici ihc married a man
Rainled with io ;many crimes, rahil' frong liflieions of the former,
and put the latter beyond all doubt. To have ful'ered the ihpreinc
power to continue ill thl hands of ia aLmbl)itious man, capable of
the ioftl atrocious and dcfCeratc aclions, would hlav been dif-

VOL. I. 3 g;acefll

3- o 1i.- graccu! tI to tle nat dilonou'abe to he q cn, and ldan;erou
. ---...' to Illc pril:e. Recourle was Ithcreforc had to arms. The queen

had bccn comnpelled to abaindon a Iihufb;id lo unworthy of hcrr-

ari; often exprchd il 1 si-o:,n .f l n;; tlc-, b) i(...-lr i .. I
to her ancient aul; oritv w

i oiild ?!'; a inc: l cr .',. 1i 1o'c'1 r to

(dCe ioy tli cl;:h, lves, !l\e _x'. l.:2: t; rc :!. l_', !h\'X.ii, a- i'hivec

,_;,.- 'Id ]'i'V a;!' (' rL'...I.,' ( "

pr'ti"'- ';;,'

iv illp',; iLc atal to tile

n;tli(n vi : ;'C;.ti '

',';; c .1'',;~' ) au;' :i;:'L~:: l it h
.' iucceli. O. t-lI" '

I \ii A. , t,

1 S od ag

t!. -.ir -..i;.ii.... .

I;;1 }. ; _

..

.... a.:ion to dci ncr tilelnflve

;and thilir Cou1i iry f;ron,

.i

'.. .
i -- . T-ilc lexpiedient they had

CLOicn -,a s lno !c:." ICC'i t l royal

l blood, than ncceflary -or
the pbllic i 'C;?v CC<bile on [(5 (

!hc iiulblic r '-v. '\\'l!c one plrin.!c .a; let aCidj as incapable of

-";vc'nin';, tlc cr1'1n \ ;.:s pil:iccd oni ils ihead ;Ixho .vas the un!-
cdouie)ted1 reprclfntaltive of thelir ancient l:inS:;.

\V: :,-'?T::':T. opinion -polerity may 11form on comarinr ieC

nar'-u;ineilts o' tlc tv.:o

contcindoi/t -parties, Vwatever CicltilCntt; v'v

l;l . ittCe!.taii coicerliiig tlc j ulicc or !cceltr of that courf!
vhich lhe confederatcs held, il: C:.',ilOt 1) denied that their coI-
due:, 'o far a.s rea-ro d ll;ele.e, w;s extiemeiy p rudent. Other
expedieCnts, less ri-orous towards Miary, mighi]lt Ihave been found
soir ittlting- tlhe naition; bu!t, after the injuries whIich they had(
-already of;c:'ci the queen, the-re xwars no)ne ) efieCLlal rfor icC.ri

Ithei oln

x fvI aty or plerpetuaillt titheir own pow er.

T'o a great part of i aton e

of ithe confedcirates

appeared not only wife, but ju'.c. The kinig's acceiion to the
throne vwas every where proclan;id, and his authority hltbmnittcd
to v/ithout oiipol;ion. Ilough levcral of the nobles w.ere iil'

a na bimled

Ii1; E. ,11 .1 .

f ^.

I : ;

l A
';,

'l.i: .. t at i L i a .id! V-

i )l to

l: Cii' _,

' ini; t'

- Corn-
1

7 '

' CU'

_ . i

...!ion n-i i

' it: l iis . ov: '
in e cll--, au : -A ' 'im

'?ilE returnl of lte cerl of 'I:urri'v : !)bo lti.;

t.n'. ad.'J-I '..,:i: .,'ó-

Li-lCc n'"i to

thlC ..rty, , a , t1 :.i'."c it ;.

a nl d i..:i .v(l isoi'.. i..:..i,'

,<)iLl aflter ic the murder o i' tlc l.:in;- ll

t.il; 'i! c-..l i i;' lti d i.. no

ifrance, upon. v lhat pr tence hiifor;ila:s d,) nit ic cnltilon. : iil :;
his re-idoence lci re, lhe h:ad 1

.. .I .;i '?il c-ovi-nlr !.;.. :i. 7 ...

ch'icfs of the confederacyr, .nd at,' ih .n- (C:i'C n:l.- -..c.ln';e.l
.ie fccend .at irfl un'illin g to 'ccct '.lthe C O',cc of ri'd; u. 'i'i;:;-
hesitation cannot he af[erlied to tlihe mcrupic- idlr o' d'i !* enC

c'

ofi dutyr. 'luri-'ay wan:tecd nCll;l th.c ab)ilitie nor tihe ilmition.'
which cntitled him to a ipire to this hig- dignuity. I e 1ihad received
the irfit accounts of llis promotion vFith the ulnloft: 'a1'lfcl
but by appearin-; to continue for omc dayst-I iln ilflenf, lie ainld
tile to view Vwith attcntio]n the geroLiund on whlici he wac to al;
to balance the flrengtih and resources of the t,.vo contcndilrli i ol-

iand to examine \vllcithr tihe indlan lon

v.-!lich /lhs i'; e eii
and fuccels nlmuf rcfl: were found and iirm.

13Er ORE he declared his finall rcfoilution hIc av.ed onl i.iy at

Lochlevin. This visit to a fifl:cr, and a queen, in a prison, friom vjl':h
he had neither any intention to reliev he]r, nor to Initigr: t the
rigour of her confine:ncn-t, ma,- bc iicn i'onc alon' itch ch .l'm-
flances which discover the great wani of delicacy and rel;n.erelnt
in tlhat age. urray, who -was naturally rough and uncourtly in

Andicr. vol. ii. .31.

3 D 2 ,;

B °Vo0 Ii ls manner , c-poftulatcd so warmly with the qucen concc-rning

----' llher p:r. conduc, and charged her faults ;b home upon her, that

Mary, who had fatt-ced herfclf vwih moi-e gentle and lbrother!
treatmcnt firom ii;n, melted into tears, and abandoned lhcrfelf
entirely to decpair '. This interview, from which lMurray could
reap no political advantage, and lwherein he difcoverlcd a fpIiit fr
fevcre and unrelenting, may be reckoned among the mos Ibitter
circiimrlances in Mary's life, and is certainly one of tlle mos1. un--
jufifiable flcps in his conduct;.
..,,gull 22. SooN after his return from Lochlevin, MAurray accepted the

ofPcc of' regent, and began to acl in that character without op-
pofltion.

Fate cf JEotl- AMJIDST so many great and unexpelcd events, the fate of
well.

Botlhwcll, the chief cause of them all, hath been almost iorgotten,
After his flight from tlhe colfedcratcs, he lurked for fobre tinme
among his vaflals in the neigbourhood of Dunbar. But finding
it impossible for him to make head in that country againfl his
enemies, or even to secure hinfelf from their purfilit, le fled for
flelter to llis kinfinan the bifllop of Murray ; and when he, over-
awed by the confederates, was obliged to abandon him, he rctircd
to the Orkney Isles. Hunted from place to place, deserted by his
friends, and accompanied by a few retainers as desperate as hirn-
self, he Ilifered at once the miseries of infamy and of want. His
indigence forced him upon a course which added to his infamy.
Hc armed a few finall ilips, which had accompanied him fiom
Dunbar, and attacking every vefll which fell in his way, endea-
voured. to procure fubfiflence for himself and his followers by

Keith, 96. Ibid. 445, 446.

piracy.

.i',, li). ,l,'1,(dy and Mur'ray f Tcl'i' l::ch,,a wcrc frnt ot:' ..

.<'.l: ')

ili:li by tllc cocldederates; anii! siri Lng lirn hi le Clie e .;.

' -

anchiior, i.'lttcI: l Ills ilnall i'et, t aoc a I):t of it, 'nd ol!ied
Ahiln to ily wvith a sing-1e sip towards i\cr:way. On that coan,, 1e

ILll n '

\viit a vicll richly laide:, and indiin:cdiatel- lttacked it; tih

i'"orwcgian' fl ilcdl ith al-med boa.s to its aifi. lnc', ;.I i. a cLir ;
CeiCpcratC gtu'llt, Bot lliwl a.d ail i is crtw w ,rc taken plIifbncrs. i-lis
name and qualit)y xeic btU likl.lwti l, anid li was treated :;t fia'rs
\vith all tic incdi a l ty and nrioiri\\'lic.l ,C1 o(iols crim- o. 01irac'
meritLed. I is i-.;:l cli :;rnclcr w;as i(onl di Ie,vcrcd, a ic tli, ()il it
Laved lim .omrn the ini a oiig d(catll to vici cil lls a;iociatcs \\c'r
oldcnlemnia, it could cnithici- I-ocurc Iii l;ilrc-t,

pt nor initigicW tI<e

h:-ard i!ips of hiis i mn prilibnnicnt. lie Lanniliehd ten Cears iil tlii ;
ur:h;lpany conlition ; mclanco-lioiy and dc'ilair depriivcd lhim o0!'
rcafon, ancd it iafi lie cnded hiis days, untpiiicId by Iis countr)Cyenl,

iand unailifrtcc by firanlgcrs ". I''w ncni cevr accoinplifhed their
ambhitious proljecs by vworlc means, or reaped fr-om them lets
liatisfaSlion. Tlhe early part of his life was rcfUels and cltcr-
prifing, full of danger and of viciflitudes. Ilis cnjoyment o' the
grandeur, to which lie attainced by so many crimes, was ex:trcncly
fiolrt; imbittered by much anxiety, and dlifquieitcd by many) CeIns.
In his latter years lie fillcrcd the miofi intolerable calamities to
*which the wretched are li.ibjecl, and from vwhich lpcrlns who have
moved in so high a fphcre are commonly exempted.

TILE good fes&s of Murray's acccfflon to the regency were Succcfsoftle

quickly felt. The party forming for tle queen was weak, irrc- r,,,5tlt ;' ;-
iblute, and disunitcd ; and no fooncr was the government of the
kingdom in the hands of a man lb remarkable both for his abilities

"Mchl. I6S,

an(d

\,£.

2. 0 0 Ks and popularity tani oc,
a ;ond of v;:,.;:i '; :wa comlipofed, ot.:"

all llop-CS of g'aini ; ioun1 d, anll hd l i o ts;Ct le im t '- ii 11

- regent. So mniiy of theml' were Lbc;iC io n .ai:nowilcdg

th'

ill, ',;i allItho ity ) that iclarce any ap;c'; 'ti: c off c:] j1-3iiion to ;lic
(:flah! ilchd govcrnncnt wlas leJt in lii C i;e: :,nJ. iCad they ad-
Icred to lch (ilieen with any li-nne; ; is .I-)l.-', from

l li-

zahlet!'s clifllction a;t

t llat til Ce tllt ':.c wouldd have a- lI c

thell fLich aflillllce as migilt have c
C lid itlcni to s;ce tllicir

lenemies in tlic field. l3ut there l Ci-;rd b litl lC 01r or li--

m:ony in tlchir colunici, thlat ilic \;1-; clilco'ir.i .-cd liituil ecfpofilng
their caluc ; and tlh regent, tai;ii ; advaili;.''c (.f thi-ii- ltunation,
oblilged them to iibnfit to his govclrlimcnI\,\ itout ...a'tig any
ternm, cither to tihmnfclves or to tlie qlccll':.

'Til rcegent was no less fllccefsfull in L]is attempt to .ct into lns

ihands tle places o fircnltl in he lingdoo . tialltior, tle calputy
;ovecrnori, fnrrnclicred tlie cafile of llihnbuirgi ; and as the reward
of his treiachery, in dclbcrting Bothwel l lis patron, ohtaincd terms
of great advantage to Ilimfcli 'The governor of t, bn ', \ who
dilccvercd greater iidelily, \was soon forced to calpitulatc: fonie
other Iinall forts fliurrendcerd withlout reliflialcc.

AX pa-ulia- Tills face of tranquillity in the nation encouraged the regent
Decem 1. . to call a meeting of parliaecnt. Nothing was vwanting to conii'mn

the king's authority, a the proceedings of the confederates, cx-

bD b

cept the approbation of this fil:renie court ; and aitcr the ficccrs
which had attended all their measures, there could be little doubt
of obtaining it. The numbers that retorted to an aficmbly which
was called to deliberate on matters of so mucl importance, were

l Kcith, 447. 450. 463.

great.

2'-l'(;t. The i ri.1v 1t'Is !atC ;1 ' R 't ?

Ii''::o

*'_-.. ;'i!'; J:

*r' : 9 4 *'\

a. l! s acts

l !:.i2 \\

its

a p i tit ; ::'- ..;.y.

; o . '..

1: -
.o .n

v, 011·' ~ ~ ~

~ . . 1 /

l r'm-, t . ]S t.C i!2C. B t t':l.' :I , .l - :i['l

' < '

. c

' 'l. .; vl;i: .?::

).'h i .1'_ l! [:

.:''. [

t :!; rl]!" ,-L~'i~;(!,' andl! ¢] i l'ic d

i 'S ; . :'-. t:'.;ln.. l (:t: pc'n y; i;., p).!'L i'.;, ' ' ,1_

t lt Ltir haviotr to; rJs i t. in; ]i1 1).'.11 tluli;li' il

a.i.

C ii .t .-! lC'- i t [ci'i'ICC ac';:.lio :.'I C ' i l y ill '
S1. TlJ'l',l.o~I'

':]-'i 2!0it

Oi tthe \2.
hlv r 5toIard the.. ''
t-l. .,,du'i/'u

I'Ll l'I1 (i.

Sl;i ]

"r

(] U' '
ai(lhi-;it cd illtO) l: .\oil.) O0 iiln:ccid l ;!s a ;l '.C(f olj tChe si:':c c iv o[tV

t!hcler ccion iiclic:'l

TI ll' pJtr.'ullli.ttC t t1'at!tctC . every H stlii ; tlic cOi 'c' rt';''!ic, 1::"*.!a 'l e f:, '2

. iallt i !':;:t 1' t'o L i 1; li l ;1 i l

wiev ni t

il't it- ' I'ii'
y'1 i; -,,

i Ijil;'n1;ilJ ':!-.. Jt

..O.K/ ,. i iioil Ci L'! Cl' Ott\.ii \'; i-' i, ;n;:i

(cL.elard to b';e'' ilid. ;C

kiin'('S :';tho
;;liI. .73 a 'r y's L...l. ' ,n

'C CC 'ccgitl

,d a l conrfi rrm c.i. T' the i i iril' i

. .g tle

. (C Ci,i

a'nrd all iheIc oh pnc,

olr ltcccis o the co ed il, v'cc p-

iOUicc laut; il]. l.e lettó r; \vlic \lary had \ittCeI tCo klol\v i

weare pro, c' ed, a.ti {zc

( Was declae1dC to be tCCeinri;, to t]he !t lliiiLi

o£' tie ki-r Z At :i e Iclme tii c alil dte acs; o:f parlilinct n o' til i
car one itlioufd five la": rld a;nd ;:-'ty, iih Thanr1 of tlC pro
tcfl-ajt religion, wCire ipublhie(l rati cd ; ncw.h iLatites to) tihe lin'e
on ipa i(. ware enatedC ; and lb It ima that Ceniill con tribtu io )'.V'.
out tLOe rcal:tiiis ol popery, or to cncoi na,;Ce the greol 'si 1the
rilurinratioi,. wa'iS 'egl5 c-Cted.

IT is obiervalile, lto wever, tha-;t tie lu 'lit pa ait :i

'n n u .

1i t

prevailcd il thllis aarliar nc10, as ii a it o the year one0
C 'ilC lj.1ive

'- , ,'

., ,..:.
/ Alollf. vol. i%. 153. Scc Ail' , No. XIV

G
d od. vli. o] h
i. 6 '. Andcrf. vo!. ii. '-cc.

i'i uod .
1·

, 0 l lll hundr-ed and fi.ty. 'T1e proteflant clergy, notwithlitaidlng many
t ---.--... difcoul-ragcmcrnit., and their cxtrneme ovcrty, had for Icvcn vcars

performed aHl religious osrices in the igom. T expedients
iallen upon for their fbfiiftence had lithelro proved inefficlual, or
v.-crc intended to be so. But notwlilhl.nding their known indi-
gence, and the warm remonstrances of the aflnmbly of the church
whiclh met this year, the parliamenlt did nothing more for their
relief, than preicril)e iOlmc new regulations conccrning the pay-
ment of the thirds of benefices, which did not produce any con-
fiderable change in the situation of the clergy.

1(8. A rr F-v days after the disSolution of parliament, four of Both-
'anuar; 3.

well's delpendants were convicted of being guilty of the king's
murder, and suffered death as traitors. Their conffllions brougiht
to light many circumnlances relative to the manner of committing
that barbarous crime ; but they were persons of low rank, and
seem not to have been admitted into the secrets of the con-
fpiracy "

NOTWVI'rITSTANDING the universal fuhlniffion to the regent's

authority, there flill abounded in the kingdom many secret inur-
murs and cabals. The partisans of the house of Hamilton reckoned
Murray's promotion an injury to the duke of Chatelherault, who,
as firfl prince of the blood, had, in their opinion, an undoubted
right to be regent. Tlhe length and rigour of Mary's funferings
began to move many to comnmiferate her cafe. All who leaned
to the ancient opinions in religion dreaded the effects of Murray's
zeal. And he, though his abilities were great, did net poflcls
rne talents requisite for soothing the rage or removing thejealoufies

Anders. vol. ii. 165.

of

of the different facions. By infnuation or address he mighlt have B .O Ki
gained or softened many who had opposed him ; but lie was a -----
stranger to these gentle arts. -Iis virtues were feverc; and his
deportment towards his equals, efpccialiy after his elevation to the
regency, distant and haughty. This behaviour ostended tonie of
the nobles and alarmed others. The queen's faCtion, which had
been so easily dispersed, began again to gather and to unite, and
was secretly favoured by foine who had hitherto zcalouny con-
curred with the confederates ".

Suct was the favourable diflofition of the nation towards the Mary )crclapl

from Loch-

queen, when she recovered her liberty, in a manner no Icts fur- levin.
prifing to her friends, than unexpected by her enemies. Several
attempts had been made to procure her an opportunity of escaping,
which some unforeseen accident, or the vigilance of her keepers,
had hitherto disappointed. At last Mary employed all her art to
gain George Douglas, her keeper's brother, a youth of eighteen.
As her manners were naturally affable and insinuating, she treated
him with the most flattering difintion ; fe even allowed him to
entertain the most ambitious hopes, by letting fall some exprclfons,
as if ihe would chufe him for her husband c. At his age, and in
such circumstances, it was impoflible to resist such a temptation.
He yielded, and drew others into the plot. On Sunday the second
of May, while his brother fat at supper, and the reft of the family
were retired to their devotions, one of his accomplices found
means to steal the keys out of his brother's chamber, and opening
the gates to the queen and one of her maids, locked them behind
her, and then threw the keys into the lake. Mary ran with pre-
cipitation to the boat which was prepared for her, and on reaching
the ihore was received with the utiloft joy, by Douglas,lord

.Melv. 179. ' Kcith, 469. 4Cr. Note.
VOL. I. 3 E Scaton,

B OO K Seaton, and fir James Hamilton, who, with a few attendants~,

V.
\-----. waited for her. She instantly mounted on horseback, and rode

1568. C

fiull fpced towards Niddrie, lord Seaton's feat in Weft Lothian.
She arrived there that night, without being pursued or interrupted.
After halting three hours flie set out for Hamilton ; and travelling
at the fame pace, she reached it next morning.

Arrives at ON the first news of Mary's escape her fiiends, whom, in their
IHamilton,
and railes a present disposition, a much Ifnaller accident would have routed,
numerous
army. ran to arms. In a few days her court was filled with a great and

fplcndid train of nobles, accompanied by such numbers of fol-
lowers, as formed an army above fix thousand strong. In their
pretence fle declared that the resignation of the crown, and the
other deeds which flhe had signed during her imprifonmcnt, were
extorted from her by fear. Sir Robert Melvil confirmed her
declaration; and on that, as well as on other accounts, a council
of the nobles and chief men of her party pronounced all these
May 8. tranfaaions void and illegal. At the fame time an association was

formed for the defence of her person and authority, and sub-
fcribcd by nine earls, nine bifiops, eighteen lords, and many
gentlcmen of difinstion '. Among them we find several who had
been present in the last parliament, and who had signed the
counter-afibciation in defence of the king's government; but
iclh sudden changes were then so common, as to be no matter
of reproach.

Conpternh- AT the time when the queen made her escape the regent was
tion of the
Rrgent's at Glasgow, holding a court of juflice. An event so contrary to

their expedations, and so fatal to their schemes, gave a great shock
to his adherents. Many of them appeared wavering and irre-

Keith, 475.

fiolute

solute; others began to carry onl private negotiations withe tlie I o0o 0

V.

queen; and oime openly revolted to her fide. In lb dillicult a .-_
julncure, where his own fame, and tlie being of the party, de- ''
pendcd on his' choice, the regent's nmolt faithf'ul aflociates were
divided in opinion. Some advised him to retire, without lois of
time, to Stirling. The queen's army was already firong, and
only eight miles distant; the adjacent country was fiull of the
fiiends and dependents of the Iioufe of Hamnilton, and other
lords of the queen's failion; Glasgow was a laru e and un-
fortified town; his own train coniftced of no greater number
than was usual in times of peacc ; all there rcafons pleaded for a
retreat. But on the other hand, arguments were tirged of no
inconliderable weight. The citizens of Glasgow were well
affected to the cause; the vatfals of Glencairn, Lcnnox, and
Semple, lay near at hand, and cwere both numerous and full of
zeal; succours might arrive from other parts of the kingdom in
a few days; in war, ficcefs depends upon reputation, as much as
upon numbers; reputation is gained or loft by the firlt flep one
takes; in his circumflanccs, a retreat rwould be attended with all
the ignominy of a flight, and would at once dilifirit his friends,
and inspire his enemies with boldness. Iln ifcl dangerous cxi- Ilis prudcnt
gencies as this, the ilperiority of Murray's genius appeared, and condu't.
enabled him both to chufe with wisdom and to act witli vigour.
I-Ie declared against retreating, and fixed his head-quarters at
Glasgow. And while he amused the queen for some days, by
pretending to hearken to tome overtures, whiclh tie made for
accommodating their differences, he was employed, with the ut-
most industry, in drawing together his adherents from different
parts of the kingdom. He was soon in a condition to take the
field; and though far inferior to the enemy in number, lie con-
fided so much in the valour of his troops and the experience of

3 E2 his

B 0 t K his officers, that he broke off the negotiation, and determined toa

---- . .

hazard a battle'.

1568.
May 13. AT the faune time, the queen's generals had commanded her

army to move. Their intention was, to conduc her to Dunbarton-
castle, a place of great strength, which the regent had not been
able to wrest out of the hands of lord Fleming the governor; but
if the enemy should endeavour to interrupt their march, they
resolved not to decline an engagement. In Mary's situation, no
resolution could be more imprudent. A part only of her forces
wvas aflcmblled. I-Iuntly, Ogilvie, and the northern clans, were
soon expeced; her sufferings had removed or diminished the
prejudices of many among her fubjeCs; the address with which
(he surmounted the dangers that obftruted her escape, dazzled
and interested the people; the sudden confluence of so many
nobles added lustre to her cause; Ihe might afluredly depend on
the friendship and countenance of France; ihe had reason to
expea the protection of England; her enemies could not poflibly
look for filpport from that quarter. She had much to hope from
pursuing flow and cautious measures; they had every thing to
fear.

BUT Mary, whose hopes were naturally sanguine, and her

paflions impetuous, was so elevated by her sudden transition from
the depth of distress, to such an unusual appearance of prosperity,
that she never doubted of success. Her army, which was almost
double to the enemy in number, consisted chiefly of the Hamil-
tons and their dependants. Of there the archbiihop of St. An-
drew's had the chief diretion, and hoped, by a victory, not only'

c Buchan. 369.

to

to crush Murray, the ancient enemy of his house, but to get B 00 K
the person of the queen into his hands, and to oblige 1her either - -
to marry one of the duke's sons, or at Ieaf to commit tlhe
chief direcion of her afl'tirs to hims!elf. I-lis ambition proved
fatal to the queen, to himielf, and to his family '.

MIARY'S imprudence in resolving to fight, was not greater than Batte of

the ill conduct of her generals in the battle. Between the two
armies, and on the road towards Dunbarton, there was an emi-
nence called Langfide Hill. This the regent had the precaution
to seize, and polled his troops in a finall villagc, and amnonf some
gardens and inclofurcs adjacent. In this advantageous fituaitioi
he waited the approach of the enemy, whofle iuperiority in cavalry
could be of no benefit to them on such broken ground. The
H-amiltons, vwho composed the vanguard, ran so eagerly to the
attack, that they put themselves out of breath, and left the main
battle far behind. The encounter of the ipearmen was fierce and
desperate; but as the forces of the Hamiltons were cxpoedl, on
the one flank, to a continued fire fiom a body of mufiluetecrs,
attacked on the other by the regent's molt choice troops, and not
supported by the reft of the queen's army, they were loon obliged The queen's

.arm.y defeat,

to give ground, and the rout immediately became univcrfil. Few cd.
vitories, in a civil war, and among a fierce people, have been
pursued with less violence, or attended with lel's bloodihed. Three
hundred fell in the field: in the flight almost none were killed.
The regent and his principal officers rode about, beseeching the
soldiers to spare their countrymen. The number of prisoners
was great, and among them many persons of dillinaion. The
regent marched back to Glasgow, and returned public thanks

f Anders. vol. iv. 32. Melv. 181.

to

B 0 0 K to God for this great, and, on his fide, almost bl)oodlcfs

V.
I-.--._~ victory .

1568.
Her flight. DURING the engagement, Mary flood on a hill, at no great

diflance, and beheld all that pasted in the field, with such emo-
tions of mind as are not easily described. When flie law the army,

lwhich was her last hope, thrown into irretrievable confulriol,

her lpirit, which all her pafli misfortunes had. not been able entirely
to subdue, Ilrnk altogether. In the utmost conflernation, flie be-
gan her flight, and ib livecly were her impreflions of fear, that flic
never closed her eyes till Ihe reached the abbey of D)ndrenan in
Galloway, full sixty Scottillh miles from the place of battle'

TIESE revolutions in Mary's fortune had been no less rapid than

singular. In the fliort space of eleven days, lhe had been a prisoner
at the mercy of her most inveterate enemies ; flle had seen a
powerful army under her command, and a numerous train of
noblcs at her devotion: and now Ihe was obliged to fly, in the
utmofl- danger of her life, and to lurk, with a few attendants, in a
corner of her kingdom. Not thinking- herself safe, even in that
retreat, her fears impelled her to an adion, the most unadvised,
as well as the most unfortunate in her whole life. This was her
retiring into England, a flep which, on many accounts, ought to
have appeared to her rash and dangerous.

Resolves on BEFORE Mary's arrival in Scotland, mutual distrus't and jea-
England.

ig"lodi"' louties had arisen betwveen her and Elizabeth. All tllheir subsequent

tranfaCions had contributed to cxafperate and inflame these passions.
She had endeavoured, by secret negotiations and intrigues, to

. Keith, 477. Id. 481.

4 disturb

dilftrb the tranquillity of Elizabeth's government, and to advance C o o K
her own pretensions to the Englifhl crown. Elizabeth, who pot- -
ferTed great power, and acded with IcEs relervc, had openly flip- '5.
ported Mary's rebellious fuljeds, and fomented all the diflcnfions
and troubles in which her reign had been involved. ''lhe maxins
of policy Rill authorilfcd that queen to purllc the fame coul-l ; as
by keeping Scotland in confusion she cfcclTually ifcu-rcd the peace
of her own kingdom. The regent, after his viclory, had marcled
to Edinburgh, and not knowing what courilf the queen had taken,
it was leveral dlays before he thought of purl-fing iher . Sic
migllt have been concealed in thlit retired corner, amongll itulecas
devoted to her intercl, until her party, lwhiclh was dlilpcrlId rIalher
than broken by the late defeat, should gather iuchl flrengh that
flie could again appear witl safety at their head. There was not
any danger which lte ought not to have run, rather than throw
herself into the hands of an enemy, from wlihom e ihad already
itffered to many injuries, and who was prompted, both by inclina-
tion and by intercft, to renew them.

BuT, on the other hand, during IMary's confinement, EIlza-

beth had declared againfi the proceedings of her iIbjcC'Ls, and
Iblicited for her liberty with a warmtlh which had all the appealr-
ance of sincerity. She had invited her to take rei'gLe iln Elngland,
and had promiied to mect her in person, and to give her fiich a
reception as was due to a queen and an ally k. \Vhatever appre-
henfion Elizabeth might entertain of Mary's dcfigns while fle had
power in her hands, ile was at prcfcnt the objed, not of fear,
but of pity; and to take advantage of her situation, would be

i Craw. MIem. 59.
k Camb. 489. Anders, vol. iv. 99. I20. Murdin, 369.

both

B o0 K both ungenerous and inhuman. The horrors of a prison were

V.
i .- I fresh in Mary's memory, and if she should fall a second time into

1568. the hands of her fubjeEts, there was no injury to which the pre-

fumption of success might not embolden them to proceed. To
attempt escaping into France was dangerous, and in her situation
almost impossible; nor could she bear the thoughts of appearing
as an exile and a fugitive in that kingdom where she had once
enjoyed all the splendour of a queen. England remained her
only aiylun ; and in spite of the entreaties of lord Herries,
Fleming, and her other attendants, who conjured her, even on
their knees, not to confide in Elizabeth's promises or generosity,
her infatuation was invincible, and fle resolved to fly thither.

Her recep- Herries, by her command, wrote to Lowther the deputy governor
tion at Car- o b
line. of Carlisle, to know what reception he would give her; and be-

fore his answer could return, her fear and impatience were so
May 16. great, that she got into a fifler-boat, and with about twenty at-

tendants landed at Wirkington in Cumberland, and thence she
was condudled with many marks of respect to Carlisle'.

Elizabeth de- AS soon as Mary arrived in England, /he wrote a long letter
liberates con-
cerning the to the queen, representing, in the frongeft terms, the injuries
manner of
treating her. ,which she had ififered fiom her own fubjeds, and imploring that

pity and afliftance which her present situation demanded m. An
event so extraordinary, and the conduct which might be proper in
consequence of it, drew the attention, and employed the thoughts,
of Elizabeth and her council. If their deliberations had been
influenced by considerations of jufiice or generosity alone, they
would not have found them long or intricate. A queen, van-
quifhed by her own fubjcts, and threatened by them with the

Keith, 483. Anders. vol. iv. 2. ' Id. 29.

loss

Iofs of her liberty, or of her life, had fled from their violcnce, B3 0O IK
and thrown herself into the arms of her ncareRf neighbour and '--.--
ally, from whom file had received repeated affuranccs of fiiendflip
and protecion. Thele circumstances entitled her to refpcca and
to compafiion, and required that llhe fiould cither be rcftorcd to
lher own kingdom, or at leaRl be left at full liberty to seek aid
from any other quarter. But with Elizabeth and her counsellors
the question was not, what was most just or generous, but what
was most beneficial to herfclf, and to the Englilh nation. Three
different resolutions might have been taken, with regard to the
queen of Scots. To reinstate her in her throne, was one; to
allow her to retire into France, was another; to detain her in
England, was a third. Each of thele drew confequcnces after it,
of the utmost importance, which were examined, as appears from
papers flill extant ", with that minute accuracy which Elizabeth's
ministers employed in all their consultations upon affairs of
moment.

To restore Mary to the full exercise of the royal authority in

Scotland, they observed, would render her more powerful than
ever. The nobles who were molt firmly attached to the Englifih
interest would quickly feel the utmost weight of her resentment.
As the gratitude of princes is seldom strong or lasting, regard to
her own interest might soon efface the memory of her obligations
to Elizabeth, and prompt her to renew the alliance of the Scottilh
nation with France, and revive her own pretensions to the English
crown. Nor was it possible to fetter and circumscribe the Scottifhi
queen by any conditions that would prevent these dangers. Her
party in Scotland was numerous and powerful. Her return, even

n Anders. vol. iv. 34. 99, I02.
VOL. I, 3 F without

B 00 K without any support from England, would inspire her friends with

V.
'-r---' new zeal and courage; a single vicory might give them the

superiority, which they had loft by a single defeat, and render
Mary a more formidable rival than ever to Elizabeth.

TnIE dangers arising from suffering Mary to return into France,.

were no less obvious. The French king could not refuse his
afiflance towards restoring his fifler and ally to her throne. Eli-
zabeth would once more fee a foreign army in the island, over-
awing the Scots, and ready to enter her kingdom; and if the
commotions in France, on account of religion, were fettled, the
princes of Lorrain might resume their ambitious projects, and the
united forces of France and Scotland might invade England where
it is weakest and most defenceless.

Resolves to NOTHING therefore remained but to detain her in England;
etain hedr i and to permit her either to live at liberty there, or to confine her

in a prison. The former was a dangerous experiment. Her
court would become a place of resort to all the Roman catholics,
to the difaffe&ed, and to the lovers of innovation. Though Eli-
zabeth asseted to represent Mary's pretensions to the English
crown as altogether extravagant and ill-founded, the was not igno-
rant that they did not appear in that light to the nation, and that
many thought them preferable even to her own title. If the
aciviry of her emissaries had gained her so many abettors, her
own personal influence was much more to be dreaded; her
beauty, her address, her sufferings, by the admiration and pity
which they would excite, could not fail of making many converts
to her party °.

w Anders. vol. iv. 56. 60.

IT

IT was indeed to be apprehended, that the treating Mary as a 0 o0 K

prisoner would excite universal indignation agalnfl Elizabcth, and * .---
that by this unexampled severity towards a queen, who implored,
and to whom Ihe had promised her proteaion, file would forfeit
the praise ofjuftice and humanity, which was hitherto due to her
administration. But the Englifl monarchs were often so solicitous
to secure their kingdom againfi the Scots, as to be little scrupulous
about the means which they, employed for that purpoic. H-enry IV,
h]ad seized the heir of the crown of Scotland, who was forced,
by the violence of a storm, to take refuge in one of the ports of
his kingdom; and, in contempt of the rights of hoifitality, with-
out regarding his tender age, or the tears and int-catics of his
father, detained him a prisoner for many years. This aQion,
though derefted by poflerity, Elizabeth resolved now to imitate.
Her virtue was not more proof than that of Henry lhad been,
against the temptations of interefl; and the pofcflion of a prcfent
advantage was preferred to the proipca of future fame. The
fatisfadion which fie felt in mortifying a rival, whose beauty and
accomplillments ile envied, had perhaps no less influence than
political considerations, in bringing her to this resolution. But at
the fame time, in order to screen herself from tle cenfiue which
this conduCt merited, and to make her treatment of the Scottifi
queen look like the effect of ncceffity, rather than of choice, fhc
determined to assume the appearance of concern for her interest,
and of deep sympathy with her fuflerings.

WITI this view flhe inflantly dispatched lord Scroope, warden Ma.y 0o.

of the weft marches, and fir Francis Knollys, her vice-chamber-
lain, to the queen of Scots, with letters full of expressions of
kindness and condolence. But at the fame time they hlad private
inftrucions to watch all her motions, and to take care that fie

3 F 2 should

13 0 0K should not escape into her own kingdomP. On their arrival,,

--. ,Mary demanded a personal interview with the queen, that she

1568.

Maryde- might lay before her the injuries which /he had suffered, and re-
tdande int ceive from her those friendly offices which she had been encouraged
Elizabeth's to expecL They answered, that it was with reludance admission
prefcnce.

into the presence of their sovereign was at present denied her;,
that while /he lay under the imputation of a crime so horrid as the
murder of her husband, their mistress, to whom he was so nearly
allied, could not, without bringing a stain upon. her own reputation,,
admit her into her pretence; but as soon as /he had cleared herself
from that aspersion, they promised her a reception suitable to her
dignity, and aid proportioned to her distress q.

Slec offers to NOTHING could be more artful than this pretence; and it was
vindicate her
ode hra. the occasion of leading the queen of Scots into the snare in which

Elizabeth and her miinflers wished to entangle her. Mary
expressed the utmost surprise at this unexpeCted manner of evad-
ing her request; but as she could not believe so many professions
of friendship to be void of sincerity, (he frankly offered to submit
her cause to the cognizance of Elizabeth, and undertook to pro-
duce Iuch proofs of her own innocence,. and of the falsehood of
the accusations brought against her, as fould fully remove the

Elizabeth scruples, and satisfy the delicacy of the English queen. This was
takes advan- the very point to which Elizabeth laboured to bring the matter°
efticr. In consequence of this appeal of the Scottish queen,. he now con-

fidered herself as the umpire between her and her subjects, and:
foresaw that she would have it entirely in her own power to
protrac the inquiry to any length, and to perplex and involve
it in endless difficulties. In the mean time, ihe was furnifixed

? Ander.s vol. iv. 36. 70. 92. 1 Ibid. vol. iv. 8. 55.

. t Lwith

with a plausible reason for keeping her at a distance from court, B o K.
and for refusing to contribute towards replacing her on the throne. ------
As Mary's conduct had been extremely incautious, and the pre- I
fumptions of her guilt were many and strong, it was not impof-
fible her fubjeEs might make good their charge against her; and
if this fliould be the result of the inquiry, she would, thcnccforth,
cease to be the objet of regard or of comnpaflion, and the treating
her with coldncfs and neglect would merit little ccnfurc. In a
matter so dark and mysterious, there was no probability that Mary
could bring proofs of her innocence, to inconteftcd, as to render
the conduEt of the Englifhi queen altogether culpable ;. and,
perhaps, impatience under refraint, suspicion of Elizabeth's par-
tiality, or the discovery of her artifices, might engage Mary in fuclL
cabals as would justify the uling her with greater rigour.

ELIZABETII early perceived many advantages which would

arise from an inquiry into the conduc( of the Scottish queen,
carried on under her direction. There was Iome danger, however,
that Mary might discover her fecrct intentions too soon, and by
receding from the offer which she had made,. cndeavour to difap-
point them. But even in that event, she determined not to drop
the inquiry, and had thought of several different expedients for
carrying it on. The countess of Lennox, convinced that IMary
was accessary to the murder of her son, and thirfling for that
vengeance which it was natural for a mother to demand,. had im-
plored Elizabeth's justice, and solicitec her, with many tears, in
her own name, and in her husband's, to bring the Scottish queen:
to a trial for that crime . The parents of the unhappy prince had
a just right to prefer this accusation; nor could she,. who was.

' Camd, 4Z.z, Haynes, 469.

their

B o0 K their nearest kinswoman, be condemned for listening to so equitable

V.
-------' a demand. Betides, as the Scottish nobles openly accused Mary

8 of the fame crime, and pretended to be able to confirm their

charge by sufficient proof, it would be no difficult matter to pre-
vail on them to petition the queen of England to take cognizance
of their proceedings against their sovereign; and it was the opi-
nion of the Englifi council, that it would be reasonable to com-
ply with the request s. At the fame time the obsolete claim of
the superiority of England over Scotland began to be talked of;
and on that account it was pretended that the decision of the con-
tcft between Mary and her subje&s belonged of right to Eliza-
beth '. But though Elizabeth revolved all these expedients in her
mind, and kept them in reserve to be made use of as occasion
might require, she wified that the inquiry into Mary's conduac
should appear to be undertaken purely in compliance with her
own demand, and in order to vindicate her innocence; and so
long as that appearance could be preserved, none of the other ex-
pedients were to be employed.

TIHEN Mary consented to submit her cause to Elizabeth, Ihe

was far from fufpeling that any bad consequences could follow,
or that any dangerous pretensions could be founded on her offer.
She expe&ed that Elizabeth herself would receive and examine
her defences " ; she meant to confider her as an equal, for whose
fatisfacion she was willing to explain any part of her condua
that was liable to censure, not to acknowledge her as a superior,
before whom fle was bound to plead her cause. But Elizabeth
put a very different sense on Mary's offer. She confidered herself
as chosen to be judge in the controversy between the Scottish

' And. vol. iv. part i. 37. ' Ibid. u Anders. vol. iv. Io.

queen

queen and herfubjeas, and began to aEt in that capacity. Shle rO 00
proposed to appoint commiflioners to hear the pleadings of both _
parties, and wrote to the regent of Scotland to empower proper '568'
persons to appear before them, in his name, and to produce lwhat
he could allege in vindication of his procecdings against his
sovereign.

MARY had hitherto relied with unaccountable credulity on Mary greatlr

Elizabeth's profeflions of regard, and expccQed that so many kind lEiezlteth'
speeches would at last be accompanied with some suitable actions. COnduia.
But this proposal entirely undeceived her. She plainly perceived
the artifice of Elizabeth's conduct, and saw what a diminution it
would be to her own honour, to appear on a level with her rebel-
lious subjeCts, and to stand together with them at the bar of a
superior and a judge. She retraCted the offer which ihe had
made, and which had been perverted to a purpose so contrary to
her intention. She demanded with more earnestness than cver,
to be admitted into Elizabeth's presence; and wrote to her in June I-.
a strain very different from what flle had formerly ufecl, and
wvhich fully difeovers the grief and indignation that preyed on her
heart. " In my present situation," fays lhe, " I neither will nor
t can reply to the accusations of my fubjeas. I am ready, of
"my own accord, and out of fricndfhip to you, to satisfy your
" scruples, and to vindicate my own conduct. My fubjccds are
" not my equals; nor will I, by submitting my cause to a judicial
" trial, acknowledge them to be so. I fled into your arms, as
" into those of my nearest relation and most perfect friend. I did
" you honour, as I imagined, in chuiing you, preferably to any
" other prince, to be the restorer of an injured queen. Was it
" ever known that a prince was blamed for hearing in person the
4! complaints of those who appealed to his justice againfi the falle

" accufa-

B O OK " accusations of their enemies ? You admitted into your presence

V.
.--)-- - "' my bastard brother, who had been guilty of rebellion; and
i5G s' you deny me that honour! God forbid that I should be the

" occasion of bringing any stain upon your reputation ! I ex-
"peded that your manner of treating me would have added
"lufire to it. Suffer me either to implore the aid of other princes
L' whose delicacy on this head will be less, and their resentment
c of my wrongs greater; or let me receive from your hands that
' assistance which it becomes you, more than any other prince,
i' to grant; and by that benefit bind me to yourself in the indif-
" soluble ties of gratitude "."

June zo. THIS letter somewhat disconcerted Elizabeth's plan, but did not
lE,izabeth's
precautions divert her from the prosecution of it. She laid the matter before
against Ier. the privy council, and it was there determined, notwitiiftanding the

intreaties and remonstrances of the Scottifli queen, to go on with
the inquiry into her condu&, and until that were finished, it was
agreed that Elizabeth could'not, confiflently with her own honour,
or with the safety of her government, either give her the afift-
ance which she demanded, or permit her to retire out of the
kingdom. Left flie fould have an opportunity of escaping, while
she resided so near Scotland, it was thought advisable to remove
her to some place at a greater ditfance from the borders Y.

Proceedings WHILE the English court was occupied in these deliberations,
againit th te regent did not neglect to improve the viEtory at Langfide.
queen'sadhe- That event was of the utmost importance to him. It not only
rents.

drove the queen herself out of the kingdom, but left her adhe-
rents dispersed, and without a leader, at his mercy. He seemed

Anders. vol. iv. part i, 94. Y Id. ibid. 102.

resolved,

resolved, at first, to proceed against: them with the utmofl B o00 oK
rigour. Six persons of bome diflindion, who had been taken ----
prisoners in the battle, were tried and condemned to death, as
rebels againrt the king's government. They were led to the place
of execution, but by the povwcrful intcrcel]ion of Knox thlcv ob-
tained a pardon. Hamilton of 3otllhcllllauth was one of the
number, lwho lived to give both the regelnt and Knox rafobn to
repent of this commendable ad of lenity '

SOON after thle regent marclhed with an army, conlfiflin of ifot

thousand llorlc and one thouland foot, towards thle vwet borders.
The nobles in this part of threkingdom wre all the queen's ad-
herents ; but as they had not force f llicicnt to oblfruC his
progress, he muff either have obliged them to Liinbit to the kitn2, or
would have laid wafl- their lands with inrc and f\vord. But I:li.a-
bcth, whole interest it was to keep Scotland in confuifion, by prc-
fcrving the balance between the t1wo parties, and who was cndea-
vouring to sooth the Scotcifh quecen by gentle treatment, inter-
posed at her dcfirc. After keeping the field two weeks, ith reCgnt
in compliance to the Englilh ainralilaldo, diiniitnd his forccs;
and an expedition, ihich milght have proved iatal to his oppo-
nents, ended witll a few adcs of tcverity :'

TuE resolution of the Engliih privy council, with regard to Mary ciric;d

. - '

.

,' to ik)lto,.

I¥lary's pcrfon, was Toon carried into execution; and, without jul' ,1.
regarding hcr remonfhrances or complaints, eic was conduced to
Bolton, a castle of lord Scroop's, on the borders of Yorklfire ".
In this place, her correspondence with her friends in Scotland be-

Cald. vol. ii. 99. Ibd.
And. vol. iv. 14. Sec Appendix, No. XXV.
'OL, I, 3 G camin

B oo 0I came more difficult, and any profpea of making her escape was

V.
t.--'---. entirely cut off. She now felt herself to be entirely in Elizabeth's

power, and though treated as yet with the refpet due to a queen,
her real condition was that of a prisoner. Mary knew what it
was to be deprived of liberty, and dreaded it as the worst of
all evils. While tile remembrance of her late imprisonment was
July z3, lill lively, and the terror of a new one filled her mind, Elizabeth

thought it a proper junclure to renew her former proposition, that
fle would susser the regent and his adherents to be called into
England, and consent to their being heard in defence of their own
condu.L She declared it to be far from her intention to claiml
any right of judging between Mary and her fubjeds, or of de-
grading her so far as to require that flhe should answer to their
accusations. On the contrary, Murray and his associates were
s:ummoned to appear, in order to justify their conduc in treating
their fovcreign so harfily, and to vindicate themselves from those
crimes with which she had charged them. On her part, Elizabeth
promised, whatever should be the issue of this inquiry, to employ
all her power and influence towards replacing Mi4ary on her throne,

.grces that under a few limitations by no means unreasonable. Mary, de-
111 inquiry bei
.nadeinto her ceived by this seeming attention to her dignity as a queen; soothed,
conduet.

on one hand, by a promise more flattering than any which she
had hitherto received from Elizabeth, and urged, on the other,
by the feelings which were natural on being condutedl into a
more interior part of England, and kcept there in more rigorous
confinement, complied at length with what Elizabeth required, and
promined to fend commiflioners to the conferences appointed to be
held at York c.

c Anderr. iv. part i. p. I, I2, &c. 109, &c. Hayncs, 468, &c. State Trials,
edit. Hargravc, i. 9o.

II ,1 1.

iN order to persuade Elizabeth that file desired nothing so muchi 1 t)

as to render the union between them as close as possible, flhe ihewed _ ---_
a dilpofition to relax fomewlhat in one point; with regard to HIer(i:i.nll
which, during all her past and Iflbifeqlucnt misfortunes, Ihe was ,'.lgrd to c
uniformly inllexil:leo. She expreflcd a great veneration for the ligi;:
liturgy of the church of England ; she was often plrefcnt at reli-
gious worflilp, according to the rites of the reformed clherch;
made choice of a protestant clergyman to be her chaplain ; heard
lhim preach against the errors of popery writh attention and fLcCm-
ing pleasure ; and dilfovered all the fy mptoms of an approachingl
converlion '. Such was Mary's known and bigoted attaclmllent
to the popifi religion, that it is impossible to lbelieve her sincere irn
this part of her conduct; nor can any thing mark more firongly
the wvretchednefs of her conditionl, and the exccfs of her fears.,
than that they betrayed her into diflllnulation, in a matter coi-
cerning which her fcetiments were a aall other times, fcrulpullo!lil'
delicate.

AT this time the regent called a parliament, in order to pro- A, ,;.

ceed to the forfeiture of thoef who refused to aclknowledg the in co:i,.l.l
-ing's authority. The queen's adherents vcre alarmed, and
Argyll and H-Iuntly, whom Mary had appointed her lieutenants,
ithe one in the south, and the other il the north of Scotland, be-
gan to aflemble forces to obflrucl this meeting. .CompaiIion for
the queen, and envy at those who govern.ed in the king's iname,
had added so much strength to the party, that the regent would
have found it difficult to withfland its efforts. But as IMary had
ihbmitted her cause to Elizabeth, fle could not refuse, at her
defre, to command her friends to lay down their arms, and to

· Anders. vol. iv. part i. 13. I-Haynes, 509, Sec Appcndi.', No. XXVI.

3 ; 2 wac

0 0 IC wait patiently until matters were brought to a decision in England.

Q_ --I. -
By procuring this cessation of arms, Elizabeth afforded as season-

ij68. able relief to the regent's fation as she had formerly given to the-

queen's .

TuE regent, however, would not consent, even at Elizabeth's

request, to put off the meeting of parliament '. But we may
,ifcribe to her influence, as well as to the eloquence of Maitland,
who laboured to prevent the one half of lis countrymen fiom cx-
terminating the other, any appearances of moderation which this-
parliament cdilfovcred in its proceedings. The moit violent oppo-,
nents of the king's government were forfeited; the reft were
allowed still to hope for favour :.

J7lizabeth re- No sooner did the queen of Scots submit her cause to her rival,
quircs the rc-
gent to de- than Elizabeth recuired the regent to fend to York deputies pro-
seind his con-
t.lut. perly inftruc-cd for vindicating his conduc, in presence of her

commiflioners. It was not without hesitation and anxiety that
ille regent consented to this measure. HIis authority was already
cflabliihed in Scotland, and confirmed by parliament. To fulfer
its validity now to be called in question, and fuLbjecled to a
foreign jurifldicion, was extremely mortifying. To accuse his
sovereign before flrangers, the ancient enemies of the Scottish name,
was an odious task. To fail in this accusation was dangerous;
to ficceed in it was disgraceful. But the flrength of the adverse
faction daily increased. H-e dreaded the interposition of the French
king in its behalf. In his situation, and in a matter which Eliza-
beth had so much at heart, her commands were. neither to be dif-
putcd nor disobeyed ".

Anders. vol. iv. 125. ' See Appendix, No. XXVII.
- Buch. 371. h Bucl. 372. See Append. No. XXVIII.

? ~~~~~~~~~~~~is

TrIE necessity of repairi-ng in pcrlbo to York added to the I 10 ( '.

ignominy of the frep which he was obliged to take. All ]is ab- ---
ciates declined the office ; they were unvwi!!ing to expofc tlhcmilvcs ,l; ic, the
to the odium and danger with which it was cafl to forelbe that .:'p.'.:t.'l,.l
the dilcharge of it wou.ld bl e attended, unlefis lie linifimlf conllcnted
to fhiare thlic in commion wvli theml. Thic ci-rl oif ir;lrto:, s.!. 1:.

Eothwell bilhop of Orkney, 'itca-in co;nmc;ni:ltor of Oi) tl';i:-inli in,
and lord Lilndfay, vcre joi:ned with liii in con l'islioii. io v-
gill of Rankieilor, and Balnavcs of I-Iallliil!, two eminent civilian;,
George Buclianan, Mnrray's ilulfil deUlcren, a n,:ai woli l
genius did honour to the ige, i i.:itl.ld, andii l vral others, were
appointed to attend theml a; afiifants. l ltitland owed tlis clit-
tindaion to the regent's fear, rather than to his afid'Lion. I-Te
had warmly rcmonftrated against this mcaftire. Ie wiflied lhi:
country to continue in fiiciindlhip with England, but not to become
dependant on that nation. I-Ie was desirous of rc-ceiabliihing the
queen in some degree of 'power, not inconfitcent with that whiich
the king poitllcd ; and the regent could not, with fafcty, leave
behind him a man whose views were so contrary to his own, and
who, by his fupcrior abilities, had acquired an in:lucnc in the
nation, equal to that which others derived from the antiquity ain
power of their families '.

¥IMA1sY empowered Lefly biflop of Ross, lord Livingfito, lord

3oyd, lord Ilerries, Gavin H-Iamilton conmenldator of !Kilhvin-
ning, fir John Gordon of Lochinvar, and fir James Coclburn ol
Skirling, to appear in her namne '

Buch. 37r. Anders. vol. iv. 35. Melv. iS6. iS8.
k Andcrf. vol. iv. 33.

E-L 1 ZA 1F.'1-:.

B 0 0 K ELIZAIETH nominated Thomas I-oward duke of Norfolki

V.
^_.'__ Thomas Ratclif earl of Suffex, and fir Ralph Sadler, her commis-
1568. fioners to hear both parties.

The confer- T-I. fourth of O-ober was the day fixed for opening the coser-
ence at York; m£. Tlac great abilitics of the deputies on both /ides, the dig-

nity of the judges before whom they wei-c to appear, the high
rank of the persons whose cause was to be heard, and the import-
ance of the points in dispute, rendered the whole tranfaccion no
less illustrious than it was singular. The situation in which Eli-
zabeth appeared, on this occalion, strikes us with an air of mag-
nificence. I-er rival, an independent queen, and the heir of an
ancient race of monarchs, was a prilncr in her hands, and
appeared, by her ambafladors, before her tribunal. The regent
of Scotland, who reprefcnted the majefly, and poifeffed the
authority of a king, flood in person at her bar. And the fate of a
kingdlom, whose power her ancefiors had often dreaded, but could
never subdue, was now at her difpiofal

;jicws of the TIIE views, however, with which the fcveral parties consented
diffrcnt par- to this conference, and the iille to which they expected to bring it,
ties.

were extremely dififrcnt.

MARY's chief objed was the recovering her former authority.

This induced her to consent to a meafire against which flIe had
long struggled. Elizabeth's promises gave her ground for entertain-
ing hopes of being restored to her kingdom ; in order to which, she
would have willingly ma(le many concefions to the king's party;
and the influence of the English queen, as well as her own im-
patience under her present situation, might have led her to many

more.

more . The regent aimed at nothing but icuriCg EFlizatlh's B 0 o0
protc&tion to his party, and seems not to have had tlic moll (lin lltt - --
thoughts of coming to any compolition witi h Mlary. i:.' .,:',
vievcs were more various, and her ichlhles ml(orl ill;-ic :ii. Sli
lecmcld to be full of concern for Mary's honl our, :nid IbliLiil t:I;it
file fliould wipe off the apClrlions 'which ble'ilhed icz' chi!.ltci-
This she pretended to be the intention of the conlfrcncc C aimulin
1Mary, and eluding tle oblicitations ot' the Frenchl and Spanili
ambaflladors in lier behalf, by repeated promnifes of afililing her, as
toon as fihe could venture to do so without bringing ditgracc ulpo
lierfelf. Blut, under this veil of friendlhii and gencrolity, -1li'::abtbtl
concealcd sentiments of a different nature. Slie espe&ed that tlle
regent would accuse Inlary of being acceflihry to the murder of ller
lluflband. She encouraged him, as far as decency would permit,
to take this defpc;ate fielp '. And as this accufition migllt ter-
minate in two diffcrent ways, the had concerted measures for lier
future concduc fiitable to each of tllcf. If the charge againf
Mary fhlould appear to be well foundeld, sic rcfolvcd to pronounce
1her unworthy of wearing a crown, and to declare that she would
never burden her own confcince with tlhe guilt of an a5cion to
detePfable as the refnoring her to her kingdom ". If it liould
happen, that what her accusers alleged did not amount to a proof
of guilt, but only of mal-adminifration, lle determined to el
on foot a treaty for refloring lher, but on lcch conditions as would
render her hereafter dcpendant not only upon England, bin up

,

her own fubjeds O. As every flep in the progrces of tie con-
ference, as well as the final result of it, wa.s in E1lizabcth's own
powcr, flle would flill be at liberty to clhufe which of these courlc:.

Ander. vol. . i. part ii. 33. Good. vol. ii. 337.
A' ndA rC. vol. iv. palt ii. IT. 45. H.iy cs, .7.
:1 Andsur, vol. i'v. partii. 1. iAnderi. vol. iV. p:rt ii. I 6.

41.,(

B 0o 0 flle would loll ; or if there appeared to be any dlanger or in

V.

..----,~ J convlienncy in purfibing either of them, fle mnight protradc the
15 .' vwhole caule by endlces delays, and involve it in inextricable

perplexity.

Complaint of TI1E conference, 'however, was opened with much /olemnlty.
the luccni's
conniffion- But the very firfl frep difiovcrcd it to be Ellizabeth's intention to
cs:ent.l h inflame, rather than to extinguish, the difleiifions and animofities

among the Scots. No endeavours were ufce to reconcile the con-
tending parties, or to mollify the fiercencl; of their hatred, by
briining the queen to olfer pardon for what was pait, or her sub-
ODcobeer S. jecCs to promise more dutiful obedience for the future. On the

contrary, Mary's commifnioncrs were permitted to prefer a com-
plaint against the regent and his party, containing an enumeration
of their trcafonable actions, of their leizing her person by force
of arms, committing her to prison, compelling her to resign the
crown, and making ule of lier son's name to colour their ufilnp-
ation of the whole royal authority ; and of all thele enormities
they required tinch speedy and efcTlual rcdrefs, as the injuries of
*one queen demanded from thle juthice of another .

IT was then expected that the regent would have disclosed all

*the circumirances of tlat unnatural crime to which he pretended
the qucen had been accefeu-y, .and wotdd ha,,e produced evidence
in sup.port of lis, charge. But, far from accusin-g ANlry, the regent
did not even anfirer the complaints brought against himself. He
dilcovered a reluctance at undertaking that office, and started many
doubts and scruples, with regard to which he demanded to be
resolved by Elizabeth hertelf. His reserve and helitation were

.Anders. vol. iv. part ii. 52. i Haynes, 478.

? ;no

no less surprising to the greater part of the English conmmiffloners 0(3
thani to his own associates. They knew that lh could not vin- ------.
dicate his own conduct without charging the murder upon l 15he
queen, and he had not hitherto shown any extraordinary delicacy
on that head. An intrigue, however, had been fecrctly carried on,
since his arrival at York, which explains this myflerv.

TnII duke of Norfolk was at that time the most powerful and ntiiigues of

most popular man in England. His wife was lately dead ; and th Icgc' it.
he began already to form a proje&t, which he afterwards more
openly avowed, of mounting the throne of Scotland, by a mar-
riage with the queen of Scots. He saw the infamy which would
be the consequence of a public accusation againfl Mary, and how
prejudicial it might be to her pretensions to the Englifli ficceflion.
In order to save her from this cruel mortification, iec applicd to
Maitland, and expressed his aftoniflnmcnt at feeing a man of Lo
much reputation for wisfdom concurring with the regent in a
measure so diflonourable to therfltlvcs, to their queen, and to
their country; fibmitting the public tranfations of the nation to
the judgment of foreigners; and publishing the ignominy, and
exposing the faults of their sovereign, which they were bound in
good policy, as well as in duty, to conceal and to cover. It was
easy for Maitland, whose sentiments were the alme with the duke's,
to vindicate his own conduc. He assured him, that he had em-
ployed all his credit to dissuade his countrymen from this meaflure;
and would flill contribute, to the utmost of his power, to divert
them from it. This encouraged Norfolk to communicate the
matter to the regent. H-e repeated and enforced the fame argu-
ments which he had used with Maitland. He warned hlim of
the danger to which he must expose himself by such a violent
action as the public accusation of his sovereign. Mary would

VOL. I. 3 H never

B 0 0 K never forgive a man, who had endeavourd d to fix such a brand

. ... - of infamy on her characer. If flc ever recovered any degrec of

3 power, his defiru&ion would be inevitable, and he would justly

merit it at her hands. Nor would Elizabeth fereen him from
this, by a public approbation of his conduc-. For whatever evi-
dence of Mary's guilt he might produce, :he was resolved to give
no definitive fcntencc in the caufc. Let him only demand that
thet matter should be lbrought to a decision immediately after
hearing the proof; and he would be fully convinced how falle and
insidious her intentions were, and, by consequence, how improper
it would be for him to appear as the accuser of his own fove-
reign '. The candour which Norfolk seemed to discover in these
remonstrances, as well as the truth which they contained, made a
deep impression on the regent. I-Ie daily received the strongest
afiuranccs of Mary's willingness to be reconciled to him, if he
abstained from accusing her of such an odious crime, together
with the denunciations of her irreconcilable hatred, if he acded a
contrary part . All these corifiderations concurred in determining
him to alter his purpose, and to make trial of the expedient which
the duke had fuggefied.
oaobcr 9. I-l demanded therefore to be informed, before he proceeded

farther, whether the English comminfloners were empowered to
declare the queen guilty by a judicial aa; whether they would
promise to pals sentence without delay; whether the queen flould
be kept under such restraint as to prevent her from disturbing the
government now established in Scotland; and whether Elizabeth,
if fie approved of the proceedings of the king's party, would

r Melv. 187. IHaynes, 573.
* Anders. vol. iv. partii. 77. Good. vol. ii. 157. See Append. No. XXIX.

I engage

engage to protet it for the future'. The paper containing thcle o o K,
demands was signed by himself alone, without communicating it t---
to any of his attendants, except M/aitland and Mclvil". But leic
so many precautions should excite any suspicion of their procced-
ing, from iome confciouiiefs of defeca in the evidence which he
had to produce against his foverieg, MIurray empowered Ic-
thington, Macgill, and Buchanan, to wait upon the duke of Nor-
folk, the earl of Suflex, and fir Ralph Sadlcr, and to lay bclore
ltem, not in their public charactcr as commiiioners,, but as private
persons, Mary's letters to Bothwell, her sonnets, and all the other
papers upon whliclh were founded the charge of her being accefibry
to the murder of the king, and to declare that this confilential
communication was made to them, with a view to learnll wxhedr
the queen of England xould confider this evidence as ilfficient to
eflablifil the truth of the accusation. Nothing could be more
natural ta the regent's solicitude, to know on what sloting lie
Ri:ood. To have ventured on a ftcp so uncommon and dangerous,
as the accusing his fovercign, without previoullny alccrlaining that
he might take it with safety, would have been unpardonable im-
prudence. But Elizabeth, who did not expct that lie woul
have moved any ifchl dilliculty, ha]d not emplowcreld her coin-
minioncrs to givc him that tltisfaCion wlichl lie demanlded. It
became necefFiry to transmit the articles to hcrlelf, and by the
lighlt in which Norfolk placed them, it is casy to fee that lie wishd
that they should make no flight imprcflion on Elizableth and Iier
minifilers. " Think not the Scots," satild e, " ovcr-Icrupu1lous
" or precise. Let us view their conduCt as wve would( wis our
" own to be viewed in a like situation. The game they play is

Anders. vol. iv. part ii. 55. State Trials, i. 91, &c.
Anders. vol. iv. part. ii. 56. Mlclv. I9o.

3 H 2 deep;

B o00 IC deep; their estates, their lives, their honour are at flake. It is
- -. -_ " now in their own power to be reconciled to their queen, or to

offend her irrecoverably; and in a matter of so much import-
" ance the utmnoft degree of caution is not exceflive x."

WVIIILE the English commiflioners waited for fuller inftrudaions

with regard to the regent's demands, he gave in an answer to
the complaint which had been offrced in name of the Scottish
queen. It was expreflied in terms perfectly conformable to the
fyifem which he had at that time adopted. It contained no
insinuation of the queen's being accefTory to the murder of her
husband; the bitterness of flylc peculiar to the age was conlider-
ably abated; and though hle pleaded, that the infamy of the
marriage with Bothwell made it necesSary to take arms in order
to diffblve it; though Mary's attachment to a man so odious
justified the keeping her for tome time under refraint; yet nothing
more was laid on thele iubje-ls than was barely requisite in his
oAobcr 17. own defence. The queen's commiHioners did not fail to reply Y.

But while the article with regard to the murder remained un-
touched, these were only fldrmiflles at a distance, of no confe-
quence towards ending the contest, and were little regarded by
Elizabeth or her commissioners.

The confer- THE conference had, hitherto, been condu&ed in a manner
ence remov-
ed to Weft- which disappointed Elizabeth's views, and produced none of those
sinfter. discoveries which file had expected. The distance between York

and London, and the necessity of consulting her upon every
difficulty which occurred, consumed much time. Norfolk's
negotiation with the Scottifi regent, however secretly carried on,

x Anders. vol. iv. 77. Y lbid. vol. iv. partii. 64. 8o.

was

was not, in all probability, unknown to a princcls so remnarkable for B O I;

V.

her sagacity in penetrating the defiglls of her enemics, and feing -
through their deepest fehlemes =. Inllead, therefore, of returniin- 56S
any answer to the regent's demands, file resolved to remove the
conference to aVeftminficr, and to appoint new commiffloners, in
whom tlhe could more abfolutcly confide. Both the queen of
Scots and the regent were brought without difliculty to approve of
this resolution a.

VWE often find Mary boafling of the fiuperiority in argument

obtained by her comminflibners. during the conference at York,
and how, by the strength of their reasons, they confounded her
adversarics, and silenced all their cavils`'. The diiute flood, at
that time, on a footing which rendered her viEor y not only
apparent, but ealy. H-Ier participation of the guilt of the king's
murder was the circumnrance upon which her fhbjecLs ought to
have refled, as a justification of their violent proceedings againfl
her; and while they indufirioufly avoided mentioning that, her
cause gained as nuch as that of her advcrlarics loft by fupprefling
this capital argument.

ELIZABnETHI resolved that Mary should not enjoy the fame

advantage in the conference to be held at WVcefninlfter. She deli-
berated with the utmost anxiety, how she might overcome the
regent's scruples, and persuade him to accuse the queen. She
confidered of the most proper method for bringing Mary's conm-
miflioners to answer such an accusation; and as she foresaw that

Good. vol. ii. i6o. Anders. vol. iii. 71,

a Haynes, 484. Anderr. vol. iv. 4q.
b Good. vol. i. 186. 284. 350,

the

B 00o IK the promises with which it was necessary to allure the regent, and

V. i_.-----i which it was impossible to conceal from the Scottifl queen, would

i568. naturally exasperate her to a great degree, fle determined to guard

her more narrowly than ever; and though lord Scroop had given
her no reason to diflruft his vigilance or fidelity, yet because he
was the duke of Norfolk's brother-in-law, she thought it proper
to remove the queen as soon as poflible to Tuthbury in Stafford-
shire, and commit iher to the keeping of the earl of Shrewsbury, to
whom that castle belonged .

Mary's fluf_ MARY began to fufpec the design of this fccond conference;
picio usof Elii-
zabetlh'sn- and notwithllanding the fatisfacion fle exprefled at feeing her
^o&er 21. cause taken more immediately under the queen's own eye d, she

framed her initru&ions to her commiflioners in such a manner, as
to avoid being brought under the nccflity of anLfwcring the accu-
fation of her fubljets, if they should be Ib detfperate as to exhibit
one against her'. These fiifpicions were toon confirmed by a
circumflance extremely mortifying. The regent having arrived
at London, in order to be prcelnt at the conference, was im-
mediately admitted into .lizabeth's presence, and received by
her, not only with -recfpel, but with aflsclion. This Mary
justly confidered as an open declaration of that queen's partiality

Nov. 2Z. towards her adversaries. In the firit emotions of her resent-
(Cl.ims uper- m nt, the wrote to her commissioners, and commanded them
fonal audi-
ence of Eli- to complain, in the presence of the Englifi nobles and before

the ambafld!ors of foreign princes, of the usage flie had hitherto
mct Vwith, and the additional injuries which the had rcafon to
apiprehend. Her rebellious fubijels were allowed access to
the queen, she was excluded from her presence; they enjoyed
c Haynes, 487. a Anders. vol. iv. part ii. 95. Good. vol. ii. 349.

full

full liberty, file languished under a long imprilbninlent; they were D \ 0 K

V.

encouraged to accuse her, in defending hcrfclf lhe laboured under ----
every disadvantage. For thele realons ihe once more renewedl
her demand of being admitted into the queen's prcencec: and if
that were denied, Ihe ini'ruicd them to dcclare, that ilch recalled
tlhe conlent which file had given to the conference at \VcIilnitiler,
and protested, that whatever was done there, Ihlould be held to be
null and invalid .

TIIIS, perhaps, was the moflt prudent resolution .\Mary could

have taken. The pretences on which flec declined the conference
were plausible, and the jullIurc-ll for onfringg tlhem well choclln.
But either the queen's letter did not reach her commitifoners in
due time, or they fuLcred theninclves to le deceived by Lliy.abcth's
profeflions of regard for their mihli'cs, and cointentcd to the opening
of the conference g.

To the commiffloncrs vwho had appeared in her name at York, Nov. 25.

Elizabeth now added fir Nicholas Bacon, keeper of the great fcal,
the earls of Arundcl and Lciccfcer, lord Clinton, and fir Willianm
Cecil". The difficulties which obflru-ecl the proceedings at York
were quickly removed. A latisfying anlwver was given to the
regent's demands ; nor was he to much dilipoled to hesitate and
raise objections as formerly. His negotiation with Norfolk had
been discovered to Morton by some of Mary's attendants, andl lie
had communicated it to Cecil '. His pcrionlal ftfety, as well as
the continuance of his power, depended on Elizabeth. 3y fia-
vouring Mary, she might at any time ruin him, and by a qucfiion
which ihe artfully flarted, concerning the person who had a right,

F Good. vol. ii. 84. r Andlcrf. vol. iii. 25.
h Id. vol. iv. part ii. 99. elv. 191.

by

B 00 Ir: ly the law of Scotland, to govern the kingdom during a minority,
t.----- ..he let him fee, that, even without restoring the queen, it was an

easy matter for her to deprive him of the fuprelne direcion of
affairs k These considerations, which were powerfully fcconded
by moil of his attendants, at length dctermined the regent to pro-
duce his accusation against the queen.

The regent HIE endeavoured to lefTen the obloquy with which he was
accures lhe
queen of be- sensible this ation would be attended, by protefling, that it was
ing accCelry
to her bfe1' with the utmofl reluctance he undertook this disagreeable task;
band's mur- that his party had long suffered their conduct to be mifonftrued,
der.

and had borne the woril imputations in silence, rather than ex-
pose the crimes of their sovereign to the eyes of itrangers; but
that now the insolence and importunity of the adverse faction
forced them to publish what they had hitherto, though with loss
to themselves, endeavoured to conceal '. These pretexts are de-
cent; and the considerations which he mentions had, during tome
time, a real influence upon tile conduct of the party; but since
the meeting of parliament held in December, they had discovered
so little delicacy and reserve with refpe& to the queen's a&ions,
as renders it impossible to give credit to thole studied professions.
The regent and his associates were drawn, it is plain, partly by
the necessity of their affairs, and partly by Elizabeth's artifices,
into a situation where no liberty of choice was left to them; and
they were obliged either to acknowledge themselves to be guilty
of rebellion, or to charge Mary with having been accessory to the
commission of murder.

TIHE accusation itself was conceived in the strongest terms. Mary
was charged, not only with having consented to the murder, but

k Hayncs, 484. AndexC. vol. iv. part ii. 115.

with

Nvith being accessory to the contrivance and execution of it. Both- B 0 0 K

V.

well, it was pretended, had been `creened from the pursuits of
jutlice by her favour; and flhe had formed designs no less dangerous 5s.
to the life of the young prince, than subversive of the liberties and
conflitution of the kingdom. If any of there crimes flould be
denied, an ofler was made to produce the most ample and undoubted
evidence in confirmation of the charge "'

AT the next mecting of the commissioners, the earl of Lennox Nov. =9

appeared before them; and after bewailing the tragical and un-
natural murder of his son, he ipiplored Elizabeth's juflice against
the queen of Scots, whom he acculcd upon oath of being the
author of that crime, and produced papers, which, as he pre-
tended, would make good what he alleged. The cntrance of a
new aclcr on the sage so opportunely, and at a junclure to critical,
can scarce be imputed to chance. This contrivance was mani-
feptly Elizabeth's, in order to increase, by this additional accu-
fation, the infamy of the Scottill queen ".

MARY's commissioners expreflcd the utmost surprise and indig- Hcr comnii,-

nation at the regent's presumption, in loading the queen with ca- ftoacr'rcfurt
lumnies which, as they affirmed, file had so little merited. But, Decccrb. l
inflead of attempting to vindicate her honour, by a reply to the
charge, they had recourse to an article in their inftruaions, which
they had formerly negleced to mention in its proper place. They
demanded an audience of Elizabeth; and having renewed their
mistress's request of a personal interview, they protested, if that
were denied her, against all the future proceedings of the com-
minioners °. A protestation of this nature, offered just at the

' Anders. vol. iv. part ii. 119. Id. ibid. 122.
0 Id. ibid. 133. I587 &c.
VoL. o 3 I critica.

B 0 0 K critical time when such a bold accusation had been preferred against

V.
-- --- Mary, and when the proofs in support of it were ready to be

examined, gave reason to fufpeEt that the dreaded the event of
that examination. This suspicion received the strongest confirm-
ation from another circumstance; Ross and Herries, before they
were introduced to Elizabeth, in order to make this protestation,
privately acquainted Leicester and Cecil, that as their mistress had
from the beginning discovered an inclination towards bringing the
differences between herself and her fubjets to an amicable accomn-
modation, so Ihe was still desirous, notwithstanding the regent's
audacious accusation, that they should be terminated in that
manner P.

SUCH moderation seems hardly to be compatible with the fProng

resentment which calumniated innocence naturally feels; or with
that eagerness to vindicate itself which it always discovers. In
Mary's situation, an offer so ill-timed must be confidered as a con-
session of the weakness of her cause. The known characer of
her commiflioners exempts them from the imputation of folly, or
the suspicion of treachery. Some secret conviEion, that the con-
duet of their mistress could not bear so ftriat a scrutiny as must be
made into it, if they should reply to the accusation preferred
by Murray against her, seems to be the most probable motive
of this imprudent proposal, by which they endeavoured to
avoid it.
Deccmb. 4. IT appeared in this light to Elizabeth, and afforded her a pretence

for rejecting it. She represented to Mary's commissioners, that
in the present junture, nothing could be so dishonourable to their

P Anderson, vol. iv. part ii. 134. Cabbala, 157.

7 mistress

miltrefs as an accommodation; and that the matter would fcem. B o ;K
to be huddled up in this manner, merely to suppress diicoveries, -.-
and to hide her lfamc ; nor was it possible that file could be ad-
mitted with any decency into her pretence, while she lay under
the infamy of such a public accusation.

UPON this repulse, Mary's commiflioners withdrew; and as

they had declined anfwcring, there seemed now to be no further
reason for the regent's producing the proofs in support of his
charge. But without getting these into her hands, Elizabeth's
schemes were incomplete; and her artifice for this purpose was as
mean, but as successful, as any fle had hitherto employed. She
commanded her commissioners to testify her indignation and di:-
pleasure at the regent's presumption, in forgetting so far the duty
of a subjec&, as to accuse his sovereign of such atrocious crimes.
He, in order to regain the good opinion of fuclh a powerful pro-
tearefs, offered to shew that his accusations were not malicious
nor ill-grounded. Then were produced and submitted to the in-
fpeion of the Englifll commiflioners, the ats of the Scottish
parliament in confirmation of the regent's authority, and of the
queen's resignation; the confeflions of the persons executed for the
king's murder; and the fatal casket which contained the letters,
sonnets, and contracts, that have been already mentioned.

As soon as Elizabeth got these into her poifeffion, the laid Elizabeth

treats Mary

them before her privy council, to which flle joined, on this oc- with greater
cation, several noblemen of the greatest eminence in her kingdom; Dgeccrb. 14.
In order that they might have an opportunity of confidering the
mode in which an inquiry of such public importance had been
:hitherto conducted, as well as the amount of the evidence
,now brought againIt a person who claimed a preferable right of

3 I 2 succession

B V IC succession to the English crown. In this refpedtable assembly all
.---- the proceedings in the conferences at York and cVeflminffer were

1568. reviewed, and the evidence produced by the regent of Scotland

against his sovereign was examined with attention. In particular,
the letters and other papers. said to be written by the queen of
Scots, were carefully compared " for the manner of writing and
" orthography," with a variety of letters which Elizabeth had
received at different times from the Scottiflh queen; and, as the
result of a most accurate collation, the members of the privy
council, and noblemen conjoined with them, declared that no
difference between these could be discovered q. Elizabeth, having
eftablilhed a fact so unfavourable to her rival, began to lay aside
the expressions of friendflip and respect which ihe had hitherto
used in all her letters to the Scottifl queen. She now wrote to
her in such terms, as if the presumptions of her guilt had amounted
almost to certainty; the blamed her for refuting to vindicate
herself from an accusation which could not be left unanfiered,
without a manifcfl injury to her'chlaraler ; and plainly intimated,
that unless that were done, no change would be made in her pre-
lent fituationr. She hoped that such a diIcovery of her fensi-
ments would intimidate Mary, who was hardly recovered from
the ihock of the regent's attack on her reputation,. and force her
to confirm her resignation of the crown, to ratify Murray's au-
thority as regent, and to content that both herself and her ton

ohould reside in England, under Engli!h protec-ion. This fcieme

Elizabeth had much at heart; she proposed it both to Mary and to
her commiflioners, and neglected no argument, nor artifice, that
could poflibly recommend it. Mary Law how fatal this would
prove to her reputation, to her pretensions, and even to her per-

q Anderson, vol. iv. partii. 170, &c..
: Id. ibid. .79. 183. Good. vol. ii. 260,

founal

fonal safety. She rejeted it without hesitation. " Death," said l o o ;K
she, " is less dreadful than such an ignominious ftep. Rather than _-.---
" give away, with my own hands, the crown which defeenlcd ISd
" to me from my anceflors, I will part with life; but the last
" words I utter, ihall be thole of a queen of Scotland '."

AT the fame time she seems to have been sensible how open her

reputation lay to censure, while she fufecrcd fichl a public accu-
iation to remain unanfwcred ; and though the conference was now
diflolved, she empowered her commilioners to preient a reply to the
allegations of her enemies, in lwhich the denied, in the strongest
terms, the crimes imputed to her ; and recriminated upon the Dcccmb. 21.
regent and his party, by acculing them of having dcviied and
executed the murder of the king . The regent and Ins af'ociatcs
aneTrted their innocence with great warmth. Mary continued to
infifl on a perflonal interview, a condition whichi he knew would
never be granted 1. Elizabeth urged her to vindicate her own
honour. But it is evident from the delays, the cvafions, and fulb-
terfuges to which both queens had recourse by turns, tlat Mary
avoided, and lElizabeth did not delire to make, any further progrcls
in the inquiry.

TnE regent was nowt impatient to return into Scotland, lwhere ,9.

Feb. 2

his adversaries were endeavouring, in his ablence, to railc {obme 1)i lnics tlhe
commnotions. Before he set out, he was called into the privy (;,'' cilerl;,,-
council, to receive a final declaration of Elizabeth's tentiments. v;i,1g o,
Cecil acquainted hilm, in her name, that on one hand' nothilng h:s coiiu't
had been objected to his condut, whichl fle could reckon detri-
mental to his honour, or inconsistent with his duty; nor had lie,

I-Hancs, 497. Sec App. No. XXX. Good. vol. ii. 274. 301.
t Go.ol. ii. 285. Ibid. 283. CabLba!a, J57.

0o!'

I 0o 0 C on the other hand, produced any thing against his sovereign, on

V.
-.--' which she could found an unfavourable opinion of her actions;
1569 .and for this reason she resolved to leave all the affairs of Scotland

precisely in the fame situation in which the had found them at the
beginning of the conference. 'The queen's commissioners were
difiniifed much in the fame manner X.

AFT'ER the attention of both nations had been fixed so earnefily

on this conference upwards of four months, such a conclusion of
the whole appears at firfl fight trifling and ridiculous. Nothing,
however, could be more favourable to Elizabeth's future schemes.

*but secretly Notwithstanding her teeming impartiality, she had no thoughts of
fapports his
party. continuing neuter; nor was she at any loss on whom to bestow

her protection. Before the regent left London, ihe supplied him
with a considerable fum of money, and engaged to support the
king's authority to the utmost of her power Y. Mary, by her
own conduct, fortified this resolution. Enraged at the repeated
instances of Elizabeth's artifice and deceit, which she had dif-
covered during the progress of the conference, and despairing of
ever obtaining any succour from her, (he endeavoured to rouse
her own adherents in Scotland to arms, by imputing such designs
to Elizabeth and Murray, as could not fail to inspire every Scotch-
man with indignation. Murray, she pretended, had agreed to
convey the prince her son into England; to surrender to Elizabeth
the places of greatest strength in the kingdom; and to acknow-
ledge the dependence of the Scottish upon the English nation.
In return for this, Murray was to be declared the lawful heir of
the crown of Scotland; and at the fame time the question with
regard to the English succession was to be decided in favour of the

Good. ii. 315. 333. y Ibid. 2X3. Carte, iii. 47&

J-~~~~~~~, ~earl

earl of Hartford, who had promised to marry one of Cecil's n o o KI
daughters. An account of thelc wild and chimerical projcElcs was v
spread indufirioufly among the Scots. Elizabeth, perceiving it I569.
was calculated of purpose to bring her government into difrc-
putation, laboured to destroy its effeas, by a counter-procla-
mation, and became more disgusted than ever with the Scottifl
queen z.

ItE regent, on his return, found the kingdom in the utmost Efforts of

MAar.'sadcler.--

tranquillity. But the rage of the queen's adherents, which lad ents againsi
been suspended in expeCtation that the conference in England llln
would terminate to her advantage, was now ready to break out
with all the violence of civil war. They were encouraged too by
the appearance of a leader, whofc high quality and pretensions
entitled him to great authority in the nation. This was the duke
of Chatelherault, who had relided for ibmc years in France, and
was now sent over by that court with a finall supply of money,
in hopes that the pretence of the first nobleman in the kingdom
would strengthen the queen's party. Elizabeth had detained him
in England, for some months, under various pretences, but was
obliged at last to susser him to proceed on his journey. Before Feb. 25,
his departure, Mary invelted him with the high dignity of her
lieutenant general in Scotland, together with the fantastic title of
her adopted father.

THE regent did not give him time to form his party into any H;s vigcrous

regular body. He assembled an army with his usual expedition, ondusther
and marched to Glasgow. The followers of Argyll and Huntly, party.
who composed the chief part of the queen's fadtion, being feated.

1 Hayncs, 500. 503. See Append, No. XXXI.

? I:

B 00 IK in corners of the kingdom very diflant from each other, and many

V.
'_..-.--. of the duke's dependants having been killed or taken in the battle of

Langfide, the spirit and strength of his adherents were totally
broken, and an accommodation witli the regent was the only
thing which could prevent the deftruEtion of his eflate and vassals.
This was effected without difficulty, and on no unreasonable terms.
The duke promised to acknowledge the authority loth of the king
and of the regent; and to claim no jurisdieiion in confequlence of
the commission which he had received from the queen. The
regent bound himself to repeal the adtc which had pased for at-
tainting several of the queen's adherents; to restore all who would
submit to the king's government to the poffeflion of their eftatcs
and honours; and to hold a convention, wherein all the differ-
ences between the two parties should be fettled by mutual consent.
The duke gave hostages for his faithful performance of the treaty;
and, in token of their sincerity, he and lord Hcrries accompanied
the regent to Stirling, and visited the young king. The regent
set at liberty the prisoners taken at Langfide =.

ARGYLL and Huntly refused to be included in this treaty. A

secret negotiation was carrying on in England, in favour of the
captive queen, with so much success, that her affairs began to wear
a better afpedt, and her return into her own kingdom seemed to
be an event not very distant. The French king had lately ob-
tained such advantages over the Hugonots, that the extinction
of that party appeared to be inevitable, and France, by recover-
ing domestic tranquillity, would be no longer prevented from pro-
tedting her friends in Britain. These circumstances not only in-
fluenced Argyll and Huntly, but made so deep an impression on

a Cabbala, I6I. Crawf, Mem. Xo6.

the

the duke, that he appeared to be waverilr g and irresolute, and

t n 0o

plainly discovercd that he wished to cvade the accomplihllmnt of ----....
the treaty. The regent saw the danger of allowin!g the duke to
flake himielf loofc, in this manncr, firoml his engagementc ; and
inflantly formed a rcfolution equally bold and politic. I-3e com-
manded his guards to fcize Chatclhlrault iln his own houfc in .d!iiin-
burgh, whither he had come in order to attend the coknvel'tion
agreed upon; and, regardlef- either of his dignity as the firfi
nobleman in the kingdom, and Inext heir to tlhe crown, or of the
promises of perlonal iecurity, on which lic had rclied, commnitted
him and lord -tcrrics prilncers -to the calf'll of linbrl h

l '. A

blow bo fatal and unexpecled dipiritcd t!e party. Argyll hllb-
mitted to the king's government, and madce Lis pcace with tlli
regent on very ceay terms; and I-luntly, being- left alone, was at April I6.
last obliged to lay down his arms.

SOON after, lord Boyd returned into Scotland, and brought July z1.

1

r i TA propoCal

letters to tile regent, both from the Englihil and Scottifli queens. in plvouro
A convention was held at Perth, in order to confider them. Ii- a.y jcd-
zabelth's letter contained three different proposals with rcgard to
Ivlary ; that lfe should cither be rcllored to the f15ll poflfnion of
her former authority; or be admitted to rcign jointly with the
king her son; or at least be allowed to reside in Scotland, in ibme
decent retirement, without any share in the adminifIration of
government. These overtures were extorted by tile importunity
of Fenclon the French ambafTador, and have some appearance
of being favourable to the captive queen. They were, however,
perfecly suitable to Elizabeth's general fyflcm with regard to
Scottish affairs. Among pl^¥fitions so unequal and difpropor-

b Crawf. Mcm. iir. Melv. 202.
VOL. I. 3 K tionae.

B oVo I in corners of the kingdom very distant from each other, and many

V.
_--- --' of the duke's dependants having been killed or taken in the battle of

59 Langfide, the spirit and flrength of his adherents were totally

broken, and an accommodation with the regent was the only
thing which could prevent the deitrucion of his estate and vafials.
This was effeted without difficulty, and on no unreasonable terms.
The duke promised to acknowledge the authority both of the king
and of the regent; and to claim no jurifclicion in confcquence of
the commifflon which he had received from the queen. The
regent bound himself to repeal the at which had palied for at-
tainting several of the queen's adherents; to restore all who would
submit to the king's government to the poeiffieon of their estates
and honours ; and to hold a convention, whcrein all the differ-
ences between the two parties should be fettled by mutual consent.
'The duke gave hostages for his faithful performance of the treaty;
and, in token of their sincerity, he and lord HIerries accompanied
the regent to Stirling, and visited the young king. The regent
set at liberty the prisoners taken at Langfide .

ARGYLL and Huntly refused to be included in this treaty. A

secret negotiation was carrying on in England, in favour of the
captive queen, with so much success, that her affairs began to wear
a better aspect, and her return into her own kingdom seemed to
be an event not very distant. The French king had lately ob-
tained such advantages over the Hugonots, that the extinction
of that party appeared to be inevitable, and France, by recover-
ing doneftic tranquillity, would be no longer prevented from pro-
teting her friends in Britain. These circumstances not only in-
fluenced Argyll and Huntly, but made so deep an impression on

a Cabbala, 16i. Crawf. Mem. 1o6.

the

the duke, that he appeared to be waveling and irrefclutc, anld J 0o K

V.

plainly discovered that he winsed to evade the accomlplillhmcnt of' --...-
tile treaty. The regent fawv the danl-r of allowing the tduke to
flake hiifielf loose, in this manner, from his engagcnCmnts; and
instantly formed a rcfolition equally bold and politic. I-]c cmn-
manded his guards to seize Chatcllirault in his own houlf in :.din-
burgh, whither he had come in order to attend tlhe coInveti.i
agreed upon; and, regardlcls cither of his dignity as tli filit
nobleman in the kingdom, and nc::t heir to the crown, or of the
promiscs of personal security, on which hl had relied, committed
him and lord I--erries prisoners to tile caltle of ldinburlghll A
blow vb r fatal and unexpc-ed dispiritcd tlie p'irty. Argyll liib-
initted to the king's government, and made his peace with tle
regent on very easy terms; and I-Iuntly, being left alone, vwas at April 16.
last obliged to lay down his arms.

SOON after, lord Boyd returned into Scotland, and brought July 21.

A propinfal

letters to the regent, both from the Englilll and Scottish queens. i, iavourof
A convention was held at Perth, in order to confider them. Eli- \edy
zabcthl's letter contained three different proposals with regard to
Mary; that fie fliould either be reflored to the full poflnlcion el
her former authority; or be admitted to rciiig jointly with the
king her son ; or at leafl be allowed to rcfide in Scotland, in some
decent retirement, without any lfare in the adminifIration of
government. These overtures were extorted by the importunity
of Fenclon the French ambafTador, and have fomc appearance
of being favourable to the captive queen. They were, however,
perfecly suitable to Elizabeth's general fyflem witl regard to
Scottilh affairs. Among propositions so unequal and difpropor-

b Crawf. vlem.

_ Ir. MIselv. 202.
VOL. I. 3 K ionate.

B o0 K tionate, ihe easily lav where the choice would fall. The two

V.
'.--.'. former were rejctaed; and long delays mufl necefltrily have
15 9. intervened, and many difliculiics have arisen, before every cir-

cumfiance relative to the lalt- could be finally adjustcd c.

iMxARY, in her letter, demanded that her marriage with Both-

well should be reviewed by the proper judges, and if found invalid,
should be dissolved by a legal sentence of divorce. This fatal
marriage was the principal source of all the calamities she had
endured for two years; a divorce was the only thing which could
repair the injuries her reputation had fluflred by that ftep. It was
her interest to have propoled it early; and it is not easy to account

Norfolk's for ler long silence with respect to this point. Her particular
scheme for
marrying the motive for proposing it at this time began to be so well known,
quee of that the demand was rejected by the convention of estates d. They

imputed it not so much to any ablorrence of Bothwell, as to her
eagerness to conclude a marriage with the duke of Norfolk.

Tiiis marriage was the objecl of that secret negotiation inEng.

land, which we have already mentioned. The fertile and pro-
jcaing genius of Maitland iirft conceived this scheme. During
the conference at York, he communicated it to the duke himself,
and to the bishop of Rols. The former readily closed with a
scheme so flattering to his ambition. The latter confidered it as a
probable device for restoring his miflrefs to liberty, and replacing
her on her throne. Nor was Mary, with whom Norfolk held a
correlfondence by means of his ifter lady Scroop, averse from a

Spotfw. 230.
d Spotfw. 231. In a Privy Council, held July 30, i569, this demand was

confidered; and, of fifty-one members present, only seven voted to comply with thc
queen's rcqucft. Records Priv. Counc. MS. in the Lyon Office, p. 148.

meafuire,

meafurc, which would have rcftored her to her kingdom with so B 0 0 K
much splendour c. The fidden removal of tie conference from *

.

York to Weftminfler suspendcd, but did not break off this intrigue. 1569.
Maitland and Ross were flill the duke's prompters, and his agents;
and many letters and love tokens were exchanged between him
and the queen of Scots.

BUT as he could not hope, that under an adminitiration so concenls it

from Eliza..

vigilant as Elizabeth's, such an intrigue could be kept long con- beth.
ccaled, he attempted to deceive her by the appearance of openness
and candour, an artifice which seldom fails of success. He men-
tioned to her the rumour whicli was fprcad of his marriage with
the Scottish queen; he complained of it as a groundles calumny;
and disclaimed all thoughts of that kind, with many exprcflions
full of contempt both for Mary's character and dominions. Jealous
as Elizabeth was of every thing relative to the queen of Scots, the
seems to have credited these profeflions '. But, instead of difcon-
tinuing the negotiation, he renewed it with greater vigour, and
admitted into it new aflbciates. Among thcre was the regent of
Scotland. He had given great offence to Norfolk, by his public
accusation of the queen, in breach of the concert into which he
had entered at York. I-e was then ready to return into Scotland.
The influence of the duke in the North of England was great.
The earls of Northumberland and Westmorland, the most power-
ful noblemen in that part of the kingdom, threatened to revenge
upon the regent the injuries which he had done his sovereign.
Murray, in order to secure a safe return into Scotland, addrefted
himself to Norfolk, and after some apology for his pafl condu&,
he insinuated that the duke's feheme of marrying the queen his

c Camd. 419. Haynes, 573. State Trials, i. 73.
f Haynes, 574. State Trials, i. 79, 80.

3 K 2 lflIer

B O IO K fifler was no lelk acceptable to him than beneficial to botl king-
t.---,--- doms; and that lie would concur with the utmost ardour in pro-

'i5 !I moting so dclirable an event . orfolk heard him with the cre-

dulity natural to thole who are paflionately bent upon any design.
He wrote to the two earls to dcfiif fiom any hostile attempt againfl
Murray, and to that he owed his paflge through the northern
counties without diflurbance.

Gains the ENCOURAGED by his fucccfs in gaining the regent, he next
consent of the
Englinh attempted to draw the Englifll nobles to approve his dcfign. The
mobles.

nation began to despair of Elizabeth's marrying. H-er jealousy
kept the queflion with regard to the right of fucceflion undecided.
The memory of the civil wars, which had desolated Etngland for
more than a century, on account of the disputed titles of the houses
of York and Lancaster, was flill recent. Almost all the ancient
nobility had periihed, and the nation itfclf had been brought to
the brink of defrudtion in that unhappy contcef. The Scottish
queen, though her right of fucoeflion was generally held to be
undoubted, might meet with formidable competitors. She might
marry a foreign and a popiffi prince, and bring both liberty and
religion into danger. But, by marrying her to an Englilhman, a
zealous protefiant, the most powerful and mofl universally beloved
of all the nobles, an effedual remedy Ieemed to be provided
against all these evils. The greater part of the 'peers, either di-
redly or tacitly, approved of it, as a salutary projet. The earls of
Arundel, Pembroke, Leicester, and lord Lumley, fuibfcribed a
letter to the Scottish queen, written with Leicester's hand, in
which they warmly recommended the match, but insisted, by
way of preliminary, on Mary's promise, that she should attempt

g Anders. iii. 3..

n-othing:

noihiln-, in conflcuencc of her pretellions to tie nT!;ll crown, I; 0 0 K

V.

prejudicial to Elizabeth, or to her poflerity; that fie fliould coni- _-.-
lent to a league, offenive and dcicfnIive, between the two kinig-

w

doms; that file ihould confi-rm the prei:cet clalliflinmnt of rclieion
in Scotland ; and receive into favour lihchi of lier f all.j]cs as iadl
appeared in arms againfl hler. Upon lher a:recinl uo tile :llarriage
and ratifying tllcfc articles, they cnid that the E.ngliih nobles
vwou-ld not only concur in refiorilg her ilnllu'Cnditcl to ier- o \n
throne, but in tfcuring to her that of lngland in reverionl. ?.I.u-y
readily contented to all theic propolals, e:.ccl)t the iccondl, w\\i
regard to lwhich fh demanded toine time oir coui;lllting Iher ancient
ally the French kinig'.

Tni- whiole of this negotiation vwas intluPrioufly concealed froIl

Elizabeth. I-Ier jealotfy Clf ;:e Scottifhl qu,:n was w-ell k-rlown,
nor could it. be exlecled that ihe w.ould \.villingly come into a
measure, v which tended io viiibly to fiGv thc lcputation, and to
increase the lowevcr of her ri, '. I'- t in a anntter oi lo mucli con-
fcquence to the nation, the takil a. fe".£ Iimps wiLthou licr linow-
ledge could hardly be rc- koned nin.'; and while every pcrin!
concerned, even Ma:ury and :' .b'ok thelliIvcs, dleclared that
nothing fhotild be concluded w'l.ii;'ut obtaining iher conrlint, the
duty and allegiance of fubtjc _s lee-ntcl to be filly prce-vcd.
The grcater part of the nobles regarded the matter in tii; light.
Those who conducted the intrigrc, had farihcr and more' dangerous
views. They saw the advanta es -which Mary would obtain by
this treaty, to be present and , ertain; and the execution of tile
promises which she came under, to be distant and uncertain. They
had carly communicated their scheme to the kings of France and

h Andcrf. vol. iii. 51. Card. 42c.

Spain,

B o0 K Spain, and obtained their approbation. A treaty concerning

--.-_, which they consulted foreign princes, while they concealed it from

5 their own sovereign, could not be deemed innocent. They hoped,

however, that the union of such a number of the chief persons
in the kingdom would render it necessary for Elizabeth to comply;
they flattered themselves that a combination so strong would be
altogether irrefiflible; and such was their confidence of success,
that when a plan was concerted in the North of England for
rescuing Mary out of the hands of her keepers, Norfolk, who
vas afraid that if she recovered her liberty, her sentiments in his
favour might change, used all his interell to dissuade the conlpi-
rators from attempting it k

IN this situation did the affair remain when lord Boyd arrived

from England; and, betides the letters which he produced pub-
licly, brought others in cyphers from Norfolk and Throkmorton
to the regent and to Maitland. These were full of the most
sanguine hopes. All the nobles of England concurred, said they,
in favouring the design. Every preliminary was adjusted; nor
was it possible that a scheme so deep laid, conduced with so much
art, and supported both by power and by numbers, could mif-
carry, or be defeated in the execution. Nothing now was wanting
but the concluding ceremony. It depended on the regent to haften
that, by procuring a icntence of divorce, which would remove
the only obRtacle that flood in the way. This was expeced of
him, in consequence of his promise to Norfolk; and if he re-
garded either his interest or his fame, or even his safety, he would
not fail to fulfil these engagements'.

i Anders. vol. iii. 63. k Camd. 420.
' Haynes, 520. Spotfw. 230. See Appendix, No. XXXII.

BUT

BUT the regent was now in very dillfrent circumflnenccs from In O O.

those which had formerly induced him to asse:t an approbation of
·Norfolk's fichemes. -eI law that the downfal of his own power 156S9
must be the firPc contfquencei of the duke's fucces ; and if the
queen, who confidered him as the chief author of all her misfbr-
tt:nes, fliould recover her ancicnt authority, he couldl never cx-
peSc favour, nor scarce hope for impunity. No wonder he de-
clined a fPrp lb fatal to lilmfelf andwic which would mave ctablifled
the grandeur of another on the ruins of his own. ins re'ufl
occasioned a delay. But, as every other circui-mfiance was fettlcd,
the bishop of Ross, in name of his mlifiricf, and the dclll.e, in
perfbn, declared, in presence of the FI-ench amtaflhtdor, their
mutual consent to the marriage, and a colntrac t to his pui-polf was
signed, and intrusted to the keeping of the ambassador '"

THE intrigue was now in so many hands, that it could not AOgut i3.

Elizabcth
long remain a secret. It began to be whliifpcred at court; and diifcovers tlhe

duke's de-

Elizabeth calling the duke into her presence, exprefied the utnmot fin, and de-
indignation at his condu&-, and charged him to lay aside all feat it.
thoughts of prosecuting uclic a dangerous delign. Soon after
Leicefler, who perhaps had countenanced the projec with no
other intention, revealed all the circumstances of it to the queen.
Pembroke, Arundel, Lumley, and Throkmorton, wcre confined
and examined. Mary was watched more narrowly than ever;
and Haflings earl of Huntingdon, who pretended to lditiute with
the Scottifi queen her right to the fucceflion, being joined in
commifion with Shrcwfbury, rendered her imprisonment more
intolerable, by the excess of his vigilance and rigour". The
Scottifhl regent, threatened with Elizabeth's difpleafurc, meanly

C Carte, vol. iii. 486. " Haynes, 525, 526. 530. 532.

betrayed
4

B 0o o ! betrayed the duke; put his letters into her hands; and furniflied

V.
<- ---, all the intelligence in his power °. The duke himself retired first to

5 Howard-houfe, and then, in contempt of the summons to appear

before the privy council, fled to his feat in Norfolk. Intimidated
by the imprisonment of his aflbciates; coldly received by his
friends in that country; unprepared for a rebellion; and unwilling
perhaps to rebel; he hesitated for some days, and at last obeyed a
OClub'r 3. second call, and repaired to Windsor. l-Ie was firfl kept as a prisoner

in a private house, and then sent to the Tower. After being
confined there upwards of nine months, he was released upon
his humble ful)lmiTion to Elizabeth, giving her a promise, on his
:dlegiance, to hold no farther corrcfpondence with the queen of
Scots P. During the progress of Norfolk's negotiations, the queen's
partisans in Scotland, Vwho made no doubt of their ifiling in her
rcloration to the throne, with an increase of authority, were

Maitland im- wonderfully elevated. Maitland was the foul of that party, and
prisoned by p
the regent. the p erfon whoe activity and ability the regent chiefly dreaded.

lie had laid the plan of that intrigue which had kindled such
combustion in England. lie continued to foment the spirit of
diltficelion in Scotland, and had cfduced fiom the regent lord
I-Iomc, Kirkaldy, and cfvcral of his former aflbciates. While
he enjoyed liberty, the regent could not reckon his own power
secure. For this reason, having by an artifice allured Maitland
to Stirling, he employed captain Crawfurl, one of his creatures,
to accure him of being accessory to the murder of the king; and
under that pretence he was arrefled and carried as a prisoner to
Edinburgh. He would soon have been brought to trial, but was
saved by the friendship of Kirkaldy, governor of the caille, wvlco,
by pretending a warrant for that purpose from the regent, got

° See Append. No. XXXIII. P Ha)nes, 525. 597.

him

him out of the hands of the per!;n to o.l:i cLiare : v.,, c.'i-
mittedl, and conduecld him iito the cafle, w\-lich. -on ltha tin i ...
was entirely under railtland'; conmmlandll ''. ThI!; oi a ia c
so much importance, adc the dlciidt:ii o a m. n ;ilj -,:..;i,::.

ii .

military flill as Kirl aldy, broulht tie rC.eji, ihiu <:'n1 (.'' '::,.

;tn-.

tion ,

or w hich, lloweve, the lilccj !' : all- '

i.: : j'Li. :;..ll
this time, abundantly compinci.tc,1.

1 IIE intrigue carried on for rcLr'i;i '';

c "

, '. t -

liberty having been ldlcovercdl aTnd dI ':! i'.:> itci, :t 1 :tl:- ; v:; .
miade to the lame )urpoi1)of " ;' s; Ii: L 'i '"' i:; '' '

was not mIore oi-tullnt. lc c s (i o

a' i, ! .: 'h. l :i

!,i .'

_ .-

moC)rlandl, tlougi lit'tlc dilnCjii, .''-i :. r tby.h

l:ii'ii j I Lai.i:l d:i

:, -

w>erc- two of the lmo-l ancient alld " rf;l of, il: l'.;1
Their eflatcs ill the northern coui:tics VC.c!'e ,.rcat, and

L tle'C- oi-.

feicld that influence over theL i :t'ill pit -it:;, v'hicl '.i:.:i 'C.a:' . ':rv
i the popular and

ic ll 'tl vl;i.

'(t

c. 'i,.

v.:CreC both attached to the poplii r , and d!;co. \ i
the courllrt, iCr ew mel aeln l

ad 't 11e\v' ,.' l

' r cvi!'. :. 'Cl

incC IMary)'; arrival iln EL nglatnd, itieiy ad viri-.iy elioucd

In l i

Intcreft and zeal ftor popery; Cf 'oition 'l tohe court, at t c-t';ii
mitcration of her fullerings, ihad clnga.d them in "ii;"Ii 1 lt;

1t vi g l n o h ;':

c.

for hecr rclief. Notwithslandinglo tl vigilance of her keeper. they
held a close correfiondence ih lllier, and comnimuicatcd to iic_
all lhecir dclignis . They w'cre privy to 'Lor-b'O' 1 , !liemc's bil:
the caution w' ith whih llie proceeded did ,ot lii: i L'ir a'rdI ; iid
!iLsLptuolltj'M.i The liberty:.7 of the c tt(tih qcealn x.':-:; n10 ther ,.:'
object. They aimed at hriging,- .ut a clange ithe clig ,
arnd a revo.ltion, in tilhe gov'ern me ii l
o' te 'c oi-dom V o i..,

' Spoti . 23 . -'la cs: '5'. ,

. 14 ', c".
oTo , I, (' i, !,:..''",,.

B 0 0 K reason they solicited the aid of the king of Spain, the avowed-

V.
_-.----i and zealous patron of popery in that age. Nothing could be

6 more delightful to the restless spirit of Philip, or more necessary

towards facilitating his schemes in the Netherlands, than the in-
volvilng England in the confusion and miseries of a civil war.
The duke of Alva, by his direction, encouraged the two earls, and'
promised, as loon as they either took the field with their forces, or
surprised any place of strength, or rescued the queen of Scots,
that he would supply them both with money and a strong body of
troops. La Mothe, the governor of Dunkirk, in the difgui'e of
a sailor, founded the ports where it would be most proper to land.
And Chiapini Vitelli, one of Alva's ablest officers, was dispatched
into England, on pretence of fettling rome commercial differences
between the two nations; but in reality that the rebels might be
Lfre of a leader of experience, as soon as they ventured to take

arms '.
defeated. THE conduEt of this negotiation occasioned many meetings and

meflages between the two earls. Elizabeth was informed of
these; and though fle fuifetsed nothing of their real design, she
concluded that they were among the number of Norfolk's con-
sidents. They were summoned, for this reason, to repair to
court. Conscious of guilt,, and afraid of discovery, they delayed
giving obedience. A second, and more peremptory order was
Nov. 9. issued. This they could not- decline, without flhaking off their

allegiance; and as no time was left for deliberation, they instantly
erected their standard against their sovereign. The re-eflablifhing
the catholic religion ; the fettling the order of fuccefflon to the
crown; the defence of the ancient nobility; were the motives

Carte, vol. iii. 489, 490. Camd. 421.

which

which they alleged to justify their rebellion'. Many of tle E 0 0 K.

V.

lower people flocked to them with such arms as they could pro- --
cure; and had the capacity of their leaders been in any degree 56
equal to the enterprise, it muff have oion grown to be extremely
formidable. Elizabeth aded with prudence and vigour; and was
served by her fuljeds with fidelity and ardour. On the first
rumour of an iniurredion, Mary was removed to Coventry, a
place of strength, which could not be taken without a regular
siege; a detachment of the rebels, wllich was sent to refcuc her.
returned without success. Troops were afiembled in different parts
of the kingdom; as they advanced, the malecontents retired. In
their retreat their numnbers dwindled away, and their spirits 1ink.
Deifpair, and uncertainty whither to direct their flight, kept to-
gether for some time a finall body of them among the mountains
of Northumberland; but they were at length obliged to dil)erfe,
and the chiefs took refuge among the Scottifhi borderers. The Dcc. zi
two earls, together with the countess of Northumberland, wan-
dering for omce days in the wafles of Liddifdale, were plun-
dered by the banditti, exposed to the rigour of the fcafon, and
left destitute of the neceflarics of life. Westmorland was con-
cealed by Scot of Buccleugh and Ker of Ferniherfl-, and after-
'wards conveyed into the Netherlands. Northumberland was
seized by the regent, who had marched with some troops towards
the borders, to prevent any imprclion the rebels might make on.
those mutinous provinces ".

AMIDST so many surprising events, the affairs of the church, ChuIchlaf.

for two years, have almooft cicaped our notice. Its general a- airs
femblies were held regulally ; but no business of much importance

l Strypc, vol. i. 547. Cabbala, 17I. CamnJ. 422.

3 L 2 employed

0; 00 \- empiloyed lthe- attention. -As the number of tire protciiant clergy

d-- .ily increaLfcd, the deficiency of the funds set apart for their
:q fuhbl~ftelncc lne

bc gricater, and was more ienlibly felt. Mvany

c..rc. swere mdcic e tollwards recovering the ancient patrimony of
t'. c1ii:cl!, or at lcal1 as much of it as w3 poffefl (d by the popifli
.... ...'...)';li, arace o men who wvere nowv not only ulleiss but

UL!tr.l 2fo2nc to tlihc natioi. Eut tliiogi thle n iaR

I:cr in Vwic tho

;regent received the addlrenlcs and coiphl' .its of tlle genera! ailc!n-
blies was very cliCIlrcnt fiomn that-o to hi tey had been ac-
cuRomlcc, no ci'Cciulal rcmcdy was provided ; and while they
fiitlrcd intolerable opprcffonh, and groaned under extrcmo
poverty, fair words, and liberal promils, were all they were ablJ
to obtain x

iN7O. ELIZABETIH now began to be weary of keeping such a prifonc:i

Rlizibeth re-
fblIr.s give as the queen of Scots. During the former year, the tranquillity of
no niVary to
t!e regent: ler government had been dillurbcd, frirt by a fccret combination

of I'me of her nobles, then by tlle relellion of others; and ihs
often declared, not without rcaion, that \Mary was the IiA/rcII crai,
of both. iany of- her ovw.n flb jcls favoured or pitied the cap-
tive queen; the Roman catholic princes on the continent were
wvarmly interefled inher cause. The detaining her any longer in
England, ile foresaw, would be made the pretext or occasion of

eerpetual cabals and infiurrecions among the former; and mighi t
expoie her to the hostile attempts of the latter. She .rcfolved,
therefore, to give up Mary into the hands of the regent, after
ilipulating with him, not only that her days should not be cut
fliort, either by a judicial sentence or by secret violence, but that
.lie should be treated in a manner flited to her rank ; and, in order

Cald, vol. ii. 80, &c.

to
7

co feCille his obfcrvance of tlis, flie required that fix or the chliCf : o K

V.

nclc;aenll ill tlei kiingom fIhuld bl e ici.t into I'n'ln an ls Iioi-
t','c.s Y r. XVtith r1lcfjc'- to thlc fae a cuflody of the quele, lhe rlted ';1'
on /Itur-aay'. vigilance, \vho!c ficnr'iy, no l, l' than her own, dce-
pcIticd oiin p: evcting i\I ary i oni rc-.:'.!ciii t! e . e. T lic
nc.'eodntriL Ibr thlis purpofp was carrli'._ i lbiO lci? ,tl,, whcii it wa'a:
lil:covc-:'.A by tlc vigilance o£ tlic 1)iilop (i' oI l, \l', t ' 'ill
\1ithli I'c 'rc "ic:i and Sp-:alh zl ). i i i.'i, r.'ioil'fIrtcd aca.iini
tlc iniLI:' o0 Itncl all a cLion, at1l reprclcnted thle firrcnei'iien
hle (licen to icr rcl)i-liols sil)ihjel, to Ije tile lbMnc tiling a.i ilt
Ili;-, :thll houlili, I, hier own luiitlliolit, condClllm lhicr to it!l.ant
tdc Lti. 'Iliis procured a deCly ; anid tlic Imurder of the rcgcnc
aprevntcd tlie revival of that dcfig ii

I-lA .: ILTOIN of oBotliv:llhainugh xas the perfonl who commilittcd luii cismu.r.
iis barbarous aiion. lie ihadc bccn condemned to dcati lbooi d:I'CL
after thc battle of Langiile, as we have alrelady related, anid oved
his life to the regent's clemency. 3But part of his cetat'c had bele
iei2vowcd uponl one of the regcnt's favoiurites, -vlo Ixcizcd his
lhoulit, and turied out L;is wife naked, in a cold niht, into tiic
open fields, lwhere, berf;e next monlilng, ihc becalme iurioully
mad. This injiury made a deeper i nprecfion upon him thia tihe
benefit -which he had received, and from that momcent he vowed
to be revenged upon the rgcnt. PIarty-rage itrcngtlhcild andil
inflamed his private rcfcntnlcnt. Iis kinsmen the -Iamlltons ap-
plaudcd the enterlprifi. The maxiis of tliat age jufliiicl the
motl desperate course which he could take to obtain vengeance.

eIc followed the regent for sonic time, and watcled for an op-
Y IHayncs, 524. ' Carte, vol. iii. 4qI, Anldef. vol. iii. 8,4.

n{ortt'nl -,'

B 0 0 K portunity to firike the blow. He resolved at last to wait till his

V. _.--,--' enemy should arrive at Linlithgow, through which he was to pass

5 in his way from Stirling to Edinburgh. He took his stand in a
wooden gallery, which had a window towards the street; spread
a feather-bed on the floor, to hinder the noile of his feet from.
being heard; hung up a black cloth behind him, that his shadow
might not be observed from without; and after all this prepa-
ration, calmly expected the regent's approach, who had lodged
during the night in a part of the town not far diflant. Some
indistinCt information of the danger which threatened him- had
been conveyed to the regent, and he paid so much regard to it,
that he resolved to return by the fame gate through which he had
entered, and to fetch a compass round the town. But as the
crowd about the gate was great, and he himself unacquainted
with fear, he proceeded directly along the fireet; and the throng
of the people obliging him to move very slowly, gave the assassin
time to take so true an aim, that he shot him with a single bullet
through the lower part of his belly, and killed the horse of a
gentleman who rode on his other fide. His followers inflantly
endeavoured to break into the house whence the blow had come,
but they found the door strongly barricaded; and before it could
be forced open, Hamilton had mounted a fleet horse, which flood
ready for him at a back-paffage, and was got far beyond their
reach. The regent died the fame night of his wound ".
I-ischaraAcr. THERE is no person in that age about whom historians have

been more divided, or whose characer has been drawn with fueli
opposite colours. Personal intrepidity, military ikill, sagacity, and

Buchan. 385. Crawf. Mem. 124. Cabbala, 171.

vigour
7

vigour in the adminiltration of civil affairs, are virtues, which o0 0
even his enemies allow him to have pofleffed in an eminent dc- ---
gree. His moral qualities are more dubious, and ought ucither 1570'
to be praised nor censured without great refcrve, and many dif-
tinacions. In a fierce age he was capable of using viELory with
humanity, and of treating the vanquished with moderation. A.
patron of learning, which, among martial nobles, was either un-
known, or defpilcd. Zealous for religion, to a degree which
distinguished him, even at a time when profcfions of that kind
were not uncommon. His confidence in his friends was extreme,
and inferior only to his liberality towards them, which knew no.
bounds. A difintcrefled paflion for the liberty of his country,
prompted him to oppose the pernicious system which the princes
of Lorrain had obliged the queen-mother to purfuc. On M'ary's
return into Scotland, he fcrved her with a zeal and affacion, to
which he sacrificed the friendlhip of those who were molt attached
to his person. But, on the other hand, his ambition was immo-
derate; and events happened that opened to him vast projeas,
which allured his enterprising genius, and led him to actions in-
conliftent with the duty of a Iubjet. His treatment of the queen,
to whose bounty he was so much indebted, was unbrotherly and
ungrateful. The dependence on Elizabeth, under which lihe
brought Scotland,. was dilgraccful to the nation. He deceived
and betrayed Norfolk with a baseness unworthy of a man of ho-
nour. His elevation to ifch unexpected dignity inliired him.
with new passions, with haughtiness and reserve ; and inilcad of
his natural manner, which was blunt and open, he affected the
arts of dissimulation and refinement. Fond, towards the end of'
his life, of flattery, and impatient of advice, his creatures, by
soothing his vanity, led him astray, while his ancient friends stood;

Iz- a£t

B V 10 at a distance, and predited his approaching fall. But, amidst the

V.
& ---- turbulence and confusion of that fascious period, he dispensed

justice with so much impartiality, he represscd the licentious bor-
derers with so much courage, and efiabliflled such uncommon
order and tranquillity in the country, that his administration was
extremely popular, and he was long and affedionately remembered
among the commons, by the name of the Good Rcgcztni

. N D OPS Til S T' V OLU1 M ,
