HISTORY OF THE REIGN

OF THE

EMPEROR CHARLES V.

VOL. I.

FRONTISPIECE.

PoV

----~'A

- jf"

F ___

THE

HISTORT OF THE REIGN

OF THE

EMPEROR CHARLES V..

By WILLIAM ROBERTSON, D.D.

'RINCIPAL OF THE UNIVERSITY OF EDINEURGB,

HISTORIOGRAPHER TO HIS MAJESTY

FOR SCOTLAND,

AND MEMBER OF THE ROYAL ACADEMY OF

HISTORY AT MADRID.

THE NINTH EDITION.

IN FOUR VOLUMES.

VOL. I.

LONDON:

PRINTED FOR T. CADELL JUN. AND W. DAVIES

iSUCCRSSORS TO MR. CADELL) IN THE STRANIj

AND F. RALFOUR, EDINEURGH.

1;998

# TO THE KING.

TO THE

K IN G.

SIR,

I PRESUME to lay before Your Majesty the

Hifory of a Period, which, if the abilities

of the Writer were equal to the dignity of the
Subje&, would not be unworthy the attention
of a Monarch, who is no less a Judge than a
Patron of Literary Merit.

Hiffory claims it as her prerogative to offer

infiruaion to KINGS, as well as to their people.
What refleAions the Reign of the Emperor
CHARLES Vs may suggest to Your Majesty, it
becomes not me to conjedure. But your Subjeas
cannot observe the various calamities, which
that Monarch's ambition to be distinguished as
a Conqueror, brought upon his dominions,
without recolleding the felicity of their own
times, and looking up with gratitude to their
Sovereign, who, during the fervour of youth,

A3 and

and amidR the career of vidory, poffeffed such
feif-command, and maturity of judgment, as to
set bounds to his own triumphs, and prefer the
blessings of peace to the splendour of military
glory.

Posterity will not only celebrate the wisdom

of Your Majefty's choice, but will enumerate
the many virtues, which render Your reign
conspicuous for a sacred regard to all the duties
incumbent on the Sovereign of a Free People.

It is our happiness to feel the influence of these

Virtues; and to live under the dominion of a
Prince, who delights more in promoting the
Public Welfare, than in receiving the just Praise
ps his Royal Beneficence. I am,

SIR,

YOUR MAJESTY'S

Most faithful Subje&,

And most dutiful Servant,

WILLAnM ROBERTSON.

# THE PREFACE.

THE

PREFACE.

o .period in the hiitory of one's own country
can be considered as altogether uninteresting.

Such tranfaaions as tend to illuffrate the pro-
grefs of its confkitution, laws, or manners, merit
the utmost attention. Even remote and minute
events are objeds of a curiosity, which, being
natural to the hunman mind, the gratification of
it is attended with pleasure.

But, with refpe& to the hiilory of foreign

States, we muf't set other bounds to our desire
of information. The universal progress of
science, during the two last centuries, the art of
printing, and other obvious causes, have filled
Europe with such a multiplicity of hijiories, and
with such vait colleations of historical materials,
that the term of human life is too short for the
study or even the perusal of them. It is necessary,
then, not only for those who are called to con-
du& the affairs of nations, but for such as in-
quire and reason concerning them, to remain
satisfied with a general knowledge of difitant

events,

detail chiefly to that period, in which the several
States of Europe having become intimately con-
neAed, the operations of one power are so felt
by all, as to influence their councils, and to
regulate their measures.

Some boundary, then, ought to be fixed in

order to separate these periods. An ara should
be pointed out, prior to which, each country,
little conneAcd with those around it, may trace
its own hilory apart; after which, the tranf-
aAions of every conifiderable nation in Europe
become interesting and infiruaive to all. With
this intention I undertook to write the history
of the Emperor CHARLES V. It was during
his adminiliration that the powers of Europe
were formed into one great political fy11em, in
which ench took a Ration, wherein it has since
remained with less variation, than could have
been expedted after tile Ihocks occailoned by so
many internal revolutions, and so many foreign
wars. The great events which happened then
have not hitherto spent their force. The
political principles and maxims, then ellablifhed,
fill continue to operate. The ideas concerning
the balance of power, then introduced or ren-
dered general, ifill influence the councils of
nations.

The age of CHARLES V. may therefore be

considered as the period at which the political
Rtate of Europe began to assume a new form.
I have endeavoured to render my account of
it, an introdudlion to the hiflory of Europe
subsequent to his reign. While his numerous
Biographers deflribe his personal qualities and

adions;

aions; while the hifcorians of different countries
relate occurrences the consequences of which were
local or transient, it hath been my purpose to re-
cord only those great tranfadions in his reign,
the effeds of which were universal, or continue
to be permanent.

As my readers could derive little inifruAion

from such a hillory of the reign of CHARLES V.
without some information concerning the Rate
oif Europe previous to the fisxteenth century, my
desire of supplying this has produced a preli-
minary volume, in which I have attempted to
point out and to explain the great causes and
events, to whole operation all the improvements
in the political ifate of Europe, from the sub-
version of the Roman Empire to the beginning
of the sixteenth century, mufd be ascribed. I
have exhibited a view of the progress of society
in Europe, not only with refpea to interior
government, laws, and manners, but with re-
fpe& to the command of the national force re-
quifite in foreign operations; and I have described
the political conflitution of the principal dlates
in Europe at the time when Charles V. began
his reign.

In this part of my work I have been led into

several critical difquifitions, which belong more
properly to the province of the lawyer or anti-
quary, than to that of the hidlorian. These I
have placed at the end of the firdt volume, under
the title of Proofs and Illufdrations. Many of
my readers will, probably, give little attention
to such researches. To some they may, per-
haps, appear the modt curious and interedting
part of the work. I have carefully pointed out

the

the sources from which I have derived informs-
tion, and have cited the writers on whose autho-
rity I rely with a minute exaanefs, which might
appear to border upon ofientation, if it were
possible to be vain of having read books, many
of which nothing but the duty of examining
with accnracy whatever I laid before the Public,
would have induced me to open. As my in-
quiries conduaed me often into paths which
were obscure or little frequented, such conflant
references to the authors who have been my
guides, were not only necessary for authenti-
cating the fads which are the foundations of
my reasonings, but may be useful in pointing
out the way to such as shall hereafter hold the
fame course, and in enabling them to carry on
their researches with greater facility and foccefis.

Every intelligent reader will observe one omif-

sion in my work, the reason of which it is necef-
fary to explain. I have given no account of the
conquests of Mexico and Peru, or of the elta-
blifhment of the Spanish colonies in the continent
and islands of America. The hiflory of these
events I originally intended to have related at
considerable length. But upon a nearer and more
attentive confidrration of this part of my plan, I
found that the discovery of the new world; the
Rate of society among its ancient inhabitants;
their charader, manners, and arts; the genius
of the European settlements in its various pro-
vinces, together with the influence of these upon
the fyfiems of policy or commerce in Europe,
were fubjeds so splendid and important, that a
superficial view of theni could afford little fatif-
faction; and, on the other hand, to treat of them

as

as extensively as they merited, mull produce an
episode, disproportionate to the principal work.
I have therefore reserved these for a separate his-
tory; which, if the performance now offered to
the Public ihall receive its approbation, I purpose
to undertake.

Though, by omitting such considerable but

detached articles in the reign of CharlesV. I have
circumscribed my narration within more narrow
limits, I am yet persuaded, from this view of
the intention and nature of the work which I
thought it necessary to lay before my readers,
that the plan mult dill appear to them too ex-
tensive, and the undertaking too arduous. I have
often felt them to be so. But my convidion of
the utility of such a history prompted me to per-
severe. With what success I have executed it,
'the Pubic mult now judge. I wait, not with-
out solicitude, for its deciiion; to which I flhall
submit with a refpeaful silence.

A VIEW

# A VIEW OF THE PROGRESS OF SOCIETY IN EUROPE, FROM THE SUBVERSION OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE, TO THE BEGINNING OF THE SIXTEENTH CENTURY.

## SECT. I. View of the Progress of Society in Europe, with respect to interior Government, Laws, and Manners.

VIEW

OF THE

PROGRESS OF SOCIETT lN EUROPE,

FROM THE

SUBVERSION OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE,

TO THE

BEGINNING OF THE SIXTEENTH CENTURY.

SECT. I.

View of the Progress of Society in Europe, with re-

sped to interior Government, Laws, and IVIan-

ners.

Two great revolutions have happened in the

political fiate, and in the manners of the

European nations. The firit was occasioned bythe
progress of the Roman power; the second by the
subversion of it. When the spirit of conquest led
the armies of Rome beyond the Alps, they found
all the countries which they invaded, inhabited
by people whom they denominated barbarians, but
who were nevertheless brave and independent.
These defended their ancient poffefflions with ob-
itinate valour. It was by the superiority of their
discipline, rather than that of their courage, that

VOL. 1. the

the Romans gained any advantage over them. A
single battle did not, as among the effeminate in-
habitants ofAfia, decide the fate of a fRate. The
vanquished people resumed their arms with fresh
spirit, and their undisciplined valour, animated
by the love of liberty, supplied the want of con-
duBt as well as-of union. During those long and
fierce firuggles for dominion or independence,
the counitries of Europe were fucceflively laid
waftY, a great part of their inhabitants perished
in the field, many were carried into slavery, and
a feeble remnant, incapable of further resistance,
submitted to the Roman power.

The Romans having thus desolated Europe,

set themselves to civilize it. The form of go-
vernment which they established in the conquered
provinces, though severe, was regular, and pre-
served public tranquillity. As a consolation for
the loss of liberty, they communicated their arts,
sciences, language, and manners, to their new
fubjefis. Europe began to breathe, and to re-
cover fitrength after the calamities which it had
undergone; agriculture was encouraged; popu-
latioi increased; the ruined cities were rebuilt;
new towns were founded ; an appearance of prof-
perity succeeded, and repaired, in some degree,
the havoc of war.

This slate, however, was far from being happy

or favourable to the improvement of the human
mind. The vanquished nations were disarmed by
their conquerors, and overawed by soldiers kept
in pay to reltrain them. They were given up as
a prey to rapacious governors, who plundered
them with impunity; and were drained of their
wealt by exorbitant taxes, levied with so little

attention

attention to the situation of the provinces, that
the impositions were often increased in propor-
tion to their inability to support them. They
were deprived of their molt enterprizing citizens,
who resorted to a distant capital in quelt of pre-
ferment, or of riches; and were accuoomed in
all their aaions to look up to a superior, and
tamely to receive his commands. Under so many
deprefling circumllances, it was hardly poffiible
that they could retain vigour or generosity of
mind. The martial and independent spirit, which
had diltinguifhed their ancestors, became, in a
great measure, extind among all the people sub-
jeaed to the Roman yoke; they loft not only
the habit but even the capacity of deciding for
themselves, or of aaing from the impulse of their
own minds; and the dominions of the Romans,
like that of all great empires, degraded and de-
based the human species [A].

A society in such a fRate could not fubfilt long.

There were defeas in the Roman government,
even in its molt perfeft form, which threatened
its dissolution. Time ripened theft original feeds
of corruption, and gave birth to many new dif-
orders. A conritution, unsound, and worn out,
mull have fallen into pieces of itself, without any
external thock. The violent irruption of the
Goths, Vandals, Huns, and other barbarians,
hastened this event, and precipitated the downfal
of the empire. New nations seemed to arise,
and to ruoh from unknown regions, in order to
take vengeance on the Romans for the calamities
which they had inflided on mankind. These
fierce tribes either inhabited the various pro-

[A] NOTE I.

152 vinces

dued by the Romans, or were scattered over
those vait countries in the north of Europe, and
north-west of Aiia, which are now occupied by
the Danes, the Swedes, the Poles, the fubjeas
of the Ruffian empire, and the Tartars. Their
condition and tranfadions, previous to their in-
vafion of the empire, are but little known. Al-
snoft all our information with refpe& to these is
derived from the Romans; and as they did not
penetrate far into countries, which were at that
time uncultivated and uninviting, the accounts
of their original iate given by the Roman hif-o.
rians are extremely imperfe&. The rude inha-
bitants themselves, destitute of science as well as
of records, and without leisure or curiosity to
inquire into remote events, retained, perhaps,
some indiftina memory of recent occurrences,
but beyond these, all was buried in oblivion, or
involved in darkness and in fable [B].

The prodigious swarms which poured in upon

the empire from the beginning of the fourth cen.
tury to the final extinaion of the Roman power,
have given rife to an opinion that the countries
whence they ifined were crowded with inhabit-
ants; and various theories have been formed to
account for such an extraordinary degree of po-
pulation as hath produced these countries the
appellation of The Storehoofe of Nations. But
if we confider, that the countries poffeffed by the
people who invaded the empire were of vait ex.
tent; that a great part of these was covered with
woods and marshes; that some of the molt con.
fiderable of the barbarous nations subsisted en-

[B] NOTE 11.

tirely

slates of society large traas of land are required
for maintaining a few inhabitants; and that all
of them were firangers to the arts and industry,
without which population cannot increase to any
great degree, we mufd conclude, that these coun-
tries could not be so populous in ancient times
as they are in the present, when they dtill con-
tinue to be less peopled than any other part of
Europe or of Asia.

But the fame circumstances that prevented the

barbarous nations from becoming populous, con-
tributed to inspire, or to drengthen, the martial
spirit by which they were diflinguifhed. Inured
by the rigour of their climate, or the poverty of
their foil, to hardships which rendered their
bodies firm and their minds vigorous; accuf-
tomed to a course of life which was a continual
preparation for adion; and disdaining every oc-
cupation but that of war or of hunting; they
undertook, and prosecuted their military enter-
prizes with an ardour and impetuosity of which
men softened by the refinements of more polished
times can fearcely form any idea [C].

Their firdt inroads into the empire proceeded

rather from the love of plunder than from the
desire of new settlements. Roused to arms by
some enterprizing or popular leader, they sallied
out of their forests; broke in upon the frontier
provinces with irresistible violence; put all who
opposed them to the sword; carried off the modt
valuable effeas of the inhabitants; dragged along
multitudes of captives in chains; waited all be-
fore them with fire or sword; and returned in

IC] NOTE III.

1 3 triumph

triumph to their wilds and fafineffes. Their fuc-
cess, together with the accounts which they gave
of the unknown conveniences and luxuries that
abounded in countries better cultivated, or blessed
with a milder climate than their own, excited
new adventurers, and exposed the frontier to new
devaitations.

When nothing was left to plunder in the ad-

Jacent provinces, ravaged by frequent excursions,
they marched farther from home, and finding it
difficult, or dangerous to return, they began to
fettle in the countries which they had subdued.
The sudden and (hort excurlions in quest of
booty, which had alarmed and difquieted the
empir-e, ceased; a more dreadful calamity im-
peaded. Great bodies of armed men, with their
wives and children, and slaves and flocks, ififued
forth; like regular colonies, in queit of new set-
tlemnents. People who had no cities, and seldom
any fixed habitation, were so little attached to
their native foil, that they migrated without re-
ludance from one place to another. New ad-
venturers followed them. The lands which they
deserted were occupied by more remote tribes
of barbarians. These, in their turn, pushed fcr-
ward into more fertile countries, and, like a tor-
rent continually increasing, rolled on, and fwvept
every thing before them. In less than two cen-
turies from their first irruption, barbarians of va-
rious names and lineage plundered and took pof-
feflion of Thrace, Pannonia, Gaul, Spain, Africa,
and at last of Italy, and Rome itself. The vaRt
lIabric of the Roman powqr, which it had been
the work of ages to perfed, was in that ihort
period overturned from the foundation.

Many

this great revolution, and ensured success to the
nations which invaded the empire. The Roman
commonwealth had conquered the world by the
wisdom of its civil maxims, and the rigour of its
military discipline. But, under the emperors,
the former were forgotten or despised, and the
latter was gradually relaxed. The armies of the
empire in the fourth and fifth centuries bore
fearcely any resemblance to those invincible le-
gions which had been viaorious wherever they
marched. Instead of freemen, who voluntaiily
took arms from the love of glory, or of their
country, provincials and barbarians were bribed
or forced into service. These were too feeble,
or too proud to fublnit to the fatigue of military
duty. They even complained of the weight of
their defenjive armour as intolerable, and laid it
aside. Infantry, from which the armies of an-
cient Rome derived their vigour and stability,
fell into contempt; the effeminate and undifci-
plined soldiers of later times could hardly be
brought to venture into the field but on horse-
hack. These wretched troops, however, were
the only guardians of the empire. The jealousy
of dflpotitm had deprived the prople of the uife
of arms; and fubjeas, opprefifd and rendered
incapable of defending themnfelves, had neither
spirit nor inclination to reilil their invaders, from
whom they had little to fear, because their condi-
tion could hardly be rendered more unhappy. At
the fame time that the martial spirit became ex-
tindt, the revenues of the empire gradually di-
rninifhed. The taste for the luxuries of the East
increased to such a pitch in the Imperial court,

that

which, in the channel of commerce, money never
returns. By the large subsidies paid to the bar-
barous nations, a dtill greater quantity of specie
was withdrawn from circulation. The frontier
provinces, wasted by frequent incursions, became
unable to pay the customary tribute; and the
wealth of the world, which had long centered
in the capital of the empire, ceased to flow thi-
ther in the fame abundance, or was diverted into
other channels. The limits of the empire con-
tinued to be as extensive as ever, while the spirit
requisite for its defence declined, and its resources
were exhausted. A vaR body, languid and al-
mod unanimated, became incapable of any effort
to save itself, and was easily overpowered. The
emperors, who had the absolute dire&iod of this
disordered fyfitem, funk in the foftnefs of Eafern
luxury, shut up within the walls of a palace,
ignorant of war, unacquainted with affairs, and
governed entirely by women and eunuchs, or by
ministers equally effeminate, trembled at the ap-
proach of danger, and, under circumitances which
called for the utmost vigour in counsel as well as
in aation, difcoyered all the impotent irresolution
of fear and of folly.

In every refpe& the condition of the barbarous

nations was the reverse of that of the Romans.
Among the former, the martial spirit was in
full vigour; their leaders were hardy and enter-
prifing; the arts which had enervated the Ro-
mans were unknown; and such was the nature
of their military infitutions, that they brought
forces into the field without any trouble, and
supported them at little expence. The merce-

S nary

nary and effeminate troops ilationed on the fron-
tier, afionifhed at their fierceness, either fled at
their approach, or were routed on the first on-
set. The feeble expedient to which the emperors
had recourse, of taking large bodies of the bar-
barians into pay, and of employing them to repel
new invaders, inflead of retarding, hastened the
deifruAion of the empire. These mercenaries
soon turned their arms againif their mailers, and
with greater advantage than ever, for, by serving
in the Roman armies, they had acquired all the
discipline, or skill in war, which the Romans still
retained; and, upon adding these to their native
ferocity, they became altogether irrefillible.

But though from these, and many other

causes, the progress and conquests of the nations
which over-ran the empire became so extremely
rapid, they were accompanied with horrible de-
vaftations, and an incredible defirudion of the
human species. Civilized nations, which take
arms upon cool refleiion, from motives of policy
or prudence, with a view to guard againit some
diRiant danger, or to prevent some remote con-
tingency, carry on their hostilities with so little
rancour or animosity, that war among them is
disarmed of half its terrors. Barbarians are
firangers to such refinements. They ruih into
war with impetuosity, and prosecute it with
violence. Their sole objea is to make their
enemies feel the weight of their vengeance; nor
does their rage subside until it be Lhtiated with
infliding on them every poffibie calamity. It is
with such a spirit that the savage tribes in Ame-
rica carry on their petty wars. It was with the

fame

fierce barbarians in the north of Europe, and of
Asia, fell upon the Roman empire.

Wherever they marched, their rout was marked

with blood. They ravaged or defroyed all around
them. They made no diftinaion between what
was sacred and what was profane. They refpeded
no age, or sex, or rank. What escaped the fury
of the first inundation, perished in those which
followed it. The most fertile and populous pro-
vinces were converted into deserts, in which were
scattered the ruins of villages and cities, that
afforded (helter to a few miserable inhabitants
whom chance had preserved, or tile sword of the
enemy, wearied with destroying, had spared.
The conquerors who firift fettled in the coun-
tries which they had waited, were expelled or
exterminated by new invaders, who, coming
from regions farther removed from the civilized
parts of the world, were fill more fierce and
rapacious. This brought fresh calamities upon
mankind, which did not cease until the north,
by pouring forth successive swarms, was drained
of people, and could no longer furnish infitru-
ments of deftruaion. Famine and pestilence,
which always march in the train of war, when
it ravages with such inconsiderate cruelty, raged
in every part of Europe, and completed its sus-
ferings. If a man were called to fix upon the
period in the history of the world, during which
½he condition of the human race was most cala-
mitous and affliAed, he would, without hefita-
tion, name that which elapsed from the death of
Theodosius the Great, to the eitablilhment of

the

authors, who beheld that feene of desolation,
labour and are at a loss for expressions to de-
scribe the horror of it. The Scourge of God, the
DeJroyer ofNations, are the dreadful epithets by
which they diftinguilh the molu noted of the bar-
barous leaders; and they compare the ruin which
they had brought on the world, to the havoc
occasioned by earthquakes, conflagrations, or
deluges, the mouf formidable and fatal cala-
mities which the imagination of man can con-
ceive.

But no expressions can convey so perfed an

idea of the deltruaive progress of the barbarians
as that which must ifrike an attentive observer
when he contemplates the total change which
he will discover in the dlate of Europe, after it
began to recover fume degree of tranquillity,
towards the close of the iixth century. The
Saxons were by that time maiters of the southern
and more fertile provinces of Britain; the Franks
of Gaul; the Huns of Pannonia; the Goths of
Spain; the Goths and Lombards of Italy and
the adjacent provinces. Very faint vestiges of
the Roman policy, jurisprudence, arts, or lite-
rature remained. New forms of government,
new laws, new manners, new dresses, new lan-
guages, and new names of men and countries,
were every where introduced. To make a great
or sudden alteration with refpe& to any of these,
unless where the ancient inhabitants of a country
have been almolt totally exterminated, has proved
an undertaking beyond the power of the greatest

a Theodosius died A. D. 395, the reign of Alboinus in

Lombardy began A. D. 5715 Cao thatshis period was 176 years.

conquerors.

conquerors [D]. The great change which the
settlement of the barbarous nations occasioned in
the fiate of Europe, may therefore be considered
as a more decisive proof than even the testimony
of contemporary hiftorians,of the defitrudive vio-
lence with which these invaders carried on their
conquelts, and of the havoc which they had
made from one extremity of this quarter of the
globe to the other [E].

In the obscurity of the chaos occasioned by

this general wreck of nations, we muit search
for the feeds of order, and endeavour to discover
tile firfi rudiments of the policy and laws now
efiablifhed in Europe. To this source the his-
torians of its different kingdoms have attempted,
though with' less attention and industry than the
importance of the enquiry merits, to trace back
the inflitutions and customs peculiar to their
countrymen. It is not my province to give a
minute detail of the progress of government and
manners in each particular nation, whose tranf-
aaions are the objea of the following history.
But, in order to exhibit a just view of the slate
of Europe at the opening of the sixteenth cen-
tury, it is necessary to look back, and to con-
template the condition of the northern nations
upon their firf' settlement in those countries
which they occupied. It is necessary to mark
the great steps by which they advanced from
barbarism to refinement, and to point out those
general principles and events which, by their
uniform as well as extensive operation, con-
duaed all of them to that degree of improve-
ment in policy and in manners which they had

LDJ NoTr IV. - [EJ NOTE V. attained

reign.

When nations fubjea to despotic government

make conqueffs, these serve only to extend the
dominion and the power of their mailer. But
armies composed of freemen conquer for them-
selves, not for their leaders. The people who
overturned the Roman empire, and fettled in
its various provinces, were of the latter class.
Not only the different nations that issued from
the north of Europe, which has always been con-
fidered as the feat of liberty, but the Huns and
Alans who inhabited part of those countries,
which have been marked out as the peculiar
region of servitude b, enjoyed freedom and in-
dependence in such a high degree as seems to be
fearcely compatible with a fiate of social union,
or with the subordination necessary to maintain
it. They followed the chieftain who led them
forth in quest of new settlements, not by con.
ftraint, but from choice; not as soldiers whom
he could order to march, but as volunteers who
offered to accompany him [F]. They considered
their conqueffs as a common property, in which
all had a title to share, as all had contributed to
acquire them [G]. In what manner, or by what
principles, they divided among them the lands
which they seized, we cannot now determine
with any certainty. There is no nation in Eu-
rope whose records reach back to this remote
period; and there is little information to be got
from the uninfitruaive and meagre chronicles,
compiled by writers ignorant of the true endr

i' De I'efprit des loux, liv. 17. ch. 3.
[ 1F]. Norz VI. [G3 NoTr VII.
voL. i. e and

history.

This new division of property, however, toge-

ther with the maxims and manners to which it
gave rife, gradually introduced a species of go-
vernment formerly unknown. This singular in-
ititution is now distinguished by the name of the
Feudal SyJiem: and though the barbarous nations
which framed it, fettled in their new territories
at different times, came from different countries,
spoke various languages, and were under the
command of separate leaders, the feudal policy
and laws were efitablifhed, with little variation,
in every kingdom of Europe. This amazing
uniformity hath induced some authors C to believe
that all these nations, notwithitanding so many
apparent circumstances of diftinaion, were ori-
ginally the fame people. But it may be aferibed,
with greater probability, to the similar state of
society and of manners to which they were ac-
cuftomed in their native countries, and to the
similar situation in which they found themselves
on taking poffeffion of their new domains.

As the conquerors of Europe had their acqui.

fitions to maintain, not only against such of the
ancient inhabitants as they had spared, but againfW
the more formidable inroads of new invaders,
feif-defence was their chief care, and seems to
have been the chief objea of their first inititu-
tions and policy. Infread of those loose affoci-
ations, which, though they scarcely diminished
their personal independence, had been fufficient
for their security while they remained in their

c Procop. de bello Vandal, ap. Script. Byz. edits Ven.

vol. p. 3r5iin original

original countries, they Law the necessity of unit-
ing in more close confederacy, and of relinquilh.
ing some of their private rights in order to attain
public safety. Exery freeman, upon receivig
a portion of the lands which were divided, hound
himself to appear in arms against the enemies of
the community. This military service was the
condition upon which he received and held his
lands; and as they were exempted from every
other burden, that tenure, among a warlike
people, was deemed both easy and honourable.-
The king, or general, who led them to conquest,
continuing still to be the head of the colony,
had, of course, the largeRt portion allotted to
him. Having thus acquired the means of re-
warding paRt services, as well as of gaining new
adherents, he parcelled out his lands with this
view, binding those on whom they were bestowed
to resort to his ifandard with a number of men
in proportion to the extent of the territory which
they received, and to bear arms in his defence.
His chief officers imitated the example of the
sovereign, and, in diffributing portions of their
lands among their dependents, annexed the fame
condition to the grant. Thus a feudal kingdom
resembled a military eftablifihment, rather than a
civil institution. The viAorious army, cantoned
out in the country which it had seized, conti-
nued ranged under its proper officers, and Lub-
erdinate to military command. The names of a
Soldier and of a freeman were synonymous d
Every proprietor of land, girt with a sword, was
ready to march at the summons of his superior,
and to take the field against the common enemy.

d On Lnge Gloffar. icC. Miles.

S2 . Bnt

admirably calculated for defence againit the as-
faults of any foreign power, its provisions for the
interior order and tranquillity of society were
extremely defeaive. The principles of disorder
and corruption are discernible in that conftitu-
tion under its best and most perfea form. They
soon unfolded themselves, and, spreading with
rapidity through every part of the system, pro.
duced the most fatal effeds. The bond of po-
litical union was extremely feeble; the sources
of anarchy were innumerable. The monarchical
and ariftocratical parts of the constitution, having
no intermediate power to balance them, were
perpetually at variance, and juftling with each
other. The powerful vassals of the crown soon
extorted a confirmation for life of those grants of
land, which being'at first purely gratuitous, had
been bestowed only during pleasure. Not fatif-
fled with this, they prevailed to have them con-
verted into hereditary poffeflions. One flep more
completed their ufurpations, and rendered them
unalienable [H.] With an ambition no less en-
terprifing, and more preposterous, they appro-
priated to themselves titles of honour, as well as
offices of power or truit. These personal marks of
diitinaion, which the public admiration beftows
on illufirious merit, or which the public con-
fidence confers on extraordinary abilities, were
annexed to certain families, and transmitted like
fiefs, from father to son, by hereditary right.
The crown vassals having thus secured the pof-
session of their lands and dignities, the nature of
the feudal inflitutions, which though founded on

[H] NOTE VIII.

fubor-

to new, and frill more dangerous encroachments
on the prerogatives of the sovereign. They ob-
tained the power of supreme jurifdiaion, both
civil and criminal, within their own territories;
the right of coining money; together with the
privilege of carrying on war againit their private
enemies, in their own name, and by their own
authority. The ideas of political fubjedion were
almost entirely loft, and frequently fearce any
appearance of feudal subordination remained.
Nobles, who had acquired fisch enormous pow.
er, scorned to confider themselves as fubjeAs.
They aspired openly at being independent: the
bonds which conneacd the principal members of
the confritution with the crown, were dissolved.
A kingdom, considerable in name and in extent,
was broken into as many separate principalities
as it contained powerful barons. A thousand
Faufes of jealousy and discord fubfis{ed among
them, and gave rife to as many wars. Every
country in Europe, wasted or kept in continual
alarm during these endless contests, was filled
with castles and places of firength ercted for
the security of the inhabitants; not against so-
reign force, but against internal hostilities. An
universal anarchy, deifruaive, in a great measure,
of all the advantages which men expea to de-
rive from society, prevailed. The people, the
inoft numerous as well as the most useful part of
the community, were either reduced to a fiate
of adual servitude, or treated with the fame in-
folence and rigour as if they had been degraded
into that wretched condition [I]. The king,
itripped of almost every prerogative, and without

[IJ NOTe IX.

c 3 authority

authority to ena& or to execute salutary laws,
could neither proted the innocent, nor punish
the guilty. The nobles, superior to all refiraint,
harassed each other with perpetual wars, oppref.
fed their fellow-fubjeds, and humbled or insulted
their sovereign. To crown all, time gradually
fixed, and rendered venerable this pernicious sys.
tem, which violence had eftablithed.

Such was the fiate of Europe with refpea to

the interior adminifiration of government from
the seventh to the eleventh century. All the
external operations of its various states, during
this period, were, of course, extremely feeble,
A kingdom dismembered, and torn with differin
sion, without any common interell to rouse, or
any common head to condua its force, was in-
capable of ading with vigour. Almost all the
wars in Europe, during the ages which I have
mentioned, were trifling, indecisive, and produc-
tive of no considerable event. They resembled
the short incursions ofpirates or banditti, rather
than the iteady operations of a regular army.
Every baron, at the head of his vassals, carried
on some petty enterprize, to which he was
prompted by his own ambition or revenge. The
iiate itself, destitute of union, either remained
altogether ina~ive, or if it attempted to make
any effort, that served only to discover its impo-
tence. The superior genius of Charlemagne, it
is true, united all these disjointed and discordant
members, and forming them again into one
body, refrored to government that degree of
adtivity which diftinguilhes his reign, and renders
the tranfadions of it objeds not only of atten-
tion but of admiration to more enlightened
times. But this fHate of union and vigour, not

being

short duration. Immediately upon his death,
the spirit which animated and sustained the vait
Lyftem which he had established, being with-
drawn, it broke into pieces. All the calamities
which flow from anarchy and discord, returning
with additional force, affliaed the different king-
doms into which his empire was split. From
that time to the eleventh century, a succession
of uninteresting events; a series of wars, the
motives as well as the consequences of which
were unimportant, fill and deform the annals of
all the nations in Europe.

To these pernicious effeas of the feudal anar-

chy may be added its fatal influence on the cha-
raaer and improvement of the human mind. If
men do not enjoy the proteaion of regular go-
vernment, together with the expedation of per-
fonal security, which naturally flows from it,
they never attempt to make progress in science,
nor aim at attaining refinement in taste or in
manners. That period of turbulence, oppref-
lion, and rapine, which I have described, was ill
suited to favour improvement in any of these.
In less than a century after the barbarous nations
fettled in their new conquests, almcft all the es-
seas of the knowledge and civility, which the
Romans had spread through Europe, disappeared.
Not only the arts of elegance, which minister to
luxury, and are supported by it, but many of
the useful arts, without which life can fearcely
be considered as comfortable, were negleAed or
loft. Literature, science, taste, were words little
in use during the ages which we are contem-
plating; or, if they occur at any time, eminence

1n

in them is aScribed to persons and produaions
so contemptible, that it appears their true import
was little underflood. Persons of the higheRt
rank, and in the most eminent Rations, could
not read or write. Many of the clergy did not
underfdand the breviary which they were obliged
daily to recite; some of them could scarcely
read it [K]. The memory of padt tranfadions
was, in a great degree, loft, or preserved in an-
nals filled with trifling events, or legendary tales.
Even the codes of laws, published by the several
nations which efablifhed themselves in the dif-
ferent countries of Europe, fell into disuse,
while, in their place, cudnoms, vague and capri-
cious, were fubdituted. The human mind,
pegLeded, uncultivated, and depressed, conti.
rtued in the most profound ignorance. Europe,
during four centuries, produced few authors
who merit to be read, either on account of the
elegance of their composition, or the jufdnefs
and novelty of their sentiments. There are few
inventions, useful or ornamental to society, of
which that long period can boaRt.

Even the Chrifdian religion, though its pre-

cepts are delivered, and its infditutions are fixed
in scripture, with a precision which Ihould have
exempted them from being misinterpreted or
corrupted, degenerated, during those ages of
darkness, into an illiberal fuperdtition. The
barbarous nations, when converted to Chrifdian-
ity, changed the objed, not the spirit, of
their religious worihip. They endeavoured to
conciliate the favour of the true God by means
not unlike to those which they had employed in

[K] NOTE X.

order

aspiring to fanaity and viitue, which alone can
render men acceptable to the great Author of
order and of excellence, they imagined that they
satisfied every obligation of duty by a scrupulous
observance of external ceremonies [L]. Reli-
gion, according to their conception of it, com-
prehended nothing else; and the rites, by which
they persuaded themselves that they should gain
the favour of heaven, were of such a nature as
might have been expeded from the rude ideas
of the ages which devised and introduced them.
They were either so unmeaning as to be alto-
gether unworthy of the Being to whole honour
they were consecrated; or so abfiurd as to be
a disgrace to reason and humanity [M]. Charle-
magne in France, and Alfred the Great in Eng-
land, endeavoured to dispel this darkness, and
gave their fubjeas a short glimpse of light and
knowledge. But the ignorance of the age was
too powerful for their efforts and inititutions.
The darkness returned, and fettled over Europe
more thick and heavy than before.

As the inhabitants of Europe, during these

centuries, were firangers to the arts which em-
bellifh a polished age, they were destitute of the
virtues which abound among people who con-
tinue in a fiinple slate. Force of mind, a sense
of personal dignity, gallantry in enterprize, in-
vincible perseverance in execution, contempt of
danger and of death, are the charaaerillic virtues
of uncivilized nations. But these are all the off-
spring of equality and independence, both which
the feudal inilitutions had deftroved. The spirit

[LI NOTE XI. [I% NOTE XII.

of

of domination corrupted the nobles; the yoke
of servitude depressed the people; the generous
sentiments inspired by a sense of equality were
extinguished, and hardly any thing remained to
be a check on ferocity and violence. Human so-
ciety is in its mou corrupted state, at that period
when men have loft their original independence
and simplicity of manners, but have not attained
that degree of refinement which introduces a
Lense of decorum and of propriety in condu&,
as a restraint pn thpfe passions which lead to
heinous crimes. Accordingly, a greater number
of those atrocious adions, which fill the mind of
man with astonishment and horror, occur in the
biftory of the centuries under review, than in
that of any period of the fame extent in the an-
zals of Europe. If we open the history of Gre-
gory of Tours, or of any contemporary author,
we meet with a series of deeds of cruelty, per-
fidy, and revenge, so wild and enormous as almost
to exceed belief.

But, according to the observation of an ele-

gant and profound historian p, there is an ulti-
nate point ps depression, as well as of exaltation,
from which human affairs naturally return in a
pontrary progress, and beyond which they never
pass either in their advancement or decline.
When defeas, either in the form or in the ad-
ministration of government, occasion such dif-
prders in society as are exceflive and intolerable,
it becomes the common interest to discover and
to apply such remedies as will most effeaually
reihove them. Slight inconveniences may be
long overlooked or endured; but when abtfes

e Ffne's Hi1tory of England, vpl. ii. p. 44'-

grow

grow to a certain pitch, the society muf go to
ruins or muff attempt to reform them. The dif-
orders in the feudal fytem, together with the
corruption of taste and manners consequent upon
these, which had gone on increasing during a
long course of years, seemed to have attained
their utmost point of excess towards the close
of tile eleventh century. From that sra, we
may date the return of government and manners
in a contrary dire6tion, and can trace a succession
of causes and events which contributed, some
with a nearer and more conspicuous, others with
a more remote and less perceptible influence, to
abolish confusion and barbarism, and to introduce
order, regularity, and refinement.

In pointing out and explaining these causes

and events, it is not necessary to observe the
order of time with a chronological accuracy; it
is of more importance to keep in view their
mutual connecdion and dependence, and to fhiew
how the operation of one event, or one cause,
prepared the way for another, and augmented
its influence. We have hitherto been contem-
plating the progress of that darkness, which
spread over Europe, from its firff approach, to
the period of greatest obscuration; a more plea-
sant exercise begins here; to observe the firff
dawvnings of returning light, to mark the various
accelfions by which it gradually increased and
advanced towards the full splendor of day.

I. The Ciufades, or expeditions in order to

rescue the Holy Land out of the hands of
infidels, seem to be the first event that roused
Europe from the lethargy in which it had been
long funk, and that tended to introduce any
considerable change in government or in man-

ners.

those places which have been diftinguilhed by
being the residence of any illuffrious personage,.
or the scene of any great tranfadion, with some
degree of delight and veneration. To this prin-
ciple muff he ascribed the superstitious devotion
with which Christians, from the earliest ages of
the church, were accuflomed to visit that coun-
try which the Almighty had feleAed as the in-
heritance of his favourite people, and in which
the Son of God had accomplished the redemp-
tion of mankind. As this diffant pilgrimage
could not be performed without considerable
expence, fatigue, and danger, it appeared the
more meritorious, and came to be coofidered as
an expiation for almost every crime. An opi-
nion which spread with rapidity over Europe
about the close of the tenth and beginning of
the eleventh century, and which gained universal
credit, wonderfully augmented the number of
credulous pilgrims, and increased the ardour
with which they undertook this useless voyage.
The thousand years, mentioned by St. John ,
were supposed to be accomplished, and the end
of the world to be at hand. A general con-
fiernation seized mankind; many relinquished
their poffefhions; and abandoning their friends
and families, hurried with precipitation to the
Holy Land, where they imagined that Christ
would quickly appear to judge the world g

f Revel. xx 2, 3, 4.
a Chronic. Will. Godelli ap. Bouquet Recuhel des Hifto-

riens de France, tom. x. p. 262. Vita Abbonis, ibid.
p. 332. Chronic S. Pantnlionis ap. Eccard. Corp. Scrip.
mecdi cvi, vol. i. p. 909. Annalitto Saxo, ibid. 576.

While

they had encouraged the resort of pilgrims to Je-
rufalem; and considered this as a beneficial Spe-
cies of commerce, which brought into their do.
minions gold and hiver, and carried nothing out
of them but relics and consecrated trinkets. But
the Turks having conquered Syria about the
rmiddle of the eleventh century, pilgrims were
exposed to outrages of every kind from these
fierce barbarians h. This change happening pre-
cifely at the junaure when the panic terror,
wihich I have mentioned, rendered pilgrimages
mout frequent, filled Europe with alarm and in-
dignation. Every person who returned from
Palestine related the dangers which he had en-
countered, in visiting the holy city, and de-
Scribed with exaggeration the cruelty and vex.
ations of the Turks.

When the minds of men were thus prepared,

the zeal of a fanatical monk, who conceived the
idea of leading all the forces of Chri'tendom
against the infidels, and of driving them out of
the Holy Land by violence, was Sufficient to
give a beginning to that wild enterprize. Peter
the hermit, for that was the name of this martial
apoffle, ran from province to province with a cru-
cifix in his hand, exciting princes and people to
this Holy War, and wherever he came kindled
the fame enthusiastic ardour for it with which he
himself was animated. The council of Placen-
tia, where upwards of thirty thousand persons
were assembled, pronounced the scheme to have
been fuggefied by the immediate inspiration of

h Jo. Dan. Schoepflini de factis Gallorum in orientem ex.

peditionibus, p. 4. Argen:. 5726. 4.to.

Von.. i. heaveb.

numerous, as soon as the measure was proposed,
all cried out with one voice, " It is the will of
" God." Persons of all ranks catched the con-
tagion; not only the gallant nobles of that age,
with their martial followers, whom xe may sup-
pose apt to be allured by the boldness of a ro-
mantic enterprize, but men in the more humble
and pacific Rtations of life; ecclefiaftics of every
order, and even women and children, engaged
with emulation in an undertaking, which was
deemed sacred and meritorious. If we may be-
lieve the concurring testimony of contemporary
authors, fix millions of persons assumed the
crofs', which was the badge that diftingnifhed
such as devoted themselves to this holy warfare.
All Europe, says the Princess Anna Comne-
na, torn up from the foundation, seemed ready
to precipitate itself in one united body upon
Asia I. Nor did the fumes of this enthusiastic
zeal evaporate at once: the frenzy was as lashing
as it was extravagant. During two centuries,
Europe seems to have had no obje& but to reco-
ver, or keep poffeffion of, the Holy Land; and
through that period valR armies continued to
march thither [N].

The firit efforts of valour, animated by en-

thufiafm, were irresistible; part of the lesser Asia,
all Syria and Palestine, were wrested from the in-
fidels; the banner of the cross was displayed on
Mount Sion; Confantinople, the capital of the

I Fulcherius Carnotenfis ap. Bongarfii Gella Dei per Fran-

gos, vol. i. 387. ealt. Han. 161a.

Ic Alexias, lib. x. ap. Byz, script. vol, Ii. p. zz4.
[NJ NonTE XIii Christian

seized by a body of those adventurers, who had
taken arms againit the Mahometans, and an earl
of Slanders, and his descendants, kept poffeflion
of the imperial throne during half a century.
But though the firif impression of the Crusaders
was lb unexpeAed that they made their conquests
with great ease, they found infinite difficulty in
preserving them. Eitablifhments so distant from
Europe, surrounded by warlike nations, animated
with fanatical zeal fearcely inferior to that of the
Crusaders themselves, were perpetually in danger
of being overturned. Before the expiration of
the thirteenth century, [5291,] the Christians
were driven out of all their Asiatic poffeflions, in
acquiring of which incredible numbers of men
had perilbed, and immense sums of money had
been walted. The only common enterprize in
which the European nations ever engaged, and
which they all undertook with equal ardour, re-
mains a singular monument of human folly.

But from these expeditions, extravagant as

they were, beneficial consequences followed,
which had neither been foreseen nor expeaed.
In their progress towards the Holy Land, the
followers of the cross marched through countries
better cultivated, and more civilized than their
own. Their firit rendezvous was commonly in
Italy, in which Venice, Genoa, Pisa, and other
cities, had begun to apply themselves to com-
merce, and had made conliderable advances to-
wards wealth as well as refinement. They em-
barked there, and landing in Dalmatia, pursued
their route by land to Conitantinaple. Though
the military spirit had been long extinA in the

n a caftern

eastern Empire, and a despotism of the worst
species had annihilated almost every public virtue,
yet Constantinople, having never felt the deftruc-
tive rage of the barbarous nations, was the great-
eft, as well as the molt beautiful city in Europe,
and the only one in which there remained any
image of the ancient elegance in manners and
arts. The naval power of the eastern Empire
was considerable. Manufatures of the moit cu-
rious fabric were carried on in its dominions.
Constantinople was the chief mart in Europe for
the commodities of the East Indies. Although
the Saracens and Turks had torn from the Em-
pire many of its richest provinces, and had re-
duced it within very narrow bounds, yet great
wealth flowed into the capital from these various
sources, which not only cherished such a taste
for magnificence, but kept alive foch a relish for
the sciences, as appears considerable, when com-
pared with what was known in other parts of
Europe. Even in Asia, the Europeans, who
had assumed the cross, found the remains of the
knowledge and arts which the example and en-
couragement of the Caliphs had diffufed through
their empire. Although the attention of the
hiitorians of the Crofades was fixed on other ob-
jeds than the state of society and manners among
the nations which they invaded, although most
of them had neither taste nor discernment enough
to deferibe these, they relate, however, such fig-
nal aAs of humanity and generosity in the con-
dud of Saladin, as well as some other leaders of
the Mahometans, as give us a very high idea of
their manners. It was not pofEble for the Cru-
faders to travel through so many countries, and

to

to behold their various cuffoms and institutions,
without acquiring information and improvement.
Their views enlarged; their prejudices wore off;
new ideas crowded into their minds; and they
muff have been sensible, on many occaiions, of
the rufficity of their own manners, when comn.
pared with those of a more polilhed people.
Thele impreflions were not so flight as to be es-
faced upon their return to their native countries.
A close intercourse fubfifled between the east
and werl during two centuries ; new armies were
continually marching from Europe to Aiia,
while former adventurers returned home and im-
ported manyof the cuffoms to which theyhad been
familiarized by a long residence abrpad. Accord-
ingly, we discover, soon after the commence-
ment of the Crusades, greater splendour in the
courts of princes, greater pomp in public cere-
monies, a more refined take in pleasure and
amusements, together with a more romantic fin-
rit of enterprize spreading gradually over Europe;
and to these wild expeditions, the effed of super-
fitrion or folly, we owe the first gleams of light
which tended to dispel barbarifin and ignorance.

Butthefebeneficial consequences of the Crusades

took place slowly; their influence upon the Rtate of
property, and consequently of power, in the dif-
ferent kingdoms of Europe, was more immediate
as well as discernible. The nobles who assumed
the cross, and bound themselves to march to the
Holy Land, soon perceived that great sums were
necessary towards defraying the expences of such
a diffant expedition, and enabling them to ap-
pear with suitable dignity at the head of their
vassals. But the genius of the feudal fyffem was

o3 averse

and fubjeds in that age were unaccuofomed to
pay them. No expedient remained for levying
the sums requisite, but the sale of their poffel-
lions. As men were inflamed with romantic ex-
peaations of the splendid conqueffs which they
hoped to make in Asia, and poffeffed with such
zeal for recovering the Holy Land as swallowed
up every other paffioan, they relinquished their an-
cient inheritances without any reluaancc, and for
prices far below their value, that they might sally
forth as adventurers 4n quest of new settlements
in unknown countries. The monarchs of the
great kingdoms in the welt, none of whom had
engaged in the sirs Crusade, eagerly seized this
opportunity of annexing considerable territories
to their crowns at small expencel. Befidcs this,
several great barons, who perifhied in the Holy
War, having left no heirs, their fiefs reverted of
course to their refpedive forereigos; and by these
accefiions of property, as well as power taklrn
from the one scale and thrown into the other,
the regal authority rose in proportion as that of
the ariflocracy declined. The absence, too, of
many potent vassals, accustomed to controul and
give law to their sovereigns, afforded them an
opportunity of extending their prerogal ive, and
of acquiring a degree of weight :n the conditu-
tion which they did not formerly poffefe. To
these circumfiances, we may add, that as all who
affimed the cross were taken under the imme-
diate proteeion of the 'church, and its heaviefi
anathemas were denounced againfd fsch as (hould

I Wilelm. Malmnibur. Gulhurt. Absa:2 p, Borgarf. vol. i.

481.

- dfoic

disquiet or annoythofe who had devoted themfelvcs
to this service; the private quarrels and ho{Iilities
which banijhed tranquillity from a feudal king-
dom, were fiofpeuded or extinguished; a more
general and fleady admini{iration ofjuftice began
to be introduced, and fume advances were made
towards the eliablifhiment of regular government
in the several kingdoms of Europe rn [0].

The commercial effeLts of the Crofades were

not less considerable than those which I have al-
ready mentioned. The first armies under the
fiandard of the cross, which Peter the hermit and
Godfrey of Bouillon led through Germany and
Hungary to Confiantinople, ftfiered so much by
the length of the march, as well as by the fierce-
aefs of the barbarous people who inhabited those
countries, that it deterred others from taking the
fame route; and rather than encounter so many
dangers, they chose to go by sea. Venice, Ge-
noa, and Pisa furnithed the trafports on which
they embarked. The faum which these cities re-
ceived merely for freight from such numerous ar-
anies was immenfe". This, however, was but a
inall part of what they gained by the expedi-
tions to the Holy Land; the Crusaders contract-
ed with them for military fIores and provisions;
Iheir fleets kept on the coast as the armies ad-
Tanced by land; and supplying them with what-
ever was wanting, engrossed all the profits of a
'hranch of commerce which, in every age, has
been extrenely lucrative. The success which at-

an Du Cange GlofTar. voc. Crucrrgnatus. Guil. Abbas

a. Bangarf. vol. iA 480. 4AS.

f0l NoTe XIV.

- turanori Antiqiit. Italec. medii aev, vol. ii. 905.

tende4

of advantages still more permanent. There are
charters yet extant, containing grants to the
Venetians, Pifans, and Genoese of the most ex-
tensive immunities in the several settlements whkch
the Christians made in Asia. All the commoqd-
ties which they imported or exported are there-
by exempted from every imposition; the proper-
ty of entire suburbs in some of the maritime
towns, and of large streets in others, is vefited in
them; and all questions, arising among persons
fettled within their precinas, or who traded un-
der their proteaion, are appointed to be tried
by their own laws, and by judges of their own
appointment 0. When the Crusaders seized
Constantinople, and placed one of their own
leaders on the imperial throne, the Italian States
were likewise gainers by that event. The Vene-
tians, who had planned the enterprize, and took
a considerable part in carrying it into execution,
did not neglea to secure to themselves the chief
advantages redounding from its success. They
snade themselves masters of part of the ancient
Peloponnefus in Greece, together with some of
the modt fertile islands in the Archipelago. Ma-
ny valuable branches of the commerce, which
formerly centered in Constantinople, were tranf-
ferred to Venice, Genoa, or Pisa. Thus a fuc-
cession of events, occasioned by the Holy War,
opened various sources, from which wealth flow-
ed in such abundance into these cities P, as enabled
them, in concurrence with another inifitution,

0 Muratori Antiquit. Italic. mcdii aevi, vol. ii. 906, &c.
P Viilehardouin Hilt. de Conitant, fous l'fmpereurs

Franfois, 1o05 &c. which

their own liberty and independence.

II. The institution to which I allhided was the

forming of cities into communities, corporations,
or bodies politic, and granting them the privilege
of municipal jurifdicfion, which contributed
more, perhaps, than any other cause, to intro-
duce regular government, police, and arts, and
to diffiiie them over Europe. The feudal go-
vernment had degenerated into a system of op-
pression. The ufurpations of the nobles were
become unbounded and intolerable: they had re-
dnced the great body of the people into a state of
adual servitude: the condition of thoDe dignified
with the name of freemen, was often little pre-
ferable to that of the other. Nor was ftch op-
pression the portion of those alone who dwelt is
the country, and were employed in culcivating
the ellate of their mailer. Cities and villages
found it necessary to hold of some great lord, on
whom they might depend for proteRion, and
became no less fubjea to his arbitrary jurifdic.
tion. The inhabitants were deprived of those
rights, which, in social life, are deemed molt na
tural and inalienable. They could not difpole of
the effeds which their own industry had ac-
quired, either by a latter will, or by any deed
executed during their life s. They had no right
to appoint guardians for their children during
their minority. They were not permitted to
marry without purchasing the consent of the

q Dlcherli Spicelkg. tom. xi. 374, 375. edic. in 4to. Or.

dondnces des Rois de France, tom. iii. 204. No. S. 6r

lord

had commenced a law-suit, they durit not termi.
nate it by an accommodation, because that would
have deprived the lord, in whose court they
pleaded, of the perquisites due to him on pailing
fentence'. Services of various kinds, no less
disgraceful than oppressive, were exaaded from
them without mercy or moderation. The spirit
of industry was checked in some cities by ab.
surd regulations, and in others by unreasonable
exadlions; nor would the narrow and oppreflive
maxims of a military aristocracy have permitted
it ever to rife to any degree of height or vigour'.

But as soon as the cities of Italy began to

turn their attention towards commerce, and to
conceive fume idea of the advantages which they
might derive from it, they became impatient to
thake off the yoke of their insolent lords, and to
establish among themselves such a free and equal
government, as would render property secure,
and indufry flourilhing. The German empe-
rors, especially those of the Franconian and
Suabian lines, as the feat of their government
was far difiant from Italy, poffeffed a feeble and
imperfed jurifdi;tion in that country. Their
perpetual quarrels, either with the popes or with
their own turbulent vaffale, diverted their atten.
tion from the interior police of Italy, and gave

r Ordonances des Rois de France, tom. i. p. 22. torn iu.

so3. No. I. Murat. Antiq. -Ital. vol. iv. p. 20. Dacher.
Spicel vol. xi. 3255 34'.

s Dacher. Spicel. vol. ix. r82.
t M. l'Abbe Mably obfervat. fur l'hift. de France, tom.

ii, p. P. 96.

conitant

cumftances encouraged the inhabitants of some
of the Italian cities, towards the beginning of
the eleventh century, to assume new privileges,
to unite together more closely, and to form
themselves into bodies politic under the govern-
ment of laws established by common consent u.
The rights, which many cities acquired by bold
or fortunate ufurpations, others purchased from
the emperors, who deemed themselves gainers
when they received large sums for immunities
which they were no longer able to withhold;
and some cities obtained them gratuitously, from
the generosity or facility of the princes on whom
they depended. The great increase of wealth
which the Crusades brought into Italy occa-
fioned a new kind of fermentation and adtivity m
the minds of the people, and excited such a ge-
neral passion for liberty and independence, that,
before the conclusion of the lait Crusade, all the
considerable cities in that country had either pur-
chased or had extorted large immunities from the
emperors [P].

This innovation was not long known in Italy

before it made its way into France. Louis-le
Gros, in order to create some power that might
counterbalance those potent vafials who con-
trouled, or gave law to the crown, firif adopted
the plan of conferring new privileges on the
towns situated within his own domaine. These
privileges were called charters of community, by
which he enfranchised the inhabitants, abolished
all marks of servitude, and formed them into

a Murat. Antiq. Ital. vol. iv. p. 5. [P] NOTE XV.

cor-

corporations or bodies politic, to be governed by
a council and magistrates of .their own nomsna-
tion. These magifIrates had the right of ad-
ministering justice within their own precinlts, of
levying taxes, of embodying and training to arms
the militia of the town, which took the field
when required by the sovereign, under the com.
imand of officers appointed by the community.
The great barons imitated the example of their
monarch, and granted like immunities to the
towns within their territories. They had waited
fuels great foms in their expeditions to the Holy
Land, that they were eager to lay hold on this
new expedient for railing money, by the fiale of
of those charters of liberty. Though the infli.
tution of communities was as repugnant to their
maxims of policy, as it was adverse to their
power, they disregarded remote consequences, in
order to obtain present relief. In less than two
centuries, servitude was abolished in most of the
towns in France, and they became free corpora.
tions, instead of dependant villages, without ju-
riifdiaion or privileges [Q]. Much about the
fame period, the great cities in Germany began to
acquire like immunities, and laid the foundation
of their present liberty and independence [R].
The pradice spread quickly over Europe, and
was adopted in Spain, England, Scotland, and
all the other feudal kingdoms [S].

The good effeds of this new inflitution were

immediately felt, and its influence on govern-
ment as well as manners was no less extensive
than salutary. A great body of the people was,

(Q] NOTE XVI. [R3 NOTE XVII.
[SJ NOTE XVII.

released

released from servitude, and from all the arbi-
trary and grievous impositions to which that
wretched condition had fubjeaed them. Towns,
upon acquiring the right of community, became
so many little republics, governed by known and
equal laws. Liberty was deemed such an effen'
tial and charaderiftic part in their constitution,
that if any slave took refuge in one of them, and
resided there during a year without being claim-
ed, he was inflantly declared a freeman, and ad-
mitted as a member of the community w.

As one part of the people owed their liberty

to the ereaion of communities, another was in-
debted to them for their security. Such had
been the ifate of Europe during several centuries,
that felf-prefervation obliged every man to court
the patronage of some powerful baron, and in
times of danger his cafie was the place to which
all resorted for safety. But towns surrounded with
walls, wlhofe inhabitants were regularly trained
to arms, and bound by interest, as well as by the
most solemn engagements, reciprocally to defend
each other, afforded a more commodious and fe-
cure retreat. The nobles began to be confilered
as of less importance when they ceased to be the
sole guardians to whom the people could look
up for proteAion againit violence.

If the nobility fuffered some diminution of

their credit and power by the privileges granted
to the cities, the crown acquired an increase of
both. As there were no regular troops kept on
foot in any of the feudal kingdoms, the monarch
could bring no army into the field, but what
was composed of soldiers furnished by the crown

w Statut. Humberti BellojociDacher. Spocel, vol, ix. s82.

zS5. Charta Comit. Forextf. ibid. 193.

vOL. I. £ valfals,

nor had he any finds for carrying on the public
service but such as they granted him with a very
sparing hand. BUt when the members of comr
munities were permitted to bear arms, and were
trained to the use of them, this in some degree
supplied the first defed,. and gave the crown the
command of a body of men, independent of its
great vaflals. The attachment of the cities to
their sovereigns, whom they refpeAed as the
firit authors of their liberties, and whom they
were obliged to court as the protetors of their
Immunities againil the domineering spirit of the
nobles, contributed somewhat towards removing
the fecnd evil, as, on many occasions, it pro-
cured the crown supplies of money, which added
new force to government ',

The acquisition of liberty made such a happy

change in the condition of all the members of
communities, as roused them from that inadtion
into which they had been funk by the wretched-
niefs of their former slate. The spirit of indufiry
revived. Commerce became an objea of atten-
tion, and began to flourifb. Population in-
creased. Independence was established; and
wealth fRowed into cities which had long been
the feat of poverty and opprelfion. Wealth was
accompanied by its usual attendants, ostentation
and luxury; and though the former was formal
and cumbersome, and the latter inelegant, they
kd gradually to greatrr refinement in manners,
and in the habits of life. Togetler with this
improvement in manners, a more regular fpe-
cies of government and police was introduced.

x Ordon. des Roii de France, tom. i. 60e. 785. tom. it.

As

occasions of intercourse among men increased,
statutes and regulations multiplied of course,
and all became sensible that their common safety
depended on observing them with exadnefs, and
on punilhing such as violated them, with promp-
titude and rigour. Laws and subordination, as
well as poliihed manners, taking their rife in
cities, diffufed themselves infeifibly through the
xeft of the society.

III. The inhabitants of cities, having obtain-

ed personal freedom and municipal jurifdiaion,
soon acquired civil liberty and political poweri
It was a fundamental principle in the feudal sys-
tem of policy, that no freeman couldbe fubjeaed
to new laws or taxes unless by his own consent.
In consequence of this, the vassals of every baron
were called to his court, in which they establish.
ed, by mutual consent, such regulations as they
deemed most beneficial to their small society, and
granted their superiors such supplies of money,
as were proportioned to their abilities, or to his
wants. The barons themselves, conformably to
the fame maxim, were admitted into the supreme
assembly of the nation, and concurred with the
sovereign in enaaing laws, or in impdfing taxes.
As the superior lord, according to the original
plan of feudal policy, retained the direci proper-
ty of those lands which he granted, in temporary
poffeffion, to his vassals; the law, even after
fiefs became hereditary, frill supposed this ori-
gitl praaice to subsist. The great council of
each nation, whether distinguished by the name
of a parliament, a diet, the Cortes, or the States-
general, was conmpofed entirely of such barons,

E 3 and

ofthe crown. Towns, whether situated within
the royal domaine or on the lands of a fubje&,
depended originally for proteaion on the lord of
whom they held. They had no legal name,
no political existence, which could entitle them
to be admitted into thelegiflative assembly, or
could give them any authority there. But as
soon as they were enfranchised, and formed into
bodies corporate, they became legal and inde-
pendent members of the constitution, and ac-
quired all the rights essential to freemen.
Amongst these, the most valuable was, the pri.
vilege of a deciiive-voice in enaaing public laws,
and granting national subsidies. It was natural
for cities, accustomed to a form of municipal go-
vernment, according to which no regulation
could be established within the community, and
no money could be raised but by their own con-
sent, to claim this privilege. The wealth, the
power, and consideration, which they acquired
on recovering their liberty, added weight to
their claim; and favourable events happened, or
fortunate conjunAures occurred, in the different
kingdoms of Europe, which facilitated their ob-
taining pofeffion of this important right. In
England, one of the first countries in which the
reprefentativcs of boroughs were admitted into
the great council of the nation, the barons who
took arms against Henry III. [A. D. 1265s
summoned them to attend parliament, in order
to add greater popularity to their party, and to
Itrengthen the barrier againit the encroachments
of regal power. In France, Philip the Fair, a
nmonarch no less sagacious than enterprising,

con-

considered them as inifruments which might be
employed with equal advantage to extend the
royal prerogative, to counterbalance the exorbi-
tant power of the nobles, and to facilitate the
imposition of new taxes. With thcfe views, he
introduced the deputies of such towns as were
formed into communities, into the States-gene-
ral of the nation Y. In the empire, the wealth
and immunities of the imperial cities placed them
on a level with the most considerable members of
the Germanic body. Conscious of their own pow.
cr and dignity, they pretended to the privilege
of forming a separate bench in the diet [A. D.
5293] ; and made good their pretension Z.

3ut in what way soever the representatives of

cities firit gained a place in the legislature, that
event had great influence on the form and genius
of government. It tempered the rigour of an-
ftocratical oppression with a proper mixture of
popular liberty: it secured to the great body of
the people, who had formerly no representatives,
a6ive and powerful guardians of their rights and
privileges: it established an intermediate power
between the king and the nobles, to which each
had recourse alternately, and which at some
times opposed the ufurpations of the former, on
other occasions checked the encroachments of
the latter. As soon as the representatives of
communities gained any degree of credit and in-
fluence in the legislature, the spirit of laws be-
came different from what it had formerly been;
it flowed from new principles; it was direaed

Y Pafquier Recherches de la France, p. 8r. edit. Par. x633.
s Pfefltc Abr6ge de l'hiftoire S& droit d'Allemagne, P.

4*8. 45r.

E 3o-

lic good, and the redress of grievances, were
phrases and ideas brought into use, and which
grew to be familiar in the statutes and jurifpru.
dence of the European nations. Almost all the
efforts in favour of liberty in every country of
Europe, have been made by this new power in
the legislature. In proportion as it rose to con-
fideration and influence, the severity of the ari-
itocratical spirit decreased; and the privileges of
the people became gradually more extensive, as
the ancient and exorbitant jurifdiEtion of the no.
bles was abridged [T].

IV. The inhabitants of towns having been de.

dared free by the charters of communities, that
part of the people which resided in the country,
and was employed in agriculture, began to recover
liberty by enfranchisement. During the rigour
of feudal government, as hath been already ob-
served, the great body of the lower people was re-
duced to servitude. They were slaves fixed to the
foil which they cultivated, and together with it
were transferred from one proprietor to another,
by sale, or by conveyance. The spirit of feudal
policy did not favour the enfranchisement of that
order of men. It was an established maxim, that
no vassal could legally diminish the value of a
fief, to the detriment of the lord from whom he
had received it. In consequence of this, manu-
Iniflion by the authority ofthe immediate mailer
was not valid; and unless it was confirmed by
the superior lord of whom he held, slaves belong-
ing to the fief did not acquire a complete right

[T] NoTz XJX.

to

alcend through all the gradations of feudal hold-
ing to the King, the lord paramount a. A form
of procedure so tedious and troublesome, dif-
couraged the praaice of manumiffilon. Domestic
or personal slaves often obtained liberty from the
humanity or beneficence of their maiters, to
whom they belonged in absolute property. The
condition of slaves fixed to the foil, was much
more unalterable.

But the freedom and independence which one

part of the people had obtained by the inifitution
of communities, inspired the other with the most
ardent desire of acquiring the fame privileges;
and their superiors, sensible of the various ad-
vantages which they had derived from their for-
mer concessions to their dependents, were less
unwilling to gratify them by the grant of new
immunities. The enfranchisement of slaves be-
came more frequent; and the monarchs of
France, prompted by neceflity no less than by
their inclination to reduce the power of the no-
bles, endeavoured to render it general [A. D.
1315 and 1318]. Louis X. and Philip the
Long ilfued ordinances, dcclaring, " That as
all men were by nature fleeborn, and as their
kingdom was called the kingdom of Franks,
they determined that it (hould be so in reality
as well as in name; therefore they appointed
that enfranchifements (hould be granted through.
out the whole kingdom, upon jufl and reason-
able conditions b." These edids were carried

a Etabliffemens de St. Louis, liv. ii. ch. 34. Ordon.

tom. i. 283, not. (a:.

Q Ordon. tom. i. p. 583. 653.

into

maine. The example of their sovereigns, to-
gether with the expedation of considerable sums
which they might raise by this expedient, led
many of the nobles to set their dependants at li.
berty ; and servitude was gradually abolilhed in
almost every province of the kingdom [U]. In
Italy, the establishment of republican govern,
ment in their great cities, the genius and max-
ims of which were extremely different from those
of the feudal policy, together with the ideas of
equality, which the progress of commerce had
rendered familiar, gradually introduced the prac-
tice of enfranchising the ancient predial slaves.
In some provinces of Germany, the persons who
had been fubjed to this species of bondage were
released; in others, the rigour of their date was
mitigated. In England, as the spirit of liberty
gained ground, the very name and idea of person-
al servitude, without any formal interposition of
the legislature to prohibit it, was totally banished.

The effe&'s of such a remarkable change in the

condition of so great a part of the people, could
not fail of being considerable and extensive. The
husbandman, mailer of his own induiry, and
lecure of reaping for himself the fruits of his
labour, became the farmer of the fame fields
where he had formerly been compelled to toil
for the benefit of another, The odious names
of master and of slave, the mod mortifying aud
depressing of all diftindions to human nature,
were abolished. New profpeas opened, and new
incitements to ingenuity and enterprize presented
themselves to those who were emancipated. The

[U] Noe

o ,

e'ped.

expe~tation of bettering their fortune, as well as
that of raising themselves to a more honourable
condition, concurred in calling forth their ac-
tivity and genius; and a numerous class of men,
who formerly had no political existence, and
were employed merely as infitruments of labour,
became useful citizens, and contributed towards
augmenting the force or riches of the society
which adopted them as members.

V. The various expedients which were em-

ployed in order to introduce a more regular,
equal, and vigorous adminjifration of justice,
contributed greatly towards the improvement of
society. What were the particular modes of
dispensing justice, in their several countries,
among the various barbarous nations, which over-
ran the Roman Empire, and took poffeffion of
its different provinces, cannot now be determined
with certainty. We may conclude, from the
form of government established among them, as
well as from their ideas concerning the nature of
society, that the authority of the magistrate was
extremely limited, and the independetice of in-.
dividuals proportionally great. History and re-
cords, as far as these reach back, justify this
conclusion, and represent the ideas and exercise
ofjuftice in all the countries of Europe, as little
different from those which must take place in the
most simple fhate of civil life. To maintain the
order and tranquillity of society by the regular
execution of known laws; to infli&t vengeance on
crimes destructive of the peace and safety of in-
dividuals, by a prosecution carried on in the
name and by the authority of the community;
to confider the punishment of criminals as a pub-
lic example to deter others from violating the

laws

laws; were objeEts of government little underilood
in theory, and less regarded in praaice. The
magistrate could hardly be said to hold the sword
of juitice; it was left in the hands of private per-
sons. Resentment was almost the sole motive
for prosecuting crimes; and to gratify that pas.
sion, was considered as the chief end in punish.
ing them. He who fuffered the wrong, was the
only person who had a right to pursue the ag.
greffor, and to exad or to remit the punishment.
From a system of judicial procedure, so crude
and defetive, that it seems to be scarcely com.
patible with the subsistence of civil society, dif6
order and anarchy flowed. Superifition con.
curred with this ignorance concerning the nature
of government, in obitruaing the adminifiration
ofjuftice, or in rendering it capricious and un-
equal. To provide remedies for these evils, so
as to give a more regular course to justice, was,
during several centuries, one great objeet of po-
litical wisdom. The regulations for this purpose
may be reduced to three general heads: To ex-
plain these, and to point out the manner in which
they operated, is an important article in the his.
tory of society among the nations of Europe.

I. The firdt considerable fdep towards establish-

ing an equal adminifdration of justice, was the
abolishment of the right which individuals claim-
ed of waging war with each other, in their own
name, and by their own authority. To repel
injuries, aisdto revenge wrongs, is no less natu-
ral to man, than to cultivate friendship: and
while society remains in its mos simple slate, the
former is considered as a personal right no less
alienable than the latter. Nor do men in this
situation deem that they have a title to redrds

their

the injuries done to those with whom they are
conneded, or in whole honour they are interest-
ed, and are no less prompt to avenge them. The
savage, how imperfedly soever he may compre-
hend the principles of political union, feels
warmly the sentiments of social affedion, and the
obligations arising from the ties of blood. On
the appearance of an injury or affront offered to
his family or tribe, he kindles into rage, and pur-
sues the authors of it with the keenest refeatment.
He conliders it as cowardly to exped redress
from any arm but his own, and as infamous to
give up to another the right of determilling what
reparation he (hould accept, or with what ven-
geance he should reft satisfied.

The maxims and praaice of all uncivilized na-

tions, with refpe& to the prosecution and pui-
nilhment of offenders, particularly those of the
ancient Germans, aud other barbarians who in-
vaded the Roman Empire, are perfedly con-
formable to these ideas c. While they retained
their native simplicity of manners, and continued&
to be divided into small tribes or societies, the
defea in this imperfe fyfitem of criminal jurif-
prudence (if it merits that name) were less fen-
sibly felt. When they came to fettle in the ex-
tensive provinces which they had conquered, and
to form themselves into great monarchies; when
ncw objecds of ambition presenting themselves,
increased both the number and the violence of
their diffhnlions; they ought to have adopted
new maxims concerning the redress of injuries,

c Tacit. de MIor. German. isp. zi. Vell. Paterc. lib. ii.

and

laws, that which they formerly left to be dired-
ed by the caprice of private passion. But fierce
and haughty chieftains, accustomed to avenge
themselves on such as had injured them, did not
think of reiinquifhing a right which they confi-
dered as a privilege of their order, and a mark of
their independence. Laws enforced by the au-
thority of princes and magistrates, who poffeffed
little power, commanded no great degree of re-
verence. The administration of jubice among
rude illiterate people, was not so accurate, or de.
cifive, or uniform, as to induce men to submit
implicitly to its determinations, Every offended
baron buckled on his armour, and fought redress
at the head of his vassals. His adversary met
him in like hostile array. Neither of them ap-
pealed to impotent laws, which could afford
them no proteaion. Neither of them would
submit points, in which their honour and their
passions were warmly interefited, to the flow de-
termination,0s a judicial inquiry. Both trusted
to their swords for the decision of the contest.
The kindred and dependants of the aggressor, as
well as of the defender, were involved in the
quarrel. They had not even the liberty of re-
maining neutral. Such as refused to a& in con-
cert with the party to which they belonged,
were not only exposed to infamy, but fubjeaed
to legal penalties.

The different kingdoms of Europe were torn

and afflided, during several centuries, by intestine
wars, excited by private animofities, and carried
on with all the rage natural to men of fierce man-
ners, and of violent paflions. The estate of

every

every baron was a kind of independent territory,
disjoined from those around it, and the hostilities
between them seldom ceased. The evil became
so inveterate and deep-rooted, that the form and
laws of private war were ascertained, and regu-
lations concerning it made a part in the fyfitem of
jurisprudence d, in the fame manner as if this
praAice had been founded in some natural right
of humanity, or in the original conflitution of
civil society.

So great was the disorder, and such the cala-

mities, which these perpetual hostilities occasion-
ed, that various efforts were made to wrest from
the nobles this pernicious privilege. It was the
interest of every sovereign to abolish a praaice
which almost annihilated his authority. Charle-
magne prohibited it by an express law, as an in-
vention of the devil to destroy the order and hap-
pinefs of focietye; but the reign of one monarch,
however vigorous and adive, was too short to
extirpate a custom so firmly established. Infiead
of enforcing this prohibition, his feeble successors
durif venture on nothing more than to apply pal-
liatives. They declared it unlawful for any per-
son to commence war, until he had sent a formal
defiance to the kindred and dependants of his
adversary; they ordained that, after the commis-
Lion of the trespass or crime which gave rife to a
private war, forty days must elapse before the
person injured (hould attack the vassals of his ad-
verfary ; they enjoined all persons to suspend
their private animofities, and to cease from hof-

. Beaumanoir Couftumes de Beauvoifis, ch. 59, et les

notes de Thaumafliere, p. 447-

c Capitul. A. D. 80x. Edit. Baluz. vol. i. p. 37'.

VOL. 5. tilities,

against the enemies of the nation. The church
co-operated with the civil magiflrate, and interi
posed its authority in order to extirpate a praaice
so repugnant to the spirit of Chriltianity. Va-
rious councils ififued decrees, prohibiting all pri.
tate wars; and denounced the heaviest anathemas
againfi such as (hould diffurb the tranquillity of
society, by claiming or exerciiing that barbarous
right. The aid of religion was called in to comn
bat and subdue the ferocity of the timesr The
Almighty was said to have manifefied, by visions
and revelations to different pcrfons, his difappro-
bation of that spirit of revenge, which armed one
part of his creatures againit the other. Men
were required, in the name of God, to sheath
their swords, and to remember the sacred ties
which united them as Chrifdians, and as members
of the fame society. But this junaion of civil
and eccleliafdic authority, though firengthened
by every thing mott apt to alarm and to overawe
the credulous spirit of those ages, produced no
other effec than some temporary fupenflions of
hostilities, and a cessation from war on certain
days and seasons consecrated to the more solemn
aas of devotion. The nobles continued to assert
this dangerous privilege; jthey refused to obey
some of the laws calculated to annul and cir-
cumferibe it; they eluded others; they peti-
tioned; they remonfitrted; they firuggled for
the right of private war, as the higheit and most
honourable diftinaion of their order. Even so
late as the fourteenth century, we find the no-
bles, in several provinces of France, contending
for their ancient method of terminating thrir dif-

ferencee

submitting them to the decilion of any judge.
The final abolition of this praaice in that king-
dom, and the other countries in which it pre-
vailed, is not to be ascribed so much to the force
of statutes and decrees, as to the gradual increase
of the royal authority, and to the imperceptible
progress of jufier sentiments concerning govern-
snent, order, and public security [X].

2. The pmrhibition of the form of trial by ju-

dicial combat, was another considerable itep to-
wards the introduaion of such regular govern,
pnent, as secured public order and private tran-
quillity. As the right of private war left maniy
of the quarrels among individuals to be decided,
like those between nations, by arms; the form
of trial by judicial combat, which was established
in every country of Europe, banilhed equity
from courts of justice, and rendered chance or
force the arbiter of their determinations. In ci-
vilized nations, all tranfations of any importance
are concluded in writing. The exhibition of the
deed or infsrument is full evidence of the faA,
and ascertains with precilion what each party has
Ilipulated to perform. But among a rude people,
when the arts of reading and writing were such
uncommon attainments, that to be matter of
either entitles a person to the appellation of a
clerk or learned man, scarcely any thing was
committed to writing but treaties betiveen princes,
their grants and charters to their fubjedis, or
such tranfaAions between private parties as were
of extraordinary consequence, or had an extensive

JX] NoTr XXi.

r efcffed,

life and business were carried on by verbal con-
trafts or promises. This, in many civil quef-
tions, not only made it difficult to bring proof
fufficient to efiablifh any claim, but encouraged
falsehood and fraud, by rendering them extreme-
ly easy. Even in criminal cafes, where a parti-
cular fa& muff be ascertained, or an accusation
must be disproved, the nature and effea of legal
evidence were little underflood by barbarous na-
tions. To define with accuracy that species of
evidence which a court had reason to expea; to
determine when it ought to infiit on positive
proof, and when it lhould be satisfied with a
proof from circumitances; to compare the teili-
mony of discordant witnesses, and to fix the de-
gree of credit due to each; were discussions too
intricate and subtile for the jurisprudence of ig-
norant ages. In order to avoid encumbering
themselves with these, a more finmple form of
procedure was introduced into courts as well ci-
vil as criminal. In all cafes where the notoriety
of the fa&t did not furnish the clearest and most
direat evidence, the person accused, or he against
whom an ation was brought, was called legally,
or offered voluntarily, to purge himself by oath;
and upon his declaring his innocence, he was in-
ilantly acquitted '. This absurd pratice effe8-
ually screened guilt and fraud from dete&.ion and
punishment, by rendering the temptation to per-
jury so powerful, that it was not easy to resist it,
The pernicious effeas of it were sensibly felt;
and in order to guard against them, the laws or-

SLeg. Eurgund. tit. 8, & 4. Leg. Aleman. tit. 89.
keg. Baiwar. tic. 8. O 5a

2, nc.

dainedi,

dained, that oaths lhould be administered with
great solemnity, and accompanied with every cir-
cumftance which could inspire religious reverence,
or fuperilitious terror g. This, however, proved
a feeble remedy: these ceremonious rites became
familiar, and their impreflion on the imagination
gradually diminifled; men who could venture to
disregard truth, were not apt to startle at the so-
lemnities of an oath. Their obfcrvation of this,
put legislators upon devising a new expedient for
rendering the purgation by oath more certain
and fatisfadory. They required the person ac-
cufed to appear with a certain number of free.
men, his neighbours or relations, who corrobo-
rated the oath which he took, by swearing that
they believed all that he uttered to be true.
These were called Compurgators, and their num-
ber varied according to the importance of the
fubjea in dispute, or the nature of the crime
with which a person was chargedh* In some
cafes, the concurrence of no less than three
hundred of these auxiliary witnesses was requisite
to acquit the person accufedl. But even this
device was found to be ineffedual. It was a
point of honour with every man in Europe, dur-
ang several ages, not to desert the chief on whom
he depended, and to itand by those with whom
the ties of blood conneaed him. Whoever then
was bold enough to violate the laws, was sure of
devoted adherents, willing to abet, and eager to

g Do Cange Gloffar. voc. 7uramenrum, vol. iii. p. 3607.

Edit. Benedicd.

h Ibid. p. 5'99.
I Spelman GloiTar. voc. Afath. Gregor. Turon. Hiif. lib.

vilC. c. 9.

F 3 serve

formality of calling compurgators proved an ap-
parent, not a real security, againdt falsehood and
perjury; and the sentences of courts, while they
continued to refer every point in question to the
oath of the defendant, became so flagrantly ini-
quitous, as excited universal indignation against
this method of procedure k*

Sensible of these defeas, but ifrangers to the

manner of corre&ing them, or of introducing a
more proper form, our ancestors, as an infallible
method of discovering truth, and of guarding
againit deception, appealed to Heaven, and re-
ferred every point in dispute to be determined,
as they imagined, by the decisions of unerring
wisdom and impartial justice. The person ac-
cufed, in order to prove his innocence, submitted
to trial, in certain cafes, either by plunging his
arm in boiling water; or by lifting a red-hot iron
with his naked hand; or by walking bare-foot
over burning plough-shares; or by other experi-
ments equally perilous and formidable. On other
occasions, he challenged his accuser to fight him
in single combat. All these various forms of
trial were conduated with many devout ceremo-
nies; the ministers of religion were employed,
the Almighty was called upon to interpose for
the manifestation of guilt, and for the protedion
of innocence; and whoever escaped unhurt, or
came off vidorious, was pronounced to be ac-
quitted by the Judgment of God'.

k Leg. Langobard. lib. ii. tit. 53. g 34.
i Murat. dilertatio de judiciis Dei Antiquit. Ital. vol. iii.

q. 6mo.

Among:

Among all the whimsical and absurd inftitu-

tions which owe their existence to the weakness
of human reason, this, which submitted questions
that affeaed the property, the reputation, and
the lives of men, to the determination of chance,
or of bodily strength and address, appears to
be the most extravagant and preposterous. There
were circumstances, however, which led the na-
tions of Europe to confider this equivocal mode
of deciding any point in contest, as a direal ap-
peal to Heaven, and a certain method of disco-
vering its will. As men are unable to compre-
hend the manner in which the Almighty carries
on the government of the universe, by equal, fix-
ed, and general laws, they are apt to imagine,
that in every cafe which their passions or intereit
render important in their own eyes, the Supreme
Ruler of all ought visibly to display his power in
vindicating innocence and punishing guilt. It
requires no inconsiderable degree of science and
philosophy to corre& this popular error. But
the sentiments prevalent in Europe during the
dark ages, inflead of correaing, fitrengthened it.
Religion, for several centuries, consisted chiefly
in believing the legendary hlitory of those faints
whose names crowd and disgrace the Romith ca-
lendar. The fabulous tales concerning their mira-
cles, had been declared authentic by the bulls of
popes, and the decrees of councils: they made the
great fubjeA of the infitruaions which the clergy
offered to the people, and were received by them
with implicit credulity and admiration. By at-
tending to these, men were accustomed to believe
that the eltabliihed laws of nature might he violated
on the most fiivolous occasions, and were taught

to

ry ads of power under the divine adminifira.
tion, than to contemplate the regular progress
and execution of a general plan. One fuperfti.
tion prepared the way for another; and whoever
believed that the Supreme Being had interposed
miraculously on those trivial occasions mentioned
in legends, could not but exped his intervention
in matters of greater importance, when solemnly
referred to his decision.

With this fuperititious opinion, the martial

spirit of Europe, during the middle ages, con-
curred in establishing the mode of trial by judi-
cial combat. To be ready to maintain with his
sword whatever his lips had uttered, was the firit
maxim of honour with every gentleman. To as-
fert their own rights by force of arms, to inflid
vengeance on those who had injured or affronted
them, were the diftindion and pride of high-fpi.
rited nobles. The form of trial by combat coin-
ciding with this maxim, flattered and gratified
these passions. Every man was the guardian of
his own honour, and of his own life; the juflice
of his cause, as well as his future reputation, de-
pended on his own courage and prowess. This
mode of decision was considered, accordingly, as
one of the happief' efforts of wife policy; and as
soon as it was introduced, all the forms of trial
by fire or water, and other fuperifitious experi-
ments, fell into disuse, or were employed only
in controversies between persons of inferior rank.
As it was the privilege of a gentleman to claim
the trial by combat, it was quickly authorized
.over all Europe, and received in every country
with equal fatisfadtion. Not only questions cons

3 cerning

and abfitraa points in law, were determined by
the issue of a combat; and the latter was deem-
ed a method of discovering truth more liberal,
as well as more fatisfatory, than that by invefti-
gation and argument. Not only might parties,
whose minds were exasperated by the eagerness
and the hostility of opposition, defy their anta-
gonift, and require him to make good his charge,
or to prove his innocence, with his sword; but
witnesses who had no interest in the issue of the
question, though called to declare the truth by
laws which ought to have afforded them protec-
tion, were equally exposed to the danger of a
challenge, and equally bound to assert the vera-
city of their evidence by dint of arms. To com-
plete the absurdities of this military jurifpru-
dence, even the charaaer of a judge was not fa-
cred from its violence. Any one of the parties
might interrupt a judge when about to deliver his
opinion; might accuse him of iniquity and cor-
ruption in the most reproachful terms, and throw-
ing down his gauntlet, might challenge him to
defend his integrity in the field; nor could he,
without infamy, refuse to accept the defiance,
or decline to enter the lifts against such an ad-
verfary.

Thus the form of trial by combat, like other

abuses, spread gradually, and extended to all
persons, and ahnoft to all cafes. Ecclefiaftics,
*women, minors, superannuated and intirm per-
sons, who could not with decency or justice bc
compelled to take arms, or to maintain their
own cause, were obliged to produce champions,
who offered from affteion, or were engaged by

rewards,

of a judicial combat were finch as were natural in
an amion, which was considered both as a formal
appeal to God, and as the final decision of quef.
tions of the highest moment. Every circum-
fiance relating to them was regulated by the
edifts of princes, and explained in the comments
of lawyers, with a minute and even superstitious
accuracy. Skill in these laws and rights was fre-
quently the only science of which warlike nobles
boasted, or which they were ambitious to at.
tain mu

By this barbarous custom, the natural course

of proceeding, both in civil and criminal quef-
tions, was entirely perverted. Force usurped the
place of equity in courts of judicature, and justice
was banished from her proper mansion. Discern-
ment, learning, integrity, were qualities less ne-
ceffary to a judge, than bodily fitrength and dex-
terity in the use of arms. Daring courage, and
superior vigour or address, were of more moment
towards securing the favourable iflfue of a suit,
than the equity of a cause, or the clearness of
the evidence. Men, of course, applied them-
selves to cultivate the talents which they found
to be of greatest utility. As fitrength of body
and address in arms were no less requilite in those
lifts which they were obliged to enter in defence
of their private rights, than in the field of battle,
where they met the enemies of their country, it
became the great objea of education, as well as
the chief employment of life, to acquire these

ms See a curious discourse concerning the laws of judicial

combat, by Thomas of Wooditock, duke of Gloucefler,
uncle to Richard 11. in Spclman'S Gloffar. voc. Campus. martial

juflice, instead of accustoming men to listen to
the voice of equity, or to reverence the decilions
of law, added to the ferocity of their manners,
and taught them to confider force as the great
arbiter of right and wrong.

These pernicious effeas of the trial by combat

were so obvious, that they did not altogether es-
cape the view of the unobferving age in which it
was introduced. The clergy, from the begin-
sing, remonfirated against it as repugnant to
the spirit of Christianity, and subversive of justice
and order n. But the maxims and passions which
favoured it, had taken such hold of the minds
ofmen, that they disregarded admonitions and
censures, which, on other occasions, would have
struck them with terror. The evil was too great
and inveterate to yield to that remedy, and con-
tinuing to increase, the civil power at length
found it necessary to interpose. Conscious, how-
ever, of their own limited authority, monarchs
proceeded with caution, and their firit attempts
to restrain, or to set any bounds to this pradice,
were extremely feeble. One of the earliest re-
ftritions of this praaice which occurs in the his-
tory of Europe, is that of Henry I. of England.
It extended no farther than to prohibit the trial
by combat in questions concerning property of
small value 9. Louis VII. of France imitated
his example, and issued an edid to the fame es-
set P. St. Louis, whose ideas as a legiflator'
were far superior to those of his age, endeavour-

a Du Cange Gloffar. voc. Duellum, vol. ii. p. r675.
o Bruffel Ulage des Fiefs, vol. ii. p. 962.
P Ordon. tom. i. p. 16.

and to substitute the trial by evidence, in place
of that by combat. But his regulations, with
refpea to this, were confined to his own do-
mains; for the great vassals of the crown pof.
sessed such independent authority, and were so
fondly attached to the ancient pradice, that he
had not power to venture to extend it to the
whole kingdom. Some barons voluntarily adopt-
ed his regulations. The spirit of courts of jus.
tice became averse to the mode of decision by
combat, and discouraged it on every occasion.
The nobles, nevertheless, thought it so honour-
able to depend for the security of their lives and
fortunes on their own courage alone, and con-
tended with so much vehemence for the pre-
(ervation of this favourite privilege of their or-
der, that the successors of St. Louis, unable to
oppose and afraid of offending such powerful
fubjeas, were obliged not only to tolerate, hut
to authorize the pradice which he had attempt.
ed to abolifhqs. In other countries of Europe,
efforts equally zealous were employed to main-
tain the established custom; and similar concef-
fions were extorted from their refpekive fove,
reigns. It continued, however, to be an objea
of policy with every monarch of abilities or vs-
gour to explode the trial by combat; and va-
rious ediAs were iifued for this purpose. But
the observation which was made concerning the
right of private war, is equally applicable to the
unode of trial under review. No custom, how
absurd fuever it may be, if it has fubfsffed long,
or derives its force from the manners and pre-

q Ordon. tom, i. p. 1 S. 390. 435. judices

judices of the age in which it prevails; was ever
abolished by the bare promulgation of laws and
statutes. The sentiments of the people must
change, or fume new power, fufficient to coun-
tera& the prevalent cuffom, must be introduced.
Such a change accordiogly took place in Europe,
as science gradually increased, and society ad-
vanced towards more perfea order. In propor-
tion as the prerogative of princes extended, and
came to acquire new force, a power, interefled
in fupprefling every praaice favourable to the in-
dependence of the nobles, was introduced. The
struggle, nevertheless, subsisted for several centu-
ries; sometimes the new regulations and ideas
seemed to gain ground; sometimes ancient ha-
bits recurred: and though, upon the whole, the
trial by combat went more and more into disuse,
yet initances of it occur, as late as the sixteenth
century, in the hiffory both of France and of
England. In proportion as it declined, the regu-
lar adminiffration ofjuflice was reffored, the pro-
ceedings of courts were direAed by known laws,
the fludy of these became an objea of attention to
judges, and the people of Europe advanced fast
towards civility, when this great cause of the
ferocity of their manners was removed [Y].

3. By authorizing the right of appeal from

the courts of the.barons to those of the king,
and fubjeding the. decisions of the former to the
review of the latter, a new fiep, not less confi-
derable than those which I have already men-
tioned, was taken towards establishing the regu-
lar, confident, and vigorous administration of
justice. Among all the encroachments of the

[YJ NOTE XXII.

- voL.. G feudal

feudal nobles on the prerogative of their mo-
narchs, their ufurping the adminjifration of jus-
tice with fipreme authority, both in civil and
criminal causes, within the precinAs of their own
estates, was the most singular. In other nations,
fubjqes have contended with their sovereigns,
and have endeavoured to extend their own power
and privileges; but in the history of their
fdruggles and pretensions, we discover nothing
similar to this right which the feudal barons
claimed, and obtained. It mutt have been some-
thing peculiar in their genius and manners that
fugoefted this idea, and prompted them to insist
on ruch a claim. Among the rude people who
conquered the various provinces of the Roman
Empire, and eftablithed new kingdoms there,
the passion of resentment, too impetuous to bear
control, was permitted to remain almost unre-
dirained by the authority of laws. The person
offcnded, as has been observed, retained not only
the right of prosecuting, but of punishing his ad-
verfary. To him it belonged to infliA such
vengeance as satiated his rage, or to accept of
such fatisfa&ion as appeased it. But while fierce
barbarians continued to be the sole judges in
their own cause, their enmities were implacable
and immortal.; they set no bounds either to the
degree of their vengeance, or to the duration of
their resentment. The excesses which this oc-
cafioned, proved so deifruaive of peace and or-
der in society, as to render it necessary to devise
some remedy. At firit, recourse was had to ar-
bitrators, who by persuasion or intreaty prevailed
on the party offended to accept of a fine or com-,
position from the aggressor, and to drop all far-

ther

ther prosecution. But as submission to persons
who had no legal or magisterial authority was
altogether voluntary, it became necessary to eita-
blifh judges, with power fufficient to enforce
their own decisions. The leader whom they
were accustomed to follow and to obey, whofq
courage they refpeaed, and in whose integrity
they placed confidence, was the person to whom
a martial people naturally committed this im,
portant prerogative. Every chieftain was the
commander of his tribe in war, and their judge
in peace. Every baron led his vassals to the field,
and administered juflice to them in his hall. The
high-Epirited dependants would not have recog-
nized any other authority, or have submitted to
any other jurifdiaion. But in times of turbu-
lence and violence, the exercise of this new func.
tion was attended not only with trouble, but with
danger. No person could assume the charaaer
of a judge, if he did not possess power fufficient
to prote& the one party from the violence of
private revenge, and to compel the other to ac-
cept of such reparation as he enjoined. In con-
fideration of the extraordinary efforts which this
office required, judges, besides the fine which
they appointed to be paid as a compensation to
the person or family who had been injured, levied
an additional fum as a recompence for their own
labour; and in all the feudal kingdoms the lat-
ter was not only as precisely ascertained, but as
regularly exacted, as the former.

Thus, by the natural operation of circum,

fRances peculiar to the manners or political slate
of the feudal nations, separate and territorial ju.
rifdiaions came not only to be established in

G a every

every kingdom, but were established in such a
way, that the interest of the barons concurred
with their ambition in maintaining and extending
them. It was not merely a point of honour with
the feudal nobles to dispense justice to their vas-
fals; but from the exercise of that power arose
one capital branch of their revenue; and the
emoluments of their courts were frequently the
main support of their dignity. It was with in-
finite zeal that they asserted and defended this
high privilege of their order. By this inifitution,
however, every kingdom in Europe was split into
as many separate principalities as it contained
powerful barons. Their vassals, whether in peace
or in war, were hardly sensible of any authority,
but that of their immediate superior lord. They
felt themselves fubjed to no other command.
They were amenable to no other jurifdiaion.
The ties which linked together these smaller con-
federacies became close and firm; the bonds of
public union relaxed, or were dissolved. The
nobles itrained their invention in devising regu-
lations which tended to ascertain and perpetuate
this diftindion. In order to guard againdt any
appearance of subordination in their courts to
those of the crown, they frequently confitrained
theii- monarchs to prohibit the royal judges from
entering their territories, or from claiming any
jurifdidion there; and if, either through mif-
iake, or from the spirit of encroachment, any
royal judge ventured to extend his authority to
the vassals of a baron, they might plead their
sight of exemption, and the lord of whom they
held could not only rescue them out of his hands,
but was entitled to legal reparation for the injury and

the royal judges fearcely reached beyond the nar-
row limits of the king's demefnes. Initead of
a regular gradation of courts, all acknowledging
the authority of the fame general laws, and look-
ing up to these as the guides of their decisions,
there were in every feudal kingdom a number of
independent tribunals, the proceedings of which
were direded by local cufioms and contradiaory
forms. The collision of jurifliaion among these
different courts often retarded the execution of
justice. The variety and caprice of their modes
of procedure muff have for ever kept the admini-
ftration of it from attaining any degree of uni-
formity or perfeaion.

All the monarchs of Europe perceived there en?

croachments on their jurifdiAion, and bore them
with impatience. But the ufurpations of the no-
bles were so firmly elIablifhed, and the danger of
endeavouring to overturn them by open force was
so manifefi, that kings were obliged to remain far
tisfied with attempts to undermine them. Various
expedients were employed for this purpose; each
of which merits attention, as they mark the pro-
grefs of law and equity in the several kingdoms
of Europe. At firr, princes endeavoured to cir-
curnferibe the jurifdidion of the barons, by con-
tending that they ought to take cognizance only
of smaller offences, reserving those of greater mo-
ment, under the appellation of Pleas of the
Crown, and Royal Gaufes, to be tried in the
king's courts. This, however, affeaed only
the barons of inferior note; the more powerful
nobles scorned such a diftinaion, and not only
claimed unlimited jurifdiaion, but obliged their
lovereigns to grant them charters, conveying or

G · recog-

recognizing this privilege in the mout ample
form. The attempt, nevertheless, was produc.
tive of some good consequences, and paved the
way for more. It turned the attention of men
towards a jurifdiaion diftin67 from that of the
baron whose vassals they were ; it accustomed
them to the pretenoions of superiority which the
crown daimed over territorial judges; and taught
them, when oppressed by their own superior
lord, to look up to their sovereign as their pro-
tedor. This facilitated the introdurion of ap-
peals, by which princes brought the decifians of
the barons' courts under the review of the royal
judges. While trial by combat fubhifted in full
vigour, no point decided according to that
mode could be brought under the review of
another court. It had been referred to the judg-'
ment of God; the issue of battle had declared
his will; and it would have been impious to have
called in question the equity of the divine deci-
sion. But as soon as that barbar6us cuffom he-
gan to fall into disuse, princes encouraged the
vassals of the barons to sue for redress, by ap-
pealing to the royal courts. The progrers of
this pradice, however, was flow and gradual.
The firit initances of appeals were on account of
the delay or the refmfal of jiflice in the barons'
court; and as these were countenanced by the
ideas of subordination in the feudal conititution,
the nobles allowed them to be introduced with-
out much opposition. But when these were fol-
lowed by appeals on accosmt of the iajuftice or
iniquity of the fenence, the nobles then began to
be feasible, that if this innovation became gene-
ral, the shadow ps power alone would remain in
their hands, and all real authority and jurifdic-

tRon

the right of review. They int'tantly took the
alarm, remonitrated against the encroachutent,
and contended boldly for their ancient privileges.
But the monarchs in the different kingdoms of
Europe pursued their plan with steadiness and
prudence. Though forced to suspend their
operations on some occasions, and seemingly to
yield when anx formidable confederacy of their
vafials united against them, they resumed their
measures as soon as they observed the nobles to
be remiss or feeble, and pushed them with vi-
gour. They appointed the royal courts, which
criginally were ambulatory, and irregular with
refpe& to their times of meeting, to be held in
a fixed place, and at fiated seasons. They were
solicitous to name judges of more distinguished
abilities than such as usually presided in the
courts of the barons. They added dignity to
their charaaer, and splendour to their.affemblies.
They laboured to render their forms reg-ular,
and their decrees confident. Such judicatories
became, of course, the objeas of public con-
fidence as well as veneration. The people, re-
linquilhing the tribunals of their lords, were
eager to bring every fubjea of contest under the
more equal and discerning eye of those whom
their sovereign had chosen to give judgment in
his name. Thus kings became once more the
heads of the community, amd the dispensers of
justice to their fubjeas. The barons, in fume
kingdoms, ceased to exercise their right of jurif-
diaion, because it funk into contempt; in
others, it was circumscribed by such regulations
as rendered it innocent, or it was entirely abo-

lithcd

lifhed by express fatutes. Thus the adminiftra-
tion of juflice taking its rife from one source,
and following one direaion, held its course in
every frate with more uniformity, and with great-
er force [Z].

VI. The forms and maxims of the canon law,

which were become universally refpedable from
their authority in the spiritual courts, contri-
buted not a little towards those improvements in
jurisprudence which I have enumerated. If we
confider the canon law politically, and view it
either as a system framed on purpose to asift the
clergy in ufurping powers and jurifdiaion no
less repugnant to the nature of their funAion,
than inconsistent with the order of government;
or as the chief instrument in establishing the do-
minion of the pope3, which shook the throne,
and endangered the liberties of every kingdom in
Europe, we muff pronounce it one of the molt
formidable engines ever formed against the hap.
pinefs of civil society. But if we contemplate it
merely as a code of laws refpeAing the rights
and property of individuals, and attend only to
the civil eflcas of its decisions concerning these,
it will appear in a different, and 'a much more
favourable light. In ages'of ignorance and cre-
dulity, the ministers of religion are the oijeAs
of fuperifitious veneration. Wrhen the barbarians
who over-ran the Roman Empire first umnbraced
the Christian faith, they found the clergy in pof-
session of considerable power; and they naturally
transferred to those new guides the profound fuob-
rifflion and reverence which they were accufilom-
ed to yield to the priests of that religion which

[Z] NOTE XXIII.

they

they had forsaken. They deemed their persons
to be equally sacred with their funaion; and
would have considered it as impious to fubje&
them to the profane jurifdi&ion of the laity.
The clergy were not blind to these advantages
which the weakness of mankind afforded them.
They eitablifhed courts, in which every queftio:i
relating to their own charaaer, their fundtion,
or their property, was tried. They pleaded,
and obtained an almofl total exemption from the
authority of civil judges. Upon d&fferent pre-
texts, and by a multiplicity of artifices, they
communicated this privilege to so many persons,
and extended their jurifdiaion to such a variety
of cafes, that the greater part of those affairs
which give rife to contest and litigation, was
drawn under- the cognizance of the spiritual
courts.

But in order to dispose the laity to fuffer these

ufurpations without murmur or opposition, it
was necessary to convince them, that the admi-
nifhration ofjuftice would be rendered more per-
fe& by the efitablifhment of this new jurifdiaion,
This was not a difficult undertaking at that period,
when ecclefiaftics carried on their encroachments
with the greatest success. That feanty portion
of fience which served to gaide men in the ages
of darkness, was almost entirely engrossed by the
clergy. They alone were accustomed to read,
to inquire, and to reason. Whatever knowledge
of ancient jurisprudence had been preserved,
either by tradition, or in such books as had es-
caped the defcruaive rage of barbarians, was pof-
Teffed by them. Upon the maxims of that ex-
arllent fyrtem, they founded a code of laws con-

sonant

direded by fixed and known rules, the forms of
their courts were ascertained, and their decisions
became uniform and consistent. Nor did they
want authority fufficient to enforce their fen.
tences. Excommunications and other ecclefiaf.
tical censures, were punifnments more formidable
than any that civil judges could inflia in support
of their decrees.

It is not surprising, then, that ecclesiastical

jurisprudence should become such an objea of ad-
miration and refpea, that exemption from civil
jurifdidlon was courted as a privilege, and con-
ferred as a reward. It is not surprising, that
even to rude people, the maxims of the canon
law should appear more equal and just than those
of the ill-digefited jurisprudence which direded all
proceedings in civil courts. According to the
latter, the differences between contending barons
were terminated, as in a fdate of nature, by the
sword; according to the former, every matter
was fubjeaed to the decision of laws. The one,
by permitting judicial combats, left chance and
force to be arbiters of right or wrong, of truth
or falsehood; the other passed judgment with
refpea to these, by the maxims of equity, and
the testimony of witnesses. Any error or iniqui-
ty in a sentence pronounced by a baron to whom
feudal jurifdition belonged, was irremediable,
because originally it was fubje& to the review of
no superior tribunal; the ecclefiafical law eila-
blifhcd a regular gradation of courts, through all
which a cause mighst be carried by appeal, until
it was determinmed by that authority which Wvas
held to be supreme in the church. Thus the ge.

1iue

men for approving those three great alterations
in the feudal jurisprudence which I have men-
tioned. But it was not with refpea to these
points alone that the canon law fuggefled im-
provements beneficial to society. Many of the
regulations, now deemed the barriers of personal
security, or the safeguards of private property,
are contrary to the spirit and repugnant to the
maxims of the civil jurisprudence known in Eu-
rope during several centuries, and were borrowed
from the rules and praaice of the eccliefiaftical
courts. By observing the widom and equity of
the deciiions in these courts, men began to per-
ceive the neceflity either of deserting the martial
tribunals of the barons, or of attempting to re-
form them FAA].

VII. The revival of the knowledge and frudy

of the Roman law co-operated with the causes
which I have mentioned, in introducing more
just and liberal ideas concerning the nature of
government, and the administration of juflice.
Among the calamities which the devastations of
the barbarians wvho broke in upon the empire
brought upon mankind, one of the greatest was
their overturning the system of Roman jurifpru-
dence, the nobieft monument of the wisdom of
that great people, formed to subdue and to go-
vern the world. The laws and regulations of a
civilized community were repugnant to the
manners and ideas of these fierce invaders. They
had refpea to objeas of which a rude people
had no conception; and were adapted to a state
of society with which they were entirely unac-

[AA] NoTr 2XIV.

quainted.

quainted. For this reason, wherever they set.
tied, the Roman jurisprudence Loon funk into
oblivion, and lay buried for some centuries under
the load of those inititutions which the inhabit-
ants of Europe dignified with the name of laws.
But towards the middle of the twelfth century,
a copy of Juttinian's Pandeds was accidentally
difcdvered in Italy. By that time, the fiate of
society was so far advanced, and the ideas of men
Lo much enlarged and improved by the occur-
rences of several centuries, during which they
1uad continued in political union, that they were
firuck with admiration of a fyitem which their
anceflors could not comprehend. Though they
had not hitherto attained such a degree of refine-
suent, as to acquire from the ancients a relish for
true philosophy or £peculative ficence; though
they were fill insensible, in a great degree, to
the beauty and elegance of classical composition;
they were fufficiently qualified to judge with ref-
pea to the merit of their fyiem of laws, in
which the many points most interefling to man-
kind were fettled with discernment, precilion,
and equity. All men of letters Rudied this new
leience with eagerness; and within a few years
'fter the discovery of the Pandedts, profeffors of
civil law were appointed, who taught it publicly
in most countries of Europe.
- The efleas of having such an excellent model
to fRudy and to imitate were immediately per-
cdived. Men, as soon as they were acquainted
with fixed and general laws, perceived the advan-
tige of them, and became impatient to ascertain
the principles and forms by which judges should
regulate thcir decisions. Such was the ardour

with

great importance to society, that, before the
close of the twelfth century, the feudal law was
reduced into a regular system; the code of canon
law was enlarged and methodized; and the loose
uncertain cufoms of different provinces or king-
doms were colleaed and arranged with an order
and accuracy acquired from the knowledge of
Roman jurisprudence. In some countries of
Europe the Roman law was adopted as sub-
fidiary to their own municipal law; and all cafes
to whicl the latter did not extend, were decided
according to the principles of the former. In
others, the maxims as well as forms of Roman
jurisprudence mingled imperceptibly with the
laws of the country, and had a powerful, though
less sensible, influence, in improving and perfea-
ing them [BBJ.

These various improvements in the fyfiem of

jurisprudence, and adminidration of justice, oc-
cafioned a change in manners, of great import-
ance, and of extensive effeA. They gave rife to
a diftinaion of profeifions; they obliged men to
cultivate different talents, and to aim at different
accomplishments, in order to qualify themselves
for the various departments and funaions which
became necessary in society r. Among unci-
vilized nations, there is but one profeffion ho-
nourable, that of arms. All the ingenuity and
vigour of the human mind are exerted in acquir-
ing military skill or address. The funaions of
peace are few and simple; and require no parti-

(BB] NOTE XXV.
r Dr. Fergufon's Essay on Ithe Hitory of Civil Society,

part iv. fe&. a.

VOL. I. a cular

cular course of education or of study, as a pre-
paration for discharging them. This was the
ilate of Europe dur ng several centuries. Every
gentleman, born a soldier, scorned any other oc-
cupation; he was taught no fEcicce but that of
war; even his exercises and pafrimes were feats
of martial proxxefs. Nor did the judicial cha-
raaer, which persons of noble birth were alone
eneitr! d to afrume, demand any degree of know-
kd'e beyond that which such unturured soldiers
poflkerd. To recollec a few traditionary cuf-
toms which time had coniirmed, and rendered
refpe~anale; to mark out the lils of battle with
due formality; to observe the ifue of the com-
bat ; and to pronounce whether it had been con-
dntied according to the laws of arms; included
every thing thIat a baron, who ated as a judge,
found it nuceffarv to underfhand.

SBut when the forms of legal proceedings were

fixed, when the rules of decihion were committed
to wrtinig, an'i collefted into a body, law be-
came a science, the knowledge of which required
a regular course of fludy, together with long at-
tention to the pradice of courts. Martial and
illite ate nobles had neither leihire nor inclination
to undertake a talk so laborious, as well as so
foreign from all the occupations which they
<icellkd entertaining, or suitable to their rank.
They gradually relinquished their places in courts
ofjurice, where their ignorance exposed them to
contempt. Ther became weary of attending to
the difcuhlion of cafes, which grewv too intricate
for thi u to comprehend. Not only the judicial
determination of points which were the fubjed
of controverfv, but the condufr of all legal bufi.

nels

ness and tranfations, was committed to persons
trained by previous itudy and application to the
knowledge of law. An order of men, to whom
their fellow citizens had daily recourse for ad-
vice, and to whom they looked up for decision
in their mont important concerns, naturaliy ac-.
quired contideration and influence in society.
They were advanced to honours which had been
contidered hitherto as the peculiar rewards of
military virtue. They were entroRed with of-
fices of the higheit dignity and mofd extensive
power. Thus, another profeflion than that of
arms came to be introduced among the laity,
and was reputed honourable. The fundions of
civil life were attended to. The talents re-
quilite for difeharging them were cultivated.
A new road was opened to wealth and eminence.
The arts and virtues of peace were placed in
their proper rank, and received their due recom-
pence sCC].

VIII. While improvements, so important with

refpe& to the state of society and the adminiffra.
tion of justice, gradually made progress in Eu-
rope, sentiments more liberal and generous had
begun to animate the nobles. These were in-
spired by the spirit of Chivalry, which, though
considered, commonly, as a wild inifitution, the
ehr& of caprice, and the source of extravagance,
aroie naturally from the Rtate of society at that
periodt, and had a very serious influence in resin-
ing the manners of the European nations. The
feudal Rare was a frate of almoti perpetual war,
rapine, and anarchy; during wihich the weaic
and unarmed were exposed tu infoits or injuries.
The power of the sovereign was too limited to

:CC] NoTE XXV1.

H 2 prevent

prevent these wrongs; and the adminiflration of
jufiice too feeble to redress them. The most es.
feaual prote&ion againit violence and oppreflion
was often found to be that which the valour and
gecnerofity of private persons afforded. The fame
spirit of enterprise which had prompted so many
gentlemen to take arms in defence of the op.
pressed pilgrims in Palestine, incited others to
declare themselves the patrons and avengers of
injured innocence at home. When the final re-
duAion of the Holy Land under the dominion
of infidels put an end to these foreign expeditions,
the latter was the only employment left for the
ativity and courage of adventurers. To check
the insolence of overgrown oppressors; to rescue
the helpless from captivity; to protea, or to
avenge women, orphans, and ecclefiaftics, who
could not bear arms in their own defence; to re-
dress wrongs and remove grievances; were deem.
ed aas of the higheit prowess and merit. Va.
lour, humanity, courtesy, justice, honour, were
the charaaeriftic qualities of chivalry. To these
were added religion, which mingled itfelfwith
every pafflon and inflitution during the middle
ages, and by infusing a large proportion of en-
thufiaftic zeal, gave them such force, as carried
them to romantic excess. Men were trained to
knighthood by a long previous discipline; they
were admitted into the order by folemnities no
less devout than pompous; every person of noble
birth courted that honour; it was deemed a dif-
tinaion superior to royalty; and monarchs were
proud to receive it from the hands of private
gentlemen.

This singular institution, in which valour,

gallantry, and religion, were so itrangely blend-

ed,

nius of martial nobles; and its effeds were soon
visible in their manners. War was carried on
with less ferocity, when humanity came to be
deemed the ornament of knighthood no less than
courage. More gentle and polished manners
were introduced, when courtesy was recommend-
ed as the modt amiable of knightly virtues.
Violence and opprefiion decreased, when it was
reckoned meritorious to check and to punifil
them. A fEcrupulous adherence to truth, with
the mout religions attention to fullil every en-
gagement, became the diRinguifhing charaderif-
tic of a gentleman, because chivalry was regard-
ed as the school of honour, and inculcated the
moul delicate sensibility with refpe& to those
points. The admiration of these qualities, to-
gethler with the high diflinaions and preroga-
tives conferred on knighthood in every part of
Europe, inspired persons of noble birth on some
occalfons with a species of military fanaticism,
and led them to extravagant enterprises. But
they deeply imprinted on their minds the prin-
ciples of generosity and honour. These were
strengthened by every thing that can affea the
senses or touch the heart. The wild exploits of
those romantic knights who sallied forth in quest
of adventures, are well known, and have been
treated with proper ridicule. The political and
permanent effects of the spirit of chivalry have
been less observed. Perhaps, the humanity
which accompanies all the operations of war, the
refnements of gallantry, and the point of honour,
the three chief circumitances which distinguish
modern from ancient manners, may be aferibed

553 mn

appeared whimsical to superficial observers, but
yits effeds has proved of great benefit to man-
ind. The sentiments which chivalry inspired

had a wonderful influence on manners and con-
dud during the twelfth, thirteenth, fourteenth,
and fifteenth centuries. They were so deeply
rooted, that they continued to operate after the
vigour and reputation of the institution itfeilf be-
gan to decline. Some considerable tranfadions,
recorded in the following hiltory, resemble the
adventurous exploits of chivalry, rather than the
well-regulated operations of found policy. Some
of the most eminent personages, whose charac-
ters will be delineated, weie strongly tinaured
with this romantic spirit. Francis I. was ambi.
tious to distinguish himself by all the qualities of
an accomplilhed knight, and endeavoured to imi-
tate the enterprising genius of chivalry in war,
as well as its pomp and courtesy during peace.
The fame which the French monarch acquired
by these splendid adions, so far dazzled his more
temperate rival, that he departed on some ocea-
fions from his usual prudence and moderation,
and emulated Francis in deeds of prowess or of
gallantry [DDI.

IX. The progress of science, and the culti.

vation of literature, had considerable effed in
changing the manners of the European nations,
and introducing that civility and refinement by
which they are now distinguished. At the time
when their Empire was overturned, the Romans,
though they had loft that correa taste which has
rendered the produaions of their ancestors itand.

[1D] NorZ XXVdI. ards

ards of exccellence, and models of imitation for
succeeding ages, still preserved their love of let-
ters, and cultivated the arts with great ardour.
But rude barbarians were so far from being firuck
with any admiration of these unknown accom-
plifhments, that they despised them. They were
not arrived at that fate of society, when those
faculties of the human mind, which have beauty
and elegance for their objeks, begin to unfold
themselves. They were firangers to most of those
wants and desires which are the parents 'of inge.
nious invention; and as they did not compre.
hend either the merit or utility of the Roman
arts, they defroyed the monuments of them,
with an induffry not inferior to that with which
their posterity have since fudied to preserve or
to recover them. The convulsions occasioned by
the settlement of so many unpolifhed tribes in
the Empire; the frequent as well as violent re-
volutions in every kingdom which they establish-
ed; together with the interior defe~ts in the
form of government which they introduced, ba-
nifhed security and leisure; prevented the growth
of taste, or the culture of science; and kept
Europe, during several centuries, in that slate
of ignorance which has been already described.
But the events and infitutions which I have
enumerated, produced great alterations in so-
ciety. As soon as their operation, in refforing
liberty and independence to one part of the com-
munity, began to be felt; as soon as they began
to communicate to all the members of society,
some taste of the advantages arising from com-
merce, from public order, and from personal fe-
curity, the human mind became conscious of

powerS

powers which it did not formerly perceive, and
fond of occupations or pursuits of which it was
formerly incapable. Towards the beginning of
the twelfth century, we discern the firit fymp-
toms of its awakening from that lethargy in
which it had been long funk, and observe it
turning with curiosity and attention towards new
objeas.

The first literary efforts, however, of the Eu-

ropean nations in the middle ages, were extreme-
ly ill-direaed. Among nations, as well as indi-
viduals, the powers of imagination attain some
degree of vigour before the intelleeual faculties
are much exercised in fpecnlative or abftra& dif-
quifition. Men are poets before they are philo-
fophers. They feel with fenfibilitys, and de-
scribe with force, when they have made but
little progress in invetligation or reasoning.
The age of Homer and of Hesiod long preceded
thiat of Thales or of Socrates. But, unhappily
for literature, our ancestors, deviating from this
course which nature points out, plunged at once
into the depths of abstruse and metaphysical in-
quirsr. They had been converted to the Christ-
san faith, soon after they fettled in their new
conquests. But they did not receive it pure.
The prefniption of men had added to the fim-
pie and initruaive doArines of Christianity the
theories of a vain philosophy, that attempted to
penetrate into myfiteries, and to decide questions
which the limited faculties of the human mind
are unable to comprehend or to resolve. These
over-curious speculations were incorporated with
the fytrem of religion, and came to be considered
as the most essential part of it. As soon, then,

3 a

reason, these were the fubjeds which first pre-
fented themselves, and engaged their attention.
The scholastic theology, with its infinite train of
bold difquifitions, and subtile diftinaions con-
cerning points which are not the objea of hu-
man reason, was the firit produaion of the spirit
of inquiry after it began to resume some degree
of adivity and vigour in Europe. It was not,
however, this circumitance alone that. gave such
a wrong turn to the minds of men, when they
began again to exercise talents which they had
so long negleaed. Most of the persons who at-
tempted to revive literature in the twelfth and
thirteenth centuries, had received infitruaion, or
derived their principles of science, from the
Greeks in the eastern Empire, or from the Ara-
bians in Spain and Africa. Both these people,
acute and inquisitive to excess, had corrupted
those sciences which they cultivated. The former
rendered theology a system of speculative refine-
ment, or of endless controversy. The latter
communicated to philosophy a spirit of metaphy-
fical and frivolous subtlety. Milled by these
guides, the persons who firif applied to science
were involved in a maze of intricate inquiries.
Initead of allowing their fancy to take its natural
range, and to produce such works of invention
as might have improved their tale, and refined
their sentiments; initead of cultivating those
arts which embellish human life, and render it
comfortable; they were fettered by authority,
they were led astray by example, and wasted the
whole force of their genius in speculations as
unavailing as they were difficult.

But

But fruitless and ill-direated as these fpecula-

tions were, their novelty routed, and their bold-
ness intereiled the human mind. The ardour
with which men pursued those uninviting itudies,
was aftonimhing. Genuine philosophy was never
cultivated, in any enlightened age, with more
zeal. Schools, upon the model of those inifi-
tuted by Charlemagne, were opened in every
cathedral, and ahmoft in every monailery of note.
Colleges and universities were creded and form-
ed into communmties or corporations, governed
by their own laws, and invested with separate
and extensive jurifdiaion over their own mem-
bers. A regular course of frudies was planned.
Privileges of great value were conferred on maf.
ters and scholars. Academical titles and ho-
nours of various kinds were invented as a recom-
pence for both. Nor was it in the schools alone
that superiority in feience led to reputation and
authority ; it became an objea of refpe& in life,
and advanced such as required it to a rank of no
inconsiderable eminence. Allured by all these
advantages, an incredible number of itudents re-
sorted to those new feats of learning, and crowd.
ed with eagerness into that new path which was
opened to fame and diftinaion.

But how considerable soever these first efforts

may appear, there was one circemilance which
prevented the effeas of them from being as ex-
tensive as they naturally ought to have been.
All the languages in Europe, during the period
under review, were barbarous. They were def-
titute of elegance, of force, and even of perfpi-
euity. No attempt had been hitherto made to
improve or to polish them. The Latin tongue

was

tom, with authority fearcely less sacred, had ap-
propriated it to literature. All the fejences cul-
tivated in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries
were taught in Latin. All books with refpe&
to them were written in that language. It would
have been deemed a degradation of any imror-
tant fubjca, to have treated of it in a modern
language. This confined feience within a very
narrow circle. The learned alone were admitted
into the temple of knowledge; the gate was fnut
againit all others, who were fuffered to remain
involved in their former darkness and ignorance.

Btut though fcicnce was thus prevented, du-

ring several ages, from diffuling itself through
society, and its influence was much circumscribed;
the progress which it made may be mentioned,
neverthelcfs, among the great causes which con-
tributed to introduce a change of manners into
Europe. The ardent, though ill-judged spirit
of inquiry which I have deferilied, occaiioned a
fermentation of mind that put ingenuity and in-
vention in motion, and gave them vigour. It
led men to a new employment of their faculties,
wiich they found to be agreeable as well as in-
teretiiug. It accustomed them to exercises and
occjparions which teinled to soften their man-
ners, and to give them some relish for the gentle
virtues, peculiar to people among whom icience
hac been cultivated with success [EE].

X. The progress of commerce had confidcir-

able influence in polishing the manners of the Eu.
ropean nations, and in elatblifhing among them
order, equal laws, and humanity. The wants of

[EE] NOTE XXVIIL

men,

men, in the original and most simple ifate of so-
ciety, are so few, and their desires so limited, that
they rell contented with the natural produaions
of their climate and foil, or with what they can
add to these by their own rude indufiry. They
have no superfluities to dispose of, and few neceffi-
ties that demand a supply. Every little conm-
munity subsisting on its own domestic stock, and
satisfied with it, is eitherlittle acquainted with the
states around it,or at variance with them. Society
and manners mull be considerably improved, and
many provisions mull be made for public order
and personal security, before a liberal intercourse
can take place between different nations. We
find, accordingly, that the firit effea of the set-
tlement of the barbarians in the Empire, was to
divide those nations which the Roman power
had united. Europe was broken into many fe.
parate communities. The intercourse between
these divided states, ceased almost entirely during
several centuries. Navigation was dangerous in
seas infelted by pirates; nor could Ptrangers trust
to a friendly reception in the ports of uncivilized
nations. Even between difiant parts of the fame
kingdom,thecommunicationwas rare anddifficult.
The lawless rapine of banditti, together with the
avowed exadions of the nobles, fearcely less for-
midable than oppressive, rendered a journey of
any length a perilous enterprise. Fixed to the
spot in which they resided, the greater part of
the inhabitants of Europe loft, in a great measure,
the knowledge of remote regions, and were un-
acquainted with their names,their situations, their
climates, and their commodities [FS].

[FS3 Nors XXIXi VariousP

vive the spirit of commerce, and to renew, in
some degree, the intercourse between different
nations. The Italians, by their conneaion with
Confrantinople, and other cities of the Greek em-
pire, had preserved in their own country con.
fiderable reiiih for the precious commodities and
curious manufaAures of the East. They commu-
nicated fame knowledge of these to the countries
contiguous to Italy. But this commerce being
extremely limited, the intercourse which it oc-
cafioned between different nations was not con-
fiderable. The Crusades, by leading multitudes
from every corner of Europe into Asia, opened
a mere extensive communication between the
East and Weft, which fubfiftcd for two cen-
turies; and though the objea of these expedi-
tions was conquest and not commerce; though
the issue of them proved as unfortunate, as the
motives for undertaking them were wild and en-
thufiaftic; their commercial effeds, as hath been
ihewn, were both beneficial and permanent.
During the continuance of the Crusades, the
great cities in Italy, and in other countries of
Europe, acquired liberty, and together with it
such privileges as rendered them refpetable and
independent communities. Thus, in every state,
there was formed a new order of citizens, to whom
commerce presented itself as their proper objea,
and opened to them a certain path to wealth and
consideration. Soon after the close of the Holy
WVar, the mariner's compais was invented, which,
by rendering navigation more secure, encouraged
it to become more adventurous, facilitated the

VOL. I. u commu.

communication between remote nations, and
brought them nearer to each other.

The Italian States, during the fame period,

eftabliihed a regular commerce with the Ealt in
the ports of Egypt, and drew from thence all
the rich produds of the Indies. They intro-
duced into their own territories manufaftures of
various kinds, and carried them on with great
ingenuity and vigour. They attempted new
arts; and transplanted from watmer climates, to
which they had been hitherto deemed peculiar,
several natural produ&ions which now furniih
the materials of a lucrative and extended com-
merce. All these commodities, whether im-
ported from Asia, or produced by their own
ikili, they disposed of to great advantage among
the other people of Europe, who began to ac-
quire some taste for an elegance in living unknown
to their ancestors, or despised by them. During
the twelfth and thirteenth centuries, the com-
merce of Europe was almost entirely in the hands
of the Italians, more commonly known in those
ages by the name of Lombards. Companies or
societies of Lombard merchants fettled in every
different kingdom. They were taken under the
immediate proteaion of the several governments.
They enjoyed extensive privileges and immuni-
ties. The operation of the ancient barbarous
laws concerning strangers, was suspended with
refpe& to them. They became the carriers, the
manufadurers, and the bankers of all Europe.

While the Italians, in the South of Europe,

were cultivatingo trade wikh such industry and
success, the counimercial spirit awakened in the

North

century. As the nations around the Baltic were,
at that time, extremely barbarous, and infested
that sea with their piracies, the cities of Lubec
and Hamburgh, soon after they began to open
some trade with these people, found it necefrary
to enter into a league of mutual defence. They
derived such advantages from this union, that
other towns acceded to their confederacy, and,
in a Ihort time, eighty of the most considerable
cities feattered through those extensive countries
which firetch from the bottom of the Baltic to
Cologne on the Rhine, joined in the famous
Hanseatic league, which became so formidable,
that its alliance was courted and its enmity was
dreaded by the greatest monarchs. The mem-
bers of this powerful association formed the firlR
systematic plan of commerce known in the middle
ages, and conduced it by common laws enaded
in their general assemblies. They supplied the
reft of Europe with naval stores, and pitched on
different towns, the most eminent of which was
Bruges in Slanders, where they etablifhed staples
in which their commerce was regularly carried
on. Thither the Lombards brought the pro-
duaions of India, together with the manufaaures
of Italy, and exchanged them for the more bulky,
but not less useful commodities of the North.
Tne Hanseatic merchants disposed of the cargoes
which they received from the Lombards, in the
ports of the Baltic, or carried them up the great
rivers into the interior parts of Germany.

This regular intercourse opened between the

nations in the north and south of Europe, made
themr sensible of their mutual wants, and created

i z such

such new and increafsng demands for commodi-
ties of every kind, that it excited among the
inhabitants of the Netherlands a more vigorous
spirit in carrying on the two great manufadures
of wool and flax, which seem to have been con-
fiderable in that country as early as the age of
Charlemagne. As Bruges became the centre
of communication between the Lombard and
Ilanfeatic merchants, the Flemings traded with
both in that city to such extent as well as ad-
vantage, as spread among them a general habit
of indufiry, which long rendered Slanders and
the adjacent provinces the molt opulent, the
molt populous, and best cultivated countries in

Europe. Struck with the flourishing Rate of these pro.
vinces, of which he discerned the true cause,
Edward III. of England endeavoured to excite a
spirit of indufiry among his own fubjefas, who,
blind to the advantages of their situation, and
ignorant of the source from which opulence was
deltined to flow into their country, were so little
attentive to their commercial intereits, as hardly
to attempt those manufaaures, the materials of
which they furnished to foreigners. By alluring
Fiemifh artisans t6 fettle in his dominions, as well
as by many wife laws for the encouragement and
regulation of trade, Edward gave a beginning to
the woollen manufaaures of England, and firit
turned the adive and enterprising genius of his
people towards those arts which have raised the
English to the highef rank among commercial
nations.

This increase of commerce, and of intercourse

between nations, how inconsiderable soever it

may

progress during the last and present age, seems
wonderfully great, when we compare it with the
frate of both in Europe previous to the twelfth
century. It did not fail of producing great
effeAs. Commerce tends to wear off those pre-
judices which maintain diflinaion and animosity
between nations. It softens and polifnes the
manners of men. It unites them by one of the
ifrongeft of all ties, the desire of supplying their
mutual wants, It disposes them to peace, by
eitablilhing in every state an order of citizens
bound by their interest to be the guardians of
public tranquillity. As soon as the commercial
spirit acquires vigour, and begins to gain an as-
cendant in any society, we discover a new genius
in its policy, its alliances, its wars, and its ne-
gotiations. Conspicuous proofs of this occur in
the history of the Italian states, of the Hanseatic
league, and the cities of the Netherlands during
the period under review. In proportion ascom-
merce made its way into the different countries
of Europe, they successively turned their atten-
tion to those objeas, and adopted those man-
ners, which occupy and distinguish polished na-
tions [GG].

[GGJ NOTE XXX,

## SECT. II. View of the Progress of Society in Europe, with respect to the Command of the national Force requisite in foreign Operations.

SECT. II.

flew of the Progress of Society in Europe, with re-

fpe& to the Command of the national Force requi-
]te in foreign Operations.
SUCH are the events and inflitutions which, by

their powerful operation, contributed gradu-

ally to introduce regular government and polished
manners into the various nations of Europe.
When we survey the fRate of society, or the
charader of individuals, at the opening of the
fifteenth century, and then turn back to view
the condition of both at the time when the bar-
barous tribes, which overturned the Roman pow-
er, completed their settlement in their new con-
quests, the progress which mankind had made to-
wards order and refinement will appear immense.

Government, however, was Rill far from having

attained that fRate, in which extensive monarchies
ad with the united vigour of the whole com-
munity, or carry on great undertakings with
perseverance and success. Small tribes or com-
munities, even in their rudest frate, may operate
in concert, and exert their utmost force. They
are excited to acd not by the difitant objeas or
the refined speculations which interest or affe62
men in polilhed societies, but by their present
feelings. The insults of an enemy kindle re-
fentment; the success of a rival tribe awakens
emulation; these passions -communicate from
breast to breast, and all the members of the
community, with united ardour, rufhl into the

field

quire diicinaion. But in widely extended states,
such as the great kingdoms of Europe at the
beginning of the fifteenth century, where there
is little intercourse between the distant members
of the community, and where every great enter-
prize requires previous concert and long prepar-
ation, nothing can rouse and call forth their
united strength, but the absolute command of a
despot, or the powerful influence of regular po-
licy. Of the former, the vast empires in the
Ealt are an example; the irreiftible mandate of
the sovereign reaches the most remote provinces
of his dominions, and compels whatever number
of his fubjeas he is pleased to summon, to follow
his standard. The kingdoms of Europe, in the
present age, are an instance of the latter; the
prince, by the less violent, but no less effeAual
operation of laws and a well-regulated govern-
ment, is enabled to avail himfelfof the whole
force of his state, and to employ it in enter-
prizes which require fitrenuous and persevering
efforts.

But, at the opening of the fifteenth century,

the political conititution in all the kingdoms of
Europe was very different from either of these
itates of government. The several monarchs,
though they had somewhat enlarged the boun.
daries of prerogative by fuccefsful encroachments
on the immunities and privileges of the nobility,
were poffeffed of an authority extremely limited..
The laws and interior police of kingdoms, though
much improved by the various events and re-
gulations which I have enumerated, were fill
feeble and imperfed. In every country, a nu-

merous

formidable notwithstanding thevarious expedients
employed to depress them, watched all the mo-
tions of their sovereign with a jealous attention,
which set bounds to his ambition, and either pre-
vented his forming schemes of extensive enter-
prize, or obflruaed the execution of them.

The ordinary revenues of every prince were so

extemely small as to be inadequate to any great
undertaking. He depended for extraordinary
supplies on the good-will of his fubjeas, who
granted them often with a reluAant, and always
with a sparing hand.

As the revenues of princes were inconsiderable,

the armies which they could bring into the field
were unfit for long and effe6fnal service. Inflead
of being able to employ troops trained to lkill
in arms, and to military subordination, by regular
discipline, monarchs were obliged to depend on
such forces as their vassals conduaed to their
imandard in consequence of their military tenures.
These, as they were bound to remain under arms
only for a ihort time, could not march far from
their usual place of residence, and being more
attached to the lord of whom they held, than to
the sovereign whom they served, were often as
much disposed to counteraa as to forward his
schemes. Nor were they, even if they had been
more fubjea to the command of the monarch,
proper instruments to carry into execution any
great and arduous enterprize. The fitrength of
an army, formed either for conquest or defence,
lies in infantry. To the flability and discipline
of their legions, confidting chiefly of infantry, the
Romnans, during the times of the republic, were

indebted

fcendants, forgetting the institutions which had
led them to universal dominion, so far altered
their military fyfiem as to place their principal
confidence in a numerous cavalry, the undifci-
plined impetuosity of the barbarous nations, who
fought mofitly on foot, was fufficient, as I have
already observed, to overcome them. These
nations, soon after they fettled in their new con-
quefis, uninfitruded by the fatal error of the
Romans, relinquished the customs of their an-
ceftors, and converted the chief force of their
armies into cavalry. Among the Romans this
change was occasioned by the effeminacy of their
troops, who could not endure the fatigues of
service, which their more virtuous and hardy
anceflors had sustained with ease. Among the
people who established the new monarchies into
which Europe was divided, this innovation in
military discipline seems to have flowed from the
pride of the nobles, who, scorning to mingle
with persons of inferior rank, aimed at being
diffinguifhed from them in the field, as well as
during peace. The institution of chivalry, and
the frequency of tournaments, in which knights,
in complete armour, entered the lifts on horse-
back with extraordinary splendour, displaying
amazing address, force, and valour, brought
cavalry into still greater esteem. The fondness
for that service increased to such a degree, that,
during the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries,
the armies of Europe were composed almost en-
tirely of cavalry. No gentleman would appear
in the field but on horseback. To serve in any
other manner, he would have deemed derogatory

to

was called The baftle, and on it alone depended
the fate of every adion. The infantry, colleaed
from the dregs and refuse of the people, ill
armed and worse disciplined, was ahnoit of no
account.

As these circumifances rendered the operations

of particular kingdoms less considerable and less
vigorous, so they long kept the princes of Eu-
rope from giving fiuch attention to the schemes
and tranfaaions of their neighbours, as might
lead them to form any regular fyfitem of public
security. They were, of consequence, prevented
from uniting in confederacy, or from aAing with
concert, in order to establish such a distribution
and balance of power, as ihould hinder any Rate
from rifingtoafuperiority, which might endanger
the general liberty and independence. During
several centuries, the nations of Europe appear
to have considered themselves asfeparate societies,
scarcely conneiled together by any common in-
terest, and little concerned in each other's affairs
or operations. An extenlive commerce did not
afford them an opportunity of observing and pe.
netrating into the schemes of every different Rate.
They had not ambassadors residing conitantly in
every court to watch and give early intelligence
of all its motions. The expeilation of remote
advantages, or the profped of difiant and con-
tingent evils, were not fufficient to excite nations
to take arms. Such only as were within the
sphere of immediate danger, and unavoidably
exposed to injury or insult, thought themselves
interested in any contest, or bound to take pre-
cautions for their own safety. Wi~hoever

the more considerable European fdates during the
two last centuries, muff write the history of Eu-
rope. Its various kingdoms, throughout that
pei-iod, have been formed into one great fyfiem,
so closely united, that each holding a determinate
Ration, the operations of one are so felt by all,
as to influence their counsels and regulate their
measures. But previous to the fifteenth century,
unless when vicinity of territory rendered the
occasions of discord frequent and unavoidable,
or when national emulation fomented or em-
bittered the spirit of hoflility, the affairs of dif-
ferent countries are seldom interwoven with each
other. In each kingdom of Europe great events
and revolutions happened, which the other powers
beheld with almost the fame indifference as if
they had been uninterefed fpeAators, to whom
the effeA of these tranfadions could never ex-
tend.

During the violent liruggles between France

and England, and notwithitanding the alarming
progress which was made towards rendering one
prince the maler of both these kingdoms, hardly
one measure, which can be considered as the
result of a sagacious and prudent policy, was
formed in order to guard againif an event so
fatal to Eurone. The dukes of Burgundy and
Breragne, whom their situation would not per-
mit to remain neutral, engaged, it is true, in
the conteit; but in taking their part, they
feenm rather to have followed the impulse of their
paflions, than to have been guided by any juat
discernment of the danger which threatened
themselves and the tranquillity of Europe. The

other

nate successes of the contending parties, left
them to decide the quarrel by themselves, or
interposed only by feeble and ineffeaual negoti.
ations.

Notwithianding the perpetual hoflilities in

which the various kingdoms of Spain were en.
gaged during several centuries, and the successive
occurrences which visibly tended to unite that
part of the continent into one great monarchy,
the princes of Europe hardly took any Ptep from
which we may conclude that they gave a proper
attention to that important event. They per.
mitted a power to arise imperceptibly, and to ac-
quire firength there, which soon became formid-
able to all its neighbours.

Amidfl the violent convulsions with which the

spirit of domination in the fee of Rome, and the
turbulent ambition of the German nobles, agi-
tated the Empire, neither the authority of the
popes, seconded by all their artifices and in-
trigues, nor the folicitations of the emperors,
could induce any of the powerful monarchs in
Europe to engage in their quarrel, or to avail
themselves of many favourable opportunities of
interposing with effed and advantage.

This amazing inactivity, during tranfafions

so interesting, is not to be imputed to any inca-
pacity of discerning their political consequences.
The power of judging with sagacity, and of a&-
ing with vigour, is the portion of men in every
age. The monarchs who reigned in the different
kingdoms of Europe during several centuries,
were not blind to their particular interest, negli-
gent of the public safety, or itrangers to the

method

that salutary system, which teaches modern po-
liticians to take the alarm at the profpe& of
distant dangers, which prompts them to check
the first encroachments of any formidable power,
and which renders each state the guardian, in
some degree, of the rights and independence of
all its neighbours, this was owing entirely to such
imperfeaions and disorders in the civil govern-
ment of each country, as made it impossible for
sovereigns to a& suitably to those ideas which
the posture of affairs, and their own observation,
must have fuggelled.

But during the course of the fifteenth century,

various events happened, which, by giving
princes more entire command of the force in
their refpeaive dominions, rendered their opera-
tions more vigorous and extensive. In confe-
quence of this, the affairs of different kingdoms
becoming more frequently as well as more inti-
mately conneaed, they were gradually accustom-
ed to a& in concert and confederacy, and were
insensibly prepared for forming a fyfitem of policy,
in order to establish or to preserve such a balance
of power as was most consistent with the general
security. It was during the reign of Charles the
Fifth, that the ideas, on which this system is
founded, firif came to be fully underifood. It
was then, that the maxims by which it has been
uniformly maintained since that uera, were uni-
verfally adopted. On this account, a view of the
causes and events which contributed to establish a
plan of policy, more salutary and extensive than
any that has taken place in the condua of hu-
man affairs, is not only a necessary introduaion

voL. 5. S to

the hiflorv of Europe.

The firit event that occasioned any confider-

able alteration in the arrangement of affairs in
Europe, was the annexation of the extensive ter-
ritories, which England poffeffed on the conti-
nent, to tihe crown of France. While the Englifb
were maiters of several of the most fertile and
opulent provinces in France, and a great part of
its most martial inhabitants was bound to follow
their standard, an English monarch considered
himfeif rather as the rival, than as the vassal of
the sovereign of whom he held. The kings of
France, circumscribed and thwarted in their
schemes and operations by an adversary no lfs
jealous than formidable, durit not enter upon
any enterprize of importance or of difliculty.
The English were always at hand, ready to oppole
them. They disputed even their right to their
crown, and being able to penetrate, with ease,
into the heart of the kingdom, could arm against
them those very bands which ought to have been
employed in their defence. Timid counsels and
feeble efforts were natural to monarchs in such a
situation. France, dismembered and overawed,
could not attain its proper flation in the fyfitem
of Europe. But the death of Henry V. of
England, happily for France, and not unfortu-
nately for his own country, delivered the French
from the calamity of having a foreign maiter feat.
ed on their throne. The veaknefs of a long mi-
sority, the dissensions in the English court, to-
gether with the unileady and languid condud
which these occasioned, afforded the French a
favourable opportunity of recovering the terri-

tories

of the French nobility, heightened to an enthu-
fiaftic confidence.by a supposed interposition of
Heaven in their behalf; conduded in the field
by skilful leaders; and direAed in the cabinet
by a prudent monarch; was exerted with fucl
vigour and success, during this favourable junc-
ture, as not only wvrefted from the English their
new conquests, but fiript them of their an-
cient poffeffions in France, and reduced them
within the narrow precinds of Calais, and its
petty territory.

As soon as so many considerable provinces

were reunited to their dominions, the kings of
France, conscious of this acquilition of Rrength,
began to form bolder schemes of interior policy,
as veli as of foreign operations. They immedi-
ately became formidable to their neighbours, who
began to fix their attention on their measures and
motions, the importance of which they fully per-
ceived. From this uera, France, poffeffed of the
advantages which it derives from the situation
and coutiguity of its territories, as well as from
the number and valour of its people, rose to new
influence in Europe, and was the first power in
a condition to give alarm to the jealousy or fears
of the Rtates around it.

Nor was France indebted for this increase of

importance merely to the reunion of the pro-
vinces which had been torn from it. A circum-
fiance attended the recovery of these, which,
though less confiderabie, and less observed, con-
tributed not a little to give additional vigour and
decision to all the efforts of that monarchy.
During the obitinate firuggles between France

K and

and England, all the defeas of the military
system under the feudal government were sensibly
felt. A war of long continuance languished,
when carried on by troops bound and accuf-
tomed to keep the field only for a short time.
Armies, composed chiefly of heavy-armed ca.
valry, were unfit either for the defence or the
attack of the many towns and castles, which it
became necessary to guard or to reduce. In
order to obtain such permanent and effe&ive
force, as became requisite during these lengthened
contests, the kings of France took into their pay
considerable bands of mercenary soldiers, levied
sometimes among their own fubjeas, and some-
times in foreign countries. But as the feudal
policy provided no fufficient fund for such ex-
traordinary service, these adventurers were dif-
miffed at the close of every campaign, or upon
any profpea of accommodation; and having
been little accustomed to the redtraints of difci-
pline, they frequently turned their arms against
the country which they had been hired to dcfend,
and desolated it with cruelty not inferior to that
of its foreign enemies.

A body of troops kept conifantly on foot, and

regularly trained to military subordination, would
have supplied what was wanting in the feudal
confitution, and have furnished princes with the
means of executing enterprizes, to which they
were then unequal. Such an establishment, how-
ever, was so repugnant to the genius of feudal
policy, and so incompatible with the privileges
and pretensions of the nobility, that during feve-
ral centuries no monarch was either so bold, or
so powerful, as to venture on any fiep towards

intro-

introducing it. At ladt, Charles VII. availing
himfeif of the reputation which he had acquired
by his successes against the Englith, and taking
advantage of the impressions of terror which
such a formidable enemy had left upon the minds
of his fubjeds, executed that which his prede-
ceffors durd not attempt. Under pretence of
having always ready a force fuflicient to defend
the kingdom against any sudden invaflion of the
English, he, at the time when he disbanded his
other troops [A. D. 1445], retained under
arms a body of nine thousand cavalry, and of
iixteen thousand infantry. He appropriated
funds for the regular payment of these; he dta-
tioned them in different places of the kingdom,
according to his pleasure; and appointed the
officers who commanded and difcipiined them.
The prime nobility courted this service, in which
they were taught to depend on their sovereign,
to execute his orders, and to look up to him as
the judge and rewarder of their merit. The
feudal militia, composed of the vaifals whom the
nobles could call out to follow their dandard, as
it was in no degree comparable to a body of fol-
diers regusarly trained to war, funk gradually in
reputation. The i-renn-th of an army was no
longer ediimated solely by the number of cavalry
which served in it. From the time that gun-
powder was invented, and the tie of cannon in
the field became general, horsemen cased inr comn-
plete armour lou all the advantages which gave
them the pre-eminence over other foldicrs. The
helmet, the (hield, and the breadt-plate, which
refilled the arrow or the spear, no longer afforded
them security againfd these new indruments of

t3 ddeitruc.

into esteem, and viaories were gained, and con-
quelts made, chiefly by their efforts. The nobles
and their military tenants, though sometimes
summoned to the field, according to ancient
form, were considered as an incumbrance upon
the troops with which they aAed; and were
viewed with contempt by soldiers accustomed to
the vigorous and iteady operations of regular
service.

Thus the regulations of Charles the Seventh,

by eftablifhling the first fRanding army known in
Europe, occasioned an important revolution in its
affairs and policy. By taking from the nobles the
sole direaion of the national military force, which
had raised them to such high authority and im-
portance, a deep wound was given to the feudal
aristocracy, in that part where its power seemed
to be molt complete.

France, by forming this body of regular troops

at a time when there was hardly a squadron or
company kept in constant pay in any other part
of Europe, acquired such advantages over its
neighbours, either in attack or defence, that
felf-prefervation made it necessary for them to
imitate its example. Mercenary troops were in-
troduced into all the considerable kingdoms on
the continent. They gradually became the only
military force that was employed or trusted. It
has long been the chiefobjea of policy to increase
and to support them. It has long been the great
aim of princes and ministers to discredit and to
annihilate all other means of national aaivity or
4efence.

powers in establishing a military force in their
dominions, which enabled them to carry on so-
reign operations with more vigour, and to greater
extent, so they were the first who effeaually
broke the feudal aristocracy, and humbled the
great vassals of the crown, who by their exorbi-
tant power had long circumscribed the royal pre-
rogative within very narrow limits, and had ren-
dered all the efforts of the monarchs of Europe
inconsiderable. Many things concurred to un-
dermine, gradually, the power of the feudal
aristocracy in France. The wealth and property
of the nobility were greatly impaired during the
long wars which the kingdom was obliged to
maintain with the English. The extraordinary
zeal with which they exerted themselves in de-
fence of their country againit its ancient enemies,
exhausted entirely the fortunes of some great fa-
milies. As almost every province in the king-
dom was, in its turn, the feat of war, the lands
of others were exposed to the depredations of the
enemy, were ravaged by the mercenary troops
which their sovereigns hired occasionally, but
could not pay, or were desolated with rage till
more deftruaive, by the peasants, in different in-
furreaions. At the fame time, the necefiities
of government having forced their kings upon the
desperate expedient of making great and sudden
alterations in the current coin of the kingdom,
the fines, quit-rents, and other payments fixed
by ancient cuitom, funk much in value, and the
revenues of a fief were reduced far below the fuum
which it had once yielded. During their con-
tests with the Engliih, in which a generous

nobility

peared, or honour could be gained, many fami-
lies of note became extind, and their fiefs were
reunited to the crown. Other 'fiefs, in a long
course of years, fell to female heirs, and were
divided among them; were diminished by pro-
fuse donations to the church, or were broken
and split by the fucceffon of remote collateral
heirs '.

Encouraged by these manifest symptoms of

decline in that body which he wished to deprels,
Charles VII. during the firif interval of peace
with England, made several effoets towards efta-
blifhing the regal prerogative on the ruins of the
aristocracy. But his obligations to the nobles
were so many, as well as recent, and their ser-
vices in recovering the kingdom so splendid, as
rendered it necefirBy for him to proceed with
moderation and caution. Such, however, was
the authority which the crown had acquired by
the progress of its arms againR the English, and
so much was the power of the nobility diminish-
ed, that, without any opposition, he soon made
innovations of great consequence in the conftitu-
tion. He not only eftablilhed that formidable
body of regular troops, which has been mention-
ed, but he was the firt monarch of France who,
by his royal edia [A. D. 1440], without the
concurrence of the States-general of the kingdom,
levied an extraordinary subsidy on his people.
IHe prevailed likewise with his fubjeAs, to render
several taxes perpetual, which had formerly been
imposed occalionaily, and exaded during a ihort

s Boulainvilliers HEitoire de Gouvnriement de France,

Lettre xii.

time.

quired such an increase of power, and extended
his prerogative so far beyond its ancient limits,
that, from being the molt dependent prince who
had ever fat upon the throne of France, he came
to possess, during the latter years of his reign, a
degree of authority which none of his predeceifors
had enjoyed for several ages'.

That plan of humbling the nobility which

Charles began to execute, his son Louis XI.
carried on with a bolder spirit, and with greater
success. Louis was formed by nature to be a
tyrant; and at whatever period he had been
called to ascend the throne, his reign mult have
abounded with schemes to oppress his people,
and to render his own power absolute. Subtle,
unfeeling, cruel; a liranger to every principle
of integrity, and regardless of decency, he scorn-
ed all the reffraints which a sense of honour, or
the desire of fame, impose even upon ambitious
men. Sagacious, at the fame time, to discern
what he deemed his true interest, and influenced
by that alone, he was capable of pursuing it with
a persevering industry, and of adhering to it with
a fyfitematic.fpirit, from which no objea could
divert, and no danger could deter him.

The maxims of his adminiltration were as pro-

found as they were fatal to the privileges of the
nobility. He filled all the departments of go-
vernment with new men, and often with persons
whom he called from the lowell as well as molt
despised fundions of life, and raised at pleasure

t Hiffoire de France par Valley & Villaret, tom. xv. 33r,

&c. 389. tom. xvi. 324., Variations dela Monarchie Fian-
coife, toib. iii. 16a.

to

to flations of great power or truol. These were
his only confidents, whom he consulted in form-
ing his plans, and to whom he committed the
execution of them: while the nobiee, accuflomed
to be the companions, the favourites, and the
miniffers of their sovereigns, were treated with
such itudied and mortifying negled, that if they
would not submit to follow a court in which they.
appeared without any (hadow of their ancient
power, they were obliged to retir e to their
caffles, where they remained unemployed and
forgotten. Not satisfied with having rendered
the nobles oflefs consideration, by taking out of
their hands the sole dire&ion of affairs, Louis
added insult to neglea; and by violating their
muR valuable privileges, endeavoured to degrade.
the order, and to reduce the members of it to
the fame level with other fubjeas. Persons of
the highefl rank among them, if so bold as to
oppose his schemes, or so unfortunate as toawaken
the jealousy of his capricious temper, were per-
fecuted with rigour, from which all who belong-
ed to the order of nobility had hitherto been ex-
empt; they were tried by judges who had no
right to take cognizance of their aaions; and
were fubje~ed to torture, or condemned to an
ignominious death, without regard to their birth
or condition. The people, accuflomed to fee
the blood of the mod iloflurious personages (hed
by the hands of the common executioner, to be-
hold them (hat up in dungeons, and carried about
in cages of iron, began to view the nobility with
less reverence than formerly, and looked up with
terror to the royal authority, which seemed to

have

in the kingdom.

At the fame time, Louis, being afraid that

oppreflion might rouse the nobles, whom the ri-
gour of his government had intimidated, or that
felf-prefervation might at lafd teach them to unite,
dexterously scattered among them the feeds of
discord; and indudrioufly fomented those ancient
animofities between the great families, which the
spirit of jealousy and emulation, natural to the
feudal government, had originally kindled and
dill kept alive. To accompliih this, all the arts
of intrigue, all the myfleries and refinements of
his fraudulent policy were employed, and with
such success, that at a junaure which required
the modt direnuous efforts, as well as the mod
perse& union, the nobles never aaed, except
during one (hort faily of resentment at the be-
ginning of his reign, either with vigour or in
concert.

As he diripped the nobility of their privileges,

he added to the power and prerogative of the
crown. In order to have at command such a
body of foldicrs as might be fufficient to crumh
any force that his difaffeded fubjeas could draw
together, he not only kept on foot the regular
troops which his father had raised, but, besides
augmenting their number considerably, he took
into his pay fix thousand Swvifs, at that time the
bed disciplined and modt formidable infantry in
.Europe u. From the jealousy natural to tyrants,
he confided in these foreian mercenaries, as the
modt devoted indiruments of oppression, and the

U Men. de Comines, tom. i. 367. Dsn, Hilt; de la

Milice Fran90ife, tom. o18.

most

moit faithful guardians of the power which he
had usurped. That they might be ready to a&
on the ihortcft warning, he, during the latter
years of his reign, kept a considerable body of
them encamped in one place w.

Great funds were requisite, not only to defray

the expence of this additional eilabliihment, but
to supply the fems employed in the various en-
terprizes which the restless adivity of his genius
prompted him to undertake. But the preroga-
tive that his father had assumed of levying taxes
without the concurrence of the States-general,
which he was careful not only to retain but to
extend, enabled him to provide in some measure
for the encreafing charges of government.

What his prerogative, enlarged as it was,

could not furnish, his address procured. He
was the first monarch in Europe who discovered
the method of managing those great assemblies,
in which the feudal policy had vefied the power
of granting fiubfidies and of imposing taxes. He
first taught other princes the fatal art of beginning
their attack on public liberty, by corrupting the
source from which it ihould flow. By exerting
all his power and address in influencing the elec-
tion of representatives, by bribing or overawing
the members, and by various changes which he
artfully made in the form of their deliberations,
Louis acquired such entire diredion of these as-
femblies, that, from being the vigilant guardians
of the privileges and property of the people, he
rendered them tamely subservient towards pro-
moting the most odious measures of his reign X,

w Mem. de Coin. tom. i. 3Br, a Mem. de Cosain.

tom. i. 536. Chron. Scandal. ibid. tom, ii. p. 71.

z As

tions, he not only continued all the taxes
imposed by his father, but made great additions
to them, which amounted to a fum that appeared
astonishing to his contemporaries Y.*

Nor was it the power alone or wealth of the

crown that Louis increased; he extended its ter-
ritories by acquisitions of various kinds. He
got poffeflion of Roufillon by purchase; Provence
was conveyed to him by the will of Chsarles de
Anjou; and upon the death of Charles the Bold,
le seized with a strong hand Burgundy and
Artois, which had belonged to that prince.
Thus, during the course of a lingle reign, France
was formed into one compad kingdom, and the
fleady unrelenting policy of Louis XI. not only
subdued the haughty spirit of the feudal nobles,
but efiablifhed a species of government, scarcely
less absolute, or less terrible than eastern defpo-
tifm.

But fatal as his administration was to the liber-

ties of his fubjeds, the authority which he ac-
quired, the resources of which he became mailer,
and his freedom from reifraint in concerting his
plans as well as in executing them, rendered his
reign adive and enterprizing. Louis negotiated
in all the courts of Europe; he observed the mo-
1tions of all his neighbours; he engaged, either
as principal, or as an auxiliary, in every great
tranfaAion; his resolutions were prompt, his

Y Mem. de Com. tom. i. 334.
* Charles VII. levied taxes to the amount of s,Soo,coo

francs; Louis XI. raised 4,700,000. The former had in
pay 9000 cavalry and ,6,ooo infantry. The latter aug-
mented the cavalry to 9,0ooo, and the infantry to ¶a,0oo.
Mem. de Comines, i. 394.

vOL. I. L opera-

operations vigorous; and upon every emergence
he could call forth into adion the whole force of
his kingdom. From the nera of his reign, the
kings of France, no longer fettered and circum-
fcribed at home by a jealous nobility, have ex;
erted themselves more abroad, have formed more
extensive schemes of foreign conquests, and have
carried on war with a spirit and vigourlong un-
known in Europe.

The example which Louis set was too inviting

not to be imitated by other princes. Henry VII.
as soon as he was seated on the throne of England,
formed the plan of enlarging his own prerogative,
by breaking the power of the nobility. The
circumfances under which he undertook to exe-
cute it, were less favourable than those which in-
duced Charles VII. to make the fame attempt;
and the spirit with which he conduAoed it, was
very different from that of Louis XI. Charles,
by the success of his arms against the English,
by the merit of having expelled them out of so
many provinces, had eRablifhed himself so firmly
in the confidence of his people, as encouraged
him to make bold encroachments on the ancient
conflitution. The daring genius of Louis brok&
through every barrier, and endeavoured to fur-
mount or to remove every obstacle that Rood in
his way. But Henry held the sceptre by a dif-
puted title; a popular faftion was ready every
moment to take arms against him; and after
long civil wars, during which the nobility had
often displayed their power in creating and de-
posing kings, he felt that the regal authority had
been so much relaxed, and that he entered into
poiffllion of a prerogative so much abridged, as

rendered

deliberately, and without any violent exertion.
He endeavoured to undermine that formidable
ftruaure, which he durit not attack by open
force. His schemes, though cautious and flow
in their operation, were well concerted, and pro-
duaive in the end of great effeAs. By his laws,
permitting the barons to break the entails of
their efiates, and expose them to sale; by his
regulations to prevent the nobility from keeping
in their service those numerous bands of retainers,
which rendered them formidable and turbulent;
by favouring the rising power of the commons;
by encouraging population, agriculture, and com-
merce; by securing to his fubjeas, during a long
reign, the enjoyment of the blessings which flow
from the arts of peace ; by accufloming them to
an administration of government, under which
the laws were executed with steadiness and vi-
gour; he made imperceptibly considerable alter-
ations in the English conititution, and tranf-
mitted to his successor authority so extensive, as
rendered him one of the molt absolute monarchs
in Europe, and capable of the greatelt and molt
vigorous efforts.

In Spain, the union of all its crowns by the

marriage of Ferdinand and Isabella; the glory
that they acquired by the conquest of Granada,
which brought the odious dominion .of the
Moors to a period; the command of the great
armies which it had been necessary to keep long
on foot, in order ta accomplish this; the wisdom
and iteadinefs of their administration; and the
addrcfs with which they availed themselves of
every incident that occurred to humble the no-

Lz bility,

spired in railing these monarchs to such eminence
and authority, as none of their predecessors had
ever enjoyed. Though several causes, which
lhall be explained in another place, prevented
their attaining the fame powers with the kings
of France and England, and preserved the
feudal confilitution longer entire in Spain, their
great abilities fupplicd the defets of their
prerogative, and improved with such dexterity
all the advantages which they poffeffed, that
Ferdinand carried on his foreign operations,
which were very extensive, with extraordinary
vigour and effed.

While these princes were thus enlarging the

boundaries of prerogative, and taking such fieps
towards rendering their kingdom capable of a61-
ing with union and force, events occurred, which
called them forth to exert the new powers which
they had acquired. These engaged them in such
a series of enterprizes and negotiations, that the
affairs of all the considerable nations in Europe
came to be insensibly interwoven with each
other; and a great political system was gradu-
ally formed, which grew to be an obje& of uni-
versal attention.

The first event which merits notice, on ac-

count of its influence, in producing this change
in the slate of Europe, was the marriage of the
daughter of Charles the Bold, the sole heiress
of the Ihoufe of Burgundy. For some years be-
fore her father's death, ihe had been considered
as the apparent successor to his territories, and
Charles had made proposals of marrying her to
several different princes, with a view of alluring

them,

them1 by that offer, to favour the schemes
which his reliefs ambition was continually form-

This rendered the alliance with her an obje&

of general attention; and all the advantages of
acquiring pof'eflion of her territories, the most
opulent at that time, and the best cultivated of
any on this fide of the Alps, were perfealy
rnderftood. As soon, then, as the untimely
death of Charles opened the succession [A. D.
s477, Jan. 5], the eyes of all the princes in Eu-
rope were turned towards Mary, and they felt
themselves deeply interested in the choice which
Ihe was about to make of the person on whom
she would belfow that rich inheritance.

Louis XI. from whole kingdom several of the

provinces which lhe poffeffed had been difmem-
bered, and whose dominions ifretched along the
frontier of her territories, had every inducement
to court her alliance. He had, likewise, a good
title to expe& the favourable reception of any
reasonable proposition he should make, with
refped to the disposal of a princess, who was the
vassal of his crown, and descended from the royal
blood of France. There were only two propo-
fitions, however, which he could make with pro-
priety. The one was the marriage of the
dauphin, the other that of the count of Angou-
leme, a prince of the blood, with the heiress of
Burgundy. By the former, he would have an-
nexed all her territories to his crown, and have
rendered France at once the most refpeaable
monarchy in Europe. But the great disparity of
age between the two parties, Mary being twenty,
and the dauphin only .eight years old; the

L 3 avowed

a master poffeffed of such power as might enable
him to form schemes dangerous to their liberties;
together with their dread of falling under the
odious and oppressive government of Louis,
were obfacles in the way of executing this -plan,
which it was vain to think of surmounting, By
the latter, the accomplishment of which might
have been attained with ease, Mary discovered
some inclination to a match with the count of
Angouleme s, Louis would have prevented the
dominions of the house of Burgundy from being
conveyed to a rival power, and in return for such
a splendid establishment for the count of Angou-
leme, he muff have obtained, or would have ex-
torted from him, concefions highly beneficial to
the crown of France. But Louis had been ac-
cuffomed so long to the intricacies of a crooked
and insidious policy, that he could not be fatis-
fled with what was obvious and simple; and was
so fond of artifice and refinement, that he came
to confider there rather as an ultimate objeA,
than merely as the means of conduating affairs,
From this principle, no less than from his unwil-
lingnefs to aggrandize any of his own fubjeas,
or from his desire of oppressing the house of Bur-
gundy, which he hated, he negleaed the course
which a prince less able and artful would have
taken, and followed one more suited to his own

gunnis. Hie proposed to render himfeilf, by force of
arms, master of those provinces which Mary held
of the crown of France, and even to push his
conquests into her other territories, while he

z Mrrn. de Comines, L 358* amused

pradicable match with the dauphin. In prose-
cuting this plan, he displayed wonderful talents
and induRry, and exhibited such scenes of treach-
ery, falsehood, and cruelty, as are amazing even
in the history of Louis XI. Immediately upon
the death of Charles, he put his troops in motion,
and advanced towards the Netherlands. He cor-
rupted the leading men in the provinces of Bur-
gundy and Artois, and seduced them to desert
their sovereign. He got admission into some of
the frontier towns by bribing the governors; the
gates of others were opened to him in confe-
quence of his intrigues with the inhabitants.
He negotiated with Mary; and, in order to
render her odious to her fubjeats, he betrayed to
them her most important secrets. He carried on
a private correspondence with the two ministers
whom she chiefly trusted, and then communicated
the letters which he had received from them to
the dates of Slanders, who, enraged at their per-
fidy, brought them immediately to trial, tortured
them with extreme cruelty, and, unmoved by the
tears and entreaties of their sovereign, who knew
and approved of all that the miniflers had done,
they beheaded them in her presence a.

While Louis, by this condud, unworthy of a

great monarch, was securing the poffeffion of\
Burgundy, Artois, and the towns on the Somme,
the dlates of Slanders carried on a negotiation
with the emperor Frederic III. and concluded a
treaty of marriage between their sovereign and
his son Maximilian, archduke of Auffria [A. D.
1477]. The illufrious birth of that prince, as

a Mem. de Comines, liv. v, chbps 55. p. 309, &c.

wefl

well as the high dignity of which he had the
profpefi, rendered the alliance honourable for*
Mary, while, from the difitance of his hereditary
territories, and the scantiness of his revenues, his
power was so inconsiderable, as did not excite
the jealousy or fear of the Flemings.

Thus Louis, by the caprice of his temper, and

the excess of his refinements, put the house of
Aufrria in poffefiron of this noble Inheritance.
By this acquisition, the foundation of the future
grandeur of Charles V. was laid; and he be.
came master of those territories, which enabled
him to carry on his most formidable and decisive
operations against France. Thus, too, the
fame monarch who firit united the interior force
of France, and established it on such a footing,
as to render it formidable to the ref1 of Europe,
contributed, far contrary to his intention, to
raise up a rival power, which, during two
centuries, has thwarted the measures, opposed
the arms, and checked the progress of his fuc-
ceffors.

The next event of consequence in the sis-

teenth century, was the expedition of Charles
VIII. into Italy [A. D. 1494]. This occa.
fioned revolutions no less memorable; pro,
duced alterations, both in the military and po-
litical system, which were more immediately
perceived; roused the states of Europe to bolder
efforts; and blended their affairs and interests
more closely together. The mild administration
of Charles, a weak but generous prince, seems to
have revived the spirit and genius of the French
nation, which the rigid despotism of Louis XIL
iis father, had depressed, and almost ektinguifhed. The

French nobility, returned, and their young mo-
narch was impatient to distinguish his reign by
some splendid enterprize. While he was uncertain
towards what quarter he should turn his arms,
the folicitations and intrigues of an Italian poli-
tician, no lefa infamous on account of his crimes,
than eminent for his abilities, determined
his choice. Ludovico Sforza, having formed
the delign of deposing his nephew the duke of
Milan, and of placing himfeif on the ducal
throne, was so much afraid of a combination of
the Italian powers to oppose this measure, and
to fiupport the injured prince, with whom molt
of them were conneaed by blood or alliance,
that he saw the necessity of securing the aid of
some able protedor. The king of France was
the person to whom he applied; and without
difelofing his own intentions, he laboured to pre-
vail with him to march into Italy, at the head of
a powerful army, in order to .seize the crown of
Naplks, to which Charles had pretensions as heir
of the house of Anjou. The right to that king-
dom, claimed by the Angevin family, had been
conveyed to Louis XI. by Charles of Anjou,
count of Maine and Provence. But that saga-
cious monarch, though he took immediate
poffeflion of those territories of which Charles
was really mailer, totally disregarded his ideal
title to a kingdom, over which another prince
reigned in tranquillity; and uniformly declined
involving himself in the labyrinth of Italian
politics. His. fmn, more adventurous, or more
Inconsiderate, embarked eagerlyin this enterprize;
and contemning all the remnonftrances of his moi

expe-

experienced counsellors, prepared to carry it on
with the utmoki vigour.

The power which Charles poffeffed was so

great, that he reckoned himself equal to this
arduous undertaking. His father had trauf-
mitted to him such an ample prerogative, as
gave him the entire command of his kingdom.
He himself had added considerably to the extent
of his dominions, by his prudent marriage with
the heiress of Bretagne, which rendered him
makler of that province, the last of the great
fiefs that remained to be annexed to the crown.
He soon assembled forces which he thought sus-
ficient; and so impatient was he to enter on his
career as a conqueror, that sacrificing what was
real, for what was chimerical, he restored Rou-
lillon to Ferdinand, and gave up part of his
father's acquisitions in Artois to Maximilian,
with a view of inducing these princes not to
moled France, while he was carrying on his
operations in Italy.

But so different were the efforts of the slates

of Europe in the fifteenth century, from those
which we ihall behold in the course of this
history, that the army with which Charles un-
dertook this great enterprize, did not exceed
twenty thousand men. The train of artillery,
however, the ammunition, and warlike iores of
every kind provided for its use, were so con-
fiderable, as' to bear some resemblance to the
immense apparatus of modern war b

Wlhen the French entered Italy, they met

Jvith nothing able to resist them. The Italian

b Mezeray HWIf. :om. 11, 777*

powers

undiflurbed by the invasion of any foreign enemy,
had formed a fyfem with refpe& to their aFairs,
both in peace and war, peculiar to themselves.
In order to adjust the interests, and balance the
power of the different states into which Italy
was divided, they were engaged in perpetual and
endless negotiations with each other, which they
conduEted with all the subtlety of a refining and
deceitful policy. Their conteits in the field, when
they had recourse to arms, were decided in mock
battles, by innocent and bloodless viAories.
Upon the firRt appearance of the danger which
now impended, they had recourse to the arts
which they'had iludied, and employed their ut-
most Ikill in intrigue in order to avert it. But
this proving ineffectual, their bands of effeminate
mercenaries, the only military force that remained
in the country, being fit only for the parade of
service, were terrified at the afped of real war,
and shrunk at its approach. The impetuosity of
the French valour appeared to them irresistible.
Florence, Pisa, and Rome opened their gates as
the French army advanced. The profpe& of
this dreadful invasion -fruck one king of Naples
with such panic terror, that he died (if we may
believe hilrorians) of the fright. Another abh-
dicated his. throne from the fame pusillanimous
spirit. A third fled out of his dominions, as
soon as the enemy appeared on the Neapolitan
frontiers. Charles, after marching thither from
the bottom of the Alps, with as much rapidity,
and almost as. little opposition, as if h4e had been
on a progress through his own dominions, took

quiet

quiet poffeffion of the throne of Naples, and in,
timidated or gave law to every power in Italy.

Such was the conclusion of an expedition,

that must be considered as the first great exer-
tion of those new powers which the princes of
Europe had acquired, and now began to exercise.
Its effeds were no less considerable, than its
success had beens astonishing. The Italians,
unable to refill the impreiion of the enemy who
broke in upon them, permitted him to hold on
his course undisturbed. They quickly perceived
that no single power, which they could rouse to
aaion, was an equal match for a monarch who
ruled over such extensive territories, and was at
the head of such a martial people; but that a
confederacy might accomplish what the separate
members of it durit not attempt. To this expe.
dient, the only one that remained to deliver or
to preserve them from the yoke, they had re-
course. While Charles inconsiderately wasted
his time at Naples in fellivals and triumphs on
account of his pail successes, or was fondly
dreaming of future conqueits in the East, to
the empire of which he now aspired, they formed
against him a powerful combination of aimoft all
the Italian slates, supported by the emperor
Maximilian, and Ferdinand king of Aragon.
The union of so many powers, who flfpended
or forgot all their particular animofities, that
they might ad in concert against an enemy who
had become formidable to them all, awakened
Charles from his thoughtless security. He saw
now no profpea of safety but in returning to
France. An army of thirty thousand men, as-

fembled

march; and though the French, with a daring
courage, which more than countervailed their
inferiority in number, broke through that great
body and gained a viaory, which opened to their
monarch a safe passage into his own territories,
he was firipped of all his conquedts in Italy in as
short a time as it had taken to acquire them;
and the political fydem in that country resumed
the fame appearance as before his invalion.

The sudden and decisive effea of this confe-

deracy, seems to have inftruaed the princes and
itatefmen of Italy as much as the irruption of
the French had disconcerted and alarmed them.
They had extended, on this occasion, to the
affairs of Europe, the maxims of that political
science which had hitherto been applied only to
regulate the operations of the petty dtates in their
own country. They had discovered the method
of preventing any monarch from rising to such a
degree of power, as was inconfitent with the
general liberty; and had manifedied the import-
ance of attending to that great secret in modern
policy, the preservation of a proper didfribution
of power among all the members of the fydfem
into which the dlates of Europe are formed.
During all the wars of which Italy from that
time was the theatre, and amidit the hodtile
operations which the imprudence of Louis XII.
and the ambition of Ferdinand of Aragon, car-
ried on in that country, with little interruption,
from the close of the fifteenth century, to that
period at which the fubfqueqnt hidfory com-
mences, the maintaining a proper balance of
power between the contending parties, became

voL. 1. M the

the great objea of attention to the ilatefmen of
Italy. Nor was the idea confined to them. Self-
preservation taught other powers to adopt it.
It grew to be faihionable and universal. From
this era we can trace the progress of that in-
tercourfe between nations, which has linked the
powers of Europe so closely together; and can
discern the operations of that provident policy,
which, during peace, guards against remote and
contingent dangers; and, in war, has prevented
rapid and deftrudcive conquests.

This was not the only effe& of the opera-

tions which the great powers of Europe carried
on in Italy. They contributed to render general
such a change, as the French had begun to make
in the fate of their troops; and obliged all the
princes, who appeared on this new theatre of
acion, to put the military force of their kingdoms
on an eflablilhment similar to that of France.
WThen the feat of war came to be remote from
the countries which maintained the conteit, the
service of the feudal vassals ceased to be of any
use; and the neceflity of employing soldiers re-
gularly trained to arms, and kept in conotant
pay, came at once to be evident. When
Charles VIII. marched into Italy, his cavalry
was entirely composed of those companies of
Gendarmes, embodied by Charles VII. and con-
tinued by Louis XI. ; his mfantry consisted partly
of Swiss, hired of the Cantons, and partly of
Gafcons, armed and disciplined after the Swiss
model. To these Louis XII. added a body of
Germans, well known in the wars of Italy by
the name of the Black Bands. But neither of
these monarchb made any account of the feudal

militia,

force. which they might have commanded, in
virtue of the ancient infritutions in their king·
dom. Maximilian and Ferdinand, as soon as they
began to a& in Italy, employed similar inftru,
ments, and truffed the execution of their plans
entirely to mercenary troops.

This innovation in the military fyfem was

quickly followed by another, which the cuflom
of employing Swiss in the Italian wars was the
oncafion of introducing. The arms and difci-
pline of the Swiss were different from those of
other European nations. During their long and
violent fitruggles in defence of their liberties
against the house of Auffria, whose armies, like
those of other considerable princes, consisted
chiefly of heavy-armed cavalry, the Swiss found
that their poverty, and the small number of gen.
tlemen residing in their country, at that time
barren and ill cultivated, put it out of their
power to bring into the field any body of horse
capable of facing the enemy. Necefiity com-
pelled them to place all their confidence in in-
fantry; and in order to render it capable of
withitanding the shock of cavalry, they gave
the soldiers brealt-plates and helmets as defensive
armour; together with long spears, halberts,
and heavy swords, as weapons of offence. They
formed them into large battalions ranged in deep
and close array, so that they could present on
every fide a formidable front to the enemy c.
The men at arms could make no imprefion on
the solid itrength of such a body. 'It repulsed
the Auffrians in all their attempts to conquer

c Machiavel's Art of War, b. ii. chsi. ii. p. 45!.

rv z Swifferland,

merie, which was scarcely inferior to that of
France, either in number or reputation; and when
firR called to ad in Italy, it bore down, by its
irresistible force, every enemy that attempted to
oppose it. These repeated proofs of the decisive
effe6S of infantry, exhibited on such conspicuous
occasions, restored that service to reputation, ind
gradually re-eftablifned the opinion, which had
been long exploded, of its superior importance
in the operations of war. But the glory which
the Swiss had acquired, having inspired them
with such high ideas of their own prowess and
consequence as frequently rendered them muti-
nous and insolent, the princes who employed
them became weary of depending on the caprice
of foreign mercenaries, and began to turn their
attention towards the improvement of their na-
tional infantry.

The German powers having the command of

men, whom nature has endowed with that fleady
courage and persevering fitrength which forms
them to be soldiers, soon modelled their troops
in such a manner, that they vied with the Swiss
both in discipline and valour.

The French monarchs, though more slowly,

and with greater difficulty; accustomed the im-
petuous spirit of their people to subordination
and discipline; and were at such pains to render
their national infantry refpedable, that as early
as the reign of Louis XII. several gentlemen of
high rank had so far abandoned their ancient
ideas, as to condescend to enter into that ser-
ice d

d Jrantome, tom. x. p. i8. Mem. de Fleuranges, s43*

The

cult to employ any other than their national
troops in the southern parts of Italy, which was
the chief scene of their operations in that coun-
try, not only adopted the Swiss discipline, but
improved upon it, by mingling a proper number
of soldiers, armed with heavy mulkets, in their
battalions; and thus formed that famous body
of infantry, which, during a century and a half,
was the admiration and terror of all Europe.
The Italian fdates gradually diminished the num-
ber of their cavalry, and, in imitation of their
more powerful neighbours, brought the lirength
of their armies to consist in foot soldiers. From
this period the nations of Europe have carried
on war with forces more adapted to every fpe-
cies of service, more capable of ading in every
country, and better fitted both for making cony
queds, and for preserving them.

As their efforts in Italy led the people of Eu-

rope to these improvements in the art of war,
they gave them likewise the firdt idea of the ex-
pence with which it is accompanied when exten-
five or of long continuance, and accustomed every
nation to the burden of such impositions as are
necessary for supporting it. While the feudal
policy fubfiled in full vigour, while armies were
composed of military vassals called forth to attack
some neighbouring power, and to perform, ini a
short campaign, the services which they owed
to their sovereign, the expence of war was ex-
tremely moderate. A small fnbfidy enabled .a
prince to begin and to finish his greatest military
operations. But when Italy became the theatre
on which the powers of Europe contended for

M 3 fupe.

superiority, the preparations requisite for such a
distant expedition, the pay of armies kept con-
ftantly on foot, their fubfiflence in a foreign
country, the sieges to be undertaken, and the
towns to be defended, swelled the charges of war
immensely, and, by creating demands unknown
in less a~tive times, multiplied taxes in every
kingdom. The progress of ambition, however,
was so rapid, and princes extended their opera.
tions so fait, that it was impossible at firnt to eita-
blifh funds proportional to the increase of ex-
pence which these occasioned. When Charles
VIII. invaded Naples, the sums requisite for
carrying on that enterprize so far exceeded
those which France had been accustomed to con-
tribute for the support of government, that be-
fore he reached the frontiers of Italy, his trea.
fury was exhanfled, and the domellic resources,
of which his extensive prerogative gave him the
command, were at an end. As he durit not
venture to lay any new imposition on his people,
oppressed already with the weight of unusual bur-
dens; the only expedient that remained was, to
borrow of the Genoese as much money as might
enable him to continue his march. But he could
not obtain a fuflicient fum, without consenting
to pay annually the exorbitant interest of forty-
two livres for every hundred that he receivede.
We may observe the fame disproportion between
the efforts and revenues of other princes, his con-
temporaries. From this period, taxes went on
increasing; and during the reign of Charles V.
such sums were levied in every date, as would
have appeared enormous at the close of the sis-

SMInem. de Comines, hib. vii. c. 5. P. 440. teenth

for the fRill more exorbitant exaAions of modern
times.

The last tranfadion, previous to the reign of

Charles V. that merits attention on account of
its influence upon the fiate of Europe, is the
league of Cambray. To humble the republic of
Venice, and to divide its territories, was the ob-
'jet of all the powers who united in this confe-
deracy. The civil conflitution of Venice, efta-
hlifhed on a firm basis, had fuffered no confide-
rable alteration for several centuries; during
which, the senate conduded its affairs by max-
ims of policy no less prudent than vigorous, and
adhered to these with an uniform confidtent spirit,
which gave that commonwealth great advantage
tver other slates, whose views and measures
changed as often as the form of their govern-
ment, or the persons who administered it. By
these unintermitted exertions of wisdom and va-
lour, the Venetians enlarged the dominions of
their commonwealth, until it became the most
considerable power in Italy; while their exten-
five commerce, the useful and curious manufac-
tures which they carried on, together with the
large lhare which they had acquired of the lu-
crative commerce with the Eadc, rendered Venice
the modt opulent date in Europe.

The power of the Venetians was the obje& of

terror to their Italian neighbours. Their wealth
was viewed with envy by the greatest monarchs,
who could not vie with many of their private ci-
tizens in the magnificence of their buildings, in
the richlnfs of their dress and furniture, or in

splendor

splendor and elegance of living f. Julius II,
whose ambition was superior, and his abilities
cqsal, to those of any pontiff who ever fat on
the papal throne, conceived the idea of this
league against the Venetians, and endeavoured,
by applying to those pafiions which I have men-
tioned, to perfiuade other princes to join in it.
By working upon the fears of the Italian powers,
and upon the avarice of several monarchs beyond
the Alps, he induced them, in concnrrence with
other causes, which it is not my province to eK-
plain, to form one of the moit powerful confe.
deracies that Europe had ever beheld, againt
those haughty republicans.

The emperor, the king of France, the king

of Aragon, the pope, were principals in the
league of Cambray, to which almost all the
princes of Italy acceded, the least considerable of
them hoping for some lhare in the spoils of a
fiate, which they deemed to be now devoted to
deftruaion. The Venetians might have diverted
this florm, or have broken its force; but with a
presumptuous rashness, to which there is nothing
similar in the course of their history, they waited
its approach. The impetuous valour of the
French rendered ineffeaual all their precautions
for the safety of the republic; and the fatal
battle of Ghiarraddada entirely ruined the army,
on which they relied for defence. Julius seized
all the towns which they held in the ecclesiastical
territories. Ferdinand re-annexed the towns of
which they had got poffeffion on the coaPt of
Calabria, to his Neapolitan dominions. Maximi-
i Heliani oratio apud Goldatium in polit. Imperial. p. 9S0.

han,

lian, at the head of a powerful army, advanced
towards Venice on the one fide. The French
pushed their conquests on the other. The Vene-
tians, surrounded by so many enemies, and left
without one ally, funk from the height of pre-
fumption to the depths of despair; abandoned
all their territories on the continent; and hfut
themselves up in their capital, as their last re-
fuge, and the only place which they hoped to

preserve. This rapk1 success, however, proved fatal to
the confederacy. The members of it, whose
union continued while they were engaged in
seizing their prey, began to feel their ancient
jealousies and animofities revive, as soon as they
had a profpea of dividing it. When the Vene-
tians oblerved there symptoms of diftruit and
alienation, a ray of hope broke in upon them;
the spirit natural to their councils returned; they
resumed such wisdom and firmness, as made some
atonement for their former imprudence and de-
jeaion; they recovered part of the territory
which they had loft; they appeased the pope
and Ferdinand by well-timed conceflions in their
favour; and at length dissolved the confederacy,
which had brought their commonwealth to the
brink of ruiu.

Julius, elated with beholding the effears of a

league which he himself had planned, and ima-
gining that nothing was too arduous for him to
undertake, conceived the idea of expelling every
foreign power out of Italy, and bent all the
force of his mind towards executing a scheme so
well suited to his enterprizmg genius. He di-~
reaed his first attack against the French, who,

011

lians, than any of the foreigners who had ac-
quired dominion in their country. By his ac-
tivity and address, he prevailed on most of the
powers, who had joined in the league of Cam-
bray, to turn their arms against the king of
France, their former ally; and engaged Henry
VIII. who had lately ascended the throne of
England, to favour their operations by invading
France. Louis XII. resifted all the efforts of
this formidable and unexpeaed confederacy with
indaunted fortitude. Hostilities were carried
on, during several campaigns, in Italy, on the
frontiers of Spain, and inPicardy, with alternate
finccefs. Exhausted, at length, by the variety
as well as extent of his operations; unable to
withfiand a confederacy which brought againd
him superior force, conduaed with wisdom and
aling with perseverance; Louis found it necef,
fary to conclude separate treaties of peace with
his enemies; and the war terminated with the
iofs of every thing which the French had ac-
quired in Italy, except the cadle of Milan, and
a few inconsiderable towns in that dutchy.

The various negotiations carried on during

this bury period, and the different combinations
formed among powers hitherto little conneaed
pvith each other, greatly increased that inter-
course among the nations of Europe, which I
have mentioned as one effed of the events in the
fifteenth century; while the greatness of the ob.
jeEt at which different nations aimed, the difitant
expeditions which they undertook, as well as the
length and obdtinacy -of the contest in which they
engaged, obliged them to exert themselves witlh

a vigour

## SECT. III. View of the political Constitution of the principal States in Europe, at the Commencement of the sixteenth Century.

a vigour and perseverance unknown in the prc-
ceding ages.

Those aaive scenes which the following hif'.

tory will exhibit, as well as the variety and im-
portance of those tranfaaions which difiinguifh
the period to which it extends, are not to be
aferibed solely to the ambition, to the abilities,
or to the rivalfhip of Charles V. and of Francis I.
The kingdoms of Europe had arrived at such a
degree of improvement in the internal adminifdra-
tion of government, and princes had acquired
such command of -the national force which was
to be exerted in foreign wars, that they were in
a condition to enlarge the sphere of their ope-
Tations, to multiply their claims and pretensions,
and to increase the vigour of their efforts. Ac-
cordingly the sixteenth century opened with the
certain profpe& of its abounding in great and
interefihng events.

SECT. III.

Fiec of the political Confitution of the princzpal

States in Europe, at the Commencement of the
fxteenth Century.
HAVING thus enumerated the principal causes

and events, the influence of which was felt

in every part of Europe, and contributed either
to improve internal order and police in its various
itates, or to enlarge the sphere of their a&ivity,
by giving them more intire command of the force

with

nothing farther seems requisite for preparing my
readers to enter, with full information, upon pe-
rufing the Hiflory of Charles V., but to give a
view of the political conititntion and form of civil
government in each of the nations which aded
any confiderahle part during that period. For
'as the infitutions and events which I have en-
deavoured to illuflrate, formed the people of Eu-
rope to resemble each other, and conduaed them
from barbarism to refinement, in the fame path,
and by nearly equal steps; there were other cir-
cumftances which occasioned a difference in their
political establishments, and gave rife to those
peculiar modes of government, which have pro-
duced such variety in the charadter and genius
of nations.

It is no less necessary to become acquainted

with the latter, than to have contemplated the
former. Without a difcind knowledge of the
peculiar form and genius of civil government in
each fiate, a great part of its tranfations must
appear altogether myfierious and inexplicable.
The hifiorians of particular countries, as they
seldom extend their views farther than to the
amusement or inftruAion of their fellow-citizens,
by whom they might presume that all their do-
medtic cufloms and infditutions were perfe~tly un-
derdtood, have often negleaed to descend into
such details with refpea to these, as are fuffi-
cient to convey to foreigners full light and in-
formation concerning the occurrences which they
relate. But a hiflory, which comprehends the
tranfations of so many different countries, would
be extremely imperfe6t, without a previous fur-

vey

It is from his knowledge of these, that the reader
must draw those principles, which will enable
him to judge with discernment, and to decide
with certainty concerning the condua of nations.

A minute detail, however, of the peculiar

forms and regulations in every country, would
lead to dedutions of immeasurable length. To
Iketch out the great lines which dillinguiih and
charaferife each government, is all that the na-
ture of my present work will admit of, and all
that is necessary to illuffrate the events which it
records.

At the opening of the sixteenth century, the

political afpe& of Italy was extremely different
from that of any other part of Europe. In-
Read of those extensive monarchies, which oc-
cupied the reft of the continent, that delightful
country was parcelled out among many small
Rates, each of which poffeffed sovereign and in-
dependent jurifdiaion. The only monarchy in
Italy was that of Naples. The dominion of the
popes was of a peculiar species, to which there
is nothing similar either in ancient or modern
times. In Venice, Florence, and Genoa, a re-
publican form of government was eitablifhed.
Milan was ftbjed to sovereigns, who had as-
fumed no higher title than that of dukes.

The pope was the first of these powers in dig.

nity, and not the least considerable by the extent
of his territories. In the primitive church, the
jurifdidion of bishops was equal and co-ordinate.
They derived, perhaps, some degree of confider-
ation from the dignity of the fee in which they
prelided. They poffeffed, however, no real au-

vOL. I. N thority

by superior abilities,, or superior fanaity. As
Rome had so long been the feat of empire, and
the capital of the world, its bilhops were on that
account entitled to refpe&; they received it;
but during several ages they received, and even
claimed, nothing more. From these humble be-
ginnings, they advanced with such adventurous
and well-direfted ambition, that they ellablilhed
a spiritual dominion over the minds and senti-
ments of men, to which all Europe submitted
with implicit obedience. Their claim of uni-
versal jurifdidion, as heads of the church; and
their pretensions to infallibility in their decifsons,
as successors of St. Peter, are as chimerical, as
they are repugnant to the genius of the Christian
religion. But on these foundations, the super-
ilition and credulity of mankind enabled them to
ere& an amazing fuperftruiure. In all eccleli-
allical controversies, their decisions were received
as the infallible oracles of truth. Nor was the
plenitude of their power confined solely to what
was spiritual; they dethroned monarchs; dif-
posed of crowns; absolved fubjeas from the
obedience due to their sovereigns; and laid
kingdoms under interdiAs. There was not a
hate in Europe which had not been difquieted
by their ambition. There was not a throne
which they had not shaken; nor a prince, who
did not tremble at their power.

Nothing was wanting to render this empire

absolute, and to establish it on the ruins of all
civil authority, but that the popes lhould have
poffeffed such a degree of temporal power, as
was fufficient to second and enforce their ifpi.

z ritual

time when their spiritual jurifdiaion was mout
extensive, and mout revered, their secular domi-
nion was extremely limited. They were power-
ful pontiffs, formidable at a difitance; but they
were petty princes, without any considerable do,
meftic force. They had early endeavoured, in-
deed, to acquire territory by arts similar to those
which they had employed in extending their fpi.
ritual jurididtion. Under pretence of a donation
from Conflantine, and of another from Charle-
magne or his father Pepin, they attempted to
take poffefilon of some towns adjacent to Rome.
But these donations were fiaitious, and availed
them little. The benefaaions, for which they
were indebted to the credulity of the Norman
adventurers, who conquered Naples, and to the
fuperilition of the countess Matilda, were real,
and added ample domains to the Holy See,

But the power of the popes did not increase

in proportion to the extent of territory which
they had acquired. In the dominions annexed
to the Holy See, as well as in those fubJe& to
other princes in Italy, the sovereign of a slate
was far from having the command of the force
which it contained. During the turbulence and
confusion of the middle ages, the powerful no-
bility, or leaders of popular fadions in Italy,
had seized the government of different towns;
and after firengthening their fortifications, and
tak jag a body of mercenaries into pay, they as-
pired at independence. The territory which the
church had gained was filled with petty lords of
this kind, who left the pope hardly the (hadow
of domestic authority.

w a As

papal power in the greater part of the towns
fubjed to the church, the Roman barons fre-
quently disputed the authority of the popes, even
in Rome itself. In the twelfth century, an opi-
nion began to be propagated, " That as the
funaion of ecclefiaftics was purely spiritual, they
ought to possess no property, and to claim no
temporal jurifdifion; but, according to the
laudable example of their predecessors in the pri-
anitive church, (hould fubisft wholly upon their
tithes, or upon the voluntary oblations of the
people a." This doarine being addressed to
men, who had beheld the fcandaious manner in
which the avarice and ambition of the clergy
had prompted them to contend for wealth, and
to exercise power, they listened to it with fond
attention. The Roman barons, who had felt
most sensibly the rigour of ecclesiastical oppref-
sion, adopted these sentiments with such ardour,
that they set themfeives instantly to (hake off the
yoke. They endeavoured to re{tore some image
of their ancient liberty, by reviving the inftitu.
tion of the Roman senate [A.D. I1431, in
which they vefited supreme authority; commit-
ting the executive power sometimes to one chief
senator, sometimes to two, and sometimes to B
magistrate dignified with the name of The Patri-
zian. The popes exerted themselves with vigour,
in order to check this dangerous encroachment
on their jurifdidion. One of theni, finding all
his endeavours ineffedual, was so much morti-
fied, that extreme grief cut ihort his days. An-
other, having ventured to attack the senators at

a Otto Frifgentis de Geftis Frider. Imp. lib. ii. cap. so.

the

wounded in the fray b. During a considerable
period, the power of the popes, before which
the greatest monarchs in Europe trembled, was
circumscribed within such narrow limits in their
own capital, that they durst hardly exert any
a& of authority, without the permiflion and con-
currence of the senate.

Encroachments were made upon the papal

sovereignty, not only by the ufurpations of the
Roman nobility, but by the mutinous spirit of
the people. During seventy years of the four-
teenth century, the popes fixed their residence in
Avignon. The inhabitants of Rome, accustom-
ed to confider themselves as the descendants of
the people who had conquered the world, and
had given laws to it, were too high-fpirited to
submit with patience to the delegated authority
of those persons to whom the popes committed
the government of the city. On rmany occa-
fions, they opposed the execution of the papal
mandates, and on the slightest appearance of in-
novation or oppreflion, they were ready to take
arms in defence of their own immunities. To-
wards the middle of the fourteenth century, be-
ing instigated by1 Nicolas Rienzo, a man of low
birth and a seditious spirit, but of popular elo-
quence, and an enterprising ambition, they drove
all the nobility out of the city, established a de-
mocratical form of government, eleaed Rienzo
tribune of the people, and invefited him with ex-
tensive authority. But though the frantic pro;

b Otto Frifing. Chron. lib. vii. cap. 27. 3r. Id. de Gest.

Frid. lib. i. c. 27. Muratori Annali d'Italia, vol. i . 398.
404.

N 3 ceedings

ceedings of the tribune soon overturned this new
fyffem; though the government of Rome was
reinstated in its ancient form; yet every fresh at-
tack contributed to weaken the papal jurifdic-
Lion : and the turbulence of the people concurred
with the spirit of independence among the nobi.
lity, in circumscribing it more and more C. Gre-
gory VII. and other domineering pontiffs, ac-
complifhed those great things which rendered
them so formidable to the emperors with whom
they contended, not by the force of their arms,
or by the extent of their power, but by the
dread of their spiritual censures, and by the es-
fed of their intrigues, which excited rivals, and
called forth enemies against every prince whom
they wished to depress or to destroy.

Many attempts were made by the popes, not

only to humble those ufurpers, who lorded it
over the cities in the eccleliaftical slate, but to
break the turbulent spirit of the Roman people.
These were long unfuccefsful. But at last Alex-
ander VI. with a policy no less artful than ilagi-
tious, subdued or extirpated mout of the great
Roman barons, and rendered the popes maiters
of their own dominions. The enterprising am-
bition of Julius II. added, conquests of no incon,
fiderable value to the patrimony of St. Peter.
Thus the popes, by degrees, became powerful
temporal princes. Their territories, in the age
of Charles V. were of greater extent than at pre-
sent; their country seems to have been better cul-

c Hitoire Florentine de Giov. Villani, lib. xu1. c. 29.

1o0, ap. Murat. Script. Rerum Ital. vol. xiii. Vita de Cola
di Rienzo, ap. Murat. Antiq. Ital. vol. iii. P. 399, &c.
Hilt, de Nic. Rieasy, par M. de Boifpreaux, P. 95, &c.

tivated

drew large contributions from every part of Eu-
rope, their revenues far exceeded those of the
neighbouring powers, and rendered them capa-
ble of more sudden and vigorous efforts.

The genius of the papal government, however,

was better adapted to the exercise of spiritual
dominion, than of temporal power. With re-
fpe& to the former, all its maxims were fready
and invariable. Every new pontiff adopted the
plan of his predecessor. By education and habit,
ecclefiaflics were so formed, that the charaaer of
the individual was funk in that of the profeflion;
and the passions of the man were sacrificed to
the interest and honour of the order. The hands
which held the reins of administration might
change; but the spirit which conduaed them
was always the fame. While the measures of
other governments fluanated, and the objeas at
which they aimed varied, the church kept one
end in view; and to this unrelaxing confdancy of
pursuit, it was indebted for its success in the
boldeit attempts ever made by human ambition.

But in their civil adminiflration, the popes

followed no such uniform or consistent plan.
There, as in other governments, the charaher,
the passions, and the interest of the person who
had the supreme diretion of affairs, occasioned
a variation both in objeas and measures. As
few prelates reached the summit of ecdefiaftical
dignity until they were far advanced in life, a
change of mailers was more frequent in the papal
dominions than in other states, and the political
fyfem was, of course, less iable and permanent.
Every pope was eager to make the moot of the

Ihort

of enjoying power, in order to aggrandize his
own family, and to attain his private ends; and
it was often the fsrft business of his successor to
undo all that he had done, and to overturn what
he had established.

As ecclefiaftics were trained to pacific arts, and

early initiated in the mysteries of that policy by
which the court of Rome extended or fipported
its spiritual dominion, the popes in the conduat
of their temporal affairs were apt to follow the
fame maxims, and in all their measures were more
ready to employ the refinements of intrigue, than
the force of arms. `It was in the papal court
that address and subtlety in negotiation became
a science; and during the sixteenth century,
Rome was considered as the school in which it
might be best acquired.

As the decorum of their ecclesiastical charaaer

prevented the popes from placing themselves at
the head of their armies, or from taking the
command in person of the military force in their
dominions, they were afraid to arm their sub-
jeas; and in all their operations, whether offen-
five or defensive, they trusted entirely to merce-
nary troops.

As their power and dominions could not de-

scend to their posterity, the popes were less soli-
citous than other princes to form or to encourage
schemes of public utility and improvement, Their
tenure was only for a ihort life; present advan-
tage was what they chiefly dudied; to squeeze
and to amass, rather than to meliorate, was their
objed. They ere6{ed, perhaps, some work of
ostentation, to remain as a monument of their

ponti-

times, to eftablith useful institutions, in order to
soothe and silence the turbulent populace of
Rome; but plans of general benefit to their sub-
jeas, framed with a viewy to futurity, were rarely
objeds of attention in the papal policy. The
patrimony of St. Peter was worse governed than
any part of Europe; and though a generous pon-
tiff might suspend for a little, or counterat the
effeds of those vices which are peculiar to the
adminitiration of ecclefiafrics; the disease not
only remained without remedy, but has gone on
increasing from age to age; and the decline of
the date has kept pace with its progress.

One circumitance, farther, concerning the pa-

pal government, is f0 singular, as to merit atten-
tion. As the spiritual supremacy and temporal
power were united in one person, and uniformly
aided each other in their operations, they became
so blended together, that it was difficult to fepa-
rate them, even in imagination. The potentates,
who found it necessary to oppose the measures
which the popes pursued as temporal princes,
could not easily dived themselves of the reverence
which they imagined to be due to them as hseads
of the church, and vicars of Jesus Christ. It
was with reludance that they could be brought
to a rupture with the head of the church; they
were unwilling to puth their operations againit
him to extremity; they liltened eagerlf to the
sirs overturesofaccommodation, and were anxious
to procure it almost upon any terms. Their
consciousness of this encouraged the enterprising
pontiffs, who filled the papal throne about the
beginning of the sixteenth century, to engage in

schemes

trusted, that if their temporal power was not sus.
ficient to carry them through with success, the
refped paid to their spiritual dignity would ena-
ble them to extricate themselves with facility and
with honour . But when popes came to take
part more frequently in the contests among
princes, and to engage as principals or auxiliaries
in every war kindled in Europe, this veneration
for their sacred charaster began to abate; and
lrinking inflances will occur in the following his-
tory of its being almost totally extind.

Of all the Italian powers, the republic of Ve-

nice, next to the papal fee, was most conneaed
with the relt of Europe. The rife of that com-
monwealth, during the inroads of the Huns in

d The manner in which Louis XII. of France undertook

and carried on war againlt Julius II. remarkably illuffrates
this obfSrvation. Louis solemnly confiulted the clergy of
France, whether it was lawful to take arms against a pope
who had wantonly kindled war in Europe, and svnhom neither
the faith of treaties, nor gratitude for favours received, nor
the decorum of his charaaer, could refrrain from the mout
violent aations to which the lull of power prompts ambitious
princes. Though his clergy authorized the war, yet Anne
of Bretagne, his queen, entertained feruples with regard to
the lawfulness of it. The king himself, from some super-
diltion of the fame kind, carried it on faintly; and, upon
every frefih adeastage, renewed his propositions of peace.
Isdezeray, Hilt. de France, fol. edit. 1685. tom. . 852. I
shall produce another proof of this reverence for the papal
charaer, ftiil more firiking. Guicciardini, the mlt saga-
cious, perlhpm, of all modern hiflorians, and the bolideR in
1sainting the vires and ambirion of the popes, reprefnts the
death of Migliau, a Spanish offkmer, who was killed during
the siege of Naples, es a punilhment inflfted on him by
heaven, on account of his having opposed the letting of Cle.
ment VII. at liberty. Guic. Hiltoria d'Itali2. Genev. 1645.
vol. ii. lib. iS. p. 467.

the

capital in the small isles of the Adriatic gulf;
and the more singular form of its civil conftitu-
tion, are generally known. If we view the Ve-
netian government as calculated for the order of
nobles alone, its inititutions may be pronounced
excellent; the deliberative, legislative, and exe-
cutive powers, are so admirably difributed and
adjusted, that it must be regarded as a perfedt
model of political wisdom. But if we confider it
as formed for a numerous body of people fubjea
to its jurifdi&ion, it will appear a rigid and par-
tial aristocracy, which lodges all power in the
hands of a fex' members of the community, while
it degrades and oppresses the reft.

The fpiriteof government, in a commonwealth

of this species, was, of courfc, timid and jealous.
The Venetian nobles difirufted their own fubjeas,
and were afraid of allowing them the use of arms.
They encouraged among them arts of industry
and commerce; they employed them in manu-
faaures and in navigation; but never admitted
them into the troops which the state kept in its
pay. The military force of the republic consisted
entirely of foreign mercenaries. The command
of these was never truited to noble Venetians, eit
they should acquire such influence over the army,
as might endanger the public liberty; or become
accustomed to the exercise of such power, as
would make them unwilling to return to the con-
dition of private citizens. A soldier of fortune
was placed at the head of the armies of the com-
monwealth; and to obtain that honour, was the
great objea of the Italian Condottieri, or leaders
of bands, who, in the fifcenth and fixtenth cen-

turies,

out soldiers to different slates. But the fame
suspicious policy, which induced the Venetians
to employ these adventurers, prevented their
placing entire confidence in them. Two noble-
men, appointed by the senate, accompanied their
army, when it took the field, with the appellation
of Proveditori, and, like the field-deputies of the
Dutch republic in latter times, observed all the
motions of the general, and checked and con-
trouled him in all his operations.

A commonwealth with foch civil and military

inflitutions, was not formed to make conquests.
While its fubjedis were disarmed, and its nobles
excluded from military command, it carried on its
warlike enterprizes with great disadvantage. This
ought to have taught the Venetians to reft fatif-
fled with making felf-prefervation, and the enjoy-
ment of domedtic security, the objeas of their
policy. But republics are apt to be seduced by
the spirit of ambition, as well as kings. When
the Venetians so far forgot the interior defeas in
their government as to aim at extensive conquests,
the fatal blow, which they received in the war
excited by the league of Cambray, convinced
them of the imprudence and danger of making
violent efforts, in opposition to the genius and
tendency of their confditution.

It is not, however, by its military, but by its

naval and commercial power, that the importance
of the Venetian commonwealth mud2 be efdimated.
The latter confituted the real force and nerves
of the dtate. The jealousy of government did
not extend to this department. Nothing was
apjrehended from this quarter, that could prove

3 formidable

the nobles to trade, and to serve on board the
fleet. They became merchants and admirals.
They increased the wealth of their country by
their industry. They added to its dominions by
the valour with which they conduted its naval
armaments.

Commerce was an inexhaustible source of opu-

lence to the Venetians. All the nations in
Europe depended upon them, not only for the
commodities of the East, but for various manu-
faatures fabricated by them alone, or finished with
a dexterity and elegance unknown in other coun-
tries. From this extensive commerce, the date
derived such immense supplies, as concealed those
vices in its constitution which I have mentioned;
and enabled it to keep on foot such armies, as
were not only an over-match for the force which
any of its neighbours could bring into the field,
but were fuflicient to contend, for some time,
with the powerful monarchs beyond the Alps.
During its itruggles with the princes united againif
it by the league of Cambray, the republic levied
sums which, even in the present age, would be
deemed considerable; and while the king of
France paid the exorbitant interest which I have
mentioned for the money advanced to him, and
the emperor, eager to borrow, but destitute of
credit, was known by the name of Maximilian the
.Money-less, the Venetians raised whatever sums
they pleased, at the moderate premium of five in
the hundred e.

e Hifk. de la Ligue fait & Cambray, par M. I'Abbf du Bos,

lib. v. Sandi Storia Civil Veneziana, lib. viii. c. i6.
p. 891, &c.

voit. a. o The

reverse of the Venetian. It partook as much of
democratical turbulence and licentiousness, as the
other of ariftocratical rigour. Florence, however,
was a commercial, not a military democracy.
The nature of its inflitutions was favourable to
commerce, and the genius of the people was
turned towards it. The vait wealth which the
family of Medici had acquired by trade, together
with the magnificence, the generosity, and the
virtue of the first Cosmo, gave him such an
ascendant over the affeaions as well as the coun-
cils of his countrymen, that though the forms of
popular government were preserved, though the
various departments of adminiitration were filled
by magifirates distinguished by the ancient names,
and eleacd in the usual manner, he was in reality
the head of the commonwealth; and in the flation
of a private citizen, he poffeffedfupreme authority.
Cosmo transmitted a considerable degree of this
power to his descendants; and during the greater
part of the fifteenth century, the political itate-of
Florence was extremely singular. The appear-
ance of republican government subsisted, the peo.
pie were passionately attached to it, and on some
occasions contended warmly for their privileges,
and yet they permitted a single family to assume
the direaion of their affairs, almost as absolutely
as if it had been formally invefled with sovereign
power. The jealouly of the Medici concurred
with the commercial spirit of the Florentines, in
putting the military force of the republic upon
the fame footing with that of the other Italian
11ates. The troops, which the Florentines em-
pioyed in their wars, consisted almost entirely of

mercenary

or leaders of bands, whom they took into their
Pay.

In the kingdom of Naples, to which the so-

vereignty of the island of Sicily was annexed, the
feudal government was established in the fame
form, and with the fame defeas, as in the other
nations of Europe. The frequent and violent
revolutions which happened in that monarchy had
considerably increased these defeds, and rendered
them more intolerable. The fuccerfion to the
crown of Naples had been so often interrupted or
altered, and so many princes of foreign blood had,
at different periods, obtained poffefiion of the
throne, that the Neapolitan nobility had loit, in
a great measure, that attachment to the family of
their sovereigns, as well as that reverence for their
persons, which, in other feudal kingdoms, con-
tributed to set some bounds to the encroachments
of the barons upon the royal prerogative and-
power. At the fame time, the different pre-
tenders to the crown, being obliged to court the
barons who adhered to them, and on whose sup-
port they depended for the fuccefa of their claims,
they augmented their privileges by liberal con-
ceffions, and connived at their boldest ufurpations.
Even when seated on the throne, it was dangerous
for a prince, who held his sceptre by a disputed
title, to venture on any itep towards extending
his own power, or circumscribing that of the
nobles.

From all these causes, the kingdom of Naples

was the modt turbulent of any in Europe, and the
authority of its monarchs the leadt extensive.
Though Ferdinand I., who began his reign in

02 the

eight, attempted to break the power of the arif,
tocracy ; though his sion Alphonfo, that he might
cruih it at once by cutting off the leaders of
greatest reputation and influence among the Nea-
politan barons, ventured to commit one of the
iont perfidious and cruel adtions recorded in his-
tory [A. D. 1487]; the order of nobles was
nevertheless more cxafperated than humbled by
their meafuresf. The resentment which these
outrages excited was so violent, and the power.
of the malcontent nobles was shill so formidable,
that to these may be aferibed, in a great degree,
the ease and rapidity with which Charles VIII.
conquered the kingdom of Naples g.

The event that gave rife to the violent contests.

concerning the succession to the crown of Naples
and Sicily, which brought so many calamities
upon these kingdoms, happened in the thirteenth.
century [A. D. 5254]. Upon the deathof the
emperor Frederic II., Manfred, his natural son,
aspiring to the Neapolitan throne, murdered his bro.
ther the emperor Conrad (if we may believe con.
temporary hillorians), and by that crime obtained
poffeflion of ith. The popes,from their implacable
enmity to the house of Swabia, not only refused
to recognize Manfred's title, but endeavoured to
excite against him some rival capable of wrefring
the sceptre out of his hand. Charles, count of
Anjou, the brother of St. Louis king of France,
undertook this; and he received from the popes

f Giannone, book xxviii. chap. z. vol. ii. p. 450, &c.
F Giannone, ibid. p. 474.
. Stray. Corp. Hilt. Germ. i. 48 . Giannone, book

xvill. ch. 5. the

Sicily as a fief held of the holy fee. The count
of Anjou's efforts were crowned with success;
Manfred fell in battle; and he took poffeifion of
the vacant throne. But soon after, Charles ful-
lied the glory which he had acquired, by the in-
jufaice and cruelty with which he put to death,
by the hands of the executioner, Conradin, the
last prince of the house of Swabia, and the right-
ful heir of the Neapolitan crown. That gallant
young prince asserted his title, to the last, with a
courage worthy of a better fate. On the fcaffold,
he declared Peter, at that time prince, and soon
after king of Aragon, who had married Manfred's
only daughter, his heir; and throwing his glove
among the people, he entreated that it might be
carried to Peter, as the symbol by which he con-
veyed all his rights to him'. The desire of
avenging the insult offered to royalty, by the
death of Conradin, concurred with his own am-
bition, in prompting Peter to take arms in sup.
port of the title which he had acquired. From
that period, during almoRf two centuries, the
houses of Aragon and Anjou contended for the
crown of Naples. Amidst a fuccefflion of revo-
lutions more rapid, as well as of crimes more
atrocious, than what occur in the hiffory of almost
any other kingdom, monarchs, sometimes of the
Aragonefe line, and sometimes of the Angevin,
were seated on the throne. At length the
princes of the house of Aragon [A. D. r434J
obtained such firm poffeflion of this long-difpute4

) GCannone, book xix. ch. 4. ( 2.

fl 3 inheritances

baflard branch of their family kI

The race of the Angevin kings, however, was

not extinEt; nor had they relinquished their title
to the Neapolitan crown. The count of Maine and
Provence, the heir of this family, conveyed alhis
rights and pretensions to Louis XI. and to his fuc-
cefiors [A.D. 1494]. Charles VIII. as I have
already related, crossed the Alps at the head of a
powerful army, in order toprofecute his claimwith
a degree of vigour, far superior to that which the
princes from whom he derived it had been capa-
ble of exerting. The rapid progress of his arms
in Italy, as well as the lhort time during which
he enjoyed the fruits of his fuceefs, have already
been mentioned, and are well known. Frederic,
the heir of the illegitimate branch of the Arago-
nefe family, soon recovered the throne of which
Charles had difpoffeffed him. Louis XII. and
Ferdinand of Aragon united against this prince,
whom both, though for different reasons, confi-
dered as an usurper, and agreed to divide his domi-
nions between them [A. D. ijos]. Frederic, un-
able to resist the combined monarchs,each of whom
was far his fiuperior in power, resigned his sceptre.
Louis and Ferdinand, though they had concurred
in making the conquest, differed about the divi-
sion of it; and from allies became enemies. But
Gonfailvo de Cordova, partly by the exertion of
such military talents as gave him a just title to
the appellation of the Great Captain, whikh the
Spanish hillorians have bellowed upon him;- and
partly by such shameless and frequent violations
of the most solemn engagements, as leave an in-

k Giannoae, bosk xxvi. ch, 2.

delible

of all that they poffeffed in the Neapolitan do-
minions, and secured the peaceable poffeffion of
them to his matter. These, together with his
other kingdoms, Ferdinand transmitted to his
grandson Charles V., whose right to possess them,
if not altogether uncontrovertibie, seems, at least,
to be as well founded, as that which the kings of
France set up in opposition to it .

There is nothing in the political constitution,

or interior government of the dutchy of Milan,
so remarkable, as to require a particular explana-
tion. But as the right of succession to that ser-
tile province was the cause or the pretext of almost
all the wars carried on in Italy during the reign
of Cha:1es V., it is necessary to trace these dif-
putes to their source, and to inquire into the pre-
tenflons of the various competitors.

During the long and fierce contests excited in

Italy by the violence of the Guelf and Ghibelline
fadions, the family of Visconti role to great emi-
nence among their fellow-citizens of Milan. As
the Visconti had adhered uniformly to the Ghi-
belline or Imperial interest, they, by way of re-
compence, received, from one emperor, the dig-
nity of perpetual vicars of the empire in Italy n
[A. D. 1354] : they were created, by another,
dukes of Milan [A. D. 5395]; and, together
with that title, the poffeffion of the city and its
territories was bellowed upon them as an heredi-
tary fiefa. John, king of France, among other

1 Droits des Rois de France an Royaume de Sicile. Mem.

de Comin Edit. de Fretnoy, tom. iv. part. iv. p. 5.

m Petrarch. epift. ap. Struv. Corp. i. 6a5.
a Leibnit. Cod. Jur. Gent. Diplom. vol. i. 157.

expedients

ties of his reign obliged him to employ, conde-
fcended to give one of his daughters in marriage
to John Galeazzo Visconti, the firit duke of
Milan, from whom he had received considerable
sums. Valentine Visconti, one of the children
of this marriage, married her cousin, Louis, duke
of Orleans, the only brother of Charles VI. In
their marriage-contrad, which the pope con-
firmed, it was stipulated that, upon failure of
heirs male in the family of Vifonti, the dutchy
of Milan Ihould descend to the posterity of Va-
lentine and the duke of Orleans. That event
took place. In the year one thousand four hun-
dred and forty-feven, Philip Maria, the last prince
of the ducal family of Visconti, died. Various
competitors claimed the succession. Charles,
duke of Orleans, pleaded his right to it, founded
on the marriage-contra& of his mother Valentine
Visconti. Alfonso king of Naples claimed it in
consequence of a will made by Philip Maria in
his favour. The emperor contended that, upor
the extinalion of male issue in the family of Vis-
conti, the fief returned to the superior lord, and
ought to be re-annexed to the empire. The
people of Milan, smitten with the love of liberty
which in that age prevailed among the Italian
states, declared againfi the dominion of any maf-
ter, and eftablilhed a republican form of governi
ment.

But during the firuggle among so many com-

petitors, the prize for which they contended was
teized by one from whom none of them appre-
hended any danger. Francis Sforza, the natural
fun of Jacomuzzo Sforza, whom-his courage and

abilities

to be one of the most eminent and powerful of
the Italian Condottieri, having succeeded his father
in the command of the adventurers who followed
his frandard, had married a natural daughter of
the last duke of Milan. Upon this shadow of
a title Francis founded his pretensions to the
dutchy, which he supported with such talents and
valour, as placed him at last on the ducal throne.
The virtues, as well as abilities, with which he
governed, inducing his fubjeas to forget the de-
seas in his title, he transmitted his dominions
quietly to his son; from whom they descended
to his grandson. He was murdered by his grand-
uncle Ludovico, surnamed the Moor, who took
poffeffion of the dutchy; and his right to it was
confirmed by the investiture of the emperor.
Maximilian in the year one thousand four hun.
dred and ninety-four 0.

Louis XI. who took pleasure in deprefling the

princes of the blood, and who admired the poli.
tical abilities of Francis Sforza, would not per-
mit the duke of Orleans to take any fiep in pro-
fecution of his right to the dutchy of Milan. Lu-
dovico the Moor kept up such a close conneaion
with Charles VIII. that, during the greater part
of his reign, the claim of the family of Orleans
continued to lie dormant. But when the crown
of France devolved on Louis XII., duke of Or-
leans, he initantly asserted the rights of his family
with the ardour which it wvas natural to expea,
and marched at the head of a powerful army to
support them. Ludovico Sforza, incapable of

a Ripalin. Hil. M diol. lib. vi. 65'. ap. Struv. Corp. i.

930. Du Moot Corps Diplom. tomi. 11. p. ii. 333. ibid.

contending

his dominions in the space of a few days. The
king, clad in the ducal robes, entered Milan in
triumph; and Loon after, Ludovico, having been
betrayed by the Swiss in his pay, was sent a pri-
Loner into France, and ihut up in the castle of
Loches, where he lay unpitied during the re-
mainder of his days. In consequence of one of
the singular revolutions which occur so frequently
in the hillory of the Milanese, his son Maximilian
Sforza was placed on the ducal throne, of which
he kept poffefion during the reign of Louis XII.
[A. D. I5Is2. But his successor Francis I.
was too high-fpirited and enterprising tamely to
relinquilh his title. As Loon as he was seated
upon the throne, he prepared to invade the Mila.
nefe; and his right of succession to it appears,
from this detail, to have been more natural and
more just than that of any other competitor.

It is unnecessary to enter into any detail with

refpe& to the form of government in Genoa,
Parma, Modena, and the other inferior fhates of
Italy. Their names, indeed, will often occur in
the following history. But the power of these
fhates themselves was so inconsiderable, that their
fate'depended little upon their own efforts; and
the frequent revolutions which they underwent,
were brought about rather by the operations of
the princes who attacked or defended them, than
by any thing peculiar in their internal conititu-
tron.

Of the great kingdoms on this fide of the Alps,

Spain is one of the most considerable; and as it
was the hereditary domain of Charles V., as well
pts the chief source of his power and wealth, a

diftinadt

of capital importance towards underfianding the
tranfations of his reign.

The Vandals and Goths, who overturned the

Roman power in Spain, established a form of go-
vernment in that country, and introduced customs
and laws, perfealy similar to those which were
established in the reft of Europe, by the other
viaorious tribes which acquired settlements there.
For some time, society advanced, among the new
inhabitants of Spain, by the fame fieps, and
seemed to hold the fame course, as in other Eu-
ropean nations. To this progress a sudden flop
was put by the invasion of the Saracens or Moors
from Africa [A. D. 712]. The Goths could
not withitand the efforts of their enthusiastic va-
lour, which subdued the greatest part of Spain,
with the fame impetuous rapidity that diftin-
guilhes all the operations of their arms. The
conquerors introduced into the country in which
they fettled, the Mahometan religion, the Arabic
language, the manners of the East, together with
that taste for the arts, and that love of elegance
and splendour, which the caliphs had begun to
cultivate among their fubjeas.

Such Gothic nobles as difdained to submit to

the Moorifh-yoke, fled for refuge to the inaccefii,
ble mountains of Asturias. There they com-
sorted themselves with enjoying the exercise of
the Christian religion, and with maintaining the
authority of their ancient laws. Being joined
by many of the boldest and most warlike among
their countrymen, they sallied out upon the ad-
jacent fettiements of the Moors in small parties ;
but venturing only upon short excursions at firit,

they

without thinking of conquest. By degrees, their
{irength increased, their views enlarged, a regulars
government was established among them, and they
began to aim at extending their territories. While
they pushed on their attacks with the unremitting
ardour, excited by zeal for religion, by the desire
of vengeance, and by the hope of rescuing their
country from oppression; while they conduAed
their operations with the courage natural to men
who had no other occupation but war, and who
were strangers to all the arts which corrupt or
enfeeble the mind; the Moors gradually loft
many of the advantages to which they had been
indebted for their firdt success. They threw off
all dependence on the caliphs P; they negleaed
to preserve a close connetion with their country-
men in Africa; their empire in Spain was split
into many small kingdoms; the arts which they
cultivated, together with the luxury to which
these gave rife, relaxed, in some measure, the
force of their military institutions, and abated
the vigour of their warlike spirit. The Moors,
however, continued still to be a gallant people,
and poffeffed great resources. According to the
magnificent flyle of the Spanish historians, eight
centuries of almost uninterrupted war elapsed,
and three thousand seven hundred battles were
fought, before the last of the Mooriih kingdoms
in Spain submitted to the Christian arms [1492].

As the Christians made their conquests upon

the Mahometans at various periods, and under
different leaders, each formed the territory which

i JoC. Sim. Affemanni Hiftor. Ital. Scriptores, vol. iii.

P. 135.

he

independent slate. Spain was divided into almost
as many separate kingdoms as it contained pro-
vinces; in each city of note, a petty monarch
established his throne, and assumed all the ensigns
wf royalty. In a series of years, however, by the
usual events of intermarriages, or fucceflion, or
conquest, all these inferior principalities were an-
nexed to the more powerful kingdoms of Caltile
and of Aragon. At length, by the fortunate
marriage of Ferdinand and Isabella, the former
the hereditary monarch of Aragon, and the lat-
ter raised to the throne of Castile by the affeaion
.of her fubjeas [1481], all the Spanish crowns
were united, and descended in the fame line.

From this period, the political conifitution of

Spain began to aifume a regular and uniform ap-
-pearance; the genius of its government may be
delineated, and the progress of its laws and man-
ners may be traced with certainty. Notwith-
fianding the singular revolution which the inva-
lion of the Moors occasioned in Spain, and the
peculiarity of its fate, in being so long fubjeA to
the Mahometan yoke, the customs introduced by
the Vandals and Goths had taken fugh deep root,
and were so thoroughly incorporated with the
frame of its government, that in every province
which the Christians recovered from the Moors,
we find the condition of individuals, as well as
the political conititution, nearly the fame as in
other nations of Europe. Lands were held by
the fame tenure; ju{tice was dispensed in the
fame form; the fame privileges were claimed
by the nobility; and the fame power exercised
by the Cortes, or general assembly of the king-

moa. I. P dom.

this permanence of the feudal inititutions in Spain1
notwithstanding the conquest of the Moors, which
seemed to have overturned them. Such of the
Spaniards, as preserved their independence, ad.
hered to their ancient customs, not.only fromn
attachment to them, but out of antipathy to the
Moors, to whose ideas concerning property and
government these customs were totally repugnant,
Even among the Christians, who submitted to
the Moorish conquerors, and consented to become
their fubjeas, ancient customs were not entirely
abolished. They were permitted to retain their
religion, their laws concerning private property,
their forms of administering juilice, and their
mode of levying taxes. The followers of Maho-
met are the only enthunfafts who have united the
spirit of toleration with zeal for making prose-
lytes, and who, at the fame time that they took
arms to propagate the doftrine of their Prophet,
permitted such as would not embrace it, to ad-.
here to their own tenets, and to praaife their
own rites. To this peculiarity in the genius of
the Mahometan religion, as well as to the defre
which the Moors had of reconciling the Chris-
tians to their yoke, it was owing that the an-
cient manners and laws in Spain survived the vio-
lent shock of a conquest, and were permitted to
subsist, notwithstanding the introdu~tion of a new
religion and a new form of government into that
country. It is obvious, from all these particulars,
that the Christians muff have found it extremely
easy to re-eftabliih manners and government on
their ancient foundations, in those provinces of
Spain which they wrested fuccefilvely from the

Moors.

tained such a fondness for the customs, and such
a reverence for the laws of their anceitors, that,
wishing to fee them completely restored, they
were not only willing but eager to resume the
former, and to recognize the authority of the
latter.

But though the feudal form of government,

with all the moftitutions which chara~terize its
was thus preserved entire in Castile and Aragon,
as well as in all the kingdoms which depended
on these crowns, there were certain peculiarities
in their political constitutions, which diftinguiih
them from those of any other country in Europe.
The royal prerogative, extremely limited in every
feudal kingdom,. was circumscribed, in Spain,
within such narrow bounds, as reduced the power
of the sovereign almost to nothing. The privi;
leges of the nobility were great in proportion,
and extended so far, as to border on absolute in-
dependence. The immunities of the cities were
likewise greater than in other feudal kingdoms,
they poffeffed considerable influence in the Cortes,
and they aspired at obtaining more. Such a
state of society, in which the political machine
was so ill adjusted, and the several members of
the legislature so niproperly balanced, produced
internal disorders in the kingdoms of Spain,
which rose beyond the pitch of turbulence and
anarchy usual under the feudalagovernment. The
whole tenor of the Spanish history confirms the
truth of this observation; and when the muti-
nous spirit, to which the genius of their policy
gave birth and vigour, was no longer restrained
and overawed by the immediate dread of the

' a Moorit

infurreaions against the government of their
princes, as well as more outrageous insults on
their dignity, than occur in the annals of any.
other country. These were accompanied at
some times with more liberal sentiments concern.
ing the rights of the people, at other times with
more elevated notions concerning the privileges
of the nobles, than were common in other nations,

In the principality of Catalonia, which was ane

nexed to the kingdom of Aragon, the impatience
of the people to obtain the redress of their
grievances having prompted them to take arms
againit their sovereign John II. [A. D. 1462],
they, by a solemn deed, recalled the oath of alle-
giance which they had sworn to him, declared him
and his posterity to be unworthy of the throne P,
and endeavoured to establish a republican form of
government, in order to secure the perpetual en-.
joyment of that liberty, after which they afpiredn.
Nearly about the fame period, the indignation of,
the Castilian nobility againit the weak and flagi-
tious adminintration of Henry IV., having led
them to combine against him, they arrogated, as
one of the privileges belonging to their order,
the right of trying and of passing sentence on.
their sovereign. That the exercise of this power
might be as public and solemn, as the pretension
to it was bold, they summoned all the nobility of
their party to meet at Avila [A. D. 1465] ; a,
spacious theatre was ereaed in a plain, without

P Zurita Annales de Arag. tom. iv. 113. I55, &c.
q Ferreras Hill. d'Etpagne, tom. vii. p. 9z. P. Otleans

Revol. d'Efpagne, tom. iii. p. s35. I. Marinaus Siculus
Je Reb. filpan. apud Schotti Sctipt. Hifpan. foL pp.

the

the king, was seated on a throne, clad in royal
robes, with a crown on its head, a sceptre in its
hand, and the sword of justice by its fide. The
accusation against the king was read, and the
sentence of deposition was pronounced, in pre-
fence of a numerous assembly. At the close of
the first article of the charge, the archbishop of
Toledo advanced, and tore the crown from the
head of the image; at the close of the second,
the Conde de Placentia snatched the sword of
juitice from its fide; at the close of the third,
the Conde de Beneventh wrested the sceptre from
its hand; at the close of the last, Don Diego
Lopes de Stuniga tumbled it headlong from the
throne. At the fame instant, Don Alfonso,
Henry's brother, was proclaimed king of Castle
and Leon in his itead r

The most daring leaders of faaion would not

have ventured on these measures, nor have con-
duated them with such public ceremony, if the
sentiments of the people concerning the royal
dignity had not been so formed by the laws and
policy to which they were accustomed both in
Castile and Catalonia, as prepared them to ap-
prove of such extraordinary proceedings, or to
acquiesce in them.

In Aragon, the form of government was mo-

narchical, but the genius and maxims of it were
purely republican. The kings, who were long
4leaive, retained only the shadow of power; the
real exercise of it was in the Cortes or parliament
of the kingdom. This supreme assembly was
composed of four different arms or members. The

M Ivlarian. Hilt. lib. xxiii. c. 9.

P 3 nobility

or nobility of the second class. The reprefenta-
tives of the cities and towns, whose right to a
place in the Cortes, if we may give credit to the
hifcorians of Aragon, was co~val with the con-
flitution. The ecclesiastical order, composed of
the dignitaries of the church, together with thle
representatives of the inferior clergy', No law
could pass in this assembly without the assent of
every single member who had a right to vote ..
Without the permiflion of the Cortes, no tax could
be imposed; no war could be declared; no peace
could be concluded; no money could be coined;
nor could any alteration be made in ths current
specie ". The power of reviewing the proceed-
ings of all inferior courts, the privilege of infpe&-
ing every department of adminifiration, and the
right of redressing all grievances, belonged to the
Cortes. Nor did those who conceived themselves
to be aggrieved, address the Cortes in the hum-
ble tone of supplicants, and petition for redress;
they demanded it as the birthright of freemen,
and required the guardians of their liberty to de.
cide with refpeCd to the points which they laid
before them ". This sovereign court was held,
during several centuries, every year; but, in con-
sequence of a regulation introduced about the
beginning of the fourteenth century, it was con-
voked from that period only once in two years.
After it was assembled, the king had no right to

5 Forma de Celebrar. Cortes en Aragon. por Geron.

Martel. t Martel. ibid. p. a.

u Hier. Blanca Comment. Rer. Alsgon. ap. Schot. Script.

1lifpan. vol. iii p. 750.

K Martel. Forma de Celebr, p. 2.

prorogue

and the feflion continued forty days 7.

Not satisfied with having ereded such formi-

dable barriers against the encroachments of the
royal prerogative, nor willing to commit the
sole guardianship of their liberties entirely to the
vigilance and authority of an assembly, similar
to the diets, flates-general, and parliaments, in
which the other feudal nations have placed so
much confidence, the Aragonefe had recourse to
an inifitution peculiar to themselves, and eleded
a Jfuizta or supreme judge. This magistrate,
whose office bore some resemblance to that of the
Ephori in ancient Sparta, aded as the prote~lor
of the people, and the comptroller of the prince.
The person of the juftiza was sacred, his power
and jurifdition almost unbounded. He was the
supreme interpreter of the laws. Not only infe-
rior judges, but the kings themselves, were bound
to consult him in every doubtful cafe, and to re-
ceive his responses with implicit deference #. An
appeal lay to him from the royal judges, as well
as from those appointed by the barons within
their refpetive territories, Even when no ap-
peal was made to him, he could interpose by his
own authority, prohibit the ordinary judge to
proceed, take immediate cognizance of the cause
himself, and remove the party accused to the
MIanifefation, or prison of the frate, to which no
person had access but by his permission. His
power was exerted with no less vigour and effed-

Y Hler. Blanca Comment. 763.
* B lanca has preserved two responses of the jufliza td

James II. who reigned towards the close of the thirteenth
century, Blanca 748.

1n

ment, than in regulating the course of justice,
It was the prerogative of the juftiza to infpet
the condua of the king. flIe had a title to re-
view all the royal proclamations and patents, and
to declare whether or not they were agreeable to
law, and ought to be carried into execution. He,
by his sole authority, could exclude any of the
king's ministers from the condudk of affairs, and
call them to answer for their mal-administration.
He himself was accountable to the Cortes only,
for the manner in which he discharged the duties
of this high office; and performed funaions of
the greatest importance that could be committed
to a fiubjea [HH] z.

It is evident, from a bare enumeration of the

privileges of the Aragonefe Coites, as well as of
the rights belonging to the juftiza, that a very
small portion of power remained in the hands of
the king. The Aragonefe seem to have been
solicitous that their monarchs {hould know and
feel this state of impotence, to which they were
reduced. Even in swearing allegiance to their
sovereign, an ad which ought naturally to be ac·
pompanied with profeffions of fubmififon and re-
fpea, they devised an oath, in such a form, as to
remind him of his dependence on his fubjeas.
" We," said the juftiza to the king in name of
his high-fpirited barons, "* who are each of us
as good, and who are all together more powerful
than you, promise obedience to your government,
if you maintain our rights and liberties; but if
Pot, not." Conformably to this oath, they efta-

[HHJ NOTE XXXI.
Z Hier. Blanca Comment. P. 747-755*

blilhed

tution, that if the king should violate their rights
and privileges, it was lawful for the people to
difelaim him as their sovereign, and to eleEt an-
other, even though a heathen, in his place a. The
attachment of the Aragonefe to this singular-
constitution of government was extreme, and their
refpe& for it approached to superstitious venera-
tion [II]. In the preamble to one of their laws,
they declare, that such was the barrenness of their
country, and the poverty of the inhabitants, that,
if it were not on account of the liberties by
which they were distinguished from other nations,
the people would abandon it, and go in quelt of
a settlement to some more fruitful region b

In CasTile there were not such peculiarities in

the form of government, as to establish any re-
markable diftinaion between it and that of the
other European nations. The executive part
of government was committed to the king, but
with a prerogative extremely limited. The le-
giflative authority resided in the Cortes, which
was composed of the nobility, the dignified eccle-
fiaftics, and the representatives of the cities. The
assembly of the Cortes in Castile was very ancient,
and seems to have been almost coival with the
conilitution. The members of the three different
orders, who had a right of fulfrage, met in one
place, and deliberated as one colle&ive body;
the decisions of which were regulated by the fen-
timents of the majority. The right of impoiing
taxes, of enading laws, and of redressing grie-
vances, belonged to this assembly and in order

a Hier. Blanca Comment. 72o. j11] Nova XXXII.
b Hiir. Blanca Comn. p 75i*

to

to secure the assent of the king to such itfatutes
and regulations as were deemed salutary or benes,
ficial to the kingdom, it was usual in the Cortes
to take no flep towards granting money, until
all business relative to the public welfare was con-
cluded. The representatives of cities seem to
have obtained a feat very early in the Cortes of
Castile, and soon acquired such influence and cre-
dit, as were very uncommon, at a period when
the splendour and pre-eminence of the nobility
had eclipsed or depressed all other orders of men.
The number of members from cities bore such a
proportion to that of the whole colleaive hody,
as rendered them extremely refpeaable in the
Cortes [I KK]. The degree of conflderation,which
they poffeffed in the fiate, may be estimated by one
event. Upon the death of John I. [A. D. 1390]
a council of regency was appointed to govern the
kingdom during the minority of his son. It was
composed of an equal number of noblemen, and
of deputies chosen by the cities; the latter were
admitted to the fame rank, and inveited with the
fame powers as prelates and grandees of the firit
order c. But though the members of communi.
ties in Callile were elevated above the condition
wherein they were placed in other kingdoms of
Europe; though they had attained to such poli·
tical importance, that even the proud and jealous
spirit of the feudal aristocracy could not exclude
them from a considerable share in government;
yet the nobles, notwithstanding these acquisitions
of the commons, continued to assert the privi-
leges of their order, in opposition to the crown,

[KK] NOTE XXXIII.
c Marian. Hilt. lib. xviii. c. i5.

body of nobility in Europe more distinguished
for independence of spirit, haughtiness of deport-
ment, and bold pretensions, than that of Castile.
The history of that monarchy affords the most
firiking examples of the vigilance with which
they observed, and of the vigour with which they
opposed, every measure of their kings, that tended
to encroach on their jurifdiaion, to diminiih their
dignity, or to abridge their power. Even in
their ordinary intercourse with their monarchs,
they preserved such a consciousness of their rank,
that the nobles of the first order claimed it as a
privilege to be covered in the royal presence, and
approached their sovereigns rather as equals than
as fubjeas.

The constitutions of the subordinate monar-

chies, which depended on the crowns of Castile
and Aragon, nearly resembled those of the king-
doms to which they were annexed. In all of
them, the dignity and independence of the no-
bles were great; the immunities and power of
the cities were considerable.

An attentive observation of the singular fitua-

tion of Spain, as well as the various events which
occurred there, from the invasion of the Moors
to the union of its kingdoms under Ferdinand
and Isabella, will discover the causes to which all
the peculiarities in its political conflitution I have
pointed out, ought to be ascribed.

As the provinces of Spain were wrested from

the Mahometans gradually and with difficulty,
the nobles who followed the standard of any emi-
nent leader in these wars, conquered not for him
alone, but for themselves. They claimed a ihare

111

in the lands which their valour had won from the
enemy, and their prosperity and power increased,
in proportion as the territory of the prince ex-
tended.

During their perpetual wars with the Moors,

the monarchs of the several kingdoms in Spain
depended so much on their nobles, that it became
necessary to conciliate their good-will by fuc-
celfive grants of new honours and privileges. By
the time that any prince could ellablifh his do-
minion in a conquered province, the greater part
of the territory was parcelled out by him among
his barons, with such jurifdiAion and immunities
as raised them almost to sovereign power.

At the fame time, the kingdoms ereaed in so

many different corners of Spain, were of inconfi-
.derable extent. The petty monarch was but
little elevated above his nobles. They, feeling
themselves to be almost his equals, aaed as such;
and could not look up to the kings of such li-
mited domains with the fame revereince that the
sovereigns of the great monarchies in Europe
were viewed by their fubjeds [LL].

While these circumitances concurred in exalt-

ing the nobility, and in deprefling the royal autho-
rity, there were other causes which raised the
cities in Spain to consideration and power.

As the open country, duriiig the wars with

the Moors, was perpetually exposed to the in-
curfions of the enemy, with whlom no peace or
truce was so permanent as to prove any ladting
security, felf-prefervation obliged persons of all
ranks to fix their residence in places of fitrength.
The cafdles of the barons, which, in other coun-

[LLU NOTE XXXIV,

tries,

predations of banditti, or from the transient vio-
lence of any interior commotion, were unable to
relift an enemy whose operations were conduaed
with regular and persevering vigour. Cities, in
which great numbers united for their mutual de-
fence, were the only places in which people could
reside with any profpea of safety. To this was
owing the rapid growth of those cities in Spain
of which the Christians recovered pofle~ifon. All
who fled from the Moorish yoke resorted to
them, as to an asylum; and in them, the great-
er part of those who took the field against the
Mahometans established their families.

Several of these cities, during a longer or

shorter course of years, were the capitals of little
states, and enjoyed all the advantages which ac-
celerate the increase of inhabitants in every place
that is the feat of government.

From those concurring causes, the number of

cities in Spain, at the beginning of the fifteenth
century, had become considerable, and they
were peopled far beyond the proportion which
was common in other parts of Europe, ex.cept in
Italy and the Low-Countries. The Moors had
introduced manufadures into those cities, while
under their dominion. The Christians, who, by
intermixture with them, had learned their arts,
continued to cultivate these. Trade in feeral
of the Spaniih towns appears to have been carried
on with vigour; and the spirit of commerce
continued to preserve the number of their in-
habitants, as the sense of danger had first. in-
duced them to crowd together.

VOL. I. Q. 1As

the inhabitants were of a rank superior to those
who resided in towns in other countries of Eu-
rope. That cause, which contributed chiefly to
their population, affeded equally persons of every
condition, who flocked thither promiscuously,
in order to find shelter there, or in hopes of
making a ltand against the enemy, with greater
advantage than in any other station. The per-
sons eleaed as their representatives in the Cortes
by the cities, or promoted to offices of trufo and
dignity in the government of the community,
were often, as will appear from tranfa&ions
which I shall hereafter relate, of such confidera-
ble rank in the kingdom, as refleaed luitre on
their conitituents, and on the flations wherein
they were placed.

As it was impossible to carry on a continual

war against the Moors, without some other mi-
litary force than that which the barons were
obliged to bring into the field, in consequence
of the feudal tenures, it became necessary to have
some troops, particularly a body of light cavalry,
in conitant pay. It was one of the privileges of
the nobles, that their lands were exempt from
the burden oftaxes. The charge of fuipporting
the troops requisite for the public safety, fell
wholly upon the cities; and their kings, being
obliged frequently ·to apply to them for aid,
found it necessary to gain their favour by con-
ceffions, which not only extended their immuni-
ties, but added to their wealth and power.

When the influence of all these circumstances,

peculiar to Spain, is added to the general and

common

dize cities in other countries of Europe, this will
fully account for the extensive privileges which
they acquired, as well as for the extraordinary
consideration to which they attained, in all the
Spanish kingdoms [MM].

By these exorbitant privileges of the nobility,

and this unusual power of the cities in Spain,
the royal prerogative was hemmed. in on every
fide, and reduced within very narrow hounds.
Sensible of this, and impatient of such restraint,
several monarchs endeavoured at various junc-
tures, and by different means, to enlarge their
own jurifdiAion. Their power, however, or
their abilities, were so unequal to the undertak-
ing, that their efforts were attended with little
success. But when Ferdinand and Isabella found
themselves at the head of the united kingdoms
of Spain, and delivered from the danger and in-
terruption of domef'ic wars, they were not only
in a condition to resume, but were able to pro.
fecute with advantage, the schemes of extending
the prerogative, which their anceitors had at-
tempted in vain. Ferdinand's profound sagacity
in concerting his measures, his persevering indus-
try in conduaing them, and his uncommon ad.
drels in carrying them into execution, fitted him
admirably for an undertaking which required all
these talents.

As the overgrown power and high pretenions

of the nobility were what the monarchs of Spain
felt moat sensibly, and bore with the greatelt
impatience, the great objea of Ferdinand's poli.
cy was to reduce these within more moderate

CMM] NOTE XXXV.

az bounds.

violence, more frequently in consequence of de-
crees obtained in the courts of law, he wrefled
from the barons a great part of the lands which
had been granted to them by the inconsiderate
bounty of former monarchs, particularly during
the feeble and profuse reign of his predecessor
Henry IV. He did not give the entire condua
of affairs to persons of noble birth, who were ac-
cullomed to occupy every department of import-
ance in peace or in war, as if it had been a pri-
vilege peculiar to their order, to be employed as
the sole counsellors and ministers of the crown.
lie often tranfaded business of great consequence
without their intervention, and bellowed many
offices of power and truit on new men, devoted
to his interelld. He introduced a degree of
slate and dignity into his court, which being lit-
tle known in Spain, while it remained split into
many small kingdoms, taught the nobles to ap-
proach their sovereign with more ceremony, and
gradually rendered him the obje& of greater de-
ference and refpeA.

The annexing the maflerfhips of the three mi.

litary orders of St. Jago, Calatrava, and Aican-
tara, to the crown, was another expedient, by
which Ferdinand greatly augmented the revenue
and power of the kings of Spain. These orders
were inlituted in imitation of those of the
'Knights Templars and of St. John of Jerusalem,
on purpose to wage perpetual war with the Ma-
hometans, and to prote& the pilgrims who visit-
ed Compoftella, or other places of eminent fanc-
tity in Spain. The zeal and fuperitition of the

d Zurita Anoales de Arag. tom. vi. p. zz.

ages

ages in which they were founded, prompted per-
sons of every rank to beffow such liberal dona,
tions on those holy warriors, that, in a short
time, they engrossed a considerable lhare in the
property and wealth of the kingdom. The maf-
terfhips of these orders came to be fiations of the
greatest power and opulence to which a Spaniflh
nobleman could be advanced. These high dig-
nities were in the disposal of the knights of the
order, and placed the persons on whom they
conferred them almost on a level with their fove.
reign [NN]. Ferdinand, unwilling that the
nobility, whom he considered as already too for-
midable, should derive such additional credit and
influence from poffeffing the government of these
wealthy fraternities, was solicitous to wrest it
out of their hands, and to vest it in the crown.
His measures for accomplishing this were wifely
planned, and executed with vigoure [A. D.
5476 and 5493]. By address, by promises, and
by threats, he prevailed on the knights of each
order to place Isabella and him at the head of it.
Innocent VIII. and Alexander VI. gave this
elkaion the fanaion of papal authority'; and
finhfequent pontiffs rendered the annexation of
these mafterfhins to the crown perpetual.

While Ferdinand, by this measure, diminish-

ed the power and influence of the nobility, and
added new luffre or authority to the crown, he
was taking other important fieps with a view to
the fame objea. The sovereign jurifdi&ion,

rNN] NOTE XXXVI. e Marian. Hitt. lib. xxv. c. 5.
f Zuriia Annales, tom. v. p. zz. iElii Anton Nebrif-

fenfis rerum a Ferdinand & Elizabe geftarum decades ii. apud
Schot. script. Hifpan. i. 860.

Q.3 w vhich

own territories, was the pride and diflindion of
their order. To have invaded openly a privilege
which they prized so highly, and in defence of
which they would have run so eagerly to arms,
was a measure too daring for a prince of Ferdi-
nand's cautious temper. He took advantage,
however, of an opportunity which the fate of
his kingdoms and the spirit of his people pre-
fented him, in order to undermine what he durdt
not assault. The incessant depredations of the
Moors, the want of discipline among the troops
which were employed to oppose them, the fre-
quent civil wars betweetn the crown and the no-
bility, as well as the undifcerning rage with
which the barons carried on their private wars
with each other, filled all the provinces of Spain
with disorder. Rapine, outrage, and murder
became lb common, as not only to interrupt
commerce; but in a great measure to suspend all
intercourse between one place and another. That
security and proteAion, which men expia from
entering into civil society, ceased in a great de-
gree. Internal order and police, while the feu-
dal inflitutions remained in vigour, were so little
objeas of attention, and the adminifiration of
justice was so extremely feeble, that it would
have been vain to have expeaed relief from the
eftabliihed laws or the ordinary judges. But the
evil became so intolerable, and the inhabitants of
cities, who were the chief fufferers, grew so im-
patient of this anarchy, that felf-prefervation
forced them to have recourse to an extraordinary
remedy. About the middle of the thirteenth
century, the cities in the kingdom of Aragon,

and,

themselves into an association, diitinguiihed by
the name of the Holy Brotherhood. They ex-
a6ted a certain contribution from each of the as-
fociated towns; they levied a considerable body
of troops, in order to proted travellers, and to
pursue criminals; they appointed judges, who
opened their courts in various parts of the king-
dom. Whoever was guilty of murder, robbery,
or of any ad that violated the public peace, and
was feizedi by the troops of the Brotherhood, was
carried before judges of their nomination, who,
without paying any regard to the exclusive and
sovereign jurifdiciion, which the lord of the
place might claim, tried and condemned the cri-
minals. By the establishment of this fraternity,
the prompt and impartial adminifiration of jus-
tice was restored ; and, together with it, inter-
nal tranquillity and order began to return. The
nobles alone murmured at this falntary inifitution.
They complsined of it as an encroachment on
one of their most valuable privileges. They re.
monitrated againiz it iu an high tone; and, on
some occasions, refused to grant any aid to the
crown, unless it were abolished. Ferdinand,
however, was sensible not only of the good es.
feds of the Holy Brotherhood with refpea to
the police of his kingdoms, but perceived its
tendency to abridge, and at length to annihilate,
the territorial jurifihiftion of the nobility. He
countenanced it on every occasion. He support-
ed it with the whole force of royal authority;
and, behides the expedients employed by him in
common with the other monarchs of Europe, he.
availed himself of this inititution, which was pe-

culir

ty, which was no kfs inconsistent with the au-
thorityof the prince, than with the order of so.
ciety [00].

But though Ferdinand by these measures con.

fiderably enlarged the boundaries of prerogative,
and acquired a degree of influence and powtr
far beyond what any of his predecessors had en.
joyed, yet the limitations of the royal authority,
as well as the barriers againit its encroachments,
continued to be many and firong. The spirit of
liberty was vigorous among the people of Spain,
the spirit of independence was high among the
nobility; and though the love of glory, pecu-
liar to the Spaniards in every period of their his-
tory, prompted them to support Ferdinand with
zeal in his foreign operations, and to afford him
such aid as enabled him not only to undertake
but to execute great enterprizes; he reigned over
his fubje&ts with a jurifdiaion less extensive than
that of any of the great monarchs in Europe.
It will appear from many paflages in the follow-
ing history, that, during a considerable part of
the reign of his successor Charles V., the prero-
gative of the Spanilh crown was equally circum-
fcribed.

The ancient government and laws in France so

nearly resembled those of the other feudal king-
*aoms, that such a detail with refpea to them
as was necessary, in order to convey some idea of
the nature and efferts ps the peculiar inflitutions
which took place in Spain, would be superfluous.
In the view which I have exhibited of the means

jOOJ NOTE XXXVII.

3 by

by which the French monarchs acquired such a
full command of the national force of their king-
dom, as enabled them to engage in extensive
schemes of foreign operation, I have already
pointed out the great iteps by which they ad-
vanced towirds a more ample poffeffion of polL.
tical power, and a more uncontrouled exercise of
their royal prerogative. All that now remains.
is to take notice of such particulars in the confti-
tution of France, as serve either to distinguish it
from that of other countries, or tend to throw
any light on the tranfa&ions of that period, to
which the following hilfory extends.

Under the French monarchs of the firit race,

the royal prerogative was very inconsiderable.
The general assemblies of the nation, which met
annually at Rated seasons, extended their autho-
rity to every department of government. The
power of eleding kings, of enading laws, of re-
dressing grievances, of conferring donations on
the prince, of pafling judgment in the last resort,
with refpe& to every person and to every cause,
resided in this great convention of the nation.
Under the second race of kings, notwithianding
the power and splendour which the conquests of
Charlemagne added to the crown, the general
assemblies of the nation continued to possess ex-
tensive authority. The right of determining
which of the royal family ihould be placed on
the throne, was veiled in them. The princes,
elevated to that dignity by their fuffrage, were
accustomed regularly to call and to consult them
with refpeft to every affair of importance to the
itate, and without their consent no law was pafi.
ed, and no new tax was levied.

But,

ther of the third race of kings, took pofefflion
of the throne of France, such changes had hap,
pened in the political state of the kingdom, as
considerably affeded the power and jurifdiaion
of the general assembly of the nation. The royal
authority, in the hands of the degenerate pofte-
rity of Charlemagne, had dwindled into infignifi-
cance and contempt. Every considerable pro-
prietor of land had formed his territory into a
barony, almost independent of the sovereign.
The dukes or governors of provinces, the counts
or governors of towns and small diftrias, and
the great officers of the crown, had rendered
these dignities, which originally were granted
only durimg pleasure or for life, hereditary in their
families. Each of these had usurped all the
rights which hitherto had been deemed the dif-
tindions of royalty, particularly the privileges
of dispensing juflice within their own domains,
of coining money, and of waging war. Every
difiria was governed by local customs, acknow.
ledged a diftind lord, and pursued a separate in-
terest. The formality of doing homage to their
sovereign, was almost the only ad of fubjeAion
fwhich those haughty barons would perform, and
that bound them no farther than they were will-
ing to acknowledge its obligatipn [PP].

In a kingdom broken into so many independ-

ent baronies, hardly any comnon principle of
union remained; and the general assembly, in its
deliberations, could fearcely confider the nation
as forming one body, or efiablilh common regu-
lations to be of equal force in every part, With·

[PP] NOTE XXXVIIIr

i1i

king might publish laws, and they were obeyed,
because there he was acknowledged as the only
lord. But if he had aimed at rendering these
laws general, that would have alarmed the ba-
rons as an encroachment upon the independence
of their jurifdi&ion, The barons, when met in
the great national convention, avoided, with no
less care, the enading of general laws to be ob-
served in every part of the kingdom, because the
execution of them must have been vested in the
king, and would have enlarged that paramount
power, which was the objed of their jealousy.
Thus, under the descendants of Hugh Capet,
the States General (for that was the name by
which the supreme assembly of the French nation
came then to be distinguished) loft their legifla-
tive authority, or at least entirely relinquished
the exercise of it. From that period, the jurif-
diaion of the States General extended no farther
than to the imposition of new taxes, the deter-
inination of questions with refpe& to the right
of succession to the crown, the fettling of the
regency when the preceding monarch had not
fixed it by his will, and the presenting remon-
fitrances enumerating the grievances of which the
nation wished to obtain redress.

As, during several centuries, the monarchs of

Europe seldom demanded extraordinary subsidies
of their fubjeas, and the other events, which re-
quired the interpolition of the States, rarely oc-
curred, their meetings inFrancewere not frequent.
They were summoned occasionally by their kings,
when compelled by their wants or their fears to
have recourse to the great convention of their

people;

people; but they did not, like the Diet in Ger-
many, the Cortes in Spain, or the Parliament
in England, form an essential member of the con-
flitution, the regular exertion of whose powers
was requiite to give vigour and order to govern-
inent.

When the slates of France ceased to exercise

legislative authority, the kings began to assume
it. They ventured at firdt on aas of legislation
with great reserve, and after taking every pre-
caution that could prevent their fubjeAs from be.
ing alarmed at the exercise of a new power.
They did not at once issue their ordinances in a
tone of authority and command. They treated
with their fubje ds; they pointed out what was
best; and allured them to comply with it. By
degrees, however, as the prerogative of the
crown extended, and as the supreme jurifdiaion
of the loyal courts came to he efitablifhed, the
kings of France assumed more openly the style
and authority of lawgivers; and, before the be-
ginning of the fifteenth century, the complete le-
giflative power was vefied in the crown [O ].

Having secured this important acquisition, the

ifeps which led to the right of imposing taxes
were rendered few and easy. The people, ac-
cditommed to fee their sovereigns iffiue ordinances,
by their sole authority, which regulated points
of the greateff consequence with refped to the
property of their fubjeds, were not alarmed when
they were required, by the royal ediAs, to con-
tribute certain sums towards supplying the exi-
gencies of government, and carrying forward the
mneaiures of the nation. When Charles VII.

[QI-] Nor XXXJX.

and

power, in the manner which I have already de.
fcribed, the gradual increase of the royal autho-
rity had so imperceptibly prepared the minds of
the people of France for this innovation, that it
excited no commotion in the kingdom, and
seems fearcely to have given rife to any murmur
or complaint.

When the kings of France had thus engrossed

every power which can be exerted in govern.
ment; when the right of making laws, of levy-
ing money, of keeping an army of mercenaries
in conflant pay, of declaring war, and of con-
cluding peace, centered in the crown, the coniti-
tution of the kingdom, which, under the *firit
race of kings, was nearly democratical; which,
under the second race, became an aristocracy;
terminated, under the third race, in a pure mo-
narchy. Every thing that tended to preserve
the appearance, or revive the memory, of the
ancient mixed government, seems from that pe
riod to have been induffrioufly avoided. During
the long and adive reign of Francis I., the va.
riety as well as extent of whole operations obliged
him to lay many heavy impositions on his sub.
jeAs, the States General of France were not
once assembled, nor were the people once allow-
ed to exert the power of taxing themselves,
which, according to the original ideas of feudal
government, was a right essential to every free-
man.

Two things, however, remained, which mo--

derated the exercise of the regal prerogative, and
reifrained it within such bounds as preserved the
constitution of France from degenerating into

VOL. 5. a mere

ed by the nobility, must be'confsdered as one bar-
rier againit the abholute dominion of the crown.
Though the nobles of France had loft that poli-
tical power which was veited in their order as a
body, they frill retained the personal rights and
pre-eminence which they derived from their rank.
They preserved a consciousness of elevation above
other classes of citizens; an exemption from bur-
dens to which persons of inferior condition were
fubjed; a contempt of the occupations in which
they were engaged; the privilege of affisming en.
signs that indicated their own dignity; a right
to be treated with a certain degree of deference
during peace; and a claim to various diltindions
when in the field. Many of these pretensions
were not founded on the words of flatutes, or
derived from positive laws; they were defined
and ascertained by the maxims of honour, a title
more delicate, but no lefa sacred. There rights,
eftablifhsed and proteded by a principle equally
vigilant in guarding, and intrepid in defending
them, are to the sovereign himself objeas of re-
sped and veneration. Wherever they fiand in its
way, the royal prerogative is bounded. The
violence of a despot may exterminate such an or-
der of men; but as long as it subsists, and its
ideas of personal diftindion remain entire, the
power of the prince has limits E.

As in France the body of nobility was very

numerous, and the individuals of which it was
composed retained an high sense of their ozn
pre-eminence, to this we may ascribe, in a great

g De I'Efprit de3 Loix, liv. ii. c. 4. Dr. Fergufon's Es-

fay on the Hist, of Chil Society, pare i. fc61. 0o.

measure,

gative which peculiarly diftinguilhes the govern-
ment of that kingdom. An intermediate order
was placed between the monarch and his other
fubjeds, and in every ad of authority it became
necessary to attend to its privileges, and not
only to guard against any real violation of them,
but to avoid any suspicion of supposing it to be
possible that they might be violated. Thus a
species of government was eifablifhed in France,
unknown in the ancient world, that of a monar-
chy, in which the power of the sovereign, though
unconfined by anylegal or constitutional refiraint,
has certain bounds set to it by the ideas which
one class of his fubjeds entertain concerning their
own dignity.

The jurifdiaion of the- parliaments in France,

particularly that of Paris, was the other barrier
which served to confine the exercise of the royal
prerogative within certain limits. The parlia-
ment of Paris was originally the court of the
kings of France, to which they committed the
supreme adminitration ofjufrice within their own
domains, as well as the power of deciding with
refpea to all cafes brought before it by appeals
from the courts of the barons. When, in cons
sequence of events and regulations which have
been mentioned formerly, the time and place of
its meeting were fixed, when not only the form
of its procedure, but the principles on which it
decided, were rendered regular and confifdent,
when every cause of importance was finally deter-
mined there, and when the people became accuf-
tomed to resort thither as to the supreme temple
ofjuflice, the parliament of Paris role to high

a 2 estimation

dignity, and its decrees were submitted to with
deference. Nor was this the only source of the
power and influence which the parliament ob-
tained. The kings of France, when they first
began to assume the legislative power, in order
to reconcile the minds of their people to this
new exertion of prerogative, produced their
ediAs and ordinances in the parliament of Paris,
that they might be approved of and regiflered
there, before they were published and declared to
be of authority in the kingdom. During the in-
tervals between the meetings of the States Gene.
ral of the kingdom, or during those reigns in
which the States General were 'not assembled,
the monarchs of France were accustomed to conr
fult the parliament of Paris with refpe& to the
most arduous affairs of government, and frequent-
ly regulated their condua by its advice, in de-
claring war, in concluding peace, and in other
tranfafions of public concern. Thus there was
ereaed in the kingdom a tribunal which became
the great depository of the laws, and by the uni-
form tenor of its decrees, efitabliihed principles
of justice and forms of proceeding which were
considered as so sacred, that even the sovereign
power of the monarch durfi not venture to difre-
gard or to violate them.. The members of this
illuirious body, though they neither possess le-
giflative authority, nor can be considered as the
representatives of the people, have availed them-
Lilves of the reputation and influence which they
hid acquired among their countrymen, in order
to make a fland, to the utmost of their ability,
against every unprecedented and exorbitant ex-

ertion

the French history, they have merited the praise
of being the virtuous but feeble guardians of the
rights and privileges of the nation [RR].

After taking this view of the political state of

France, I proceed to confider that of the Ger-
man empire, from which Charles V. derived his
title of highest dignity. In explaining the con-
ilitution of this great and complex body at the
beginning of the sixteenth century, I shall avoid
entering into such a detail as would involve my
readers in that inextricable labyrinth, which is
formed by the multiplicity of its tribunals, the
number of its members, their interfering rights,
and by the endless difcuiions or refinements of
the public lawyers of Germany, with refpea to
all these.

The empire of Charlemagne was a fitruaure

ereAed in so short a time, that it could not be
permanent. Under his immediate fuccefior it
began to totter; and soon after fell to pieces.
The crown of Germany was separated from that
of France, and the descendants of Charlemagne
established two great monarchies so situated as to
give rife to a perpetual rivalfhip and enmity be-
tween them. But the princes of the race of
Charlemagne who were placed on the Imperial
throne, were not altogether so degenerate, as
those of the fame family who reigned in France.
In the hands of the former the royal authority
retained some vigour, and the nobles of Germa-
ny, though poffeffed of extensive privileges as
well as ample territories, did not so early obtain
independence. The great offices of the crown

IRR) NOTE XL,

a 3 con.

and during a long period, fiefs remained in their
original state, without becoming hereditary and
perpetual in the families of the persons to whom
they had been granted.

At length the German branch of the family of

Charlemagne became extina, and his feeble de-
fcendants who reigned in France had funk into
such contempt, that the Germans, without look-
ing towards them, exercised the right inherent
in a free people; and in a general assembly of the
nation eleEded Conrad count of Franconia empe-
ror [A. D. 911]. After him Henry of Saxony,
and his descendants the three Othos, were placed,
in succession, on the Imperial throne, by the sus-
frages of their countrymen. The extensive ter-
ritories of the Saxon emperors, their eminent
abilities and enterprising genius, not only added
new vigour to the Imperial dignity, but raised it
to higher power and pre-eminence. Otho the
Great marched at the head of a numerous army
into Italy [A. D. 952], and after the example of
Charlemagne, gave law to that country. Every
power there recognized his authority. He created
popes, and deposed them, by his sovereign man-
date. He annexed the kingdom of Italy to the
German empire. Elated with his success, he
assumed the title of Cefar Augustus h. A prince,
born in the heart of Germany, pretended to be
the successor of the emperors of ancient Rome,
and claimed a right to the fame power and pre-

rogative. But while the emperors, by means of these
new titles and new dominions, gradually acquired

b Annalilia Saxo, &c, ap. Struv. Corp. vol.i. p. 246*

additional

Germany had gone on at the fame time extending
their privileges and jurifdiaion. The situation
of affairs was favourable to their attempts. The
vigour which Charlemagne had given to govern-
ment quickly relaxed. The incapacity of some
of his successors was such, as would have encou-
raged vassals less enterprising than the nobles of
that age, to have claimed new rights, and to
have affiumed new powers. The civil wars in
which other emperors were engaged, obliged them
to pay perpetual court to their fubje~ts, on whose
support they depended, and not only to connive
at their ufurpations, but to permit, and even to
authorize them. Fiefs gradually became here-
ditary. They were transmitted not only in the
direa, but also in the collateral line. The -mn
veffiture of them was demanded not only by male
but by female heirs. Every baron began to ex-
ercife sovereign jurifdiaion within his own do-
mains; and the dukes and counts of Germany
took wide fleps towards rendering their territo-
ries diindt and independent frates'. The Saxon
emperors observed their progress, and were aware
of its tendency. But as they could not hope to
humble vassals already grown too potent, unless
they had turned their whole force as well as
attention to that enterprise, and as they were
extremely intent on their expeditions into Italy,
which they could not undertake without the
concurrence of their nobles, they were solicitous
not to alarm them by any dived attack on their
privileges and jurifdiaions. They aimed, how-
ever, at undermining their power. With this

i Pfeffel. Abrig6, p. iso. 155. Lib. Feudor. tit. i.

viCW,

view, they inconsiderately bestowed additional
territories, and accumulated new honours on the
clergy, in hopes that this order might serve as a
counterpoise to that of the nobility in any future
firuggle kI

The unhappy effeas of this fatal error in po-

licy were quickly felt. Under the emperors of
the Franconian and Swabian lines, whom the
Germans, by their voluntary ele&ion, placed on
the Imperial throne, a new face of things ap-
peared, and a feene was exhibited in Germany,
which aftoniflhed all Christendom at that time
(A. D. soz4], and in the present age appears al-
most incredible. The popes, hitherto dependent
on the emperors, and indebted for power as well
as dignity to their beneficence and proteaion, be-
gan to claim a superior jurifdi~aion; and, in vir-
tue of authority which they pretended to derive
from heaven, tried, condemned, excommunicated,
and deposed their former masters. Nor is this
to be considered merely as a frantic sally of pas-
sion in a pontiff intoxicated with high ideas con-
cerning the extent of prieitly domination, and
the plenitude of papal authority. Gregory VII.
was able as well as daring. His presumption
and violence were accompanied with political
discernment and sagacity. He had observed that
the princes and nobles of Germany had acquired
such considerable territories and such extensive
jurifddidion, as rendered them not only formidable
to the emperors, but disposed them to favour
any attempt to circumscribe their power. He
foresaw that the ecclefiaftics of Germany, raised
almoit to a level with its princes, were ready to

k Pfeffel. Abrgig, p. 54*.

z support

support any person who would fRand forth as the
protedor of their privileges and independence.
With both of these Gregory negotiated, and had
secured many devoted adherents among them,
before he ventured to enter the lifts against the
head of the empire.

He began his rupture with Henry IV. upon

a pretext that was popular and plausible. He
complained of the venality and corruption with
which the emperor had granted the investiture of
benefices to ecclefiaftics. He contended that
this right belonged to him as the head of the
church; he required Henry to confine himself
within the bounds of his civil jurifdidion, and
to abstain for the future from such sacrilegious
encroachments on the spiritual dominion. All
the cenfires of the church were denounced againit
Henry, because he refused to relinquilh those
powers which his predecessors had uniformly ex-
ercifed. The most considerable of the German
princes and ecclefiaftics were excited to take arms
against him. His mother, his wife, his sons
were wrought upon to difregar4 all the ties of
blood as well as of duty, and to join the party of
his enemies k. Such were the fuccefsful arts
with which the court of Rome inflamed the fu-
perftitious zeal, and conduded the fadious spirit
of the Germans and Italians, that an emperor,
distinguished not only for many virtues, but pof-
sessed of confiderabhe talents, was at length
obliged to appear as a supplicant at the gate of
the castle in which the pope resided, and to
fRand there, three days, bare-footed, in the
depth of winter, imploring a pardon, which at

k Annal. German. ap. Struv. i. p. 335* length

o077].
This ac% of humiliation degraded the Imperial

dignity. Nor was the depression momentary only.
The contest between Gregory and Henry gave
rife to the two great faaions of the Guelfs and
Ghibellines; the former of which supporting the
pretensions of the popes, and the latter defending
the rights of the emperor, kept Germany and
Italy in perpetual agitation during three centu-
ries. A regular system, for humbling the em-
perors and circumscribing their power was formed,
and adhered to uniformly throughout that period.
The popes, the free slates in Italy, the nobility,
and ecclefiaflics of Germany, were all interefited
in its success; and notwithstanding the return of
some short intervals of vigour, under the admi.
nidration of a few able emperors, the Imperial
authority continued to decline. During the
anarchy of the long interregnum subsequent to
the death of William of Holland [A.D. I256],
it dwindled down almolt to nothing. Rodolph
of Hapfburgh, the founder of the House of
Auffria, and who firnt opened the way to its fu-
ture grandeur, was at length.eleded emperor
tA. ID. 5273], not that he might re-efitablifh
and extend the Imperial authority, but because
his territories and influence were so inconfider-
able as to excite no jealousy in the German
princes, who were willing to preserve the forms
of a confditution, the power and vigour of
which they had destroyed. Several of his fuc-
ceffors were placed on the Imperial throne from
the fame motive; and almost every remaining

[SSI NOTE XLI.

prerogative

feeble princes unable to exercise or to defend
them.

During this period of turbulence and confu-

sion, the confditution of the Germanic body- un-
derwent a total change. The ancient names of
courts and magiflrates, together with the origi.
nal forms and appearance of policy, were pre-
served; but such new privileges and jurifdiftion
were assumed, and so many various rights effra-
blifhed, that the fame species of government no
longer fnrbfnird. The princes, the great nobiiity,
the dignified eclefiaftics, the free cities had taken
advantage of the interregnum, which I have men-
tioned, to establish or to extend their ufurpations.
They claimed and exercised the right of govern.
ing their refpeaive territories with full fove-
reignty. They acknowledged no superior with
refpe& to any point, relative to the interior ad.
mInistration and police of their domains. They
enaded laws, imposed taxes, coined money, de-
clared war, concluded peace, and exerted every
prerogative peculiar to independent states. The
ideas of order and political union, which had ori-
ginally formed the various provinces of Germany
into one body, were almost entirely loft; and the
society must have dissolved, if the forms of feudal
subordination had not preserved such an appear-
ance of conneaion or dependence among the va-
rious members of the community, as preserved it
from falling to pieces.

This bond of union, however, was extremely

feeble; and hardly any principle remained in the
German conflitution, of ufficient force to main-
tain public order, or even to ascertain personal

security.

Hapfburgh, to the reign of Maximilian, the im-
mediate predecessor of Charles V., the empire
felt every calamity which a fRate must endure,
when the authority of government is so much
relaxed as to have loft its proper degree of vigour.
The causes of dissension among that vast number
of members, which composed the Germanic body,
were infinite and unavoidable. These gave rife
to perpetual private wars, which were carried on
with all the violence that usually accompanies
rcfentment, when unreitrained by superior autho-
rity. Rapine, outrage, exadions, becameuni-
versal. Commei-ce was interrupted; induifry
suspended; and every part of Germany refem-
bled a country which an enemy had plundered
and left desolate ' The variety of expedients
employed with a view to restore order and tran-
quillity, prove that the grievances occasioned by
this slate of anarchy had grown intolerable.
Arbiters were appointed to terminate the differ-
ences among the several fRates. The cities united
in a league, the objea of which was to check
the rapine and extortions of the nobility. The
nobility formed confederacies, on purpose to
maintain tranquillity among their own order.
Germany was divided into several circles, in each
of which a provincial and partial jurifdiAion was
established, to supply the place of a public and
common tribunal .

But all these remedies were so ineffeaual, that

they served only to demonfrate the violence of

See above, page 49, and note xxi. Datt. de pace publica

Imper. p. 25, no. 53. p. 28, no. 26. p. 35, no. as.

no Datt. pa1iim. Struv, Corp. Hist. 1. 5io, &c.

that

of the means employed to corred it. At length
Maximilian re-efiablifhed public order in the em-
pire, by initituting the Imperial chamber [A. D.
1495], a tribunal composed of judges named
partly by the emperor, partly by the several
slates, and vefied with authority to decide finally
concerning all differences among the members of
the Germanic body. A few years after [A. D.
II5], by giving a new form to the Aulic
council, which takes cognizance of all feudal
causes, and such as belong to the emperor's im-
mediate jurifdiAion, he reflored some degree of
vigour to the Imperial authority.

But notwithitanding the salutary effeas of

these regulations and improvements, the political
conflitution of the German empire, at the com-
mencement of the period of which I propose to
write the history, was of a species so peculiar, as
not to resemble perfealy any form of government
known either in the ancient or modern world.
It was a complex body, formed by the association
of several itates, each of which poffeffed sovereign
and independent jurifdiaion within its own terri-
tories. Of all the members which composed
this united body, the emperor was the head. In
his name, all decrees and regulations, with refpjed
to points of common concern, were issued; and
to him the power of carrying them into execution
was committed. But this appearance of monar-
chical power in the emperor was more than
counterbalanced by the influence of the princes
and slates of the empire in every a& of admini-
fkration. No law extending to the whole body
could pass, no resolution that affeaed the general

vOL. i. interef

of the diet of the empire. In this assembly, every
sovereign prince and ilate of the Germanic body
had a right to be present, to deliberate, and to
vote. The decrees or Rec as of the diet were
the laws of the empire, which the emperor was
bound to ratify and enforce.

Under this afpea, the conflitution of the em-

pire appears a regular confederacy, similar to the
Achman league in ancient Greece, or to that of
the United Provinces and of the Swiss cantons
in modern times. But if viewed in another light,
striking peculiarities in its political state present
themselves. The Germanic body was not formed
by the union of members altogether diftind and
independent. All the princes and slates, joined
in this association, were originally fubjea to the
emperors, and acknowledged them as sovereigns.
Besides this, they originally held their lands as
Imperial fiefs, and in consequence of this tenure
owed the emperor all those services which feudal
vassals are bound to perform to their liege lord.
But though this political fubjeafion was entirely
at an end, and the influence of the feudal relation
much diminiihed, the ancient forms and inftitu-
tions, introduced while the emperors governed
Germany with authority not inferior to that
which the other monarchs of Europe poffeffed,
Rill remained. Thus an opposition was established
between the genius of the government, and the
forms of administration in the German empire.
The former considered the emperor only as the
head of a confederacy, the members of which,
by their voluntary choice, have raised him to
that dignity; the latter seemed to imply, that he

Is

circumifance, such principles of hoflility and dif-
cord were interwoven into the frame of the Ger-
manic body, as affeaed each of its members, ren-
dering their interior union incomplete, and their
etternal efforts feeble and irregular. The per-
nicious influence of this defet inherent in the
conilitution of the empire is so considerable, that,
without attending to it, we cannot fully compre-
hend many tranfadions in the reign of Charles V.,
or form just ideas concerning the genius of the
German government.

The emperors of Germany, at the beginning

of the sixteenth century, were distinguished by
the moit pompous titles, and by such ensigns of
dignity, as intimated their authority to be fupe-
rnor to that of all other monarchs. The greatest
princes of the empire attended, and served them,
on some occasions, as the officers of their house.
hold. They exercised prerogatives which no
other sovereign ever claimed. They retained
pretensions to all the extensive powers which their
predecessors had enjoyed in any former age.
But, at the fame time, inflead of poffeffing that
ample domain which had belonged to the ancient
emperors of Germany, and which fitretchcd from
Ealil to Cologne, along both banks of the Rhine',
they were firipped of all territorial property, and
had not a single city, a single caffle, a lingle foot
of land, that belonged to them, as heads of the
empire. As their domain was alienated, their
Rtated revenues were reduced almost to nothing;
and the extraordinary aids, which on a few occa-
fions they obtained, were granted sparingly and

a Pfeffel. AbrigC, &c. p. 241.

12 paid

paid with reluaance. The princes and fdates of
the empire, though they seemed to recognize the
Imperial authority, were fubjeas only in name,
each of them poffefling a complete municipal
jurifdiaion within the precinas of his own terri.
tories.

From this ill-compaaed frame of government,

effeas that were unavoidable resulted. The em-
perors, dazzled with the splendour of their titles,
and the external signs of vadl authority, were apt
to imagine themselves to be the real sovereigns
of Germany, and were led to aim continually at
recovering the exercise of those powers which
the forms of the conititution seemed to vedt in
them, and which their predecessors, Charlemagne
and the Othos, had aaually enjoyed. The
princes and dates, aware of the nature as well as
extent of these pretensions, were perpetually on
their guard, in order to watch all the motions of
the Imperial court, and to circumscribe its power
within limits dill more narrow. The emperors,
in support of their claims, appealed to ancient
forms and inititutions, which the states held to
be obsolete. The dates founded their rights on
recent pradice and modern privileges, which the
emperors considered as ufurpations.

This jealousy of the Imperial authority, toge-

ther with the opposition between it and the rights
of the dlates, increased considerably from the time
that the emperors were eleded, not by the col-
leatie body of German nobles, but by a few
princes of chief dignity. During a long period,
all the members of the Germanic body had a
right to assemble, and to make choice of the per-
fun whom they appointed to be their head. But

amidst

for several centuries in the empire, seven princes
who poffeffed the modt extensive territories, and
who had obtained a hereditary title to the great
offices of the dtate, acquired the exclusive privi-
lege of nominatieg the emperor. This right was
confirmed to them by the Golden Bull; the
snode of exercising it was ascertained, and they
were dignified with the appellation of Elcr7ors.
The nobility and free cities being thus firipped
of a privilege which they had once enjoyed, were
less connedted with a prince, towards whose ele-
vation they had not contributed by their fuffrages,
and came to be more apprehensive of his autho-
rity. The eleaors, by their extensive power,
and the diftinguilhing privileges which they pof-
Leffed, became tormidable to the emperors, with
whom they were placed almost on a level in feve-
ral aas of jurifdifion. Thus the introduAion
of the eleAoral college into the empire, and the
authority which it acquired, indtead of diminish-
ing, con ributed to frengthen, the principles of
holtility and discord in the Germanic confdi-
tution.

These were further augmented by the various

and repugnant forms of civil policy in the several
dtates which composed the Germanic body. It
is no easy matter to render the union of independ.
ent dtates perfed and entire, even when the ge-
nius and forms oZ their refpeaive governments
hapien to be altogether similar. But in the
German empire, which was a confederacy of
rrinces, of ecciefiaftics, and of free cities, it was
irepoffible that they could incorporate thorough.
]y. The free cities were fmallrepublics, in which

53 the

government prevailed. The princes and nobles,
to whom supreme jurifdiaion belonged, poffeffed
a fort of monarchical power within their own
territories, and the forms of their interior admi-
niftration nearly resembled those of the great
feudal kingdoms. The interelts, the ideas, the
objeas of states so differently conofituted, cannot
be the fame. Nor could their common delibera-
tions be carried on with the fame spirit, while the,
love of liberty, and attention to commerce, were
the reigning principles in the cities; while the
desire of power, and ardour for military glory,
were the governing passions of the princes and
nobility.

The secular and ecclesiastical members of the

empire were as little fitted for union as the free
cities and the nobility. Considerable territories
had been granted to several of the German bi-
ihoprics and abbeys, and some of the highest
offices in the empire having been annexed to them
inalienably, were held by the ecclefiaftics raised
to these dignities. The younger sons of noble-
men of the second order, who had devoted them-
selves to the church, were commonly promoted
to these fiations of eminence and power; and it
was no small mortification to the princes and
great nobility, to fee persons raised from an in-
ferior rank to the fame level with themselves, or
even exalted to superior dignity. The education
of these churchmen, the genius of their profeffion,
and their conneaion with the court of Rome,
rendered their charaaer as well as their interest
different from those of the other members of the
Germanic body, with whom they were called to

and variance was opened, which ought not to be
overlooked when we are searching into the nature
of the German conflitution.

To all these causes of dissension may be added

one more, arising from the unequal difhribution
of power and wealth among the fates of the em-
pire. The eledors, and other nobles of the
highest rank, not only poffeffed sovereign jurif.
diaion, but governed such extensive, populous,
and rich countries, as rendered them great princes.
Many of the other members, though they enjoyed
all the rights of sovereignty, ruled over such
petty domains, that their real power bore no
proportion to this high prerogative. A well-
compaaed and vigorous confederacy could not
be formed of such dissimilar fdates. The weaker
were jealous, timid, and unable either to assert
or to defend their just privileges. The more
powerful were apt to assume and to become op-
preflive. The eleaors, and emperors, by turns,
endeavoured to extend their own authority, by
encroaching on those feeble members of the Ger-
manic body, who sometimes defended their rights
with much spirit, but more frequently, being
overawed or corrupted, they tamely surrendered
their privileges, or meanly favoured the designs
formed against them [TT].

After contemplating all these principles of dif-

union and opposition in the conititution of the
German empire, it will be easy to account for
the want of concord and uniformity, conspicuous
in its councils and proceedings. That flow, di-
latory, difdrufiful, and irresolute spirit, which
charaderizes all its deliberations, will appear na-

[TT] NOTE XLII,

tur4

was so incomplete, the different parts of which
were held together by such feeble ties, and set at
variance by such powerful motives. But the
empire of Germany, nevertheless, comprehended
countries of such great extent, and was inhabited
'by such a martial and hardy race of men, that
when the abilities of an emperor, or zeal for any
common cause, could rouse this unwieldy body
to put forth its firength, it ated with almoR ir-
resistible force. In the following hillory we shall
find, that as the measures on which Charles V.
was most intent, were often thwarted or rendered
abortive by the spirit of jealousy and division pe-
culiar to the Germanic conititution; so it was
by the influence which he acquired over the
princes of the empire, and by engaging them to
co-operate with him, that he was enabled to
make some of the greateit efforts which diftin.
guifh his reign.

The Turkish hiffory is to blended, during the

reign of Charles V., with that of the great nations
in Europe, and the Ottoman Porte interposed so
often, and with such decisive influence, in the
wars and negotiations of the Christian princes,
that some previous account of the slate of govern-
ment in that great empire, is no less necessary
for the information of my readers, than those
views of the conflitution of other kingdoms which
I have already exhibited to them.

It has been the fate of the southern and more

fertile parts of Asia, at different periods, to be
conquered by that warlike and hardy race of
men, who inhabit the vast country known to the
ancients by the name of Scythia, and among the
moderns by that of Tartary. One tribe of these

people,

people, called Turks or Turcomans, extended its
conqueffs, under various leaders, and during feve-
ral centuries, from the thore of the Caspian Sea
to the Straits of the Dardanelles. Towards the
middle of the fifteenth century, these formidable
conquerors took Conilantinople by form, and
eftablijhed the feat of their government in that
imperial city. Greece, Moidavia, Walachia, and
the other provinces of the ancient kingdoms of
Thrace and Macedonia, together with part of
Hungary, were fubjeaed to their power.

But though the feat of the Turkish govern-

ment was fixed in Europe, and the sultans ob-
tained poffeffion of such extenfisv dominions in
that quarter of the globe, the genius of their
policy continued to be purely Asiatic; and may
be properly termed a despotism, in contradiftinc-
tion to those monarchical and republican forms
of government which we have been hitherto con-
templating. The supreme power was vefied in
sultans of the Ottoman race, that blood being
deemed so sacred, that no other was thought
worthy of the throne. From this elevation, these
sovereigns could look down and behold all their
fubjeas reduced to the fame level before them.
The maxims of Turkish policy do not authorise
any of those in{ritutions, which, in other coun-.
tries, limit the exercise, or moderate the rigour
of monarchical power: they admit neither of
any great court with constitutional and perma;
nent jurifdicaion to interpose, both in enading
laws, and in fuperintending the execution of
them nor of a body of hereditary nobles, whose
sense of their own pre-eminence, whose confcioul-
ness of what is due to their rank and charaaer,
whose jealousy of their privileges circunifcribe

the

the authority of the prince, and serve not only
as a barrier againfR the excesses of his caprice,
but stand as an intermediate order between him
and the people. Under the Turkish government,
the political condition of every fubjed is equal.
To be employed in the service of the sultan, is
the only circumitance that confers diftinaion.
Even this diltinaion is rather official than perfo..
nal, and so closely annexed to the station in which
any individual serves, that it is scarcely commu-
nicated to the persons of those who are placed
in them. The higheit dignity in the empire
does not give any rank or pre-emilience to the
family of him who enjoys it. As every man,
before he is raised to any flation of authority,
mull go through the preparatory discipline of a
long and servile obedience o, the moment he is
deprived of power, he and his posterity return to
the fame condition with other fubieas, and fink
back into obscurity. It is the dillinguilhing and
odious chara&eriftic of Eastern despotism, that it
annihilates all other ranks of men, in order to
exalt the monarch; that it leaves nothing to
the former, while it gives every thing to the
latter; that it endeavours to fix in the minds
of those who are fubjed to it, the idea of no
relation between men, but that of a maiter and
of a slave, the former deitined to command and
to punish, the latter formed to tremble and to
obey [UU]J.

But as there are circumfiances which frequently

obitrud or defeat the salutary effeds of the best-
regulated governments, there are others which
contribute to mitigate the evils of the molt de-

o State of the Turkiih Empire by Rycaut, p. 25.
LUU] NOTE XLIII.

feaive

no coniftitutional refiraints upon the will of a
prince in a despotic government; but there may
be such as are accidental. Absolute as the
Turkish Sultans are, they feel themselves cir-
cumferibed both by religion, the principle on
which their authority is founded P, and by the
army, the infitrument which they must employ in
order to maintain it. Wherever religion inter-
poses, the will of the sovereign muff submit to
its decrees. When the Koran hath prescribed
any religious rite, hath enjoined any moral duty,
or hath confirmed by its fanaion any political
maxim, the command of the Sultan cannot over-
turn that which an higher authority hath ella-
blifhed. The chief reitridion, however, on the
will of the Sultans, is imposed by the military
power. An armed force muff surround the
throne of every despot, to maintain his authority,
and to execute his commands. As the Turks
extended their empire over nations which they did
not exterminate, but reduce to fubjedion, they
found it necessary to render their military ellablifh-
menc numerous and formidable. Amurath, their
third Sultan, in order to form a body of troops
devoted to his will, that might serve as the imme-
diate giards of his person and dignity, commanded
his officers to seize annually, as the Imperial pro-
perty, the fifth part of the youth taken in war
[A. D. s362]. These, after being infiruded in
the Mahometan religion, inured to obedience by
severe discipline, and trained to warlike exercises,
were formed into a body distinguished by the
name of 7anhzaries, or new soldiers. Every fen-
timent which enthusiasm can inspire, every mark

P Rycaut, p. 8.

of

confer, were employed in order to animate this
body with martial ardour, and with a conscious-
ness of its own pre-eminence q. The Janizaries
soon became the chief fitrength and pride of the
Ottoman armies; and, by their number as well
as reputation, were diftinguilhed above al1 the
troops, whose duty it was to attend on the per-
son of the Sultans [XX].

Thus, as the supreme power in every society

is poffeffed by those who have arms in their hands,
this formidable body of soldiers, destined to be
the inifruments of enlarging the Sultan's autho-
rity, acquired, at the fame time, the means of
controuling it. The Janizaries in Conofantino-
pie, like the.Prutorian bands in ancient Rome,
quickly perceived all the advantages which they
derived from being ilationed in the capital; from
their union under one ilandard; and from being
mailers of the person of the prince. The Sul-
tans became no less fenfibie of their influence and
importance. The Capiculy, or soldiery of the
Porte, was the only power in the empire that a
Sultan or his vifier had reason to dread. To
preserve the fidelity and attachment of the Jani-
zaries, was the great art of government, and the
principal objeft of attention in the policy of the
Ottoman court. Under a monarch, whose abi-
lities and vigour of mind fit him for command,
they are obsequious infitruments; execute what-.
ever he enjoins; and render his power irresistible.
Under feeble princes, or such as are unfortunate,
they become turbulent and mutinous; assume
the tone of mailers; degrade and exalt Sultans

q Prince Cantemir's Hiflory of he Othman Empire, p. 27.
[XXJ NOTE XLIV.

3 at

whose nod, at other times, life and death depend.

From Mahomet II. who took Conflantinople,

to Solyman the Magnificent, who began his reign
a few months after Charles V. was placed on the
Imperial throne of Germany, a succession of illus-
trious princes ruled over the Turkish empire.
By their great abilities, they kept their fubjeAs
of every order, military as well as civil, fubmif-
five to government; and had the absolute com-
mand of whatever force their vast empire was
able to exert. Solyman, in particular, who is
known to the Christians chiefly as a conqueror,
but is celebrated in the Turkish annals, as the
great lawgiver who eflablilhed order and police
in their empire, governed, during his long reign,
with no less authority than wisdom. He divided
his dominions into several difdrids; he appointed
the number of soldiers which each should furnish;
he appropriated a certain proportion of the land
in every province, for their maintenance; he re-
gulated, with a minute accuracy, every thing re-
lative to their difeipline, their arms, and the na-
ture of their service. He put the finances of the
empire into an orderly train of administration;
and, though the taxes in the Turkish dominions,
as well as in the other despotic monarchies of the
East, are far from being considerable, he supplied
that defe& by an attentive and severe (economy.

Nor was it only under such sultans as Solyman,

whose talents were no less adapted to preserve
internal order than to condua the operations of
war, that the Turkish empire engaged with ad-
vantage in its contests with the Christian fdates.
The long succession of able princes, which I have
mentioned, had given such vigour and firmness

VOL. I. T to

to the Ottoman government, that it seems to
have attained, during the sixteenth century, the
higheit degree of perfeaion of which its conifi-
tution was capable. Whereas the great monar-
chies in Christendom were still far from that slate,
which could enable them to ad with a full exer-
tion of their force. Besides this, the Turkish
troops in that age poffeffed every advantage which
arises from superiority in military discipline. At
the time when Solyman began his reign, the Ja-
nizaries had been embodied near a century and a
half; and, during that long period, the severity
of their military discipline had in no degree re.
laxed. The other soldiers, drawn from the pro-
vinces of the empire, had been kept almost con-
tinually under arms, in the various wars which
the sultans had carried on, with hardly any in-
terval of peace. Againit troops thus trained
and accustomed to service, the forces of the
Christian powers took the field with great difad-
vantage. The moRl intelligent as well as impar-
tial authors of the sixteenth century acknowledge
and lament the superior attainments of the Turks
in the military art [YY]. The foccefs which
almost uniformly attended their arms, in all their
wars, demonfirates the justness of this observation.
The Christian armies did not acquire that fupe-
riority over the Turks, which they now possess,
until the long establishment of flanding forces had
improved mslitary discipline among the former;
and until various causes and events, which it is
not my province to explain, had corrupted or
abolished their ancient warlike institutions among
the latter.

[YY] NoTE XLV.

# PROOFS AND ILLUSTRATIONS.

AND

ILLUSTRATIONS.

NOTE I. SECT.I.p.3. [A].

HsE confiernation of the Britons, when invaded by
the Pias and Caledonians after the Roman legions

were called out of the island, may give some idea of the
degree of debalement to which the human mind was re-
duced by long servitude under the Romans. In their
supplicatory letter to Aetius, which they call the groans
ofBritain, " We know not (fay they) which way to
turn us. The barbarians drive us to the sea, and the sea
forces us back on the barbarians; between which we
have only the choice of two deaths, either to be (wal-
lowed up by the waves, or to be slain by the (word."
Hiftor. Gilds, ap. Gale, Hist. Britan. Script. p. 6.-One
can hardly believe this dastardly race to be the descend-
ants of that gallant people, who repulsed Cafar, and
defended their liberty so long against the Roman arms.

,NOTE II. SECT.I. p.4. [B].

THE barbarous nations were not only illiterate, but

regarded literature with contempt. They found the in-
habitants of all the provinces of the empire funk in
effeminacy, and averse to war. Such a charaaer was
the objea of (corn to an high-fpirited and gallant race
of men. " When we would brand an enemy," says Liut-
prandus, " with the mofl disgraceful and contumelious
appellation, we call him a Roman; hoc solo, id eft
Romani nomine, quicquid ignobilitatis,quicquid timiditatis,
quicquid avariti9, ouicquid luxurix, quicquid mendacii,

TI immo

prandi Legatio apud Murat. Scriptor. Italic. vol. ii.
pars s. p. 48B. This degeneracy of manners, illiterate
barbarians imputed to their love of learning. Even
after they fettled in the countries which they had con-
quered, they would not permit their children to be in-
ltruded in any science; " for (said they) inftruaion
in the sciences tends to corrupt, enervate, and depreRs
the mind ; and he who has been accustomed to tremble
under the rod of a pedagogue, will neverlook on a sword
or spear with an undaunted eye'.' Procop de bello
Gothor. lib. i. p. 4. ap. Scrip. Byz. edit. Woenet. vol. i.
Acconfiderable number of years elapsed, before nations
so rude, and lo unwilling to learn, could produce his-
torians capable of recording their tranfa1ions, or of
deferibing their manners and inl'itutions. By that time,
the memory of their ancient condition was in a great.
sneafnre lofi, and fewv monuments remained to guide
their firfi writers to any certain knowledge of it. If one.
expeas to receive any fatisfatory account of the man-
users and laws of the Goths, Lombards, or Franks, during
their relidence in thole countries where they were ori-
ginally seated, from jornandes, Paulus Warnefridus, or
iregory of Tours, the earliell and mos authentic his-
torians of these people, he will be miserably disappoint-
ed. Whatever imperfect knowledge has been conveyed
to us of their ancient fiate, we owe not to their own
writers, but to the Greek and Roman historians.

N O T E III. SEcr. I. p.. [C].

A CIRCUMSTANCE, related by Prifcus in his history

of the embassy to Attila, king of the Huns, gives a
firiking view of the enthusiastic passion for war which
prevailed among the barbarous nations. When the
entertainment, to which that fierce conqueror admitted
the Roman ambassadors, was ended, two Scythians ad-
vanced towards Attila, and recited a poem in which
they celebrated his vivtories and military virtues. All
Ase Ji-ns fixed their eyes with attention on she bards,

Some

remembering their own battles and exploits, exulted
with joy ; while such as were become feeble through
age, burRt out into tears, bewailing the decay of their
vigour, and the slate of inaaivity in which they were
now obliged to remain. Excerpta ex hiftoria Prifti
Rhetoris ap. Byzant. Hiior. Script.. vol. i. p. 45.

NOTE IV. SECT. I. p. 12. [D].

A REMARKABSLE confirmation of both parts of this

reasoning occurs in the hifltory of England. The Saxons
carried on the conquest of that country with the fame
deftruaive spirit which distinguished the other barbarous
nations. The ancient inhabitants of Britain were either
exterminated, or forced to take shelter among the moun-
tains of Wales, or reduced to servitude. The Saxon
government, laws, manners, and language were of con-
sequence introduced into Britain and were lo perfealy
eflabliihed, that all memory of the inltitutions previousto
their conquest of the cosntry, was in a great meafureloft.
The very reverse of this happened in a fublequent revolu-
tion. A single viaory placed William the Norman on the
throne of England. The Saxon inhabitants, though op-
pressed, were not exterminated. William employed the
iatmoft efforts of his power and policy to make his new
fubjeds conform in every thing to the Norman flandard,
but without success. The Saxons, though vanquilhed,
were far more numerous than their conquerors; when the
two races began to incorporate, the Saxon laws and
manners gradually gained ground. The Norman initi-
tutions became unpopular and odious j many of them
fell into disuse; and in the Englilh conflitution and lan-
guage, at this day, many essential parts are manifestly of
Saxon, not of Norman extra~tion.

NOTE V. SECT.I. p. 12. EE].

PRocoPrus, the historian, declines, from a principle of

benevolence, to give any particular detail of the cruelties
of the Goths; " Left," lays he, " I hould transmit a mo-

T 3 nument

Proc. de bello Goth. lib. iii. cap. so. ap. Byz. Script,
vol. i. Iz6. But as the change, which I have pointed
out as a consequence of the settlement of the barbarous
nations in the countries formerly fubjea to the Roman
empire, could not have taken place, if the greater part
of the ancient inhabitants had not been extirpated, an
event of such importance and influence merits a more
particular illujtration. This will justify me for exhibit-
ing some part of that melancholy fpeaacle, over which
humanity prompted Procopius to draw a veil. I Ihall
not, however, dilguft my readers by a minute narration;
but reRt satisfied with colleaing some inifances of the
devaflations made by two of the many nations which set-
tied in the empire. The Vandals were the first of the
barbarians who invaded Spain. It was one of the richest
and molt populous of the Roman provinces; the inha-
bitants had been diftinguiflaed for courage, and had de-
fended their liberty againfi the arms of Rome, with
greater obflinacy, and during a longer course of years,
than any nation in Europe. But To entirely were they
enervated by their fubjedtion to the Romans, that the
Vandals, who entered the kingdom A. D. 409, complet-
ed the conquest of it with fucl rapidity, that in the year
421 , these barbarians divided it among them by casting
lots. The desolation occaftoned by their inva(ion is thus
described by Idatius an eye witness: " The barbarians
wasted every thing with hoffile cruelty. The pestilence
was no less deltruaive. A dreadful famine raged, to
such a degree, that the living were confirained to feed
on the dead bodies of their fellow-citizens; and all those
terrible plagues desolated at once the unhappy king-
doms." Idatii Chron. ap. Biblioth. Patrum, vol. vii.
p. rz33. edit. Lugd. 5677. The Goths having attacked
eheVandals in their new settlements, a fierce warenfued;
the country was plundered by both parties; the cities
which had escaped from defiruaion in the firfi invasion
oftheVandals, were now laid in ashes, and the inhabitants
Lxpofed to fuffer every thing that the wanton cruelty of

barbarians

of inhumanity, ibid. p. 1235. b. 1236. c. f. A similar
account of their devaltations is given by Ifidorus His-
palenfis, and other contemporary writers. 1id. Chron.
ap. Grot. hilt. Goth. 732. Prom Spain the.Vandals
passed over into Africa, A. D. 428. Africa was, next
to Egypt, the mofe fertile of the Roman provinces.
It was one of the granaries of the empire, and is called
by an ancient writer, the foul of the commonwvealth.
Though the army with which the Vandals invaded it
did not exceed 30,000 fighting men, they became ab-
solute matters of the province in less than two years.
A contemporary author gives a dreadful account of the
havoc which they made: " They found a province well
cultivated, and enjoying plenty, the beauty of the
whole earth. They carried their deftruaive arms into
every corner of it they difpeopled it by their devaila-
tions; exterminating every thing with fire and (word.
They did not even spare the vines and fruit trees, thsat
those, to whom caves and inaccessible mountains had
afforded a retreat, might find no nourilhment of any
kind. Their hostile rage could not be satiated, and
there was no place exempted from the effeas of it.
They tortured their prisoners with the most exquisite
cruelty, that they might force from them a discovery of
their hidden treasures. The more they discovered the
more they expeaed, and the more implacable they be-
came. Neither the infirmities of age nor of sex nei-
ther the dignity of nobility, nor the fandity of the facer-
dotal office, could mitigate their fury; but the more
illufirious their prisoners were, the more barbaroully they
insulted them. The public buildings, which refilled the
violence of the flames, they levelled with the ground.
They left many cities without an inhabitant. When
they approached any fortified place, which their undif-
ciplined army could not reduce, they gathered together
a multitude of prisoners, and putting them to the
(word, left their bodies unburied, that the fiench of the
carcasses might oblige the garrison to abandon it." Vic-
tor Vitenlis de perfecutione Africans ap. Bibi. Patrum,

vol.

vived the conquest of his country by the Vandals some
years, gives a similar defeription of their cruelties, Opera,
vol. x. p. 372. edit. i6r6.-About an hundred years
after the settlement of the Vandals in Africa, Belisarius
attacked and difpoffelfed them. Procopius, a contem-
porary historian, deferibes the devastation which that
war occationed. "Africa," fayshe, " was To entirely dif-
peopled, that one might travel several days in it without
meeting one man i and it is no exaggeration to fay,
that in the course of the war five millions of persons
perished l" Proc. hilt. Arcana, cap. s8. ap. Byz.
Script. vol. i. 31s5.-I have dwelt longer uponethe ca--
Jamities of this province, because they are deferibed not
only by contemporary authors, but by eye-witnesses.
The present slate of Africa confirms their,tedtimony.
Many of the roost flourilhing and populous cities with
which it was filled, were To entirely ruined, that no
vefhiges remain to point out where they were tituated.
That fertile territory which sustained the Roman em-
pire, fiill lies in a great meafare uncultivated ; and that
province, which Vi~tor, in his barbarous Latin, called
Speciefas totius terroflrenris, is now the retreat of pirates -
and banditti.

While the Vandals laid waste a great part of the

empire, the Huns desolated the remainder. Of all the
barbarous tribes they were the fierceil and most formid-
able. Ammianus Marcellinus, a contemporary author,
and one of the bell of the later hillorians, gives an
accout.t of their poilcy aid manners ; which nearly re-
fembirs those of the Scythians deferibed by the ancients,
and of the Tartars known to the moderns. Some parts
of their charaaer, and several of their customs are not
unlike those of the savages in North America. Their
paflion for war was extreme. " As in polilhed focie-
ties (says Ammianus) ease and tranquillity are courted,
they delight in war and dangers. He who falls in
battle is reckoned happy, They who die of old age or
of disease are deemed infamous. They boast, with the
utlmol exultalion, of the number of enemies whom

they

ments, they faflen the fralps of those who have fallen
by their hands to the trappings of their horfes." Am-
mian. Marc. lib. xxxi. p, 477. edit. Gronov. Lugd.
1693.-Their incurlions into the empire began in the
fourth century; and the Romans, though no fitrangers,,
by that time, to the effeets of barbarous rage, were
ationithed at the cruelty of their devaf'ations. Thrace,
Pannonia, and Illyricum, were the countries which
they firti laid desolate. As they had at firit no inten-
tion of fettling in Europe, they made only inroads of
fihort continuance into the empire, but these were fre-
quent, and Procopius computes that in each of there,
at a medium, two hundred thousand persons pelithed,
or were carried of as ilaves. Procop. Hist. Arisn ap.
Byz. Script.. vol. i 316. Thrace, the belt ce! ivated
province in that quarter of the empire, was converted
into a desert, and, when Prifcus accompanied the am-
baffadors Cent to Attila, there were iso inhabitants in
some of the cities, but a few milerable people who had
taken shelter among the ruins of the churches; and the
fields were covered with the bones of those who had
fallen by the sword. Prifcus ap. Byz. Script. vol i. 3 *
Attila became king of the Huns, A. D. 434. He is
one of the greatest and moll enterprising conquerors
mentioned in hitfory. He extended his empire over
all the vail countries comprehended under the ge.
neral names of Scythia and Germany in the ancient
divilion of the world. While lhe was carrying on
his wars against the barbarous nations, he kept the
Roman empire under perpetual apprehendlons, and ex-
torted enormous fubhidies from the timid and effeminate
monarchs who governed it. In the year 455, he en-
tered Gaul, at the head of an army composed of all the
various nations which he had subdued. It was more
numerous than any with wltich the barbarians had hi-
therto invaded the empire. The devaRations which he
committed were horrible: not only the open country,
but the most flourilhing cities, were desolated. The
extent and cruelty of his devastations are described by

Salvianus

p. 139, &c. and by Idiatus, ubi supra, p. 5±35. Aetius
put a stop to his progress in that country by the famous
battle of Chalons, in which (if we may believe the his.
torians of that age) three hundred thousand persons pe-
rilbed. Idat. ibid. Jornandes de Rebus Geticis ap.
Grot. Hilt. Gothor. p. 671. Amft. i66s. But the
next year he resolved to attack the centre of the em-
pire, and, marching into Italy, wasted it with rage,
inflamed by the sense of His late disgrace. What Italy
(uffered by the Huns exceeded all the calamities which
the preceding incursions of the barbarians had brought
upon it. Conringius has colleaed several passages
from the ancient hifforians, which prove that the devaf-
tations committed by the Vandals and Huns in the coun-
tries fstuated on the banks of the Rhine, were no leTs
cruel and fatal to the human race. Exercitatio de urbi-
bus Germania*, Opera, vol. i. 488. It is endless, it is
lhocking, to follow these defiroyers of mankind through
to many scenes of horror, and to contemplate the havoc
which they made of the human species.

But the fiate in which Italy appears to have been,

during fereral ages after the barbarous nations fettled in
it, is the mast decifve proof of the cruelty as well as ex-
tent of their devastations. Whenever any country is
thinly inhabited, trees and Ihrubs spring up in the un..
cultivated fields, and, spreading by degrees, form large
forests by the overflowing of rivers, and the flagnating
of waters, other parts of it are converted into lakes and
marshes. Ancient Italy. which the Romans rendered
the feat of elegance and luxury, was cultivated to the
highest pitch. But so effeltually did the devastations of
the barbarians destroy all the effeas of Roman indufiry
and cultivation, that in the eighth century a conftderable
part of Italy appears to have been covered with forests
and marshes of great extent. Muratori enters into a
minute detail concerning the situation and limits of feve-
ral of these; and proves, by the mott authentic evidence,
that great trass of territory, in all the different provinces
of Italy, were either over-run with wood, or laid under

water.

rally barren or of little value, but were spread over dif-
trias which ancient writers represent as extremely ser-
tile, and which at present are highly cultivated. Mu-
ratori Antiquitates Italice medii xevi, dissert. xxi. v. ii.
p. r49. 153 &c. A trong proof of this occurs in a
description of the city of *Modena, by an author of the
tenth century. Murat. Script. Rerum Italic. vol, ii. pars
ii. p. 691. The slate of desolation in other countries of
Europe seems to have been the fame. In many of the
most early charters now extant, the lands granted to
monasteries, or to private persons, are ditinguifhed into
such as are cultivated or inhabited, and such as were
eremi, desolate. In many instances, lands are granted
to persons because they had taken them from the desert,
ab eremo, and had cultivated and planted them with in-
habitants. This appears from a charter of Charlemagne,
publithed by Eckhart de Rebus Francia Orientalis, vol.
ii. p. 864. and from many charters of his successors
quoted by Du Cange, voc. eremus.-Wherever a right of
property in land can be thus acquired, it is evident that
the country mult be extremely desolate, and thinly peo-
pled. The first settlers in America obtained poffefion
of land by such a title. Whoever was able to clear and
to cultivate a field, was recognized as the proprietor.
His indufiry merited such a recompence. The grants
in the charters which I have mentioned flow from a
similar principle, and there must have been some refem-
blance in the fIate of the countries.

Muratori adds, that during the eighth and ninth cen-

turies, Italy was greatly infefled by wolves and other
wild beafis; another mark of its being destitute of inha-
bitants. Murat. Antiq. vol ii, p. s63. Thus Italy,
the pride of the ancient world for its fertility and culti-
vation, was reduced to the slate of -a country newly
peopled and lately rendered habitable.

I am fenlible, not only that some of there deferiptions

of the devastations, which I have quoted, may be exag-
gerated, but that the barbarous tribes, in making their
settlements, did not proceed invariably in the fame man-

ner.

ner. Some of them seemed to be bent on exterminating
the ancient inhabitants ; others were more disposed to
incorporate with them. It is not my province either to
inquire into the causes which occasioned this variety in
the condua of she conquerors, or to delcribe the slate
of those countries where the ancient inhabitants were
tteated most mildly. The faas which I have produced
are fufficient to juflify the account which I have given
in the text, and to prove, that the deitruoion of the
human species, occasioned by the hostile invasions of the
northern narions, and their subsequent fettlementa, was
much greater than many authors seem. to imagine.

NOTE VI. SEcr. I. p. . [ .

I HnvE observed, Note II., that our only certain in-

formation concerning the ancient fdate of the barbarous
nations mud be derived from the Greek and Roman
writers. Happily an account of the indlitutions and
cutoms of one people, to which those of all the reft
seem to have been in a great measure limilar, has been
transmitted to us by two authors, the moid capable,
perhaps, that ever wrote, of observing them with pro-
found difrernment, and of describing them with proprie-
ty and force. The reader mud perceive that Calar and
Tacitus are the authors whom I have in view. The
forner gives a Ihort account of the ancient Germans in
a few chapters of the ftxth book of his Commentaries :
the latter wrote a treatise expressly on that fubjea.
These are the mold precious and infitruive monuments
of antiquity to the present inhabitants of Europe. From
them we learn,

s. That the slate of society among the ancient Ger-

mans was of the rudest and modt simple form. They
uhfbifled entirely by hunting or by paflurage. Cal.
Eib. vi. e 2r. They negle&ed agriculture, and lived
chiefly on milk, cheese, and defh. Ibid. c. 2.. Taci-
tus agrees with him in most of these points; De morib.
Gerra. c. 14, 15. 23. The Goths were equally negli-

gent

gent of agriculture. Prifc. Rhet. ap. Byz. Script. v. i.
p. 3 . B. Society was in the fame dlate among the Huns,
who dildained to cultivate the earth, or to touch a
plough. Amm. Marcel. Itb. xxxi. p. 475. The fame
manners took place among the Alans; ibid. p. 477.
While society remains in this simple state, men by uniting
together scarcely relinquilh any portion of their natural
independence. Accordingly we are informed, 2. That
the authority of civil government was extremely limited
among the Germans. During times of peace they had
no common or fixed magiltrate, but the ch:ef men of
every diftria dispensed jufiice, and accommodated dif-
ferences. Cief. ibid. c. a3. Their kings had not abfo-
lure or unbounded power their authority confided ra-
ther in the privilege of advising, than in the power of
commanding. Matters of small confequecce were de-
termined by the chief men: affairs of importance by the
whole community. Tacit. c. 7. aT. The Huns, in
like manner, deliberated in common concerning every
business of moment to the society; and were not fubje&t
to the rigour of regil authority. Amm. Marcel. lib.
xxxi. p. 474. 3. Every individual among the anc ent
Germans was left at liberty to choose whether he would
take part in any military enterprise which was proposed;
there seems to have been no obligation to engage in it
imposed on him by public authority. " When any of
the chief men proposes an expedition, such as approve
of the cause and of the leader rife up, and declare their
intention of following him; after coining under this en-
gagement, those who do not fulfil it, are considered as
deserters and traitors, and are looked upon as infamoos."
Cif. ibid. c. 23. Tacitus plainly points at the fame
cudom, though in terms more ohfcure. Tacit. c. cc.
4. As every individual was To independent, and mailer
in so great a degree of his own adions, it became, of
confeouence, the great obje& of every parson among the
Germans, who aimed at being a leader, to gain adhe-
rants, and attach them to his person and intereit.
These adherents Ciefar calls Ambatdi and Clienrer, i. e. re-
tainers or cliento; Tscitus, Comitea, or companions.

VOL. e. v The

in being attended by a numerous band of chosen youth.
This was their pride as well as ornament during peace
and their defence in war. The leaders gained or pre-
(erved the favour of there retainers by presents of armour
and of horses; or by the profuse though inelegant hof-
pitality with which they entertained them. Tacit. c. 54,
IS* 5. Another consequence of the personal liberty and
independence which the Germans retained, even after
they united in society, was their circumscribing the cri-
minal jurifdiaion of the magifirate within very narrow
limits, and their not only claiming but exerciftng almost
all the rights of private resentment and revenge. Their
isagiflrates had not the power either of impriloning or
of infliaing any corporal punishment on a free man. Ta-
cit. c. 7. E£ery person was obliged to avenge the
wrongs which his parents or friends had sustained.
Their enemies were hereditary, but not irreconcilable.
Even murder was compensated by paying a certain num.
ber of cattle. Tac. c. at. A part of the fine went to
the king, or slate, a part to the person who had been
injured, or to his kindred. Ibid. c. 12.

T'hofe particulars concerning the inflitutions and

manners of the Germans, though well-known to every
person converlant in ancient literature, I have thought
proper to arrange in this order, and to lay before such
- of my readers as may be less acquainted with there fads,
both because they confirm the account which I have
given of the slate of the barbarous nations, and because
they tend to illufirate all the observations I thall have
occasion to make concerning the various changes in their
government and customs. The laws and customs in-
troduced by the barbarous nations into their new fettle-
ments, are the belt commentary on the writings of Cafar
and Tacitus; and their observations are the best key to
a perfed knowledge of these laws and customs.

One circumfiance, with refpelI to the teflimonies of

COfar and Tacitus, concerning the Germans, merits
attention. Csefar wrote his briefaccount of their man.
ners more than an hundred years before Tacitus corn-

z posed

posed his treatise De Moribus Germanorum. An hun-
dred years make a considerable period in the progress of
national manners, especially if, during that time, those
people who are rude and unpolithed have had much
communication with more civilized dates. This was
the cafe with the Germans. Their intercourse with the
Romans began when Calar crossed the Rhine, and in-
creased greatly during the interval between that event
and the time when Tacitus flourished. We may ac-
cordingly observe, that the manners of the Germans, in
his time, which Ctefar describes, were less improved
than those of the fame people as delineated by Tatitus.
Besides this, it is remarkable that there was a confidera-
ble difference in the date of society among the different
tribes of Germans. The Suiones were Co much im-
proved, that they began to be corrupted. Tac. cap. 44.
The Fenni were Co barbarous, that it is wonderful how
they were able to subsist. Ibid. cap. 46. Whoever un-
dertakes to describe the manners of the Germans, or to
found any political theory upon the date of society
among them, ought carefully to attend to both these
circumitances.

Before I quit this fubjaa, it may not be improper to

obherve, that, though CIcceflive alterations in their infti-
tutions, together with the gradual progrefa of refine-
ment, have made an entire change in the manners of
the various people who conquered the Roman empire,
there is dill one race of men nearly in the fame political
lituation with theirs, when they fird fettled in their new
conquefs; I mean the various tribes and nations of
Savages in North America. It cannot then be confider-
ed either as a digrefion, or as an improper indulgence
of curiosity, to enquire whether this similarity in their
political fate has occasioned any resemblance between
their charaeler and manners. If the likeness turns out
to be itriking, it is a itronger proof that a just account
has been given of the ancient inhabitants of Europe,
than the teldimony even of Cafar or of Tacitus.

r. The Americans Cubfift chiefly by hunting and fifhk

ing. Some tribes neglea agriculture entirely. Among

U those

that, together with all works of labour, is performed
by the women. P. Charievoix Journal Hiflorique d'cn
Voyage de l'Amerique,4to. Par. r?44. P. 334. In
luch a slate of focicty, the common wants of men be,-
ing few, and their mutual dependence upon each other
fmal], their uflon is extremely imperfe& and feeble,
and they continue to enjoy their natural liberty almost
unimpaired. It is the firfi idea of an American, that
every man is born free and independent, and that no
power on earth hath any right to diminilh or circumscribe
his natural liberty. There is hardly any appearance of
fubordinasion either in civil or domestic government.
Every one does what he pleales. A father and mother
live with their children, lIke persons whom chance has
brought together, and whom no common bond unites.
Their manner of educating their children is suitable to
this principle They never chaflife or punibh them,
even during their infancy. As they advance in years,
they continue to be entirely matiers of their own ac-
tions, and seem not to be conscious of being refponftble
for any part of their condud. Id. p. 27 277 -
2. The power of their civil magiitrates is extremely ii-
mined. Among moid of their tribes, the Sachem or
chief is eleiive. A council of old men is chosen to as-
flft him, without whole advice he determines no affair
of importance. The Sachems neither possess nor claim
any great degree of authority. They propose and in-
treat, rather than command. The obedience of their
people is altciether voluntary. Id. p. 266. 268.---
?. The savages of America engage in their military en-
terprifes, nor from constraint, but choice. When war
is resolved, a chief arises, and offers himself to be the
lbader. Such as are willing (for they compel no person)
itand up one after another, and ling their war-long.
But if, after this, any of these should refuse to follow
the leader to'whom they have engagcd, his life would
be in danger, and he would be conifidered as the most
infamous of men. Id. p. 257, 218.---4 Such as en-
gage to follow any leader, expeat ,to be treated by him

with

make them presents of considerable value. Id. p. as8.
-i. Among the Americans, the magifdrate has
fearcely any criminal jurifdi&ion. Id. p. ays. Upon
receiving any injury, the person or family offended
may infii what punishment they please on the person
who was the author of it. Id. p. 274. Their resent-
ment and desire of vengeance are excessive and impla-
cable. Time can neither extinguilh nor abate it. It
is the chief inheritance parents leave to their children;
it is transmitted from generation to generation, until an
occasion be found of satisfying it. Id. p. 309. Some-
times, however, the offended party is appeared. A
compensation is paid for a murder that has been com-
mitted. The relations of the decealed receive it; and
it conlifts most commonly of a captive taken in war,
who, being substituted in place of the person who was
murdered, assumes his name, and is adopted into his
faniily. Id. p. 274. The resemblance holds in many
other particulars. It is (ufficient for my purpose to
have pointed out the similarity of those great features
which distinguish and charaterize both people. Bo-
chart, and other philologists of the last century, who,
with more erudition than science, endeavoured to trace
the migrations of various nations, and who were apt,
upon the slightest appearance of resemblance, to find an
affinity between nations far removed from each other,
and to conclude that they were descended from the fame
ancestors, would hardly have failed, on viewing (uch
an amazing similarity, to pronounce with confidence,.
" That the Germans and Americans mult be the fame
people." But a philosopher will satisfy himself with ob.
serving, " That the charaaers of nations depend on the
fiate of society in which they live, and on the political
inflitutions eltablilhed among them; and that the hu-
man mind, whenever it is placed in the fame situation,
will, in ages the most difitant, and in countries the molt
remote, assume the fame form, and be diftinguilhed by
the fame manners."

a 3 I have

arsd Americans no farther than was necefrary for the il-
luflration of my fubjea. I do not pretend that the
slate of society in the two countries was perfealy similar
in every refped. Many of the German tribes were
more civilizcd than the Americans. Some of them
were not unscquainted with agriculture j almost all of
them had flocks of rame catrtle, and depended upon them
for the chief part of their fublidtence. Most of the Ame-
rican tribes fublftf by hunting, and ate in a ruder and
more ftmple Itate than the ancient Germans. The re-
semblance, however, between their condition, is greater,
perltaps, than any that hillory affords an opportunity
of observing betweecn any two races of oncivilteed peo-
ple, and this has produced a furpriiing similarity of
manners.

NOTE VII. SECT. I. p. 53. [G].

THtE booty gained by an army belonged to the army.

The king himself had no part of it but what be acquired
by lot. A remarkable inmance of this occurs in the his-
tory of the Franirs. The army of Clovis, the founder
of the Frerch monarchy, having plundered a church,
carrted cif, among other facryd utenotls, a vase of ex-
traordinary ilae and beauty. The binhdp frnr deputies
to Clovis, bhfeechring him to rellore the vale, that it
eright be again employed in the sacred services to which
it had been consecrated. Clovis delired the deputies to
follow him to Soiltons, as the booty was to be di-
vided in that place, and pronmifed, that if the lot ihould
give him the dtrpofal of the vase, he would grant what
the bilop derfrd. When he came to Soissons, and all
tie booty was plated in one great heap in th- middle of
the army, Clovis entreated, that before making the di-
vs son, they would give him that vase over and above
his share. All appeared willing to gratify the king.
and to comply wtth his requefi, when a fierce and
JtPeghty soldier lifted up his battle.axe, and iftoiing the

vase

voice, " You ihall receive nothing here but that to
which the lot gives you a right." Gregor. Turon.
Hiftor. Francorum, lib. ii. c. z;. p. 7o. Par. 16xo.

NOTE VIII. SECT. I. p. 16. [H].

THE hilloryof the eftabhltiment and progress of the

feudal system is an interesting objea to all the nations
of Europe. In some countries, their jurisprudence and
laws are fill in a great measure feudal. In others,
many forms and praldices ellablilhed by custom, or
founded on flatutes, took their rife from the feudal law,
and cannot be underflood without attending to the ideas
peculiar to it. Several auihors of the highest reputa-
tion for genius and erudition, have endeavoured to il-
luffrate this fubjet, but Ilill many parts of it are ob-
foure. I ihall endeavour to trace, with precifton, the
progrets and variation of ideas concerning property in
land among the barbarous nations; and jhall attempt
to point out the causes which introduced these changes,
as well as the effets which followed upon them. Pro-
perty in land seems to have gone through four fuccerive
changes among the people who fettled in the various
provinces of the Roman empire.

I. While thls barbarous nations remained in their ori-

ginal countries, their property in land was only tempo-
rary, and they had no certain limits to their poffelitons.
After feeding their flocks in one difiric?, they removed
with them, and with their wives and families, to an-
otber; and abandoned that likewise in a short time.
They were not, in consequence of this imperfca species
of property, brought under any politive or formal obli-
gation to serve the community j all their services were
pdrely voluntary. Every individual was at liberty to
choose how far Ihe would contibute towards carrying
on any military enterprise. If he followed a leader in
any expedition, it was from attachment, not from a
renfe of obligation. The chareft proof of this has beetp
jroduced in Note VI. While property continued in

this

semblance to a feudal tenure, or to the subordination
and military service which the feudal system introduced.

II. Upon fettling in the countries which they had

subdued, the viacrious troops divided the conquered
lands. Whatever portion of them fell to a soldier, he
seized as the recompence due to his valour, as a fettle-
ment acquired by his own sword. He took poffetion of
it as a freeman in full property. He enjoyed it during
his own life, and could dispose of it at pleasure, or
transmit it as an inheritance to his children. Thus pro-
perty in land became fixed. It was at the fame time
allodial, i. e. the poffelfor had the entire right.of proper-
ty and dominion; he held of no sovereign or superior
lord, to whom he was bound to do homage and perform
service. But as these new proprietors were in some
danger (as has been observed in the text) of being dif-
turbed by the remainder of the ancient inhabitants, and
in itill greater danger of being attacked by fucccefive co-
lonies of barbarians as fierce and rapacious as them-
selves, they saw the necessity of coming under obliga.
tions to defend the community, more explicit than those
to which they had been fubjea in their original habita-
tions. On this account, immediately upon their fixing
in their new settlements, every freeman became bound -
to take arms in defence of the community, and, if he
refused or negleaed To to do, was liable to a confider.
able penalty. I do not mean that any contraa of this
kind was formally concluded, or mutually ratified by
any legal solemnity. It was eftablithed by tacit consent,
like the other compaas which hold society together.
Their mutual security and preservation made it the in-
,terest of all to recognize its authority, and to enforce
the observation of it. We can trace back this new obli-
gation on the proprietors of land to a very early period
in the hiflory of the Franks. Chilperic, who began his -
reign A. D. 562, exated a fine, Aannossjsjit exigi, from
certain persons who had refused to accompany him in
an expedition. Gregor. Turon. lib. v. c. 26, p. soi.
Childebcrt, who began hii reign A, .D 576, proceeded

in

of a like crime. Id. lib. vii. c. 4Z. p. 34.2. Such a
fine could not have been exa&ed while property conti-
nued in its firfi fiate, and military service was entirely
voluntary. Charlemagne ordained, that ever-v freeman
who poffeffed five manfi, i. e. ftxxy acrev of land, inpro.
perty, Ihould march in person asainit the enemy. Ca-
pitul. A. D 8. 7. Louis le Debonnaire, A. D. 8rC
granted lands to certain Spaniards who fled from the
Saracens, and allowed them to fettle in his territories,
on condition that they lhould serve in the army like other
freemen. Capitul. vol. i. p. Soo. By land polfflfed in
property, which is mentioned in the law of Charlemagne,
we are to understand, according to the flyle of that age,
allodial land j alodes and proprieors, alodum and prsprium
being words perfealy fynonimous. Du Cange voce
Alodis. The clearest proof of the diftinflion between
allodial and beneficiary poffeiflon, is contained in two
charters publi/hed by Muratori, by which it appears,
that a person might poffrfs one part of his efiate as al.
lodial, which he could dispose of at pleasure, the other
as a b9enefirium, of which he had only the ufufrud, the
property returning to the superior lord on his demise.
Antiq. Ital. medii avi, vol i. p. s99. 4.. The fame
diftinfion is pointed out in a CaFitulare of Charlemagne,
A. D. 8 ii, edit. Baluz. vol. i- p. 491. Count Eve-
rard, who married a daughter of- Louis le Debonnaire,
in the curious teliament, by which he disposes of his
vast efiate among his children, diflinguilhes between
what he poffeffed proprietate, and what he held beneficio i
and it appears that the greater part was allodial, A. I).
87. Aub. Miraei Opera Diplomatica, Lovan. 17z3.
vol, p. 'p.

In the fame manner Li;er homo is commonly opposed

to 'aJ/s or rafailns; the former denotes an allodial pro-
prietor, the latter one who held of a superior. These
free men were under an obligation to serve the fiate; and
this duty was considered as so sacred, that free men were
prohibited from entering into holy orders unless they
had obtained the coofent of the sovereign. The reason

given

informed that some do so, not so much out of devotion,
as in order to avoid that military service which they are
bound to perform. Capitul. lib. i. § s4.. If, upon
being (ummoned into the Eheld, any free man refused to
obey, a full fserebannum, i..e. a fine of sixty crowns, was
to be exalked from him according to the law of the
Franks." Capit. Car. Magn. ap. Leg. Longob. lib. i.
tie. J4 4 13. P. 539. This expreflion, according to
the law of the Franks, seems to imply, that both the
obligation to serve, and the penalty on those who difre-
garded it, were cogval with the laws made by the Franks
at their firit settlement in Gaul. This fine was levied
with such rigour, " That if any person convitled of this
crime was insolvent, he was reduced to servitude, and
continued in that slate until such time as his labour
should amount to the value of the herebannum." Ibid.
The emperor Lotharius rendered the penalty hill more
severe; and if any person poffeffing such an extent of
property as made it incumbent on him to take the field
in person, refused to obey the summons, all his goods
were declared to be forfeited, and he himself might be
punished with banilhment. Murat. Script. Ital. vol. i.
pars i. p. i53*

III. Property in land having thus become fixed, and

lubje& to military service, another change was intro-
duced, though slowly, and htep by fiep. We learn
from Tacitus, that the chief men among the Germans
endeavoured to attach to their persons and interests cer-
tain adherents whom he calls Comises. There fought un-
der their handard, and followed them in all their enter.
prizes. The fame cufiom continued among them in
their new settlements, and those attached or devoted
followers were called fideles, nntruz/iones, homines in trufe
Dominrica, leudes. Tacitus informs us, that the rank of
a Comes was deemed honourable; De Morib. Germ.
c. r3. The composition, which is the handard by
which we must judge of the rank and condition of per-
sons in the middle ages, paid for the murder of one is
trrjle Dominica, was triple to that paid for the murder of

a free-

Germans remained in their own ccuntry, they courted
the favour of there Comites by presents of arms and
horses, and by hospitality. See Note VI. As long as
they had no fixed property in land, there were the only
gifts that they could bestow, and the only reward which
their followers desired. But upon their fettling in the
countries which they conquered, and when the value of
property came to be understood among them, inflead of
those flight presents, the kings and chieftains bieftowed
a more fubitantial recompence in land on their adherents.
There grants were called benefcia, because they were
gratuitous donations; and bonores, because they were
regarded as marks of diftinaion. What were the ser-
vices originally exaaed in return for there beneficia can-
not be determined with absolute precision; because there
are no records To ancient. When allodial poffefions
were first rendered feudal, they were not, at once, fob-
jeaed to all the feudal services. The transition here,
as in all other changes of importance, was gradual. As
the great objea of a feudal vassal was to obtain protec-
tion, when allodial proprietors firfi consented to become
valfals of any powerful leader, they continued to retain
as much of their ancient independence as was conlitent
with that new relation. The homage which they did
to the superior of whom they chose to hold, was called
homagium planum, and bound them to nothing more than
fidelity, but without any obligation either of military
service, or attendance in the courts of their superior.
Of this bomagium planum some traces, though obscure,
may still be discovered. Bruffel, tom. i. p. 97. Among
the ancient writs published by D. D. De Vic and Vai-
fette hist. de Langued. are a great many which they call
bomagia. They seem to be an intermediate flep between
the homeagium planum mentioned by Bruffel, and the en-
gagem~ent to perform complete feudal service. The one
party promises proteaion, and grants certain castles or
lands; the other engages to defend the person of the
granter, and to aftift him likewise in defending his pro-
perty as often as he Ihall be summoned to do so. But

these

feudal formalities, and no mention is made of any of the
other feudal services. They appear rather to be a mu-
tual contrad between equals, than the engagement of a
vaflal to perform services to a superior lord. Preuves
de I'hift. de Lang. tom. ii. i77. & pafim. As soon as
men were accustomed to these, the other feudal services
were gradually introduced. M. de Montesquieu conli-
ders these benefcia as fiefs, which originally fubjefled
those who held them to military service. L'Efprit des
Loix, i. xxx. c. 3. & .6. M. PAbb6 de Mably con-
tends that such as held there were at first ftbjeaed to no
other service than what was incumbent on every free man.
Observations furl'hifioire de France, i. 3 6. But, up-
on comparing their proofs and reasonings and conjec-
tures, it seems to be evident, that as every free man, in
consequence of his allodial property, was bound to
serve the community under a severe penalty, no good
reason can be afigned for conferring there beneficia, if
they did not fubjedt such as received them to some new
obligation. Why Ihould a king have fitripped himself
of his domain, if he had not expeaed that, by parcel.
ling it out, he might acquire a right to services, to
which he had formerly no title? We may then warrant-
ably conclude, " That as allodial property fubjeaed
those who poffeffed it to serve the community, so bensS-
cia fubjeaed such as held them to personal serv.ice and
fdelity to him from whom they received these lands.
There beneficia were granted originally only during plea-
sure. No circumitance relating to the eufloms of the
middle ages is better alcertained than tlis ; and innume-
rable proofs of it m ght be added to those produced in
L'Efprit des Loix, i. xxx. c. s6. and by Du Cange, voc.
BLeefcium &fedusm.

1V. But the poffeflion of beneftces did not continue

long in this (hate. A p:ecarious tenure during pleasure
was not fulficient to satisfy such as held lands, and by
various means they gradually obtained a confirmation of
their benefices during life. Feudor. lib. tit. i. Du
Cange produces several quotations from ancient charters
and chronicles in proof of this Glof. voc Benefcium.

3 After

dering beneficia hereditary, first in the direst line, then in
the collateral, and at last in the female line. Leg.
Longob. lib. iii. tit. 8. Du Cange, voc. Benefci um.

Jt is no easy matter to fix the precise time when each

of these changes took place. M. l'Ab. Mably conjec-
tures, with some isobability, that Charles Nlartel first
introduced the pradtice of granting beneflcia for life:
Obfeivat. tom. i. p. 1o3 t60 ; and that Louis Ie De-
bonnaire was among the flrft who rendered them here-
ditary, is evident from the authorities to which he refers -
Id. 420. Mabillon however has publilhc-d a placitum
of Louis le Debonnaire, A. D. 860, by which it ap-
pears, that he f'tll continued to grant some beneficia only
during life. De Re Diplomatica, lib. vi. p. 353. I
the year 88q, Odo king of France granted lands to Ri-
cabodo, fideli suo, jure beneficiario & fruauario, during
his own life ; and if he should die, and a son were born
to him, that right was to continue during the life of
his son. Mahillon ut supra, p. 5e6. This was an
intermediate flep between fiefs merely during life, and
flefs hereditary to perpetuity. While benefcia continued
under their fir' form, and were held only during plea-
sure, he who granted them not only exercised the do-
rninsum or prerogative of superior lord, but he retained
the property, giving his vassal only the frsjifius.-But
under the latter form, when they became hereditary,
although feudal lawyers continued to define a benaefcium
agreeably to its original nature, the property was in
rffe&t taken out of the hands of the superior lords, and
lodged in those of the vassal. As soon as the reciprocal
adeantages of the feudal mode of tenure came to be un-
derftood by superiors as well as vassals, that Species of
holding became to agrecabl to both, that not only lands,
bat casual rents, such as the profits of a tell, the fare
paid at ferties, &c. the faiaries or perquisites of offces, and
even pensions themfeives, were granted and held as fiefs;
and military service was promised and exadfed on account
of these. Morice Mem. pour fervir de preuves B l'hift.
de Bretagne, tom. ii. 78. 690. Bruffel, tom, i. p. 4t.

VOL. I. x How

precarious and casual property as a fief, there are in-
flances of feudal tenures flill more tingular. The pro-
fits ariling from the masses said at an altar were properly
an eccleliaftical revenue, belonging to the clergy of the
church or monaflery which performed that duty; but
there were (ometimes seized by the powerful barons. in
order to ascertain their right to them, they held them
as fiefs of the church, and parcelled them out in the
fame manner as other property to their fub-vaffals.
Bouquet, receuil des hist. vol. x. 238. 480. The fame
spirit of encroachment which rendered flefs hereditary,
led the nobles to extort from their sovereigns hereditary
grants of offices. Many of the great offices of the crown
became hereditary in most of the kingdoms in Europe ;
and so conscious were monarchs of this spirit of ufurpa-
tion among the nobility, and so solicitous to guard
against it, that, on some occaftons, they obliged the per-
sons whom they promoted to any office of dignity, to
grant an obligation, that neither they nor their heirs
thould claim it as belonging to them by hereditary
right. A remarkable inflance of this is produced, Mem,
de 'Acad. des Infeript. tom. xxx. p. 595. Another
occurs in the Thefaur. anecdot. publilhed by Martene
&c Durand, vol. i. p. 87*.-This revolution in property
occafloned a change corresponding to it in political go.
vernment; the great vassals of the crown, as they ac-
quired such extensive poffeffions, usurped a proportional
degree of power, depressed the jurifdiaion of the
crown, and trampled on the privileges of the people.
Jt is on account of this connebion, that it becomes
an objea of importance in history to trace the progress
of feudal property; for, upon discovering in what fate
property was at any particular period, we may determine
with precision what was the degree of power poffelred
by the king or by the nobility at that junlure.

One circumstance more, with refpe& to the changes

which property underwent, deserves attention. I have
shewn, that when the various tribes of barbarians di-
vided their conquests in the Gfth and sixth centuries,

the

several parts of Europe, property had become almost
entirely feudal by the beginning of the tenth century.
The former Cpecies of property seems to be so much
better and more defirabie than the latter, that such a
change appears furpri1ing, especially when we are in-
formed that allodial property was frequently converted
into feudal, by a voluntary deed of the poffeffor. The
motives. which determined them to a choice Co repug-
nant to the ideas of modern times concerning property,
have been invefligated and explained by M. de Montef-
quieu, with his usual discernment and accuracy,lib. xxxi.
c. 8. The mofl considerable is that of which we have
an hint in Lambertus Ardenfs, an ancient writer quoted
by Ducange, voce A'odis. In those times of anarchy and
eiforder which became general in Europe after the death
of Charlemagne, when there was fearcely any union
among the different members of the community, and
individuals were exposed, dingle and undefended by go-
wernment, to rapine and opprefion, it became necessary
for every man to have a powerful proteaor, under whose
banner he might range himself, and obtain security
against enemies whom singly he could not oppose. For
this reason he relinquished his allodial independence, and
fuubjefted himself to the feudal Cervices, that he might
find safety under the patronage of Come refpeaable fiu-
perior. In some parts of Europe, this change from al-
lodial to feudal property became To general, that he who
poifeffrd land had no longer any liberty of choice left.
Ple was obliged to recognize some liege lord, and to hold
of him. Thus Beaumanoir informs us, that in the
counties of Clermont and Beauvois, if the lord or count
discovered any lands within his jurifdieion, for which
no service was performed, and which paid to him no
taxes or cuRloms, he might inltantly seize it as his own;
for, says he, according to our custom, no man can hold
allodial property. Cout. ch. a4. p. rae. Upon the
fame principle is founded a maxim, which has at length
become general in the law of France, tulle terre fans Seig.
pear. Ip other provinces of France, allodial property

x + fteni4

been more highly valued. A great number of charters,
containing grants, or sales, or exchanges of allodial
lands in the province of Languedoc, are publilhed Hist.
gener. de Langued. par D. D. De Vic & Vaifette, tom.ii.
During the ninth, tenth, and great part of the eleventh
century, the property in that province seems to have
been entirely allodial; and scarcely any mention of feudal
tenures occurs in the deeds of that country. The fiate
of property. during there centumies, seems to have been
perfetly similar in Catalonia and the country of Roufl-
ion, as appears from the original charters publilhed in
the Appendix to Petr. de Ia Marca's creatife de marca
five limite Hifpanico. Allodial property seems to have
continued in the Low Countries to a period still later.
During the eleventh, twelfth, and thirteenth centuries,
this species of property appears to have been of con-
fiderable extent. Miraei opera diplom. vol. i. 14. 74,
7t. 8l. 8ey. 29g. 842. 847. 57d. Some vefliges of
allodial property appear there as late as the fourteenth
century. Ibid. I rX. Several fadts which prove that allo-
dial property fubfiflgd in different parts of Europe long
after the inmrodufion of feudal tenures, and which tend
to illustrate the dilfinaion between there two different
species of poffefilon, are produced by M. Houard, An-
ciennes Loix des Francois, confervfes dans les Coutumes
Angicifes, vol. i. p. 192, &c. The notions of men
with refpe&t to property vary according to the diversity
of their underhlandings, and the caprice of their pas-
fions. At the fame time that some persons were fond
of relinquishing allodial property, in order to hold it
by feudal tenure, others seem to have been solicitous to
convert their liefs into allodial property. An inflance
of this occurs in a charter of Louis le Debonnaire, pub-
lifhed byEckhaid, Commentarii de rebus Francis Orien-
tabs, vol. ii. p. 885. Another occurs in the year 1299,
Reliquiat MSS, omnis sevi, by Ludwig, vol. i. p. ·eej;
and even one as late as the year 1137, ibid. vol. vii.
p.40. Thefame thing took place in the Lov Countries.
AMirzi oper, i. ph.

have hitherto chiefly confined myself to what happened
in France, because the ancient monuments of that nation
have either been more carefully preserved, or have
Been more clearly iliufirated than those of any people in
Europe.

In Italy, the fame revolutions happened in property,

and succeeded each other in the fame order. There is
some ground, however, for conjeauring that allodial
property continued longer in eflimation among the Ita-
lians, than among the French. It appears, that many
of the charters granted by the emperors in the ninth
century, conveyed an allodial right to land. Murat.
Antiq. med. evi, v. i. p. S75, &c. But in the eleventh
century we find some examples of persons who religned
their allodial property, and received it back asa feudal
tenure. Id. p. 6ao, &c. Muratori observes, that the
word frudum, which came to be substituted in place of
benefciam, does not occur in any authentic charter pre-
vious to the eleventh century. Id. 59. A charter of
king Robert of France, A. D. 5oo8, is the earliest deed
in which I have met with the word feudum. Bouquet
receuil des hifloriens de Gaule & de la France, tom. x.
P. s93, b. This word occurs indeed in an edia,
A. D. 79c, publilhedaby BruiTel, vol. i. p. 77. But the
authenticity of that deed has been called in queflion,
and perhaps the frequent use of the word feudum in it
is an additional reason for doing so. The account which
I have given of the nature both of allodial and feudal
poiTeffions receives some confirmation from the etymology
of the words themselves. Alode or at/odium is compound-
ed of the German particle an and lor, i. e. land obtained
by lot. Wachteri Clolfar. Germanicum, voc. Allodium,
p. 35. It appears from the authorities produced by him
and by Du Cange, voc Sors, that the northern nations
divided the lands which they had conquered in this
manner. Feodum is compounded of od poffefion or
eflate, and ser wages, pay ; intimating that it was fli-
pendiary, and granted as a recompence for service.
Wachterus, ibid. vet. Feodum, p. 44t.

I3t The

mans was perfetly similar to that which we have traced
in France. But as the emperors of Germany, especially
after the Imperial crown patTed from the delcendants of
Charlemagne to the house of Saxony, were far superior
to the contemporary monarchs of France in abilities, the
Imperial vallals did not aspire so early to independence,
nor did they so soon obtain the privilege of poiftlfing
their benefices by hereditary right. According to the
compilers of the Libri Feudorum, Conrad iL or the
Salic, was the first emperor who rendered fiefs heredi-
tary. Lib. i. tit i. Conrad began his reign A.D. 0104.
Ludovicus Pius, under wholoe reign grants of hereditary
fiefs were frequent in France, succeeded his father A. D.
814. Not only was this innovation so much later in
being introduced among the valfals of the German em-
perors, but even after Conrad had efitablihed it, the law
continued favourable to the ancient pradice; and unless
the charter of the vassal bore expressly that the fief de-
(cended to his heirs, it was presumed to be granted
only during life. Lib. feud. ibid. Even after the al-
teration made by Conrad, it was not uncommon in
Germany to grant fiefs only for life; a charter of this
kind occurs as late as the year 5576. Charta ap. Boeh-
mer. Princip. Jur. feud. p. 361. The tranfmiflion of
fiefs to collateral and female heirs, took place very
slowly among the Germans. There is extant a charter,
A. D. Isor, conveying their right of focceifion to fe-
males, but it is granted as an extraordinary mark of
favour, and ip reward of uncommon services. Boeb.
mer. ibid. p. 36t. In Germany, as well as in France
and Italy, a considerable part of the lands continuad to
be allodial long after the feudal mode of tenure was intro-
duced. It appears from the CodexDiplomaticus Monas-
terii Buch, that a great part of the lands in the marquifare
of Mifnia was shill allodial as late as the thirteenth cen-
tury. No 31. 36, 37 46, &c, ap. Scriptores hil.
German. cura Schoetgenii & Kreyfigii. Alrenb. 1755*
vol. ii. iIq, &c. Allodial property seems to have been
common in another diltrift of the fame province, during

tle

Beutiz. No 17. 36. 58. ibid. 374, &C.

NOTE IX. SECT. I. p.I). [I].

As I shall have occation, in another Note, to re-

present the condition of that part of the people who
dwelt in cities, I will confine myself in this to confider
the slate of the inhabitants of the country. The per-
sons employed in cultivating the ground during the ages
under review may be divided into three classes; I. Serei
or slaves. This seems to have been the mol* numerous
class, and consfited either of captives taken in war, or
of persons, the property in whom was acquired in Come
one of the various methods enumerated by Du Cange,
voc. Servous, v. 6. p. 447. The wretched condition of
this numerous race of men will appear from several cir-
cumftances. x. Their maflers had ablolute dominion over
their persons. They had the power of punishing their
slaves capitally, without the intervention of any judge.
This dangerous right they poffeled not only in the more
early periods, when their manners were fierce, but it
continued as late as the twelfth century. JoachPotgi-
efferus de fitatu fervorum. Lemgov. 736. 4to. lib. ii.
cap. i. § 4. to. 13. 24. Even after this jurifdidion of
mailers came to be refirained, the lfe of a slave was
deemed to be of To little value, that a very flight com-
Sensation atoned for taking it away. Idem,lib iii. c. 6.
If maiters had power over the lives of their slaves, it is
evident that almost no bounds would be set to the rigour
of the punishments which they might indi& upon them.
The codes of ancient laws prescribed punishments for
the crimes of slaves different from those which were
inflidled on free men. The latter paid only a fine or
compensation ; the former were fubjeded to corporal
punilhments. The cruelty of there was in many in-
itances excessive. Slaves might be put to the rack on
very flighe occasions. The laws with refpe& to thefq
points are to be found in Poegiefferus, lib.iii. cap. 7. 2.
snd are thocking to humansty. If the dominion of

malterc

thus extensive, it was no less so over their ations and
property. They were not originally permitted to marry.
Male and female slaves were allowed, and even encou-.
raged to cohabit together. But this union was not
considered as a marriage, it was called lentuberniudi, not
supiae or matrimonium. Potgiefi. lib. ii. c. a. § I. Thit
notion was Co much eltablifhed, that, during several
centuries after the barbarous nations embraced the
Christian religion, slaves, who lived as husband and wife,
were not joined together by any religious ceremony, and
did not receive the nuptial benedi&ion from a priest.
Jbid. § so, Is. When this conjunaion between slaves
came to be considered as a lawful marriage, they were
not permitted to marry without the consent of their
maiter, and such as ventured to do so, without obtain-
ing that, were punished with great severity, and Come-
times were put to death. Potgieff. ibid. § sa, &c.
Gregor. Turon. hist. lib. v. c. 3. When the manners
of the European nations became more gentle, and their
ideas more liberal, slaves who married without their
mafter's consent were Cubjetled only to a fine. Potgieff.
ibid. f ao. Du Cange Gloss. voc. Forljnfaritagium.
?. All the children of slaves were in the Came condition
with their parents, and became the property of the maC-
ter. Du Cange Cloff. voc. Servus, vol. vi. 450.
Murat. Antiq. Ital. vol. i. 766. 4. Slaves were so
entirely the property of their mailers, that they could
fell them at pleasure. While domestic slavery continued,
property in a slave was fold in the fame manner with
that which a person had in any other moveable. After-
wards slaves became adfcripti gleba, and were conveyed
by sale, together with the farm or efltate to which they
belonged. Potgiefferus has colleded the laws and char-
ters which illuf'rate this well-known circumltance in
the condition of slaves. Lib. ii. c. 4. S. Slaves had
a title to nothing but fubliftence and clothes from their
master; all the profits of their labour accrued to him.
If a mailer, from indulgence, gave his slaves any tew-
liem, or fixed allowance for their Cubliftence, they had

no

All that they accunttulated belonged to their master.
Potgieff. lib. ii. c. so. Murat. Antiq. Ital. vol. i. 768*
Du Cange, voc. Serves, vol. vi. p. 45t. Conformably
to the fame principle, all the effeats of slaves belonged
to their maiter at their death, and they could not dif-
pore of them by teflament. Potgieff. lib. ii. c. Ii.
6. Slaves were ditlinguilhed from free men by a pe-
culiar dress. Among all the barbarous nations,
long hair was a mark of dignity and of freedom ; slaves
were for that reason obliged to Ihave their heads; and
by this diftintion, how indifferent soever it may be in
its own nature, they were reminded every moment of
the inferiority of their condition. Potgieflf. lib. iii.
c. 4. For the fame reason it was enaaed in the laws of
almolt all the nations of Europe, that no have Ihould be
admitted to give evidence againtt a free man in a court
of juisice. Du Cange, voc. Ser'vs, vol. vi P. a45e.
Potgieff. lib. iii. c. 3*

z. Filani. They were likewise adfcripti glebe or

'evlle, from which they derived their name, and were
transferr-able along with it. Do Cange, voc. Villanus.
But in this they differed from slaves, that they paid a
fixed rent to their mailer for the land which they cul-
tivated, and, after paying that, all the fruits of their
labour and induitry belonged to themselves in property.
This diftinition is marked by Pierre de Fontain's Con-
feil. Vie de Sr. Louis par Joinville, p. Ire. edit. de
Du Cange. Several cafes decided agreeably to this
principle are mentioned by Murat. ibid. 1. 773.

'. The lati class of persons employed in agriculture

were free men. There are diltingui hed by various
names among the writers of the middle agrs, Arimannri,
condtitionsles, originarii, tributancs, fc. There frem to have
been per/ons who poffeffed some Fmeall allodial property
of their own, and beitdes that, cultivated some farm be.
longing to their more wealthy neighbours, for which
they paid a fixed rent j and bound themselves likewi/e
to perform several small services in praro r'e! in snefe, in
aratura eel in vinea, such as plotghing a certain quantity

vintage work, &c. The clearest proof of this may
be found in Muratori, v. i. p. tea. and in Du Cange
under the refpeaive words above mentioned. I have
not been able to difoover whether these arirnanni, &c.
were removeable at pleasure, or held their farms by
lease for a certain number of years. The former, if we
may judge from the genius and maxims of the age,
seems to be most probable. There persons, however,
were considered as free men in the most honourable
fedne of the word; they enjoyed all the privileges of
that condition, and were even called to serve in war;
an honour to which no slave was admitted. Murat.
Antiq. vol. i. p. 743. vol. ii, p. 446. This account
of the condition of there three different clatles of per-
sons, will enable the reader to apprehend the full force
of an argument which I (hall produce in confirmation of
what I have said in the text concerning the wretched fiate
of the people during the middle ages. Wotwithfiand-
ing the immense difference between the first of there
Flaffes and the third, such was the spirit of tyranny
which prevailed among the great proprietors of land,
and To various their opportunities of oppressing thoel
who were fettled on their efiates, and of rendering their
condition intolerable, that many free men, in despair,
renounced their liberty, and voluntarily surrendered
themselves as slaves to their powerful matters. This
they did, in order that their mafiers might become more
immediately intcrefied to afford them prote&ion, toge,.
ther with the means of fib(ifting themselves and their
families. The forms of such a surrender, or oenoxiatio,
as it was then called, are preserved by Marculfus, Ihb, ii.
c. 28 ; and by the ancnymous author published by M.
Bignon, together with the colletion of formule com-
piled by Marculfus, c. s6. In both, the reason give&
for the obnoxiatio, is the wretched and indigent con-
dition of the person who gives up his liberty. It
was fill more common for flee men to surrender their
liberty to bilhops or abbots, that they might partake of
the lecurity which the vassals and Ilaves of churches and

fpongleriel

veneration paid to the faint under whose immediate
protetion they were supposed to be taken. Du Cange,
voc. Oblitus, vol. iv. p. xh86. That condition mult
have been miserable indeed, which could induce a free
man voluntarily to renounce his liberty, and to give up
himself as a slave to the disposal of another. The num-
ber of slaves in every nation of Europe was immense.
The greater part of theinferior class of people in France
ivere reduced to this state at the commencement of the
third race of kings. L'Efpr. des Loix, liv. xxx. c. yr.
The fame was the cafe in England. Brady Pref. to Gen.
lift. Many curious faas, with refped to the ancient
slate of evillains, or slaves in England, are publilhed in
Observations on the Statutes, chiefly the more ancient,
third edit. p. 169, &c.

NOTE X. SECT.I. p.20. [K].

INNUMERABLE proofs of this might be produced.

Many charters, granted by persons of the highest rank,
are preserved, from which it appears that they could
not subscribe their name. It was usual for persons,
who could not write, to make the sign of the cross in
confirmation of a charter. Several of these remain,
where kings and persons of great eminence aflixfignum
crucis manu propria pro ignoratione literarum. Do Cange,
voc. Crux, vol. iii. p. asgI. From this is derived the
phrase of fmgning instead of subscribing a paper. In the
ninth century, Herbaud Comes Palatii, though supreme
judge of the empire by virtue of his office, could not
subscribe his name. Nouveau TraitB de Diplomatique
par deux Benediiins, 4to. tom. ii. p. 4vs. As late as
the fourteenth century, Du Gueflin, confltable of France,
the greatest man in the hate, and one of the greatest
men of his age, could neither read nor write. St. Pa-
laye Memoires fur lancienne Chevalerie, tit. ii. p. 8t.
Nor was this ignorance confined to laymen; the greater
part of the clergy was not many degrees superior ts
them in (cience, Many dignified eceelisfics could not

subscribe

fat as members. Nouv. Traite de Diplom. tom ii.
p. 424. One of the questions appointed by the canons
to be put to persons who were candidates for orders was
this, ' Whether they could read the gospels and epistles,
and explain the sense of them, at least literally ?' Re-
gino Prumienlis ap. Blruck. 1-ift. Philof. v. iii. p. 631.
Alfred the Great complained, that from the Humber to
the Thames there was not a priest who underitood the
liturgy in his mother-tongue, or who could translate the
eafieit piece of Latin ; and that from the Thames to the
sea, the ecclelialtics were still more ignorant. Afferius
derehus geftis Alfredi, ap.CamdeniAnglica, Ste. p. 25.
The ignorance of the clergy is quaintly dercribed by an
author of the dark ages: " Potius dediti gula quam
gloffie; potius colligunt libras quam legunt libros; 1i-
bentiils intuentur Martham quam Marcum; malunt
legere in Salmone quam in Solomone." Alanus de Art.
Predicat. ap. Lebeuf. Dissert, tom. ii. p. 2r. To the
obvious caules of such universal ignorance, ariling from
the state of government and mannets, from the seventh
to the eleventh century, we may add the fearcity of
books during that period, and the dihiculty of render-
ing them more common. The Romoans wrote their
books either on parchment or on paper made of the
Egyptian papyrus. The latter being the cheapelt, was
of course the most commonly used. But after the Sara-
cens conquered Egypt in the fevenrlh century, the com-
munication between that country and the people fettled
in Italy, or in other parts of Europe was almoll entirely
broken off, and the papyrus was no longer in use amotg
them. They were obliged, on that account, to write
all their books upon parchment, and, as the price of that
was high, books became extremely rare and of great
value We may judge of the fearcity of the materials
for writing them from one circomfiance. There 1ll
remain several manuscripts of the eighth, ninth, and
following centuries, written on parchment, from which
some former writing had been erased, in order to sub-
flitute a new comtolition in its place. In this manneritis

piobable

probable that several works of the ancients perilhed.
A book of Livy or of Tacitus might be erased, to make
room for the legendary tale of a faint, or the fuperifitious
prayers of a mroaal. Murat. Antiq. Ital. v. iii. p. 833.
P. de Montfaucon affirms, that the greater part of the
manulcripts on parchment which he has seen, those of
an ancient date excepted, are written on parchment
from which some former treatise had been eraled. Mem.
de l'Acad des Infcript. tom. ix. p. 325. As the want
of materials sor writing is one reason why so many of
the works of the ancients have perished, it accounts
likewile for the small number of msanuferipts of any
kind, previous to the eleventh century, when they be-
gan to muli ly from a cause which ihall he mentioned.
Ifift. Liter. de France, tom. vi. p. 6. Many circum-
flances prove the featcity of books during these ages.
Private persons seldom poffeffed any books whatever.
Even monalteries of considerable note had only one
missal. Murat. Antiq. v. ix, p. 789. Lupus, abbot of
Ferriers, in a letiter to the pope, A. D. b5g, beseeches
him to lend him a copy of Cicero de Oratore and Quin'
tilian's Inflitutions, '' for," says he. " although we have
parts of those books, there is no complete copy of them
in all France." Murat. Ant. v. iii p. 8a . The
price of books became so high, that persons of a mo-
derate fortune could not afford to purchase them The
counrefs of Anjou paid for a copy of the Homilies of
Haimon, bilbop of Alberitadt. two hundred sleep, tive
quarters of wheat, and the fame quantity of rye and
millet. Hifoire Literaire de France par des Religieux
Benedidhins, tom vii. p 3. Even so late as the year
1471, when louis XL. borrowed the works of Rafts,
the Arabian phyflcian, from the faculty of medicine in
Paris, he not only deposited in pledge a considerable
quantity of plate, but was obliged to procure a noble-
man to join s'ith him as surety in a deed binding him-
seif under a great forfeiture to relfore it. Gabr. Naud6
Addit. a IsHif'oire de Louys XI. par Comines, edit. de
Frefoy, tom iv p. 2i8. Many curious circumstances,
with rrfpea to the extravagant price of books in the

VOL. I. Y middle

to whom I refer such of my readers as deem this small
branch of literary history an objea of curiofaty. When
any person made a present of a book to a church or mo-
naftery, in which were the only libraries during several
ages, it was deemed a donative of such value, that he
offered it on the altar pro remedi, anime suer, in order to
obtain the forgiveness of his fins. Murat. vol. iii. p. 336.
lift. Lit. de France, tom. vi. p. 6. Nouv. Trait. du
Diplomat. par deux Benediains, 4to. tom. i. p. 481.
In the eleventh century, the art of making paper, in the
manner now become universal, was invented; by means
of that, not only the number of manuscripts increased,
but the study of the sciences was wonderfully facilitated.
Mlurat. ib. p. 871. The invention of the art of making
paper, and the invention of the art of printing, are two
conliderable events in literary history. It is remarkable
that the former preceded the first dawning of letters and
improvement in knowledge towards the close of the
eleventh century; the latter ushered in the light which
(pread over Europe at the tra of the Reformation.

NOTE XI. SECT.I. p.21. [U.

ALL the religious maxims and pradices of the dark

ages are a proof of this. I shall produce one remark.
able teflimony in confirmation of it, from an au-
thor canonized by the church of Rome, St. Eloy or
Egidius, bilhop of Noyon, in the seventh century.
" He is a good Christian who comes frequently to
church ; who prelents the oblation which is offered to
God upon the altar;I who doth not taste of the fruits
of his own industry until he has consecrated a part of
them to God; who, when the holy festivals approach,
lives chastely even with his own wife during several
days, that with a safe conscience he may draw near the
altar of God; and who, in the last place, can repeat the
Creed and the Lord's Prayer. Redeem then your fouls
from detfruaion, while you have the means in your
power; offer presents and tythes to churchmen; come
lgqre frequently to church j humbly implore the patron-

age

may come with security in the day of retribution to the
tribunal of the eternal Judge, and fay, " Give to us,
O Lord, for we have given unto thee." Dacherii Spice-
legium Vet. Script. v. ii. p. 94. The learned and ju-
dicious translator of Dr. Moiheim's Eccletiaftical Hiflory,
to one of whole additional notes I am indebted for my
knowledge of this parage, fubjoins a very proper re-
flteion: " We fee here a large and ample description
of a good Christian, in which there is not the least men-
tion of the love of God, resignation to his will, obedience
to his laws, or of justice, benevolence, and charity
towards men." Moth. Eccles. Hist. v. i. p. 354.

NOTE XII. SECT. I, p. 21. EM].
THAT infallibility in all its determinations, to which

the church of Rome pretends, has been attended with
one unhappy consequence, As it is impoflible to re-
linquifh any opinion, or to alter any pradice which
has been eftablilhed by authority that cannot err, all its
inflitutions and ceremonies must be immutable and
everlasting, and the church must continue to observe,
in enlightened times, those rites which were introduced
during the ages of darkness and credulity. What de-
lighted and edified the latter, must disgust and ihock
the former. Many of the rites observed in the Romish
church appear manifestly to have been introduced by 4
superstition of the lowest and most illiberal species.
Many of them were borrowed, with little variation,
from the religious ceremonies eitablilhed among the an-
cient Heathens. Some were (o ridiculous, that if every
age did nor furnilh infiances of the fascinating influence
of fuperitition as well as of the whimsical forms which it
assumes, it must appear incredible that they should have
been ever received or tolerated. In several churches of
France, they celebrated a feflival in commemoration of
the Virgin Mary's flight into Egypt. It was called the
Feast of the Ass. A young girl richly dressed, with a
child in her arms, was set upon an ass superbly capa.
aifoned. The als was led to the altar in solemn pro-

4r effion,

ass was taught to kneel at proper places; a hymn no
less childish than impious was sung in his praise; and
when the ceremony was ended, the priest, instead of
the usual words with which he dismissed the people,
brayed three times like an ass ; and the people, initead
of the usual reCfponfe, We blers the Lord, brayed three
times in the fame manner Du Cange, voc. Fejlum, v.
iii. p. 4:4 This ridiculous ceremony was not, like
the feltival of fools, and some other pageants of those.
ages, a mere farcical entertainment exhibited in a church,
and mingled, as was then the culom, with an imitation of
Come religious rites; it was an ad of devotion, per-
formed by the minihters of religion, and by the autho-
rity of the church. However, as this pratice did not
prevail universally in the Catholic church, its absurdity
contributed at last to abolish it.

NOTE XIII. SECT. I. p. 26. [N].

As there is no event in the hlltory of mankind more

singular than that of the Crusades, every circumitance
that tends to explain or to give any rational account of
this extraordinary frenzy of the human mind is interest-
ing. I have asserted in the text, that the minds of men
were prepared gradually for the amazing effort which
they made in consequence of the exhortations of Peter
the hermait, by several occurrences previous to his time.
A more particular detail of this curious and obscure part
of history, may perhaps appear to nome of my readers
to be of importance. That the end of the world was
expefted about the close of thie te- th and beginning of
the eleventh century ; and that this occaftoned a gene-
ral alarm, is evident from the authors to whom I have
referred in the text. This belief was To universal and
Co firong, that it mingled itself with civil tratrfations.
Many charters, in the latter part of the tenth century,
begin in this manner: " Appropinquante mundi termi-
no," &c. As the end of the world Is now at hand, and
by various calamities and judgments the signs of its ap-

proach

proach afe now manifest. Hist. de Langued. par D. D.
deVic Vaifette, tom. ii. Preuves, p. 86. 89, g0, 517.
358, &c. One effe& of this opinion was, that a great
number of pilgrims resorted to Jerusalem, with a refo-
lution to die there, or to wait the coming of the Lord;
kings, earls, marquiffes, bishops, and even a great num-
ber of women, betides persons of inferior rank, flocked
to the Holy Land. Glaber. Rodulph. Hist. chez Bou -
quet Receuil, tom. x. p. So. 5s. Another hiltorian
mentions a vast cavalcade of pilgrims who accompanied
the count of Angouleme to Jerusalem in the year loa6.
Chronic. Ademari, ibid. p. '6a. Upon their return,
these pilgrims filled Europe with lamentable accounts of
the state of Christians in the Holy Land. Willerm. Tyr.
Hist. ap. Guest. Dei per France, vol. ii. p. 6i6. Gui-
bert. Abbat. Hist. ibid. vol. i. p. 476. Besides this,
it was usual for many of the Christian inhabitants of Jec.
rufalem, as well as of other cities in the East, to travel
as mendicants through Europe; and by describing the
wretched condition of the profeffors of the Christian
faith under the dominion of Infidels, ta extort charity,
and to excite zealous persons to make some attempt in
order to deliver them from oppression. Baldrici Archi-
epifcopi Hiftor. ap. Gefta Dei, &c. vol. i. p. 86. In
the year 986, Gerbert, archbilhop of Ravenna, after-
wards Pope Silvefier II. addressed a letter to all Chris-
tians in the name of the church of Jerusalem. It is
eloquent and pathetic, and contains a formal exhorta-
tion to take arms against the Pagan oppressors, in order
to rescue the holy city from their yoke. Gerberti Epif-
tolz ap. Bouquet Receuil, tom, x. p. 426. In confe-
quence of this spirited call, some fubje6ts of the republic
of Pisa equipped a fleet, and invaded the territories of
the Mahometans in Syria. Murat. Script. Rer. Italic.
vol. iii. p. 400. The alarm was taken in the East,
and an opinion prevailed, A. D. Iono, that all the forces
of Chriflendom were to unite, in order to drive the Ma-
hometans out of Palestine. Chron. Ademari ap. Bouquet,
tom. x. p. I52. It is evident from all there particu-
lars, that the ideas which led the Crusaders to undertake

x3 their

scription of many authors, from a sudden fit of frantic
enthufafm, but were gradually formed ; so that the uni-
versal concourse to the standard of the cross, when
erefed by Urban II. will appear less surprising.

If the various circumitances which I have enumerated

in this note, as well as in the hiflory, are fudicient to
account for the ardour with which. uch vast numbers en-
gaged in such a dangerous undertaking, the exteniwve
privileges and immunities granted to the persons who
assumed the crots, serve to account for the long conti-
noance of th s spirit in Europe. a. They were exempt-
ed from prosecutions on account of debt, during the
time of their being engaged in this holy service. Du
Cange, voc. Crs;is privilegium, v. ii. p. !194.-Z. They
were exempted from paying interest for the money which
they had borrowed, in order to fit them for this sacred
warfare. Ibrd.-3. Theywere exempted either entirely,
or at least dunog a certain time, from the payment of
taxes. Ib:d. Ordonances des Rois de France, tom. i.
p. t2.-4. They might alienate their lands without the
confcnt of the superior lord of whom they held. Ibid.-
5. Their persons and effedhs were taken under the pro-
teflion of St- Peter, and the anathemas of the church
were denounced againflt all who should molelt them,
or carry on any quarrel or hoihility againfi them, during
their absence, on account of the holy war. Du Cange,
Ibid. Guibertus Abbas ap. Bongarf. i. p n8o. 4.82.-
6. They enjoyed all the privileges of ecclefiaftics, and
were not bound to plead in any civil court, but were
declared fubjedh to the spiritual jurifdidtion alone. Du
Cange. Ib. Ordon. des Rois, tom. i. p.* 4. 174..-
7. They ohtained a plenary rernill'on of all their fins,
and the gates of heaven were set open to them, without
requiring any other proof of their penitence, but their
engaging in this expedition; and thus, by gratifying
their favourite pation, the love of war, they secured to
themselves civil rights of great value, and religious im-
munities, which were not usually obtained, but by pay-
atog large suns of money, or by undergoing-painful pe-

nances,

the civil and eccleftaitical powers vying with each other,
and flraining their invention in order to devire expe-
dients for encouraging and adding fIrengrh to the spirit
of fuperflitiion, can we be surprised that itihould become
so general as to render it infamous, and a mark of cow-
ardice, to decline engaging in the holy war? Willerm
Tyrientis ap Bongarf. vol. ii. p c4i. The hipories
of the Crusades, written by modern authors, who are
apt to substitute the ideas and maxims of their own age
in the place of those which influenced the persons whose
adions they attempt to relate, convey a very imperfe&
notion of the (pirit at that time predominant in Europe.
The original historians, who were animated themfslves
with the fame patffons which pofehffed their contemnpo-
raries, exhibit to us a more firiking piaure of the times
and manners which they describe. The enthutaitic
rapture 'with which they account for the effeas of the
pope's discourse in the council of Clermont; the exul-
tation with which they mention the numbers who de-
voted themfeives to this holy warfare ; the contidence
with which they express their reliance on the divine
proteaion j the extacy of joy with which they deferibe
their taking poffetion of the holy city, will enable us to
conceive, in some degree, the extravagance of that zeal
which agitated the minds of men with such violence,
and will suggest as many fsngular reflcaions to a philo-.
fopher, as any occurrence in the history of mankind.
It is unnecessary to fele& the particular passages in the
several hiflorians, which confirm this observation. But
left those authors may be fulpeaed of adorning their
narrative with any exaggerated defeription, I shall ap-
peal to one of the leaders who conduted the enterprize.
There is extant a letter from Stephen, the earl of Char-
tres and Blois, to Adela his wife, in which he gives her
an account of the progress of the Crusaders. He de-
scribes the Crusaders as the chosen army of Christ, as
the servants and soldiers of God, as men who marched
under the immediate proteaion of the Almighty, being
condu~ted by his hand to vidory and conquest. He

fpcalsJ

voted by Heaven to defirution; and when he mentions
the (oldiers in the Christian army, who had died, or
were killed, he is confident that their fouls were admit-
ted direAly into the joys of Paradise, Dacherii Spicele-
gium, vol; iv. p. .57.

The expence of conduaing numerous bodies of men

from Europe to Asia, mutt have been exceffeive, and
the difficulty of railing the necessary sums must have been
proportionally great, during ages when the public re-
venues in every nation of Europe were extremely small.
Some account is preserved of the expedients employed
by Humbert I1. Dauphin of Vienne, in order to levy
the money requiftte towards equipping him for the Cru-
fade, A. D. 5346. These I shall mention, as they tend
to shew the considerable influence which the Crusades
had, both on the fiate of property, and of civil govern-
ment. I. He exposed to (ale part of his domaits; and
as the price was deflined for such a sacred service, he
obtained the consent of the French king, of whom these
lands were held, ratifying the alienation. Hill de Dau.
phine, tom. i. p. 31s. 315.-2. He issued a proclama-
tion, in which he promised to grant new privileges to
the nobles, as well as new immunities to the cities and
towns, in his territories, in conlideration of certain
sums which they were inflantly to pay on that account.
Ibid. tom. ii. p. gs2. 10any of the charters of commu-
nity, which I Ihall mention in another Note, were ob.
tained in this manner.-3. He exaaed a contribution
towards defraying the charges of the expedition from all
his fubjeas, whether eccleliaftics or laymen, who did
not accompany him in person to the Eait. Ibid. tom. i.
P 335--4. He appropriated a conliderable part of his
usual revenues for the support of the troops to be em-
ployed in this service. Ibid. tom. ii. p. 558*-5. He
exaaed considerable (ums not only of the Jews fettled in
his dominions, but also of the Lombards and other bank-
ers who had fixed their relidence there. Ibid. tom. i.
p. 338. tom ii. 528. Notwithilanding the varietyof
these resources, the dauphin was involved in such ex-

pence

pence by this expedition, that on his return he was
obliged to make new demands on his fubjech, and to
pillage the Jews by fresh exadions. Ibid. torn. i. p.
344. 347. When the count de Foix engaged in the fir't
Crusade, he railed the money necessary for defraying
the expences of that expedition, by alienating parr of his
territornes. Hist. de Langued. par D. D. de Vic &
Vaifetre, tom. ii. p. z87. In lihe manner, Baldwin,
count of Hainaut, mortgaged or fold a conlftderable por-
tion of his dominions to the bilhop of Liege, A. D. a th.
Du Mont Corps Diplomatique, tom. i. p. j9. At a
later period, Baldwin, count of Namur, fold part of his
eltate to a monaltery, when he intended to afufme the
erofs, A D. 1z39. Mirmi Oter. i. 31.

NOTE XIV. SECT. I. p.3I. [OJ.

THE oUfual method of forming an opinion concerning

the comparative state of manners in two different nations,
is by attending to the fatfs which hiltorians telate con-
cerning each of rhem. Various pafTages might be feleted
from the Byzantin hifforians, deferibing the splendour
and magnificence of the Greek empire. P. de Montfau-
con has produced from the writings of St Chryfotonm a
very full account of the elegance and luxury of the Greeks
in his age. That father in his sermons enters into lucch
minute details concerning the manners and cuitoms oi his
contemporaries, as appear firange in'dircourtes from the
pulpit. P. de Montfaucon has colleaed there deferip-
tions, and ranged them under ditferent heads. TIhe
court of tile mote early Greek emperors seems to have
resembled those of Eatlern monarchs, both in magnificence
and in corruption of manners. The emperors in the
eleventh century, though inferior in power, did not yield
to them in ostentation and splendour. Memoires de
I'Acad. des Interip. tom. xx. p. r97.- But we may
decide concerning the comparative fiate of manners in
the Eaflern empire, and among the nations in the weft
of Europe, by another method, which, if not more cer-
taim, is at least more firiking. As Conflantinople was

the

this brought together the people of the East and Weft as
to one great interview. There are extant several con-
temporary authors both among the Greeks and Latins,
who were witnesses of this singular congress of people,
formerly firangers, in a great measure, to each other.
They deferibe, with Pimplicity and candour, the impref-
lion which that new fpedacle made upon their own
minds. This may be conlidered as the most lively and
just piaure of the real charader and manners of each
people. When the Greeks speak of the Franks, they
describe them as barbarians, fierce, illiterate, impetuous,
and savage. They assume a tone of superiority, as a
more polilhed people, acquainted with the arts both of
government and of elegance, of which the other was ig-
norant. It is thus Anna Comnena deferibes the man-
ners of the Latins, Alexias, p. 224. 231.237. ap. Byz.
Script. vol. xi. She always views them with contempt
as a rude people, the very mention of whose names was
fufficient to contaminate the beauty and elegance of his-
tory, p. 229. Nicetas Choniatas inveighs against them
with itill more violence, and gives an account of their
ferocity and devafiations, in terms not unlike those which
preceding hillorians had employed in deferibing the in-
curflons of the Goths and Vandals. Nicet. Chon. ap.
Byz. Script. vol. iii. p. 30±, &c. But, on the other
hand, the Latin historians were (iruck with astonish-
ment at the magnificence, wealth, and elegance which
they dilcovered in the eastern empire. " O what a
vait city is Conflantinople (exclaims Fulcherius Carno-
tenfis, when he firfi beheld it), and how beautiful!
How many monasteries are there in it, and how many
palaces built with wonderful art ! How many manu-
faaures are there in the city amazing to behold i It
would be astonishing to relate how it abounds with all
good things, with gold, silver, and fluffs of various kinds;
for every hour ships arrive in its port laden with all
things necessary for the ife of man." Fulcher. ap.
Bongarf. vol. . p. 386. Willermus archbishop of Tyre,
the most intelligent historian of the Crtfades, seems to

be

splendour of the court of Constantinople, and adds, that
what he and his countrymen observed there exceeded any
idea which they could have formed of it, nofirarum enimt
rerum modum & dignitatem excedunt. Willerm. Tyr.
ap. Bong. vol. ii. p. 657. 664. Benjamin the Jew, of
Tudela in Navarre, who began his travels A. D. rr73,
appears to have been equally astonished at the magnifi-
cence of that city, and gives a deferiprion of its fplen-
dour, in terms of high admiration. Benj. Tudel chez
les Voyages faits en i2, 13, &c. Siecles, par Bergeron,
p. so, &c. Guntherus, a French monk, who wrote a
hiflory of the conquelt of Constantinople by the Crusaders
in the thirteenth century, speaks of the magnificence of
that city in the fame tone of admiration: " Strud±uram
autem ;edificiorum in corpore civitatis, in ecclefiis vide-
licet, & turribus, & in domibus magnatorum, vix ullus
vel deferibere potelt, vel credere deferibenti, nifi qui ea
oculata fide cognoverit." Hill. Conltantinop. ap. Cani-
iii Lediones Antiquas, fol. Antw. a7z5. vol. iv. p. 14.
Geoffrey de Villehardouin, a nobleman of high rank,
and accutlomed to all the magnificence then known in
the Well, describes, in ftmilar terms, the aflonilhment
and admiration of such of his fellow-foldiers as beheld
Conotantinople for the fir time : " They could not have
believed, says he, that there was a city To beautiful and
Co rich in the whole world. When they viewed its high
walls, its lofty towers, its rich palaces, its superb
churches, all appeared Co great, that they could have
formed no conception of this Covereign city, unlefa they
had seen it with their own eyes." Hiftoire de la Con-
quete de Conllat. p. 49. From there undisguised repre-
fentations of their own feelings, it is evident, that to the
Greeks, the Crusaders appeared to be a race of rude,
unpolifhed barbarians; whereas the latter, how much
soever they might contemn the unwarlike charater of
the former, could not help regarding them as far fupe-
nror to themselves in elegance and arts.-That the llate
of government and manners was much more improved
in Italy than in the other countries of Europe, is evident

not

pears that the more intelligent leaders of the Crusaders
were f'rnck with the difference. Jacobus de Vitriaco, a
French historian of the holy war, makes an elaborate
panegyric on the charadher and manners of the Italians.
He views them as a more polhted people, and particu-
larly celebrates them for their love of liberty, and civil
wisdom ; " in confilis circumfpedli, in re ful publicl
procurandl diligentes & iludioli ; fibi in podterum provi-
denres ; aiis fubjici renuentes ; ante omnia Ilbertatem
tbi defendentes ; sub uno quem eligunt capitaneo, com-
munitari susa jura & inifituta didantes & fimiliter obler-
vantes." Hilor. Hterofol. ap. Gefta Dei per Francos,
vol. ii. p. so85-

NOTE XV. SECT. I. P. 35. [P.

THE different fleps taken by the cities of italy in order

to extend their power and dominions are remarkable.
As soon as their liberties were eskablsihed, and they be-
gan to feel their own importance, they endeavoured to
render themselves maiters of the territory round their
walls. Under the Romans, when cities enjoyed muni-
cipal privileges and jurifdiaion, the circumjacent lands
belonged to each town, and were the property of the
community. But as it was not the genius of the feudal
policy to encourage cities, or to shew any regard for
their pofiffflons and immunities, these lands had been
seized, and Ihared among the conquerors. The barons
to whom they were eranted, eteed their cafhles aimolt
at the gates of the city, and exercised their jurifdidbon
there. Under pretence of recovering their ancient pro-
perty, many of the cities in Italy attacked these tron-
blefome neighbours, and difpooiffefng them, annexed
their territories to the communities, and made thereby
a confderable addition to their power. Several in-
stances of this occur in the eleventh, and beginning of
the twelfth centuries. Murat. Antiq. Ital. vol. iv. p.
a 59, &c. Their ambition increating together with their
rower, the cities afterwards attacked several barons (itu-

ated

ated at a greater dillance from their walls, and obliged
them to engage that they would become members of their
community; that they would take the oath of fidelity to
their magistrates; that they would fubje& their lands to
all burdens and taxes imposed by common consent that
they would defend the community against all its ene-
mies ; and that they would refede within the city during
a certain specified time in each year. Murat. ibid. 163*
This fubjetion of the nobility to the municipal govern-
ment eftablithed in cities, became almol' universal, and
was often extremely grievous to persons accustomed to
confider themselves as independent. Otto Frifingenfis
thus describes the slate of Italy under Frederick I. " The
cities so much affea liberty, and are So solicitous to avoid
the insolence of power, that almost all of them have
thrown off every other authority, and are governed by
their own magiltrates. Insomuch that all that country
is now filled with free cities, most of which have com-
pelled their bishops to reside within their walls, and there
is scarcely any nobleman, how great soever his power
may be, who is not fubjeft to the laws and government
of some city." De Geflis Frider. i. Imp. lib. ii. c. s3.
p. 453. In another place he observes of the Marquis of
Montserrat, that he was almost the only Italian baron
who had preserved his independence, and had not become
fubjea to the laws of any city. Seealfo Muratori Anti-
chita Eftenli, vol. i. p. 411, 4It. That slate into which
some of the nobles were compelled to entera others em-
braced from choice. They observed the high degree of
security, as well as of credit and eflimation, which the
growing wealth and dominion of the great communities
procured to all the members of them. They were delirous
to partake of these, and to put themselves under such
powerful proteaion. With this view they voluntarily
became citizens of the towns to which their lands were
most contiguous; and abandoning their ancient cafles,
took up their relidence in the cities at least during part
of the year. Several deeds are still extant, by which
some of the most illuefrious families in Italy are alfociated
as citizens of different cities, Murat, ib, p. z6 , &cc.

VoL. S. Z A charter,

citizen of Ofimo, A. D. I I9, in the Marcha di Ancona,
is tlil extant. In this he flipulates, that he will acknow-
ledge himfeif to be a burgess of that commssnity ; that he
will to the utmost of his power promote its honour and
welfare that he will obey its magifirates; that he will
enter into no league with its enemies; that he will reside
in the town during two months in every year, or for a
longer time, if required by the magifirates. The com-
munity, on the o:her hand, take him, his family, and
friends, under their protedbon, and engage to defend
him against every enemy. Fr. Ant. Zacharias Anecdosa
medii iWvi. Aug. Taur. 753. fol. p. 66. This privi-
lege was deemned ro important, that not only Isymen, bet
ecclefaltics of the highelt rank, condefcended to be
adopted as members of the great communities, in hopes
of enjoying the fafesy and dignity which that condition
conferred. Murat. ib. 179. Before the inflitution of
communities, persons of noble birth had no other reli-
dence but their castles. They kept their petty courts
there; and the cities were deserted, having hardly any
inhabitants but slaves, or persons of low condition. But
in confequene of the prafice which I have mentioned,
cities not only became more populous, but were filled
with inhabitants of betler rank, and a cuitom which htill
fuhbilis in Italy was then introduced, tlsat all families of
diflinflion reside more coniuantly in the great towns, than
is usual in other paris of Europe. As cites acquired new
conftderation and dignity by the accecifon of such citizens,
they became more folicitaus to preServe Iheir liberty and
independence. The emperors, as sovereigns, had anci-
ently a palace in almost every great city of Italy; when
they visited that country they were accui'omed to reside
in tslefe palaces, and the troops which accompanied them
were quartered in the houses of the citizens. This the
ciiszens deemed both ignominious and dangerous. They
could not help considering it as receiving a master and an
enemy within their walls. They laboured therefore to
get free of this fubje~tion. Some cities prevailed on the
enaperors to engage that they would never enter their

gates,

ga'es, but take up their reftdence without the walls:
Chart. Hen. IV. Murar. ib. p. 24. Others ohtaoned
the imperial Ilcence to pull down the palace fi.ihated
within their hher ies. on condition that they bilik an-
other in the fubur's for tihe occadonhl reception of ihe
emperor. Char'. Hen. IV. Murat. ib. p* 2t. There
vartous encroachments of the Italian cities alarmed the
emperors, and put them on fchemcs for ie cilabitihing
the lInptrial jurtldiflion over them on its ancient foot-
ing. Frederick Barbarossa engaged in this enterprize
with great ardour. The free cities of Italy joined toge-
ther in a general league, and flood on their defence :
and after a long contell, carried on with alternate fuc-
cess, a foIemn treaty of peace was concluded at Con-
fiance, A. D. t ' 83, by which all the privileges and im-
minities granted by former emperors to the principal
cities in Iraly were confirmed and ratified. Mura'.
Dnfetr. XLVIII. This treaty of Contfance was conli-
dared as such an important article in the jurdsrudence
of the middle ages, that it is usually pubhlihed together
with the Libri Feudoram at the end of the Corpus Juris
Ctvilis. The treaty lecuted privileges of great inmport-
ance to the confederawe cities, and thoughl it reserved a
considerable degree of authority and jurifdidlion to the
empire, yet the cities persevered with such vigour in their
efforts in order to extettd their immunities, and the con-
jundures in which they made them were so favourable,
that, before the concluaion of the thirteenth century, mott
of the great cities in Italy had ihalen off all ma lks of
fubjeflion to the empire, and were become indepetdent
sovereign republics. It is not requisite that I fiould
trace the various Ileps by which they advanced to this
high degtec of power tf fatal to the empire, and so be-
neficial to the caute of liberty in Italy. Muratort; with
his usual indufiry, has colieed mnany original papers
which illultrate this curious and little known part ot his-
tory. Mtlarat. Antitq. Ital. Dissert. L. Seealfo Jo. Fapt.
Villanovie Huih. Laudis Pompeii five Lodi, in Granv
Thla. Antiquit. Ital. vol. iii. p* 8d8.

NOTE XVI. SECT. I. p. 36. [Q3.

LONc before the inflitution of communities in France,

charters of immunity or franchise were granted to some
towns and villages by the lords on whom they depended.
But these are very different from such as became common
in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries. They did not
ereCa there towns into corporations; they did not eftab.
lifh a municipal government; they did not grant them
the privilege of bearing arms. They contained nothing
more than a manumifion of the inhabitants from the
yoke of servitude i an exemption from certain services
which were oppreflive and ignominious; and the eftab-
jifhment of a fixed tax or rent which the citizens were
to pay to their lord in place of impotitions which he
could formerly lay upon them at pleasure. Two charters
of this kind to two villages in the county of Roufllon,
one in A. D. 974, the other in A. D. sos z, are ftll ex-
tant. Petr. de Marca, Milarca, five Limes Hifpanicus,
App. p. 909. Tod8. Such concessions, it is probable,
were not unknown in other parts of Europe, and may
be considered as a step towards the more extensive privi-
leges conferred by Louis le Gros, on the towns within
his domains. The communities in France never aspired
to the fame independence with those in Italy. They act
quired new privileges and immunities, but the right of
sovereignty remained entire to the king or baron within
whose territories the refpedive cities were situated, and
from whom they receive the charter of their freedom.
A great number of these charters, granted both by the
kings of France, and by their great vassals, are published
by M. D'Achery in his Spicelegium, and many are found
in the colleaion of the Ordonnances des Rois de France.
These convey a very firiking representation of the
wretched condition of cities previous to the inftiturion of
communities, when they were fubje& to the judges ap-
pointed by the superior lords of whom they held, and
who had fearcely any other law but their will. Each
concefion in these charters must be considered as a grant

of

enjoy, and each regulation as a method of redrefling
fume grievance under which the inhabitants of cities for-
meily lahoured. The chartera of comununities contain
Iukewife the firtt expeduents emplove I for the introdeaion
of equal laws and regular government. On both there
accounts they merit particular attention, and therefore,
inflea:i of ucterring my readers to the many bulky volumes
in which they are scattered, Ifhall give them a view of
some of the most important articles in there charters,
ranged under two general heads. I. Such as refpea
personal safety. 1I. Such as refpea the security of pro-
Perry.

1. During that ifate of turbulence and disorder which

tite corruption of the feudal government introduced into
.Europe, personal safety was the first and great obje& of
every individual and as the great military barons alone
were able to give fuificuene proteaion to their vassals,
this was one great source of their power and authority.
But, by the inilitusion of communities, effe~iual provi-
sion was made for the safety of individuals, independent
of the nobles. For, u. The fundamental article in every
charter was, that all the members of the community
bound themselves by oath to asifR, defend, and fland by
each other againitall aggretfors, and that they should
not luffer any person to injure, diflrefs, or moleli any of
their fellow-citizens. D'Acher. Spicel. x. 6g2. xi. :4:,
&c.-s. Whoever resided in any town, which was made
free, was obliged, under a severe penalty, to accede to
the community, and to take part in the mutual de'ence
of its members. D'Acher. Spic. xi. 3144-3. The com-
munities had the privilege of carrying arms; of making
war on their private enemies; and of executing by mili-
tary force' any sentence which their magiffrates pro-
nourced. D'Ach. Spicel. x. 641, 644. Xi. 343-
4. The praaice of making fatisfadion by a pecuniary
compensation for murder, assault, or other atas of vio-
lence, moll inconfifent with the order of society, and
the safety of individuals, was abolished; and such as
committed theft crimes were punithed capitally, or with

z 3 rigour

Opera Diplomatica, i. 295.-5. No member of a com.
Inunity was bound to justify or defend himself by battle
or combat; but, if he was charged with any crime, he
could be conviated only by the evidence of witnesses,
and the regular course of legal proceedings. J\4iraeus,
ibid. D'Ach. xi. 375. 349. Ordon. tom. iii. 265.-6.
If any man folpe.5ed himself to be in danger from the
malice or enmity of another, upon his making oath to
that effe& before a magistrate, the person fufpeaed was
bound under a severe penalty to give security for his
peaceable behaviour. D'Ach. xi. 346. This is the fame
species of security which is fitll known in Scotland under
the name of Lawburrows. In France, it was firt intro-
duced among the inhabitants of communities, and having
been found to contribute conftderably towards personal
safety, it was extended to all the other members of so-
ciety. Eftabliffemens de St. Louis, liv. i. cap. 28. ap. Du
Cange Vie de St. Louis, p. cI.

U1. The provificns in the charters of communities con-

cerning the security of property, are not less considerable
than those refpe1ing personal safety. ly the ancient
law of France, no person could be arrefited or confined
in prison on account of any private debt. Ordon. des
Rois de France, tom. i. p. 72. 8. If any person was
arrested upon any pretext, but his having been guilty of
a capital crime, it was lawful to rescue him out of the
bands of the officers who had seized him. Ordon. iii.
p. s7. Freedom from arrest on account of debt seems
likewise to have been enjoyed in other countries. Gude-
nus Sylloge Diplom. 473. In society, while it remained
in its rudest and molt simple form, debt seems to have
been considered as an obligation merely personal. Men
had made some progress towards refinement, before cre-
ditors acquired a right of seizing the property of their
debtors in order to recover payment. The expedients
for this purpose were all introduced originally in com-
nunities, and we can trace the gradual progress of them.
I. The simplest and molt obvious species of security
wte, that the pernon wvho fold any commodity should re-

ceive

stored upon receiving payment. Of this custom there
are vefliges in several charters of community. D'Ach.
ix. r85. xi. 377.-2. When no pledge was given, and the
debtor became refraaory or insolvent, the creditor was
allowed to seize his effeats with a firong hand, and by
his private authority; the citizens of Paris are warrant-
ed by the royal mandate, " ut ubicumque, et quocumquc
modo poterunt, tantum capiant, unde pecuniam fibi de.
bitam integra & plenaria habeant, & inde fibi invicem ad-
jutores exiflant." Ordon. &c. tom. i. p. 6. This rude
pratice, fuicable only to the violence of that which has
been called a slate of nature, was tolerated longer than
one can conceive to be possible in any society where laws
and order were at all known. The ordonance autho-
rizing it was issued, A. D. x'34: and that which cor-
reds the law, and prohibits creditors from seizing the
effeats of their debtors, unless by a warrant from a ma-
giftrate, and under his infpetion, was not publilhed un-
til the year 5351. Ordon. tom. ii. p. 4'.8. It is pro-
bable, however, that men were taught, by observing the
disorders which the former mode of proceeding occalon-
ed, to correa it in pratice long before a remedy was
provided by a law to that effet. Every diScerning reader
will apply this observation to many other cufloms and
pratices which I have mentioned. New etl'oms are
not always to be ascribed to the laws which authorize
them. Those statutes only give a legal fandion to such
things as the experience of mankind has previously found
to be proper and beneficial.-1. As soon as the incerpo-
fition of the magifirate became requisite, regular provi-
lion was made for attaching or diffraining the moveable
effeats of a debtor ; and if his moveables were not fuffi-
cient to discharge the debt, his immoveable property, or
estate in land, was liable to the fame difirers, and was
fold for the benefit of his creditor. D'Ach. ix. p. 184,
185. xi. p. 348. 380. As this regulation afforded the
mofi complete security to the creditor, it was conlidered
as so severe, that humanity pointed out several limita-
tions in the execution of it, Creditors were prohibited

from

beds, the door of their house, their infirunents of hus-
bandry, &c. D'Ach. ix. 1a4. xi. 377. Upon the fame
principles, when the power of diltraining effetS became
more general, the horse and arms of a gen'leman could
not be seized. D'Ach. ix. :8 As hunting was the fa.
vourite amusement of martial nobles, the emperor Lo-
dovicus Pius prohibited the seizing of a hawk on account
of any composition or debt. Capitul. lib.iv. O 21. But
if the debtor had no other moveables, even these privi-
leged articles might be seized.-4. In order to render the
security of property complete within a community, every
person who was admitted a member of it, was obliged
to buy or build a house, or to purchase lands wititin its
precindis, or at least to bring into the town a confider-
able portion of his moveables, per YuCejlfiiciari psffit, Ji
quid fort? it eurn querela e'ueerit. D'Ach, xi. 3-6. Odon,
i. 36g. Libertates S. Georgil de Efperunchia. Hill. de
Daaphin6, tom. i. p. 26.-5. That security might he as
ptrtet as poifible in some towns, the members of the
community seem to have been bound for each other.
D'Ach. x. 644.-6. All queflions with refped6 to pro-
perty were tried within the community, by magistrates
and judges witom the citizens ele6bed or appointed. 'Thuir
deciitons were more equal and fixed than the sentences
which depended on the capricious and arbitrary will of
a baron, who thought himself superior to all laws.
D'Ach. x, 644. 6s6. xi. 144. &. pallim. Ordon. iii.
204.-7. No member of a community could be bur-
dened by any arbitrary tax ; for the fttperior lord, who
granted the charter of community, accepted of a fixed
census or duty in lieu of all demands. Ordon. tom. iii.
204. Libertates de Calma Hili, de Dauphina, tom, i.
p. '9. Libert. St. Georgii de Efperanchia, ibid. p. s6.
Nor could the members of a community be diilreffed by
an unequal impofitifn of tite faim to be levied on the
community. Regulations are inserted in the charters
of some communities, concerning the method of deter-
mining the quota of any tax to be levied on each iu-
Babitant, D'Acb. xi. 350. 365. St. Louis publilied an

drdonanre

ordonance concerning this matter which extended to all
the communities. Ordor. tom. i. 186. Theferegulations
are extremely favourable to liberty, as they vest the
power of proportioning the taxes in a certain number
of citizens chosen out of each parish, who were bound
by solemn oath to decide according tojuflice.-.That the
more perse& security of properny was one great obje&
of those who inflituted communities, we learn, not only
from the nature of the thing, but from the express words
of several charters, of which I shall only meniion that
granted by Alienor Queen of England and Duchess of
Guienne, to the community of Poitiers, " ut fua propria
melius defendere pollint, & magis integra cuftodire."
Du Cange, voc. Communia, v. ii. p. 86?.-Such are some
of the capital regulations eftablithed in communities
during the twelfth and thirteenth centuries. These may be
confzdered as the firfit expedients ;or the re establishment
of law and order, and contributed greatly to introduce
regular government among all the members of society.
As soon as communities were inflituted, high sentiments
of liberty began to manifest themselves. When Hum-
bert lord of Beaujeu, upon granting a charter of commu-
nity to the town of Belleville, eXaated of the inhabitants
an oath of fidelity to himself and successors, they ftipu-
lated on their part, that he thould swear to maintain
their franchises and liberties; and, for their greater fe-
curity, they obliged him to bring twenty gentlemen to
take the fame oath, and to be bound together with him.
D'Ach. ix. i8. In the fame manner the lord of Mori-
ens in DauphinB produced a certain number of persons
as his sureties for the observation of the articles contained
in the charter of community to that town. These were
bound to surrender themselves prisoners to the inhabit-
ants of Moriens, if their liege lord Ihould violate any of
their franchises and they promised to remain in cutody
until be thould grant the members of the community
redress. Hill. de Dauphin$, tom. i. p. r7. If the mayor
or chief magifirate of a town did any injury to a citizen,
he was obliged to give security for his appearance in
judgment in the fame manner as a private person ; and

if

These are ideas of equality uncommon in the feudal
times. Communities were so favourable to freedom,
that they were diftinguithed by the name of Ldcrtates.
Du Cange, v. ii. p. 86 (. They were at firit exitemely
odioos to the nobles, who foresaw what a check they muat
prove to their power and domination. Guibert Abbot of
Nogent calls them execrable inventiotis, by which, con-
trary to law and joflice, slaves withdrew themfeives from
that obedience which they owed to thcir mailers. Da
Cange, ib. 862. The zeal with which some of the
nobles and powerful eccleiafstcs opposed the eilablilh
ment of communities, and endeavoured to ciicumferbe
their privileges, was extraordinary. A fthiking inflance
of this occurs in the contests between tlte arcbbilbop of
Reims, and the inhabitants of that communsy. It
was the chief bulinefs of every archbishop, during a con-
ftderable time, to abridge the righas and jurifdtiion of
the community; and the great objea of the riuizans,
especially when the fee was vacant, to maintain, to re-
cover, and to extend their own jurfididhon. Hitaire
civile & politique de 1 Ville de Reinms par M. Anquetil,
tom. i. p. 2 87, &c.

The oblervations which I have made concerning the

low state of cities, and the condition of their inhabitants,
are confirmed by innumerable passages in the hillorians
and laws of the middle ages. It is not improbable, how-
ever, that some cities of the first order were in a better
itate, and enjoyed a fupersor degree of I berty. Under
the Roman government, the municipal government efla-
blilbed in cities was extremely frvourable to liberty.
The jurifdidion of the senate in each corpotation, and
the privileges of the citizens, were bosh exentlive.
There is reason to believe, that ftme of the gteatcr
cities which elcaped the deflruilive rage of tIe bar-
barcus nations, tlIl retained the r ancient form of go-
vernment, at lead in a great measure. They wcro go-
verned by a council of citizens, and by magistrates whom
they themselves eleaed. Very tfrong presumptions in
favour of this opinion are produced by Mi. l'Abb6 De

Bos;

Roe, Hiit. Crit. de la Mon. Franc, tom i. p. IS, &c.
tom ii. p. 524. edit. 1742. It appears from some of
the charters of community to ci'ies, granted in the
twelfth and thirteenth centuries, that these only con-
firm the privileges poss ifed by the inhabitants previous
to the establishment of the community. D'Acher.
Spiceleg. vol. xi p 4;i. Other citics claimed their
privileges, as having pofiRIed them without interruption
from the times of the Romans Hist. Crit. de Ia
Mon Franic. tom. ii p 3133 But the number of cities
which enjoycd fueh immunities was so small, as hardly
in any degree to dtminiih the force of my conclulions
in the text.

NOTE XVII. SECT. 1. P.36. [R].

IjAVING given a full account of the eflahllhment as

well as effeas of commonities in Italy and France, it
will be neceirary to inquire with some attention into
the progress of cities and of municipal government in
Germany. The ancient Germans had no cilies. Even
in their hamlets or villages they did not build their
houses conriguous to each omher. Tac, de Mor. Germ.
cap. 16. Titey considered it as a badge of servitude to
be oblieed to dwell in a city surrounded with walls.
When one ot. their tribes had thaken off the Roman
yoke, their countrymen required of them, as an evidence
of their having recovered liberty, to demolith the walls
of a town which the Romans Itad built in their country.
Evcn the fiercelt aniimale, said they, lose their spirt and
courage when they are confined. Tac. 1-itior. lib. iv.
c. ca. The Romans built several ci~ies of note on the
banks of the Rhine But in all the vait countries from
that river to the coulls of the Baltic, there was hardly
one city previous to the ninth century of the Chritian
ara. Canringius Exercitatio de Urbibus Germania,
Oper. vol. i. P 25. z7. 3r, &c. Heineccius diffeis
from Conringius with refpe& to this. But even, after
allowing to his a guments and authorities their utmost
Sforcc, they prove only, titat there were a few places in

those

bestowed the name of towns. Elem. Jur. German.
lib. i. § sea. Under Charlemagne, and the emperors
of his family, as the politicalitate of Germany began to
improve, several cities were founded, and men became
accustomed to associate and to live together in one place.
Charlemagne founded two archbilhoprics and nine bi.
fhoprics in the most considerable towns of Germany.
Aub. Mirmi Opera Diplomatica, vol. i. p. x6. His
successOrs increased the number of these; and as
bilhops fixed their residence in the chief town of their
diocese, and performed religious funaions there, that
induced many people to fettle in them. Conring. ibid.
§ 48. But Henry, firnamed the Fowler, who began his
reign A. D. gzo, mult be considered as the great founder
of cities in Germany. The empire was at that time in-
felled by the incursions oft he Hungarians and other bar-
barous people. In order to oppose them, Henry encou-
raged his fubjeas to fettle in cities which he surrounded
with walls fitrengrhened by towers. He enjoined or per-
fuaded a certain proportion of the nobility to fix their
residence in the towns, and thus rendered the condition of
citizens more honourable than it had been formerly.
Wittikindus Annal. lib. i. ap. Conring. §S. From this
period the number of cities continued to increase, and
they became more populous and more wealthy. But
cities in Germany were skill deititute of municipal
liberty or jurifdilion. Such of them as were situated
in the Imperial demefnes, were fubjea to the Emperors.
Their Conites, Mq/i, and other judges presided in them,
and dispensed juflice. Towns situated on the efltate of
a baron, were part of his fief, and he or his officers
exercised a similar jurifdiaion in them. Conring. ibid.
S73* 74n. Heinec. Elem. Jur. Germ. lib. i. g 1o4.
The Germans borrowed the inflitution of communities
from the Italians. Knipfchildius Traf'atus Politico.
Hitor. Jurid. de Civitatum Imperialium Juribus, vol. i.
lib. i. cap. 5. No. a3. Frederick Barbarolfa was the
first emperor who, from the fame political confideratioti
that influenced Louis le Gros, multiplied communities

II'

Abreg6 de 1Hifloire & du Droit Publique d'Allemagne,
4to. p. 297. From the reign of Henry the Fowler, to
the time when the German cities acquired full poffeflion
of their immunities, various circumitances contributed
to their increase. The eftabbibment of bifhoprics (al-
ready mentioned) and the building of cathedrals, natur-
ally induced many people to fettle near the chief place
of worship. It became the custom to hold councils and
courts of judicature of every kind, ecclesiastical as well
as civil, in cities. In the eleventh century, many slaves
were enfranchised, the greater part of whom fettled in
cities. Several mines were discovered and wrought in
different provinces, which drew together such a con-
course of people, as gave rife to several cities, and in-
creased the number of inhabitants in others. Conring.

s 1o0. The cities began in the thirteenth century to

form leagues for their mutual defence, and for reprelting
the disorders occalioned by the private wars among the
barons, as well as by their exaaions. This rendered
the condition of the inhabitants of cities more secure
than that of any other order of men, and allured many
to become members of their communities. Conring.
Q 94. There were inhabitants of three different ranks
in the towns of Germany: the nobles, or familie; the
citizens, or liberi; and the artisans, who were slaves, or
homines proprii. Knipfchild. lib. ii. cap. 29. No. r3.
Henry V. who began his reign A. D. a tc6, enfranchiCed
the slaves who were artisans or inhabitants in several
towns, and gave them the rank of citizens or liberi.
Pfeffel, p. 254. Kniplch. lib. ii. c. s9. No. I13*. 59.
Though the cities in Germany did not acquire liberty To
early as thole in France, they extended their privileges
much farther. All the Imperial and free cities, the
number of which is conliderable, acquired the full right
of being immediate; by which term, in the German jurif-
prudence, we are to underfiand, that they are fubjed
to the empire alone, and poffers within their own pre-
cinQs all the rights of complete and independent fove-
reignty. The various privileges of the Imperial cities,

VOL. I. A A the

merated by Knipfchtld. lib. ii. The most important
articles are generally known, and it would be improper
to enter into any difquilition concerning minute par.
ticulars.

NOTE XVIII. SECT. I. P.36. [SJ.
THE Spanilh hiltorians are almoil entirely silent con-

cerning the origin and progress of communities in that
kingdom so that I cannot fix, with any degree of
certainty, the time and manner of their firit introdu8iota
there. It appears, however, from Mariana, vol. ii.
p. azr. fol. Hage, p;36, that in the year 5350, eigh-
teen cities had obtained a feat in the Cortes of Caltle.
From the account, which will be given of their confhi-
tution and pretcnftons, Se&. III. of this volume, it
appears that their privileges and form of government
were the fame with those of tlse other feudal corpor-
ations j and this, as well as the perseEf similarity of
political inflitutions and tranfaihions in all the feudal
kinedoms, may lead us to conclude that communites
were introduced thete in the fame manner, and pro-
bably about the fame time, as in the other nations of
Europe. In Arandn, assI !hall have occafton to ohferve
in a subsequent note, cities seem early to have acquired
extensive immunities, together with a thare in the legis-
lature. In the year is a, the citizens of Saragossa had
not only attained political liberty, but they were declared
to be of equal rank with the nobles of the second clals;
and many other immtsunitics, unknown to persons in
tieir rank of life in other parts of Europe, were con-
ferred upon them. Zurita Annales de Aragon, tom. i.
p. 44. In England, the eltabliflhment of communities
or corpaorations was posterior to the conquest. The
praiice was borrowed from France, and the privileges
granted by the crown were perfeily ftmilar to those
which I have enuserated. But as this part of hilhory
is well known to moR of my readers, I (hall, withouc
entering into any criticol or minute difcuEflon, refer them
to authors who have fully i!luitrated this interesting

3 poinm

roughs. Madox Firma Burgi, cap. i. fef. ix. Hume's
fliflory of England, vol. i. append. i. and ii. Jr is not
improbable that some of the towns in England were
formed into corporations under the Saxon kings, and
that the charters granted by the kings of the Norman
race were not tharters of enfranchilfment from a slate
of fiavery, but a confirmatioo of privileges which they
already enjoyed. See Lord Lytrelron's tlihiory of Hen-
ry I. vol. ii. p. 317. The Eigiifh cities, however,
were very incorifiderable in the twelfTh century. A
clear proof of this occuis in toe hillory to which I
last referred. Fitzfhephen, a contemporary author, gives
a defeription of the city of London in the reign of
Henry II. and the terms in which he speaks of its trade,
its wealth, and the splendour of its inhabitants, would
suggest no inadequate idea of its flare at present, when
it is the greatelt and molt opulent city of Europe.
But all ideas of grandeur and magnificence are merely
comparative; and every defrciiption of them in general
terms is very apt to deceive. It appears from Peter of
Blois, archdeacon of London, who flourished in the fame
reign, and who had good opportunity of being well in-
formed, that this city of which Fitzitzeplen gives such a
pompous account, contained no more than forty thou-
sand inhabitants. Jbid.3 5S, 3a6. The other cities
were fomali in proportion, and were not in a condition
to extort any extensive privileges. That the conflitution
of the boroughs in Scotland, in marty circumitances,
resembled that of the towns in Fiance and England, is
manitfet from the Leges Burgorum, annexed to the Re-
giam Majelhatern,

N OTE XIX. SECT. I. p. 42. [T].

SooNt after the introduflirn of the third efhate into

the national council, the ipirit of liberty which that
excited in France began to produce conspicuous effeas.
In several provinces of France the nobility and com-
zsunities formed aflhciations, whereby they bound them-

A A a selves

formidable and arbitrary proceedings of the king. The
Count de Boulainvilliers has preserved a copy of one of
these associations, dated in the year 13 54, twelve years
after the admission of the deputies from towns into the
States General. Hiloire de l'ancien Gouvernement de la
France, tom. ii. p. 94. The vigour with which the
people afferred and prepared to maintain their rights,
obliged their sovereigns to refpedl them. Six years after
this aftociation, Philip the Long iltued a writ of summons
to the community of Nat bonne, in the following terms:
" Philip, by the grace, &c. to our well-beloved, &c.
As we dtfsre with all our heart, and above all other
things, to govern our kingdom and people in peace and
tranquillity, by the help of God; and to reform our said
kingdom in so far as it fiands in need thereof, for the
public good, and for the benefit of our fubjeas, whoin
times pall have been aggrieved and oppressed in divers
snanners by the malice of sundry persons, as we have
learned by common report, as well as by the information
of good men worthy of credit, and we having determined
in our council which we have called to meet in our good
city, &c. to give redress to the utmoll of our power, by
all ways and means possible, according to reason and
juffice, and willing that this (hould be done with so-
lemnity and deliberation by the advice of the prelates,
barons, and good towns of our realm, and particularly
of you, and that it lhould be tranfaded agreeably to the
will of God, and for the good of our people, therefore
we command," &c. Mably, Obfervat. ii. App. p. 396.
I thall allow these to be only the formal words of a public
and legal ilyle; but the ideas are singular, and much
more liberal and enlarged than one could espel in that
age. A popular monarch of Great Britain could hardly
addrels himself to parliament, in terms more favourable
to public liberty. There occurs in the hillory of France
a firiking inilance of the progress which the principles
of liberty had made in that kingdom, and of the influ-
ence which the deputies of towns had acquired in the
States General. During the calamities in which the war

with

volved France, the States General made a bold effort to
extend their own privileges and jurifdiaion. The regu-
lations established by the States, held A. D. e35., con-
cerning the mode of levying taxes, the admninillration of
which they velled not in the crown, but in commilfion-
ers appointed by the States i concerning the coining of
money; concerning the redress of the grievance of purvey-
ance; concerning the regular administration of jufice;
are much more feitable to the genius of a republican
government than that of a feudal monarchy. This curious
statute is publithed, Ordon. t. iii. p. 19. Such as have
not an opportunity to consult that large colleaion, will
ind an abridgment of it in Hifl. de France par Vallaret,
tom. ix. p. tItc. or in Hiioire de Boulainv. tom. ii. 2 13.
The Frenzh historians reprelenr the bilhop of Laon, and
Afarcel Provol' of the merchants of Paris, who had the
chief diredion of this assembly, as seditious tribunes,
violent, interelled, ambitious, and aiming at innovations
subversive of the conolitution and coveronment of their
country. That may have been the cafe, but these men
poilefed the confidence of the people; and the measures
which they proposed as the muol popular and acceptable,
as well as molt likely to increase their own influence,
plainly prove that the spirit of liberty had spread won-
derfully, and thct the ideas which then prevailed in
France concerning government were extremely liberal.
The States- General held nt Paris, A. D. 135 , confited
of about eight hundred members, and above one half
of there were deputies from towns. M. Secoutfe Pref.
a Ordon. tom. iii. p. 415. It appears that in all the
diffrrent assemblies of the Stares, held during the reign
of John, the reprerentatives of towns had great infst-
ence, and in every refped the third State was considered
as co-ordinate and equal to either of the other two.
Ibid. pafm. These spirited efforts were made in France
long br-tore the House of Commons in England acquired
any confderable influence- in the legillarure. As the
feudal system was carried to its utmost height in France
foouer than in England, so it began to decline foner in

A^3 - the

almoll all attempts to eltablijh or to extend the liberty
of the people have been fuccefsful; in France they have
proved unfortunate. What were the accidental events,
or political causes, which occationed this difference, it is
not my present business to enquire.

NOTE XX. SECT. I. p.44. 0UJ.

IN a former Note, No. VIII. I have enquired into

the condition of that part of the people which was em-
ployed in agriculture, and have represented the various
hardihips and calamities of their situation. When char-
ters of liberty or manumillion were granted to sech
persons, they contained four concessions corresponding
to the four capital grievances to which men in a slate
of servitude are fubjedl. a. The right of disposing of
their persons by sale or grant was relinquilhed. a. Power
was given to them of conveying their property and
effeas by will or any other legal deed. Or if they hap-
pened to die intestate, it was provided that their pro-
perty Ihould go to their lawful heirs in the fame
manner as the property of other persons. 3. The
services and taxes which they owed to their superior
or hlege lord, which were formerly arbitrary and imposed
at pleasure, are precisely ascertained. 4. They are
allowed the privilege of marrying according to their own
inclination; formerly they could contra& no marriage
without their lord's permillion, and with no person but
one of his slaves. All there particulars are found united
in the charter granted Habitatoribus Montis Britonis,
A. D. 5376. Hilt. de DauphinQ, tom. i. p. et. Many
-circumflances concurred with those which I have men-
tioned in the text in procuring them deliverance from
that wretched state. The gentle spirt of the Christian
religion ; the doarines which it teaches, concerning the
original equality of mankind; its tenets with refpe& to
the divine government, and the impartial eye with
which the Almighty regards men of every condition,
and admits them to a participation of his benefits, are

all

other intances, considerations of interest, and the max-
imsn of false policy, led men to a condua inconfiflent
with their principles. They were so sensible. however,
of this inconsistency, that to Cfet their fellow-chriflians at
liberty from servitude was deemed an aat of piety highly
meritorious and acceptable to Heaven. The humane
(pinit of the Christian religion hruggled long with the
maxims and manners of the world, and contributed more
than any other circumitance to introduce the praaice of
manumimon. When Pope Gregory the Great, who
flourilhed toward the end of the lixth century, granted
liberty to Come of his slaves, he gives this reason for it,
" Cum Redemptor nosier, totius conditor nature, ad
hoc propiriatus humanam carnem voluerit affumere,
ut divinitatis Cuse gratia, dirempto (quo tenebamur cap-
tivi) vinculo, priftinse nos reltitueret libertati Calu-
briter agitur, si homines, quos ab initio liberos natura
protulit, & jus genrium jugo Cubftituit Fervitutis, in eg,
qua nati fuerant, manumittentis beneficio, libertati
reddantur." Gregor. Magn. ap. PotgielT. lib. iv. c. i.
4 3. Several laws or charters founded on reasons Cimilar
to this, are produced by the fame author. Accordingly,
a great part of the charters of manumiflion, previous to
the reign of Louis X. are granted pro amore Dei, pro
remedio anime, & pro mercede animse. Murat. Antiq.
Ital. vol. i. p. 849, b'j. Du Cange, voc. Mansmifo.
The formality of manumiiffon was executed in a church,
as a religious Colemnity. The person to be Cet free was
led round the great altar with a torch in his hand, he
took hold of the horns of the altar, and there the Colemtt
words conferring liberty were pronounced. Du Cange,
lb. vol. iv. p. 467. I Ihall transcribe a part of a char-
ter of manumission granted A. D. aoS6; both as it con-
tains a full account of the ceremonies uied in this fotmof
manumimflon, and as a Cpecimnen of the imperfe& know-
ledge of the Latin tongue in that barbarous age. It is
granred by Willa the widow of Hugo the Duke and
Marquis, in favour of Clatiza one of her slaves. " Et
ideo nos Domine Wille indite cometiffe-libera et abfolvo

- te

remedio ltminarie anime bone memorie quondam fopra
feripso Domini Ugo gloriolimTfmo, uc quando illum
Dominus de hac vita miglare, jufferit, pars iniqua non
abeat poteldatem unlamn, fed anguelus Domini nodtri Jesu
Chriith colocare dignitur illum inter fanftos ddleaos fuos;
& beatus Petrus princips apodolorum, qui habed potef.
tatem omnium anirnmaum ligandi et abfolvendi, ut ipti
abfolvat anim e ejus de peccatis fui, & aperiad illum
jinua paradifi; pro eadem vero rationi, in mano mite
re Ilenzo prefbiter, ut vadat tecum in eccliea fandi
Bartholomai apofloli ; traad de tribus vicibus circa altare
iptlis eccldite cum cereo apprehenfum in manibus tuis
& nianibus ulus; deinde exile ambulate in via quadru-
bio. ubi quatu.r vie fe deviduntur. Statimq; pro re-
medio luminarie anime bone memorie quondam supra
fcripro Domini Ugo et ipfi prefbiter Benzo fecit omnia,
& drxir, Ecce quatuor vie, ire et ambulate in quacung;
partem tibi placurit, tam sic supra fcripra Cleriza, qua
siofque tui heredes, qui ab hac hora in antra nati, vel
procreati fuerit utriufq; fexus, &e. Murat. ib. p. 853*
Many other charters might have been feleced, which,
in point of grammar or style, are in no wife superior to
this. Manumillon was frequently granted on death-bed
or by latter-will. As the minds of men are at that
t me awakened to sentiments of humanity and piety,
tihere deeds proceeded from religious motives, and were
granted pro redemptione animee, in order to obtain accept-
ance with God. Du Cange ubi supra, p. 470. & voc.
Scrpsts, vol. vi. p. 45;. Another method of obtaining
liberty was by entering into holy orders, or taking the
vow in a nionaflery. This was permitted for lome
time; but so many slaves escaped, by this means, out of
the hands of their masters, that the pra~bice was after-
wards reftra ned, and at last prohibited by the laws of
almost all the nations of Europe. Murat.ib. p.84.2.
Coisformably to the fame principles, princes, on the
birth of a son, or upon any othler agreeable event, ap-
pointed a certain number of slaves to be enfranchised, as
a testimony of their gratitude to God for that benefit.

Marculfi

of manumition pubiifhed by Marculfus, and all of them
are founded on religious considerations, in order to pro-
cure the favour of God, or to obtain thle forgiveness of
their lins. jib. ii. c.2t. 23, 3>4. edit. Baluz. The
fame observation holds with refpea to the other col-
leflions of Formule annexed to Marculfus. As fen.i-
ments of religion induced some to grant liberty to their
fellow-chriflians who groaned under the yoke of fervi-
tude; so miffaken ideas concerning devotion led others
to relinquilh their liberty. When a person conceived an
extraordinary refpea for the faint who was the patron
of any church or monasfery in which he was accufomed
to attend religious worihip, it was not unusual among
men poffeffed with an excess of fuperflitiocs reverence,
to give up themselves and their poflerity to be the slaves
of the faint. Mabillon de Re Diplomat. lib. vi. 632-
The blati or voluntary slaves of churches or monalteries
were very numerous, and may be divided into three
different classes. The first were such as put themselves
and effeats under the proteaion of a particular church
or monaflery, binding themselves to defend its privi-
Peges and property against every aggressor. There were
prompted to do so not merely by devotion, but in order
to obtain that security which arose from the proteaion of
the church. They were rather vassals than slaves, and
sometimes persons of noble birth found it prudent to
secure the proteaion of the church in this manner.
Persons of the second class bound themselves to pay an
annual tax or quit-rent out of their estates to a church
or monastery. Betides this, they sometimes engaged
to perform certain services. They were called cenfuales.
Thie lafi class conifted of such as aaually renounced
their liberty, and became slaves in the flri& and proper
sense of the word. These were called einfi/eriaies, and
enslaved their bodies, as some of the charters bear, that
they might procure the liberty of their fouls. Potgi-
efferus de ltatu fervorum, lib. i. cap. i. g 6, 7. How
zealous the clergy were to encourage the opinions which
led to this pradice, will appear from a clause in a

charter

more frequent. Proofs of this occur in their early his-
torians. Greg. Turon. Hist. lib. vii. c. 2. lib. viii.
c. a8. lib. x. c. 27. and likewise in the codes of their
laws. It was not only allowable for the relations to
avenge the injuries of their family, but it was incum-
bent on them. Thus by the laws of the Angli and
Werini, ad quemcunque hereditas terra pervenerit, ad
illum veftis bellica id eft lorica & ultio proximi, et sola-
tio leudis, debet pertinere, tit. vi. § 5. ap. Lindenbr.
Leg. Saliq. tit. 63. Leg. Longob. lib. ii. tit. 14. t 0o.
-3. None but gentlemen, or persons of noble birth,
had the right of private war. All disputes between
slaves, villani, the inhabitants of towns, and freemen
of inferior condition, were decided in the courts of
justice. All disputes between gentlemen and persons of
inferior rank were terminated in the fame manner. The
right of private war supposed nobility of birth,. and
equality of rank in both the contending parties. Beau.
manoir Coflumes de Beauv. ch. lix. p. 300. Ordon.
des Rois de France, tom. ii. 195. § xvii. 508. § xv.
&c. The dignified ecclefiatics likewise claimed and
exercised the right of private war; but as it was not
altogether decent for them to profrecute quarrels in per.
son, ad'vocati or Aidames were chosen by the several mo.
nafteries and bifboprics. These were commonly men of
high rank and reputation, who became the proteaors of
the churches and convents by which they were elered;
espoused their quarrels, and fought their battles;, armis
omnia que erant ecclefii viriliter defendebant, et vigi.
lanter protegebant. Bruffel Usage des Fiefs, tom. i.
p. 544. Du Cange, voc. Advocatua. On many occa-
fions, the martial ideas to which eccleiiaftics of noble
birth were accustomed, made them forget the pacific
spirit of their profefion, and led them into the field iii
person at the head of their vassals, " fiamma, ferro,
cade, poffeliones ecclefiarum prelati defendebant."
Guido Abbas ap. Du Cange, ib. p. 1y9.-4. It was not
every injury or trespass that gave a gentleman a title to
make war upon his adversary. Atrocious ans of

violencb

legal and permitted motives for taking arms against the
authors of them. Such crimes as are now punilhed
capitally in civilized nations, at that time judified pri-
vate hostilities. Beauman. ch. lix. Du Cange Dissert.
xxix. fur Joinville, p. 331. But though the avenging
of injuries was the only motive that could legally au-
thorife a private war, yet disputes concerning civil pro-
perty often gave rife to hostilities, and were terminated
by the sword. Du Cange Dissert. p. 332.-5. All
persons present when any quarrel arose, or any adt of
violence was committed, were included in the war
which it occanoned for it was fuppoled to he impof-
ftble for any man in such a situation to remain neuter,
without taking fide with one or other of the contending
parties. Beauman. p. 300.-6. All the kindred of the
two principals in the war were included in it, and
obliged to espouse the quarrel of the chieftain with
whom they were connedled, Du Cange, ib. 33a. This
was founded on the maxim of the ancient Germans,
" fufcipere tam inimicitias feu patris, feu propinqui,
quam amicitias, neceffe eit;" a maxim natural to all
rude nations, among which the form of society, and
political union, firengthen such a sentiment. This obli-
gation was enforced by legal authority. If a person
refused to take part in the quarrel of his kinsman, and
to aid him against his adversary, he was deemed to have
renounced all the rights and privileges of kindredfhip,
and became incapable of succeeding to any of his rela-
tions, or of deriving any benefit from any civil right or
property belonging to them. Du Cange Dissert. p. 333.
The method of ascertaining the degree of affinity which
obliged a person to take part in the quarrel of a kin(-
man, was curious. While the church prohibited the
marriage of persons within the feveith degree of affini-
ty, the vengeance of private war extended as far as this
absurd prohibition, and all who had such a remote con.
selion with any of the principals, were involved in the
calamities of war. But when the church relaxed some-
what of its rigour, and did not extend its prohibition

vol.. 1. 1E of

fame reftritcion took place in the condudi of private
war. Beauman. 3 DuCange Dissert. 353--7. A
private war could not be carried on between two full
brothers, becaule both have the fame common kindred,
and consequently neither had any persons bound to
fiand by him against the other in the contef; but two
brothers of the half blood might wage war, becaule each
of them has a diflina kndred. Beaumsan. p. 299.-
8. The vassals of each principal in any private war were
involved in the contelt, becaure by the feudal maxims
they were bound to take arms in defence of the chieftain
of whom they held, and to amit him in every quarrel.
As soon, therefore, as feudal tenures were insrodusacd,
and this artificial conneaion was eftablihed between
vafils and the baren of whom they held, valials came
to be considered as in the fame state with relations.
Beauman. to .-g. Private wars were very trequent
for several centuries. Nothing contributed more to in-
creafte those disorders in government, or to encourage
foch ferocity of manners as reduced the nations of Eu-
rope to that wretched fiate which dillinguirhed the pe-
riod of hiflory which I am reviewing. Nothing was
ftch an obhtacle to the introdueion of a regutar atmini-
ftracion of jutice. Nothing could more effeftually dif-
courage indufiry, or retard the progress and cultivation
of the arts of peace. Private wars were carried on with
all the deftruflive rage which is to be dreaded from
violent resentment when armed with force, and autho-
rifed by law. It appears from the flatutes prohibiting
or retiraining the exercise of private hofhilities, that the
invafon of the most barbarous enemy could not be
more defoliting to a country, or more fatal to its in-
habitants, thtan those intestine wars. Ordon. tom. i.
p o7r. tom.ii. p. ior.40S. so7, &c. The contem-
porary hiflorians deferibe the excesses committed in
prosecution of there quarrels in such terms as excite
aflonifhment and horror. I ltall mention only one
passage from the h;ltory of the Holy.War, by Guibert
Abbot of Nogent; " Erat eo tempore maximis ad in-

vicem

barto; crebra uoiq; larocinia, viarum obfelio audie-
baniur passim, immo fishant incendia infinira ; nullis
preter sola & indcomita cupid.iase exiflenribus caufrs ex-
truebantur prelia & ut brevi totum claudam, quicquid
obutibus cepidorum fubjacebat, nurquAm attrendendo
cujus etiet, prazdrs patebat." Geita Dci per Francos,
vol. i. p. 4, 7.

Having thus collefted the chief regu'arions which

custom had etablilhed concerning he righ' and cxrcife
of privare war, I ihall enumerate, in chronoiogical
crder, the various expedients employed to aboluih or
refirain this tatal cuirom. . The si£. expedient em-
ployed by the civil magistrate, in order to set some
bounds to the violence of private revenge, was the rix-
ing by law the fine or compelition to be paid for each
different crime. The injuied person was originally the
sole judge concerning the nature of the wrong whirlh
se had fuffered, the degree of vengeance wvhich he
Ihould exaft, as well as the species of atonement or re-
paration with which he might reft satisfied. Relent-
ment became of courre as implacable as it was fierce.
It was often a point of honour not to forgive, nor to
be reconciled. This made it necessary to fix those com-
polirions which make so great a figure in the laws of
barbarous natinnr. The nature of crimes and offences
was elrimared by the n;agitrate, and the suns due to
the person offended was alcertained with a minute and
often a whimsical accuracy. Rotharis, the legillator of
the Lombards, vho teigned about the middle of trle
seventh century, dilcovet s his intention both in afcer-
raining the compolision to be paid by the offender, and
in increasing its value j it is, says he, that tue enmity
may be extingnuihed, the prolecution may cease, and
peace may be rellored. Leg. Longob. hb. i. tit. 7.

tC.-2. About the brginning of the ninth cenury,

Chirlemagne htruck at tihe root of the evil, and enid-
ed, " 'hat when any person had been guilty of a
crime, or had committed az outrage, he Ihould imme-
4iately fibmit to the penance which the church im-

a a a posed,

law preferibed ; and if the injured person or his kindred
lhould refute to accept of this, and presume to avenge
themselves by force of arms, their lands and properties
Ihould be forfeited." Capitul. A. D. 80s, edit. Baluz.
vol. i. 37 .--3. But in this, as well asinother regulations,
the genius of Charlemagne advanced before the (pirit of
his age. The ideas of his contemporaries concerning
regular government were too imperfe&t, and their man-
ners too fierce to hubmit to this law. Private wars,
with all the calamities which they occaftoned, became
more frequent than ever after the death of that great
monarch. His successors were unable to restrain them.
The church found it necessary to interpose. The most
early of these interpofitions now extant, is towards the
end of the tenth century. In the year 990, several bi-
ihops in the routh of France assembled, and publilhed
various regulations, in order to set some bounds to the
violence and frequency of private wars; if any person
within their diocefes Thould venture to transgress, they
ordained that he ihould be excluded from all Christian
privileges during his life, and be denied Christian burial
after his death. Du Mont Corps Diplomatique, tom. i.
P. 41. These, however, were only partial remedies
and therefore a council was held at Limoges, A. D. 994*
The bodies of the faints, according to the custom of those
ages, were carried thither; and by there (acred relics
men were exhorted to lay down their arms, to extin-
guilh their animofities, and to (wear that they would
not for the future violate the public peace by their pri-
vate hostilities. Bouquet Recueil des Hiftor. vol. x.
p. 49. 147. Several other councils issued decrees to the
fame effe6a. Du Cange Dissert. 343.-4. But the au-
thority of councils, how venerable soever in those ages,
was not fulhcient to abolith a custom which flattered the
pride of the nobles, and gratiflied their favourite pamons.
The evil grew so intolerable, that it became neceflary
to employ supernatural means for fupprefmng it. A
bilhop of Aquitaine, A.D. 1032, pretended that an
angel had appeared to him, and brought him a writing

from

ties, and to be reconciled to each other. It was during
a season of public calamity that he published this revela-
tion. The minds ofmen were difpored to receive pious
imprelfions, and willing to perfo;m any thing in order to
avert the wrath of heaven. A general peace and ceffa-
tion from hofhliities took place, and continuod for seven
years and a refoluiion was formed, that no man Ihould
in times to come attack or moleli his adversaries during
the season set apart for celebratng the great festivals of
the church, or from the evening of Thursday in each
week, to the nmorning of Monday in the week ensuing,
the intervening days being considered as particularly holy,
our Lo!d's Pallion having happened on one of these days,
and his Refurreefion on another. A change in the dif-
politions of men so sudden, and which produced a refo-
iprion so uuexpeaed, was conlidered as miraculous and
the refoite from hoitiities which followed upon it,
was psled The Truce .f Gnd. Glabar. Rodulphos
Hiftor. iib. v. ap. Bouquer, vol. x. p. 59. This,
,from being a regulation or concert in one kingdom,
become a general law in Christendom, was confirmed
by the authority of several Popes, and the violatcrs were
fubjederd to the penolty of excommunication. Corpus
Juir. Canon. Decretal. Isb.l. tie. 34. c. i. Du Cange
,Gloifar. voc. Treaga. An ai of the council of Toulojes
in Rou hillon, A. D. 1Q41, containing all the flipulations
required by the triuce of God, is publiihed by Dom
tie Vic & Dom Vaileste, Hid. de Languedoc tom. ii.
Preuves, p. oc6. A ceifarion from hostilities during three
complete days in every week, allowed such a confider-
able space for the passions of the antagonitis to cool,
and for the people to enjoy a respite from the calamities
of war, as well as to take measures for iheir own fecu-
rity, that, if this truce of God had been exafly obferv-
ed, it must have gone far towards putting an end to pri-
vate wars. This, however, seems not to have been
the cafe the nobles, disregarding the truce, prosecuted
their quarrels without interruption as formerly. Qua
ssimirum Lempeftate, tniveifx provincite adeo devafla-

B B 3 tionis

pro obfervatione divine pacis, profeffa facramenta cuito-
diantur. Abbas Ufpergenrfs, apud Datt. de pace impe-
rii publica, p. a3. No. 35. The violent spirit of the
nobility could not be reflrained by any engagements.
The complaints of this were frequent ; and bifhlops, in
order to compel them to renew their vows and promiles
of cealing from their private wars, were obliged to en-
join their clergy to suspend the performance of divine
service and the exercise of any religious funtion within
the parilhes of such as were refraaory and obstinate.
lift. de Langued. par D D. de Vic & Vaifeete, tom. ii.
Preuves, p. i8.--5. The people, eager to obtain relief
from their fufferings, called in a second time revelation to
their aid.. Towards the end of the twelfth century, a
carpenter in Guienne gave out, that Jesus Christ, to.
gether with the blessed Virgin, had appeared to him,
and having commanded him to exhortmankind to peace,
had given him, as a proof of his mission, an image of
the Virgin holding her son in her arms, with this in-
scription, Lamb of God who take/l aay the lins of the .world,
gi've ks peace. This low fanatic addressed himself to an
ignorant age, prone to credit what was marvellous.
He was received as an inspired metfenger of God. Many
prelates and barons assembled at Puy, and took an oath,
not only to make peace with all their enemies, but to
attack such as refused to lay down their arms, and to
be reconciled to their enemies. They formed an alfoci-
ation for this purpose, and aftumed tbe honourable name
of the Brotherhood of God. Robertus de Monte Michaele,
ap. M. de Lauriere Pref. tom. i. Ordon. p. 29. But
the influence of this fuperfitiious terror or devotion was
not of long continuance.-6. The civil magistrate was
obliged to exert his authority in order to check a custom
which threatened the dissolution of government. Philip
Auguflus, as some imagine, or St. Louis, as is more
probable, publilhed an ordonance, A. D. 1245, prohi-
biting any person to commence hoflilities against the
friends and vassals of his adversary, untilforty days after
the commillion of the crime or offence which gave rife

to

tranfgrels this fiatute, he should be considered as guilty
of a breach of the public peace, and be tried and punish.
ed by the judge ordinary as a traitor. Ordon, tom. i.
p. 56. This was called the Royal Truce, and afforded
time for the violence of resentment to fubtide, as well
as leisure for the good offices of Cuch as were willing to
compose the difference. The happy effeas of this
regulation Ceem to have been considerable, if we may
judge from the Colicitude of succeeding monarchs to
enforce it.-7. In order to reltrain the exercise of private
war Col1 farther, Philip the Fair, towards the close of
the fame century, A. D. J296, publithed an or-
donance commanding all private hol'ilities to cease,
while he was engaged in war againfi the enemies of the
itate. Ordon. tom. i. p. 378. 390. This regulation,
which Ceems to be almost. eirential to the exillence and
preservation of society, was often renewed by hi3 Cue-
ceffors, and being enforced by the regal authority, proved
a conliderable check to the deftrudive contests of the
nobles. Both these regulations, introduced firil in France,
were adopted by the other nations of Europe.-8. The
evil, however, was Co inveterate, that it did not yield to
all these remedies. No Coon was public peace eftablthed
in any kingdom, than the barons renewed their private
hostilities. They not only itruggled to maintain this
pernicious right, but to secure the exercise of it without
any retiraint. Upon the death of Philip the Fair, the
nobles of different provinces in France formed associations,
and presented remonfitrances to his successor, demanding
the repeal of several laws, by which he had abridged the
privileges of their order. Among thele, the right of
private war is always mentioned as one of the mofe va-
iuable and they claim that the reltraint imposed by the
truce of God, the royal truce, as well as that arising
from the ordonance of the year Ia96, should be taken
off. In Come instances, the two Cons of Philip who
mounted the throne Cucceffively, eluded their demands,
in others, they were obliged to make concellions.
Ordon. tom.1 i. p. 55!. 557. 56i. 573. The ordonances

to

fertthem, but they are extremely curious, and may be
peculiarly infirudlive to an Englitl reader, as they throw.
considerable light on that period of Englilh hfldory, in
which the attempts to circumscribe the regal prerogative
were carried on, not by the people ftruggihng for liberty,
but by the nobles contending for power. It is not ne,
celfary to produce any evidence of the continuance and
frequency of private wars under the fecceffors of Philip
the Fair.-9. A praftice somewhat itmilar to the royal
truce was introduced, in order to itrengtlten and extend
it. Bonds of assurance, or mutual security, were de-
ananded from the parties at variance, by which they
obliged tihemfelves to abilain from all hortilities, eithet
during a time mentioned in the bond, or for evert and
became fubjef to heavy penalties, if they violated this
obligation. These bonds were sometimes granted stolun-
tarily, but more frequently exaded by the authority of
the civil magifirate. Upzn a petition from the parry
who felt himself weakelf, the magilirate furnmoned his
adversary to appear in court, and obhied him to gtve a
bond of allurance. If, afterthat, he committed any far-
ther holiilities, he became fubjea to ail the penalties of
treason. This refilatnc on private war was known in the
age of St. Louis. Ellablilemens, liv. i. c. 8. It was
frequent in Bretagne; and what is very rentarkable, such
bonds of assurance were given mutually between vafalas
and the lord of whom they held. Oliver de Cliffon grants
one to the Duke of Bretagne, his lovereign. Mortce
Itlem. pour fervir de preuves t l'ifl. de Bret. tom, i.
p. 846. ii. p. 3 7. Many examples of bonds of atffrance
in other provinces of France are collleded by BruiTel,
tom. ii. p. 846. The nobles of Burgundy remonlirated
againfi this pradice, and obtained exemption from it as
an encroachment on the privileges of their order. Or-
don. tom. i. P. 558. This mode of security was iBri in-
troduced in cities, and the good effedts of it having been
felt there, was extended to the nobles. See Note XVI,
-to. The calamities occationed by private wars became
at fume times so intolerable, that tsie nobles entered into

voluntary

matters in dispute, whether concerning civil property,
or points of honour, to the determination of the majo-
rity of the associates. Morice Mem. pour fervir de
preuves h 'Hift. de Bret. tom. ii. p. 728.-rl. But all
these expedients proving ineffeaual, Charles VI. A. D.
5413, issued an ordonance expressly prohibiting private
wars on any pretext whatsoever, with power to the
judge ordinary to compel all persons to comply with
this injundion, and to punilh fach as should prove re-
fraaory or disobedient, by imprifonittg their persons,
seizing their goods, and appointing the officers of juffice,
1Mangeurs & Ga/3eurs, to live at free quarters on their es-
tate. If those who were disobedient to this edi& could
not be personally arrefced, he appointed their friends and
vassals to be seized, and detained until they gave surety
for keeping the peace; and he abolilhed all laws, cul'oms,
or privileges which might be pleaded in opposition
to this ordonance. Ordon. tom. x. p. 138. How flow
is the progrels ofreafon and of civdlorderl Regulations
which to us appearfo equitable, obvious, and iimple, re-
quired the efforts of civil and eccleftaflical authority,
during several centuries, to introduce and ellablilh
them. Even poaterior to this period, Louis XI. was
obliged to abolilh private wars in Dauphind, by a par-
ticularedi&, A. D. I45v Du Cange Dissert. p. 348.

This note would twell to a disproportionate bulk, if

I Ihould attempt to inquire with the fame minute atten-
tion into the progrefa of this pernicious custom in tha
other countries of Europe. In England, the ideas of
the Saxons concerning personal revenge, the right of
private wars, and the composition due to thle party of-
fended, seem to have been much the fame with thoft
which prevailed on the Continent. The law of Ina de
vindicantibus, in the eighth century, Lamb. p. 3.; thofh
of Edmund in the tenth century, de bomnicidio, Lamb. p.
l;2, &de inimicitiis, p. 76.; and those of Edward the Con-
feffor, in the eleventh century, de temporiius & diebus pa-
cis, or Treuga Dei, Lamb. p. aa6. are perfealy similar
to the erdonanvcv of the French kings their contempora-

ries.

explicit than those of the French monarchs, and, by
Several previlions in them, discover that a more perse&
police was eitabltlhed in England at that period. Lam-
bard, p. I28. fol. verf. Even after the conquelt, 1ri-
vate wars, and the regulations for preventing them,
were not altogether unknown, as appears from Madox
Formulare Anglicanum, NV CXLV. and from the ex-
traas from Domesday Book, publilhed by Gale Scrip.
tores Hill. Britan. p. 7e9. 777. The well known
clause in the form of an English indimrnent, which, as
an aggravation of the criminal's guilt, mentions his hav-
ing allaulted a person, who was in the pe'ce of God
and of the King, seems to be borrowed from the Treaga.
or l'ax Dei, and the Pax Regis, which I have explained.
J3ut after the conquelt, the mention of prirate wars.
among the nobility occurs more rarely in the Englilh
history, than in that of any other European nationt, and
mo laws concerning them ate to be found in thel body of
their fiatutes, Such a change in their own manners,
and such a variation from those of their neighbours, is
remarkable. Is it to be aferibed to the extraordinary
power that William the Norman acquired by right of
conqcteft, and eranfmiteed to his fucceliOra, which ren-
dered the execution of juelice more vigorous and de¶
chfive, and the jurifdiaion of the King's court more ex-
tenlive than under the Monarchs on the Continent? Or,
was it owing to the feetlement of the Norrans in Eng-
land, who having never adopted the pradlice of pri ate
war in their own country, aholibhed it in the kingdom
which they conquered? It is alfersed in an ordonance
of John king of France, that in all times pal, perloes
of every tank in Normandy have been prohihited to
wage private war, and the praglice leas been dcemed
unlawful. Ordon. tom. ii. p. 407. If this faa were
ce: tam, it would go far towarda explaining the peculi-
arity whiich I have mentioncd. But as there are some
Enghih agis of Parhlameno, which, according to the re-
mnrkof the learned author of the Ohfi'aoeana on the Starsaes,
eiifly the more anceenr, recite falftehoods, it may be added,

that

that this is not peculiar tothe laws of that country. Not-
withitanding the positive aifertion contained in this public
law of France, there is good reason for considering it as
a tiatute which recites a falfhood. This, however, is
not the place for difcuifing that point. It is an inquiry
not unworthy the curiosity of an English antiquary.

In Cafile, the pernicious praatice of private war

prevailed, and was authorized by the cultorns and law of
the kingdom. Leges Tauri, tit. 76. corn commentario
An on. Gomezii, p. gt. As the Castilian nobles were
no less tuibulent than powerful, their quarrels and hoE.
tilities involved their country in many calamities. In-
numerable proofs of this occur in Mariana. In Aragon,
the right of private revenge was likewise authorised by
law; exercised in its full extent, and accompanied with
the fame unhappy consequences. Hieron. Blanca Com-
ment, de Rebus Arag. ala. Schotti Hifpan, illullrat. vol.
iii. p. 733. Lex Jacohi I. A D. J247. Fueros & Oh-
fervancias del Reyno de Aragon, lib. ix. p. 182. Se-
veral confederacies between the kings of Aragon and
their nobles, for the restoring of peace, founded on the
truce of God, are 3:11 extant. Petr. de Marca, Marca
ftve Limes Hispanic. APp. 1303. 1388. 5428. As
early as the year 1165, we find a combination of the
king and court of Aragon, in order to abolith the right
of private war, and to puniih these who prefumied
to claim that privilege. Anales de Aragon por.
Zurita, vol. i. p. 73. Bat the evil was so inveterate,
that as late as A. D. 3239, Charles V. was obliged to
publish a law enforcing all former regulations tending
to suppress this praaice. Fueros etObfervanc. lib. ix.
183. h.

The Lombards, and other northern nations who set-

tied in Italy, introduced the fame maxims concerning
the right of revenge into that country, and these were
followed by the faine effefts. As the progress of the
evil was perfedlly similar to what happened in France,
the expedients employed to check its career, or to rx.
tirpate it finally, resembled those which I have enunce-
rated. Mursi. Ant. Ital. vol. ii. p. 306, &c.

)n

by the right of private war were greater and more
intolerable than in any other country of Europe. The
Imtperial authority was so much Ihaken and enfeebled
bg the violence of the civil wars excited by the con-
tests between the popes and the empercrs of the Fran-
conian and Suabian lines, that not only the nobility
but the cities acquired aimoft independent power, and
Lcorned all subordination and obedience to the laws,
The frequency of thefefaid&e, or private wars, is often
mentioned in the German Annals, and the fatal effeas
of them are mofl pathetically deferibed, Datt, de Pace
Imper. pub. lib. i. cap. v. n0 30. & pamm. The Ger-
mans early adopted the Treuga Dei, which was firif
eieabtifhed in France. This, however, proved but a
temporary and ineffeclual remedy. The disorders mul-
tipiied so fail, and grew to be To enormous, that they
threatened the diffolurion of society, and compelled the
Germans to have recourse to the only remedy of the evil,
viz. an absolute prohibition of private wars. The em-
peror William published his edidt to this purpose, A. D.
1255, an hundred and sixty years previous to the ordo-
narce of Charles VI. in France. Datt, lib. i. cap. 4.
so zo. But neither he nor his successors had authority
to secure the observance of it. This gave rife to a prac-
tice in Germany, which conveys to us a firiking idea
both of the intolerable calamities occaftoned by private
wars, and of the feebleness of government during the
twelfth and thirteenth centuries, The cities and nobles
entered into alliances and associations, by which they
bound themselves to maintain the public peace, and to
nmake war on such as should violate it. This was the origin
of the league of the Rhine, of Suabia, and of many smaller
confederacies diftinguilbed by various names. The rife,
progress, and beneficial effefls of there aflociations are
traced by Datt, with great accuracy. Whatever degree
of public peace or of regular adminiliration was preserved
in the empile from the beginning of the twelfth century
to the close of the fifteenth, Germany owes to these
leagues. During that period, political order, refpedt

a for

jultice, made considerable progress in Germany. But
the final and perpetual abolition of the right of private
war was not accomplithed until A. D. I495 The Im-
perial authority was by that time more firmly eltabliih-
ed, the ideas of men with refpedt to government and
subordination were become more just. That barbarous
and pernicious privilege of waging private war, which
the nobles had so long poffelfed, was declared to be in-.
compatible with the happiness and existence of society.
In order to terminate any differences which might arise
among the various members of the Germanic body, the
Imperial chamber was inflituted with supreme jurifdic-
tion, to judge without appeal in every queltion brought
before it. That court has fublifted lince that period,
forming a very refpetable tribunal, of eltential im-
portance in the German constitution. Datt, lib. iii. iv. v,
Pfeffel Abrege de l'I-liftoire. duDroit, &c. p. 556·

NOTE XXII. SECT.I. p. 6I. [Y].

IT would be tedious and of little use to enumerate

the various modes of appealing to the justice of God,
which superstition introduced during the ages of igno-
rance. I ihall mention only'one, because we have an
account of it in a placitum or trial in the presence of
Charlemagne, from which we may learn the imperfe&
manner in which juflice was administered even during
his reign. In the year 775, a contest arole between
the bilhop of Paris and the abbot of St. Denys, concern-
ing the property of a small abbey, Each of them ex-
hibited deeds and records, in order to prove the right
to be in them. Instead of trying the authenticity, or
considering the import of there, the point was referred
to the judicium crucis. Each produced a person, who,
during the celebration of mass: flood before the cross
with his arms expanded ; and he, whole representative
firlt became weary, and altered his posture, loft the
gaufe. The person employed by the bilhop on this
occalon had less llrength orlefs spirit than his adversary,

VOL. I. CC and

Mabillco de Re Diplcmat. lib. vi. p. 498. If a prince
so enlightened as Charlemaerne countenanced such an ab-
lurd mode of deciton, it is no wonder that other mo-
narchs Ihould tolerate it so long. M. de Monmdquieu
has treated of the trial by judicial combat at considerable
length. The two talents which diftinguiished that ilutf-
trious author, indufiry in tracing all the circumfiances of
antient and obscure inflitutions, and sagacity in pene-
trating into the causes and principles which contributed
to eftabiifh them, are equally confpicudus in his ob.
fervations on this fobjea. To these I refer the reader,
as they contain most of the princip!rs by which I have
endeavoured to explain this pradlice. De l'Efprit des
Loix, lib. xxviii, It seems to be probable from the
remarks of M. de Montesquieu, as well as from the
fads produced by Muratori, tom. iii. Dissert. axxviii.
that appeals to the juflice of God by the experiments
with fire and water, &c. were frequent among the
people who fettled in the diflerent provinces of the
Roman empire, before they had recourse to the jedicial
combat; and yet the judicial combat seems to have been
the most ancient mode of terminating any controversy
among the barbarous natians in their original fettle-
Inents. This is evident from Veileius Paterculus,
lib. ii. e. a S. who informs us, that all qunflions which
were decided among the Romans by legal trial, were
terminated among the Germans by arms. The fame
thing appears in the ancient laws and cufloms of the
Swedes, quoted by Jo. 0. Stiernhock de jure Sueonum
& Gothorum vetuifo, 4to, Holmie s68a, hib. i. c. 7.
It is probable that when the various tribes which in-
vaded the empire were converted to Chrittianity, their
ancient cuflom of allowing judicial combats appeared
so glaringly repugnant to the precepts of religion, that,
for fume time, it was aboliibed, and by degrees, several
circumfiances which I have mentioned led them to re-
fume it.

It seems likewise to be probable from a law quoted

by Stiebnhook in the treatise which I have mentioned,

that

order to determine points refpe~ting the personal cha-
rader or reputation of individuals, and was afterwards
extended not only to criminal cafes, but to quefiions
concerning property. The words of the law are, " if
any man Ihall fay to another these reproschful words,
' -you are not a man equal to other men," or,
" you have not the heart of a man," anti the other
1hall reply, " I am a man as good as you," let them
meet on the highway. If he who firfit gave iffence
appear, and the person of~nded ahfent himfelif, let
the latter be deemed a worse man even than he was
called; let him not be admitted to give evidence in
judgment either for man or woman, and let bin not
have the privilege of making a teflameot. If he who
gave the odfence be absent, and only the tperfon o sinded
appear, let him call upon the other thrice with a loud
voice, and make a mark upon the earth, and then let
him who absented himself be deemed infamous, because
he uttered words which he duri! not support. If both
fhasl appear properly armed, and the person offended (ball
fall in the combat, let a half compensation be paid for his
death. But if the person who gave the offence Ihall
fall, let it be imputed to his own raihnefa. The petu-
lance of his tongue hath been fatal to hlim. Let him lie
in the field without any campenfation being demanded
for lji death." Lex Uplandica, ap. Stiern. p. 76.
Martial people were extremely delicate with refpe&t to
every thing that affeated their reputation as soldiers.
By the laws of the Salians, if any man called another a
hare, or acculed him of having left his shield in the field
es battle, he was ordained to pay a large fine. Leg.
Sal. tit. xxxii. g 4. 6. By the law of the Lombards, if
any one called anotlser arra, i. e. a good for nothinE
fellaw, he might immediately challenge him to combat5
Leg. Longob. lib. i. tit. v. § I. By the law of the Sa.
lians, if one called another cenitus, a term of reproach
equivalent to arga, he was bound to pay a very high
fine. TiC. xxxii. §r. Paulus Diaconus relates the
violent imprelion which this reproachful expression

cc2 made

with which it was attended. De Geftis Longobard,
lib. vi. c. s4. Thus the ideas concerning the point of
honour, which we are apt to confider as a modern re-
finement, as well as the prad'ice of duelling, to which
it gave rife, are derived from the notions of our an-
ceftors, while in a slate of society very little improved.

As M. de Montefquieu's view of this fubje& did not

lead him to confider every circumltance relative to judi-
cial combats, I shall mention some particular faas ne-
ceffary for the illufiration of what I have said with refpe&
to them. A remarkable inltance occurs of the decilion
of an abflraa point of law by combat. A question arose
in the tenth century concerning the rigbt of representation,
which was not then fixed, though now universally efta-
blithed in every part of Europe. " It was a matter of
doubt and dispute (faith the hlitorian), whether the sons
of a son ought to be reckoned among the children of the
family, apd succeed equally with their uncles, if their
father happened to die while their grandfather was alive.
An assembly was called to deliberate on this point, and
it was the general opinion that it ought to be remitted
to the examination and decifton of judges. But the em-
peror following a better course, and deirous of dealing
honourably with his people and nobles, appointed the
natter to be decided by battle between two cham-
pions, He who appeared in behalf of the right of
children to represent their deceased father was viaorious i
and it was efltablifhed, by a perpetual decree, that they
1hould hereafter share in the inheritance together with
their uncles " Wittikindus Corbienfis, lib. Annal. ap.
yVL. de lauriere Pref. Ordon. vol. i. p. xxxiii. If we
can suppose the caprice of folly to lead men to any
alion more extravagant than this of fettling a point in
law by combat, it muit be that of referring the truth or
falsehood of a religious opinion to be decided in the fame
manner. To the disgrace of human reason, it has been
capable even of this extravagance. A question was
agitated in Spain in the eleventh century, whether the
Mufarabiq liturgy and ritual which had been ufgd i'q

the

Rome, which diffared in many particulars from the
other, contained the form of worfarip molt acceptable to
the Deity. The Spaniards cntendcd zealoully for the
ritual of their anceitors, The popes urged them to
receive that to which they had given their infallible
fan&ion. A violent contest arcfe, The nobles proposed
to decide the controversy by the sword. The king ap-
proved of this method of decilion. Two knights in
complete armour enzeted the lifts. John Ruys de Ma-
tanca, the champion of the Mufarabic liturgy, was
viDorious. But the queen and archbilhop of Toledo,
who favoured the other form, inmued on having the
matter submitted to another trial, and had interest
enough to prevarl in a requeff, inconfiltent with the laws
of combat, which being confdered as an appeal to
God, the decifron ought to have been acquicfed in as
final. A great fire was kindled. A co y of each liturgy
was calt into the flames. It was agreed that the book
which flood thia-proof, and remained untouched, Ihould
be received in all the churches of Spain. The Mu-
farabic liturgy triumphed iikewife in this trial, and, if
we may believe Roderigo de Toledo, remainpd unhurt
by the fire, when the other was reduced to athes. The
queen and archbishop had power or art fulEcient to
elude this decilion also, and tihe ore of the Mufarabic
form of devotion was permitted only in certain churches.
A determination no les extraordinary than the whole
tranfaaion. Roger de Toledo, .quoted by P. Orleans,
Hill. de Revol. d'Efpagne, tom. i. p. 4r7. Mariana,
ib. i. c. t8. vol. i. p. 78.-A remarkable proof of
the general use of trial by combat, and of the pre-
diledion for that mode of decihion, occurs in tlhe laws of
the Lombards. It was a cullom in the middle ages,
that any person might fisgnify publicly the law to which
he chole to be fubjeted and by the preferiptions of
that law he was obliged to regulate his tranfaflions,
without being bound to comply with any praaice au-
thorized by other codes of law. Persons who had sub-
jefled themselves to the Roman law, and adhered to the
ancient jurifprutlnee, as far as any knowledge of it was

C C 3 retained

paying any regard to the forms of proceedings eftabli(hed
by the laws of the Burgundians, Lombards, and other
barbarous people, But tle emperor Otho, in dire& con-
tradi&ion to this received maxim, ordained, " That all
persons, under whatever law they lived, even although
it were the Roman law, should be bound to conform to
the edids concerning the trial by combat." Leg. Lon-
gob. Jib. ii. tit. 55. 5 38. While the trial by judicial
combat subsisted, proof by charters, contraCs, or other
deeds, became ineffelusl; and even this species of
written evidence, calculated, to render the proceedings
of courts certain and decilive, was eluded. When a
charter or other infitrument was produced by one of the
parties, his opponent might challenge it, affirm that it
was false and forged, and offer to prove this by com-
bat. Leg. Longob. ib. 34. It is trug, that among
the reasons enumerated by Beaumanoir, on acqunt of
which judges might refuse to permit a trial by combat,
one is, " If the point in contest can be clearly proved
or ascertained by other evidence." Couft. de Beauv.
Eh. 63. P. 323. Bpt that regulation removed the evil
only a single itep. For the party who fuipeded that a
witners was about to depose in a manner unfavourable
to his cause, might accuse him of being suborned, give
him the lie, and challenge him to combat ; if the wit-
ness was vanquished in battle, no other evidence could
be admitted, and the party by whom he was summoned
to appear loft his caufg. Leg. Baivar. tit. t6. g i. Leg.
Burguod. tit. .5 Beauman. ch.6. P. 3IS. The
reason given for obliging a witners to accept of a defi-
ance, and to defend himself by combat, is remarkable,
and contains the fame idea which is itill the foundation
of what is callgd the point of honour; " for it is just,
that if any one affirms that he perfealy knows the
truth of any thing, and offers to give 9ath upon it, that
he should not helitate to maintain the veracity of his
filirmation in combat." Leg. Burgund. tit. 45.

That the trial by judicial combat was efiablilhed in

every country of Europe, is a fa& well known, and
requires no proof. That lhis mode of decifcon was

frgquent,

frequent, appears not only from the codes of ancient
laws which ehtablithed it, but from the earliest writers
concerning the pradice of law in the different nations
of Europe. They treat of this cuflom at great length;
they enumerate the regulations concerning it with mi-
nute accuracy and explain them with much solicitude.
It made a capital and extensive article in jurisprudence.
There is not any one fubje& in their fyfiem of law,
which Beaumanoir, Defontaines, or the compilers of the
Aflifes de Jerusalem, seem to have conlidered as of
greater importance; and none upon which they have
bestowed so much attention. The fame observation will
hold with refpea to the early authors of other nations.
It appears from Madox, that trials of this kind were
so frequent in England, that fines, paid on these occa-
fions, made no inconsiderable branch of the king's re-
venue. Hil', of the Excheq. vol. i. p. 349. A very
curious account of a judicial combat between Mefire
Robert de Beaumanoir, and Meflre Pierre Tournemine,
in presence of the Duke of Bretagne, A.D. Is83. is
publilhed by Morice, Mem.pour fervir dep reuves il Hifl.
de Bretagne, tom. ii. p. 498. All the formalities oh-
(erved in fucl extraordinary proceedings are there de-
fcribed more minutely than in any ancient monument
which I have had an opportunity of considering. Toor-
nemine was accofed by Beaumanoir of having murdered
his brother. The former was vanquished, but was saved
from being hanged upon the fpqt, by the generous in-
terceiron of his antagonist. A good account of the
origin of the laws concerning judicial combat is pub-
lilhed in the history of Pavia, by Bernardo Sacci, lib, ix.
c. 8. in Grav. Thef. Antiquit. Ital. vol. iii. 743.

This mode of trial was To acceptable, that eccleliaf-

tics, notwithltanding the prohibitions of the church,
were constrained not only to connive at the praaice,
but to authorize it. A remarkable instance of this is
produced by Parquier Recherches, lib. iv. ch. i. p. 35`.
The abbot Wittikindus, whose words I have produced
in this note, considered the determination of a point in
law by combat as the best and most lonourable mode

fought in the presence of the emperor. The azchbiihop
Alrlehert advised him to terminate a contest which had
trifen between two noblemen of his court, by this mode
of decilion. The vanquified combatant, though a per-
son of high rank, was beheaded on the spot. Chronic.
Ditmari Epifc. Merlb. chee Bouquet Recueil des Hilt.
tom. x. p. tsr. Questions concerning the property of
churches and monasteries were decided by combat. In the
year 961, a controversy concerning the church of St.
Medard, whether it belonged to the abbey of Beaulieu
or not, was terminated by judicial combat. Bouquet
Recucil dcs Hit. tom. ix. p. 729. Ibid. p. 6z, &c.
The emperor Henry I. declares, that this law, authoriz.
ing the pradice of judicial combats, was enaaed with
consent and applause of many faithful biihops. Ibid.
p. 23a. So rematkably did the martial ideas of those
ages prevail over the genius and maxims of the canon
law, which in other infcances was in the highell credit
and authority with eccleii:sthics. A judicial combat was
appointed in Spain, by Charles V., A. D. 52zz. The
combatants fought in the emperor's presence, and the
battle was condudled with all the rites prescribed by lie
ancient laws of chivalry. The whole tranfaaion is de-
fcsibed at great length by Pontus Heuterus Rer. Auftriac.
lib. viii. c. 17. p. zo5.

The hail inhlancewhich occurs in the hiflory ofFrance,

of a judicial combat authorised by the mnagiilrate, was
tite famous one between M. Jarnac and M. de laChaif-
taignerie, A. D. a 547. A trial by combat was appoint-
ed in Engiand, A. D. as 7, under the infpeftion of the
judges in the court of Common Pleas; and though it was
not carried to the fame extremity with the former, Qyeen
Zlszabeth having incerpofed her authority, and enjoined
the parties to compound the matter, yet, in order to pre-
serve their honour, the lifts were marked our, and all thle
forms previous to the combat were observed with much
ceremony. Spelm. Gloss. voc. Campus, p. 5o3. In the
year t63r, a judicial combat was appointed between
Donald Lord Rea, and David Reamfay, Efq. by the autho-

tity

rity of the lord high conflable, and earl marshal of Eng-
land; but that quarrel likewise terminated without
bloodshed, being accommodated by Charles I. Another
inilance occurs (even years later. Rulhworth in Obfer-
vations on the Statutes, &c. p. 266.

NOTE XXIII. SECT. I. p. 68. [Z].

THe text contains the great outlines which mark the

course of private and public jurifdiaion in the several
nations of Europe. I shall here follow more minutely
the various fieps of this progress, as the matter is curious
and important enough to merit this attention The pay-
ment of a fine by way of fatisfaaion to the person or
family injured, was the first device of a rude people, in
order to check the career of private resentment, and to
extinguilh thofefaid~e, or deadly feuds, which were pro-
fecuted among them with the utmost violence. This
cfiom may be traced back to the ancient Germans.
Tacit. de NVorib, Germ. c. as, and prevailed among
other uncivilized nations. Many examples of this are
colleded by the ingenious and learned author of Hifto-
rical Law-Traas, vol. i. p. 4 . There fines were as-
certained and levied in three different manners. At
first they were fettled by voluntary agreement between
the parties at variance. When their rage began to sub-
fide, and they felt the bad effels of their continuing in
enmity. they came to terms of concord, and the fatis-
fa&ion made was called a compsfition, implying that it
was fixed by mutual consent. De l'Efprit des Loix, lib.
xxx. c. t9. It is apparent from some of the more an-
cient codes of laws, that at the time when these were
compiled, matters fill remained in that simple fiate. In
certain cafes, the person who had committed an offence
was left expoled to the resentment of those whom he
had injured, until he thould recover their favour, quoquo
modo potuerit. Lex Frifion. tit. as. S. The next
slode of levying there fines was by the sentence of arbi-
ters. An arbiter is called in the Regiam Majefiatem
qmicabilis compositor, lib. $i. c. 4. g so. He could es-

timats

the parties interefled, and determine with greater equity
what fatisfaaioa ought to be demanded. It is difficult
to bring an authentic proof of a cu(tom previous to the
records preserved in any nation of Europe.. But one of
the Formule Andegavenfes compiled in the sixth century,
frems to allude to a tranfac?ion carried on, not by the
authority of a judge, but by the mediation of arbiters
choufn by mutual consent. Bouquet Recueil des Hifior.
tom. iv. p. i66. But as an arbiter wanted authority to
enforce his decilions, judges were appointed with com-
pullive power to oblige both parties to acquierce in their
decisions. Previous to this lat flep, the expedient of
paying compolitions was an imperfea remedy against the
pernicious effefts of private resentment. As soon as
this important change was introduced, the magifirate,
putting himself in place of the person injured, alcertained
the compoiirion with which he ought to refR satisfied.
Every polfble injury tltat could occur in the intercourse
of civil society was conftdered and eitimated, and the
compositions due to the person aggrieved were fixed with
such minute attention, as discovers; in molt cafcs, amaz-
itg discernment and delicacy; in some inflances, unac-
countable caprice. Beiides the composition payable to
the private party, a certain fum called a f edumn, was paid
to the king or slate, as Tacitus expresses it, or to the
filcus, in the language of the barbarous laws. Some
autlors blending the refined ideas of modern policy with
their reasonings concerning ancient tranfaDions; have
imagined that thefredum was a compensation due to the
community, on account of the violation of the public
peace. But it is manifefly nothing more than the price
paid to the magiffrate for the protedtion which he afford-
ed against tlte violence of relentment. The enadmng of
this was a considerable ffep towards improvement in cri-
minal juirprudence. In some of the more ancient codes
of laws, the freda are altogether omitted, or so seldom
mentioned, that it is evident they were hut little known.
In the later codes, thefredum is as precisely specified as
the compoftsion. In common cafes it was equal to the

third

In some extraordinary cafes, where it was more diffcult
to protedi the person who had committed violence, the
fredum was augmented. Capitul. vol. i. p. 5aa. Thefo
freda made a conliderable branch in the revenues of the
barons and in wharever diilri& territorial jurifdition
was granted, the royal judges were prohibited from
levying any freda. In explaining the nature of thefredum,
I have followed in a great measure the opinion of M. de
Montesquieu, though I know that several learned anti-
quaries have taken the word in a different sense. De
l'Efprit des Loix, liv. xxx. c. 20. &c. The great objea of
judges was to compel the one party to give, and the other
to accept, the fatisfaaion prescribed. They multiplied
regulations to this purpose, and enforced them by griev-
ous penalties. Leg. Longob. lib. i. tit. 9. g 34. lb. tit.
37. § t, 2. Capitul. vol. i. p. 371. § 22. The person
who received a compofstion was obliged to cease from
all farther hollility, and to confirm his reconciliation
with the adverse party by an oath. Leg. Longob. lib. i.
tit. 9. § f. As an additional and more permanent evi-
dence of reconciliation, he was required to grant a bond
of security to the person from whom he received a comn-
polition, absolving him from all farther prosecution.
Marculfus, and the other colledors of ancient writs,
have preserved several different forms of such bonds.
Marc. lib. xi. § a8. Append. § 23. Form. Sirmondict,
§ 39. The Letaers ofFlanes, known in the law of Scot-
land, are perfeEtly limilar to these bonds of security.
By the Letters of Slanes, the heirs and relations of a per-
son who had been murdered, bound themselves, in con-
fsderation of an a1jgrhment or composition paid to them,
to forgive, " pass over, and for ever forget, and in ob-
livion inter, all rancour, malice, revenge, prejudice,
grudge, and resentment, that they have or may con-
ceive againif the aggressor or his gollerity, for the crime
which he had committed, and discharge him of all a8ion,
civilor criminal, againit him or his eflate, for now and
ever." Syflemof StilesbyDallas of St. Martin's, p. 862.
In the ancient form of Letters of Slanes, the private

party

grants remission of the crime. This praaice, Dallas,
reasoning according to the principles of his own age,
considers as an encroachment on the rights of fove-
reignty, as none, says he, could pardon a criminal but
the king. Ibid. Hut, in early and rude times, the prose-
cution, the punibhment, and the pardon of criminals,
were all deeds of the private person who was injured.
Madox has published two writs, one in the reign of
Edward I. the other in the reign of Edward Il1. by
which private persona grant a release or pardon of all
trespasses, felonies, robberies, and murders committed.
Formul. Anglican. No. 702. 70S. In the last of there
intruments, some regard seems to be paid to the rights
of the sovereign, for the pardon is granted en quant yue
e naous efl. Even after the authority of the magistrate
was interposed in punilhing crimes, the punithment of
criminals is long conftdered chiefly as a gratification to
the relentment of the persons who have been injured.
In Persia a murderer is still delivered to the relations of
the person whom he has lain, who put him to death
with their own hands. If they refule to accept of a fum
of money as a compensation, the sovereign, absolute as
he is, cannot pardon the murderer. Voyages de Chardin,
iii. p. 417, edit. r73j, 4to. Voyages de Tavernier, liv. v.
c. 5. to. Among the Arabians, though one of the firit
polilhed peoplein the East, the fame custom 1ill fubifsts.
Defcriprion de l'Arabie par M. Niebuhr. p. az. By a law
in the kingdom of Aragon, as late as the year a 64, the pu-
nilhment of one condemned to death cannot be mitigated
but by consent of the parties who have been injured.
Fueros & Oblervancias del Reyno de Aragon, p. 204. 6.

If, after all the engagements toceafe from enmity which

I have mentioned, any person renewed hofitlities, and
was guilty of any violence, either towards the person
from whom he had received micompofition, or towards
his relations and heirs, this was deemed a most heinous
crime, and punilhed with extraordinary rigour. It was
an a& of direa rebellion against the authority of the ma-
gihtrate, and was repressed by the interpaoftion of all his

power.

power. Leg. Longob. lib. i. tit. 9. g 8. 34. Capit. vol.
i. p. 371. § az. Thus the avenging of injuries was
taken out of private hands, a legal compofirion was es-
tablijhed, and peace and amity were reflored, under the
infpedion, and by the authority of a judge. It is evi-
dent that at the time when the barbarians fettled in the
prorinces of the Roman empire, they had fixed judges
eisablilhed among them with compultive authority.
Persons vefiled with this charatfer are mentioned by the
earliefi historians. Du Cange, voc. Judices. The right
of territorial jurnfdieion was not altogether an usurpation
of the feudal barons, or an invalion of the prerogative of
the sovereign. There is good reason to believe, that the
powerful leaders, who seized different diflrils of the
countries which they conquered, and kept poffeffon of
them as allodial property, assumed from the beginning
the right of jurifdiaion, and exercised it within their
own territories. This jurnfdiaion was supreme, and
extended to all causes. The clearest proofs of this are
produced by M. Bouquet. Le Droit publique de PFrance
eclairci, &c. tom. i. p. ao6, &c. The privilegeofjudg-
ing his own vassals, appears to have been originally a
right inherent in every baron who held a fief. As far
back as the archives of nations can condu&t us with any
certainty, we find the jurifdiflion and fief united. One
of the earliest charters to a layman which I have met
with, is that of Ludovicus Pius, A.D. 814. And it
contains the right of territorial jurifdiation, in the ipolt
express and extensive terms. Capitul. vol. ii. p. 1405-
There are many charters to churches and monasteries of a
more early date, containing grants of a similar jurifdic-
diiion, and prohibiting any royal judge to enter the
territories of those churches or monalteries, or to perform
any aft of judicial authority there. Bouquet Recueil des
Rift. tom. iv. p. 6a8. 63r. 633. tom. v. p. 703o 71c-
752. 762. Muratori has published many very ancient
charters containing the fame immunities. Antiq. ItaL
Dissert. Ixx.· In most of these deeds, the royal judge is
prohibited from exaaing thefreda due to the poffeffor of
territorial jurifdidticn, which Ihews that they confti-

ioL.. a, D D tuted

at that junrure. The expence of obtaining a sentence
in a court of jullice during the middle ages was so con.
fiderable, that this circumltance alone was fufficient to
render men unwilling to decide any contest in judicial
form. It appears from a charter in the thirteenth cen-
tury, that the baron who had the right of juflice, re-
ceived the fifth part of the value of every fubjea, the
property of which was tried and determined in his court.
If, after the commencement of a law.suit, the parties
terminated the contest in an amicable manner, or by arbi-
tration, they were nevertheless bound to pay the fifth
part of the fubjed contefled, to the court before which
the feit had been brought. Hist. de Dauphind, Geneve,
17z2, tom.i. p. 22. Similar to this is a regulation in
the charter of liberty granted to the town of Friburg
A. D. Iso. If two of the citizens (hall quarrel, and if
one of them (hall complain to the huperior lord or to his
judge, and after commencing the suit, (hall be privately
reconciled to his adverfury, the judge, if he does not ap-
prove of this reconciliation, may compel him to go on
with his law-suit and all who were present at the re-
conciliation shall forfeit the favour of the superior lord.
fliiloria Zaringo Badenfis. Autor. Jo. Dan Schoepfiinus.
Carolfr. a 6·, 4to. vol. v. p. 55.

What was the extent of that jurifdiaion which those

who held fiefs poffelTed originally, we cannot now de-
termine with certainty. It is evident that, during the
disorders which prevailed in every kingdom of Europe,e
the great valfals took advantage of the feebleness of their
monarchs, and enlarged their jurildiiions to the utmoff.
As early as the tenth century, the more powerful barons
had usurped the right of deciding all caufls, whether civil
or criminal. They had acquired the High J]cfice as well
as the Lowa. Eftabl. de St. Louis, lib. i. c. 24, 25.
Their sentences were final, and there lay no appeal from
them to any superior court. Several firiking instances
of this are collehed by Brulfel. Trait6 des Fiefs, liv. iii.
c. at. Is, a a. Not satisfied with this, the more potent
Larons got their territories ereted into Regaliries, with al-

3 most

of these were frequent in France. Bruff. ib. In Scotland,
where the power of the feudal nobles became exorbitant,
they were very numerous. Hilorical Law Trats, vol.s
trat vi. Even in England, though the authority of the
Norman kings circumscribed the jurifdiaion of tite barous
within more narrow limits than in any other feudal
kingdom, several counties palatine were ereded, into
which the king's judges could not enter, and no writ.
could come in the king's name, until it received the feal
of the county palatine. Spelman. Gloss. voc. Comites Pa-
latini; Blackilone's Commentaries on the Laws. of Eng-
land, vol. iii. p. f8. These lords of Regalities had a
right to claim or rescue their vaffsls from the king's
judges, if they affiumed any jurifdiaion over them.
Brufel, ubi supra. In the law of Scotland this privilege
was termed the right of repledgiva; and the frequency of
it not only interrupted the course of juflice, but gave
rife to great disorders in the exercise of it. Hist. Law
Traas, ib. The jurifdi~dion of the counties palatine
Leems to have been produ~iive of like inconveniencies in
England.

The remedies provided by princes againlt the. had es-

seas of these ufurpations of the nobles, or inconliderate'
grants of the crown, were various, and gradually applied.
Under Charlemagne and his immediate descendants, the
regal prerogative fdill retained great vigour, and the Duces,
Comrites, and Mc11/iDosinnici, the former of whom were ordi-
nary and fixed judges, the latter extraordinary and itine.
rantjudges, in the different provinces of their extenffve do-
minions, exercised a jurifds&ion co-ordinate with the
barons in Come cafes, and superior to them in others.
Du Cange, voc. Dux, comites, & iMZgff. Murar. Antiq.
Dissert. viii. &. ix. But under the feeble race of monarcbs
who succeeded them, the authority of the royal judges
declined, and the barons acquired that unlimited jurif-
difion which has been deferibed. Louis VI. of Fiance
attempted to revive the fundion of the. Mffi Dsminici
under the title of ]eges des Exempts, but the barons were
become too powerful to bear such an encroachment on

D0 1 their

ploying them. Henaut Abrege Chron. tom. ii. p. 730.
His successor (as has been observed) had recourse to ex-
pedients less alarming. The appeal de defaute de droit,
or on account of the refusal of jufice, was the firlt which
was attended with any considerable effea. According
to the maxims of feudal law, if a baron had not as many
valfals as enabled him to try by their peers the parties
who offered to plead in this court, or if he delayed or
refuled to proceed in the trial, the cause might be carried,
by appeal, to the court of the superior lord of whom the
baron held, and tried there. De l'Efprit des Loix, liv.
xxviii. c. 28. Du Cange, voc. DefeErus ]ufiitiae. The
number of peers or affeffors in the courts of barons was
frequently very considerable. It appears from a crimi-
nal trial in the court of the viscount de Lautrec, A. D.
2 99, that upwards of two hundred persons were present,
and alfffted in the trial, and voted in passing judgment.
Hifl. de Langued. par D. D. de Vic & Naifette, tom. iv.
Preuves, p. 554. But as the right of jurifdiaion had
been usurped by many inconsiderable barons, they were
often unable to hold courts. This gave frequent occa-
sion to such appeals, and rendered the praaice familiar.
By degrees Luch appeals began to be made from the courts
of the more powerful barons, and it is evident, from a
decision recorded by Bruffel, that the royal judges were
willing to give countenance to any pretext for them.
Traitd des Fiefs, tom. i. p. a3. a6,. This species of
appeal had less effea in abridging the jurifdiaion of the
nobles, than the appeal on account of the injuffice of
the sentence. When the feudal monarchs were power-
ful, and their judges poffeffed extensive authority, Luch
appeals seem to have been frequent. Capitul. vol. i. p.

o75. I80.; and they were made in a manner suitable to

the rudeness of a simple age. The persons aggrieved re-
sorted to the palace of their sovereign, and with outcries
and loud noise called to him for redrels. Capitul. lib. iii.
c. .9 Chronic. Lawterbergienfeap. Mencken. Script. Gar-
man.vol. ii. p. 284.b. Inthekingdomof Aragon, the ap-
peals to thle 7ufiaiz or supreme judge were taken in foch

a form

a form as supposed the appellant to be in immediate <dan-
ger of death, or of Come violent outrage he ruihed in-
to the presence of the judge, crying with a loud voice,
A'vi, .ei, Fuerza, Fuerza, thus imploring (as it were)
the infiant interposition of that supreme judge in order
to save him. Hier. Blanca Comment. de rebus Aragon.
ap. Script. Hispanic. Piflorii, vol. iii. p. 753. The
abolition of the trial by combat facilitated the revival of
appeals of this kind. The effets of the subordination
which appeals eltablifhed, in introducing attention,
equity, and confillency of decilion into courts of judica-
ture, were soon conspicuous; and almolt all causes of
importance were carried to be finally determined in the
king's courts. Brulfel, tom. l. 252. Various circum-
i1ances which contributed towards the introduftion and
frequency of such appeals are enumerated De l'Efprit des
Loix, liv. xxviii. c. 27. Nothing, however, was offuch
effe6& as the attention which monarchs gave to the con-
flitution and dignity of their courts of justice. It was
the ancient custom for the feudal monarchs to prelide
themselves in their courts, and to adminifler juflice in
person. Marcuif. lib. i. § 25. Murat. Driert. xxxi.
Charlemagne, whilst he was dressing, used to call parties
into his presence, and having heard and considered the
fubjet of litigation, gave judgment concerning it. Egin.
hartus, Vita Caroli Mllagni, cited by Madox, Hiift. of Ex-
chequer, vol. i. p. or. This trial and decision of causes
by the sovereigns themselves could not fail of rendering
their courts refpeaable. St. Louis, who encouraged to
the utmoit the praftice of appeals, revived this ancient
custom, and adminillered juflice in person with all the
ancient simplicity. " I have often freen the faint," says
Joinville, " fit under the fhadeof an oak in the wood of
Vincennes, when all who had any complaint freely ap-
proached him. At other times he gave orders to spread
a carpet in a garden, and feating hinfelif upon it, heard
the causes that were brought before him." Hilt. de St.
Louis, p. 13. edit. 176 r. Princes of inferior rank, who
poffelfed the right of juihice, sometimes dispensed it ira
person, and presided in their tribunals. Two inflances

DD3 of

His. de Dauphin8, tom. i. p. 8. tom. ii. p. a5'. But
as kings and princes could not decide every cause in per-
son, nor bring them all to be determined in the fame
court ; they appointed Bail/is, with a right of jurifdiaion,
in different diftri,9s of their kingdom. 'Thefe poffeffed
powers (omewhat similar to those of the ancient Comites.
It was towards the end of the twelfth century and be,.
ginning of the thirteenth, that this office was first infi-
tuted in France. Bruffel, liv. ii. c. 34. When the king
had a court efiablilhed in different quarters of his domi-
nions, this invited his fubjeas to have recourse to it.
It was the privare interest of the Baillis, as well as an
ohjea of public policy, to extend their jurifdiation.
They took advantage of every defe& in the rights of the
barons, and of every error in their proceedings, to remove
causes out of their courts, and to bring them under their
own cognizance. There was a diltinaion in the feudal
law, and an extremely ancient one, between the high
julhice and the low, Capitul. t. A. D. 8Ir. O 4. A. D.
lreg g 3. Ellabh, de St, Louis, liv. i. c. 40. Many ba-
rons polhffted the latter jutifdiaion who had no title to
the former. The former included the right of trying
crimes of every kind, even the highest; the latter was
confined to petty trespasses. This furnished endless pre-
texts, for obltruaing, restraining, and reviewing the
proceedings in the baron courts. Ordon. ii. 457. g 25.
458. O 29.-A regulation of greater importance fuc-
eeeded the inflitution of Bail/is. The king's supreme
court or parliament was rendered fixed as to the place,
and conliant as to the time of its meetings. In France,
as well as in the other feudal kingdoms, the king's court
ofjufthce was originally ambulatory, followed the person
of the monarch, and was held only during Some of the
great fefhivals. Philip Augullus, A. D. ' 05, rendered
it fiationary at Paris, and continued irs terms during the
greater part of the year. Pafquier Recherches, liv. ii.
C. 2 and 3, &c. Ordon. tom. i. p. 366. Q 62. He and
Ms fuccffors vegfed extentive powers in that court;

they

they granted the members of it several privileges and dif-
tinftionss which it would be tedious to enumerate. Pas-
quier, ib. Velly Hist. de France, tom. vii. p. jo7.
Persons eminent for integrity and (kill in law were ap-
pointed judges there. Ib. By degrees the final decilion
of all causes of importance was brought into the parlia-
asent of Paris, and the other parliaments, which admi-
mistered justice in the king's name, in different provinces
of the kingdom. This jurifdidlion, however, the parlia-
snent of Paris acquired very slowly, and the great vamals
of the crown made violent efforts in order to obltrua the
attempts of that parliament to extend its authority. To-
wards the close of the thirteenth century, Philip the Fair
was obliged to prohibit his parliament from taking cog-
nizance of certain appeals brought into it from the courts
of the Count of Bretagne, and to recognize and refpe&
his right of fopreme and final juridifition. Memoires
pour fervir de Preuves i I Hifloire de Bretagne par Morice,
tom. i. p. to37. 5074. Charles VI. at the end of the
following century was obliged to confirm the rights of the
Dukes of Bretagne in still more ample form. Ibid. tom.
ii. p. 580, 58a. So violent was the oppofstion ofthe
barons to this right of appeal, which they considered as
fatal to their privileges and power, that the authors of
the Encycispedie have mentioned several infiances in which
barons put to death, or mutilated, such persons as ven-
tured to appeal from the sentences pronounced in their
courts, to the parliament of Paris, tom. xii. art. Perle-
snent, p. 25.

The progress of jurifdi~lion in the other feudal king-

doms was in a great measure similar to that which we
have traced in France. In England the territorial jurif-
diaion of the barons was both ancient and extensive.
Leg. Edw. Cons. No. 4 and 9. After the Norman con-
quest it became more firifuly feudal; and it is evident
from faas recorded in the Englilh history, as well as
from the inflitution of Counties Palatine, which I have
already mentioned, that the ufurpations of the nobles in
England were not less bold or extenfave than those of
their contemporaries on the continent. The fame ex-

pedients

dangerous jurifdiaions. William the Conqueror efla-
blifhed a conlitant court in the hall of his palace; from
which the four courts noentcrulled with the admini-
firation of jufiice in England took their rife. Henry II.
divided his kingdom into fix circuits, and sent itinerant
judges to hold their courts in them at slated seasons.
Blackitone's Commentaries on the Laws of England,
vol. iii. 57. Jusfices of the peace were appointed in
every county by subsequent monarchs; to whose jurif-
didhion the people gradually had recourse in many civil
caules. The privileges of the Counties Palatine were
gradually limited ; with refpe& to some points they were
aSoliihpd ; and the adminif'ration ofjufhice was brought
into the king's courts, or before judges of his appoint.
ment. The several iheps taken for this purpose are
enumerated in Dalrymple's Hilory of Fetdal Property,
chap. vii.

In Scotland the ufurpations of the nobility were more

exorbitant than in any other feudal kingdom. The pro-
grefs of their encroachments, and the methods taken by
the crown to limit or abolish their territorial and inde-
pendent jurifdidlions, both which I had occasion to con-
fider and explain in a former work, differed very little
from those of which 1 have now given the detail. I-hf-
tory of Scotland, vol. i. p. 4f.

I ihould perplex myself and my readers in the

labyrinth of German jurisprudence, if I were to attempt
to delineate the progress of jurifdiaion in the empire,
with a minute accuracy. It is fufficient to observe,
that the authority which the Aulic council and Imperial
chamber now polfefs, took its rife from the fame delire
of redrelling the abules of territorial jurifdidhion, and
was acquired in the fame manner that the royal courts
attained influence in other countries of Europe. All the
important sass with refpe& to both these particulars
may be found in Phil. Datt, de pace publica Imperil,
lib. iv. The capital articles are pointed out in Pfeffel
Abreg6 de 1'Hiltoire & Droit publique d'Allemagne,
p. 56. , 8i.; and in Trait& du Droit publhque del'Em*

pire

pire par M. le Coq. de Villeray. The two lalt treatises
are of great authority, having been composed under the
eye of M. Shoepflin of Stralburg, one of the ablest public
lawyers in Germany.

NOTEXXIV. SECT. I. p. 7'. [AA].

IT is not easy to fix with precilion the period at

which eccleliaflics firli began to claim exemption from
the civil jurifdiaion. It is certain, that during the early
and pureRt ages of the church, they pretended to no such
immunity. The authority of the civil magifrate ex-
tended to all persons, and to all caufesi This fa& has
not only been clearly elfablilled by Protestant authors,
but is admitted by many Roman Catholics of eminence,
and particularly by the writers in defence of the liberties
of the Gallican church. There are several original pa-
pers publilhed by Muratori, which lhew that, in the ninth
and tenth centuries, causes of the greateRt importance
relating to ecciefialtics were still determined by civil
judges. Antiq Ital. vol.v. dissert. lxx. Proofs of this
are produced likewise by M. Houard, Anciennes Loix
des Francois, &c. vol. i. p. zog. Ecclefiaftics did not
shake off all at once their fubjefion to civil conrts. This
privilege, like their other ufurpations, was acquired flow-
ly, and fRep by fiep. This exemption seems at firfi to
have been merely an at of complaisance, flowing from
veneration for their charader. Thus from a charter of
Charlemagne in favour of the church of Mans, A. D.
796, to which M. l'Abb6 de Soy refers in his Notice de
Diplomes, tom. i. p. aog, that monarch direas his
judges, if any difference should arise between the ad-
minifirators of the revenues of that church and any per-
son whatever, not to summon the administrators to
appear in mallo publico; but firl1 of all to meet with
them, and to endeavour to accommodate the difference
in an amicable manner. This indulgence was in piocers
of time improved into a legal exemption; which was
founded on the fame fuperflitious refpe&t of the lainy for
the clerical charader and funtion. A remarkable in-

fiance

A. D. ssa, to the monastery of Altenburg. He grants
them judicium non tantum fanguinolentis plage, fed
vit a & mortis; he prohibits any of the royal judges
from difiurbing their jurifdiaion; and the reason which
he gives for this ample conceflion is, nam quorum, ex
Dei gratia, ratione divini minilerii onus leve eif, & ju.
gum suave; nos penitus nolumus illos oppreflonis con-
tumeli8, vel manu Laica, fatigari. Mencken. Script.
rer. Germ. vol. iii. p. o67.

It is not neceifary for illuolrating what is contained

in the text, that I (hould deferibe the manner in which
the code of the canon law was compiled, or shew that
the dorrines in it mofd favourable to the power of the
clergy, are founded on ignorance, or supported by fraud
and forgery. The reader will find a full account of
there in Gerard. Van Madricht. Hiftoria Juris Ecclefiaf-
tici, & in Science de Gouvernement parM. Real, tom. vii.
c. a & 3* g a, 3, &c. The history of the progress and
extent of eccleliaftical jurifdiaion, with an account of
the arts which the clergy employed in order to draw
causes of every kind into the spiritual courts, is no lets
curious, and would throw great light upon many of the
customs and inl'itutions of the dark ages; but it is like-
wife foreign from the present fubje&. Du Cange in his
Glossary, voc. Curia Chriftianitatis, has colleaed modt of
the causes with refped to which the clergy arrogated
an exclusive jurifdiaion, and refers to the authors, or
original papers, which confirm his observations. Gian-
none in his Civil Hiflory of Naples, lib. xix. f 3. has
arranged there under proper heads, and scrutinizes the
pretensions of the church with his ulual boldness and
discernment. M. Fleury obfervcs, that the clergy mul-
tiplied the pretexts for extending the authority of the
spiritual courts with so much boldness, that it was soon
in their power to withdraw almod every person and
every cause from the jurifdi&ion of the civil magidrate.
Hist. Ecclel, tom. xix. Dire Prelim. x6. Bnt how ill-
founded soever the jurirdiaion of the clergy may have
been, or whatever might be the abuses to which their

manner

manner of exercising it gave Life, the principles and
forms of their jurisprudence were far more perfea than
that which was known in the civil courts. It seems to
be certain that ecclelitics never submitted, during any
period in the middle ages, to the laws contained in the
codes of the barbarous nations, but were governed en-
tirely by the Roman law. They regulated all their
tranfadlions by such of its maxims as were preserved by
tradition, or were contained in the Theodosian code,
and other bocks extant among thent. This we learn
from a cuflom which prevailed univerfallyin tbofe ages.
Every person was permitted to choose among the various
codes of laws then in force, that to which he was willing
to conform. In any tranfadion of importance, it was
usual for the persons con!radling to mention the law to
which they submitted, that it might be known Isow any
controversy that thould arise between them was to be
decided. Innumerable proofs of this occur in the char-
ters of the middle ages. But the clergy confrdered it as
such a valuable privilege of their order to be governed
by the Roman law, that when any perlon entered into
holy orders, it was uifual for him to renounce the code
of laws to which he had been formerly fuhjed', and to
declare that he now submitted to the Roman law.
Conflat mejohannem clericum, filium quondamVerandi,
qui profeffus fum, ex ratione mei, lege vivese Lango-
bardorum, fed tamen, pro honore eccleliaftico, lege nune
videor vivereRomana. Charta, A. D. tr72. Farulfus
prelbyter qui profetias fum, more facerdotii mel, lege
vivere Romara. Charta, A. D. 1o75. Muratori An-
tichita Efltent. vol. , p.78. See likewise Houard An-
ciennes Loix des Frangois, &c. vol. i. p. 203.

The code of the canon law began to be compiled early

in the ninth century. Mem. de l'Acad. des Infeript.
tom. xviii. p. 346, &c. It was above two centuries
after that before any colleftion was made of those cuT-
toms, which were the rule of judgments in the courts of
the barons. Spiritual judges decided, of course, accord.
ing to written and known laws : Lay judges, left with-
out any fixed guide, were direced by loose traditionary

cultoms.

law, its forms and principles were more consonant to
reason, and more favourable to the equitable decilion of
every point in controversy, than thole which prevailed
in lay courts. It appears from Notes XXI. and XXIII.
concerning private wars, and the trial by combat, that
the whole spirit of eccleliafical jurisprudence was ad-
verse to those sanguinary cul'oms which were defirueive
of juffice i and the whole force of ecclefiaflical authority
was exerted to abolish them, and to fubilitute trials by
law and evidence in their room. Almost all the forms
in lay courts, which contribute to eitablibh, and continue
to preserve order in judicial proceedings, are borrowed
from the canon law. Fleury, Inltit. du droit canon.
part iii. c. 6. p. 32. St. Louis, in his Eftablilfemens,
confirms many of his new regulations concerning pro.
perty, and the adminifiration of juitice by the authority
of the canon law, from which he borrowed them. Thus,
for instance, the first hint of attaching moveables
for the recovery of a debt was taken from the canon
law. Eslab. liv. ii. c. as and 40. And likewise the
cefso bonorum, by a person who was insolvent. Ibid.
In the fame manner, he eltablinled new regulations with
refpe& to the effees of persons dying intestate, liv. i.
c. 89. These and many other salutary regulations the
Canonifts had borrowed from the Roman law. Many
other examples might be produced of more perseEt jurif-
prudence in the canon law than was known in lay
courts. For that reason it was deemed an high privilege
to be fubjeEt to eccleafltical jurifdiaion. Among the
many immunities, by which men were allured to engage
in the dangerous expeditions for the recovery of the Holy
Land, one of the most considerable was the declaring
such as took the Cross to be fubje& only to the spiritual
courts, and to the rules of decision observed in them.
See Note XIII. and Du Cange, voc. Crucis Privilegia.

NOTE XXV. SECT. I. p. 73. [EB.

THE rapidity with which the knowledge and iludy

of the Roman law spread over Europe is amazine. The
copy of the Panders was found at Amalphi, A. D. a a7-
Irnerius opened a college of civil law at Bologna a few
years after. Giann. Hi's. book xi. c. z. It began to
be taught as a part of academical learning in different
parts of France before the middle of the century.
Vaccarius gave leCaures on the civil law at Oxford, as
early as the year I 47. A regular fyflem of feudal law,
formed plainly in imitation of the Roman code, was
composed by two Milanese lawyers about the year s zy.
Gratian published the code of canon law, with large ad-
ditions and emendations, about the fame time. The
earliest colleaion of those customs, which served as the
rules of decifson in the courts of justice, is the Ajfes de
jerusalem. They were compiled, as the preamble in-
forms us, in the year 5099, and are called Jus Confuetu.
dinarium quo regebatur regnum orientale. Willerm.
Tyr. lib. xix. c., 2. But peculiar circumfiances gave
occaflon to this early compilation. The viaorious
Crutfaders fettled as a colony in a foreign country, and
adventurers from all the different nations of Europe
composed this new society. It was necessary on that
account to ascertain the laws and customs which were
to regulate the tranfaflions of butfners, and the admini-
ftration of juflice among them. But in no country of
Europe was there, at that time, any collefhion of cuf.
toms, nor had any attempt been made to render law fixed.
The firfi undertaking of that kind was by Glanville,
Lord Chief Juflice of England, in his Tra~atus de
Legibus & Confuetudinibus Angli9, composed about the
year rI8l. The Regiam Majefiatem in Scotland, as-
cribed to David I. seems to be an imitation, and a servile
one, of Glanville. Several Scottish antiquaries, under
the influence of that pious credulity, which difpnfes men
to assent, without helitation, to whatever they deem for
the honour of their native country, contend zealously,

VOL. 1. Ea that

treatile of Glanville ; and have brought themselves to
believe, that a nation, in a superior stare of improve-
ment, borrowed its laws and inilitutions from one con-
fiderably less advanced in its political progress. The
internal evidence (were it my province to examine it)
by which this theory might be refuted, is, in my opinion,
decifxve. The external circumfiances which have reduced
Scottilh authors into this miflake, have been explained
with so much preciflon and candour by Sir David Dal-
rymple, in his examination of fayne of the arguments for
the high antiquity of Regiam Majettatem, Bdin. 1769,
4to. that it is to be hoped the controversy will not be
again revived. Pierre de Fontaines, who tells us, that
he was the firil who had attempted fucl a work in
France, composed his Conclil, which contains in account
of the cufioms of the country of Vermandois, in the
reign of St. Louis, which began A. D. s2s6. Beaumassi,-
the author of the Co/lurnes de Beauavoiis, lived about the
fame time. The EthbblilTemens of St. Louis, containing
a large colledion of the customs which prevailed within
the royal domains, were publilhed by the authority of
that monarch. As soon as men became acquainted with
the advantages of having written cultoms and laws, to
which they could have recourse on every occasion, the
pradice of colleaing them became common. CharlesVII.
of France, by an ordonance, A. D. 1453, appointed
the cufiomary laws in every province of France to be
co!leaed and arranged. Velley and Villaret, Hiftoire,
tom. xvi. p. 13s. His successor, LouisXI. renewed the
injundtion. But this salutary undertaking hath never
been fully executed, and the jurisprudence of the French
nation remains more obscure and uncertain than it
would have been if there prudent regulations of their
monarchs had taken effe6. A mode of judicial deter-
mination was eftablilbed in the middle agee, which as-
fords the clearest proof that judges, while they had no
other rule to direr their decrees but unwritten and
traditionary cufloms, were often at a loss how to find
out the facts and principles, according to which they

were

cafes, to call a certain number of old men, and to lay
the cafe before them, that they might inform them
what was the praaice or cuftom' with regard to the
point. This was called Enyu/fie par tourbe. Do Cange,
vuc. Turba. The effeas of the revival of the Roman
jurisprudence have been explained by M. de Montef-
quicu, liv. xxviii. c. 4s. and by Mr. Hume, Hist. of
England, vol. ii. p. 441. I have adopted many of their
ideas. Who can pretend to review any fubje61 which
fucb writers have considered, without receiving from
them light and information ? At the fame time I am
convinced, that the knowledge of the Roman law was
not so entirely loft in Europe during the middle ages, as
is commonly believed. My fubjeti does not require me
to examine this point. Many firiking faas with regard
to it are colleated by Donato Antonio d'Afli Dali' Ufo
e autorita della regione civild nelle provincie deli' Im-
perio Occidentale. Nap. Igr. a vol. 8vo.

That the civil law is intimately connealed with the

municipal jurisprudence in several countries of Europe,
is a fa& so well Inown, that it needs no illufiration.
Even in England, where the common law is supposed
to form a fyllem perfealy diflinet from the Roman code,
and although such as apply in that country to the iludy
of the common law boatt of this diitn&ion with some
degree of affedation, it is evident that many of the ideas
and maxims of the civil law are incorporated into the
English jurilprudence. This is well illustrated by the
ingenious and learned author of Observations on the
Statutes, chiefly the more ancient, 3d edit. p. 76, &c.

NO T E XXVI. SscT. I. p 75. [CCJ.
THE whole hifory of the middle ages makes it evi-

dent, that war was the sole profemlon of gentlemen, and
almost the only objea attended to in their education.
Even after some change in manners began to take place,
and the civil arts of life had acquired fume reputation,
the ancient ideas with refped to the accomplilhments

E E z necessary

force. In the Memoires de Fleuranges, p. 9, &c. we
have an account of the youthful exercises and occupa-
tions of Franeis I. and they were altogether martial and
athletic. That father of letters owed his relith for them,
not to education, but to his own good sense and good
taile. The manners of the superior order of ecclefialtics
during the middle ages furnish the firongelt proof that,
in some inltances, the diftinaion of profeffions was not
completely ascertained in Europe. The fundions and
charader of the clergy are obviously very different from
those of laymen; and among the inferior orders of
churchmen, this conflituted a diftina charaaer separate
from that of other citizens. But the dignified eccleli.
aftiCs, who were frequently of noble birth, were above
ftuch a diftin&ion ; they retained the idea of what be-
longed to them as gentlemen, and in spite of the de-
crees of Popes, or the canons of councils, they bore
arms, led their vassals to the field, and fought at their
head in battle. Among them the priefihood was fearcely
a separate profellion ; the military accomplishments
which they thought essential to them as gentlemen, were
cultivated; the theological science, and pacific virtues
suitable to their spiritual funaion, were negleaed and
despised.

As soon as the science of law became a laborious

fludy, and the pra&ice of it a separate profeflion, such
persons as rose to eminence in it obtained honours which
had formerly been appropriated to soldiers. Knight-
hood was the moit iliuftrious mark of diftindion during
several ages, an I conferred privileges to which rank or
birth alone were not entitled. To this high dignity
persons eminent for their knowledge of law were ad-
vanced, and werecthereby placed on a level with those
whom their military talents had rendered conspicuous.
Miles fafircie, Mies Literattus, became common titles.
Matthew Paris mentions such knights as early as A,D.
Iaar. If a judge attained a certain rank in the courts
of justice, that alone gave him a right to tlfe honour of
knighthood. PafquierRecherches,hv. xi. c. t6. p. 130.

DilTertations

Dissertations hiftoriques fur la Chevalerie, par Honor6 de
Sainte Marie, p. 164, &c. A profelion that led to
offices, which ennobled the persons who held them,
grew into credit, and the people of Europe became
accuflomed to fee men rife to eminence by civil as avell
as military talents.

NOTE XXVII., SECT. I. p. 78. [DDJ.

THE chief intention of these notes was to bring at

once under the view of my readers, such faats and cir-
cumifances as tend to illustrate or confirm what is con-
tained in that pert of the hiflory to which they refer.
When these lay scattered in many different authors, and
were taken from books not generally known, or which
many of my readers might find it disagreeable to con-
fult, I thought it would be of advantage to colle6& them
together. But when every thing necessary for the proof
or illufiration of my narrative or reasoning may be found
in any one book which is generally known, or deserves
to be so, I shall satisfy myfelif with referring to it. This
is the cafe with refpeft to Chivalry. Almoff every fa&
which I have mentioned in the text, together with many
other curious and infirudive particulars concerning this
singular inltirution, may be found in Memoires fur Pan-
ciennte Chevalerie conftderiie comme une Eflabliffement
politique & militaire, par M. de la Curne de St.Palaye.

NOTE XXVIII. SECT. I. p. 83. [EE].

TtHE fubje& of noy enquiries does not cell me to

write a hiilory of the progress of science. The fafls
and ohFbrvations which I have produced, are fufficient
to illufirate the effeitfs of its progress upon manners and
the slate of society. While science was altogether extint
in the weflern parts of Europe, it was cultivated in Con-
itantinople and other parts of the Grecian Empire. But
the subtile genius of the Greeks turned alinoti entirely
to theological disputation. The Latins borrowed that
fi~rit from them, and many of the controvenies which

Es Eill

the Greeks, from whom the other Europeans derived a
conliderable part oftheir knowledge. See the teflimony
of IEneas Sylvius ap. Conringium de antiq. academicis,
P.43. Hitloire literaire de France, tom. vii. p. 53,
&c. tom. ix. p. rrc, &c. Soon after the Empire of the
Caliphs was eflablilbed in the East, some iliufirious
princes arose among them, who encouraged science.
But when the Arabians turned their attention to the
literature cultivated by the ancient Greeks and Romans,
the chalfe and corred taste of their works of genius ap-
peared frigid and unanimated to a people of a more warm
imagination. Though they could not admire the poets
and biftorians of Greece or of Rome, they were sensible
of the merit of their phslofophers. The operations of
the intellea are more fixed and uniform than those of
the fancy or taste. Truth makes an imprelion nearly
the fame in every place; the ideas of what is beautiful,
elegant, or sublime, vary in different climates. The
Arabians, though they neglefed Homer, tranilated the
mofl eminent of the Greek philosophers into their own
language; and, guided by their precepts and discoveries,
applied themselves with great ardour to the fudy of
geometry, afironomy, medicine, dialeakcs, and metaphy-
fics. . In the three former, they made considerable and
useful improvements, which have contributed not a
little to advance those fiences to that high degree of
perfedion which they have attained. In the two latter,
they chose Aristotle for their guide, and refining on the
fubsle and dil'inguilhing spirit which chara~terifes his
philosophy, thley rendered it in a great degree frivolous
or unintelligible. The schools eftablilhed in the Eaa
for teaching and cultivating these sciences were in high
reputation. They communicated their love of science
to their countrymen, who conquored Africa and Spain;
and the rchools infhituted there were little inferior in
fame to those in the Eait. Many of the persons who
diftinguilhed themfelvee by their proficiency in science
during the twelfth and thirteenth centuries, were edu-
sated among the Arabians. Brulkerts colleas many

initances

inilances of this, Hiflor. Philof. v. iii. p. 68r, &c. Al-
most all the men eminent for science, during several
centuries, if they did not resort in person to the schools
in Africa and Spain, were infirudted in the philosophy
of the Arabians. The first knowledge of the Arif'ote-
lian philosophy in the middle ares was acquired by
translations of Arifotle's works out of the Arabic. The
Arabian commentators were deemed the most skilful and
authentic guides in the fludy of his fyflem. Conring.
Antiq. Acad. Diff. iii. P. 95, &c. Supplem. p. a4r,
&c. Murat. Antiquit. Ital. vol. iii. p. 9 2, &c. From
them the (choolmen derived the genius and principles of
their philosophy, which contributed so much to retard
the progress of true science.

The eftablithment of colleges or universities is a re-

markable era in literary hiflory. The schools in ca-
thedrals and monasteries confined themselves chiefly to
the teaching of grammar. There were only one or
two maiters employed in that office. But in colleges,
profeffors were appointed to teach all the different parts
of feience. The course or order of education was fix-
ed. The time that ought to be allotted to the fludy of
each science was ascertained. A regular form of trying
the proficiency of fludents was preferibed; and acade-
mical titles and honours were conferred on such as ac-
quitted themselves with approbation. A good account
of the origin and nature of these is given by Seb. Bac-
meillerus Antiquitates Roftochienfes, five, HifRoria Ur-
his & Academie Rofioch. ap. Monumenta inedita Rer.
Germ. per E. J. de Wefiphalen, vol. iii. p. 78 ,. Lipt.
3743. The tirft obscure mention of these academical
degrees in the univerfsty of Paris (from which the other
universities in Europe have borrowed most of their cuF-
toms and inflitutions) occurs A. D. rs.rS Crevier. Hilt.
de 1'Univ. de Paris, tom. i. p. 296, &c. They were
completely eftablilhed A. D. 113!. lb. a4S. It is un-
necessary to enumerate the several privileges to which
bachelors, maiters, and dodtors were entitled. One
circumitance is fufficient to demonf'rate the high degree
of etimation in which they were held. Doftors in the

different

end the dispute wa rtermminated in many inihances by ad-
vancing the former to the dignity of knighthood, the
bigh przrogatives of which I have mentioned. It was
even aiffrted, that a doaor had a right to that title with-
out creation. Barto!us taught--doftorem aflualiter
regentem in jure civili per decennium eflici mijitem ipso
faao. Honolt de St. Marie Dissert. p. n65. This was
called Chevalerie de Leftures, and the persons advanced
to that dignity, Militvs Clerici. These new efltablifhments
for education, together with the extraordinary honours
conferred on learned men, greatly increased the number
of scholars. In the year 126z, there were ten thousand
fludents in thet univertity of Bologna; and it appears
from the history of that univertity, that law was the only
science taught in it at that time. In the year g340, there
were thirty thousand in the university of Oxford. Speed's
Chron. ap. Anderfon's Chronol. Dedudion of Com-
merce, vol. i.p. 172. In the fame century ten thoufaud
persons voted In a quetion agitated in the university of
Paris; and as graduates alone were admitted to that
privilege, the number of fludenis must have been very
great. Velly Hist. de France, tom. xi. p. 147. There
were indeed few univerlities in Europe at that time;
but such a number of fludents may nevertheless be pro-
duced as a proof of the extraordinary ardour with which
2nen applied to the fludy of science in thole ages ; it
lhows likewise that they already brgan to confider other
profellions betide that of a soldier as honourabie and
useful.

NOT E XXIX. SECT. I. p. 8. EFF

THE great variety of fubjeas which I have endeavoured

to illufrate, and the extent of this tupon which I now
enter, will justify my adopting the words of M. de Mon-
tefquieu. when he begins to treat of commerce. " The
S" fobjet which follows would require to be discussed
" more at large; but the nature of this work does not

'' permit

" permit it. I with to glide on a tranquil fiream; but
" I am hurried along by a torrent."

Many proofs occur in hif'ory of the little intercourse

between nations during the middle ages. Towards the
close of the tenth century, Count Bouchard intending to
found a monastery at St. Maur des Foffes near Paris, ap-
plied to an Abbot of Clugny in Burgundy famous for his
fanlity, intreating him to condua the monks thither.
The language in which he addressed that holy man is lin-
gular: he tells him that he had undertaken the labour of
such a great journey; that he was fatigued with the
length of it, therefore hoped to obtain his request, and
that his journey into such a dillant country should not be
in vain. The answer of the abbot is still more extra-
ordinary: he refuted to comply with his detire, as it
would be extremely fatiguing to go along with him into
a itrange and unknown region. Vita Burchardi venera-
bilis comitis ap. Bouquet Rec. des Hist. vol. x. p. 35e.
Even Co late as the beginning of the twelfth century, the
monks of Ferrieres in the diocese of Sens did not know
that there was such a city as Tournay in Slanders; an$
the monks of St. Martin of Tournay were equally unac-
quainted with the ftuation of Ferrieres. A tranta&ion
in which they were both concerned made it necessary for
them to have Come intercourse. The mutual interest of
both monasteries prompted each to find out the tituation
of the other. After a long Cearch, which is particularly
*defribed, the difeovery was made by accident. Heri-
mannus Abbas de Reflauratione St. Martini Tornacentis
ap. Dacher. Spicel. vol. xii. p. 400. The ignorance of
the middle ages with refpea to the situation and geogra-
phy of remote countries was fill more remarkable. The
must ancient geographical chart which now remains as
a monument of the slate of that Ccience in Europe during
the middle ages, is found in a manuscript of the Chro-
nique de St. Denys. There the three parts of the earth
then known are to represented, that Jerusalem is placed
in the middle of the globe, and Alexandria appears to
be as near to it as Nazareth. Mem. de l'Acad des Belles
Lettres, tem. xvi. p. is5. There seems to have been

no

so inns or houses of entertainment for the reception of
travellers during the middle ages. Murat. Antiq. Itsl.
vol. ijt p. 5s., &c. This is a proof of the little inter-
coufle which took place between different narions.
Among people whose manners are simple, and who are
seldom villeed by firangers, hoirsity is a virtue of the
sirs rank. This duty of hospitality was To neceffory in
that slate of society which took place during the nmddle
ages, tIrt it was not considered as one of those virtues
which mon may praaile or not, according to the temper
of their minds and the ;enerofry of their hearts. Hof-
pitality was enforced by flatutes, and such as negleted
this duty were liable to punishment. QOicunque hofpiti
venienti ledum, aut focum negaverit, trium folidorum
inlatione nmultetur. Leg. lurgund. tit. xxxviiL g I.
Si quis homini aliquo pergenti in itinere manfionem ve-
taverit fexaginta folidos componat in publico. Capitul.
lib. vi. g 82. This increase of the penalty, at a period
(o long after that in which the laws of the Burgundians
were publiihed, and when the state of society was much
improved, is very remarkable. Other laws of the fame
purport are colleded by Jo. Fred. Posac. Syftema Jurif.
prud. Germar.ics, Lips. 57 3, p. 75. The laws of the
Slavi were more rigorous than any that he mentions;
they ordained, " that the moveables of an inhospitable
person (hould be confrfcated, and lis house burnt. They
were even so filicitoes for the entertainment of firangers
that they permitted the landlord to fleal for the support
of his gueft." Quod noedu furatus fueris, eras appone,
hofpitibus. Rerum Mecleburgicar. lib. viii. a Mat. Jo.
Beehr. Lips. 175t, p. 50. In consequence of these laws,
or of the slate of society which made it proper to enadt
them, hofpitaiity abounded while the intercourse among
men was inconfidersble, and secured the firanger a kind
reception under ever y roof where he Lshofe to take hblter.
This, too, proves clearly, that the intercourse among
men was rare, for as soon as this became frequent,
what was a pleafere became a burden, and the en-
tercaining of travellers was converted into a branch of
commerce.

But

more convincing of the small intercourle between dif-
ferent nations. The genius of the feudal fyitem, as well
as the spirit of jealoury which always accompanies igno-
rance, concurred in difcouragingitrangers from fettling in
any new country. If a person removed from one province
in a kingdom to another, he was bound within a year
and day to acknowledge himself the vatfal of the baron
in whose estate he lettled; if he nrgleaed to'do so, he
became liable to a penal'y; and, if at his death he ne-
gleded to leave a certain legacy to the baron within
whose territory he had relided, all his goods were con-
fifcated. The hardlsips imposed on foreigners fettling
in a country, were dtill more intolerable. In more early
times, the superior lord of any territory in which a
foreigner fettled, might seize his person, and reduce him
to servitude. Very firiking indtances of this occur in
the history of the middle ages. The cruel depredations
of the Normans in the ninth century, obliged many in-
habi'ants of the maritime provinces of France to fly into
the interior parts of the kingdom. But inflead of being
received with that humanity to which their wretched
condition entitled them, they were reduced to a flare of
fertitude. Both the civil and ecclefiaflical powers found
it necefary to interpose in order to put a flop to this
barbarous praaice Potgieffer. de Statu Servor. lib. i.
c. r. § 16. In other countries, the laws permitted thse
inhabitants of maritime provinbes to reduce such as were
shipwrecked on their coast to servitude. Ibid. § a7.
This barbarous custom prevailed in many countries of
Europe. The praaice of seizing the goods of persons who
had been (hipwrecked, and of confifeating them as the
property of the lord on whole manor they were thrown,
feema to Itave been universal. De Wefitphalen Monum.
inedita Rer. Germ. vol iv. p. qo0, &c. et Du Cange,
voc. Laganum, Beehr. Rer. Meclcb. lib. p. tia. Among
the ancient Welih, three forts of persons, a madman, a
diranger, and a leper, might be killed with impunity.
Leges Hoel Dda, quoted in Obfervat. on the Statutes,
ehigfly the more ancient5 p. zz. M. de Lauriete pro-

duces

ferent provinces of France, flrangers became the slaves
of the lord on whose lands they fettled. Gloffaire du
Droit Francois, art. Aubaine, p. 92. Beaumanoir says,
' that there are several places in France, in which, if a
firanger fixes his residence for a year and day, he be-
comes the slave of the lord of the manor." Couft. de
Beav. ch. 4- p. 54. As a prafice so contrary to
humanity could not fublftflong, the fuperiorlords found
it necetfary to refi satisfied, infitead of enilaving aliens,
with levying certain annual taxes upon them, or im-
poling upon them Come extraordinary duties or services.
But when any firanger died, he could not convey his
effeas by will; and all his real, as well as personal
efiare, fell to the king, or to the lord of the barony, to
the exclulion of his natural heirs. This is termed in
France Droit D'Aubaine. Pref. de Laurier. Ordon. tom. i.
p. s5. Bruffel. tom. ii. p. 944. DuCange, voc. Aabani.
Parquier Recherches, p- 367. This prafice of confif.
eating the effeas ot Iirangers upon their death was very
ancient. It is mentioned, though very obscurely, in a
law of Charlemagne, A. D. 8a3. Capitul. Baluz.
p. 507. § 5. Not only persons who were born in a
soreign country were fubjea to the Droit D'Aubaine,
but in Come countries Cuch as removed from one diocese
to another, or from the lands of one baron to another.
BrulTel. vol.ii. p. 94?. 949. It is hardly possible to
conceive any law more unfavourable to the intercourfc
between nations. Something similar to it, however,
may be found in the ancient laws of every kingdom in
Europe. With refpe& to Italy, fee Murat. Ant. vol. ii.
p. I.. As nations advanced in improvement, this
praaice was gradually abolished. It is no Cmall disgrace
to the French jurisprudence, that this barbarous, inhof-
pitable coutom thould have Co long remained among a
people Co highly civilized.

The confufson and outrage which abounded under

a feeble form of government, incapable of framing or
executing Calutary laws, rendered the communication
between the different provinces of the fame kingdom

a extremely

pus, abbot ot Ferrieres, in the ninth century, that the
highways were so much infelled by banditti, that it was
necessary for travellers to form themselves into compa-
nies or caravans, that they might be safe from the as-
faults of *robbers. Bouquet Recueil des Hsft. vol. vii.
p. 5s5. The numerous regulations publifhedby Charles
the Bald in the fame century, discover the frequency of
there disorders; and such aa3s of violence were become
To common, that by many they were hardly conlidered
as criminal. For this reason the inferior judges, called
centenarli, were required to take an oath, that they
would neither commit any robbery themselves, nor pro-
te& such as were guilty of that crime. Capitul. edit.
Baluz. vol. ii. p. 63. 68. The hillorians of the ninth
and tenth centuries gave pathetic deferiptions of there
disorders. Some remarkable passages to this purpose
are colleaed by Mat. Jo. Ieehr. Rer. Mecleb. lib..viii.
p. 603. They became to frequent and audacious, that
the authority of the civil magiltrate was unable to repress
them. The ecclefiatical jurifdiaion was called in to
aid it. Councils were held with great solemnity, the
bodies of the faints were broughst thither, and, in pre-
fence of their sacred reliqqes, anathemas were denounced
against robbers, and other violators of the public peace.
Bouquet Recueil des Hist. tom. x. p. 360. 435' 536-
One of these forms of excommunication, lifued A.D.
988, is dtill preserved, and is so singular, and composed
with eloquence of such a peculiar kind, that it will not
perhaps be deemed unworthy of a place here. After
the uSual introduaion, and mentioning the outrage
twhich gave occasion to the anathema, it runs thus;
" Obtenebretcant oculi veltri, qui concupiverunt;
arefcant manus, quat rapuerunt, debilitentur omnia
membra, quae adjuverunt. Semper iaboretis, nec re-
4uiem inveniatis, fruduque vedtri laboris privemini.
Formidetis, & paveatis, . facie perfequentis, & nore
perfequentis hoftis, ut tabefcendo deficiatis. Sit portio
vefira cum Juda traditore Domini, in terra mortis et
tenebrarum j donec corda veltra ad fatisfasionem ple-

VOL. 1* SS cam

ones, fcelerum veitrorum perfecutrices, quamdiu per-
stanebitis in peccato pervafionis. Amen, Fiat, Fiat."
Bouquet, lb. p. 517*

NOTE XXX. SECT.I. p. 89. [GG].
WITH refpe& to the progrefe of commerce which

I have described, p. 8 3, &c. it may be observed, that
the Italian slates carried on some commerce with the
cities of the Greek empire, as early as the age of
Charlemagne, and imported into their own counmry the
rich commodities of the East. Murat. Antiq. Ital.
vol. ii. p. 882. In the tenth century, the Venetians
had opened a trade with Alexandria in Egypt. Ibid.
The inhabitants of Amalphi and Pisa had lilkewife ex-
tended their trade to the fame ports. Murat. lb. p. 884,
885. The effeas of the Crusades in increaftng the
wealth and commerce of the Italian slates, and par-
ticularly that which they carried on with the Eafi, I
bave explained, page 3sft of this volume. They not
only imported the Indian commodities from the Ead,
but eflablilhed manufaaures of curious fabric in their
own country. Several of these are enumerated by
Muratori in his Dilfertations concerning the arts and
the ·wea~ving of the middle ages. Antiq. Ital. vol. ii.
p. 3A9. 399. They made great progress, particularly
in the manufature of silk, which had long been pe-
culiar to the eastern provinces of Asia. Silk fluffs were
of such high price in ancient Rome, that only a few
persons of the lirf' rank were able to purchase them.
Under Aurelian, A. D. syo, a pound of silk was equal
in value to a pound of gold. Abut ut auro fila pen-
fentur. Libra enim auri unc libra ferici suit. Vopif-
cus in Aureliano. Justinian, in the Iixth century, intro-
duced the art of rearing silk-worms into Greece, which
rendered the commodity somewhat more plentiful,
though filllit was of such great value as to remain an ar-
ticle of luxury or magnificence, reserved only for persons
of the firR order, or forpublic folemnities. Roger I. king

of

artificers in the 6lk trade from Athens, and fettling them
in Palermo, introduced the culture of ilk into his king-
dom, from which it was communicated to other parts of
Italy. Gianon. Hilt. of Naples, b. xi. c. 7. This seems
to have rendered ilk so common, that, about the middle
of the fourteenth century, a thousand citizens of Genoa
appeared in one proceffson clad in ilk robes. Sugar is
likewise a produaion of the Eall. Some plants of the
sugar cane were brought from Ata; and the firil at-
tempt to cultivate them in Sicily was made about the
middle of the twelfth century. From thence they were
transplanted into the southern provinces of Spain.
From Spain they were carried to the Canary and Ma-
deira isles, and at length into the new world. Ludovico
Guicciardini, in enumerating the goods imported into
Antwcrp about the year I 5oo, mentions the sugar
which they received from Spain and Portugal as a con-
fiderable article. He deferibes that fogar as the pro-
duct of the Madeira and Canary islands. Defcritt. de
Paefi BaRi, p. i80, s81. The sugar cane was intro-
duced into the Well Indies before that time, but the
cultivation of it was not Co improved or so extenfsve
as to furnilh an article of much consequence in com-
merce. In the middle ages, though sugar was not
raised in such quantities, or employed for so many pur-
pores, as to become one of the common necessaries of
life, it appears to have been a considerable article in the
commerce of the Italian states.

TheSe various commodities with which the Italians

furnithed the other nations of Europe, procured them a
favourable reception in every kingdom. They were
eltablifhed in France in the thirteenth century with mofi
extensive immunities. They not only obtained every
indulgence favourable to their commerce, but personal
rights and privileges were granted to them, which the
natives of the kingdom did not enjoy. Ordon. tom. iv.
p. 668. By a Ipecial proviso, they were exempted from
the Droit d'Aubaine. Ibid. p. 670. As the Lombaids
(a name frequently given to all Italian merchants in

rra many

many parts of Europe) engrossed the trade of every
kingdom in which they fettled, they became mailers of
its cash. Money of course was in their hands not only
a flgn of the value of other commodities, but became
an objea of commerce itself. They dealt largely as
bankers. In an ordonance, A. D. 1295, we find them
itiled mercstores and camp/ores. They carried on this as
wvell as other branches of their commerce with some-
what of that rapacious spirit which is natural to mono-
polizers who are not restrained by the competition of
rival traders. An absurd opinion, which prevailed in
-the middle ages, was, however, in some measure, the
caule of their exorbitant demands, and may be pleaded
in apology for them. Trade cannot be carried on with
advantage, unless the persons who lend a fum of money
are allowed a certain premium for the use of it, as a
compensation for the risk which they run in permitting
another to trafic with their flock. This premium is
fixed by law in all commercial countries, and is called
the legal intereff of money. But the Fathers of the
church had prepofheroully applied the -prohibitions of
usury in scripture to the payment of legal interest, and
condemned it as a fin. The fchoolmen, milled by Arif-
totie, whose sentiments they followed implicitly, and
without examination, adopted the fame error, and en-
forced it. Blackflone's Commentaries on the Laws of
England, vol. ii. p. 455 Thus the Lombards found
themselves engaged in a traffic which was every where
deemed criminal and odious. They were liable to
punishment if deteaed. They were not satisfied,
therefore, with that moderate premium, which they
might have claimed if their trade had been open and
authorized by law. They exadled a fum proportional
to the danger and infamy of a dilcovery. Accordingly,
we find that it was usual for them to demand twenty
per cent, for the use of money in the thirteenth century.
Murat. Antiq. Ital. vol. i. p. 893. About the beginning
of that century, the couneefs of Slanders was obliged to
borrow money in order to pay her hufband's ransom.
She procured the fum requisite, either from Italian mer-

chant -

paid to them was above twenty per cent. and some of
them exafted near thirty. Marrene and Durand. The-
faur. Anecdotorum, vol. i. p. 885. In the fourteenth
century, A. D. s Is, Philip IV. fixed the interest which
might be legally exaated in the fairs of Champagne at
twenty per cent. Ordonan. tom. i. p. 484. The in-
terest of money in Aragon was somewhat lower.
James I. A. D. 2.42, fixed it by law at eighteen per
cent. Petr. de Marca. Mllarca five Limes Hifpan. app.
1433. As late as the year 1490, it appears tlhat the
interest of money in lJlacentia was at the rate of forty
per cent. This is the more extraordinary, because at
that time the commerce of the Italian fates was become
considerable. Memorie Storiche de Piacenza, tom. viii.
p. 1o4. siac. 1760. It appears from Lud. Gu cciar-
dini, that Charles V. had fixed the rate of interefi in his
dominons in the Low Countries at twelve per cent. and
at the time when he wrote, about the year 1560, it was
not uncommon to exsa more than that fum. He com-
plains of this as exorbitant, and points out its bad effeas
both on agriculture and commerce. Defcritt. di Paefi
Bassi, p. 172. This high interest of money is alone a
proof that the profits on commerce were exorbitant;
and that it was not carried on to great extent.-The
Lombards were likewise eflabliihed in England in the
thirteenth century, and a considerable fireet in the city
of London itill bears their name. They enjoyed great
privileges, and carried on an extenfsve commerce, par-
ticularly as bankers. See Anderfon's Chronol. Deduc.
tion, vol. i. p. 137. i6o. 204. 231. where the featutes
or other authorities which confirm this are quoted. But
the chief mart for Italian commodities was at Bruges.
Navigation was then To imperfe&t that to fail from any
port in the Baltic, and to return again, was a voyage
too great to be performed in one summer. For that
reason, a magazine or florehoufe half way between the
commercial cities in the North, and those in Italy,
became necessary. Bruges was pitched upon as the
most convenient flation. That choice introduced vast

1 r3 wealth

the flaple for English wool ; for the woollen and linen
manufadtures of the Netherlands; for the naval flores
and other bulky conmnodities of the North ; and for the
Indian commodities, as well as domeflic produaions
imported by the Italian States. The extent of its com-
merce in Indian goods with Venice alone, appears front
one fa&t. In the year 13o8, five Venetian galeaffes
laden with Indian commodities arrived at Bruges, in
order to dispose of their cargoes at the fair. There
galeaffes were vefifls of vety considerable burthen.
L. Guic. Defcritt. di Paet Bafi, p. 74. Biuges was
the greatest emporium in all Europe. Many proofs of
this occur in the hiflorians and records of the thirteenth
and fourteenth centuries. But, inflead of multiplying
quotations, I Ehall refer my readers to Anderson, vol. i.
p. Ca. a -. 21-. a46, &c. The nature of this wcrk
prevents me from entering into any more minute detail,
but there are some detached fadCs, which give an high
idea of the wealth both of the Flemish and Italian com-
snercial flares. The Duke of Brabant contradled his
daughter to the Black Prince, son of Edward Iii. of
England, A. D. 1339, and gave her a portion which
we may reckon to be of equal value with three hundrrd
thloufand pounds of our present money. Rymer's F e-
dera, vol. v. p. 113. John Galeazzo Visconti Duke of
Milan concluded a treaty of marriage between his
daughter and Lionel Duke of Clarence, Edward's third
son, pA.D. a367, and granted her a portion equal to
two hundred thousand pounds of our present money.
Rymer a Fieder. vol. vi. p. 54. Thefeexorbitantfurts
To far exceeding what was then granted by the most
powerful monarchs, and which appear extraordinaty
even in the present age when the wealth of Europe is
so much increased, mull have arisen from the riches
which flowed into those countries from their extensive
and lucrative commerce. The firfit source of wealth to
the towns situated on t're Baltic sea seems to have been
the herring fishery ; the floals of herrings frequenting
at that time the coaflts of Sweden and Denmark, in the

fame

tame manner as they now reforf to the Britilb coafls.
The effeds of this filhery are thus described by an au-
thor of the thirteenth century. The Danes, says he,
who were formerly clad in the poor garb of sailor , are
now clothed in fearlet, purple, and fine linen. For they
abound with wealth flowing from their annual fithery
on the coast of Schonen ; so that all nations resort to
them, bringing their gold, silver, and precious com-
modities, that they may purchase herrings, which the
divine bounty bellows upon them. Arnoldus Lubecen-
fls ap. Conring. de Urbib. German. 4 87.

The Hanseatic league is the most powerful com-

mercial confederacy known in hiflory. Its origin to-
wards the close of the twelfth century, and the objeals
of its union, are deferibed by Knipfcltildt Tradatus His-
torico Politico Juridicus de Juribus Civitat. Imper. lib. i.
cap. 4. Andetfon .has mentioned the chief lads with
refped to their commercial progrers, the extent of the
privileges which they obtained in different countries,
their fuccefsful wars with several monarchs, as well as
the spirit and zeal with which they contended for those
liberties and rights without which it is impoffihle to
carry on commerce to advantage. The vigorous efforts
of a society of merchans attentive only to commercial
objeds, could not fail of diffuling new and more liberal
ideas concerning justice and order in every country of
Europe where they fettled.

In England, the progress of commerce was extremely

flow; and the caues of this are obvious. During the
Saxon heprarchy, England, split into many petty king-
doms, which were perpetually at variance with each
other; exposed to the fierce incursions of the Danes,
and other northern pirates ; and funk in barbarity and
ignorance, was in no condition to cultivate commerce,
or to pursue any fyfiem of useful and salutary policy.
When a better profpe& began to open by the union of
the kingdom under one monarch, the Norman conquest
took place. This occasioned such a violent shock, as
well as fuchsa sudden and total revolution of property,
that the nation did not recover from it durihg several

reigns.

reigns. By the time that the conflitution began to ac-
quire some stability, and the English had so incorporated
with their conquerors as to become one people, the
nation engaged with no less ardour than imprudence in
support of the pretenlions of their sovereigns to the
clown of France, and long wasted its vigour and genius
in its wild efforts to conquer that kingdom. When by
ill fuccels, and repeated disappointments, aperiod was at
last put to this fatal phrenzy, and the nation, beginning to
enjoy some repose, had leisure to breathe and to gather
new fitrength, the deftrumdive wars between the houses
of York and Lancaster broke out, and involved the
kingdom in the worst of all calamities. Thus, belides
the common obftruations of commerce occaftoned by the
nature of the feudal government, and the slate of man-
ners during the middle ages, its progress in England was
retarded by peculiar caules. Such a fucceion of events
adverle to the commerci.il spirit was fufficient to have
checked its growth, although every other circumstance
had favoured it. The Englith were accordingly one of
the last nations in Europe who availed themselves of
those commercial advantages which were natural or pe-
culiar to their country. Before the reign of EdwardlII.
all the wool of England, except a small quantity wrought
into coarse cloths for home consumption, was fold to the
Flemings or Lombards, and manufaaured by them.
Though Edward, A. D. s326, began to allure some of
the Flemilh weavers to fettle in England, it was long
before the Englibh were capable of fabricating cloth for
foreign markets, and the export of unwrought wool
itill continued to be the chief article of their commerce.
Anderson palfim.-Ali foreign commodities were brought
into England by the Lombards or Hanseatic merchants.
The Englilh ports were frequented by ships both
from the north and south of Europe, and they tamely
allowed foreigners to reap all the profits arising from
the supply of their wants. The firit commercial treaty
of England on record, is that with Haquin King of
Norway, -A. D. sa7. Anders. vol. i. p. io8. But
the English did not venture to trade in their own ships

to

to the Baltic until the heginoing of the fourteenth cen-
tury. lb. IS'. It was after the middle of the fifteenth,
before they sent any (hip into the Mediterranean. ]b.
p. 577. Nor was it long before this period that their
vessels began to visit the ports of Spain or Portugal.
But though I have pointed out the flow progress of the
English commerce as a fa& little attended to, and yet
meriting consideration; the concourse of foreigners to
the ports of England, together with the communication
among all the different countries in Europe, which
went on increaSing from the beginning of the twelfth
century, is fufficient to jullify all the observations
and reasonings in the text concerning the influence of
commerce on the 'tate of manners and of society.

NO T E XXXI. SECT. III. p. 164. [HHJ.

I HAVE not been able to discover the precise manner

in which the juftiza was appointed. Among the claims
of the junta.or union formed againf' James I. A. D. 1564,
this was one; that the king (hould not nominate any
person to be jufliza, without the conl'ent or approbation
of tre ricos-hombres or nobles. Zurita Anales de Aragon,
vol. i. p. u80. But the king in his answer to their re-
monfirance asserts, " that it was eltablithed by imme-
morial prafice, and was conformable to the laws of the
kingdom, that the king, in vIrtue of his royal preroga-
tive, should name the jutliza." Zurita, Ibid. 187.
Blanca, 656. From another passage in Zurica, it appears,
that while the Aragonefe enjoyed the privilege of the union,
i. e. the power of confederating against their sovereign
as often as they conceived that he had violated any of
their rights and immunities, trhe juliza was not only no-
minated by the king, but held his office during the king's
pleasure. Nor was this pradlice attended with any bad
effecls, as the privilege of the union was a (ufficient and
effeatual check to any abuse of the royal prerogative.
But when the plivilege of the union was abolithed as
dangerous to the order and peace of society, it was agreed
tlrat the juftiza Ihould continue in office during life.

Several

who were obnoxious to them, and they sometimes fuc.
ceeded in the attempt. In order to guard againht this en.
croachment, which would have defiroyed the intention
of the infttution, and have rendered the jufliza site de-
pendant and tool of the crown, instead of the guardian
of the people, a law was enaaed in the Cortes, A. D.
144a. ordaining that the jultiza (hould continue in office
during life, and should not be removed from it unless by
the authority of the Cortes. Fueros & Obfervancias del
Reyno de Arag. lib. i. p. 22. By former laws the per.
son of the juftiza had been declared sacred, and he was
responsible only to the Cortes, Ibid. p. z5, b. Zurita
and Blanca, who both publithed their histories while the
jufliza of Aragon retained the full exercise of his privi.
leges and jurifdidlion, have negled-ed to explain several
circumfiances with regard to the office of that refpeaable
magifirate, because they addrefed their works to their
countrymen, who were well acquainted with every par-
ticular concerning the funtions of a judge, to whom
they looked up as to the guardian of their liberties. It
is vain to consult the later historians of Spain, about
any point with refpe& to which the excellent Iiflorlans
whom I have named are illent. The ancient. cosflitu.
tion of their country was overturned, and despotism es-
tablithed on the ruin of its liberties, when the writers of
this and the preceding century composed their hiffories,
and on that account they had little curiosity to know the
nature of those inifitutions to which their ancestors owed
the enjoyment of freedom, or they were afraid to deferibe
them with much accuracy. 'The spirit with which
Mariana, his continuator Miniana, and Ferreras, write
their histories, is very different from that of the two
historians of Aragon, from whom I have taken my ac-
count of the constitution of that kingdom.

Two circumstances concerning the juftiza, betides

those which I have mentioned in the text, are worthy of
observation : e. None of the ricos-hombres, or noblemen
of the firfi order, could be appointed julliza. He was
taken out of the second class of cavalieros, who seem to

have

tlemen or commoners in Great Britain. Fueros & Ob-
fervanc. del Reyno, &c. lib. i. p. zr, b. The rearon
was, By the laws of Aragon, the ricos-hombres were
not fubje& to capital punishment; but as it was necef-
fary for the security of liberty, that the juftiza thould be
accountable for the manner in which he executed the
high trust reposed in him, it was a powerful restraint
upon him to know that he was liable to be punmfhed
capitally. Blanca, p. 6S7. 756. Zurita, tom. ii. 2so.
Fueros & Obfervanc. lib, ix. p. s82, b. 83s. It ap-
pears too from many passages in Zurita, that the
juftiza was appointed to check the domineering and
oppretive spirit of the nobles, as well as to set bounds
to the power of the monarch, and therefore be was
chosen from an order of citizens equally interef'ed in
oppodng both.

2. A magiflrate poffeffed of such extensive powers as

the juftiza, might have exercised them in a manner per-
nicious to the slate, if he himself had been fubje& to no
controul. A conflitutional remedy was on that account
provided against this danger. Seventeen persons were
chosen by lot in each meeting of the Cortes. These
formed a tribunal called the court of inquisition into the
office of juftiza. This court met at three slated terms
in each year. Every person had liberty of complaining
to it of any iniquity or negle& of duty in the jufliza, or
in the inferior judges, who aaed in his name. The jufliza
and his deputies were called to answer for their condua.
The members of the court palfed sentence by ballot.
They might punish by degradation, confiscation of goods,
or even with death. The law which ereaed this court,
and regulated the form of its procedure, was enaaed
A. D. 5465. Zurita Anales, iv. soa. Blanca Comment.
Rer. Aragon, 770. Previous to this period, inquiry was
made into the condua of the juftiza, though not with
the fame formality. He was, from the first inflitution
of the office, fubjea to the review of the Cortes. The
constant dread of such an impartial and severe inquiry
into his behaviour, was a powerful motive to the vigi-

lant

lant and faithful discharge of his duty. A remarkable
instance of the authority of the jufliza when opposed to
that of the king occurs in the year 386. By the con-
flitution of Aragon, tbe eldest son or heir apparent of
the crown poffeffed considerable power and jurifdiitaon
in the kingdom. Fueros & Obfervan. dcl Reytno de Arag.
lib. i. p. r6.. Peter IV. instigated by a second wife, at-
tcmpted to deprive his son of this, and enjoined his sub.
jeas to yield him no obedience. The prince immediately
applied to the jufiza ; " the safeguard and defence, says
Zurita, againit all violence and oppremion." The jufliza
granted him thefrso de derecho, the effed of which was,
that upon his giving surety to appear in judgment, he
could not be deprived of any immunity or privilege
which he poffeffed, but in consequence of a legal tiial
before the juftiza, and of a ifntence pronounced by him.
This was puhlilhed throughout the kingdom, and not-
withflanding the proclamation in contradidion io this
which had been issued by the king, the prince continued
in the exercise of all his rights, and his authority was
universally recognised. Zurita Anales de Aragon, tom.
ii. 365-

NNOTE XXXII. SECT. III. p. 65- [II].

I HAVE been induced, by the concurring testimony of

many refpeaable authors, to mention this as the confli-
tutional form of the nath of allegiance, which the Ara-
gonefe took to their sovereigns. I must acknowledge,
however, that I have nor found this ftngular oath in any
Spanibh author whom I have had an opportunity of con-
fulting. It is mentioned neither by Zurita, nor Blanca,
nor Argenfola, nor Sayas, who were all hdlorio-
graphers appointed by the Cortes of Aragon to record the
tranfafions of the kingdom. All there writers possess a
merit which is very rare among hiltorians. They are
extremely accurate in tracing the progress of the laws
and conilitution of their country. Their silence with re.
sped to this, creates some furpicion concerning the ge-
nuinenefs of the 4ith. But as it is mentioned by To many

authors,

which it is exprefed, it is probable that they have taken
it from some wiiter of credit, whose works have not
fallen into my hands. The spirit of the oath is perfealy
agreeable to the genius of the Aragonefe conltitution.
Since the publication of the first edition, the learned
M. Totze, Profelfor of hiltory at Batzow in the duchy of
Mecklenburgh, has been To good as to point out to me a
Spantih author of great authority, who has publilhed the
words of this oath. It is Antonio Perez, a native of
Aragon, secretary to Philip II. The words of the oath
are, " Nos, que valemos tanto como vos, os hazemos
nuefiro Rey y Segnor, con tal que nos guardeys nueflros
fueros, y Ilbertades, y Ci No, No." Las Obtas y Rela-
ciones de Ant. Perez. Svo. par Juan de la Planche 1631.
P. '43.

The privilegeof union,which I have mentioned in the

preceding note, and alluded to in the text, is indeed one of
the most fsngular which could take place in a regular go-
vernment, and the oath that I have quoted expresses no-
thing more than this conolitutional privilege entitled the
Aragonefe to perform. If the king or his ministers vio-
lated any of the laws or immunities of the Aragonefe,
and did not grant immediate redress in conlequence of
their representations and remonflrances, the nobles of
the firt rank, or Ricos-homubres de nasura, & de mefnada,
the equefirian order, or the nobility of the second class,
called llidageos & Infancicnes, together with the magistrates
of cities, might, either in the Cortes, or in a voluntary
assembly, join in union, and binding themselves by mu-
tual oaths and the exchange of hollages to be faithful to
each other, they might require the king, in the name
and by the authority of this body corporate, to grant
them redrels If the king refused to comply with their
requell, or took arms in order to oppole them, they
might, in virtue of the privilege of union, inflantly witlh-
draw their allegiance from the king, refuse to acknow-
ledge him as their fovercign, and proceed to ele an-
other monarch; nor did they incur any guilt, or be-
come liable to any prosecution on that account. Blanca

VOL, 1. GO Com.

the confederacies in other feudal kingdoms. It was a
conltitutional association, in which Irgal privileges were
vetted, which iflled its mandates under a common feal,
and proceeded in all its operations by regular and afcer-
tained forms. This dangerous right was not only claimed
but exercised. In the year 1287, the Aragonefe formed
an union in opposition to Alfonso III. and obliged that
king not only to comply with their demands, but to rati-
fy a privilege so fatal to the power of the crown. Zurita
Anales, tom. i. p. z22. In the year 1347, an union
was formed againit Peter IV. with equal success, and a
new ratification of the privilege was extorted. Zurita,
tom. ii. p. 2o0. But soon after, the king having de-
seated the leaders of the union in battle, the privi-
lege of union was finally abrogated in the Cortes,
and all the laws or records which contained any con-
firmation of it were cancelled or destroyed. The
king, in presence of the Cortes, called for the a& whereby
he had ratified the union, and having wounded his hand
with his poniard, he held it above the record, " that
" privilege, says he, which has been so fatal to the
" kingdom, and To injurious to royalty, thould be es.
" faced with the blood of a king.' Zurita, tom. ii.
p. 229. The law abolilhing the union is published.
Fueros & Obfervanc. lib, ix. p. 578. From that period
the juftiza became the conititutional guardian of public
liberty, and his power and jurifdiaion occaftoned none
of those violent convulsions which the tumultuary privi-
lege of the union was ape to produce. The conflitution
of Aragon, however, flill remained extremely free. One
source of this liberty arose from the early admiffon of
the representatives of cities into the Cornes. It seems
probable from Zurita, that burgesses were conifituent
members of the Corres from its first infltiution. He
mentions a meeting of Cortes, A. D. 2533, in which the
procuradores de las ciudadesy evilas were present. Tom. i.
p 5e. This is the constitutional language in which
their presence is declared in the Cortes, after the journals
of that court were regularly kept. It is probable, that
an historian To accurate as Zurita would not have used

thef,

thentic record. It was more than a century after this
period before the representatives of cities formed a con-
Rittuent part in the fu1 reme assemblies of the other
European nations. The free spirit of the Aragonefe
government is conspicuous in many particulars. The
Cortes not only opposed the attempts of their kings to
increase their revenue, or to extend their prerogative,
but they claimed rights and exercised powers which will
appear extraordinary even in a country accullomed to
the enjoyment of liberty. In the year aaS6, the Cortes
claimed the privilege of naming the members of the
king's council and the officers of his household, and
they seem to have obtained it for Lome time. Zurica,
tom. i. p. 3c 3. 307. It ilas the privilege of the Cortes
to name the officers who commanded the troops raised
by their authority. This seems to be evident from a
passage in Zurita. When the Cortes, in the year 1503,
raised a body of troops to be employed in Italy, it passed
an asl empowering the king to name the officers who
should command them, Zurita, tom. v. p. 274; which
plainly implies that, withiouit this warrant, it did not be-
long to him in virtue of his prerogative. In the Fueros
& Obfervancias del Reyno de Aragon, two general de-
clarations of the rights and privileges of the Aragonefe
are publifted; the one, in the reign of Pedro I. A. D.
3283; the other, in that of James II. A.D. INS-
They are of such a length, that I cannot infett them;
but it is evident from there, that not only the privileges
of the nobility, but the rights of the people, personal as
well as political, were, at that period, more extensive
and better underflood than iu any kingdom in Europe.
Lib. i. p. 7. 9. The oath by which the king bound him-
self to observe those rights and liberties of the people,
was very solemn. Ibid. p. 14, b. & p. r5. The Corres
of Aragon discovered not only the jealouly and vigilance
which are peculiar to free Rtates, in guarding the etrential
parts of the confhitution, but they were scrupulously at-
tentive to observe the most minute forms and ceremonies
to which they were accustomed. According to the

G G a efeablifhed

had liberty to enter the hall in which the Cortes as-
fembled. Ferdinand, in the year 148r, appointed his
queen, Isabella, regent of the kingdom, while he was ab-.
Cent during the course of the eampaign. The law re. -
quired that a regent Ihould take the oath of fidelity in
presence of the Cortes; but as Isabella was a foreigner,
before (he could be admitted, the Cortes thought it ne-
ceffary to pasS an afi authorizing the ferjeant-porter to
open the door of the hall, and to allow her to entert'
" Co attentive were they (tays Zurita) to obherve their
" laws and forms, even such as may seem most mi.
"l nute." Tom. iv. p.3t3.

The Aragonefe were no less folhcitous to secure the

personal rights of individuals, than to maintain the
freedom of the conftitation ; and the spirit of their fatutes
with relpe& to both was equally liberal. Two fafls rela.
tive to this matter merit obtervation. By an exprets
flatute in the year 5335, it was declared to be unlawful
to put any native Aragonefe to the torture. If he could
not be convidled by the teltimony of witnesses, he was
inflantly absolved. Zurita, tom. ii. p. 66. Zurita re-
cords the regulation with the Catisfadion natural to an
hiltorian, when he contemplates the humanity of his
countrymen. He coinpares the laws of Aragon to those
of Rome, as both exempted citizens and freemen from
such ignominious and cruel treatment, and had recourse
to it only in the trial of slaves. Zurita had reason to be-
flow Cuch an encomium on the laws of his country.
Torture was at that time permitted by the laws of every
other nation in Europe. Even in England, from which
the mild spirit of legislation has long banished it, torture
was not, at that time, unknown. Observations on the
Statutes, chiefly the more ancient, &c. p. 66.

The other faEt (hows, thatsthe Came Cpirit which in-

fluenced the legillature prevailed among the people. In
the year 5485, the religious zeal of Ferdinand and Ifa-
bella prompted them to introduce the inquitition into
Aragon. Though the Aragonefe were no less fuperti-
tioualy attached than the other Spanliards to the Roman

3 Catholic

Catholic faith, and no lefe delirous to root out the feeds
of error and of herely which the Jews and Moors had
feattered, yet they took arms against the inquoltors,
murdered the chief inquisitor, and long opposed the es-
tablifhment of that tribunal. The reason which they
gave for their conduc was, That the mode of trial in the
inquistion was inconilltent with liberty. The criminal
was not confronted with the witneifes. he was not ac-
quainted with what they deposed againlt him, he was
(ubjeaed to torture, and the goods of persons condemned
were confircated. Zurica Anales, tom. iv. p. 34.5.

The form of government in the kingdom of Valencia,

and principality of Catalonia, which were annexed to
the crown of Aragon, was likewise extremely favour-
able to liberty. The Valencians enjoyed the privilege
of union in the fame manner with the Aragonefe. But
they had no magifirate resembling thejuitiza. The Ca-
talonians were no iels jealous of their liberties than the
two other nations7 and no less bold in asserting them.
But it is not necelfaty for illufirating the following his-
tory to enter into any farther detail concerning the pe-
culiarities in the conititution of there kingdoms.

NOTE XXXIII. SECT. III. p. i66. [KK].

I HAVE searched in vain among the hifiorians of Castile

for such information as might enable me to trace the
progress of laws and government in Castile, or to explain
the nature of the constitution with the fame degree of
accuracy wherewith I have deferibed the political fiate
of Aragon. It is manifelt not only from the historians
of Castile, but from its ancient laws, particularly the
Puero Juzgo, that its monarchs were originally eleaive.
Ley, a. s. 8. They were chosen by the bilhops, the no-
bility, and the people, ibid. It appears from the fame
Venerable code of laws, that the prerogative of the Caf-
tilian monarchs was extremely limited. Villaldiego, in
his commentary on the Fuero Juzgo, produces many
fasts and authorities in confirmation of both these parti-
culars. Dr. Geddes, who was well acquainted with

G G 3 Spanilh

Spanibh literature, complains that he could find no author
who gave a ditin& account of the Cortes or supreme as-
fembly of the nation, or who deferibed the manner in
which it was held, or mentioned the precise number of
members who had a right to fit in it. He produces,
however, from Gil Gonzales d'Avila, who publilled a
history of Henry II. the writ of summons to the town
of Abula, requiring it to chufe representatives to appear
in the Cortes whcli he called to meet A.D. 5390.
From this we learn, that prelates, dukes, marquiffes,
the masters of the three milirary orders, Condes and
Ricos-hombres were required to attend. There com-
posed the bodies of eccletialtics and nobles, which formed
two members of the legislature. The cities which sent
members to that meeting of the Cortes were forty eight.
The number of representatives (for the cities had right
to chufe more or fewer according to their refpe~tive dig.
nity) amounted to an hundred and twenty five. Geddes'
Miscellaneous Trats, vol. i. ?33. Zurita having occasion
to mention the Cortes which Ferdinand held at Toro
A. D. 5505, in order to secure for himself the govern-
ment of Caflile after the death of Isabella, records, with
his usual accuracy. the names of the members present,
and of the cities which they represented. From that liit it
appears, that only eighteen cities had deputies in this
assembly. Anales de Aragon, tom. vi. p. 3. What
was the occasion of this great difference in the number
of cities represented in these two meetings of the Cortes,
I am unable to explain.

N OTE XXXIV. SECT. III. p. 168. [LLU.

A GREAT part of the territory in Spain was engrossed

by the nobility. L. Marinsus Siculus, who composed
his treatise De Rebus Hifpaniz during the reign of
Charles V. gives a catalogue of the Spanilh nobility, to-
gether with the yearly rent of their eflates. According
to his account, which he affirms was as accurate as the
nature of the fubjea would admit, the fum total of the
annual revenue of their lands amounted to one million

four

make allowance for the great difference in the value of
money in the fifteenth century from that which it now
bears, and confider that the catalogue of Marinnus in-
cludes only the Titulados, or nobility whole families were
distinguished by some honorary title, their wealth must
appear very great. L. Marinnus ap. Schotti Scriprores

lilpan. vol. i. p. 323. The Commons of Castile, in
their contests with the crown, which I thall hereafter
relate, complain of the extensive property of the no-
bility as extremely perniciovs to the kingdom. In one
of thbir manifefloes they assert, that from Valladolid to
St. Jago in Gallicia, which was an hundred leagues, the
crown did not possess more than three villages. All the
reft belonged to the nobility, and could be fubjeaed to
no public burden. Sandov. Vida del Emperor Carl. V.
vol.1i. P*422. It appears from the teflimony of au-
thors quoted by Bovadilla, that threfextentivepoffetlions
were bellowed upon the Ricos-bombLres, bida/gos, and ca-
vallerso, by the kings of Castile, in reward for the afihl-
ance which they had received from them in expelling
the Moors. They likwife obtained by the fame means
a considerable influence in the cities, many of which
anciently depended upon the nobility. Politica par&
Corregidores. Amb. 1750, fol. vol, i. 44o. 442.

NOTE XXXV. SECT. III. p.171. [MM].

I NAVE been able to discover nothing certain, as I

observed Note XVIII. with refpe& to the origin of
communities or free cities in Spain. It is probable, that
as soon as the conftderable towns were recovered from
the Moors, the inhabitants who fixed their relidence
in them, being persons of diflinaion and credit, had
all the privileges of municipal government and jurif-
daion conferred upon them. Many firiking proofs
occur of the splendour, wealth, and power of the
Spanilh cities. Hieronymus Paulus wrote a deferip-
tion of Barcelona in the year 1491, and compares the
dimensions of the towns to that of Naples, and the
elegance of its buildings, the variety of its manufadures,

and

Paulus ap. Schottum Script. Hifp. ii. 844. Marinaus
deferibes Toledo as a large and populous city. A great
number of its inhabitants were persons of quality and
of illustrious rank. Its commerce was great. It carried
on with great aativity and success the manufaEtures of
silk and wool ; and the number of inhabitants employed
in there two branches of trade, amounted nearly to teal

- thousand. Marin. ubi supr. p. 3c8. I know no city,

says he, that I would prefer to Valladolid for elegance
and splendour. Ibid. p. 3Is. We may form some efti.
mate of its populousness from the following circum-
fiances. The citizens having taken arms in the year
Is'6, in order to oppose a measure concerted by car-
dinal Ximenes, they muf'ered in the city, and in the
territory which 'belonged to it, thirty thousand fighting
men. Sandov. Vida del Emper. Carl. V. tom. i. p. St.
The manufa6tures carried on in the towns of Spain were
not intended merely for homne consumption, they were
exported to foreign countries, and their commerce was
a considerable source of wealth to the inhabitants. The
maritime laws of Barcelona are the foundation of mer-
cantile jurisprudence in modern times, as the Leges
Rhodim were among the ancients. All the commercial
llates in Italy adopted these laws, and regulated their
trade according to them. Sandi Snoria Civile Veneziani,
vol. ii. 865. It appears from several ordonances of the
kings of France, that the merchants of Aragon and
Cailile were received on the fame footing, and admitted
to the fame privileges with thole of Italy. Ordonances
des Roys, &c. tom. ii. p. !35. iii. 166. 504. 635. Ci-
ties in such a flourilhing Crate became a refpeaahle part
of the society, and were entitled to a conliderable share
in the legislature. The magifirates of Barcelona aspired
to the highest honour a Spanilh fubjeA can enjoy, that of
being covered in the presence of their fovereigo, and of
being treated as grandees of the kingdom. Origin de la
dignidad de Grande de Castilla por don Alosafo Carillo,
Madr. 1657. p. 18.

NOTE XXXVI. SECT.III. p. 173. [NN].

THE military order of St. Jago, the most honourable

and opulent of the three Spanish orders, was inflituted
about the year 117o. The bull of confirmation by Alex.
ander III. is dated A. D. r176. At that time a considerable
part of Spain dill remained under fubjefion to the
Moors, and the whole country was much expoled to
depredations not only of the enemy, but of banditti. It
is no wonder then, that an inflitution, the objecc of
which was to oppose the enemies of the Christian faith,
and to redtrain and punilh those who diturbed the
public peace, should be extremely popular, and meet
with general encouragement. The wealth and power
of the order became so great, that according to one
hiflorian the grand matter of St. Jago was the person in
Spain of greatest power and dignity next to the king.
IEl. Anton. Nebriffenfas, ap. Schott. Scrip. Hifp. i. II a.
Another hiforian observes, that the order poffeffed
every thing in Caflile that a king would modt desire to
obtain. Zurita Anales, v. aa. The knights took the
vows of obedience, of poverty, and of conjugal chafti-
ty. By the former they were bound implicitly to obey
the commands of their grand master. The order could
bring into the field a thousand men at arms. Ai1.
Ant. Nebref. p. 8e3. If, as we have reason to believe,
these men at arms were accompanied, as was usual in
that age, this was a formidable body of cavalry. There
belonged to this order eighty-four commanderies, and
two hundred priories and other benefices. Dissertations
fur la Chevalerie par Hon. de St. Marie, p. z62. It is
obvious how formidable to his sovereign the command
of these troops, the adminifdration of such revenues,
and the disposal of so many offices, muff have ren-
dered a fubjea. The other two orders, though infe-
rior to that of St. Jago in power and wealth, were
nevertheless very considerable fraternities. When the
conqueet of Granada deprived the knights of St. Jago
of those enemies againdt whom their zeal was originally

diredede

fence of which they engaged to employ their courage.
To their usual oath, they added the following clause:
" We do swear to believe, to maintain, and to contend
in public and in private, that the Virgin Mary, the Mo-
ther of God, our Lady, was conceived without tLe slain
of original fsn."-This addition wes made about the
niiddle of the seventeenth century. Honord de Sr,
Marie Dissertations, &c. p. 26-.--Nor is such a singular
engagement peculiar to the oeder of St. Jago. Themem.
bers of the second military order in Spain, that of Cala-
trava, equally zealous to employ their prowess in defence
of the honours of the Pleffed Virgin, have likewise pro-
sessed themselves her true knights. Their vow, con-
ceived in terms more theologically accurate than that
of St. Jago, may afford some amusement to an Englilfl
reader. " I vow to God, to the Grand Master, and to
you who here represent his person, that now, and for
ever, I will maintain and contend, that the Virgin Ma-
ry, Mother of God, our Lady, was conceived without
original fin, and never incurred the pollution of it i but
that in the moment of her happy conception, and of the
union of her foul with her body, the Divine Grace pre-
vented and preserved her from original guilt, by the
merits of the pafilon and death of Christ our Redeemer,
her future son, foreseen in the Divine Council, by which
she was truly redeemed, and by a more noble kind of
redemption than any of the childien of Adam. In the
belief of this truth, and in maintaining the honour of the
most Holy Virgin, through the 1irength ofAlmighty
God, I will live and will die." Definiciones de la Orden
deCalatrava, conforme al Capitulo General en 1652, fol.
IVMadr. 1748. p. 53t3 Though the church of Rome
hath prudently avoided to give its Candion to the doftrine
of the immaculate conception, and the two great mo-
tsaic orders of St. Dominick and St. grancis have es-
poured oppolite opinions concerning it, the Spaniards
pre such ardent champions for the honour of the Virgin,
that when the present king of Spain inflituted a new
military order in the year 177I, in commemoration of

the

protefion of the moss H-oly Mary in the myfiery of her
immaculate conception. Conflitutiones de la Real y
diftinguida Orrlin. Efpanola de Carlos IIl. p. 7. To
undertake the dejence of the Virgmn Mary's honour, had
such a resemblance to that species of refined gallantry,
which was the orginal objea of chivalry, that the zeal
with which the military orders bound themselves, by a
folernn vow, to defend it, was worthy of a true knight
in those ages, when the spirit of the inltisution fubfified
in full vigour. But in the present age, it muff excite
some surprise to fee the inflitution of an illuffrious order
conneded with a dodrine Co extravagant and detithute
of any foundation in scripture.

NOTE XXXVII. SECT. III. p. 576. [001.

I HAVE frequently had occasion to take notice of the

defeas in police during the middle ages, occasioned by
the feebienefs of government, and the want of proper
subordination among the different ranks of men. I have
observed in a former Note, that thii greatly interrupted
the intercourse between nations, and even between
different places in the fame kingdom. The defeription
which the Spanish hifforians give of the frequency of
rapine, murder, and every a& of violence, in all the
provinces of Spain, are amazing, and present to us the
idea of a society but little removed from the disorder
and turbulence of that which has been called a Itate of
nature. Zurita Anales de Arag. i. 75a. IEL. Ant. Ne-
briffenfis rer. a Ferdmn.geflar.IHift. ap.Schottum, ii. 849.
Though the excess of these disorders rendered the inf'i-
tution of the Santa Hermandad necessary, great care was
taken at first to avoid giving any offence or alarm to
the nobility. The juriLdiaion of the judges of the Her-
mandad was expressly confined to crimes which violated
the public peace. All other offences were left to the
cognizance of the ordinary judges. If a perlon was
guilty of the most notorious perjury, in any trial before
a judge of the Herniandad, he could not punish him,

but

of the place. Commentaria in Regias Hifpan. Conflitut.
per Alph. de Azevedo, pars v. p. 22a, &c. fol. Duaci,
a6a2. Notwithstanding there reftridlions, the bar9ns
were early fenijble how much the establishment of the
Hermandad would encroach on their jurifdsftion. In
Castile, some opposition was made to the inflitution;
but Ferdinand had the address to obtain the consent of
the Conflable to the introdudion of the Hermandad into
that part of the kingdom where his ellate lay ; and by
that means, as well as the popularity of the institution,
he surmounted every obitacle that flood in its way.
./E1. Ant. Nebriffen. 8 r. In Aragon, the nobles com-
bined against it with great spirit; and Ferdinand,
though he supported it with vigour, was obliged to
make some conceslions, in order to reconcile them.
Zurita Anles de Arag. iv. 356. The power and re-
venue of the Hermandad in Castile seems to have been
very great. Ferdinand, when preparing for the war
against the Moors of Granado, required of the Hermandad
to furnish him sixteen thotfand beauts of burthen, to-
gether with eight thousand men to condta them, and
he obtained what he demanded. AEI. Ant. Nebriff. 88r.
The Hermandad has been found to be of so much use in
preserving peace, and refitraining or ceteAing crimes,
that it is fill continued in Spain ; but as it is no longer
necessary either for moderating tite power of the nobili-
ty, or extending that of the crown, tite vigour and au-
thority of the inflitution diminish gradually.

NOTE XXXVIII. SECT. III. p. 178. [PP].

NOrHINo is more common among Antiquaries, and

there is not a more copious source of error, than to de-
cide concerning the institutions and manners of palt
ages, by tile forms and ideas which prevail in thieir own
times. The French lawyers in the ferenteenth and
eighteenth centuries, having found their sovereigns in
poffeLion of abholute power, seem to think it a duty
incumbent on them to maintain that such unbounded

authority

monarchy. " The government of France," says M. de
Real very gravely, " is purely monarchical at this day,
as it was from the beginning. Our kings were absolute
originally as they are at prefent." Science du Govern-
ment, tom. ii. P. 3r. It is impofble, however, to
conceive two slates of civil society more unlike to each
other, than that of the French nation under Clovis, and
that under Lewis XV. It is evident from the codes of
laws of the various tribes which fettled in Gaul and
the counsties adjacent to it, as well as from the hiflory
of Grtgory of Toors, and other early annalifts, that
among all theSe people the form of government was ex-
tremely rude and simple, and that they had fearcely
begun to acquire the first rudiments of that order and
,police which are necelfary in extenlive societies. The
ktng or leader had the command of soldiers or com-
panions, who followed his standard from choice, not by
cnnltraint. I have produced the clearest evidence of
this, Note VI. An event related by Gregory of Tours,
lib. iv. c. i4. affords the moflt firiking proof of the
dependance of the early French kings on the sentiment
and inclination of their people. Clotaire I. having
marched at the head of his army, in the year 553,
againit the Saxons, chat people, intimidated at his ap-
proach, sued for peace, and offered to pay a large fum
to the offended monarch. Clotaire was willing to close
with what they proposed. But his arniy insisted to
be led forth to battle. The king employed all his elo-
quence to persuade them to accept of what the Saxons
were ready to pay. The Saxons, in order to sooth
them, increased their original offer. The king renewed
his folicitations : but the army, enraged, rulhed upon
the king, tore his tent in pieces, dragged him out of it,
and would have slain him on the spot, if he had not con-
fented to lead them inflantly againit the enemy.

If the early monarchs of France poffeffed such limited

authority, even vrhile at the head of their army, their
prerogative during peace will be found to be ltil more
confined. They alcended the throne not by any here-

VOL. 1. H t ditary

fubjeis. In order to avoid an unnecessary number of
quotations, I refer my readers to Hottomanni Franco-
gallia, cap. vi. p. 47. edit. 1573, where they will find
the fulled proof of this from Gregory of Tours, Amo.
inus, and the most authentic hillorians of the Merovin-
gian kings. The effe& of this eleaion was not to in.
vest them with absolute power. Whatever related to
the general welfare of the nation, was submitted to
public deliberation, and determined by the fuffrage of
the people, in the annual assemblies called Les Champs
de Mars and Les Champs de Mai. These assemblies
were called Champs, becaule, according to the custom of
all the barbarous nations, they were held in the open
air, in some plain capable of containing the vast number
of persons who had a right to be present. Jo. Jac. Sor-
berus de Comitlis veterum Germanorum, vol.i. p 59,
&c. They were denominated Champs de Mars and de
Mai, from the months in which they were held. Every
freeman seems to have had a right to be present in there
assemblies. Sorberus, ibid. § 133, &c. The ancient
annals of the Franks describe the persons who were
present in the airembly held A. D. 788, in these words:
In placito Ingelheimenfi conveniunt pontifices, majores,
minores, facerdotes, reguli, duces, comites, prefedi,
cives, oppidani, Apud Sorber. 5 304. There every
thing that concerned the happiness of their country, says
an ancient historian, every thing that could be of benefit
to the Franks, was considered and enjoined. Fre-
degarius ap. Du Cange Gloffar. voc Campus Martii,
Chlotharius II. describes the business, and acknow-
ledges the authority of these alfemblies. They are
called, says he, that whatever relates to the common
safety may be considered and resolved by common
deliberation; and whatever they determine, to that
I will conform. Amoinus de Gefi. Franc. lib. iv. c. i.
ap. Bouquet Recueil, iii. a 6. The flatutory clauses, or
words of legislative authority in the decrees issued in
these assemblies, run not in the name of the king alone.
" We have created, lays Childebert, in a decree, A. D.

r J5ZZ,

Sys, in the assembly of March, together with our no-
bles, concerning some affairs, and we now publilh the
conclusion, that it may come to-the knowledge of all."
Childeb. Decret. ap. Bouquet Recueil des Hiftor. tom. iv.
p. 3. We have agreed together with our vassals, Ibid.
§ a. It is agreed in the altembly in which we were all
united. Ibid. § 4. The Salic laws, the most venerable
monument of French jurisprudence, were ena1ed in the
fame manner. Didlaverunt Salicam legem proceres
iplius gentis, qui tunc temporis apud eam erant Re6o-
res. Sunt autem eleai de pluribus viri quatuor-qui
per tres Mallos convenientes, omnes caufarum origines
folicita difeurrendo, tratantes de fingulis judicium de-
creverunt hoc modo. Pref. Leg. Salic. ap. Bouquet.
Ibid. p. Ixz. Hoc decretum eft apud regem & principes
ejus, & apud cunaum populum Chriftianum, qui infra
regnum Merwingorum conftslunt. Ibid. p. Is4. Nay,
even in their charters, the kings of the first race are
careful to specify that they were granted with the con-
sent of their vassals. Ego Childebertus Rex unh cun
confenFu & voluntate Francorum, &c. A. D. 55g. Bou-
quet, ibid. 622. Chlotharius IIi. unl cum patribus
noftris epifcopis, optimatibus, ctcternfque palatii noltri
minifiris, A.D. 664. Ibid. 648. De confenfu fidelium
nofirorum. Mably Obferv. tom. i. p. 239. The his-
torians likewise describe the funaions of the king in
the national assemblies in such terms as imply that
his authority there was extremely small, and that every
thing depended on the court itself. Iple Rex (says the
author of the Annales Francorum, speaking of the Field
of March) fedebat in fella regia, circumftante exercitu,
precipiebatque is, die illo, quicquid a Francis decretum
erat. Bouquet Recuell. tom. ii. p. 647.

That the general assemblies exercised supreme jorif.

diaion over all persons, and with refpe& to all caules,
is so evident as to fland in need of no proof. The
trial of Brunehaut, A. D. 653, how unjust soever the
sentence againit her may be, as related by Fredegarius,
Chron. cap. 41. Bouquet, ibid. 430, is in itself fuffi.
Fient proof of this. The notorious violency and iniquity

51H of

didtion which this assembly poffeffed, as a prince so fan-
guinary as Clothaire II. thought the fandlion of its au-
thority would be fufficient to juflify his rigorous treat-
ment of the mother and grandmother of so many kings.

With refpe6& to conferring donatives on the prince, we

may observe, that among nations whose manners and
political inflitutions are simple, the public as well as
individuals, having few wants, they are lihle acquainted
with taxes, and free uncivilised tribes disdain to submit
to any slated imposition. This was remarkably the cafe
of the Germans, and of all the various people that issued
from that country. Tacitus pronounces two tribes not
to be of German origin, hecaufe they submitted to pay
taxes. De Morib. Germ. c. 43. And speaking of an-
other tribe according to the ideas prevalent in Germany,
he says, '' they were not degraded by the impolition of
taxes." Ibid. c. s9. Upon the settlement of the Franks
in Gaul, we may conclude, that while elated with the
consciousness of viaory, they would not renounce the
high-fpirited ideas of their ancestors, or voluntarily fub-'
mit to a burden which they regarded as a badge of fervi-
tude. The evidence of the earliest records and hillorians
justify this conclusion. M. de Montesquieu, in the
twelfth and subsequent chapters of the thirteenth book of
l'Efprit des Loix, and M. de Mably Obfervat. fur 'Hill.
de France, tom. i. p. 247, have investigated this fa&
with great attention, and have proved clearly that the
property of freemen among the Franks was not fubjea to
any slated tax. That the slate required nothing fronr
persons of this rank, but military service at their own
expence, and that they should entertain the king in their
houses when he was upon any progress through his do-
minions, or his officers when sent on any public employ-
ment, furnishing tliem with carriages and horses. Mo-
narchs -fublifted almost entirely upon the revenues of
their own domains, and upon the perquisites arising
from the adminil'ration of justice, together with a few
(mall fines and forfeitures exased from such as had been
guilty of certain trespasses. It is foreign from my fubh

jed

je& to enumerate there. The reader may find them in
Obfervat. de M. de Mably, vol. i. p. 267.

When any extraordinary aid was granted by freemen

to their sovereign, it was purely voluntary. In the an-
nual assembly of March or May, it was the cufaom to
make the king a present of money, of horses or arms,
or of Come other thing of value. This was an ancient
custom, and derived from their ancestors the Germans.
Mos eli civitatibus, ultro ac viritim conferri principibus
vel armentorum vel frugum, quod pro honore acceptum,
etiam neceffitatibus fubvenit. Tacit. de Mor. Germ.
c. 'S. There gifts, if we may form a judgment concern-
ing them from the general terms in which they are men-
tioned by the ancient hiltorians, are considerable, and
made no small part of the royal revenue. Many passages
to this purpose are produced by M. do Cange, Dissert. iv.
fur Joinville, '53. Sometimes a conquered people fpe-
cified the gift which they bound themselves to pay annu-
ally, and it was exaaed as a debt if they failed. Annales
Metenfes, ap. Du Cange, ibid. p. s53. It ia probable,
that the first fiep towards taxation was to ascertain the
value of there gifts which were originally gratuitous, and
to compel the people to pay the oum at which they were
rated. Still, however, Come memory of their original
was preserved, and the aids granted to monarchs in all
the kingdoms of Europe were termed benevolences or free
gifts.

The kings of the second race in France were raised to

the throne by the eledian of the people. Pepinus Rex
plus, says an author who wrote a few years after the
tranfahion which he records, per authoritatem Pape,
& undionem fandi chrifmatis & ele&ionem omnium
Francorum in regni folio fublimatus et. Claufula de
Pepini confecratione ap. Bouq. Recueildes Hiftor. tom.
v. p. 9. At the fame time, as the chief men of the na-
tion had transferred the crown from one family to another,
an oath was exacted of them, that they Ihould maintain
on the throne the family which they had now promoted,
ayt nunquam de alterius lumbis regem in evo prefumant
eligere. Ibid, p. zo. This oath the nation faithfully

H 11 3 observe4

terity of Pepin kept poffelion of the throne; hut with
refpea to the manner of dividing their dominions ainong
their children, princes were obliged to consult the general
assembly of the nation. Thus Pepin himself, A. D 768,
appointed his two sons, Charles and Carlomannus, to
reign as joint sovereigns; but he did this, una cum con-
fenfu Francorum et procerum fuorum feu & epitcoporum,
before whom he laid the matter in their general alfembly.
Conventus apud fanaum Dionyftum, Capitular. vol. i.
p. 187.. This deflination the French confirmed in a
fubfequont alfembly, which was called upon the death
of Pepin: for, as Eginhart relates, they not only appoint-
ed them kings, but by their authority they regulated the
limits of their refpecive territories. Vita Car. Magni
ap. Bouquet Recueil, tom, v. p. 90. In the fame man-
ner, it was by the authority of the supreme assemblies
that any dispute which arose among the descendants of
the~royal family was determined. Charlemagne recog-
nizes this important part of their jurifdiiaon, and con-
firms it in his.charter concerning the partidion of his do,
minions for he appoints, that, in cafe of any uncertainty
with refpea to the right of the several competitors, he
whom the people thall chufe, Ihall succeed to the crown.
Capitular. vol. i. 442.

Under the second race of kings the assembly of the na-

tion, diltinguifhed by the name of Conventus, Malli,
Placita, were regularly assembled once a year at least,
and frequently twice in the year. One of the molt va-
luable monuments of the hiflory of France is the treatise
of Hinemarus, archbishop of Rheims, de ordine Palatii.
He died A. D. 883, only fixty-eight years after Charle-
magne, and he relates in that ihort dilcourfe the faas
which were communicated to him by Adalhardus, a mi-
nifter and confident of Charlemagne. From him we learn,
that this great monarch never failed to hold the general
assembly of his fubjeas every year. In quo placito ge-
neralitas univerforumn majorum tam clericorum quam
Zaicorum conveniebat. Hincm. oper. edit. Sirmondi,
vol, ii. c. 29. sax. In these alfemblies, matters whuich

related

were always dilcuffed, before they entered upon any pri-
vate or less important bsinefs. ]bid. c. 33. p. a'3. His
immediate successors imihated his example, and tranfaaed
no affair of importance without the advice of their great
council.

Under the second race of kings, the genius of the

French government continued to be in a good measure
democratical. The nobles, the dignified ecclefiallics,
and the great officers of the crown, were not the only
members of the national council; the peopl?, or the
whole body of free men, either in person or by their
representatives, had a right to be present in it. Hinc-
marus, in deferibing the manner of holding the general
assemblies, says, that if the weather was favourable,
they met in the open air; but if otherwise, they had
different apartments allotted to them: so that the dig-
nified clergy were separated from the laity, and the co-
mites vel hujufmodi principes fibimet honorificabiliter a
catera multitudine fegregarentur. Ibid. c. 35. p. 554.
Agobardus, archbilhop of Lyons, thus deferibes a nation-
al council in the year 833, wherein he was present. QE1
ubique conventus extitie ex reverendiffimis epilcopis, &
magoificentiffimis viris illufiribus, collegio quoque abba-
tum 8I comitum, promilcuarue statis et dignitatis po-
puio. The caetera murltitudo of Hincmarus is the fame with
the populus of Agobardus, and both deferibe the inferior or-
der of free-men, the fame who were afterwards known in
France by the name of the third estate, and in England,
by the name of commons. The people, as well as
the members of higher dignity, were admitted to a
thare of the legislative power. Thus, by a law, A. D.
So3, it is ordained, " that the queltion Ihall be put to
the people with refpet to every new law, and if they
hall agree to it, they Ihall confirm it by their fignature,"
Capit. vol. i. 394. There are two capitularia which
convey to us a full idea of the part which the people
took in the administration of government. When they
felt the weight of any grievance, they had a right to pe-
tition the sovereign for redress. One of these petitions,
i which they desire that ecclefialtics might be exempted

frona

the enemy, is still extant. It is addressed to Charlemagne,
A. D. 80o, and expretfed in such terms as could have
been used only by men conscious of liberty, and of the
extenfsve privileges which they poffeffed. They conclude
with requiring him to grant their demand, if he withed
that they Ihould any longer 9ontinue faithful fubjeas to
him. That great monarch, infiead of being offended
or surprised at the boldnels of their petition, received it
in a most gracious manner, and tignified his willingners
to comply with it. But sensible that he himself did not
poffers legislative authority, he promises to lay the mat-
ter before the next general assembly, that such things as
were of common concern to all might be there considered
and established by common consent. Capitul. tom. i.
p. 405-409. As the people by their petitions brought
matters to be proposed in the general assembly, we learn
from another capitulare the form in which they were ap-
proved there, and enaaed as laws. The propositions
were read aloud, and then the people were required to
declare whether'they assented to them or not. They
ignified their assent by crying three times, " We are fa-
tisfied," and then the capitulare was confirmed by the
subscription of the monarch, the clergy, and the chief
men of the laity. Capitul. tom. i. p. 6a7y A. D. 822.
It seems probable from a capitulare of Carolus Calvus,
A.D. 85a, that the sovereign could not refuse his assent
to what was proposed and eftablilhed by his fubjeds
in the general assembly. Tit. ix. 9 6. Capitul. vol. ii.
p. 47. It is unnecessary to muhiply quotations concern-
ing the legislative power of the national assembly of
France under the recond race, or concerning its right to
determine with regard to peace and war. The uniform
flyle of the Capitularia is an abundant confirmation of
the former. The reader who desires any tarther informa-
tion with refpedl to the latter, may consult Les Origines
ou l'Ancien Gouvernement de la France, &c. tom, iii.
p. 87, &c, What has been said with refpedt to the ad-
minlicn of the people or their representatives into the ftu-
preme assembly merits attention, not only in tracing the

progress

prozrefs of the French government, but on account of
the light which it throws upon a similar queltion agitated
in England, concerning the time when the commons be-
came part of the legillative body in that kingdom.

NOTE XXXIX. SECT. III. p. 180. [ Q].

THaT important change which the conflitution of

France underwent, when the legillative power was
trandferred from the great coun;il of the nation to the
king, has been explained by tite French anriquaries with
less care than they bestow in illuifrating other events in
their hiflory. For that reason I have endeavoured with
greater attention to trace the fleps which led to this
memorable revolution. I Ihall here add some particulars
which tend to throw additional light upon it. TIhe Leges
Salicte, the Leges Burgundionum, and omher codes pub-
lihed by the several tribes which fettled in Gaul, were.
general laws extending to every person, to every pro-
vince and diflri& where the authority of those tribec
was acknowledged. But they seem to have become ob-
foleze ; and the reason of their falling into disuse is very
obvious. Almost the whole property of the nation was
allodial when these laws were framed. But when the
feudal inflirutions became general, and gave rile to an
infinite variety of quefions peculiar to that (pecies of
tenure, the ascient codes were of no uTe in deciding with
regard to there, because they could not contain regula-
tions applicable to cafes which did not exist at the time
when they were compiled. This considerable change in
tele nature of property made it neccifary to publilh the
new regulations contained in the Capitularia. Many of.
these, as is evident from the perusal of them, were pub-
lic laws extending to the whole French nation, in the
general alfembly of which they were enaaed. The
weakness of the greater part of the monarchs of the fe-
cond race, and the disorder into which the nation was
thlrown by the depredations of the Normans, encouraged
the barons to usurp an independent power formerly un.
Lnown in France, The nature and extent of that jurif,

diaioa

The political union of the kindgom was at an end, its
ancient conflitution was dissolved, and only a feudal
relation fublifted between the king and his vassals. The
regal jurifdi&ion extended no further than the domains
of the crown. Under the last kings of the second race,
these were reduced almoR to nothing. Under the first
kings of the third race, they comprehended little more
than the patrimonial eflate of Hugh Caput, which he
annexed to the crown. Even with this accetion, they
continued to ,be of small extent. Velley, Hill. de
France, tom. iii. p. p'. Many of the mofe conliderable
provinces in France did not at first acknowledge Hugh
Caput as a lawful monarch. There are still extant fe-
veral charters, granted during the fill years of his reign,
with this remarkable claule in the form of dating the
charter; " Deo regnante, rege expeaante," regnante
domino nofiro Jefe Chriflo, Francis autem contra jus
regnum ufurpance Ugone rege. Bouquet Recueil, tom. x.
P. 544. A monarch vwhofe title was thus openly dif-
puted, was not in a condition to assert the royal jurif.
dilion, or to limit that of the barons.

All these circumstances rendered it easy for the barons

to usurp the rights of royalty within their own terri-
tories, The Capitularia became no less oblolete than
the ancient laws; local cufioms were every where in-
troduced, and became the sole rule by which all civil
tranfa&ions were conduaed, and all causes were tried.
The wonderful ignorance, which became .general in
France during the ninth and tenth centuries contributed
to the introdulion of customary law. Few persons,
except ecclefiatics, could read ; and it was not in the
power of such illiterate persons to have recourse to
written laws, either as their guide in butinefs, or their
rule in administering justice, the ceftomary law, the
knowledge of which was preserved by tradition, uni-
verfally prevailed.

During this period, the general assembly of the

nation seems not to have been called, nor to have once
exerte4its legilative authority. Local customs regulated

and

in tracing the progress of the French jurirprudence.
The last of the Capitularia colleted by M. Baluze, was
issued in the year 925, by Charles the Simple. An
hundred and thirty years elapsed from that period to the
publication of the firli ordonance of the kings of the third
race, contained in the great colleaon of M. Lauriere,
and the first ordonance which appears to be an a& of
legillation extending to the whole kingdom, is that of
Philip Auguflus, A. D. Irgo. Ordon. tom. i. p. .8 I.
During that long period of two hundred and fixty-nine
years, all tranfaflions were direaed by local customs,
and no addition was made to the statutory law of
France. The ordonances, previous to the reign of Philip
Augustus, contain regulations, the authority of which
did not extend beyond the king's domains.

Various inflances occur of the caution with which

the kings of France ventured at lirft to exercise legifla-
tive authority. M. l'Ab. de Mably produces an ordo-
nance of Philip Augutus, A. D. azo6, concerning the
Jews, who, in that age, were in Come measure the pro.
perty of the lord in whole territories they resided. But
it is rather a treaty of the king with the countess of
Champagne, and the compte de Dampierre, than an at
of royal power, and the regulations in it seem to be
eitablithed not so much by his authority, as by their
consent. Obfervat. fur l'HfL. de France, ii. p. 355. Iii
the fame manner an ordonance of Louis VIII. concern-
ing the Jews, A. D. aza;, is a contraa between the
king and his nobles, with refpe& to their manner of
treating that unhappy race of men. Ordun. tom. i.
p. 47. The Eftabliffemens of St. Louis, though well
adapted to Serve as general laws to the whole kingdom,
were not puhlithed as such, but only as a complete code
of cuftoinary law, to be of authority within the king's
domains. The wisdom, the equity, and the order con-
fpicuous in that code of St. Louis, procured it a favour-
able reception throughout the kingdom. The veneration
due to the virtues and good intentions of its author,
contributed not a little to reconcile the nation to that

leg~islative

Soon after the reign of St. Louis, the idea of the king's
poffeffing supreme legislative power became common.
If, 1sys Beaumanoir, the king maikes any eftablijhment
fpecally for his own domain, the barons may never-
thelefs adhere to their ancient customs but if tht eea-
biilhment be general, it thall be current throughout the

bhole kingdom, and we ought to believe that such ela..
blifments are made with mature deliberation, and for
the general good. Count de Beauvoilis, c. 48. p. 26 .
Though the kings of the third race did not call the gene-
rsl assembly of the nation, during the long period from
Hugh Caput to Philip the Fair, yet they seem to have
consulted the bilbops and barons who happened to be
peefent in their court, with refpedt to any new law-
which they puhilehd. Examples of this occur Otdon.
tom. i. p. 3 & 5. This pradice seems to have cottinued
as late as the reign of St. Louis, when the kginlative
authority of the crown was well eftablilhed. Ordon.
tom. i. p. 58. A. D. 1246. This attention paid to thr
barons facilitated the kings acquiring such full poffellion
of the legislative power, as enabled them afterwards to
exerrife it without observing that formality.

The affembilies diflinguilhed by the name of the States

General were sirs called A.D. 1301, and were held
occaiionally from that period to the year 5654, since
which time they have not been summoned. There were
very difierent from the ancient assemblies of the French
nation under the kings of the firlt and recond race.
There is no point with refpe& to which the French an-
tiquaries are more generally agreed, than in maintaining
that the States General had no fuifrage in the pafling of
laws, and poareffed no proper legislative jurifdiaion.
The whole tenor of the French hiitory confirms this
opinion. The form of proceeding in the States General
was this :-The king addrpfed himself, at opening the
meeting, to the whole body alfembled in one place, and
laid before them the affairs on account of which he had
summoned them. Then the deputies of each of the
three orders, of nobles, of clergy, and of the third estate,

met

taining their answer to the propolitions which had been
made to them, together with the representations which
they thought proper to laybefore the king. These an-
fwers and reprefenrations were confiderEc by the king
in his council, and generally gave rife to an ordonance.
There ordonances were not addressed to the three efates
in common. Sometimes the king addrelfed an ordo-
nance to each of the etlates in particular. Sometimes
he mentioned the affembiy of the three estates. Some-
times mention is made only of the atfembly of that
eflate to which the ordonance is addreifed. Sometimes
no mention at all is iiade of the assembly of eflates,
which fuggetled the propriety of enafting the law.
Preface au tom. iii. des Ordon. p. xx. Thus the States
General had only the privilege of advising and remon-
ilrating; the legillative authority reiidcd in the king
alone;

NOTE XL. SECT. III. p. 585. [RR].
Is the parliament of Paris be conlidered only as the

supreme court of juafice, every thing relative to its
origin and jurndition is clear and obvious. It is the
ancient court of the king's palace, new-modelled, ren-
dered flattonary, and invested with an extensive and afC
certained jurifdilion. The power of this court, while
employed in this part of its funaions, is not the ohjeft
of prelent conlideration. The retenfrons of the parlia.
ment to control the exercise of the legillAtive authority,
and its clsim of a right to interpose with refpedt to
pubhle affairs and the political administration of the
kingdom, lead to inqeiries attended with great difficulty.
As the officers and members of the parliament of Paris
were anciently nominated by the king, were paid by
him, and on several occations were removed by him at
pleasure (Chronic. Scandaleufe de Louis XI. cihez lea
Mem. de Comines, tom. ii. p. 5t. Edit. de N'S. Lenglet
de Frefnoy), they cannot be considered as repreferntarives
of the people, nor could they claim any share in the

vOL. I. I I legitative

ther efore search for some other source of this high privi-
lege. The parliament was originally compcfed of the
most eminent persons in the kingdom. The peers of
France, ecclefiatics of the highefl order, and noblemen
of illustrious birth, were members of it, to whom were
added fame clerks and counsellors learned in the laws.
Pafquier Recherches, p. 44, &c. Encyclopedie, tom. xii.
Art. Parlement. p. 3. 3. A court thus conflituted was
properly a committee of the States General of the king-
dom, and was composed of those barons and fideles,
whom the kings of France were accuflomed to consult
with regard to every a& of jurifdiaion or legillative
authority. It was natural, therefore, during the inter-
vals between the meetings of the States General, or
during those periods when that assembly was not called,
to conrult the parliament, to lay matters of puhlic cost-
cern before it, and to obtain its approbation and con-
currence, before any ordonance was published, to which
the people were required to conform. 2. Under the
second race of kings, every new law was reduced into
proper form by the chancellor of the kingdom, was
propored by him to the people, and when enated, was
committed to him to be kept among the public records,
that he might give authentic copies of it to all who
thould demand them. Hincm. de Ord. Palat. c. s6.
Capitol. Car. Calv. tit. xiv. Q x e. tit. xxxiii. The
chancellor pretnded in the parliament of Paris at its firfi
inflitution. Encyclopedie, tom. .iii. art. Chancelier, p. 8?.
It was therefore natural for the king to continue to em-
ploy him in his ancient funaions of framing, taking
into his cuflody, and publishing the ordonances which
vere issued. To an acient copy of the Capitularia of
Charlemagne, the following words are fubjoined: Anno
tertio clementitfimi domini noffri Caroli Auguiti, sub
iplo anno, haec fasa Capitula funt, & confignata Ste-
phano comiti, ut hbc manifefla faceret Pariftis mallo
publico, & illa legere faceret coram Scabineis, quod ita
& fecir, & omnes in uno confenferunt, quod ipli volu-
iffent obfervare ufque in Fofterum, etiam omnes Scabi-

net,

tignaverunt. Bouquet Recueil, tom. v. p. 663. Mallus
lignifies not only the public assembly of the nation, but
the court of jultice held by the Comes, or miius domi-
nicus. Scabini were the judges, or the affeffors of the
judges in that court. Here then seems to be a very
early infiance, not only of laws being publi(hed in a
court of justice, but of their being verified or confirmed
by the subscription of the judges. If this was the com-
mon praaice, it naturally introduced the verifying of
edids in the parliament of PariS. But this conjeaure I
propole with that diffidence, which I have felt in all
my reasonings concerning the laws and inflitutions of
foreign nations. 3. This supreme court of jullice in
France was dignified with the appellation of parliament,
the name by which the general assembly of the nation
was diftinguihed towards the close of the second race
of kings; and men, both in reafon:ng and in condua,
are wonderfully influenced by the limilarity of names.
The prele ving the ancient names of the magiltrates
ellablilhed while the republican government fubrii'ced in
Rome, enabled Augustus and his successors to alfume
new powers with less observation and greater ease. The
bellowing the fame name in France upon two courts,
which were extremely different, contributed not a little
to confound their jurifdiaion and funtions.

All these circumfiances concurred in leading the

kings of France to avail themselves of the parliament
of Paris, as the infirument of reconciling the people
to the exercise of legislative authority by the crown.
The French, accullomed to fee all -new laws examined
and autholifed before they were pubhlihed, did not
fufficiently diftinguilh between the effe&t of performing
this in the national alfembly, or in a court appointed by
the king. But as that court was composed of relpedtable
memhers, and who were well Ikilled in the laws
of their country, when any new edi& received its
fanflon, that was fulficient to difpore the people to
fubmnit to it.

Isa When

ediAs in the parliament of Paris became common, the
parliament contended that this was necessary in order to
give them leyal authority. It was eftabiifhed as a
fundamental maxim in French jurisprudence, that no
law could be published in any other manner; that
without this formality no edia or ordonance could have,
any effea& that the people were not bound to obey it,
and ought not to confider it as an edia or ordonance
until it was verified in the supreme court, after free
deliberation. Roche-flavin des Parlemens de France,
4to. Gen. i62i. p. 951. The parliament, at different
times, hath, with great foriitude and integrity, opposed
the will of their sovereigns; and, notwithitanding re-
peated and peremptory requilitions and commands of
the crown, hath relufed to verity and publilh such edias
as it conceived to Le oppressive to the people, or sub-
verfive of the conflitution of the kingdom, Roche-
flavin reckons, that between the year r36a and the
year 1t19, the parliament refused to verify more than a
hundred edias of the kings. Ibid. 925. Many in-
itances of the spirit and conflancy with which the par-
liaments of France opposed perniciosis laws, and asserted
their own privileges, are enumerated by Limnaus in his
Notiti9 Regni Francie, lib. i., c. 9. p. 224.

But the power of the parliament to maintain and de-

fend this privilege, bore no proportion to its importance,
or to the courage with which the members asserted it.
When any monarch was determined that an edid should
be carried into execution, and found the parliament in-
flexibly resolved not to verify or publish it, he could
easly supply this defef by the plenitude of his regal
power. He repaired to the parliament in person, he
took poffeflion of his feat of juflice, and commanded
the edia to be read, verified, regiflered, and published
in his presence. Then, according to another maxim of
French law, the king himself being present, neither the
parliament, nor any magistrate whatever, can exercise
any authority, or perform any funalon. Adveniente

Principe,

9'9. Encyclopedie, tom. ix. Art. Lit. de 7ullice, p. 58s.
Roche-flavin mentions several inflances ol kings who
adually exerted Ihis prerogative, so fatal to the residue
of the rights and liberties transmitted to the French by
their anceltors. Pafquier produces some infiances of
the fame kind. Rech. p. 6 i. Limnaus enumerates
many other infances, but the length to which this note
has swelled prevents me from inrerting them at length,
though they tend greatly to illuifrate this important arti-
cle in the French history, p. 245. Thus by an exertion
of prerogative, whch, though violent, seems to be con-
ftitutional. and is justified by innumerable precedents,
all the efforts of the parliament to limit and control the
king's legifiative authority are rendered ineffeaual.

I have not attempted to explain the constitution or

jurifdihion of any parlament in France but that of
Paris. All of them are formed upon the model of that
moftwancienc and refpevfable tribunal, and all my ob.
fervations concerning it will apply with full force to
them.

NOTE XLI. SEcT.III. p.I90. [SS].
THE humiliating porfure in which a great emperor

implored absolution is an event To singular, that the
words in which Gregory himfeif defcribes' it merit a
place here, and convey a firiking pidture of the arrogance
of that pontiff. Per triduum, ante portam caifri, de-
pofito omni regio cultu, mirerabiliter, utpote difcalce-
atus, & laneis indutus, perftftens, non prius cum multo
fletu apoftolica miferationis auxilium, & confolationem
implorari deftitit, quam omnes qui ibi aderant, & ad quos
rumor ille pervenit, ad tantam pietatem, & compationis
milericordiam movit, ut pro eo multis precibus & lacry.
mis intercedentes, omnes quidem infolitam noffrac mentis
duritiem mirarentur; nonnulli vero in nobis non apof-
tolica fedis gravitatem, fed quail tyrannicte feritatis cru-
delitatem else clamirunt. Epift. Gregor. ap. Memorie

1 13 delia

77,56, vol. i. p. 174.

NOTE XLII. SECT. III. p. 199. [TT].

As I have endeavoured in the hillory to trace the

various fleps in the progress of the conflitution of the
empire, and torexp'ain the peculiarities in its policy very
fully, it is not necessary to add much by way of illus-
tration. What appears to be of any importance, I
lhall range under distina heads.

r. With refpea to the power, jurifdiflion, and re-

venue of the emperors. A very just idea of there may
be formed by attending to the view which Pftffcl gives
of the rights of the, emperors at two different periods.
The firlt at the close of the Saxon race, A. D. 1024.
These, according to his enumeration, were the right of
conferring all the ecclefiatical benefices in Germany;
of receiving the revenues of them during a vacancy
of mortmain, or of succeeding to the effetis of ecclefi-
aftics who died inteihate. The right of confirming or
of annulling the eleaions of the popes. The right of
assembling councils, and of appointing them to decide
concerning the affairs of the church. The right of con-
ferring the title of king upon their vassals. The right
of granting vacant fiefs. The right of receiving the
revenues of the empire, vihether arising from the Im-
perial domains, from imports and tolls, from gold or
dilver mines, from the taxes paid by the Jews, or from
forfeitures. The right of governing Italy as its proper
sovereigns. The right of ere&ing free cities, and of
eftabshliing fairs in them. The right of assembling the
diets of the empire, and of fixing the time of their du-
Tation. The right of coining money, and of conferring
that privilege on the slates of the 'empire. The right of
adminsfiering both higli and low juflice within the ter-
ritories of the different slates. Abregd, p. s6r. The
other period is at the exti: ion of the emperors of the
families of Juxembflrg and Bavaria, A, D. 1437 Ac-

cordios

that time were the right of conferring all dignities and
titles, except the privilege of being a fiate of the em-
pire. The right ps Preces primarike, or of appointing
once during their reign a dignitary in each chapter or
religious house. 'The right of granting difpenfations
with refpea to the age of majority. The right of ere&-
ing cities, and of conferring the privilege of coining
money. The right of calling the meetings of the diet,
and of preftding in them. Abregd, &c. p. sc7. It
were easy to lhcw that Mr. PfefTel js well founded in all
these atrertions, and to confirm them by the testimony
of the moll refpedlahle authors. In thg one period, the
emperors appear as mighty sovereigns with extenlive
prerogatives; in the other, as the heads of a confederacy
with very limited powers.

The revenues of the emperors decreased still more

than their authority. The early emperors, and particu-
larly titole of the Saxon line, besides their great patri.
monial or hereditary territories, poffeffed an extenlive
domain both in Italy and Germany, which belonged to
them as emperors. Italy belonged to the emperors as
their proper kingdom, and the revenues which they
drew from it were very considerable. The firlit aliena-
ations of the Imperial revenue were made in that
country. The Italian cities having acquired wealth,
and aspiring at independence, purehafed their liberty
from different emperors, as I have observed, Note XV.
The lums which they paid, and the emperors with whom
they concluded these bargains, are mentioned by
Cafp. Klockius de Alrario Norimb. 1671, p. 85, &c.
Charles IV. and his son Wencellaus, dililpated all that
remained of the Italian branch of the domain. The
German domain lay chiefly upon the banks of the
Rhine, and was under the government of tlse counrs
palatine. It is not easy to mark out the boundaries,
or to eflimate the value of th;e ancient domain, which
has been so long incorporated with the territories of
different princes. Some hints with refpe& to it may
be found in the glossary of Speidelius, which he has in-

titled

Obfervationum, &c. Norimb. 1673, vol. i. 679. 5o04.
a more full account of it is given by Klockius de .Erario,
p. 84. Besides this, the emperors poffetfed conliderable dit-
trifts of land lying intermixed with the efates of the
dultes and barons. They were accultomed to viftt these
frequently, and drew ftom their vassals in each what
was fufficient to support their court during the time of
their residence among them. Annalifta. ap. Struv.
tom, i. 6ss. A great part of these detached poffeflions
were seized by the nobles during the long interregnum,
or during the wars occaftoned by the contefis between
the emperors and the court of Rome. At the fame time
that such encroachments were made on the fixed or ter-
ritorial property of the emperors, they were robbed
almofi entirely of their calual revenues. The princes
and barons appropriating to tsemfelves taxes and duties
of every kind, which had usually been paid to them.
Pfaffel Abtegd, p. !74. The profuse and inconsiderate
amt·ition of Charles IV. squandered whatever remained
of the Imperial revenues after so many defalcations. He,
in the year t 76, in order to prevail with the elefors
to choose his Con Wenceilaus king of the Romans, pro-
mired each of them a hundred thousand crowns. But
being unable to pay Co large a rum, and eager to secure
the eleaion to his son, he alienated to the three eccles.
aftical eledors, and to the count palatine, such countries
as still belonged to the Imperial domain, on the banks
of the Rhine, and likewise made over to them all the
taxes and tolls then levied by the emperors in that dif-
triai. Trithemius, and the author of the Chronicle of
Magdeburgh, enumerate the territories and taxes which
were thus alienated, and represent this as the last and
fatal blow to the Imperial authority. Struv. Corp.
vol. i. p.437. From that period the shreds of the
ancient revenues poffelfed by the emperors have been Co
inconsiderable, that, in the opinion of Speidelius, all
that they yield would be Co far from defraying the exl
pences of supporting fheir houthold, that they would not
pay the charge of maintaining the pofis eftablilhed in the

emFire.

empire. Speidelli Speculum, &c. vol. i. p. 68o. There
funds, inconsiderable as they were, continued to do-
crease. Glanvelle, the minifler of Chatles V. asserted
in the year s e46, in presence of several of the German
princes, that his master drew no money at all from the
empire. Sleid. Hilory of the Reformation, Lond. s689.
P. 372. The fame is the cafe at present. Traits de
droite publique de l'Empire, par M. le Coq. de Villeray,
p. 55. From the reign of Charles IV. whom Maximilian
called the peA of the empire, the emperors have depend-
ed entirely on their hereditary dominions, as the chief
and almofi the only source of their power, and even of
their fubfillence.

a. The ancient mode of eleaing the emperors, and the

various charges whichit underwent, require some illus-
tration. The Imperial crown was originally obtained
by ele6ion, as well as those of molt monarchies in Eu-
rope. An opinion long prevailed among the antiquaries
and public lawyers of Germany, that the right of chuiing
the emperors was vested in the archbdihops of Mentz,
Cologne, and Treves, the king of Bohemia, the duke
of Saxony, the marquis of Brandenburgh, and the count
palatine of the Rhine, by an ediat of Otho III. confirmed
by Gregory V. about the year 996. But the whole tenor
of hillory contradias this opinion. It appears, that
from the earliest period in the hifiory of Germany,
the person who was to reign over all, was eleled by
the fuffrage of all. Thus Conrad 1. was eleated by all
the people of the Franks, fay some annalifits; by ail the
princes and chief men, fay others; by all the nation,
fay others. See their words, Strav. Corp. z a. Con-
ringius de German. Imper. Repub. Acroamata Sex.
Ebroduni r654, p. 5o3. In the year r504, poflerior
to the supposed regulations of Otho III. Conrad 11, was
eleaed by all tite chief men, and his election was ap.
proved and confirmed by the people, Struv. Corp. zS.4
At the eleftion of Lotharius II. A. D. i y, ,ixty thou-
sand persons of all ranks were present. He was named
by the chief men, and their nomination was approved by
the pegle. Struv. ibid. p. 357. The siret author who

mentions

6ourilhed in the reign of Frederick II. which ended
A. 0. Du1o5. We find that in all the ancient ele&ions to
which I have referred, the princes of the greatelt power
and authority were allowed by their countrymen to name
the person whom they wilhed to appoint emperor, and
the people approved or difsproved of their nomination.
This privilege of voting flrlt is called by the German
lawyers the right of Prataxaeion. Pfeflel Abreg6, p. 316.
7 his was the firfi origin of the excluilve right which the
eletors acquired. The eledors poffetred the molt extensive
territories of any princes in theempire ; all the great of.
fhces of the slate were in their hands by hereditary right;
as soon as they obtained or engrossed so much influence
in the eleaion as to be allowed the right of pretaxation,
it was vain to oppole their will, and it even became un-
receffary for the inferior eccieliaflies and barons to at-
tend, when they had no other fundion but that of con.
firming the deed of these more powerful princes by their
assent. During times of turbulence, the subordinate
members of the Germanic body could not resort to the
place of eleaion without a retinue of armed va!thls, the
expence of which they were obliged to defray out of their
own revenues i and finding their attendance to be un-
necelfmry, they were unwilling to wafle them to no pur-
pore. The rights of the seven eleetors were supported
by all the descendants and allies of their powerful fami-
lies, who thared in the (plendour and influence which
they enjoyed by this diflinguilhing privilege. Pfeffrl
Abreg6, p. 376. The (even eletors were considered as
the representatives of all the orders which composed the
highcit class of German nobility. There were three
archbilbops, chancellors of the three great difirits into
which the empire was anciently divided; one king, one
duke, one marquis, and one count. All these circum-
stances contributed to render the introdution of this
conliderable innovation into the conflitution of the Ger-
nssnic bode extremel) easy. E very thingofiinportsnce, re-.
lating to this branch of the political fIate of the empire, is
well illufirated by Onuphrius Panvinius, an Augufinian

monk

monk of Verona, who lived in the reign of Charles V. His
treatise, if we make some allowance for that partiality
which he expresses in favour of the powers which the
popes claimed in the empire, has the merit of being one
of the firfi works in which a controverted point in hit.
tory is examined with critical precifton, and wi'h a
proper acttntion to that evidence which is derived from
records, or the teflimony of contemporary hilrorians.
It is inserted by Goldailus in his Political Imperialia,
p. 2.

As the eleiors have engrossed the sole right of chufing

the emperors, they have assumed likewise that of deposing
them. This high power the elefors have not only pre-
fumed to claim, but have ventured, in more than one
inflance, to exercise. In the year 1291, a part of the
eleecors deposed Adolphus of NafTau, and fubfiitutcd
Albert of Auffria in his place. The reasons on which
they found their sentence, thew that this deed flowed
from fadious, not from public-fpirited motives. Struv.
Corp. vol. i. 540o In the first year of the fifteenth cen-
tury, the eleaors deposed Wencellaus, and placed the
Imperial crown on the head of Rupert elefor palatine.
The aa of deposition is still extant. Goldafti Conflitr.
vol. i. 3f9* It is pronounced In the name and by the
authority of the eleaors, and confirmed by several pre-
lates and barons of the empire, who were prelent.
There exertions of the eletoral power demonirate that
the Imperial authority was funk very loyv.

The other privileges of the eleaors, and the rights of

the eleaoral college, are explained by the writers on the
public law in Germany.

3. With refpea to the diets or general assemblies of the

empire, it would be necessary, if my objea were to write
a particular hiflory of Germany, to enter into a minete
detail, concerning the forms of assembling it, the per-
-ons who have right to be present, their division into fe-
veral colleges or benches, the objeas of their deliberation,
the mode in which they carry on their debates or give
their fuffrages. and the authority of their decrees or re-

ceffes.

the confhi'ution of the German empire, it will be futfi-
cient to observe, that, originally, the diets of the empire
were exafly the fame with the aflemblies of March and
of May, beld by the kings of France They met, at leafs,
once a year. Every freeman hyd a right to be present.
They were assemblies, in which a monarch deliberated
with his fubjeds, concerning their common interedf.
Aruminus de Comitiis Rom. German, Imperii, 4to.
Jenw, a66c, cap. 7. No 20, &c. But when the princes,
dignified eccleftaflics, and barons, acquired territorial
and independent jurtfdifion, the diet became an assembly
of the separate hates, which formed the confederacy cf
which the emperor was head. While the confiitution of
the empire remained in its -primitive form, attendance
on the diets was a duty, like the other services due from
feudal fubjeas to their sovereign, which the members
were bound to perform in pet on; and if any member
who had a right to be present in the diet, negieded to
attend in person, he not only lofi his vote, but was liable
to an heavy penalty. Arumrus deComit. c. e. NO 4c.
Whereas, from the time that the members of the diet
became independent ftaes, the right of fuffrage was an-
nexed to the territory or dignity, not to the person. The
members, if they could not, or would not attend in per-
ion, might fend their deputies, as princes fend ambalfa-
dors, and they were enti:led to exercise all the rights be-
longing to their confliruents. Ibid. NO 4 *. 46. 49. By
degrees, and upon the fame principle of considering the
diet as an assembly of independent slates, in which each
confederate had the right of fuffrage, if any member
poffeffed more than one of those flares or charaders which
entitle to a feat in the diet, he was allowved a proportional
anumber of fuffrages. Pfeffel Abreg6, 6a3. From the
dame cause the Imperial cities, as soon as they became
free, and acquired fupremne and independent jurifdiadon
within their own territories, were received as members
of the diet. The powers of the diet extend to every
thing relative to the common concern of the Germanic

body,

body, or that can interest or affea it as a confederacy.
The diet takes no cognizance of the interior adminiftra-
tion in the different slates, unless that happens to diflurb
the public peace, or to threaten the general safety.

4. With refpea to the Imperial chamber, the jurif-

diaion of which has been the great source of order and
tranquillity in Germany, it is necessary to observe, that
this court was inflituted in order to put an end to the
calamities occasioned by private wars in Germany. I
have already traced the rife and progress of this praaice,
and pointed out its pernicious effeas as filly as their ex-
tensive influence during the middle ages required. In
Germany, private wars seem to have been more frequent
and produoive of worse consequences than in the other
countries of Europe. There are obvious reasons for this.
The nobility of Germany were extremely numerous,
and the causes of their dissention multiplied in proportion,
The territorial jurifdiaion which the German nobles ac-
quired, was more complete than that poffeIfed by their
order in other nations. They became, in reality, inde-
pendent powers, and they claimed all the privileges of
that charader. The long interregnum from A. D. ;z56*
to A. D. 5273, accuflomed them to an uncontrolled li-
cense, and led them to forget that fubordinatlon which is
necessary in order to maintain public tranquillity. At
the time when the other monarchs of Europe began to
acquite such an increase of power and revenues as added
new vigour to their government, the authority and reve-
nues of the emperors continued gradually to decline.
The diets of the empire, which alone had authority to
judge between Ctch mighty barons, and power to enforce
i's decisions, met very seldom. Conring. Acroamata,
p.234 . The diets, when they did assemble, were often
composed of several thousand members, Chronic. Conflat.
ap. Struv. Corp. i. p. 546. and were tumultuary affem-
bhies, ill qualified to decide concerning any quetion of
right. The iefeion of the diets continued only two or
three days; Pfeffel Abregt, p. a44: so that .they had
no time to hear or discuss any cause that was in the

vOL.. 1. K K smallest

some measure, without any court of judicature capable
of deciding the conteits berween its more powerful
members, or of reprelling the evils occasioned by their
private wars.

All the expedients which were employed in other

countries of Europe, in order to refirain this pradlice,
and. which I have deferibed Note XXI. were tried in
Germany with little effe&. The confederacies of the
nobles and of the cities, and the divilion of Germany
into various circles, which I mentioned in that Note,
were found likewise infufficient. As a ladt remedy, the
Germans had recourse to arbiters whom they called
Auftrega. The barons and dtates in different parts of
Germany joined in conventions, by which they bound
themselves to refer all controverfes that might arise be-
tween them to the determination of Ausfrege, and to
(ubmit to their sentences as final. These arbiters are
named sometimes in the treaty of convention, an in-
fiance of which occurs in Ludewig Reliqure Manufer.
omnis evi, vol. ii. z2e; sometimes they were cholen
by mutual consent upon occalion of any conaeit that
arose; sometimes they were appointed by neutral per-
sons; and sometimes the choice was left to be decided
`by lot. Datc. de Pace publics Imperii. lb. i. cap. z7.
No. 60, &c. Speidelius Speculum, &c. voc. A/ilre.
p. 95. Upon the introduaion of this pradice, the
public tribunals of judfice became in a great measure
ufeleis, and were almofi entirely deserted.

In order to re edtablilh the authority of government,

Maximilian I. inlituted the Imperial chamber at the pe-
riod which I have mentioned. This tribunal consisted
originally of a president, who was always a nobleman of
the firt order, and of sixteen judges. The preltdent
was appointed by the emperor, and the judges, partly
by him, and partly by the dates, according to forms
which it is unnecessary to describe. A fum was imposed,
with their own consent, on the dates of the empire, for
paying the salaries of the judges and officers in this

COutt.

court. The Imperial chamber was eftablijhed first at
Francfort on the Maine. During the reign of Charles V.
it was removed to Spires, and continued in thar ciry
above a century and a half. It is now fixed at Wetzlar.
This court takes cognizance of all quritions concerning
civil right between the slates of the empire, and passes
judgment in the last resort, and wvithout appeal. To it
belongs likewise the privilege of judging in criminal
causes, which may be conlidered as connehed with the
preservation of the public peace. Pfeffel Abregd, 56o.

All causes relating to points of feudal right or jurif-

diftion, together with such as respect the territories
which hold of the empire in Italy, belong properly to
the jurifdidion of the Aulic council. This tribunal was
formed upon the model of the ancient court of the palace
inflituted by the emperors of Germany. It depended not
upon the slates of the empire, but upon the emperor, he
having the right of appointing at pleasure all the judges of
whom it is composed. Maximilian, in order to procure some
compensation for the diminution of his authority, by the
powers vetted in the Imperial chamber, prevailed on the
diet, A. D. s5Iz, to give its consent to the establishment
of the Auic council. Since that time it has been a great
obje& of policy in the court of Vienna to extend the ju-
rifdiaion, and support the authority of the Aulic coun-
cil, and to circumfnribe and weaken those of the Impe-
rial chamber. The tedious forms and dilatory proceed-
ings of the Imperial chamber have furnished the emperors
with pretexts for doing to. Lites Spirra, according to
the witricifm of a German lawyer, spirant, fed nunquam
expirant. Such delays are unavoidable in a court com-
posed of members named by many different lates, jealous
of each orlser. Whereas the judges of the Aulic council,
depending upon one mafler, and being refponfihle to
him alone, are more vigorous and decisive. Puffendorf,
deStatuImper. German. cap.v. 2zo. Pffeffl Abregd ,
p. 581.

P·scscz

N O T E XIII. SECT. III. p. 202. fUU].

THE defeription which I have given of the Turkiih

government is conformable to the accounts of the moul
intelligent travellers who have visited that empire. The
count de Marcugli, in his treatie concerning the military
Slate of the Turkish empire, ch. vi. and the author of
Observations on the religion, laws, government, and
nianners of the Turks, publilted at London 1768, vol.i.
p. 8s. differ from other writers who have described the
political conflitutnon of that powerful monarchy. As
they had opportunity, during their long residence in
Turkey, to obherve the order and jultice conspicuous in
several departments of adminifiration, they seem unwill-
ing to admit that it should be denominated a delpotilm.
But when the form of government in any country is re-
presented to be defpoeic, this does not suppose that the
power of the monarch is continually exerted in a&s of
violence, injuifce, and cruelty. Under political con.
flitutions of every species, unless when some frantic tyrant
1tappens to hold the sceptre, the ordinary adminifiration
of government mult be conformable to the principles of
juflice, and if not adivein promoting the welfare of the
people, cannot certainly have their deftruaion for its
obje&. A slate, in which the sovereign pofellres the
absolute command of a vast military force, together with
the difpofai of an extensive revenue; in which the people
have no privileges, and no part either immediate or re-
mote in legislation ; in which there is no body of here-
ditary nobility, jealous of their own rights and dillinc-
tions, to fland as an intermediate order between the
prince and the people, cannot be diflinguithed by any
name but that of a despotism. The restraints, however,
which I have mentioned, arising from the Capicusy, and
from religion, are powerful. But they are (sut such as
change the nature or denomination of the government,
When a despotic prince employs an armed force to sup.
port his authority, he commits the supreme power to

their

their hands. The Pratorian bands in Rome dethroned,
murdered, and exalted their princes, in the fame wanton
manner with the soldiery of the Porte at Conflantinople.
But notwithtlanding this, the Roman emperors have
been confiderrd by all political writers as poffefling deC-
potic power.

The author of Observations on the religion, law, go.

vernment, and manners of the Turks, in a preface to
the recond edition of his work, bath made some remarks
on what is contained in this Note, and in that part of
the text to which it refers. It is with diffidence I set
my opinion in opprfitrion to that of a person, who has
observed the government of the Tusks with attention,
and has defcrabed it with abilities. But after a careful
review of the fubjec, to me the Turkith government
lill appears of such a species as can be ranged in no
class but that to which political writers have given the
name of defpstim. There is not in Turkey any confti-
tutional reliraint upon the will of the sovereign, or any
barrier to circumscribe the exercise of his power, but
the two which I have mentioned ; one afforded by re-
ligion, the principle upon which the authority of the
sultan is founded ; the other by the army, the inltru.
ment which he mull employ to maintain his power.
The author represents the Ulema, or body of the law.
as an intermediate order between the monarch and the
people. Pref. p. 30. But whatever seliraint the au.
thority of the Ulerma may impose upon the sovereign, is
derived from religion. The Asoulasel, out of whom the
Mufti and other chief officers of the lawmuil be chosen,
are ecclefaltics. It is as interpreters of the Koran or
Divine Will that they are objeas of veneration. The
check, then, which they give to the exercise of arbi-
trary power is not different from one of those of which
I took notice. Indeed, this relt'raint cannot be very
confsderable. The Mufti, who is the head of the order,
as well as every inferior officer of law, is named by
the Sultan, and is removable at his pleasure. The firange
means employed by the Ulema in 746g, to obtain the

I K 3 ditfmifflon

proof that they possess but little constitutional authority
which can serve as a restraint upon the will of the
sovereign. Obfervat. p. 92 of ad edit. If the author's
idea be juet it is astonishing that the body oftbeia'iu bhould
have no method of remonfirating against the errors of
adminifiration, but by setting fire to the capital.

The author seems to confider the Capicuis or soldiery

of the Porte, neither as formidable infiruments of the Sul-
tan's power, nor as any restraint upon the exercise of it.
His reasons for this opinion are, that the number of the
Capiculy is (mall in proportion to the other troops which
compose the Turkifl armies, and that in time of peace
they are undisciplined. Pref. zd edit. p. at, &c. But
the troops stationed in a capital, though their number
be not great, are always maiters of the fovereign's
person and power. The Pr etorian bands bore no pro.
portion to the legionary troops in the frontier provinces.
The soldiery of the Porte are more numerous, and muff
poIfers power of the fame kind, and be equally formida-
ble, sometimes to the sovereign, and oftener to the
people. However much the dilcipline of the Janizarire
may be negledhed at prelent, it certainly was not so in
that age to which alone my description of the Turkiih
government applies. The author observes, Pref. p. 29,
that the Janizaries never deposed any Sultan of them.
(elves, but that some form of law, true or false, has
been observed. and that either the Mufri, or some
other minister of religion, has announced to the un-
happy prince the law which renders him unworthy of
the throne. Obferv. p. boa. This will always happen.
In every revolution, though brought about by military
power, the deeds of the soldiery must be confirmed
and carried into execution with the civil and religious
formalities peculiar to the conilitution.

This addition to the Note may serve as a furtherilluf-

tration of my own sentiments, but is not made with an
intcntion of entering into any controversy with the au-
thor of ObJErvationss, &c. to whom I am indebted for

3 the

the obliging terms in which he has expressed his re-
marks upon what I had advanced. Happy were it for
such as venture to communicate their opinions to the
world, if every animadversion upon them were conveyed
with the fame candid and liberal spirit. In one parti-
cular, however, he seems to have misapprehended what
I meant. Pref. p. 17. I certainly did not mention his -
or count Marligli's long residence in Turkey, as a cir-
ctmitance which fisould detraa frona the weight of their
authority. I took notice of it, in juflice to my readers,
that they might receive my opinion with ditruft, as it
differed from that of persons whose means of information
were so far superior to mine.

NOTE XLIV. SECT. III. p. 204. [XX].

THE inflitution, the discipline, and privileges of the

Janizaries are deferibed by all the authors who give any
account of the Turkilh government. The manner in
which enthufstam was employed in order to inspire them
with courage, is thus related by prince Cantemir:
" When Amurath I. had formed them into a body, he
sent them to Haji Bektalt, a Turkilh faint, famous for
his miracles and prophecies, desiring him to bellow on
them a banner, to pray to God for their success, and to
give them a name. The faint, when they appeared in
his presence, put the sleeve of his gown upon one of
their heads, and said, Let them be called Tnrgicheri. Let
their countenance be ever bright, their hands viaorious,
their swords keen; let their spear always hang over
the heads of their enemies, and wherever they go, may
they return with a shining face." Hifiory of the Otto-
man Empire, p. 3t. The number of Janizaries. at the
firfit inltitution of the body, was not considerable.
Under Solyman, in the year 152 r, they amounted to
twelve thousand. Since that time their number has
greatly increased. 1\Iarligli, Etat. &c. ch. i6. p. 68.
Though Solyman polfelred such abilities and authority

as to restrain this formidable body within the bounds
of obedience, yet its tendency to limit the power of the
Sultans was, even in that age, foreseen by sagacious
observers. Nicolas Daulphinois, who accompanied M.
D'Aramon, ambaiTador from Henry II. of France to So7
lyman, publilhed an account of his travels, in which
he deferibes and celebrates the discipline of the Janizas
ries, but at the fame time prediis, that they would, one
day, become formidable to their maiters, and ad the fame
part at Conitantinople, as the Prsetorian bands had done
at Rome. Colledion of Voyages from the Earl of Ox-
ford's Library, vol. i. p. 599.

NOT E XLV. SECT. III. p. 206. [YY].
SOLYMAN the Magnificent, to whom the Turkilh

historians have given the firname of Canutni, or inflituter
of rules, firfi brought the finances and military eltablilh-
ment of the Turki(h empire into a regular form. He
divided the military force into the Capiculy or soldiery
of the Porte, which was properly the fianding army,
and Serrataczly or soldiers appointed to guard the fron-
tiers. The chief firength of the latter confifled of those
who held Timariots and Ziams. There were portions
of land granted to certain persons for life, in much the
fame manner as the military fiefs among the nations of
Europe, in return for which military service was pey-
formed. Solyman, in his Cansn Name, or book of re-
gulations, fixed with great accuracy the extent of there
lands in each province of his empire, appointed the
precise number of soldiers each person who held a
Timariot or a Ziam Ihould bring into the field, and efla-
blilhed the pay which they thould receive while en-
gaged in service. Count Marltgli and Sir Paul Rycaut
have given extrads from this book of regulations, and
it appears, that the ordinary eftablilhment of the
Turkish army exceeded an hundred and fifty thousand
men. When there were added to the soldiery of the
Porte, they formed a military power greatly superior to

what

what any Chrillian itate could command in the 6ixteenth
century. Marligli, Etat Militaire, &c. p. a y6. Ry-
caut's State of the Ottoman Empire, book. iii. clh ii.
As Solyman, during his adive reign, was engagcd so
confianely in war, that his troops were always in the
field, the Scrraoracuy became almof' equal to the Janiza.
ries themselves in discipline and valour.

It is not furpriirng then, that the authors of the

sixteenth century should represent tihe Turks as far fu-
perior to the Chritlians both in the knowledge and in
the praaice of the art of war. Guicciardini informs us,
that the ltalians learned the art of fortifying towns from
the Turks. Hihor. lib. i5. p. z66. Busbcquius, who
was ambafrdor from the emperor Ferdinand to Soly-
man, and who had opportunity to observe the slate
both of the Christian and Turkish armies, pubirihed a
dilcourfe concerning the best manner of carrying on
war against the TurlsS, in which he points our at great
length the immense advantages which the Infidels pof.
felfed with refpe& to discipline, and military improve-
ments of every kind. Bufbequii opera, edit. Elzevir,
p. 393, &c. The teflimony of other authors might be
added, if the matter were in any degree doubtful.

Before I conclude there Proofs and Illustrations, I

ought to explain the reason of two omnilions in them;
one of which it is neceltfary to mention on my own
account, the other to obviate an objeation to this part of
the work.

In all my enquiries and difquifitions concerning the

progrefa of government, manners, literature, and com-
merce, during the middle ages, as well as in my deline-
ations of the political conflitution of the different itates
of Europe at the opening of the fixieenth century, I
have not once mentioned M. de Voltaire, who, in his
Efay fur 1'BEfloire generale, has reviewed the fame period,
and has treated of all these fubjets. This does not
prdceed from inattention to the works of that extraordi.
nary man, whole genius, no less enterprising than uni-
versal, has attempted almost every different species of

literary

all, if he had left religion untouched, he is infrautive
and agreeable. But as he seldom imitates the example
of modern bildorians in citing the authors from whom
they derived their information, I could not, with pro.
priety, appeal to his authority in confirmation of any
doubtful or unknown fast. I have often, however,
followed him as my guide in these researches; and he
has not only pointed out the faas with refpe61 to which
it was of importacce to inquire, but the conclusions which
it was proper to draw from them. If he had, at the
fame time, mentioned the books which relate these
particulars, a great part of my labour would have been
unnecessary, and many of his readers, who now con-
fider him only as an entertaining and lively writer, would
find that he is a learned and well informed hiflorian.

As to the other omifson, every intelligent reader

mulf have obherved, that I have not entered, either in
the historical part of this volume, or in the Proofs and
Illuflrations, into the fame detail with refpea to the
ancient laws and cul'oms of the Britilh kingdoms, as
concerning those of the other European nations. As
the capital fats with regard to the progress of go.
Vernment and manners in their own country are known
to most of my readers, such a detail appeared to me to
be less essential. Such faas and observations, however,
as were necessary towards completing my delign in
this part of the work, I have mentioned under the
different articles which are the fubjeas of my difqui-
Litions. The ltate of government, in all the nations
of Europe, having been nearly the fame during several
ages, nothing can tend more to illufirate the progrefa
of the Englilh confitution, than a careful inquiry into
the laws and customs of the kingdoms on the conti-
nent. - This source of information has been too much
negleceed by the Engliih antiquaries and lawyers,
Filled with admiration of that happy conflitution riow
elablifhed in Great Britain, they have been more at-
tentive to its forms and principles than to the con-

ditiao

dition and ideas of remote times, which in almost every
particular differ from the present. While engaged in
perusing the laws, charters, and early hiftornans of the
continental kingdoms. I have often been led to think
that an attempt to illultrate the progress of Englilh ju-
rifprudence and policy, by a comparison with those of
odher kingdoms in a similar ficuation, would be of great
utility, and might throw much light on some points
which are now obscure, and decide others which have
been long controverted.

INDEX

# INDEX TO THE FIRST VOLUME.

IN D EX

TO THE

FIRST VOLUM E.

A

AFRICA, tho thockieg denaliations made there by the

Vandals, z25.

Atlens, his charas?er of the clergy in his time0 240.
Alfred the Greac, his complaisto of the ignorance of the

clergy, 240.

Alledral poffelion of land, explained, 224. How such psf..

eHlion became fubje6& to military service, ibid. Dilin.
guished fram bereficiary ttnures, ibid. 225. How con.
verted into feudal tenures, 230.

A/indium, the etymology of that word, z23.
Armianvs, his charahier of the Huns, 212. 217.
Amurath, Sultan, the body of janizaries formrd by him, 203.
Anaraacmaz, for. of that denounced againib robbers during the

middleages, 325.

Ai-obia, the ancient Greek philosophy cultivated there, while

loit in Euro: e, 318, Note xxvili. The progrees of phil-
sophy from thsnceto Europe, 319.

Asragrn, rife of the kingdom of, 157. Its union with Caihile,

ibid. The con thtution and form of its government, 16,.

hlie privileers of its Corres, ibid. Ofice and jurifd~aion

of the jufliza, 163. The regal power very conlined, 164.
Form of the allegiance fiworn to the kings of, ibid. The
lower of the nwbihity to controul the regal power, 33d.
Their privilege of union talten away by Peter IV. sbid. Tite
eftablfihmeust of the irquirition oppsofed there, 315.

.Arwirs, dtanding, the rife of, traced, 0oo. By what means

they becaume mose general in Europe, Isr.

Arms, the p!ofeslion of, the moit honourable in uncivilized

nations, 73, 74.

A/j, an account of the ancient Romiti fealt of, 243.

vL. I. . 5rblie

Afhemblies, legislative, how formed, 39.
-- general, of France, their power under the firlR

race of kings, 177. Under the second and third, ibid. 178.
At what period they loft their legislative authority, 579.

Atti/a, king of the Huns, account of his reception of the

Roman ambaffodors, aoS, Noteiii. Some account of his
conquelts, z,3.

Avila, an aflembly of CaIrilian nobles there, folsmnly try

and depole Henry IV. their king, a60.

Aunfria, the house of, by whom founded, 190.

B

Bailiis, in the old French law, their office explained, go6.
Balance of power, the first rife of, in Europe, Iso. The

progress of, azz.

Baltic, the firit source of wealth to the towns situated on

that sea, 330.

Barcelona, its trade, riches, and privileges at the clafe of the

fifteenth century, 344.

Barons, their independence, and mutual hostilities, under the

feudal system, 17. How affedled by the infranchifement
of cities, 37. Acquire a participation in legislative govern-
snent, 39. Their private wans for redress of personal in-
juries, 46. Methods employed to abolilh there conten-
- tiofs, 49. Origin of their supreme and independent ju-

rifdiktion, 62. The bad effedts resulting from these pri-
vileges, 63. The fleps taken by princes to reduce their
courts, 65. How obliged to relinquilfh their judicial pre.
rogatives, 74. Of Italy, fubjeted to municipal laws, 252s
N2ote xv. Their right of territorial jurifdiaion explained,
30t. Their emoluments from causes decided in their
courts, 302..

Benefces, under the feudal fyfitem, a hiltory of, 227. When

they became hereditary, zzs.

Books, an enquiry into the materials of the ancient ones, 240.

The lofsof old mansferipts accounted for, 14.. The great
prices they fold for in ancient times, ibid.

Borougbs, representatives of, how introduced into national

councils, 39.

Britoar, ancient, their dif'refs and dejedtion when deserted

by the Romans, and harassed by the Pitts and Caledonians,

a07, Note i.

I ,Brobrr-

Ereahrhood of God, an account of that association for extin.

gudhing private wars, 232.

Bruges, how it became the chief mart for Italian commodities

during the middle ages, 329.

Burgundy, Mary, heiress of, the importance with which her

choice in a hufhand was considered by all Europe, 503.
Trte treacherous views of Louis XI. of France towards
her, 154. Is married to the archduke Maximilian, x1y.
The influence of this match on the ihate of Europe, a 6.

C

Coefar, his account of the ancient Germans, compared with

thatof Tacirus, 217.

Calatrava, military order of, in Spain, zealous to employ

their prowess in defence of the honours of the Virgin Mary,
346 The vow used by rhefe knights, ibid.

Cambray, treaty of, its objea, 027. The confederacy dif.

foiveu, 529.

Canon Law, an inquiry into, 68. Progress of ecclefiafrical

ufrrpations, ibid. The maxims of, more equitable than
the civil courts of the middle ages, 69.

Cafuile, rife ot the kingdom of, IS7, Its union wiihAragon,

ibid. Its king Henry IV. solemnly tried and deposed in
an assembly of the nobhes, s6a. The coniftiution and go.
vernment of that kingdom, 165. A hieory of the Cortes
of, and its privileges, 166. The kingdom originally eledive,
34t, Note xxxiii.

Catalonia, the spirited behaviour of the people there in de-

fence of their rights, againit their king John II. of Ara-
gon, 160.

Cenfuales, a species of the Oblati, or voluntary laves, the ob-

ligations they entesed into, described, 273.

Centenarii, or inferior judges in the middle ages, the extra-

ordinary oath required from them, 325.

Champs deMars, and do Mai, account of those alTemblies of

the ancient Gauls, 350.

Charlemagnre, his law to prevent private wars for redress of

personal injuries, 49. 280. State of Germany under his
defcendantr, nS5

Chorlcs 1V. emperor, dillipates the imperial domains, 367.
-- V. emperor, an emulator of the heroic condua of
his rival, Francis I. 78. His future grandeur founded og

.LL the

of Burgundy, 1s5.

Charles ViI. of France, the firit who introduced itbnding

armiesin Europe, 0oo. His fu'ccefsful extention of the rc-
gal prerogative, 104.
- eil,. of France, his charafter, et7. How induced

to invade Italy, ibid. His resources and pteparations for
this enttrprize, 1i8. His rapid fuccefa, ibid. A combi-
nation of the Italian fates formed agaiilr bimn, izn. Is
forced to return back to France, ibid. The didrelied date
of his revenues by this espeditiots, 125.

Cjharlevsoix, his account of the North American Itdidjns,

made use of in a comparison between them and the ancient
Germans, zzo.

Churters, of immunity or franchise, an inquiry into the na-

ture of those granted by the barons of France to the towns
under their jurifdiblions, 256, Note xvi. Of rommuni.
ties, granted by the kiings of France, how they tended to
eliablth regular government, 34. 256.

Chioalry, theorigie of, 75. Its beneficial effe1s on human

manners, 77. The enthufaafm of, diftinguilbhd from its
fdutary conkqurnces, ibid.

Cbeli~'asity, corrupted when flrlt brought into Europe, so.

Its influence in fleeing mankind from the bondage of the
feudal psiscy, 270, Note xx.

Circles of Germany, the occaiton of their being formed, 1 93.
Cuts, the ancient fRates of, under the feudal policy, 33.

The freedom of, where dirlt etabliled, A4 Chasters of
community, why granted in France by Louis le Groe, 35*
Obtain the like all oser Europe, ibid. Acquire poiiricda
conlideration, 39.

Clergy, the progrefsof their ufurpations, 68. Their plan of

jurilprudence more perfe6a than that of the civil courts in
the middle ages, 69. The great ignorance of, in the early
feudal times of Europe, 240.

Cleriza, have to Willa, widow of duke Hugo, extradt from

the charterofmaoumiffion granted to hsr, 271.

Clermonn, council of, resolves on the holy war, 2a. See

Peter the Hermit, and Cru odes.

Clotaire I. initance of the small auithority he had over his

army, 349.

ClotZariuu II. his account of the popular alfemblies among the

ancient Gaslis, 350 CWids,

a sacred vase taken by his army, from being difrributed by
lot among the refe of the plunder, 22z, Note vii.

Colleges, the 6rfh el'ablifhment of, in Europe, 319.
Combat, judicial, the prohibition of, an improvementin the

adminiltration ofjuffice, 51. The foundation and univer.
fality of this mode of trial, 57. The pernicious effeas
of, 58. Various expedients for abolishing this pradhice,
59. The ancient Swedilh law of, for words of reproach,
291. Pofrtive evidence, or pointl of proof, rendered in-
effelual by it, 294. 1 his mode of trial authorized by the
ecclefiai'rcs, 295. The lath inltances of, in the histories of
France and England, 296.

Comnmerce, the spirit of crusading how far favourable to, at

that early period, 3'. The firlt eflablifhment of free cor-
porations, 35. Charters of community, why granted by
Louis le Gros, 36. The like prasdice obtains all over
Europe, ibid. The salutary effeas of these inflirutions,
ibrd. The low State of, during the middle ages, 54.
Causes contributing to its revival, S5. Promoted by the
HanlFeacic league, 86. Is cultivated in the Netherlands,
57. Is intr duced into England by Edward III. 88. The
beneficial consequences resulting from the revival of, 89.
The early cultivation of, in Italy, 326.

Common Lawo, the firlR compilation of, made in England by

Lord Chief JufRice Glanville, 3t3.

Communities. See Chartero, Cit;eo, Commerce, and Corpera-

tions.

Comnena, Anne, her charater of the crusaders, es5.
Ctmpafs, mariner's, when invented, and its influence on the

extension of commerce, 85.

Compojition for personal injuries, the motives for eftablilshing,

279. The cultom of, deduced from the prathice of the
ancient Germans, 297.

Csmpurgators, introduced as evidence in the jurisprudence of

the middle ages, 53.

Condoteieri, in the Italian policy, what, 143.
Conrad, count of Franconia, how he obtained eleaion to the

empire, 186.

Ccnradin, the last rightful heir to the crown of Naples of the

house of Swabia. his unhappy fate, 149.

Confiance, treaty of, between the emperor Frederic BarbarolTa

and the free cities of Italy, 255.

1. L 3 Con/fan.

28. When firfl taken by the Turks, 20o. The crofa.
ders how looked upon there, 249 The account given of
this city by the Latin writers, 250.

Csnfiiturions, popular, how formed, 39.
Cordova, Gonfalvo de, secures the crown of Naples to Ferdi.

nand of Aragon, Igo.

Crporations, and bodies politic, the eliablilhments of, hows

far favourable to the improvement of manners, 33. The
privileges of, how thlt claimed, 35. Charters of com-
munity, why granted by Louis le Gros in France, 36.
The inilitution of, obtains all over Europe, ibid. Their es-
fefls, ibid.

Cortes of Aragon, its confhitution and privileges, tbr.
- of Caltile, a hiltory of, and an account of its conlti-

tution and privileges, a65. The vigilance with which it
guarded its privileges againlt the encroachments of the
regal power, x66.

Crsfades, the firit motives of undertaking, 23. The en-

thulialtic zeal with which they were undertaken, 24. First
promoted by Peter the Hermit, 25. The success of them,
26. The consequences refuiring from them, 27. Their
effeas on manners, 28. On property, 29. How advan-
tagerus to the enlargement of the regal power of the Euro-
pean princes, 30. The commercial elfeas of, 31. 85.
The universal frenzy for engaging in these expeditions ac-
counted for, 214, Note xiii. The privileges granted to
tisofe who engaged in them, 246. Stephen earl of Chartres
and Blois, his accouot of them, 247. The expence of
condufling them, how raised, 248. Charaaer given of
the Crssfaders by the Greek writers, 250.

D

Debt, the 6rff hint of attaching moveables for the recovery

of, derived from the canonlaw, 32z.

Debrors, how considered in the rude and simple fate of foci-

ety, 258.
litrs of Germany, fume account of, 371.
iodEoro in the different faculties, dispute precedence with

cnights, 319, 320,

Ecdie.

E

Endle/7afical jurisprudence, more perfeca in its plan than the

civil courts of the middle ages, 69.

Eccleiafiics, when, and by what degrees they claimed exemnp.

tion from civil jurifdiaion, 309. Military talents cul.
tivatesi and exercised by rhofe of the midole ages, 31$.

Edward III. of England, his endeavours to introduce com.

merce into his kingdom, 88.

Eleiors of Germany, the rife of their privileges, 596.
Eloy, Sr. his definition or deferiprion of a goad Christian,

242, Nate xi.

Emarperors of Germany, an inquiry into their power, jurifdic-

rion, and revenue, 366, Nate xshi. The ancient mode of
eleding them, 369.

Eaglond, a summary view of the contests between, and

France, 95. The consequences of its losing its conti-
nental pollefioss, 98. 'The power of the crown, how
extended, rio. Ste Hcnry VII. Why so many marks
of Saxon ofages and language, in comparison with those of
thc Normans, to be found in, 2o9, Note iv. When
corporarions began to be eltablihed in, 267. Infances of
the long continuance of personal servitude there, 274.
Inquiry into the Saxon laws for.putting an end to private
wars, 283. The canfes of the speedy decline of private
wars there, proposed to the researches of antiquarians, 287.
T he lafr instances of judicial combat recorded in the hiluory
of, 296. The territorial jurildidion of the barons hosv
abolilhed, 0o7. Cause of the flow progress of commerce
there, 331. The furft commercial treaty entere4 into
by, 332* .

E'zridencr, the imperfe& nmture of that admitted in law-

proceedings during the middle ages, 5r. Rendered inef-
feaual by the jnrdical combat, 294.

Earope, the alterations in, by the conquelts of the Romans,

2. The improvements the nations of, received in exchange
for their liberties, ibid. Its disadvantages under tiris
change of circumilanes, ibid. Inqairy into the fiuppofed
populuolnefs of the ancient northern nations, 4. The
savage desolations exercised by the Goths, Vandals, and
h-uns, so. The naiverfal change occafsated by their
irrsptions and cauonuclI, Ia. The firlt rudisenos of the

arebast:

Origin 6f the feudal fytem, x4. See Feudal Syflem.
The general barbarism introduced with this policy, 19.
At what time government and manners began to improve,
:2. The causes and events which contributed to this im-
provement, 23. See Crusades, Csrporations, Preopl. The
miseries occasioned by private wars in, 47. Methods taken
to suppress them, 40. Judicial combats prohibited, 5r.
The defeAs of judicial proceedings in the middle ages, ibid.
The influence of superstition in these proceedings, 54.
The origin of the independent territorial jurildiaions of
the barons, 6a. The bad consequences of their judicial
power, ibid. The fleps taken by princes to abolish their
courts, 65. An inquiry into the canon law, 68. Revival
of the Roman law, 68. Effe&s of the fpiritof chival-
vy, 75. How improved by the progress of science and
cultivation of literature, 78. Christianity corrupted when
firt received in, 80. Scholallic theology the firtf obje&
of learning in, 82. Low state of commerce in, during
the middle ages, I4. Commerce revives in Italy, 8. Is
promoted by the Hanseatic league, 86. Is cultivated in the
Netherlands, 87. The effeds of the progress of com-
merce on the polihing of manners, 89. The effeas of
the marr age of the heiress of Burgundy with the arch,.
duke Mlaximilian, on the frate of, sr5. By what means
franding forces became general in, sze. Consequences of
the league of Cambray to, 127. A view of the political
conititution of the several itares of, at the commencement
of the sixteenth century. aSr. Italy, 133. The pa-
pacy, 134. Venice, 543. Florence, 546. Naples, 147.
Milan, sp. Spain, 554. France, 176. Germany, 185*
Turkey, coo. Inltances of the small intercourse among
nations in the middle ages, 3zz.

F

Feodum, the etymology of that word, 233.
.Ferdinand, kiing of Aragon, unites the Spanih monarchy,

by his n.arriage with Isabella of Caflile, 057. His frhemes
to exalt the regal power, 070. Resumes former grants of
land from his barons, 172. Unites to the crown the grand
maferrihips of the three military orders, ibid. Why he
patronized the association called the .Fly Brotherhood,
againit the barons, 75.e Feud~al

objrbt of this policy, ibid. its deficiencies for inferior
gosernment, oh. Tenures of land, how effablifhed under,
ibid. The rife of inselhine discords among the barnss
under, ibid. The servile ilate of the people, s7. The
weak authority of the kieg, ibid. Its infuence on the
axtecoot operations of war, :8. The general extinEtion
of all arts and sciences effeded by, o9. Its operation
oe religien, 20. Its influence on the charafer of the
human mind, 20. At what time government and mnn-
-ers began to he improved, .z2. The causes and even s
. hich rontributed to this improvement, 23. Ste Crujid. s.
The ancienr state of cities under, 3;. The frame of
national councils under this policy, 39. How altered by
the pr gsefs of civil liberty, 41. An inquiry into the ad-
misnilration of justice under, 45. Private war, 5i. Ju-
diciol combat, 54. The independont jurifdibion of the
barons, 54. The diltinabion between freemen and vsf.
dais under, za9. Hlow frrangers s-cre considered and
treated under, 323.

Fiefs, under the feudal fyRem, a hillory of, zz5. When

they became hercdixary, 229.

Firtriephens, observations on his account of the state of

London at the time of Henry 11. 267.

Flandera. See Netberlands.
Floarence, a view of the constitution of, at the commencement

of the sixteenth century, r46. The intluesceacquired
by Cosmo di Medici in, ibid.

France, by what means the towns in, lirft obtained charters of

community, 36. Ordinances of Louis X. and his brother
Philip in favour ofcivil librrty, 43. Methods ervployed
to fupprtfs private wars, 49. St. Louis attempts to diP-
countenance judicial combat, 59. A viee of the conteRts
between, and England, 95. The consequences of its re-
covering its provinces from England, 98. The monarchy
of, howv Idrengthened by this event, 99. The rife ofitaed-
ing forces in, ibid. The regal prerogative frengthened by
this meafare, 103. The extension of the regal precoga-
tive vigoerualy pursued by Louis XI. sop. See Loris XI.
The ellebts of the invafton of Italy by Charles Viii. e7.
See Char/es Vil. National infantry eflablilhed in, i4..
League of Canmbray formed aga nft the Venetians, sa7.
hattle of Ghianradadda, oz8. An inquiry into its anciknt

goernmeont

second and third, ibid. x79. The regal power conlined
to the king's own domains, s79. When the general
assembly or stares general lt their legislative authority,
ibid. When the kings began to assert their legislative
power, 18g. When the government of, became purely
monarchical, ibid. The regal power nevertheless reelrained
by the ptivileges of the nobility, ibid. An inquiry into
the jurifdition of its parliaments, particularly that of
Paris, S33. How the allodial property of land there was
altered into feudal, 23z. The progress of liberty in that
kingdom traced, 234, Note xix. The attempts to ella.
blilh liberty there unfuccefsful, z69. The lall inflance
of judicial combat recorded in the hillory of, 2.96. The
prefeat government of, compared with that of ancient
Gaul, 345, Note xxxviii. The fRates general, when firl
assembled, 3so.

Francis I. of France, his charader influenced by the spirit

of chivalry, 77. Is emulated by the emperor Charles V.
78.

Frederic Barbarolfa, emperor, the free cities of Italy unite

againit him, 255. Treaty of Conflance with them, ibid.
Was the first who granted privileges to the cities in Ger-
many, 264.

Fredoma, in the ancient German usages explained, a93.
freemen, how diftingulihed from valfals, under the feudal

policy, 2Z5. 237 Why often induced to fussender their
freedom, and become slaves, 240.

FulcberCsr Carnotenfis, his charaaer of the city of Conlranti-

nopie, z50.

G

Goul, how allodial property of land was changed into feu-

dal there, 23j. The government of, compared with
that of modern France, 348, .Vore xxxviii. The small
authority the kings of, enjoyed over their armies, illuTf-
traced in an anecdoteof Clotaire1. 349. Account of the
popular assemblies of, 50. The Salic laws how enaaed,
351. Were not fuijea to taxation, 352. See France.

Geejrey de VJ!ehardcuin, his account of the magnihicence of

Contlantinople at the time when taken by the Crusaders,

ag5r Germans,

life, alp. Their method of engaging in war, ibid. A
comparison between them and the North American In.
dians, zI9. Why they had no cities, 263, Note xvii.
The pradice of compounding for personal injuries by fnes,
deduced from their usages, 298.

Germany, little interefled in foreign concerns at the beginning

of the flfieenth century, 97. National infantry eltabhilhed
in, a24. State of, under Charlemagne and his descend-
ants, 185. Conrad, count of Franconia, chosen emperor,
,86. His fuccelfors in the Imperial digniry, ibid. How
the nobility of, acquired independent sovereign authority,
187. The fatal effees of aggrandizing the clergy in,
l88. The conteib between the emperor Henry IV, and
Pope Gregory Vii. 189, Rife. of the faaions of Guelfa
and Ghibelines, a9o. Decline of the Imperial authority,
ibid. The house of Aufria, by whom founded, ibid. A
total change in the political constitution of the empire,
191. The itate of anarchy in which it continued to the
time of Maximilian, the immediate predecessor of CharlesV.
ibid. 192. Divided into circles, 192. The Imperial
chamber inflituted, 193. The Aulic council reformed,
ibid. A view of its political constitution at the commence.
ment of the ensuing hiffory, 104. Its defefs pointed
out, ibid. The Imperial dignity and power compared, 595.
Eledion of the emperors, 196. The repugnant forms of
civil policy, in the several ftlaes of, 197, The oppolition
between the lecular and ecclefsalticai members of, 598.
The united body hence incapable of ading with vigour,
199. When cities firit began to be built in, 263, Note
xvii. When the cities of, fitrf acquired municipal privi-
leges, 264. The artizans of, when infranchifed, 265.
Immediate cities in the German jurilprudence, what, 266.
The great calamities occafsoned there by privatewars, 288.
Origin of the league of the Rhine, 289. When private
wars were finally abolished there, ibid. Inquiry into the
power, jurifdiaion, and revenue of its emperors, 366,
Note xlii. The ancient mode of eleding the emperors,
371. Account of the diets, ibid.

Ghibelines. See Guelfo
Ghiarradadda, the battle of, fatal to the Venetians, az8.
Glanville, Lord Chief Justice, the firRt who compiled a body

of common law, in all Europe, 313.

Geths,

precipitate its downfall, 3. The slate of the countries
from whence they issued, 4. The motives of their firmft
rxcufrons, 5. HFow they came to fettle in the countries
they conquered, 6. A comparlon drawn between them
arid the Romans, at the period of their irruptions, 7, &
fry. Compared with the native Americans, i. The de-
lolations they occafoned in Europe, to. The universal
chrnge madety them in the slate of Europe, Is. The
plinciplfes on ulhich they made their fettleinents, 13. Ori-
gin ot the feudoijfyftem, 54. See FcsdiR Ssfem. An in-
quiry into the .dminiflration ofjulhice among, 45. Their
private wars, 47. Desroy the monuments of the Roman
arts, 79. Their conten~r of the Romins, and hatred of
their arts, 207, Note ii. T'heir aveifren to liserature,
ibid. No authentic account of their origin, or ancient
history exiffing, 208.

Govertnment, how limited by the feudal palicy, 16. The

effeds of the crusades on, 30. How aoedhed be the in-
franchifement of cities, 33. Legillative aslemblies how
foined, 37. Private wars defrufive to the authority of,
48. Methods employed to aboifh this holtile mode of
redrelting ilnjuries, 49. How afedaed by the Cupteme in-
dependent jusifdibhions of the barons, 62. The Iteps to-
wards abolilhing them, 66. The origin and growth of
royal courts ofjullice, 67. How influenced by the revival
of icience and literature, 8i. A view of, at the beginnieg
of the fifteenth century, 90. The power of monwrchs
then very limited, 9t. Their rerenues thnall, 92. Their
armies unmit for conqueff, ibid. The princes hence inca.
pable of exteslive plans ofoperation, 94. The kingdoms
very little conneaed with each other, 95. Iow the
effirts of, from this period became more powerful and
extensive, 97. The consequences of England lofrng its
provinces in France, 98. The scheme of Louis XI. of
Fiance to extend the regal power, 505. See LouisXI.
1 he power of the Englith crown enlarged, to. See
Henry VII. As also that of Spain, Ion. Hlow the use of
fianding armies became general, s22. A view of the po-
litical confnitution of the several Slates of Europe, at the
crmrmencment of the Sixteenth century, 532. In what
rerpehis the charters of communities granted by the kings
of France, tended to introduce a regular form of, 257.

- Greces

327.

Greek emperors, their magnificence at Coniantinople, 2.49.
Gregory of Tours, remarks on the state of Europe during the

period of which he wrote the history, 21.

- the Great, pope, his reason for granting liberty to

his slaves, 271.

- VII. pope, the foundation of his conteffs with Hen-

ry IV. emperor of Germany, 188. The mean fubmif-
sinn be extorted from Henry, 239. His own account of
this affair, 3C3.

Gaelfs and Ghibellines, rife of those faffions in Germany,

190.

Guicciardini, the biRorian, instance of his fuperRirious rever-

ence for pope Clement VII. 142, Note.

Gunrheras, a monk, his charaaer of Conotantinople, at the

time when taken by the crusaders, 322.

Hanseatic league, when formed, and its influence on the ex-

tenflon of commerce, 86. 335.

Henry IV. of CaRile, solemnly tried and depoled by an afifm-

bly of Cafilian nobles, o6r.

- emperor of Germany, the humiliating slate to

which he was reduced by Pope Gregory VII. 188. 365,
Note xli.

- VII. ofEngland, his situation at his accefflion to the

crown, I10. Enables his barons to break their entails and
fell their eflates, Iax. Prohibits his barons keeping re-
tainers, ikid. Encourages agriculture and commerce, ibid.

Herebannuam, the nature of this fine unler the feudal policy,

explained, 226.

Hermandad, Santa, account of that inffitution, 343.
History, the mout calamitous period of, pointed out, a0.
Holy Brotherhood, an alfociation in Spain under that name,

on what occasion formed, 075.

- Land, the original inducements of the Chririans to

rescue it from the hands of the Infidels, 23. See Crusades
and Peter the Hermit.

Honour, points of the ancient Swedijh law for determining.

291. Hrfpitaliry, enforced by statutes during the zaiddle ages, 32'
VOL. 5. M 5 Hu

.Note iii. Some account of their policy and manners,
2a2. 21. See Gothrs.

I

*oniuiaries, origin, and formidable nature of those troops,

2o3.

Imperial chamber of Germany inflituted, 193. The occasion

of its inlhitution, 344.

Indians, North American, a compasifon drawn between them

and the ancient Germans, azo.

Indfjlry, the Ipirit of, how excited by the enfranchifements

of cities, 39.

Infantry, the advantages of, beyond cavaliy, taught to the

relf of Europe by the Swiss, 124. National bodies of,
eflabijihed in Germany, ibid. In France and Spain, ibid.
t25.

Inheritance, and right of representation, between orphan

grandsons and their uncles, how decided in the tenth
century, 292.

Intereof of money, the neceiiity of admitting, in a commercial

view, 328. Prepolteroully condemned by the churchmen
of the misldle ogrs, ibid The cause hence, of the exorbitant
exaaions of the Lombard bankrrs, ibid.

Italy, when the cities of, began to form themselves into bo-

dies politic, 35. Commerce firt improved there, and the
reasons of it, 86. The revolutions in Europe occalioned
by the irvafson of, by Charles VIII. of France, 517-
The slate of, at the time of this invafton, jI I. The
rapid luccefs of Charles, 119.- A combination of the
foates of, drives Charles out of, and gives birth to the
balance of power in Europe, lao. The political situation
of, at the commencement of the sixteenth century, 133.
The papacy, 134. Venice, 143. Florence, 146. Naples,
147. Milan, 151. Evidences of the desolation made
there by the northern invaders of the Roman empire, 254.
How the cities of, obtained their municipal privileges,
t52, Note xv. State of, under Frederic 1. 253. Treaty
of Con'Rance between the free cities of, and the emperor
Frederic Barbarossa, 254.

7udgment of God, modes of acquittal by, in the law proceed-

ings during the middle ages, 54. 239, lNiote xxii.

Judicium

yudicium Crucih, nmthod of trial by, z89.
Julius II. pope, thos, a confederacy agamnl the Venetiansat

Cambray, I57. Seizns part of theVenerian territories, pz8.
The confederacy dilfolved, 129. Turns his chiemeu
againf' France, '30.

far jrudence, ecclefidtical, more perfea in its plan thin

the civil courts in the middle ages, 50. See Law.

Juffice, an inquiry into the arminiffration of, under the feudal

policy, 45. The Ieps towards the improvement of, as civil
liberty advanced, 46. Redress chiely pursued by private
wars, 47. Methods taken to suppress private wars, ibid.
Judicial combats prohibited, Sr. The defefts ofjudicial
proceedings in the middles aget, ibid. Compurgaoors,
the nature of that kind of evidence, 53. Methods of
trial by ordeal, or acquittal by judgment of God, 54.
Origin of the fupieme indepsndent jurifdi&ions of the
feudal barons, 62. The exrent and bad effeas of their
privileges, ibid. The feps taken by monarchs to reduce
the barons courts, 64. The growth of royal courts of
juotice, 66. Inquiry into the canon law, 68. Horvim.
proved by the revival of the Roman law, 7t. When the
adminifiration p1, became a diftinf profeffion, 74.

Juftiza, or supreme judge of Aragon, his office and privi-

leges, P63. An inquiry by whom this odlicer was eleaed,
333. Who was eligible to this office, 334. Nature of
the tribunal appointed to controul his adminifration, 335*
Initance of his extensive power, 336.

K

King, his power how circumscribed by the barons, under

the feudal fyilem, 27. By what means the Crufadna
tended to enlarge the regol authority, 30.

Koran, its influence in checking the fCutana of the Ottoman

empire, zo3.

L

Land, how held at the eftabiifhment of the feudal system,

16. See Feudal Syfiem.

- the property of, how considered by the ancient bar-

barous nations, 0s3, Note viii. Allodial poffeflion of, et.

M M 2 plained,

service, ibid. Allodial and beneficiary poafkemon diflin-
guiibed, zaa. Allodial property why generally converted
inofeudal, 23!.

Law, when the study of it became a diilin& employment,

74.

- Canon, an.inquiry into, 68. The maxims of, more

equitable than the civil courts of the middle ages, 69.
When firE compiled, 312.

- Roman, how it funk into oblivion, 71. Circum-

frances which favoured the revival of it, ibid. Its effeAs
in improving the administration ofjuftice, 72. Its rapid
progress over Europe, 353, Note xxv.

La'wburrovos, in the Scottilhlaw, explained, 258.
Liberty, civil, the rife and progress of, traced, 35. How

favoured by the ordonances of Louis X. of France, and his
brother Philip, 43. The spirit of, how excited in France,
267, Note xix. The particulars included in the charters
of, granted to husbandmen, 27c, Note xx. The influence
of the Christian religion in extending, ibid. The several
opportunities of obtaining, "8s.

Limoges, council of, its endeavours to extinguilh private

wars, 28o.

Literature, the cultivation of, greatly inlfrumental in civiliz.

ing the nations of Europe, 78. Why the fil'r efforts of,
ill direaed, 80. The good effeas nevertheless of the
spirit of inquiry exerted, 82. How checked in its pro-
grefs, ibid. Its influence on manners and government,
33.

Liturgy, the preference between the Mliufarabic and Romish,

how ascertained in Spain, 292.

Lrmbardo, the firfE bankers in Europe, 327. The motive

of their exading exobitant interelt, 328.

Lordon, its flourilhing slate at the time of Henry II. 267.
Lcuis le Gros, of France, his inducement to grant privileges

to towns within his own domains, 35. See Cbarters.

- St. the great attention he paid to the administration of

jufRice, in appeals which came before him, 305.

- X. of France, his ordonances in favour of civil librr-

ty> 43*
c XI. of France, his charaeier, aog. His schemes for
depreffsng the nobility, ibid. Sows divilsons among them,
2c6. Increases the tanding forces, 107. Enlarges the

revenues

revenues of the crown, ibid. His address in overruling the
alfembly of Rtates, 108. Extends the bounds of the French
monarchy, 109. The adivity of his external operations,
ibid. His treacherous baseness towards the helrefs of Bur-
gundy, ao3, Im4. The effeds of his condud, I I5.

Louis XII. his hefaration in rarrying on war againit the pope,

142, Note. Asserts his right to the dutchy of Milan, and
retains Ludovico Sforza in prison, 054.

M

Manfred, his 'rruggles for the crown of Naples, 148.
Mankind, the moll calamitous period in the history of, pointed

out, 10.

Manner,, the barbarity of, under the feudal eftablilhments,

after the overthrow of the Roman empire, ig. When
they began to improve, 22. Effeas of the Crofades on,
27. How improved by theenfranchilement of cities, 39.
How improved by the ereaion of royal courts ofjulrice, in
opposition to the barons courts, 66. Effeas of the revival
ofthe Roman law on, 71. The beneficial tendency of
the fpisit of chivalry on, 75. How influenced by the pro-
grefs of science, 78. 83. How polilhed by the revival of
commerce, 89.

MZanumifion, particulars included in the charters of, granted

to huibandmen or haves, 270, NOte xx. The form
of, 271.

Maximilian, archduke of Aufiria, married to Mary heiress

of Burgundy, to5. The influence of this match on the
Rate of Europe, rs6.

-- emperor, institutes the Imperial chamber, 193.

Reforms the Aulic council, ibid.

Medici, Cosmo di, the sirs of the name, the influence he ac-

quired in Florence, 046.

Milan, the Rlate of the dutchy of, at the commencement of

the sixteenth century, IS5. Rife and progress of the dif-
putes concerning the succession to, ibid.

Mind, the human, a view of, under the first eltablilhment

of the feudal policy in Europe, xi. The amra of its ulti.
mate depression, and commencement of its improvement,
22. The progress of its operations, before the full exertion
ofit, 80.

SM 3 Minmf

pious motives of the obligations they entered into, 273.

Mocrs, make a conquert of Spain, a55. By what means

weakened during their eltablifhment there, 156. Remarks
on their condua in Spain, n57.

.Municipal privileges, how obtained by the cities of Italy,

252, Nate xv. Secured to them by the treaty of Con-
itance, 256. The favourite frate of, under the Roman
government, 263.

N

Naples, a view of the conlfitution of that kingdom, at the

commencement of.the sixteenth century, 247. The tur-
bulent unsettled Crate of that kingdom, ibid. State of the
disputes concerning the fuccefiaon of the crown of, a48.
T;:e pretenfsons of the French and Spanish monarchs to
the crown of, ago.

.lairbonnc, community of, preamble to the writ of summons

of Philip the Long to, z68, Note xix.

?Sawigation, proof of the imperfet6t fate of, during the middle

ages, 329.

Nretherlands, vigorous prosecution of the manufadures of

hemp and flax there, on the revival of commerce in Eu-
rope, 88.

N.rmans, why To few traces of their usages and language to

be found in England, in comparison with thule of-the
Saxons, zcy, Note iv.

0

Oblati, or voluntary slaves, the clafs'es of, specified, 273.
Ordeal, methods of trial by, during the middle ages, 54*

The influenceof fuperitition in diaating these means, 55.

Otto, Frifingeuofa, his account of the Crate of Italy under

Frederic I. 253.

Ottoman empire, the origin, and despotic nature of, zoo.

Becomes formidable to the Chrifrian powers, 205.

P

Papacy. See Popedo m.
Paper, whei 6irit made of the present materials, 2.z.

Paric, aninquiry into the pre-eminent jurifdlBion of its par-

liament over the other parliaments of France, 183. Its
origin traced, 362, Note xl. The royal edias regillered
by, before admitted to be laws, 364.

Pariaments, or legislative assemblies, how formed under the

feudal policy, 39. How altered by the progress of civil
liberty, 40.

People, their wretched servile fate under the feudal fydem,

17. 42. Released from their slavish Rate by the infran-
chifement of cities, 39. How they obtained a reprelenta-
tion in national councils, 40. Those who lived in the
country and cultinated the ground, an inquiry into their
condition under the feudal policy, 235, Note ix.

Per/a, murder in, how punifled there, 300.
Peter the herosit, excites the European princes to undertake

the Holy War, 25.

- IV. king of Aragon, defeats the leaders of the Arago-.

nefe union, and deltroys the privilege of these affocia-
tions, 339.

Philip the Long, preamble to his writ offummons to the com-

munity of Narbonne, 269, Note xix.

PhilSfoppy, cultivated by the Arabians, when loft in Europe,

3 ' 7, Ncte xrxviii. Its progress from them into Europe, 358.

Pilgnmages to the Holy Land, when firRt undertaken, 23.

See Crusades and Peter the Hermit.

Placetia, council of, the Holy War resolved on by, 27. See

Peter the lermit, and Crusades.

Plunder, how divided among the ancient northern nations,

13. Illullrated in an anecdote of Clovis, 222, Note vii.

Pnpednsm, the highest dignity in Europe at the commencement

of the sixteenth century, 133. Origin and progress of the
papal power, I34. The territories of the popes unequal to
the support of their spiritual jurildiaion, ibidr Their au.
thority in their own territories extremely limited, 135.
The check they received from the Roman barons, 537.
Nicholas Rienzo attempts to efRablifh a democratical go-
vernment in Rome, and to deltroy the papal jurifdidion,
ibid. The papal authority considerably firengthened by
the popes Alexander VI. and Julius II. 039. Sea
5alius II. The permanent nature of ecclefrialtical do-
minion, [59. The civil adminifrration of, not uniform
or confillent, ibid. Rome the school of political intrigue
during the sixteenth century, 540. The advantages de-

3 riveat

145. A view of the contefls between the, popes and the
emperossof Germany, 18h

Popuioufoefs of the ancient northern nations, an inquiry

into, 4.

Prifucia, extraa from his account of the Roman embassy to

Attila king of the Huns, 208, Note iii.

Procopiuos, his account of the cruel devaiations made by the

irruption of the northern nations, zog, Note v. 212, 213.

Property, the poffeffion of, how secured by the French char-

ters of communities, 259.

Provcditori, in the Venetian policy, their once, 144-

R

Religion, how corrupted by the northern nations eftablilhed

in Europe under the feudal policy, 20. Its influence in
freeing mrtanklind from the feodal Servitude, z jo.

Rep/edging, the right of, in the law of Scotland, explained,

383*

Reproach, words of, the ancient Swedilh law of fatisfa&ion

for, 291.

Revesses, royal, very small under the feudal policy, 92. By

what means incrrafed, i29.

Rbine, origin and intention of the league of, o88.
Riezos, Nicholas, endeavouts to reftue Rome from the papal

authority, and eftablilh a democratical form of govern.
ment there, 137.

Robbers, the anathema pronounced againll them during the

middle ages, 325.

Rudulph of Haplburgh, how he attained eleaion to the em-

pire of Germany, 190.

Romnaos, an inquiry into those advantages which enabled them

to conquer the red of Europe, 2. The improvements they
communicated in return for their conquelts, ibid. The dif-
advantages the provinces laboured under, from their do.
minion, 3. Their empire overturned by the irruption of
the barbarous nations, ibid. The concurrentcaufes of their
ruin, 5. A comparison drawn between thern and the
northern nations, 8. All the civil artseitablilhed by them
obliterated, 19. The monuments of their arts indufirioully
dedtroyed by their barbarous invaders, 79. Rene,

Rjme, papal. See Popedom.
Royal truce, an account of, 283*

S

Salic laws, the manner in which they were enabed, 355.
Saxons, why so many traces of their laws, language, and cut-

toms, to be found in England, 209, Note iv. Inquiry
into their laws for putting an end to private wars, a85.

&ience, the revival and progress of, how far inf'rumental in

civilizing the nations ofEurope, 78. A summary view of
the revival and progrels of, in Europe, 327, Note xxviii.

Sforza, Francis, the foundation of his pretenlions to the

dutchy of Milan, 5az. Is murdered by his uncle Ludo-
vico, 1t3.
-- Ludovico, his private views in engaging Charles
VIII. of France to invade Italy, 517. See Charles
VIII. Murders his nephew Francis, and seizes Mlian,
153. Is firipped of his dominions by Louis XII.of France,
and dies in prilon, ibid.

Shipwrecks, the right lords of manors claim to, whence de.

rived, 323.

Silk, the rarity of, and the high price it bore in ancient

Rome, remarked, 326. The breeding of flikc-worms,
when introduced into Greece, ibid.

Slanes, letters of, in the law of Scotland, what, 299.
Slaves, under the feudal policy, their wretched state, 235.

Oblati, or voluntary haves, the several classes of, 274.

Society, civil, the rude ifate of, under the feudal eitablifh-

ments after the downfal of the Roman empire, 59. The
influence of tise Crusades on, 27. How improved by
the el'ablifhment of municipal communities, 33. The
effeds the enfranchilements of the people had on, 44.
Private wars how dellrubive to, 46. These intel'ine hof.
t lities, how suppressed, 49. The adminilhation ofjuftice
improved by the prohibition of judicial combats, Sr. The
growth of royal courts of jufrice, in opposition to the ba-
rons courts, 65. How advanced by the revival of the
Ronman law, 73. The effels of the spirit of chivalry in
improving, 75. The revival of commerce and its inla-.
ences, 85.

&{yyman, fuitan, his charaaer, 205.

Spain,

ment of the %ifteenth century, 90. The power of the
crown of, how extended by Ferdinand, IIs. National
infantry eltablilhed in, 525. Is conquered by the Vandals,
and after by the Moors, 55. The empire of the Moors
in, how weakened, a q6. Rife of the kingdoms of Caile
and Aragon, r 57. Theirunion into the Spanilh monarchy,
ibid. The ancient culroms still retained amidlt all its re-
volutions, ibid. Peculiarities in its conilitution and laws
remarked, a 9. See Aragon and Cajile. Various causes
which contributed tolimit the regal power in, 167. The
cities of, how they attained their confsderation and power,
169. The schemes of Ferdinand and Isabella, to exalt
the regal power, ny,. The grand mafterfhips of the three
orders, annexed to the crown, 172. The association of
the Holy Brotherhood, on what occalion formed, 175.
The tendency of this association to abridge the territorial
jurifdiaions of the barons, lbid. The cruel devastations
made by the Vandals in theinvafion of that province, 210.
When the cities of, acquired municipal prrvileges, 266,
.Note xviii. The long continuance of the pra6tice of pri-
vate wars there, 286. The total annual revenue of the
nobility, in the time of Charles V-. 42. An inquiry
into the origin of communities or free cities in, 34.g

St. Jage, the military order of, when and on what occasion

intlituted, 345, Nrre xxxvi.

Standing armies. See Armies.
States general of France, causes which rendered their autho-

rity mperfe&, 578. When they los their legislative au-
thority, 579. When firlt assembled, 360. The farm of
proceeding in them, ibid.

Stephen earl of Chartres and Blois, his account of the pro-

grefs of the Crusaders, 247.

Sternhaigik, his account of the ancient Swedilh law of fatis-

fadtion for words of reproach, 291.

Strangers, in what light considered, and how treated during

the middle ages, and under the feudal policy, 322.

Sugar-canes, when firlr brought from Afaa into Europe, and

thence carried to America, 327.

Sultans, Turkilh, their despotic power, 202. How never-

thelefs limited, 203.

Superfition, its influence in the legal proceedings during the

middle ages, 55.

Smys,

century, 523. Teach other nations the advantages ofin-
fantry over cavalry, ibid.

T

7Trciras, hit account of the ancient Germans compared with

that of Crelar, z 6.

'Trnulcr, feedal, the origin of, a6. Ste Fearal Sjylem and

Land.

'heolorgy, fclholaftic, the firEt literary purfai:s at the revivel

of learniag in Europe, 80.

Trace rj God, an account of, zS a.
Thuriey, origin of its government, zoo. The despotic genius

rof rhis groarrnmant, zo2 . No hereditary nobihiy in, 202.
T'he author 'y or the sultans, hrsw checkrd, 204 . Origir
of lhe Janizaries, ibid. Eccomaes formidable to the Chris-
tian princes, 204.

V

rnrrdarlr, their cruel devastations in the invafron of Spain,

210. The havoc made by them in Africa, 2 tx. See
Got/s

I'jas uarder the feudal fyflem, a view of their flaviih con-

drtion, 17. 42. How they obtained enfraochifement, 42.
How anciently diltinguifhed from freemen, zzag Their
wretched slate under their feudal malters, 235, Note ix.

Firrce, the long duration of its civil conf'ritution, arrd its

flourilhing Crate at the time of the league of Cambray,
127. Its poffelfons dismembered by the confederates,
izS. Dissolves the confederacy, Is9. Its rire and pro-
grefs, 143 Deteats in its conihntution, ibid. The excel-
lency of irs naval inftiturions, 544. Its extensive com.
merce, 145.

Visconti, rife of the family of, in Milan, agS.
Urirn of the Aragonefe nobles to controul the undue exercise

of regal power, explained, 337. This privilege abro-
gated cy Peter IV. 338.

Uinivrrftties, the firi eirablifhment of, in Europe, 3r9.

W

War, a comparison between the manner of carrying on, by

barbarous and by civilized nations, 9. How rendered feeble

of arms, the mot hoonourable in uncivilized nations, 73.
the rife of standing armies traced, 99. By what means
flanding forces became general, 1sa. The fuperioriry of
infantry in, how taught, 523.

Wars, private, for the redrelfing personal injuries, under the

feudal policy, an inquiry into, 46. Methods taken to
abolijh this holbile prafice, 49. ludicial combat pro-
hibited, qa. Inquiry into the sources of there culboms, 275,
Note xxi. Who entitled to the privileges of exercising,
276. On what occasions undertaken, ibid. Who in-
cluded, or bound to engage in these difliutes, 277. Who
excluded from undertaking, 278. The cruel manner of
prosecuting them, ibid. A chronological account of the
expedients made afe of to suppress them, 279. TrUce Js
God, an account of, 2xI. BrotberhOodofGrd, an accUnrt
of, 282. Royaltruce, what, 213. Saxon laws of Eng.
land, for putting an end to them, 28x. The obiinate
attachment of the Spaniards to this pradlice, 217. The
calamities occasioned in Germany by, 288.

Wdl/h, ancient, firangers killed with impunity by them, 32z.
W'illa, widow of duke Hugo, extrat from her charter of

manumission, granted to Cleniza, one of her havry, 272.
illermnus, archbiihop of Tyre, his account of Conitantinople,
aco.

Wittikindus, abbot, his testimony in favour of the judicial

combat, 295..

IND OF THE WIRST VOLUME.
