THE
HISTORY

OF
A M E R ICA.

By WILLIAM ROBERTSON, D.D.
PRINCIPAL OF TIIE UNIVERSITY OF EDINBURGII, IIISTORIOGRAPtIER

TO 1115 MAJE£TY FOR SCOTLAND, AND MEMBER OF TUE

ROYAL ACADEMY OF HISTOR Y AT MADBID,

THE NINTH EDITION,
In 'zvich is included te PofJilkmous Volume,

CONTAINING
THE HISTORY OF VIRGINIA, TO THE YEAR I688;

AND OF NEW ENGLANI), TO THE YEAR I652.

IN FOUR VOLUMES.

VOL. I1.

LO DON:

I'rnilid by A. SIralai, jl'ilts Sirc(,
For A. ,S'rAIIAN; 'I'. C'AnILil jini. antl W. DAV\ls, Strand;

alll E. Edu
r iut, linbulrgh.

180o.

# THE HISTORY OF AMERICA. BOOK V. continued.

t$ THs

H I S T O R Y
HISTORY

OF
AME RICA.

B 0 O K V. continued.
A TER a prosperous voyage, Narvaez landed B o o X

his men without opposition near St. Juan -

de Ullua. Three soldiers, whom Cortes had sent Thspro-
to search for mines in that diftrid, immediately Nedis of
joined him. By this accident, he not only re, April.
ceived information concerning the progress and
situation of Cortes, but as there soldiers had
made some progress in ihe knowledge of the
Mexican language, he acquired interpreters, by
whose means he was enabled to hold fotne in.
tercourfe with the people of the country. But,
according to the low cunning of deserters, they
framed their intelligence with more attention to
what they thought would be agreeable, than to
what they knew to be true; and represented
the situation of Cortes to be so desperate, and

voil, 1l. s the

B K the difaffedion of his followers to be so general,

V.
_,-,- as increased the natural confidence and prefump-

'520° tion of Narvaez. His first operation, however,

might have taught him not to rely on their par-
tial accounts. Having sent to summon the go-
vernor of Vera Cruz to surrender, Guevara, a
priest whom he employed in that service, made
the requisition with such insolence, that San-
doval, an officer of high spirit, and zealously at-
tached to Cortes, instead of complying with his
demands, fcized him and his attendants, and sent
them in chains to Mexico.

Cortes CORTES received them not like enemies, but
Il,,.,Y as friends, and condemning the severity of

Sandoval, set theni immediately at liberty.
By this well-timed clemency, seconded by ca-
rceles and presents, he gained their confidence,
and drew from them such particulars concerning
the force and intentions of Narvaez, as gave
him a view of the impending danger in its full
extent. He had not to contend now with half-
naked Indians, no match for him in war, and
fill more inferior in the arts of policy, but to
take the field againit an army in courage and
martial discipline equal to his own, in number
far superior, ating under the fanaion of royal
authority, and commanded by an officer of
known bravery. Ie was informed that Nar-

vaez,

Vaez, mote solicitous to gratify the resentment B K
of Velasquez, than attentive to the honour or -,,-
interest of his country, had begun his inter- 152Z.
course with the natives, by representing him and
his followers as fugitives and outlaws, guilty
of rebellion against their own sovereign, and of
injustice in invading the Mexican empire; and
had declared that his chief objec in visiting the
country was to punish the Spaniards who had
committed these crimes, and to .rescue the Mexi-
cans from opprefion. He soon perceived that
the fame unfavourable representations of his
character and ations had been conveyed to
Montezuma, and that Narvaez had found means
to assure him, that as the conduc of those who
kept him under restraint was highly displeasing
to the king his master, he had it in charge not
only to rescue an injured monarch from confine-
ment, but to reinstate him in the possession of
his ancient power and independence. Animated
with this profpedt of being set free from subjec-
tion to fIrangers, the Mexicans in fcveral pro-
vinces began openly to revolt from Cortes, and
to regard Narvaez as a deliverer no lets able
than willing to save them. Montezuma him-
self kept up a secret intercourse with the new
commander, and seemed to court him as a
person fipcrior in power and dignity to those

B5 '" Spaniards

B oO K Spaniards whom he had hitherto revered as the

V.
<,-c-_, first of men "

1520.

His dclie- SUCH were the various aspe&s of danger and
rat,lls fin-
c-ininglhis difficulty which presented themselves to the
dua.' view f Cortes. No situation can be conceived

more trying to the capacity and firmness of a
general, or where the choice of the plan which
ought to be adopted was more difficult.' If he
fllould wait the approach of Narvaez in Mexico,
deftrution seemed to be unavoidable; for while
the Spaniards pressed him from without, the in-
habitants, whole turbulent spirit he could hardly
restrain with all his authority and attention,
would eagerly lay hold on such a favourable op-
portunity of avenging all their wrongs. If he
should abandon the capital, set the captive mo-
narch at liberty, and march out to meet the
enemy; he muff at once forego the fruits of all
his toils and victories, and relinquish advan-
tages which could not be recovered without ex-
traordinary efforts, and infinite danger. If, in-
stead of employing force, he {hould have re-
course to conciliating measures, and attempt
an accommodation with Narvaez; the natural
haughtiness of that officer, augmented by con-

' .Se NOTI .

ci uufn cfi

fcioufnefs of his present superiority, sorbad him B 0 0 K

V.

to cherish any sanguine hope of success. After _
revolving every scheme with deep attention, '5'
Cortes fixed upon that which in execution was
most hazardous, but, if successful, would prove
molt beneficial to himself and to his country;
and with the decisive intrepidity suited to defpe-
rate situations, determined to make one bold
effort for victory under every disadvantage,
rather than sacrifice his own conquests and the
Spanish interest in Mexico.

BUT though he foresaw that the contest muff rIn;,,oci-

be terminated finally by arms, it would have t. ic ,.;'..-
been not only indecent, but criminal, to have *° ,-
marched against his countrymen, without at-
tempting to adjust matters by an amicable nego-
ciation. In this service he employed Olmcdo,
his chaplain, to whose characer the funtion was
well suited, and who possessed, betides, such
prudence and address as qualified him to carry
on the secret intrigues in which Cortes placed
his chief confidence. Narvaez rejetccl, with
scorn, every scheme of accommodation that
Olmedo proposed, and was with difficulty re-
strained from laying violent hands on him and
his attendants. He met, however, with a more
favourable reception among the followers of
Narvaez, to many of wlhom he delivered letters,

I 3 citL i

B3 0 K either from Cortes or his officers, their ancient

V.

- -_-j friends and companions. Cortes artfully ac-
X52°0 companied there with presents of rings, chains of

gold, and other trinkets of value, which inspired
those needy adventurers with high ideas of the
wealth that he had acquired, and with envy of
their good fortune who were engaged in his
service. Some, from hopes of becoming sharers
in those rich spoils, declared for an immediate
accommodation with Cortes. Others, from
public spirit, laboured to prevent a civil
war, which, whatever party should prevail,
must shake, and perhaps subvert the Spanish
power, in a country where it was so imperfedly
established. Narvaez disregarded both, and by
a public proclamation denounced Cortes and his
adherents rebels and enemies to their country.
Cortes, it is probable, was not much surprised
at the untraftable arrogance of Narvaez; and,
after having given such a pioof of his own paci.
sic disposition as might juitify his recourse to
other means, he determined to advance towards
an enemy whom he had laboured in vain to
appease.
,Mr(is,- I-I lft a hundred and fifty men in the capital,

Iayl,. under the command of Pedro de Alvarado, an

officer of diflinguifhed courage, for whom the
Mexicans had conceived a singular degree of

icfpct.

refpe&. To the custody of this slender garrison B o o i
he committed a great city, with all the wealth .
he had amassed, and, what was still of greater IszO.
importance, the person of the imptifoned mo-
narch. His utmost art was employed in con-
cealing from Montezuma the real cause of his
march. He laboured to persuade him, that the
strangers who had lately arrived were his friends
and fellow-fubjeds; and that, after a short in.
terview with them, they would depart together,
and return to their own country. The captive
prince, unable to comprehend the designs of the
Spaniards, or to reconcile what he now heard
with the declarations of Narvaez, and afraid to
discover any symptom of suspicion or distrust of
Cortes, promised to remain quietly in the Spanish
quarters, and to cultivate the fame friendship
with Alvarado which he had uniformly main.
tained with him. Cortes, with seeming confi-
dence in this promise, but relying principally
upon the injuntions which he had given Alva-
rado to guard his prisoner with the mofl fcruw
pulous vigilance, set out from Mexico.

His strength, even after it was reinforced by Numberof

the jun&ion of Sandoval and the garrison of Vera
Cruz, did not exceed two hundred and fifty
men. As he hoped for success chiefly from the
rapidity of his motions, his troops were not

.p 4 incuIlm

B O K incumbered either with baggage or artillery.

But as he dreaded extremely the impression
152p. which the enemy might make with their cavalry,

he had provided against this danger with the
foresight and sagacity which diflinguilh a great
commander. Having observed that the Indians
in the province of Chinantla used pears of ex-
traordinary length and force, he armed his fol-
diers with these, and accustomed them to that
deep and compaat arrangement which the use of
this formidable weapon, the belt perhaps that
ever was invented for defence, enabled them to
assume.

Continues WITH this small but firm battalion, Cortes
to negociate
a hL ,ad- advanced towards Zempoalla, of which Narvaez
vanced. had taken poffeflion. During his march, he

made repeated attempts towards some accommo-
dation with his opponent. But Narvaez requiring
that Cortes and his followers hould instantly re-
cognize his title to'be governor of New Spain,
in virtue of the powers which he derived from
Velasquez; and Cortes refuing to ubmit to
any authority which was'not founded on a com-
mission from the emperor himself, under whose
immediate protction he and his adherents had
placed their infant colony,; all there attempts
proved fruitless. The intercourse, however,
which this occasioned between the two parties,

proved

proved of no small advantage to Cortes, as B 0 K
it afforded him an opportunity of gaining ome _
of Narvaez's officers by liberal presents, of soften- ,520,
ing others by a semblance of moderation, and of
dazzling all by the appearance of wealth among
his troops, most of his soldiers having converted
their Ihare of the Mexican gold into chains,
bracelets, and other ornaments, which they dif-
played with military ostentation. Narvaez and a
little junto of his creatures excepted, all the army
leaned towards an accommodation with their
countrymen. This discovery of their inclination
irritated his violent temper almost to madness.
In a transport of rage, he set a price upon the
head of Cortes, and of his principal officers;
and having learned that he was now advanced
within a league of Zempoalla with his small body
of men, he confidered this as an insult which
merited immediate chastisement, and marched
out with all his troops to offer him battle.

BUT Cortes was a leader of greater abilities Attachk

N;rvacz in

and experience than, on equal ground, to fight thilegj.
an enemy so far superior in number, and so
much better appointed. Having taken his fiation
on the opposite bank of the river de Canoas,
where he knew that he could not be attacked, he
beheld the approach of the enemy without con.
cern, and disregarded this vain bravade. It was

then

0 K then the beginning of the wet feafonb, and the
u -.,_ rain had poured down, during a great part of

'52'° the day, with the violence peculiar to the torrid

zone. The followers of Nar'aez, unaccustomed
to the hardships of military service, murmured so
much at being thus fruitlessly expofedj that,
from their unfoldier-like impatience, as well as
his own contempt of his adversary, their ge-
neral permitted them to retire to Zempoalla.
The very circumstance which induced them to
quit the field, encouraged Cortes to form a
scheme, by which he hoped at once to terminate
the war. He observed, that his hardy veterans,
though standing under the torrents, which con-
tinued to fall, without a single tent or any flhelter
whatsoever to cover them, were so far from re-
pining at hardships which were become familiar
to them, that they were still fresh and alert for
service. He foresaw that the enemy would
naturally give themselves up to repose after their
fatigue, and that, judging of the condut of
others by their own effeminacy, they would deem
themselves perfetly secure at a season so unfit
for ation. He resolved, therefore, to fall upon
them in the dead of night, when the surprise and
terror of this unexpected attack might more
than compensate the inferiority of his numbers.

] lackluyt, vol. iii. 467. Dc Laet Dcfr. Ind. Occid. 22 .

I lis

His soldiers, sensible that no resource remained B O K
but in some desperate effort of courage, approved -
of the measure with such warmth, that Cortes, in '5z0.
a military oration which he addrefled to them
before they began their march, was more so-
licitous to temper than to inflame their ardour.
He divided them into three parties. At the head
of the first he placed Sandoval; entrusting this
gallant officer with the most dangerous and im-
portant service, that of seizing the enemy's
artillery, which was planted before the principal
tower of the temple, where Narvaez had fixed
his headquarters. Chriftoval de Olid com-
manded the second, with orders to aflault the
tower, and lay hold on the general. Cortes
himself conducted the third and inalleft division,
which was to at as a body of reserve, and to
support the other two as there ihould be occasion.
Having passed the river de Canoas, which was
much swelled with the rains, not without diffi-
culty, the water reaching almost to their chins,
they advanced in profound silence, without beat
of drum, or found of any warlike infirument;
each man armed with his sword, his dagger, and
his Chinantlan spear. Narvaez, remiss in pro-
portion to his security, had porfed only two
centinels to watch the motions of an enemy
whom he had such good cause to dread. One
of thelc was seizcd by the advanced guard

of

B 0 K of Cortes's troops, the other made his escape,
_e-^ and hurrying to the town with all the precipita-
'i"' tion of fear and zeal, gave such timely notice of

the enemy's approach, that there was full leisure
to have prepared for their reception. But,
through the arrogance and infatuation of Nar-
vaez, this important interval was loft. He im-
puted this alarm to the cowardice of the centinel,
and treated with derision the idea of being
attacked by forces so unequal to his own. The
shouts of Cortes's soldiers, ruffing on to the
assault, convinced him at last, that the danger
which he despised was real.. The rapidity with
which they advanced was such, that only one
cannon could be fired, before Sandoval's party
closed with the enemy, drove them from their
guns, and began to force their way up the steps
of the tower. Narvaez, no less brave in -acion
than presumptuous in conduct, armed himself
in halfe, and by his voice and example animated
his men to the combat. Olid advanced to
sustain his companions; and Cortes himself rush-
ing to the front, conducted and added new
vigour to the attack. The compaa order in
which this linall body prelled on, and the im-
penctrable front which they presented with their
long pears, bore down all opposition before it.
1.ii >,o- Thcy had now reached tle gate, and were ftrug-

i gling to burlt it open, when a foldicr having set

fire

fire to the reeds with which the tower was B o O F
covered, compelled Narvaez to sally out. In the LV
first encounter he was wounded in the eye with a. '20
spear, and falling to the ground, was dragged
down the steps, and in a moment clapt in fetters.
The cry of viaory resounded among the troops
of Cortes. Those who had sallied out with their
leader now maintained the conflict feebly, and
began to surrender. Among the remainder of
his soldiers, Rationed in two fnaller towers
of the temple, terror and confusion prevailed.
The darkness was so great, that they could not
diltinguifh between their friends and foes. Their
own artillery was pointed against them. Where-
ever they turned their eyes, they beheld lights
gleaming through the obscurity of night, which,
though proceeding only from a variety of flining
infects, that abound in moist and sultry climates,
their affrighted imaginations represented as nu-
merous bands of musketeers advancing with
kindled matches to the attack. After a short
refintance, the soldiers compelled their officers
to capitulate, and before morning all laid down
their arms, and submitted quietly to their con-
querors.

Tins complete victory proved more ac- Tilc citi

ceptable, as it was gained almost without blood- lory
shed, only two soldiers being killed on the fidce of

(.'irtlC,

B o 0 K C-ortes, and two officers, with fifteen private meril

.-J- of the adverse facion. Cortes treated the van-
57Z0. quifhed not like enemies, but as countrymen and

friends, and offered either to fend them back di.
realy to Cuba, or to take them into his service,
as partners in his fortune, on equal terms with
his own ioldiers. This latter proposition, seconded
by a seasonable distribution of some presents from
Cortes, and liberal promises of more, opened
prolpects so agreeable to the romantic expecta-
tions which had invited them to engage in this
service, that all, a few partizans of Narvaez ex-
cepted, closed with it, and vied with each other
in profefions of fidelity and attachment to a
general, whose recent success had given them
such a firiking proof of his abilities for command.
Thus, by a series of events no less fortunate than
uncommon, Cortes not only escaped from per-
dition which seemed inevitable, but, when he had
least reason to expect it, was placed at the head
of a thousand Spaniards, ready to follow where-
ever he flould lead them. Whoever reflects
upon the facility with which this victory was ob-
tained, or confiders with what sudden and unani-
mous transition the followers of Narvaez ranged
themselves under the tlandard of his rival, will
be apt to ascribe both events a much to the
intrigues as to the arms of Cortes, and cannot
but suspect that the ruin of Narvaez was oc-

3 cafioned,

cafioned, no less by the treachery of his own B o o K
followers, than by the valour of the enemy c .-

BUT, in one point, the prudent conduct and The Mcxio
BUT, in one point, the prudent condu&I and The Mcxv.

-cans take
good fortune of Cortes were equally conspicuous. armsagain(t

the. Spa-

If, by the rapidity of his operations after he niards.
began his march, he had not brought matters to
such a speedy iflue, even this decisive victory
would have come too late to have saved his com-
panions whom he left in Mexico. A few days
after the discomfiture of Narvaez, a courier
arrived with an account that the Mexicans had
taken arms, and having seized and destroyed the
two brigantines, which Cortes had built in order
to secure the command of the lake, and attacked
the Spaniards in their quarters, had killed several
of them, and wounded more, had reduced to
ashes their, magazine of provisions, and carried
on hostilities with such fury, that, though AIva-
rado and his men defended theinfelves with un-
daunted resolution, they muf either be oon cut
off by famine, or fink under the multitude of
their enemies. This revolt was excited by
motives which rendered it till more alarmininr
On the departure of Cortes for Zempoalla, the
Mexicans flattered themselves, that the long ex-

c Cortes Relat. 242. D. B. D;I) . c. o -12;. Ir l-
rcra, dec. 2. lib. ix. c. 1i, &c. ;Guiiin:Ia (iCro. c. 97, &.

p~CikJ

Boo 1K peeed opportunity of restoring their sovereign

to liberty, and of vindicating their country from
*'~Ss the odious dominion of strangers, was at length

arrived; that while the forces of their oppressors
were divided, and the arms of one party turned
against the other, they might triumph with
greater facility over both. Consultations were
held, and schemes formed with this intention.
The Spaniards in Mexico, conscious of their own
feebleness, fufpeted and dreaded those machina-
tions. Alvarado, though a gallant officer, pof-
sessed neither that extent of capacity, nor dignity
of manners, by which Cortes had acquired such
an ascendant over the minds of the Mexicans, as
never allowed them to form a just etimate of
his weakness or of their own strength. Alvarado
knew no mode of supporting his authority but
force. Instead of employing address to difcon-
cert the plans or to footl the spirits of the
Mexicans, he waited the return of one of their
solemn festivals, when the principal persons in
the empire were dancing, according to cuflom,
in the court of the great temple; he eized
all the avenues which led to it, and, allured partly
by the rich ornaments which they wore in honour
of their gods, and partly by the facility of cutting
off at once the authors of that conliiracy which
he dreaded, he fell upon them, unarmed and
unfufpicious of any danger, and mailacred a

great

great number, none escaping but such as made o o K
their way over the battlements of the temple.
An ation so cruel and treacherous filled not iso.
only the city, but the whole empire with indigna-
tion and rage. All called aloud for vengeance;
and regardless of the safety of their monarch,
whose life was at the mercy of the Spaniards,
or of their own danger in assaulting an enemy
who had been so long the objet of their terror,
they committed all those as of violence of
which Cortes received an account.

To him the danger appeared so imminent, as He marclle

baclk to thp

to admit neither of deliberation nor delay. He set capital.
out instantly with all his forces, and returned
from Zempoalla with no less rapidity than he had
advanced thither. At Tlafcala he was joined by
two thousand chosen warriors. On entering the
Mexican territories he found that difaffeEtion to
the Spaniards was not confined to the capital.
The principal inhabitants had deserted the towns
through which he passed; no person of note ap-
pearing to meet him with the usual refpec; no
provision was made for the subsistence of his
troops; and though he was permitted to ad-
vance without opposition, the solitude and silence
which reigned in every place, and the horror
with which the people avoided all intercourse
with him, discovered a deep-rooted antipathy,

VOL. ll, C that

B K that excited the most just alarm. But, inl-

V. _b-„-^ placable as the enmity of the Mexicans was, they
1510 were so unacquainted with the science of war,

that they knew not how to take the proper
measures, either for their own safety or the
deftruEtion of the Spaniards. UninftruEted by
their former error in admitting a formidable
enemy into their capital, instead of breaking
down the causeways and bridges, by which they
might have inclosed Alvarado and his party, and
j!nm 24. have efFctually stopped the career of Cortes, they

again suffered him to march into the city with-
out molestation, and to take quiet poffeiiion of
his ancient station.

ImproperC SiTH transports of joy with which Alvarado
condud of
Cortts. and his soldiers received their companions cannot

be exprefled. Both parties were so much elated,
the one with their seasonable deliverance, and the
other with the great exploits which they had
atchieved, that this intoxication of success seems
to have reached Cortes himself; and he behaved
on this occasion neither with his usual sagacity
nor attention. He not only neglected to visit
Montezuma, but imbittered the insult by ex-
prellions full of contempt for that unfortunate
prince and his people. The forces of which he
had now the command, appeared to him so
irrcfillible, that he might assume an higher tone,

and

and lay aside the mask of moderation, under B 0 0 K
which he had hitherto concealed his designs. --.-
Some Mexicans who understood the Spanish I''s
language, heard the contemptuous words which
Cortes uttered, and reporting them to their
countrymen, kindled their rage anew. They
were now convinced that the intentions of the
general were equally bloody with those of Alva-
rado, and that his original purpose in visiting
their country, had not been, as he pretended, to
court the alliance of their sovereign, but to
attempt the conquefl of his dominions. They Tlleviolent

- hoiilicy of

resumed their arms with the additional fury tie Mexi-
which this discovery inspired, attacked a con-
fiderable body of Spaniards who were marching
towards the great square in which the public
market was held, and compelled them to retire
with ome loss. Emboldened by this success,
and delighted to find that their oppressors were
not invincible, they advanced next day with ex-
traordinary martial pomp to assault the Spaniards
in their quarters. Their number was formidable,
and their undaunted courage till more so.
Though the artillery pointed against their nu-
merous battalions, crowded together in narrow
Itrcets, swept off multitudes at every discharge;
though every blow of the Spanifl weapons fell
with mortal effed upon their naked bodies, the
iiiipetuofity of the assault did not abate. Fresh

c 2 men

B o K men rushed forward to occupy the places of the
^^»^ slain, and meeting with the fame fate, were fuc-

jj20. ceeded by others no less intrepid and eager for

vengeance. The utmost effort of Cortes's abili-
ties and experience, seconded by the disciplined
valour of his troops, were hardly sufficient to de-
fend the fortifications, that surrounded the post
where the Spaniards were stationed, into which
the enemy were more than once on the point of
forcing their way.

Direfs of CORTES beheld, with wonder, the implacable
piards. ferocity of a people who seemed at first to submit

tamely to the yoke, and had continued so long
palTive under it. The soldiers of Narvaez, who
fondly imagined that they followed Cortes to
flare in the spoils of a conquered empire, were
aflonifhed to find that they were involved in
a dangerous war, with an enemy whose vigour
was till unbroken, and loudly execrated their
own weakness, in giving such easy credit to the
delusive promises of their new leader d. But
furprifc and complaints were of no avail. Some
immediate and extraordinary effort was requisite
to extricate themselves out of their present fitua-
tion. As soon as the approch of evening
induced the Mexicans to retire, in compliance

B. Dia2. c. 126.

with their national custom of ceasing from hofti- B o K
lities with the setting fun, Cortes began to pre-
pare for a sally, next day, with such a considerable '5zo
force, as might either drive the enemy out of the
city, or compel them to liften to terms of
accommodation.

IIE condu&ed, in person, the troops destined Cortes t-

tacks them

for this important service. Every invention uitioti
known in the European art of war, as well as
every precaution, suggested by his long acquaint-
ance with the Indian mode of fighting, were
employed to ensure success. But he found an
enemy prepared and determined to oppose him.
The force of the Mexicans was greatly aug-
mented by freth troops, which poured in con-
tinually from the country, and their animosity
was in no degree abated. They were led by
their nobles, inflamed by the exhortations of
their prieRt, and fought in defence of their
temples and families, under the eye of their
gods, and in presence of their wives and children.
Notwithfanding their numbers, and enthufiaflic
contempt of danger and death, wherever the Spa-
niards could close with them, the superiority of
their discipline and arms obliged the Mexicans to
give way. But in narrow streets, and where
many of the bridges of communication were
broken down, the Spaniards could seldom come

c 3 to

B 0 K . to a fair rencounter with the enemy, and as they

V. .,_J, advanced, were exposed to showers of arrows
1510. and stones from the tops of houses. After a

day of incessant exertion, though vast numbers
of the Mexicans fell, and part of the city
was burnt, the Spaniards, weary with the
slaughter, and harassed by multitudes which
fucceflively relieved each other, were obliged at
length to retire, with the mortification of having
accomplished nothing so decisive as to compen-
fate the unusual calamity of having twelve fol-
diers killed, and above sixty wounded. Another
sally, made with greater force, was not more
effetual, and in it the general himself was
wounded in the hand.

Montezuna CORTES now perceived, too late, the fatal
lafln' error into which he had been betrayed by his

own contempt of the Mexicans, and was satisfied
that he could neither maintain his present station
in the centre of an hostile city, nor retire from it
without the molt imminent danger. One resource
till remained, to try what effect the interposition
of Montezuma might have to oothe or overawe
his fubjeds. When the Mexicans approached
next morning to renew the assault, that unfortu-
nate prince, at the mercy of the Spaniards, and
reduced to the fad neceflity of becoming the in-
ftrument of his own disgrace, and of the slavery

of'

of his people , advanced to the battlements in his B 0 K
royal robes, and with all the pomp in which he _
used to appear on solemn occasions. At fight of '5'
their sovereign, whom they had long been
accustomed to honour, and alnoft to revere as
a god, the weapons dropt from their hands,
every tongue was silent, all bowed their heads,
and many prostrated thenfelves on the ground.
Montezuma addressed them with every argument
that could mitigate their rage, or persuade them
to cease from hoflilities. When he ended his
discourse, a fullen murmur of disapprobation run
through the ranks; to this fcceeded reproaches
and threats; and the fury of the multitude rising
in a moment above every restraint of decency or
respect, flights of arrows and volleys of stones
poured in so violently upon the ramparts, that
before the Spaniflh soldiers, appointed to cover
Montezuma with their bucklers, had time to lift
them in his defence, two arrows wounded the
unhappy monarch, and the blow of a stone on
his temple struck him to the ground. On feein
him fall, the Mexicans were so much aflonilhcd,
that, with a transition not uncommon in popular
tumults, they pawed in a moment from one ex-
treme to the other, remorse succeedcd to insult,
and they fled with horror, as if the vengeance of

e Sec NOTE II.

c 4 IIcavc

B o0 K Heaven were pursuing the crime which they had

V.

A..- committed. The Spaniards, without molestation,
'*50' carried Montezuma to his apartments, and Cortes

hastened thither to console him under his misfor-
tune. But the unhappy monarch now per-
ceived how low he was funk, and the haughty
spirit which seemed to have been so long extinct,
returning, he scorned to survive this last humi-
liation, and to protrac an ignominious life, not
only as the prisoner and tool of his enemies, but
as the objet of contempt or deteation among
his fubjeEts. In a transport of rage he tore the
bandages from his wounds, and refused, with
such obstinacy, to take any nourishment, that he
soon ended his wretched days, rejecting with
disdain all the solicitations of the Spaniards to
embrace the Christian faith.
ewv con- UPON the death of Montezuna, Cortes hav-

ing loft all hope of bringing the Mexicans to an
accommodation, saw no profped of safety but ill
attempting a retreat, and began to prepare for it.
But a sudden motion of the Mexicans engaged
him in new conflicts. They took pofleffion of a
high tower in the great temple which overlooked
the Spanish quarters, and placing there a garrison
of their principal warriors, not a Spaniard could
tir without being exposed to their misfile wea-
pons. From this poIf it was necessary to dislodge

6 thenl

them at' any risk; and Juan de Efcobar, with a B o
numerous detachment of chosen soldiers, was
ordered to make the attack. But Efcobar, JS^o
though a gallant officer, and at the head of
troops accustomed to conquer, and who now
fought under the eyes of their countrymen, was
thrice repulsed. Cortes, sensible that not only
the reputation, but the safety of his army de-
pended on the success of this assault, ordered
a buckler to be tied to his arm, as he could
not manage it with his wounded hand, and
rufled with his drawn sword into the thickest of
the combatants. Encouraged by the presence of
their general, the Spaniards returned to the
charge with such vigour, that they gradually
forced their way up the steps, and drove the
Mexicans to the platform at the top of the tower.
There a dreadful carnage began, when two young
Mexicans of high rank, observing Cortes as he
animated his soldiers by his voice and example,
resolved to sacrifice their own lives in order to
cut off the author of all the calamities which de-
solated their country. They approached him in
a supplicant posture, as if they had intended to
lay down their arms, and seizing him in a
moment, hurried him towards the battlements,
over which they threw themselves headlong,
in hopes of dragging him along to be dashed
in pieces by the ame fall. But Cortes, by his

strength

B 0 K strength and agility, broke loose from their

V.
v_ grasp, and the gallant youths perished in this
1520. generous though unsuccessful attempt to save

their country f. As soon as the Spaniards became
masters of the tower, they set fire to it, and,
without farther molestation, continued the pre-
parations for their retreat.

The Spa- THIS became the more necessary, as the
riiais aban-
.doithcciy. Mexicans were so much astonished at the last

effort of the Spanish valour, that they began to
change their whole fyttem of hostility, and, in-
itead of inceflant attacks, endeavoured, by barri-
cading the streets, and breaking down the cause-
ways, to cut off the communication of the
Spaniards with the continent, and thus to fiarve
an enemy whom they could not subdue. The
first point to be determined by Cortes and his
followers, was, whether they should march out
openly in the face of day, when they could dif-
cern every danger, and fee how to regulate their

r M. Clavigero las censured me with asperity for relating

this gallant alion of tlic two Mexicans, and for fippofing
that there were battlements round the temple of Mexico.
related the attempt to deflroy Cortes on the authority of
I er. dec. 2. lib. x. c. 9. and of Torquemiada, lib. 4. c. 69.
1 fol!owed them likcswife in ilppofilg the uppernolt plat-
form of the temple to be encompanl(d Iby a battlement or
T'ail.

Oi.n

own motions, as well as how to refilt the assaults o o K
of the enemy; or, whether they should en-
deavour to retire secretly in the night ? The 's5Z
latter was preferred, partly from hopes that their
national fuperltition would refrain the Mexicans
from venturing to attack then in the night, and
partly from their own fond belief in the pre-
dictions of a private soldier, who having acquired
universal credit by a fnattering of learning, and
his pretensions to astrology, boldly assured his
countrymen of success, if they made their retreat
in this manner. They began to move, towards
midnight, in three divisions. Sandoval led the
van; Pedro Alvarado, and Velasquez de Leon,
had the conduct of the rear; and Cortes com-
manded in the centre, where he placed the
prisoners, among whom were a son and two
daughters of Montezuma, together with several
Mexicans of diftintion, the artillery, the hag-
gage, and a portable bridge of timber, intended
to be laid over the breaches in the caifcway.
They marched in profound silence aluoi the
causeway which led to Tacuba, bccaufe it was
shorter than any of the reft, and lying moll
remote from the road towards Tlafcala and the
sea-coast, had been left more entire by the Mexi-
cans. They reached the firtll brcach in it with-
out molestation, hoping that their retreat was
undilcovcrcd.

Blu

B 0 K Butr the Mexicans, unperceived, had not only
-_.-..' watched all their motions with attention, but had
Atta°d made proper dispositions for a most formidable
hytlhe attack. While the Spaniards were intent upon
Mtxicans.

placing their bridge in the breach, and occupied
in conducting their horses and artillery along it,
they were suddenly alarmed with a tremendous
found of warlike instruments, and a general
hout from an innumerable multitude of enemies;
the lake was covered with canoes; flights of
arrows, and showers of stones poured in upon
them from every quarter; the Mexicans ruffling
forward to the charge with fearless impetuosity,
as if they hoped in that moment to be avenged
for all their wrongs. Unfortunately the wooden
bridge, by the weight of the artillery, was
wedged so fast into the stones and mud, that
it was impossible to remove it. Difnayed at this
accident, the Spaniards advanced with precipita-
tion towards the second breach. The Mexicans
hemmed them in on every fide, and though they
defended themselves with their usual courage,
yet crouded together as they were on a narrow
causeway, their discipline and military flill were
of little avail, nor did the obscurity of the night
permit them to derive great advantage from
their fire-arms, or the superiority of their other
weapons. All Mexico was now in arms, and so
cager were the p1,oplc on the dcftrudion of their

opprcflbrs,

oppressors, that they who were not near enough B o o K
to annoy them in person, impatient of the delay, L
pressed forward with such ardour, as drove on I52o-
their countrymen in the front with irresistible
violence. Fresh warriors instantly filled the
place of such as fell. The Spaniards, weary
with slaughter, and unable to fuflain the weight
of the torrent that poured in upon them, began
to give way. In a moment the confusion was
universal; horse and foot, officers and soldiers,
friends and enemies, were mingled together;
and while all fought, and many fell, they
could hardly diflinguifh from what hand the
blow came.

CORTES, with about a hundred foot soldiers Theilrd;-

and a few horse, forced his way over the two re- A
maining breaches in the causeway, the bodies of
the dead serving to fill up the chasms, and
reached the main land. Having formed them
as soon as they arrived, he returned with such as
were yet capable of service, to aflift his friends in
their retreat, and to encourage them, by his pre-
fence and example, to persevere in the efforts
requisite to cffe it. I-e met with part of his
soldiers, who had broke through the enemy, but
found many more ovcrwhelmed by the multitude
of their aggrefbrs, or perilhing in the lake ; and
heard the piteous lamnntations of others, whom

the

B 0 0 K the Mexicans, having taken alive, were carrying

off in triumph to be sacrificed to the god of war.
15'0* Before day, all who had escaped assembled at

Tacuba. But when the morning dawned, and
discovered to the view of Cortes his hattered
battalion, reduced to less than half its number,
the survivors dejeced, and most of them covered
with wounds, the thoughts of what they had
suffered, and the remembrance of so many
faithful friends and gallant followers who had
fallen in that night of sorrow g, pierced his foul
with such anguish, that while he was forming
their ranks, and issuing ome necessary orders,
his soldiers obfcrved the tears trickling from his
eyes, and remarked, with much fatisfa&ion, that
while attentive to the duties of a general, he was
not insensible to the feelings of a man.
al, l..,,:. IN this fatal retreat many officers of diftindion

pcrified h, and among these Velasquez de Leon,
who having florfaken the party of his kinsman, the
governor of Cuba, to follow the fortune of his
comp)anions, was, on that account, as well as for
his superior merit, refpedcd by them as the
fccond person in the army. All the artillery,
ammunition, and baggage, were loft ; the greater

7 NorL,,i 7 'L; is thic lname by

1 'i licl it is ill diflinguifhed
i, Nce Spa;il.

h 8cc NOTI1 III.

part

part of the horses, and above two thousand B o o
Tlafcalans, were killed, and only a very small
portion of the treasure which they had amafled '5'
was saved. This, which had been always their
chief object, proved a great cause of their cala-
mity; for many of the soldiers having o over-
loaded themselves with bars of gold as rendered
them unfit for ation, and retarded their flight,
fell, ignominiously, the victims of their own
inconsiderate avarice. Amidst so many disasters,
it was ome consolation to find that Aguilar
and Marina, whose function as interpreters
was of such essential importance, had made their
escape .

THE firil care of Cortes was to find some Difficult r-

trea o tc

shelter for his wearied troops; for as the Mexi- Spaliard..
cans infersed them on every fide, and the people
of Tacuba began to take arms, he could not
continue in his present station. He directed
his march towards the riling ground, and having
fortunately discovered a temple situated on an
eminence, took poffcflion of it. There he found
not only the helter for which he wiiied, but,
what was no lets wanted, some provisions to
refiefh his men; and though the enemy did

i Cortes Rlat. p. 248. B. Diaz. c. I28. Gomnra
Cron. c. og9. Hcrrera, dec. 2. Jib. x . c. , 12.

not

B 0 0 K not intermit their attacks throughout the day3

-^__j they were with less difficulty prevented from
^55" making any impreflion. During this time Cortes

was engaged in deep consultation with his offi-
cers, concerning the route which they ought to
take in their retreat. They were now on the
weft fide of the lake. Tlafcala, the only place
where they could hope for a friendly reception,
lay about fixty-four miles to the east of Mexico k;
so that they were obliged to go round the north
end of the lake before they could fall into the
road which led thither. A Tlafcalan soldier un-
dertook to be their guide, and conduted them
through a country, in ome places marfly, in
others mountainous, in all ill-cultivated and
thinly peopled. They marched for fix days
with little respite, and under continual alarms,
numerous bodies of the Mexicans hovering
around them, sometimes harassing them at a
distance with their miflile weapons, and some-
times attacking them closely in front, in rear,
in flank, with great boldness, as they now knew
that they were not invincible. Nor were the fa-
tigue and danger of those incessant conflics the
worll evils to which they were exposed. As the
barren country through which they passed as-
forded hardly any provisions, they were reduced

'z Vil!a Scgnor T''caro Americanos, lit. ii, c. 1 .

to

to feed on berries, roots, and the stalks of green B O O K
maize; and at the very time that famine was de- aV
prefling their spirits and waling their tfrength, '5sZ
their situation required the most vigorous and
unremitting exertions of courage and activity.
Amnidlf those complicated distresses, one circum-
fiance supported and animated the Spaniards.
Their commander sustained this fad reverse of
fortune with unhaken magnanimity. IIs pre-
fence of mind never forsook him; his sagacity
foresaw every event, ad his vigilance provided
for it. I-Ie was foremost in every danger,
and endured every hardship with cheerfulness.
The difficulties with which he was surrounded
seemed to call forth new talents; and his fol-
diers, though despairing themselves, continued
to follow him with encreafing confidence in his
abilities.

ON the sixth day they arrived near to Otumba, Battle of

not far friom the road between Mexico and
T lafcala. Early next morning they began to
advance towards it, flying parties of the enemy
still hanging on their rear; and, amidtfl the in-
fults with which they accompanied their hofti-
lities, Marina remarked that they often exclaimed
with exultation, " Go on, robbers; go to the
place where you hall quickly meet the ven-
geance due to your crimes." The meaning of this

vol., i. D threat

B O K threat the Spaniards did not comprehend, until
i-_, they reached the summit of an eminence before

15u. them. There a spacious valley opened to their

view, covered with a vast army, extending as far
as the eye could reach. The Mexicans, while
with one body of their troops they harassed the
Spaniards in their retreat, had assembled their
principal force on the other fide of the lake;
and marching along the road which led direaly
to Tlafcala, potled it in the plain of Otumba,
through which they knew Cortes must pass.
At the fight of this incredible multitude, which
they could survey at once from the rising
ground, the Spaniards were aftonifled, and even
the boldest began to despair. But Cortes, with-
out allowing leisure for their fears to acquire
strength by reflection, after warning them briefly
that no alternative now remained but to conquer
or to die, led them inantly to the charge. The
Mexicans waited their approach with unusual
fortitude. Such, however, was the superiority
of the Spanifi discipline and arms, that the
impreflion of this finall body was irresistible;
and whichever way its force was directed, it
pcnetrated and dispersed the most numerous
battalions. But while thcfe gave way in one
quaitcr, lew combatants advanced from an-
other, and tie Spaniards, though fuccefisful in
every attac, were ready to fink under those re-

peated

peated efforts, without feeing any end of their u o K
toil, or any hope of vitory. At that time ,_
Cortes observed the great standard of the empire, 1520'
which was carried before the Mexican general,
advancing; and fortunately recollefting to have
heard, that on the fate of it depended the
event of every battle, he assembled a few of his
bravest officers, whose horses were ill capable
of service, and placing himself at their head,
puflied forward towards the flandard with an
impetuosity which bore down every thing before
it. A chosen body of nobles, who guarded the
flandard, made some resistance, but were oon
broken. Cortes, with a firoke of his lance,
wounded the Mexican general, and threw him
to the ground. One of the Spanish officers
alighting, put an end to his life, and laid hold of
the imperial standard. The moment that their
leader fell, and the standard, towards which all
direed their eyes, disappeared, an universal
panic struck the Mexicans, and, as if the bond
which held them together had been diflolved,
every ensign was lowered, each soldier threw
away his weapons, and all fled with precipitation
to the mountains. '1he Spaniards, unable to
purfuc themi far, returned to collec the spoils of
the field, which were lo valuable, as to be tome
compellation or the wealth which they had loft
in Mexico ; or in the cnemy's army were nmolt

2 of

B Oo OK of their principal warriors, drefl'ed out in their

a-/-V richest ornanents, as if they had been marching
july 8. to assured vitory. Next day, to their great joy,

they entered the Tlacalan territories'.

BUT amidst their fatisfation in having got
nai beyond the precincts of an hostile country, they

could not look forward without solicitude, as
they were ill uncertain what reception they
might meet with from allies, to whom they re-
turned in a condition very different from that in
which they had lately set out from their dominions.
Happily for them, the enmity of the Tlafcalans
to the Mexican name was so inveterate, their
desire to avenge the death of their countrymen
so vehement, and the ascendant. which Cortes
had acquired over the chiefs of the republic so
complete, that, far from entertaining a thought
of taking any advantage of the distressed fitua-
tion in which they beheld the Spaniards, they
received them with a tenderness and cordi-
ality which quickly dissipated all their suspicions.

Ncw wdii SOMt interval of tranquillity and indulgence
coltC,. was now absolutely necessary ; not only that the

Spaniards might give attention to the cure of
their wounds, which had been too long ne-

1 Cortes Relat. p. 219. B. Diaz. c. 128. Gomara
Crou. c. O. Hcrrlra, dec. 2. lib. x. c. 12, 13.

6 glealed,

gleced, but in order to recruit their strength, ex- B o o K
haufted by such a long fucceflion of fatigue and _V
hardships. During this, Cortes learned that he '51s0
and his companions were not the only Spaniards
who had felt the effects of the Mexican enmity.
A considerable detachment, which was march-
ing from Zmpoalla towards the capital, had
been cut off by the people of Tepeaca. A
smaller party, returning from Tlafcala to Vera
Cruz, with the ihare of the Mexican gold
allotted to the garrison, had been surprised and
destroyed in the mountains. At a juncture
when the life of every Spaniard was of im-
portance, such losses were deeply felt. The
schemes which Cortes was meditating rendered
them peculiarly afilitive to him. While his
enemies, and even many of his own followers,
confidered the disasters which had befallen hinm
as fatal to the progress of his arms, and imagined
that nothing now remained but speedily to aban-
don a country which he had invaded with un-
equal force, his mind, as eminent for pcrfeverance
as for enterprise, was till bent on accomplinfing
his original purpose, of fubje(ing the Mcexican
empire to the crown of Caflile. Severe and
unexpeced as the check was which he had
received, it did not appear to him a fulliciiint
reason for relinquifling the conquefs which he
had already made, or against resuming his ope-

D 3 rations

B o0 K rations with better hopes of success. The colony

V.
-.-i at Vera Cruz was not only safe but had re-
1520- mained unmolested. The people of Zempoalla

and the adjacent diftrits had discovered no
symptoms of defection. The Tlafcalans continued
faithful to their alliance. On their martial spirit,
easily rouzed to arms, and inflamed with impla-
cable hatred of the Mexicans, Cortes depended
for powerful aid. He had still the command of
a body of Spaniards, equal in number to that
with which he had opened his way into the
centre of the empire, and had taken poffeflion
of the capital; so that with the benefit of greater
experience, as well as more perfet knowledge
of the country, he did not despair of quickly re-
covering all that he had been deprived of by
untoward events.

Tlic n-ca- FULL of this idea, he courted the Tlafcalan
s'is i' chiefs with such attention, and distributed among

them so liberally the rich spoils of Otumba, that
he was secure of obtaining whatever he should
require of the republic. He drew a small supply
of ammunition, and two or three field-pieces,
from his tores at Vera Cruz. He dispatchcd
an officer of confidence with four flips of Nar-
vaez's fleet to IHifpaniola and Jamaica, to engage
adventurers, and to purchase hoifes, gunpowder,
and other military ftorcs. As he knew that it

would

would be vain to attempt the reduction of B o o K
Mexico, unless he could secure the command -
of the lake, he gave orders to prepare, in the s"io
mountains of Tlafcala, materials for building
twelve brigantines, lb as they might be carried
thither in pieces ready to be put together, and
launched when he flood in need of their
service '.

BUT while, with provident attention, he was MuttllnoIs

fpiilit of his

taking hose necessary steps towards the execu- troops.
lion of his measures, an obstacle arose in a
quarter where it was least expeced, but most
formidable. The spirit of discontent and mutiny
broke out in his own army. Many of Narvaez's
followers were planters rather than soldiers, and
had accompanied him to New Spain with
sanguine hopes of obtaining settlements, but
with little inclination to engage in the hardfiips
and dangers of war. As the fame motives had
induced them to enter into their new engage-
ments with Cortes, they no sooner became
acquainted with the nature of the service, than
they bitterly repented of their choice. Such of
them as had the good fortune to survive the
perilous adventures in which their own impru-
lence had involved them, happy in having made

;" Cortcs Prclit. p1. 253. E. Goinara (,'ol. c. 117.

L) 4 their

B o O'K their escape, trembled at the thoughts of beingr
L v exposed a second time to similar calamities.

1'20. As soon as they discovered the intention of

Cortes, they began secretly to murmur and
cabal, and waxing gradually more audacious,
they, in a body, offered a remonstrance to their
general against the imprudence of attacking a
powerful empire with his hattered forces, and
formally required him to lead them back direIctl
to Cuba. Though Cortes, long praalifed in
the arts of command, employed arguments;,
intreaties, and presents, to convince or to
soothe them; though his own soldiers, animated
with the spirit of their leader, warmly seconded
his endeavours; he found their fears too violent
and deep-rooted to be removed, and the utmoll
he could effect was to prevail with them to defer
their departure for some time, on a promise that
he would, at a more proper jun&ure, dismiss
such as hould desire it.

Means ie T-HAT the malcontents might have no leisure
revivetlir to brood over the causes of their difaffetion, he
confidence. resolved instantly to call forth his troops into

acion. He proposed to chatife the people o
Tepeaca for the outrage which they had coim-
mitted, and as the detachment which they had
cut off happened to be composcd nmolLly of
soldiers who had ervcd under Narvacz, their

COIIllX 011iOIIS,

companions, from the desire of vengeance, B 0 K
engaged the more willingly in this war. He
took the command in person, accompanied by TIso
a numerous body of 'llafcalans, and in the pace
of a few weeks, after various encounters, with
great slaughter of the Tepeacans, reduced that
province to fllbjeion. During several months,
while he waited for the supplies of men and
ammunition which he expe&ed, and was carrying
on his preparations for conflruting the brigan-
tines, he kept his troops constantly employed in
various expeditions against the adjacent provinces,
all of which were conducted with an uniform
tenor of success. By these, his men became
again accustomed to vicory, and resumed their
wonted sense of superiority; the Mexican power
was weakened; the T'lafcalan warriors acquired
the habit of aing in conjunction with the
Spaniards; and the chiefs of the republic de-
lighted to fee their country enriched with the
spoils of all the people around them, and
astonished every day with fresh dilcoveries of the
irresistible prowess of their allies, they declined
no effort requisite to ILpport them.

ALL those preparatory arrangements, Ihosw-' St:rrtin-

ever, though the most prudent and efficacious ire,,rcl-
which the ituation of Cortes allowed hill to ""ttt.
make, would have been of little avail, without a

reinforce-

B o0 K reinforcement of Spanish soldiers. Of this he

V.

was so deeply sensible, that it was the chief
15Z0 object of his thoughts and withes; and yet his

only profped of obtaining it from the return of
the officer whom he had sent to the isles to
solicit aid, was both diflant and uncertain. But
what neither his own sagacity nor power could
have procured, he owed to a eries of fortunate
and unforeseen incidents. The governor of
Cuba, to whom the success of Narvaez appeared
an event of infallible certainty, having sent two
small ships after him with new instructions, and
a supply of men and military Rfores, the officer
whom Cortes had appointed to command on the
coafl, artfully decoyed them into the harbour of
Vera Cruz, seized the vessels, and easily per-
fuaded the soldiers to follow the standard of
a more able leader than him whom they were
decfined to join". Soon after, three ships of
more considerable force came into the harbour
feparatcly. Tlcefe belonged to an armament
fitted out by Francisco de Garay, governor of
Tamaica, who, being possessed with the rage of
discovery and conquelt which animated every
Spaniard fettled in America, hd long aimed
at intruding into ftme difria of New Spain, and
dividing with Cortes the glory and gain of

.h I)tiz.a
c. nn131.

anncxing

annexing that empire to the crown of Castile. B 0o oK
They unadvisedly made their attempt on the . i
northern provinces, where the country was poor, 15'0
and the people fierce and warlike; and, after a
cruel succession of disasters, famine compelled
them to venture into Vera Cruz, and cast them-
selves upon the mercy of their countrymen.
Their fidelity was not proof against the splendid aobhe zs.
hopes and promises which had seduced other
adventurers, and as if the spirit of revolt had
been contagious in New Spain, they likewise
abandoned the master whom they were bound to
serve, and inlifted under Cortes . Nor was it
America alone that furnished such unexpeEted
aid. A flhip arrived from Spain, freighted by
some private merchants with military stores, in
hopes of a profitable market in a country, the
fame of whose opulence began to spread over
Europe. Cortes eagerly purchased a cargo
which to him was invaluable, and the crew,
following the general example, joined him at
Tlafcala P.

FROM those various quarters, the army of

Cortcs was augmented with a hundred and
eighty men, and twcnty horses, a reinforcement

o CorLcs RJcit. 253. . .B. Diaz. c. 133.
P Ibid. c. 136.

B o0 K too inconsiderable to produce any conicquene

V.
_s-*-- which would entitle it to have been.mentioned in
5'j"' the hiltory of other parts of the globe. But in

that of America, where great revolutions were
brought about by causes which eermed to bear
no proportion to their effcts, such frnall events
rife into importance, because they were fufEcicnt
ro decide with relpcd to the fate of kingdoms.
Nor is it the least remarkable instance of the
iingular felicity conspicuous in many passages of
Cortes's story, that the two perlons chiefly
instrumental in furnifiling him with those season-
able supplies, fliould be an avowed enemy who
aimed at his deftruion, and an envious rival
who wished to supplant himn
N., ,rof THEr- first eflt of the junlion with his new

followers was to enable him to difinifs such
of Narvaez's soldiers as remained with reluctance
in his service. Atter their departure, he still
nmutered five hundred and fifty infantry, of
Ixhici flurfcore wcre arimed with muikcts or
crols-bows, forty horl:nien, and a train of nine
ficld-picces''. At the head of thcfc, accom-
panied by ten thousand Tlafcalans and other
friendly Indians, Cortes began his march towards
\'Mxic(, on the twenty-eighth of December, si.\

'1 Cortes Rclat. 255. E.

inonthil

months after his difaflrous retreat from that r, 0 0 K

V.
city'.

NOR did be advance to attack an ernemy un- r,.-

prepared to receive him. Upon tle death of i..xicins
l\Iontezuman, the Mexican chiefs, in whom the &,,.:
right of clte.ing the emperor was velted, had
inflantly railed his 1,rother Q(etlavaca to the
tihrone. Ilis avow-ed rind invctr..rate enmitv to
the Spaniards would have been f;ficient to gain
their fufifages, although he had been less dif-
tinguified for courage and capacity. IIe had an
immediate opportunity of (fcxing that he was
worthy of their choice, by condudting, in pcrfon,
those fierce attacks which conpelled the Spa-
niards to abandon Ins capital; and as soon as
their retreat alforded him any respite fiom
aion, he took meafres for preventing their
return to Mexico, with prudence equal to the
spirit which he had dilplayed in drivilng ihei out
of it. As from the vCilniry of TIlafcala, he could
not be unacquainted iih the notion.s and in-
tentions of Cortes, he observcd the flornm that
was gathering, and began

b arly to provile

againit it. He repaired what tie Spaniards had
rlined in the city, aInd P. rc(ngtlenlcd it with fich
new florifica!ios as lhe l .iil (, I'lu.is u was

R
' at. 2qS. A. 1 , B;;: c. 1 -

cp[ail¢

i o o iK capable of ereding. Beside filling his magazines

w__ ith the uual weapons of war, he gave directions
'15'' to make long .spears headed with the swords and

daggers taken from the Spaniards, in order to
annoy the cavalry. He fuinmoned the people in
every province of the empire to take arms
against their oppressors, and as an encourage-
nent to exert thenifelves with vigour, he promised
them exemption from all the taxes which his
predeceftors had imlpofed . But what he laboured
with the greatest earnetlnefs was, to deprive the
Spaniards of the advantages which they derived
from the friendflhip of the Tiafcalans, by endea-
vouring to pcrfuade that people to renounce all
conn-eion with men, who were not only avowed
enemies of the gods whom they worlhipped, but
who would not fail to subjea them at last to the
fame yoke, which they were now inconsiderately
lending their aid to impose upon others. These
reprefiitations, no lers firiking than well founded,
were urged so forcibly by his ambassadors, that
it required all the address of Cortes to prevent
their making a dangerous iinpreflion '.

1u while Qitelavaca was arranging his plan

of defence, with a degree of furefight uncommon

6 C.llllt R!.,tIi p. 25. . 25pj. 11. 1). c. c.
t . l)ii.. C. 129. 1 ILITrie , d(ec. 2. lib. x, C. 14. 19.

in

in an American, his days were cut short by the B K
finall-pox. This diltemper, which raged at that
time in New Spain with fatal rmalignity, was '5"0'
unknown in that quarter of the globe, until
it was introduced by the Europeans, and may be
reckoned among the greatest calamities brought
upon them by their invaders. In his scad the
Mcxicans raised to the throne Guatimozin,
nephew and fbon-inl of M;lontezuma, a young
man of fu:' lig-h reputation for abilities and
vaiour, that in ibis danglrous criiis, his country-
men, with one voice, called him to the fupremc
command :'.

As soon as Cortes entered the enemy's tcri- Is

('- C C a([

tories, he discovered various preparations to ,,:.,t!
obftrudt his progress. But his troops forced ij,.
their way with little difficulty, and took poffcflion
of Tezeuco, the fcond city of the empire,
situated on the banks of the lake about twenty
miles from Mexico . IIere he determined to
establish his head-quarters, as the mol: proper
flation for launching his brigantines, as well as
for making his approaches to the capital. In
order to render his residence there Inmre secure,
he dcpofed the cziqlue or chiel', who was at the

" 13 . Ciz . . I j.
'W \'il!:i , o1101 'l'Ti itl ' lI;CIIc .', I i),

lcad

B 0 K head of that community, under pretext of some

V.
_»-^-- defect in his title, and substituted in his place a
'521' person whom a facion of the nobles pointed out

as the right heir of that dignity. Attached
to him by this benefit, the new cazique and
his adherents served the Spaniards with inviolable
fidelity .

tlI cptra. As the preparations for conftrucing the brig-
ti.)ns I.)w
and cau- antines advanced slowly under the unskilful

tu hands of soldiers and Indians, whom Cortes was

obliged to employ in aflifing three or four
carpenters who happened fortunately to be in his
service, and as he had not yet received the rein-
forceinent which he expected from HIifpaniola,
he was not in a condition to turn his arms
directly against the capital. To have attacked.
at this period, a city so populous, so well pre-
pared for defence, and in a situation of filch pecu-
liar firength, niuft have exposed his troops to
inevitable cli-ruction. Three months elapsed
before the materials for the brigantines were
finifled, and before he heard any thing with
refpe)c to the fuccels of the officer -whom he had
fcnt to I-liFpaniola. This, however, was not a
icafon of inadcion to Cortcs. lie attacked fuc-

'Ca tcs Rcl;l. 25, S c. ]). Di)iz. c. r37. Gomara
Cronl, c. 121. Il crc,, , decc. 3. c. .

celivcly

ceflively several of the towns situated around the B o o K

V.

lake; and though all the Mexican power was _
exerted to obftruat his operations, he either 'l5"
compelled them to submit to the Spanih crown,
or reduced them to ruins. The inhabitants of
other towns he endeavoured to conciliate by
more gentle means, and. though he could not
hold any intercourse with them but by the
intervention of interpreters, yet, under all the
disadvantage of that tedious and imperfeE mode
of communication, he had acquired fich thorough
knowledge of the state of the country, as well as
of the dispositions of the people, that he con-
ducted his negociations and intrigues with afto-
nifhing dexterity and success. Most of the cities
adjacent to Mexico were originally the capitals
of finall independent states; and some of them
having been but lately annexed to the Mexican
empire, still retained the remembrance of their
ancient liberty, and bore with impatience the
rigorous yoke of their new masters. Cortes
having early observed symptoms of their dif-
affecion, availed himself of this knowledge to
gain their confidence and friendship. By offcr-
ing, with confidence, to deliver them from the
odious dominion of the Mexicans, and by liberal
promies of more indulgent treatment, if they
would unite with him againit their oppreflbrs, he
prevailed on the people of several considerable

VOL. ill. . dcliftricts,

B 0 0 K diflriets, not only to acknowledge the king of

V.

Castile as their sovereign, but to supply the
15"2. Spanish camp with provisions, and to firengthen

his army with auxiliary troops. Guatimozin,
on the first appearance of defecion among his
fubjets, exerted himself with vigour to prevent
or to punish their revolt; but in spite of his
efforts, the spirit continued to spread. The
Spaniards gradually acquired new allies, and
with deep concern he beheld Cortes arming
against his empire those very hands which ought
to have been active in its defence; and ready to
advance against the capital at the head of a
numerous body of his own fubjets .

WHILE, by those various methods, Cortes was

gradually circumscribing the Mexican power in
such a manner that his profped of overturning
it seemed neither to be uncertain nor remote, all
his schemes were well nigh defeated, by a con-
fpiracy no less unexpeEed than dangerous. The
Ioldiers of Narvaez had never united perfeAly
with the original companions of Cortes, nor did
they enter into his measures with the fame cordial
zeal. Upon every occasion that required any
extraordinary effort of courage or of paticncc,

Y Cortes Relit.256--26o. B.Diaz. c. 37-140. Co-
mara Crou. c. 12s, 123. I-Ikrrra, dec. 3. lib. i, c. , 2.

thcir

their spirits were apt to fink; and now, on a o o K
near view of what they had to encounter, in ._l
attempting to reduce a city so inacceflible as 152-.
Mexico, and defended by a numerous army, the
resolution even of those among them who had
adhered to Cortes when he was deserted by their
afrociates, began to fail. Their fears led them
to presumptuous and unfoldier-like discussions
concerning the propriety of their general's mea-
fures, and the improbability of their success.
From these they proceeded to censure and in-
vedives, and at last began to deliberate how they
might provide for their own safety, of which they
deemed their commander to be totally negligent.
Antonio Villefagna, a private soldier, but bold,
intriguing, and firongly attached to Velasquez,
artfully fomented this growing spirit of dif-
affedion. His quarters became the rendezvous
of the malcontents, where, after many consult-
ations, they could discover no method of checking
Cortes in his career, but by affailinating him and
his most considerable officers, and conferring the
command upon ome person who would relin-
quifh his wild plans, and adopt measures more
confiflent with the general security. Despair
inspired them with courage. The hour for
perpetrating the crime, the persons whom they
destined as victims, the officers to succeed theln
in command, were all named; and the con-

E 2 jipirators

B o K fpirators signed an association, by which they
.-,.- bound themselves with most solemn oaths to

'151' mutual fidelity. But on the evening before the

appointed day, one of Cortes's ancient followers,
who had been seduced into the conspiracy,
touched with compuncion at the imminent
danger of a man whom he had long been
accustomed to revere, or struck ith horror
at his own treachery, went privately to his
general, and revealed to him all that he knew.
Cortes, though deeply alarmed, discerned at once
what conduct was proper in a situation so critical.
He repaired instantly to Villefagna's quarters,
accompanied by ome of his inoft trusty officers.
The aftonifliment and confusion of the man at
this unexpeced visit anticipated the confession of
his guilt. Cortes, while his attendants seized
the traitor, flatched from his bosom a paper
containing the association, signed by the confpi-
rators. Impatient to know how far the defetion
extended, he retired to read it, and found there
names which filled him with furprile and sorrow.
But, aware how dangerous a (tri& scrutiny
might prove at such a junture, he confined his
judicial inquiries to Villefagna alone. As the
proofs of his guilt were nlanifeft, he was con-
demnned after a ihort trial, and next morning lie
was seen hanging before the door of the houle
in which he had lodged. Cortes called is

?2~. ~ troops

troops together, and having explained to them n o o
the atrocious purpose of the conspirators, as ..j
well as the justice of the punishment infliEted on '5"'
Villefagna, he added, with an appearance of
fatisfadion, that he was entirely ignorant with
refpea to all the circumstances of this dark
tranfadion, as the traitor, when arrested, had
suddenly torn and swallowed a paper which
probably contained an account of it, and under
the severest tortures possessed such constancy as
to conceal the names of his accomplices. This
artful declaration restored tranquillity to many a
breast that was throbbing, while he spoke, with
consciousness of guilt and dread of deteEion;
and by this prudent moderation, Cortes had the
advantage of having discovered, and of being
able to observe such of his followers as were
difaffeEted; while they, flattering themselves
that their pals crime was unknown, endeavoured
to avert any suspicion of it, by redoubling their
activity and zeal in his service'.

CORTES did not allow them leisure to rumi- ";ring"-

lh:r picl)ara-

nate on what had happened; and as the mnoflt ioni,,-
effectual means of preventing the return of a b^iiits.
mutinous spirit, he determined to call forth his

Cortes Relat. 283, C. B. Diaz. c. 6. lcrrcra,
dec. 3 lib. i. c. I.

3 troops

B O K troops immediately to ation. Fortunately, a

Vc^.y proper occasion for this occurred without his
s521- seeming to court it. He received intelligence

that the materials for building the brigantines
were at length completely finished, and waited
only for a body of Spaniards to conduct them to
Tezeuco. The command of this convoy, con-
silting of two hundred foot soldiers, fifteen
horsemen, and two field-pieces, he gave to
Sandoval, who, by the vigilance, aivity, and
courage which he manifested on every occasion,
was growing daily in his confidence, and in the
estimation of his fellow-foldiers. The service
was no less singular than important; the beams,
the planks, the masts, the cordage, the fails, the
iron-work, and all the infinite variety of articles
requisite for the conftrudion of thirteen brigan-
tines, were to be carried sixty miles oyer land,
through a mountainous country, by people who
were unacquainted with the minifiry of domelic
animals, or the aid of machines to facilitate any
work of labour. The Tlafcalans furnifllcd eight
thousand Tamcncs, an inferior order of men
deflined for servile tasks, to carry the materials
on their shoulders, and appointed fifteen thoulhnd
warriors to accompany and defend them. San-
doval made the disposition for their progress
with great propriety, placing the Tamcncs in the
Fcntrc, onc hody of warriors in the front, another

ill

in the rear, with considerable parties to cover B O o K
the flanks. To each of these he joined some a
Spaniards, not only to aflift them in danger, '"
but to accustom them to regularity and fubordi-
nation. A body so numerous, and so much
encumbered, advanced leisurely, but in excellent
order; and in some places, where it was con-
fined by the woods or mountains, the line
of march extended above fix miles. Parties of
Mexicans frequently appeared hovering around
them on the high grounds; but perceiving no
profpet of success in attacking an enemy con-
tinually on his guard, and prepared to receive
them, they did not venture to molest him ; and
Sandoval had the glory of conduEting safely to
Tezeuco, a convoy on which all the future
operations of his countrymen depended L

THIS was followed by another event of no less Reccives

rew rein-

moment. Four ships arrived at Vera Cruz foccn,lnt,
from Hispaniola, with two hundred soldiers,
eighty horses, two battering cannon, and a con-
fiderable supply of ammunition and armsb.
Elevated with observing that all his preparatory
schemes, either for recruiting his own army, or
impairing the force of the enemy, had now

1 Cortes Rclat. 6Go. C. E. 13. Dianz c. 14o.
b Cortes Rejti. 2 9. F. ?6z. 1). G(imara Cron. r-. 129.

E 4 produced

B 0 0 K produced their full effect, Cortes, impatient to

V.
a-__- begin the siege in form, hastened the launching

'521' of the brigantines. To facilitate this, he had

employed a vast number of Indians for two
months in deepening the small rivulet which runs
by Tezeuco into the lake, and in forming it into
a canal near two miles in lengthc and though
the Mexicans, aware of his intentions, as well
as of the danger which threatened them, en-
deavoured frequently to interrupt the labourers,
or to burn the brigantines, the work was at last

Thlebi. completed . On the twenty-eighth of April,
aucheLd. all the Spanish troops, together with the auxiliary

Indians, were drawn up on the banks of the
canal; and with extraordinary military pomp,
rendered more solemn by the celebration of the
molf sacred rites of religion, the brigantines were
launched. As they fell down the canal in order,
Father Olmedo blessed them, and gave each its
name. Every eye followed them with wonder
and hope, until they entered the lake, when
they hoifled their fails, and blore away before
the wind. A general sout of joy was raised;
all admiring that bold inventive genius, which,
by means so extraordinary that their success
almost exceeded belief, had acquired the com-
mand of a fleet, without the aid of which Mexico

See NOTE IV. . Diz
. .. I4.0.

would

would have continued to set the Spanish power B 0O K
and arms at defiance. _

15ZI.

CORTES determined to attack the city from Dispositions

three different quarters; from Tepeaca on the
north fide of the lake, from Tacuba on the weft,
and from Cuyocan towards the south. Thole
towns were situated on the principal causeways
which led to the capital, and intended for their
defence. He appointed Sandoval to command
in the first, Pedro de Alvarado in the second,
and Chriftoval de Olid in the third; allotting to
each a numerous body of Indian auxiliaries,
together with an equal division of Spaniards,
who, by the jun&ion of the troops from I-if-
paniola, amounted now to eighty-fix horsemen,
and eight hundred and eighteen foot soldiers; of
whom one hundred and eighteen were armed
with muskets or cross-bows. The train of artil-
lery confifled of three battering cannon, and
fifteen field-pieces . He reserved for himself, as
the station of greatest importance and danger,
the conduet of the brigantines, each armed with
one of his fall cannon, and manned with
twenty-five Spaniards.

c Cortes Relat. 266. C. IIrcrr , dcco 3. lib. c.
(Gomara Cron. c. 129.

f Cortes Relat. 266. C.

As

B oK As Alvarado and Olid proceeded towards the
L.-- polls afligned them, they broke down the aque-

s121. duds which the ingenuity of the Mexicans had

erected for conveying water into the capital, and
by the distress to which this reduced the in.
habitants, gave a beginning to the calamities
which they were deltined to susser g. Alvarado
and Olid found the towns of which they were
ordered to take possession deserted by their
inhabitants, who had fled for safety to the capital,
where Guatimozin had colleced the chief force
of his empire, as there alone he could hope to
make a successful stand againif the formidable
enemies who were approaching to assault him.

Mexicans THE firfl effort of the Mexicans was to destroy
atack the
bliantins. the fleet of brigantines, the fatal effeEts of whose

operations they foresaw and dreaded. Though
the brigantines, after all the labour and merit
of Cortes in forming them, were of incon-
fiderable bulk, rudely conflrued, and manned
chiefly with landmen, hardly possessed of skill
enough to conduc them, they muff have been
ol)jets of terror to a people unacquainted with
any navigation but that of their lake, and pof-
Jili'cl of no vessel larger than a canoe. Ncccflity,

C
C rones R]t t. 267. B. 13. Diz)i . c. rio. .clrrel a,
,ie'. j. Il, i . . c 13.

hlowevcl

however, urged Guatimozin to hazard the at- B O O K
tack; and hoping to supply by numbers what
he wanted in force, he assembled such a multi- IsZ'
tude of canoes as covered the face of the lake.
They rowed on boldly to the charge, while the
brigantines, retarded by a dead calm, could
scarcely advance to meet them. But as the Repulsed.
enemy drew near, a breeze suddenly sprung up;
in a moment the fails were spread, the brigan-
tines, with the utnoft ease, broke through their
feeble opponents, overset many canoes, and dif-
fipated the whole armament with such slaughter,
as convinced the Mexicans, that the progress of
the Europeans in knowledge and arts rendered
their superiority greater on this new element,
than they had hitherto found it by land .

FROM that time Cortes remained mafler of s:ngul,,

ipla of con-

the lake, and the brigantines not only preferred lu',lc t c
a communication between the Spaniards in their tó''
different Itations, though at confidcrable diltance
from each other, but were employed to cover
the causeways on each fide, and keel) olF the
canoes, when they attempted to annoy the troops
as they advanced towards the city. Cortes
formed the brigantines in three divisions, ap-

h Cortes Rclat. 27. C. . Diaz. c. 50. Gonmar:
Cron. c. 131. 1-crrclr, (lcc. 3. lib). i c. 17.

3 poilting

B o K pointing one to cover each of the stations from

v. _^'i which an attack was to be carried on against the
'15"1 city, with orders to second the operations of the

officer who commanded there. From all the
three iations he pushed on the attack againfl
the city with equal vigour; but in a manner
so very different from the condu0t of sieges in
regular war, that he himself seems afraid it would
appear no less improper than singular, to persons
unacquainted with his situation'. Each morning
his troops assaulted the barricades which the
enemy had erected on the causeways, forced
their way over the trenches which they had dug
and through the canals where the bridges were
broken down, and endeavoured to penetrate
into the heart of the city, in hopes of obtaining
some decisive advantage, which might force the
enemy to surrender, and terminate the war at
'once; but when the obstinate valour of the
Mexicans rendered the efforts of the day in-
effeftual, the Spaniards retired in the evening
to their former quarters. Thus their toil and
danger were, in some measure, continually re-
newed; the Mexicans repairing in the night
what the Spaniards had destroyed through the
day, and recovering the pots from which they
had driven them. But neceflity prescribed this

Cortes Relat, 270. F.

flow

flow and untoward mode of operation. The n o o Ki
number of his troops was so small, that Cortes -
durst not, with a handful of men, attempt to '5s'
make a lodgment in a city where he might be
surrounded and annoyed by such a multitude of
enemies. The remembrance of what he had
already suffered by the ill-judged confidence
with which he had ventured into such a dan-
gerous situation, was ill fresh in his mind.
The Spaniards, exhausted with fatigue, were
unable to guard the various polls which they
daily gained; and though their camp was filled
with Indian auxiliaries, they durst not devolve.
this charge upon them, because they were so
little accustomed to discipline, that no confidence
could be placed in their vigilance. Besides this,
Cortes was extremely solicitous to preserve the
city as much as pofible from being destroyed,
both because he destined it to be the capital of
his conquests, and wifllled that it might remain
as a monument of his glory. From all these
considerations, he adhered obflinately, for a
month after the siege was opened, to the systen
which lie had adopted. The Mexicans, in their
own defence, displayed valour which was hardly
inferior to that with which the Spaniards attacked
them. On land, on water, by night and by day,
one furious confliLt fuccecdcd to another. Several
Spaniards were killed, more wounded, and all

were

B o K were ready to fink under the toils of unintermit-

V. ,-_j ting service, which were rendered more intolerable

1521- by the injuries of the season, the periodical rains

being now set in with their usual violence k.

Enceavcurs ASTONISHED and disconcerted with the length
to take the
city by ard difficulties of the siege, Cortes determined to
itorin.

make one great effort to get possession of the
city, before he relinquifled the plan which he
had hitherto followed, and had recourse to any
other mode of attack. WTith this view, he ent
initrudtions to Alvarado and Sandoval to advance
with their divisions to a general afault, and
took the command in person of that posted
July 3. on the causeway of Cuyocan. Animated by his

presence, and the expecation of ome decisive
event, the Spaniards pushed forward with irre-
fiflible impetuosity. They broke through one
barricade after another, forced their way over
the ditches and canals, and having entered the
city, gained ground inceflntly, in spite of the
multitude and ferocity of their opponents. Cortes,
though delighted with the rapidity of his pro-
grefs, did not forget that he might frill find
it necessary to retreat; and in order to secure it,
appointed Julicn de Alderte, a captain of chief
note in the troops which he had received from

k 13. *Diaz. c. 151.

Iirifpaniula,

Hispaniola, to fill up the canals and gaps in the z o K
causeway as the main body advanced. That _
officer, deeming it inglorious to be thus em- '521
ployed, while his companions were in the heat of
action and the career of victory, neglected the
important charge committed to him, and hurried
on, inconsiderately, to mingle with the com-
batants. The Mexicans, whose military attention
and skill were daily improving, no sooner ob-
served this, than they carried an account of it to
their monarch.

GUATIMOZIN inifantly discerned the confe- RepullrJ

quence of the error which the Spaniards had
committed, and, with admirable presence of
mind, prepared to take advantage of it. He
commanded the troops polled in the front to
flacken their efforts, in order to allure the
Spaniards to push forward, while he dispatched
a large body of chosen warriors through different
ifreets, some by land, and others by water,
towards the great breach in the causeway, which
had been left open. On a signal which he gave,
the prietfs in the principal tcmple struck the
great drum confccratcd to the god of war. No
sooner did the Mexicans hear its doleful folenm
found, calculated to inspire tlher with contempt
of death ani eniltlufiraitic arwlur, than they

r fllifed

B O K ruffed upon the enemy with frantic rage. The

,-^ Spaniards, unable to refilt men urged on no less
I"Z1 by religious fury than hope of success, began to

retire, at first leisurely, and with a good counte-
nance; but as the enemy pressed on, and their
own impatience to escape increased, the terror
and confusion became so general, that when they
arrived at the gap in the causeway, Spaniards
and Tlafcalans, horsemen and infantry, plunged
in promiscuously, while the Mexicans rushed
upon them fiercely from every fide, their light
canoes carrying them through shoals which the
brigantines could not approach. In vain did
Cortes attempt to flop and rally his flying
troops; fear rendered them regardless of his
entreaties or commands. Finding all his en-
deavours to renew the combat fruitless, his next
care was to save fomn of those who had thrown
theitifelves into the water; but while thus em-
ployed, with more attention to their situation
than to his own, fix Mexican captains suddenly
laid hold of him, and were hurrying him off in
triumph; and though two of his officers rescued
him at the expence of their own lives, he re-
ceived several dangerous wounds before he could

wii conli. break loose. Above sixty Spaniards perifled
d .hl. lol.i,

in the rout; and what irendcred the difafler
more afliting, furty us tlidl fll alive into the

hian :

hands of an enemy never known to shew mercy B o o K
to a captive . v.

I521.
T1E approach of night, though it delivered TIhoreho

were tken
the dejedted Spaniards from the attacks of the flcriliccd to

the god of

enemy, ushered in, what was hardly less grievous, W.,ar.
the noise of their barbarous triumph, and of the
horrid festival with which they celebrated their
victory. Every quarter of the city was illumi-
nated; the great temple shone with such peculiar
splendour, that the Spaniards could plainly fee
the people in motion, and the priefrs busy in
hastening the preparations for the death of the
prisoners. Through the gloom, they fancied
that they discerned their companions by the
whiteness' of their fins, as they were stript
naked, and compelled to dance before the image
of the god to whom they were to be offered.
They heard the shrieks of those who were
sacrificed, and thought that they could distinguish
each unhappy vicEim, by the well-known found
of his voice. Imagination added to what they
really saw or heard, and augmented its horror.
The most unfeeling melted into tears of com-
pallion, and the flouteft heart trembled at the
dreadful fpedacle which they beheld ".

' Cortes Rclat. p. 273. 13. Di)a. c. 152. Gomara Cron.
c. 138. IHerrera, dec. 3. lib. i. c. 2c.

," See NOTE V.

VOL. 11l. F CORTES,

B O O K CORTES, who, betides all that he felt in

V.

common with his soldiers, was oppressed with

NoCw5' the additional load of anxious reflecions natural
fwil es to a general on such an unexpeted calamity,
I;d, efforts
of the could not, like them, relieve his mind by giving
Mexicans.

vent to its anguith. He was obliged to assume
an air of tranquillity, in order to revive the spirit
and hopes of his followers. The juncture,
indeed, required an extraordinary exertion of
fortitude. The Mexicans, elated with their
victory, sallied out next morning to attack him
in his quarters. But they did not rely on
the efforts of their own arms alone. They sent
the heads of the Spaniards whom they had
sacrificed, to the leading men in the adjacent
provinces, and aured them that the Ad of war,
appeased by the blood of their invaders, which
had been shed so plentifully on his altars, had
declared with an audible voice, that in eight
days time those hated enemies hould be finally
destroyed, and peace and prosperity re-eftabliflhel
in the empire.

Cortes de- A PREDICTION uttered with such confidence,
elrted by
i.ly o is and in terms so void of ambiguity, gained

universal credit among a people prone to super-
ftition. The zeal of the provinces, which had
already declared against the Spaniards, aug-
mnented; and several which had hitherto reinained

inlative,

inacive, took arms, with enthusiastic ardour, to B O O K
execute the decree of the gods. The Indian v
auxiliaries who had joined Cortes, accustomed to 's-1
venerate the fame deities with the Mexicans, and
to receive the responses of their priests with the
fame implicit faith, abandoned the Spaniards as
a race of men devoted to certain destruction.
Even the fidelity of the Tlafcalans was fhlaken,
and the Spanish troops were left almost alone
in their itations. Cortes, finding that he
attempted in vain to dispel the superstitious fears
of his confederates by argument, took advantage,
from the imprudence of those who had framed
the prophecy, in fixing its accomplishment so
near at hand, to give a striking demonstration of
its falsity*. He suspended all military operations
during the period marked out by the oracle.
Under cover of the brigantines, which kept the
enemy at a distance, his troops lay in safety,
and the fatal term expired without any disaster .

MANY of his allies, ashamed of their own He regains

credulity, returned to their flation. Other tribes, ntrip,r
judging that the gods who had now deceived the
Mexicans, had decreed finally to withdraw their
protection from them, joined his flandard ; and
such was the levity of a simple people, moved by

1B. Diaz. . 153. Gomara Crou. . 138.

r ' every

G O K every flight imprefiion, that in a hort time after

fucll a general defedion of his confederates,
1s.1' Cortes saw himself, if we may believe his own

account, at the head of a hundred and fifty

andadoptsa thouland Indians. Even with such a numerous
new yftem
of attack army, he found it necessary to adopt a new and

more wary system of operation. Inflead of
renewing his attempts to become master of the
city at once, by such bold but dangerous efforts
of valour as he had already tried, he made his
advances gradually, and with every possible
precaution against exposing his men to any
calamity similar to that which they still bewailed.
As the Spaniards pushed forward, the Indians
regularly repaired the causeways behind them.
As oon as they got poffeflion of any it of the
town, the houses were instantly levelled with the
ground. Day by day, the Mexicans, forced to
retire as their enemies gained ground, were
hemmed in within more narrow limits. Guati-
mozin, though unable to flop the career of the
enemy, continued to defend his capital with
obltinate resolution, and disputed every inch of
ground. The Spaniards not only varied their
mode of attack, but by orders of Cortes, changed
the weapons with which they fought. They
were again armied with the long Chinantlan
spears, which they had employed with fucl
success aginift Narvaez; and, by the firm array

. .~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~l

'in which this enabled them to range themselves, B O O K
they repelled, with little danger, the loose assault -
of the Mexicans: incredible numbers of them 5'
fell in the conflicts which they renewed every
day0. While war wafted without, famine began
to consume them within, the city. The Spanish
brigantines, having the entire command of the
lake, rendered it almost impossible to convey to
the besieged any supply of provisions by water.
The immense number of his Indian auxiliaries
enabled Cortes to shut up the avenues to the
city by land. The stores which Guatimozin
had laid up were exhausted by the multitudes
which had crowded into the capital to defend
their sovereign and the temples of their gods.
Not onlythe people, but persons of the highest
rank, felt the utmost distresses of famine. What
they suffered, brought on infectious and mortal
distempers, the last calamity that visits besieged
cities, and which filled up the measure of their
woes P.

BUT, under the pressure of so many and such Courage nd

various evils, the spirit of Guatimozin remained (,,t;,u,,,.
firm and unfubdued. He rejected, with scorn, Z"'
every overture of peace from Cortes; and,

o Cortcs Relat. p. 275. C. 276. F1. B. i;az. c. 153.
P Cortes Relat. 276. E. 277. F. B. Diaz. 155. Gutuara
Cron. c. 141.

3 didaliliiing

B o K disdaining the idea of submitting to the oppressors

», of his country, determined not to survive its
1522. ruin. The Spaniards continued their progress.
Jully 27. At length allthe three divisions penetrated into the

great square in the centre of the city, and made
a secure lodgement there. Three-fourths of the
city were now reduced, and laid in ruins. The
remaining quarter was so closely pressed, that it
could not long withltand assailants, who attacked
it from their new tation with superior advantage,
and more assured expectation of success. The
Mexican nobles, solicitous to save the life of
a monarch whom they revered, prevailed on
Guatimozin to retire from a place where resist.
ance was now vain, that he might rouse the more
distant provinces of the empire to'armis, and
maintain there a more successful struggle with
the public enemy. In order to facilitate the
execution of this measure, they endeavoured to
amuse Cortes with overtures of submission, that,
while his attention was employed in adjulting the
articles of pacification, Guatimozin might escape
unperceived. But they made this attempt upon
a leader of greater sagacity and discernment than
to be deceived by their arts. Cortes fupeting
their intention, and aware of what moment it
was to defeat it, appointed Sandoval, the officer
on whose vigilance he could molt perfetly rely,
to take the command of the brigantines, witl

stria

strict injuncions to watch every motion of the B K
enemy. Sandoval, attentive to the charge, ob- ---
serving some large canoes crowded with people 'is5
rowing across the lake with extraordinary.rapi.
dity, inflantly gave the signal to chace. Garcia
Holguin, who commanded the fvifteft-failing
brigantine, soon overtook them, and was pre-
paring to fire on the foreinoft canoe, which
seemed to carry some person whom all the reft
followed and obeyed. At once the rowers dropt He is raken

prisoner.

their oars, and all on board, throwing down
their arms, conjured him with cries and tears to
forbear, as the emperor was there. Holguin
eagerly seized his prize, and Guatimozin, with
a dignified composure, gave himself up into his
hands, requesting only that no insult might be
offered to the empress or his children. When
conduted to Cortes, he appeared neither with
the fullen fierceness of a barbarian, nor with the
dejetion of a supplicant. " I have done," said
he, addrefling himself to the Spanish general,
" what became a monarch. I have defended
my people to the last extremity. Nothing now
remains but to die. Take this dagger," laying
his hand on one which Cortes wore, " plant it in
my breast, and put an end to a life which can no
longer be of use ."

q Cortes Rclat. 279. B. Diaz. c. 56. Gomara Cron.
c. 42. Herrera, dec. 3. lib. i. c. 7.

1 4 As

t o K As soon as the fate of their sovereign wat

V.

,-,, known, the refiflance of the Mexicans ceased;
Au',3. and Cortes took pofiefion of that fiall part of
Th city. the capital which yet remained undeltroyed.

Thus terminated the siege of Mexico, the molt
memorable event in the conquest of America.
It continued feventy-five days, hardly one of
which passed without some extraordinary effort
of one party in the attack, or of the other in the
defence of a city, on the fate of which both
knew that the fortune of the empire depended.
As the firuggle here was more obitinate, it was
likewise more equal, than any between the
inhabitants of the Old and New Worlds. The
great abilities of Guatimozin, the number of his
troops, the peculiar situation of his capital, so
:far counterbalanced the superiority of the Spa.
niards in arms and discipline, that they muR
have relinquifled the enterprise, if they had
trusted for success to themselves alone. But
Mexico was overturned by the jealousy of neigh-
bours who dreaded its power, and by the revolt
of fubjests impatient to hake off its yoke. By
their effetual aid, Cortes was enabled to acconl-
plifli what, without such support, he would hardly
have ventured to attempt. How much foevcr
this account of the redulcion of Mexico may
detrat, on the one hand, from the marvellous
relations of some Spaniih writers, by ascribing
that to simple and obvious causes which they

attribute

attribute to the romantic valour of their country- n o o K
men, it adds, on the other, to the merit and _.
abilities of Cortes, who, under every difadvan- is,-
tage, acquired such an acfendant over unknown
nations, as to render them intfruments towards
carrying his schemes into execution'.

THE exultation of the Spaniards, on accom- Smallnefsof

the booty,
plifhing this arduous enterprise, was at first anddifap-

pointment

exceflive. But this was quickly damped by the of the Spa-
cruel disappointment of those sanguine hopes, r.iards.
which had animated them amidst so many hard-
ships and dangers. Instead of the inexhaustible
wealth which they expected from becoming
maflers of Montezuma's treasures, and the orna-
ments of so many temples, their rapaciousness
could collet only an inconsiderable booty amidst
ruins and desolation'. Guatimozin, aware of
his impending fate, had ordered what remained
of the riches amafled by his anceltors to be
thrown into the lake. The Indian auxiliaries,
while the Spaniards were engaged in confliEt
with the enemy, had carried off the most valuable
part of the spoil. The fum to be divided among

r See NOTE VI.

' The gold and lilver, according to Cortes, amounted

only to 120,000 pesos, Rclat. 280. A. a fm much infcrior
to that which the Spaniards had formely divided in Mcxico.

the

B o 0 K the conquerors was so small, that many of them
1 __, disdained to accept of the pittance which fell to

1521. their share, and all murmured and exclaimed;

some, againIt Cortes and his confidents, whom
they fufpe&ed of having secretly appropriated to
their own use a large portion of the riches which
should have been brought into the common
stock; others, against Guatimozin, whom they
accused of obstinacy, in refuing to discover the
place where he had hidden his treasure.

Guatimoz:n ARGUMENTS, intreaties, and promises were
tolrturcd.

employed in order to sooth them, but with so
little effeEt, that Cortes, from solicitude to check
this growing spirit of discontent, gave way to a
deed which slains the glory of all his great
aAions. Without regarding the former dignity
of Guatimozin, or feeling any reverence for
those virtues which he had displayed, he
fubjeted the unhappy monarch, together with
his chief favourite, to torture, in order to force
from them a discovery of the royal treasures,
which it was supposed they had concealed.
Guatdmozin bore whatever the refined cruelty
of his tormentors could inflit, with the invin-
cible fortitude of an American warrior. lHis
fcllow-fuffcrer, overcome by the violence of the
anguish, turned a dejeceed eye towards his
malter, which seemed to implore his permiflion

(.]

to reveal all that he knew. But the high-fpirited B 0 K
prince, darting on him a look of authority --v
mingled with scorn, checked his weakness by s5Z-
asking, " Am I now reposing on a bed of
flowers " Overawed by the reproach, the
favourite persevered in his dutiful silence, and
expired. Cortes, ashamed of a scene so horrid,
rescued the royal vicim from the hands of his
torturers, and prolonged a life reserved for new
indignities and sufferings .

THE fate of the capital, as both parties had A'ltllepro-

vincc of the

foreseen, decided that of the empire. The empire sub-
provinces submitted one after another to the m
conquerors. Small detachments of Spaniards
marching through them without interruption,
penetrated in different quarters to the great
Southern Ocean, which, according to the ideas
of Columbus, they imagined would open a short
as well as easy passage to the East Indies, and
secure to the crown of Castile all the envied
wealth of those fertile regions u; and the acive Cortes
mind of Cortes began already to form schemes r',.llsof
for attempting this important discovery". v11

B. Diaz. c. 157. Gomara Cron. c. 146. ITcrrcra,
dec. 3. lib. ii. c. 8. Torqiuem. on. on 1l. i. 574.

U Cortes Relat. 280. D. &c. B. Diaz. c. 7.
? llcrrera, dec. 3. lib. ii. c. 17. Gounara Cron. C. 149.

II'

Bo o K IHE did not know, that during the pregrefs of
a__ his victorious arms in Mexico, the very scheme,

,5-. of which he began to form some idea, had been

whichi aire
(onmplcied undertaken and accompliihed. As this is one
by MaSel-
(4. of the molt splendid events in the history of the

Spanish discoveries, and has been producive of
effecs peculiarly interesting to those extensive
provinces which Cortes had now subjected to
the crown of Castile, the account of its rife
and progress merits a particular detail.

FERDINAND MAGA.\LHAENS, or Magellan, a

Portuguese gentleman of honourable birth,
having served several years in the East Indies,
with difiinguifhed valour, under the famous
Albuquerque, demanded the recompence which
he thought due to his services, with the bold-
iefs natural to a high-fpirited soldier. But as
his general would not grant his suit, and he
expected greater justice from his sovereign,
whom he knew to be a good judge and a
generous rewarder of merit, he quitted India
abruptly, and returned to Lisbon. In order to
induce Emanuel to liften more favourably to his
claim, he not only stated his past services, but
offrced to add to them by conducting his
countrymen to the Molucca or Spice Islands, by
holding a westerly course; which he contended
would be both horter and lcfs hazardous than

6 that

that which the Portuguese now followed by the B o o K
Cape of Good Hope, through the immense V.
extent of the Eastern Ocean. This was the 15s21
original and favourite project of Columbus, and
Magellan founded his hopes of success on the
ideas of that great navigator, confirmed by many
observations, the rcfult of his own naval expe-
rience, as well as that of his countrymen in their
intercourse with the E1ast. But though the
Portuguese monarchs had the merit of having
first awakened and encouraged the spirit of
discovery in that age, it was their destiny, in the
course of a few years, to rejeEt two grand
schemes for this purpose, the executic.i of which
would have been attended with a great accefllon
of glory to themselves, and of power to their
kingdom. In consequence of ome ill-founded
prejudice against Magellan, or of ome dark
intrigue which contemporary hiitorians have not
explained, Emanuel would neither bestow the
recompence which l-e claimed, nor approve of
the scheme which he proposed ; and difiniffd
him with a disdainful co,!;lncfs intolerable to a
man conscious of what lie deserved, and animnlatce
with the sanguine hopes of fucccfs peculiur to
thole who are capable of frming or of coinlul-
ing new and great undertakingrs. In a tr:,iilort
of rcftntmclnt, Magcllan f{urirllly rcinouncid lis ,5,7.

all lgiance

B o o K allegiance to an ungrateful matter, and fled

V.
-v_- to the court of Castile, where he expe&ed that
'532 his talents would be more justly estimated. He

endeavoured to recommend himself by offering
to execute, under the patronage of Spain, that
scheme, which he had laid before the court
of Portugal, the accomplishment of which, he
knew, would wound the monarch against whom
he was exasperated in the most tender part.
In order to eflablifl the justness of his theory, he
produced the fame arguments which he had
employed at Lisbon; acknowledging, at the
fame time, that the undertaking was both arduous
and expensive, as it could not be attempted
but with a squadron of considerable force, and
victualled for at leaf two years. Fortunately,
he applied to a minister who was not apt to
be deterred, either by the boldness of a design,
or the expence of carrying it into execution.
Cardinal Ximenes, who at that time direded the
affairs of Spain, discerning at once what an in-
crease of wealth and glory would accrue to his
country by the success of Magellan's proposal,
listened to it with a most favourable car.
Charles V. on his arrival in his Spanish domi-
nions, entered into the measure with no less
ardour, and orders were issued for equipping
a proper squadron at the public charge, of which

the

the command was given to Magellan, whom the B o o K
king honoured with the habit of St. Jago and V.
the title of Captain-Generalx. 1521.

ON the tenth of Augufi one thousand five His voyage,

hundred and nineteen, Magellan failed from
Seville with five flips, which, according to the
ideas of the age, were deemed to be of con-
fiderable force, though the burden of the largest
did not exceed one hundred and twenty tons.
The crews of the whole amounted to two
hundred and thirty-four men, among whom
were some of the most filful pilots in Spain,
and several Portuguese sailors, in whole expe-
rience, as more extensive, Magellan placed still
greater confidence. After touching at the
Canaries, he Rfood direcly south towards the
equinoFtial line along the coast of America, but
was so long retarded by tedious calms, and spent
so much time in searching every bay and inlet
for that communication with the Southern Ocean
which he wished to discover, that he did not
reach the river De la Plata till the twelfth of
January. 'I hat fipacious opening through which 151s.
its vast body of water pours into the Atlantic
allured him to enter ; but after failing up it for

X I-ri'ret, decr. 2. lib. ii. . 19. li.) iv. c. 9. Gomara

H ifl. c. 1. I)al'rinplI's Colledt. of Voyages to the SouLth
l)r1LiliC Occall, vol. i. . I, .'c.

fomc

B 0 K. some days, he concluded, from the hallownefs

of the stream and the freshness of the water, that
'51' the wilhed-for firait was not situated there, and

continued his course towards the south. On the
thirty-firft of March he arrived in the port of
St. Julian, about forty-eight degrees south of the
line, where he resolved to winter. In this un-
comfortable station he loft one of his squadron,
and the Spaniards suffered so much from the
excessive rigour of the climate, that the crews of
three of his flips, headed by their officers, rose
in open mutiny, and insisted on relinquishing
the visionary proje& of a desperate adventurer,
and returning directly to Spain. This dangerous
infurretion Magellan suppressed, by an effort
of courage no less prompt than intrepid, and
inflicted exemplary punishment on the ring-
leaders. With the remainder of his followers,
overawed but not reconciled to his scheme,
he continued his voyage towards the south,
and at length discovered, near the fifty-third
degree of latitude, the mouth of a strait, into
which he entered, notwithstanding the murmurs
and remonstrances of the people under his
command. After failing twenty days in that
winding dangerous channel, to which he gave
his own name, and where one of his fmips
deserted him, the great Southern Ocean opened
to his view, and with tears of joy he returned

thanks

thanks to Heaven for having thus far crowned B K
his endeavours with success Y.

BUT he was still at a greater distance than he

imagined from the objea of his wishes. He
failed during three months and twenty days in
an uniform direction towards the north-west
without discovering land. In this voyage, the
longest that had ever been made in the un.
bounded ocean, he suffered incredible distress.
His stock of provisions was alrioft exhausted,
the water became putrid, the men were reduced
to the shortest allowance with which it was
possible to sustain life, and the scurvy, the most
dreadful of all the maladies with which sea-
faring people are afflic:ed, began to spread among
the crew. One circumstance alone afforded
them some consolation; they enjoyed an unin-
terrupted course of fair weather, with such
favourable winds, that Magellan bestowed on
that ocean the name of Pacific, which it fill
retains. When reduced to such extremity that
they must have funk under their sufferings, they
fell in with a cluster of small but fertile islands, March6
which afforded them refreshments in such abund-

Y Herrera, dec. 2. lib. iv. c. o. lib. ix. c. Io, &c. Go-

mara Hilt. c. 92. Pigafetta Viaggio ap. Ramus. ii.
p. 352, &c.

VOL. IIi. r ance,

1B O0 K ance, that their health was soon re-eftablihed.
-1 z'L._, From these isles, which he called De los Ladrones,
's2' he proceeded on his voyage, and soon made

a more important discovery of the islands now
known by the name of the Philippines. In one
of these he got into an unfortunate quarrel with
the natives, who attacked him with a numerous
body of troops well armed; and while he fought
at the head of his -men with his usual valour, he
April 6. fell by the hands of those barbarians, together

with several of his principal officers.

THE expedition was prosecuted under other

commanders. After visiting many of the smaller
isles scattered in the eastern part of the Indian
Nov. . ocean, they touched at the great island of Borneo,

and at length landed in Tidore, one of the
Moluccas, to the astonishment of the Portuguese,
who could not comprehend how the Spaniards,
by holding a weterly course, had arrived at that
fcqueflered feat of their most valuable com-
merce, which they theifclves had discovered by
failing in an opposite direction. There, and in
the adjacent isles, the Spaniards found a people
acquainted with the benefits of extensive trade,
and willing to open an intercourse with a new
nation. They took in a cargo of the precious
spices, which are the distinguished producion of
those islands; and with that, as well as with

fpecinmens

rpeelmens of the rich commodities yielded by B K
the other countries which they had visited, the ._
Vitory, which, of the two ships that remained of 15:2-
the fqtadron, was most fit for a long voyage, set
fail for Europe, under the command of Juan Jan.
Sebastian del Cano. He followed the course of
the Portuguese, by the Cape of Good Hope,
and, after many disasters and sufferings, he
arrived at St. Lucar on the seventh of September
one thousand five hundred and twenty-two,
having failed round the globe in the space of
three-years and twenty-eight days ?.

THOUGH an untimely fate deprived Magellan

of the fatisfaion of accomplishing this great un.
dertaig, his contemporaries, just to his memory
and talents, ascribed to him not only the honour
of having formed the plan, but of having fur-
mounted almost eyery obstacle to the completion
of it; and- in the present age his name is still
ranked among the highest in the roll of eminent
and successful navigators. The naval glory of
Spain now eclipsed that of every other nation;
and by a singular felicity he had the merit, in
the course of a few years, of discovering a new
continent almost as large as that part of the

1 Herrera, dec. 3. lib. i. c. 3. 9. lib. iv . i. Gomara
Cron. c. 93, &c. Pigafetta ap Ramnuf. ii. p. 36,. &c.

o 2 earth

B o0 K earth which was formerly known, and of acer.

V.
, ._i taining by experience the form and extent of the

15Zz' whole terraqueous globe.

THE Spaniards were not satisfied with the

glory of having first encompassed the earth;
they expected to derive great commercial advan-
tages from this new and boldest effort of their
maritime kill. The men of science among them
contended, that the spice islands, and several
of the richest countries in the East, were so
situated as to belong of right to the crown
of Caffile, in consequence of the partition made
by Alexander VI. The merchants, without
attending to this difcuflion, engaged eagerly in
that lucrative and alluring commerce, which was
now opened to them. The Portuguese, alarmed
at the intrusion of such formidable rivals, remlon-
firated and negociated in Europe, while in Asia
they obftruaed the trade of the Spaniards by
force of arms. Charles V. not sufficiently in-
struted with refpe& to the importance of this
valuable branch of commerce, or diftraEted by
the multiplicity of his schemes and operations,
did not afford his fubjeds proper proteion.
At last, the low flare of his finances, exhausted
by the efforts of his arms in every part of
Europe, together with the dread of adding a new
war with Portugal to thliou in which he wa

already

already engaged, induced him to make over his B o o K
claim of the Moluccas to the Portugueie for
three hundred and fifty thousand ducats. IIe -5"'
reserved, however, to the crown of Castile the
right of reviving its pretensions on repayment of
that rum; but other objeds engrossed his atten-
tion and that of his successors; and Spain was
finally excluded from a branch of commerce
in which it was engaging with sanguine expet-
ations of profit ,

THOUGH the trade with the Moluccas was

relinquished, the voyage of Magellan was fol-
lowed by commercial effects of great moment to
Spain. Philip II. in the year one thousand five
hundred and fixty-four, reduced those islands
which he discovered in the Eaitern Ocean to
fubjeaion, and established settlements there;
between which and the kingdom of New Spain,
a regular intercourse, the nature of which shall
be explained in its proper place, is Rill carried
on. I return now to the tranfations in New
Spain.

AT the time that fortes was acquiring such An order o

extensive territories for his native country, and CPrtes,
preparing the way for future conquests, it was

Henrera, dec, 3. lib. vi c. . , &c. dec. 4, lib. v. c. 7, &c.

3 his

B o k ' his singular fate not only to be defitiute of any

V.
i_, -commission or authority from the sovereign

J's5. whom he was serving with such successful zeal,

but to be regarded as an undutiful and seditious
fubjedt. By the influence of Fonseca, bihop of
Burgos, his conduct in assuming the government
of New Spain was declared to be an irregular
usurpation, in contempt of the royal authority;
and Chriftoval de Tapia received a commission,
impowering him to supersede Cortes, to seize his
person, to confiscate his effets, to make a itrift
scrutiny into his proceedings, and to transmit the
result of all the enquiries carried on in New
Spain to the council of the Indies, of which the
biffop of Burgos was president. A few weeks
after the reduction of Mexico, Tapia landed
at Vera Cruz with the royal mandate to strip its
conqueror of his power, and to treat him as
a criminal. But Fonseca had chosen a very
improper instrument to wreak his vengeance on
Cortes. Tapia had neither the reputation nor
the talents that suited the high command to

w.hic he which he was appointed. Cortes, while he
Clut!:s, publicly exprefled the most refpecful veneration

for the emperor's authoiy, secretly took mea-
fures to defeat the effect of his commission;
and having involved Tapia and his followers in
a multiplicity of negociarions and conferences,
in which he sometimes had recourse to threats,

but

but more frequently employed bribes and pro- B o0 K
mises, he at length prevailed on that weak man
to abandon a province which he was unworthy 52"'.
of governingb.

BUT notwithitanding the fortunate dexterity Applies

again to tile

with which he had eluded this danger, Cortes court,
was so sensible of the precarious tenure by May s
which he held his power, that he dispatched
deputies to Spain, with a pompous account
of the success of his arms, with farther specimens
of the productions of the country, and with rich
presents to the emperor, as the earnest of future
contributions from his new coriquefts; request-
ing, in recompence for all his services, the
approbation of his proceedings, and that he
might be entrusted with the government of those
dominions, which his conduct, and the valour of
his followers, had added to the crown of Castile.
The junEture in which his deputies reached the
court was favourable. The internal commotions
in Spain, which had disquieted the beginning of
Charles's reign, were just appeased . The
ministers had leisure to turn their attention

t' Herrera, dec. 3. lib. iii. c. 16. dec. iv. c. I. Cort.

Relat. 281. E. B. Diaz. c. 158.
c Hilt. of Charles V. vol. ii. b. iii.

4 towards

B o°v K towards foreign affairs. The account of Cortes's

V.
y %*** ~~vicories filled his countrymen with admiration.

5<2. The extent and value of his conquests became

the objeEt of vat and intereffing hopes. What.
ever tain he might have contraEted, by the
irregularity of the iteps which he took in order
to attain power, was so fully effaced by the
splendor and merit of the great aions which
this had enabled him to perform, that every
heart revolted at the thought of inflicing any
censure on a man, whose services entitled him to
the highest marks of diftinEion. The public
voice declared warmly in favour of his preten-
sions, and Charles arriving in Spain about this
time, adopted the sentiments of his fubjets with
a youthful ardour. Notwithitanding the claims
of Velasquez, and the partial representations of

and is ap. the bishop of Burgos, the emperor appointed
poipttd
captain Cortes captain-general and governor of New
general and
governorof Spain, judging that no person was so capable of
Wew Spain. maintaining the royal authority, or of eftablilh-

ing good order both among his Spanish and
Indian fubjets, as the vidorious leader whom the
former had long been accultomed to obey, and
the latter had been taught to fear and to refped '

''Hcrrera, dec. 3. lib. iv. c. 3. Comara Crp. c. 14,
165. B. Diaz. I67, 168.

@VI.N

EVEN before his jurifdiaion received this legal B o o K

fanfion, Cortes ventured to exercise all the v.
powers of a governor, and, by various arrange- sZ2.

His flleme

ments, endeavoured to render his conquelt a and ar
secure and beneficial acquisition to his country. 5t'.
He determined to establish the feat of govern-
ment in its ancient flation, and to raise Mexico
again from its ruins; and having conceived
high ideas concerning the future grandeur of the
state of which he was laying the foundation,
he began to rebuild its capital on a plan which
hath gradually formed the most magnificent city
in the New World. At the fame time, he
employed ikilful persons to search for mines in
different parts of the country, and opened
some which were found to be richer than any
which the Spaniards had hitherto discovered in
America. He detached his principal officers
into the remote provinces, and encouraged them
to fettle there, not only by bestowing upon them
large trats of land, but by granting them the
fame dominion over the Indians, and the fame
right to their service, which the Spaniards had
assumed in the islands.

Ir was not, however, without difficulty, that infurreci-

the Mexican empire could be entirely reduced IMrx,'cI',.,
into'the form of a Spanish colony. Enraged and ,t' crulsp,
ycndered desperate by oppreslion, the natives ""lJl

often

B 0 O K often forgot the superiority of their enemies,

V.
--j and ran to arms in defence of their liberties. In

every contest, however, the European valour
and discipline prevailed. But fatally for the
honour of their country, the Spaniards sullied
the glory redounding from these repeated vic.
tories, by their mode of treating the vanquished
people. After taking Guatimozin, and becoming
matters of his capital, they supposed that the
king of Castile entered on poffefiion of all the
rights of the captive monarch, and affeEed to
confider every effort of the Mexicans to assert
their own independence, as the rebellion of
vassals against their sovereign, or the mutiny of
slaves against their master. Under the fanlion
of those ill-founded maxims, they violated every
right that ihould be held sacred between hostile
nations. After each insurrection, they reduced
the common people, in the provinces which they
subdued, to the most humiliating of all conditions,
that of personal servitude. Their chiefs, supposed
to be more criminal, were punished with greater
severity, and put to death in the mnof igno-
minious or the inoft excruciating mode, that the
insolence or the cruelty of their conquerors
could devise. In alnoft every diflrid of the
Mexican empire, the progrief of the Spanish
arms is marked with blood, and with deeds o
atrocious, as dilgrace the enterprising valour

that

that conduced them to success. In the country B3 0 K
of Panuco, sixty caziques or leaders, and four ,
hundred nobles, were burnt at one time. Nor 522'
was this hocking barbarity perpetrated in any
sudden ally of rage, or by a commander of
inferior note. It was the act of Sandoval, an
officer whose name is entitled to the second rank
in the annals of New Spain, and executed after
a solemn consultation with Cortes; and to com-
plete the horror of the scene, the children and
relations of the wretched victims were assembled,
and compelled to be fpetators of their dying
agonies . It seems hardly poflible to exceed in
horror this dreadful example of severity; but it
was followed by another, which affected the
Mexicans still more sensibly, as it gave them a
most feeling proof of their own degradation,
and of the small regard which their haughty
maflers retained for the ancient dignity and
iplendor of their late. On a flight suspicion,
confirmed by very imperfect evidence, that
Guatimozin had formed a scheme to flake off
the yoke, and to excite his former fubjets to
take arms, Cortes, without the formality of a
trial, ordered the unhappy monarch, together
with the caziques of Tezeuco and Tacuba, the
two perlons of greatest eminence in the empire,

e Cortcs Relat. 291. C. Gomara Cron. c. 155.

to

B Oy0 ; to be hanged; and the Mexicans, with aonifli.
----'
~ ment and horror, beheld this disgraceful punish.

ment inflicted upon persons, to whom they were
accuitomed to look up with reverence, hardly
inferior to that which they paid to the gods
themselves'. The example of Cortes and his
principal officers encouraged and jutified persons
of subordinate rank to venture upon committing
greater excesses. Nuno de Guzman, in parti-
cular, stained an illustrious name by deeds of
peculiar enormity and rigour, in various expe.
ditions which he conducted g.

rFir ocif ONE circumstance, however, saved the Mexi-
of indufirY
moing the cans from farther consumption, perhaps from one
conquerors. as complete as that which had depopulated the

islands. The first conquerors did not attempt
to search for the precious metals in the bowels
of the earth. They were neither sufficiently
wealthy to carry on the expensive works, which
are requisite for opening those deep recesses,
where nature has concealed the veins of gold and
silver, nor fufliciently kilful to perform the
ingenious operations by which those precious
metals are separated from their refpe&tive ores.
They were satisfied with the more simple

f Gomara Cron. c. 170. 1. Diaz. c. 177. IIcrrcr:,
dec. 3. lil. viii. c.. 9. Sce NOTE VII.

I-Irrcllrn, dec. 4 5 pfflm.

method,

method, pratifed by the Indians, of warning B o o K
the earth carried down rivers and torrents from -_--
the mountains, and collecing the grains of 5:2.
native metal deposited there. The rich mines of
New Spain, which have poured forth their
treasures with such profusion on every quarter
of the globe, were not discovered for several
years after the conque t''. By that time, a more 155s, ac.
orderly government and police were intro-
duced into the colony; experience, derived
from former errors, had suggested many useful
and humane regulations for the protection and
preservation of the Indians; and though it then
became necessary to increase the number of those
employed in the mines, and they were engaged
in a species of labour more pernicious to the
human constitution, they suffered less hardship
or diminution than from the ill-judged, but le's
extensive, schemes of the first conquerors.

WHILE it was the lot of the Indians to susser, rhir po-

their new malters seem not to have derived any
considerable wealth from their ill-condluted
researches. According to the ufLual fate of first
settlers in new colonies, it was their lot to
encounter danger, and to truggle with dini-
ulties; the fruits of their vitories and toils

h .HcirrcIa, dlc. . lbw. x. c. 21.

were

B 0 K were reserved for times of tranquillity, and

-^_- reaped by successors of greater industry, but of
s52Z. inferior merit. The early historians of America

abound with accounts of the sufferings and of
the poverty of its conquerors '. In New Spain,
their condition was rendered more grievous by a
peculiar arrangement. When Charles V. advanced
Cortes to the government of that country, he at
the fame time appointed certain commissioners to
receive and adminifler the royal revenue there,
with independent jurifdiion k. These men,
chosen from inferior Itations in various depart-
ments of public business at Madrid, were so
much elevated with their promotion, that they
thought they were called to aft a part of the firfl
consequence. But being accustomed to the
minute formalities of office, and having con
traded the narrow ideas suited to the sphere in
which they had hitherto moved, they were
'5 4. altonithed, on arriving in lMexico, at the high

authority which Cortes exercised, and could not
conceive that the mode of administration, in a
country recently subdued and fettled, muff be
different from what took place in one where
tranquillity and regular government had been
long eftabliflhed. In their letters, they repre-
sented Cortes as an ambitious tyrant, who having

Cortes Rclat. 283. F. B. Diaz. c. 2c9.
k -lcrrera, dec. 3. lib.iv. c. 3.

usurped

usurped a jurisdiCtion superior to law, aspired at Bo O K
independence, and by his exorbitant wealth and _
extensive influence might accomplish those 1514.
disloyal schemes which he apparently meditated '.
These insinuations made such deep impression
upon the Spanish ministers, moti of whom had
been formed to business under the jealous and
rigid administration of Ferdinand, that, uninind.
ful of all Cortes's past services, and regardless
of what he was then suffering in conducting that
extraordinary expedition, in which he advanced
from the lake of Mexico to the western extre-
mities of Honduras", they infused the fame
suspicions into the mind of their maier, and
prevailed on him to order a solemn inquest to be
made into his conduEt, with powers to the
licentiate Ponce de Leon, entrufed with that
commiflion, to seize his person, if he should 525.
find that expedient, and fend him prisoner to
Spain .

THE sudden death of Ponce de Leon, a few Corc re.

days after his arrival in New Spain, prevented Spain.
the execution of this commilion. But as the
object of his appointment was known, the mind
of Cortes was deeply wounded with this unex-
peEted return for services, which far exceeded

Henrera, dec. 3. lib. v. c. 14. " Sc NOT1' VIII.
" I cllrcra,, dr. 3 ib. vIii{, . 14, 15.

whatever

B o K whatever any fulbje& of Spain had rendered to
L-a__ his sovereign. He endeavoured, however, to

'515. maintain his fRation, and to recover the confi-

dence of the court. But every person in office,
who had arrived from Spain since the conquest,
was a spy upon his conduct, and with malicious
ingenuity gave an unfavourable representation of
all his ations. The apprehensions of Charles
522. and his minifers increaled. A new commiflion

of inquiry was iued, with more extensive
powers, and various precautions were taken in
order to prevent or to punish him, if he should
be so presumptuous as to attempt what was
inconsistent with the fidelity of a subjet o.
Cortes beheld the approaching crisis of his
fortune with all the violent emotions natural to
a haughty mind, conscious of high desert, and
receiving unworthy treatment. But though
some of his desperate followers urged him to
assert his own rights againt his ungrateful
country, and with a bold hand to seize that
power which the courtiers meanly accused him
of coveting', he retained such felf.command,
or was auated with such sentiments of loyalty,
as to reject their dangerous counsels, and to

I-lrrcra, dec. 3. lib. viii. c. . e. cc. 4. lib. ii. c. .

lib. iv. c. 9j, o. Bi. Diaz. i;. G Ouara Cron .
c. 166.

P B. Diaz. c. 194.

c ,.u

chufe the only course in which he could secure n o o K
his own dignity, without departing from his L_
duty. He resolved not to expose himself to the 'i5'
ignominy of a trial, in that country which had
been the scene of his triumphs; but without
waiting for the arrival of his judges, to repair
directly to Castile, and commit himself and his
cause to thejuftice and generosity of his fove-
reign 1.

CORTES appeared in his native country with -,isrecep.

tionl there,

the splendour that suited. the conqueror of a
mighty kingdom. He brought with him a great
part of his wealth, many jewels and ornaments
of great value, several curious productions of
the country', and was attended by ibme Mexi-
cans of the first rank, as well as by the most
considerable of his own officers. His arrival in
Spain removed at once every suspicion and fear
that had been entertained with refpedt to his
intentions. The emperor, having now nothing
to apprehend from the designs of Cortes,
received him like a person whom consciousness
of his own innocence had brought into the
pretence of his master, and who was entitled, by
the eminence of his iervices, to the highcft
marks of diftindion and reifEt. The order

q Hcrrera, dec. 3. ib. iv. c. 8. See NOTE IX.
VOL. III. 11 of

I o O K of St. Jago, the title of Marquis del Valle de
L, , Guaxaca, the grant of an ample territory in

izS. New Spain, were fucceflively beflowed upon

himn; and as his manners were correct and
elegant, althou1(gh he had paied the greater par;r
of his lile amnong rou;h adventurers, the emperor
admitted him to the lame amiliar intercourIl
vith himfcif, that wvas ejoycd by noblemen of
the first ra,.,.

Sre:!·eir.t BUT, amid f those external proofs of regail,

cl .;'' .n 1 dmnptomnsofremaining dif:ruil appeared. Though
": '' ""' Corrcs earnefily solicited to be reinstated in the

government of New Spain, Charles, too saga..
cious to commit tfch an important charge to a
man whcm he had once fupeted, peremptorily
refued to invefl himi again with powers which
,.,. i he might find it impoilible to controul. Cortes,

though dignified with new titles, returned to
Mexico with diminifiled authority. The mili-
tary department, with powers to attempt new
difcovcrics, was left in his hands; but the
fuprelmeI diredtion of civil aflsairs was placed in a
board, called The/ Audlcncce of Ncrw Spain. At
a subsequent period, when, upon the increase of
tlh.e colony, the exertion of' authority more

1lcrrerax, dec. . l. i. c x. lib. vY. c. 4. B. I'i,1.'.
.. 196. Gur. Cron. . 2.

united

united and extensive became necefiary, Antonio o o K
de Mendoza, a nobleman of high rank, was sent V'
thither as Viceroy, to take the government into 's53-
his hands.

THIS division of power in New Spain proved, New

as was unavoidable, the source of perpetual otCrt.
dissention, which embittered the life of Cortes,
and thwarted all his schemes. As he had now
no opportunity to display his ative talents but in
attempting new discoveries, he formed various
schemes for that purpose, all of which bear
impreflions of a genius that delighted in what
was bold and splendid. He early entertained an
idea, that, either by steering through the gulf of
Florida along the east coast of North Ameica,
some firait would be found that communicated
with the western ocean; or that, by examining
the isthmus of Darien, some passage would be
discovered between the North and South Seas'.
But having been disappointed in his expectations
with refpet to both, he now confined his views
to such voyages of discovery as he could make
from the ports of New Spain in the South Sea.
There he fitted out fucceflively several finall
squadrons, which either periflied in the attempt,
or returned without making any difcovcry of

Cortcs Rclat. Ram. iii 294. B.

i 2 moment.

E O O K moment. Cortes, weary of entrusting the cone

v , duet of his operations to others, took the com-
l 26. mand of a new armament in person, and, after

enduring incredible hardilips, and encountering
dangers of every fpccies, he dilcovered the large
peninsula of California, and surveyed the greater
part of the gulf which eparates it from New
Spain. The discovery of a country of such
extent would have relleAted credit on a common
adventurer; but it could add little new honour
to the name of Cortes, and was far from satisfy-
ing the sanguine expectations which he had
formed . Disgusted with ill success, to which
he had not been accuflomed, and weary of con-
testing with adversaries to whom he confidered it
1540. as a disgrace to be opposed, he once more fought

for redress in his native country.
is (ti.cati. BUT his reception there was very different

from that which gratitude, and even decency,
ought to have secured for him. The merit of
his ancient exploits was already, in a great mca-
sure, forgotten, or eclipsed by the fame of
recent and more valuable conquests in another
quarter of America. No service of moment
was now expedted from a man of declining

" i[ lCI

' ,a, 'dec. 5. li. iii. . 10. (I9,

lo. dec. 8. Ill. v. c. i.
\ enmc as I lilt. ul 'C lifoJIn. i. 125. Lrcluzi;ina 1 ill. p. 322,

years,

years, and who began to be unfortunate. The B o K
emperor behaved to him with cold civility; his
mirifters treated him, sometimes with neglec, '50
sometimes with insolence. His grievances re-
ceived no redress; his claims were urged without
effe&E; and after several years spent in fruitless
application to miniftcrs and judges, an occupa-
tion the most irksome and mortifying to a man
of high spirit, who had moved in a sphere
where he was more accustomed to command
than to solicit, Cortes ended his days on the
second of December one thousand five hun-
dred and forty-feven, in the fixty-fecond
year of his age. His fate was the fame with
that of all the persons who difinguifhed them-
selves in the discovery or conquest of the New
World. Envied by his contemporaries, and ill
requited by the court which he served, he has
been admired and celebrated by succeeding ages.
Which has formed the molt just eflimate of his
characer, an impartial consideration of his
aaions must determine.

3

# THE HISTORY OF AMERICA. BOOK VI.

T 11.

THO
HISTORY

OF
A M E R I C A.

BOOK VI.
nROM the time that Nugnez de Balboa disco- C 0 ° K

vered the great Southern Ocean, and ---

received the firfi olfcure hints concerning the Is*
opulent countries swih ich it might open a ':i '"ti'"
comnmunicaion, the vwihes and fclleiiles of every
enterpriling perfort in the colonies of I)arien
and Panama were turned towards the wealth of
those unknowvn regions. In an age when the
'pirit of acniLurle \w;'s o1; arden't and vi oro(ls,
that large fortunes were watled, and tie nmo
alarming danig(,,r:s braved, in purflit of diico-
veries merely pollible, the faintct ray of hope
was followed with an cager cxpctlation, and the
slightest infornmaion 'was uflnicit to inrpire such

1 4 perltct

B o K perse& confidence, as conducted men to the

vI.

H_^ _ most arduous undertakings a

Unfucccfi- ACCORDINGLY, several armaments were
ful fcr omen
time. fitted out in order to explore and take possession

of the countries to the east of Panama, but
under the condud of leaders whose talents and
resources were unequal to the attempt b. As the
excursions of those adventurers did not extend
beyond the limits of the province to which the
Spaniards have given the name of Tierra Firmc,
a mountainous region covered with woods,
thinly inhabited, and extremely unhealthy, they
returned with dismal accounts concerning the
distresses to which they had been exposed, and
the unpromising aspet of the places which they
had visited. Damped by these tidings, the rage
for discovery in that direEtion abated; and it
became the general opinion, that Balboa had
founded visionary hopes, on the tale of an
ignorant Indian, ill understood, or calculated to
deceive.

154. BUT there were three persons fettled in Pa-
[ ilIlc t.

11

by izano, nama, on whom the circumstances which
and Lu(q.c. deterred others made so little impression, that at

Scc NOTE X. b Calincha Coroiiica, p. 10o.

the

the very moment when all confidered Balboa's n o o K

VI.

expecations of discovering a rich country, by _ _
fleering towards the east, as chimerical, they '154.
resolved to attempt the execution of his scheme.
The names of those extraordinary men were
Francisco Pizarro, Diego de Almagro, and
Hernando Luque. Pizarro was the natural obn
of a gentleman of an honourable family by a
very low woman, and, according to the cruel
fate which often attends the offspring of unlawful
love, had been so totally ncglected in his youth
by the author of his birth, that he seems to
have destined him never to rife beyond the
condition of his mother. In consequence of this
ungenerous idea, he set him, when bordering
on manhood, to keep hogs. But the aspiring
mind of young Pizarro disdaining that ignoble
occupation, he abruptly abandoned his charge,
enlisted as a soldier, and, after serving some
years in Italy, embarked for America, which,
by opening such a boundless range to active
talents, allured every adventurer whose fortune
was not equal to his ambitious thoughts. There
Pizarro early diflinguiflled himlfelf. With a
temper of mind no less daring than the coniti-
tution of his body was robust, he was foremolt
in every danger, palicnt under the grealenf
hardships, and unifubducd( by any fhtigue.
1Though lb illiterate that he could not even read,

he

B 0O0 K le was soon confidered as a man formed to cornm

VI.
_--^-- mand. Every operation committed to his conduct

14 proved successful, as, by a happy but rare con-

juntion, he united perseverance with ardour,
and was as cautious in executing, as he was bold
in forming his plans. By engaging early in
acive life, without any rcfource but his own
talents and indultry, and by depending on him.
ielf alone in his firuggles to emerge firom
obscurity, he acquired such a thorough know-
ledge of allairs, and of men, that he was fitted to
affumne a flperior part in conduding the former,
and in governing the latterc.

AlMACRRo had as little to boas of his descent

as Pizarro. The one was a bafltrd, the other a
foundling. Bred, like his companion, in the
camp, he yielded not to him in any of the
soldierly qualities of intrepid valour, indefatigable
acivity, or inlurnountable conflancy in endur-
ing the hardships inseparable from military
service in the New Wrorld. But in Almagro
these virtues were accompanied with the open-
nels, generosity, and candour, natural to men
whose profeflion is arnms; in Pizarro, they were
united with the address, the craft, and the

C IleTrrIn, dec i & 2, paltnim. dec. . lib. vi. c. 107.
Gomara Ilill. . 144. Zaratc, lib. iv. c. 9.

di ninuul;l ion

difiniulation of a politician, with the art of con- B 00 K
cealing his own purposes, and with sagacity -_
to penetrate into those of other men. 324

HERNANDO DE L;QUE was an ecclefialic,

who acted both as priest and fchoolnafter at
Panama, and, by means which the contemporary
writers have not efcribed, had amassed riches
that inspired him with thoughts of rising to
greater eminence.

SucH were the men destined to overturn one Termsof

their alTloi-

of the most extensive empires on the face of the ation.
earth. Their confederacy for this purpose was
authorised by Pedrarias, the governor of Panama.
Each engaged to employ his whole fortune in
the adventure. Pizarro, the lealft wealthy of the
three, as he could not throw so large a fum
as his associates into the common stock, engaged
to take the department of greatelt fatigue and
danger, and to command in person the arnament
vhich was to go first upon discovery. Almngro
oltered to conduc: the upplics of proviCions and
reinforcements of troops, of which Pizarro n:ight
htand in need. ILuque was to remain at Panalia
to negociate with the governor, and fupcriiitcnd
whatever was carrying on for the general intcrcll.
As the fl)irit of enthulialin uniforinly accoin-
paiicd that of adventure in lhe New World, aid

by

B o o K by that strange union both acquired an increase
_ ..L_ of force, this confederacy, formed by ambition
J524' and avarice, was confirmed by the most solemn

a& of religion. Luque celebrated mass, divided
a consecrated hofl into three, and reserving one
part to himfclf, gave the other two to his
associates, of which they partook; and thus, in
the name of the Prince of Peace, ratified a
contrac of which plunder and bloodshed were
the objects '.

Their frft T-E attempt was begun with a force more
attempt suited to the humble condition of the three

associates, than to the greatness of the enterprise
Nov. 14. in which they were engaged. Pizarro set fail

from Panama with a single vessel, of small
burden, and a hundred and twelve men. But
in that age, so little were the Spaniards acquainted
with the peculiarities of climate in America, that
the time which Pizarro chose for his departure
was the most improper in the whole year;
the periodical winds, which were then set in,
being diredly adverse to the course which he
purposed to flter . After beating about for
seventy days, with much danger and incessant
fatigue, Pizarro's progress towards the south-east

,I Herrira, tic. 3. lit. vi. c. 13. Zaratc, lib. i. c. I.

1 lIcrrtra, dec. b. lib. ii. c. 8. Xcrcz, p. 179.

W;1 ;

was not greater than what a skilful navigator will r: oo K
now make in as many hours. He touched at _"
several places on the coast of Tierra Firme, but 155
found everywhere the fame uninviting country
which former adventurers had described; the
low grounds converted into swamps by an over-
flowing of rivers; the higher, covered with
impervious woods; few inhabitants, and those
fierce and hofile. Famine, fatigue, frequent
rencounters with the natives, and above all, the
distempers of a moist, sultry climate, combined
in wafting his slender band of followers. The Attcnded

ith little

undaunted resolution of their leader continued, ficccfa.
however, for some time, to sustain their spirits,
although no sign had yet appeared of discovering
those golden regions to which he had promised to
conduEt them. At length he was obliged to
abandon that inhofpirable coafr, and retire to
Chuchama, opposite to the pearl islands, where
he hoped to receive a supply of provisions and
troops from +anama.

BUT Almagro having failed from that port

with seventy men, flood directly towards that
part of the continent where he hoped to meet
with his afibciate. Not finding him there,
he landed his foldicrs, who, in fiarching for
their companions, underwent the fame diflrcfles,
and were exposed to the iarme dlangers, which

had

B 0 0 K had driven them out of the country. Repulsed

VI.
._._ at length by the Indians in a harp conflit, in
J525- which their leader loft one of his eyes by the

wound of an arrow, they likewise were compelled
to reimbark. Chance led them to the place of
Pizarro's retreat, where they found omen confola.
tion in recounting to each other their adventures,
Junc 4. and comparing their fuifferings. As Almagro

had advanced as far as the river St. Juan, in the
province of Popayan, where both the country
and inhabitants appeared with a more promising
afpe&, that dawn of better fortune was sufficient
to determine such sanguine projectors not to
abandon their scheme, notwithstanding all that
they had suffered in prosecuting it .

.S26. ALMAGRO repaired to Panama, in hopes of

They re-
tnie i tie recruiting their shattered troops. But what he
mltdclt ak-
ing. and Pizarro had suffered, gave his countrymen

such an unfavourable idea of the service, that it
was with difficulty he could levy fourscore men g
Feeble as this reinforcement was, Almagro took
the command of it, and having joined Pizarro,
they did not hesitate about resuming their
operations. After a long series of disasters and
disappointments, not inferior to those which they

f- errera, dec. 3. lib. viii. c. , 12. See NOTE X.
g Zarate, lib. i. c. i.

had

had already experienced, part of the armament n o oK
reached the Bay of St. Matthew, on the coast of _
Quito, and landing at Tacamez, to the Ibuth of ]526
the river of Emeraulds, they beheld a country
more champaign and fertile than any they had
yet discovered in the Southern Ocean, the
natives clad in garments of woollen or cotton
stuff, and adorned with ieveral trinkets of gold
and silver.

BUT, notwithstanding those favourable appear-

ances, magnified beyond the truth, both by the
vanity of the persons who brought the report
from Tacamez, and by the fond imagination of
those who listened to them, Pizarro and Almagro
durst not venture to invade a country so populous
with a handful of men enfeebled by fatigue and
diseases. They retired to the finall iland of
Gallo, where Pizarro remained with part of the
troops, and lhis associate returned to Panama, in
hopes of bringing such a reinforcement as might
enable them to take pofieflion of the opulent
territories, whose existence feerned to be no
longer doubtful

BUT some of the adventurers, less enterprising, Pi;.rro r-
or less hardy than their leaders, having secretly ;,o.vLtoy.t

b Xercr, i8r. JIrrcra, dec. 3. lib. viii . 13.

conveyed

B o o K conveyed lamentable accounts of their lfferings

Vt'' and loses to their friends at Panama, Almagro
1526. iet with an unfavourable reception from Pedro

de los Rios, who had succeeded Pedrarias in the
government of that settlement. After weighing
the matter with that cold ceconomical prudence
which :ppears the first of all virtues to persons
whose limited faculties are incapable of conceiv.
ing or executing great designs. he concluded an
expedition, attended with fich certain wafle of
men, to be so detrimental to an infant and feeble
colony, that he not only prohibited the raising of
new levies, but dispatched a vcllel to bring home
Pizarro and his companions from the island
of G;illo. Almagro and Luque, though deeply
affected v'ith those measures, which they could
not prevent, and durst not oppose, found means
of com)mt;nicating their sentiments privately to
Pizarro, and exhorted him not to relinquifll
an enturprile that was the foundation of all their
hopes, and the only means of re-establishing
their reputation and fortune, which were both
on the decline. Pizarro's mind, bent with
inflexible obflinacy on all its purposes, needed

Perfil it, no incentive to persist in the fclenme. lie
his dcfis. peremptorily refuled to obey the governor of

Panama's orders, and employed all his addtcls
and eloquence in perfi;ading his men not to
abandon him. Butt the incredile calamities

to

to which they had been exposed were still so B o O K
recent in their memories, and the thoughts 1---v
of revisiting their families and friends after a I1z '
long absence, rushed with such joy into their
minds, that when Pizarro drew a line upon the
sand with his sword, permitting such as wished to
return home to pass over it, only thirteen of all
the daring veterans in his service had resolution
to remain with their commander '.

Ti-us small, but determined band, whose

names the Spanish historians record with deserved
praise, as the persons to whose persevering forti-
tude their country is indebted for the moil
valuable of all its American possessions, fixed
their residence in the island of Gorgona. This,
as it was farther removed from the coast than
Gallo, and uninhabited, they confidered as a
more secure retreat, where, unmolested, they
might wait for supplies from Panama, which they
{rusted that the aivity of their aflbciates would
be able to procure. Almagro and Luque were
not inattentive or cold solicitors, and their
;iicefiant importunity was seconded by the
general voice of the colony, which exclaimed
loudly againll the infamy of exposing brave'

i llrinera, dec. 3. lib. x. c. 2, 3. Zarate, lib. i. c. 2.
tr.cz, 18i. Gmuaa Hillt c. 109.
VL. III. l men,

! 0 K men, engaged in the public fervicc, aiul

VI.
,_._, chargeable with no error but what Ilowed froi

5'6. an excess of zeal and courage, to perish like ilt

moilf odious criminals in a desert island. Over.
come by thole entreaties and expostulations, the
governor at last concented to fend a fmiall veflel
to their relief. But that he might not seem
to encourage Pizarro to any new enterprise, he
would not permit one landman to embark on
board of it.

T.il B13Y this time, Pizarro and his companions had
I!e cnd.;rcd.

remained five months in an island, infamous for
the moil unhealthy climate in that region of
America`. During all this period, their eyes
were turned towards Panama, in hopes of
succour from their countrymen; but worn out
at length with fruitless expeetations, and dispirited
with ullering hardflips of which they saw no
end, they, in delpair, came to a resolution of
committing thenifelvcs to the ocean on a float,
rather than continue in that deteflable abode.
But, on the arrival of the vessel from Panam;a,
they were ranfported with such joy, that all
thtir fIul' lilgs were forgotten. Their hopes
revived, and, with a rapid transition, not un-
;i;itlur;l among men ac cu floncd by their imoi:

k ';.. N1'OTE X.

of

of life to sudden viciflitudes of fortune, high B 0 O K
confidence succeeding to extreme dejeftion, -v
Pizarro easily induced not only his own followers, 1526.
hut the crew of the veflel from Panama, to
refunie his former fchene with frefl ardour.
Inflead of returning to Panama, they flood
iowards the south-east, and more fortunate in
this than in any of their past efforts, they, on
the twentiethl day after their departure from
Gorgona, discovered the coast of Peru. After Difcocrs
touching at several villages near the shore, which l'ru.
they found to be no wife inviting, they landed
it Tumbez, a place of ome note, about three
degrees south of the line, diflinguifhed for its
stately temple, and a palace of the Incas or
sovereigns of the country'. There the Spaniards
feasted their eyes with the first view of the
opulence and civilization of the Peruvian empire.
They beheld a country fully peopled, and culti-
vated with an appearance of regular industry;
the natives decently clothed, and poflbseCd of
ingenuity fb far furpafling the other inhabitants
of the New World, as to have the use of tame
lonmeftic animals. But what chiefly attractcd
Ihcir notice, was fucli a flhow of gold and silver,
not only in the ornaments of their pcrfons and
liniplcs, but in several vessels and utensils

I Calancha, p. 103.

2 for

B3 0 K for common use, formed of those preciou

VI. ;__ metals, as left no room to doubt that tllhe
1 26. abounded with profusion in the country. Pizarro

and his companions seemed now to have attained
to the completion of their most sanguine hopes,
and fancied that all their wishes and dreams
of rich domains, and inexhaustible treasures,
would soon be realized.
Rclins to BuTr with the flendcr force then under is

conmmand, Pizarro could only view the rici
country of which lie hoped hereafter to obtain
poffefion. IHe ranged, however, for ome tinii
along the coast, maintaining everywhere a
peaceable intercourse with the natives, no less
aflonifled at their new visitants, than the
Spaniards were with the uniform appearance
of opulence and cultivation which they beheld.
;5-. Having explored the country as far as w;

requisite to ascertain the importance of the dil:
covery, Pizarro procured from the inhabitanl;
some of their Llamas or tame cattle, to which
the Spaniards gave the name of flheep, some
vecels of gold and silver, as well as fonc
tpicciniens of their other works of ingenuity, and
two young men, whom he proposed to inflrudl
in the Catilian language, that they might lr\sc
as interpreters in the expedition which he mcdi-
tated. With tlie: lie arrived at l'anama, towarld

i, ,

the close of the third year from the time of B o K

VI.

his departure thence m. No adventurer of the v j
age suffered hardhips or encountered dangers '517.
which equal those to which he was exposed
during this long period. The patience with
which he endured the one, and the fortitude
with which he surmounted the other, exceed
whatever is recorded in the history of the New
World, where so many romantic displays of
those virtues occur.

NEITHER the splendid relation that Pizarro s.

jave of the incredible opulence of the country fcll liTs
which he had discovered, nor his bitter corn- oiatlT.
plaints on account of that unseasonable recal of
his forces, which had put it out of his power to
attempt making any settlement there, could
move the governor of Panama to swerve from
his former plan of conduct. IIc Itill contended,
that the colony was not in a condition to invade
such a mighty empire, and reffed to authorise
an expedition which he forefawv would be so
alluring that it might ruin the province in which
he presided, by an effort beyond its strength.
His coldness, however, did not in any degree

m l irricra, dec. 3. lib. x. c. 3- i, (Icc. c lib. ii. c.. 7,8.

Vcg;, 2. lib. i. C. 10--14. Z:1i tic, lib. i. c. 2. Ii/o
Ililt Novi Orbis, lib. iii. c. I.

i 3 aba e

B O O K abate the ardour of the three aflbciates; Lb

w._^j they perceived that they could not carry bci:
1528. scheme into execution without the counten;:n/-:

of superior authority, and must solicit their
sovereign to grant that permission which the'-
could not extort from his delegate. With thi;
view, after adjusting among themnlelves, ti::,
Pizarro ihould claim the tation of gove!rnor,
Almagro that of lieutenant-governor, and Luqii
the dignity of bishop in the country which thcy
purposed to conquer, they sent Pizarro as their
agent to Spain, though their fortunes were no,
so much exhaufled by the repeated efforts whichi
they had made, that they found ome difficulh
in borrowing the fnall fum requisite toward,
equipping him for the voyage

Pizarro rent PIZARRO loft no time in repairing to court,
to Spain to
negociate. and new as the scene might be to him, he

appeared before the emperor with the unem-
barraffed dignity of a man conscious of what his
services merited; and he conducted his nego-
ciations with an insinuating dexterity of addrc,
which could not have been expetled either Ironi
his education or former habits of life. H-is
feeling description of his own fuflerings, and his
pompous account of the country which he hal

Herrera, dec. 4. lib. iii. c. i. Vegr;2. lIb. i . 14.

dilcovcrcd,

discovered, confirmed by the specimens of its B K.

VIe

productions which he exhibited, made iuch an
impreflion both on Charles and his miniflers, 'S-.
that they not only approved of the intended
expedition, but seemed to be interested in the
success of its leader. Presuming on thole difpo-
fitions in his favour, Pizarro paid little attention
to the interest of his aflbciates. As the preten- N-l;l, !.
sions of Luque did not interfere with his own,
he obtained for him the ecclesiastical dignity to
which he aspired. For Alinagro, he claimed
only the command of the fortress which should
be erected at Tumibez. To himself lhe secured
whatever his boundlels ambition could desire.
lie was appointed governor, captain-general, I,i 26
and adelantado of all the country which he had a' P"-
discovered, and hoped to conquer, with supreme f'i.:il'-
authority, civil as well as military; and vwith iu.,n;;
full right to all the privileges and enmoluments
uliially granted to adventurers in the New
W\orld. I-lis jurildidion was declared to extend
two hundred leagues along the coast to the
south of the river St. Jago ; to be independent
of the governor of Panama ; and lie lad power
to nominate all the oflicers who were I to rv;
under himn. In return or tllof! ciictiios,
which colt the court of Spain iiliinl, as 1the
eLnjoylment of tem lldecl endd tpjuin 1li lc fI'clIs )l'

I I P Ii/.iir , '-.

B OO K Pizarro's own efforts, he engaged to raise two
_--, hundred and fifty men, and to provide the
1528. Ihips, arms, and warlike flores requisite towards

fubjeding to the crown of Castile the country
of which the government was allotted him.

Slender INCONSIDERABLE as the body of men was
force he was
able to raise. which Pizarro had undertaken to raise, his

J529. funds and credit were so low that he could

hardly complete half the number; and after
obtaining his patents from the crown, he was
obliged to steal privately out of the port of
Seville, in order to elude the scrutiny of the
officers who had it in charge to examine,
whether he had fulfilled the stipulations in his
contrat °. Before his departure, however, he
received some supply of money from Cortes, who
having returned to Spain about this time, was
willing to contribute his aid towards enabling an
ancient companion, with whose talents and
courage he was well acquainted, to begin a
career of glory similar to that which he himlflf
had finished P.

IIE landed at Nombre de Dios, and marched

across the isthmus to Panama, accompanied by
his three brothers, Ferdinand, Juan, and Gonzalo,
* Hcrlera, dec. 4. lib. vii. c. 9. P Ibid. lib. vii, c. io.

of

of whom the first was born in lawful wedlock, B O K
the two latter, like himself, were of illegitimate _
birth, and by Francisco de Alcantara, his mother's 1529'
brother. They were all in the prime of life, and
of such abilities and courage, as fitted them to
take a distinguished part in his subsequent tranf-
aEtions.

ON his arrival at Panama, Pizarro found '5i .

-His recon.
Almagro so much exasperated at the manner in Liition

with Al-

which he had conducted his negociation, that he masro.
not only refused to a any longer in concert
with a man by whose perfidy he had been
excluded from the power and honours to which
he had a just claim, but laboured to form a new
afrociation, in order to thwart or to rival his
former confederate in his discoveries. Pizarro,
however, had more wisdom and address than to
susser a rupture so fatal to all his schemes, to
become irreparable. By offering voluntarily to
relinquifl the office of adelantado, and pro-
nifing to concur in soliciting that title, with an
independent government, for Almagro, he
gradually mitigated the rage of an open-hearted
soldier, which had been violent, but was not
implacable. Luque, highly latisfied with having
been successful in all his own prctenfiois,
cordially seconded Pizarro's endeavours. A
reconciliation was cflececd, and the confdec-

i lk y

B oI. racy renewed on its original terms, that t:
,--_c entcrprize hould be carried on at the coim11lon
'53^ expence of the associates, and the profits accru.

ing from it Iliould be equally divided aol::
them''.
'Tti;ra:n'm- I\'IN after their re-union, and the utmotl

l. cfoirts of their interest, three finall vessels, ith

a hundred and eighty soldiers, thirty-fix of whom
were horlfcen, composed the armament which
they were able to fit out. But the aftonifliin
progrcfs of the Spaniards in America had inspircd
then with such ideas of their own fupcrioritv,
that Pizarro did not hesitate to fail with this
FstrL.y. contemptible force to invade a great empic,

Almagro was left at'Panama,as formerly, to follorw
him with what reinforcement of men he fliould
be able to muster. As the season for embarkin

,

was properly chosen, and the course of navi.
gation between Panama and Peru was now
better known, Pizarro completed the voyage in
thirteen days; though, by the force of tli
winds and currents, he was carried above a
hundred leagues to the north of' Tumlbez, th

lan< in place of his deflination, and obliged to land his
1'cru. troops in the bay of St. Matthew. Without

I HIC-erl- , dce. .

4 lib. vii. c. 9. Z ralc, lib. i. c. 3.
Vega; , 2. lil, i. . ' 4

|l~;lrr

ofing a moment, he began to advance towards B 0 o KI
the south, taking care, however, not to depart - -
far from the fea-Ihorc, both that he might easily, ',3'
til:ct a junction with the supplies which he
cxpeced finom Panama, and clcure a retreat in
cafe of any disaster, by keeping as near as
pollible to his ships. But as the country in
fciveral parts on the coast of Peru is barren,
unhcalhful, and thinly peopled; as the Spa-
niards had to pass all the rivers near their mouth,
where the body of water is greatelct, and as the
imprudence of Pizarro, in attacking the natives
when he should have studied to gain their confi-
dence, had forced them to abandon their habit-
ations ; famine, fatigue, and diseases of various
kinds, brought upon him and his lollowers
calamities hardly inferior to thof which they had
endured in their former expedition. What they
now experienced correfpolnded to ill with the
alluring description of the country given by
Pizarro, that many began to reproach him, and
every foldicr inufl have become cold to the
service, if even in this unfertile region of Peru
they had not met wilth tome appearances of
wvalth and cultivation, which 'crlned to juilify
the report of their leader. At length they ,pi,; .
reached the province of Coaque; and, having
flurpriled the principal ltttleinct of the natives,
they lzized tl.i vl:ls and orinalnclts of gold

and

B o o K and silver, to the amount of thirty thousand
,--^, pesos, with other booty of such value, as dispelled

's,' all their doubts, and inspired the most despond.

ing with sanguine hopes r.

Iis nica- PIZARRO himself was so much delighted with
I eli t or
obtaining this rich spoil, which he confidered as the firi.
a rtinf s'cc-

.ilcnt. fruits of a land abounding with treasure, that he

instantly dispatched one of his ships to Panama
with a large remittance to Almagro; and another
to Nicaragua with a considerable fum to several
persons of influence in that province, in hopes
of alluring adventurers, by this early display of
the wealth which he had acquired. Meanwhile,
he continued his march along the coast, and
disdaining to employ any means of reducing the
natives but force, he attacked them with such vio.
lence in their scattered habitations, as compelled
them either to retire into the interior country,
or to submit to his yoke. This sudden appear-
ance of invaders, whose aspea and manners wcre
io strange, and whose power seemed to be b
irresistible, made the fame dreadful impreflion as
in other parts of America. Pizarro hardly met
with resistance until he attacked the island of
Puna in the bay of Guayquil. As that as
better peopled than the country through which

' IIcrcra, dec. 4. lil,. vii. c. 9, lib. ii. c . X X c; I.q

he had passed, and its inhabitants fiercer and B o o K
less civilized than those of the continent, they ,_,
defended themselves with such obstinate valour, 1531.
that Pizarro spent fix months in reducing them
to fubjecion. From Puna he proceeded to
Tumbez, where the distempers which raged
among his men compelled him to remain for
three months .

\iWHILE lie was thus employed, he began to

reap advantage from his attention to spread the
fame of his firfi success at Coaque. Two differ- Rcceir;

fom, and

ent detachments arrived from Nicaragua, which, conrt,,,u,,c
though neither exceeded thirty men, he confi- 'vac
dered as a reinforcement of great consequence
to his feeble band, epecially as the one was
under the command of Sebastian Benalcazar, i.;-
and the other of Hernando Soto, officers not
inferior in merit and reputation to any who had
served in America. From Tumbez he proceeded M;.y 6,
to the river Piura, and in an advantageous
station near the mouth of it, he eftablilhcd the
firfl Spanish colony in Peru to which he gave
the name of St. Michael.

s P. Sancho ap. Raifnl. iii. p. 37r. F. I Icrciia,

ic. 4. lib. vii. c. IS. lib. Ix. a.

I. Zaiatc, lib. ii. c 2, 3.
Xercs, p. 1 t2, &c.

A:

B K
0 . As Pizarro continued to advance towards the

vr. t.__,- centre of the Peruvian empire, he gradually

53 3Z received more full information concerning its

extent and policy, as well as the situation of its
affairs at that juncture. Without some know.
ledge of thef, he could nottave conducted his
operations with propriety; and without a suit-
able attention to them, it is impossible to account
for the progress which the Spaniards had already
made, or to unfold the causes of their fubfe.
quent fcccfs.

State of tie AT the time when the Spaniards invaded
Peluvidri
tmpil. Peru, the dominions of its sovereigns extended

in length, from north to south, above fifteen
hundred miles along the Pacific Ocean. It,:
breadth, from east to vwelt, was much less con-
fiderable; being uniformly bounded by the vast
ridge of the Andes, firetching from its one
extremity to the other. Peru, like the reft of
the New World, was originally possessed by finall
independent tribes, differing from each other in
manners, and in their forms of rude policy.
All, however, were so little civilized, that, if
the traditions concerning their mode of life,
prelerrved among their defeendants, defre
credit, they nmuft be classed among the mofl:
unimproved il.iv;gcs of America. Strangers to

cvciy

every species of cultivation or regular induflry, 0O K
without any fixed residence, and unacquainted ,__,
with those sentiments and obligations which '53'
form the first bonds of social union, they are
Laid to have roamed about naked in the soress,
with which the country was then covered, more
like wild bearts than like men. After they had
Itruggled for several ages with the hardflips
and calamities which are inevitable in fiich a
date, and when no circumstance feemned to
indicate the approach of any uncommon effort
towards improvement, we are told that there
appeared, on the banks of the lake Titiaca, a
man and woman of najeftic form, and clothed
in decent garments. They declared themselves
to be children of the Sun, ent by their bene-
ficent parent, who beheld with pity the miseries
of the human race, to inftru: and to reclaimn
them. At their persuasion, enforced by reve-
rence for the divinity in whlofe name they were
supposed to speak, several of the dispersed
savages united together, and receiving their
commands as heavenly iiijuncions, followed
them to Cuzco, where they fettled, and beganl
to lay the foundations of a city.

MA NCo CPAC' and Malma Ocollo, for fucll
M Ll tl c names of [l:ole cxtraordinary pcrfTI-

n, ''.,

Bo o K ages, having thus collected some wandering

tribes, formed that social union, which, by mul.
i53^2 tiplying the desires, and uniting the efforts of

the human species, excites industry, and leads to
improvement. Manco Capac inftruded the
men in agriculture, and other useful arts.
Mama Ocollo taught the women to spin and to
weave. By the labour of the one sex, fubfiftl
ence became less precarious; by that of the
other, life was rendered more comfortable.
After securing the objects of first necessity in an
infant state, by providing food, raiment, and
habitations, for the rude people of whom he
took charge, Manco Capac turned his attention
towards introducing such laws and policy as
might perpetuate their happiness. By his infti-
tutions, which hall be more particularly explained
hereafter, the various relations in private life
were established, and the duties resulting from
them prescribed with such propriety, as gradu-
ally formed a barbarous people to decency of
manners. In public administration, the func-
- tions of persons in authority were so precisely
defined, and the fulbordination of those under
their jurildiclion maintained with such a feiady
hand, that the society in which he presidcd,
toon aumed the afpest of a regular and well-
governed Itate.

TI u,

THUS, according to the Indian tradition, was B 0 K

founded the empire of the Incas or Lords of -
Peru. At first its extent was small. The 1532'
territory of Man~6 Capac did not reach above
eight leagues from Cuzco. But within its
narrow precincts he exercised absolute and uncon-
trolled authority. His successors, as their domi-
nions extended, arrogated a similar jurifdition
over the new fubjeCfs which they acquired; the
despotism of Asia was not more complete. The
Incas were not only obeyed as monarchs, but
revered as divinities. Their blood was held to
be sacred, and, by prohibiting intermarriages
with the people, was never contaminated by
mixing with that of any other race. The family,
thus separated from the reft of the nation, was
distinguished by peculiarities in dress and orna-
ments, which it was unlawful for others to
assume. The monarch himself appeared with
ensigns of royalty reserved for him alone; and
received from his fubjets marks of obsequious
homage and refpet, which approached almost to
adoration.

BUT, among the Peruvians, this unbounded

power of their monarchs teems to have been
uniformly accompanied with attention to the
good of their flbjeds. It was not the rage
of conquest, if we may believe the accounts

Vol . . of

B 0 0 K of their countrymen, that prompted the Incas to

VI.

extend their dominnions, but the desire of diffusing
'532 the blcfings of civilization, and the knowledge

of the arts which they possessed, among the
barbarous people whom they reduced. During
a succession of twelve monarchs, it is said that
not one deviated from this beneficent character'.

WHIEN the Spaniards first visited the coast of

Peru, in the year one thousand five hundred and
twenty-fix, Huana Capac, the twelfth monarch
from the founder of the state, was feated on the
throne. He is represented as a prince diftin.
guifhed not only for the pacific virtues peculiar
to the race, but eminent for his martial talents.
By his vicorious arms the kingdom of Quito was
subjected, a conquest of such extent and im.
portance as almost doubled the power of the
Peruvian empire. He was fond of residing
in the capital of that valuable province, which
he had added to his dominions; and, notwith.
Itanding the ancient and fundamental law of the
monarchy againfl polluting the royal blood by
any foreign alliance, he married the daughter of
the vanquished monarch of Quito. She bore
him a on named Atahualpa, whom, on ii

t Ciccn de ,con, Cllron. c. 44, lerrcera, dec. 3. lib.

:. c:. 5. it. i ii. c
. 17.

dcalth

death at Quito, which seems to have happened o o K

vI.

about the year one thousand five hundred and -
twenty-nine, he appointed his fucceffdr in that '532
kingdom, leaving the reft of his dominions to
Hluafcar, his eldet son, by a mother of the royal
race. Greatly as the Peruvians revered the
memory of a monarch who had reigned with
greater reputation and splendour than any
of his predecessors, the destination of Huana
Capac concerning the succession, appeared so
repugnant to a maxim coeval with the empire,
and founded on authority deemed sacred, that it
was so sooner known at Cuzco than it excited
general difguf. Encouraged by those sentiments
of his fubjedcs,. Iuafcar required his brother to
renounce the government of (Quito, and to
acknowledge him as his lawful superior. But it
had been the first care of Atahualpa to gain
a large body of troops which had accompanied
his father to Quito. Thcfe were the flower
of the Peruvian v ariors, to whole valour
Iluana Cpac had ;cln indebted for all hi.
vi(ories. Rel)ing on their support, Atahualpa
silt eluded his brother's demand, and then
marched againll him in hoflile array.

Timis the ambition of two young men, the

litlc of the one folllundc on aicient ul'age, and
liat of the oheir afrertted by the veteran troops,

Ki 2 involvcd

B o o K involved Peru in civil war, a calamity to which,

VI.

under a fuccefiion of virtuous princes, it had
J532. hitherto been a stranger. In such a contest the

issue was obvious. The force of arms triumphed
over the authority of laws. Atahualpa remained
victorious, and made a cruel ufc of his viEtory.
Conscious of the defect in his own title to
the crown, he attempted to exterminate the royal
race, by putting to death all the children of the
Sun descended from Manco Capac, whom he
could seize either by force or fratagem. From
a political motive, the life of his unfortunate
rival Huafcar, who had been taken prisoner in a
battle which decided the fate of the empire, was
prolonged for some time, that, by issuing orders
in his name, the usurper might more easily
eflablifli his own authority ".

I.:l;o.lu. . WHEN Pizarro landed in the bay of St. M.
gore, ol thew, this civil war raged between the two
"t:nII. brothers in its greatest fury. Had he made any

hostile attempt in his former visit to Peru in the
year one thousand five hundred and twenty-
seven, he must then have enconntered the force
of a powcrful slate, united under a monarch.
pofl'lec of capacity as well as courage, and

Zaratc, till. i. c. 15. Vcga, I. lib. ix. c. 12 and 32---
40. H-Icrrcla;, dec. 5. lib. i. c. 2. lib. iii. c. 17.

tllIl.ll-

unembarraffed with any care that could divert g3 0 K

Vi.

him from opposing his progress. But at this
time, the two competitors, though they received '3s'
early accounts of the arrival and violent proceed-
ings of the Spaniards, were so intent upon the
operations of a war, which they deemed more
interesting, that they paid no attention to the
motions of an enemy, too inconsiderable in
number to excite any great alarm, and to whom,
it would be easy, as they imagined, to give
a check when more at leisure.

BY this fortunate coincidence of events, Ie aA;i

himrei of

whereof ?izarro could have no foresight, and of i ad, ,.

. l,.

which, from his defective mode of intercourse '"1'"'
with the people of the country, he remained
long ignorant, he was permitted to carry on his
operations unmolested, and advanced to the
centre of a great empire before one eflort of its
power was exerted to flop his career. During
their progrcfs, the Spaniards had acquired ome
iiiperfc knowledge of this frllle between
the two contending fictions. The firit comp!lc
information with reliect to it, they receivcd
from ineffengers whom Iluafcar sent to Pizarro,
in order to solicit his aid ag;:inf Atahtihll:a,
whom he reprcenited as a rebel and an tufurpcr w

v Za;r;it, li ii. c. ,

IK Piz.arro

B 0 0 K Pizarro perceived at once the importance of thi

vi.
t_-_-.j intelligence, and foresaw so clearly all the advan.

1532. tages which might be derived from this dividcd

state of the kingdom, which he had invaded,
that, without waiting for the rinforceme t
which he expected from Panama, he determincd
to pufli forward, while intefline discord put it
out of the power of the Peruvians to attack iii
with their whole force, and while, by taking
part, as circumstances should incline him, wi!i
one of the competitors, he might be enahled
with greater ease to crush both. Enterprisings a
the Spaniards of that age were in all their opera-
tions againit Americans, and diflinguifhcd as
Pizarro was among his countrymen for daring
courage, we can hardly suppose, that after h.iving
proceeded hitherto slowly, and with much cau-
tion, he would have changed at once his systen
of operation, and have ventured upon a mea-
sure so hazardous, without ome new motive or
propeEt to justify it.

State of iis As he was obliged to divide his troops,
foc'C"' in order to leave a garrison in St. Michael,

sufficient to defend a station of equal impurtance
as a place of retreat in cafe of any dilahlcr, m;.d
as a port for receiving any supplies which fiiould
conie from Panama, he began his march \iili a
very slender and ill-accoutred train of followcr<,

'T'1 ,'

T'hey consisted of fixty-two horsemen , and B O K
a hundred and two foot-foldiers, of whom twenty v.-
were armed with cross-bows, and three with '532-
muskets. He directed his course towards Caxa-
inalca, a frall town at the distance of twelve
days march from St. Michael, where Atahualpa
was encamped with a considerable body of
troops. Before he had proceeded far, an officer
dispatched by the Inca met him with a valuable
present from that prince, accompanied with a
proffer of his alliance, and assurances of a friendly
reception at Caxamalca. Pizarro, according to
the usual artifice of his countrymen in America,
pretended to come as the ambaflador of a very
powerful monarch, and declared that he was
now advancing with an intention to offer
Atahualpa his aid againfl those enemies who
difluted his title to the throne Y.

As the objet of the Spaniards in entering ,c; r!;l,r
lheir country was altogether incomprehensible to Cc i';,lnS
the Peruvians, they had rmncd various con- ,;:r ''.
jecurcs concerning it, without being able to
decide whether they should confider their new
gucfts as beings of a superior nature, who had
rifited them from ome beneficent motive, or as

X ice NOTE XII.
llclrt.rl, dec. 5. lib. i. c. 3. Xeres, p. 89.

a 4 form,

B 0 0 K formidable avengers of their crimes, and enemies

VI.
,_»^;-_ to their repose and liberty. The continual pro.

'53' sessions of the Spaniards, that they came to

enlighten them with the knowledge of truth,
and lead them in the way of happiness, favourc,l
the former opinion; the outrages which thve
committed, their rapacioufiefs and cruelty, were
awful confirmations of the latter. While in this
state of uncertainty, Iizarro's declaration of li;s
pacific intentions so far removed all the Inca's
fears, that he determined to give him a friendly
reception. In consequence of this rcfolution,
the Spaniards were allowed to march in tran.
quillity across the sandy desert between S:.
Michael and Motupe, where the most feeble
effort of an enemy, added to the unavoidable
distresses which they suffered in pasing through
that comfortless region, muff have proved fatal
to them Z. From Motupe they advanced towards
the mountains which encompassed the low
country of Peru, and passed through a defile
so narrow and inacceflible, that a few mcii
might have defended it against a numlclrus
army. But here likcwife, from the fame in.
considerate credulity of the Inca, the Spaniards
met with no opposition, and took quiLt pof-
session of a fort erecqed for the fccurity of that

Sce NOTE XIV.

inporlant

important fiation. As they now approached n o o K
near to Caxamalca, Atahualpa renewed his pro- _ _
sessions of friendship; and as an evidence of their 's532
sincerity, sent them presents of greater value
than the former.

ON entering Caxamalca, Pizarro took pof- Arriveat

Caxamalca.

session of a large court, on one fide of which
was a house which the Spanish historians call a
palace of the Inca, and on the other a temple of
the Sun, the whole surrounded with a itrong
rampart or wall of earth. When he had poRed
his troops in this advantageous station, he dif-
patched his brother Ferdinand and Hernando
Soto to the camp of Atahualpa, which was
about a league distant from the town. He
intruded them to confirm the declaration which
he had formerly made of his pacific disposition,
and to defile an interview with the Inca, that he
might explain more fully the intention of the
Spaniards in visiting his country. They wsere
treated with all the relpeltful hospitality usual
.,i1ongl the Peruvians in the reception of their
inoll cordial friends, and At:hllualpa prollifed to
'ifit the Spanifli cnlmandcr next day in his
q(]arters. The decent el)otllet of the Pcru-
xian monarch, the order of his court, and thi
reverence with hicli li; fubjees approached
hi, pcrfon and obeyed is coiimands, alloi,iel:l

hlC

B o K those Spaniards, who had never met in America
,_>_, with any thing more dignified than the petty

35372 cazique of a barbarous tribe. But their eye,

were still powerfully attracted by the vast profu.
sion of wealth which they observed in the Inca's
camp. The rich ornaments worn by him and
his attendants, the velels of gold and filvci
in which the repast offered to them was fervel
up, the multitude of utensils of every kind
formed of those precious metals, opened prospects
far exceeding any idea of opulence that a Euro-
pean of the fixtcenth century could form.

Perfidious ON their return to Caxamalca, while their
fchll:ni of
Pizaro. minds were yet warm with admiration and desire

of the wealth which they had beheld, they gave
such a description of it to their countrymen, as
confirmed Pizarro in a resolution which he had
already taken. From his own observation of
American manners during his long fervicc in the
New Worold, as well as fiom the advanta;es
which Cortes had derived from seizing AMonte-
zuma, lhe knew of what consequence it was to
have the Inca in his power. For this ppole,
he ornmed a plan as daring as it was perfidious.
Notwvitllhanding the character that lie had
.aftuned of an ambaflador om a Ipwerful
monarch, who courted an alliance with the I1(.l,
and in violation of the repcated oilers whicih li

lhad

had made to him of his own friendship and o o K

VI.

afiftance, he determined to avail himself of the .
unfufpicious simplicity with which Atahualpa '532-
relied on his profeflons, and to seize the person
of the Inca during tyle interview to which he
had invited him. He prepared Ifr the execution
of his scheme with the fame deliberate arrange-
ment, and with as little compunlCion, as if it
had reflected no disgrace on himself or his
country. He divided his cavalry into three
finall squadrons, under the command of his
brother Ferdinand, Soto, and Benalcazar; his
infantry were formed in one body, except twenty
of molt tried courage, whom he kept near his
own person to support him in the dangerous
service which he relfrved for himfeflf; the
artillery, consisting of two field-pieces and the
crofs-bowmen, were placed opposite to the
avenue by which Atahualpa was to approach.
All were commanded to keep within the fquarc,
anid not to move until the lignal for aion was
given.

F]'.\1A L. i th lni'n lh 1e Permuxian calmp ' :

was all in motion.. But as Atahualpa was oli- ,
citous to appear with the grcatct liplcdour and
tiagnificcncc in his firil itcrxvicw with the

KXcrC/, p. (1)1.

' rangcl:

i o o K irangers, the preparations for this were o
L^_.- tedious, that the day was far advanced before he

353Z- began his march. Even then, left the ordcr of

tile procetion should be deranged, he moved so
slowly, that the Spaniards became impatient, and
apprehensive that some suspicion of their inten-
tion might be the cause of this delay. In order
to remove this, Pizarro dispatched one of his
officers with frcfil aifurances of his friendly
disposition. At length the Inca approached.
First of all appeared four hundred men, in an
uniform dress, as harbingers to clear the way
before him. He himself, fitting on a throne or
couch, adorned with plumes of various colours,
and almost covered with plates of gold and silver
enriched with precious flones, was carried on
the floulders of his principal attendants. Behind
him came fonme chief officers of his court, carried
in the fame manner. Several bands of fingers
and dancers accompanied this cavalcade ; and
the vwhole plain was covered with troops, aount-
in, to more tlian thirty thousand meln.

tranrr h ia. As the Inca drew near the Spanish quarters,

.:'l"'v. father Vincent Valvcrde, chaplain to the expe-
''''' (dition, advanced with a crucilix in one hand,

and a breviary in the other, and ill a lonG
diliourlce explained to him. the doctrine ofi l11
creation, tlie ,11l of Adam, the incarnation, tlie

fullcrilltl

sufferings and refurrecion of Jesus Chrilt, the B o rK
appointment of St. Peter as God's vicegerent on
earth, the tranfiniffion of his apotfolic power by 53t"
fucceflion to the popes, the donation made to the
king of Cafiile by pope Alexander of all the
regions in the New World. In consequence of
all this, he required Atahualpa to embrace the
Chriflian faith, to acknowledge the fuprcme
iurifdiction of the pope, and to submit to the
king of Caflile as his lawful sovereign; promifng-,
if he complied inflantly with this requisition, that
the Castilian monarch would protec his domi-
nions, and permit him to continue in he exer-
cife of his royal authority; but if he should
impiously refuse to obey this fumnmons, he de-
nounced war against him in his maftel's name,
and threatened him with the molt dreadful effe&ts
of his vengeance.

Ti-iIs tfrange harangue, unfolding deep myfle- Rcplyoftlle

ries, and alluding to unknown fltQs, of which no
power of eloquence could have conveyed at once
a diflin: idea to an American, was lo lamely
translated by an unlkilful interpreter, little ac-
quainted with the idiom of tlle Spanill tongue,
and incapable of expreling himlclf with pro-
priety in the language of the lica, that is
gt(:ncIl tenor was altogether inlconpll-chIiLlible

to)

o o to Atahualpa. Some parts in it, of more
vi.
u_- obvious meaning, filled him with astonishment

and indignation. His reply, however, was tem-
perate. He began with observing, that he was
lord of ilte dominions over which he reigned by
hereditary fuccefiion; and added, that he could
not conceive how a foreign priest fllould pretend
to difpole of territories which did not belong to
him ; that if such a preposterous grant had
been mnade, he, who was the rightful poffeor,
refued to confirm it; that he had no inclination
to renounce the religious institutions eablified
by his anccfiors ; nor would he forsake the
fCrx'ice of the Sun, the immortal divinity whom
he and his people revered, in order to worfllip
the God of the Spaniards, who was subjed
to death; that with respect to other matters
contained in hi, dli-ourre, as he had never heard
,!f theml befirc, andL did not now undertand
leir ncaninii,, lie desired to know where thc
)ricfl had learned things lb ctriaord nary. " In
this booI," afwlcred Valverde, reaching out to
him lh is breviar. lThe II;ca opnced it eagerly,
and tulllrnii over lhe leaves, lifted it o his ear:
'l This," Iays he, " is silent; it tells me
nothing;" and threw it with dildain to the
ground. 'IThe cnragc monk, running towards
his countrymen, cried out, ' To arms, CifL-

ians,

ians, to arms; the word of God is insulted; n o o K

vi.
avenge this profanation on those impious dogs b." _

1531

PIZARRO, who, during this long conference, p'z.arroat-

had with difficulty refrained his soldiers, eager P,-uvias,
to seize the rich spoils of which they had now so
near a view, immediately gave the signal of
afault. At once the martial music struck up,
the cannon and muflkets began to fire, the horse
sallied out fiercely to the charge, the infantry
ruffled on sword in hand. The Peruvians,
astonished at the fuddenncfs of an attack which
they did not expect, and difinaycd with the
deftrutiive effcts of the iir'-anrs, and the
irrcfiftible impression of the cavalry, fled with
universal conrtcrnation on every fide, without
attempting either to annoy the enemy, or to
defend themselves. Pizarro, at the head of his
chosen band, advanced directly towards the
Inca ; and though his nobles crowded around
iimn with oflicious zeal, and fell in numbers
at his feet, while they vied one with another in
sacrificing their own lives, that they might cover
the sacred person of their fovercign, the Spaniards
lron, penctrated. to the royal liat; and Pizarro anl r.:;.-
I;izing the Inca by the armn, dragged him to the
i;',iiti , and crried himl :s a pril, r to his

";,' NOT''1'E XV.

(]UT:h C1 c

B o° K quarters. The fate of the monarch increased
L--- the precipitate flight of his followers. The

Spaniards pursued them towards every quarter,
and with deliberate and unrelenting barbarity
continued to slaughter wretched fugitives, who
never once offered to resist. The carnage did
not cease until the close of day. Above four
thousand Peruvians were killed. Not a tingle
Spaniard fell, nor was one wounded but Pizarro
himself, whose hand was slightly hurt by one of
his own soldiers, while struggling eagerly to lay
hold on the Inca c

TH-IE plunder of the field was rich beyond any

idea which the Spaniards had yet formed con-
cerning the wealth of Peru, and they were
so transported with the value of the acquisition,
as well as the greatness of their success, that
they paired the night in the extravagant exulta-
tion natural to indigent adventurers on such an
extraordinary change of fortune.
Dcj.lion of AT first the captive monarch could hardly

believe a calamity which he so little expctecd tn
be rc;al. lutt he loon felt all the miifry of
his fate, and the djccion into which he llnk
was inl plroplrion to the height of grandeur fromn

S c- NOTE XVI.

,! ,!.,

which he had fallen. Pizarro, afraid of losing r o oK

VI.

all the advantages which he hoped to derive I__-
from the poffefiion of such a prisoner, laboured 1532
to console him with profeflions of kindness and
refped, that corresponded ill with his actions.
By residing among the Spaniards, the Inca
quickly discovered their ruling paflion, which,
ideed, they were no-wise iblicitous to conceal,
and by applying to that, made an attempt to
recover his liberty. He offered as a ransom His offer of
what astonished the Spaniards, even after all they a an"on)
now knew concerning the opulence of his king.
dom. The apartment in which he was confined
was twenty-two feet in length and sixteen in
breadth; he undertook to fill it with vessels of
gold as high as he could reach. Pizarro closed
eagerly with this tempting proposal, and a line
was drawn upon the walls of the chamber,
to mark the stipulated height to which the
treasure was to rife.

ATAHUALPA, transported with having ob-
tained some profpet of liberty, took measures
instantly for fulfilling his part of the agreement,
by fending messengers to Cuzco, Quito, and
other places, where gold had been amassed in
largest quantities, either for adorning the temples
of the gods, or the houses of the Inca, to bring
what was necessary for completing his ransom

VOL. 111. L directly

B K direcly to Caxamalca. Though Atahualpa wa

VI.

_c- - now in the custody of his enemies, yet so much
153-. were the Peruvians accustomed to refpet every

mandate issued by their sovereign, that his orders
were executed with the greatest alacrity. Soothed
with hopes of recovering his liberty by this
means, the subje&s of the Inca were afraid of
endangering his life by forming any other
scheme for his relief; and though the force of
the empire was still entire, no preparations were
made, and no army assembled to aenge their
own wrongs or those of their monarch d. The
Spaniards remained in Caxamalca tranquil and

The Spa- unmolested. Small detachments of their num.
niards visit
different ber marched into remote provinces of the empire,
provinces. and, instead of meeting with any opposition,

were everywhere received with marks of the
most fubmiflive refpet& .

Almazroar- INCONSIDERABLE as those parties were, and
rives with a
reinforce- desirous as Pizarro might be to obtain tome

t' knowledge of the interior state of the country,

he could not have ventured upon any diminution
Decmlber. of his main body, if he had not about this'time

received an account of Almagro's having landed
at St. Michael with such a reinforcement as
would almost double the number of his fol.

e Xcrcz, 205. e Se NOTE XVII.

lowers.

lowers . The arrival of this long-expeaed B O K

VI.

succour was not more agreeable to the Spaniards, -
than alarming to the Inca. He saw the power 1532'
of his enemies increase; and as he knew neither
ihe source whence they derived their supplies,

hr the means by which they were conveyed to

lt er:!, he could not foresee to what a height the
inundation that poured in upon his dominions
might rife. While disquieted with such appre- 533

Huafcarput

henfions, he learned that some Spaniards, in to death.
their way to Cuzco, had visited his brother
IHuafcar in the place where he kept him con-
fined, and that the captive prince had represented
to them the justice of his own cause, and as an
inducement to espouse it, had promised them a
quantity of treasure greatly beyond that which
Atahualpa had engaged to pay for his ransom.
If the Spaniards should liften to this proposal,
Atahualpa perceived his own deflrucion to be
inevitable; and fufpeding that their insatiable
thirst for gold would tempt them to lend a
favourable ear to it, he determined to sacrifice
his brother's life, that he might save his own;
and his orders for this purpose were executed,
like all his other commands, with scrupulous
punduality g.

f Xcrez, 204. Herrera, dec. 5. lib. ii;. c. 1, 2.

Zalrate, lib. ii. c. 6. Gomara H-ilt. c. 115. Herrerl,
dec. 5. lib. iii. c. 2.

L 2 MEAN-

B OO K MEANWHILE, Indians daily arrived at Caxa.

--.-J malca from different parts of the kingdom,

Ths537p- loaded with treasure. A great part of the
niardbmn.kf stipulated quantity was now analed, and Ata.
a division of
the poil. hualpa asured the Spaniards, that the only thig

which prevented the whole from being brougi,:
in, was the remoteness of the provinces where i.
was deposited. But such raft piles of goi
presented continually to the view of needy
Ibldiers, had so inflamed their avarice, tha it
was impoflible any longer to restrain their i-
patience to obtain poffefliun of this rich bcot.
Orders were given for melting down the whole,
except some pieces of curious fabric, reserved s
a present for the emperor. After fLtting apart
the fifth due to the crown, and a hundred
thousand pesos as a donative to the soldiers
which arrived with Alnagro, there remained
one million five hundred and twenty-eight thou.
sand five hundred pesos to Pizarro and his
July 25, followers. The festival of St. Jani:s, the patron

faint of Spain, was the day chofern r the parti
tion of this enormous furn, and the manner ol
conducing it £trongly marks the firange allianc
of fanaticism with avarice, which I have nion
than once had occasion to point out as a ftrikin[
feature in the charater of the conquerors of illi
New World. Though alleiblcd to divide th
spoils of an innocent people, procured by deceit

extortion

cxtortion, and cruelty, the tranfacion began with B o o K
a solemn invocation of the name of God h, as if V.
they could have expected the guidance of 1533-
Heaven in distributing those wages of iniquity.
In this division above eight thousand pesos, at
that time not inferior in effective value to as
many pounds sterling in the present century, fell
to the share of each horseman, and half that fum
to each foot soldier. Pizarro himself, and his
officers, received dividends in proportion to the
dignity of their rank.
THERE is no example in hiftorv of such a Tle effc

of it.

sudden acquisition of wealth by military service,
nor was ever a fum so great divided among
so small a number of soldiers. Many of them
having received a recompence for their services
farbeyond their most sanguine hopes, were so
impatient to retire from fatigue and danger,
in order to spend the remainder of their days in
their native country, in ease and opulence, that
they demanded their discharge with clamorous
importunity. Pizarro, sensible that from such
men he could expect neither enterprise in ation
nor fortitude in suffering, and persuaded that
wherever they went, the display of their riches
would allure adventurers, le's opulent but more

h Herrera, dec. 5. lib. iii c. 3.

, 3 hardy,

B O O K hardy, to his flandard, granted their suit with.

V,__ , out reluctance, and permitted above sixty of
X533- them to accompany his brother Ferdinand, whom

he sent to Spain with an account of his success,
and the present deflined for the emperor '.

TheInca THE Spaniards having divided among them
demands his
liberty in the treasure amassed for the Inca's ransom, he

insisted with them to fulfil their promile of
setting him at liberty. But nothing was farther
from Pizarro's thoughts. During his long
service in the New World, he had imbibed those
ideas and maxims of his fellow.foldiers, which
led them to confider its inhabitants as an inferior
race, neither worthy of the name, nor entitled to
the rights, of men. In his compact with Ata.
hualpa, he had no other objeE than to amuse his
captive with such a profpet f recovering his
liberty, as might induce him to lend all the aid
of his authority towards colleting the wealth of
his kingdom. Having now accomplished this,
he no longer regarded his plighted faith ; and at
the very time when the credulous prince hoped
to be replaced on his throne, he had fcretly
resolved to bereave him of life. Many circumn-
stances seem to have concurred in pronlpting
him to this acion, the mofi criminal and atrociu

I-lcrrcra, dec. 5. lib. iii. c. 4.. Vcg;, p. 2. lb. i. c. i.

til;.,;

that slains the Spanish name, amidt all the deeds B O O K
of violence committed in carrying on the con- --
quest of the New World. I533.

THOUGH Pizarro had seized the Inca, in Hcand the

Spaniards

imitation of Cortes's condut towards the Mexi- mutually
can monarch, he did not possess talents for carry-
ing on the fame artful plan of policy. Deflitute of
the temper and address requisite for gaining the
confidence of his prisoner, he never reaped all
the advantages which might have been derived
from being mafler of his person and authority.
Atahualpa was, indeed, a prince' of greater
abilities and discernment than Montezuma, and
seems to have penetrated more thoroughly into
the charader and intentions of the Spaniards.
Mutual suspicion and distrust accordingly took
place between them. The ftri& attention with
which it, was necessary to guard a captive of such
importance, greatly increased the fatigue of
military duty. The utility of keeping him
appeared inconsiderable; and Pizarro felt him
as an incumbrance, from which he wished to be
delivered .

ALMAGRO and his followers had made a Almngro

and his tol-
dcmand of an equal hare in the Inca's ransom; lowers dlc-

mand hlii
lilc.

k I-tccra, dec. 5

. iii.
cl . 4.

. 4 and

B 0 0 K and though Pizarro had bestowed upon the

VI. _-.i private men the large gratuity which I have
1533. mentioned, and endeavoured to sooth their leader

by presents of great value, they ffill continued
dissatisfied. They were apprehensive, that as
long as Atahualpa remained a prisoner, Pizarro's
soldiers would apply whatever treasure should be
acquired, to make up what was wanting of the
quantity stipulated for his ransom, and under
that pretext exclude them from any part of it.
They insisted eagerly on putting the Ilca to
death, that all the adventurers in Peru might
thereafter be on an equal footing'.

Motives PIZARRO himself began to be alarmed with
which in- ~
duced Pi- accounts of forces assembling in the remote
content. provinces of the empire, and fufpeaed Atahualpa

of having issued orders for that purpose. These
fears and suspicions were artfully increased by
Philippillo, one of the Indians whom Pizarro
had carried off from Tumbez in the year one
thousand five hundred and twenty-feven, and
whom he employed as an interpreter. The
funEtion which he performed admitting this man
to familiar intercourse with the captive monarch,
he prelumed, notwithflanding the meanness of

' Zaratc, l;b. ii. c. 7. Vega, p. 2. lib. i. c. 7. ]-crrcra,
dec. 5. lib. iii. c. .

his birth, to raise his affecions to a Coyaj B3 0 K
or descendant of the Sun, one of Atahualpa's Vj
wives; and feeing no prorpet of gratifying that '533.
paflion during the life of the monarch, he
endeavoured to fill the ears of the Spaniards
with such accounts of the Inca's secret designs
and preparations, as might awaken their jealousy,
and incite them to cut him off.

WHILE Almagro and his followers openly

demanded the life of the Inca, and Philippillo
laboured to ruin him by private machinatiors,
that unhappy prince inadvertently contributed to
haften his own fate. During his c- iiemtnt he
had attached himself with peculiar affetion to Ser-
dinand Pizarro and FHernando Soto; who, as they
were persons of birth and education superior to
the rough adventurers with whom they served,
were accuflomed to behave with more decency
and attention to the captive monarch. Soothed
with this refped from persons of such high
rank, he delighted in their society. But in
the presence of the governor he was always
uneasy and overawed. This dread oon came to
be mingled with contempt. Among all the
European arts, what he admired mol was that
of reading and writing ; and he long deliberated
with himself, whether he hould regard it as
a natural or acquired talent. In order to

3 determine

B o OK determine this, he desired one of the soldiers,

V1.
a^__, who guarded him, to write the name of God on

1533- the nail of his thumb. This he hewed fuc.

ceffively to several Spaniards, asking its meaning;
and to his amazement, they all, without hefita.
tion, returned the fame answer. At length
Pizarro entered; and on presenting it to him, he
blushed, and with some confusion was obliged to
acknowledge his ignorance. From that moment,
Atahualpa confidered him as a mean person, less
inftrueed than his own soldiers; and he had
not address enough to conceal the sentiments
with which this discovery inspired him. To be
the obje& of a barbarian's scorn, not only
mortified the pride of Pizarro, but excited such
resentment in his breast, as added force to all the
other considerations which prompted him to put
the Inca to deathm.
His trial. . BUT in order to give sone colour ofjuftice to

this violent ation, and that he himnfelf might be
exempted from tanding singly responsible for
the commiflion of it, Pizarro resolved to try the
Inca with all the formalities observed in the
criminal courts of Spain. Pizarro himself, and
Almagro, with two afliflants, were appointed
judges, with full power to acquit or to condemn;

II Herrcra, dec. 5. lib. iii. c. 4. Vcga, p. 11. lib. i. c. 38.

an

an attorney-general was named to carry on the B O O K
prosecution in the king's name; counsellors ---
were chosen to aflift the prisoner in his defence; '533
and clerks were ordained to record the proceed-
ings of court. Before this strange tribunal,
a charge was exhibited still more amazing. It
consisted of various articles; that Atahualpa,
though a bastard, had difpoffeffed the rightful
owner of the throne, and usurped the regal
power; that he had put his brother and lawful
sovereign to death; that he was an idolater, and
had not only permitted, but commanded the
offering of human sacrifices; that he had a great
number of concubines; that since his imprison-
ment he had wafted and embezzled the royal
treasures, which now belonged of right to the
conquerors; that he had incited his fubjeds to
take arms againfl the Spaniards. On these
heads of accusation, ome of which are so ludi-
crous, others so absurd, that the effrontery of
Pizarro, in making them the foundation of a
serious procedure, is not less surprising than his
injustice, did this strange court go on to try the
sovereign of a great empire, over whom it had no
jurifdicion. With refpe&t to each of the articles,
witnesses were examined; but as they delivered
their evidence in their native tongue, Philippillo
had it in his power to give their words whatever

turn

Bo o K turn belt suited his malevolent intentions. 'rT

VI.
,-- -- judges predetermined in their opinion, this evi-

sl533l. dence appeared sufficient. They pronounced
dcn)icd, Atahualpa guilty, and condemned him to be

burnt alive. Friar Valverde proltituted the
authority of his sacred function to confirm this
fcntence, and by his signature warranted it to be
just. Aftonifled at his fate, Atahualpa en-
deavoured to avert it by tears, by promises, and
by entreaties, that he might be ent to Spain,
where a monarch would be the arbiter of his lot.
But pity never touched the unfeeling heart of
Pizarro. He ordered him to be led instantly to
execution ; and, what added to the bitterness of
his last moments, the fame monk who had just
ratified his doom, offered to console, and at-
tempted to convert him. The molt powerful
argument Valverde employed to prevail with
him to embrace the Christian faith, was a
promise of mitigation in his punishment. The
dread of a cruel death extorted from the
trembling vicim a desire of receiving baptifin.
The ceremony was performed; and Atahualpa,

a,? (x>. inflead of being burnt, was firangled at the
uclcd fltake ".

Za' i let, lib ii. c. 7. Xere,, p). 233. Vega, p. 1.

lil. i.c. 3(, 37. Gomala Ilill. c. . i. lccria, dec. 3.
lib, hi. c. .).

IIAPPILY for the credit of the Spanifli nation , o o K.

VI.

even among the profligate adventurels which it ,_
sent forth to conquer and desolate the New sev.c3'
World, there were perlons who retained some Spania''rdS
tincture of the Catilian generosity and honour. azin i.
Though, before the trial of Atahualpa, Ferdi-
nand Pizarro had set out for Spain, and Soto was
sent on a separate command at a diflance from
Caxamalca, this odious tranfadLion was not
carried on without censure and opposition.
Several officers, and among those some of the
greatest reputation and most relpectable families
in the service, not only reronflrated, but pro-
tested againIt this measure of their general, as
disgraceful to their country, as repugnant to
every maxim of equity, as a violation of public
faith, and an usurpation of jurisdiction over an
independent monarch, to which they had no
title. But their laudable endeavours were vain.
Numbers, and the opinion of fulch as held every
thing to be lawful which they deened advanta-
geous, prevailed. History, however, records
even the unfuccefsflul exertions of virtue with
applause; and the Spanish writers, in relating
events where the valour of their nation is more
conpicuous than its humanity, have not failed
to preserve the names of hlic who mnad
this laudable cflort to five tliir colInIIry

Ifrio

BO0 K from the infamy of having perpetrated such a
,__- crime °.

1533.

Difnolution ON the death of Atahualpa, Pizarro in.
of overl.
mrt and vcrted one of his ons with the ensigns of
Pcru. royalty, hoping that a young man without

experience might prove a more pailive in.
ftrument in his hands, than an ambitious
monarch, who had been accuflomed to inde-
pendent command. The people of Cuzco, and
the adjacent country, acknowledged Manco
Capac, a brother of H-uafcar, as IncaP. But
neither possessed the authority which belonged
to a sovereign of Peru. The violent convul-
sions into which the empire had been thrown,
first by the civil war between the two brothers,
and then by the invasion of the Spaniards, had
not only deranged the order of the Peruvian
government, but almost dissolved its frame.
When they beheld their monarch a captive in
the power of flrangers, and at lat fuflering aa
ignominious death, the people in everal pro-
vinces, as if they had been let siee fronm every
restraint of law and decency, broke out into the
most licentious excesses''. So nany delceinlant;;

o Vega, p. . Ill). i. c. 37. Xcrcz, i. 235. IIcireca,
dec. 5. llb. iii. c. 5.

P Vega, p. . lill. ii. c. 7.
q lcirecra, dec 5. lil. ii. c. 2. li). iii. c. 5>

of

of the Sun, after being treated with the utmofl B 0 K
indignity, had been cut off by Atahualpa, that ,_
not only their influence in the fRate diminihed 1531.
with their number, but the accustomed reve-
rence for that sacred race sensibly decreased.
In consequence of this fate of things, ambitious
men in different parts of the empire aspired to
independent authority, and usurped jurifdi&ion
to which they had no title. The general who
commanded for Atahualpa in Quito, seized the
brother and children of his maier, put them
to a cruel death, and disclaiming any connection
with either Inca, endeavoured to establish a fepa-
rate kingdom for himself'.

THrE Spaniards, with pleasure, beheld the Pizarro ad,

spirit of discord diffusing itself, and the vigour cuzcoo
of government relaxing among the Peruvians.
They confidered those disorders as symptoms of
altate haftening-towards its dissolution. Pizarro
no longer hesitated to advance towards Cuzco,
and he had received such considerable reinforce-
ments, that he could venture, with little danger,
to penetrate so far into the interior part of the
country. The account of the wealth acquired
at Caxamalca operated as he had forelccn. No
sooner did his brother Ferdinand, with the ofli-

Zaratc, lib. ii. c. 8. Vegai, p. l. lib. ii. c. , 4.

cers

o O K cers and soldiers to whom he had given their
v_1. discharge after the partition of the Inca's ransom,
5 33. arrive at Panama, and display their riches in i:he

view of their aftonifled countrymen, than fame
spread the account with such exaggeration
through all the Spanish fettlenents on the
South Sea, that the governors of Guatimala,
Panama, and Nicaragua, could hardly reflrain
the people under their jurifdition, from aban-
doning their poffleions, and crowding to that
inexhaustible source of wealth which seemed to
he opened in Peru . In spite of every check
and regulation, such numbers resorted thither,
that Pizarro began his march at the head of five
hundred men, after leaving a coniiderable gar-
rifon in St. Michael, under the command of
Benalcazar. The Peruvians had assembled some
large bodies of troops to oppose his progress.
Several fierce encounters happened. But they
terminated like all the actions in America;
a few Spaniards were killed or wounded; the
natives were put to flight with incredible slaughter.
At length Pizarro forced his way to Cuzcu,
and took quiet poiffffion of that capital. The
riches found there, even after all that the natives
had carried oil and concealed, either from a

s Gomara Ilif. c. i25. Vcgt , p). . lib. ii. c. i.
kIcrrcra, dec, . lib. iii. c. 5.

ftiper.

fuperilitious veneration for the ornaments of B 0 0 K

VI.

their temples, or out of hatred to their rapacious
conquerors, exceeded in value what had been ,533-
received as Atahualpa's ransom. But as the
Spaniards were now accustomed to the wealth of
the country, and it came to be parcelled out
among a greater number of adventurers, this
dividend did not excite the fame surprise, either
from novelty, or the largeness of the fum that
fell to the hare of each individual'.

DURING the march to Cuzco, that son of
Atahualpa whom Pizarro treated as Inca, died;
and as the Spaniards substituted no person in his
place, the title of Manco Capac seems to have
been universally recognized ".

WHILE his fellow-foldiers were thus employed, Qputo con-

Benalcazar, governor of St. Michael, an able and qsueabr.
enterprising officer, was aihamed of remaining
inative, and impatient to have his name diltin-
guifhed among the discoverers and conquerors of
the New World. The seasonable arrival of a
frefl body of recruits from Panama and Nica-
ragua, put it in his power to gratify this passion.
Leaving a sufficient force to protect the infant
iettlement entrusted to his care, he placed himself

See NOTE XVIII. u Hcrrera, dec. 5. lib. v. c. 2.
VOL. 11I. M at

B or K at the head of the reft, and set out to attempt the

V1
a__/-- reduction of Ouito, where, according to the

'533' report of the natives, Atahualpa had left the

greatest part of his treasure. Notwithstanding
the diflance of that city from St. Michael, the
difficulty of marching through a mountainous
country covered with woods, and the frequent
and fierce attacks of the best troops in Peru,
commanded by a skilful leader, the valour, good
conduct, and perseverance of Benalcazar fur.
mounted every obtfacle, and he entered Quito
with his victorious troops. But they met with a
cruel mortification there. The natives, now
acquainted to their sorrow with the predominant
pailion of their invaders, and knowing how
to disappoint it, had carried off all those treasures,
the profpea of which had prompted them to
undertake this arduous expedition, and had sup-
ported them under all the dangers and hardships
wherewith they had to struggle in carrying
it on ".

Al.;i.ardo' BENALCAZAR was not the only Spanifli leader
ixt. flon who attacked the kingdom of (i)ito. The Iamle

of its riches attrated a more powerful enemy.
Pedro de Alvarado, who had diltinguified him-

' Zaratc, lil. ii. c. 9. Vcga, p. i . 1ib. ii. c. 9. Hrr-
rter;, decc. 5. li). iv. . , 12. b1 , V. . 2, 3. lib. vi. c. 3.

Iulf

self so eminently in the conquest of Mexico, Bn 0 O K
having obtained the government of Guatimala as
a recompence for his valour, soon became dif- 1533.
gused with a life of uniform tranquillity, and
longed to be again engaged in the bustle of
military service. The glory and wealth acquired
by the conquerors of Peru heightened this passion,
and gave it a determined direction. Believing,
or pretending to believe, that the kingdom of
Quito did not lie within the limits of the province
allotted to Pizarro, he resolved to invade it.
The high reputation of the commander allured
volunteers from every quarter. He embarked
with five hundred men, of whom above two
hundred were of such diflintion as to serve
on horseback. He landed at Puerto Viejo, and
without sufficient knowledge of the country,
or proper guides to conduEt him, attempted to
march direcly to Quito, by following the course
of the river Guayquil, and crossing the ridge of
the Andes towards its head. But in this route,
one of the moss impracticable in all America,
his troops endured -such fatigue in forcing their
way through forests and marfies on the low
grounds, and suffered so much from exceflive
cold when they began to ascend the mountains,
that before they reached the plain of Quito,
a fifth part of the men and half of their horses
died, and the reft were so much dispirited and

M wolr

B OO K worn out, as to be almost unfit for fervicex.

VI.
a -m i There they meet with a body, not of Indians but of

'533 Spaniards, drawn up in hostile array against them.

Pizarro having received an account of Alvarado's
armament, had detached Almagro with some
troops to oppose this formidable invader of his
jurifdiEtion ; and these were joined by Benalcazar
and his victorious party. Alvarado, though
surprised at the fight of enemies whom he did not
expect, advanced boldly to the charge. But, by
the interposition of some moderate men in each
party, an amicable accommodation took place;
and the fatal period, when Spaniards suspended
their conquests to embrue their hands in the
blood of their countrymen, was postponed a few
years. Alvarado engaged to return to his
government, upon Almagro's paying hin a
hundred thousand pesos to defray the expence
of his armament. MoR of his followers re.
mained in the country; and an expedition,
which threatened Pizarro and his colony ith
ruin, contributed to augment its lrength Y.

a See NOTE XIX.

Y Zaratc, lib. ii. c. 1C-13. Vega, p. 11. ll. ii. c. ,

2. 9, &c. Gomara Hilt. c. I26, &c. Rnc(;il liili.
(;t, timi l, lib. iii. c. 6. lcerrera, dcc. 5. lib. vi. c.
.7, 8.

1}','

By this time Ferdinand Pizarro had landed in B o o K

Vi.

Spain. The immense quantities of gold and --
silver which he imported , filled the kingdom HoJ',
with no less aflonifhment than they had excited contrred
in Panama and the adjacent provinces. Pizarro ind Al-
was received by the emperor with the attention
due to the bearer of a present so rich, as to
exceed anyidea which the Spaniards had formed
concerning the value of their acquisitions in
America, even after they had been ten years
matters of Mexico. In recompence of his
brother's services, his authority was confirmed
with new powers and privileges, and the addition
offeventy leagues, extending along the coast, to
the southward of the territory granted in his
former patent. Alnagro received the honours
which he had so long desired. The title of Ade-
lantado, or governor, was conferred upon him,
with jurifdition over two hundred leagues of
country, stretching beyond the southern limits of
the province allotted to Pizarro. Ferdinand
himself did not go unrewarded. He was ad-
mitted into the military order of St. Jago, a
ditintion always acceptable to a Spanilh gentle-
man, and soon let out on his return to Peru,
accompanied by many persons of higher rank
than had yet served in that country '.

' See NOTE XX.

Zaratc, lib. iii. c. 3. Vega, p. . lib. ii. c. l

9. eIr-
Wra, (Iec. 5. lib. vi. c. 13.

M 3 SOME

B O O K SOME account of his negociations reached Peru

VI. o_--_ before he arrived there himself. Almagro no

Bel'534l, sooner learned that he had obtained the royal
of disl1n- grant of an independent government, than, pre.
twvCln li- tending that Cuzco, the imperial residence of the
Zrio and
Alnagro. Incas, lay within its boundaries, he attempted to

render himself master of that important flation.
Juan and Gonzalez Pizarro prepared to oppole
him. Each of the contending parties was sup.
ported by powerful adherents, and the dispute
was on the point of being terminated by the
sword, when Francis Pizarro arrived in the
capital. The reconciliation between him and
Almagro had never been cordial. The treachery
of Pizarro in engrossing to himself all the
honours and emoluments, which ought to have
been divided with his associate, was always present
in both their thoughts. The former, conscious
of his own perfidy, did not expeEt forgiveness;
the latter, feeling that he had been deceived, was
impatient to be avenged; and though avarice and
ambition had induced them not only to dissemble
their sentiments, but even to act in concert while
in pursuit of wealth and power, no lfoncr did
they obtain poflffion of these, than the tame
pailions which had formed this temporary uniol,
gave rile to jealousy and discord. 'o cach of
theim was attached a fiall band of intercllcd
clepelCn nts, Vho, with the malicions art pcctliar
to such men, heightened their ifulicions, and

miagificd

magnified every appearance of offence. But B o K
with all those feeds of enmity in their minds, -v
and thus afliduoufly cherilhed, each was so '534
thoroughly acquainted with the abilities and
courage of his rival, that they equally dreaded
the consequences of an open rupture. The
fortunate arrival of Pizarro at Cuzco, and the
address mingled with firmness which he mani-
fefled in his expostulations with Almagro and his
partizans, averted that evil for the present. A
new reconciliation took place; the chief article
of which was, that Almagro should attempt the
conquefl of Chili; and if he did not find in
that province an establishment adequate to his
merit and expecations, Pizarro, by way of in-
demnification, hould yield up to him a part of
Peru. This new agreement, though confirmed june ,
with the fame sacred folemnities as their firfl
contract, was observed with as little fidelity b.

SooN after he concluded this important tranf- Regulatiuna

action, Pizarro marched back to the countries on
the sea-coast, and as he now enjoyed an interval
of tranquillity, undiflurbel by any enemy, either
Spanifl or Indian, he applied himself with that
persevering ardour, which lditinguifhes his cha-

Zarate, lib. ii. . 13. Vega, p. 1i. lib. ii. c. 19. Bnzo,
rib. iii. c. 6. Herrra, dec. 5. lib. vii. c. .

M 4 ,raAer,

B 0 K racier, to introduce a form of regular government

0_-
. into the extensive provinces subjeE to his autho.
'534· rity. Though ill qualified by his education to

enter into any disquisition concerning the prin.
ciples of civil policy, and little accultomed by his
former habits of life to attend to its arrange.
ments, his natural sagacity supplied the want
both of science and experience. He diflributed
the country into various diftriAs; he appointed
proper magifrates to preside in each; and
established regulations concerning the adminiftra.
tion of justice, the collection of the royal revenue,
the working of the mines, and the treatment of
the Indians, extremely simple, but well calculated
to promote the public prosperity. But, though,
for the present, he adapted his plan to the infant
state of his colony, his aspiring mind looked
forward to its future grandeur. He confidered

Foundation himself as laying the foundation of a great
of Lima.

empire, and deliberated long, and with much
Solicitude, in what place he should fix the feat of
government. Cuzco, the imperial city of the
Incas, was situated in a corner of the empire,
above four hundred miles from the sea, and
much farther from Quito, a province of whole
value he had formed an high idea. No other
fettlelnent of the Peruvians was so considerable as
to merit the name of a town, or to allure the
Spaniards to fix their residence in it. But,

in

in marching through the country, Pizarro had B oO K
been struck with the beauty and fertility of the i
valley of Rimac, one of the most extensive and I534-
best cultivated in Peru. There, on the banks of
a small river, of the fame name with the vale
which it waters and enriches, at the distance of
fix miles from Callao, the most commodious
harbour in the Pacific Ocean, he founded a city
which he destined to be the capital of his
government. He gave it the name of Ciudad de *5,.
los Reyes, either from the circumstance of having J,"lu"ry I.
laid the firit one, at that season when the
church celebrates the festival of the Three Kings,
or, as is more probable, in honour of Juana and
Charles, the joint sovereigns of Castile. This
name it frill retains among the Spaniards, in all
legal and formal deeds; but it is better known
to foreigners by that of Limza, a corruption of the
ancient appellation of the valley in which it is
situated. Under his inspection, the buildings
advanced with such rapidity, that it soon assumed
the form of a city, which, by a magnificent
palace that he ereaed for himself, and by the
llately houses built by several of his officers, gave,
even in its infancy, some indication of its fib-
sequent grandeur .

1-errera, dec. 5. lib. vi. c. 12. lib. vii. c. 13. Calancho
Coronica, lib. i.c. c37. arncuvo, Lima findata, ii. 294.

IN

B 0 K IN consequence of what had been agreed with

VI.

x- ^ Pizarro, Almagro began his march towards
Ailloi Chili; and as he possessed in an eminent decree
vadcsCill. the virtues most admired by soldiers, boundlcfs

liberality and fearless courage, his standard was
followed by five hundred and seventy men, the
greatest body of Europeans that had hitherto
been assembled in Peru. From impatience to
finish the expedition, or from that contempt of
hardship and danger acquired by all the Spaniards
who had served long in America, Almagro,
instead of advancing along the level country on
the coast, chose to march across the mountains by
a route that was horter indeed, but almof
impracticable. In this attempt his troops were
exposed to every calamity which men can susser,
from fatigue, from famine, and from the rigour
of the climate in those elevated regions of the
torrid zone, where the degree of cold is hardly
inferior to what is felt within the polar circle.
Many of them perified; and the survivors, when
they descended into the fertile plains of Chili,
had new difficulties to encounter. They found
there a race of men very different from the
people of Peru, intrepid, hardy, independent,
and in their bodily conltitution, as well as vigour
of fpirir, nearly refenmbling the warlike tribes in
North nAmerica. Though filled with wonder at
the silt appearance of the Spaniards, and frill

nmore

more astonished at the operations of their cavalry B o o K

vI.

and the effecs of their fire-arms, the Chilefe soon i-
recovered so far from their furprize, as not only 1535
to defend themselves with obstinacy, but to
attack their new enemies with more determined
fierceness than any American nation had hitherto
discovered. The Spaniards, however, continued
to penetrate into the country, and collected ome
considerable quantities of gold; but were so far
from thinking of making any fettlemcnt amidst
such formidable neighbours, that, in spite of all
the experience and valour of their leader, the
final issue of the expedition still remained ex-
tremely dubious, when they were recalled from
it by an unexpected revolution in Perud. The
causes of this important event I hall endeavour
to trace to their source.

So many adventurers had flocked to Peru Aninfur-

rc.tion of

from every Spanish colony in America, and all tIIl- r.u-
with such high expectations of accumulating va"".
independent fortunes at once, that, to men
possessed with notions so extravagant, any mention
of acquiring wealth gradually, and by fchenes
of patient induflry, would have been not only a

Zarate, lib. iii. c. . CGom.ia Ht . c. T

3 . Vcga, p. z.

Jil,. ii. c. 2o. Ovalle Ilia. d e Chile, llb. iv. c. 15, &c.
lIcircra, dec. 5. lib. vi. c. 9. lib. x. c. , &c.

dif-

B 0 0 K disappointment, but an insult. In order to find

Vi.

occupation for men who could not with safety be
z535 allowed to remain inactive, Pizarro encouraged

some of the molt distinguished officers who had
lately joined him, to invade different provinces of
the empire, which the Spaniards had not hitherto
visited. Several large bodies were formed for
this purpose; and about the time that Almagro
set out for Chili, they marched into remote
Its rifr, diftrias of the country. No sooner did Manco

Capac, the Inca, observe the inconsiderate fecu-
rity of the Spaniards in thus dispersing their
troops, and that only a handful of soldiers
remained in Cuzco, under Juan and Gonzalez
Pizarro, than he thought that the happy period
was at length come for vindicating his own
rights, for avenging the wrongs of his country,
and extirpating its oppressors. Though ftrialy
watched by the Spaniards, who allowed him to
reside in the palace of his ancestors at Cuzco, he
found means of communicating his scheme to
the persons who were to be entrusted with
the execution of it. Among people accuflomed
to revere their sovereign as a divinity, every hint
of his will carries the authority of a command;
and they themselves were now convinced, by
the daily increase in the number of their in-
vadlers, that the fond hopes which they had long
entertained of their voluntary departure werc

altogctlher

altogether vain. All perceived that a vigorous B Oo 0K
effort of the whole nation was requiite to expel -
them, and the preparations for it were car- 153s'
ried on with the secrecy and filcnce peculiar to
Americans.

AFTER some unsuccessful attempts of the Inca and pro-

to make his escape, Ferdinand Pizarro happening
to arrive at that time in Cuzco, he obtained per- 1536.
miflion from him to attend a great festival which
was to be celebrated a few leagues from the
capital. Under pretext of that solemnity, the
great men of the empire were aembled. As
soon as the Inca joined them, the standard of
war was ereced; and in a short time all the
fighting men, from the confines of Quito to the
frontier of Chili, were in arms. Many Spaniards,
living securely on the settlements allotted them,
were massacred. Several detachments, as they
marched carelessly through a country which
seemed to be tamely fubmiflive to their dominion,
wcre cut off to a man. An army amounting (if
we may believe the Spanish writers) to two
hundred thousand men, attacked Cuzco, which
the three brothers endeavoured to defend with
only one hundred and fcvcnty Spaniards. An-
,llIer formidable body inverted Lima, and kept
the govcrnor clolely hut up. There was no
longer any communication between llhe two

cities ;

B O K cities; the numerous forces of the Peruvians

VI.
L_-i-_ spreading over the country, intercepted every

1536. messenger; and as the parties in Cuzco and

Lima were equally unacquainted with the fate of
their countrymen, each boded the worfl con-
cerning the other, and imagined that they theni-
selves were the only persons who had survived
the general extinction of the Spanifl name
in Peru .
Scze of IT was at Cuzco, where the Inca commanded

in person, that the Peruvians made their chief
effort. During nine months they carried on the
siege with incessant ardour, and in various forms;
and though they displayed not the fame un-
daunted ferocity as the Mexican warriors, they
conducted some of their operations in a manner
which discovered greater sagacity, and a genius
more susceptible of improvement in the military
art. They not only observed the advantages
which the Spaniards derived from their discipline
and their weapons, but they endeavoured to
imitate th. former, and turn the latter againt
them. They armed a considerable body of their
bravest warriors with the swords, the spears, and
bucklers, which they had taken from the Spanifl

e Vega, p. Il. lib. ii. C. 28. Z a ltlc , lih. iii. c. 3.

Cicca de Lcol1, c. R2. Gomaira Ilit, c. 135. lieJici:,
dec, . lib. vii, . 5.

foll icer

soldiers whom they had cut off in different parts n o o K

VI.

of the country. These they endeavoured to ,___
marthal in that regular compact order, to which 1536.
experience had taught them that the Spaniards
were indebted for their irresistible force in
action. Some appeared in the field with Spanifli
muskets, and had acquired ikill and resolution
enough to use them. A few of the boldest,
among whom was the Inca himlfelf, were mounted
on the horses which they had taken, and ad-
vanced briskly to the charge like Spanish cavaliers,
with their lances in the reit. It was more by
their numbers, however, than by those imperfec
essays to imitate European arts and to employ
European arms, that the Peruvians annoyed the
Spaniards . In spite of the valour, heightened
by despair, with which the three brothers de-
fended Cuzco, Manco Capac recovered poiffeTion
of one half of his capital; and in their various
eliorts to drive him out of it, the Spaniards loft
Juan Pizarro, the belt beloved of all the brothers,
together with foell other persons of note. WVorn
out with the fatigue (cf incctfant duty, diflrefled
with want of provilions, and dlepairing of being
;ble any longetr to rfcill an enemy wholl num-
bers daily incrcafcd, the soldiers became impatient
to abandon Cuzco, ill hopes either of joining

Scc NO'I' xx r.

thclr

B o0 K their countrymen, if any of them yet survived,

vi.
,_l-^- or of forcing their way to the ea, and finding

s36. some means of escaping from a country which

had been so fatal to the Spanish name g. While
they were brooding over those desponding
thoughts, which their officers laboured in vain
to dispel, Almagro appeared suddenly in the
neighbourhood of Cuzco.

In,.

Arrival of TIHE accounts transmitted to Almagro con-
Alinagro
and nmotives cerning the general infurretion of the Peruvians,
otf his con-

.du. were such as would have induced him, without

hesitation, to relinquish the conquest of Chili,
and haften to the aid of his countrymen. But
in this resolution he was confirmed by a motive
less generous, but more interesting. By the
fame messenger who brought him intelligence of
the Inca's revolt, he received the royal patent
creating him governor of Chili, and defining the
limits of his jurifdidion. Upon confidering the
tenor of it, he deemed it manifest beyond con-
tradistion, that Cuzco lay within the boundaries
of his government, and he was equally solicitous
to prevent the Peruvians from recovering pol
feflion of their capital, and to wrest it out of the
hands of the Pizarros. From impatience to
accomplifhl both, he ventured to return by a new

g IIcrrcra, dec. 5. lib. viii. c. 4.

route

route; and in marching through the sandy plains o o K
on the coast, he suffered, from heat and drought, --
calamities of a new species, hardly inferior to I56
those in which he had been involved by cold and
famine on the summits of the Andes.

His arrival at Cuzco was in a critical moment. H537.
The Spaniards and Peruvians fixed their eyes tio,.
upon him with equal solicitude. The former, as
le did not study to conceal his pretensions, were'
at a loss whether to welcome him as a deliverer,
or to take precautions against him as an enemy.
The latter, knowing the points in contest between
him and his countrymen, flattered themselves
that they had more to hope than to dread from
his operations. Almagro hinmfelf, unacquainted
with the detail of the events which had happened
in his absence, and solicitous to learn the precise
poflure of affairs, advanced towards the capital
lowly, and with great circumfpedion. Various
negociations with both parties were et on foot.
The Inca conducted them on his part with much
address. At firIt he endeavoured to gain the
fiiendtlhip of Almagro; and after many fruitless
ovcrtures, despairing of any cordial union with a
Spaniard, he attacked him by surprise with a
nulmerous body) of choen troops. But the
Spanih difciplinc and valour maintained their
Wontcd flperiuriiy. lihe Peruvians were re-
VOL. 111. N pulled

B 0 0 K pulsed with such slaughter, that a great part
--. i,-, of their army dispersed, and Almagro proceeded
1537' to the gates of Cuzco without interruption.

Takes pof. THE Pizarros, as they had no longer to make
feffioi of
Cuzco. head againfi the Peruvians, directed all their

attention towards their new enemy, and took
measures to obflrut his entry into the capital.
Prudence, however, restrained both parties for
some time from turning their arms against one
another, while surrounded by common enemies,
who would rejoice in the mutual slaughter.
Different schemes of accommodation were pro-
posed. Each endeavoured to deceive the other,
or to corrupt his followers. The generous,
open, affable temper of Almagro gained many
adherents of the Pizarros, who were disgusted
with their harfll domineering manners. Encou-
raged by this defection, he advanced towards the
city by night, surprised the centinels, or was
admitted by them, and investing the house where
the two brothers resided, compelled them, after
an obflinate defence, to surrender at discretion.
Almagro's claim of jurifdistion over Cuzco was
universally acknowledged, and a form of ad-
nliniftiation eflablifhed in his name''

h Zara1l, lib . ii. c 4.. Vtga, p. I . ib. ii. c. 29. 31.
Golnlara Hifl. c. 134. HT-ricral, icc. 6. lib. ii. c. -5.

TWO~'

Two or three persons only were killed in this B 0 0 1

firl at of civil hostility; but it was soon fol- L
lowed by scenes more bloody. Francis Pizarro civi537a
having dispersed the Peruvians who had inveited arid ctri
Lima, and received ome considerable reinforce- "'Jnao,
ments from Hispaniola and Nicaragua, ordered
five hundred men, under the command of Alonfo
de Alvarado, to march to Cuzco, in hopes of
relieving his brothers, if they and their garrison
were not already cut off by the Peruvians. This
body, which, at that period of the Spanish power
in America, must be deemed a considerable force,
advanced near to the capital before they knew
that they had any enemy more formidable than
Indians to encounter. It was with aflonilhment
that they beheld their countrymen posted on the
banks of the river Abancay to oppose their
progress. Almagro, however, wished rather to
gain than to conquer them, and by bribes and
promises endeavoured to seduce their leader.
The fidelity of Alvarado remained unfiaken;
but his talents for war were not equal to his
virtue. Almagro amused him with various
movements, of which he did not comprehend
lle meaning, while a large detachment of Ji,,' ":
chofeni foldlirs passed the river by night, fell
upon his camp by surprise, broke his troops
before they had time to form, and took

N 2 |himi

B 0 K him prisoner, together with his principal

'
. -,~ officersi.

'537.

but does not B the sudden rout of this body, the contest
improve his
advantages. between the two rivals mult have been decided,

if Almagro had known as well how to improve
as how to gain a vi&ory. Rodrigo Orgognez,
an officer of great abilities, who having served
under the conltable Bourbon, when he led the
Imperial army to Rome, had been accustomed
to bold and decisive measures, advised il
instantly to issue orders for putting to death
Ferdinand and Gonzalo Pizarros, Alvarado,
and a few other persons whom he could not
hope to gain, and to march directly with his
victorious troops to Lima, before the governor
had time to prepare for his defence. But
Almagro, though he discerned at once the
utility of the counsel, and though he had
courage to have carried it into execution, fui
sered himself to be influenced by sentiments
unlike those of a soldier of fortune gro\vn (old
in service, and by scruples which suited not
the chief of a party who had drawn his f\ord
in civil war. Feelings of humanity reflitied

I Zarate, lib. iii. c. . Com. H-ifl . I3S. Ve , p. 1:
lib, ii. c. 32. 34. Ic c cri, (ec. 6. lil. ii. c. 9.

])in,

him from hedding the blood of his opponents; B o K
and the dread of being deemed a rebel, deterred
him from entering a province which the king 537.
had allotted to another. Though he knew that
arms must terminate the dispute between him
and Pizarro, and resolved not to shun that mode
of decision, yet, with a timid delicacy pre-
pofterous at such a juncture, he was so solicitous
that his rival should be confidered as the aggref-
for, that he marched quietly back to Cuzco, to
wait his approach k.

PIZARRO was still unacquainted with all the Dirtrefsof
interesting events which had happened near
Cuzco. Accounts of Almagro's return, of the
loss of the capital, of the death of one brother,
of the imprisonment of the other two, and of the
defeat of Alvarado, were brought to him at once.
Such a tide of misfortunes almost overwhelmed
a spirit which had continued firm and eret
under the rudest hocks of adversity. But the
neceflity of attending to his own safety, as well
as the desire of revenge, preserved him from
linking under it. He took measures for both His 3rtftl
with his wonted sagacity. As he had the com-
rinnd of the sea-coast, and expe&ted confielerable
uppllis both of men and military stores, it was

1 ll crrera, dec. 6. Iib. ii. c. ,o, i.

N 110

Uo o K no less his interest to gain time, and to avoid
I _J^ . action, than it was that of Almagro to precipitate
'537. operations, and bring the contest to a speedy

issue. He had recourse to arts which he had
formelly pradifed with success; and Almagro
was again weak enough to susser himself to
be amused with a profped of terminating their
differences by some amicable accommodation.
By varying his overtures, and histing his ground
as often as it suited his purpose, sometimes seem.
ing to yield every thing which his rival could
desire, and then retracing all that he had
granted, Pizarro dexterously protracted the nego.
ciation to such a length, that though every day
was precious to Almagro, several months elapsed
without coming to any final agreement. While
the attention of Almagro, and of the officers
with whom he consulted, was occupied in detect-
ing and eluding the fraudulent intentions of the
governor, Gonzalo Pizarro and Alvarado found
means to corrupt the soldiers to whose custody
they were committed, and not only made their
escape themselves, but persuaded sixty of the
men who formerly guarded them to accompany
their flight'. Fortune having thus delivered one
of his brothers, the governor scruplcd not at one
adt of perfidy more to procure the release of the

Zaratc, lib. iii. c. 8. Itt rrcra, dec. 6. lib. ii . . .

otller,

other. He proposed, that every point in con- B O K
troverfy between Almagro and himself should be -
submitted to the decision of their sovereign; that 1537.
until his award was known, each should retain
undisturbed poffeflion of whatever part of the
country he now occupied; that Ferdinand Pizarro
should be set at liberty, and return inflantly to
Spain, together with the officers, whom Almagro
purposed to fend thither to represent the justice
of his claims. Obvious as the design of Pizarro
was in those propositions, and familiar as his
artifices might now have been to his opponent,
Almagro, with a credulity approaching to infa-
tuation, relied on his sincerity, and concluded an
agreement on these termsm,

THE moment that Ferdinand Pizarro recovered His prepa.

tlons tIer

his liberty, the governor, no longer fettered in wa,.
his operations by anxiety about his brother's life,
threw off every disguise which his concern for it
had obliged him to assume. The treaty was for-
gotten; pacific and conciliating measures were
no more mentioned; it was in the field he
openly declared, and not in the cabinet; by
arms, and not by negociation; that it mutt now
be determined who should be mafler of Peru.

"' He-lc era, dec. 6. lib. iii c. 9. aratc, lib. ii. c.
Cunnara Hilit. c. 140. Vega, p. li . ii. c. 5.

N 4 'T1he

B 0 K The rapidity of his preparations suited such a

V-1-. decisive resolution. Seven hundred men were
'538 soon ready to march towards Cuzco. The

command of these was given to his two brothers,
in whom he could perfectly confide for the
execution of his moit violent schemes, as they
were urged on, not only by the enmity flowing
from the rivalfhip between their family and
Almagro, but animated with the desire of ven.
geance, excited by recollection of their own recent
disgrace and sufferings. After an unsuccessful
attempt to cross the mountains in the direct road
between Lima and Cuzco, they marched towards
the south along the coast as far as Nafca, and
then turning to the left, penetrated through the
defiles in that branch of the Andes which lay
between them and the capital. Almagro, in-
stead of hearkening to ome of his officers, who
adviled him to attempt the defence of those
difficult passes, waited the approach of the enemy
in the plain of Cuzco. Two reasons seem to
have induced him to take this resolution. llis
followers amounted hardly to five hundred, and
he wvas afraid of weakening fnch a feeble body
by iending any detachment towards the moun-
tains. llis cavalry far exceeded that of the
adverse party, both in number and discipline, and
it was only in an open country that he could avail
lliniielf of that advantage.

'1,111.

THE Pizarros advanced without any ob- B 0o0 K

VI.

iruction, but what arose from the nature of the - '
desert and horrid regions through which they is15r3my
marched. As oon as they reached the plain, ,rn'z"ce to

Cuzco.

both factions were equally impatient to bring
this long-protra&ed contest to an issue. Though
countrymen and friends, the subjects of the fame
sovereign, and each with the royal standard dif-
played; and though they beheld the mountains
that surrounded the plain inwhich they were drawn
up, covered with a vait multitude of Indians,
assembled to enjoy the fpetacle of their mutual
carnage, and prepared to attack whatever party
remained master of the field; so fell and im-
placable was the rancour which had taken
possession of every breast, that not one pacific
counsel, not a single overture towards accom-
modation proceeded from either fide. Unfortu-
nately for Almagro, he was so worn out with the
fatigues of service, to which his advanced age
was unequal, that, at this crisis of his fate, he
could not exert his wonted activity; and he was
obliged to commit the leading of his troops
to Orgognez, who, though an officer of great
merit, did not poilefs the fame ascendant either
over the spirit or afleftions of the soldiers, as the
chief whom they had longed been accustomed to
follow and revere.

TH£m

B o K THE conflic was fierce, and maintained by

"_ '
- each party with equal courage. On the fide of
1538, Almagro, were more veteran soldiers, and a

April 26.
Almagro larger proportion of cavalry; but these were
dfeated,

counterbalanced by Pizarro's superiority in num-
bers, and by two companies of well-difciplined
musketeers, which, on receiving an account of
the insurrection of the Indians, the emperor had
sent from Spain n. As the use of fire-arms was
not frequent among the adventurers in America °,
hastily equipped for service, at their own ex-
pence, this fall band of soldiers, regularly
trained and armed, was a novelty in Peru, and
decided the fate of the day. Wherever it ad-
vanced, the weight of a heavy and well-fuftained
fire bore down horse and foot before it; and
Orgognez, while he endeavoured to rally and
animate his troops, having received a dangerous
wound, the rout became general, The barbarity
of the conquerors stained the glory which they
acquired by this complete vitory, The violence
of civil rage hurried on some to slaughter their
countrymen with indiscriminate cruelty; the
meanness of private revenge instigated others to
single out individuals as the objects of their

IHerrera, dec. 6. lib. iii c. 8.
O Zaratc, lib. iii. c. 8.

vengeance.

vengeance. Orgognez and several officers of B OO K
diftinEtion were massacred in cold blood; above. _
a hundred and forty soldiers fell in the field; a "538
large proportion, where the number of com-
batants were few, and the heat of the contest
soon over. Almagro, though so feeble that he
could not bear the motion of a horse, had
insisted on being carried in a litter to an eminence
which overlooked the field of battle. From
thence, in the utmost agitation of mind, he
viewed the various movements of both parties,
and at last beheld the total defeat of his own
troops, with all the passionate indignation of
a veteran leader long accustomed to yiEtory.
He endeavoured to save himself by flight, but and taken.
was taken prisoner, and guarded with the itriceft
vigilance P.

THE Indians, inflead of executing the refolu-

tion which they had formed, retired quietly after
the battle was over; and in the hiflory of the
New World, there is not a more firiking
instance of the wonderful ascendant which the
Spaniards had acquired over its inhabitants, than
that after feeing one of the contending parties
uined and dilperfcd, and the other weakened

I, Zarate, lib. iii c. I. , 12. Vega, p. r . lib. ii. c. 36 --
38. Hcrreca, dec. 6. lib. iii. c. o1-12. lll. iv. c. X-6.

and

B K and fatigued, they had not courage to fall upon

VI.
i^^_;«( their enemies, when fortune presented an oppor.

'53s. tunity of attacking them with such advantage q.
New epe- Cuzco was pillaged by the vicorious troops,

who found there a considerable booty, consisting
partly of the gleanings of the Indian treasures,
and partly of the wealth amassed by their anta-
gonifts from the spoils of Peru and Chili. But
so far did this, and whatever the bounty of their
leader could add to it, fall below the high ideas of
the recompence which they conceived to be due to
their merit, that Ferdinand Pizarro, unable to
gratify such extravagant expectations, had re-
course to the fame expedient which his brother
had employed on a similar occasion, and endea-
voured to find occupation for his turbulent
assuming spirit, in order to prevent it from
breaking out into open mutiny. With this
view, he encouraged his most active officers to
attempt the discovery and reduEtion of various
provinces which had not hitherto submitted to the
Spaniards. To every standard ereced by the
leaders who undertook any of those new expedi-
tions, volunteers retorted with the ardour and
hope peculiar to the age. Several of Almlagro's
Ioldiers joined them, and thus Pizarro had the

Ziuratc, lIl. iii. c. z . V ga, p. , 1 lib. ii. c. 3g.

fat is-

fatisfaion of being delivered both from the im- B K

VI.

portunity of his discontented friends, and the ----
dread of his ancient enemies r. 533

ALMAGRO himself remained for several months Almagro

in custody, under all the anguish of fufpence. d,
For although his doom was determined by the
Pizarros from the moment that he fell into their
hands, prudence constrained them to defer grati-
fying their vengeance, until the soldiers who had
served under him, as well as several of their own
followers in whom they could not perfectly con-
fide, had left Cuzco. As soon as they set out
upon their different expeditions, Almagro was
impeached of treason, formally tried, and con- condemned,
demned to die. The sentence afRonifhed him;
and though lie had often braved death with
undaunted spirit in the field, its approach under
this ignominious form appalled him so much,
that he had recourse to abjet supplications,
unworthy of his former fame. He besought the
Pizarros to remember the ancient friendship be-
tween their brother and him, and how much he
had contributed to the prosperity of their family;
he reminded them of the humanity with which,
in opposition to the repeated remonstrances of

r Zaratc, 1. i. c.

i 2. Golnara Hit. c. 141. -ecrrera,
dec. 6. lib. iv. c. 7.

his

B OO K his own most attached friends, he had spared

v] their lives when he had them in his power; he
'538. conjured them to pity his age and infirmities. and

to susser him to pass the wretched remainder of
his days in bewailing his crimes, and in making
his peace with Heaven. The entreaties, fays a
Spanifl historian, of a man so much beloved,
touched many an unfeeling heart, and drew
tears from many a stern eye. But the brothers
remained inflexible. As soon as Almagro knew
his fate to be inevitable, he met it with the
and purto dignity and fortitude of a veteran. He was

strangled in prison, and afterwards publicly be-
headed. He fiFered in the feventy-fifth year of
his age, and left one son by an Indian woman of
Panama, whom, though at that time a prisoner
in Lima, he named as uccefior to his goverment,
pursuant to a power which the emperor had
granted him .

1539. As, during the civil dissentions in Peru, all

tions othe intercourse with Spain was suspended, the detail
parn °on of the extraordinary tranfadions there did not
ce ing the oon reach the court. Unfortunately for the
fate of
Peru. victorious fadion, the firif intelligence was

brought thither by lbme of Alnagro's officers,

" Zaratc, lib. iii. c. 12. Gomara -lift. c. 141. Vega,
p. . lib. ii. c. 39. H t'rcra, dec. .lil). iv. c. 9. lib. v. c. .

wlho

who left the country upon the ruin of their B K
cause; and they related what had happened, i_._. -
with every circunfltance unfavourable to Pizarro 153.
and his brothers. Their ambition, their breach
of the molt solemn engagements, their violence
and cruelty, were painted with all the malignity
and exaggeration of party hatred. Ferdinand
Pizarro, who arrived soon after, and appeared in
court with extraordinary splendor, endeavoured
to efface the impreflion which their accusations
had made, and to justify his brother and himself
by representing Alnagro as the aggressor. The
emperor and his ministers, though they could not
pronounce which of the contending factions was
most criminal, clearly discerned the fatal ten-
dency of their difnentiuns. It was obvious, that
while the leaders, entrusted with the conduct of
two infant colonies, employed the arms which
(hould have been turned against the common
enemy, in destroying one another, all attention
to the public good muff cease, and there was
reason to dread that the Indians might improve
the advantage which the disunion of the Spaniards
presented to them, and extirpate both the victors
;and vanquillcd. But the evil was more ap-
parent than the remedy. Where the information
which had been received was so defetive and
filipicious, and the fcCne of action so remote, it
wlas almolt iponiflble to chalk out the line

of

B OO K of conduc that ought to be followed; and
-_-L before any plan- that hould be approved of
'53s. in Spain could be carried into execution, the

fitualion of the parties, and the circumstances of
affairs, might alter so entirely as to render its
effets extremely pernicious.

Vaca de NOTHING therefore remained but to fend
Caiflo sent
thither with a person to Peru, veflcd with extensive and
ample powers. discretionary power, who, after viewing delic-

rately the posture of affairs with his own eyes,
and enquiring upon the spot into the conduct of
the different lcaders, flould be authorise to
establish the government in that form which he
deemed molt conducive to the interest of the
parent state, and the welfare of the colony.
The man feleccd for this important charge was
Chriftoval Vaca de Ca ro, a judge in the curt
of royal audience at Valladolid ; and his abilities,
integrity, and firnnefs, justified the choice.
His inftrutions, though ample, were not fucli
as to fetter him in his operations. Accordi to
the different aspect of affairs, he had pov.cr
to take upon hinm different charaders. 11 lie
found the governor flill alive, he was to aune
only the title of judge, to maintain the appear-
ance of ating in concert with him, and to guard
against giving any just caule of offence to a manl
who had inc:ited to highly of his country. But

i.

HISTORY OF AMERICA. 193

if Pizarro were dead, he was entrusted with'a B o K
commission that he might then produce, by
which he was appointed his successor in the '539.
government of Peru. This attention to Pizarro5
however, seems to have flowed rather from dread
of his power, than from any approbation of his
measures; for at the very time that the court
seemed so solicitous not to irritate him, his
brother Ferdinand was arrested at Madrid, and
confined to a prison, where he remained above
twenty years'.

WHILE Vaca de Cafiro was preparing for his 1540.

Pzalrro cl;-

royage, events of great moment happened in videsl'cru
Peru. The governor, confidering himself, upon s~'I°" no.s
the death of Almagro, as the unrivalled possessor
of that vast empire, proceeded to parcel out its
territories among the conquerors; and had this
division been made with any degree of im-
partiality, the extent of country which he had to
betlow, was sufficient to have gratified his friends,
and to have gained his enemies. But Pizarro
conduLted this tranfadion, not with the equity
and candour of a judge attentive to discover and
to reward merit, but with the illiberal spirit of a
party leader. Large districts, in parts of the

' Gomara 1Jift. c. 142. Vega, p. Ii. lib. ii. c. 40.
'(erera, dec. 6. lib. viii. c. 1J, 1i. lib. x. c, .

VOL. ,
l . O country

B oV K country most cultivated and populous, were fc,
tir apart as his own property, or granted to hi,

54 brothers, his adherents and favourites. To

others, lots less valuable and inviting were
assigned. The followers of Almagro, amongif
whom were many of the original adventurers to
whose valour and perseverance Pizarro was in.
debted for his success, were totally excluded
fiom any portion in those lands, towards the
acquisition of which they had contributed so
largely. As the vanity of every individual set an
immoderate value upon his own services, and the
idea of each concerning the recompence due to
them rose gradually to a more exorbitant heighi
in proportion as their conquests extended, all
who were disappointed in their expectations ex.
claimed loudly against the rapaciousness and
partiality of the governor. The partisans of
Almagro murmured in secret, and meditated
revenge ".

[ ;S',;os, RAPID as the progress of the Spaniards in
-r'1... South America had been since Pizarro landed in

Peru, their avidity of dominion was not yct
satisfied. The oflicers to whom Fcrdinand Pi-
zarro gave the command of different detachments,

" Vcg;, p. ib. lib. iii. c. 2. I-Icr-cra, dec. 6.
1i). viii. c. 5,

pcnetratcd

penetrated into several new provinces, and though B o o K
iome of them were exposed to great hardihips in -
the cold and barren regions of the Andes, and "'4°'
others suffered diflrefs not inferior amidst the
woods and marfles of the plains, they made
discoveries and conquests which not only ex-
tended their knowledge of the country, but
added considerably to the territories of Spain in
the New World. Pedro dc Valdivia re-affumed
Alnagro's scheme of invading Chili, and not-
withstanding the fortitude of the natives in de-
fending their pofffions, made such progress in
the conquest of the country, that he founded the
city of St. Jago, and gave a beginning to the
eltablifliment of the Spanish dominion in that
province w. But of all the enterprises undertaken Remarka.le

expeditiorx

about this period, that of Gonzalo Pizarro was of oilaol
the most remarkable. The governor, who seems Pizarro.
to have resolved that no person in Peru should
pollcl's any station of distinguished eminence or
auhllority but those of his own family, had
deprived Benalcazar, the conqueror of Quito, of
hi:; command in that kingdom, and appointed
his brother Gonzalo to take the government of
i . i iftructed him to attempt the di`covery
and conquest of the country to the cast of
ti.e Andes, which, according to the information

\' Ziat, lib. iii. c. 13. Ovallc, lib. ii. c. , &c.

02 of

B 0oo K of the Indians, abounded with cinnamon and

VI.
-^-- other valuable spices. Gonzalo, not inferior to
54' any of his bothers in courage, and no l;

ambitious of acquiring diftincoion, eagerly en.
gaged in thi di(icult service. He let out fron
Ouito at the cad of three hundred and forty
ioldicrs, near one half of whom were horfc!iii;
with ibur thouland Indians to carry their provi.
lions. In forcing their way through the dcfils,
or over the ridges of the Andes, excess of c!d
and latigue, to neither of which they were
accustomed, proved fatal to the greater part
t.! of their wretched attendants. The Spaniard.

though more robust, and inured to a variety
of climates, fufered considerably, and loftl 1one
men; but lwhen they descended into the low
country their distress increased. During two
months it rained incessantly, without any interval
of fair weather long enough to dry their clothes'.
The immense plains upon which they were nov
entering, either altogether without inhabitants, c1
occupied by the rudelt and least idufiious tribeC
in the New World, yielded little ubfiftcnce.
They could not advance a tcep but as the) curt
road through woods, or made it through marlhc,
Such iccllint toil, and continual farcily ol
ftoo. fei'e more than fuflicient o have c:;llaultu

:;nd

end dispirited any troops. But the fortitude and B 0O K
perseverance of the Spaniards in the sixteenth -
century were insuperable. Allured by frequent 1540"
but false accounts of rich countries before them,
they persisted in struggling on, until they reached
the banks of the Coca or Napo, one of the large
rivers whose waters pour into the Maragnon,
and contribute to its grandeur. There, with
infinite labour, they built a bark, which they
expected would prove of great utility, in convey-
ing them over rivers, in procuring provisions,
and in exploring the country. This was manned
with fifty soldiers, under the command of Francis
Orellana, the officer next in rank to Pizarro.
'Flie stream carried them down with such rapi-
dity, that they were soon far a-head of their
countrymen, who followed slowly and with
dificulty by land.

AT this distance from his commander, Orel- Dir;r-ld hy
iana, a young man of an aspiring mind, began to '" rt;"'
incy himself independent, and tranlported with
the predominant paflion of the age, he formed
the scheme of diftinguifling himfclf as a dill
coverer, by following the courle of the Marag-
non, until it joined the.occan, and by filrveying
ic vaIf regions through which it flows. T'his
!;:nhe.e of Orellana's was as bold ais it was
::.achlrous. i or, ii he be clharcable with tll

o 3 guilt

B 0 K guilt of having violated his duty to his cor
..-_ mander, and with having abandoned his fello
J54°0 soldiers in a pathless desert, where they hac

hardly any hopes of success, or even of fafet.
but what were founded on the service vniic!
they expeCed from the bark; his crime is,
some measure, balanced by the glory of havin'
ventured upon a navigation of near two thoullng,
leagues, through unknown nations, in a vil
hastily conftruted, with green timber, and r:
very unskilful hands, without provisions, viiho'!
a compass, or a pilot. But his cournae t :::

Sails down alacrity supplied every defect. Committing im1.
the Marags self fearlessly to the guidance of the fiream, ti:

Napo bore him along to the south, until h,
reached the great channel of the Maragnon,
Turning with it towards the coast, he held on
his course in that direAtion. He made frequen:
descents on both fides of the river, sometimes
seizing by force of arms the provisions of the
fierce savages feated on its banks; and some
times procuring a supply of food by a fiicntil
intercourse with more gentle tribes. After a
long series of dangers, which he encountered with
amazing fortitude, and of difhreffes which he
supported with no less magnanimity, he reachd
the oceany, where new perils awaited him,

Y Sec NOTE XXIT.

I K

Tlefe he likewise surmounted, and got safe B 0 o K

vi.

to the Spanish settlement in the island Cubagua; L[_
from thence he failed to Spain. The vanity 1'40.
natural to travellers who visit regions unknown
to the reft of mankind, and the art of an
adventurer, solicitous to magnify his own merit,
concurred in prompting him to mingle an ex-
traordinary proportion of the marvellous in the
narrative of his voyage. He pretended to have
discovered nations so rich, that the roofs of their
temples were covered with plates of gold; and
described a republic of women so warlike and
powerful, as to have extended their dominion
over a considerable tra&t of the fertile plains
which he had visited. Extravagant as those
tales were, they gave rife to an opinion, that a
region abounding with gold, difinguifhcd by
the name of El Dorado, and a community of
Amazons, were to be found in this part of
the New Worll ; and fiich is the propensity
of mankind to believe what is wonderful, that it
has been flokwly and with difficulty that rcalbn
and observation have exploded those fables. The
voyage, however, even when firipped of every
romantic embelliflhment, deserves to be recordled
not only as one of the mloft mcmlorable occur-
rcnccs in that adventurous age, but as the
irfl event which led to any certain knowledge

O 4- '' '

Bo o K of the extensive countries that fretch eaftwarn

Vi.
,Ji , from the Andes to the ocean z

154o.
niftrersof No words can describe the consternation ui

Pizarro, when he did not find the bark a!
the confluence of the Napo and Maragnon, where
he had ordered Orellana to wait for him. 1k
would not allow himself to Iufpeet that a man,
whom he had entrusted with such an important
command, could be so base and So unfeeling, a;
to desert him at such a jundure. But imputin2
his absence from the place of rendezvous ti,
some unknown accident, he advanced above
fifty leagues along the banks of the Maragnon,
expecing every moment to fee the bark appear
i54I. with a supply of provisions. At length he came

up with an officer whom Orellana had Lfit to
perish in the desert, because he had the courag,-
to remonfsrate against his perfidy. From him li
learned the extent of Orellana's crime, and 1:
followers perceived at once their own ddclleral
situation, when deprived of their only rc;iurcL.
The spirit of the stoutest hearted vetcra:.! 1;tn
within him, and all demanded to be led bacl
instantly. Pizarro, though he assumed an

z Zaratc, lib. iv. c. 4. Gomara Hist. c. 86. Vga, p. -

lib. iii. c. 4. Herrcra, dec. 6. lib.xi. c. 2-5. Rodrigict
El Maragnon y Ainazonas, lib. i. c. 3.

appearance of tranquillity, did not oppose their B o o K

vI.

inclination. But he was now twelve hundred L-V-
miles from Quito ; and in that long march the '541
Spaniards encountered hardships greater than
those which they had endured in their progress
outward, without the alluring hopes which then
toothed and animated them under their susser,
ings. Hunger compelled them to feed on roots
and berries, to eat all their dogs and horses,
to devour the most loathsome reptiles, and even
to gnaw the leather of their saddles and sword-
belts. Four thousand Indians, and two hundred
and ten Spaniards, perified in this wild disastrous
expedition, which continued near two years; and
as fifty men were aboard the bark with Orellana,
only fourscore got back to Quito. Thefi were
naked like savages, and so emaciated with
famine, or worn out with fatigue, that they
had more the appearance of fpestres than of
men L

BUT, instead of returning to enjoy the repose NmbeCr o

which his condition required, Pizarro, on enter- t',
ing Quito, received accounts of a fatal event that l'"'
threatened calamities more dreadful to him than
those through which he had pafied. From dhe

'; Zarate, lib. iv. c. 2-5. Vega, p. Ilib. iii. . , ,5.

;4. I-lcrrera, dec. 6. lib. viii c. 7, 8. lib. i>:. c 2-5.
rc. ,. lib. iii. c. 14. Pizar. Varoiucs, illurfi. 349, &c.

li1e1

B o o K time that his brother made that partial division of

VI. - his conquefls which has been mentioned, the
54t. adherents of Almagro, confidering themselves as

proscribed by the party in power, no longer
entertained any hope of bettering their con.
dition. Great numbers in despair resorted to
Lima, where the house of young Almagro was
always open to them, and the slender portion of
his father's fortune, which the governor allowed
him to enjoy, was spent in affording them sub-
fif-cnce. The warm attachment with which
every person who had served under the elder
Almagro devoted himself to his interelis, was
quickly transferred to his son, who was now
grown up to the age of manhood, and poffefilf
all the qualities which captivate the affecions of

condter soldiers. Of a graceful appearance, dexterous ar
mI,, 's all martial exercises, bold, open, generous, lhe
tilir licacr. feeed to be formed for command; and as hi~

father, conscious of his own inferiority, from the
total want of education, had been extreme!'
attentive to have him inftruted in every 1ciclnCC
becoming a gentleman; the accompliflmnents
which lie had acquired heightened the refpcc: of
his followers, as they gave him diflinc-ion nd
cnincnce among illiterate adventurers. ln lthii
youn1g man the Alllmagrians iound a point !
union lwhich they wanted, and looking up to hlil
as their head, were ready to undertake any tlliii',

6 1

for his advancement. Nor was affection for B OO K
Alnagro their only incitement; they were urged <-
on by their own diflrefles. Many of them, 54x1
deflitute of common necefaries b, and weary of
loitering away life, a burden to their chief, or to
such of their associates as hadfaved some remnant
of their fortune from pillage and confiscation,
longed impatiently for an occasion to exert their
ativity and courage, and began to deliberate
how they might be avenged on the author of
all their milery. Their frequent cabals did not C,nr.ic
pass unobserved; and the governor was warned jio!, l'-
to be on his guard against men who meditated zr'"
some dlelperate deed, and had resolution to
execute it. But either from the native in-
trepidity of his mind, or from contempt of
persons whose poverty seemed to render their
machinations of little consequence, lie difre-
garded the admonitions of his friends. " Be
in no pain," said he carelessly, " about imy
life; it is perfecly fatfe, as long as every man in
Peru knows that I can in a moment cut of any
head which dares to harbonlr a thought aganfi
it." This fccurity gave tlic Almi:grians ' nt
leisure to digcfl. and ripen every part of 1u
Icleme; and Juan (c l lcrrad:, :a1 olliccr o
great abilities, who had the charge: o A.i nao's

b cc NO'l' X' ;11,

C.tiC, l'U':i,

Bo o K education, took the diretion of their confulta.

VI.
_V,_. tions, with all the zeal which this connection
I54'* inspired, and with all the authority which the

ascendant that he was known to have over the
mind of his pupil gave him.

ON Sunday, the twenty-fixth of June, at

mid-day, the fcafon of tranquillity and iepofe in
all sultry climates, Herrada, at the head of
eighteen of the most determined conspirators,
sallied out of Almagro's house in complete
armour; and drawing their swords, as they
advanced hastily towards the governor's palace,
cried out, " Long live the king, but let the
tyrant die!" Their associates, warned of their
motions by a signal, were in arms at different
Itations ready to support themn. Though Pizarro
was usually surrounded by such a numerous
train of attendants as suited the magnificence of
the most opulent subjcd of the age in which he
lived, yet as he was jus: rilcn from table, and
moit of his domefiics had retired to their own
apartments, the conspirators pailed through the
two outer courts of the palace unobfcrved.

llhey were at the bottom of the flair-cafe, before

a page in waiting could give the alarn to his
rnaltcr, who was converting witl a few iicnls
in a large all. T'hc governor, wlol fadyl
iniild no form of danger could appal, fartini- ull,

cal lcd

called for arms, and commanded Francisco de I3 o K
Chaves to make fast the door. But that officer, vi.
who did not retain so much presence of mind as 1s41
to obey this prudent order, running to the top
of the flair-cafe, wildly asked the conspirators
what they meant, and whither they were going ?
Intfead of answering, they tfabbed him to the
heart, and burst into the hall. Some of the
persons who were there threw themselves from
the windows; others attempted to fly; and
a few drawing their swords, followcd their
leader into an inner apartment. The confi)i-
rators, animated ith having the object of their
vengeance now in view, ruffled forward after
them. Pizarro, with no other arms than his
fwvord and buckler, defended the entry, and
supported by his half-brother Alcantara, and his
fittle knot of friends, he maintained the unequal
contest with intrepidity worthy of his palt ex-
ploits, and with the vigour of a youthful com-
banalt, " Courage," cried he, " companions,
wvc are yet enow to make those traitors repent of
their audacity." But the armour of the con-
Ipirators protected them, while every thrust they
made took effe&. Alcantara fell dead at his
brother's feet; his oliher defenders were mortally
woundel. The overnor, so weary that he
could hardly wield his Iword, and no longer
able to p;rryl the many weapons furiously aimed

ite

c oo K at him, received a deadly thrust full in his

HVoI throat, funk to the ground, and expired.

154I.

A:mgro AS soon as he was slain, the afiafiins ran out
."li:c',.':s into the flreets, and waving their bloody vfords,
i):k.: proclaimed the death of the tyrant. Above two

hundred of their associates having joined them,
they conducted young Almagro in solemn pro.
ceflion through the city, and assembling the
magistrates and principal citizens, compelled
them to acknowledge him as lawful successor to
his father in his government. The palace of
Pizarro, together with the houses of several of
his adhercnts, were pillaged by the soldiers, who
had the fatisfation at once of being avenged on
their enemies, and of enriching themselves by
the spoils of thole through whose hands all the
weath of Peru had passed .

N. ,;- 'l'ns boldness and success of the conspiracy,
,..I;ti. as well as the name and popular qualities of

Alnuagro, drew many soldiers to his tandard.
lvciy adventurer of desperate fortune, all who
wcre dillitisfied with Pizarro, and from the
rapacioulhicfs of his government in the latter
years of his life, the number of malcontents was

' Z;.'at', lib. . c. 6-8. Gornara Hifl. c. 44, 145.

Vega, p. 11. lib. iii. c. 5-7. lIcrrcra, dec. 6. lib. x. . 4--7
I'izarro Var. llill. p. 183.

C 01on-1-

considerable, declared without hesitation in favour B o c
of Almagro, and lie was soon at the head of i, _
eight hundred of the most gallant veterans in 1541.
Peru. As his youth and inexperience difqualifiel
him from taking the command of them hinifelf,
he appointed IHerrada to at as general. But
though Almagro fpcedily collected such a re-
fpe'table force, the acquiescence in his government
was far from being general. Piz;arro had left
many friends to whom his memory was dear;
the barbarous affafination of a man to whom his
country was so highly indebted, filled every
impartial person with horror. The ignominious
birth of Almagro, as well as the doubtful title on
which he founded his pretensions, led oihers to
confider him as an usurper. The oficers who
commanded in ome provinces refused to recog-
nize his authority, until it was confirmed by
the emperor. In others, particularly at Cuzco,
tlie royal tandard was erefted, and preparations
were begun in order to revenge the murder of
their ancient leader.

THOSE feeds of discord, which could not have Arriv. of

V.c:i dce

lain long dormant, acquired great vigour and C;:lro,
adcivity, when the arrival of Vaca de Castro was
known. After a long and difiaftous voyage, ie
wIas driven by ftrefis of weather into a finall har-
bour in the province of Popayan ; and proceed-

ing

B 0 0 K ing from thence by land, after a journey no les
v_^- tedious than difficult, he reached Quito. In hit

54'. way he received accounts of Pizarro's death, and

.ho ns- of the events which followed upon it. He
lUImes tle
itl., of immediately produced the royal commiflion ap-
'O,:ve ior.

ovor pointing him governor of Peru, with the fame

privileges and authority ; and his jurifdiEtion was
acknowledged without hesitation by Benalcazar,
adelantado or lieutenant-general for the emperor
in Popayan, and by Pedro de Puelles, who, in
the absence of Gonzalo Pizarro, had the com-
mand of the troops left in Quito. Vaca de
Catro not only aflumed the supreme authority,
but shewed that he possessed the talents which
the exercise of it at that juncture required. By
his influence and address he soon assembled such
a body of troops, as not only set him above all
fear of being exposed to any insult from the
adverse party, but enabled him to advance from
Quito with the dignity that became his charater.
By dispatching persons of confidence to the dif-
ferent settlements in Peru, with a formal notifi-
cation of his arrival and of his commifion, he
communicated to his countrymen the royal
pleasure with relpe&t to the government of the
country. By private emiflaries, lie excited such
officers as had discovered their disapprobation
of Almagro's proceedings, to manieflt their duty
to their fovcrcign by supporting the perfo).

honourc'

honoured with his commiflion. Those measures B o o K

VI.

were productive of great eiiets. Encouraged by _
the approach of the new governor, or prepared 1541.
by his machinations, the loyal were confirmed in
their principles, a avt,:w'L them ith greater
boldness; the timid veni; d to declare their
sentiments; the neutral and wavering, finding it
necefiary to chule a fide, began to lean to that
which now appeared to be the fafelt, as well as
the most just .

ALMAGRO observed the rapid progress of this Conduc of

Almingro.

spirit of difaffction to his cauic, and in order to
give an effectual check to it before the arrival of
Vaca de Castro, he set out at the head of his 1542.
troops for Cuzco, where the most considerable
body of opponents had erected the royal standard,
under the command of Pedro Alvarez Holguin.
During his march thither, Herrada, the flilful
guide of his youth and of his counsels, died;
and from that time his measures were conspicuous
for their violence, but concerted with little saga-
city, and executed with no address. Ilolguin,
who, with forces far inferior to those of the
opposite party, was dcfcending towards the coast
at the very time that Ahlagro was on his way

Bcni.oii, lib. iii. c. 9. Zaratc, lib. iv. c. . Gomara,

. 46, 147. Iicnrcrl, dec. 6. lit. x. c. i, 2, 3. 7, &c.
VOL. 111. P to

B 0 0 Kc to Cuzco, deceived his unexperienced adversary

VI. «.-,_ by a very simple flratagem, avoided an engage.

I54- ment, and effeEted a junction with Alvarado, an

officer of note, who had been the first to declare
against Almagro as an usurper.

Prorctfs of SOON after, Vaca de Cafiro entered their
\'aca de
caaio. camp with the troops which he brought from

Quito, and ereting the royal flandard before his
own tent, he declared, that as governor, he
would discharge in person all the funtions of
general of their combined forces. Though
formed by the tenour of his palt life to the
habits of a sedentary and pacific profeflion, he at
once assumed the ativity and difcDvered the
decision of an officer long accustomed to coIn.
mand. Knowing his strength to be now far
superior to that of the enemy, he was impatient
to terminate the contest by a battle. Nor diil
the followers of Almagro, who had no hopes of
obtaining a pardon for a crime lb atrocious
as the murder of the governor, decline that
Scpt. 16. mode of decifioi. They met at Chupaz, about

two hundred miles from Cuzco, and fought with
all the fierce animosity inspired by the violence
of civil rage, the rancour of private enmity, the
cagerncfs of revenge, and the last ellorts f
n.r( f:;l despair. Victory, after remaining long doubtfllll,

W cdclared at lafl for Vaca dc Caflro. The fulprior

nun;l~)1;'

nrimber of his troops, his own intrepidity, and 1 o o K

Vio

the martial talents of Francisco de Carvajal, _
a veteran officer formed under the great captain 542.
in the wars of Italy, and who on that day laid
the foundation of his future fame in Peru,
triumphed over the bravery of his opponents,
though led on by young Almagro with a gallant
spirit, worthy of a better cause, and deserving
another fate. The carnage was great in propor-
tion to the number of the combatants. Many
of the vanquished, especially such as were
conscious that they might be charged with being
accessory to the affafination of Pizarro, rushing
on the swords of the enemy, chore to fall like
soldiers, rather than wait an ignominious doom.
Of fourteen hundred men, the total amount of
combatants on both fides, five hundred lay dead
on the field, and the number of the wounded was
fill greater .
.

IF the military talents displayed by Vaca de Severity of

Castro, both in the council and in the field, h .Ins
firprifed the adventurers in Peru, they were still
more aftonifled at his condu& after the viEtory.
As he was by nature a rigid dispenser of jurfice,
and persuaded that it required examples of

e ;rantc, lilb. iv. c. 12-19. Gomara, c. r48. Vega,

I. I i.

b .

i C. . -- -i L. IHclier ra, dec. 7. lib. i. c. . 2, 3.
i1,. iii, . - 1I.

P 2 extra-

B O 0 K extraordinary severity to restrain the licentious

vI.

_-,_ spirit of soldiers so far removed from the feat of
3542. government, he proceeded directly to try his

prisoners as rebels. Forty were condemned
to susSer the death of traitors, others were
banished from Peru. Their leader, who made
his escape from the battle, being betrayed by
some of his officers, was publicly beheaded in
Cuzco; and in him the name of Almagro, and
the spirit of the party, was extinct'.

ConfuIta1 DURING those violent convulsions in Peru, te
tikus1 of the
cmplt.ro- emperor and his ministers were intently employed
concerning

,iibdomi- in preparing regulations, by which they hoped
Arica. not only to re-cftablifh tranquillity there, but tu

introduce a more perfect system of internal
policy into all their settlements in the N:
World. It is manifest from all the eveint
recorded in the history of America, that rapid
and extensive as the Sp;,nifli conquells there lihad
been, tley wera not carried on by any regulir
exertion of the national force, but by tl'.
occasional efforts of private adventurers. At'
fitting out a few of the sirs: armanlents fur dil
covering new regions, the court of Spain, dm il,:
the busy reigns of F'erdinad and and of ChaIis V.

f /Z ratc, lib. iv. c. 21. (,)in:;ri, c. 150. lii;
''cc. 7 lib. iii. c. 2. lib. vi. c, i.

IIi.

the former the most intriguing prince of the age, B O O K
and the latter the most ambitious, was encumbered vi
with such a multiplicity of schemes, and involved 154.
in war with so many nations of Europe, that he
had not leisure to attend to didtant and les
interesting objeEcs. The care of prosecuting dif-
covery, or of attempting conquest, was abandoned
to individuals; and with such ardour did men
push forward in this new career, on which
novelty, the spirit of adventure, avarice, ambi-
tion, and the hope of meriting heaven, prompted
them wilh combined influence to enter, that in
lels than half a century alinofl the whole of that
extensive empire which Spain now pofltcnes in the
New World, was fubjeedl to its dominion. As
the Spanish court contributed nothing towards
the various expeditions undertaken in America,
it was not entitled to claim much from their
fifccefs. The fvereignty of the conquered pro-
\inccs, with the fifth of the gold and silver,
I as reserved for the crown ; every thing else was
fiizecd by the albciates ill each expedition as
thcir own right. The plunder of the countries
v.lich they invaded served to indemnify them
1;I'. \\ lht they had expended in equipping them-
Ulvcs Ior tlie frvice, and the conquered territory
\uas dli ided a nong tlicm, according to rules
\t!icli cu(finftl liad itroducetd, as perniannt ct fa-
illiiicnts whicl their iccclsful valour Ilerited.

' 3 ii

B 0 K In the infancy of those settlements, when their

, extent as wall as their value were unknown,
'42. many irregularities Jcaped observation, and it

was found necessary to connive at many excesses,
The conquered people were frequently pillaged
with deftruaive rapacity, and their country
parcelled out among its new mailers in exorbi.
tant shares, far exceeding the highest recompence
due to their services. The rude conquerors of
America, incapable of forming their ellablifli.
ments upon any general or extensive plan of
policy, attentive only to private interest, unwilling
to forego prefcnt gain from the profpe of
remote or public benefit, seem to have had no
objct but to amass sudden wealth, without
regarding what might be the consequences of the
means by which they acquired it. But when
time at length discovered to the Spanifli court
the importance of its American poffeflions, the
necessity of new-modelling their whole frame
became obvious, and in place of the maxims and
practices, prevalent among military adventurers,
it was found requisite to substitute the inltitutions
of regular government.

ONE evil in particular called for an immediate

remedy. The conquerors of Mexico and Peru
imitated the fatal example of their countrymen
ftctlcd in the islands, and employed thcmfelvcs in

fcarch.

searching for gold and silver with the fame incon- B o o K
fitlerate eagerness. Sinmilar effecrs followed. The -
natives employed in this labour by masters, who s542'
in imposing talks had no regard either to what
they felt or to what they were able to perform,
pined away and perished so salt, that there was
reason to apprehend that Spain, instead of poffefl-
ing countries peopled to such a degree as to be
susceptible of progressive improvement, would
soon remain proprietor only of a aft uninhabited
desert.

THE emperor and his ministers were so

sensible of this, and so solicitous to prevent the
extindion of the Indian race, which threatened
to render their acquisitions of no value, that
fiom time to time various laws, which I have
mentioned, had been made for securing to that
unhappy people more gentle and equitable treat-
ment. But the distance of America from the
feat of empire, the fceblenefs of government in
the new colonies, the avarice and audacity of
ol(liers unaccustomed to restraint, prevented
these lalutary regulations from operating with
any conficlerable influence. The evil continued
to grow, and at this time the emplcrol found an
interval of leisure from the afitirs of Europe to
lake it into attentive confidcration. I cluil tcd '/lhcjtll,,.s
!!ot only with his iniifters and the inciiib'.-'rs f
.ic ;(!i

1 4 1h11

B O O K the council of the Indies, but called upon several

VI.

t_- persons who had resided long in the New World,
'542- to aid them with the result of their experience

and obfervatiun. Fortu;I ately for thc people of
America, among these was Bartholomew de las
Casas, who happened to be then at Madrid on a
inilion from a Chapter of his order at Chiapa,.
Though, since the miscarriage of his former
fchenies for the relief of the Indians, he had
continued hut up in his cloister, or occupied il
religious fuoftions, his zeal in behalf of the
former objets of his pity was so far from
abating, that, from an increased knowledge of
their fuffcrings, its ardour had augmented. Ile
seized eagerly this opportunity of reviving his
favourite maxims concerning the treatment of the
Indians. With the moving eloquence natural to
a man on whose mind the scenes which lie
had beheld had made a deep impreflion, he
deicribed the irreparable walle of the human
species in the New World, the Indian race almost
totally swept away in the ilands in less than
fifty years, and hastening to extinction on the
continent with the fame rapid decay. With tlc
dccilive tone of one firongly prepoffelled with
the truth of his own system, he imputed all
this to a ingle caufc, to the exadions and cruelty

g Remefal Hill. de Ciipa, p. 146.

of

of his countrymen, and contended that nothing B o o K
could prevent the depopulation of America, but ,
the declaring of its natives to be freemen, and 154z.
treating them as fubjeds, not as slaves. Nor did
he confide for the success of this proposal in the
powers of his oratory alone. In order to enforce
them, he composcd his famous treatise concern-
ing the deftrution of America h, in which he
relates, with many horrid circumstances, but
with apparent marks of exaggerated description,
the devaflation of every, province which had
been visited by the Spaniards.

THE emperor was deeply aifed with the r"l foici-

ltU(L 7(1 in-

recital of so many aions hocking to humanity. tioduc a
But as his views etended far beyond those of foration
Las Casas, he perceived that relieving the Indians °f ,l",,
from oppreflion was but one ftep towards render-
ing his poffeflions in the New World a valuable
acquisition, and would be of little avail, unless he
could circumscribe the power and usurpations of
his own subje&s there. The conquerors of
America, however great ihcir ncerit had been
towards their country, were moilly persons of
fulch mean birth, and of such an albjte rank in
society, as gave ni) di(liiclill in ilic eye of
a monarch. The xorbitatil wvalth with whicl

h Rrcm. fal p. 192. )9.

foimeC

B O o K some of them returned, gave umbrage to an ae

v ,-,, not accustomed to fee men in inferior condition
'54%. elevated above their level, and rising to emulate

or to surpass the ancient nobility in splendour.
The territories which their leaders had appro.
priated to thenfelves were of such enormous
extent , that if the country should ever be
improved in proportion to the fertility of the foil,
they muff grow too wealthy and too powerful
for fubjeCs. It appeared to Charles that this
abuse required a remedy no less than the other,
and that the regulations concerning both must
be enforced by a mode of government more
vigorous than had yet been introduced into
America.

Ne' reg- WITH this view he framed a body of law;,
hations for
tills pur- containing many salutary appointments with

refpea to the constitution and powers of the
supreme council of the Indies; concerning the
station and jurifdicion of the royal audiences in
different parts of America ; the adnminiltratioi of
justice; the order of government, both cccle-
fiaftical and civil. Thete were approved of Iby
all ranks of men. But to(clhtr with them r'cre
iflued the following regulations, w!hich excited
universal alarm, and occasioned the molt violent

Sec NOTE XXIV.

C'I.*!

convulsions: " That as the rpartimicnfos or B o o K

VI.

shares of land seized by several persons appeared
to be exceflive, the royal audiences are empowered I54 Z
to reduce them to a moderate extent: That upon
the death of any conqueror or planter, the lands
and Indians granted to him shall not descend to
his widow or children, but return to the crown:
That the Indians shall henceforth be exempt
from personal service, and shall not be compelled
to carry the baggage of travellers, to labour
in the mines, o, to live in the pearl fisheries:
That the itatcd tribute due by them to their
superior hall be ascertained, and they (hall be
paid as servants for any work they voluntarily
perform: That all perrons who are or have
been in public offices, ail ecclesiastics of every
denomination, all hospitals and rnonafteries, hall
be deprived of the lands and Indians allotted
to them, and there be annexed to the crown:
That every person in Peru, who had any criminal
concern in the contests between Pizarro and
Almnagro, flould forfeit his lands and Indians k."

ALL the Spanish ministers who had hitherto Hisminlr-

been entrufled with the lireEtion of Amierican ri a.l a-
afIairs, and who were belt acqutainted with tile ""' l

k Hlerrera, dec. 7. lib. vi. c. 5. Fcriutinl c.z I-li l. lil,. i.
C. 1, 2.

slate

B O O K ate of the country, remonflrated againfl those

._L, regulations as ruinous to their infant colo,ics.
542- They represented, that the number of Spaniards

who had hitherto emigrated to the New World
was so extremely small, that nothing could be
expeted from any effort of theirs towards im-
proving the vast regions over which they were
Scattered; that the success of every cheme
for this purpose must depend upon the ministry
and service of the Indians, whole native indo-
lence and aversion to labour, no prospect of
benefit or promise of reward could surmount;
that the moment the right of imposing a tafl;,
and exacting the performance of it, was taken
from their mailers, every work of industry
mult cease, and all the sources from which
wealth begun to pour in upon Spain must be
ftopt for ever. But Charles, tenacious at all
times of his own opinions, and so much im-
prefled at present with the view of the disorders
which reigned in Ameriea, that he was willing
to hazard the application ein of a dangerous
remedy, pcrfifted in his resolution of pilblifling
the laws. That they might be carried into
execution with greater vigour and authority, he
authorised lrancilio Tello de Sandloval to repair
to Mexico as !/'i/t(r or fiuperintendlan of Ihat
country, and to co-operate with Antonio de
\lcndloz:, the viceroy, in enforcing them.

11l

He appointed Blasco Nugnez Vela to be o o K
governor of Peru, with the title of Viceroy ; <
and in order to strengthen his administration, he ^ 'icroy
eftahlifhed a court of royal audience in Lima, in :','1'"1
which four lawyers of eminence were to preside
as judges '

THE viceroy and fuperintcndant failed at the lffeaof

tilhe regula-

fame time; and an account of the laws which tion in
they were to enforce reached America before Ncw 'bn.
them. The entry of Sandoval into Mexico was
viewed as the prelude of general ruin. The
unlimited grant of liberty to the Indians affected
every Spaniard in America without diftinEion,
and there was hardly one who might not on
some pretext be included under the other regu-
lations, and susser by them. But the colony in
New Spain had now been so long accultomed to
the reitraints of law and authority under the
steady and prudent adminifiration of Mcndoza,
that how much soever the fpilit of the new
flatutes was detefed and dreaded, no attempt
was made to obstruct the pullication ol them by
any a of violence unbecoming subje&s. The
magistrates and principal inhabitants, however,
prufented dutiful addrelles to the viceroy and

t Zaratc, lib. iii. c, 24.

2 Gonlla , c. 151. Vcga, p. 2.
lib. iii. . 20.

fupetr-

B 6 o K fuperintendant, representing the fatal confe.

VI. 'li quences of enforcing them. Happily for them,
.543- Mcndoza, by long residence in the country, was

so thoroughly acquainted with its state, that he
knew what was for its interet as well as what it
could bear; and Sandoval, though new in office,
displayed a degree of moderation seldom poffecled
by persons just entering upon the exercise of
power. They engaged to fulpend, for some
time, the execution oi what was offensive in the
new laws, and not only contented that a deputa-
tion of citizens flould be sent to Europe to
lay before the emperor the appreherfions of his
fubjeas in New Spain with refpeEt to their
tendency and effects, but they concurred with
them in supporting their sentiments. Charles,
moved by the opinion of men whose abilities and
integrity entitled them to decide concerning
what fell imniediately under their own view,
granted such a relaxation of the rigour of the
laws as re-eftablilhcd the colony in its former
tranquillity "'.
InI Ciu. IN Peru the orm gathered with an apel

(ill more fierce and threatening, and was not o
soon difpclled. The conquerors of Peru, of

Fecrnandez I;l. lib. i. c. 3,, 5 . li, b. iii.

o. 2, 22. H-lTr ra, (de. 7 '. li. v. c. lib. vii. c. 14, rS.
Turqucmn. MNond. Ind. lib. v. c. 13.

a rank

a rank much inferior t th.e who had fubjeAed n o o rK
Mexico to the SpaniSh c.vn, farther removed
from the inspection of the parent Itate, and '543'
intoxicated wilh the sudden acquisition of wealth,
carried on all their operations with greater
licence and irregularity than any body of adven-
turers in the New World. Amidst the general
subversion of law and order, occasioned by two
successive civil wars, when each individual was at
liberty to decide for himself, without any guide
but his own interest or pallions, this turbulent
spirit rose above all sense of subordination. To
men thus corrupted by anarchy, the itroduction
of regular government, the power of a viceroy,
and the authority of a refpedable court of
judicature, would of themselves have appeared
formidable restraints, to which they would have
fubiitted with reluctance. But they revolted
with indignation againfl the idea of complying
with laws, by which they were to be firipped at
once of all they had earned so hardly during
many years of service and suffering. As the
account of the new laws spread fucceflively
through the different fettlemcnts, the inhabitants
ran together, the women in tears, and the men
excl.iming againfl the injulice andi ingratitude
of their I)vcrcign in cprliving them, unheard
anl uiconvicd, of their puoll;li'ns. "Is tl'i,"
cricd [hey, ' the recomipnce due to pcrolls,

who,

B 0 0 K who, without public aid, at their own expencc,

VI.
-v-- and by their own valour, have fubjeEted to the

53 crown of Castile territories of fuich iinmenle

extent and opulence? Are these the rewards
bestowed for having endured unparalleled diflrefs,
for having encountered every species of danger
in the service of their country? Whose merit
is so great, whole cndut has been so irreproach-
able, that he may not be condemned by fonle
penal clause in regulations, conceived in terms
as loose and comprelienfive, as if it had been
intended that all flould be entangled in their
snare? Every Spaniard of note in Peru has
held some public office, and all, without dif-
tinaion, have been conltrained to take an active
part in the contest between the two rival chidc;.
Were the former to be robbed of their property
because they had done their duty? Were the
latter to be punilhed on account of what they
could not avoid'? Shall the conquerors of tlii
great empire, infead of receiving marks c
diftindion, be deprived of ilic natural colnlu.i-
tion of providing fOr their widows and childrein,
and leave them to depend for flubfifence on tilh
scanty ifupply they can extort from unfeclinli,
courtiers"? We are not able now, coitinucd[
they, to explore unknown regliolns in qucft oi

" IIrrcra, dec. 7. lib. ii. c. i1, 15.

micre

more secure settlements; our constitutions debi- n o ,o K
litated with age, and our bodies covered with v]i
wounds, are no longer fit for active service; but '543
itill we possess vigour sufficient to aert our juit
rights, and we will not tamely susser them to be
wrested from us ."

B' discourses of this fort, uttered with vehe- An infut-

rt tion prc-
mence, and liflened to with universal approbation, vented by

the r!odc

their paflions were inflamed to flch a pitch, ration of
that they were prepared for the moil violent Crftro.
measures; and began to hold consultations in
different places, how they might oppose the
entrance of the viceroy and judges, and prevent
not only the execution but the promulgation of
the new laws. From this, however, they were
diverted by the address of Vaca de Castro, who
flattered them with hopes, that, as soon as
the viceroy and judges should arrive, and had
leisure to examine their petitions and remon-
flrances, they would concur with them in endea-
vouring to procure some mitigation in the rigour
of laws which had been framed without due
attention either to the tlate of the country, or to
the entiments of the people. A greater degree
of accommodation to there, and even ome con-

' Gomara, c. 152. I1rrcra, dec. 7. Eb. vi. c. o,
Vc!ra, p. i. lib. iii. c. 20. 22.1Iib. iv. c. 3, 4.

VOL. III, Q ccflions

B o o
v ceilions on the part of government, were now

V1.

become requisite to compose the present ferment,
'543. and to soothe the colonists into fubmifion, by

inspiring them with confidence in their superiors.
But without profound difcernmcnt, conciliating
manners, and flexibility of temper, such a plan

The fpiirt could not be carried on. The viceroy possesid

to-is ^

,, none of these. Of all the qualities that fit men

tic 'fccl'Yy for high command, he was endowed only with
tlic viceroy.

integrity and courage; the former harsh and
uncomplying, the latter bordering so frequently
on rashness or obstinacy, that in his situation they
Marli 4. were defects rather than virtues. From the

moment that he landed at Tumbez, Nugnez
Vela seems to have confidered himself merely a.
an executive officer, without any discretionary
power ; and, regardless of whatever he observed
or heard concerning the ifate of the country, he
adhered to the letter of the regulations with
unrelenting rigour. In all the towns througli
which he pased, the natives were declared to h'.
free, every person in public oflice was deprived
of his lands and servants ; and as an example oi
obedience to others, he would not fufler a ingle
Indian to be employed in carrying his own
baggage in his march towards Lima. Amazec
Ilent and conflernation went before him as hi
approached ; and o little flicitous was lie t
prevent thelcf from augmlenting, that, on citcr-

i !;

ilg the capital, he openly avowed that he came B o o K
to obey the orders of his sovereign, not to L-
difpenre with his laws. This harsh declaration s143
was accompanied with what rendered it still
more intolerable, haughtiness in deportment,
a tone of arrogance and decision in discourse,
and an infolencc of office grievous to men little
accultomed to hold civil authority in high refpe&.
Every attempt to procure a suspension or mitiga-
tion of the new laws, the viceroy confidered as
flowing fiom a spirit of difaffecion that tended
to rebellion. Several persons of rank were con-
fined, and ome put to death, without any form
of trial. Vaca de Castro was arrested, and not-
withltanding the dignity of his former rank, and
his merit, in having prevented a general infur-
reftion in the colony, he was loaded with chains,
and hut up in the common jail P.

BUTr however general the indignation was Thc miil-

against such proceedings, it is probable the hand Cl',ltG,,O-
ot authority would have been strong enough to `lo i',,Io
ilpprefs it, or to prevent it burliing out with lcadr.
open violence, if the malcontents had not been
provided with a leader of credit and eminence to
unite and to direct their efibrts. From the

P %Zaatc, lil. iv. c. 23, 24, 2. Gomara, c. 153-r55.
V\i;, p. 11. lib. iv. . t, 5. lcrlulla dez, lib. i. . 6-1o.

(^ 2I time

B 0 0 K time that the purport of the new regulations

was known in Peru, every Spaniard there turned
1543. his eyes towards Gonzalo Pizarro, as the only

person able to avert the ruin with which they
threatened the colony. From all quarters, letters
and addrelles were fcnt to him, conjuring him to
itand forth as their common prote&tor, and olfer.
ing to support him in the attempt with their
lives and fortunes. Gonzalo, though inferior in
talents to his other brothers, was equally anmbi
tious, and of courage no lets daring. The
behaviour of an ungrateful court towards his
brothers and himself, dwelt continually on his
mind. Ferdinand a slate prisoner in Europe,
the children of the governor in custody of the
viceroy, and sent aboard his fleet, himself reduced
to the condition of a private citizen in a country,
for the discovery and conquefl of which Spain
was indebted to his family. These thought
prompted him to seek for vengeance, and to
assert the rights of his family, of which he now
confidercd himself as the guardian and the heir.
But as no Spaniard can easily surmount that
veneration for his overeign which eems to
be interwoven in his frame, the idea of marching
in arms against the royal flandard filled him!
with horror. He hesitated long, and was flill
unresolved, when the violence of the viceroy, thc
universal call of his countrymen, and the certainI'

r(

of becoming soon a victim himself to the severity o o K

V.

of the new laws, moved him to quit his residence _
at Chuquifaca de la Plata, and repair to Cuzco. 's3-
All the inhabitants went our to meet him, and
received him with transports of joy as the
deliverer of the colony. In the fervour of their
zeal, they elected him procurator-general of the
Spanifi nation in Peru, to solicit the repeal of
the late regulations. They empowered him to
lay their remonstrances before the royal audience
il Lima, and upon pretext of danger from the
Indians, authoriscd him to march thither in
;;rms. Under sanction of this nomination Pizarro ,544
took pofnefion of the royal trcafure, appointed
officers, levied soldiers, seized a large train of
artillery which Vaca de Castro had depofted in
Gumanga, and set out for Lima, as if he had been
advancing againfl a public enemy. Di)ifraftion
having now alumied a regular form, and being
united under a chief of f ifliiiguifned name,
many perlons of note rcfluted to his standard;
and a conliderable p)iart ol the troops, railed by
the viceroy to oppoif his progrelf, dcfcrtcd to
:ilin in a body q.

'! Zaratc, lilb. v. c. . G omail, . 156, I57. \V rga, p. J 1.
: i'v.C. 4- 12. l'F'ri]ld(hT .Z, li). i. 12-17. J iL cr1;,
,,, ., li. vii. c. I ,', S:. lib. vi'i. c. I-.

_, 3 Bjlrom;

B o0 K BEFORE Pizarro reached Lima, a revolutionr
i _-v-- had happened there, which encouraged him to
Difcntio4ns proceed with almost certainty of success. The
ofthevice- violence of the viceroy's administration was not
roy and
court of more formidable to the Spaniards of Peru, th;ln
audience.

his over-bearing haughtiness was odious to lii
associates, the judges of the royal audience,
During their voyage from Spain, some fymptoni:
of coldness between the viceroy and them begsal
to appear r. But as soon as they entered upon
the exercise of their refpecEive offices, both
parties were so much exasperated by frcquc:,
contests, arising from interference of ju:ifidii
and contrariety of opinion, that their mutual
disgust oon grew into open enmity. The judges
thwarted the viceroy in every measure, frt ;!t
liberty prisoners whom he had confined, juflifill
the malcontents, and applauded their rcmen.
itrances. At a time when both departne;;
of government should have united againt the
approaching enemy, they were contending *iii
each other for superiority. The jud;l s a:'

Theviceroy length prevailed. The viceroy, univ

s ll!ix

imprifontdl,
slit. is. odious, and abandoned even by his own gu;lru,.

was seized in his palace, and carried to ;
desert island on the coals, to be kept tllrL
until he could be lent home to Spain.

r Gomara, c. 17 1.

TI,;

THE judges, in consequence of this, having B 0o K

assumed the supreme direifon of affairs into -...
their own hands, issued a proclamation suspend- vie54fr
ing the execution of the obnoxious laws, and P'za''o.
sent a mnefage to Pizarro, requiring hinm, as they
had already granted whatever he could request,
to dismiss his troops, and to repair to Lima with
fifteen or twenty attendants. They could hardly
expec that a man so daring and ambitious would
tamely comply ith this requisition. It was
made, probably, with no such intention, but
only to throw a decent veil over their own
condu&t; for Cepeda, the president of the court
of audience, a pragmatical and aspiring lawyer,
seems to have held a secret correfpondcnce with
Pizarro, and had already formed the plan,
which he afterwards executed, of devoting him-
self to his service. The imprisonment of the
viceroy, the usurpation of the judges, together
with the universal confusion and anarchy con-
sequent upon events to singular and unexpcded,
opened new and vast plroivcts to Pizarro. lie
nIow beheld the luprcllcii power withiln his reach.
Nor did he want courage to push on towards
the objest which fortun presented to his view.
Carvajal, the prompter of his reiblutions, and
guidc of all ills ations, had long sixd hisi eye
upon it as the only end at which Pizarro oiughl
to aim. Jlnfiad of' the inferior funcliont o

. .1 plOCI-

Bo o K procurator for the Spanish settlements in Peru,

Vi.

..--_ he openly demanded to be governor and captain-
1544. general of the whole province, and required the

court of audience to grant him a commiflion to
that effet. At the head of twelve hundred
men, within a mile of Lima, where there was
neither leader nor army to oppose him, fucl
a request carried with it the authority of a
command. But the judges, either from unwil-
lingnefs to relinquish power, or fi-om a desire
of preserving some attention to appearances,
hesitated, or seemed to helitate, about comlplying

He arruncs with what he demanded. Carvajal, impatient of
the goxtrn-
7nnt. delay, and impetuous in all his operations,

Inarched into the city by night, seized several
officers of diflin&ion obnoxious to Pizarro, and
hanged them without the formality of a trial.
Next morning the court of audience issued a
commission in the emperor's name, appointing
Pizarro governor of Peru, with full powers,
civil as well as military, and he entered the
town that day with extraordinary pomp, to take
possession of his new dignity .

oC. 1S. BUT amidst the disorder and turbulence which
The viceroy
Thovershis accompanied this total dissolution of the famnl
libcrty.

' Zaratc, lib. v. c. 8-1o. Vcga, p. l. lb. iv. c. 3-

i9. Goniara, c. 159-63. Fcrnandcz, lib. i. c. IS-25..
Ilcrrcra, dec. 7. lib. viii. c. o1-20.

o[

of government, the minds of men, set loose B o o K

vI.

from the ordinary restraints of law and authority,
aced with flch capricious irregularity, that J544.
events no less extraordinary than unexpected
followed in a rapid filccefsion. Pizarro had
scarcely begun to exercise the new powers with
which he was invetfed, when he beheld for-
midable enemies ife up to oppose him. The
viceroy having been put on board a vessel by
the judges of the audience, il order that he
might be carried to Spain under cultody of Juan
Alvarez, one of their own number; as oon as
they were out at ea, Alvarez, either touched
with remorse or moved by fear, kneeled down
to his prisoner, declaring him from that moment
to be free, and that he himself, and every
person in the hip, would obey him as the legal
representative of their sovereign. Nugnez Vela
ordered the pilot of the vefiel to hape his
course towards Tumbez, and as oon as he
landed there, crected the royal standard, and
reurned his functions of viceroy. Several per-
sons of note, to whom the contagion of the
seditious flpiit which reigned at Cuzoo and
Lima had not reached, instantly avowed their
resolution to lipport his authority . The

' :.arate, lib. c. 9.

c . , . 65. Feriand'rz, lib. i.
': '3. l r:rrcra;, (ci . b. iii. . 15.

violencc

B 0 0 K violence of Pizarro's government, who obfervci

VI.
.-i every individual with the jealousy natural to
J544. usurpers, and who punifihed every appearance of

difaTffEion with unforgiving severity, soon aug.
mented the number of the viceroy's adherents, as
it forced some leading men in the colony to 1ly
to him for refuge. While he was gathering
such firength at Tumbez, that his forces began
to assume the appearance of what was con-
fidered as an army in America, Diego Centeno,
a bold and acive oflicer, exasperated by the
cruelty and opprefflion of Pizarro's lieutenant-
governor in the province of Charcas, formced a
conspiracy againfl his life, cut him olf, and
declared for the viceroy .

,4. 5455 PIZARRO, though alarmed with those appear-
Pizarro
matchs ances of hofiility in the opposite extremes o thi
againl him.

empire, was not disconcerted. He prepared to
assert the authority to which he had attain'd.
with the spirit and conduct of an oflicer accul:
tomed to command, and marched diretdi'
'agaiiint the viccroy as the enemy who w:,;
nearel: as well as noft formidable. A\ lic
wuas malter of the public revcnues in Peru,
and molt of the military men were attachld

n Zarate, lib. v. c, IS. Gomii'a, c. 1(9. Icrl;.
Jec. 7. lib. ix c. 2.

to his family, his troops were so numlious, that B O O K
the viceroy, unable to face them, rc:r .:: ted ,
towards Quito. Pizarro followed him; and Is54
in that long march, through a wild mountainous
country, suffered hardships and encountered difi-
culties, which no troops but those accustomed
to serve in America could have endured or
surmounted w. The viceroy had scarcely reached
Quito, when the van-guard of Pizarro's forces
appeared, led by Carvajal, who, though near
fourscore, was as hardy and active as any young
soldier under his command. Nugnez Vela in-
flantly abandoned a town incapable of defence,
and with a rapidity more resembling a flight
than a retreat, marched into the province of
Popayan. Pizarro continued to pursue; but
finding it impoflible to overtake him, returned
to Quito. From thence he dilpatched Carvajal
to oppose Centeno, who was growing formidable
in the southern provinces of the empire, and he
himself remained there to make head againil llc
viceroy x.

BY his own activity, and the afiiflance of rtl:( ;roy
Bcnalcazar, Nugncz Vela soon alblcd flour

See NOTE XXV.

x Ziiatc, 1lb. v. c. 15, 6- -I (n ar, c. 167. V*,ai

p. 1i. lil,. i. c. 25-28. li"t,,icl , lib. . c. 3't.
JJc1ircra, dec. 7. lit). viii. c. 6. 20-27.

h undrled

no o K hundred men in Popayan. As he retained,

V_. amidst all his disasters, the fame elevation of
3545. mind, and the fame high sense of his own

dignity, he rejected with disdain the advice of
fbme of his followers, who urged him to make
overtures of accommodation to Pizarro, declaring
that it was only by the sword that a contest with
rebels could be decided. With this intention
he marched back to Quito. Pizarro, relying
1546.

on the superior number, and Itill more on the
discipline and valour of his troops, advanced
aury resolutely to meet him. T'he battle was fierce

and bloody, both parties fighting like mcn who
knew that the pofinefion of a great empire, tle
fate of their leaders, and their own future
fortune, depended upon the issue of that day.
But Pizarro's veterans pulfied forward with such
regular and wll-direced force, that they soon
began to make impreflion on their enemies.
The viceroy, by extraordinary exertions, in
which the abilities of a commander and the
courage of a soldier were equally dillayed,
held victory for fonme time in uli)ence. At
and. length lie fell, pierced with many wounds ; and

the rout of his followers became general. They
wcre Ic olly purlilcd. lis head was cut o(,1 and
placed (on the public gibbet in uito, which
>'iz/arro cUtclccl d in triumph. 'IThe troops affm-
11.l !) y Centl:i were dlilplcrlJ soon after by

Carvajal,

Carvajal, and he himself compelled to fly to the n o o K.

VI.

mountains, where he remained for several months k--V
concealed in a cave. Every person in Peru, 's546
from the frontiers of Popayan to those of Chlili,
submitted to Pizarro; and by his fleet, under
l'edro de Hinojofa, he had not only the un-
rivalled command of the South-Sea, but had
taken possession of Panama, and placed a garrison
in Nombre de Dios, on the opposite fide of the
isthmus, which rendered him malter of the only
avenue of communication between Spain and
Peru, that was used at that period .

AFTER this decisive vicoli, Pizarro and his Pizarro d--

viac. d to al-

followers remained for ome time at Quito, and frnctlr
during the firlt transports of their exultation, of eru.
they ran into every excess of licentious in-
dulgence, with the riotous spirit usual among
low adventurers upon extraordinary success.
But anlidt this dissipation, their chief and his
confidents were obliged to turn their thoughts
foinetilmes to what was serious, and deliberated
with much solicitude conccrning the part that he
ought now to take. Carvajal, no les bold and
decisive in counsel than in the field, had from

Y Z;, l, Iib. v. . 31,32. Go)l 'a, '. I 7. Vcga,p. ) I.

Il1,. iv. c.. 33, 34 I 'l idcli .

i. . 51-54. I-Icrrr;l,

tlc. 7. lib. x. c. 12. 19- 22. dec. lbi. i. . I- 3. Bcnz.o,
1il), iii, . I. .th

tllc

v o o K the beginlning warned Pizarro, that in the
. _._career on which he was entering, it was vain to
'541- think of holding a middle course ; that he must

either boldly aim at all, or attempt nothing.
From the time that Pizarro obtained poffeflion of
the government of Peru, he inculcated the fame
maxim with greater earnestness. Upon receiving
an account of the victory at Quito, he remon-
£trated with him in a tone tfill more peremptory.
*' You have usurped (aid he, in a letter written
to Pizarro on that occasion) the supreme power
.a this country, in contempt of the emperor's
commiiiion to the viceroy. You have marched,
hn hostile array, aainft the royal standard; you
have attacked the representative of your sovereign
in the field, have defeated him, and cut off his
head. Think not that ever a monarch will
forgive ifuch insults on his dignity, or that
.;ny reconciliation with him can be cordial or
iiccre. Depend no longer on the precarious
lavour of another. Aifume yourself the fovc-
rciglnty over a country, to the dominion of
which your family has a title founded on the
rights both of diicovery and conquclt. It is in
y)lur power to attach every Spaniard in Pcru
:i any conlequencc inviolably to your interc by
liberal grants of lands and of Indians, or by
hiltitutin ranks of nobility, and creating title:;
ol honour imilar to those which are couric!

w\ith

with so much eagcrnefs in Europe. By establish- B o0 K
in, orders of knighthood, with privileges and
diflinftions resembling those in Spain, you may I546
beRfowv a gratification upon the officers in your
service, suited to the ideas of military men.
Nor is it to your countrymen only that you
ought to attend; endeavour to gain the natives.
By narrying the Coya, or daughter of the Sun
next in fucccflion to the crown, you will induce
the Indians, out of veneration for the blood
ns their antient princes, to unite with the
Spaniards in support of your authority. Thus,
at the head of the antient inhabitants of Peru,
as well as of the new settlers there, you may
set at defiance the power of Spain, and repel
with ease any feeble force which it can fend
at such a distance." Cepcda, the lawyer, who
was now Pizarro's confidential counsellor, warmly
cfconded Carvajal's exhortations, and employed
wxhatever learning he ;oflicffcd in demnonftrating,
liat all the founders of reat monarchies had
been raired to prc-eincllcc, not by the antiquity
)f their lineage, ,r the validity of their rights,
but by their own aliiiing valour and perlbnal

i:crit .

' V i;,1, jI 1. I

I. ,

i . (: -). ]' L;I:Jd'7, lib. i. . 3..
1' jj. c. i. . ]. lcI'c ra, til '. S. Lib. ii. c, 1Jo.

1:',,.A Ht itO

B OO K PIZARRO listened attentively to both, and

vi. ,__ , could not conceal the fatisfaclion with which he
BU546fc contemplated the objec that they presented to
But chuscs
to negsci: t his view. But happily for the tranquillity of the
with the
court of wvorld, few men ponefs that superior strength of

mind, and extent of abilities, which are capable
of forming and executing such daring schemes,
as cannot be accomplished without overturning
the eftablifled order of society, and violating
those maxims of duty which men are accutormed
to hold iacred. The mediocrity of Pizarro's
talents circumscribed his ambition within more
narrow limits. Inftcad of aspiring at inde.
pendent power, he confined his views to the
obtaining from the court of Spain a confirmation
of the authority which he now possessed; and
for that purpose, he fnt an oficer of diftintion
thither, to give such a representation of his
conduct, and of the slate of the country, as
might induce the emperor and his ministers,
either from inclination or from necessity, to
continue him in his prcfeilt flation.

Confulta- WVIII,E Pizarro was deliberating with rfpcct
tJ l

s ot tile

Spa.nih m- to the part which he hould take, consultations
'"i"i"'r were held in Spain, xvith no less folicitudc,

concerning the measures which ought to be
pursued in order to re-.ctabliflt the emperor's

authority

authority in Peru. Though unacquainted with B O K
the last excesses of outrage to which the mal-
contents had proceeded in that country, the s54t'
court had received an account of the infur-
refion againfl the viceroy, of his imprisonment,
and the usurpation of the government by Pizarro.
A revolution so alarming called for an immediate
interposition of the emperor's abilities and autho-
rity. But as he was fully occupied at that time
in Germany, in condufing the war against the
famous league of Smalkalde, one of the most
interesting and arduous enterprises in his reign,
the care of providing a remedy for the disorders
in Peru devolved upon his son Philip, and the
counsellors whom Charles had appointed to
afllift him in the government of Spain during
his absence. Ar first view, the actions of
Pizarro and his adherents appeared so repugnant
to the duty of subjes towards their sovereign,
that the greater part of the ministers insistcd on
declaring them inflantly to be guilty of rebellion,
and on proceeding to punish them with exemplary
rigour. But when the fervour of their zeal and
indignation began to abate, innumerable obltacles
to the execution of this measure presentcd them-
clves. The veteran bands of infantry, the
tlr(ngth and glory of the Spanifl armies, were
then employed in Germany. Spain, exhaulted

VOL. 111. J< of

B 0 K of men and money by a long series of wars, n
_Lw_-1 which he had been involved by the restless
1546. ambition of two fucceilive monarchs, could not

easily equip an armament of sufficient force
to reduce Pizarro. To transport any refpedable
body of troops to a country so remote as Peru,
appeared almost impossible. While Pizarro
continued master of the South Sea, the direct
route by Nombre de Dios and Panama was
impracticable. An attempt to march to Quito
by land through the new kingdom of Granada,
and the province of Popayan, across regions of
prodigious extent, desolate, unhealthy, or in.
habited by fierce and hostile tribes, would be
attended with unsurmountable danger and hard.
thips. The passage to the South Sea by the
Straits of Magellan was so tedious, so uncertain,
and so little known in that age, that no con-
fidence could be placed in any effort carried on
in a course of navigation so remote and pre-
carious. Nothing then remained but to relin.
quifl the system which the ardour of their
loyalty had firit suggested, and to attempt by
lenient measures what could not be effected by
force. It was mnanifeft, from Pizarro's solicitude
to represent his conduc in a favourable light t0
the emperor, that, notwithstanding the exclfls
of which he had been guilty, he ill retained

Iniiti.

sentiments of veneration for his sovereign. By B o O K
a proper application to there, together with ome --.j
such concessions as hould discover a spirit of 1546.
moderation and forbearance in government, there
was ill room to hope that he might be yet
reclaimed, or the ideas of loyalty natural to
Spaniards might so far revive among his fol-
lowers, that they would no longer lend their aid
to uphold his usurped authority.

THE success, however, of this negociation, no Garca ap-

pointed to
less delicate than it was important, depended repairto

Peru as

entirely on the abilities and address of the president.
person to whom it should be committed. After
weighing with much attention the comparative
merit of various persons, the Spanish miniffters
fixed with unanimity of choice upon Pedro de la
Gafca, a priest in no higher flation than that of
counsellor to the Inquisition. Though in no
public office, he had been occasionally employed
by government in affairs of trust and confe-
quence, and had conduEted them with no less
skill han success; displaying a gentle and
insinuating temper, accompanied with much
firmness; probity, superior to any feeling of
private interest; and a cautious circumfpetion
in concerting measures, followed by such vigour
in executing them, as is arely found in alliance

K. 2 with

D o K with the other. These qualities marked him

v]-_ i out for the function to which he was destined.
,^'6. The emperor, to whoim (Ijfca was not unknown,

warmly approved of the choice, and commtu.
nicated it to him in a letter containing exprefiioni
of good-will and confidence, no leis honourable
to the prince who wrote, than to the fubjecS who
received it. Gafca, notwithstanding his advanced
age and feeble conltitution, and though, from
the apprehensions natural to a man, who, during
the course of his life, had never been out of his
own country, he dreaded the eflccas of a long
voyage, and of an unhealthy climate, did not
hesitate a moment about complying with the
i;s maod- will of his sovereign. But as a proof that it was

from this principle alone he ated, he refused a
bifhiopric which was offered to him, in order that
he might appear in Peru with a more dignified
charater; he would accept of no higher title
than that of president of the court of audience in
Liima; and declared that he would receive no
ialary on account of his difcllarging the duties of
that office. All he required was, that t,
expence of supporting his funmily llould be
defirayed by the public, and as lie was to go like
a minister of peace with his gown and breviary,

a lrrnanlc7, lib. ii. . 1.

. 1

and without any retinue but a few domestics, B 0 o K
tiis would not load the revenue with any l_.
enormous burden b. 546.
BUT hile he discovered such disinterested Tie powers

comizmittcd

moderation with refpec: to whatever related. tolam.
personally to himself, he demanded his official
powers in a very different tone. He insisted, as
he was to be employed in a country so remote
from the feat of government, where he could
not have recourse to his sovereign for new
inftruations on every emergence; and as the
whole success of his negociations must depend
upon the confidence which the people with
Whom he had to treat could place in the extent
of his powers, that he ought to be invested with
unlimited authority; that his jurifdi&ion muff
reach to all persons and to all causes; that he
mufft be empowered to pardon, to punish, or
to reward, as circumfances and the behaviour ot
dilferent men might require; that in cafe of
resistance from the malcontents, he might be
authorised to reduce them to obedience by force
of arms, to levy troops for that purpose, and to
call for aillance from the governors of all the
Spanish fettlemients in America. These powers,

h Zaratc, lib. vi. c. . Comaniia, c. 174. IFrinanld7,
'ii. iic. 14-16. Vega, p. I1. ill,. v. c. z. I Icicri,

ldb. it .
ib ., 4, &c.

R 3 though

B O O K though manifestly conducive to the great object!

vi.

of his mission, appeared to the Spanifih ninifter;
1546- to be inalienable prerogatives of royalty, which

ought not to be delegated to a fubje&, and thev
refused to grant them.' But the emperor's views
were more enlarged. As, from the nature of
his employment, Gafca muff be entrusted with
discretionary power in several points, and all his
efforts might prove ineffectual if he was circlul.
fcribed in any one particular, Charles scrupled
not to invest him with authority to the full
extent that he demanded. Highly satisfied with
this fresh proof of his matter's confidence, Gafca
hastened his departure, and, without either
money or troops, set out to quell a formidable

rebellion .

July 27. ON his arrival at Nombre de Dios, he found

I-ls arrival
at 'anama. Herman Mexia, an officer of note, posted thlre,

by order of Pizarro, with a considerable bod) of
men, to oppose the landing of any hostile force;.
But Gafca appeared in such pacific guise, with a
train so little formidable, and with a title of no
such dignity as to excite terror, that he w;
received with much rcflie&. From Nombre ide
Dios he advanced to Panama, and met wilh
a similar reception from llinojofl, whoim izlrri

C Firnanldcz, lib. ii. c 16 -18.

li11l]

had entrusted with the government of that B 0 0 K
town, and the command of his fleet flationed _.
there. In both places he held the fame lan- 1546.
guage, declaring that he was sent by their
sovereign as a messenger of peace, not as a
minister of vengeance; that he came to redress
all their grievances, to revoke the laws which
had excited alarm, to pardon past offences, and
to re-establish order and justice in the govern-
ment of Peru. His mild deportment, the
simplicity of his manners, the fantity of his
profession, and a winning appearance of candour,
gained credit to his declarations. The venera-
tion due to a person clothed with legal authority,
and a&ing in virtue of a royal commiflion, began
to revive among men accustomed for some time
to nothing more refpetable than an usurped
jurifdiEtion. Hinojofa, Mexia, and several other
officers of diftin&ion, to each of whom Gafca
applied separately, were gained over to his
interest, and waited only for some decent occasion
of declaring openly in his favour .

THIS the violence of Pizarro soon afforded violelt

them. As soon as he heard of Gafca's arrival o(Pt2,icQ'
at Panama, though he received, at the fame
time, an account of the nature of his commiflion,

d Frnandcz, lib. ii. c. 21, &c. Zarate, lib. vi. c. 6, 7,
Gomara, c. 175. Vega, p. 1l. lib. v. c. 3.

R 4 ;tl]

B o K and was informed of his offers not only to render

every Spaniard in Peru easy concerning what
1546. was past, by an at of general oblivion; but

secure with refpee to the future by repealing
the obnoxious laws; instead of accepting with
gratitude his sovereign's gracious conceilions, he
was so much exasperated on finding that he was
not to be continued in his flation as governor of
the country, that he instantly resolved to oppose
the president's entry into Peru, and to prevent
his exercising any jurifdidion there. To this
desperate resolution he added another highly
preposterous. He ent a new deputation to
Spain to justify this conduct, and to insist, in
name of all the communities in Peru, for a
confirmation of the government to himself during
life, as the only means of preserving tranquillity
there. The perions entrusted with this itrange
commission, intimated the intention of Pizarro to
the president, and required him, in his name, to
depart from Panama and return to Spain. They
carried likewise ccret infructions to Hinojofa,
dircEting him to offer Gafca a present of fifty
thousand pesos, if he would comply voluntarily
with what was demanded of him; and if lec
Should continue obstinate, to cut hinm off eitlicr
by alTiflination or poison '.

' aratc, lih. vi. c. A. Fcrniia n cz, lib. . c. c. 33, 3.
Ilcrrcri, dec. . lib. ii. c. 9, Io.

MAN'

MANY circumstances concurred in pushing on n o K

Pizarro to those wild mealures. Having been vL
once accultomed to ftpremne command, he could G4g,,
not bear the thoughts of descending to a private hia I"cL.
station. Conscious of his own demerit, he
suspected that the emperor fludied only to
deceive him, and would never pardon the out-
rages which he had committed. His chief con-
sidents, no less guilty, entertained the fame
apprehensions. The approach of Gafca with-
out any military force excited no terror. There
were now above fix thousand Spaniards fettled in
Peruf; and at the head of there he doubted not
to maintain his own independence, if the court
of Spain fmould refuse to grant what he required.
But he knew not that a spirit of defeEtion had
already begun to spread among those whom he
trulted most. lIilojofa, amazed at Pizarro's
precipitate resolution of setting himself in oppo-
fition to the emperor's cominiffon, and disdain-
ing to be his instrument in perpetrating the
odious crimes pointed out in his secret in-
ftructions, publicly recognized the title of the
prelident to the supreme authority in Peru.
The officers under his command did the fame.
Such was the contagious influence of the
example, that it reached cven the deputies who

l ri.cll, ( ";c. . lib. iii. c. 1.

lad

B o o K had been sent from Peru; and at the time when

V.

Pizarro expedted to hear either of Gafca's return
1546. to Spain, or of his death, he received an account

of his being master of the fleet, of Panama, and
of the troops Ifationed there.

147. IRRIrATED almost to madness by events so

Pizairo re-
iofeson unexpeced, he openly prepared for war; and

in order to give ome colour of juflice to his
arms, he appointed the court of audience in
Lima to proceed to the trial of Gafca, for
the crimes of having seized his hips, seduced his
officers, and prevented his deputies from pro.
ceeding in their voyage to Spain. Cepeda,
though ating as a judge in virtue of the royal
commission, did not scruple to proititute the
dignity of his funtion by finding Gafca guilty
of treason, and condemning him to death on
that account . Wild, and even ridiculous as
this proceeding was, it imposed on the low
illiterate adventurers, with whom Peru was
filled, by the semblance of a legal fanfion
warranting Pizarro to carry on hoflilities against
a convited traitor. Soldiers accordingly re-
Iorted from every quarter to his flandard, and
he was soon at the head of a thousand men, the

Fcrnandcz , lib. ii. c. 5j. Vtga, p. 1. lib. v. c. 7.
ln-crra, dec. 8. lib. iii. c. 6.

be[d

best equipped that had ever taken the field B o o K
in Peru.

1547.

GASCA, on his part, perceiving that force Prepara-

must be employed in order to accomplish the c;ara.
purpose of his miflion, was no lets assiduous in
collecting troops from Nicaragua, Carthagena,
and other settlements on the continent; and
with such fuccels, that he was soon in a condition
to detach a squadron of his fleet, with a con-
fiderable body of soldiers, to the coast of Peru.
Their appearance excited a dreadful alarm; and April.
though they did not attempt for some time
to make any descent, they did more effectual
service, by setting ashore in different places
persons who dispersed copies of the at of general
indemnity, and the revocation of the late edicts;
and who made known everywhere the pacific
intentions, as well as mild temper, of the pre-
sident. The effet of spreading this information
was wonderful. All who were diflatisfied with
Pizarro's violent adminiltration, all who retained
any sentiments of fidelity to their fbvcreign, began
to meditate revolt. Some openly deserted a
cause which they now deemed to be unjul.
Centeno, leaving the cave in which lie lay con- Inrtrrenio
cealed, afelnbled about fiftly of his former " ct''"'I"'
adherents, and with this feeble half-armed band
advanced boldly to Cuzco. By a ludden attack

in

B o o K in the night-time, in which he displayed no leTs

vL_ military skill than valour, he rendered himself
J5b7. master of that capital, though defended by

a garrison of five hundred men. Most of these
having ranged themselves under hisbanners, he
had soon the command of a refpetable body of
troops

Sag;inl PIZARRO, though astonished at beholding one
aolr t'i enemy approaching by sea, and another by land,
marches, at a time when he trusted to the union of all

Peru in his favour, was of a spirit more un-
daunted, and more accustomed to the viciflitudes
of fortune, than to be disconcerted or appalled.
As the danger from Centeno's operations was
the most urgent, he inltantly set out to oppose
him. Having provided horses for all his soldiers,
he marched with amazing rapidity. But every
morning he found his force diminilhed, by
numbers who had left him during the night;
and though he became suspicious to excess, and
punifled without mercy all whom he fufpeetcd,
the rage of desertion was too violent to be
checked. Before he got within fight of the
enemy at Iluarina, near the lake Titiaca, he
could not mufler more than four hundred

h Zaratc, lib. ,. 13-16. Comara, c. 180, 18r.
J:tnlandl( , lib. iL . 28. 64, &e.

soldiers,

fcldiers. But these he justly confidered as men n o o K

vI.

of tried attachment, on whom he might depend. L--
They were indeed the boldest and mofl desperate 'w7.
of his followers, conscious, like himself, of crimes
for which they could hardly expcc forgiveness,
and without any hope but in the success of their
arms. With these he did not hesitate to attack Oa1oberzc.
Centeno's troops, though double to his own in
number. The royalists did not decline the
combat. It was the most obl(inate and bloody
that had hitherto been fougl-t in Peru. At and dcfe:ts
length the intrepid valour of Pizarro, and hi,"'
the superiority of Carvajal's military talents,
triumphed over numbers, and obtained a com-
plete viEory. The booty was immense ', and
the treatment of the vanquified cruel. By this
signal success the reputation of Pizarro was re-
established, and being now deemed invincible
in the field, his army increased daily il
number k

BUT events happened in other parts of Peru,

which more than counterbalanced the iplendid
idtory at Iluarina. Pizarro liad fcarccly left
Lima, when the citizens, weary of hisi olpprefi l

i See NOTE XXVI.
k Zaratc, lil. vii. c. 2, 3. (,,ii ;l, . g. , p. I .

il . c. I. l, &. 'ctiiidic, lil. ii. c. vi. it 'rer.i, dcc. 8.
ib. iv. c. I, '.

B o K dominion, erected the royal flandard, and Aldana,

V_-._ with a detachment of soldiers from the fleet,
1547- took poffcffion of the town. About the fame

Gafca lands
atPelu. time', Gafca landed at Tumbez with five

hundred men. Encouraged by his preence,
every settlement in the low country declared for
the king. The situation of the two parties was
now perfeEtly reverted; Cuzco and the adjacent
provinces were pofleffed by Pizarro ; all the reft
of the empire, from Quito southward, acknow-
ledged the jifdiction of the president. As his
numbers augmented fast, Gafca advanced into
the interior part of the country. His behaviour
fill continued to be gentle and unassuming; he
expressed on every occasion, his ardent wifl
of terminating the contest without bloodshed.
More solicitous to reclaim than to punish, he
upbraided no man for past offences, but received
them as a father receives penitent children re-
turning to a sense of their duty. Though
desirous of peace, he did not flacken his pre.

Advl'anc3 parations for war. He appointed the general
Cuzco. rendezvous of his troops in the feitile valley of

Xauxa, on the road to Cuzco'". There he
remained for fonie months, not only that he
might have time to make another attempt

1 ;,iratc, lib. vi. c. 1 7.
n iZariatc, lib. vii. c. 9. Fernandcz, lib. ii. c. 77. 82.

toward'

towards an accommodation with Pizarro, but B O O K

Vl.

that he might train his new soldiers to the use of _
arms, and accustom them to the discipline of a 547.
camp, before he led them againtf a body of
viEtorious veterans. Pizarro, intoxicated with
the success which had hitherto accompanied his
arms, and elated with having again near a
thousand men under his command, refused to
liften to any terms, although Cepeda, together
with several of his officers, and even Carvajal
himself', gave it as their advice to close with the
president's offer of a general indemnity, and the
revocation of the obnoxious laws . Gafca
having tried in vain every expedient to avoid
imbruing his hands in the blood of his country-
men, began to move towards Cuzco, at the )Dc. z.
head of sixteen hundred men.

PIZARRO, confident of victory, suffered the Botipntite

royalifls to pass all the rivers whiich lie between battle.
Guamanga and Cuzco without oppoiion, and i548.
to advance within four leagues of that capital,
flattering himself that a dlfeat in llch a situation
as rendered escape ipraticable would at once
terminate the war. He then marched out to
meet the enemy, antl Carvajal chose his ground,

See NOTE XXVII.
Zarate, lib. vii. c. 6. Vc'::, p. 11. lib. v. c. 27.

and

B K and made the disposition of the troops with the

__ discerning eye, and profound knowledge in the

154S. art of war conspicuous in all his operations. As
Aprl 9. the two armies moved forwards slowly to the

charge, the appearance of each was singular.
In that of Pizarro, composel of men enriched
with the spoils of the molt opulent country
in America, every officer, and almost all the
private men, were clothed ill fluffs of silk, or
brocade, embroidered with gold and silver; and
their horses, their arms, their standards, were
adorned with all the pride of military pomp P.
That of Gafca, though not so splendid, exhibited
what was no less firiking. Ile himself, accom.
panied by the archbishop of Lima, the bishops
of Quito and Cuzco, and a great number of
ecclefiaflics, marching along the lines, blefling
the men, and encouraging them to a resolute
difchaIge of their duty.

r;zarro dc- WTEN both armies were jull ready to engage,
f£rted by
hi Ltroupj, Cepeda set spurs to his hors, galloped oil, and

lurrendered himself to the president. Garcilafib
de la Vega, and other officers of note, ifllowed
his example. The revolt of persons in such
high rank lIruck all with amazement. The
nutual confidence on which the union a

r ZJ)rjte, lib. vi. . J t,

ltrcnqitli

strength of armies depend, ceased at once. o o
Distrust and consternation spread from rank vl.
to rank. Some silently flipped away, others ',s'.
threw down their arms, the greatest numb:er
went over to the royalists. Pizarro, Carvajal,
and some leaders, employed authority, threats,
and entreaties, to stop them, but in vain. In
less than half an hour, a body of imen, which
might have decided the fate of the Periuvian
empire, was totally dilperfed. Pizarro, feeing all
irretrievably loft, cried out in amazement to a
few officers who still faithfully adhered to him,
" What remains for us to do?" " Let us
rush," replied one of them, " upon the enemy's
firmest battalion, and die like Romans." DejeEted
with such a reverse of fortune, he had not spirit
to follow this soldierly counsel, and with a tame-
ness disgraceful to his former fame, he furren- takeni
dered to one of Gafca's officers. Carvajal,
endeavouring to ecape, was overtakcn and
seized.

GASCA, happy in this bloodless viaory, did and(put to

death.

not stain it with cruelty. Pizarro, Carvajal, and
a fnall number of the noft dillinguilhed or
notorious offenders, were punished capitally.
Pizarro was beheaded on the day after lie
furrcndered. IIe submitted to his fate ilth a
collpolcd dignity, and fcllmcId dclficilo to atone

vol. IIt. .s by

B O O K by repentance for the crimes which he had corn.

vI. _-m-- mitted. The end of Carvajal was suitable to his
'4S-4 life. On his trial he offered no defence. When

the sentence adjudging him to be hanged was
pronounced, he carclefsly replied, " One can
die but once." During the interval between
the sentence and execution, he discovered no
sign either of remorse for the past, or of folici.
tude about the future; scoffing at all who
visited him, in his usual sarcastic vein of mirth,
with the fame quickness of repartee and gross
pleasantry as at any other period of his life.
Cepeda, more criminal than either, ought to
have shared the fame fate; but the merit of
having deserted his associates at such a critical
moment, and with such decisive effect, saved
him from immediate punishment. He was sent,
however, as a prisoner to Spain, and died in
confinement ''

IN the minute detail which the contemporary

hiflorians have given of the civil diflentions that
raged in Peru, with little interruption, during
ten years, many circuniftances occur so itriking,
and which indicate such an uncommon tfate of
manners, as to merit particular attention.

I Zaratc, lib. vii. c. 6, 7, . Gomara, c. 185, ,.

Vcga, p. i. llb. v. c. 30, &c. I'cFrnndez, lib. ii. c. Y6, &.
I IcricrII, 'icc. . lib. iv. c. 14, &c.

Tl-ioukli

THOUGH- the Spaniards who first invaded B o o K

VI.

Peru were of the lowest order in society, and the l
greater part of those who afterwards joined them No ,lsc-
were persons of desperate fortune, yet in all the ""'y soldiers

in tile civil

bodies of troops brought into the field by the wr of
different leaders who contended for superiority,
not one man ated as a hired soldier, that
follows his Itandard for pay. Every adventurer
in Peru confidered himself as a conqueror,
entitled, by his services, to an establishment in
that country which had been acquired by his
valour. In the contefis between the rival chiefs,
each chose his fide as he was direc-ed by his own
judgment or affedions. He joined his com-
mander as a companion of his fortune, and
disdained to degrade himself by receiving the
wages of a mercenary. It was to their fvord,
not to pre-eminence in office, or nobility of birth,
that most of the leaders whom they followed
were indebted for their elevation ; and each of
their adherents hoped, by the amne means, to
open a way for himnflf to the pofceflio of
power and wealth '.

BUT though the troops in Pru served with- Arn,m, n;m-

ilertii.' iy Lx.,

out any regular pay, they were riiled at inmcnfc InIi;Y
expcnce. Among men accllftC;icd to divide

r V Ea, p. . ib. iv. c. 33. 41.

s 2 the

B K the spoils of an opulent country, the desire of

VI.

obtaining wealth acquired incredible force. The
ardour of pursuit augmented in proportion to
the hope of success. Where all were intent on
the fame objcet, and under the dominion of the
fame paflion, there was but one mode of ,gaini,
men, or of securing their attachment. Orl"ce r
of name and inflleice, betides the proniilc
of future eflablilments, received in hand large
gratuities from the chief with whom they engaged.
Gonzalo Pizarro, in order to raill a thoufalid
men, advanced five hundred thousand pesos;.
Gafca expended in levying the troops which he
led against Pizarro nine hundred thousand pelos '
'i'he diflribution of property, bestowed as the
rew.ard of Ifrvices, was still more exorbitant.

.T.-r- (Cepeda, as the recompence of his perfidy and
'.*',''. in- address, in pcrfuading thc court of royal audience

;';' to give t fandion of its authority to thc

ullurped ,iurlfdi;ion of Pizarro, received a grant
ot lands viich yielded an annual income of a
hundred and sirty tpouf.ld pesos ". HIinojofa,
;vho,, by hi', a:rly deftcion from Pizarro, and
!.:rrender of the fIect to (;:lca, decided the fate
U Peru, ob.t:.ined a diltrid of country affordin,

7crnarndez, {\,.

i. v. 5.

' arnatc, !ib. . . I1. I ::r;, dec. 8. lib. v. c. ',
' (,' O ;~t -;;, ^. ó,It.

twi'0

two hundred thousand pesos of yea'ly value'. B O o K
While such rewards were dealt out to the prin- v
cipal officers, with more than rval munificence, ~,
proportional fliares were conlerred upon thole
of inferior rank.

SUCH a rapid change of fortune produced its Th.; rpr-

natural effes. It gave birth to new wants, and ;lrx:"?"
new desires. Veterans, lcig accustomed to
hardciip and toil, acquir d of a ujden a tale
for profuse and icuonfidelrat difipation, and in-
dulged in all the exceffcs of ,!:!i.'-rv licentic(,il.
ness. The riot of low dcbauchlry occupied
some; a relifl for expensive luxuIuls frcad
among othersx. The meanest soldier in Peru
would have thought himflf degraded by march-
ing on foot; and at a time when the prices
of horses in that country were exorbitant, each
insisted on being furnified with onel before
he would take the field. But thouh lels
patient under the fatigue and lhardhips of lervice,
they were ready to ace danger anil dea'h with
as much intrepidity as ever; and animated by
the hope of new rewards, they never failed,
on the day of battle, to dililay all their ancient
valour.

' Vega, p. ii. lib. vi. c. 3,

r Hc lC ra, d c . 5. lib. ii. . 3 d .
d. ib. i. viii. c, 10.

s '' u(; 'I'l

lo K TOGETHER with their courage, they retained
vI.

_. -.- all the ferocity by which, they were originally
Fe'oS4 diltinguiihed. Civil discord never raged with a
with which more fell spirit than among the Spaniards in
thtircon-
tests were Peru. To all the paflions which usually envenom
carried on;

contests among countrymen, avarice was added,
and rendered their enmity more rancorous.
Eagerness to seize the valuable forfeitures cx.
peded upon the death of every opponent, shut
the door against mercy. To be wealthy, was of
itself sufficient to expose a man to accusation, or
to subjet him to punishment. On the flighteR
suspicions, Pizarro condemned many of the
most opulent inhabitants in Peru to dath,
Carvajal, without searching for any pretext to
justify his cruelty, cut off many more. The
number of those who suffered by the hand of the
executioner, was not much inferior to what fl
in the field Y; and the greater part was con-
demned without the formality of any legal trial.
nl ..wnt Ti-E violence with which the contending

parties treated their opponents was not accom-
panied with its usual attendants, attachment an;
fidelity to those with whom they aed. Tle
ties of honour, which ought to be held sacrcd
among foldicrs, and the principle of intcgri)y,

Y Sec N'I. XXVIII.

intcr-

interwoven as thoroughly in the Spanif character B O o K
as in that of any nation, seem to have been .,
equally forgotten. Even regard for decency, 154.
and the sense of fliame, were totally loft. During
their dissentions, there was hardly a Spaniard in
Peru who did not abandon the party which
he had originally espoused, betray the associates
with whom he had united, and violate the
engagements under which he had come. The
viceroy Nugnez Vela was ruined by the treachery
of Cepeda and the other judges of the royal
audience, who were bound by the duties of their
funEtion to have supported his authority. The
chief advisers and companions of Gonzalo Pi-
zarro's revolt, were the first to forsake him, and
submit to his enemies. His fleet was given
up to Gafca, by the man whom he had singled
out among his officers to entrust with that
important command. On the day that was
to decide his fate, an army of veterans, in fight
of the enemy, threw down their arms without
itriking a blow, and deserted a leader who had
often conducted them to victory. Instances
of such general and avowed contempt of the
principles and obligations which attach man to
man, and bind them together in social union,
rarely occur in history. It is only where men
are far removed from the feat of government,
where the rftraints of law and order are little

k 4 Iscit,

3 0 0 K felt, where the profpet of gain is unbounded,

VI.
w- and where immense wealth may cover the crimes

3548' by which it is acquired, that we can find

any parallel to the levity, the rapacioufiefs, the
perfidy and corruption prevalent among the
Spaniards i Peru.

carrade- ON the death of Pizarro, the malcontents in
vises em-
ployment every corner of Peru laid down their arms, and
for his fol.
dirC I' tranquillity feeined t be perfedly re-established.

But two very interesting objects frill remained to
occupy the president's attention. The one was
to find immediately such employment for a
multitude of turbulent and daring adventurers
with which the country was filled, as might
prevent them from exciting new commotions.
The other, to bestow proper gratifications upon
those to whose loyalty and valour he had been
indebted for his success. The former of these
was in some measure accomplished, by appoint.
ing Pedro de Valdivia to prosecute the conquert
of Chili; and by empowering Diego Centeno to
undertake the discovery of the vast regions border.
ing on the river De la Plata. The reputation of
those leaders, together with the hopes of acquir.
ing wealth, and of rsing to consequence in ome
unexplored country, alluring many of the most
indigent and desperate soldiers to follow their
flandards, drained off no inconsiderable por-

tion

tion of that mutinous spirit which Gafca B o K

V1.
dreaded. --

1548.
THE latter was an affair of greater difficulty, lisdivi.

sion ofJ:c

and to be adjusted with a more attentive and country
delicate hand. The repartimientos, or allotments lcl;,c, hS
of lands and Indians which fell to be distributed,
in consequence of the death or forfeiture of the
former possessors, exceeded two millions of pesos
of yearly rent . Gafca, when now absolute
malter of this immense property, retained the
fame disinterested sentiments which he had
originally professed, and refused to reserve the
smallest portion of it for himself. But the num-
ber of claimants was great; and whilst the
vanity or avarice of every individual fixed the
value of his own services, and estimated the re-
compence which he thought due to him, the
pretensions of each were so extravagant, that it
was impofible to satisfy all. Gafca listened
to them one by one, with the molt patient
attention; and that he might have leisure to
weigh the comparative merit of their several
claims with accuracy, he retired, with the arch-
bishop of Lima and a single secretary, to a
village twelve leagues from Cuzco. There he
ipent several days in allotting ,o each a diftri

; Vega, p, i. lib. vi c. 4,

of

B K of lands and number of Indians, in proportion to

VI.
«_^^ his idea of their pals services and future im.

'54- portance. But that he might get beyond the

reach of the fierce ftl-m of clamour and rage,
which he foresaw would burst out on the publi.
cation of his decree, notwithtanding the impartial
equity with which he had framed it, he set out
for Lima, leaving the instrument of partition
fealed up, with orders not to open it for some
days after his departure.

Aug. 24. THE indignation excited by publishing the
The difcon-
ttntitocca- decree of partition was not less than Gafca had

os expeced. Vanity, avarice, emulation, envy,

hame, rage, and all the other passions which
most vehemently agitate the minds of men when
both their honour and their interest are deeply
affeEted, conspired in adding to its violence.
It broke out with all the fury of military in.
folence. Calumny, threats, and curses, were
poured out openly upon the president. lIe was
accused of ingratitude, of partiality, and of
injutlice. Among soldiers prompt to aion,
jich fcclitious dilcourfe would have been oon
followed by deeds no lets violent, and they
already began to turn their eyes towards onic
(lilcontcntcd leaders, expecting heml to laind
forth in rcdlrels of their wrongs. By Ioln
vigorous intcrpofitions of government, a timely

cIIcCl

check was given to this mutinous fpirfr, and the B 0 0 K
danger of another civil war was averted for the v-.-
present . i5s 3.

GASCA, however, perceiving that the flame r549
was fupprefled rather than extinguished, laboured blifnles oder

and 'vtlll.

with the utmost assiduity to soothe the malcon- nilt,
tents, by betowing large gratuities on some,
by promising rcpartimienior, when they fell
vacant, to others, and by carefliig and flattering
all. But that the public security might reft
on a foundation more stable than their good
affetion, he endeavoured to strengthen the
hands of his successors in office, by re-eftablifl-
ing the regular administration of jultice in every
part of the empire. lie introduced order and
simplicity into the mode of collecting the royal
revenue. He issued regulations concerning the
treatment of the Indians, well calculated to
protect them from opprellion, and to provide for
their inftrution in the principles of religion,
without depriving the Spaniards of the benefit
accruing from their labour. Having now ac- iso.
conipliflied every object of his nillion, Gafca,
longing to return again to a private tfation,

Z Z;urate, lib. nii. c. 9. Gomarn, c. 187. Vega, p. 1.

lle. 'ii. c. l,c . . Fc riimindz, p1. I. lib. i. C. , &c. 1-Icr~
Ici;i, dec. Lb. ib .
iv. . , & .

coll1-

B O O I committed the government of Peru to the court

Vt. ___,___ of audience, and set out for Spain. As, during

s5s5o the anarchy and turbulence of the four last
ar., fts out )ears, there had been no remittance made of the

royal revenue, he carried with him thirteen hun-
drcd thousand pesos of public money, which
the ccconorny and order of his administration
enabled him to save, after paying all the expences
of the war.

ir.t- ccp-' IIE was received in his native country with
i : ltie. universal admiration of his abilities, and of his

virtue. Both were, indeed, highly conspicuous.
Without army, or fleet, or public funds; with a
train so simple, that only three thousand ducats
,,ere expended in equipping him b, he set out to
oppose a formidable rebellion. By his address
and talents he supplied all those defeEts, and
seemed to create inllruments for executing his
designs. He acquired such a naval force, as
gave him the command of the ea. He raised a
body of men able to cope with the veteran
bands which gave law to Peru. He vanquifiled
their leader, on whole arms victory had hitherto
attended, and in place of anarchy and ulurpa-
tion, he eflablifhed the government of laws, and
the authority of the rightful lovcreign. But the

b FCI iindcz, lib. ii. c. 18.

prais/

praise bestowed on his abilities was exceeded B o o K
by that which his virtue merited. After residing --,-
in a country where wealth presented allure- 's50.
ments which had seduced every person who had
hitherto poflfied power there, he returned from
that trying fatiol with integrity not only un-
tainted but u;:fuf|pccdc3. After difiributing
among his countrymen pofl'llions of greater
extent and value than had ever becn in the
disposal of a subjet in any ge or nation, he
himself remained in his origiinal !ate of poverty;
and at the very time when he brought such
a large recruit to the royal treasury, he was
obliged to apply by petition for a finall fum
to discharge bome petty debts which lie had
contraced during the courle of his service'.
Charles was not insensible to such disinterested
nmerit. Gafa was reccived by him wvith the
inoft diftinguilhing marks of eleei, and being
promoted to the bifhlopric of Palencia, lie pafiied
the remainder of his days in the tranquillity
of retirement, rfpceted by his country, honourcd
by his sovereign, and beloved by all.

NOTWI1-TSTANDINC all Gafla's ile rgult-

tions, the tranquillity of Peru was not of loing
continuance. In a country, where th alio
tity of government had bnii ahnuof forgotten

' 1~S-. I)c'IcI niut.

dulillg

B O K during tlhe long prevalence of anarchy and

_, misrule, where there were disappointed leaders
s55o. ripe for revolt, and seditious soldiers ready to

follow them, it was not difficult to raise corn.
buflion. Several fucceflive infurredions defo.
lated the country for some years. But as those,
though fierce, were only transient storms, excited
rather by the ambition and turbulence of par.
ticular men, than by general or public motives,
the detail of them is not the object of this
hiltory. These commotions in Peru, like every
thing of extreme violence either in the natural
or political body, were not of long duration,
and by carrying off the corrupted humours
which had given rife to the disorders, they
contributed in the end to strengthen the society
which at firfl they threatened to deflroy. During
their fierce contefis, several of the first invaders
of Peru, and many of those licentious adven-
turers whom the fame of their success ad
allured thither, fell by each other's hands.
Each of the parties, as they alternately prevailed
in the fruggle, gradually cleared the country
of a number of turbulent iirits, by cxecutini;,
proscribing, or banifling their opponents. Men
less niterprifing, lelt desperate, and more ac-
cuftloled to Imove in the path of fober and
peaceable idufry, fettled in Peru; and the
royal authority was gradually eftablifitd as firmly
there as in the other Spanilll colonies.

# THE HISTORY OF AMERICA. BOOK VII.

THFE
H ISTORY

OF
A MERI CA.

BOOK VII.

s the conquest of the two great empires of B o o K

A Mexico and Peru forms the most splendid v'-
and interefring period in the history of America,
a view of their political institutions, and a
description of their national manners, will exhibit
the human species to the contemplation of in-
telligent observers in a very singular flage of its
progress ".

WHEN compared with other parts of the New Mexico and

Peru more

World, Mexico and Peru may be confidered as ploflnd
polished ftatcs. Inftcad of imall, independent, t"n,' oter
hotile tribes, struggling for fbfiilence aidft A"lcric;-.

a See NOTE XXIX.

'wvoods

B o K w'oods and marshes, franrp rs to induifry and

Vii.
_ - arts, unacquainted with subordination. and almofl

,vithout the appearance of regular government,
we find countries of great extent fulij ede to
the dnriinion of one ibverein-, the ibitants
collecied togcther in citii": the irdln and
foresight of ru!ers cnmpl ycd in providing for the
maintenance all fccurity of the peoi.lc, the
empire of law-s in fine me:uire eflablifhed, the
authority of religion recognized, many of the
arts eflential to life brought to some degree
of maturity, and the dawn of such as are
ornamental beginning to appear.

Theirinfe- BUT if the comparison be made with the
th nations people of the ancient continent, the inferiority

tt co;tl-; of Aimerica in improvement will be conspicuous,

lt and neither the Mexicans nor Peruvians will be

entitled to rank with those nations which merit
the name of civilized. The people of both the
great empires in America, like the rude tribes
around them, were totally unacquainted withl the
useful metals, and the progress which they Iiad
made in extending their dominion over the
animal creation was inconfiderablc. 'The Mcxi.
cans had gone no farther than to tame and rear
turkeys, ducks, a species of fiall dogs and rabbits''.

b Herrcra, dec. I . lib. vii. c. 2z.

3By

By this feeble essay of ingenuity, the means B oo K
of subsistence were rendered somewhat more I
plentiful and secure, than when men depend
solely on hunting; but they had no idea of
attempting to subdue the more robust animals,
or of deriving any aid from their niniftry in
carrying on works of labour. The Peruvians
seem to have neglefted the inferior animals,
and had not rendered any of them domestic
except the duck; but they were more fortunate
in taming the Llama, an animal peculiar to their
country, of a form which bears some resemblance
to a deer, and ome to a camel, and is of a size
somewhat larger than a sheep. Under the pro.
tetion of man, this species multiplied greatly.
Its wool furnished the Peruvians with clothing,
its flesh with food. It was even employed as
a beast of burden, and carried a moderate load
with much patience and docilityc. It was
never used for draught; and the breed being
confined to the mountainous country, its service,
if we may judge by incidents which occur in
the early Spanish writers, was not very extensive
among the Peruvians in their original itate.

IN tracing the line by which nations proceed
towards civilization, the difcovcry of the ulfeul

Vega, p. i. lib. viii. c. 6. Zarate, lib. i. c. 1+.
\'OI.. II. T lletas,

B 0 K metals, and the acquisition of dominion over

-- the animal creation, have been marked as tfeps

of capital importance in their progress. In our
continent, long after men had attained both,
society continued in that slate which is denomi-
nated barbarous. Even with all that command
over nature which these confer, many ages
elapse, before induitry becomes so regular as
to render subsistence secure, before the arts
which supply the wants and furnish the accom-
modations of life are brought to any considerable
degree of perfection, and before any idea is
conceived of various institutions requisite in a
well-ordered society. The Mexicans and Peru.
vians, without knowledge of the useful metals, or
the aid of domestic animals, laboured under dif.
advantages which must have greatly retarded
their progress, and in their highest fIate of im.
provement their power was so limited, and their
operations so feeble, that they can hardly be
confidered as having advanced beyond the in-
fancy of civil life.

Vi:-w ol tC AS r l- R this general observation concerning the
11 t1 It tk lli S
aind 111:1- inofl singular and diltinguiining circumflancc in

the Itate of both the great empires in America, I
ihall endeavour to give such a view of the con-
flituion and interior police of each, as miay
enable us to acertain their place ill the political

lcuac,

scale, to allot them their proper ifation between B o o K

vrI.

the rude tribes in the New World, and the _
polilhed states of the ancient, and to determine
how far they had risen above the former, as well
as how much they fell below the latter.

MEXICO was first fubjeced to the Spanifl Imperfe:

info mation
crown. But our acquaintance with its laws concerning

those of

and manners is not, from that circumstance, Iex:o.
more complete. What I have remarked con-
cerning the defective and inaccurate information
on which we must rely with refpet to the
condition and customs of the savage tribes in
America, may be applied likewise to our know.
ledge of the Mexican empire. Cortes, and the
rapacious adventurers who accompanied him,
Iad not leisure or capacity to enrich either civil
or natural history with new observations. They
undertook their expedition in quelt of one object,
and seemed hardly to have turned their eyes
towards any other. Or, if during some flort
interval of tranquillity, when the occupations of
war ceased, and the ardour of plunder was
iufpended, the institutions and manners of the
people whom they had invaded, drew their
attention, the inquiries of illiterate soldiers were
conducted with bt little sagacity and precision,
that the accounts given by them of the policy and
order established in the Mexican monarchy are

T 2 super-

B O K superficial, confused, and inexplicable. It is
L_,- rather from incidents which they relate occasion.

ally, than from their own deducions and
remarks, that we are enabled to form fonme
idea of the genius and manners of that people.
The obscurity in which the ignorance of is
conquerors involved the annals of Mexico, was
auglnented by the superstition of those xho
succeeded them. As the memory of past events
was preserved among the MIexicans by figures
painted on skins, on cotton cloth, on a kind of
pasteboard, or on the bark of trees, the carly
missionaries, unable to comprehend their mean-
ing, and firuck with their uncouth forms, con.
ceived them to be monuments of idolatry vwhich
ought to be destroyed, in order to facilitate the
converiion of the Indians. In obedience to an
ediEt iflued by Juan de Zummaraga, a Francilcan
monk, the first biflop of Mexico, as in:iny
records of the ancient Mexican flory as could be
collc&ted were committed to the lames. In
confequencc of this fanatical zeal of the mon;s
who first visited New Spain (which their fucccllrls
loon began to lament), wliatevcr knowledge
remote events filch rude !monuments contaillnd
was allmof eltirely loft, and no iolbrimatio
remained concerning the ancient revolutions alnd
policy of the empire, but what was deriviel lrom
tradition, or fioin some fragments of thiii

liflo riic

hirlorical paintings that escaped the barbarous n o o
rclearches of Zummaraga d. From the expe- _ I
rience of all nations it is manifefR, that the
memory of past tranfa&ions can neither be long
preserved, nor be tranfinitte with any fidelity,
by tradition. The Mexican paintings, which are
fJppofed to have served as annals of their empire,
re few in number, and of ambiguous meaning.
Thus, amidst the uncertainty of the former, ald
the obscurity of the latter, we must glean what
intelligence can be collected from the scanty
materials scattered in the Spanifl writers *.

ACCORD-

d Alcola, lib. vi. . 7. Torquicm. Procin. lib. ii. lib. iii,
c. 6. lib. xiv. c. 6.

In the lirit edition, I observcd that in confcquencc of

tlc dcltrultion of the ancient Mexican paintings, occaloiicc
1:v tile z:'l of Zumnaraga, whatever knowrlc:gec they
n:illt lhave conveyed xwas ellirly liol. lEvery candid rladcr
inilt have perceived that te preflioll wvas inaccurate ; a;
i:i few linecs afterwards I nimcioin finec ancinct paintings to
hie ill extant. M. Clavigero, not iali.iicd withi layilng hold
f Lllis inaccuracy, which I corrc:. id in tilhe fbcqiicnt
dlitions, labours to render it more lilarlil, by the anllner in
which lie qoltts tile rcilaillilt part of te fntcilce. 1He
rcipliends with grcat a'perity th ai'collnt which gave of
lie scanty matcrials for writig the ancient hilltory of Mexico.
\'il. 1. Accoulnt of \Writers, . xxvi. Vol. 1L. 3o. My
woirds, Ihowever, are alinoll tle Afime with tlhoe of T'orque-
latl:i, who fns to have been beltlr acquainted withi tih
,tlntillt Inolittilll it of the M exican s 1thla ;,iy S)alilh

1 3 aitlilJt'

B o O K ACCORDING to the account of the Moxicana
L--._.J themselves, their empire was not of long duration,
Ohrig" of Their country, as they relate, was originally
the Mrx,can
monarchy. possesed, rather than peopled, by finall inde.

pendent

author whoe wnorks I have fcen. Lib. xiv. c. 6. M. Cla;
gero himsef gives a description of the deltrudion of ancir:!
paintings in almost the fame terms I have used; and mc:i
tions, as an additional reason of there being so small
number of ancient paintings known to the Spaniards, tha:
the natives have become so solicitous to prefcrve and concca'
them, that it is " difficult, if not impossible, to make tl:ri
" part with one of them." Vol. I. 407. II. 194. J
point can be more afccrtaincd than that few of the Mexic:
hitlorical paintings have been preserved. Though fever
Spaniards have carried on inquiries into the antiquities of tl,
Mexican empire, no engravings from Mexican paintin
have been communicated to the public, ecept those :
Pulichas, Gemelli Carreri, and Lorenzana. It affords :
fomc ftisfaCtionl, that in the course of my researches, I li;h
difeovcrcd two colletions of Mexican paintings which wc:
unknown to former inquirers. The cut which I publilb
is an xact copy of the original, and gives no high idea
tle. progress which the Mexicans had made in the art
pailting. I calnnot conjecure what could induce M. I:a
gero to exprclfs tlme dissatisfaction with me for I;\ia
piu)lilicd it witliout the fn ( colours it has in tle ori;li:
painting, p. xxix. l migt hvei rccollcled, tllat liltln
Purchi as, nor (Gemnclli Carreri, nor Lorcllzalla, tI1lIiIt
nccclillry to colour tlie prints vwliich they lhave pillitili1
andl tliy lhave never been ceilnflld on that accoul. li
ir:y ill allurcl, that tionugl tlhe colonis i tlhe piiltiig,':

pendent tribes, whose mode of life and manners B o K
resembled those of the rudest savages which we _
have described. But about a period correspond-
ing to the beginning of the tenth century in the
Christian ara, several tribes moved in fucceflive
migrations from unknown regions towards the
north and north-west, and fettled in different
provinces of Anahuac, the antient name of New
Spain. These, more civilized than the original
inhabitants, began to form them to the arts of
social life. At length, towards the commence-
ment of the thirteenth century, the Mexicans, a
people more polilhed than any of the former,
advanced from the border of the Californian
gulf, and took pofeffion of the plains adjacent to
the great lake near the centre of the country.

the Imperial Library are remarkably bright, they are laid on
without art, and without " any of that regard to light
"and liade, or the rules of perfpetive," which M. Clavigero
requires. Vol. II. 378. If the public express any deile to
have the seven paintings still in my possession engraved, I am
ready to communicate them. The print.publliflcd by Grnelli
Carreri, of the route of the ancient Mexicans when they
travelled towards the lake on which they built the capital of
their empire, Churchill, Vol. IV. p. 48 . is the mil iniflled
monumlellt of art brought from the New World, and yet a
very flight inlfpccion of it will satisfy every one, that the
annals of a nation conveyed in tilis manner mufl be very
mncagre and impcrfcdt.

T 4 After

o O K After residing there about fifty years, they

founded a town, since diflinguifhed by the name
of Mexico, which from humble beginnings soon
grew to be the most considerable city in the New
World. The Mexicans, long after they were
established in their new possessions, continued,
like other martial tribes in America, unac.
quainted with regal dominion, and were go.
verned in peace, and condu&ed in war, by such
as were entitled to pre-eminence by their wifdoin
or their valour. But among them, as in other
states whose power and territories become exten-
five, the supreme authority centered at last in
a tingle person; and when the Spaniards under
Cortes invaded the country, Montezuma was the
ninth monarch in order who had swayed the
Mexican sceptre, not by hereditary right, but by
eleEtion.
VerCJ rec;nt. SUr-i is the traditional tale of the Mexicans

concerning the progress of their own empire.
According to this, its duration was very short,
From the first migration of their parent tribe,
they can reckon little more than three hundred
years. From the eflabliflhment of monarchical
government, not above a hundred and thirty
years, according to one account', or a hundred

A icofl. 1if. lib. vii. c. 8, &c,

and

and ninety-feven, according to another coin- o o A
putation', had elapsed. If, on one hand, we _ ,
luppofe the Mexican itate to have been of
higher antiquity, and to have subsisted during
such a length of time as the Spanifl accounts of
its civilization would naturally lead us to con-
clude, it is difficult to conceive how., among a
people who pofleiled the art of recording events
by pictures, and who confidercd it as an essential
part of their national education, to teach their
children to repeat the historical songs which
celebrated the exploits of their ancestors , the
knowledge of past transactions should be so
slender and limited. If, on the other hand, we
adopt their own system with refpe& to the
antiquities of their nation, it is no lets difficult to
account either for that improved itate of focicty,
or for the extensive dominion to which their
empire had attained, when firit visited by the
Spaniards. The infancy of nations is so long,
and, even when every circumstance is favourable
to their progress, they advance to slowly towards
any maturity of strength or policy, that the
recent origin of the Mexicans feetns to be a
ilrong presumption of foine exaggeration, in the

r Purchas Pilgr. iii. p. !068, &c.
F Herrera, dec. 3. lib. ii. c. 18.

1: l .ldi.(

n o o K splendid descriptions which have been given cf

vn1.

1i_.Z. their government and manners.

Faes which BUT it is not by theory or conjectures that
prove thelicir
plogrelstin hirfory decides with regard to the slate or
ivlz.,on. character of nations. It produces fats as the

foundation of every judgment which it venture;
to pronounce. In collecting those which muR
regulate our opinion in the present inquiry, omen
occur that suggest an idea of considerable pro.
grefs in civilization in the Mexican empire, and
others which seem to indicate that it had ad-
vanccd but little beyond the savage tribes around
it. Both fliall be exhibited to the view of
the reader, that, from comparing them, he may
determine on which fide the evidence prepon-
derates.

The right 1N the Mexican empire, the right of private
of property
fuily ella- property was perfetly understood, and efla-
blfih/d. bliflhed in its full extent. Among several savage

tribes, we have seen, that the idea of a title to
the separate and exclusive poffeflion of any
objet was hardly known; and that among all,
it was extremly limited and ill-defined. But in
Mexico, where agriculture and indufry had
made ome progress, the distinction bevvecn
property in land and property i:i goods lh;ia

taken

taken place. Both might be transferred from B K
one person to another by sale or barter; both I
might descend by inheritance. Every person
who could be denominated a freeman had pro-
perty in land. This, however, they held by
various tenures. Some possessed it in full right,
and it descended to their heirs. The title of
others to their lands was derived from the
office or dignity which they enjoyed; and when
deprived of the latter, they loft poffeflion of the
former. Both these modes of occupying land
were deemed noble, and peculiar to citizens
of the highefi class. The tenure, by which the
great body of the people held their property,
was very different. In every difariE a certain
quantity of land was measured out in proportion
to the number of families. This was cultivated
by the joint labour of the whole; its produce was
deposited in a common ftorchoufe, and divided
among them according to their respective exi-
gencies. The members of the Ca/pullc, or
afibciations, could not alienate their share of the
common elate; it was an indivisible permanent
property, de{lined br the support of their
families . In consequence of this diflribution of
the territory of the slate, every man had an

h I-lcrc.r, dec. 3. lib. iv. c. i . Turqli. n. ll, d.
lil. xiv. c. 7. Culta;, M", .

intcrcfte

BOO K interest in its welfare, and the happiness of

V"_. the individual was conneated with the public

security.

'lTe num- ANOTHER firiking circumfrance, which difin-
bir and
y.cr.tncfs of guifhes the Mexican empire from those nations

in America we have already described, is the
number and greatness of its cities. While
society continues in a rude state, the wants of
men are so few, and they stand so little in need
of mutual assistance, that their inducements to
crowd together are extremly feeble. Their
industry at the fame time is so imperfect, that
it cannot secure fubfitence for any considerable
number of families fettled in one spot. They
live dispersed, at this period, from choice as well
as from necessity, or at the utmost assemble in
fnall hamlets on the banks of the river which
supplies them with food, or on the border of
some plain left open by nature, or cleared by
their own labour. The Spaniards, accustomed
to this mode of habitation among all the savage
tribes with which they were hitherto acquainted,
were aftonifled, on entering New Spain, to
find tlhe natives rcfiding in towns of such extent
as relclltblecl those of Europe. In the firlt
fcrvour of their admiration, they compared cln-
poalla, though a town only of the second or
third fizc, to the cities of greatcfl note in their

3 ownl

own country. When, afterwards, they visited in r o o K
fucceflion Tlafcala, Cholula, Tacuba, Tezcuco, v
and Mexico itself, their amazenment increased so
much, that it led them to convey ideas of their
magnitude and populousness bordering on what
is incredible. Even when theie is leisure for
observation, and no interest that leads to deceive,
conjectural estimates of the number of people in
cities are extremely loose, and usually much
exaggerated. It is not furpriling, then, that
Cortes and his companions, litle accustomed to
such computations, and powerfully tempted to
magnify, in order to exalt the merit of their
own discoveries and conquests, flould have been
betrayed into tis common error, and have
raised their descriptions confidcrably above truth.
For this reason, ome considerable abatement
ought to be made from their calculations of the
number of inhabitants in the Mexican cities,
and we may fix the standard of their populationt
much lower than they have done; but still they
will appear to be cities of ifch confcqluence, s
are not to be found but among people who have
made fomc considerable progrcs in the arts of
social life . From their accouiils, we can hardly
Itppolc Mexico, the capital of the emnpire, ,

i c NOTE. XXX.

]h:l '

n o O x have contained fewer than sixty thousand in.

-- habitants.

The fepara- THE separation of professions among the
tion of pro.
frionx. Mexicans is a symptom of improvement no less

remarkable. Arts, in the early ages of society,
are so few and so simple, that each man is
sufficiently master of them all, to gratify every
demand of his own limited desires. The savage
can form his bow, point his arrows, rear his
hut, and hollow his canos, without calling in the
aid of any hand more flilful than his own.
Time mufl have augmented the wants of men,
and ripened their ingenuity, before the pro-
ductions of art became so complicated in their
firuture, or so curious in their fabric, that a
particular course of education was requisite to.
wards forming the artificer to expertness in con.
trivance and workmanship. In proportion as
refinement spreads, the diftindion of profefions
increases, and they branch out into more nu-
merous and minute subdivisions. Among the
Mexicans, this separation of the arts neceflary in
life had taken place to a considerable extent.
The functions of the mason, the weaver, tle
goldsmith, the painter, and of several other
crafts, were carried on by difl-rent pcrf'os.
Each was regularly intrudcd in his calling.

To it alone his industry was confined; and, by o o
afliduous application to one object, together with a
the persevering patience peculiar to Americans,
their artizans attained to a degree of neatness
and perfection in work, far beyond what could
have been expeted from the rude tools which
they employed. Their various productions were
brought into commerce; and by the exchange
of them in the hated markets held in the cities,
not only were their mutual wants supplied k, in
fich orderly intercourse as characterizes an im-
proved tfate of society, but their indufry was
daily rendered persevering and inventive.

THE diltinction of ranks eltablifled in the Tlietli(inc-

tio! of

Mexican empire is the next circumstance that i,,,ks.
merits attention. In surveying the savage tribes
of America, we observed, that confciouficfs of
equality, and impatience of ubordination, are
sentiments natural to man in the infancy of civil
life. During peace, the authority of a superior
is hardly felt among them, and even in war it is
but little acknowledged. Strangers t the idea
of property, the difference in condition resulting
from the inequality of it is unknown. Birth or
titles confer no pre-eminence; it is only by

k Cortes Rclat. ap. RamnF. iii. 239, &c. Gorn. Cron.

c. 79. Torquer. lib. xiii. c. 34. I-lcrrcra, dec. 2. lil. vii.
C. I5, &c.

personal

B O O K personal merit and accomplishments that diflinc.

V1_. tion'can be acquired. The form of society was

very different among the Mexicans. The great
body of the people was in a moil humiliating
state. A considerable number, known by the
name of Maycqles, nearly resembling in con-
dition those peasants who, under various denomi-
nations, were confidered, during the prevalence
of the feudal system, as instruments of labour
attached to the foil. The Maycqlcs could not
change their place of residence without per-
miflion of the superior on whom they depended.
lhey were conveyed, together with the lands on
which they were Ifttled, from one proprietor
to another; and were bound to cultivate the
ground, and to pcrform several kinds of fervilc
work'. Others were reduced to the lowet
f.rm of iubjection, that of domeltic servitude,
and felt the utmoift ligour of that wretched Ilate.
Their condition was held to be so vile, and their
lives deemed to be of ib liLtlc value, that a pcr-
son wlho killed one of tlefe slaves was not lb-
jceted to any )punifmllllCn'"'. Even thofi coil.
fidered as ireeillcn were treated by their haughty
lords as beings ol l in lrior fpecics. ''ei
nobles, pollulccd of amnle territories, were divided

1 lcrr.;i, dtic. ;. llb. iv. c. 17. Couita, MS.

': 1
] i-]til'l, ,d1 (,. .n. C .

intto

into various classes, to each of which peculiar B o0 K

vn.

titles of honour belonged. Some of these titles, _
like their lands, descended from father to son in
perpetual succession. Others were annexed to
particular offices, or conferred during life as
marks of personal diftintion". The monarch,
exalted above all, enjoyed extensive power, and
supreme dignity. Thus the diftintion of ranks
was completely eflablifhed, in a line of regular
subordination, reaching from the highest to the
lowest member of the community. Each of
these knew what he could claim, and what
he owed. The people, who were not allowed to
wear a dress of the fame fafiion, or to dwell in
houses of a form similar to those of the nobles,
accofled them with the utmost fubmiflive re.
verence. In the presence of their sovereign,
they durst not lift their eyes from the ground, or
look him in tie face . The nobles themselves,
when admitted to an audience of their sovereign,
entered bare-footed, in mean garments, and, as
his slaves, paid him homage approaching to
adoration. This refpet due from inferiors to
those above them in rank, was prelcribcd with
such ceremonious accuracy, that it incorporated
with the language, and influenced its genius and.

"llcrrcial, dc. 3. lb. iv. c. 15. C.rita, MS.
" IlcnIcI., dtc. 3. ;. ii. . .
VoL. il!. t idiom,

B OO K idiom. The Mexican tongue abounded in ex.

preflions of reverence and courtesy. The stile
and appellations, used in the intercourse between
equals, would have been so unbecoming in the
mouth of one in a lower sphere, when he ac.
colted a person in higher rank, as to be deemed
an insult . It is only in focicties, which time
and the institution of regular government have
moulded into form, that we find such an ordcrly
arrangement of men into different ranks, and
such nice attention paid to their various rights.

Their poli- Tios
* .'.:l conti- Tii spirit of the Mexicans, thus familiarized
:t"'.". and bended to subordination, was prepared for

submitting to monarchical government. But the
descriptions of their policy and laws, by the
Spaniards who overturned them, are so in-
accurate and contradicory, that it is difficult t,
delineate the form of their conflitution with any
precision. Sonictimes they reprcefnt the in(o
narcls of Mexico as absolute, deciding accold-
ing to their plcafure, with rfpelct to c\: ry
operation of the (fatc. (n other occain;,
we dlifcov,-r the tra:ces of efalblifhed cultion;
and laws, framcd in order to circunci;ilhc il:
power of the crown, and x\\x ne' t wix! ri '
a'.dl ljivil,'1_ .. of the loblcs Wviicji l.Ciil to [,'

opposed as barriers against its encroachments. B 0o K
This appearance of inconsistency has arisen from .iAJ
inattention to the innovations of Montezuma
upon the Mexican policy. His aspiring ambition
subverted the original fyttem of government,
and introduced a pure despotism. He difre-
garded the ancient laws, violated the privileges
held most sacred, and reduced his fubjets of
every order to the level of slaves . The chiefs,
or nobles of the first rank, submitted to the
yoke with such reluctance, that, from impatience
to hake it off, and hope of recovering their
rights, many of them courted the protection of
Cortes, and joined a foreign power against their
domestic oppressor'. It is not then under the
dominion of Montezuma, but under the govern-
ment of his predecessors, that we can discover
what was the original form and genius of Mexi-
can policy. From the foundation of the mo-
narchy to the eletion of Montezuma, it teems
te have fubfilfed with little variation. That
body of citizens, which may be diftinguilhcd by
the name of nobility, formed the chief and mnoft
refpetable order in the tfate. They were of
various ranks, as has been already observed, and

Ilcrr ;, d 3cc. 3. lib. i. c. 14. Torqucn. lib. li.
c. ('.

r II(IC.;I , d(ec. 2. lib. v. c. Io, i i. 'rquc l. lib. iv.

2 their

B o 0 K their honours were acquired and transmitted in

VII.

different manners. Their number seems to have
been great. According to an author accustomed
to examine with attention what he relates, there
were in the Mexican empire thirty of this order,
each of whom had in his territories about an
hundred thousand people, and subordinate to
there, there were about three thousand nobles of
a lower clalfs . The territories belonging to the
chiefs of ezcuco and Tacuba were hardly
inferior in extent to those of the Mexican
monarch'. Each of these pofTeiled complete
territorial jurifdition, and levied taxes from
their own vassals. But all followed the standard
of Mexico in war, serving with a number of
men in proportion to their domain, and most of
them paid tribute to its monarch as their upe.
rior lord.

IN tracing iilife great lines of the Mexican

confitution, an image of feudal policy, in i;
mut rigid form, rifcs to view, and we difccrn it;
ihrce liftlinguihing charasteriltics, a nobility
p 'fttfiing alniof independent authority, a people
dlprelfed into the loaett itate of subjection, and
at kill;' cntruii.c with the executive power of the

i tii irr,, ,'c . 2. Ili,. .jli. c. 12.

'11 ,,, 11 !* !,

,l" i . C

. '

. 'u a,
IS.

(late.

tate. Its spirit and principles seem to have u o o r
operated in the New World in the fame manner
as in the ancient. The jurifdition of the crown
was extremely limited. All real and effective
authority was retained by the Mexican nobles in
their own hands, and the shadow of it only left
to the king. Jealous to excess of their own
rights, they guarded with the most vigilant
anxiety against the cncroachments of their obve-
reigns. By a fundamental law of the empire,
it was provided that the king flould not deter-
mine concerning any point of general importance,
without the approbation of a council composed of
the prime nobility . Unless he obtained their
conlent, he could not engage the nation in war,
nor could he dispose of the most considerable
branch of the public revenue at pleasure; it was
appropriated to certain purposes fiom which
it could not be diverted by the regal authority
alone ". In order to secure full effec to those
constitutional reltraints, the Mexican nobles did
liot permit their crown to dcfcend by inheritance,
Ibt disposed of it by elecion. The right of
:lection fcems to have been originally vftcd
in the whole body of nobility, but was after-
w:ardl cotmmitted to fix electors, of whom the

" 1Icrrlcr, , dec. 3. ll. ii. c. 19. lib. i. c . C l;it MS.
"' llclarcr, dlc. 3. lii. iv. c. 17,

3 Clief-

B O K Chiefs of Tezeuco and Tacuba were always two.

VI'.

_ From refpe& for the family of their monarchs,

the choice fell generally upon some person sprung
from it. But as the aftivity and valour of their
prince were of greater moment to a people per.
petually engaged in war, than a stria adherence
to the order of birth, collaterals of mature age
or of distinguished merit were often preferred to
those who were nearer- the throne in direc
descent x. To this maxim in their policy, the
Mexicans appear to be indebted for such a
succession of able and warlike princes, as raised
their empire in a short period to that extra.
ordinary height of power which it had attained
when Cortes landed in New Spain.

rower and WHII.E the jurifdition of the Mexican mr,.
their lo- narchs continued to be limited, ir is probable that
trcllcs. it was exercised witli little olleiitation. But ;:

their authority became more extensive, the fplcn-
dour of their government augmented. It was in
this lafi slate that the Spaniards beheld it; anil
tlruck with the appearance of Montezumn;i'
court, they describe its pomp at great length, ad
with much admiration. The number of his
attendants, the order, the filencc, and the reve-

x Acofla, lib. vi. c. 24. IHcrrcra, dec. 3. lib. ii. c. ij.
Curila MiS.

rcnc

rence with which they served him; the extent o o K
of his royal mansion, the variety of its apart-
ments allotted to different officers, and the often.
tation with which his grandeur was displayed,
whenever he permitted his fuljefts to behold
him, feemi to rcfemble the magnificence of the
ancient monarchies in Aia, rather than the
simplicity of the infant states in the New World.

BuTr it was not in the mere parade of royalty o,'er or

· J *' their go-

that the Mexican potentates exhibited their vrinm lt.
power; they ma'nifested it more beneficially in
the order and regularity with which they con-
duRced the internal administration and police of
their dominions. Complete jurifdicionI civil as
well as criminal, over its own immediate vassals,
was vetted in the crown. Judges were appointed
for each department, and if we may rely on the
account which the Spanish writers give of the
maxims and laws upon which they founded their
decisions with refped to the difitibution of pro-
perty and the punifhinent of crimes, jullice was
adminifered in the Mexican empire with a
degree of order and equity relembling what
takes place in Ibcieties highly civilized.

THlli rl attention in providing for the support Proviii n

. . ' tl fillp-

of government was not lets lagacious. l'axes port f it.
were laid upon land, upon the acquisitions of

U 4 indus ty,

B 0 0 K induflry, and upon commodities of every kind

VII.

A.
- exposed to sale in the public markets. These

duties were considerable, but not arbitrary or
unequal. They were imposed according to efla.
blifhed rules, and each knew what lhare of the
common burden he had to bear. As the use of
money was unknown, all the taxes were paid in
kind, and thus not only the natural productions
of all the different provinces in the empire, but
every species of manufacture, and every work of
ingenuity and art, were collected in the public
flore-houfes. From those the emperor supplied
his numerous train of attendants in peace, and
his armies during war, with food, with clothes,
and ornaments. People of inferior condition,
neither possessing land nor engaged in commerce,
were bound to the performance of various ser-
vices. By their stated labour the crown-lands
were cultivated, public works were carried on,
and the various houses belonging to the emperor
were built and kept in repair Y.

Their po- THEi improved state of government among the
lice.

Mexicans is conspicuous, not only in points
essential to the being of a well-ordered flcicty,
but in fevcral regulations of inferior conlequlnce

Y Ilcrrera, dec. 2. lib. vii. c. 13. dec. 3. lib. iv. c. i6, 17
Sec NOTE XXXII.

with

with refpea to police. The institution which I B o o .
have already mentioned, of public couriers, 1,
fationed at proper intervals, to convey intelli.
gence from one part of the empire to the other,
was a refinement in police not introduced into
any kingdom of Europe at that period. The
ftrucure of the capital city in a lake, with
artificial dykes, and causeways of great length,
which served as avenues to it from different
quarters, erected in the water, with no lets
ingenuity than labour, seems to be an idea that
could not have occurred to any but a civilized
people. The fame observation may be applied
to the fruure of the aqueducts, or conduits,
by which they conveyed a stream of fresh water,
from a considerable distance, into the city, along
one of the causeways . The appointment of a
number of persons to clean the streets, to light
them by fires kindled in different places, and to
patrole as watchmen during the night a% discovers
a degree of attention which even polished nations
are late in acquiring.

THE progress of the Mexicans in various arts, Tl;i arra.

is confidered as the most decisive proof of their
superior refinement. Cortes, and the early

Z See NOTE XXXIH.
I-Icrrcra, dec. 2. lib, viii. c. 4. Torribio MS.

Spiul il

B O O K Spanish authors, describe this with rapture, and

VII.
A _~ maintain, that the most celebrated European

artists could not surpass or even equal them
in ingenuity and neatness of workmanship.
They represented men, animals, and other ob-
jecs, by such a disposition of various coloured
feathers, as is said to have produced all the
effets of, light and fliade, and to have imitated
nature with truth and delicacy. Their orna.
ments of gold and silver have been described to
be of a fabric no less curious. But in forniing
any idea, from general descriptions, concerning
the state of arts among nations imperfctly
polished, we are extremely ready to err. In
examining the works of people whose advances
in improvement are nearly the fame with our
own, we view them with a critical, and often
with a jealous eye. Whereas, when conlcious
of our own superiority, we survey the arts of
nations comparatively rude, we are aflonifled at
works executed by them under such manifest dif-
advantages, and, in the warmth of our admira-
tion, are apt to reprelent them as productions
more finified than they really are. To thl
influence of this illusion, without supposing alny
intention to deceive, we may impute the exaggc.
ration of some Spanish authors, in their accouits
of the cMexican ;ts.

1;

IT is not from those descriptions, but from B o o K

confidering such specimens of their arts as are _
still preserved, that we mult decide concerning
their degree of merit. As the ship in which
Cortes ent to Charles V. the most curious pro-
ductions of the Mexican artisans, which were
colleced by the Spaniards when they first pillaged
the empire, was taken by a French corsair b, the
remains of their ingenuity are less numerous than
those of the Peruvians. Whether any of their
works with feathers, in imitation of painting, be
frill extant in Spain, I have not learned; but
many of their ornaments in gold and silver, as
well as various utensils employed in common
life, are deposited in the magnificent cabinet of
natural and artificial producions, lately opened
by the king of Spain; and I am informed by
persons on whose judgment and taste I can rely,
that there boasted efforts of their art are uncouth
representations of common objeas, or very coarle
images of the human and ome other forms,
dcefitute of grace and propriety . The jufinefs
of there observations is confirmed by infpeding
the wooden prints and copper-plates of their
paintings, which have been publifled by various
authors. In them every figure of men, of

b Rclac. de Cort. Rtimuf. iii. 294. IF.
c See NOTE XXXIV.

quladru-

B O°1 K quadrupeds, or birds, as well as every repre.

Vii.
L.-v--.. fentation of inanimated nature, is extremely rud.

and awkward*. The hardest Egyptian flvlc,

ItitT

* As a fpccimen of the spirit and flyle in which M. Cla.

vigero makes hia ftrichAties upon my IIiitory of Ameiica, I
fliall publish his remarks upon this pafltge. " Thus far
"( Robertson; to whom we an;swer, firll, That there is ;i,,
" reason to believe that those rude works were rally
,' Mexican; secondly, That neither do we know whether
" those persons in whose judgment he confides, may be pel-
( sons fit to merit our faith, because we have observed tlit
" Robertson trufis frequently to the tetlimony of Gage,
" Correal, II agnez, and other such authlors, who are cn-
( tircly undeferving of credit; thirdly, It ismore probable
( that the arms of copper, believed by those intelligent
" judges to be certainly Oriental, are really Mexican."
Vol. II. 39i.-When an author, not entirely destitute of
integrity or discernment, and who has some solicitude about
his own charaCter, ailerts that he received his infor:natio
concerning any particular point from persons " on wlionf
judgment and talle he can rely ;" a very slender degree of
candour, one should think, might ntduce the reader to blircv
that lie does not enleavour to impose upon the pul lic by :i
appeal to tellimony altogether unworthy of credit. iMy
iniforimation concerning the Mexican works of art are tl:-
polited in the King of Spain's cailnet, was received from t}n'
late Lord raiithani, ambaflildor extraordinrary from tl,'
c.iurt of London to tliat of Madrid, and from Mr. Alct)-
deacon a\\ adilov, chl;al;lin to the clibafly ; and it w';':
upion tlicit I pruolilouncetll tlce co;it of arnii' ',
Ileiitioncd in tlie note, to be of Oriental fabric. As l.I
vtcre butl at M1adrid in tlicir public charaser whlien the I;;i!

c li.' i

fliff and imperfect as it was, is more elegant. 1 o o K
The scrawls of children delineate objedts alrnoft v__
as accurately.

Bur however low the Mexican paintings may

be ranked, when viewed merly as works of art,
a very different station belongs to theml, when
confidered as the records of their country, as

edition of the HiPfory of America was pulilllled, I thought
it imlroper at that time to mention their names. Did their
dctci!ion concerning a matter of taite, or their tliliony con-
cerniig a point of facit, htand in need of collirmation, I
right produce the evidence of an intelligent traveller, vwhto,
in defcribilg the royal cabinet of Madrid, takes notice that
it contains ' specimens of Mexican and Peruvian utcnfi.;,
\itiHs, &c. in earthen-ware, wretchied both in talte and
execution." DIillon's Travel, 1 t1hroug Spain, p. 77. As
(age comnpofed his Srvey js N' zw Spain wvitl all thle zeal
and acrimony of a new convert, I have paid little regard to
iis ttilin uny witih rflped to points relating to religion. But
;i., li rclided in fevcral provincce, in New Spain, which travel-

fir,. lIllom \ilit, anil as feeTcnls to have obfcrvcd their

an'lirtail 111(1 laws witlh ;, ii cllitecnt cyc, I have availed

iilvflll of lis ifolrni.itioii \ithl rflC(dt to mnatteis where
ltligi(us opiionl could ha l ittle inflhecc. Correal I have
leldom quoted, ind never relied Ulpon his evidence alone.
''The fiation in which llagcz. was unploycl i n America, :1

ell11 a the crcdit givci: o his verncity lby pi lililr lis Repgn,
liitiltlci among tlie lare collecitoil ofi (i, iieits publlill(ed
(;:. I believe 1y nuAlioaity) ait M.l:hld i, A. 17. 7, juft;lies
i.; lor'l ;Ilp;liilig t(o Ii: .tIi11.1l ;t!.

hiltorical

B O K historical monuments of its policy and tranf.

-Vi actions; and they become curious as well as

interesting objecs of attention. The noblest and
most beneficial invention of which human in-
genuity can boast, is that of writing. But the
firll essays of this art, which hath contributed
more than all others to the improvement of the
species, were very rude, and it advanced towards
perfeEtion slowly, and by a gradual progrelion.
When the warrior, eager for fame, wishcd to
tranfiit some knowledge of his exploits to
succeeding ages; when the gratitude of a people
to their sovereign prompted thenm to hand down
an account of his beneficent deeds to posterity;
the first method of accomplishing this, which
seems to have occurred to them, was to delineate,
in the best manner they could, figures represent
ing the ation of which they were 'olicitou3
to preserve the memory. Of this, which has
very properly been called piuzrc-writing , we
find traces among fomc of the noft savage
tribes of Amcrica. When a leader returns
from the field, he rliips a tree of its bark, and
vith red paint firalclchs upon it iotme uncouth
figures which represent the order of his march,
the number of his followcrs, the elcnmy whom
c,e attacked, the scalps and captives which lie

' I)iinc Legat. of Mofcs, iii. 73.

brouIght

brought home. To those simple annals he trusts B o o
for renown, and soothes himself with hope that _,
bv their means he fiall receive praise from the
warriors of futur- times'

COMPARED with those awkward essays of their

savage countrymen, the paintings of the Mexi-
cans may be confidered as works of composition
and design. They were not acquainted, it is
true, with any other method of recording tranf-
ations, than that of delineating the objects
which they wished to represent. But they could
exhibit a more complex series of events in
progressive order, and defcribc, by a proper dif-
position of figures, the occurrences of a king's
reign from his accellion to his death; the pro-
grefs of an infant's education from its birth until
it attain to the years of maturity ; the diflerent
rcconpences and marks of diltindion conferred
upon warriors, in proportion to the exploits
which they haid perlolred. Some singular fpe-
cimcns of this piiture-vwriii, have been preserved,
wlich are ju{lly confidered as the most curious
Inonuments of art l)rought froim the New \'rorld.
The moll valuable of tlhee was publiflied by
'uirchas in fixty-lix plailc. It is divided into

f Si, W. J (,l I;,:l Pili'i.'l' ,ms.l j'.j , 1. ! ii. p. 143. Mrcin.
'l'l.,i'Io t;,. ii ;1. . ili.tl M 11 . it: S;Lu'.'. ii. 43.

tlirec.

n o K three parts. The firit contains the history of

1___, the Mexican empire under its ten monarchs,

The second is a ribute-roll, leprefenting what
each conquered town paid into the royal treasury.
The third is a code of their institutions, domeflic,
political, and military. Another fpeciinen of
Mexican painting has been published in thirty.
two plates, by the present archbishop of Toledo.
To both are annexed a full explanation of what
the figures were intented to represent, which vwas
obtained by the Spaniards from Indians well
acquainted with their own arts. The style of
painting in all these is the fame. They represent
things, not words. They exhibit images to the
eye, not ideas to the understanding. They may,
therefore, be confidered as the earliest and most
imperfect essay of men in their progress towards
discovering the art of writing. The defects in
this mode of recording transactions muff have
been early felt. To paint every occurrence w:il.,
from its nature, a very tedious operation and as
affairs became more complicated, and cvents
multiplied in any focicty, its annals mull have
fwclled to an enormous bulk. Besides this, no
objc&s could be delineated but those of fciile;
the conceptions of the mind had no corporeal
form, and as long as picure-writing could not
convey an idea of these, it muf have been a
very imperfec art. The neceflity of improving

It

it must have rouzed and harpened invention, B o K
and the human mind holding the fame course
in the New World as in the Old, might have
advanced by the fame successive teps, firit, from an
actual picture to the plain hieroglyphic; next, to
the allegorical symbol; then to the arbitrary
characer; until, at length, an alphabet of letters
was discovered, capable of exprefling all the
various combinations of found employed in
speech. In the paintings of the Mexicans we,
accordingly, perceive, that this progress was
begun among them. Upon an attentive in-
fpeaion of the plates, which I have mentioned,
we may observe some approach to the plain
or simple hieroglyphic, where ome principal
part or circumstance in the fubjeEt is made to
Rand for the whole. In the annals of their
kings, published by Purchas, the towns con-
quered .by each are uniformly represented in the
fame manner by a rude delineation of a house;
but in order to point out the particular towns
which submitted to their viaorious arms, peculiar
emblems, sometimes natural objcds, and some-
times artificial figures, are employed. In the
tribute-roll published by the arclibiflop of To-
ledo, the house, which was properly the picture
of the town, is omitted, and the emblem alone is
employed to represent it. The Mexicans fecm
even to have made tome advances beyond this,

VOL. in. x towards

3 0 K towards the use of the more figurative and

VII.
_<_,- fanciful hieroglyphic. In order to describe a

monarch, who had enlarged his dominions by
force of arms, they painted a target ornamented
with darts, and placed it between him and those
towns which he subdued. But it is only in one
inflance, the notation of numbers, that we discern
any attempt to exhibit ideas which had no
corporeal form. The Mexican painters had in-
vented artificial marks, or fgns of convention, for
this purpose. By means of these, they computed
the years of their kings' reigns, as well as the
amount of tribute to be paid into the royal
treasury. The figure of a circle represented
unit, and in small numbers, the computation
was made by repeating it. Larger numbers
were expressed by a peculiar mark, and they had
ilch as denoted all integral numbers, from
twenty to eight thousand. The short duration
of their empire prevented the Mexicans fron
advancing farther in that long course which con-
duls men fiom the labour of delineating real
cbjets, to the iiinplicil.y and ease of alphabetic
writing. ' h ir records, notwithstanding some
dawn of fucli ideas as might have led to a more
perfect: flile, can be confidcred as little more than
a i)ccies of picture-writilng, so far improved as to
mark their fui)criorily over the savage tribes of
Anlcrica ; but flill lb defective, as to prove tia!

they

they had not proceeded far beyond the first flage o o

vui.

in that progress which mtft be completed before -
any people can be ranked among polished
nations g.

THEIR mode of computing time may be con- Tlcir mor'e

0 ,of -ollom ut-

fidered as a more decisive evidence of their pro- insti,~e.
grefs in improvement. They divided their year
into eighteen months, each consisting of twenty
days, amounting in all to three hundred and
sixty. But as they observed that the course
of the fun was not completed in that time, they
added five days to the year. These, which were
properly intercalary days, they termed fipcr-
mumerary or waqte; and as they did not belong
to any month, no work was done, and no sacred
rite performed on them; they were devoted
wholly to festivity and pastime b. This near
approach to philosophical accuracy is a remark-
able proof that the Mexicans had beftoweld ome
attention upon inquiries and speculations, to
which men in a very rde slate never turn their
thoughts *.

Suc r

g See NOTE XXXV. h Acolla, lib. vi . c2.
* The Mexican mode of computing time, niidl c'('y

other particular relating to thleir cliiuonology, lave bccn
confiGdciably clucidatcd by M. Clavircro, Vol. 1. 2;-:S;

x 2 Vol. 11.

B O O K SUCH are the mo st(riking particulars in the

VII.
,_ manners and policy of the Mexicans, which ex-
F'. indi- hibit them to view as a people considerably
cting a
fiiallipro- refined. But from other circumstances, one is
grt fs In ci-
viliz.'cn. apt to fufpe that their characer, and many of

their institutions, did not. diiFer greatly from
those of the other inhabitants of America.

Tllhir wars LIKE the rude tribes around them, the Mexi-
continualan )
,and fro- cans were incessantly engaged in war, and the

"'" motives which prompted them to hostility seem

to have been the fame. They fought, in order
to gratify their vengeance, by hedding the blood
of their enemies. In battle they were chiefly
intent on taking prisoners, and it was by the
number of these that they eflimated the glory of
vicory. No captive was ever ransomed or
spared. All were sacrificed without mercy, and
their flesh devoured with the fame barbarous joy
as among the fiercest iavages. On some occa.
sions it rose to even wilder excesses. Their
principal warriors covered thenlfelves with the
lkins of the unhappy victims, and danced about

Vol. II. 2295, c. Thel ol)fcrvations and theories o tc
Mexicans concernliiig tliofc subjects lifcovcr a greater iro
grc i fcultilive fcicncc than we find among any people
il the New World.

the

the treets, boasting of their own valour, and B K
exulting over their enemies'. Even in their _
civil inftiiutions we discover traces of that
barbarous di!pofition which their fviiem of war
inspired. The four chief counrellors of the em-
pire were diftinguifled by illeJ, which codl.
have been assumcd only by a people who de-
lighted in blood. 'i.'his ferocity of cala&der
prevailed among all thei nations of New Spain.
The Tlafcalans, the people of TIechoacan, and
other states at enmity with the Mex!-ans, de-
lighted equally in s;ar, and treated tiher prisoners
with the fame cruelty. In proportion a man-
kind combine in ficial union, and live under the
influence of equal laws and regular policy, their
manners soften, sentients of hulianity arise,
and the rights of the 1pecies come to be under-
stood. The fiercenels of war abates, a,d even
while engaged in hostility, mn rnetuer what
they owe one to another. The savate i;itlls to
destroy, the citizen to conquer. Tlie lornitr
neither pities nor spares, the latter has acquired
fenfibilily which tempers his rage. To this
fenfibili y the Mexicans fcem to have been
perfl'e itl angers, allnd among them war \vas
carried on with lo much us its uriginal baibarity,

i lcrrcrn, dec. 3. ilb. ii. c. 15. Goin. Con. c. 2 1'

Sec
S ' NU''E XXXVI.

3 llat

B O 0 K that we cannot but fuf)cct their degree of

VII.

;^ civilization to have been very imperfe&.
Their rne- THEIR funeral rites were not less bloody than

those of the nmof favage.tribes. On the death of
any diftinguifled personage, especially of the
Emperor, a certain number of his attendants
were chosen to accompany him to the other
world; and those unfortunate vitimns were put
to death without mercy, and buried in the fame
tomb'.

Their ar'- THOUGii their agriculture was more extensive
cu!ture jilll-
pelfet. than that of the roving tribes who trusted chiefly

to their bow for food, it seems not to have sup-
plied them with such subsistence as men require
when engaged in efforts of active indultry. The
Spaniards appear not to have been struck with
any superiority of the Mexicans over the other
people of America in bodily vigour. 3Both,
accol ding to their oblfrvation, were of fucl
a feeble famne as to be unable to endure fatigue,
and the flrengthl of one Spantiard exceeded that
of fveral Indians. This thev imputcd to their
scanty diet, on oo-r are, (fiflicient to prelcrvc
life, but not to give firincfs to the conftitutioi.
Such a remark could hardlly have been wade

i (Itrcr;', d:'c. lib. ii. c. . r. Crunl. c. 22.

wvill

with respect to any people furnished plentifully B o o K
with the necessaries of life. The difficulty which I.
Cortes found in procuring subsistence for his
finall body of soldiers, who were often con-
itrained to live on the fponraneous produfions
of the earth, seems to confirm the remark of the
Spanish writers, and gives no high idea of the
state of cultivation in the Mexican empire m

A PRACTICE that was universal in New Spain A further

proof of

appears to favour this opinion. The Mexican this.
women gave fuck to their children for several
years, and during that time they did not cohabit
with their husbands . This precaution against a
burdensome increase of progeny, though ne-
ceflary, as I have already observed, among
savages, who, from the hardihips of their con-
dition, and the precarioufnels of their subsistence,
find it impolible to rear a numerous family,
can hardly be supposed to have continued among
a people who lived at cafe and in abundance.

THE vast extent of the Mexican empire, which Douhts cn

has been confidercd, and with juflice, as the cxtIu, ,l
most decisive proof of a considerable progress in t'lU c""iC.
regular government and police, is one of those

" Relat. ap, R nuf. iii . 3o6. A. lrrcera, dec. 3. lil. iv.

c. 17. dIc. . li2 . vi. c. 16.
" Gom. Cron. . 2o8. Hcrrcra, jcc. 3. lil. iv, c. 16.

x ,I l.dt:s

B O K fats in the history of the New World which

vi'.
.-v-_- seems to have been admitted without due exami-

nation or sufficient evidence. The Spanish
historians, in order to magnify the valour of
their countrymen, are accufromed to represent
the dominion of Montezuma as itretching over
all the provinces of New Spain from the Northern
to the Southern Ocean. But a great part of the
mountainous country was possessed by the Otomics,
a fierce uncivilized people, who seem to have
been the residue of the original inhabitants.
The provinces towards the north and weft of
Mexico were occupied by the Cichemecas, and
other tribes of hunters. None of these recog.
nized the Mexican monarch as their superior.
Even in the interior and more level country,
there were several cities and provinces which
had never submitted to the Mexican yoke.
Tlafcala, though only twenty-one leagues from
the capital of the empire, was an independent
and hoitile republic. Cholula,.. though ill
nearer, had been fubjeclcd only a short time
before the arrival of the Spaniards. Tepeaca,
at the distance of thirty leagucs from Mexico,
seems to have been a feparaLe slate, governed by
its own laws . Mecloacan, the frontier of
which extended within forty leagues of Mexico,

Heerrera, dec. 3. lib. x. c. i5. 21. B. Diiaz. c. 13'.

\v,~

was a powerful kingdom, remarkable for its i- B o o K

VII.

placable enmity to the Mexican nameP. By _
these hostile powers the Mexican empire was
circumscribed on every quarter, and the high
ideas which we are apt to frm of it from the
description of the Spanish hitorians, flould be
considerably moderated.

IN consequence of this independence of several Little in-

tercourfc
states in New Spain upon the Mexican empire, among is

fve a pl:o.

there was not any considerable intercourse be- vinccs.
tween its various provinces. Even in the interior
country not far ditant from the capital, there
seem to have been no roads to facilitate the
communication of one district with another; and
when the Spaniards first attempted to penetrate
into its several provinces, they had to open their
way through forests and marshes . Cortes, in
his adventurous march from Mexico to Hon-
duras in 1525, met with obftrution;, and
endured hardships, little inferior to those with
which he mufft have struggled in the most un-
civilized regions of America. In some places he
could hardly force a pailage through impervious
woods, and plains overflowcd with water. In
others he found so little cultivation, that his

P Icrrera, dec. 3. lib. ii . c . .
q 13. Diaz,. c 6. 16. 76.

3 troops

B o K troops were frequently in danger of perishing by
^_V. famine. Such fads correspond ill with the

pompous dcfcription which the Spanifl writer,
give of Mexican police and indutlry, and convey
an idea of a country nearly similar to that
poflffed by the Indian tribes in North America.
Here and there a trading or a war path, as they
are called in North America, led fi-om one
iettlement to another , but generally there ap-
peared no sign of any eftablifhled communication,
few marks of industry, and fewer monuments
of art.

further A PROOF of this imperfection in their commer-
proofof
tji. cial intercourse no less flriking, is their want of

money, or some universal standard by which to
estimate the value of commodities. The dilf
covery of this is among the steps of greatelt
consequence in the progress of nations. Until it
has been made, all their tranf.acions must be so
avwkward, so operose, and so limited, that we
.may boldly pronounce that they have advanced
liut a little way in their career. The invention
of such a commercial flandard is of such high
antiquity in our heillphere, and rifes so ar
bcynid lie :era of authentic hifory, as to appear
alninof coval with the cxiflencc of focicty. 'The

r Icrrca, d(Ic. 3. lib.. c. 8.

]i'rcciou'

precious metals seem to have been early employed B o o K
for this purpose, and from their permanent value, _-V
their divisibility, and many other qualities, they
are better adapted to serve as a common standard
than any other substance of which nature has
given us the command. But in tie New World,
where these metals abound mofl, this use of
them was not known. The exigencies of rude
tribes, or of monarchies imperfectly civilized,
did not call for it. All their commercial inter-
course was carried on by barter, and their igno-
rance of any common standard by which to
facilitate that exchange of commodities which
contributes so much towards the comfort of life,
may be jufily mentioned as an evidence of the
infant state of their policy. But even in the
New World the inconvenience of wanting some
general inltrumcnt of commerce began to be felt,
and some efforts were made twards supplying
that defect. The Mexicans, among whom the
number and greatness of their cities gave rife to
a more extended commerce than in any other
part of America, had begun to employ a common
flandard of value, which rendered finaller tranf-
adions much more easy. As chocolate was the
favourite drink of persons in every rank of life,
the nuts or almonds of cacao, of which it is
compoled, were of such universal conlumlption,

that,

B O O K that, in their flated markets, there were willinly
hl___e j received il return for commodities of finall price,

Thus they came to be confidered as the iftru.
Inent of commerce, and the value of what one
wished to dispose of was eflimated by the number
of nuts of the cacao, which he might expect
in exchange for it. This seems to be the utmuft
length which the Americans had advanced to.
wards the discovery of any expedient for suppl.
ing the use of money. And if the want of it i.
to be held, on one hand, as a proof of their
barbarity, this expedient for supplying that want,
should be admitted, on the other, as an evidence
no less satisfying, of ome progress which the
Mexicans had made in refinement and civilization,
beyond the savage tribes around them.

Doubtscon- IN such a rude slate were many of the Mexican
ccrning the
it-:-ofithir provinces when first visited by their conquerors.
Crits. Even their cities, extensive and populous as they

were, fecm more fit to be the habitation of men
just emerging from barbarity, than the refidcncc
of a polished people. The description of ltlcal
nearly resembles that of an Indian village. A
number of low straggling huts, scattered about
irregularly, according to the caprice of each pro-
prictor, built with turf and stone and thatcli!
with reeds, without any light but lwhat llitv

rccivd

received by a door, so low that it could not B o o K
be entered upright'. In Mexico, though, from vi .
the peculiarity of its situation, the disposition of
the houses was more orderly, the fruEure of the
greater part was equally mean. Nor does the
fabric of their temples, and other public edifices, Tenmplcs,
appear to have been such as entitled them to the
high praises bestowed upon them by many Spanish
a;uthors. As far as one can gather from their
obscure and inaccurate descriptions, the great
temple of Mexico, the most famous in New
Spain, which has been represented as a magnifi-
cent building, raised to such a height, that the
ascent to it was by a flight of a hundred and
fourteen steps, was a solid mass of earth of a
square form, faced partly with fione. its base on
each fide extended ninety feet, and decreasing
gradually as it advanced in height, it terminated
in a quadrangle of about thirty feet, where were
placed a flhrine of the deity, and two altars
on which the vilims were sacrificed'. All the
other celebrated temples of New Spain exactly
rcfeinblcd that of Mexico . Such ftrucures
convey no high idea of progrcis in art and
ingenuity; and one can hardly conceive that a
lorni more rude and simple could have occurrd!

Heircr;a, (ce. 2. lib. vi. c. 2.
I Tc iicrai, dec. 2. Ii. ) ii. c. .
Scc N''; XXVII.

to

B} o o K to a nation in its first efobrts towards ereEting any
_ _J- great work.

and other GREATE'rR f;ill and ingenuity were displayed,
public buildings. if we may believe the Spanifi historians, in the

houses of the emperor and in those of the
principal nobility. There, some elegance of
design was visible, and a commodious arrange.
ment of the apartments was attended to. But if
buildings corresponding to such descriptions had
ever existed in the Mexican cities, it is probable
that foine remains of them would fill be viible.
From the manner in which Cortes conducted the
siege of Mexico, we can indeed easily account
for the total deftrution of whatever had any
appearance of splendor in that capital. But
as only two centuries and a half have elapsed
since the conquest of New Spain, it feemns
altogether incredible that in a period so ilort,
every vefiige of this boated elegance and gran-
deur fiould have difiplearc'l; and that in the
other cities, particularly in those which did not
fufler by the dcflruLive liaill of heIC conquerors,
there arc any ruins, which can be confidered as
monuments of their ancient nlmaulliificcnce.

EVEN in a village of Ilte riidcf liiclian;, there

are buildings of Cgrc;ICar extent all1 eIlevation llhal
commnllo dxvclling-hloulcs. Such as arc dcllinied

klr

for holding the council of the tribe, and in , o o
which all alemble on occasions of public feflivity, _ ,
may be called irately edifices, when compared
vith the reft. As among the Mexicans the
difsinion of ranks was effablifhed, and property
was unequally divided, the number of diftin-
guifhed ftruEtures in their towns would of course
be greater than in other parts of America. But
these eem not to have been either so solid or
magnificent as to merit the pompous epithets
which some Spanifli authors employ in describing
them. It is probable that, though more orna-
mented, and built on a larger cale, they were
erected with the fame flight materials which the
Indians employed in their common buildingsw,
and Time, in a space much less than two hundred
and fifty years, may have swept away all remains
of them ".

FROM this enumeration of htSC:, t fc!ms, upon

the whole, to be evident, that th (bite of ficicytv
in Mexico was confidlcrT.ly alv::. . I! leyond
that of the savage tribes whicil \c )!:vc tlcli(;ittct.(
But it is nolefs manifest, that with rli)c& to in:lo
particulars, the Spaniflh accounts o te ir plOg;li;e
appear to be highly cmhcllifhcd. 'Thre is nor
a more frequent or a more fcrti!c lourcc ol

'"t¢c N(TE XXXVI11. ;. '
Il)TE XXX XI,

,:' (l~! i '1

B o O K deception in describing the manners and arts of

vII. _-.. savage nations, or of such as are imperfecly

civilized, than that of applying to them the
names and phrases appropriated to the inflitutions
and refinements of polished life. When the
leader of a finall tribe, or the head of a rude
community, is dignified with the name of king
or emperor, the place of his residence can receive
no other name but that of his palace ; and what-
ever his attendants may be, they muff be called
his court. Under such appellations they acquire,
in our estimation, an importance and dignity
which does not belong to them. The illusion
spreads, and giving a sal'e colour to every part
of the narrative, the imagination is so much
carried away with the resemblance, that it be.
comes difficult to dilcern objects as they really
are. The Spaniards, when they first touched on
the Mexican coast, were so much struck with tl'c
appearance of attainments in policy and in the
arts of life, far ihpcrior to those of the rude
/ tribes with which tlhe wcre hitherto acquainti,

that they fancied they had at length dilcovercd a
civilized people in the New World. This coin-
parison between the people of Mexico and their
uncultivated neighbours, they appear to Ihave
kept conltantly in view, and observing withi
admiration many things which marked the prc-
eminence of the former, they employ in lc-

fcrilbinE

scribing their imperfect policy and infant arts, B o o K
such terms as are applicable to the infritutions of l
men far beyond tlhem in improvement. Both
these circumstances concur in detrascing from
the credit due to the descriptions of Mexican
manners by the early Spanish writers. By draw-
ing a parallel between them and those of people
lb much less civilized, they railed their own
ideas too high. By their mode of describing
them, they conveyed ideas to others no less
exalted above truth. Later writers have adopted
the lyle of the original historians, and improved
upon it. The colours with which De Solis
delineates the character and describes the actions
of Montezuma, the fplcndor of his court, the
laws and policy of his empire, are the fame that
he mut have employed in exhibiting to view the
monarch and inflitutions of an highiy poliihed
people.

Br though we may admit, thal the warm

imagination of the Spanifl wiitcrs has added
folnc einbelliflment to their dclcriptions, this
will not julify the clcilive and peremptory tone,
with which several authors pronounce all their
accounts of the Mexican power, policy, and laws,
to be the fictions of meni who xwinlcd to deceive,
or who delighted in the in;irvcllnu:. l'cr. are
lew liiltoricail sic: that (:in bc aei cittinetl by

Vol.. Ili. y LVidLIncC

B 0 K evidence more unexceptionable, than may be
'v-^ produced in support of the material articles, in

the description of the Mexican confitution and
manners. Eye witnesses relate what they be-
held. Men who had resided among the Mexi-
cans, both before and after the conquest, describe
institutions and cuitoms which were familiar to
them. Persons of profeflions so different that
ol)jeds must have presented theinfelves to their
view under every various aspet ; soldiers, priests,
and lawyers, all concur in their tetimony. Had
Cortes ventured to impose upon his sovereign,
by exhibiting to him a picture of imaginary
nanners, there wanted not enemies and ivals
who were qualified to detec his deceit, and
who would have rejoiced in exposing it. But
according to the just remark of an author, whose
ingenuity has illustrated, and whose eloquence
has adorned the history of America Y, this fuppo-
lition is in itself as improbable, as the attempt
would have been audacious. Who among the
dellroyers of this great empire was lb enlightened
by fciencc, or so attentive to the progress and
operations of men in social life, as to fi-ame
a fictitious fyfemn of policy o well combined
and lb confillent, as tat which they delineate,
in their accounts of the Alcxican government?

y M. 1' Abb6 Rty al li!l.
h ilol . & plit. &c. iii. 27,

W lie I

Where could they have borrowed the idea of B o K
many intitutions in legislation and police, to vi_
which, at that period, there was nothing parallel
in the nations with which they were acquainted ?
There was not, at the beginning of the sixteenth
century, a regular establishment of posts for con-
veying intelligence to the sovereign of any king.
dom in Europe. The fame observation will
apply to what the Spaniards relate, with refpef
to the ftruture of the city of Mexico, the
regulations concerning its police, and various
laws established for the administration of juflice,
or securing the happiness of the community.
Whoever is accustomed to contemplate the pro-
grefs of nations, will often, at very early stages
of it, discover a premature and unexpeced dawn
of those ideas, which give rife to institutions that
are the pride and ornament of its most advanced
period. Even in a slate as impcrfe&ly polifled
as the Mexican empire, the happy genius of some
sagacious observer, excited or aided by circum-
Itances unknown to us, may have introduced
inltitutions which are Iclloin found but in
Societies highly refined. But it is almost im-
poflible that the illiterate conquerors of the
New World flioulJ have formed in any one
inllance a conception of cuflomns and laws,
beyond the itandard of improvement in their
own age and country. Or if Cortes had been

Y 2 capable

B o0 K capable of this, what inducement had those

VII.
---„-- by whom he was superseded to continue the

deception? Why should Coriia, or Motolinea,
or Acofta, have ainufed their sovereign or their
fellow-citizens with a tale purely fabulous?

Rcliin.t JIN one particular, however, the guides whom
thu NMC).-
71,5. we mutf follow have rerefetcdl the Mexicans to

be more barbarous, perhaps, than they really
were. Their religious tenets, and the rites of
their worship, are described by themn as wild and
cruel in an extreme degree. Religion, which
occupies no considerable place in the thoughts of
a savage, whoie conceptions of any superior
power are obscure, and his sacrcd rites few
as well as simple, was sorned, among the
Mexicans, into a regular fiftcl, with its conm
plcte train of p eus, temples, vitims, and
fiftival.-. 'Thi;, of itself, is a clear proof tliiat
the ffate of tile Mlexicans was very dillrent
i;onl tllat of the ruder Amecricanl tribes. But
iron tlic ex;ia'a';;mce of' ilicir vrlitious notions,
ur the barbarity of their rites, no conclulion can
biL drawn w:ili certainty concer!'ill the degree
(A lltcir civilization. i,'or nalioliS, long alter
Ilicir ida.a3 begin to enlarge, and t cir lmannelrs
lo rcline, adheie to flias of pIupcrlLiliol
U)Ioundcd oI lhe cruile conc(:])tiOlls o[ cu.'iy a;Ies.
'l'it)m he Clitis of tile
i lexic:in rcl; iol \u'

I'i:y',

may, however, form a mot jufl conclusion with n o o r.
refpe to its influence upon the character of the
people. The aecL' of fuperftiion in Mexico
was gloomy and atrocious. Its divinitics were
clothed with terror, and delighted in vengeance.
They were exhibited to the people under de-
testable forms, which created horror. The
figures of serpents, of tygers, and of other
defruive animals, decorated their temples.
Fear was the only principle that inipird their
votaries. Flafts, mortifications, and pnances,
all rigid, and many of them excruciating to alt
extreme degree, were the means employed to
appease the wrath of their gods, and the Mlexi-
cans never approached their altars without
sprinkling them with blood drawni fromi their
own bodies. But, of all !iter.!lns, human
sacrifices were deeCed the molt aiccltable.
This religious belii-f, miiiinging iith tlhe iipla-
cable Plirit of vna;.liilce, and adding new fulce
to it, every capivec taken in war was brought to
the temple, was d,.'oied as a viclimi l the ell ity,
a;1d facrilicL(ld iti rites no leCs Is(cll1ll than
(cruc1l '. 'T'lle heart :1d lead were te portiouI
coiiUci;atc(t to lthe gI,.>; the W; rrir, by l
provwels thILe lri',iier hal ben i'iz.ed, carried (,i

Z* C r',. i . p. . ji.

'c. 15

. c. 2.

:\culta, lib . c. C., .

1i,, . .

,1 . j E ,
(:. Guollar-a Coi. . 8, Sc. Sec NO 1'1 XL.

Y3 the

B O K the body to feast upon it with his friends. Under
L, the impression of ideas so dreary and terrible, and

accustomed daily to scenes of bloodihed rendered
awful by religion, the heart of man must harden
and be fleeled to every sentiment of humanity.
The spirit of the Mexicans was accordingly un-
feeling, and the genius of their religion so far
counterbalanced the influence of policy and arts,
that notwithstanding their progress in both, their
manners, instead of softening, became more
fierce. To what circumftanccs it was owing
that fuperflition assumed such a dreadful form
among the Mexicans, we have not sufficient
knowledge of their history to determine. But its
influence is visible, and produced an effect that
is singular in the history of the human species.
The manners of the people in the New World
who had made the greatelt progress in the arts of
policy, were, in several refpeEts, the most fero-
cious, and the barbarity of tome of their cuftonis
exceeded even thole of the flavage state.
rrctenfions TI-1 empire of Peru boasts of an higher anti-

lrit,,,,tn- quity than that of Mexico. According to the
tI'(uty traditionary accounts colleced by the Spaniards,

it had ubfiltcd four hundred years, under twelve
fuccefive monarchs. But the knowlcdgc of
their ancient story, which the Peruvians could
unctLt:iin. communicate to their conquerors, must have

been

been both imperfect and uncertain a. Like the B o o K

Vii.

other American nations, they were totally unac-
quainted with the art of writing, and destitute of
the only means by which the memory of past
transactions can be preserved with any degree of
accuracy. Even among people to whom the use
of letters is known, the ra where the authen-
ticity of hifLory commences is much posterior to
the introdution of writing. That noble inven-
tion continued, everywhere, to be long sub-
servient to the common business and wants of
life, before it was employed in recording events,
with a view of conveying information from one
age to another. But in no country (lid ever
tradition alone carry down historical knowledge,
in any full continued ftreaem, during a period of
half the length that the monarchy of Pelru is said
to have subsisted.

''uE .QI/ipos, or knots on cords of different tic:,; in

colours, which are celebrated by authors iond of l',i, ,: h,y
the marvellous, as if they had been regular ''"s.
annals of the empire, imperlfctly lupplicd the
place of writing. According to the obscure
dlccription of them by Acofta b, which Caicilalit
de la Vega has adopted ,,l ith little vaiation and
no improvement, the quipos fecm to have been a

Se NO'Tl' X. b H1it. ib. vi. c. 8.

v I device

B o o K device for rendering calculation more expeditioIui
«--i and accurate. By the various colours different

objects were denoted, and by each knot a diftinci
number. Thus an account was taken, and a
kind of regilter kept, of the inhabitants in each
province, or of the several productions collected
there for public use. But as by these knots,
however varied or combined, no moral or ab-
firat idea, no operation or quality of the mind
could be represented, they contributed little to-
wards preserving the memory of ancient events
and institutions. By the Mexican paintings and
symbols, rude as they were, more knowledge of
remote tranfaCions seems to have been con-
veyed, than the Peruvians could derive fron their
boasted quipos. Had the latter been even of
more extensive use, and better adapted to fuppll
the place of written records, they perished ,
generally, together with other monuments i
Peruvian ingenuity, in the wreck occasioned bv
the Spanifl conquest, and the civil wars ful-
sequent to it, that no acceflion of light r
knowledge comes from them. All the zeal (::
Garcilaffo de la Vega, for the honour of liat
race of monarchs from whom he decended, all
the induflry of his researches, and the fiupcrior
advantages with which he carried them on,
opened no fourcc of inlormation unknw\n t
the Spanifi authors who wrote before hin. 1,i

h 1i "

his Royal Commlcnitaries, he confines himself to B o o K.
illultrate what they had related concerning the v_
antiquities and inflitutions of Peru ; and his
illustrations, like their accounts, are derived en-
tirely from the traditionary tales current among
his countrymen.

VERY little credit then is due to the minute

details which have been given of the exploits, the
battles, the conquests, and private character of
the early Peruvian monarchs. We can reft
upon nothing in their flory, as authentic, but a
few fads, so intcrwoven in the system of their
religion and policy, as preserved the memory of
them from being lofn; and upon the description
of such customs and institutions as continued
in force at the time of the conquell, and fell
under the immediate obfcrvation of the Spaniards.
By attending carefully to thiei, and endeavour-
ing to separate them from what appears to
be fabulous, or of doubtful authority, I have
laboured to form an idea of the Peruvian govern-
ment and manners.

ll'T people of Peru, as I have already o- oii.;,ni

frcvled", had not advanced beyond the rucdeftl p,';,I'
oirm of savage lif, whcn Manco Calpc, and

c Lib. i. c, it . .!

l ,'.; \'i - 1. 26,
, i-..

lis

l o
0 K his consort Mama Ocollo, appeared to inftrut

^ _ and civilize them. Who there extraordinary

personages were, whether they imported their
fyftein of legislation and knowledge of arts from
some country more improved, or, if natives
of Peru, how they acquired ideas so far superior
to those of the people whom they addrefled, are
circumflances with refpe& to which the Peruvian
tradition conveys no information. Manco Capac
and his consort, taking advantage of the propen.
fity in the Peruvians to superstition, and parti.
cularly of their veneration for the Sun, pretended
to be children of that glorious luminary, and to
deliver their infiructions in his name, and by
authority from him. The multitude listened and
believed. What reformation in policy and man-
ners the Peruvians ascribe to those founders of
their empire, and how, from the precepts of the
Inca and his consort, their ancestors gradually
acquired some knowledge of those arts, and
tome relifl for that industry, which render sub-
fifcncc secure and life comfortable, hath been
formerly related. Thoe bleflings were originally
confined within narrow precincts; but in pro-
ccls of time, the successors of Manco Capac
cxtcndcd their dominion over all the regions
lhalt (fretch to the weft of the Andes from Chlii
so ito, eflablifling in every province their
pLculiar policy and religious inflitutions.

'Tin'

THE most singular and striking circumrtance B o C K

in the Peruvian government, is the influence of v".
religion upon its genius and laws. Religious Founldd ir
ideas make such a feeble imprefion on the mind leisio,.
of a savage, that their effet upon his sentiments
and manners is hardly perceptible. Among the
Mexicans, religion, reduced into a regular system,
and holding a considerable place in their public
institutions, operated with conspicuous efficacy in
forming the peculiar character of that people.
But in Peru, the whole system of civil policy was
founded on religion. The Inca appeared not
only as a legislator, but as the messenger of
Heaven. His precepts were received not merely
as the injunctions of a superior, but as the man-
dates of the Deity. Iis race was to be held
sacred; and in order to preserve it diftind,
without being polluted by any mixture of less
noble blood, the sons of Manco Capac married
their own sifters, and no person was ever ad-
mitted to the throne who could not claim it by
such a pure descent. To those Children of the
Suln, for that was the appellation bellowed upon
all the offspring of the first Inca, the people
looked up with the reverence due to beings of a
luperior order. They were deemed to be under
the immediate protection of the deity from whom
they issued, and by him every order of the
reigning Inca was fuppolcd to be dilatcd.

l ROM

B o K FROM those ideas two consequences resultej,

_ The authority of the Inca was unlimited a!:

nTwo re- absolute, in the most extensive meaning of ti
niarkable
et'cas of words. Whenevcr the decrees of a prince arc
tlis.

confidered as the commands of the Divinity, it
is not only an act of rebellion, but of impiety, t

Th aro- dispute or oppose his will. Obedience beconilc
ou'tll lJica. a duty of religion ; and as it would be prophanie

to control a monarch who is believed to be untlir
the guidance of Heaven, and prcfuiiptuous lt
advise him, nothing remains but to submit with
implicit respect. This mufi necessarily be the
effect of every government cftablifhed on prc-
tensions of intercourse with superior powers.
Such accordingly was the blind fubminliion vhich
the Peruvians yielded to their fovcreigns. The
persons of highest rank and greatest power in
their dominions acknowledged them to be of
a more exalted nature; and in teftiniony of this,
when admitted into their preence, they entcredl
with a burden upon their foulders, as an enibleli
of their servitude, and willinglnls to bear what-
ever the Inca was plealcd to ilmpofe. Arlonii
their fubjeets, force was not requisite to Ibcild
their commands. Every officer entrut lCl witl
the execution of ihem was reverend, ad, acord-
ing to the account of an intelligent obfervcr f
Peruvian manners%, lie might proceed aloei

C /;.'intr, lib. i. c. 13.

frolll

from one extremity of the empire to another B O o IC
without meeting opposition ; for, on producing -
a friinge from the royal Borl/, an ornament of
the head peculiar to the reigning Inca, the
lives and fortunes of the people were at his
dlifpofal.

ANOTHER consequence of eflablifling govern- All c;,mc

pun iiti-

melt in Peru on the foundation of religion was, cal:;iiy.
that all crimes were punished capitally. They
nwcr not confiderecd as tranfgreliions of human
laws, but as insults oi'cred to the I)city. Each,
without any diftinciion between such as were
flight and such as were atrocious, called for
vengeance, and could be cit:ed only by the
blood of the offender. Consonantly to the fame
ideas, punishment followed the trcfpafs with in-
evxit.lble certainty, becaufl an o''nce against
1leaven was deemed Iuch an high enormity
;!s could not be pardonedl. Among a people
If corrupted morals, nlaximlls of jrifprudence b
i:verc and unrelenting, by rendering mnen fero-
cious and dcleierate, would be mIore apt to
multiply crimes than to refirain them. But the
'eruvians, of simple manners and iunluilficious
f[iili, xvere held in uch awe by this rigid difl
iillinc, tllal the lnumlber of ofenderl s was ex-

' V'Cg%, libl. ii. c.

. :. ...i!y

B o K tremely fnall. Veneration for monarchs, en.

vii.
,_-_j lightened and direted, as they believed, by the

divinity whom they adored, prompted them to
their duty ; the dread of punihment, which they
were taught to confider as unavoidable vengeance
inflicted by offended Heaven, withheld them
from evil.

MA;l gn)ius TH-E fy;tem of superstition on which the Inca;
of ther re-
lion. ingrafted their pretensions to such high authority,

was of a genius very different from that ea-
blilhed among the Mexicans. Manco Capac
turned the veneration of his followers entirely
towards natural objects. The Sun, as the great
source of light, of joy, and fertility in the
creation, attracted their principal homage. The
Moon and Stars, as co-operating with him, were
entitled to secondary honours. Wherever the
propensity in the human mind to acknowledge
and to adore some superior power, takes this
direction, and is employed in contemplating the
order and beneficence that really exist in nature,
the spirit of fiiperfition is mild. Wherever
imaginary beings, created by the fancy and the
fears of men, are fuppolcd to preside in nature,
and become the objects of worfillp, fuperfition
always aflimes a nmore ievere and atrocious orn.
Of the latter we have an example among the
Mexicans, of the lornicr among the people ol

'eriu.

Peru. The Peruvians had not, indeed, made o o lx
luch progress in observation or inquiry, as to _ ,
have attained just conceptions of the Deity; nor
was there in their language any proper name or
appellation of the Supreme Power, which inti-
mated, that they had formed any idea of him as
the Creator and Governor of the World g. But
ly directing their veneration to that glorious
luminary, which, by its universal and vivifying
energy, is the best emblem of divine beneficence,
the rites and observances which they deemed
acceptable to him were innocent and humane.
They offered to the Sun a part of those pro-
dutions which his genial warmth had called
forth from the bosom of the earth, and reared to
maturity. They sacrificed, as an oblation of
gratitude, some of the animals which were in-
debted to his influence for nourishment. They
presented to him choice specimens of those works
of ingenuity which his light had guided the hand
of man in forming. But the Incas never slained
his altars with human blood, nor could they
conceive that their beneficent father the Sun
would be delighted with such horrid vicims .
Thus the Peruvians, unacquainted with those
barbarous rites which extinguifll sensibility, and

' .\cla, lib. v. c. v S. c NOTE XL1I.

fupprcfs

B O K suppress the feelings of nature at the fight (

_-,.J human sufferings, were formed by the fplrit of

the superstition which they had adopted, to a
national character, more gentle than that of any
people in America.

ItsinflueIce THE influence of this superstition operated in
liy,' the fame manner upon their civil infititutions,

and tended to correct in them whatever w.as
adverfi to gentleneis of character. The domi-
nion of the Incas, tou the noft absolute of
all delfpotifms, was mitigated by its alliance with
religion. The mind was not humbled and
deprefied by the idea of a forced fubjcdtion
to the will of a superior ; obedience, paid to one
who was believed to be clothed with divine
authority, was willingly yielded, and inmplicd no
degradation. The sovereign, conscious that the
fubminflive reverence of his people flowed from
their belief of his heavenly descent, was co:1-
tinually reminded of a diflindtion which promipi cd
him to imitate that beneficent power which he
was supposed to reprcfent. In confequcnce of
those imprefiions, there hardly occurs in the
traditional history of Peru, any inftauce of
rebellion against the reigning prince, and ainorn
twelve {lbcceflive monarchs, there was not one
tyrant.

1VEN the wars in which the Incas engaged, u o o K

V'I.

were carried on with a spirit very different from i_-,
that of other American nations. They fought and<lon thir

mil;tary

not, like savages, to destroy and exterminate; or, T)Ar.
like the Mexicans, to glut blood-thirsty divinities
with human sacrifices. They conquered, in
order to reclaim and civilize the vanquished, and
to diffuse the knowledge of their own institutions
and arts. Prisoners feemn not to have been ex-
posed to the insults and tortures, which were
their lot in every other part of the New World.
The Incas took the people whom they subdued
under their protecion, and admitted them to a
participation of all the advantages enjoyed by
their original subjes. This pratice, so repug.
nant to American ferocity, and refcmbling the
humanity of the most polished nations, must be
ascribed, like other peculiarities which we have
observed in the Peruvian manners, to the genius
of their religion. The Incas, confideriiig the
homage paid to any other objcEt than to the
heavenly powers which they adored as ilpious,
were fond of gaining proselytes to their favourite
fyflem. The idols of every conquered province
were carried in triumph to the great temple
at (Czco', and placed there as trophies of the
lupcrior power of the divinity who was the pro-

llerrcra, dec. 5. lib. iv. c. 4. Vega, lib. v. c. 12.
VOL. HI. 2 ttaor

Bo o ,K tetor of the empire. The people were treat'ci

viA-
icy-- with lenity, and inftrued in the religious tenets

of their new masters k, that the conqueror migil!
have the glory of having added to the numbcr
of the votaries of his father the Sun.

cc r T-IE fate of property in Peru was no Ic.:
t.lt prot :-

,-,. singular than that of religion, and contributcec,

likewise, towards giving a mild turn of character
to the people. All the lands capable of cultiv,.
tion were divided into three flares. One wva
consecrated to the Sun, and the produt of i.
was applied to the erection of temples, anl
furnishing what was requisite towards celebratii'
the public rites of religion. The second belongeid
to the Inca, and was iet apart as the provilion
made by the community for the support o!
government. The third and largest share xw.
rcerved for the maintenance of the peopl,
among whom it was parcelled out. Neitihc
individuals, however, nor communities, had 1.
right of cxclufive property in the portion L:
apart for their uif. 'l'lTh pofi:fied it only for .
year, at the expiration of which a new divifit!
was made in proportiun to the rank, the nunbir,
and exigencies of each faulily. All those la:!d
ccrc cultivated by the joint iduftry of t.11.

1
i 1 llcl , c.. 5 lib. iv. c. 8.

C('ln.

community. The people, summoned by a proper B o o K
officer, repaired in a body to the fields, and per- _,
formed their common talk, while songs and
inufical instruments cheered them to their
labour'. By this singular distribution of terri.- ffasof
tory, as well as by the mode of cultivating it, the S
idea of a common interest, and of mutual sub-
ferviency, was continually inculcated. Each
individual felt his connection with those around
him, and knew that he depended on their
friendly aid for what increase he was to reap.
A state thus constituted may be confidered as
one great family, in which the union of the
members was so complete, and the exchange of
good offices so perceptible, as to create stronger
attachment, and to bind man to man in closer
intercourse, than subsisted under any form of
society established in America. From this re-
fulted gentle manners, and mild virtues unknown
in the savage state, and with which the Mexicans
were little acquainted.

BUT, though the inflitutions of the Incas were l'qu:ty

lo framed as to flrengtrhcn the bonds of affection
among their, fubjecs, there was great inequality
in their condition. The ditinCtion of ranks was
fully etabliflhed in Peru. A great body of the

' nrr,-a, dcl . 5' lib, i. c. . Vega, lib. v. c. .

, 2 inlhabitants,

B K inhabitants, under the denomination of anacona:.,

vII.
,-,--. were held in a state of servitude. Their garb

and houses were of a form different from thole
of freemen. Like the Tamemes of Mexico, they
were employed in carrying burdens, and in per.
forming every other work of drudgery m. Next
to them in rank, were such of the people as were
free, but distinguished by no official or hereditary
honours. Above them were raised, those whom
the Spaniards call Orejones, from the ornaments
worn in their ears. They formed what may be
denominated the order of nobles, and in peace
as well as war held every office of power or
trust". At the head of all were the children
of the Sun, who, by their high descent and
peculiar privileges, were as much exalted above
the Orejones, as these were elevated above the
people.
s tc o t . Suc-( a form of society, from the union of it;

lmembers, as well as from the diftindtion in their
ranks, was favourable to progress in the arts.
But the Spaniards having been acquainted with
the improved fhate of various arts in lexico,
several years before they discovered Peru, wcr
not b much flruck with what they oblicrnc

* lIt lt.ri;), Ad C. 5. l ii .
. ib. 4 . . S.

.icr-i, dec. 5. lib. iv. . .

in the latter country, and describe the appear- B K
ances of ingenuity there with less warmth of v"
admiration. The Peruvians, nevertheless, had
advanced far beyond the Mexicans, both in the
necessary arts of life, and in such as have some
title to the name of elegant.

IN Peru, agriculture, the art of primary ne- Improved

ceffity in social life, was more extensive, and culture.
carried on with greater fill than in any part of
America. The Spaniards, in their progress
through the country, were so fully supplied with
provisions of every kind, that in the relation
of their adventures we meet with few of those
difnal scenes of distress occasioned by famine, in
which the conquerors of Mexico were so often
involved. The quantity of foil under cultivation
was not left to the discretion of individuals, but
regulated by public authority in proportion to
the exigencies of the community. Even the
calamity of an unfruitful season was but little
fell, for the produ-t of the lands consecrated to
the Sun, as well as those set apart for the Incas,
being deposited in the Tam1bos, or public store-
houses, it remained there as a flated provision
for times of scarcity o. As the extent of cultiva-
tion was determined with such provident attention

" '/''tte, lib. . . 1 . Vc.l , ;Lb. i. c, i.

/ J tu

B O OK to the demands of the slate, the invention and
_ . industry of the Peruvians were called forth to

extraordinary exertions, by certain def'ets pew
culiar to their climate and foil. All the vast
rivers that flow from the Andes take their course
eastward to the Atlantic Ocean. Peru is watered
only by some streams which rush down from the
mountains like torrents. A great part of th-;
low country is sandy and barren, and never
refreshed with rain. In order to render such an
unpromifirg region fertile, the ingenuity of th:
Peruvians had recourse to various expedients,
By means of artificial canals conducted, with
much patience and considerable art, from the
torrents that poured across their country, they
conveyed a regular supply of moisture to their
fields . They enriched the foil by manuring it
with the dung of sea-fowls, of which they found
an inexhaustible flore on all the islands scattered
along their coafrs q. In describing the cufton;
of any nation thoroughly civilized, such practiccl,
would hardly draw attention, or be mentioned as
in any degree remarkable; but in the history f
the improvident race of men in the New World,
tl:ey are entitled to notice an singular proof;
u c induifry and of art. The use of the plouglh,

r Z.nt;t, lib. i . 4. V ,

. c

V ga,l . . I, & 24.

', :*cos.a, lib. iv. c. 37. Vega, lilb. . c. 3. Sec NO''
'x1, III.lc

indeed, was unknown to the Peruvians. They o o
turned up the earth with a kind of mattock of ---v,
hard woodr. Nor was this labour deemed so
degrading as to be devolved whoily upon the
women. Both sexes joined in performing this
necessary work. Even the children of the Sun
fct an example of indultry, by cultivating a field
near Cuzco with tieir own hands, and they
dignified this funOcion by denominating it their
triumph over the earth'

Ti-ir superior ingenuity of the Peruvians is ':-'

obvious, likewise, in the conf{ruction of their
houses and public buildings. In the cetenlvc
plains vwhich itretch along the Pacific Ocean,

lwhere the sky is perpetually ferenc, and the
climate mild, their houses were very prop :rly of
a fabric extremely flight. But in the higher
regions, where rain falls, where the viciflitud of
seasons is known, and thcir rigour fclt, hnufcs
were conlrutc'ed with grcalcr solidity. They
werc generally of a 1tiuare forin, the ails al;mut
eight feet high, built with bricks hardned inl the
fun, without any xindows, and the d oor hlw and
strait. Simple as there firucturc' wesre, and!
?ude as the materials may lecm to be of' which
thcy were formed, they were I[ durable, llhat

Zar:aie, Eb. i. c. . ' ' gi, lb.. v . ?.

'. 4 niany

P o o K many of them till subsist in different parts

of Peru, long after every monument that might
have conveyed to us any idea of the domeltic
state of the other American nations has vanished
from the face of the earth. But it was in the
temples consecrated to the Sun, and in the
buildings destined for the residence of their
monarchs, that the Peruvians displayed the ut-
molt extent of their art and contrivance. The
descriptions of them by such of the Spanifl
writers as had an opportunity of contemplating
them, while, in rome measure, entire, might
have appeared highly exaggerated, if the ruins
which fill remain, did not vouch the truth of
their relations. These ruins of sacred or royal
buildings are found in every province of the
empire, and by their frequency demonstrate that
they are monuments of a powerful people, who
must have subsisted, during a period of sone
extent, in a late of no inconsiderable improve-
rncnt. They appear to have been edifices various
in their dimensions. Some of a moderate fizc,
many of immense extent, all remarkable for
solidity, and resembling each other in the flile of
architcCture. The temple of Pachacamac, toge-
tlier with a palace of the Inca, and a fortress,
were so connedcd together as to form one great
fIri uc u re, above half a league in circuit. In llis
prodigious pile, the fame singular tae in buili.

illi_

ing is conspicuous, as in other works of the o o
Peruvians. As they were unacquainted with B
the use of the pulley, and other mechanical
powers, and could not elevate the large stones
and bricks which they employed in building to
any considerable height, the walls of this edifice,
in which they eem to have made their greatest
effort towards magnificence, did not rife above
twelve feet from the ground. Though they had
not discovered the use of mortar or of any other
cement in building, the bricks or stones were
joined with so much nicety, that the eams can
hardly be discerned'. The apartments, as far as
the distribution of them can be traced in the
ruins, were ill-difpofed, and afforded little accom-
modation. There was not a ingle window in
any part of the building; and as no light could
enter but by the door, all the apartments of
largest dimension must either have been perfectly
dark, or illuminated by some other means. But
with all these, and many other imperfeelion
that might be mentioned in their art of buildinc,
the works of the Peruvians which fiill remain,
nuff be confidered as flupendous efforts of a
people unacquainted with the use of iron, and
convey to us an high idea of the power pofefllzd
by their ancient monarchs.

Scc NOTE XLV.

'J'II:.TJL

r o (o H. T'iESE, however, were not the noblest or molt
, _ nuiifeful works of the Incas. The two great roads
'!;p o:li- iom1 Cuzco to Quito, extending in an uninter.
-o ds,

upted fretch above fifteen hundred miles, are
entitled to fill higher praile. The one was con-
ducled through the interior and mountainous
country, the other through the plains on the
iea-coalt. From the language of admiration in
which me of the early writers express their
altonifhment when they first viewed those roads,
and fomn the more pompous descriptions of later
xriters, who labour to upport some favourite
tlheory concerning America, one might be led to
compare this work of the Incas to the famous
mniUitary ways which remain as monuments ol
the Roman power: but in a country where
there as no tame animal except the Llama,
which was never ui d for draught, and but little
as a beaf: of burden, where the high roads were
ildoin trod by any but a human foot, no great
degree of labour or art was requisite in forming
them. The Peruvian roads were only fiftccn
sect in breadth", and in many places lo slightly
formned, that time has effaced every vestige of the
coturc in which they ran. In the low country
little more fecmns to have been done, than to
plant trecs or to fix posts at certain intervals, i.

U Ciccia, c. 60.

oni..

order to mark the proper ruie to travellers. To o o K
open a path through the mount.inous country
was a more arduous tak. Ei.inenes were
levelled, and hollows filled up, a;id for the
preservation of the road it was fernc. w.ith
a bank of turf. At proper distances, Tainbus,
or torehoufes, were erctd for the accommoda-
tion of the Inca and his attendants, in their pro-
grefs through his dominions. From the manner
in which the road was originally formed in this
higher and more impervious region, it has proved
more durable ; and though, from the inattention
of the Spaniards to every object hut that of
working their mines, nothing has been done
towards keeping it in repair, iis courfk mn.y fill
be tracedw. Such was the celebrated road of
the Incas; and even from this description,
diverted of every circumflance of manif:fit ex-
aggeration, or of fufpiciots alpe&c, it mult be
confidered as a striking proof of an extraordinary
progress in improvement and policy. To the
savage tribes of America, the idea of faciliiatiung
communication with places at a iiltace liad
never occurred. To the exicans it was hardly
known. .:ven in the mofi civilized cotitries of
Europe, men had advanced iar in refliminct,

w Xcrcz, p. iRO. i9 i. . Zarn.t, lib. i. c. 13, 14' \ (i.;,

i1c). i::. c. Ig. l'ilgtiucr \Vo'. gc,' p. I' o.

10 loa 1litw:cncr .
iiculoi, p. 35.

be ore

BO o K before it became a regular objeEt of national

VI.
e ,-...i police to form such roads as render intercourse

commodious. It was a capital objet of Roman
policy to open a communication with all the
provinces of their extensive empire, by means of
those roads which are justly confidered as one of
the noblest monuments both of their wisdom and
their power. But during the long reign of
barbarism, the Roman roads were negleted or
deltroyed; and at the time when the Spaniards
entered Peru, no kingdom in Europe could
boast of any work of public utility that could be
compared with the great roads formed by the
Incas.
ndl, iilges. T-HE formation of those roads introduced

another improvement in Peru equally unknown
over all the reft of America. In its course from
south to north, the road of the Incas was inter-
Ictecd by all the torrents which roll fiom the
Andes towards the Weftcrn Ocean. From the
rapidity of tlcir courfc, as well as froi the
frequency and violence of their inundation, these
were not fordable. Some expedient, however,
was to bc found for pafling them. The Peru-
vians, from their unacquaintancc with the ule of
arches, and their inability to work in wood,
colld not conlt iruit b)ridges either of htone or
ti::iblr. lBut niccesiy, the parent of invention,

snlyOeLc

suggested a device which supplied that defer. B OK
They formed cables of great trength, by twist- --
ing together some of the pliable withs or osiers,
with which their country abounds; fix of there
cables they stretched across the stream parallel to
one another, and made them fast on each fide.
These they bound firmly together by interweav-
ing smaller ropes so close, as to form a compact
piece of net-work, which being covered with
branches of trees and earth, they pafled along it
with tolerable security . Proper persons were
appointed to attend at each bridge, to keep it in
repair, and to aflift passengers '. In the level
country, where the rivers, became deep and
broad and fill, they are pafled in Balnas, or
floats; in the confirution, as well as navigation
of which, the ingenuity of the Peruvians appears
to be far fiperior to that of any people in
America. These had advanced n) farther in
naval skill than the use of the pltdil:, or oar;
the Peruvians ventured to raile a mafn, and
spread a fail, by means ofl which their balzas not
only went nilllly lilre e

the ind, but could
veer and tack with treuat c'lcity '.

x See NO'1'E )XLV.

y S:mnchlo up. l I;.ii. iii. ' . a1'. ra:., lib. i. c. 14.
V\(g , lil. iii. c. 7, . l! v .il, l,:. 5. lil. iv. c. 3, 4.

* Ullo;a \ruy. i. 1ó", ::9..

l'o' .

B o o K NOR were the ingenlity and art of the Peru.

vn.

,__ ,_ vians confined lolly to objets of essential utility.
Mrodfir.e They had made some progress in arts, which

may be called elegant. They poflcfied the
precious inetals in greater abundance than any
people of America. They obtained gold in the
lame manner with the Mexicans, by fearhiing in
the channels of rivers, or washing the earth
in which particles of it were contained. But in
order to procure silver, they exerted no incon.
fiderable degree of Ikill and invention. They
had not, indeed, attained the art of finking
a shaft into the bowels of the earth, and pene-
trating to the riches concealed ithre; but they
hollowed deep caverns on the bLanks of rivers
and the fides of mountains, ani emptied hfch
veins as did not dip suddenly beyond their reach.
In other places, where -the vein lay near the
surface, they dug pits to uchl a depth, that the
person who worked below could throw out the
ore, or and it up in balkets . They had dilf
covered the art of inelting and refining this,
either by the simple application of fire, or where
tlle ore was inore ftnibborn, and imlpregnated
wilth loreiagn ifubltaiccs, by placing it in iiiall
ovens or hlrnaces, on hilh !.noimlds, so artificially
conllruded, that the draulght of air perlfrined

l ,..iiiifio, jj .1i . A .

ilh

the funEtion of a bellows, an engine with which o o K
they were totally unacquainted. By this simple _
device, the purer ores were smelted with facility,
and the quantity of silver in Peru was Io con-
fiderable, that many of the utensils employed il
the functions of' conmmon life were made of it
Several of those veles and trinkets are f;id
to have merited no finall degree of estimation,
nn account of the neatness of the workmanfiip,
as well as the inrrinfic value of the materials.
But as the conquerors of America were xcll
acquainted with the latter, but had scarcely any
conception of the former, moil of the silver
veflels and trinkets were melted down, and rated
according to the weight and fineness of tlhe metal
in the division of the spoil.

IN other works of mere curiofityor ornament,,

their ingenuity has been highly celebrated. Many :

. '"'-

specimens of those have been dug, out of the
GiuJras, or mounds of earth, with which the
Peruvians covered the bodies of the dad.
Among these are mirrors of various dimensions,
of hard shining tones highly polified ; vll'l. ol
earthen ware of dilferent forls; hatchet:s, ani!
otier intruments, fomne deflined ior war, an(

1 i(ol;!, lb '. .,. c.., 5. V\ g:, p. '. Li. .i . ."
T ll l 1' Ii' l -.t' , 25Y.

B o K others for labour. Some were of flint, Ibine of

VII.
y_ copper, hardened to such a degree by an un-

known process, as to supply the place of iron on
several occasions. Had the use of those tools
formed of copper been general, the progress of
the Peruvians in the arts might have been such,
as to emulate that of more cultivated nations.
But either the metal was so rare, or the operation
by which it was hardened o tedious, that their
infiruments of copper were few, and so extremely
finall, that they eem to have been employed only
in fighter works. But even to fIch a circum-
fcribed use of this imperfect metal, the Peruvians
were indebted for their superiority to the other
people of America in various arts c. The fame
observation, however, may be applied to them,
which I formerly made with refpe( to the arts
of the Mexicans. From several specimens of
Peruvian utensils and ornaments, which are
deposited in the royal cabinet of Madrid, and
from some preserved in dififrent collelions in
other parts of Europe, I have reason to believe
that the workmnanfhip is more to be admired
on account of the rude tools with which it
was executed, than on account of its intrinsic
neatncfs and elegance; and that the Peruvians,

' h11,a; V;,.y. tn,,:. i. 3!I:, ..' sI'. Entr ten. p . 3I' , C.
S

tltltlSl

though the most improved of all the Americans, B o o K
were not advanced beyond the infancy of arts. L-V_

BUT notwithstanding so many particulars, An imper-

ca civl,za-

which seem to indicate an high degree of im- t.ol.
provement in Peru, other circumstances occur
that suggest the idea of a society till in the first
flages of its transition from barbarifi to civiliza-
tion. In all the dominions of the Incas, Cuzco Nocities

but Cuzo.

was the only place that had the appearance,
or was entitled to the name of a city. Every
where elfc, the people lived mostly in detached
habitations, dispersed over the country, or, at the
utmost, fettled together in small villages d. But
until men are brought to assemble in numerous
bodies, and incorporated in such clole union, as
to enjoy frequent intercourse, and to feel mutual
dependence, they. never imbibe perfectly the
spirit, or assume the manners of social life. In
a country of immense extent, with only one city,
the progress of manners, and the improvement
either of the necessary or more refined arts, must
have been so flow, and carried on under such
disadvantages, that it is more surprising the
Peruvians hould have advanced so far in refine-
ment, than that they did not proceed farther.

a Zarate, lib. i. c . Ilc c r;a, d(c. 5. vi . C. '.
VOL. 111. A A IL

B o o K IN consequence of this state of imperfect union,

VI.

' --^ the- eparation of professions in Peru was not so
No perfo complete as among the Mexicans. The less
of pro- closely men associate, the moie simple are their
ftfions.

manners, and the fewer their wants. The crafts
of common and most necessary use in life do not,
in such a state, become so complex or difficult,
as to render it requisite that men lhould be
trained to them by any particular course of edu.
cation. All the arts, accordingly, which were
of daily and indispensable utility, were exercised
by every Peruvian indiscriminately. None but
the artists, employed in works of mere curiosity
or ornament, constituted a separate order of men,
or were diftinguiflied from other citizens .

Little con- FROM the want of cities in Peru, another con-
merciil in-
tclcourfe. sequence followed. There was little commercial

intercourse among the inhabitants of that great
empire. The ativity of commerce is coeval
with the foundation of cities; and from the
moment that the members of any community
fettle in considerable numbers in one place,
its operations become vigorous. The citizen
muff depend for fubfitence on the labour of

C Acofia, li,. . . 15. V eg:i, lib .

v . c. 9. IfTvr;,
d&ec. 5 li,. iv. c. 4.

tl. C-

those who cultivate the ground. They, in B O K
return, muff receive some equivalent. Thus
mutual intercourse is established, and the pro-
ducfions of art are regularly exchanged for the
fruits of agriculture. In the towns of the Mexican
empire, tated markets were held, and whatever
could supply any want or desire of man was an
object of commerce. But in Peru, from the
singular mode of dividing property, and the
manner in which the people were fettled, there
was hardly any species of commerce carried on
between different provinces , and the community
was less acquainted with that ative intercourse,
which is at once a bond of union, and an in-
centive to improvement.

BUT the unwarlike spirit of the Peruvians was Unw.,rlike

spirit of the

the most remarkable, as well as mol fatal dcfect I-elulans.
in their charaCter . The greater part of the
rude nations of America opposed their invaders
with undaunted ferocity, though with little con-
dust or success. The Mexicans maintained the
firuggle in defence of their liberties, with such
persevering fortitude, that it was with difficulty
the Spaniards triunphed over them. Peru was
subdued at once, and alinoft without refitance;

f Vega, lib. vi. c. 8.
; Xcrcz, I(;o. Saiiclho aI). Rain. iii. 372. Hcrrera,

dc.. ;, li.
li . 3.

A A 2 and

B K and the most favourable opportunities of regain-

VII.
air-- ing their freedom, and of crushing their op-

pressors, were loft through the timidity of the
people. Though the traditional history of the
Peruvians represents all the Incas as warlike
princes, frequently at the head of armies, which
they led to victory and conquest; few symptoms
of such a martial spirit appear in any of their
operations subsequent to the invasion of the Spa-
niards. The influence, perhaps, of those inffitu-
tions which rendered their manners gentle, gave
their minds this unmanly softness; perhaps, the
constant serenity and mildness of the climate may
have enervated the vigour of their frame; per-
haps, ome principle in their government, un-
known to us, was the occalion of this political
debility. Whatever may have been the cause,
the faa is certain, and there is not an instance in
history of any people so little advanced in refine-
ment, so totally destitute of military enterprize.
This charater hath descended to their potferity.
The Indians of Peru are now more tame anil
depressed than any people of America. Their
feeble spirits, relaxed in lifeless ina&ion, fecm
hardly capable of any bold or manly exertion.

BUT, besides those capital defeEts in the poli

tical lrate of Peru, some detached circumflancc*
;:nd fals occur in the Spanish writers, which dlil

cos(!

cover a considerable remainder of barbarity in o o
their manners. A cruel custom, that prevailed B
in some of the motl savage tribes, fubfifled among
the Peruvians. On the death of the Incas, and
of other eminent persons, a considerable number
of their attendants was put to death, and interred
around their Guacas, that they might appear in
the next world with their former dignity, and be
served with the fame refped. On the death of
Huana-Capac, the most powerful of their nlo-
narchs, above a thousand victims were doomed
to accompany him to the tomb . In one parti-
cular, their manners appear to have been more
barbarous than those of molt rude tribes. Though
acquainted with the use of fire in preparing maize,
and other vegetables for food, they devoured both
flefli and fish perfecly raw, and aflonifhled the
Spaniards, with a practice repugnant to the ideas
of all civilized people .

BUT though Mexico and Peru are the pofref- OtlCt!o.

min.oiios of

lions of Spain in the New World, which, on spun in
account both of their ancient and present slate, Am"C,'ic
have attracted the grcateft attention; her other
dominions there are far from being inconsiderable,
either in extent or value. The greater part of

h Acofla, lib. v. c. 7.
i Xcrcz, p. 9)o. Sanclio, Ram. iii. 372.C. IIcrrcra,
dec. 5. lib. i. c. 3.

3
A \ 3 thenl

B 00 K them was reduced to fubjeEtion during the first

ViI.
-,-.. part of the sixteenth century, by private adven-

turers, who fitted out their finall armaments
either in Hispaniola or in Old Spain; and were
we to follow each leader in his progrcfs, we
should discover the fame daring courage, the
fame persevering ardour, the fame rapacious
desire of wealth, and the fame capacity of eln-
during and surmounting every thing in order to
attain it, which diflinguiffied the operations of
the Spaniards in their greater American con-
quests. But, instead of entering into a detail,
xhich, fro.n the similarity of the tranfacions,
would appear alinoft a repetition of what has

Abreffur- been already related, I lmall satisfy nyfelf with
vcy ot tlim.

. uch a view of those provinces of the Spanifi

empire in America, which have not hitherto
been mentioned, as may convey to my readers
an adequate idea of its greatness, fertility, and
opulence.

Such as are I BiGIN c with the countries contiguous to the
adjactnt to
tlt rmpilc two great inonarchies, of whose history and

Mrxio. infitutions I have given foine account, and liall

then briefly dcfcribe the other difiricts of Spanifli
Amcrica. The jurifdilion of tle viceroy o'
New Spain extends over several provinces, which
\Ccre not ubject to the dominion of the Mcxi-

cirl nncand all. '11Th countries of Cinalua and Sonlr.t,
b< iiLk:i,,t
&c.

that stretch along the east fide of the Vermilion o o K
sea, or gulf of California, as well as the immense , _
kingdoms of New Navarre and New Mexico,
which bend towards the weft and north, did not
acknowledge the sovereignty of Montezuma, or
his predecessors. These regions, not inferior in
magnitude to all the Mexican empire, are reduced
some to a greater, others to a less degree of sub-
jedion to the Spanifi yoke. They extend
through the most delightful part of the temperate
zone; their foil is, in general, remarkably fertile,
and all their productions, whether animal or
vegetable, are mofr perfec in their kind. They
have all a communication either with the Pacific
Ocean, or with the Gulph of Mexico, and are
watered by rivers which not only enrich them,
but may become subservient to commerce. The
number of Spaniards fettled in those vast coun-
tries, is indeed extremely fnall. They may be
said to have subdued rather than to have occupied
them. But if the population in their ancient
establishments in America fliall continue to in-
crcale, they may gradually spread over those
provinces, of which, however inviting, they have
not hitherto been able to take full pofielfion.

ONE circumstance may contribute to the R;chmin;s.

speedy population of ome dilrids. Very rich
mines both of gold and silver have been dif

A 4 covered

B 0 0 K covered in many of the regions which I have

mentioned. Wherever these are opened, and
worked with success, a multitude of people resort.
In order to supply them with the necessaries of
life, cultivation must be increased, artisans of
various kinds muff assemble, and industry as
well as wealth will be gradually diffused. Many
examples of this have occurred in different parts
of America since they fell under the dominion
of the Spaniards. Populous villages and large
towns have suddenly arisen amidst uninhabited
wilds and mountains ; and the working of mines,
though far from being the most proper object
towards which the attention of an infant society
should be turned, may become the-means both
of promoting useful aivity, and of augmenting

A recent the number of people. A recent and singular
and remark-
able dif instance of this has happened, which, as it is but
covcry. little known in Europe, and may be producqivu

of great effects, merits attention. The Spaniards
fettled in the provinces of Cinaloa and Sonora,
had been long disturbed by the depredations of
some fierce tribes of Indians. In the year 7 ,
the incursions of those savages became so fre-
quent, and so destructive, that the Spanish inha-
bitants, in delpair, applied to the Marquis d
Croix, viceroy of Mexico, for ltch a body of
troops as might enable them to drive thole
formidable invaders from their places of retreat

ill

in the mountains. But the treasury of Mexico o o K

vii.

was so much exhausted by the large fums drawn l
from it, in order to support the late war against
Great Britain, that the viceroy cou!d afford them
no aid. The refpcd due to his virtues accom-
plifhed what his official power could not efie&t.
He prevailed with the merchants of New Spain
to advance about two hundred thousand pesos
lor defraying the cxpence of the expedition.
The war was condu&tcd by an officer of abilities;
and after being protracted for three years, chiefly
by the difficulty of pursuing the fugitives over
mountains and through defiles which were almost
impassable, it terminated, in the year 177I, in
the final fubmiflion of the tribes, which had
been so long the object of terror to the two pro-
vinces. In the course of this service, the Spa-
niards marched through countries into which
they seem not to have penetrated before that
time, and discovered mines of such value, as was
aftonifiling even to men acquainted with the
riches contained in the mountains of the New
World. At Cineguilla, in the province of
Sonora, they entered a plain of fourteen leagues
in extent, in which, at the depth of only sixteen
inches, they found gold in grains of such a size,
that 1ome of them weighed nine marks, and in
such quantities, that in a flort time, with a few
labourers, they collected a thousand marks of

gold

B O O K gold in grains, even without taking time to wash

vi.
_.-i the earth that had been dug, which appeared to

be so rich, that persons of skill computed that it
might yield what would be equal in value to

Probable a million of pesos. Before the end of the year
efei'.s of
,hi,. i771, above two thousand persons were fettled

in Cineguilla, under the government of proper
magistrates, and the infpetion of several eccle-
fiaftics. As several other mines, not inferior in
richness to that of Cineguilla, have been dif-
covered, both in Sonora and Cinaloa , it is
probable that these neglected and thinly.inhabited
provinces, may soon become as populous and
valuable as any part of the Spanifil empire iu
America.

Ciiforn;a, THE peninsula of California, on the other fide
its fate,

of the Vermilion sea, seems to have been leds
known to the ancient Mexicans, than the pro-
vinces which I have mentioned. It was dif-
covered by Cortes in the year 1536'. During
a long period it continued to be so little fre-
quented, that even its form was unknown, ant
in nmof charts it was represented as an island,
not as a peninsula "'. Though the climate of this
country, if we may judge from its situation, mull

k See NOTE XLVI. I Book v, vol. iii. p. oo.
' Sec NOTE XLVII.

be

be very desirable; the Spaniards have made B o o K
finall progress in peopling it. Towards the close .
of the last century, the Jesuits, who had great
merit in exploring this negleEted province, and
in civilizing its rude inhabitants, imperceptibly
acquired a dominion over it as complete as that
which they possessed in their miflions in Paraguay,
and they laboured to introduce into it the fame
policy, and to govern the natives by the fame
maximins. In order to prevent the court of Spain
from conceiving any jealousy of their designs and
operations, they feein studiously to have depre-
ciated the country, by representing the climate as
io disagreeable and unwholesome, and the foil as
so barren, that nothing but a zealous desire of
converting the natives, could have induced them
to fettle there". Several public-fpirited citizens
endeavoured to undeceive their sovereigns, and
to give them a better view of California; but in
vain. At length, on the expulsion of the Jesuits andprpm,1a-

l-'ity of its

from the Spanish dominions, the court of Madrid, improving.
as prone at that juncture to ufpe the purity of
tile Order's intentions, as formerly to confide in
them with implicit trust, appointed Don Joseph
Galvcz, whose abilities have since railed him to
the high rank of minifler for the Indies, to visit
that pcnilfula. Ilis account of the country was

Ventgas, Ilill. of California, i. 26.

favourable;

B o.o K favourable; he found the pearl fifheiy on its

VII.
*,_ coasts to be valuable, and he 4ifcovered mines of

gold of a very promising appearance . Froml
its vicinity to Cinaloa and Sonora, it is probable,
that if the population of there provinces hall in-
crease in the manner which I have supposed,
California may, by degrees, receive from them
such a recruit of inhabitants, as to be no longer
reckoned among the desolate and useless diftrics
of the Spanish empire.

Yucatan ON the east of Mexico, Yucatan and lon-
and Hon-
iur3s. duras are comprehended in the government of

New Spain, though anciently they can hardly be
said to have formed a part of the Mexican empire.
These large provinces, itretching from the Bay
of Campeachy beyond Cape Gracias a Dios, do
not, like the other territories of Spain in the
New World, derive their value either from the
fertility of their foil, or the richness of their
mines; but they produce in greater abundance,
than any part of America, the logwood-tree,
which, in dyeing some colours, is so far preferable
to any other material, that the confuniption of it
in Europe is considerable, and it has become
an article in commerce of great value. During
a long period, no European nation intruded

° Lorcnzano, 349, 350.

upon

upon the Spaniards in those provinces, or at- BOOv K
tempted to obtain any hare in this branch of _ -
trade. But after the conquest of Jamaica by the
English, it soon appeared what a formidable rival
was now feated in the neighbourhood of the
Spanish territories. One of the first objects
which tempted the English fettled in that island,
was the great profit arising from the logwood
trade, and the facility of wresting some portion
of it from the Spaniards. Some adventurers Tleir dc-
from Jamaica made the firif attempt at Cape cn
Catoche, the south-east promontory of Yucatan,
and by cutting logwood there, carried on a
gainful traffic. When most of the trees near the
coast in that place were felled, they removed to
the island of Trift, in the Bay of Campeachy;
and in later times, their principal station has
been in the Bay of Honduras. The Spaniards,
alarmed at this encroachment, endeavoured by
negociation, remonstrances, and open force, to
prevent the English from obtaining any footing
on that part of the American continent. But
after struggling against it for more than a
century, the di:afters of lat war extorted from
the Court of Madrid a relucant -consent to
tolerate this settlement of foreigners in the heart
l' its territories ''. The pain which this humbling

r'l,'iTea of P.,ri.t% , A tl. xviii.

coifccflon

RO 0O K concession occasioned, seems to have prompted
_ the Spaniards to devise a method of rendering it

of little consequence, more efectual than all the
efforts of negociation or violence. The logwood
produced on the weft coast of Yucatan, where
the foil is drier, is in quality far superior to that
which grows on the marshy grounds where the
and revival. English are fettled. By encouraging the cutting

of this, and permitting the importation of it into
Spain without paying any duty , such vigour has
been given to this branch of commerce, and
the logwood which the Englifll bring to market
has funk so much in value, that their trade to
the Bay of Honduras has gradually declined'
since it obtained a legal fandion; and, it is
probable, will oon be finally abandoned. In
that event, Yucatan and Honduras will become
poffeflions of considerable importance to Spain.

costa Ria STII, farther east than Honduras lie the two
aimd Vera-
gua. provinces of Cofia Rica and Veragua, which

likewise belong to the vice-royalty of New Spain;
but both have been o much neglected by the
Spaniards, and are apparently of such inall
value, that they merit no particular attention.

q Real Cdlula, Campomialls, iii. 1i5.
Scc NOTE X.VIII.

THliE

THE most important province depending on n o o K

the vice-royalty of Peru, is Chili. The Incas V-,
had established their dominion in some of its Chili.
northern diftri&s; but in the greater part of the
country, its gallant and high-fpirited inhabitants
maintained their independence. The Spaniards,
allured by the fame of its opulence, early
attempted the conquest of it under Diego Alma-
gro; and after his death, Pedro de Valdivia
resumed the design. Both met with fierce oppo-
fition. The former relinquished the enterprize
in the manner which I have mentioned'. The
latter, after having given many displays, both of
courage and military skill, was cut off, together
with a considerable body of troops under his
command. Francisco de Villagra, Valdivia's
lieutenant, by his spirited condut, checked the
natives in their career, and saved the remainder
of the Spaniards from deflrution. By degrees,
all the champaign country along the coalt was
fubjeed to the Spanish dominion. The moun-
tainous country is still pofneffed by'the Puclches,
Araucos, and other tribes of its original inha-
bitants, formidable neighbours to the Spaniards;
with whom, during the course of two centuries,
they have been obliged to maintain alnioft per-

'Bouk vi. vol. iii. p. 17jo, &c.

pctual

B O O K petual holtility, suspended only by a few intervals

V___. of iniecure peace.

Excdlclnce THAT part of Chili then, which may properly
of its li-
wnai and be deemed a Spanilh province, is a narrow

district, extended along the coast from the desert
of Atacamas to the island of Chiloe, above nine
hundred miles. Its climate is the most delicious
in the New World, and is hardly equalled by
that of any region on the face of the earth.
Though bordering on the Torrid Zone, it never
feels the extremity of heat, being screened on
the east by the Andes, and refreshed from the
weft by cooling fea-breezes. The temperature
of the air is so mild and equable, that the
Spaniards give it the preference to that of the
southern provinces in their native country. The
fertility of the foil corresponds with the benignity
of the climate, and is wonderfully accommodated
to European productions. The most valuable of
these, corn, wine, and oil, abound in Chili, as if
they had been native to the country. All the
fruits imported from Europe attain to full ma-
turity there. The animals of our hemisphere
not only multiply, but improve in this delightful
region. The horned cattle are of larger size
than those of Spain. Its breed of horses fur.
pafcs, both in beauty and in lfirit, the famous

Amlalulli:,.

Andalufian race, from which they sprung. Nor B K

VII,

has nature exhausted her bounty on the surface H
of the earth;. he has stored its bowels with
riches. Valuable mines of gold, of silver, of
copper, and of lead, have been discovered in'
various parts of it.

A COUNTRY distinguished by so manybleflings, Cause ofits

being ne-

we may be apt to conclude, would early become J6eted, y
a favourite flation of the Spaniards, and must tle Spa
have been cultivated with peculiar prediletion
and care. Instead of this, a great part of it
remains unoccupied. In all this extent of
country, there are not above eighty thousand
white inhabitants, and about three times that
number of negroes and people of a mixed race.
The most fertile foil in America lies uncultivated,
and some of its most promising mines remain
unwrought. Strange as this neglect of the
Spaniards to avail themselves of advantages,
which seemed to court their acceptance, may
appear, the causes of it can be traced. The
only intercourse of Spain with its colonies in the
South Sea, was carried on during two centuries
by the annual fleet to Porto-bello. All the pro.
duce of there colonies was flipped in the ports
of Callao, or Arica in Peru, for Panama, and
carried from thence across the isthmus. All the

VOL. III. n1B COlll-

oO K commodities which they received from the

vi.
iLr ulmother-country, were conveyed from Panama to

the fame harbours. Thus both the exports and
imports of Chili passed through the hands of
merchants fettled in Peru. These had of course
a profit on each; and in both tranfadions
the Chilefe felt their own subordination; and
having no dired intercourse with the parent
state, they depended upon another province
for the disposal of their productions, as well
as for the supply of their wants. Under such
discouragements, population could not increafc,
and industry was destitute of one chief incite-

rrofpea of ment. But now that Spain, from motives which
its iilmprove-
,icrit. I lhall mention hereafter, has adopted a new

fyfiemn, and carries on her commerce with the
colonies in the South Sea, by flhips which go
round Cape Horn, a diret intercourse is opened
between Chili and the mother-country. The
gold, the silver, and the other commodities of
the province will be exchanged in its own
harbours for the manufacures of Europe. Chili
may speedily rife into that importance among
the Spanish ettlements to which it is entitled by
its natural advantages. It may become the
granary of Peru, and the other provinces along
the Pacific Ocean. It may supply them wild
wine, with cattle, with horses, with hcmp, and

Ilain\

many other articles for which they now depend o o t

vii.

upon Europe. Though the new fyflem has
been eftablified only a few years, thole effets
of it begin already to be observed'. If it lhall
be adhered to with any steadiness for half a
century, one may venture to foretel, that popu-
lation, industry, and opulence will advance in
this province with rapid progress.

To the east of the Andes, the provinces of Prov.;in' ^f

- I u I [!i l)lrnl

Tucuman and Rio de la Plata border on Chili, RIC,:Cll,;
and like it were dependent on the vice-royalty of
Peru. These regions of inmenfe extent stretch
in length from north to south above thirteen
hundred miles, and in breadth more than a
thousand. This country, which is larger than N.rt!,rn

and lbuth-

most European kingdoms, naturally forms itself t2n ivion.
into two great divisions, one on the north, and
the other on the south of Rio de la Plata.
The former comprehends Paraguay, the famous
miions of the Jesuits, and several other difltic'ts.
But as disputes have long fubifltcd belwcen the
courts of Spain and Portugal, concerning its
boundaries, which, it is probable, will be soon
finally acertailed, either amicably, or by the
decision of the sword, I chute to rcfclve my

t Campomancs, ii. 157.

1 B 2 account

B O o K account of_ this northern division, until I enter
,_, upon the history of Portuguese America, with

which it is intimately connected; and, in relating
it, I hall be able, from authentic materials,
supplied both by Spain and Portugal, to give
a full and accurate description of the operations
and views of the Jesuits, in rearing that singular
fabric of policy in America, which has drawn so
much attention, and has been so imperfeetly
understood. The latter division of the province
contains the governments of Tucuman and
Buenos-Ayres, and to there I flall at present
confine my observations.
v'i, of the 'THE Spaniards entered this part of America

by the river De la Plata; and though a succession
of cruel disasters befcl them in their early at-
tempts to eablifh their dominion in it, they
were encouraged to persist in the design, at first
by the hopes of discovering mines in the interior
country, and afterwards by the nccefity of
occupying it, in order to prevent any other
nation from fettling there, and penetrating by
this route into their rich poffellions in P'cru.
But except a;t Buenos-Ayres, they have made no
settlement of any consequence in all the valt
space whih I have mentioned. There arc,
indeed, cuttcred ovcr it, a few places on which

tl"r

they have bestowed the name of towns, and r o o K

vii.

to which they have endeavoured to add some '-v
dignity, by erecling them into bishoprics; but
they are no better than paltry villages, each
with two or three hundred inhabitants. One
circumitance, however, which was not originally
foreseen, has contributed to render this diftric,
though thinly peopled, of considerable import-
ance. The province of Tucuman, together with
the country to the south of the Plata, instead
of being covered with wood like other parts
of America, forms one extensive open plain,
almost without a tree. The foil is a deep fertile
mould, watered by many streams descending
fiom the Andes, and clothed in perpetual ver-
dure. In this rich pasturage, the horses and
cattle imported by the Spaniards from Europe
have multiplied to a degree which almost exceeds
belief. This has enabled the inhabitants not
only to open a lucrative trade with Peru, by
supplying it with cattle, horses, and mules, but
to carry on a commerce no lets beneficial, by
the exportation of hides to Europe. From
both, the colony has derived great advantages.
But its commodious situation for carrying on
contraband trade, has been the chief source of its
prosperity. While the court of Madrid adhered
to its ancient system, with refped to its commu-

B B 3 nication

B O K nication with America, the river De la Plata lay

vII.
-- so much out of tie course of Spanifl navigation,

that interlopers, almoflt without any risk of
being either observed or obftrucded, could pour
in European iiantl factures in such quantitrs,
that they not only supplied the wants of the
colony, but were conveyed into all the eastern
clif:ric-is of Peru. When the Portuguese in
Brasil extended their fettlenmerts to the banks of
Rio de la Plata, a new channel was opened, by
which prohibited commodities flowed into the
'ipanilh territories, with fill more facility, and
in greater abundance. This illegal traffic, how-
cver detrimental to the parent state, contributed
to the increase of the settlement, which had
the immediate benefit of it, and Buenos-Ayres
became gradually a populous and opulent town.
What may be the effect of the alteration lately
made in the government of this colony, the
nature of which flall be described in the sub.
sequent Book, cannot hitherto be known.
ChIIati- A.AI.L the other territories of Spain in the

., New World, the islands excepted, of whose

discovery and reduction I have formerly given
an account, are comprehended under two great
divilions; the former denominated the king-
dom of Ticrra Firmi, the provinces of which

ilctclh

firetch along the Atlantic, from the eaflern Bn o o K
frontier of New Spain to the mouth of the
Orinoco; the latter, the New Kingdom of
Granada, situated in the interior country. With
a short view of these I hall close this part of my
work.

To the east of Veragua, the last province

fubje to the viceroy of Mexico, lies the isthmus
of Darien. Though it was in this part of D.iricn.
the continent that the Spaniards first began
to plant colonies, they have made no confider-
able progress in peopling it. As the country
is extremely mountainous, deluged with rain
during a good part of the year, remarkably
unhealthful, and contains no mines of great
value, the Spaniards would probably have aban-
doned it altogether, if they had not been allured
to continue by the excellence of the harbour
of Porto-bello on the one sea, and that of
Panama on the other. These have been called
the keys to the communication between the
north and south sea, between Spain and her
most valuable colonies. In consequence of this
advantage, Panama has become a considerable
and thriving town. The peculiar noxiousness
of its climate has prevented Porto-bello fiom
increasing in the fame proportioln. As the

iB B 4 illtcr

B 0 K intercourse with the settlements in the Pacific

VII. _*J- Ocean is now carried on by another channel, it

is probable that both Porto-bello and Panama
will decline, when no longer nourished and
enriched by that commerce to which they were
indebted for their prosperity, and even their
existence.

Cartagena THE provinces of Carthagena and Santa
and Santa
Martha. Martha stretch to the eastward of the ithmus of

Darien. The country still continues mountain-
ous, but its vallies begin to expand, are well
watered, and extremely fertile. Pedro de He-
redia fubjeded this part of America to the crown
of Spain, about the year 1532. It is thinly
peopled, and of course ill cultivated. It pro.
duces, however, a variety of valuable drugs,
and some precious flones, particularly emeralds.
But its chief importance is derived from the har-
bour of Carthagena, the safest and best fortified
of any in the American dominions of Spain.
In a situation so favourable, commerce oon
began to flourish, As early as the year 1544, it
seems to have been a town of ome note. But
when Carthagena was chosen as the port in
which the galeons hould first begin to trade
on their arrival from Europe, and to which they
were directed to return, in order to prepare for

their

their voyage homeward, the commerce of its B 0 0
inhabitants was so much favoured by this -
arrangement, that it soon became one of the
molt populous, opulent, and beautiful cities in
America. There is, however, reason to appre-
hend, that it has reached its highest point of
exaltation, and that it will be so far affeced by
the change in the Spanifl system of trade with
America, which has withdrawn from it the
desirable visits of 4he galeons, as to feel at leafl
a temporary decline. But the wealth now col-
leted there, will oon find or create employment
for itself, and may be turned with advantage
into some new channel. Its harbour is so safe,
and so conveniently situated for receiving com-
modities from Europe, its merchants have been
so long accustomed to convey these into all
the adjacent provinces, that it is probable they
will still retain this branch of trade, and Car-
thagena continue to be a city of great im-
portance,

THE province contiguous to Santa Martha enczlau.

on the east, was first visited by Alonfo de Ojeda,
in the year I499"; and the Spaniards, on their
landing there, having observed some huts in

" Book ii. vol. ip. p. 09.

an

B 0 K an Indian village built upon piles, in order to

*_jVI raise them above the stagnated water which

covered the plain, were led to bestow upon
it the name of Venezuela, or Little Venice,
by their usual propensity to find a resemblance
between what they discovered in America, and
the objects which were familiar to them in
Europe. They made some attempts to fettle
there, but with little success. The final re-
duEtion of the province was ccomplifhed by
means very different from those to which Spain
was indebted for its other acquisitions in the
New World. The ambition of Charles V. often
engaged him in operations of such variety and
extent, that his revenues were not sufficient to
defray the expence of carrying them into execu-
tion. Among other expedients for supplying
the deficiency of his funds, he had borrowed
large fums from the Velfers of Augfburgh,
the most opulent merchants at that time in
Europe. By way of retribution for these, or
in hopes, perhaps, of obtaining a new loan, he
bestowed upon them the province of Venezuela,
to be held as an hereditary fief from the crown
of Castile, on condition that within a limited
time they should render themselves masters of
the country, and cflablifl a colony thcre. Under
the dirceOion of such prfons, it might have

bc1n

been expe&ed, that a settlement would have B 0 0 K
been etablifhed on maxims very different from ,
those of the Spaniards, and better calculated
to encourage such useful indulfrv, as mercantile
proprietors might have known to be the most
certain fourcc of prosperity and opulence. But
unfortunately they committed the execution of
their plan to fomne of those soldiers of fortune
with which Germany abounded in the sixteenth
century. These adventurers, impatient to amass
riches, that they might speedily abandon a fiation
which they soon discovered to be very uncom-
sortable, instead of planting a colony in order
to cultivate and improve the country, wandered
from difirit to difiric in fcarch of mines,
plundering the nati-es with unfe!ing rapacity,
or preflirng them by the ipofition of in-
tolerable taflks. In the couIfe of a few years,
their avarice and xactions, in comparison with
which tho!f of the Spaniards were moderate,
desolated the province so completely, that it
could hardly afford thenm fubfilencce, and the
Vclfers rclinquifhed a property from which the
inconsiderate conduci of their agents left them
no hope of ever deriving any advantage w. When
the wretched remainder of the Germans deserted

W Citildo y Bguos I-lia, diL Vc1nczticla, p. I1, &c,

Venezuela,

B OO K Vcnezuela, the Spaniards again took poffefion

La ,_r of it; but notwithitanding many natural advan-

tages, it is one of their mot: languishing and
unproductive settlements.

ca~S TE-Ir provinces of Caraccas and Cumana are
air! Cuina-

the last of the Spanifl territories on this coast;
but in relating the origin and operations of the
mercantile company, in which an exclusive right
of trade with them has been veiled, I shall
hereafter have occasion to confider their ltate
and productions.

New King- THE New Kingdom of Granada is entirely
dom of
rinada, an inland country of great extent. This import-

ant addition was made to the dominions of
Spain about the year I536, by Sebastian de
Benalcazar and Gonzalo Ximenes de Quefada,
two of the bravest and most accomplished
oflicers employed in the conquest of America.
The former, who commanded at that time in
Qtiito, attacked it from the south; the latter
made his invasion fiom Santa Martha on the
north. As the original inhabitants of this region
were farther advanced in improvement, than
any people in Amcrica but the Mexicans and
Peruvians , they defended thcmfelvcs with

x Book iv. vol ii. p. 6r, &c.

great

great resolution and good conduct. The abili- n o o K
ties and perseverance of Benalcazar and Quefada
surmounted all opposition, though not with-
out encountering many dangers, and reduced
the country into the form of a Spanish pro-
vince.

THE New Kingdom of Granada is so far

elevated above the level of the ea, that though
it approaches almost to the equator, the climate
is remarkably temperate. The fertility of its
rallies is not inferior to that of the richest
difrids in America, and its higher grounds
yield gold and precious stones of various kinds.
It is not by digging into the bowels of the
earth that this gold is found; it is mingled with
the foil near the surface, and separated from
it by repeated wafling with water. This opera-
tion is carried on wholly by negro slaves; for
though the chill subterranean air has been dif-
covered, by experience, to be so fatal to them,
that they cannot be employed with advantage in
the deep silver mines, they are more capable of
performing the other species of labour than
Indians. As the natives in the New Kirngdou
of Granada are exempt from that service, which
has wased their race so rapidly in other parts
of America, the country is lill remarkably

3 p pu luu'.

B O K populous. Some dftiri&s yield gold with a
I_, profusion no less wonderful than that in the

vale of Cineguilla, which I have formerly men-
tioned, and it is often found in large pepitas,
or grains, which manifest the abundance in
which it is produced. On a rising ground
near Pamplona, single labourers have colleced
in a day what was equal in value to a thousand
pesos Y. A late governor of Santa Fe brought
with him to Spain a lump of pure gold, efti-
mated to be worth seven hundred and forty
pounds sterling. This, which is, perhaps, the
largest and fineF specimen ever found in the
New World, is now deposited in the royal
cabinet of Madrid. But without founding any
calculation on what is rare and extraordinary,
the value of the gold usually collected in this
country, particularly in the provinces of Popayan
and Choco, is of considerable amount. Its
towns are populous and flourishing. The num-
her of inhabitants in alinoft every part of the
country daily increases. Cultivation and in-
dufiry of various kinds begin to be encou-
raged, and to profpcr. A considerable trade is
carried on with Carthagena, the produce of the

y ['i,'arihta IIlt . dcl N. Rc',o, p. .8Ri. MS.
ll 11'.i nc.

mnincs,

mines, and other commodities, being conveyed B o o K
down the great river of St. Magdalen to that v_
city. On another quarter, the New Kingdom of
Granada has a communication with the Atlantic
by the river Orinoco; but the country which
firetches along its banks towards the eaf, is
little known, and imperfectly occupied by the
Spaniards.

, ~ ~ ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~, u a s e

cell,

cs
·r

~~~L~~~r~~~~ ~~~'(~~~~~Fr~~~~~rrr~~~~~~r;;~~~~~~h~~~~nX~~~~~c· 2:3 O
.......r.....

I=~~·,~,~~, 2a tC a~~L~JJ........ C2lao
n _L: B r O 2V jmlrlo qrl r~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ic~~~ ~ n~~~~i13n7WW.........

cClitZozLz~ U
~cai itries ~ a~ysc

r~~y~ r~~e r90
140 T e br 2~~~ S ti'B J.LAm a c

-~~S~~-~~9~~ ~~t~~i~ ~~k

al

5 ..4L~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ Ln~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~·d~ ~ ~ ~ ~~~~~...
....

.. . . ... . . . . . . .. . . . .. .

-of the Envixos
of ISIE xi

·cL'i~~~~u,-~~ N.

o--------
- n

lie tie
;7.n~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~z~

,:~~~~~J~~~·~:~~L;T~~~:~ ~

IJ~~7j -I
~~

~~~ih~~~~~~a ~~~~~~z '"rolL ·

, 1~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ ·I~~~~X, 1

·y~~~~~~p~ ~ ~ ~ ~~~ n ~~~~~~?7. -~~~~~~n
p

Blind, dr~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~t

J. art,~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
-0~~--+t7-1i~~~"r33

~~~7~~~L _ T"T· ?~~~~~~~~;WW

# NOTES AND ILLUSTRATIONS.

NOTES

AND
I L LUST RATIONS.

NOTE i. P 4.

D)E Soiis contends, that as Narvaez had no inter-
preters, he could hold no intercourse with the people
of the provinces, nor colnvrfe with tihen in alln way
but by signs, and that i was equally inmpolTible for
himi to carry on any communication x ith Montezuma.
Lib. iv. c. 7. But it is upon the authority of Cortes
himlfelf, t!lht I relate all the pariculars of Narvaez's
colrrcfpl)ui;dc c boh! withl \i\'tc.:uma and with his
tInjedls in tlIc nmartime provinces. Relat. Ranmu.
ii. 24 , A. C. Cortes .::!l.:',, that there was a mode
of iultercoiirfe between Nariaez :1d1 thle IMexicans,
but d(uoe not expain ho w it was carricd on. Bernal
)iaz Ltipplic s tlis tdelet, :'c d iiforns us, that the three
deserters who j iniicd N;iv\ac: ach.d as interpretcrs,
lhaving acqired a e!o"jxtent knnlx;d:.'e L of tile lal-
gua;lc, . 10. \Vith li:; itiiial miiitLels, ie men-
nion; their ilname,; ;d cliiL.tl.r., and relates, in
chaptcr 122, liow they xwerc 1piihifli.d for illir prfidy.
'1'li Sp.lniards had iiin reIided above a year among
thle Mxlc. ien ; aid it is not surprising, that several

vol.. ilI. c c among

among them fliould have made some proficiency il
speaking their language. This seems to have been the
cafe. Herrera, dec. ii. lib. x. c. i. Both B. Diaz,
who was present, and Herrera, the most accurate and
belt informed of all the Spanifll writers, agree with
Cortes in his account of the secret correfpondencc
carried on with Montezullta. Dec. ii. lib. x. c. 8, 9.
Ie Solis flems to confider it as a discredit to Cortcs,
his hero, that MIontezuma fould have been ready to
engage in a corrcfpondence with Narvacz. He sup-
poses that monarch to have contracled fucll a wonderful
atleaion for the Spaniards, that he was not solicitous
to be delivered from them. After the indignity with
which he had been treated, such an aflcrion is incre-
dible; and even De Solis is obliged to acknowledge,
that it mutf be looked upon as one of the miracles
which God had wrought to facilitate the conquef;,
lib. iv. c. 7. The truth is, Montezuma, however
much overawed by his dread of the Spaniards, was
extremely impatient to recover his liberty.

NOTE IT. p. 23.

TI'l:sl words 1 have borrowed from the anonymous

Account of the European Settlements in America,
publifilcd by Do(lflcy, in two volumes 8vo.; a work of
so much merit, that I flould think there is hardly any
writer in Illc age who ought to be ashamed of atcknow-
ledging hinmflf to be the author of it.

NOTE III. p. 30.

THE contemporary historians differ considerably

with refpecl to the loss of the Spaniards on this occa-
iion. Cortes, in his second dispatch to the emperor,
makes the number only I5o. Rclat. ap. Ramus. iii.
p. 249, A. But it was manifcitly his intcreft, at tlat
junture, to conceal from the court of Spain the full
extent of the loss which lie had sustaincd. De Solis,
.always itudous to diminlifl every misfortune that befcl
his countrymen, rates their loss at about two hundred
men. Lib. iv. c. 9. B. Diaz affirms, that thcy'loft
870 men, and that only 440 cfcapcd from Mexico,
c. 128. p. Io8, B1. Palafox, bifliop of Los Angeles,
who seems to have inquired into the early tranfadions
of his countrymen in New Spain, with great attention,
confirms the account of B. Diaz, with refpe't to the
extent of their loss. Virtudes del Indio, p. 22.
Gomara flates their loss at 450 men. Cron. c. o19.
Somc months afterwards, when Cortes had received
Ievcral reinforcements, he mustered his troops, and
found them to be only 590. Rclat. ap. Ramus. iii.
p. 255, E. Now, as Narvaez brought 880 men into
New Spain, and about 400 of Cortes's soldiers were
tlicn alive, it is evident that his loss, in the retreat from
Mexico, niull have been much more confidcrable than
.what lie mcitions. B. Diaz, solicitous to magnify
:he dangers and fufTirings to which he and his fellow-
.,)liqtcrors were cxpofcd, may have exaggerated their
luls; lbut, in niy opinion, it cannot well be cttimatcd
it Jell; tlian 600 menl.

cC 2

NOTE IV. p. 56.

Soxl remains of this grcat work arc fill! visible, and

the spot wher te

t brigantinls v:'ere built and launched,

is fill poilted out to frnangers. Torquemada viewed
them. Ilonarq. Indiana, vol. i. p. 531.

NOTE V. p. 65.

TH'IE Ration of Alvarado on the causeway of Tacub:i

was the ncarcit to the city. Cortes observes, that-
there they could diftinCly obfcrvc what paflid when
their countrymen were facrificcl. Relat. ap. Ramus.
iii. p. 273, E. B. Diaz, who belonged to Alvarado's
division, relates what he beheld with his own eyes.
C. 152. p. 148, b. 149, a. Like a man wofe cou-
rage was so clear as to be above suspicion, lie describes
witl his usual simplicity the impression whicl this
fpetaclc made upon him. " Before, fays lie, I fw
the breasts of my companions opened, their hearts,
yet fluttering, offired to an accursed idol, and thcir
flefl devoured by their exulting enemies I ,waq
accuflomcd to enter a battle not only without fear,
but wlit hih spirit. But from that time I never
advanced to fight the Mexic:as without a fecrct
horror and ianxicty ; my heart trembled at the thoughts
of the death which I had seen them susser." He takes
care to add, that as soon ;as the combat began, hiii
terror went of'; and, indeed, hlls ;adventurous bravcrn
on every occasion is full evl.ince of this. B. Diaz

156.
15 . 157, a.

NOTE VI. p. 73.

ONE circumflance in this ficge merits particular

notice. The account which the Spanilil writers give
of the numerous armies employed in the attack or
defence of Mexico seems to be incredible. According
to Cortes himflf, lie had at one time 150o,ooo auxi-
liary Indians in his service. Relat. Ramus. iii. 275, E.
Gomara aflerts, that they wer aoe oe 200,000. Cron.
c. 36. -Hcrrera, an author of higher authority, fays,
they were about 200,000. Dec. iii. lib. i. c. 19. None
of the contemporary writers afcertai explicitly the
number of persons in Mcexico during the iege. But
Cortes on several occasions mentions the number of
Mexicans lwho were lain, or who perilhed for wan;it of
foodl; and, if we may rely on tlhofe circumfianccs,
it is probable that above two hundred tlioufanld lmflu
have been ihut up in the to.'ll. But the (clantity of
provisions necccfl ry for tle fubfiflrne o fiti'n v'l
multitudes anflmbled ill one p])ace, during three
months, is so great, aini it lr.u.irhv; so nIillui foresight
;nd arran;gelmnt to coll:Lc th!ie', ;n11l ],'v t111m tup
in m:igaziies, so as to be ('rt.ii of a rigul.lr fo)ily,
tlhit one can hardly beli\eve tl;t tliis could be ;aciOil-
plifli'd ill ; country where a;,riculture was so ilper-
se.t as in tihe Mexicanlll cUilc, wlere there were no
tame :iiiiimals, and by a: people :ittirally l ipir-
vidlent, and lo incapable of executing a complic,:ted
plan, as the moll improved Ame'ricns. 'T'lh Spa-
niards, with all their care alnd atillntion, fred very
poor.l, ;nl wtre olten redll Ii,,) extreme liii. :; fsor
Wall (r i )l ifin. ]'B. I i.,', p. I 2. Coites Rel't.

C 3 S .-i,

27 , D. Cortes on one oceafion mentions flighltl tlhe
subsistence of his army; and after acknowledging
that they were often in great want, adds, that thev
received supplies from the pcople of the countrv, of
fihf, and of some fruit, which he clls the cherries of
the country. Ibid. B. Diaz fays, that they had cai:e.
of maize, and ferafas de la tierra; and( when the
season of these was over, another fruit, which lie call
Tunas; but their molt comfortable Lfibliilence was
root which the Indians use as food, to which he gives
the name of Zilits.r, p. 142. '.lThe Indian auxiliaries
had one means of fubfilenc. more than the Spaniards.
They fed upon the bodies of the Mexicans whom they
killed in battle. Cort. Rel:t. 1-6, C. B. )iaz con-
firms his relation, and adds, that when the Indlians
returned from Mexico to their own country, they
carried with them large qua;ntities of the flch of the
Mexicans salted or dried, as a molt acceptable present
to their friends, that they might have the pleasure of
feeding upon the bodies of their enemies in their
feftiva's, p. 157. De Solis, wlho fecms to confider it
as an imputation of discredit to his countrymen, that.
they should a in concert witli auxiliaries who fed
upon human fleli, is solicitous to prove tliat the
Spaniards endeavoured to prevent their aflocilats from
eating the bodies of the Mexicans, lil. v. c. 24. But
he has no authority for this from the original historians.
Neither Cortes himself, nor B. I)iaz, fccin to hI:ive :ad
any fich fcrup!e ; and, on many occasions, mention
the Indian repais, which were become familiar to
them, without any mark of abhorrence. Even with
this additional flock of food for the Indians, it was
hardly pofibic to prrvurc: fubillcnec for armies

mIolounting

amounting to such numbers as we find in the Spaniili
writers. Perhaps tilhe best solution of the difficulty is,
to adopt t ie opinion of 1. Diaz del Caltillo, tle molt
artless of all the H/7or-iad'ror primitios. " When
Gomara (fays he) on lome occasions relates, tlhat there
were so many tlhouifmd Indians our auxiliaries, and on
others, that there were so many thousand houses in this
or that town, o regard is to be paid to his enuler.a-
tion, as he lias no authority for it, the numbers not
being in reality tile lifth of what lie relates. If we
add together tlhe dliferent numbers which lie mentions,
that country would contain more millions than there
are in Ca;llile." C. 29. But though some ccnfidcrable
deduction fliould certainly be made from the Spaniith
accounts of the Mexican forces, they n:mr. have been
very numerous; for nothing but an ilmeici fuipe
riority in number could have enabled them to with-
ltand a body of nine hundred Spaniards, condued by
a leader of such abilities as Cortes.

NOTE VII. p. 92.

IN relatiilg tie oppreflive anld cruIl proceedings of

the coiiIuerors of New Spain, 1 have not followed
1. de las Casas ;s my guide. Hlis account of theiii,
Relat. de la DI)ltr-uye. p. 18, &c. is manluiifefrly exag-
gerated. It is from the testimony of Cortes himifelf,
;and of (onial;a, wh1o wrote unlder his eye, that I
have take ni y account of the piflmiitcnt of the
Panucans, and they rlate it withl(ut ;any (difappro-
bation. 1. Diiaz, c'ontr;lly to his ifu.il cuollomn
Mnc1iiio01, it on, in gneiir:l termis, e 162. Ilerr(er:
l'licitoi. to .cxt:inut.ie ti. l),il);r ouns 't;i) of hl,

I C - t (WLT'-I '

countrymen, though he mentions 63 caziques, and
400 men of note, as being condemned to the flames,
asserts, that thirty only were burnt, and the reit par-
doned. Dec. iii. lib. v. c. . But this is contrary to
the testimony of the original hiflorians, particularly of
Gomara, whom it appears he had consulted, as he
adopts several of his expressions in this pafilge. The
punishment of Guatimozin is related by the most
authentic of the Spanish writers. Torquemada has
extra&ed from a hifory of Tezeuco, composed in the
Mexican tongue, an account of this tranfaaion, more
favourable to Guatimozin than that of the Spanish
authors. MIon. Indiana, i. 575. According to the
Mexican account, Cortes had scarcely a hadow of
evidence to justify such a wanton a of cruelty.
B. Diaz affirms, that Guatimozin and his fellow-
sufferers aflierted their innocence with their last breath,
and that many of thz Spanifhl soldiers condemned this
aCtion of Cortes as equally unnecessary and unjust,
p. zoo, b. 201, a.

NOTE VIII. p. 95.

THIE motive for undertaking this expedition was, to

punish Chrilloval de Olid, one of his officers, who
had revolted again1t him, and aimed at establishing
.in independent jurifdClion. Cortes regarded this in-
furredtion as of such dangerous example, and drcaded
so much the abilities and popularity of its author, that
in perion he led the body of troops declined to fupprcfs
it. iHc marched, according to Gomara, three thousand
miles, tlhroigh a country abounding with thick forcfts,
ruggedl mount.ins, deep rivers, thinly inh.bited, a;nd

cultivated

cultivated only in a few places. lWhat he suffered
from famine, from the hostility of the natives, from
the climate, and from hardflips of every species, has
nothing in history parallel to it, but what occurs in
the a(lventures of the other discoverers and conquerors
of the New World. Cortes was employed in this
dreadful fcrvice above two years; and though it was
not dliting-:ifilec by any splendid event, he exhibited,
during the courfc of it, greater personal courage, more
fortitude of mind, more perseverance and patience,
than in any otl:er period or scene in his life. Herrera,
dec. iii. lib. vi. vii. viii. ix. Gomara Cron. c. 163-
i77. B. Diaz, 174-190. Cortes, MS. penes mIe.
rcrc one to wxrite a life of Cortes, the account of
this expedition should occupy a splendid place in it.
In a gcneral history of America, as tli expedition was
produCivc of no great event, the me:ntion of it is
fufficicnt.

NOTE IX. p. 97.

ACCORmDNG to H-errra, the treafurc vhich Cortes

brought with hill, colnfited of fifteen hnildrcd marks
of wrought plate, two hundred thoufilad lpfos of fine
gold, alld tell tliouliiitl of iniferior flndard, many
rich jewels, one in particular worth forty thousand
pesos, and fiecr, l triiiLts ;und orin.imcnts of value.
)cc. iv. lib. iii. c. . lib. iv. c. . I e afterwards
engaged to give at portion with his 1l.igliLcr of a hum-
drled toullltnd plels. .(omlra Crl. . 237. The
fortune which heL left his fois w:,!; wcry 'oinlid,.ible.
But, as wc haive b.l.T''c n'l:tlil, lie iii dividled
among the conqtcror:;, on tv sirll rdui' -ticin 's Mexico,

was

was very small. There appears then to be fomereafori
for suspec.ting that the accusations of Cortes's enemies
4vcre not altogether destitute of foundation. They
charged imn with having applied to his own use a
disproportionate fare of the Mexican spoils ; with
having concealed the royal treasures of A'onltezuma
anld Guatimozin ; with defrauding the king of his
fifth ; and robbing his followers of what was due to
them. IIerrera, dec. iii. lib. viii. c. 15. dec. iv.
lib. iii. c. 8. Some of the conquerors themfclvcs
entertained suspicions of the fame kind, with rfpc&t
to this part of his conduit. B. Diaz, c. I57.

NOTE X. p. 104.

IN tracing th progress of tle Spanifl arms in New

Spain, we have followed Cortes hiifelf as our moiot
certain uide. Hi s dispatches to tle emperor contain
; minute account of his operations. But tle unlet-
tered conqueror of Peru was incapable of rlating his
own exploits. Our information with rcfpcL to theili,
and other tr:nf.it9ilons in Peru, is derived, Ihowever,
from coiitcmlpoi-ar and rcfpc.taibl authors.

r'Fri itol (:' ?'v ,nmi't of ]'Pizirro'i; trif.tdicis

in Pcrn w.s pi:hS;ilhcd by 1'ran(ifco de Xcrcz, is
secretary. It is a limple unlurncd narr.itivc, carried
down no f;rtlhl th.,i tl!' deathl of Atal)u:.'pa, in
I 33 ; for the autl'or rttllr 'd to Si,%.i! ill 1534, alid,
soon after lie l.autld1, printed at Sevsille his liort
Ililtory of the Con(nli:t of l'Prt, ,aitilrt'd to the
crpe llor.

1),'\

DON PEDRO SANCHIO, all officer who fcrvcd under

Pizarro, drew up an account of his expedition, which
was translated into Italian by Ramufio, and inserted
in his valuable collecion, but has never been published
in its original language. Sancho returned to Spain
at the fame time with Xerez. Great credit is due
to what both thetf authors relate concerning the
progress and operations of Pizarro; but the residence
of the Spaniards in Peru had beccnio short, at the time
when they left it, and their intcrcourfe with the natives
so slender, that their knowledge of the Peruvian
manners and cutftoms is very imperfcct:.

THE next contemporary iftorian is Pedro Cieza de

Leon, who publilfed his Cronica dcl Peru, at Seville,
in 553. If he had finiflied all that he proposes
in the general division of his work, it would have
been the most complete hiltory which had been pub-
lifhed of any region in the New World. He was
well qualified to execute it, having served during
seventeen years in America, and having visited in
person most of the provinces concerning which hc
had occasion to write. But only the first part of his
Chronicle has been printed. It contains a description
of Peru, and fevcral of te adjacent provinces, with
;ua account of the iitiutions and cuftoIms of the
natives, and is written with so Hittle art, and such an
apparent regard for trutl, that one must regret the
loss of the other parts of his work.

Tins loss is amply supplied by Don Angnftine

Zaratc, who publifled, in i555, his Ilifloria dcl
)efculbriiniento y Conquefla de la Provincia del Perl.

6 Zarate

Zarate was a man of'rank and education, and employed
in Peru as comproller-general of the public revenue.
His history, whether we attend to its matter or
composition, is a book of confiderablec merit; as lie
had an opportunity to be well informed, and feenms to
have been inquisitive with rfpe(t to the manners and
tranfafiions of the Peruvians, great credit is due to
his teflimony.

DoN DIrGco FrRNANm7. publiflicd is Hiftoria dci

Peru in 157 . His sole object is to relate the difi'n-
tions and civil uars of the Spaniards in that empire.
As lie servcd in a public fL.tion in Peru, and was u-c!l
acquainted both with the coiutry, and with te priin-
cipal adcors in those filnulaltr fccnes which hle (dccribs,
as he poflcflcd found und(lrflanding and great impar-
tiality, his work may be ran:ked among those of the
iillorians nmoil diflinguiflihd for their industry in
research, or their cpacits in judil:g with rcfpct to
the events wliich they rclate.

Ti-i. last autitor who can be reckoned aonin:l tlhe

contemporary liflorians of tle conqullft of I'cru, i
Garcilalbo de la Vega, Inca. For tough tle firl.
part of lhis work, i:ltiticd C(.T!ni::/,i.rJ. R.'a/'s I','
()Oig, ti de /os Inca's efis icl Pder'/, was not publifned
sooner than the year 609, fcventy-fix years after
the death of Atahualpa the lanfl emperor, yet as lie
was born in Peru, and was the foin of an officer
of distinction among the Spanifli conquerors, by
a Cojn, or lady of te royal race, on account of
which he always took the 1name of Inc ; as lie was
maftcr of the language fpokcn by tl:e Incas, ;ii(i

cqualilied with tile traditions of his countrymen, Ill.
.,uthority is rated very hihl, and often placed above
that of all thle other hiforians. IIis work, however,
is little more than a commentary upon the Spanili
writers of the PeruviaLn itory, and composed of quo-
tations taken from tite authors wihom I have mentioned.
J!his is the idea w!hiclh lc himself gives of it, Lib. i.
C. o. Nor is it in the account of facls only that lie
follows them fenrilely. Lven in explaining the infli-
tutions and rights of his anceflors, his information
fecms not to be more perfect tlan theirs. His expla-
nation of the Quipos is almot the fame with that of
Acofta. He produces no fpccimen of Peruvian poetry,
but that wrerched one which lh e borrows from Bias
Valera, an early miffionarv, whiofe m emoirs have
never been publilhed. Lib. ii. c. 15. As for compo-
fition, arrangement, or a capacity of diitinguifhing
between what is fabulous, what is probable, and what
is true, one fearclles for tlhem in vain in the comment-
aries of the Inca. Ilis work, however, notwithlltaid-
ing its great defes, is not altogether dclitute of use.
Some traditions which lhe received from his country-
men are preserved in it. Ilis knowledge of the Peru-
vian language has enabled him to correcl fomle erlors
of the Spanli writers, and le has inllrted ill it foine
curiolis fads, taken from authlors iwvlol works were
never publiflied, and are now lull.

NOTE XI. p. o.

():I may forlm ati idea both of the lI.rdllips which

they c.tr.rd, :lnd of tlihe Iinliealtlhfl climl:te in the
regions which tlhey ifited, fionll the extraordinary

mortality

mortality that prevailed among them. Pizarro carried
out 1 12 men, Almagro 7o. In less than nine months
r3o of these died. Few fell by the sword; most of
them were cut off by diseases. Xerez, p. I80.

NOTE XII. p. I 4.

T'-lis island, fays Hcrrera, is rendered so uncomfort-

.blc bv the unwhlolefomenefs of its climate, its impe-
netrable woods, its rugged mountains, and the multi-
tude of infcets and reptiles, that it is seldom any
softer epithet than that of ife-rzal is employed in
dcfcribing it. The fun is almost never seen there, and
throughout the year it hardly ever ceases to rain.
Dec. 3. lib. x. c. 3. Dampier touched at this island
in the year i685 ; and his account of the climate is not
more favourable. Vol. i. p. 172. He, during his
cruise on the coaf, vilited most of the places where
Pizarro landed, and his description of them throws
light on the narrations of the early Spanish historians.

NOTE XIH..p. 135.

BY this time horses had multiplied greatly in the

Spanifhi settlements on the continent. When Cortes
began his expedition in the year 518, though his
armament was more considerable than that of Pizarro,
and comnpofed of persons fupcrior in rank to those who
invaded Peru, lhecould procure no more than fixtcee
Lorfcs.

NOTE XIV. p. 136.

IN te year 17.o, 1). Ant. Ulloa, and D. George

iuan, travelled from Guayquil to Motupe, by the
i;une route which Pizarro took. From the defrip-
tiO; of their journey, one may form an idea of the
dificulty of his march. The sandy plains bctween
St. Michalel de Picura and Mlotupe extend 9s Inilec,
without water, without a tree, a plant, or any green
thiln, o'l a dreary itrctch of burning sand. Vova:,-.
!oin. i. . 39, &c.

NOT'E XV. p. 143

T'Ins; cxtravagant and unseasonable dicocurfe of

Valverdie as been censured by all liilorians, and with
julliee. But though he seems to have been an illiterate
and bigoted monk, nowise resembling the good Ol-
medo, who accompanied Cortes ; the absurdity of hi.-
address to Atahutlpa mufit not be charged wlolly upon
him. His harangue is evidecntly a tranillation or para-
phrafc of that sorn, concerted by a junto of Spanifli
divinll, and lwyers in the y;ear I 509, fr explaining
the right of their king to the fovereigiity of the New
Worll, and for dircting the officcrs employed in
Amicricai how they fliould take polTcflion of :iny new
country. See Vo. i. Note xxiii. 'Thc fetilnieits
contained in \'Valvcrd's 1tar.Ige mull )not thlien ])
impll)uted to the bigoted ilibecilitv of a ;ip.ticul.lr
nilin, but to that of the a;'ec. But (i.ouar.xi ;il
licn.ir li lre].tit one cireuiuiltlno c 'oilcerili:l \.ilvl'etic,
'Allicli, il .;tlucntic, reiidtl r: liln anl olj t, llnot of

conitc'ni ) t

contempt only, but of horror. They affirt, tat
during the whole ation, Valverde continued to excite
the soldiers to flaughtcr, calling to them to strike the
enemy, not with the edge, but with the points of
their swords. Gor. Cron. c. 113. Benz. Hiflor.
Nov. Orbis, lib. iii. c. 3. Such behaviour was very
different from that of the Roman Catholic clergy in
other parts of America, where they uniformly exerted
their influence to protec the Indians, and to moderate
the ferocity of their countrymen.

NOTE X'I. p. 144.

'I'wo difb-rent fvftems have been formed concerning

thi, conduct of Atahualpa. The Spanifil writers, in
order to juflify the violence of their countrymen,
contend, that all the Inca's profellions of friendhip
were feigned; and that his intention in agreeing to
an interview with Pizarro at Caxanialca, was to cut
off him and his followers at one blow; that for this
,urpofc lie advanced with such a numerous body of
attendants, who had arms concealed under their
g.irmeits to execute this fchcnc. lhis is the account
giveln by Xerez and Zarite, and adopted by Herrera.
But if it had been the plan of the Inca to defiroy the
Spaniards, one can hardly imagine that he would have
permitted them to march unmolclcd through the
desert of Motupe, or have neghlcCed( to defend the
palEs ith, the ioutalis, where they might have been
atta.i cl with so nmuch a hvi.tage. If the Peruvians
marchled to Cax;am.lca it hib ll illteitil)n to all upon
the Spalni; lt, it is ilconll ivacl, tli:it of to great a
body oi i: i, :'p.i for ald.ion, not one tilould

attemllpt

attempt to make resistance, but all tamely susser them-
selves to be butchered by an enemy whom they were
armed to attack. Atahualpa's mode of advancing to
the interview has the aspea of a peaceable procession,
not of a military cnterprife. He himself and his
followers were, in their habits of ceremony, preceded,
as on days of folemnuity, by unarmed harbingers.
Though rude nations are frequently cunning and false,
yet, if a scheme of deception and treachery mult be
imputed either to a monarch, that had no great rcafon
to be alarmed at a vilit from Itrangcrs who solicited
admifflio into his presence as friends, or to an adven-
turer so daring, and so little scrupulous as Pizarro, one
cannot hesitate in determining where to fix the pre-
fumption of guilt. Even amildft the cndeavours of the
Spaniih writers to palliate the proceedings of Pizarro,
one plainly perceives tlat it was his intention, as well
as his intereit, to seize the Inca, and that lie had
taken measures for that purpose previous to any fufpi-
cion of tlat monarch's dcfigns.

GARCILASSO DE LA VE(;A, extremely solicitous to

vindicate his countrymen, the Peruvians, from the
crime of having concerted the deftrution of Pizarro
and his followers, and no less afraid to charge the
Spaniards with improper conduct towards the Inca,
has framed another 'fylllm. IHe relates, that a man of
ma;jeflic form, with a long beard, and garments reach-
ing to the ground, having appeared in a vilion to
Viracocha, the eighth Inca, and declared that he was
a child of the Sun, that n'oi ;irc!h built a temple in
honour of this person, al en crted an image of himn,
refcmiblinig a: ii(arlv is pofliblc the singular form in

vol.. 11:. D which

which lie had exhibitcd himself to his view. In this
temple divine honours were paid to him, by the name
of Viracocha. P. i. lib. iv. c. 21. lib. v. c. 22. WhenC
tle Spaniards first appeared in Peru, the length of
their beards, and the dress they wore, struck every
perfol so much with their likeness to the image of
'ir:icocl, tll;t they supposed them to be children of
ite Sun, who had descended from heaven to earth.
A.i! coliciutl-l , that the fatal period of the Pcruvian
cmpire v..-;is now approaching, and that the thronc
wo-, il; ie occupied by new pofltfTors. Atahualpa
hiini;l,, cci:iilderitg the Spaniards as meflngrcr s fromi
Icav.\ , vas so far from entertaining any thoughts of
irefilltin them, that lie determined to yield implicit
obcdi;nce to their commands. From thole sentiments
sloswed his profeilions of love and respect. To thofc
wvere owing the cordial reception of Soto and Ferdi-
:ti11n Pizarroi; in llis caImp, and the fubmiflive reve-
-rinc wit which lie himself advanced to visit tlle
Sp:minll genera! in his quarters; but from the gross
ignlorance of Plilipillo, the interpreter, the declaration
of the Spaniards, and his answer to it, were so ill
cxpl.iuned, that bl their mutual inability to comprc-
lhelid each other's intentions, the fatal rcncounter at
C'axa;iallc, with all its dreadful confequnces, was
occ lionlcd.

f is rcnllmrkable, that no traces of this filpcrflitious
encration( of the Pcruivi:ls for the Spaniards, are to
be found eitlher in Xrcz, or Sancho, or Zarat, pre-
viuus to tilh illlter\i ew at Caxamnalc;a ; and yet the two
toriner lerved under Pi/.arro at that time, :and the
l.itter vilitel ed Pcri ls alter tle conquellt. If either

tlhe

the Inca himfilf, or his meflengers, had addressed the
Spaniards in the words which Garcilaflb puts in their
mouths, they must have been struck with such sub-
miflivc declarations ; and they would certainly have
availed tchlmfclves of them to accomplifl their own
designs with greater faciiity. Garcilaflb hiimflf,
though his narrative of the intercourse between the
nca ;and Spaniards, preceding the rencounter at Caxa-
malca, is founded on the supposition of his believing
them to be Viracochas, or divine beings, p. ii. lib. i.
c. 17, &c. yet, with his usual inattention and inaccu-
racy, hc admits, in another place, that the Peruvians
did not recollecd the refembllance between them and
the god Viracocha, until the fatal difaftcrs subsequent
to the defeat at Caxamalca, anll then only began to
call them Viracochas. P. i. lib. v. c. 21. This is
confirmed by Herrera, dec. 5. lib. ii. c. 2. In many
different parts of America, if we may believe the
Spanifl writers, their countrymen were confidercd s
divine beings who had d(fcended from heaven. But
in this initalice, as in many wllich occur in the inter-
course betw een nations whose progress ill refinement
is very unequal, the ideas of thole who used tle
expression were difrent from the ideas of tlofe who
heard it. For ficli is tlie idiom of the Indian lan-
guages, or i'lch is tlec implicity of those wlio fp:cak
theln, tli;t wlien tlcv 1fc :aily tlling witl which they
were fori.ncrly uli;ILu(.illtied, and of which they do
not l:iiow the origin, they laiy, tliat t came down
ifoom heaven. Nugniz. RI1am. iii. 327, C.

I' t1; account wlkicll I have gcven of the fnltimcnts

a1il p1rocccig,,
I ) sI' tl!,I PeruviIs, app';'ar to b mnore

D 2 natural

natural and consistent than either of the two prece.-
ding, and is better supportcd by the facts related by
the contemporary historians.

ACCOtING)( to Xcrcz, p. 20o, two thousand Peru-

viaus were killed. Sancho makes the number of the
l;lill fix or seven thoIfand. Ram. iii. 274, D. By
Garcilaflo's account, five thousand were maflacred.
P. ii. lib. i. c. 25. The number which I have men-
tionedl, being the medium between the extremes, may
probably be nearll the truth.

NOTE XVII. p. 146.

TNo-lli NC can be a more striking proof of this, than

that three Spaniards travelled from Caxamalca to
Cuzco. The dilfance between them is fix hundred
mils. In every place throughout this great extent of
country, they were treated with all the honours which
the Peruvians paid to their sovereigns, and even to
their divinities. Under pretext of amassing what w;al
wanting for the ransom of the Inca, they demanded
the plates of gold with which the walls of the Templh
of tle Sun in Cuzco were adorned; and thoughl thc
plieils were unwilling to alienate tllofe sacred orna-
ments, and the people refused to violate the fllrine of
their God, the three Spaniards, with their own hands,
robbed tle 'l'emple of part of this valuable treasure;
.ndl fuic was (he reverene of tlie natives for tleir
persons, that though they beheld tilis a of sacrilege
with alltonifinent, they did not attempt to prevent or
iliftlrb the coinmilion of it. Zarate, lib. ii. c. 6
)Salncho ap. Ramus. iii. 35, 1).

NOTE XVIII. p. 61.

ACCORDING to Herrera, the spoil of Cuzco, aftei

setting apart the king'sfiJt, was divided among 480
persons. Each received 4000 pcfos. This amounts to
1,920,000 pesos. Dec. v. lib. vi. c. 3. But as the
general, and other officers, were entitled to a flare far
greater than that of the private men, the furn total must
have risen much beyond what I have mentioned. Go-
mara, c. 123. and Zarate, lib. ii. c. 8. satisfy themselves
with asserting in general, that the plunder of Cuzco
wvas of greater value than the ranom of Atahualpa.

NOTE XIX. p. 164.

No expedition in the New World was colnlueled

with more persevering courage than that of Alvaraio,
and in none were greater hardlhips endured. \Lany
of the persons engaged in it were, like thlilr leader,
vcterians whlo hid lrvedt under Cortes, inured to all
tile rigour of American watr. Such of mly ri'ade-rs as
have not anl opportunity of peruiillg the iiini
decfription of teir fullcrings by Zaraltc r 1 l.rier.!,
may forlm sone ilea of the nature o thcir limarell
from the fea-coalt to )uito, by colnfulting tlle accoull
which ]). Ant. Uilloa gives of Ilis own journey in
1736, nearly in tle ame route. Voy. tom. i. . 178,
&c. or that of M. Botlgullr, who procee(ld fr'.ll
Puerto Viejo, to u(ito, by the faime road which Alva-
rado took. I I cmpalrs his o\wn joulrny xvili lhat
of tlie Sp:;lilhle adler, a lld by tlie comp;llilil gives ;

1D l) J iAl^(

most firiking idea of the boidnefs and patience of
Alvarado, in forcing his way through so many obstacles.
Voyage du Pcrou, p. 28, &c.

NOTE XX. p. 65.

ACCORDING to Herrera, there v-as cntered on account

of the king in gold 155,3o0 pcfos, and 54oo marks
(each 8 ounces) of silver, betides fcvcral veflels and
ornaments, some of gold, and others of silver; on
account of private prfons, in gold 499,000 pesos,
and 54,0co marks of silver. Dec. 5. lib. vi. c. 13.

NOTE XXI. p. 175.

'I'iE Peruvians not only imitated the militnrv arts of

the Spaniards, but had recourse to devices of their
own. As the cavalry were the chief objcca of their
terror, they endeavoured to render them incapable of
i?.ing, by means of a long thong with a stone fastened
to each end. 'This, when thrown by a skilful hand,
twilted about the horse and its rider, and cntangled
them so as to obftrua their motions. -Hcrrenr men.
tions this as an invention of their own. Dec. 5.
lib. viii. c. 4. But as I have observed, vol. ii. p. 176,
this weapon is common among several barbarous tribes
towatrds the extremity of South America ; and it is
more probable, that the Peruvians had observed the
dexterity with which they utl'd it in hunting, and
on this ocafllion adopted it themselves. The Spaniards
were conlfiderably annoyed by it, Ilcrrcra, ibid. An-
other initance of the ingenuity of the Peruviains
dlfcrvcs mention. By turning a river out of its

channel,

channel, they overflowed a valley, ill which a body of
tile enemy was posted, so suddenly, that it was with
the utmost difficulty the Sp;niardl made their cfeape.
H-errera, dec. . lib. viii. c. 5.

NOTE XXII. p. 198.

I-IERRERA'S account of Orcllana's voyage is the most

minute, and apparently the oft accurate. It :w;s
probably taken from the journal of Orcllana hilifelf.
But the dates are not distinctly marked. I-is naviga-
tion down the Coca, or Napo, begun carly in February

541 ; and he arrived at the imoithl of the river on
the 26th of August, having spent nlear seven monio hs
in the voyage. M. de la Condamine, ill the year
1743, failed from Cuenca to Para, a settlement ol
the Portugucf at the moutl of the river, a navigation
much longer thanl tlat of Orn.llinm, in lcfs than four
months. Voy;ge, p. 179. But the two advcntiurrs
were vcry diflicrcntly provided for the voyage. Thi.i

aIlzardous ui:l(ldeL;king, to \:.lihl amlbition prompted
()rcilaiia, and to which llic love of l'iencc led 51M. c dit
Coid.aiciiu,.a ui drcikt.lcninl the ye:ar 76),lyhd;iiic
(odinl des ()doialis, from cOlliiutil i1c:Clion. ''hie
narrative of the hardilips whlich h

l lul.c rd, of th

datigers to which flie was xplofcd, and of tic lilifilcrs
]lichb besel her, is oCle of thie mo il fingulhar and
lilicclg sories ill any la1ingirg, exhil)iting in her
condult a llriking pic'lure of tlic fortitude whlich
difling illlhies tle 0o e I' , ilnglcd withl thle f1:lilility
anld tel(ledrniels p.'ll' to tlhc oillr. l rdtl: le

. odi. , . . L .. . . .

NOTE XXIII. p. 203.

HERRERA gives a striking picrurc of their indigence.

Twelve gentlemen who had been oflicers of diflincion
under Almagro, lodged in the fame louse, and having
but one cloak among them, it was worn alternately
by him who had occasion to appear in public, while
the reft, from the want of a decent dress, wcre
obliged to keep within doors. Their former friends
and companions were so much afraid of giving offence
to Pizarro, that they durst not entertain or even
converse with them. One may conceive what was
the condition, ant what the indignation of men once
accustomed to power and opulence, when they felt
themselves poor and despiscd, without a roof under
which to shelter their heads, while they beheld others,
whose merit and services were not equal to theirs,
living in splendor in sumptuous edifices. Dec. 6.
lib. viii. c. 6.

NOTE XXIV. p. 218.

11ERn.ERA, whose accuracy entitles him to great

credit, aflerts, that Gonzalo Pizarro poss(cd domains
in the neighbourhood of Chtquefaca tie la Plata, which
yielded him an annual revenue greater than that of the
archbishop of Toledo, the belt endowed fee in Europe.
Dec. 7. lib. vi. c. 3.

NOTE XXV. p. 235.

ALL te Spanifl writers describe his march, and

the diftreflis of both parties, very minutely. Zarate
obfcrvcs, that hardly any parallel to it occurs in history,
either with refpe&t to the length of the retreat, or the
ardour of the pursuit. Pizarro, according to his
computation, followed the viceroy upwards of three
thouLtnd miles. Lib. v. c. 16. 26.

NOTE XXVI. p. 253.

IT amounted, according to Fernandcz, the best-

informed hitorian of that period, to one million four
hundred thousand pcfos. Lib. ii. c. 79.

NOTE XXVII. p. 255.

CARVAJAL, from the beginning, had been an advo-

cate for an accommodation with Cafca. Finding
Pizarro incapable of holding that bold course which he
originally suggested, he rccommended to him a timely
fibmilion to his fovcrcign as tle fafet micafure. When
the prfidlcnt's ofirs were firlt communicated toCarvajal,
(" By our Lady (f.id he, in that train of bufflonery
which was familiar to him) tlhe pricit ifiles gracious
bulls. IIc gives them both good and cheapl; let i
not only accept them, but wear them as rcliqjuca ,iLtul
our necks." Fcrnandez, lib. ii. c. 63.

NOTE XXVII. p. 262.

DURING the rebellion of Gonzalo Pizarro, icve!l

hundred men were killed in battle, and three hun-
dred and eighty were hanged or beheaded. lerrcra,
dec. 8. lib. iv. c. 4. Above three hundred of there
were cut off by Carvajal. Fernandez, lib. ii. c. 91.
Zarate makes the number of those put to a violent
death five hundred. Lib. vii. c. i.

NOTE XXIX. p. 27i.

IN my inquiries concerning the manners and policy

of the Mexicans, I have received muchl information
from a large manuscript of Don Alonlbf de Corita,
one of the judges in the Court of Audience of Mexico.
In the year 553, Philip II. in order to discover the
mode of levying tribute fronm lis Indian fubjefts,
that would be oft beneficial to the crown, and
lealt opprcflive to them, addressed a m:nlate to all
the C urts of Audience in America, Cenjoiing tlhem
to anlwcr certalill qutrics hlich lie ppofed to tllnm,
conccrnlilg the ancilent form of government eftabliflecd
among the various nations of Indians, and the mode
ill which they hlad becn accifomled to piy t;xes
to their kings or chicfs. In obldience to this m;11mdatec
Corita, who )ad rfidcd nineteen years in Anierica;,
fouI't'een of which li pa;fl'ed iln New Sp;in, coilnpoled
:1e worl of which halve cpvl . It ;ictlt;iiits
hsi ovcrcign, tlIt lie d nill,:'( it 111 ol)jc,'l, duri}ng

\"

his residence in Amcrica, and in all its provinces
which lie had visited, to inquire diligently into tle
manners and customs of tlhe natives; that he had
conversed for this purpocf with many aged and
intellih.'llt Indians, and consultcd several of tile
Spanifli ecclcfiaftics, who undcrilood the Indian lan-
guages most perfctly, particularly nime of thofc
who landed in New Spain soon after the conquest.
Corita appears to be a man of some learning, and to
have carried on his inquiries with the diligence and
accuracy to which lie pretends. Greater credit is due
to his testimony from one circumiallce. His work
was not composed with a view to publication, or in
support of any particular tleory, but contains timple
though full anfwcrs to queries propoied to him offi-
cially. lThoulgh Ierrera does not mention himn
among the authors whom he hlad followed as guides
in his history, I llould suppose, from several facts
of which he takes notice, as well as from several
expreflions which he uses, that tis memorial of
Corita was not unknown to him,

NOTE XXX. p. 285.

TIIF early Spanifli writers were so h;asty and inc-

cur.ite in cltimiating tlhe numbers of people i tlie
provinces nll towns of Anierlia,; tlht it i iilnble
to ,itccrta illi at of Mexico itlelf with :nxy il'.:'c of
preciliui. C'rte's t:ficrilcs Ie c( lii .in d tpiuioimf-
11 ( i of M cxic in Cner. teil :i, a\\!il

i l ly tiat.

it v,',t; lnct inl 'rio to ll'

o l/'rt.lt i i i' i . I 'liuropc.

(oll;lr;i i;llore t¢c

x li ;i, n Ju ,llin l . ti.' Il 'i:; wre.lc
6oooo000 liOiil's *r l ii.iiiii . i: M ' '. C .).' c. 7g.

; icrr-r.i

Herrera adopts his opinion, Dec. ii. lib. vii. c. I3. ; and
the generality of writers fo:low them implicitly without
inquiry or scruple. According to this account, the
inhabitants of M\exico mult have been about 300,000.
Torquemada, with his usu.al propensity to the marvel-
lous, aferts, that there were a hundred and twenty
thousand houses or 'families in Mexico, and confe-
quently about fix hundred thousand inhabitants.
Lib. iii. c. 23. But in a very judicious account of
the Mexican empire, by one of Cortcs's officers, the
population is fixed at 6o,ooo people. Ranmilo, iii.
309. A. Even by this account, which probably is
much nearer the truth than any of the foregoing,
Mexico was a great city.

NOTE XXXI. p. 90.

IT is to P. Torribio de Benavcnte, that I am in-

debtcd for this curious obfcrvation. Palafox, bishop
of Ciudad dc la Puebla Los Angeles, confirms and
illuftratcs it more fully. The Mexican (savs lle is
the only language in which a termination indicating
rclpect, fl.vv.,. r'' rer/lia,''es

, /e rrhf., 1in.%ly e aflixed

to every word. By adding the final fvlla.blc zin or
azill to any word, it becolmes a proper xprcflio of
vencration i the mouth of an inferior. If, in speak-
ing to an equal, the word Father is to be ulfed, it is
Tail, but an inferior fays Tatzin. One priclt lfpeaking
to another, calls him l'opixqul; a pcioll of inferior
rank calls him Tcjii.Vra/lzi. The name of the cmpe-
ror who reigned when Cortes inadcd Mexico, was,

nlrfotzlzlna, but his vaillls, from reverence, pro-
nouncec it [';hllcztllazb. TorribioJ MS, Pl'af. Vir-

tud(ls

tudcs dcl Indio, p. 65.' The Mexicans had not only
reverential nouns, but reverential verbs. The mannter
in which these are formed from the verbs ill colmmon
uie, is explained by ). Jos. Aug. Aldama y (Jucvu.t
in his Mexican Grammlar, N' 88.

NOTE XXII. p. 296.

FROM comparing fcvcral pafnages in Corita and

Hcrrera we may collet, with fonie degree of accu-
racy, the various modes in which the Mexicans
contributed towards the support of government. Some
persons of the firit order seem to have been exempted
from the payment of any tribute, and as their only
duty to the public, were bound to pcrfonal service il
war, and to follow tle banner of their sovereign with
their vallals. 2. The immediate vaflls of the crown
were bound not only to personal military irviec,
but paid a certain proportion of the produce of their
lands in kind. 3. Those who held ofices of honour
or trust, paid a certain fiare of what they received in
coinfecquelcc of holding these. 4. Each Capull&, or
allbciation, cultivated some part of the common field
allotted to it, for the belloof of the crown, and depo-
fited the produce in the royal granaries. 5. Some
part of whatevcr was brought to the public markets,
whether fruits of tle earth, or the various produtions
of their artil Is and nlmnufa.urers, was demanded for
the public use, alnd tlie merchants who paid this were
exempted from every tller tax. 6. 'Te iAA:'cli'Jr ,
or Nadfcipti glcbie, were bound to cultivate certain
diltridts in every province, which my be confidcrcd

as

as crown9z lands, and brought the incrafe into public
Itorehoufes. Thus the fovcreign received some part
of whatever was useful or valuable in the country,
,whclhler it was the natural production of the foil,
or acquired by the indultry of tle people. What
each contributed towards the support of government,
iecms to have been inconsiderable. Corita, in
aniiwer to one of the queries put to the Audience
of Mexico by Philip II. endeavours to estimate
in money the value of what each citizen might be
supposed to pay, and does not reckon it at more than
three or four r-als, about eighteen pence or two
hilling a head.

NOTE SXXIII. p. 297.

CohTES, vwhlo feelis to have been as much aftonified

with this, as with any inifance of Mexican ingenuity,
gives a particular defription of it. Along one of
the causeways, fays he, by which they enter the city,
are conducted two conduits, composed of clay tem-
pered with mortar, about two paces in breadth, and
railed about fix feet. In one of them is conveyed a
Itream of excellent water, as large as the body of a
man, into the centre of the city, and it supplies all
the inllabitants plentifully. The otlher is empty, tlat
whCe it is iiccflry to clean, or repair the fornimr,
the litrc:'n of water may be turned into it. As this
conduit paf'is along two of the bridges, whcre there
are breacllhes in tle c.aufi'way, through whlich the fllt-
w.ater of the lakliie I's, it i; cniveyed over theim in
pipes as large as the body of an ox, tllcn carried froni

tlhe

the conduit to the remote quarters of the city il
cllnoes, and fold to the inhabitants. Relat. ap. Ramus.
24 I A.

NOTE XXX IV. . 299.

IN the armoury of tlie royal palace of Madrid are

ihswn filits of armour, which are called Monte-
;u:na''i. They arc compole:d of thin lacqucred copper-
plates. In the opinion of very intelligent judges,
rlcy are cxidtctl calecrnl. 'he forms 'of the fil'er
ornamlcntsl upon them, reprecl'tiln dragons, &c.
may be coilidered as a confirmation of this. They
are infinitely filpcrior, i point of workmanlfip, to
a;y effort of American art. 'The Spaniards pro-
bably received them from the Philippinle illands.
The only uniquciitiol! f-pecilimen of ,Mexican art,
that I know of il (;reat Britain, is a cup of ,very
iine ,old(, LwhichI is said to 1;have belonged to Monte-
zunla. It wcigels oz. i2 ! dvt. 'Three drawings
of it \swere exhibited to the Sockity of Antiquaries,
.linCe c, 1i7(5. A man's 1 head i represented on
his cp1. On one ie idec fili face, on the other
ihe protilc, on the third ;ihe back parts of tlic head.
'1'h1e r icvo is l:tid to have been produced by punching
l;ie ifitlc o' tie cup, so as to mlake the represent-
.,tion of' a fce onl tile outside. lThe fcatures are
i'of.r, I): rTprci'clntie with some degrce of art, and
cert.ainly totu iuti, for Spanifil lworklnmallip. Tlis
t'up was:I pU.' li.il by idwn'ard carl of Orford, wliile
Jie lIt i! t !, li.sl ub, O;l Cdi z iti the fleet under

.))i.

his command, and is now in the poiieflion of his
grandson, Lord Archer. I am indebted for this
information to my reipeEable and ingenious friend
Mr. Barrington. In the sixth volume of the Archo-
logia, p. 107, is published an account of some maks
of Terra Cotta, brought from a burying-ground on
tle American continent, about seventy miles from the
Briti{h fettlemerit on the Mosquito shore. 'They are
said to be likenelies of chiefs, or other eminent persons.
From the dcfcriptions and engravings of them, we
have an additional proof of the imperfect state of arts
among the Americans.

NOTE XXXV. p. 307.

'i'ri learned reader will perceive how much I

have been indebted, in this part of my work, to
the guidance of the Biflhop of Gloucester, who has
traced the successive steps by which the human mind
advanced in this line of its progrcfs, with much
erudition, and greater ingenuity. He is the first,
as far as I know, who formed a rational and con-
Iiftent theory concerning the various modes of writing
pratifed by nations, according to the various degrees
of tlicir inmpro rcient. Div. Legation of Moses, iii.
69, &c. Some important oblervations have been
added by M. Ic relildcnt tie Brof{ls, the learned and
intelligent author of the Traite de la Formatioii
Mcchanique des Langues, torn. i. 295, &c.

As the Mexican paintings are the most curious
monluments cxtant of tle earlicll: mode of writing,

it

it will not be improper to give some account of the
means by which they were preserved from the general
wreck of every work of art in America, and commu-
nicated to the Public. For the most early and comr
plete collection of these published by Purchas, we are
indebted to the attention of that curious inquirer,
Hakluyt. Don Antonio Mendoza, viceroy of New
Spain, having deemed thofc paintings a proper present
for Charles V. the ship in which they were sent
to Spain was taken by a French cruiser, and they
came into the possession of Thevet, the king's geo-
grapher, who having travelled himself into the New
World, and described one of its provinces, was a
curious observer of whatever tended to illustrate
the manners of the Americans. On his death,
they were purchased by Ialluyt, at that time
chaplain of the Englifi ambaflhdor to the French
court; and, being left by him to Purchas, were
published at the desire of the learned antiquary Sir
Henry Spelman. Purchas, iii. o65. They were
translated from English into French by Melchizedeck
Thevenot, and published in his collecion of voyages,
A.D. 1683.

Ti. fccond specimen of Mexican picure-writing

was publflhed by Dr. Francis Gemelli Carreri, in two
copper-plates. The first is a map, or representation
of the progrifs of the ancient Mexicans on their
first arrival in the country, and of the various stations
in which they fettled, before they founded the capital
of their crpire in the lake of Mexico. The second
is a Ch:Iolluloogic l Wheel, or Circle, reprcfenlting

vol.. iI. E C the

the manner. in which they computcd and marked
their cycle of fifty-two years. He received both from
Don Carlos tie Siguenza y Congorra, a diligent
collecor of ancient Mexican documents. But as
it seems now to be a received opinion (founlded, as
far as I know, on no good evidence) that Carreri was
never out of Italy, and that his famous Giro del
AIulio is an1 account of a fititious voyage, I have
not mentioned thcfe paintings in the text. They
have, however, manifestly the appearance of being
IMeicican pr(odutions, and are allowed to be so by
Boturini, who was well qualified to determine whether
they wcre genuine or supposititious. M. Clavigero
like;wifc admits thell to be gelluine paintings of the
ancienit Mexicans. To me they always appeared to
be so, though, from my (lefire to reft no part of my
narrative upon questionable authority, I did not refer
to them. The tlyle of painting in the former is
considerably more perfca than any other specimen
of IMxican design; but as the original is said to
have been much defaced by time, I fufped that it has
been improved by some touches from the hand of an
European artist. Carreri, Churchill, iv. p. 487. Illhe
clironological wheel is a jull dclineation of the Mexican
modlc of computing time, as dcfcribedc by Acofta,
lib. vi. c. 2. It ic'ms to rcfemblc one which that
l.,ri:d IJfuii had seen ; and if it be admitted as a
gc.niu c) m11.Jininl.It) it 1,roves that the Mexicans lIt
art ii i:il, i.n arbitrary cLmralecrs, which rcprcfriited
Icver.il LlMi. l, lidcs nuitbers. Each month is there
Ircp f (tltd bva :1 ',l; Otcl cxprcnfivc of fume work or
I ti' p '.t : 'l ,' t' . it.

THE third specimen of Mexican painting was disco-

vered by another Italian. In 1736, Lorenzo Botu-
rini Benaduci iet out for New Spain, and was led by
several incidents to study the language of the Mexicansi
and to collect the remains of their historical monu-
ments. He perffted nine years in his refcarches,
with the cnthufiafmn of a projecor, and the patience
of an antiquary. In I 746, he published at Madrid,
Iha de ullan lTNuva Hitoria Genleral de la Am1erica Seplen-
rioonal, contaiing an account of the result of his
inquiries; and he added to it a catalogue of his
A\nicrican Iilorical MufciLum, arranged under thirty-
fix (diflcrent heads. His idea of a New HIiftory
appears to me the work of a whimsical credulous
man. But his catalogue of Mexican maps, paintingsj
tribute-rolls, calendars, &c is much larger than
one could have expected. Unfortunately a hip,
in which he had sent a considerable part of them
ro Europe, was taken by an Englifl privateer
during the war between Great Britain and Spain,
which commenced in the year 1739; and it is pro-
bable that they perished by falling into the hands of
i:-crnnt captors. Boturini himself incurred the dif-
1llcati're of the Spanifl court, and died in an hospital
jt Madrid. The hiltory, of which the Idea, &c. was
only a profpftRus, was never publifled. The remainder
of his Museum seems to have been ldipcrfed. Some
part of it came into the poleffion of the present arch-
lifiop -of Toledo, when he was primate of New
Spain; and he published from it tlat curious tribute-
roll which I have mentioned.

E E 2 TBT

THr. only other colleion of Mexican paintings,

as far as I can learn, is in the Imperial Library at
Vienna. By order of tllcir Imperial Majeities, I have
obtained such a fpccimen of thefc as I desired, in eight
paintings, madewith so much fidclity, thatnlam informed
the copies could hardly be diflinguified from the
originals. According to a note in this Coldex Ilcxi-
camI.r, it appears to have been a prefeilt from Emma-
nuel King of Portugal to Pope Clement VII. who
died A.D. I533. After pafling through the hands
of several illultrious proprietors, it fell into those of
the cardinal of Sa;c-Eitfnach, who presented it to the
emperor Leopold. These paintings are manifcftly
Mexican, but thev arc in a tyle very difl'rcent front
any of the former. An engraving has been made of
oue of them, in order to gratify such of my readers,
4s may deem this an object worthy of their attention.
Were it an objel of uiflicient importance, it might
perhaps be pollible, by rccourfe to the plates of
l'urchas, and the arclibiflop of Toledo, as a key, to
form plausible conjecures concerning the meaning
of this picture. Many of the figures are evidently
similar . A.A. are targets and darts, almott in the
lame form with those publitfhed by Purchas, p. Io0o,
o171, &c. B]. B. are figures of temples, nearly
refimbling those in Purchas, p. I 09 and I 13, andl
in Loreniizana, Plate 11. C. is a bale of mantles, or
cotton cloths, the figure of which occurs in almofl
every plate of Purclas and L,orcnzanal . E. E.
skeins to be Mexican criptainsi in their war dtrefs, the
f.ntanilic ornamlents ol which rfemible the figures in
lPurLlias, p. 1i :, Ill i . I
I3. 1 liould fuppofi-

this

this piEture to be a tribute-roll, as tlicr mode of
noting numbers occurs frequently. D. . D. .c.
According to Boturini, the mode of computation
by the number of knots, was known to the Mexicans
as well as to the Peruvians, p. 85. and the manner
in which the number of units is represented in the
Mexican paintings in my pofleffion seems to conlirmn
this opinion. They plainly resemble a firing of knots
on a cord or slender rope.

SINCE I publifled the former edition, Mr. Waddi-

love, who is still pleased to continue his friendly
attention to procure me information, las discovercd,
in the Library of the Eicurial, a volume in folio,
confifing of forty flleets of a kind of pasteboard,
each the size of a common fiecct of writing paper,
with great variety of uncouth and whimsical figures
of Mexican paillting, in very frclh colours, and with
an explanation in Spaniih to most of them. The
firfl twentv-tvo iicets are the signs of the months,
days, &c. A ou the middle of each filet are two
or more !:r(:e F.urcs for the month, fIrroiludcd by
the signs of ie d.!ys. The lail cighlteen lieets are
not o fiilld xv Ilil urLs. They fli:em to o s

(ig s tl

Deities, and iiges of various objects. According
to this Calcl:dar in the Escurial, the Mexican year
contained 2G°16 ldays, divided into 22 lmonthls of j
clays. Each day is reprefclted by a dlifflrent fin,,
taken from fomne natural (lj i, t ferpcnt, a dog, .a
lizard, a reed, a lioilf., . I''he signs (,f dila' il
the Cale:nd;r of ll l '' f i.nili are precil'l]y tiI,: 1; !'
with thlol:' iil!lif t.l bIl l, li:i :, ;, ,'. j.

, I· i.I

But, if we may give credit to that author, the
Mexican year contained 360. days, divided into 8
months of 20 days. The order of days in every
month was computed, according to him, first by
what he calls a trideccenDarv progreflion of days fronm
one to thirteen, in the fame manner a in the Calendar
of the Escurial, and then by a ;plcnr'y progrcTioii
of days from one to seven, making in all twenty. In
this Calendar, not only the signs which lifhlnguifl
each day, but the qualities supposed to be peculiar to
each month, are marked. There are certain weak-
neffes which fecmn to accompany the hunman mind
through every tage of its progress in obfcrvation and
science. Slender as was the knowledge of the Mexicans
in Astronomy, it appears to have been already con-
neeed with judicial Atrology. The fortune and
characer of persons born in each month are supposed
to be decided by some superior influence predominant
at the time of nativity. Hence it is foretold in the
Calendar, that all who are born in one month will be
rich, in another warlike, in a third luxurious, &c.
The pasteboard, or whatever substance it may be on
which the Calendar in the Escurial is painted, seems,
by Mr. Waddilove's description of it, to resemble
nearly that in the Imperial Library at Vienna. In
several particulars, the figures bear ome likecnefs to
those in the plate which I have publifled. The
figures marked D. which induced me to conjc(eure
that this painting might be a tribute-roll similar to
these publiflicd by Purchas and the Archbishop of
Toledo, Mr. Waddilove supposes to be signs of days:
.and I have such confidence in the accuracy of his

obferv..

observations, as to conclude his opinion to be well
founded. It appears, from the charaters in which
the explanations of the figures are written, that
this curious monument of Mexican art has been
obtained, soon after the conqucif of the empire. It
is singular that it hould never have been mentioned
by any Spanifli author.

NOTE XXXVI. p. 309,

T-lE firit was called the Prince of the deathful

Lance; the second the Divider of Men; the third
the Shedder of Blood; the fourth the Lord of the
Dark-houfe. Acofta, Lib. vi. c. 25.

NOTE XXXVII. p. 317.

THE temple of Cholula, which was deemed more

holy than any in New Spain, was likewise the molt
considerable. But it was nothing more than a mount
of solid earth. According to Torquemaida, it was
above a quarter of a league in circuit at the base, and
roe to the height of forty fathom. Mon. Ind,
Lib. iii. c. 19. Even M. Clavigero acknowledges
that all the Mexican temples were solid ftrutures,
or earthen mounts, and of consequence cannot
be confidered as any evidence of their having made
any considerable progress in the art of building.
Plavig. II. 207.

E 4 S!.o-

FROM infpeaing various figures of temples in the

paintings engraved by Purchas, there seems to he
some reason for fufpeaing, that all their temples
were constructed in the fame manner. See Vol. iii.
p. 1109, II10. 1113.

NOTE XXXVIII. p. 319.

NOT only in Tlafcala, and Tepeaca, but even in

Mexico itself, the houses of the people were mere
huts built with turf, or mud, or the branches of
trees. They were extremely low, and fight, and
without any furniture but a few earthen vessels.
Like the rudest Indians, several families rcfided under
the fame roof, without having any separate apart-
ments. Herrera, Dec. 2. lib. vii. c. 13. lib. x. c. 22.
Dec. 3. lib. iv. c. 7. Torquem. lib. iii. c. 23.

NOTE XXIX. p. 319.

I AM informed by a person who resided long in

New Spain, and visited almost every province of it,
that there is not, in all the extent of that vast empire
any monument, or vestige of any building more
ancient than the conquest, nor of any bridge or
highway, except some remains of the causeway from
Guadaloupe to that gate of Mexico by which
Cortes entered the city. MS. penes me. The author
of another account in manuscript observes, " That
at this day there docs not remain even the smallest

veflige

-vestige of the exlience of any ancient Indian building
public or private, either in cxico or in any province
of New Spain. I have travelled, fays he, through
all the countries adjacent to them, viz. New Galicia,
New Biscay, New Mexico, Sonora, Cinaloa, the
New Kingdom of Lcon, and New $antandero, with-
put having observed any monument worth notice,
except some ruins near an ancient village in the valley
de Casas Grandes, in lat. N. 300. 46'. longit. 25 S°. 24'.
from the island of Teneriffe, or 460 leagues N. N. W.
from Mexico." He dcfcribcs these ruins minutely,
and they appear to be the remains of a paltry building
of turf and ftonc, plaflcred over with white earth
or lime. A miltonary informed that gentleman,
that he had difcovcred the ruins of another edifice
similar to the former, about an hundred leagues
towards N. W. on the banks of the river St. Pedro.
MS. penes lne.

THESE testimonies derive great credit from one

circumstance, that they were not given in support
of any particular system or theory, but as simple
answers to queries which I had proposed. It is
probable, however, that when theCe gentlemen assert,
that no ruins or monuments of any ancient work
whatever are now to be discovered in the Mcxican
Empire, they meant that there were no such ruins
or monumelnts as conveyed any idea of grandleur
or in;gificence, in the works of its ancient inha-
bitants. For it appears from the tcftimony of
several Spanill authlors, thllt in Otulml);, Tlafcala,
hlolla, &c. fume veili,'. of ancicnt buildings arc

(lill

kill visible. Villa Segnor Theatro Amer. p. 143.
;o8. 353. D. Fran. Ant. Lorenzana, formerly arch-
biihop of Mexico, and now of Toledo, in his intro-
dution to that edition of the Cartas de Relacion of
Cortes, which he published at Mexico, mentions
some ruins which are still visible in several of the
towns through which Cortes pafred in his way to
the capital, p. 4, &c. But neither of these authors
give any description of them, and they teem to be
so very inconsiderable, as to shew only that ome
buildings had once been there. The large mount of
earth at Cholula, which the Spaniards dignified with
the name of temple, still remains, but without any
steps by which to ascend, or any facing of stone.
It appears now like a natural mount, covered with
grass and shrubs, and possibly it was never anything
more. Torquem. lib. iii. c. 9. I have received a
minute description of the remains of a temple near
Cuernavaca, on the road from Mexico to Acapulco.
It is composed of large stones, fitted to each other as
nicely as those in the buildings of the Peruvians,
which arc hereafter mentioned. At the foundation
it forms a square of twenty-five yards; but as it rites in
height, it dimiinifihcs in extent, not gradually, but by
being contracted suddenly at regular diftfanccs, so that
it mui have resembled the figure B in the plate It
,erminatel, it is said, in a spire.

NOTE XL. p. 325.

T'F exaggeration of the Spanifl historians, with

'cfpcd to the number of human viaims sacrificed in
Mexico, appears to be very great. According to
Gomara, there was no year in which twenty thou,
sand human victims were not offered to the Mexican
Divinities, and in some years they amounted to fifty
thousand. Cron. c. 229. The kulls of those unhappy
persons were ranged in order in a building ereced
for that purpose, and two of Cortes's officers who
ilad counted them, informed Gomara that their
number was an hundred and thirty-fix thousand.
Ibid. c. 82. Herrera's account is fiill more incredible,
that the number of vitims was so great, that five
thouand have been sacrificed in one day, nay, on
lome occasions, no less than twenty thousand. Dec. iii.
lib. ii. c. 16. Torquemada goes beyond both in
extravagance, for lie asserts, that twenty thousand
children, exclusive of other victims, were slaughtered
annually. Mon. Ind. lib. vii. c. 21. The molf re-
fpetable authority in favour of such high numbers
is that of Zumurraga, the first bilhop of Mexico,
who, in a letter to the chapter general of his order,
A.. D. 63, asserts that the Mexicans sacrificed
annually twenty thousand vicims. Davila. Teatro
Ecclcf. 26. In opposition to all these accounts,
B. de las Casas observes, that if there had been such
an annual waste of the human fpecics, the country
could never have arrived at that degree of populous-
ncf; for which it wa remnarkabloe wllen the Spaniards

firlt

firit landed there. This reasoning is just. If the
number of viltims in all the provinces of New Spain
had been so great, not only must population have
bcen prevented from incrcafing, but the human race
mutl have been exterminated in a fliort time. For
besides tle waste of the fpecics by such numerous
sacrifices, it is obfcrvablc, that wherevcr the fate of
captives takcn in war is either certain death or perpc-
tual slavery, as men can gain nothing by submitting
speedily to an enemy, they always refill to the utter-
inoft, and war becomes bloody and defiru&ive to the
last degree. Las Casas positively aflcrts, that the
Miexicans never sacrificed more than fifty or a hun-
dred persons in a year. Sec his dispute with Sepul-
veda, fubjoicd to his Brcviffima Relacion, p. o5.
Cortes does not fpccify what number of victims was
sacrificed annually, but 13. Diaz del Caftcllo relates,
that an inquiry having been made, witll reflec to
this, by the Franciscan monks, who were sent into
New Spain immediately after the conquest, it was
frund that about two thousand ive hundred were
sacrificed evcry year in Mexico. C. 207.

NOTE XLI. p. 327.

It is hardly nccefliry to obfcrve, that the Peruvian

Chronology is not only obfcurc, but repugnant to
conclusions deduced from the most accurate and
cxtenfive observations, concerning the time that elapfcs
during each reign, in any given fucccffion of princes.
The medium has been found not to exced twenty
years. According to Acoll:i ;, :d (.;al!il llo dt la

Vr i,

Vega, Huana Capac, who died about the year I527,
was the twelfth Inca. According to this rule of
computing, the duration of the Peruvian monarchy
ought not to have been reckoned above two hundred
and forty years; but they affirm that it had fubfitled
four hundred years. Acofta, lib. vi. c. 19. Vgia,
lib. i. c. 9. By this account each reign is extended
.t a medium to thirty-three years, inftcad of twenlty,
the number afccrtainedl by Sir Isaac Newton's obfcrv-
:tions; but so imperfect were the Peruvian traditions,
that though the total is boldly marked, the number
of years ilt each rgii is unknown.

NOTE XLII. p. 33J

MANY of the early Spanish writers afiert, that tit.

Peruvians offered human sacrifices. Xerez, p. 190.
Zarate, lib. i. c. . Acofta, lib. v. c. 19. But
Garciiaflb de la Vega contends, that though this bar-
barous practice prevailed among tlicir uncivilized
ancestors, it was totally abolifllcd by tle Incas, and
that no human visCtin was ever ofilred in any templ:
of the Sun. This assertion, and the plausible rcafois
with which he confirms it, are fuificicnt to refute the
Spanish writers, whose accounts seem to be founded
entirely upon report, not upon wlhat they themselv.es
had observed. Veg.i, lib. ii. c. 4. In one of their
feflivals, tle Peruvians olfered calics of bread moiftcned
with blood drawn from the arms, the cyc-brows, and
lnotes of tllir children. . l. ib. vii. c.6. Thlis rite may
have been derived from their ancient pra.cic, in tlheir
uncivilized Itate, of I.icrificing Ilhman viiltims.

NOTE XLIII. p. 342.

TIItE Spaniards have adopted both those customs of

the ancient Peruvians. They have preserved some of
the aqueducts or canals, made in the days of the
Incas, and have made new ones, by which they water
every field that they cultivate. Ulloa Voyage, tom. i.
422. 477. They likewise continue to use gtano, or
the dung of sea-fowls, as manure. Ulloa gives a
description of the almost incredible quantity of it in
:bc small islands near the coast. Ibid. 481.

NOTE XLIV. p. 345.

[ nr temple of Cayambo, the palace of the Inca at

Callo in the plain of Lacatunga, and that of Atun-
Cannar, are dfcribcd by Ulloa, tom. i. 286, &c.
who inlpctcd them with great care. M1. de Conda-
mine publithed a curious memoir concerning the
ruins of Atun-Cannar. Mcm. dc 'Acadlemie (de
Berlin, A. 1). 1746, p. 435. Acofta describes the
ruins of Czco, which he liad examined. Lib. vi.
(. 14. Garcilaif, in his usual style, gives pompous
and colfued descriptions of several temples, and
)tlicr public edifices. Iib. iii. c. . c. 21. lib. vi.
c. . )on -- .Znpata, in a large trcatife con-
tc'lrnlig Peru, which h:s not hitherto been publiflicd,
communic.ates sonic information with rcfpcS to
IC:r;cI monumlents of the ancient Peruvians, which

6 have

have not been mentioned by other authors. MS.
;csns Ime, Articulo xx. Ulloa describes some of the
ancient Peruvian fortifications, which were likcwile
works of great extent and solidity. Tom. i. 391.
Threc circumftanccs struck all those oblcrvcrs: the
va{l: size of tile stones uwhich the Peruvians employed
in fomic of their buildings. Acofta measured one,
which was thirty feet long, eighteen broad, and fix
in thickness; and yet, he adds, that in the fortress
at Cuzco, there were Itones considerably larger. It
is ditficult to conceive how the Peruvians could
move these, and raise them to the height cvc of
twelve feet. The fccond circumstance is, the imper-
section of the Peruvian art, when applied to working
in timber. By the patience and pcrfeverance naturll
to Americans, stones may be formed into any flhape,
merely hv rubbing one againill another, or bv the tife
of hatchets or otiher inftrumcnts made of stone;
but with fluch rude tools, little progrcfs can be miad;
ill carpentry. The Peruvians could not morti;ce
two beams together, or give any degree of unioln
or stability to any work composed of timber. A -
they could not form a centre, they :wcre totally
tinac(quaiint(l with tile ufi of ! lcs iin bnililinll;
nor cail the Spa.ifli auti hor,

cmliiv: he lvcV were

ble t tto ramc a roof ifor thi-s.' .Iii'i< lit!L tinres which
they rilfed.

''li: third 1*,, It!,lii :,:;'c is :t !k r..r l'v. ' ,s which

i;l l i t )!! II t- i ti'

nH'i\ l ; . ,i lriiih, of tlhclr

'.', t

; (, i uc; 'nii .'.,1 !;:;'' 1: i.im, ac 'i:.all ic'l withi
p. i:. ,pi ', . ll,~ id '- :,l , : .',l4'. ;-,,!l .' (ft h ri.'' chr,'

un,~~~151,1N'

employed in those works were formed into any
p:articu!ar or uniform liape, which could render them
lit for beifig compaaed together in building. The
Indians took them as they fell from the mountains,
or were railed out of the quarries. Some were
square, ifme triangular, ome convex, some concave.
Their art and industry were employed in joining them
together, by forming such hollows in the one, as
perfectly corresponded to the projetions or risings in
tile other. This tedious operation, which might
have been so easily abridged, by adapting the surface
of the tones to each other, either by rubbing, or by
their hatchets of copper, would be deemed incredible,
if it were not put beyond doubt by infpeaing the
remains of those buildings. It gives them a very
lingular appearace to ;in European eye. There is no
regular laycr or itratum of building, and no one stone
resembles another in dimensions or form. At the
fame time, by the persevering but ill direted industry
of the Indians, they are all joined with that minute
nicety which I have mentioned. Ulloa made this
observation concerning the form of the stones in the
fortrcs of Atun-Cn:nar. Voy. i. p. 387. Pineto
gives a fimil;r dcfription of the fortress of Cuzco,
the most perfclt of all the leruvian works. Zapata
MS. penes ill. According to M. de Condaminc, there
were regular lir.ita of building in rome parts of Atui-
Cannr, which lie remarks as singular, and as a proof
of ftome progrcfs in improvemenlt.

NOTE XLV. p. 349.

THE appearance of those bridges, which bend with

their own weight, wave with the wind, and are con-
fiderably agitated by the motion of every person who
paes along them, is very frightful at first. But
the Spaniards have found them to be the easiest mode
of pasting the torrents in Peru, over which it would
be difficult to throw more solid ftru(tures either of
flone or timber. They form those hanging bridges so
firong and broad, that loaded mules pass along them.
All the trade of Cuzco is carried on by means of such
a bridge over the river Apurimac. Ulloa, tom. i,
358. A more simple contrivance was employed in
passing smaller streams: A basket, in which the tra-
veller was placed, being suspended from a strong rope
stretched across the stream, it was pushed or drawn
from one fide to the other. Ibid.

NOTE XLVI. p. 362.

MY information with refpeat to those events is

taken from Noticia brrev de la expedicion militar de
.Sinora y Cinaloa, fu exito fcliz, y vantojofo elado,
en qu por confecuentia de ello, fe han pueflo ambas
provilcias, publilhed at Mexico, June 7th, 1771,
in order to satisfy the curiosity of the merchants,
who had furnifliled the viceroy with moncy for defray-
ing the cxpcncc of the armnlament. The copies of

VOL 111. F this

this Noticia are very rare in Madrid; but I have
obtained one, which has enabled me to commu-
nicate these curious faas to the public. Accord-
ing to this account, there was found in the mine
Yecorato in Cinaloa a grain of gold of twenty-two
,carats, which weighed sixteen marks four ounces
four ochavas; this was sent to Spain as a present fit
for the king, and is now deposited in the royal cabinet
at Madrid,

NOTE XLVII. p. 362.

THE uncertainty of geographers with refpe to

this point is remarkable, for Cortes seems to have
surveyed its coasts with great accuracy. The arch-
bishop of Toledo has publishcd, from the original,
in the possession of the marquis del Valle, the
descendant of Cortes, a map drawn in I541, by
the pilot Domingo Castillo, in which California
is laid down as a peninsula, stretching out nearly
in the fame diretion which is now given to it in the
best maps; and the point where Rio Colorado enters
the gulf is marked with precision. Hilt. de Neuva
Efpagna, 327.

NOTE XLVIII. p. 366.

I AM indebted for this fa& to M. L'Abbe Raynal,

tom. iii. 103. and upon consulting an intelligent per-
son, long fettled on the Mosquito chore, and who

has

has been engaged in the logwood trade, I find that
ingenious author has,, been well informed. The
logwood cut near the town of St. Francis of Cam.
peachy is of much better quality than that on the
other fide of Yucatan; and the Engliff trade in the
Bay of Honduras is almost at an end.

TIlE END OF THE THIRD VOLUME.

rtintcd by A. Strahan, Printers-Stret, Londn.
