As,~L
AX-RZO-2V j war 2P 71 '7741~~~~~~~~~~~~~

~~~i~~~puu wb~~~~~~~3

a~~B IO

~~~V jr19 ~~~o ;·t2p
T

ó~~~P~~ld~~~lv~~~ rm~~ó a

cuts-anes~ ~ ~
~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~~~~~~~~~~~~mo

~~~

cis~~~i

lip-~~~~Ero ~ bklrliert c

~' I
I A

I C~~~~~~~~P/dU_~~~~~~~~~~ 111 C~~~~~~~~~~~d~~~~dahs~~~~~C

CutgnesB~olor

SPA M~~~~i~s

d~i uni n

0~1
Far he RS DTobea& a

·~~~~~ ·Ba~~~~~~~~c~~~~ ~~~~~apsche;~ ~ ~ ~~~~C ~
=MECME=;R~ C n~~z

THE
H I S T O R Y

OF
A M E R I C A.

By WILLIAM ROBERTSON, D.D.
RIINCIPAL Or THI UNIVI¥SITY OFr DINBUIOG, HIITOJIOOGAIrHI

TO 1II MAJIETY FOR 8COTLAND, AND YJMBII Or Tax

AOYAL ACADEMY Or HIITORT AT MADJID.
IN THREE VOLUMES.

V O L. II.
THE SEVENTH EDITION.

LONDON:
PIIMTED FOR A. STRAHAN, AND T. CADZILL

AND E. BALFOUR, EDINBUIVOH:
And Sold by T. CADELL Jun. and W. DAVEl,

(Succefor* to Mr. CADELL,) in the Stnnd.

1796.
(Drw ,Sa.)

\ u~~~~o rH S~~o 6

c, a~~~~~~~~~~~I

5 Ak

0 -E - r -z- 0
OR -R T -Er

luo~ ~~~~

R

Ibn~~~~~~~~a M Ga.,i
P Pir~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~i

P~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ _

# BOOK IV.

,,

.THE
HISTORY

OF
A M E R I C A.

BOOK IV.

WENTY-SIX years had elapsed since Columbus B o0 K
condu&ed the people of Europe to the New .-v.

World. During that period the Spaniards had what pap
made great progress in exploring its various re- wer then
gions. They Irad visited all the islands scattered
in different clusters through that part of the ocean
which flows in between North and South America.
They had failed along the eastern coast of the
continent from the river De la Plata to the bottom
of the Mexican gulf, and had found that it stretched
without interruption through this vast portion of the
globe. They had discovered the great Southern
Ocean, which opened new prospects in that quar-
ter. They had acquired some knowledge of the
coast of Florida, which led them to observe the
continent as it extended in an opposite direction;
and though they pulhed their discoveries no farther
towards the north, other nations had visited those

VOL. II. B parts

B OO K parts which they neglected. The Englilh, in a
' _-.J voyage, the motives and success of which (hall be

related in another part of this History, had failed
along the coaff of America from Labrador to the
confines of Florida; and the Portuguese, in quest
of a shorter paRfage to the East Indies, had ven-
tured into the northern leas, and viewed the fame
iegions'. Thus, at the period where I have chosen
to take a view of the slate of the New World, its
extent was known almost from its northern extre-
mity to thirty-five degrees south of the equator.
The countries which stretch from thence to the
southern boundary of America, the great empire
of Peru, and the interior slate of the extensive
dominions fubjeft to the sovereigns of Mexico,
were till undiscovered.

Thevalf WHEN we contemplate the New World, the
extent of
the Nev first circumstance that strikes us is its immense
Woild. extent. It was not a small portion of the earth, so

inconsiderable that it might have escaped the ob-
iervation or research of former ages, which Co-
lumbus discovered. He made known a new he-
mifphere, larger than either Europe, or Asia, or
Africa, the three noted divisions of the ancient
continent, and not much inferior in dimensions to
a third part of the habitable globe.

AMERICA is remarkable not only for its magni-
tude, but for its position. It stretches from the

Hcrrcra, dec. i. lib. vi. c. 16.

northern

northern polar circle to a high southern latitude, B oO r
above fifteen hundred miles beyond the sarthes ^-
extremity of the old continent on that fide of the
line. A country of such extent pases through all
the climates capable of becoming the habitation of
man, and fit for yielding the various produtions
peculiar either to the temperate or to the torrid
regions of the earth.

NEXT to the extent of the New World, the crand ob

grandeur of the objects which it presents to view is ients, t
most apt to strike the eye of an observer. Nature vicw.
seems here to have carried on her operations upon
a larger scale, and with a bolder hand, and to have
diitipguilhed the features of this country by a pe-
culiar magnificence. The mountains of America its moun.
are much superior in height to those in the other ti""8
divisions of the globe. Even the plain of Quito,
which may be confidered as the base of the Andes,
is elevated farther above the sea than the top of the
Pyrenees. This stupendous ridge of the Andes,
no less remarkable for extent than elevation, rifes
in different places more than one third above the
Pike of Teneriffe, the highest land in the ancient
hemisphere. The Andes may literally be said to
hide their heads in the clouds; the storms often
roll, and the thunder bursts below their summits,
which, though exposed to the rays of the fun in
the center of the torrid zone, are covered with
everlasting snows b.

b See NOTE I.

B 2 PROM

3 0 0 K FROM these lofty mountains descend rivers,

IV. ',.-_.i proportionably large, with which the streams in
rive", the ancient continent are not to be compared,

either for length of course, or the vast body of
water which they roll towards the ocean. The
Maragnon, the Orinoco, the Plata in South Ame-
rica, the Miffifippi and St. Laurence in North
America, flow in flch spacious channels, that,
long before they feel the influence of the tide, they
resemble arms of the sea rather than rivers of
fresh waterc.
likes. THE lakes of the New World are no less con-

fpicuous for grandeur than its mountains and rivers.
There is nothing in other parts of the globe which
resembles the prodigious chain of lakes in North
America. They may properly be termed inland
leas of fre/h water; and even those of the second
or third class in magnitude, are of larger circuit
(the Caspian sea excepted) than the greatest lake
of the ancient continent.

Its form fa. THE New World is of a form extremely fa-
vourcblct vourable to commercial intercourse. When a

continent is formed, like Africa, of one vast solid
mass, unbroken by arms of the sea penetrating
into its interior parts, with few large rivers, and
those at a considerable distance, from each other,
the greater part of it seems defined to remain for
ever uncivilized, and to be debarred from any

c See NOTE II.

ative

ative or enlarged communication with the reft of 3B 0O K
mankind. When, like Europe, a continent is .;.a
opened by inlets of the ocean of great extent, such
as the Mediterranean and Baltic; or when, like
Afla, its coast is broken by deep bays advancing
far into the country, such as the Black Sea, the
gulfs of Arabia, of Persia, of Bengal, of Siam,
and of Leotang; when the surrounding seas are
filled with large and fertile islands, and the conti-
nent itself watered with a variety of navigable
rivers, those regions may be said to possess what-
ever can facilitate the progress of their inhabitants
in commerce and improvement. In all there re-
fpees America may bear a comparison with the
other quarters of the globe. The gulf of Mexico,
which flows in between North and South America,
may be confidered as a Mediterranean sea, which
opens a maritime commerce with all the fertile
countries by which it is encircled, The islands
scattered in it are inferior only to those in the In.
dian Archipelago, in number, in magnitude, and
in value. As we stretch along the northern divi-
sion of the American hemisphere, the Bay of
Chefapeak presents a spacious inlet, which conduts
the navigator far into the interior parts of provinces
no less fertile than extensive; and if ever the
progress of culture and population shall mitigate
the extreme rigour of the climate in the more
northern diftri&s of America, Hudson's Bay may
become as subservient to commercial intercourse in
that quarter of the globe, as the Baltic is in Eu-

B 3 rope,

B o K rope. The other great portion of the New
X *-' World is encompassed on every fide by the sea,

except one narrow neck, which separates the
Atlantic from the Pacific Ocean; and though it
be not opened by spacious bays or arms of the sea,
its interior parts are rendered acceflible by a num-
ber of large rivers, fed by so many auxiliary
streams, flowing in such various diretions, that,
almost without any aid from the hand of industry
and art, an inland navigation may be carried on
through all the provinces from the river De la
Plata to the gulf of Paria. Nor is this bounty
of Nature confined to the southern division of
America; its northern continent abounds no less
in rivers which are navigable almost to their sources,
and by its immense chain of lakes provision is
made for an inland communication, more extensive
and commodious than in any quarter of the globe.
The countries stretching from the gulf of Darien
on one fide, to that of California on the other,
which form the chain that binds the two parts of
the American continent together, are not destitute
of peculiar advantages. Their coast on one fide
is washed by the Atlantic Ocean, on the other by
the Pacific. Some of their rivers flow into the
former, some into the latter, and secure to them
all the commercial benefits that may result from a
communication with both.

Tempera. BUT what most distinguishes America from other
turc ol its
climate. parts of the earth, is the peculiar temperature of

its

its climate, and the different laws to which it is n o o K
subjet with refpea to the distribution of heat and
cold. We cannot determine with precision the
portion of heat felt in any part of the globe,
merely by meafuringits distance from the equator.
The climate of a country is affected, in some de-
gree, by its elevation above the sea, by the extent
of continent, by the nature of the foil, the height
of adjacent mountains, and many other circum-
stances. The influence of there, however, is,
from various causes, less considerable in the greater
part of the ancient continent; and from knowing
the position of any country there, we can pronounce
with greater certainty, what will be the warmth of
its climate, and the nature of its productions.

THE maxims which are founded upon obferva- Predomi-

nance of

tion of our hemisphere will not apply to the other. cold.
In the New World, cold predominates. The ri-
gour of the frigid zone extends over half of those
regions, which ihould be temperate by their pofi-
tion. Countries where the grape and the fig mhould
ripen, are buried under snow one half of the year;
and lands situated in the fame parallel with the most
fertile and bell cultivated provinces in Europe, are
chilled with perpetual froRts, which almost destroy
the power of vegetation . As we advance to
those parts of America which lie in the fame
parallel with provinces of Asia and Africa, blessed

' See NOTE III,

4 with

B O K with an uniform enjoyment of such genial warmth

Iv.

as is most friendly to life and to vegetation, the
dominion of cold continues to be felt, and winter
reigns, though during a ihort period, with ex-
treme severity. If we proceed along the American
continent into the torrid zone, we shall find the
cold prevalent in the New World extending itrelf
also to this region of the globe, and mitigating
the excess of its fervour. While\ the negro on
the coast of Africa is scorched with unremitting
heat, the inhabitant of Peru breathes an air equally
mild and temperate, and is perpetually shaded un-
der a canopy of grey clouds, which intercepts the
fierce beams of the fun, without obftruting his
friendly influence . Along the eastern coast of
America, the climate, though more similar to that
of the torrid zone in other parts of the earth, is
nevertheless considerably milder than in those coun-
tries of Asia and Africa which lie in the fame
latitude. If from the southern tropic we continue
our progress to the extremity of the American
continent, we meet with frozen seas, and countries
horrid, barren, and scarcely habitable for cold,
much soonet than in the north '.
curesof VARIOUS causes combine in rendering the cli-

mate of America so extremely different from that

Voyage de Ulloa, tom. i. p. 453. Anson's Voyage, p. 18 .
f Anson's Voyage, p. 74; and Voyage de Quiros, chez

Hilt. de Gen. des Voyages,.tom. xiv. p: 83. Richard Hilt.
Natur. de l'Air, ii. 305, &c.

Of

of the ancient continent, Though the utmost B o 0
extent of America towards the north be not yet ._
discovered, we know that it advances much nearer
to the pole than either Europe or Asia. Both there
have large seas to the north, which are open dur-
ing part of the year; and even when covered with
ice, the wind that blows over them is less intensely
cold than that which blows over land in the fame
high latitudes. But in America the land ifretches
from the river St. Laurence towards the pole, and
spreads out immensely to the Weft. A chain of
enormous mountains, covered with snow and ice,
runs through all this dreary region. The wind, in
pafling over such an extent of high and frozen land,
becomes so impregnated with cold, that it acquires
a piercing keenness, which it retains in its progress
through warmer climates, and is not entirely miti-
gated until it reach the Gulf of Mexico. Over all
the continent of North America, a north-westerly
wind and excessive cold are synonymous terms.
Even in the most sultry weather, the moment that
the wind veers to that quarter, its penetrating in-
fluence is felt in a transition from heat to cold, no
less violent than sudden. To this powerful cause
we may ascribe the extraordinary dominion of cold,
and its violent inroads into the southern provinces
in that part of the globe '.

OTHER causes, no less remarkable, diminish the
active power of heat in those parts of the American

g Charlevoix -iilt. de Nov. Fr. iii. 165. Hist. generale
Voyages, tom. xv. zig, &c.

continent

B o o K continent which lie between the tropics. In all

_ that portion of the globe, the wind blows in an

invariable direction from east to weft. As this wind
holds its course across the ancient continent, it
arrives at the countries which stretch along the
weflern shores of Africa, inflamed with all the
fiery particles which it hath collected from the
sultry plains of Asia, and the burning sands in the
African deserts. The coast of Africa is, accord-
ingly, the region of the earth which feels the most
fervent heat, and is exposed to the unmitigated
ardour of the torrid zone. But this fame wind
which brings such an acceflion of warmth to the
countries lying between the river of Senegal and
Cafraria, traverses the Atlantic Ocean, before it
reaches the American shore. It is cooled in its
passage over this vast body of water, and is felt as
a refreshing gale along the coast of Brafilb, and
Guiana, rendering there countries, though among
the warmest in America, temperate, when com-
pared with thofi which lie opposite to them in
Africa'. As this wind advances in its course across
America, it meets with immense plains, covered
with impenetrable foreits, or occupied by large
rivers, marshes, and stagnating waters, where it
can recover no considerable degree of heat. At
length it arrives at the Andes, which run from
north to south through the whole continent. In
palIing over their elevated and frozen summits, it
is to thoroughly cooled, that the greater part of

bSee NOTE IV. ' Sc NOTE V.

the

the countries beyond them hardly feel the ardour B o o K
to which they seem exposed by their situation. k ^'
In the other provinces of America, from Tierra
Ferme westward to the Mexican empire, the heat
of the climate is tempered, in some places, by the
elevation of the land above the sea, in others, by
their extraordinary humidity, and in all, by the
enormous mountains scattered over this tract. The
islands of America in the Torrid Zone are either
small or mountainous, and are fanned alternately
by refreshing sea and land breezes.

THE causes of the extraordinary cold towards

the Ibuthern limits of America, and in the seas
beyond it, cannot be ascertained in a manner
equally satisfying. It was long supposed that a vast
continent, distinguished by the name of Terra
Australis Incognita, lay between the Southern extre-
mity of America and the Antarcic pole. The
fame principles which account for the extraordinary
degree of cold in the northern regions of America,
were employed in order to explain that which is
felt at Cape Horn and the adjacent countries. The
immense extent of the southern continent, and the
large rivers which it poured into the ocean, were
mentioned and admitted by philosophers as causes
sufficient to occasion the unusual sensation of cold,
and the still more uncommon appearances of frozen

k Acofa Hilt. Novi Orbis, lib. ii. c. i1. Buffon Hil.

Naturelle, &c. tom. ii. 512, &c. ix. 107, &c. Olborn's
Collet. of Voyages, ii. p. 868.

seas

B 0 0 K seas in that region of the globe. But the imagi-

1v.
'_^ , nary continent to which such influence was ascrib'ed,

having been searchcd for in vain, and the space
which it was supposed to occupy having been found
to be an open sea, new conjectures must be formed
with refpet to the causes of a temperature of cli-
mate, so extremely different from that which we
experience in countries removed at the fame dif-
tance from the opposite pole '.

Condition AFTER contemplating those permanent and cha-
when firit
oitoverTi. rateriftic qualities of the American continent,

which arise from the peculiarity of its situation,
and the disposition of its parts, the next object that
merits attention is its condition when first disco-
vered, as far as that depended upon the industry
and operations of man. The effects of human
ingenuity and labour are more extensive and confi-
derable, than even our own vanity is apt at first to
imagine. When we survey the face of the habi-
table globe, no finall part of that fertility and beau-
ty which we ascribe to the hand of nature, is the
work of man. His efforts, when continued
through a fucceflion of ages, change the appear-
ance and improve the qualities of the earth. As
a great part of the ancient continent has long
been occupied by nations far advanced in arts and
industry, our eye is accustomed to view the earth
in that form which it assumes when rendered fit to

A See NOTE VI.

be

be the residence oCfa numerous race of men, and B 0° K
to supply them with nourishment. <. _

BUT in the New World, the state of mankind Rude and

uncuhdi-

was ruder, and the asped of nature extremely dif- vattd.
ferent. Throughout all its vast regions, there
were only two monarchies remarkable for extent
of territory, or diftinguilhed by any progress in
improvement. The reft of this continent was
possessed by small independent tribes, destitute of
arts and industry, and neither capable to correct
the defects, nor desirous to meliorate the condition
of that part of the earth allotted to them for their
habitation. Countries, occupied by such people,
were almost in the fame state as if they had been
without inhabitants. Immense forests covered a
great part of the uncultivated earth; and as the
hand of industry had not taught the rivers to run
in a proper channel, or drained off the stagnating
water, many of the most fertile plains were over-
flowed with inundations, or converted into
marshes. In the southern provinces, where the
warmth of the fun, the moisture of the climate,
and the fertility of the foil, combine in calling
forth the most vigorous powers of vegetation, the
woods are so choked with its rank luxuriance, as to
be almost impervious, and the surface of the
ground is hid from the eye under a thick covering
of shrubs and herbs and weeds. In this state of
wild unafifted nature, a great part of the large
provinces in South America, which extend from

the

B o o K the bottom of the Andes to the sea, still remain,

, The European colonies have cleared and cultivated

a few spots along the coast, but the original race
of inhabitants, as rude and indolent as ever, have
done nothing to open or improve a country, pof.
fcEling almost every advantage of situation and
climate. As we advance towards the northern
provinces of America, Nature continues to wear
the fame uncultivated alpeft, and in proportion as
the rigour of the climate increases, appears more
desolate and horrid. There the foreits, though
not encumbered with the fame exuberance of ve-
getation, are of immense extent; prodigious
marshes ovcrfpread the plains, and few marks
appear of human activity in any attempt to culti-
vate or embellish the earth. No wonder that the
colonies sent from Europe were aftonihed at their
first entrance into the New World. It appeared
to them waste, solitary, and uninviting. When
the Englilh began to fettle in America, they
termed the countries of which they took poffelion,
The FilderneJs. Nothing but their eager expect-
ation of finding mines of gold, could have induced
the Spaniards to penetrate through the woods
and marfles of America, where, at every ftep,
they observed the extreme difference between
the uncultivated face of Nature, and that which
it acquires under the forming hand of induRtry
and art".

m See NOTE VI[.

4 THE

THE labour and operations of man not only B O 0 K

improve and embellish the earth, but render it l-
more wholesome, and friendly to life. When any Unholc'
region lies negle&ed and destitute of cultivation,
the air stagnates in the woods, putrid exhalations
arise from the waters; the surface of the earth,
loaded with rank vegetation, feels not the purify-
ing influence of the fun or of the wind; the ma-
lignity of the distempers natural to the climate
increases, and new maladies no less noxious are
engendered. Accordingly, all the provinces of
America, when firif discovered, were found to be
remarkably unhealthy. This the Spaniards expe-
rienced in every expedition into the New World,
whether destined for conquest or settlement.
Though by the natural conftiution of their bodies,
their habitual temperance, and the persevering
vigour of their minds, they were as much formed
as any people in Europe for active service in a
sultry climate, they felt severely the fatal and per-
nicious qualities of those uncultivated regions
through which they marched, or where they en-
deavourcd to plant colonies. Great numbers were
cut off by the unknown and violent difeafcs with
which they were infeced. Such as survived the
deftruCive rage of tlhofe maladies, were not ex-
empted from the noxious influence of the climate.
They returned to Europe, according to the de-
scription of the early Spanifil hiforians, feeble,
emaciated, with languid looks, and complexions
of such a sickly ycllow colour, as indicated the

UltE'l OiC -

B o0 K unwholesome temperature of the countries where

Av.

I Pyar they had resided".
Its animals. THE uncultivated ltate of the New World

affeced not only the temperature of the air, but
the qualities of its producions. The principle of
life seems to have been less ative and vigorous
there, than in the ancient continent. Notwith-
flanding the vast extent of America, and the va-
riety of it climates, the different species of ani-
mals peculiar to it are much fewer in proportion,
than those of the other hemisphere. In the islands,
there were only four kind of quadrupeds known,
the largest of which did not exceed the size of a
rabbit. On the continent, the variety was greater,
and though the individuals of each kind could not
fail of multiplying exceedingly, when almost un-
molested by men, who were neither so numerous,
nor so united in society, as to be formidable ene-
mies to the animal creation, the number ofdiftint
species must ifill be confidered as extremely small.
Of two hundred different kinds of animals spread
over the face of the earth, only about one third
cxifted in America, at the time of its discovery °.
Nature was not only less prolific in the New
World, but she appears likewise to have been
less vigorous in her productions. The animals
-originally belonging to this quarter of the globe

, Gomara Hilt. c. zo, 22. Ovicdo -lift. lib . i. c. I
lib. v. c. so. P. Mart. Epilt. 545. Decad. p. 176.

o Buffon Hil. Naturelle, tom. ix. p. 86.

9 appear

appear to be of an inferior race, neither so robufr, P o o K
nor so fierce, as those of the other continent. --
America gives birth to no creature of such bulk
as to be compared with thie elephant or rhinoceros,
or that equals the lion and tyger in strength and
ferocity P. The Tapyr of Brasil, the largest
quadruped of the ravenous tribe in the New
World, is not larger than a calf of fix months
old. The Puma and Jaguar, its ficrceft beasts of
prey, which Europeans have inaccurately deno-
minated lions and tygers, possess neither the un-
daunted courage of the former, nor the ravenous
cruelty of the latterl. They are inactive and
timid, hardly formidable to man, and often turn
their backs upon the leaf appearance of refitance r.
The fame qualities in thc climate of America
which tinted the growth, and enfeebled the spirit,
of its native animals, have proved pernicious to
such as have migrated into it voluntarily from the
other continent, or have been transported thither
by the Europeans'. The bears, the wolves, the
deer of America, are not equal in size to those of

P See NOTE VIII.
I Buffon Hilt. Natur. tom. ix. p. 87. Margravii tifl.
Nat. Brasil, p. 229.

' Buffon His-. Natur. ix. 13. 203. Acota Hill. lib. iv.

t. 34. Pifonis Hilt. p. 6. Herrera, dec. 4. lib. iv. c. i.
lib. x . c. 13.

I Churchill, v. p. 69g. Ovalle Relat. of Chili, Church.

iii. p. so. Sommario do Oviedo, c. i4-a3. Voyage da
Des Marchais, iii. 299.

VOL. II. c the

3 0 0 K the Old World'. Mofft of the domestic animals,

Iv.

_ with which the Europeans have stored the provinces

wherein they fettled, have degenerated with refpeLt
either to bulk or quality, in a country whose tem-
perature and foil seem to be lets favourable to the
strength and perfecion of the animal creation.

IprnTsand THE fame causes, which checked the growth
' ''''" and the vigour of the more noble animals, were

friendly to the propagation and increase of reptiles
and infiEs. Though this is not peculiar to the
New World, and those odious tribes, nourished
by heat, moisture, and corruption, infest every
part of the torrid zone; they multiply faster, per-
haps, in America, and grow to a more monstrous
bulk. As this country is, on the whole, less cul-
tivated, and less peopled, than the other quarters
of the earth, the active principle of life waftes its
force in produtions of this inferior form. The
air is often darkened with clouds of infects, and
the ground covered with flocking and noxious
reptiles. The country around Porto-Bello swarms
with toads in such multitudes, as hide the surface
of the earth. At Guyaquil, fnnkes and vipers
are hardly less numerous. Carthagena is infested
with numerous flocks of bats, which annoy not
only the cattle but the inhabitants x. In the islands,

: Buffon Hill. Natur. ix. 103. Kalm' Travels, i. 102.
liet. Voy. de France Equinox. p. 339.
u See NOTE'1 IX.

Voyage de Ulloa, tom. i. p. 89. Id. p. 147. Hcrrera,
4,cc.i. lb. l iii. c. 3. 19.

4 legions

legions of ants have, at different times, consumed B 0 o K
every vegetable production , and left the earth -A
entirely bare, as if it had been burnt with fire.
The damp foreits, and rank foil of the countries
on the banks of the Orinoco and Maragnon, teem
with almost every offensive and poisonous crea-
ture, which the power of a sultry fun can quicken
into life .

THE birds of the New World are not diftin- Birds.

guifhed by qualities so conspicuous and charater-
iftical, as those which we have observed in its
quadrupeds. Birds are more independent of man,
and less asseted by the changes which his industry
and labour make upon the state of the earth.
They have a greater propensity to migrate from one
country to another, and can gratify this inftin& of
their nature without difficulty or danger. Hence
the number of birds common to both continents is
much greater than that of quadrupeds;' and even.
such as are peculiar to America nearly resemble
those with which mankind were acquainted in si-
milar regions of the ancient hemisphere. The
American birds of the torrid zone, like those of
the fame climate in Asia and Africa, are decked in
plumage, which dazzles the eye with the beauty of
its colours; but nature, satisfied with clothing them

Y See NOTE X.
s Voyage de Condaminc, p. 1f7. Gumilla, iii. 120, &c.

Hit. gener. des Voyages, xiv. 317. DumontMemoircs fur
la Louifianc, i, loS, Sommario de Oviedo, c. S--62.

c2 in

1 o K in this gay dress, has denied most of them tiat

Iv.

- melody of found, and variety of notes, which

catch and delight the ear. The birds of the tem-
perate climates there, in the fame manner as in
our continent, are less splendid in their appearance,
but, in compensation for that defedt, they have
voices of greater compass, and more melodious.
In some ditrifts of America, the unwholesome
temperature of the air seems to be unfavourable
even to this part of the creation. The number
of birds is leis than in other countries, and the
traveller is struck with the amazing solitude and
silence of its forests'. It is remarkable, however,
that America, where the quadrupeds are so
dwarfifh and dastardly, should produce the Con-
i/or, which is intitled to pre-eminence over all the
flying tribe, in bulk, in strength, and in courage b.
sI.a TIIE foil, in a continent so extensive as America,

must, of course, be extremely various. In each
of its provinces, we find some diftinguilhing pe-
culiarities, the description of which belongs to
those who write their particular history. In ge-
neral, we may obfcrve, that the moisture and cold,
which predominates so remarkably in all parts of

a Bourgu'r Voy. au Pcrou, 17. Chanvalon, Voyage a la

Mar:iiquiic, p. 96. Warren Defcript. Surinam. Olborn's
Coll. i' . 9ii. . Lettres Edif. xxiv. p. 339. Pharlev.
Ilit. de la Nouv, France, iii. 155.

b VoyCe de Uiloa, i. 363. Voyage de Condamine,
X;. liJtfun tlibl. Nat. xvi. 184. Voyage du Des Mar-

.ha, ii. 32,America,

America,

America, must have great ;nfluence upon the nature B O IC
of its foil; countries lyin;: in the fame parallel with _
those regions which never feel the extreme rigour
of winter in the ancient continent, are frozen over
in America during a great part of the year. Chilled
by this intense cold, the ground never acquires
warmth sufficient to ripen the fruits, which are
found in the corresponding parts of the other con-
tinent. If we wish to rear in America the produc-
tions which abound in any particular diftrit of the
ancient world, we must advance several degrees
nearer to the line than in the other hemirphere, as
it requires such an increase of heat to counterba-
lance the natural frigidity of the foil and climate c.
At the Cape of Good Hope, several of the plants,
and fruits peculiar to the countries within the tro-
pics, are cultivated with success; whereas, at St.
Augufline, in Florida, and Charles-Town, in South
Carolina, though considerably nearer the line, they
cannot be brought to thrive with equal certainty d.
But, if allowance be made for this diversity in the
degree of heat, the foil of America is naturally as
rich and fertile as in any part of the earth. As the
country was thinly inhabited, and by a people of
little induitry, who had none of the domestic ani-
mals, which civilized nations rear in such vast num-
bers, the earth was not exhausted by their con-
fumption. The vegetable productions, to which
the fertility of the foil gave birth, often remained

' See NOTE XI. d See NOTE XII.

c 3 untouched,

B O O K untouched, and being suffered to corrupt on its
_-_. surface, returned with increase into its bosom'.

As trees and plants derive a great part of their
nourishment from air and water, if they were not
destroyed by man and other animals, they would
render to the earth more, perhaps, than they take
from it, and feed rather than.impoverifh it. Thus
the unoccupied foil of America may have gone on
enriching for many ages. The vast number as well
as enormous size of the trees in America, indicate
the extraordinary vigour of the foil in its native
state. When the Europeans first began to culti-
vate the New World, they were aftonilhed at the
luxuriant power of vegetation in its virgin mould;
and in several places the ingenuity of the planter is
fiill employed in diminishing and wafting its super-
fluous fertility, in order to bring it down to a state
fit for profitable culture f.

How was HAVING thus furveved the fiate of the New
i upiici? World at the time of its difcoverv, and confidered

the peculiar features and qualities which diltinguilh
and charaLderife it, the next inquiry that merits at-
tention is, 1 -ow was America peopled ? By what
course did mankind migrate from the one conti-
nent to the other ? and in what quarter is it moit
probable that a communication was opened between
thcm ?

c Buftbn, lill. Natur. i. 242. Kalm, i. 151.

Charlevoix, Hill. de Nouv. Fran. iii. 405. Voyage du

Dcs Maichjai, iii. z29. Lery ap de Bry, part iii. p. 174.
See NOTE X1I.

WE

We know, with infallible certainty, that all the B oo K

human race spring from the fame source, and that .-..
the descendants of one man, under the protection, SNr',dtio,
as well as in obedience to the command of Heaven, it among
multiplied and replenished the earth. But neither
the annals nor the traditions of nations reach back
to those remote ages, in which they took poffeflion
of the different countries, where they are now
fettled. We cannot trace the branches of this first
family, or point out with certainty the time and
manner in which they divided and spread over the
face of the globe. Even among the most en-
lightened people, the period of authentic hiltory is
extremely short, and every thing prior to that is
fabulous or obscure. It is not surprising, then,
that the unlettered inhabitants of America, who
have no solicitude about futurity, and little curiosity
concerning what is past, should be altogether un-
acquainted with their own original. The people
on the two opposite coalts of America, who occupy
those countries in America which approach nearest
to the ancient continent, are so remarkably rude,
that it is altogether vain to search among them for
filch information as might discover the place from
whence they came, or the ancestors of whom they
are descended f. Whatever light has been thrown
on this fubje&, is derived, not fiom the natives of
America, but from the inquisitive genius of their
conquerors.

Vcnega's Hilt. of California, i. 60.

c 4 WHE.

B 0 0 K WnEN the people of Europe unexpetedly dif.

*- . covered a New World, removed at a vail distance
Var:ous theoris. from every part of the ancient continent which was

then known, and filled vFith inhabitants whose ap-
pearance and manners differed remarkably from the
reft of the human species, the question concerning
their original became naturally an objec of curio-
fity and attention. The theories and speculations
of ingenious men with respect to this fubje&,
would fill many volumes; but are often so wild and
chimerical, that I should offer an insult to the un-
deritanding of my readers, if I attempted either
minutely to enumerate or to refute them. Some
have presumptuously imagined, that the people of
America were not the offspring of the fame com-
mon parent with the reft of mankind, but that they
formed a separate race of men, diflinguifhable by
peculiar features in the constitution of their bodies,
as well as in the charaferiltic qualities of their
minds. Others contend, that they are descended
from some remnant of the antediluvian inhabitants
of the earth, who survived the deluge, which swept
away the greatest part of the human species in the
days of Noah; and preposterously suppose rude,
uncivilized tribes, scattered over an uncultivated
continent, to be the most ancient race of people on
the earth. There is hardly any nation from the
north to the south pole, to which some antiquary,
in the extravagance of conje&ure, has not ascribed
the honour of peopling America. The Jews, the
Canaanites, the Phoenicians, the Carthaginians, the

Greeks,

Greeks, the Scythians in ancient times, are sup- B oo o.
posed to have fettled in this western world. The
Chinese, the Swedes, the Norwegians, the Welsh,
the Spaniards, are said to have sent colonies thither
in later ages, at different periods, and on various
occasions. Zealous advocates stand forth to sup-
port the refpetive claims of those people; and
though they reft upon no better foundation than
the casual resemblance of some customs, or the
supposed affinity between a few words in their dif-
ferent languages, much erudition and more zeal
have been employed, to little purpose, in defence
of the opposite systems. Those regions of conjec-
ture and controversy belong not to the historian.
His is a more limited province, confined to what
is eftablilhed by certain or highly probable evi-
dence. Beyond this I shall not venture, in offer-
ing a few observations, which may contribute to
throw some light upon this curious and much agi-
tated question.

I. THERE are authors who have endeavoured Ought not

by mere conjetures to account for the peopling of tdbn'rnl
America. Some have supposed that it was ori- COnje'ure
ginally united to the ancient continent, and dif-
joined from it by the ihock of an earthquake, or
the irruption of a deluge. Others have imagined,
that some vessel being forced from its course by
the violence of a westerly wind, might be driven
by accident towards the American coast, and have
given a beginning to population in that desolate

conti-

B o o K continents. But with refpeft to all those systems,

IV.

it is vain either to reason or inquire, because it is
impoflible to come to any decision. Such events
as they suppose are barely possible, and may have
happened. That they ever did happen, we have
no evidence, either from the clear testimony of
history, or from the obscure intimations of tradition.

IblaOnrcnos 2. NOTHING can be more frivolous or uncertain
manners, than the attempts to discover the original of the

Americans, merely by tracing the resemblance
between their manners and those of any particular
people in the ancient continent. If we suppose two
tribes, though placed in the most remote regions
of the globe, to live in a climate nearly of the fame
temperature, to be in the fame state of society, and
to resemble each other in the degree of their im-
provement, they mufft feel the fame wants, and
exert the fame endeavours to supply them. The
fame objects will allure, the fame passions will ani-
mate them, and the fame ideas and sentiments will
arise in their minds. The character and occupa-
tions of the hunter in America must be little dif-
ferent from those of an Asiatic, who depends for
iubfiftence on the chace. A tribe of savages on
the banks of the Danube must nearly resemble one
upon the plains waffhed by the Mififippi. Instead
then of preluming from this similarity, that there

s rarfon's Remains of Japhet, p. 240. Ancient Univerf.

Ilil. vol. xx. p. 164. P. Feyjoo Tcatro Critico, tom. v.
p. 30t, &c. Acolth 1-ill. Moral. Novi Orbis, lib. i.c. 16, 19.

is

is any affinity between them, we should only con- B 6 o K
elude, that the disposition and manners of men are .,
formed by their situation, and arise from the state of
society in which they live. The moment that be-
gins to vary, the chara&er of a people mufft change.
In proportion as it advances in improvement, their
manners refine, their powers and talents are called
forth. In every part of the earth the progress of
man hath been nearly the fame, and we can trace
him in his career from the rude simplicity of savage
life, until he attains the industry, the arts, and the
elegance of polithed society. There is nothing
wonderful then in the similitude between the Ame-
ricans and the barbarous nations of our continent.
Had Lafitau, Garcia, and many other authors, at-
tended to this, they would not have perplexed a
subjec: which they pretend to illustrate, by their
fruitless endeavours to establish an affinity between
various races of people in the old and new conti-
nents, upon no other evidence than such a refem-
blance in their manners as necelfarily arises from
the similarity of their condition. There are, it is
true, among every people, fonie customs, which,
as they do not flow from any natural want or desire
peculiar to their situation, may be denominated
usages of arbitrary inititution. If between two na-
tions fettled in remote parts of the earth, a perfec
agreement with refpea to any of there should be
discovered, one might be led to fufpetl that they
were conneced by some affinity. If, for example,
a nation were found in America that confccrated

the

B0 0 K the seventh day to religious worihip and reft, we

V- ; might justly suppose that it had derived its know-

ledge of this usage, which is of arbitrary institution,
from the Jews. But, if it were discovered that
another nation celebrated the first appearance of
every new moon with extraordinary demonstrations
ofjoy, we Mhould not be entitled to conclude that
the observation of this monthly festival was Ior-
rowed from the Jews, but ought to confider it
merely as the expreflion of that joy which is na-
tural to man on the return of the planet which
guides and cheers him in the night. The in-
fiances of customs, merely arbitrary, common to
the inhabitants of both hemispheres, are, indeed,
so few and so equivocal, that no theory concerning
the population of the New World ought to be
founded upon them.

orofr i. 3. THE theories which have been formed with
giou- rits. rrepe&t to the original of the Americans, from ob-

servation of their religious rites and praaices, are
no les fancifil, and destitute of solid foundation.
When the religious opinions of any people are
neither the result of rational inquiry, nor derived
from the inftru&ions of revelation, they must needs
be wild and extravagant. Barbarous nations are
incapable of the former, and have not been blessed
'with the advantages arising from the latter. Still,
however, the human mind, even where its opera-
tions appear moit wild and capricious, holds a
course so regular, that in every age and country

the

the dominion of particular paflions will be attended a O K
with funilar effe&s. The savage of Europe or
America, when filled with fupertitious dread of
invilible beings, or with inquisitive, solicitude to
penetrate into the events of futurity, trembles alike
with fear, or glows with impatience. He has re-
course to rites and practices of the fame kind, in
order to avert the vengeance which he supposes to
be impending over him, or to divine the secret
which is the objet of his curiosity. Accordingly,
the ritual of superstition, in one continent, seems,
in many particulars, to be a transcript of that efta-
blilhed in the other, and both authorise similar in-
ftitutions, sometimes so frivolous as to excite pity,
sometimes so bloody and barbarous as to create
horror. But without supposing any consanguinity
between such distant nations, or imagining that
their religious ceremonies were conveyed by tradi-
tion from the one to the other, we may ascribe
this uniformity, which in many instances seems
very amazing, to the natural operation of fuperfti-
tion and enthusiasm upon the weakness of the hu.
man mind.

4. WE may lay it down as a certain principle in Notpopmr

this inquiry, that America was not peopled by any tsyon 'gM
nation of the ancient continent, which had made c""'led
considerable progress in civilization. The inhabi-
tants of the New World were in a state of society
so extremely rude, as to be unacquainted with
those arts which are the first cflays of human

ingenuity

B 0 0 K ingenuity in its advance towards improvement.
F *.V. Even the most cultivated nations of America were

strangers to many of those simple inventions,
which were almost coeval with society in other
parts of the world, and were known in the earliest
periods of civil life with which we have any ac-
quaintance. From this it is manifest, that the tribes
which originally migrated to America, came off
from nations which muf: have been no less bar-
barous than their posterity, at the time when they
were first discovered by the Europeans. For, al-
though the elegant and refined arts may decline or
perish, amidst the violent ihocks of those revolu-
tions and disasters to which nations are exposed,
the necessary arts of life, when once they have been
introduced among any people, are never loft.
None of the viciflitudes in human affairs affect
these, and they continue to be practised as long as
the race of men exists. If ever the use of iron had
been known to the savages of America, or to their
progenitors, if ever they had employed a plough,
a loom, or a forge, the utility of those inventions
would have preserved them, and it is impoflible
that they should have been abandoned or forgotten.
We may conclude then, that the Americans sprung
from some people, who were themselves in such an
early and unimproved ifage of society, as to be
unacquainted with all those necessary arts, which
continued to be unknown among their posterity,
when firif virited by the Spaniards.

5. IT

5. IT appears no less evident that America was B 0 0 K

not peopled by any colony from the more southern .-

m

nations of the ancient continent. None of the rude nor" omth
tribes fettled in that part of our hemisphere can be gionSnof ou
supposed to have visited a country so remote. They
possessed neither enterprise, nor ingenuity, nor
power, that could prompt them -to undertake, or
enable them to perform, such a distant voyage.
That the more civilized nations in Asia or Africa
are not the pregenitors of the Americans is mani-
fest, not only from the observations which I have
already made concerning their ignorance of the most
simple and necessary arts, but from an additional
circumstance. Whenever any people have expe-
rienced the advantages which men enjoy, by their
dominion over the inferior animals, they can nei-
ther subsist without the nourishment which these
afford, nor carry on any considerable operation in-
dependent of their ministry and labour. According-
ly, the firt care of the Spaniards, when'they fettled
in America, was to flock it with all the domefsic
animals of Europe; and if, prior to them, the Ty-
rians, the Carthaginians, the Chinese, or any other
polished people, had taken pofleflion of that conti-
nent, we should have found there the animals pe-
culiar to those regions of the globe where they
were originally feated. In all America, however,
there is not one animal, tame or wild, which pro-
perly belongs to the warm, or even the more tem-
perate countries of the ancient continent. The
camel, the dromedary, the horse, the cow, were

as

B o o K as much unknown in America, as the elephant or the

-- lion. From which it is obvious, that the people

who first fettled in the western world did not issue
from the countries where those animals abound, and
where men, from having been long accustomed to
their aid, would naturally confider it, not only as
beneficial, but as indispensably necessary to the im-
provement, and even the preservation, of civil so-
ciety.

The two 6. FROM confidering the animals with which
continents A
tr"m to ap. America is stored, we may conclude that the nearest

,,at to point of contact between the old and new conti-
ach other nents is towards the northern extremity of both,

towards the
north, and that there the communication was opened, and

the intercourse carried on between them. All the
extensive countries in America which lie within the
tropics, or approach near to them, are filled with
indigenous animals of various kinds, entirely dif-
ferent from those in the corresponding regions of
the ancient continent. But the northern provinces
of the New World abound with many of the wild
animals which arc common in such parts ofour
hemisphere as lie in a similar situation. The bear,
the wolf, the fox, the hare, the deer, the roebuck,
the elk, and several other species frequent the so-
refts of North America, no kss than those in the
north of Europe and Afiab. It seems to be evident
then, that the two continents approach each other
in this quarter, and are either united, or fu nearly

h Buffon Hil. Nat. ix. p. 97, &c.

adjacent,
3

adjacent, that these animals might pais from the a o o K
one to the other. .

7; THE a&ual vicinity of the two continents is ahif*cer.

so clearly established by modern discoveries, that difovery.
the chief difficulty with refpet to the peopling of
Ameriea is removed. While those immense re-
gions, which tretch eastward from the river Oby
to the sea of Kamchatka were unknown, or imper.
fec6ly explored, the north-east extremities of our
hemisphere were supposed to be- so far distant from
any part of the New World, that it was not easy to
conceive how any communication should have been
carried on between them. But the Rullians, hav-
ing fubjeted the western part of Siberia to their
empire, gradually extended their knowledge of that
vast country, by advancing towards the east into
unknown provinces. These were discovered by
hunters in their excursions after game, or by fol-
diers employed in levying the taxes, and the court
of Moscow estimated the importance of those coun.
tries only by the small addition which they made
to its revenue. At length Peter the Great ascended
the Ruflian throne. His enlightened, comprehen-
five mind, intent upon every circumstance that
could aggrandize his empire, or render his reign
illustrious, discerned conlequences of those disco-
veries, which had escaped the obfervtdon of his
ignorant predecebors. He perceived, that in pro-
portion as the regions of Asia extended towards the
cast, they must approach nearer to America; that

VOL. I. D the

B 0 K the communication between the two continents,

- which had long been searched for in vain, would pro-

bably be found in this quarter, and that by opening it,
some part of the wealth and commerce of the weft-
ern world rmight be made to flow into his dominions
by a new channel. Such an object suited a genius
that delighted in grand schemes. Peter drew up ini-
ftru&ions With his own hand for prosecuting this de-
sign, and gave orders for carrying it into execution'.

His successors adopted his ideas, and pursued his

plan. The officers whom the Ruffian court em-
ployed in this feryice, had to struggle with To many
difficulties, that their progress was extremely flow.
Encouraged by some fainit traditions among the
people of Siberia, concerning a successful voyage
in the year one thousand fix hundred and forty-
eight, round the north-east promontory of Asia,
they attempted to follow the fame course. Vessels
were fitted out, with this view, at different times,
from the rivers Lena and Kolyma; but in a frozen
ocean, which nature seems not to have destined for
navigation, they were exposed to many difaifers,
without being able to accomplish their purpose.
No vessel fitted out by the Ruffian court ever dou-
bled this formidable Capek; we are indebted for
what is known of those extreme regions of Asia, to
the discoveries made in excursions by land. In all

'Muller Voyages et' Decouvertes par les Rufles, tom. i.

. 4,'5. '41'
*. See NJOTE XIV.

those

those provinces an opinion prevails, that there B o oI
are countries of great extent and fertility, which lie _
at no considerable distance from their own coasts.
These the Ruffians imagined to be part of Ame-
rica; and several circumstances concurred not orly
in confirming them in this belief, but in persuading
them that some portion of that continent could not
be very remote. Trees of various kinds, unknown
in those naked regions of Asia, are driven upon the
coast by an easterly wind. By the fame wind, float-
ing ice is brought thither in a few days; flights of
birds arrive annually from the fame quarter; and a
tradition obtains among the inhabitants, of an in-
tercourfe formerly carried on with some countries
situated to the cart.

AFTER weighing all these particulars, and com-

paring the position of the countries in Afla which
had been discovered, with such parts in the north-
weft of America as were already known, the Rufian
court formed a plan, which would have hardly oc.
curred to a nation less accustomed to engage in ardu-
ous undertakings, and to contend with great diflicul.
ties. Orders were issued to build two vessels at the
small village of Ochotz, situated on the lea of Kam-
chatka, to fail on a voyage ofdifcovery. Though
that dreary uncultivated region furnished nothing
that could be of use in constructing them, but some
larch trees though not only the iron, the cordage,
the fails, and all the numerous articles requisite for
their equipment, but the provisions for vitlualling

D 2 them

B o O K them were to be carried through the immense de-

IV.
-, . 1_ rferts of Siberia, down rivers of difficult navigation,

and along roads alnmof impassable, the mandate of
the fovercign, and the perseverance of the people, at

1741. last surmounted every obstacle. Two velfels were
Junc 4 finihed, and, under the command of the captains

Behring and Tlhchirikow, failed from Kamchatka, in
quest of the New World, in a quarter where it had
never been approached. They ihaped their course
towards the east; and though a storm soon fepara-
ted the vessels, which never rejoined, and many dif-
afters besel them, the expetations from the voyage
were not altogether frustrated. Each of the com-
manders dilcovered land, which to them appeared to
be part of the American continent; and, according to
their observations, it seems to be situated within a few
degrees of the north-welt coast of California. Each
set some of his people alhore; but in one place the
inhabitants fled as the Ruffians approached; in ano-
ther, they carried off thoie who landed, and de-
stroyed their boats. The violence of the weather,
and the diflrefs of their crews, obliged both cap-
tains to quit this inhospitable coast. In their re-
turn, they touched at several iflnds, which stretch
in a chain from east to weftl etween the country
which they had discovered and the coall of Asia.
They had iome intercourse with the natives, who
fecneed to them to refciubln the North Americans.
They prefcntcd to the luffiaris the calumeti, or pipe
of ptace, which is a symbol of frienlflhip univcrfil
among the people of North America, and an usage
of arbitrary iiilitution, peculiar to them.

I l1 ) :(;H -

THOUGH the islands of this New Archipelago a o K

have been frequented since that time by the Ruf- _
fian hunters, the court of St. Peterfburgh, during
a period of more than forty years, Seems to have
relinquished every thought of prosecuting dllcove-
ries in that quarter. But in the year one thousand
seven hundred and fixty-eight, it was unexpe&edly
resumed. The Sovereign, who had been lately
feated on the throne of Peter the Great, pofheffed
the genius and talents of her illustrious predecessor.
During the operations of the most arduous and
extensive war in which the Ruffian empire was
ever engaged, she formed schemes and executed
undertakings, to which more limited abilities would
have been incapable of attending but amidst the
leisure of pacific times. A new voyage ofdifcovery
from the easter extremity of Aria was planned,
and captain Krenitzin and lieutenant LevafhefF were
appointed to' command the two veflels fitted out for
that purpose. In their voyage outward they held
nearly the fame course with the former navigators,
they touched at the' fame islands, observed their
situation and produ&ions more carefllly, and dif-
covered several new ilands, with which Behring
and Tfchirikow had not fallen in. Though. they
did not proceed so far to the east as to revisit the
country which Behring and Tfchirikow supposed to
be part of the American continent, yet, by return-
ing in a course considerably to the north of theirs,
they correced some capital mistakes into which
their prc4eceffors had fallen, and have contributcd

P 3 to

B o o K to facilitate the progress of future navigators in those

- seas'.

THUS the poflibility of a communication between

the continents in this quarter refs no longer upon
mere conjeture, but is efablifhed by undoubted
evidence . Some tribe, or some families of wan-
dering Tartars, from the restless spirit peculiar to
their race, might migrate to the nearest islands, and,
rude as their knowledge of navigation was, might,
by paifing from one to the other, reach at length
the coast of America, and give a beginning to po-
pulation in that continent. The distance between
the Marian or Ladrone islands and the nearest land
in Asia, is greater than that between the part of
America which the Ruffians discovered, and the
coast of Kamchatka; and yet the inhabitants of
those islands are manifestly of Asiatic extra&. If,
notwithstanding their remote situation, we admit
that the Marian islands were peopled from our con-
tinent, distance alone is no reason why we should
hesitate about admitting that the Americans may
derive their original from the fame source. It is
probable that future navigators in those seas, by
steering farther to the north, may find that the con-
tinent 'of America approaches ffill nearer to Asia.
According to the information of the barbarous.'
people who inhabit the country about the north-
eall promontory of Asia, there lies, off the coalt,

See NOTE XXV.
' Muller's Voyages, tom i. 148, &c. 267. s76.

a small

a small island, to which they fail in less than a day. BOOK
From that, they can descry a large continent, which, v
according to their description, is covered with so-
refts, and poflffed by people whose language they
do not understand". By them they are supplied
with the kins of martens,. an animal unknown in
the northern parts of Siberia, and which is never
found but in countries abounding with trees. If
we could rely on this account, we might conclude,
that the American continent is separated from ours
only by a narrow strait, and all the dificslties with
refpea to the communication between them would
vanish. What could be offered only as a conjecure
when this History was first published is now known
to be certain. The near approach of the two con-
tinents to each other has been discovered and traced
in a voyage undertaken upon principles so pure and
so liberal, and cqnduted with so much profelional
skill, as refle& luli'e upon the reign of the Sove.
reign by whom it was planned, and do honour to
the officers entrutled with the execution of it ,

IT is likewise evident from recent discoveries, Another

that an intercourse between our continent and Ame- cation by
rica might be carried on with no less facility from wcoh.
the north-west extremities of Europe. As early
as the ninth century, the Norwegians discovered A. D.S8o.
Greenland, and planted colonies there. The com-
munication with that country, after a long inter-

n Muller's Voyages et Decoou. i. 166.
° Sec NOTE XVI.

o 4 ruption,

B 0 0 K ruption, was renewed in the last century. Some

Lutheran and Moravian mifflonaries, prompted by
zeal for propagating the Christian faith, have ven-
tured to fettle in this frozen and uncultivated region'.
To them we are indebted for. much curious infor-
mation with refpce to its nature and inhabitants.
We learn, that the. north-west coast of Greenland
is separated from America by a very narrow ftrair;
that, at the bottom of the bay into which this trait
conduts, it is highly probable that they are uni-
ted q; that the inhabitants of the two countries have
oime intercourse with one another; that the Equi-
maux of America perfecly resemble the Greenland-
ers in their afpe&, dress, and mode of living; that
some sailors, who had acquired.the knowledge of a
few words in the Grecnlandih.languge, reported
that these were undertood by the Efquimaux; that,
XDA. 1764. at length, a Moravian missionary, well acquainted

with the language of Greenland, having vificed the
country of the Efquimaux, found, to his aftonilb-
ment, that they spoke the fame language with the
Greenlanders, that they were in every refpeft the
fame people, and he was accordingly received and
entertained by them as a friend 4nd a brother'.

BY chere decisive fals, not only the confangui-

nity of the Efquimaux and Greenlanders is establish-
ed, but the pofllbility of peopling America fron

P Cranta' Hist. of Greenl. i. 242. 44. Ptevot Hlft. Gen.
des Voyages, tomr. xv. it, not. (96.)

Q Eggede, p. , 3.,
I Crintz' lift. of Grecnl. p. s61, 26t.

the

the north of Europe is &demonstrated. If the Nor- o o
wegians, in a barbarous age, when science had not v
begun to dawn in the north of Europe, pole(ffcd
such naval skill as to open a communication with
Greenland, their ancestors, as much addiced to
roving by sea, as the Tartars are to wandering by
land, might, at some more remote period, accom-
plilh the fame voyage, and fettle a colony there,
whose descendants might, in progress of time, mi-
grate into America. But if, instead of venturing
to ail directly from their owh coast to Greenland,
we suppose that the Norwegians held a nore cau-
tious course, and advanced from Shetland to the
Feroe Ifands, and from them to Iceland, in all
which they had'planted colonies, their progrefi
may have been so gradual, thae this navigation can'
not be conlidered as either longer or more hatard-
ous, than thdfe voyages which'that hardy and' n-
terprifing race of men is known to have performed
in every age.

8. THOUGH it be poflible that America may Probably

have received its first inhabitants from our conti- pro, te
nent, either by the north-west of Europe or the "4'"i
north-east of Asia, there seems to be good reason
for supposing that the progenitors of all the Ame-
rican nations, from Cape Horn to the southern
confines of Labrador, migrated from the latter ra-
ther than the former,. The Efquimaux are the
only people in America, who, in their alpe& or
character, bear any rcfcmblance to the northern

Europeans.

B oo K Europeans. They are manifestly a race of men,
h-v~ diftint from all the nations of the American con-

tinent, in language, in disposition, and in habits of
of life. Their original, then, may warrantably be
traced up to that source, which I have pointed out.
But, among all the other inhabitants of America,
there is such a striking similitude in the form oftheir
bodies, and the qualities of their minds, that, not-
withitanding the diversities occasioned by the in-
fluence of climate, or unequal progress in improve-
ment, we muff pronounce them to be descended
from one source. There may be a variety in the
thades, but we can every where trace the fame ori-
ginal colour. Each tribe has something peculiar
which diftinguilhes it, but in all of them we discern
certain features common to the whole race. It is
remrarkable, that in every peculiarity, whether in
their persons or dispositions, which charaterife the
Americans, they have some resemblance to the
rude tribes scattered over the north-east of Asia,
but almost none to the nations fettled in the-north-
ctn extremities of Europe. We may, therefore,
refer them to the former origin, and conclude that
their Asiatic progenitors, having fettled in those
parts of America, where the Ruffians have disco-
vered the proximity of the two continents, spread
gradually over its various regions. This account
of the progress of population in America, coincides
with the traditionsof the Mexicans concerning their
own origin, which, imperfect as they are, were
preserved with more accuracy, and merit greater

credit,

credit, than those of any people in the New World. I o O
According to them, their ancestors came from a
remote country, situated to the north-west of
Mexico. The Mexicans point out their various
stations as they advanced from this, into the inte-
rior provinces, and it is precisely the fame route
which they must have held, if they had been emi-
grant-irom Asia. The Mexicans, in describing
the appdarance of their progenitors, their manners
and habits of life at that period, exacly delineate
those of the rude Tartars, from whom I suppose
them to have sprung'.

THUS have I finilhed a disquisition which has

been deemed of so much importance, that it would
have been improper to omit it in writing the history
of America. I have ventured to inquire, but with-
out presuming to decide. Satisfied with offering
conjectures, I pretend not to establish any system.
When an investigation is, from its nature, so intri-
cate and obscure, that it is impollible to arrive at
conclusions which are certain, there may be some
merit in pointing out such as are probable'.

THE condition and characer of the American Condition

and chitrtc-

nations, at the time when they became known to tcrofthe
the Europeans, deserve more attentive confidera- America.

' Acofa His. Nat. & Mor. lib. vii. c. a, &c. Garcia

Origen de los Indios, lib.. v. c. 3. Torquemada Monar. Ind.
lib. i. c. 2, &c. Boturini Dcnaduci Idea dc una Hilt. de la
Amer. Septentr. § xvii. p. 1i7.

Mcmoircs fur la Louifiane, par Dumont, tom. i. p. 1f 9.

tion,

s o K tion, than the inquiry concerning their original.
-_-_v The latter is merely an objet of curiosity, the

former is one of the most important as well as in-
ftructive rcfearches which can occupy the philofo-
pher or historian. In order to complete the history
of the human mind, and attain to a perfect know-
ledge of its nature and operations, we must con-
template man in all thole various fituationstlherein
he has been placed. We must follow hif'in his
progress through the different stages of focicty, as
he gradually advances from the infant slate of civil
life towards its maturity and decline. We must
observe, at each period, how the faculties of his
understanding unfold, we must attend to the efforts
of his ative powers, watch the various movements
of desire and affection, as they rife in his breast,
and mark whither they tend, and with what ardour
they are exerted. The philosophers and historians
of ancient Greece and Rome, our guides in this as
well as every other disquisition, had only a limited
view of this fubjeEt, as they had hardly any oppor-
tunity of surveying man in his rudest and mole
early itate. In all those regions of the earth with
which they were well acquainted, civil society had
made considerable advances, and nations had finilh-
ed a good part of their career before they began to
observe them. The Scythians and Germans, the
rudest people of whom any ancient authoe has
tranfinitted to us an authentic account, poffefled
flocks and herds, had acquired property of-various
kinds, and, when compared with mankind in their

primitive

primitive itate, may be reckoned to have attained B oo K.
to a great degree of civilization. _

BUT. the discovery of the New World enlarged Lerlnm.

proM. tlum

the sphere of contemplation, and presented nations in may tpu
to our view, in ltages of their progrefi, much less f
advanced than those wherein they have been ob-
served in our continent. In America, man ap-
pears under the rudest form in which we can con-
ceive him to fubfft. We behold communities just
beginning to unite, and may examine the senti-
ments and actions of human beings in the infancy
of social life, while they feel but imperfetly the
force of its ties, and have scarcely relinquilhed
their native liberty. That fiate of primeval fim-
plicity, which was known in our continent only by
the fanciful description of poets, really existed in
the other. The greater part of its inhabitants were
itrangers to industry and labour, ignorant of arts,
imperfecly acquainted with the nature of property,
and enjoying almost without refRrition or controul
the blefings which flowed fpontancouny from the
bounty of nature. There were only two nations in
this val: continent which had emerged from thi.
rude state, and had made any considerable progreis
in acquiring the ideas, and adopting the institutions,
which belong to polished societies. Their govern-
ment and manners will fall naturally under our re-
view in relating the discovery and conqleft.9',cthc
Mexican and Peruvian empires; and we shall have,
there an opportunity of contcletplating the AmFri-;

cans

3 o o K cans in the Rate of highest improvement to which

Iv.
- i ,they ever attained.

Thisin- AT present, our attention and researches shall
quiry con-
fin to be turned to the small independent tribes which
the ruder
tribes. occupied every other part of America. Among

there, though with some diversity in their charac-
ter, their manners, and inltitutions, the state of
society was nearly similar, and so extremely rude,
that the denomination of Staage may be applied to
them all. In a general history of America, it
would be highly improper to describe the condition
of each petty community, or to inveffigate every
minute circumflance which contributes to form the
character of its members. Such an inquiry would
lead to details of immeasurable and tiresome extent.
The qualities belonging to the people of all the
different tribes have such a near refenblance, that
they may be painted with the fame features.
Where any circumstances seem to constitute a di-
verfity in their characer and manners worthy of
attention, it will be sufficient to point there out as
they occur, and to inquire into the cause of such
peculiarities.-

Difficulty IT is extremely difficult to procure satisfying and
of obtaining
information, authentic information concerning nations while they

remain uncivilized. To discover their true charac-
ter under this rude form, and to feleft the features
by which they are diftinguilhed, requires an ob-
Icrver lpofeffcd of no less impartiality than discern-

ment.

ment. For, in every stage of society, the faculties, B o oK
the sentiments and desires of men are so accommo-
dated to their own slate, that they become standards
of excellence to themfclves, they affix the idea of
perfeftion and happiness to those attainments which
resemble their own, and wherever the objects and
enjoyments to which they have been accustomed
are wanting, confidently pronounce a people to be
barbarous and miserable. Hence the mutual con-
tempt with which the members of communities,
unequal in their degrees of improvement, regard
each other. Polilhed nations, conscious of the
advantages which they derive from their knowledge
and arts, are apt to view rude nations with peculiar
scorn, and, in the pride of fuperioriry, will hardly
allow either their occupations, their feelings, or
their pleafules, to be worthy of men. It has fel-
dom been the lot of communities, in their early and
unpoliflled fate, to fall under the observation of
persons endowed with force of mind superior to
vulgar prejudices, and capable of contemplating
man, under whatever apc&t he appears, with a
candid and discerning eye.

THE Spaniards, who first visited America, and aomitheo-

Yho had opportunity of beholding its various tribes 'thfir o-
while entire and unfubdued, and before any change fcrvt"r
had been made in their ideas or manners by inter-
course with a race of men much advanced beyond
them in improvement, were far from poffefflig the
qualities requifte for obfsrving the striking spec.

6 tacle

B o o K tacle ptefented to their view. Neither the age iri

1V.
i_,.f which they lived, nor the nation to which they be-

longed, had made such progress in true science, as
inspires enlarged and liberal sentiments. The con-
querors of the New World were mostly illiterate
adventurers, defitutce of all the ideas which should
have direded them in contemplating objets, so
extremely different from those with which they
were acquainted. Surrounded continually with
danger, or Itruggling with hardships, they had
little lcifure, and less capacity, for any speculative
inquiry. Eager to take poffcflion of a country of
such extent and opulence, and happy in finding ic
occupied by inhabitants so incapable to defend it,
they hastily pronounced them to be a wretched
order of men, formed merely for servitude and
were more employed in computing the profits of
their labour, than in inquiring into the operations
of their minds, or the reasons of their customs and
institutions. The persons who penetrated at sub-
sequent periods into the interior provinces, to
which the knowledge and devastations of the first
conquerors did not reach, were generally of a fimi-
lar charater; brave and enterprising in an high
degree, but so uninformed as to be little qualified
cither for observing or dcfcribing what they beheld.

and their NOT only the incapacity, but the prejudices of
prejudices; the Spaniards, render their accounts of the people

of America extremely defctive. Soon after they
planted colonies in their new conquests, a difference

in

in opinion arose with respect to the treatment of the B o O
natives. One party, solicitous to render their ser- jv-
vicude perpetual, represented them as a brutish, ob-
ftinate race, incapable either of acquiring religious
knowledge, or of being trained to the funftions of
social life. The other, full of pious concern for
their conversion, contended that, though rude and
ignorant, they were gentle, affetionate, docile,.and
by proper inftru&ions and regulations might be
formed gradually into good Christians and ufefil
citizens. This controversy, as I have already re-
lated, was carried on with all the warmth which is
natural, when attention to intercft on the one hand,
and religious zeal on the other, animate the dif-
putants. Most of the laity espoused the former
opinion; all the ecclesiastics were advocates for the
latter; and we shall uniformly find that, accord-
ingly as an author belonged to either of these par-
ties, he is apt to magnify the virtues or aggravate
the defets of the Americans far beyond truth.
Those repugnant accounts increase the difficulty of
attaining a perse& knowledge of their chara&er,
and render it necessary to peruse all the defcrip-
tions of them by Spanilh writers with distrust, and
to receive their information with rome grains of
allowance.

ALMOST two centuries elapsed after the disco- and rom

the. fyfitmi

very of America, before the manners of its inhabit- of plofo-
ants attra&ed, in any considerable degree, the at- pi""
tention of philofopphrs. At length, they disco-

VOL. I. E vered

B 0°° K vered that the contemplation of the condition and

--~ I character of the Americans in their original state,

tended to complete our knowledge of the human
species, might enable us to fill up a considerable
chasm in the history of its progress, and lead to fpe-
culations no less curious than important. They
entered upon this new field of study with great
ardour; but, instead of throwing light upon the
subjec, they have contributed, in some degree, to
involve it in additional obscurity. Too impatient
to inquire, they hastened to decide; and began to
ere&t systems, when they should have been search-
ing for fa&s on which to establish their foundations.
Struck with the appearance of degeneracy in the
human species throughout the New World, and
astonished at beholding a vast continent occupied
by a naked, feeble, and ignorant race of men,
some authors of great name have maintained, that
this part of the globe had but lately emerged from
the Tea, and become fit for the residence of man;
that every thing in it bore marks of a recent origi-
nal; and that its inhabitants, lately called into ex-
iftence, and frill at the beginning of their career,
were unworthy to be compared with the people of
a more ancient and improved continent'. Others
have imagined, that, under the influence of an un-
kindly climate, which checks and enervates the
principle of life, man never attained in America
the perfection which belongs to his nature, but
remained an animal of an inferior order, defective

M. dc Buffon Hill. Nat. iii. 484, &c. ix. 103. 114.

12 in

in the vigour of his bodily frame, and destitute of n 00 KR
sensibility, as well as of force, in the operations of .-~
his mind ". In bppofition to both these, other phi-
lofophers have Tuppofed that man arrives at his
highest dignity and excellence long before he
reaches a fate of refinement; and, in the rude
simplicity of savage life, displays an elevation of
sentiment, an independence of mind, and a warmth
of attachment, for which it is vain to search among
the members of polilhed societies z. They seem
to confider that as the most perfet state of man
which is the least civilized. They describe the
manners of the rude Americans with such rapture,
as if they propored them for models to the reft of
the species. These contraditory theories have
been proposed with equal confidence, and uncom-
mon powers of genius and eloquence have been
exerted, in order to clothe them with an appear-
ance of truth.

As all those circumstances concur in rendering

an inquiry into the state of the rude nations in Ame-.
rica intricate and obscure, it is necessary to carry
it on with caution. When guided in our researches
by the intelligent observations of the few philofo-
phers who have visited this part of the globe, we
may venture to decide. When obliged to have
recourse to the superficial remarks of vulgar tra-

u M. de P. Recherchec Philof. fur let Americ, passim.
A . Roufflau;

E 2 vellers,

B o o K vellers, of tailors, traders, buccaneers, and mif-
.., fionaries, we must often pause, and comparing

detached fa&ts, endeavour to discover what they
wanted sagacity to observe. Without indulging
conjeture, or betraying a propensity to either sys-
tem, we must study with equal care to avoid the
extremes of extravagant admiration, or of fuperci-
lious contempt for those manners which we de-
scribe.
Method nbe IN order to condu&t this inquiry with greater ac.

vquiry. curacy, it Should be rendered as simple as poflible.

Man existed as an individual before he became the
member of a community; and the qualities which
belong to him under his former capacity should
be known, before we proceed to examine those
which arise from the latter relation. This is pecu-
liarly necessary in investigating the manners of rude
nations. Their political union is so incomplete,
their civil institutions and regulations so few, so
simple, and of such slender authority, that men irf
this itate ought to be viewed rather as independent
agents, than as members of a regular society. The
charater of a savage results almost entirely from
his sentiments or feelings as an individual, and is
but little influenced by his imperfect fubjecion to
government and order. I lhall conduct my re-
searches concerning the manners of the Americans
in this natural order, proceeding gradually from
what is simple to what is more complicated.

I SHALL

I SHALL confider, I. The bodily constitution of B o o K

IV.

the Americans in those regions now under review. v-x
II. The qualities of their minds. III. Their do-
neftic state. IV. Their political state and inftitu-
tions. V. Their system of war, and public fecu-
rity. VI. The arts with which they were ac-
quainted. VII. Their religious ideas and inftitu-
tions. VIII. Such singular detached customs as
are not reducible to any of the former heads. IX.
I flall conclude with a general review and estimate
of their virtues and defets.

I. THE bodily constitution of the Americans.- The confi.

The human body is less affeced by climate than ti°aoOj
that of any other animal. Some animals are con-
fined to a particular region of the globe, and can-
not exist beyond it; others, though they may be
brought to bear the injuries of a climate foreign to
them, cease to multiply when carried out of that
diltri& which Nature deitined to be their mansion.
Even such as seem capable of being naturalized in
various climates, feel the effet of every remove
from their proper station, and gradually dwindle
and degenerate from the vigour and perfection pe-
culiar to their species. Man is the only living
creature whose frame is at once so hardy and so
flexible, that he can spread over the whole earth,
become the inhabitant of every region, and thrive
and multiply under every climate. Subjet, how-
ever, to the general law of Nature, the human
body is not entirely exempt from the operation of

E 3 climate;

B 0 0 K climate; and when exposed to the extremes either

u*,-J | of heat or cold, its size or vigour diminishes.

Complex. TIHE first appearance of the inhabitants of the
ionl &C. New World, filled the discoverers with. fich alto-

nifhment, that they were apt to imagine them a
race of men different from those of the other he-
mifphere. Their complexion is of a reddiih brown,
nearly resembling the colqur of copper'. The
hair of their heads is always black, long, coarse, and
uncurled. They have no beard, and every part of
their body is perfectly smooth. Their persons are
of a full size, extremely straight, and well propor-
tionedz. Their features are regular, though often
distorted by absurd endeavours to improve the
beauty of their natural form, or to render their

More aspet more dreadful to their enemies. In the
tkble. islands, where four-footed animals were both few

and small, and the earth yielded her produ&tions
almost spontaneously, the constitution of the natives,
neither braced by the a&ive exercises of the chace,
nor invigorated by the labour of cultivation, was
extremely feeble and languid. On the continent,
where the forests abound with game of various
kinds, and the chief occupation of many tribes was
to pursue it, the human frame acquired greater
firmness. Still, however, the Americans were more
remarkable for agility than strength. They refem-

y Oviedo Somario, p. 46, D. Life of Columbus, c. 24.
' See NOTE XVII.

bled

bled beasts of prey, rather than animals formed for- n o o K

IV.

labour'. They were not only averse to toil, but ,
incapable of it; and when rouzed by force from
their native indolence, and compelled to work,
they funk under talks which the people of the other
continent would have performed with ease . This
feebleness of contfitution was universal among the
inhabitants of those regions in America which we
are surveying, and may be confidered as charad&er-
iftic of the species there'.

THE beardless countenance and smooth lkin of

the American seems to indicate a defe& of vigour,
occasioned by some vice in his frame. He is delli-
tute of one sign of manhood and of strength. This
peculiarity, by which the inhabitants of the New
World are distinguished from the people of all
other nations, cannot be attributed, as some travel-
lers have supposed, to their mode of fubfifcenced
For though the food of many Americans be ex-
tremely insipid, as they are altogether unacquainted
with the use of salt, rude tribes in other parts of the
earth have subsisted on aliments equally simple,
without this mark of degradation, or any apparent
vfmptom of a diminution in their vigour.

' See NOTE XVIII.
b OviedoSom. p. 51. C. Voy. deCorreal, ii. 138, Wa.
ser's Description, p. 13 1.

c B. Las Casas Brev. Relac. p. 4. Torquem. Monar. i. 58o.

Oviedo Somario, p. 41. Hiltor. lib. iii. c. 6. Herrcra, dec. I.
lib. ix. c. . Simon, p. 41.

' Charley. HiR. de Nouv. Fr. iii. 31o.

E 4 As

B O O K As the external form of the Americans leads us

IV.

L-a- to fufpeet that there is some natural debility in their
Less ape. frame, the smallness of their appetite for food has

been mentioned by many authors as a confirmation
of this suspicion. ' The quantity of food which men
consume varies according to the temperature of the
climate in which they live, the degree of activity
which they exert, and the natural vigour of their
constitutions. Under the enervating heat of the
torrid zone, and when men pass their days in indo-
lence and ease, they require less nourishment than
the active inhabitants of temperate or cold countries.
But neither the warmth of their climate, nor their
extreme laziness, will account for the uncommon
defect of appetite among the Americans. The
Spaniards were astonished with observing this, not
only in the islands, but in several parts of the conti-
nent. The conflitutional temperance of the natives
far exceeded, in their opinion, the abstinence of the
most mortified hermits'; while, on the other hand,
the appetite of the Spaniards appeared to the Ame-
ricans insatiably voracious; and they affirmed, that
one Spaniard devoured more food in a day than
was sufficient for ten Americans'.

Ler vtlie. A PROOF of some feebleness in their frame, tfill
mIlcnce of
dfirc. more tlliking, is the insensibility of the Americans

to the charms of beauty, and the power of love.
That parfion which was destined to perpetuate life,

c R';mufio, iii. 304, F. 306, A. Simon Conquifla, &c. p. 39.
I akluvt, iii. .68, 50o. HIrrera, dec. . lib. ii. c. j6.

t')

to be the bond of social union, and the source of B o o
tendernels and joy, is the most ardent in the human
breast. Though the perils and hardships of the
savage state, though excessive fatigue, on tbme oc-
cafions, and the difficulty at all times of procuring
fubifitence, may seem to be adverse to this palion,
and to have a tendency to abate its vigour, yet the
rudest nations in every other part of the globe seem
to feel its influence more powerfully than the inhar
bitants of the New World. The negro glows with
all the warmth of desire natural to his climate; and
the most uncultivated Asiatics discover that fenfi-
bility, which, from their situation on the globe, we
should expect them to have felt. But the Ameri-
cans are, in an amazing degree, strangers to the
force of this first inftlin of nature. In every part
of the New World the natives treat their women
with coldness and indifference. They are neither
the objests of that tender attachment which takes
place in civilized society, nor of that ardent desire
conspicuous among rude nations. Even in climates
where this passion usually acquires its greatest vi-
gour, the savage of America views his female with
disdain, as an animal of a less noble species. He is at
no pains to win her favour by the assiduity of court-
flip, and still less solicitous to preserve it by indul-
gence and gentlenesss. Mifflonaries themselves,

g Hennepin Moeurs des Sauvages, 32, &c. Rochefort Hilt.

dcs lfles Antilles, p. 461. Voyage de Coreal, ii. 141. Ra-
mulio, iii. 3o9. F. Lozano Defcr. del (ran Chaco, 71. Falk.
ncr's Defcr. of Patagon. p. t2S. Lettere di P. Cataneo ap.
Muratori I1 Chriflian. Fclice, i. 305.

no)twikh-

B 0 0 K notwithstanding the austerity of monastic ideas, can-

-. not refrain from expressing their altonifhment at

the dispassionate coldness of the American young
men in their intercourse with the other sex'. Nor
is this reserve to be ascribed to any opinion which
they enrertain with refpe& to the merit of female
chaflity. That is an idea too refined for a savage,
and suggested by a delicacy of sentiment and as-
section to which he is a stranger.

Rflca;ions BUT in inquiries concerning either the bodily or
with rtfpct
toth:ef. mental qualities of particular races of men, there

is not a more common or more reducing error,
than that of ascribing to a single cause, those cha-
rateriftic peculiarities, which are the effect of the
combined operation of many causes. The climate
and foil of America differ, in so many refpedts,
from those of the other hemisphere, and this differ-
ence is so obvious and striking, that philosophers
of great eminence have laid hold on this as fuffi-
cient to account for what is peculiar in the confti-
tution of its inhabitants. They reft on physical
causes alone, and confider the feeble frame and
languid desire of the Americans, as consequences
of the temperament of that portion of the globe
which they occupy. But the influences of political
and moral causes ought not to have been over-
looked. These operate with no less effec than
that on which many philosophers reft as a full ex-

h Chanvalon. p. 51. Lettr. tlif. tom. xxiv. 318. Tcrtre,
ii. 377. Vcnegas, i. S:. Ribas Iitil, de los Triumf. p. I.

planation

planation of the singular appearances which have B 00 oK
been mentioned. Wherever the state of society ^
is such as to create many wants and desires, which
cannot be satisfied without regular exertions of in-
duftry, the body accustomed to labour becomeS
robust and patient of fatigue. In a more simple
state, where the demands of men are so few and so
moderate, that they may be gratified, almost with-
out any effort, by the spontaneous produ&ions of
nature, the powers of the body are not called forth,
nor can they attain their proper strength. The na-
tives of Chili and of North-America, the two tem-
perate regions in the New World, who live by
hunting, may be deemed an a&tive and vigorous
race, when compared with the inhabitants of the
isles, or of those parts of the continent where hardly
any labour is requisite to procure subsistence. The
exertions of a hunter are not, however, so regular,
or so continued, as those of persons employed in
the culture of the earth, or in the various arts of
civilized life, and though his agility may be greater
than theirs, his strength is on the whole inferior.
If another direction were given to the active pow-
ers of man in the New World, and his force aug-
mented by exercise, he might acquire a degree of
vigour which he does not in his present state pof-
fess. The truth of this is confirmed by experience.
Wherever the Americans have been gradually ac-
customed to hard labour, their constitutions become
robust, and they have been found capable of per-
forming such tasks, as seemed not only to exceed

the

Ba 0 K the powers of such a feeble frame as has been deem-
L-_ , ed peculiar to their country, but to equal any effort

of the natives, either of Africa or of Europe'.

THE fame reasoning will apply to what has been

observed concerning their slender demand for food.
As a proof that this flould be ascribed as much to
their extreme indolence, and often total want of
occupation, as to any thing peculiar in the physical
itruaure of their bodies, it has been observed, that
in those diftrifts, where the people of America are
obliged to exert any unusual effort of ativity, in
order to procure subsistence, or wherever they are
employed in ievere labour, their appetite is not in-
ferior to that of other men, and, in some places,
it has struck observers as remarkably voraciousk.

THE operation of political and moral causes is

still more conspicuous, in modifying the degree of
attachment between the sexes. In a state of high
civilization, this paflion, inflamed by restraint, re-
fined by delicacy, and cherished by fashion, occu-
pies and engrosses the heart. It is no longer a
simple inflin&t of nature; sentiment heightens the
ardour of desire, and the most tender emotions of
which our frame is susceptible, soothe and agitate
the foul. This description, however, applies only
to those, who, by their situation, are exempted

i See NOTE XIX.
k Gumilla, ii. 12. 70. 247. Lafitau, i. 515. Ovalle
Chuarch . i l. i. .Irato, i, 705.

from

from the cares and labours of life. Among perfbns B o o K
of inferior order, who are doomed by their con- ..-y
dition to incefant toil, the dominion of this pas-
sion is less violent; their solicitude to procure sub-
fiftence, and to provide for the firit demand of na-
ture, leaves little leisure for attending to its second
call. But if the nature of the intercourse between
the sexes varies so much in persons of different
rank in polished societies, the condition of man,
while he remains uncivilized, muff occasion a va-
riation still more apparent. We may well suppose,
that amidst the hardships, the dangers, and the
simplicity of savage life, where fubfitence is al-
ways precarious, and often scanty, where men are
almost continually engaged in the pursuit of their
enemies, or in guarding againfl their attacks, and
where neither dress nor reserve are employed as
arts of female allurement, that the attention of the
Americans to their women would be extremely
feeble, without imputing this solely to any physical
defeR or degradation in their frame.

IT is accordingly observed, that in those coun-

tries of America, where, from the fertility of the
foil, the mildness of the climate, or some farther
advances which the natives have made in improve-
ment, the means of subsistence are more abundant,
and the hardlhips of savage life are less severely
felt, the animal pafion of the sexes becomes more
ardent. Striking examples of this occur among
obme tribes feated on the banks of great rivers well

flored

B 0 0 K flored with food, among others who are masters of

IV.
Ij -hunting-grounds abounding so much with game,

that they have a regular and plentiful supply of nou-
rifhment with little labour. The superior degree
of security and affluence which these tribes enjoy,
is followed by their natural effecs. The passions
implanted in the human frame by the hand of na-
ture acquire additional force; new taftes and de-
fires are formed; the women, as they are more
valued and admired, become more attentive to
dress and ornament; the men, beginning to feel
how much of their own happiness depends upon
them, no longer disdain the arts of winning their
favour and affetion. The intercourse of the sexes
becomes very different from that which takes place
among their ruder countrymen; and as hardly any
restraint is imposed on the gratification of desire,
either by religion, or laws, or decency, the diffo-
lution of their manners is exceflive '.

NCon of NOTWITHSTANDING the feeble make of the
chem de.
srued. Americans, hardly any of them are deformed, or

mutilated, or defective in any of their senses. All
travellers have been struck with this circumstance,
and have celebrated the uniform symmetry and per-
fetion of their external figure. Some authors
search for the cause of this appearance in their phy-
fical condition. As the parents are not exhausted

Biet. 389. Charley, iii. 4z3. Dumont Mem. fur Louifi-
ane, i. 155.

or

or over-fatigued with hard labour, they suppose B OK
that their children are born vigorous and found. _
They imagine, that in the liberty of savage life,
the human body, naked and unconfined from its
earliest age, preserves its natural form; and that
all its limbs and members acquire a juster propor-
tion, than when fettered with artificial restraints,
which stints its growth, and distort its shape".
Something, without doubt, may be ascribed to the
operation of these causes but the true reasons of
this apparent advantage, which is common to all
ravage nations, lie deeper, and are closely inter-
woven with the nature and genius of that fiate.
The infancy of man is so long and so helpless, that
it is extremely difficult to rear children among rude
nations. Their means of fubrifience are not only
scanty, but precarious. Such as live by hunting
muff range over extensive countries, and shift often
from place to place. The care of children, as
well as every other laborious talk, is devolved upon
the women. The diftrefles and hardships of the
savage life, which are often such as can hardly be
supported by persons in full vigour, must be fatal
to those of more tender age. Afraid of under-
taking a talk so laborious, and of such long du-
ration, as that of rearing their offspring, the wo-
men, in some parts of America, procure frequent
abortions by the use of certain herbs, and extin-
guilh the first sparks of that life which they are un-

I'iCo, p. 6.

able

B o K able to cherilh ". Sensible that only stout and well

. Iv. formed children have force of confirution to frug-

gle through such an hard infancy, other nations
abandon or destroy such of their progeny as appear
feeble or defective, as unworthy of attention .
Even when they endeavour to rear all their chil-
dren without diftinetion, so great a proportion of
the whole number perifies under the rigorous treat-
ment which mull be their lot in the savage state,
that few of those who laboured under any original
frailty attain the age of manhood P. Thus, in po-
lithed societies, where the means of fubfifience are
fccured with certainty, and acquired with ease;
where the talents of the mind are often of more
importance than the powers of the body; children
are preserved notwithstanding their defecs or de-
formity, and grow up to be useful citizens. In
rude nations, such persons are either cut off as soon
as they are born, or becoming a burden to them-
selves and to the community, cannot long protract
their lives. But in those provinces of the New
World where, by the eftablilhment of the Eu-
ropeans, more regular provision has been made for
the subsistence of its inhabitants, and they are re-
firaincd from laying violent hands on their children,
the Americans are so far from being eminent for

· Ellis's Voyage to Hudson's Bay, 198. Herrera, dec. 7.
lib. ix. c. 4.

o Gumilla Hill ii. 234. Techo' HI-ift. of Paraguay, &c.
Churchill's Collca. vi. 108.

P Creu.,ii His. Canad, p. 57.

6 any

any superior perfe&ion in their form, that one B O lK

IV.

should rather fufpeE rome peculiar imbecility in -
the race, from the extraordinary number of indi-
viduals who are deformed, dwarfish, mutilated,
blind, or deafq.

How feeble soever the constitution of the Ame- Uniformi;t

of their ap4

ricans may be, it is remarkable, that there is less euancc.
variety in the human form throughout the New
World, than in the ancient continent. When Co-
lumbus and the other discoverers first visited the
different countries of America which lie within the
torrid zone, they naturally expeted to find people
of the fame complexion with those in the cor-
responding regions of the other hemisphere. To
their amazement, however, they discovered that
America contained no negroes'; and the cause of
this singular appearance became as much the ob-
jet of curiosity; as the fa& itself was of wonder.
In what part or membrane of the body that hu-
mour resides which tinges the complexion of the
negro with a deep black, it is the business of ana-
tomifts to inquire and describe. The powerful ope-
ration of heat appears manifestly to be the cause
which produces this firiking variety in the human
species. All Europe, a great part of Asia, and
the temperate countries of Africa, are inhabited
by men of a white complexion. All the torrid zone
in Africa, some of the warmer regions adjacent to

q Voyage de Ulloa, iz.232. ' P. Martyr, dec. p. 71.
VOL. 1. F it,

it

B 0 K it, and several countries in Asia, are filled with
a, ,.people of a deep black colour. If we survey t!h:

nations of our continent, making our progress
from cold and temperate countries towards those
parts which are exposed to the influence of vehe-
ment and unremitting heat, we shall find, that the
extreme whiteness of their skin soon begins to di-
ninifh; that its colour deepens gradually as we
advance; and after pafling through all the fuc-
cefive gradations of shade, terminates in an uni-
form unvarying black. But in America, where
the agency of heat is checked and abated by va-
rious causes, which I have already explained, the
climate seems to be dcftitute of that force which
produces such wonderful effecs on the human
frame. The colour of the natives of the torrid
zone, in America, is hardly of a deeper hue than
that of the people in the more temperate parts o;
their continent. Accurate observers, who had an
opportunity of viewing the Americans in very dif-
ferent climates, and in provinces far removed from
each other, have been struck with the amazing
similarity of their figure and afpe '.

BUT though the hand of Nature has deviated so

little from one standard in faihioning the human
form in America, the creation of fancy hath been
various and extravagant. The fame fables that
were current in the ancient continent, have been
revived with refpe&t to the New World, and Ame-

See NOTE XX.

rica

rica too has been peopled with human beings of mon- B o o a
ftrous and fantastic appearance. The inhabitantsof .- -
certain provinces were described to be pigmies of
three feet high; those of others to be giants of an
enormous size. Some travellers published accounts
of people with only one eye, others pretended to
have discovered men without heads, whose eyes and
mouths were planted in their breatls. The variety
of Nature in her producions is, indeed, so great,
that it is presumptuous to set bounds to her ferti-
lity, and to rejec indiscriminately every relation
that does not perfectly accord with our own limited
observation and experience. But the other ex-
treme, of yielding a hasty assent, on the slightest
evidence, to whatever has the appearance of being
itrange and marvellous, is fill more unbecom-
ing a philosophical inquirer, as, in every period,
men are more apt to be betrayed into error, by
their weakness in believing too much, than by their
arrogance in believing too little. In proportion as
science extends, and nature is examined with a dif-
cerning eye, the wonders which ainufed ages of
ignorance disappear. The tales of credulous tra-
vellers concerning America are forgotten; the
monsters which they describe have been searched
for in vain; and those provinces where they pre-
tend to have found inhabitants of singular forms,
ate now known to be pofleffed by people no wife
different from the other Americans.

THOUoH those relations may, without difculiion,
be rejected as fabulous, there are other accounts of

r a varieties

B o o K varieties in the human species in some parts of the
_- ' New World, which reft upon better evidence, and

merit more attentive examination. This variety
has been particularly observed in three different
diftri&s. The first ofthefe is situated in the isthmus
of Darien, near the centre of America. Lionel
Wafer, a traveller possessed of more curiosity and
intelligence than we ihould have expected to find
in an associate of Buccaneers, discovered there a
race of men few in number, but of a singular make.
They are of low stature, according to his defcrip-
tion, of a feeble frame, incapable of enduring fa-
tigue. Their colour is a dead milk white; not re-
fembling that of fair people among Europeans, but
without any tincture of a blush or sanguine com-
plexion. Their skin is covered with a fine hairy
down of a chalky white, the hair of their heads,
their eye-brows, and eye-lashes, are of the fame
hue. Their eyes are of a singular form, and so
weak, that they can hardly bear the light of the
fun; but they fee clearly by moon-light, and are
most aAive and gay in the night . No race fimi-
lar to this has been discovered in any other part of
America. Cortes, indeed, found some persons
exaaly resembling the white people of Darien,
among the rare and monstrous animals which Mon-
tezuma had colleted ". But as the power of the
Mexican empire extended to the provinces bor-
dering on the isthmus of Darien, they were pro.

Wafecr Dcfcript. of Iflh. ap. Dampier, iii. p. 346.
* Cortes ap. Ramus . i. p. 41, E.

bably

bably brought thence. Singular as the appearance B o o Ki
of those people may be, they cannot be confidered . -
as constituting a diftin& species. Among the ne-
groes of Africa, as well as the natives of the In-
dian islands, nature sometimes produces a small
number of individuals, with all the chara&eriftic
features and qualities of the white people of Darien.
The former are called Albinos by the Portuguese,
the latter Kackerlakes by the Dutch. In Darien
the parents of those fYhites are of the fame co-
lour with the other natives of the country; and
this observation applies equally to the anomalous
progeny of the negroes and Indians. The fame
mother who produces some children of a colour
that does not belong to the race, brings forth
the reft with the complexion peculiar to her
country". One conclusion may then be formed
with respect to the people described by Wafer, the
Albinos and the Kackerlakes; they are a degene.
rated breed, not a separate class of men; and from
some disease or defet of their parents, the peculiar
colour and debility which mark their degradation
are transmitted to them. As a decisive proof of
this, it has been observcd, that neither the white
people of Darien, nor the Albinos of Africa, pro-
pagate their race: their children are of the colour
and temperament peculiar to the natives of their
refpeive countries .

x Margrav. Hill. Rer. Nat. Bras. lib. viii. c. 4.
Y Wafer, p. 348. Demanct Hill. de 1'Afrique, ii. 234.
eclherch. Philof. fur Its Amer. ii. I, &c. NOTE XXI.

F 3 THE

B o O K THE second diftridt that is occupied by inhabit-

IV.
h., _ . ants differing in appearance from the other people

of America, is situated in a high northern latitude,
extending from the coast of Labrador towards the
pole, as far as the country is habitable. The people
scattered over those dreary regions, are known to the
Europeans by the name of Efquimaiutx. They them-
selves, with that idea of their own superiority, which
consoles the rudest and most wretched nations, aflume
the name of Keralit or Mlen. They are of a middle
size, and robust, with heads of a disproportioned
bulk, and feet as remarkably ifnall. Their com-
plexion, though swarthy, by being continually ex-
posed to the rigour of a cold climate, inclines to
the European white, rather than to the copper co-
lour of America, and the men have beards which
are Sometimes bushy and long Y. From these marks
of diftintion, as well as from one still less equivo-
cal, the affinity of their language to that of the
Greenlanders, which I have already mentioned, we
may conclude, with some degree of confidence, that
the Efquimaux are a race different from the reft of
the Americans.

WE cannot decide with equal certainty concerning

tle inhabitants of the third diltri&, situated at the
southern extremityofAmerica. These are the famous
i'atagonians, who, during two centuries and a half,

7 Ellis Voy. to Hudf Bay, p. 131. 139. De In Potheri:,

tom. i. p. 79. Wales' Journ. of a Voy. to Churchill River.
lhil. Tranf. vol. Ix. Ic9.

have

have afforded a fubje& ofcontroverfy to the learned, B o Q x
and an object of wonder to the vulgar. They are
supposed to be one of the wandering tribes, which
occupy that vait, but least known region of Ame-
rica, which extends from the river Dc la Plata
to the Straits of Magellan. Their proper fiation
is in that part of the interior country which lies
on the banks of the river Negro; but in the hunt-
ing season they often roam as far as the straits
which separate Tierra del Fuego from the main-
land. The firit accounts of this people were
brought to Europe by the companions of Magel-
lanZ, who described them as a gigantic race, above
eight feet high, and of strength in proportion to
their enormous size. Among several tribes of ani-
mals, a disparity in bulk, as considerable, may be
observed. Some large breeds of hories and dogs
exceed the more diminutive races in tature and
strength, as far as the Patagonian is supposed to
rife above the usual standard of the human body.
But animals attain the highest perfection of their
species, only in mild climates, or where they find
the most nutritive food in greatest abundance. It
is not then in the uncultivated waste of the Magel-
lanic regions, and among a tribe of improvident
savages, that we (hould expe& to find man, posses-
sing the highest honours of his race, and diftin-
guifhed by a superiority of size and vigour, far
beyond what he has reached in any other part of
the earth. The most explicit and unexceptionable

' Falkner's Description of Patagonia, p. son;

F 4 evidence

'I

B0 0 K evidence is requisite, in order to establish a fa&t
_- .__ repugnant to those general principles and laws,

which seem to affe& the human frame in every
other infance, and to decide with refpe& to its
nature and qualities. Such evidence has not hi.
therto been produced. Though several persons,
to whose testimony great respect is due, have vi-
fited this part of America since the time of Magel-
lan, and have had interviews with the natives;
though some have affirmed, that such as they saw
were of gigantic stature, and others have formed
the fame conclusion from measuring their footiteps,
or from viewing the skeletons of their dead; yet
their accounts vary from each other in so many es-
fential points, and are mingled with so many cir-
cumitances manifestly false or fabulous, as detract
much from their credit. On the other hand, fornme
navigators, and those among the most eminent of
their order for discernment and accuracy, have
asserted that the natives of Patagonia, with whom
they had intercourse, though flout and well-made,
are not of such extraordinary size as to be diftin-
guifhed from the reft of the human species'. The
existence of this gigantic race of men seems, then,
to be one of those points in natural history, with
refpe& to which a cautious inquirer will hesitate,
and will chufe to suspend his assent until more com-
plete evidence flall decide, whether he ought to
admit a fa&, seemingly inconsistent with what rea-
son and experience have discovered concerning the

* Sce NOTE XXI[.

struCture

ftrudture and condition of man, in all the various O O yK
situations in which he has been observed. ^ v.

IN order to form a complete idea with refpe& Their fam

to the eonftitution of the inhabitants of this and the .
other hemisphere, we ihould attend not only to the
make and vigour of their bodies, but confider what
degree of health they enjoy, and to what period
of longevity they ufially arrive. In the simplicity
of the savage state, when man is not oppressed with
labour, or enervated by luxury, or disquieted with
care, we are apt to imagine that his life will flow
on almost untroubled by disease or suffering, until
his days be terminated, in extieme old age, by the
gradual decays of nature. We find, accordingly,
among the Americans, as well as among other rude
people, persons, whose decrepit and Ihrivelled form
seems to indicate an extraordinary length of life,
But as most of them are unacquainted with the art
of numbering, and all of them as forgetful of what
is past, as they are improvident for what is to come,
it is impossible to ascertain their age, with any de-
gree of precifionb. It is evident, that the period
of their longevity must vary considerably, accord-
ing to the diversity of climates, and their different
modes of subsistence. They seem, however, to be
every where exempt from many of the distempers
which affli&t polilhed nations. None of the mala-
dies, which are the immediate offspring of luxury,

b Ulloa Notic. Americ. 323. Bancroft Nat. Hrif. of Gui.
ana, 334.

ever

B O O K ever visited them; and they have no names in their

Iv'. -'.' . languages by which to distinguish this numerous

train of adventitious evils.
rchaft. BBUT, whatever be the situation in which man

is placed, he is born to susser; and his dileafes, in
the savage state, though fewer in number, are, like
those of the animals whom he nearly resembles in
his mode of life, more violent, and more fatal. If
luxury engenders and nourilhes diltempers of one
species, the rigour and diftrefres of savage life bring
on those of another. As men, in this state, are
wonderfully improvident, and their means of sub-
fiftence precarious, they often pass from extreme
want to exuberant plenty, according to the viciri-
tudes of fortune in the chace, or in consequence of
the various degree of abundance with which the
earth affords to them its prodctions, in different
seasons. Their inconsiderate gluttony in the one
situation, and their levere abflinence in the other,
are equally pernicious. For, though the human
conltitution may be accustomed by habit, like that
of animals of prey, to tolerate long famine, and
then to gorge voraciously, it is not a little asseted
by such sudden and violent transitions. The ftrengti
and vigour of flvages are, at some seasons, impair-
ed by what they susser from scarcity of food; at
others they are afflicted with disorders arising fiomn
indigeflion and a superfluity of grols aliment. 'I'hel
arc to colnnmon, that they mIay be confidered as
the unavcidable confcquence of their mode of sub-

9 sising,

ifting, and cut off considerable numbers in the a V o0v
prime of life. They are likewise extremely sub- _
jet to consumptions, to pleuritic, asthmatic, and
paralytic disorders , brought on by the immode-
rate hardships and fatigue which they endure in
hunting and in war; or owing to the inclemency of
the seasons to which they are continually expoied.
In the lavage state, hardships and fatigue violently
assault the conititution. In polilhed societics, in-
temperance undermines it. It is not easy to deter-
mine which of them operates with molt fatal effe&,
or tends morl to abridge human life. The influ-
ence of the former is certainly most extensive.
The pernicious consequences of luxury reach only
a few members in any community, the distresses of
savage life are felt by all. As far as I can judge,
after very minute inquiry, the general period of
human life is Ihorter among savages, than in well-
regulated and indulfrious societies.

ONE dreadful malady, the severest scourge, with

which, in this life, offended Heaven chaitens the
indulgence of criminal desire, seems to have been
peculiar to the Americans. By communicating
it to their conquerors, they have not only amply
avenged their own wrongs, but by adding this ca-
lamity to those which formerly imbittered human
life, they have, perhaps, more than counterbalanced
all the benefits which Europe has derived from the

Charlev. N. Fr. iii. 364. Lafitau, ii. 36o Do Ia Po-
theric, ii. 37.

discovery

3 BO K discovery of the New World. This distemper,

Jv.
ae-m from the country in which it first raged, or from

the people by whom it was supposed to have been
spread over Europe, has been sometimes called the
Neapolitan, and sometimes the French disease. At
its first appearance, the infection was To malignant,
its symptoms To violent, its operation so rapid and
fatal, as to baffle all the efforts of medical skill.
Astonishment and terror accompanied this unknown
afflition in its progress, and men began to dread
the extinction of the human race by such a cruel
visitation. Experience, and the ingenuity of phy-
ficians, gradually diScovered remedies of such vir-
tue as to cure or to mitigate the evil. During the
course of two centuries and a half, its virulence
seems to have abated considerably. At length, in
the fame manner with the leprosy, which raged
in Europe for some centuries, it may waste its force
and disappear; and in tome happier age, this weft-
ern infection, like that from the East, may be known
only by description d.

Poerand II. AFTER confidering what appears to be pecu-
qualities of
aheirnds. liar in the bodily constitution of the Americans,

our attention is naturally turned towards the powers
and qualities of their minds. As the individual ad-
vances from the ignorance and imbecility of the
infant state, to vigour and maturity of understand-
ing, something similar to this may be observed in
the progress of the species. With refpeut to it,

' Sec NOTE XXIII.

7 too,

too, there is a period of infancy, during which B oo
several powers of the mind are not unfolded, and all
are feeble and defecive in their operation. In the
early ages of society, while the condition of man is
simple and rude, his reason is but little exercised,
and his desires move within a very narrow sphere.
Hence arise two remarkable charaaeriftics of the
human mind in this state. Its intellectual powers
are extremely limited; its emotions and efforts arc
few and languid. Both these diftintions are con-
fpicuous among the rudest and most unimproved of
the American tribes, and conflitute a striking part
of their description.

WHAT, among polished nations, is called fpecu- Jnrellc~n

faculties ve-

lative reasoning or research, is altogether unknown rymistce
in the rude state of society, and never becomes the
occupation or amusement of the human faculties,
until man be so far improved as to have secured, with
certainty, the means of subsistence, as well as the
pofleffion ofleifure and tranquillity. The thoughts
and attention of a savage are confined within the
small circle of objets, immediately conducive to
his preservation or enjoyment. Every thing be-
yond that, escapes his observation, or is perfecly
indifferent to him. Like a mere animal, what is
before his eyes interests and affecs him; what is
out of fight, or at a distance, makes little impref-
lion . There are several people in America whose
limited underltandings fcern not to be capable of

Ulloa Noticias Ancric. z22.

forming

B o o K forming an arrangement for futurity; neither their

Iv. -z _ f solicitude nor their foresight extend so far. They

follow blindly the impulse of the appetite which
they feel, but are entirely regardless of distant con-
sequences, and even of those removed in the least
degree from immediate apprehension. While they
highly prize such things as serve for prefcnt use, or
minister to present enjoyment, they set no value
upon those which are not the object of rome imme-
diate want '. When, on the approach of the even-
ing, a Caribbee feels himself disposed to go to reft,
no consideration will tempt him to fell his hammoc.
But, in the morning, when he is sallying out to the
business or pastime of the day, he will part with it
for the slightest toy that catches his fancy . At
the close of winter, while the impression of what he
has suffered from the rigour of the climate is fresh
in the mind of the North American, he sets himself
with vigour to prepare materials for erecting a
comfortable hut to protedt him against the incle-
mency of the succeeding season; but as loon as the
weather becomes mild, he forgets what is palt,
abandons his work, and never thinks of it more,
until the return of cold compels him, when too
late, to resume ith.

IF in concerns the most interesting, and seem-
ingly the most simple, the reason of man, while

f Venegas Hilf. of Calif. i. 66. Supp. Church. Coll. v.
693. Borde Dercr. des Caraibcs, p. 16. Ellis Voy. 194.

* Labat Voyages, ii. 14, 1 5. Tcrtre, ii. 385.
h Adair's Hilt. of Amer. Indians, 417.

rude

rude and destitute of culture, differs so little from s 3 o o
the thoughdefs levity of children, or the improvi- A
dent inftint of animals, its exertions in other di-
retions cannot be very considerable. The ob.
je&s towards which reason turns, and the difquifi-
tions in which it engages, must depend upon the
fRate in which man is placed, and are suggested by
his neceflities and desires. Disquisitions, which ap-
pear the most necessary and important to men in
one slate of society, never occur to those in ano-
ther. Among civilized nations, arithmetic, or
the art of numbering, is deemed an essential and
elementary science, and in our continent, the in.
vention and use of it reaches Back to a period so
remote as is beyond the knowledge of history. But
among savages, who have no property to estimate,
no hoarded treasures to count, no variety of ob-
jecls or multiplicity of ideas to enumerate, arith-
metic is a superfluous and useless art. Accordingly,
among some tribes in America it seems to be quite
unknown. There are many who cannot reckon
farther than three; and have no denomination to
distinguish any number above it'. Several can
proceed as far as ten, others to twenty. When they
would convey an idea of any number beyond these,
they point to the hair of their head, intimating that
it is equal to them, or with wonder declare it to be

' Condam. p. 67. Stadius ap. de Bry, ix. 128. Lery.
ibid. a21. Biet. ;62. Lettr.Edif. z3.314.

so

1B 0 K, so, great that it cannot be reckoned . Not Qnly

,- the Americans, but all nations, while extremely.

rude, seem to be unacquainted, with the art of'
computation . As soon, however, as they ac-
quire such acquaintance or connection with a vari-
ety of obje&s, that there is frequent occasion to
combine or divide them, their knowledge of num-
bers increases, so that the state of this art among
any people may be confidered as one Randard, by
which to estimate the degree of their improve-
ment. The Iroquois, in North America, as they
are much more civilized than the rude inhabitants
of Brasil, Paraguay, or Guiana, have likewise
made greater advances in this refpeft; though even
their arithmetic does not extend beyond a thousand,
as in their petty tranfa&ions they have no occasion
for any higher number'. The Cherokee, a less
considerable nation on the fame continent, can
reckon only as far as a hundred, and to that extent
have names for the several numbers; the smaller
tribes in their neighbourhood can rife no higher
than ten b.

Noabfrad IN other refpeas, the exercise of the understand-
idlc"s ing among rude nations is till more limited. The

r Dumont Louir. i. 187. Herrera, dec. i. lib. iii. c. 3.
Biet. 396. Borde, 6.

P This is the cafe with the Greenlanders, Crantz. i. a25.
and with Kamchatkadales, M. 1'Abbc Chappc, iii. 17.

a Charlev. Nouv. Franc. iii. 402.
b Adair's Iill, of Amcr. Indians, 77. See NOTE
XXIV.

first

frf ideas of every human being mufl be such as he B o o XK
receives by the senses. But, in. the mind of man, -
while in the savage Rfate, there seem to be hardly
any ideas but what enter by this avenue. The ob-
jets around him are presented to his eye. Such as
may be subservient to his use, or .can gratify any of
his appetites, attra& his notice; he views the reft
without curiosity or attention. Satisfied with confi-
dering them under that simple mode, in which they
appear to him, as separate and detached, he neither
combines them so as to form general clases, nor
contemplates their qualities apart from the. fubje&
in which they inhere, nor bestows a thought upon
the operations of hisa own mind concerning them.
Thus, he is unacquainted with all the ideas which
have been. denominated univtrfal, or aftra,4 or of
rtgffiot.. The range of his understanding rpu,
of courfc, be :vry confined, and his reasoning
powers be employed merely on what is fcnfible.
This is so. remarkably the cafe with the ruder na-
tions of America, .that their languages (Aiswe lhall
afterwards find) have not a. word to exprcfi any
thing but what is material or corporeal. Time,
/pace, fbukftace) and a thousand other'terms which
reprefent.abftrac and universal ideas, are altoge-
ther unknown to them' . 4 naked fivage, cower-
ing over the fire. in his miferabl . cabin, or
stretched under a few branches. which afford him a
temporary Ihelter, has as little inclination a capa-

Condmn, p. 54'
VOL. .I. O city

o o K city for useless speculation. His thoughts extend
IV.
..- *i not beyond what relates to animal life, and when

they are not direted towards some of in concerns,
his mind is totally inative. In situations where no
extraordinary effort either of ingenuity or labour is
requiflte, in order to satisfy the simple demands of
nature, the powers of the mind are so seldom
routed to any exertion, that the rational faculties
continue almof dormant and unexercifed. The
numerous tribes scattered over the rich plains of
South-America, the inhabitants of some of the if-
lands, and of several fertile regions on the conti-
nent, come under this description. Their vacant
countenance, their taring unexpressive eye, their
listless inattention, and total ignorance of fubjedts
which seem to be the first which ihould occupy the
thoughts of rational beings, made such imprellion
upon the Spaniards, when they first beheld those
rude people, that they confidered them as animals
of an inferior order, and could not believe that they
belonged to the human species . It required the
authority of a papal bull to countera& this opinion,
and to convince them that the Americans were ca-
pable of the functions, and intided to the privileges
of humanity, Since that time, persons more en-
lightened and impartial than the discoverers or con-
querors of America) have had an opportunity of
contemplating the most savage of its inhabitants,
and they have been astonished and humbled, with

d Herrera, dec. a. lib. ii. c. 15.
Torquem. MOD. Ind. iii. 198.

6 observing

observing how nearly man, in this condition, ap- B 0

o

proaches to the brute creation. But in feverer ci-
matc~j where fubiftencc cannot be procured with
the fame cafe, where men must unite more closely,
and a& with greater concert, necessity calls forth.
their talents, and lharpens their invention, fb that
the intelleual powers are more exercised and im-
proved. The North-American tribes and the na-
tivei of Chili, who inhabit the temperate regions
in the two great diftriits of America, are people
of otkivated and elard uderftanding when
viewed in. comparison with some of tho fieated in
the islands, or on the banks of the Maragnon and
Orinoco. Their occupations are more various,
their fyftRcm of policy, as well as of war, more
complex, their arts more numerous. But, even
among them, the intelle&ual powers are extremely
limited in their operations, and unless when turned
dire&ly to those objess which interest a savage, are
held in no efimation. Both the North-Ameri-
cans and Chilefe, when not engaged in some of the
funaions belonging to a warrior or hunter,.loiter
away their time in thoughtless indolence, unac-
quainted with any other fubje& worthy of their
attention, or capable of occupying their minds . If
even among them, reason is so much ciroum-
fcribed in its exertions, and never arrives, in its
highest attainments, at the knowledge of those ge-
neral principles and maxims, which fSrve as the

Iafitau, ii. .

,o fbundatioa

B 0 0 K foundation of science, we may conclude, that the

intellekual powers of man in the savage state are
deftitte of their proper object, and cannot acquire
any considerable degree of vigour and enlargement.

Adive ti- FROM the fame causes, the ative efforts of the
forts of the
mind few mind are few, and, on most occasions, languid.
and lan-
· isd. If we examine into the motives which rouze men

to afivity in civilized life, and prompt them to
persevere in fatiguing exertions of their ingenuity
or strength, we fliall find that they arire chiefly
from acquired wants and appetites. These are
numerous and importunate; they keep the mind in
perpetual agitation, and, in order to gratify them,
invention must be always on the itretch, and indus-
try must be incessantly employed. But the desires
of simple nature are few, and where a favourable
climate yields almost spontaneously what suffices to
gratify them, they scarcely stir the foul, or excite
any violent emotion. Hence the people of several
tribes in America wale their life in a liftlfs indo-
lence. To be free from occupation, seems to be
all the enjoyment towards which they aspire. They
will continue whole days stretched out in their ham-
mocs, or feated on the earth, in perfec idleness,
without changing their posture, or rairing their
eyes from the ground, or uttering a single word'.
tiprov;. SUCH is their averrion to labour, that neither the

' hope of future good, nor the apprehension of future

Boguer Voy. au Pcrou, o12. Borde, It.

Cvll,

evil, can surmount it. They appear equally indif- B ° ° K
ferent to both, discovering little solicitude, and .
taking no precautions to avoid the one, or to secure
the other. The cravings of hunger may routf
them; but as they devour, with little diftin&ion,
whatever will appease its inltindive demands, the
exertions which there occasion are of ihort dura-
tion. Destitute of ardour, as well as variety of
desire, they feel not the force of those powerful
springs which give vigour to the movements of the
mind, and urge the patient hand ofinduftry to per-
revere in its efforts. Man, in some parts of Ame-
rica, appears in a form so rude, that we can disco-
ver no effecs of his a&ivity, and the principle of
understanding which should dire& it, seems hardly
to be unfolded. Like the other animals, he has no
fixed residence; he has erte&ed no habitation to
Ihelter him from the inclemency of the weather;
he has taken no measures for fkcuring certain sub-
fiftnce; be neither sows nor reaps; but roams
about as led in search of the plants and fruits which
the earth brings forth in fucceflion; and in quest of
the game which he kills in the forests, or of the fifl
which he catches in the rivers.

THls description, however, applies only to some some va-

ricty witlt
tribes. Man cannot continue longin thisftatcoffeeble rerpcn to

all thcsc.

and uninformed infancy. He was made for industry
and acion, and the powers of his nature, as well as
the necefity of his condition, urge him to fulfil his
deStiny. Accordingly, among most of the Ame-

c 3 rican

B 0 0 K rican nations, especially those feared in rigorous
*-... climates, rome efforts are employed, and some

previous precautions are taken, fr securing subsist
ence. The career of regular industry is begun,
and the laborious arm has made the first efays of
its power. Still, however, the improvident and
slothful genius of the savage Rfate predominates.
Even among those more improved tribes, labour is
deemed ignominious and degrading. It is only to
work of a certain kind that a man will deign to put
his hand. The greater part is devolved entirely
upon the women. One half of the community re-
mains inactive, while the other is opprefled with
the multitude and variety of its occupations. Thus
their industry is partial, and the foresight which re-
gulates it, is no less limited. A remarkable in-
fiance of this occurs in the chief arrangement with
refpec to their manner of living. They depend
for their subsistence, during one part of the year,
on filiing; during another, on hunting; during a
third, on the produce of their agriculture. Though
experience has taught them to foresee the return of
thole various seasons, and to make some provision
for the refpecive exigencies of each, they either
want sagacity to proportion this provision to their
consumption, or are so incapable of any command
over their appetites, that, from their inconfideratc
waste, they often feel the calamities of famine as
severely as the rudest of the savage tribes. What
they susser one year does not augment their in-
duftry, or render them more provident to prevent

similar

similar diftrelcs . This inconiderace thoughld- a o o K

1V.

ness about futurity, the effect of ignorance and the .
cause of sloth, accompanies and charaterizes man
in every sage of iavage life'; and, by a capricious
fiogudarity in his operations, he is then leait flici-
tous about supplying his wants, when the means of
satisfying them are most precarious, and procured
with the greatest difficulcy k.

III. AFTZR viewing the bodily constitution of Their ocirl

the Americans, and contemplating the powers of
their minds, we are led, in the natural order of in-
quiry, to confider them as united together in society.
Hitherto our researches have been confined to the
operations of understanding rcepeaing themselves,
as individuals, now they will extend to the degree
of their fnfbility and affe&ion towards their
fecies,

Tan domestic Rate is the first and most simple Domefli

form of human association, The union of the union
sexes, among different animals, is of longer or
horter duration .in proportion to the ease or diffi-
culty of rearing their offspring. Among those
tribes where the season of infancy is short, and the
young Coon acquire vigour or agility, no permanent
union is formed. Nature commits the care of

i Charley. N. Fr. iii. 338. Lcttr. Edif. 3. 198. D.efcrip.
of N. France, Osborn's ColleIc. ii. 88o. De a Pothcfic, ii. 63.

Bancroft's Nat. Hilt. of Guiana, 326. 333.
See NOTE XXV.

c 4 training

B 0 0 K training up the offspring to the mother alone, and

IV.

* ,
-- her tenderness, without any other assistance, is equal

to the task. But where the state of infancy is long
and helpless, and the joint assiduity of both parents
is requisite in tending their feeble progeny, there a
more intimate connexion takes place, and conti-
nues until the purpo'e of nature be accomplished,
and the new race grow up to full maturity. As
the infancy of man is more feeble and helpless than
that of any other animal, and he is dependent,
during a much longer period, on the care and fore-
light of his parents, the union between husband
and wife came early to be confidered, not only as
a solemn, but as a permanent contra&. A general
slate of promiscuous intercourse between the sexes
never exiited but in the imagination of poets. In
the infancy offociety, when men, destitute of arts and
industry, lead a hard precarious life, the rearing of
their progeny demands the attention and efforts of
both parents; and if their union had not been
formed and continued with this view, the race could
not have'been prefrrved. Accordingly, in America,
even among the rudest tribes, a regular union
between huiband and wife was univcrfal, and the
rights of marriage were underifood and recognized.
In those diftri&s where subsistence was scanty, and
the difficulty of maintaining a family was great, the
man confined himself to one wife. In warmer and
-more fertile provinces, the facility of procuring
food concurred with the influence of climate, in

9~~q ~inducin.l

inducing the inhabitants to increase the number of B 0 K
their wives'. In some countries, the marriage _-.
union subsisted during life; in others, the impa-
tience of the Americans under restraint of any
species, together with their natural levity and
caprice, prompted them to dissolve it on very flight
pretexts, and often without afigning any cause m.

BUT in whatever light the Americans confidered Condition

the obligation of this contract, either as perpetual,
or only as temporary, the condition of women was
equally humiliating and miserable. Whether man
has been improved by the progress of arts and civi-
lization in society, is a question, which, in the wan-
tonness of disputation, has been agitated among
philosophers. That women are indebted to the
refinements of polished manners for a happy change
in their state, is a point which can admit of no
doubt. To despise and to degrade the female sex,
is the charaferiftic of the savage slate in every part
of the globe. Man, proud of excelling in strength
and in courage, the chief marks of pre-eminence
among rude people, treats woman, as an inferior,
with disdain. The Americans, perhaps from that
coldness and insensibility which has been confidered
as peculiar to their constitution, add neglec and

Lettr. Edif.. 3. 38. Lafitau Macur, i. 54. Lery ap.
de Bry, iii. a34. Journal de Grillet et Bechamel, p. 88.

' Lafitau, i. 58o. Joutel Journ. Hiltor. 345. Lozan

Defer. del Gran Chaco, 70. Hennepin Mauurs de, Sauvages,
P. 30. 33.

harshness

B V K harflnefs to contempt. The mod intelligent tra.

-, * vyellers have been struck with this inattention of the

Americans to their women. It is not, as I have al.
ready oblerved, bya studied display oftendernefs and
attachment, that the American endeavours to gain
the heart of the woman whom he wishes to marry.
Marriage itself, instead of being an union of assec.
tion and interests between equals, becomes, among
them, the unnatural conjuncion of a mafier with
his slave. It is the observation of an author, whose
opinions are deservedly of great weight, that where.
ever wives are purchased, their condition is ex-
tremely depressed . They become the property
and the saves ofthofe who buy them. In whatever
part of the globe this custom prevails, the obfcrva-
tion holds. In countries where refinement has
made some progress, women, when purchased, are
excluded from society, shut up in sequestered apart-
ments, and kept under the vigilant guard of their
masters. In ruder nations, they are degraded to
the meanef functions. Among many people of
America, the marriage-contrat is properly a pur-
chafe. The man buys his wife of her parents.
Though unacquainted with the use of money, or
with such commercial tranfations as take place in
more improved society, he knows how to give an
equivalent for, any obje& which he desires to pof-
feSl. In tome places, the suitor devotes his service
for a certain time to the parents of the maid whom

· Sketches of His. of Man, i. 184.

he

he courts; in others, he hunts for them occasion- sB °0 K
ally, or afifts in cultivating their fields, and forming *
their canoes; in others, he offers presents of such
things as are deemed most valuable on account of
their usefulness or rarity ". In return for these, he
receives his wife; and this circumstance, added to
the low effimation of women among savages, leads
him to confider her as a female servant whom he
has purchased, and whom he has a title to treat as
an inferior. In all unpolilhed nations, it is true,
the fin&ions in domestic ceconomy, which fall na-
turally to the share of women, are so many, that
they are fubjeted to hard labour, and must bear
more than their full portion of the common burden.
But in America their condition is so peculiarly
grievous, and their deprefflon so complete, that
servitude is a name too mild to describe their
wretched state. A wife, among most tribes, is no
better than a beast of burden, deffined to every
office of labour and fatigue. While the men loiter
out the day in sloth, or spend it in amusement, the
women are condemned to incessant toil. Talks are
imposed upon them without pity, and services are
received without complacence or gratitude'. Every
circumstance reminds women of this mortifying in-
feriority. They must approach their lords with
reverence; they must regard them as more exalted

0 Lafitau Mccurs, &c. i. 560, &c. Charley. iii. a8, &c.
Herrera, dec. 4. lib. iv. c. 7. Dumont, ii. 56.

P Tcrtle, ii. 382. Borde Rclat. des Mocurs des Caraibes,
p. ai. Bict. 357. 'Condamine, p. i o. Fcrmin. i. 79.

beings,

J o o K beings, and are not permitted to eat in their pre-

.'V fence q. There are diftri'ts in America where this

dominion is to grievous, and so sensibly felt, that
some women, in a wild emotion of maternal ten-
dernefs, have deflroyed their female children in
their infancy, in order to deliver them from that
intolerable bondage to which they knew they were
doomed r. Thus the first inffitution of social life is
perverted. That state of domefic union towards
which nature leads the human species, in order to
ibften the heart to gcntlenefs and humanity, is ren-
dered so unequal, as to establish a cruel dilfinaion
between the sexes, which forms the one to be harsh
and unfeeling, and humbles the other to servility
and fubjeaion.

Th'ir,-,' IT is owing, perhaps, in some nmeaire, to this
prolific. tate of deprefflon, that women in rude nations are

far from being prolific'. The vigour of their con-
ftitution is exhausted by exceflive fatigue, and the
wants and diitreffes of savage life are so numerous,
as to force them to take various precautions in
order to prevent too rapid an increase of their pro-
geny. Among wandering tribes, or such as depend
chiefly upon hunting for fofiftence, the mother
cannot attempt to rear a second child, until the fire

q Gumilla, i. 153. Barrerc, 164. Labat, Voy. ii. 78.
Chanvalon, 51. 'Tertre, ii. 300.

' Gumilla, ii. 233. 2 8. Hcrrera, dec. 7. lib. ix. c. 4.
' Lafiau, i. 59Q. Charlcvoir, iii. 304.

has

has attained such a degree of vigour as to be in some B C o'C

IV.

measure independent of her care. From this mo-
tive, it is the universal pra&ice of the American
women to suckle their children during several
years'; and as they seldom marry early, the period
of their fertility is over, before they can finilb the
long but necessary attendance upon two or three
children'. Among some of the leafd polished
tribes, whose industry and foresight do not extend
To far as to make any regular provision for;their
own filbfiftence, it is a maxim not to burden theih-
selves with rearing more than two children';
and no such numerous families, as are frequent in
civilized societies, are to be found among men in
the savage state . When twins are born, one of
them commonly is abandoned, because the mother
is not equal to the talk of rearing both'. When a
mother dies while she is nursing a child, all hope of
preserving its life fails, and it is buried together
with her in the fame grave'. As the parents are
frequently exposed to want by their own improvi-
dent indolence, the difficulty of sustaining their

t Herrera, dec. 6. lib. i. c. 4.
' Charlev. iii. 303. Dumont Mem, fur Louifiahe, ii 27a0.

Denys Hilt.Natur. de IAmcrique, &c. ii. 36;. Charlev. Hlt.
de Parag. ii. 422.

Techo's Account of Paraguay, &c. Church. Collet. vi.

o08. Lett. Edif. 24. 200 Lozano Defer.,9g.
7 Maccleur's Journal, 63. I

L Lett. Edif x. zoo. See NOTE XXVI.

* Charlev. iii. 368. Lett. Edif. x. 2oos P. Melch. HIer-
Pandez Memor. de Cheriqui. Colbert, Collet. Orig. Pap. i.

children

a o o t children becomes so great, that it is not uncommon
I-. _ to abandon or destroy them b. Thus their experi-

ence of the difficulty of training up an infant to
maturity, amidst the hardships offavage life, often
ftifes the voice of nature among the Americans,
and suppresses the strong emotions of parental ten-
derncfs.

rmntal as. BUT, though necellity compels the inhabitants
&iduty. of America thus to set bounds to the increase of

their families, they are not deficient in aff'ecion
and attachment to their offspring. They feel the
power of this inftint in its full force, and as long
as their progeny continue feeble and helpless, no
people exceed them in tenderness and care'. But
in rude nations, the dependence of children upon
their parents is of lhorter continuance than in po-
liihed societies. When men must be trained to
the various funtions of civil life by previous difci-
pline and education, when the knowledge ofabftrufc
sciences must be taught, and dexterity in intricate
ars must be acquired, before a young man is pre-
pared to begin his career of action, the attentive
feelings of a parent are not confined to the years of
infancy, but extend to what is more remote, the
establishment of his child in the world. Even
then, his solicitude does not terminate. His pro-
tection may still be requisite, and his wisdom and
experience still prove useful guides. Thus a per-

h Venega's Hit. of Calibrn. i. 8.
Gumila, i. all. Biet. 390.

manent

manent connexion is formed; parental tendermefs s o o
is exercised, and filial refpe& returned, throughout '

'

the whole course of life. But in the simplicity of
the savage state, the affe&tion of parents, like the
inftinrive fondness of animals, ceases almost en-
tirely as soon as' their offspring attain maturity.
Little inftru&ion fits them for that mode of life to
which they are destined. The parents, as if their
duty were accomplished, when they have conduced
their children through the helpless years of infancy,
leave them afterwards at entire liberty. Even in
their tender age, they seldom advise or admonilh,
they never chide or chalfife them. They susser
them to be absolute maflers of their own a&ions'.
In an American hut, a father, a mother, and their
posterity, live together like persons assembled by
accident, without teeming to feel the obligation of
the duties mutually arising from this connexion'.
As filial love is not cherished by the continuance of
attention or good offices, the recolc&tion of bee"-
fits received in early infancy is too faint to excite it.
Conscious of their own liberty, and impatient of
restraint, the youth of America are accuftdmed
to at as if they were totally independent. Their
parents are not objets of greater regard than other
persons. They treat them always with neglect,
and often with such harshness and insolence, as to

Chrler. iii. 37z. Bict. 39o.' Gumilla, i..at. Laitu,

i. 60r. Creuxii Hil. Cand. p. 71. Fernandez, Relac. Hilt.
le los Chequit. 33.

Charley. Ilit. N. Fr. iii. z71.

fill

B 0 0 K fill those who have been witneffcs of their condu&
.--. with horror d Thus the ideas which seem to be

natural to man in his savage state, as they result
necelarily from his circumstances and condition in
that period of his progress, affect the two capital
relations in domestic life. They render the union
between husband and wife unequal. They shorten
the duration, and weaken the force, of the con-
nexion between parents and children.

I'olitica in- IV. FROM the domestic state of the Americans,
itlut.ojnb.

the transition to the consideration of their civil go-
vernment and political institutions is natural. In
every enquiry concerning the operations of men
when united together in society, the first object of
attention should be their mode of subsistence. Ac-
cordinkly as that varies, their laws and policy muff
be different. The institution suited to the ideas
and exigeneies of tribes, which fubfit chiefly by
filhing or hunting, and which have as yet acquired
but an imperfec conception of any species of pro-
perty, will be much more simple than those which
must take place when the earth is cultivated with
regular industry, and a right of property not only
in its productions, but in the foil itself, is com-
pletely ascertained.

Mode of ALL the people of America, now under review,
blcnce. belong to the former class. But though they may

d Gumilla, i. a21. Tertre, ii. 376. Charley. Hil. de

N. France, iii. 309. Charle. Hill. de Parag. i. iJS. Lo.
zano, Defcript. del Gran Chaco, p. 68. too, lot. Fcrnand.
Rlac. Hifor. de los Chequic. 4z6.

all

all be comprehended under the general dnotnina:- B 0 K
tion of savage, the advances which they had made' i _V
in the art-of procuring to rhemfelves i certaini and
plentifil flbfiftence, were very uneqiul. On the
extenive plains of South-America, man appears id
one of the rudert Rates in which he has been ever
observed, or, perhaps, can exist. Several tribes
depend entirely upon the bounty of nature for sub-
fiftence. They difeover no folicitudt, they em-
ploy little fbrefght, they fearcely exert any ih-
duflr, tO ecure what is neceefaryfor theif:fupport.'
The ropayers of Brasil, the Guaxeros of Tifrta
FirmC,' the Caiguas, the Moxos, and several other
people of Paraguay, are unacquainted with every
species of cultivation. They neither sow nor plant.
Even the culture of the manioc, of which calTada
bread is made, is an art too intricate for their inge-
nuity, or too fatiguing to their indolence. The
roots which the earth produces spontaneously, the
fruits, the berries, and' the feeds, which they gather
in the woods, together with lizards and other rep-
tiles, which multiply amazingly with the heat of
the climate in a fat foil, moistened by frequent
rains, supply them with food during some part' ds
the year'. At other times they fubfnt by :filhng'; By fifin
and nature feema to have indulged the laziness of

Nieuhoff. Hit. of Brasil. Church. Coll.. ii. 134. Simon,

Conquifi do Tierra FirmE, p. 166. Techd,' Account f 'Fa.
raguy, kc. Church. vi. 78. Lettr. Edif. s3. 384. ro. i9o.
Lozano, Defcrip. del Gran Chaco, p. 81. Ribsi, Htbr. de
loo Triumfos, &c. . 7.

VOL. I1. H the

B 00o K the South-American tribes by the liberality with

,,.--. which she miniiters, in this way, to their wants.

The vait rivers of that region in America abound
with an infinite variety of the most delicate filh.
The lakes and marshes formed by the annual over-
flowing of the waters, are filled with all the dif-
ferent species, where they remain shut up, as in
natural reservoirs, for the use of the inhabitants.
They swarm in such shoals, that in some places
they are catched without art or industry'. In
others, the natives have discovered a method of
infe&ing the water with the juice of certain plants,
by which the fiflh are so intoxicated, that they float
on the surface, and are taken with the handg.
Some tribes have ingenuity enough to preserve
them without salt, by drying or smoking them
upon hurdles over a flow fire h. The prolific qua-
lity of the rivers in South-America induces many
of the natives to retort to their banks, and to de/
pend almoR entirely for nourishment on what their
waters fupply;with such profusion'. In this part of
the globe, hunting seems not to have been the firlt
employment of men, or the first effort of their in.
vention and labour to obtain food. They were
fishers before they became hunters; and as the oc-
cupations of the former do not call for equal exer-
tions of acivity, or talents, with those of the latter,

f See NOTE XXVII. t See NOTE XXVIII.
h Condam. 159. Gumilla, ii. 37. Lettr. Edif. 14. 199.
23. 328. Acugna, Relat. de la Riv. des Amaz. 138.

i Barrcre, Rclat. d, IFr. Equin. p, . pi.

9 people

people in that ifate appear to poflffs neither the B o O K
fame degree of enterprise nor of ingenuity. The I
petty nations, adjacent to the Maragnon and Ori-
noco, are manifestly the most ina&ive and least in-
telligent of all the Americans.

NONE but tribes contiguous to great rivers can Eyhuntlng

fuflain themselves in this manner. The greater
part of the American nations, dispersed over the
forests with which their country is covered, do not
procure subsistence with the fame facility. For al-
though there forests, cfpecially in the southern con-
tinent of America, are stored plentifully with game',
considerable efforts of ativity and ingenuity are re-
quifite in pursuit of it. Necessity incited the na-
tives to the one, and taught them the other. Hunt-
ing became their principal occupation; and as it
called forth strenuous exertions of courage, of
force, and of invention, it was deemed no less ho-
nourable than necelfary. This occupation was pe-
culiar to the men. They were trained to it from
their earliest youth. A bold and dextrous hunter
ranked next in fame to the distinguished warrior,
and an alliance with the former is often courted in
preference to one with the latter'. Hardly any de-
vice, which the ingenuity of man has discovered
for ensnaring or deltroying wild animals, was un-
known to the Americans. While engaged in this

k P. Martyr, Decad. . 324. Gumilla, ii. 4, &ec. Acugna,
i. I6.

X Charley. Hiuoire do la N. France, iii. 115.

a a favourite

B 0 0 K favourite exercise, they lhake off the indolence pe.
'L-" culiar to their nature, the latent powers and vigour

of their minds are roused, and they become active,
persevering, and indefatigable. Their sagacity in
finding their prey, and their address in killing it,
are equal. Their reason and their senses being
constantly directed towards this one object, the
former displays such fertility of invention, and the
latter acquire such a degree of acuteness, as appear
almost incredible. They discern the footsteps of a
wild beast, which escape every other eye, and can
follow them with certainty through the pathless so-
reft. If they attack their game openly, their ar-
row seldom errs from the mark m; if they endea-
vour to circumvent it by art, it is almost impolfible
to avoid their toils. Among several tribes, their
young men were not permitted to marry, until
they had given such proofs of their skill in hunt-
ing as put it beyond doubt that they were capable
of providing for a family. Their ingenuity, always
on the stretch, and sharpened by emulation, as
well as necessity, has itruck out many inventions,
which greatly facilitate success in the chafe. The
most singular of these is the discovery of a poison
in which they dip the arrows employed in hunting.
The slightest wound with those envenomed lhafts is
mortal. If they only pierce the skin, the blood
fixes and congeals in a moment, and the strongest

rm Biet. Voy. de France Equin. 357. Davies' Difcov. of the
River of Amaz. Purchaf. iv. p. 1287.

animal

animal falls motionless to the ground. Nar does a o o s
this poison, notwithstanding its violence and fib- . '.v.
tiety, infe& the flesh of the animal which it kills.
That may be eaten with perfect safety, and retains
its native relish and qualities. All the nations situ-
ated upon the banks of the Maragnon and Orinoco
are acquainted with this composition, the chief in-
gredient in which is the juice extrated from the
root of the curare, a species of withe ". In other
parts of America, they employ the juice of the
mancbenille for the fame purpose, and it operates
with no less fatal acivity. To people poflefled of
those secrets, the bow is a more deflru&ive weapon
than the musket, and, in their skilful hands, does
great execution among the birds and beasts which
abound in the forests of America.

BUT the life of a hunter gradually leads man to By agricul.

a itate more advanced. The chafe, even where t
prey is abundant, and the dexterity of the hunter
much improved, affords but an uncertain mainte-
nance, and at some seasons it must be suspended
altogether, If a savage trusts to his bow alone for
food, he and his family will be often reduced to
extreme distress °. -Hardly any region of the earth
furnifles man spontaneously with what his wants
require. In the mildest climates, and most fertile

" Gumilla, ii. I, &c. Condam. 208. Recherch. Philof.

ii. 239. Bancroft's Nat. Hilt. of Guiana, 281, &c.
' Sce NOTE XXIX.

if 3 foils,

B 0 0 K foils, his own induitry and foresight must be exerted,
* , _ in rome degree, to secure a regular supply of food.

Their experience of this surmounts the abhorrence
of labour natural to savage nations, and compels
them to have recourse to culture, as subsidiary to
hunting. In particular situations, some finall tribes
may fubfifi by fishing, independent of any pro.
dustion of the earth, raised by their own industry.
But throughout all America, we scarcely meet with
any nation of hunters, which does not praftife fomt
species of cultivation.

tvlri,,nous THE agriculture of the Americans, however, ih
tii, cui. neither extensive nor laborious. As game and fil

U are their principal food, all they aim at by cultiva.

tion, is to supply any occasional defec of these.
In the southern continent of America, the natives
confined their industry to rearing a few plants,
which, in a rich foil and warm climate, were easily
trained to maturity. The chief of these is Maize,
well known in Europe by the name of Turkey or
Indian wheat, a grain extremely prolific, of simple
culture, agreeable to the taste, and affording a
strong hearty nourishment. The second is the
Manioc, which grows to the size of a large shrub,
or small tree, and produces roots somewhat refem-
bling parsnips. After carefully squeezing put the
juice, there roots are grated down to a fine powder,
and formed into thin cakes, called Caflada bread,
which, though insipid to the taste, proves no con-

temptible

temptible food P. As the juice of the manioc is a B o o K
deadly poison, some authors have celebrated the 'vI _
ingenuity of the Americans, in converting a noxi-
ous plant into wholesome nourishment. But it
lhould rather be confidered as one of the desperate
expedients for procuring fubfi(tence, to which ne-
ceflity reduces rude nations; or, perhaps, men
were led to the use of it by a progress, in which
there is nothing marvellous. One species of manioc
is altogether free of any poisonous quality, and may
be eaten without any preparation but that of roat-
ing it in the embers. This, it is probable, was first
used by the Americans as food; and necessity hav-
ing gradually taught them the art of separating its
pernicious juice from the other species, they have
by experience found it to be more prolific as well
as more nourishing 1. The third is the plantain,
which though it rifes to the height of a tree, is of
such quick growth, that in leTs than a year it re-
wards the industry of the cultivator, with its fruit.
This, when roasted, supplies the place of bread,
and is both palatable and nourishing '. The fourth
is the potatoe, whose culture and qualities are too
well known to need any description. The fifth is

P Sloane His. of Jam. Introd. p. 18. Labat. i. 394.

Acola Hil. Ind. Occid. Natur. lib. iv. c. 17. Uloa, i. 6s.
Aublet Mem. fur le Magnioc. Hit. des Plantes, tom. ii.
p. 6s, &c.

q Martyr, Decad. 30o. Labat. i. 41 . Gumilla, iiL 192.
Machucha Milic. Indiana, 164. Sec NOTE XXX.

'See NOTE XXXI.

H pimento,

a o0 0K pimento, a small tree, yielding a strong aromatic

IV. *,-., spice. The Americans, who, like other inhabit-

ants of warm climates, delight in whatever is hot
and of poignant flavour, deem this seasoning a ne-
ceffary of life, and mingle it copiously with every
kind of food they take '.

SUCH are the various productions, which were

the chief object of culture among the hunting
tribes on the continent of America, and with a
moderate exertion of active and provident in-
dufiry, these might have yielded a full supply to
the wants of a numerous people. But men, ac-
customed to the free and vagrant life of hunters, are
incapable of regular application to labour; and con-
ider agriculture as a secondary and inferior occu-
pation. Accordingly, the provision for subsistence,
arising from cultivation, was so limited and scanty
among the Americans, that, upon any accidental
failure of their usual fiiccefs in hunting, they were
pften reduced to extreme distress.

IN the islands, the mode ds subsisting was con-

fiderably different. None of the large animals
which abound on the continent were known there.
Only four species of quadrupeds, betides a kind of
small dumb dog, existed in the islands, the biggefi
of which did not exceed the size of a rabbit ". To
hunt such diminutive prey, was an occupation which

t Gutilla, lii. 1t. Aeofia, lib. iv. c. 2o.
* Ovicdo, lib. xii. il proem.

required

required no effort either of acivity or courage. The B oO K
chief employment of a hunter in- the ifdes was to -_
kill birds, which on the continent are deemed ig-
noble game, and left chiefly to the pursuit of boys ?.
This want of animals, as well as their peculiar
firuation, led the islanders to depend principally
upon fishing for their subsistence Y. Their rivers,
and the lea with which they are surrounded, sup-
plied them with this species of food. At some par-
ticular seasons, turtle, crabs, and other ihell-fifh,
abounded in such numbers, that the natives could
support themselves with a facility in which their in-
dolence delighted z. At other times, they ate li-
zards, and various reptiles of odious forms *. To
filhing, the inhabitants of the islands added some
degree of agriculture. Maize b, manioc, and other
plants, were cultivated in the fame manner as on
the continent. But all the fruits of their indultry, Their ari-
together with what their foil and climate produced lin"utd.
fpontaneoufy, afforded them but a scanty mainte-
nance. Though their demands for food were very
sparing, they hardly raised what was sufficient for
their own consumption. If a few Spaniards fettled
in any diftri&, such a small addition of fupernume-
rary mouths soon exhaulted their scanty flores, and
brought on a famine.

x Ribu Hilt. de los Triumph. p. 13. De la Potherie,

ui. 33. 0iii. so

? Oviedo, lib. xiii. c. i. Gomara, Hill. Gener. c. i8.
* Gomara Hill. Gcner. c. 9. Labat. ii. 221, &c.
' Oviedo, lib. xiii. c. .' b See NOT E XXXIT.

Two

B3 0 K Two circumstances, common to all the savage

- nations of America, concurred with those which

of cfts I have already mentioned, not only in rendering
pcrststion. their agriculture imperfect, but in circtimfcribing

their power in all their operations. They had no
tame animals; and they were unacquainted with
the ufcfiul metals.

The want IN other parts of the globe, man, in his rudefl
of taine
animals. fate, appears as lord of the creation, giving law

to various tribes of animals, which he has tamed
and reduced to subjection. The Tartar follows his
prey on the horse which he has reared; or tends
his numerous herds, which furnish him both with
food and clothing; the Arab has rendered the ca.
mel docile, and avails himself of its persevering
strength; the Laplander has formed the rein-deer
to he subservient to his will; and even the people
of Kamchatka have trained their dogs to labour.
This command over the inferior creatures is one of
the noblefl prerogatives of man, and among the
greatest efforts of his wiidom and power. Without
this, his dominion is incomplete. He is a mo-
narch, who has no fubjets; a master, without ser-
vants, and mulf perform every operation by the
firength of his own arm. Such was the condition
of all the rude nations in America. Their reason
was so little improved, or their union so incom-
plete, that they fcem not to have been conscious
of the ftpeliority of their nature, and fuffterd all
the animal creation to retain its liberty, without

eftablilhing

establishing their own authority over any one fpe- B oo ot
cies. Most of the animals, indeed, which have ..'-...
been rendered domestic in our continent, do not
exist in the New World; but those peculiar to it
are neither so fierce, nor so formidable, as to have
exempted them from servitude. There are some
animals of the fame species in both continents. But
the rein-deer, which has been tamed and broken
to the yoke in the one hemisphere, runs wild in the
other. The bifcn of America is manifestly of the
fame species with the horned cattle of the other he-
mifpherec. The latter, even among the rudest
nations in our continent, have been rendered do-
meftic; and, in consequence of his dominion over
them, man can accomplish works of labour with
greater facility, and has made a great addition to
his means of subsistence. The inhabitants of many
regions of the New World, where the bison abounds,
might have derived the fame advantages from it.
It is not of a nature so indocile, but that it might
have been trained to be as subservient to man as
our cattled. But a savage, in that uncultivated
state wherein the Americans were discovered, is the
enemy of the other animals, not their superior. He
waftes and destroys, but knows not how to multi-
ply or to govern them'.

c Buffon, Artic. Bi/n.
· Nouv. Decouverte par Hennepin, p. 192. Kalm. i. 207.
· Buffon Hist. Nat. ix. 85. Hist. Philof. et Polit. des Eta-
blissem. des Europ. dans les deux Indes, vi. 364.

TuIS,

0O0 K THIS, perhaps, is the most notable diftin&ion

_.-' between the inhabitants of the Ancient and New

Worlds, and a high pre-eminence of civilized men
above such as continue rude. The greatest opera-
tions of man in changing and improving the face
of nature, as well as his most considerable efforts
in cultivating the earth, are accomplilhed by means
of the aid which he receives from the animals whom
he has tamed and employs in labour. It is by their
strength that he subdues the tfubborn foil, and con-
verts the desert or marsh into a fruitful field. But
man, in his civilized state, is so accustomed to the
service of the domestic animals, that he seldom re-
fleAs upon the valt benefits which he derives from
it. If we were to suppose to him, even when most
improved, to be deprived of their useful minifiry,
his empire over nature must in some measure cease,
and he would remain a feeble animal, at a loss how
to subsist, and incapable of attempting such arduous
undertakings as their assistance enables him to exe-
cute with ease.

Want of the IT is a doubtful point, whether the dominion
ufeiful no-
u;, of man over the animal creation, or his acquiring

the use of metals, has contributed most to extend
his power. The aria of this important discovery
is unknown, and in our hcmifphere very remote.
It is only by tradition, or by digging up some rude
instruments of cur forefathers, that we learn that
mankind were originally unacquainted with the uWe
of metals, and endeavoured to fitpply the want of

them

them by employing flints, Ihells, bones, and other B oO K
hard substances, for the fame purposes which me- '_'
tals serve among polished nations. Nature com-
pletes the formation of some metals. Gold, silver,
and copper, are found in their perfect state in the
clefts of rocks, in the fides of mountains, or the
channels of rivers. These were accordingly the
metals first known, and first applied to use. But
iron, the molt serviceable of all, and to which man
is modt indebted, is never discovered in its perfect.
form; its gross and stubborn ore mudt feel twice
the force of fire, and go through two laborious pro-
celfes, before it become fit for use. Man was
long acquainted with die other metals, before he
acquired the art of fabricating iron, or attained such
ingenuity as to perfect an invention, to which he is
indebted for those instruments wherewith he sub-
dues the earth, and commands all its inhabitants.
But in this, as well as in many other refpets, the
inferiority of the Americans was conspicuous. All
tie savage tribes, scattered over the continent and,
islands, were totally unacquainted with the metals
which their foil produces in great abundance, if
we except some trifling quantity of gold, which
they picked up in the torrents that descended from
their mountains, and formed into ornaments. Their
devices to supply this want of the serviceable metals,
were extremely rude and awkward. The molt
simple operation was to them an undertaking of
immense difficulty and labour. To fell a tree with
no other infitruments than hatchets of stone, was

8 employ-

B 0 0 K employment for a month . To form a canoe into

_-v Ihape, and to hollow it, consumed years; and it

frequently began to rot before they were able to
finish its. Their operations in agriculture were
equally flow and def&etive. In a country covered
with woods of the hardest timber, the clearing of
a small field destined for culture required the united
efforts of a tribe, and was a work of much time
and great toil. This was the business of the men,
and their indolence was satisfied with performing it
in a very slovenly manner. The labour of cultiva-
tion was left to the women, who, after digging, or
rather stirring the field, with wooden mattocks,
and flakes hardened in the fire, rowed or planted
it; but they were more indebted for the increase to
the fertility of the foil, than to their own rude in-
duftry b.

AGRICULTUR E, even when the strength of man

is seconded by that of the animals which he has
fubjefted to the yoke, and his power augmented
by the use of the various inltruments with which
the discovery of metals has furniihed him, is still a
work of great labour; and it is with the sweat of
his brow that he renders the earth fertile. It is not
wonderful, then, that people deltitute of both
these advantages should have made so little progress
in cultivation,. that they must be confidered as dc-

' Gumilla, iii. x96.
. Borde Relat. des Caraibcs, p. 22.
h Gumilla, iii. 166, &c. Lcttr. Edif. xii. eo.

pending

pending for subsistence on filhing and hunting, ra- B 00 oK
ther than on the fruits of their own labour. ' _

FROM this description of the mode of subsisting Poiticalin.

i, ~ ~

,i ~~~ .*~ .*~ ,,-~

, ftitutiolls

among the rude American tribes, the form and ge- ariing from
nius of their political institutions may be deduced, thi LIE
and we are enabled to trace various circumstances
of diftinaion between them and more civilized
nations.

i. THEY were divided into small independent i. Divided

communities. While hunting is the chief 'ource of Csomrun-
subsistence, a vast extent of territory is requisite for 'it'
supporting a small number of people. In propor-
tion as men multiply and unite, the wild animals,
on which they depend for food, diminish, or fly at
a greater distance from the haunts of their enemy.
The increase of a society in this state is limited by
its own nature, and the members of it must either
disperse, like the game which they pursue, or fall
upon some better method of procuring food, than
by hunting. Beasts of prey are by nature solitary
and unsocial, they go not forth to the chafe in
herds, but delight in those reccfles of the forest
where they can roam and destroy undisturbed.
A nation of hunters resembles them both in
occupation and in genius. They cannot form
into large communities, because it would be im-
possible to find subsistence and they must drive to
a distance every rival who may incroach on those
domains, which they confider as their own. This

Was

o o 0 K was the state of all the American tribes, the num.
_,V. bers in each were inconsiderable, though scattered

over countries of great extent; they were far re-
moved from one another, and engaged in perpetual
hostilities or rivalihip . In America, the word nation
is not of the fame import as in other parts of the
globe. It is applied to small societies, not exceeding,
perhaps, two or three hundred persons, but occupy-
ing provincesgreater than some kingdoms in Europe.
The country of Guiana, though of larger extent
than the kingdom of France, and divided among
a great number of nations, did not contain above
twenty-five thousand inhabitants . In the pro-
vinces which border on the Orinoco, one may tra-
vel several hundred miles in different diretions,
without finding a tingle hut, or observing the
footsteps of a human creature'. In North Ame-
rica, where the climate is more rigorous, and the
foil less fertile, the desolation is fill greater.
There, journeys of some hundred leagues have
been made through uninhabited plains and forefRs .
As long as hunting continues to be the chief em-
ployment of man to which he trusts for fubfifl-
ence, he can hardly be said to have occupied the
earth ".

i Lo .ano, Defcrip. del Gran Chaco, 59. 6z. Fernandcz,
Relac. iifi. de los Chiquit. x62.

k Voyages de Marchais, iv. 353.
1 Gumilla. ii. sol.
m M. Fabry, quoted by Buffon, iii. 488. Lafitau, ii. 179.
Bpftu, Travels through Louisiana, i. il l. See NOTE XXXIII.

Sec NOTE XXXIV.

c. NATIONS

2. NATIONS which depend upon hunting are, in B oo K

a great measure, strangers to the idea of property. I

.
As the animals on which the hunter feeds are not Vunc.

quaint'd
bred under his infpetion, nor nourilhed by his care, with the

idea of

he can claim no right to them, while they run wild property.
in the forest. Where game is so plentiful that it
may be catched with little trouble, men never
dream of appropriating what is of small value, or of
cafy acquisition. Where it is so rare, that the la-
bour or danger of the chafe requires the united
efforts of a tribe, or village, what is killed is a com-
mon stock, belonging equally to all, who, by their
skill or their courage, have contributed to the
success of the excursion. The forest, or hunting-
grounds, are deemed the property of the tribe,
from which it has a title to exclude every rival
nation. But no individual arrogates a right to any
diitri& of these, in preference to his fellow citizens.
They belong alike to all; and thither, as to a ge-
neral and undivided store, all repair in quest of
sustenance. The fame principles by which they
regulate their chief occupation, extend to that
which is subordinate. Even agriculture has not
introduced among them a complete idea of pro-
perty. As the men hunt, the women labour toge-
ther, and after they have shared the toils of the
feed time, they enjoy the harvest in common".
Among Tome tribes, the increase of their cultivated
lands is deposited in a public granary, and divided
among them at flated times, according to their

Dr. Ftrgafot's EfTly, i25.
VOL. it. X wants.

1a v K wantsP. Among others, though they lay up fepa-
.- -j 'rate ftgres, they do not acquire such an exclusive

right of property, that they can enjoy superfluity,
while those around them susser want s. Thus the
diftinftions arising from the inequality of poffellions
are unknown. The terms rich or poor enter not
into their language, and being strangers to pro-
perty, they are unacquainted with what is the great
object of laws and policy, as well as the chief mo-
tive which induced mankind to eflablifh the various
arrangements of regular government'.

fHi egtu.t 3. PEOPLE in this slate retain a high sense of
and inde- equality and independence. Wherever the idea of

. property is not eltablifhed, there can be no dif-

tinstion among men, but what arises from personal
qualities. These can be conspicuous only on such
occasions as call them forth into exertion. In
times of danger, or in affairs of intricacy, the wis-
dom and experience of age are consulted, and pre-
scribe the neafures which ought to be pursued.
When a tribe offavages takes the field againit the
enemies of their country, the warrior of moif ap-
proved courage leads the youth to the combat'.
If they go forth in a body to the chafe, the most

P Gumilla, i. 265. Brickell, Hist. of N. Carol. 327. See
NOTE XXXV.

q Denys, Hist. Natur. ii. 392, 393.
r P. Martyr, Decad. p. 45. Veneg. [lid. ofCaliforn. i. 66.
Lery, Navig. in Brasil, c. 17.

' Acofla, Hilt. lib. vi. c. 19. Stadius, Hid. Brasil, lib. ii.
c. 13. De Bry. iii. p. ilo. Biet. 361.

expert

expert and adventurous hunter is foremost, and di- B o o r

IV.

rets their motions. But during seasons of tran-
quility and inaction, when there is no occasion to
display those talents, all pre-eminence ceases. Every
circumstance indicates, that all the members of the
community are on a level. They are clothed in
the fame simple garb. They feed on the fame
plain fare. Their houses and furniture are exa&ly
similar. No diftinAion can arise from the inequa-
lity of poffeflions. Whatever forms dependence
on one part, or constitutes superiority on the other,
is unknown. All are freemen, all feel themselves
to be such, and afTert with firmness the rights which
belong to that condition'. This sentiment of in-
dependence is imprinted so deeply in their nature,
that no change of condition can eradicate it, and
bend their minds to servitude. Accustomed to be
absolute masters of their own condu&, they disdain
to execute the orders of another; and having never
known controul, they will not fibmit to correction'.
Many of the Americans, when they found that they
were treated as slaves by the Spaniards, died or
grief; many destroyed themselves in despair'.

4. AMONG people in this state, government can Senfc of

aflume little authority, and the sense of civil fubor- ,iobn',p3
dination must remain very imperfet. While the cet

t Labat. vi. 1z4. Brickell, His. of Carol. 310.
" See NOTE XXXVI.
O Oviedo, lib. iii. c. 6. p. 97. Vega, Conquift. de la Flo-
rida, i. 30. ii.6. Labat. ii. 138. Bcnzo HiR. Nov. Orb.
lib .
i . .25.

i z idea

z O K idea of property is unknown, or incompletely con-
% ~ ceived; while the Spontaneous productions of the

earth, as well as the fruits of industry, are confi-
dered as belonging to the public stock, there can
hardly be any such subject of difference or discus-
sion among the members of the fame community,
as will require the hand of authority to interpose in
order to adjust it. Where the right of separate and
exclulive poffefion is not introduced, the great ob-
je&t of law and jurifdition does not exist. Wher
the members of a tribe are called into the field,
either to invade the territories of their enemies, or
to repel their attacks, when they are engaged to-
gether in the toil and dangers of the chafe, they
then perceive that they are part of a political body.
They are conscious of their own connection with
the companions in conjuncion with whom they a&;
and they follow and reverence such as excel in con-
du&t and valour. But, during the intervals between
such common efforts, they seem scarcely to feel die
ties of political unionY. No visible form of go-
vernment is eftablilhed. The names of mnagifrate
and fuiljef are not in use. Every one seems to
enjoy his natural independence almost entire. If a
fchdme of public utility be proposed, the members
of the community are left at liberty to chufe whe-
ther they will or will not aflift in carrying it into
execution. No itatute impores any service as a
duty, no compulsory laws oblige them to perform

i Lozano, Decfr. del Gran Chaco, 93. Mclendez Tcforow
Verdadiros, ii. 33. See NOT XXXVII.

it,

it. All their resolutions are voluntary, and flow B 0 0 K
from the impulse of their own minds '. The first A2',_
ftep towards eRtablifhing a public jurifdi&ion has
not been taken in those rude Societies. The right
of revenge is left in private hands . If violence is
committed, or blood is shed, the community does
not assume the power either of infliting or of mo-
derating the punilhment. It belongs- to the family
and friends of the person injured or slain to avenge
the wrong, or to accept of the reparation offered
by the aggressor. If the elders interpose, it is to
advise, not to decide, and it is seldom their counsels
are listened to; for as it is deemed pusillanimous to
luffer an offender to escape with impunity, resent-
ment is implacable and everlaftingb. The object
of government among savages is rather foreign
than domeilic. They do not aim at maintaining
interior order and police by public regulations, or
the exertions of any permanent authority, but la-
bour to preserve such union among the members of
their tribe, that they may watch the motions of their
enemies, and a& against them with concert and
vigour.

St'CH was the form of political order elablilhed 'to wiat

am:ong the greater part of the American nations. ds,,ri. t,or
In this f ate were almost all the tribes spread over al''>

Charley. Hlif. N. France, iii. 266. z68.
llerrera, dec. 8. lib' iv. c. 8.

b Ch'lrlev. SI'It. N. France, ii. 271, 272. Lafit. i. 486.
Cafani lil. de Nuevo Reyno de Granada, az6.

1 3 the

B 0 K the provinces extending eastward of the Mississippi,
'-1-Yj from the mouth of the St. Laurence to the confines

of Florida. In a similar condition were the people
of Brasil, the inhabitants of Chili, several tribes in
Paraguay and Guiana, and in the countries which
stretch from the mouth of the Orinoco to the pc.
ninfula of Yucatan. Among such an infinite num-
ber of petty afflciations, there may be peculiarities
which constitute a diftincion, and mark the various
degrees of their civilization and improvement.
But an attempt to trace and enumerate these would
be vain, as they have not been observed by persons
capable of discerning the minute and delicate cir-
cumftances, which serve to discriminate nations
resembling one another in their general character
and features. The description which I have given
of the political institutions that took place among
those rude tribes in America, concerning which
we have received most complete information, will
apply, with little variation, to every people, both
in its northern and southern division, who have ad-
vanced no farther in civilization, than to add rome
slender degree of agriculture to fishing and hunting.

IMPERFECT as those institutions may appear, fe-

veral tribes were not so far advanced in their politi-
cal progress. Among all those petty nations which
trusted for fubfilfence entirely to fifling and hunt-
ing without any species of cultivation, the union
was so incomplete, and their sense of mutual de.
pendence To feeble, that hardly any appearance of

5 government

government or order can be discerned in their pro- B o o K
ceedings. Their wants are few, their ob le&s of
pursuit simple, they form into separate tribes, and
a& together, from infiin&, habit, or conveni-
ency, rather than from any formal concert and as-
fociation. To this class belong the Californians,
several of the small nations in the extensive country
of Paraguay, some of the people on the banks of
the Orinoco, and on the river St. Magdalene, in
the new kingdom of Granada b.

BUT though among these laf-mentioned tribes some irr.
there was hardly any ihadow of regular govern- laP-.
ment, and even among those which I first de-
fcribed, its authority is lender and confined within
narrow bounds, there were, however, some places
in America where government was carried far be-
yond the degree ofperfction which seems natural
to rude nations. In surveying the political opera-
tions of man, either in his savage or civilized iate,
we discover singular and eccentric institutions, which
start as it were from their station, and fly off so
wide, that we labour in vain to bring them within
the general laws of any system, or to account for
them by those principles which influence other
communities in a similar situation. Some instances
of this occur among those people of America,
whom I have included under the common denomi-
nation of savage. These are so curious and im-

b Venegas, i. 68. Lettr. Edif. ii. 176. Tccho Hil. of
Parag. Churchill, vi. 7. IiR78 . Gen. diVoyages, xiv. 74.

4 portant

B VO K portant that I shall describe them, and attempt to

IV.

I.. --,, explain their origin.

Particularly IN the New World, as well as in other parts of
in some of
the wanner the globe, cold or temperate countries appear to be
regions the favourite feat of freedom and independence.

There the mind, like the body, is firm and vigo-
rous, There men, conscious of their own dignity,
and capable of the greatest efforts in asserting it,
aspire to independence, and their stubborn spirits
stoop with reluctance to the yoke of servitude. In
warmer climates, bywhofe influence the whole frame
is so much enervated, that present pleasure is the
supreme felicity, and mere repose is enjoyment,
men acquiesce, almost without a struggle, in the
dominion of a superior. Accordingly, if we pro-
ceed from north to south along the continent of
America, we shall find the power of those vested
with authority gradually increasing, and the spirit
of the people becoming more tame and paflive. In
Florida, the authority of the sachems, caziques, or
chiefs, was not only permanent, but hereditary.
They were distinguished by peculiar ornaments, they
enjoyed prerogatives of various kinds, and were
treated by their fubje6ts with that reverence, which
people accustomed to fubje&ion pay to a mailer'.

Among the Among the Natchez, a powerful tribe now extin&,
Ntchca. formerly situated on the banks of the Mififllppi, a'

difference of rank took place, with which the north-

c Cardenas y Cano Enfayo Chronol ' Ia la Ii. de Florida,

p. 46. Le Moyne de Morgues Icones Floridae. Ap. de Bry.
p. 4, &c. Charlev. Hilt. N. France, iii. 467, 468.

cmn

ern tribes were altogether unacquainted. Some fa- B o o K
milies were reputed noble, and enjoyed hereditary -j
dignity. The body of the people was confidered as
vile, and formed only for fubjeaion. This diftinc-
tion was marked by appellations which intimated
the high elevation of the one slate, and the igno-
minious depression of the other. The former were
called Refpetiable; the latter, the Sti:kards. The
great Chief, in whom the supreme authority was
vested, is reputed to be a being of superior na-
ture, the brother of the Sun, the sole obje& of their
worlhip. They approach this great Chief with re-
ligious veneration, and honour him as the repre-
fentative of their deity. His will is a law, to which
all submit with implicit obedience. The lives of
his fubje6ts are so absolutely at his disposal, that if
any one has incurred his displeasure, the offender
comes with profound humility and offers him his
head. Nor does the dominion of the Chiefs end
with their lives; their principal officers, their fa-
vourite wives, together with many domestics of in-
ferior rank, are sacrificed at their tombs, that they
may be attended in the next world by the fame per-
Ions who served them in this; and filch is the reve-
rence in which they are held, that those vicims wel.
come death with exultation, deeming it a recompenc;
of their fidelity, and a mark of diftintlion, to be Ie- .
leted to accompany their deceased matier'. Thus

Dumont Memoir. Hist. fur Louillane, i. 175. Charlev.
lliR. N. France, iii. 419, &c. Lettr. Edif, z2. tc6 1 l.

a per-

B o o K a perse& despotism, with its full train of fuperitition,

- arrogance, and cruelty, is eftablilhed among the

Natchez, and by a singular fatality, that people has
tafted of the worst calamities incident to polished
nations, though they themselves are not far advanced
beyond the tribes around them in civility and im-

n the provcment. In Hispaniola, Cuba, and the larger
.I1ds.' ifands, their caziques or chiefs possessed extensive

power. The dignity was transmitted by hereditary
right from father to Ton. Its honours and preroga-
tives were considerable. Their fubjests paid great
refpeet to the caziques, and executed their orders
without hefitatiou or refervc c. They were diftin-
guiflced by peculiar ornaments, and in order to pre-
jerve or augment the veneration of the people, they
had the addrcis to call in the aid of fuperltition to
uphold their authority. They delivered their man-
dates as the oracles of lcaven, and pretended to
possess the power of regulating the fcafons, and of
dispensing rain or lunfhine, according as their sub-
jeCts lood in need of them.
ir EoOa. IN fonme parts of the oulthern continent, the

power of the caziques seems to have been as exten-
five as in the ifes. In Bogota, which is now a pro-
vince of the new kingdom of (iranada, there was set-
tled a nation, more considerable in number anl
more improved in the various arts of life, than any
in America except the Mexicans and Peruvians

* Herrcra, dec. x. lib. i. c. 16. lib. iii. . 44 .

4 . . Life of
Colu;nb. ch,.. i.

The

The eople of Bogotafubfiftedchiefly byagriculture. n oO .
The idea of property was introduced among them,
and its rights, secured by laws, handed down by tra-
dition, and observed with great care'. They lived in
towns which may be termed large, when compared
with those in other parts of America. They were
clothed in a decent manner, and their houses may
be termed commodious, when compared with
those of the small tribes around them. The effects
of this uncommon civilization were conspicuous.
Government had assumed a regular form. A jurif-
diEtion was eflablifhed, which took cognizance of
different crimes, and punished them with rigour. A
diftintion of ranks was known; their chief, to whom
the Spaniards gave the title of monarch, and who
merited that name on account of his splendour as
well as power, reigned with absolute authority. He
was attended by officers of various conditions; he
never appeared in public without a numerous reti-
nue; he was carried in a fort of palanquin with
much pomp, and harbingers went before him to
sweep the road and strew it with flowers. This
uncommon pomp was supported by presents or
taxes received from his lubjets, to whom their
prince was such an object of veneration, that none
of them presumed to look him directly in the face,
or ever approached him but with an averted coun-
tenance '. There were other tribes on the fame con-

' Piedrahita His. de las Conquift del N. Rayno de Gran. p. 46.
I Herrera, dec. 6. lib. i. c. 2. lib. v. c. 56. Pledrahita,
c. . p. 25, &c. Gomara Hil. c. 72.

tinent,

B vo o tinent, among which, though far lets advanced than
'--r-- the people of Bogota in their progress towards

refinement, the freedom and independence, na.
tural to man in his savage slate, was much abridged,
and their caziques had assumed extensive au-
thority.

LOfisn &of IT is not easy to point out the circumstances, or
tlihol irt-.
tular ap. to dilcover the causes which contributed to introduce
'pc'anc" and eftablilh among each ofthofi people aform of

government so different from that of the tribes
around them, and so repugnant to the genius of
rude nations. If the persons who had an opportu-
nity of observing them in their original state, had
been more attentive and more discerning, we might
have received information from their conquerors
sufficient to guide us in this enquiry. If the tranf-
actions of people, unacquainted with the use of let-
ters, were not involved in impenetrable obscurity,
we might have derived some information from this
domceiic Iburce. But as nothing fatisfa&ory can
be gathered, either from the accounts of the Spa-
niards, or from their own traditions, we must have
rccour'e to ccnjectures, in order to explain the
irregular appearances in the political slate of the
people whom I have mentioned. As all thoit
tribes which had loft their native liberty and inde-
pendence were feated in the Torrid Zone, or in
countries approaching to it, the climate may be
fiuppofed to have had rome influence in forming
their minds to that servitude, which seems to be the

(detiny

deRiny of man in those regions of the globe. But Bn OO K
though the influence of climate, more powerful y,
than that of any other natural cause, is not be over-
looked; that alone cannot be admitted as a solution
of the point in question. The operations of men
are so complex, that we must not attribute the form
which they assume, to the force of a tingle prin-
ciple or cause. Although despotism be confined in
America to the Torrid Zone, and to the warm re-
gions bordering upon it, I have already observed
that there countries contain various tribes, tome of
which possess a high degree of freedom, and others
are altogether unacquainted with the restraints of
government. The indolence and timidity peculiar
to the inhabitants of the islands, render them so in-
capable of the lentiments or efforts neccifary for
maintaining independence, that there is no occa-
sion to search for any other cause of their tame sub-
million to the will of a superior. The fubjetion
of the Natchez, and of the people of Bogota, seems
to have been the consequence of a difference in
their state from that of the other Americans. They
were fettled nations, residing conflantly in one place.
Hunting was not the chief occupation of the former,
and the latter seem hardly to have trusted to it for
any part of their fubtiftence. Both had made such
progress in agriculture and arts, that the idea of
property was introduced in rome degree in the one
community, and fully feiablifhed in the other.
Among people in this ltate, avarice and ambition
have acquired objecs, and have begun to exert

6 their

B °0 K their power; views of interest allure the selfish; the

IV.
k^_ desire of pre-eminence excites the enterprising; do-

minion is courted by both; and passions unknown
to man in his savage itate prompt the interested and
ambitious to encroach on the rights of their fellow-
citizens. Motives, with which rude nations are
equally unacquainted, induce the people to submit
tamely to the usurped authority of their superiors.
But even among nations in this state, the spirit of
subje&s could not have been rendered so obfequi-
ous, or the power of rulers so unbounded, without
the intervention of fuperflition. By its fatal influ-
ence, the human mind, in every itage of its pro-
grefs, is depressed, and its native vigour and inde-
pendence subdued. Whoever can acquire the di-
reaion of this formidable engine, is secure of do-
minion over his species. Unfortunately for the
people whose inflitutions are the subject of enquiry,
this power was in the hands of their chiefs. The
caziques of the ifes could put what rcfponfes they
pleated into the mouths of their Ccmis or gods;
and it was by their interposition, and in their name,
that they imposed any tribute or burden on their
people h. The fame power and prerogative was
exercised by the great chief of the Natchez as the
principal minister as well as the representative of
the Sun, their deity. The rcfped which the people
of Bogota paid to their monarchs was likewise in-
spired by religion, and the heir apparent of the

Herrera, dec. i. lib. iii. c. 3.

kingdom

kingdom was educated in the innermost recess of B o o K
their principal temple, under such austere discipline, iv
and with such peculiar rites, as tended to fill his
lijbjeds with high sentiments concerning the fanc-
tity of his characer, and the dignity of his station'.
Thus fuperflition, which, in the rudest period of
society, is either altogether unknown, or waltes its
force in childifl unmeaning pratices, had acquired
such an ascendant over those people of America,
who had made some little progress towards refine-
ment, that it became the chief instrument of bend-
ing their minds to an untimely servitude, and sub-
je&ted them, in the beginning of their political ca-
reer, to a despotism hardly less rigorous than that
which awaits nations in the last itage of their cor-
ruption and decline.

V. AFTER examining the political institutions of Thea rt of
:he rude nations in America, the next object of at- w
tention is their art of war, or their provision for
public security and defence. The small tribes dif-
perfed over America are not only independent and
unconnected, but engaged in perpetual hostilities
with one anotherk. Though mostly [(rangers to
the idea of separate property vefled in any indivi-
dual, the rudest of the American nations are well
acquainted with the rights of each community to
its own domains. This right they hold to be per-
sec and exclusive, entitling the poiTeffor to oppol'e
the encroachment of neighbouring tribes. As it is
a Piedrahita, p. 27. L Ribas HiR. do los Triumph. p. 9.

of

a o O K of the utmost consequence to prevent them from
_., destroying or disturbing the game in their hunting

grounds, they guard this national property with a
jealous attention. But as their territories are ex-
tensive, and the boundaries of them not exactly
ascertained, innumerable fubjets of dispute arise,
which seldom terminate without bloodshed. Even
in this simple and primitive itate of society, interest
is a source of discord, and often prompts savage
tribes to take arms, in order to repel or punish such
as encroach on the forests or plains, to which they
trust for subsistence.

Thll:rmo- BUT interest is not either the most- frequent or
tive> sot tn-

i',ins tihe most powerful motive of the inceflant hostilities
wa"" among rude nations. These must be imputed to

the palfion of revenge, which rages with such vio-
lence in the breast of savages, that eagemefs to
gratify it may be confidered as the dillinguilhing
charactriftic of men in their uncivilized state.
Circumstances of powerful influence, both in the
interior government of rude tribesi and in their
external operations against foreign enemies, concur
in cheriffing and adding Itrength to a pasion fatal
to the general tranquillity. When the right of re-
dressing his own wrongs is leftin the hands of every
individual, injuries are felt with exquisite sensibility,
and vengeance cxercifed with unrelenting rancour.
No tine can obliterate the memory of an offence,
and it is fcldom that it can be expiated but by the
blood of the offender. In carrying on their public

wars,

wars, savage nations are influenced by the fame B 0o K
ideas, and animated with the fame spirit, as in pro- . --
fecuting private vengeance. Jnfmall communities, pit ofe
every man is touched with the injury or affront vcnalce.
offered to the body of which he is a member, as if
it were a personal attack upon his own honour or
safety. The desire of revenge is communicated
from breast to breast, and soon kindles into rage.
As feeble societies can take the field only in small
parties, each warrior is conscious of the importance
of his own arm, and feels that to it is committed a
considerable portion of the public vengeance. War,
which between extensive kingdoms is carried on
with little animosity, is prosecuted by fn. -.i tribes
with all the rancour of a private quarrel. The re-
fentment of nations is as implacable as that of indi-
viduals. It may be dissembled or fupprefled, but Hence thr
is never extinguished; and often, when least ex- their wars
pe&ed or dreaded, it bursts out with redoubled
fury'. When polished nations have obtained the
glory of vitory, or have acquired an addition of
territory, they may terminate a war with honour.
But savages are not satisfied until they extirpate the
community which is the objet of their hatred.
They fight not to conquer, but to destroy. If
they engage in hofilities, it is with a resolution
never to fee the face of the enemy in peace, but to

i Boucher HiR. Nat. de N. France, p. 93. Charley. Hit.
de N. France, iii. z25. 251. Lery ap. de Bry, iii. ao4.
Creux. HiRl. Canad. p. 7z. Lozano Defer. del Gran Chaco,
9;. Hennep. Moeurs dcs Sauv. 40.

VOL. 11. , C prosecute

B o O K profccute the quarrel with immortal enmity ". The

d ecfire of vengeance is the first, and almoff the only
principle, which a savage instils into the minds of
his children . 'This grows up with him as he ad-
vances :, life; and as his attention is directed to
few object , ir acquires a degree of force unknown
among mren, \,'iofe paflions are dilipated and
weakened by the variety of their occupations and
pursuits. The desire of vengeance, which takes
possession of the heart of fav?.ges, resembles the in.
ftintive rage of an animal, rather than the passion
of a man. It turns, with undifcerning fury, even
againif inanimate objecs. If hurt accidentally by
a flone, they often seize it in a transport of anger,
and endeavour to wreak their vengeance upon ito.
If struck with an arrow in a battle, they will tear
it from the wound, break and bite it with their
teeth, and dash it on the ground P. With refpec
to their enemies, the rge of vengeance knows no
bounds. When under the dominion of this palion,
man becomes the molt cruel of all animals. He
neither pities, nor forgives, nor spares.

TflE force of this pafTion is so well understood
by the Americans theimf:lves, that they always

'" Charlev. lIilt. N. Ir. iii. 251. Colden, i. 108. ii. 126.
J)arrree, p. 170. 173.

" C'ar!cv. llif. N. Fr. iii. 326. Lcry ap. de Bry, iii. 236
Lo.ano Ilit. de P:rag. i. 144.

O Lry ap. de Bry, iii. 19o.
P L.cry ap. tle Bry, iii. obo. Herrcra, dec. X. lib. vi . 8.

1ap1l)

apply to it, in order to excite their people to take B O O K
arms. If the elders of any tribe attempt to rouze -,_
their youth from foth, if a chief withes to allure a
band of warriors to follow him in invading an ene-
my's country, the molt persuasive topics of their
martial eloquence are drawn from revenge. " The
bones of our countrymen," fay they, " lie unco-
vered; their bloody bed has not been waffed clean.
Their spirits cry against us; they mutt be appeased.
Let us go and devour the people by whom they
were slain. Sit no longer inactive upon your mats;
lift the hatchet, console the spirits of the dead, and
tell them that they flall be avenged ."

ANI.MATED with such exhortations, the youth and their

snatch their arms in a transport of fury, raise the l''ltu'ty.
song of war, and burn with impatience to embrue
their hands in the blood of their enemies. Private
chiefs often assemble small parties, and invade a
hostile tribe, without consulting the rulers of the
community. A tingle warrior, prompted by ca-
price or revenge, will take the field alone, and
march several hundred miles to surprise and cut of
a firaggling enemy '. The exploits of a noted
warrior, in such solitary excursions, often form the
chief part in the hliftory of an American cam-
paign' i and their elders connive at such irregular
lallies, as they tend to cherifli a Inartial spirit, and

q Charley. Hil. N. Fr. iii. 216, 217. Lcry ap. de Bry,
iii. 2c4.

' See NOTE XXXVIII. ' See NOTE XXXIX.

K 2 accullom

B o o K accustom their people to enterprise and dangers

W' _ But when a war is national, and undertaken by

public authority, the deliberations are formal and
flow. The elders assemble, they deliver their opi-
nions in solemn speeches, they weigh with natu.
rity the nature of the enterptife, and balance its
beneficial or disadvantageous consequences with no
inconsiderable portion of political discernment ol
sagacity. Their priests and soothsayers are con-
fulted, and Sometimes they ask the advice even of
their women ". If the determination be for war,
they prepare for it with much ceremony; A leader
offers to condu& the expedition, and is accepted.
But no man is constrained to follow him; the refo-
lution of the community to commence hostilities,
imposes no obligation upon any member to take
part in the war. Each individual is still master of
his own conduct, and his engagement in the service
is perfectly voluntary .

fode of THE iaxims by which they regulate their mi-
carryil on litary operations, though extremely different from

those which take place among more civilized and
populous nations, are well suited to their own po-
litical fate, and the nature of the country in which
they at. They never take the field in numerous
bodies, as it would require a greater effort of fore-

* Boffu» i. 140. Lery ap. de Bry, tsS. Hennepin Mocurs
des Sauv. 41. Lafitau, ii. 169.

u Charlcv. Hit. N. Fr. 21a5 268. Bict. 367. 380.
Charlcv. Hilt. N. Fr. 317, 218.

fight

fight and industry, than is usual among savages, to B o o K
provide for their subsistence, during a march of
blme hundred miles through dreary forests, or du-
ring a long voyage upon their lakes and rivers.
lTheir armies are not encumbered with baggage or
military stores. Each warrior, besides his arms,
carries a mat and a small bag of pounded maize,
and with there is completely equipped for any ser-
vice. While at a distance from the enemies fron-
tier, they disperse through the woods, and support
themselves with the game which they kill, or the
filh which they catch. As they approach nearer to
the territories of the nation which they intend to
attack, they colle& their troops, and advance with
greater caution. Even in their hottef and most
aftive wars, they proceed wholly by stratagem and
ambuscade. They place not their glory in attack-
ing their enemies with open force. To surprise and
destroy is the greatest merit of a commander, and
the highest pride of his followers. War and hunt-
ing are their only occupations, and they condu&
both with the fame spirit and the fame arts. They
follow the track of their enemies through the forest.
They endeavour to discover their haunts, they lurk
in some thicket near to these, and, with the patience
of a sportsman lying in wait for game, will conti-
nue in their station day after day, until they can
runl upon their prey when mos secure, and least
able to refif them. If they meet no Draggling
party of the enemy, they advance towards their
r'illages, but with such solicitude zo conceal their

K3 own

n o o I own approach, that they often creep on their hands
A- - and feet through the woods, and paint their skins of

the famne colour with the withered leaves, in order
to avoid detction Y. If so fortunate as to remain
unobfcrved, they fct on fire the enemies huts in the
dead of night, and massacre the inhabitants, as
they fly naked and defencelcfs from the flames. If
they hope to effte a retreat without being pursued,
they carry off tonme prisoners, whom they refcrve
for a more dreadful fate. But if, notwithstanding
all their address and precautions, they find that
their motions are discovered, that the enemy has
taken the alarm, and is prepared to oppose them,
they usually deem it most prudent to retire. They
regard it as extreme folly to meet an enemy who is
on his guard, upon equal terms, or to give battle
in an open field. The mos distinguished fuccefsis
a disgrace to a leader, if it has been purchased with
any considerable loss of his followersZ; and they
never boat of a vidory, if fained with the
blood of their own countrymen . To fall in
battle, inflead of being reckoned an honourable
death, is a misfortune which lubjies the memory
of a warrior to the imputation of rafliels or im-
prudencc .'

Y Charley. II11}. N. Fr. iii. ,37, -;8. Hennp. Moeursdeb
Snuv. p. ~9.

Sc NOTE XL.
Clhar!cv. Ii. N. Fr. iii. 233. 307. Bict. 381. Lafitau
.Mocur. drs Sauv. ii. 248.

1 Cllarlv. iii. 376. Sec N OTr XLT.

7

THIS system of war was univerdal in America, B o o K

and the small uncivilized tribes, diflperfed through _ i
all its different regions and climates, display more Not orng
craft than boldness in carrying on their hoffilities. of courage.
Struck with this conduct, o opposite to the ideas
and maxims of Europeans, several authors contend
that it flows from a feeble and dastardly spirit pe-
culiar to the Americans, which is incapable of any
generous or manly exertion c. But when we reflect
that many of these tribes, on occasions which call
for extraordinary efforts, not only defend them-
selves with obstinate resolution, but attack their
enemies with the most daring courage, and that
they poiTefs fortitude of mind fiperior to the sense
of danger or the fear of death, we must ascribe
their habitual caution to some other cause than con-
flitutional timidity d. The number of men in each
tribe is so small, the difficulty of rearing new mem-
bers, amidst the hardihips and dangers of savage
life, so great, that the life of a citizen is extremely
precious, and the preservation of it becomes a ca-
pital objet in their policy. Had the point of ho-
nour been the fame among the feeble American
tribes as among the powerful nations of Europe,
had they been taught to court fame or victory in
contempt of danger and death, they must have
been ruined by maxims so ill adapted to their con-

c Recherches Philof. fur les Americ. i. 115. Voyage de
March. iv. 410.

d Lafitau Mocurs des Sauv. ii. 248, 249. Charlec. N. Fr.
ii. 307.

K 4 dition.

B o o K dition. But wherever their communities are more
.-V populous, so that they can at with considerable

force, and can filftain the loss of several of their
members, without being sensibly weakened, the
military operations of the Americans more nearly
refrmble those of other nations. The Brafilians,
as well as the tribes situated upon the banks of the
river De la Plata, often take the field in such nu-
merous bodies, as deserve the name of armies .
They defy their enemies to the combat, engage in
regular battles, and maintain the conflie with that
desperate ferocity, which is natural to men, who,
having no idea of war but that of exterminating
their enemies, never give or take quarter . In the
powerful empires of Mexico and Peru, great ar-
mies were assembled, frequent battles were fought,
and the theory as well as practice of war were dif-
ferent from what took place in those petty societies
which assume the name of nations.

Incapable of BUT though vigilance and attention are the qua-
cipline. lities chiefly requisite, where the object of war is

to deceive and to furprize; and though the Ame-
ricans, when acting singly, display an amazing de-
gree of address in concealing their own motions,
and discovering those of an enemy, yet it is re-
markable that, when they take the field in parties,
they can seldom be brought to observe the precau,

Fabri Veriff. Defcrip. India ap. de Bry, vii. p. 42.
S See NOTE XLII.

9 tions

tlons most essential to their own security. Such is a 0

O K

the difficulty of accustoming savages to fubordina- 'V
ton, or to aft in concert; such is their impatience
under restraint, and such their caprice and pre-
fumption, that it is rarely they can be brought to
conform themrelves to the counsels and direcions
of their leaders. They never station centinels
around the place where they reft at night, and after
marching some hundred miles to surprise an enemy,
are often surprised themselves, and cut off, while
funk in as profound sleep as if they were not within
reach of danger '.

IF, notwithstanding this negligence and security,

which often frustrate their most artful schemes,
they catch the enemy unprepared, they rulh upon
them with the utmost ferocity, and tearing off the
scalps of all those who fall victims to their rage ',
they carry home those ifrange trophies in triumph.
These they preserve as monuments, not only of
their own prowess, but of the vengeance which
their arm has inflited upon the people who were
objects of public resentment'. They are still more
Solicitous to fcize prisoners. During their retreat,
if they hope to fse&t it unmolested, the prisoners
are commonly qecmpt from any insult, and treated
with some degree of humanity, though guarded
with the most Rrit attention.

; Charlev. N. Fr iii. 236, s37. Lettr. Edif. 17. 308. 2o.
130. Lafit. Murs, ii. 147. Lahontan, ii. 176.
b See NOTE XLIII. I Lafitau Mounr, ii. a56.

BUT

B o O K BUT after this temporary suspension, the rage of

-.. _. the conquerors rekindles with new fury. As soon
Tramnz, as they approach their own frontier, tome of their

number are dispatched to inform their countrymen
with refpeft to the success of the expedition. Then
the prisoners begin to feel the wretchedness of their
condition. The women of the village, together
with the youth who have not attained to the age of
bearing arms, assemble, and forming themselves
into two lines, -through which the prisoners must
pals, beat and bruise them with sticks or tfones in
a cruel mannerk. After this firlt gratification of
their rage against their enemies, follow lamenta-
tions for the loss of such of their own countrymen;
as have fallen in the service, accompanied with
words and actions which seem to express the ut-
most anguifl and grief, But, in a moment, upon
a signal given, their tears cease; they pals, with
a fidden and unaccountable transition, from the
depths of sorrow to transports of joy; and begin
to celebrate their victory with all the wild exulta-
tion of a barbarous triumph'. The fate of the pri-
foners remains fRill undecided. The old men deli-
Ibrate concerning it. Some are destined to be
tortured to death, in order to fatiatc the revenge
of the co:qiculrors; some to replace the member;
which the community has loft in that or former
wars. They who are reserved for this milder fate,
are led t.) the hlt. of those whose friends have beel

l 1ahon'an, ii. 1i4.
i Charlc;. IEilt, N. Fr. iii. 241. L fiict;Lt u MItr, i. 264.

killl.

killed. The women meet them at the door, and B o o K
if they receive them, their fiufferings are at an end. ^ I-..
They are adopted into the family, and, according
to their phrase, are feated upon the mat of the de-
ceased. They aflume his name, they hold the fame
rank, and are treated thenceforward with all the
tenderness due to a father, a brother, a husband, or a
friend. But, if either from caprice, or an unre-
lenting desire of revenge, the women of any family
refute to accept of the prisoner who is offered to
them, his doom is fixed. No power can then save
him from torture and death.
W HILE their lot is in suspense, the prisoners them- Th;ei;n-,

difference
selves appear altogether unconcerned about what concerning

0 their fate,

may befal them. They talk, they eat, they sleep,
as if they were perfelly at cafe, and no danger im-
pending. When the fatal sentence is intimated to
them, they receive it with an unaltered counte-
nance, raise their death-fong, and prepare to susser
like men. Their conquerors assemble as to a so- and forti
lemn fcftival, resolved to put the fortitude of the tordur:"de
captive to the utmost proof. A scene ensues, the
bare description of which is enough to chill the
heart with horror, wherever men have been accuf-
tomed, by milder institutions, to refpet their fpe-
cies, and to melt into tenderness at the fight of
human fuiffrings. The prisoners are tied naked to
a flake, but so as to be at liberty to move round
it. All who are prflent, men, women, and chil-
dren, rush upon them like furies. Every species

of

B 0 0 K of torture is applied that the rancour of revenge

--e.' can invent. Some burn their limbs with red-hot

irons, some mangle their bodies with knives, others
tear, their flesh from their bones, pluck out their
nails by the rocws, and rend and twist their fnews.
They vie with one another in refinements of tor-
ture. Nothing fcts bounds to their rage but the
dread of abrilging the duration of their vengeance
by hastening the death of the fuiffercrs; and such is
their cruel ingenuity in tormenting, that by avoid-
ing industriously to hurt any vital part, they often
prolong this scene of anguilh for several days. In
spite of all that they fuffcr, the vicims continue to
chant their death-fong with a firm voice, they boat
of their own exploits, they insult their tormentors
for their want of kill in avenging their friends and
relations, they warn them of the vengeance which
awaits them on account of what they are now doing,
and excite their ferocity by the mofi provoking re-
proaches and threats. To display undaunted forti-
tude in such dreadful situations, is the noblest tri-
umph of a warrior. To avoid the trial by a vo-
luntary death, or to Ihrink under it, is deemed in-
famous and cowardly. If any one betray symptoms
oftimidity, his tormentors often dispatch him at
once with contempt, as unworthy of being treated
like a man"'. Animated with those ideas, they
endure, without a groan, what it seems almost im-
possible that human nature ihould sustain. They

m Dc le Pothcric, ii. 237. iii. 48.

appear

appear to be not only insensible of pain, but to B o o K
court it. " Forbear," said an aged chief of the i 'v
Iroquois, when his insults had provoked one of his
tormentors to wound him with a knife, It forbear
there stabs of your knife, and rather let me die by
fire, that those dogs, your allies, from beyond the
lea, may learn by my example to susser like men "."
This magnanimity, of which there are frequent in-
stances among the American warriors, instead of
exciting admiration, or calling forth sympathy, ex-
afperates the fierce spirits of their torturers to fresh
ats of cruelty°. Weary at length of contending
with men, whose conifancy of mind they cannot
vanquish, some chief in a rage puts a period to
their sufferings, by dispatching them with his dag-
ger or club P.

THIS barbarous scene is often succeeded by one Sometime

no less (hocking. As it is impossible to appease e'a tie
the fell spirit of revenge which rages in the heart of
a savage, this frequently prompts the'Americansto
devour those unhappy persons, who have been the
vifims of their cruelty. In the ancient world, tra-
dition has preserved the memory of barbarous na-
tions of cannibals, who fed on human fleth. But

Colden, Hllf. of Five Nations, i. 0oo.
Voyages de Lahont. i. 236.

t Charlev. Hilt. N. Fr. iii. z43, &c. 385. Lafitau Moenrs, ii.
265. Creuxij Hilt. Canad. p. 73. IHennep. Moars dis Sauv,
p. 64, &c. Lahont. i. 233, &c. Tcrtrc, ii. 0o;. De la
Potheric, ii. a2, &c.

ill
*

B o0 K in every part of the New World there were people

,to whom this custom was familiar. It prevailed in

the southern continent, in several of the ifandsr,
and in various diftri&s of North America'. Even
in tholf parts, where circumnif;nces, with which we
are unacquainted, had in a great measure aboliehed
this practice, it seems formerly to have been so
well known, that it is incorporated into the idiom
of their language. Among the Iroquois, the phrase
by which they express their rcfolution of nmaking
war against an enemy is, " Let us go and eat tl:.t
nation." If they solicit the aid of a neighbouring
tribe, they invite it to "( eat broth made of the efin:
of their enemies'." Nor was the pratice peculiar
to rude unpolifhed tribes; the principle from which
it took rife is so deeply rooted in the minds of the
Americans, that it subsisted in Mexico, one of the
civilized empires in the New World, and relics of
it may be discovered among the more mild inha-
bitants of Peru. It was not scarcity of food, as
some authors imagine, and the importunate crav-
ings of hunger, which forced the Americans to
those horrid repasts on their fellow-creatures. Hu-
man flesh was never used as common food in any

q Stadius ap. de Bry, iii. 123. Lery, ibid. 210. Biet. 38.

Lettr. Edif. 23.34'. I'ifo, 8. Condam. 84. 97. RibaS, lli.
de los Triumph. 473.

r Life of Colunb. 529. Mart. Dcc. p. 8. Tertrc, ii. 40.
a Dumont, Mem. i. 254. Charlev. Hilt. N. Fr. i. 25).
ii. 14. iii. 21. De la Pothcrie, iii. 50.

t Charlev. Ilill. N. I'r iii. 2o8, 2oy. Lettr. Edif. 23. p. 2;
Dc la Pothcric, ii, i98. Sec NO OE XLIV.

country,

country, and the various relations concerning peo- 3 0 0 K
pie who reckoned it among the stated means of
subsistence, flow from the credulity and mistakes
oftravellers. The rancour of revenge first prompted
men to this barbarous ation . The fiercest tribes
devoured none but prisoners taken in war, or such
as they regarded as enemies . Women and chil-
dren who were not the objets of enmity, if not cut
off in the fury of their first inroad into an hoftilc
country, seldom suffered by the deliberate effccls
of their revenge r.

THE people of South America gratify their re-

venge in a manner somewhat different, but with
no less unrelenting rancour. There priibners,
after meeting at their first entrance with the fime
rough reception as among the North Americansz,
are not only exempt from injury, but treated with
the greatest kindness. They are feasted and ca-
reffed, and some beautiful young women are ap-
pointed to attend and solace them. It is not easy
to account for this part of their conduL, unless we
impute it to a refinement in cruelty. For, while
they seem studious to attach the captives to life, by
supplying them with every enjoyment that can ren-
der it agreeable, their doom is irrevocably fixed.

u Biet. 383. Blanco, Convcrfion de Pilr;l, p. 2z. Bancroft,
Nat. Hill. of Guiana, p. 259, &c.

' See NOTE XLV.
r Biet. 38:. Bandiiii, Vita di Americo, 84. Tcrtrc, o;..

Fermin. Dcfcrip. de Surin. i. 54.
' Stadius ap. dc Bry, iii. p. .o. I 23.

On

B OO/ K On a day appointed, the vi&orious tribe assembles,

IV.
*. ,* the prisoner is brought forth with great solemnity,

he views the preparations for the sacrifice with as
much indifference as if he himself were not the
victim, and meeting his fate with undaunted firm.
ness, is dispatched with a tingle blow. The mo.
ment he falls, the women seize the body, and dress
it for the feast. They besmear their children with
the blood, in order to kindle in their bosoms a
hatred of their enemies, which is never extinguished,
and all join in feeding upon the flesh with amazing
greediness and exultation'. To devour the body
of a slaughtered enemy, they deem the most com-
plete and exquisite gratification of revenge. Wherc-
ever this pracice prevails, captives never escape
death, but they are not tortured with the fame
cruelty as among tribes which are less accustomed
to such horrid fcafts b.

As the constancy of every American warrior may

be put to such fcvere proof, the great obje& of mi-
litary education and discipline in the New World
is to form the mind to sustain it. When nations
carry on war with open force, defy their enemies
to the combat, and vanquish them by the fuperi-
ority of their skill or courage, soldiers are trained
to be active, vigorous, and enterprising. But in
America, where the genius and maxims of war are

g Stadius ap. de Bry, iii. 128, &c. Lery, ibid. 21o.
b See NOTE XLVI.

extremely

extremely different, pafive fortitude is the quality B 0o v Z
in highefteftimation. Accordingly, it is early the . *
fudy of the Americans to acquire sentiments and
habits, which will enable them to behave like men,
when their resolution (hall be put to the proof. As
the youth of other nations exercise themselves in
feats of aaivity and force, those of America vie
with one another in exhibitions of their patience
under sufferings. They harden their nerves by
those voluntary trials, and gradually accustom them-
selves to endure the sharpest pain, withodt comr-,
plaining. A boy and girl will bind their naked
arms together, and place a burning coal between
them, in order to try who firpt discovers such im-
patience as to shake it off'. All-the trials, custom-
ary in America, when a youth is admitted into the
chafs of warriors, or when a warrior is promoted to
the dignity of captain or chief, are accommodated
to this idea of manliness. They are not displays
of valour, but of patience; they are not exhibitions
of their ability to offend, but of their capacity to
luffer. Among the. tribes on the banks of the Ori-
noco, if a warrior aspires to the rank of captain, his
probation begins with a long salt, more rigid than ,
any ever observed by the most abstemious kernit.
At the close of this, the chiefs assemble, each gives
him three lathes with a large whip, applied so vi-
goroufly, that his body is almost flayed, and if he
betrays the least symptom of impatience or even

' Charley. His. N. Fr. Ui. 307.
VOL. 1i. L sensibility,

B 0 O K sensibility, he is disgraced for ever, and rejetd as
_-_ unworthy of the honour to which he aspires, After

some interval, the constancy of the candidate is
proved by a more excruciating trial. He is laid
in a hammoc with his hands bound fast, and an in-
numerable multitude of venomous ants, whole bite
occasions exquisite pain, and produces a violent
inflammation, are thrown upon him. The judges
of his merit stand around the hammoc, and, while
these cruel insets faten upon the most sensible pars
of his body, a sigh, a groan, an involuntary motion
expreflive of what he suffers, would exclude him
for ever from the rank of captain. Even after this
evidence of his fortitude, it is not deemed to be
completely ascertained, but must stand another test
more dreadful than any he has hitherto undergone.
He is again suspended in his hammoc, and covered
with leaves of the palmetto. A fire of slinking
herbs is kindled underneath, so as he may feel its
heat, and be involved in its smoke. Though
scorched and almost suffocated, he must continue
to endure with the fame patient insensibility. Many
perish in this rude essay of their firmness and cou-
rage, but such as go through it with applause, re-
ceive the ensigns of their new dignity with much
solemnity, and are ever after regarded as leaders of
approved resolution, whose behaviour, in the mos
trying situations, will do honour to their country'.
In North America, the previous trial of a warrior

d Gumilla, ii. 286, &.c. Bit. 175, &c.

is neither so formal, nor so severe, Though even B o oK
there, befre a youth is permitted to bear arms, .-.
his patience and fortitude are proved by blows, by
fire, and by infulis, more intolerable to a haughty
spirit than both '.

THE amazing steadiness with which the Ame-
ricans endure the most exquisite torments, has in-
duced some authors to suppose that, from the pc-
culiar feebleness of their frame, their sensibility is
not so acute as that of other people; as women,
and persons of a relaxed habit, are observed to be
les affected with pain than robust men, whofa
nerves are more firmly braced. But the conIti.
tution of the Americans is not so different, in its
texture, from that of the reft of the human species,
as to account for this diversity in their behaviour.
It flows from a principle of honour, intilled early
and cultivated with such care, as to inspire man in
his rudest state with an heroic magnanimity, to
which philosophy hath endeavoured, in vain, to
form him, when more highly improved and polish-
ed. This invincible constancy he has been taught
to confider as the chief distinction of a man, and
the highest attainment of a warrior. The ideas
which influence his conduCt, and the paflions which
take poflflion of his heart, are few. They ope-
rate of course with more decisive effect, than when
the mind is crowded with a multiplicity of objects,
or diftrated by the variety of its pursuits and

* Charle. Hil. N. Fr. iii. 219.

& a when

B 0 0 K when every motive that ats with any force in form-

..
_. ing the sentiments of a savage, prompts him to

susser with dignity, he will bear what might seem
to be impossible for human patience to fultain. But
wherever the fortitude of the Americans is not
routid to exertion by their ideas of honour, their
feelings of pain are the fame with those of the ref
of mankind f. Nor is that patience under susser-
ings for which the Americans have been so justly
celebrated, an universal attainment. The constancy
of many of the victims is overcome by the agonies
of torture. Their weakness and lamentations com-
plete the triumph of their enemies, and refeEt dif-
grace upon their own country '.

wll:d by TIHE perpetual hostilities carried on among the
<,,r Pa'P. American tribes are productive of very fatal effets.

Even in seasons of public tranquillity, their imper-
se2t industry does not supply them with any super-
fluous rlore of provisions; but when the. irruption
of an enemy desolates their cultivated lands, or
disturbs them in their hunting excursions, such a
calamity reduces a community, naturally unprovi-
dent and defiitute of resources, to extreme want.
All the people of the diltri& that is invaded, are
frequently forced to take refuge in woods or moun-
tains, which can afford them little subsistence, and
where many of them perish. Notwithstanding

' See NOTE XLVII.
" Charlcv. lift. N. Fr, iii. 248. 38. De la Pothcrie, iii.
49.

their

their exceflive caution in condu&Eing their military B o K
operations, and the solicitude of every leader to, .
preserve the lives of his followers, as the rude tribes
in America seldom enjoy any interval of peace, the
loss of men among them is considerable in pro-
portion to the degree of population. Thus famine
and the sword combine in thinning their numbers.
All their communities are feeble, and nothing now
remains of ieveral nations, which were once confi-
derable, but the name b.

SENSIBLE of this continual decay, there are Recruic
tribes which endeavour to recruit their national tbher"by
force when exhaustcd, by adopting prisoners taken adopting
in war, and by this expedient prevent their total
extintion. The pracRice, however, is not univer-
sally received. Resentment operates more power-
fully among savages, than considerations of policy.
Far the greater part of their captives was anciently
sacrificed to their vengeance, and it is only since
their numbers began to decline fast, that they have
generally adopted milder maxims. But such as they
do naturalize, renounce for ever their native tribe,
and aflume the manners as well as paflions of the
people by whom they are adopted', so entirely,
that they often join them in expeditions against their
own countrymen. Such a sudden transition, and

h Charlcy. Hil. N. Fr. iii. 202, o3. 429. Gumilla, ii.
227, &c.

Charley. Hill. N. Fr. iii. 245, &c. Lafit. ii. 308,

L 3 so

B 0 o K so repugnant to one of the most powerful inftints

Iv.
L-^ _implanted by nature, would be deemed strange

among many people; but, among the members of
small communities, where national enmity is vio-
lent and deep-rooted, it has the appearace of being
flill more unaccountable. It leems, however, to
result naturally from the principles upon which war
is carried on in America. When nations aim at
exterminating their enemies, no exchange of pri-
foners can ever take place. From the moment one
is made a prisoner, his country and his friends con.
fider him as dead . He has incurred indelible
disgrace by suffering himfief to be surprised or to
be taken by an enemy; and were he to return
home, after such a stain upon his honour, his nearest
relations would not receive or even acknowledge
that they knew him'. Some tribes were still more
rigid, and if a prisoner returned, the infamy which
he had brought on his country was expiated, by
putting him intantly to death ". As the unfortu-
nate captive is thus an outcast from his own coun.
try, and the ties which bound him to it are irrepa.
rably broken, he feels less reluctance in forming a
new connection with people, who, as an evidence
of their friendly sentiments, not only deliver him
from a cruel death, but offer to admit him to all
the rights of a fellow-citizen. The perfet fimi-
larity of manners among savage nations facilitates

b See NOTE XLVIII.
4 Lahont. ii. 185, 186.
m Herrera, dec. 3. lib. iv. c. i6, p. 173.

and

and completes the union, and induces a captive to 3 0 o o
transfer not only his allegiance, but his affeftion, to t .
the community into the bosom of which he is re-
ceived.

BuT though war be the chief occupation of men Thir int

in their rude itate, and to excel in it their highest wr to po-
diftintion and pride, their inferiority is always ma- ifed .
nifeft when they engage in competition with po-
lifhed nations. Destitute of that foresight which
discerns and provides for remote events, strangers
to the union and mutual confidence requisite in
forming any extensive plan of operations, and in-
capable of the subordination no less requisite in car-
rying such plans into execution, savage nations
may astonish a disciplined enemy by their valour,
but seldom prove formidable to him by their con-
dut; and whenever the contest is of long conti-
nuance, must yield to superior art". The empires
of Peru and Mexico, though their progress in civi-
lization, when measured by the European or Asia-
tic standards, was inconsiderable, acquired such an
ascendancy over the rude tribes around them, that
they fubjeced most of them with great facility to
their power. When the people of Europe over-
ran the various provinces of America, this fupe-
riority was still more conspicuous. Neither the
courage nor number of the natives could repel a
handful of invaders. The alienation and enmity,

a See NOTE XLIX.

L 4 prevalent

B o0 K prevalent among barbarians, prevented them from

,v- uniting in any common scheme of defence, and

while each tribe fought separately, all were sub-
dued.
TheirAns. VI. THE arts of rude nations unacquainted. with

the use of metals, hardly merit any attention on
their own account, but are worthy of rome notice,
as far as they serve to display the genius and man.
ners of man in this stage of his progress. The firR
distress a savage must feel, will arise from the man.
ncr in which his body is asseted, by the heat, or
cold, or moisture, of the climate under which he

Pres and lives; and his first care will be to provide Come co.
rnamcnts. vering for his own defence. In the warmer and

more mild climates of America, none of the rude
tribes were clothed. To molf of them Nature had
not even futgeited any idea of impropriety in being
altogether uncovered d. As under a mild climate
there was little need of any defence from the inju-
ries of the air, and their extreme indolence shun-
ned every species of labour to which it was not
urged by absolute neceflity, all the inhabitants of
the isles, and a considerable part of the people on
the continent, remained in this llate of naked fim-
plicity. Others were satisfied with ibme flight co-
vering, such as decency required. But though
naked, they were not unadorned. They dresscd
their hair in many different forms. They fastened

d Lcry Navigat. ap. de Bry, iii. p. 164. Life of Colum-
buS, . z2. Venegas Hill. of Ciliforr. p. 70.

bits

bits of gold, or shells, or shining stones, in their B Oo iK
cars, their noses, and cheeks'. They stained their ,_.
skins with a great variety of figures; and they
spent much time, and submitted to great pain, in
ornamenting their persons in this fantastic manner.
Vanity, however, which finds endless occupation
for ingenuity and invention, in nations where dfefs
has become a complex and intricate art, is circum-
fcribed within so narrow bounds, and confined to so
few articles among naked savages, that they are not
satisfied with those simple decorations, and have a
wonderful propensity to alter the natural form of
their bodies, in order to render it (as they imagine)
more perse& and beautiful. This pratice was uni-
versal among the rudest of the American tribes.
Their operations for that purpose begin as soon as
an infant is born. By compressing the bones of the
skull, while still soft and flexible, some flatten the
crown of their heads; some squeeze them into the
lhape of a cone; others mould them as much as
p0ofble into a square figure t; and they often en-
danger the lives of their posterity by their violent
and absurd efforts to derange the plan of Nature, or
to improve upon her designs. But in all their at-
tempts either to adorn or to new-model their per-
sons, it seems to have been less the objet of the

° Lery ap. de Bry, iii. 165. Lettr. Edifiantes, 20. 223.
f Oviedo Hill. lib. iii. c. 5. Ulloa, i. 329. Voyage de
Labat. ii. 72. Charlevoix, iii. 323. Gumilla, i. 197, &c.
Acugna Relat. de la Riv. des Amaz. ii. 83. Lawson's Voyage
0 Carolina, p. 33.

2 Americans

o o K Americans 'to pleale, or to appear beautiful, tha
X- *_. to give an air of dignity and terror to their afpc&,

Their attention to dress had more reference to war
than to gallantry. The difference in rank and efti.
mation between the two sexes was so great, as seems
to have extinguished, in some measure, their soli-
citude to appear mutually amiable. The man
deemed it beneath him to adorn his person, for the
fake of one on whom he was accustomed to Iqok
down as a have. It was when the warrior had in
view to enter the council of his nation, or to take
the field against its enemies, that he assumed his
choicest ornaments, and decked his person with
the nicest care '. The decorations of the women
were few and simple; whatever was precious or
splendid was reserved for the men. In several
tribes the women were obliged to spend a conlider-
able part of their time every day in adorning and
painting their husbands, and could bestow little at-
tention upon ornamenting themselves. . Among a
race of men so haughty as to despise, or so cold as
to neglet them, the women naturally became care-
less and slovenly, and the love of finery and (hew,
which had been deemed their favourite passion, was
confined chiefly to the other sex". To deck his

* Wafer's Voyage, p. 142. ILery ap. de Bry, iii. 167.
Chorlev. Hil. N. Fran. iii. a 6 z z.

h Charlev. Hilt. dela Nouv. France, iii. x78. 327. Lalur,

ii. 53. Kalm's Voyage, iii. 273. Lery ap. de Bry, iii. 169,
170. Purch. Pilgr. iv. 2z87. Ribas Hilt. de los Triumpb.
&c. 472.

8 perfbn

person was the diftintion of a warrior, as well as o o t
one of his most serious occupations'. In one part * _-
of their dress, which, at first fight, appears the
most singular and capricious, the Americans have
discovered considerable sagacity in providing against
the chief inconveniencies of their climate, which is
often sultry and moist to excess. All the different
tribes, which remain unclothed, are accustomed to
anoint and rub their bodies with the grease of ani-
mals, with viscous gums, and with oils of different
kinds. By this they check that profuse perfpira-
tion, which, in the torrid zone, wases the vigour
of the frame, and abridges the period of human
life. By this too, they provide a defence against
the extreme moisture during the rainy feafonr .
They likewise, at certain seasons, temper paint of
different colours with those uncuous fubRfances,
and bedaub themselves plentifully with that compo-
fition. Sheathed with this impenetrable varnish,
their Ikins are not only prote&ted from the pene-
trating heat of the fun, but, as all the innumerable
tribes of insets have an antipathy to the smell or
taste of that mixture, they are delivered from their
teazing persecution, which amidit forests and
marshes, especially in the warmer regions, would
have been altogether intolerable in a state of per-
sec nakedness'.

' See NOTE L.
k See NOTE LI.
I Labat, ii. 73. Gumilla, i. tgo. s20. Bancroft Nat.
Hill. of Guiana, 8t. a80.

THE

B o K THE next obje& to dress that will engage the

_ attention of a savage, is to prepare some habitation
MHbui*' which may afford him shelter by day, and a retreat

at night. Whatever is connected with his ideas of
personal dignity, whatever bears any reference to
his military characer, the savage warrior deems an
obje& of importance. Whatever relates only to
peaceable and inactive life, he views with indiffer-
ence. Hence, though finically attentive to dress,
he is little solicitous about the elegance or difpofi-
tion of his habitation. Savage nations, far from
that ifate of improvement, in which the mode of
living is confidered as a mark of distinction, and
unacquainted with those wants, which. require a
variety of accommodation, regulate the conftruc-
tion of their houses according to their limited ideas
of neceflity. Some of the American tribes were so
extremely rude, and had advanced so little beyond
the primeval simplicity of nature, that they had no
houses at all. During the day, they take shelter
from the scorching rays of the fun under thick
trees; at night they form a fled with their branches
and leaves'". In the rainy season they retire into
coves, formed by the hand of Nature, or hollowed
out by their own industry . Others, who have no
fixed abode, and roam through the forest in quest
of game, sojourn in temporary hups, which they

m See NOTE Lls.
"Lettres Edif. v. 273. Venegas Hil. of Califor. i. 76.

LJozano Defcrip. del Gran Chaco, p. 5. Lcttres Edif. ii.
176. Gumilla, i. 383. Bancroft Nat. Hil. of Guiana, 277.

erlc

erect with little labour, and abandon without any o o z
concern. The inhabitants of thoef vast plains, l A- .
which are deluged by the overflowing of rivers
during the heavy rains that fall periodically between
the tropics, raifl houses upon piles fastened in the
ground, or place them among the boughs of trees,
and are thus safe amidtl that wide extended inun-
dation which surrounds them °. Such were the first
cffays of the rudest Americans towards providing
themselves with habitations. But even among
tribes which are more improved, and whose refi-
dence is become altogether fixed, the ftru&ure of
their houses is extremely mean and finple. They
are wretched huts, Ibmetimes of an oblong and
bometimes of a circular form, intended merely for
Ihelter, with no view to elegance, and little atten-
tion to conveniency. The doors are so low, that
it is necelary to bend or to creep on the hands and
feet in order to enter them. They are without
windows, and have a large hole in the middle of
the roof, to convey out the smoke. To follow
travellers in other minute circumstances of their
description, is not only beneath the dignity of.hif-
tory, but would be foreign to the objct of my re-
searches. One circumstance merits attention, as it
is singular, and illustrates the character of the peo-
ple. Some of their houses are so large as to con-
tain accommodation for fourscore or a hundred
persons. These are built for the reception of dif-

' Gumilla, i. 22a. Herrera, dec. I, lib. ix. c. 6. Ovi.
cdo Sommar, p. 53, C.

fcrcnt

o o ferent families, which dwell together under the &ine
X'. roof, and often around a common fire, without

iparate apartments, or any kind of screen or par.
tition between the spaces which they refpe&ively
occupy. As soon as men have acquired diftind
ideas of property; or when they are so much at.
tached to their females, as to watch them with care
and jealousy; families of course divide and fettle in
separate houses, where they can secure and guard
whatever they wilh to preserve. This singular
mode of habitation among several people of Ame.
rica, may therefore be confidered not only as the
effet of their imperfect notions concerning pro-
perty, but as a proof of inattention and indifference
towards their women. If they had not been accuf-
tomed to perfect equality, such an arrangement
could not have taken place. If their sensibility had
been apt to have taken alarm, they would not have
trusted the virtue of their women amidit the temp-
tations and opportunities of such a promiscuous in-
tercourfe. At the fame time, the perpetual con-
cord which reigns in habitations where so many
families are crouded together, is surprising, and
affords a striking evidence that they must be people
of either a very gentle, or of a very phlegmatic
temper, who, in such a situation, are unacquainted
with animosity, brawling, and discords.

P See NOTE LIII.
q Journ.. de Grillet & Bechamel dans la Goyane, p. 65.

LafitauMoeurs, ii.. Torquem. Monarq. i. 247. Journl

ift. de Jootal, 217. Lery His. Brasil, ap. do Bry, iii. 231
Lozano Dcfer. dcl, Gran Chaco, 67.

AFTER

AFTER making some provision for his drers and s o o a

habitation, a savage will perceive the necelity of .-v
preparing proper arms with which to aflault or Thcir*N.
repel an enemy. This, accordingly, has early ex-
ercifcd the ingenuity and invention of all rude na-
tions. The first offensive weapons were doubdlef
such as chance presented, and the first eiorts of
art to improve upon there, were extremely awk-
ward and simple. Clubs made of some heavy
wood, ltakes hardened in the fire, lances whose
heads were armed with flint or the bones of some
animal, are weapons known to the rudest nations.
All thee, however, were of use only in close en-
counter. But men wilhed to annoy their enemies
while at a distance, and the bow and arrow is the
most early invention for this purpole. This wea-
pon is in the hands of people, whose advances
in improvement are extremely inconsiderable, and
is familiar to the inhabitants of every quarter of the
globe. It is remarkable, however, that some tribes
in America were so destitute of art and ingenuity,
that they had not attained to the discovery of this
simple invention', and seem to have been unac-
quainted with the uif of any missive weapon. The
fling, though in its conftrution not more complex
than the bow, and among many nations of equal
antiquity, was little known to the people of North-
America ', or the islands, but appears to have been

e Piedrahita Conq. del Nuevo Reyno, ix. 12.
w Nauf. do Alr. Nun Cabca de vaca, c. x. p. 1

used

B 0 0 K used by a few tribes in the southern continent .

IV
.._ -* The people, in tome provinces of Chili, and those

of Patagonia, towards the southern extremity of
America, use a weapon peculiar to themselves.
They fallen flones, about the size of a sift, to each
end of a leather thong of eight feet in length, and
swinging these round their heads, throw them with
fich dexterity, that they seldom miss the objet at
which they aim'.
Their do- AMONG people who had hardly any occupation

but .var or hunting, the chief exertions of their in-
ventionl', as well as induflry, were naturally di-
rected towards these objects. With refpeat to every
thing clfe, their wants and desires were so limited,
that their invention was not upon the stretch. As
their food and habitations are perfetly simple, their
domcftic utensils are few and rude. Some of the
southern tribes had discovered the art of forming
vefels of earthen ware, and baking them in the fun,
To as they could endure the fire. In North Ame-
rica, they hollowed a piece of hard wood into the
form of a kettle, and filling it with water, brought

,d;,,,5 it to boil, by putting red-hot stones into it'. These
cir tood. veCcls they used in preparing part of their provi-

sions; and this may be confidered as a ftep to-

t Piedrah. p. 16. See NOTE LIV..
r Ovalle's Relation of Chili. Church. Collet. iii. 8,
Falkner's Defcript. of Patagon. p. 130.

See NOT .LV.
' Charlv. lilf. N. Fr. iii. 332.

wardo

wards refinement and luxury, for men in their Ba .K
rudef state were not acquainted with any method .
ofdreffing their vicuals, but by roasting them on
the fire; and among several tribes in America,
this is the only species of cookery yet known '.
But the master-piece of art, among the savages Conaruc-
of America, is the conitrulion of their canoes. t"oaf tlir
Ah Efkimaux, shut up in his boat of whalebone,
covered with the skins of fcalsi can brave that
stormy ocean, on which the barrenness of his coun-
try compels him to depend for the chief part of his
subsistence ;. The people of Canada venture upon
their rivers and lakes, in boats made of the bark of
trees, and so light that two men can carry them,
wherever (hallows or cataracts obftrua the naviga-
tion . In: these frail velitls they undertake and
accomplih long voyages :. The inhabitants of the
ides and of the southern continent form their ca-
noes by hollowing the trunk of a large tree, with
infinite labour, and though in appearance they are
extremely aukward and unwieldy, they paddle and
lteer them with such dexterity, that Europeans,
well acquainted with, all the improvements in the
icience of navigation, have been astonished at the
rapidity of their motion, and the quicknefi of their
evolutions, Their pirogues, or war-boats, are so
large as to carry forty,or fifty men; their canoes
employed in filing and in short voyages are left

See NOTE, LVI. . Ellis Voy. 133.
r See NOTE LVII.
t Lafitau Moeurs, &c. ii. 213.

VOL. Ii. M capacious.

B o K capacious *. The form, as well as materials of all

JV.

'_ .
-r these various kinds of veflels, is well adapted to the

service for which they are destined; and the more
minutely they are examined, the mechanism of their
ftruLlure, as well as neatness of their fabric, will
appear the more furpriling.

iiftlcffncfs BUT, in every attempt towards industry among
with which
thy apply the Americans, one striking quality in their cha-
to labour. raer is conspicuous. They apply to work with-

out ardour, carry it on with little acivity, and,
like children, are easily diverted from it. Even
in operations which seem the most interesting, and
where the molt powerful motives urge them to vi-
gorous exertions, they labour with a languid lift-
leffnefs. Their work advances under their hand
with. such slowness, that an eye-witness ompares
it to the imperceptible progrefi of vegetationk.
They will spend ob many years in forming a ca-
noc, that it often begins to rot with age before
they finish it. They will fufcr one prt of a roof
to decay and perilh, before they complete the
other'. The slightest manualoperation consumes
an amazing length of timn, and what in polished
nations would hardly be an ~t of industry, is
among savages an arduous undertaking. This sow-
ness of the Americans in executing works of every
kind may be imputed to various cades. Among

* Labat Voyages, ii. 91, &c. 131.
b Gumilla, ii. 297. ' Borde Rclat.de Caralbe, p. *2.

savages,

savages, who do not depend for subsistence upon a o o IC
the efforts of regular induftryr time is of so little q -,
importance, that they set no value upon it; and
provided they can finish a design, they never re-
gard how long they are employed about it. The
tools which they employ are so aukward and defec-
tive, that every work in which they engage must
nccefarily be tedious. The hand of the most in-
duftrious and lkilful artist, were it furnihied with
no better instrument than a stone hatchet, a ihell,
or the bone of some animal, would find it difficult
to perfet the most fimpe work. It is by length of
labour, that he must endeavour to supply his defec
of power. But above all, the cold phlegmatic
temper peculiar to the Americans renders their ope-
rations languid. It is almoR impoflible to rouze
them from that habitual indolence in which they are
funk ;. and unless when engaged in war or hunting,
they :seem incapabl of exerting any vigorous effort.
Their ardour of application is not so great as to call
forth that inventive spirit which fuggeRs expedients
for facilitating sad abridging: labour. They will
return to a talk day qfter day, but all their methods
of executing it .are tedious and operose c. Even
fnce the Europeas, have communicated to them
the knowledge of thir instruments, and taught
them to imitate their arts, the peculiar genius of
the Americana is conspicuous in every attempt they
make. They may be patient and afliduous in la-
bour, they can copy with a servile and minute ac-

ós ee NOTE LVIII.

M 2 curacy,

B O K curacy, but discover little invention, and no Ca.
i.r lents for dispatch. · In spite of inftrution and ex.

ample, the spirit of the race predominates; their
motions are naturally tardy, and it is in vain to urge
them to quicken their pace. Among the Spani.
ards in America, the work of an Indian is a phrase
by which they describe any thing, in the execution
of which an immense time:has been employed, and
much labour wafted'.

rheir rdli. VII. No circumstance .refpe&ing rude nations
Sion" has been the object of greater curiosity than their

religious tenets and rites; and none, perhaps, has
been so imperfectly underflood, or represented

Peculiar with so little fidelity. Priests and missionaries are
i thi uti' the persons who have had the best opportunities
quiry. of carrying on this inquiry, among the most un-

civilized of the American tribes. Their minds,
cngroffed by the doctrines of their own religion,
and habituated to its institutions, are apt to disco-
ver something which resembles those objets of
their veneration, in the opinions and rites of every
people. Whatever they contemplate, they view
through one medium, and draw and accommodate
it to their own system. They study to reconcile
the institutions, which fall under their observation,
to their own creed, not to explain them according
to the rude notions of the people themselves. They
ascribe to them ideas which they are incapable of
forming, and fuippofe them to be acquainted with

r Voyages de Ulloa, i, 335. LettO, Edif, &c. 15. 3+8.

principles

principles and fats, which it is impossible that they 0 0

o K

lhould know. Hence, some mirionaries have been i~,.
induced to believe, that even among the most bar-
barous nations in America, they had discovered
traces, no less diftina than amazing, of their ac-
quaintance with the sublime mysteries and peculiar
institutions of Christianity. From their own inter-
pretation of certain exprefllons and ceremonies,
they have concluded that these people had some
knowledge of the'docrine of the Trinity, of the
incarnation of the Son of God, of his expiatory fa-
crifice, of the virtue of the cross, and ofthe efficacy
of the sacraments'. In such unintelligent and cre-
dulous guides, we can place little confidence.

BUT, even when we make our choice of conduc-

tors, with; the greatest care, we .must not follow
theni with:implioit faith. An inquiry into the reli-
gious notions oftrude nations is involved in pecu-
liar intricacies, and we mist often pause in order
to separate the fatss which our informers relate,
from the reafoningswith which they are accompa.
nied, or the theories which they build upon them.
Several pious wfiters, more attentive to the im-
portance of the fubje& than to the condition of
the people whose sentiments they were endeavour-
ing to discover, have bestowed much unprofitable
labour in researches of this nature 1.

'Venegas, i. 88. 9.1 Torquemad3a ii. 445. Garcia Crigen.
122, Herrera, dec. 4. lib. ix. c. 7. dec. S. lib. iv. c. 7.
' See NOTE LIX.

M 3 T3IXR

3 0 0 K THERB are two fundamental doctrines, upon

IV.

a-- which the whole system of religion, as far as it can
ConAed to be discovered by the light of nature, i eftablilhed.
two arti.
cds. The one refpeAs the being of a God, the other

the immortality of the foul. To discover the
ideas of the uncultivated nations under our review
with regard to those important points, is not only
an obje&t of curiosity, but may afford inftruhtion.
To these two articles I shall confine my researches,
leaving subordinate opinions, and the detail of
local superstitions, to more minute inquirers

The bein Whoever has had any opportunity of- examining
of God. into the religious opinions of persons in the in-

ferior ranks of life, even in the mo(t enlighteied
and civilized nations, will find that their system of
belief is derived from inftrution, not discovered
by inquiry. That numerous part of the human
species, whose lot is labour, whose principal nd
almost sole occupation is to secure fubfifcnce,
views the arrangement and operations of ntmw
with little refletion, and has neither leisure nor c-a
pacity for entering into that path of refined and in
tricate speculation which conducts to the knowledge
of the principles of natural religion. In the early
and most rude periods of savage life, such difqdfi-
tions are altogether unknown. :When the intellec-
tual powers are just beginning-to unfold, and their
first feeble exertions are direted towards a few obh
jecs of primary necessity and use; when the faculties
of the mind are to limited, as not to have formed
abftratl or general ideas ; when language is so bar-

4 ren,

HISTORY OF AMERICA, I67

ren, as to be destitute of names to di(tioguih any a O o
thing that is not perceived by f9me of th ienfcs; .l^
it isprcpoftergus mo expc6 that man (hould be ca-
pable of tracing with accuracy the relation between
cause and effe4 j or to suppose that he should rife
from the contemplation of the one to the knowledge
of the other, and form jut conceptions of a Deity,
as the Creator and Goyernor of the universe. The
idea of creation is, so familiar wherever the mind is
enlarged by science, and illuminated with revelation,
that we seldom refle& bow profound and abfrrufe
this idea is, or confider what progress man must
have made in obfcrvation and research, before he
Could artive at any knowledge of this elementary
principle in religion. Accordingly, several tribes
have ben discovered in America, which have no
idea whatever of.a Supreme Being, and no rites of
tdiglous- orfhip. Inattentive to that magnificent
fpc&acle of beauty and order presented to their
view,- uaccuftomed to reflec either upon what they
themfnlves are, or to inquire who is the author of
their exitencc,. men, in their savage tate, pats
their days like the animals round them, without
knowledge or veneration of any superior power.
Some rude tribes have not in their language any
name for the Deity, nor have the mufl accurate ob-
fervcrs been able to difcovcr any praticc or infti-
tltion which fCcr;cd to imply that they recognifec
his authority, or were solicitous to obtain his favour '.

It

Biet, 539. Lery ap.deBry, iii. 2l2. Nicuhoff. Church.

Coll. ii. 132. Lcttr. Edif.. 7. d7. l 2.
i 3. '12, eeg , 5.

M t 87.

B o o K It is however only among men in 'the most un.
aI_ . cultivated state of nature, and while their intel-

lectual faculties are so feeble and limited as hardly
to elevate them above the irrational creation, that
we discover this total insensibility to the impreflions
of any invisible power.

BUT the human mind, formed'for religion, soon

opens to the reception of ideas, which are destined,
when corrected and refined,' to be the great source
of consolation amidst the calamities of life. Among
some of the American tribes, still in the infancy of
improvement, we discern apprehensions of some iq-
visible and powerful beings. These apprehenfiois
are originally indifin& and perplexed, and seem to
be suggested rather by the dread of impending
evils, than to flow from'gratitude for bleflings re-
ceived. While Nature holds on her coqrfe with
uniform and undisturbed' regularity, men enjoy the
benefits refultin& from it, without inquiring con-
cerning its cause. But every deviation from this
regular course rourts and aftonifles them. When
they behold events to which they are not accuf-
tomed, they search for the reasons of them with
eager curiosity. Their underflanding is unable to
penetrate into these; but imlgination, a more for-

87. Lozano Defcript. del Grand Chaco, 59. Fcrnand. Miflion.
de Chiquit. 39. Gumilla, ii. 156. Rochefot' Hit. des An.
tilles,.p. 468. Margrave Hilt. in Append. de Chilienfibui,
p86. Ulloa Notic. Americ. 335, &c. Barrcrc, z1i, 219.
Harcpurt Voy. to Guiana. Purch. I'ilgr. iv. p. 1273. Ac-
count of Brasil, by a Portuguese. Ibid. p. z289. Jones'S
Journal, p. 59. See NOTE LX.

ward

ward and ardent faculty 'of the mind, ;desiles,'iti- i o6 k
out hesitation. It ascribes the extraordinary-occur-, 1v,
rences in nature to the influence of invisible beings;
and supposes that the thunder, -the hurricane,'and
the earthquake, are effets of their interposition.
Some such confiued notion of Spiritual or invisible
power, superintending over those natural calamities
which frequently desolate the earth, arid terrify its
inhabitants, may be traced among many rude na-
tons t "But besides this, the difaiters and dairgers
of savage life are so many, and men often find'them-
selves in situations so formidable, that the mind,
sensible of its'owit vweaknefs, has no refbiuce but
in the guidance and proteacion of wisdom and poWer
foperior to what is human. 'Deje&ed with cala-
mities which oppress him, and exposed to dangers
which he cannot repel, the savage no longer relies
upon himself; he feels his own impotence, and fees
no profpe& of being extricated, but by the intcrpo-
fiion of some unseen arm. Hence, in all unen-
lightened nations, the firit rites or practices which
bear any resemblance to ats of religion, have it
for their objeLt to avert evils which men susser
or dread. The Manitous or Okkis of the North
Americans were amulets or charms, which they
imagined to be of such virtue, as to prererve the
persons who reposed confidence in them from
every difaflrous event, or they were confidered as
tltclary spirits, whose aid they might implore in

Sce NOTE LXI.

circum,

Bq I circumir~ace of diftres'. The Cemis of the
- , itlanders were reputed by them to be .the authors of

every calamity that aflits the human race j they
were represented under the mod frightful forms,
and religious homage was paid to them with no
other view than to appease thefc furious deities".
Even among those tribes whose religious syRem
was more enlarged, and who had formed some
conception of benevolent beings, which delighted
in conferring benefits, as well as of malicious
powers prone to inflit evil; superstition fill ap-
pears as the offspring of fear, and all its efforts
were employed to avert calamities. They were
persuaded that their good deities, prompted by the
beneficence of their nature, would bellow every
blefling in their power, without fblicitation or ac-
knowledgment; and their only anxiety was to
soothe and deprecate the wrath of the powers
whom they regarded as the enemies of mankind'.

SUCH were the imperfe&t conceptions of the

greater part of the Americans with refpct to the in-
tcrpofitions of invisible agents, and such, almost
ulivercraly, was the mean and illiberal object of
their fupcrftitions. Were we to trace back the

Charlev. N. Fr. iii. 343, &e. Creuxii Hilt. Canad. p. St,
"c.

u Ovic4eo lib. iii. c. I. p. 1 l . P. Martyr, decad. p. io2,
&e.

Tertre, ii. 365. Borde, p. State of Virginia, by a

Native, book iii. p. 32, 33. Dumont, i. 165. Bancroft Nat.
lIif. of Guiana, 309. ide

ideas

ideas of other nations to that rude itate in. which · o o
history first presents them to our view, we lhould i -..~-
discover a surprising resemblance in their tenets and
pra&ices; and should be convinced, that, in fini
lar circumstances, the faculties of the human mind
hold nearly the fame course in their progrefi, and
arrive at almost the fame conelufions. The im-
preftion: of fear are conspicuous in all the systems of
superstition formed in this situation. The most ex-
ated notions of men rife no higher than to a per-
pl~ed apprehenflon of certain beings, whose power,
though supernatural, is limited as well as partial.
BUT, among other tribes, which have been Remarkal*

divcrfity in

longer united, or have made greater progress in theirrlir-
improvement, we discern some feeble pointing to- OU O
wards more just and adequate conceptions of the
power that presides in nature. Thdy seem to per-
ccire that there must be some universal cause to
whom all things are indebted for their being. If
we may judge by some of their expressions, they
appear to acknowledge a divine power to be the
maker of the world, and the disposer of all events.
They denominate him the Great Spirit o. But these
ideas are faint and confured, and when they attempt
to explin them, it is manifest, that among them the
word pirit has a meaning very different from that
in which we employ it, and that they have no con.
ception of any deity but what is corporeal. They

Charley. N. Fr . iii. 3 Sagard, Voy. du Pays deo Hu.
rons, 226.

believe

B o o / believe their godsro be of the human form, though

L f of;a- nanre moare excellent than mrn, and retail

such wild incoherent fables concerning their func.
tions and operations, .as are altogether unworthy of
a place in history. Even among these tribes, there
is no established form of public worship; there are
no temples eredted in honour of their deities; and
no ministers peculiarly consecrated to tleir service.
They- have: the knowledge, however, of several fu.
perftitious ceremonies and pra&ices handed down
to: them by tradition, and to there they have re.
course with a childiflh credulity, when roused by
any emergence from their usual insensibility, and
excited to acknowledge the power, and to implore
the protection of superior beings .

Synt(mof THE tribe of the Natchez, and the people of
t1~¢ Nat-
tIzL.j Bogota had advanced beyond the other unculti-

vated nations of America in their ideas of religion,
as well as in their political institutions; and it is no
less difficult to explain the cause of this diflin&ion
than of that which we have already confidered.
The Sun was the chief obje&t of religious worship
among the Natchez. In their temples, which were
conftruced with tome magnificence, and decorated
with various ornaments, according to their mode
of architclturc, they preserved a perpetual fire, as
the purcft emblem of their divinity. Miniften
were appointed to watch and feed this sacred flame.

P Charlev. N. Fr. iii. 3,15. Colden, i. 17.

Tlic

The first funtion of the great chief of the nation; B o o K
every morning, was an .at of obeisance to the Sun;
and festivals returned at stated seasons, which were
celebrated by the whole community with solemn
but unbloody rites q. This is. the most refined fpe-
cies of fuperftiion known in America, and, per-
haps, one of the most natural as well as most fe-
ducing. The Sun is the apparent source of the
joy, fertility, and life, diffused through nature;
and while the human mind, in its early essays to-
wards inquiry, contemplates and admires his uni-
versal and animating energy, its admiration is' apt
to fop Ihort at what is vifiblc, without reaching to
the unseen cause; and pays that adoration to'the
most glorious and beneficial work of God, which
is due only to him who formed it. As fire is the
purest and most aftive of the elements, and in some
of its qualities and effeEts resembles the Sun, it
was, not improperly, chosen to be the emblem of
his powerful operation. The ancient Persians, a
people far superior, in every refpeet, to that rude
tribe whose rites I am describing, founded their re-
ligious system on similar principles, and established
a form of public worlhip, less gross and exception-
able than that of any people destitute of guidance.
from revelation. This furprifng co-incidence in
sentiment between two nations, in such different'
fates of improvement, is one of the many singular

Dumont, i. 158, &c. Charley. N r. Friii. 417, &c. 429.
Lafitau, i. 167.

9 and

oK0 0 and unaccountable circumftanccs which occur in
IV
:'* . the history of human affairs.

:AMONG the people of Bogota, the Sun and
Moon were, likewise, the chief objets of venera.
tion. Their system of religion was more regular
and complete, though less pure, than that of the
Natchez. They had temples, altars, priests, facri-
sices, and that long train of ceremonies, which
fuperflition introduces wherever lhe has fully cfta-
blibied her dominion over the minds of men. But
the rites of their worship were cruel and bloody.
They offered human vitims to their deities, and
many of their pra&ices nearly resembled the bar.
barous institutions of the Mexicans, the genius of
which we ihall have an opportunity of confiderin
more attentively in its proper place .

Their ideas WITH refpCet to the other great doctrine of re-
the imor- ligion, concerning the immortality of the.fpul, the
tality of the fentimrnts of the Americans were more united: the

human mind, even when least improved and invi-
gorated by culture, shrinks from the thoughts of
annihilation, and looks forward with hope and ex-
peaation to a state of future existence. This fan.
timent, resulting from a secret consciousness of it
own dignity, from an inftiintive longing after im-
mortality, is universal, and may be deemed natu-
ral. Upon this, are founded the most exalted

Piedrahita, Conq. del N, Reyno, p. 17. Herruer, dec.6.
lib. v. c. 6.

hopes

hopes of man in his highest state of improvement; X o o

0

nor has nature withheld from him this bfoohing A ,
consolation, in the most early and rude period of
his progress. We can trace this opinion from one
extremity of America to the other: in some re-
gions more faint and obscure, in others more per-
ftly developed, but no where unknown.. The
most uncivilized of its savage tribes do not appre-
hend death as the extinction of being. All enter-
tin hopes of a future and more happy tate where
tey Jhalbe forever exempt from the calamities
which imbitter human life in its present condition.
This future state they conceive to be a delightful
country, blessed with perpetual spring, whose so-
rfts abound with game, whole rivers swarm with
flb, where famine is never felt, and uninterrupted
plenty shall be enjoyed without labour or toil.
But as men, in forming their first imperfect ideas
concerning the invisible world, suppose that there
tey shall continue to feel the fame desires, and to
be engaged in the fame occupations, as in the pre-
sent world s they naturally ascribe eminence and
diftinrion, in that state, to the fame qualities and.
talents which are here the objet of their esteem.
The Americans, accordingly, allotted the highest
place, in their country of spirits, to the skilful
hunter, to the adventurous and fuccefiful warrior,
and to such as had tortured the greatest number 6f
captives, and devoured their flesh '. These notions

Lery p. de Bry, Iii. 2ai. thlrlev. N. Fr. iii. 351, &c.
De la Potherie, ii. 45, &c. iii. c.

were

BOOK were so prevalent, that they gave rife to an univcf.

-..^' fal culomn, which is, at once, the frongeft evi-

induce dence that the Americans believe in a future dtate,
them to
bury arms, and the best illustration of what they expe& there.
&c. With
tle dead. As they imagine, that departed spirits begin their

career anew in the world whither they are gone,
that their friends may not enter upon it defenceless
and unprovided, .they bury together with the bo-
dies of the dead their bow, their arrows, and other
weapons used in hunting or war; they deposit in
their tombs the skins or fluffs of which they make
garments, Indian corn, manioc, venison, domefic
utensils, and whatever is reckoned among the ne-
ceffaries in their simple mode of life'. In some
provinces, upon the decease of a cazique or chief
a certain number of his wives, of his favourites,
and .of hi slaves, were put to death, and interred
together with him, that he might appear with the
fame dignity in his future station, and be waited
upon by the fame attendants u. This perfoafion
is so deep-rooted, that many of the deceased per.
son's retainers offer thelnlflves as voluitary viaims,
and court the privilege of accompanying their de-

Chronica de Cieca deLeon, c. 28. Sagard, zg8. Creuz.

Hist. Canad. p. 9l. Rochefort. Hilt. des Antilles, 568.
Biet, 391. De la Potherie, ii. 44. iii. S. Blanco, Conerd.
de Piritu, p. 35.

" Dumont, Louifiane, i. o28, &c. Oviedo, lib. v. c. 3.

Gomara, Hill. Gen. c. 28. P. Mart. decad. 304. CharIer.
N. Fr. iii 42!. Herrera, dec. I. lib. iii. c. 3. P. Melchior
Hernandez, Memor. de Chiriqui. Coll. Orig. 'apers, 1.
Chron. de Cieca de Leon, c. 33.

pJrtcd

parted master, as an high diftintion, It has been BOO
found difficult, on some occasions, so fc bounds *
to this enthusiasm of affecionate duty, and to re-
duce the train of a favourite leader to such a num-
ber as the tribe could afford to spare '.

AMONG the Americans, as well as other unci- supcrti.
vilized nations, many of the rites and observances neddwitb
which bear some resemblance to a&s of religion, devotion.
have no connetion with devotion, but proceed
from a fond desire of prying into futurity. The
human mind is most apt to feel, and to discover
this vain curiosity, when its own powers are most
feeble and uninformed. Astonished with occdur
rences, of which it is unable to comprehend the
aufe, it naturally fancies that there is something
mysterious and wonderful in their origin. Alarmed
at events of which it cannot discern the ifue'or the
consequences, it has recourse to other means of dif-
covering them, than the exercire of its own saga.
city. Wherever superstition is so eftablilhed as to
form a regular system, this desire of penetrating
into the secrets of futurity is conneted with it.
Divination becomes a religious a&. Priests, as the
ministers of Heaven, pretend to deliver its oracles
to men. They are the only soothsayers, augurs,
and magicians, who profess the sacred and import-
ant art of disclosing what is hid from other eyes.

BUT, among rude nations, who pay no vencra- Tht, de.
tion to any superintending poedr, and who have no gns to

* Se NOTE LXII. thirphy

VOL. .
t. stablished

1 eB tabliihed rites or ministers of religion, their cu-
.
! a.- r.iofi to6 difibvet what is future and unknown is

eheriihed by a different principle, and derives
trength. ftro iaiother alliance. As the diseases of
men, in the tavage state, are (as has been already
observed) like those of the animal. creation, few but
extremely violent, their impatience under what they
susser, and Solicitude for the recovery of health, soon
inspired them with extraordinary reverence for such
as pretended to underfiand the nature of their ma-
ladies, and to be poflefTcd of knowledge 'ufficient
to preserve or deliver them from their sudden and
fatal effe&s. These ignorant pretenders, however,
were such utter strangers to the ftru&ure of the hu-
man frame, as to be equally unacquainted with the
causes of its disorders, and the manner in which
they will terminate. SuperRlition, mingled fre-
quently with some portion of craft, supplied what
they wanted in science. They imputed the origin
of diseases to supernatural influence, and prescribed
or performed a variety of mysterious rites, which
they gave out to be of such efficacy as to remove
the most dangerous and inveterate maladies. The
credulity and love of the marvellous, natural to
uninformed men, favoured the deception, and pre-
pared them to be the dupes of those impostors.
Among.favages, their first physicians are a kind of
conjurers or wizards, who boast that they know
what is past, and can foretell what is to come. In-
cantations, sorcery, and mummeries of diverse
kinds, no less strange than frivolous, are the means

which

which they employ to expel the imaginary causes Bo 0 0o
of malignity'; and relying upon the efficacy of
these, they predi& with confidence what will be
the fate of their deluded patients. Thus fuperfti-
tion, in its earliest form, flowed from the solicitude
of man to be delivered from present distress, nor
from his dread of evils awaiting him in a future
life, and was originally ingrafted on medicine, not
on religion. One of the first, and most intelligent
hifftorians of America, was struck with this alliance
between the art of divination and that of physic,
among the people of Hispaniola . But this was
not peculiar to them. The Alexis, the Piayas,
the Autmoins, or whatever was the distinguishing
name of their diviners and charmers in other parts
of America, were all the physicians of their refpec-
tive tribes, in the fame manner as the Bubitos of
Hispaniola. As their fun&tion led them to apply
to the human mind when enfeebled by sickness, and
as they found it, in that season of deje&ion, prone
to be alarmed with imaginary fears, or amused with
vain hopes, they easily induced it to rely with im-
plicit confidence on the virtue of their spells, and
the certainty of their predictions '.

i P. Melch. Hemandes, Memorial de Chiriqui. Colict.
Orig. Pap. i.

* Oviedo, lib. v. c. i.
' Herra, dec. i. lib. iii . c. Olborne, Coll. ii. 860.

Domont, i. 169, &c. Charley. N. Fr. iii. 361. 364, &c.
Lawson, N. Carol. 214. Ribas, Triumph. p. 17. Bict,386.
De la Potherie, ii. 35, &c.

N2 'WHEN EVIR

B 0 0 K WHENEVER men acknowledge the reality of fu-

-
- pernatural power and discernment in one instance,
Gradually they have a propensity to admit it in others. The

Americans did not long suppose the efficacy of con-
juration to be confined to one subjet. They had
recourse to it in every situation of danger or
distress. When the events of war were peculiarly
disastrous, when they met with unforeseen difap-
pointments in hunting, when inundations or drought
threatened their crops with deftru&tion, they called
upon their conjurers to begin their incantations, in
order to discover the causes of those calamities, or
to foretell what would be their iffueb. Their con-
1idence in this delusive art gradually increased, and
manifested itself in all the occurrences of life.
When involved in any difficulty, or about to enter
upon any tranfation of moment, every individual
regularly consulted the forcerer, and depended upon
his infru&ions to extricate him from the former,
as well as to dire& his conduct in the latter. Even
among the rudeit tribes in America, fupertition
appears in this form, and divination is an art in
high citccnm. Long before man had acquired such
knowledge of a deity as inspires reverence, and

.lads to adoration, we observe him stretching out
a presumptuous hand to draw aside that veil with
which providence kindly conceals its purposes from
human knowledge; and we find him labouring,
with fruitless anxiety, to penetrate into the myfte-

h Charlev. N. Fr. iii. 3. Dumont, i. 173. Fernand. Relac.
de !cs Chiquit. p. 4o. Lozanc, 84. Margrave, 279.

ries

ries of the divine administration. To discern, and B o o Y.
to worship a superintending power, is an evidence ^
of the enlargement and maturity of the human
understanding; a vain desire of prying into futu-
rity, is the error of its infancy, and a proof of its
weakness.

FROM this weakness proceeded likewise the faith

of the Americans in dreams, their observation of
omens, their attention to the chirping of birds,
and the cries of animals, all which they filppofe to
be indications of future events, and if any one of
there prognostics is deemed unfavourable, they in-
lantly abandon the pursuit of those measures on
which they are most eagerly bent c.

VIII. BUT if we would form a completeidea of DI~h,

culloms.

the uncultivated nations of America; we must not
pass unobserved some singular customs, which,
though universal and chara&eriftic, could not be
reduced, with propriety, to any of the articles into
which I have divided my inquiry concerning their
manners.

AMONG savages, in every part of the globe, the Love o

love of dancing is a favourite paflion. As, during
a great part of their time, they languiih in a state
of inactivity and indolence, without any occupation
to rouse or intcreft them, they delight universally

' Charler. N. Fr. iii. z6z. 353. 8tadius, ap. de Bry, iii.
nio. Creuxj. Hit. Canad. 84. Techo, Hil. of Parag.
Church. Coll. vi. 37. De la Potherie, iii. 6.

N3 in

a o o K in a pastime which calls forth the a&ive powers of

Iv.
rI ^ their nature into exercise. The Spaniards, when

they first visited America, were astonished at the
fondness of the natives for dancing, and beheld
with wonder a people, cold and unanimated in mos
of their other pursuits, kindle into life, and exert
themselves with ardour, as often as this favourite
amusement recurred. Among them, indeed, danc-
ing ought not to be denominated an amusement.
It is a serious and important occupation, which
mingles in every occurrence of public or private
life. If any intercourse be neceflfry between two
American tribes, the ambassadors of the one ap-
proach in a solemn dance, and present the calumet
or emblem of peace; the sachems of the other re-
ceive it with the fame ceremony d. If war is de-
nounced againfl an enemy, it is by a dance, ex-
preffive of the resentment which they feel, and of
the vengeance which they meditate". If the wrath
of their gods is to be appeased, or their beneficence
to be celebrated; if they rejoice at the birth of a
child, or mourn the death of a friend', they have
dances appropriated to each of these situations, and
suited to the different sentiments with which they
are then animated. If a person is indisposed, a
dance is prescribed as the most effe&ual means of
restoring him to health; and if he himself cannot
endure the fatigue of such an exercise, the physician

d De la Potherie Hil. ii. 17, &c. Charlev. N. Fr. iii. 211.
g97. LaHontan. i. 0oo. 137. Hennepin, Decou. 146, &c.
· Charlev. N. Fr. ii. 298. Lafitau, i. 523.
Joutel, 3+3. Gomera, Hil. Gon. c. 196.

6 or

or conjurer perffrms it in his name, as if the virtue B o K
of his activity could be transferred tohis patient . , *.._y ,

ALL their dances are imitations of some actiorn
and though the music by which they are regulated
is extremely simple and tiresome to the ear by its
dull monotony, some of their dancesmappear won.
derfully expreflive and animated. The war dance
is, perhaps, the most firiking. It is the reprefeni
ation of a complete American campaign. The
departure of the warriors from their village, their
march into the enemy's country, the caution with
which they encamp, the address with which they
station some of their party in arbufh, the manner
of surprising the enemy, the noise and ferocity of
the combat, the scalping of those who are slain,
the seizing of prisoners, the triumphant return of
the conquerors, and the torture of the victims, are
successively exhibited. The performers enter with
such enthusiastic ardour into their. Jeveral parts,
their gestures, their countenance, their voice, are
so wild and so well adapted to their various fitua-
tions, that Europeans can hardly believe it to be
a mimic scene, or view it without emotions of fear
and horror b

BUT however exprefive some of' the Ametican
dances may be, there is one circumftance,in,thmh

Dcnys Hift.N. Na 89. Brick'll, 372. Dela'Potheril,

ii, 36.

h De la Potherie, ii. z16. Charlev. N. Fr. iii. 297. Lafl.
tau, i. 523.

N 4 remarkable,

B 0o0 K remarkable, and conneced with the charaaer of
~ t' bthe race; The songs, the dances, the amusements

of other nations, expressive of the Sentiments which
animate their hearts, are often adapted to display
or excite that fenfibilitv which mutually attaches
the rexes. Among Conme people, such is the ardour
oft this pafion, that love is almost the sole objecf
of festivity and joy; and as rude nations are
ftiaigers to delicacy, and' unaccustomed to dif-
gtife any emotion of their minds, their dances are
often extremely wanton and indecent. Such is the
Calenda, of which the natives of Africa are so pas-
fionately fond '; and such the feats of the dancing
girls, which the Asiatics contemplate with so much
avidity of difire. But, among the Americans,
more cold and indifferent to their females, from
c:ufes which I have already explained, the paflion
of love mingles- but little with their festivals and
pastimes. Their songs and dances are mostly so.
lemn and martial, they are conne&ed with some of
the serious and important affairs of life ', and hav-
ing no relation to love or gallantry, are seldom
common to the two sexes, but executed by the
men and women apart b. If, on- tome occasions,

f Adanfon, Voyage to Senegal, p. iii. s87. Labat, Voyages,

,iv.,Jt 3 Sloan,; Hit. Nat .

of I

J n. ntro . 48. Fernin.
Defcriet. de Surin. i. p. 139.

I DeiCrpt.? N. France. Olborne, Col il. 883. Charley
N. Fr. iii. 84,

h Wafer's Account of Ilthmus, &c. z69c Lery ap. de Bry,

Pii. 177. Lozano, Hil. de Parag. i. 149. Herrera, dec. *.
iPb. vii, c.8. dec. 4. lib. x. c.4. See NOTE LXIII.

5 the

the women are permitted to join in the festival, the sB o C
charater of the entertainment is till the fame, and '-- .
no movement or gesture is expressive of attach-
ment, or encourages familiarity h.

AN immoderate love of play, especially at games PIon r

b

of hazard, which seems to be natural to all people s~st
unaccustomed to the occupations of regular indus-
try, is likewise universal among the Americans.
The fame causes, which so often prompt persons in
civilized life, who are at their. afe, to have re-
course to this patinme, render it thc delight of the
savage. The former are independent of labour,
the latter do not feel the necessity of it; and as both
are unemployed, they run with transport to what-
ever is interesting enough to stir and to agitate
their minds. Hence the Americans, who at other
times are so indifferent, so phlegmatic, so silent,
and animated with so few desires, as soon as they
engage in play become rapacious, impatient, noisy,
and almost frantic with eagerness. Their furs,
their domestic utensils, their clothes, their arms,
are staked at the gaming-table, and when all is loft,
high as their sense of independence is, in a wild
emotion of despair or of hope, they will often rilk
their personal liberty upon a single cast . Among
several tribes, such gaming parties frequently recur,
and become their most acceptable entertainment at

h Barrere, Fr. Equin. p, 191.
s Charley. N. Fr. iii. 261. 318 Lata. ii. 338, &c.
Ribu, Triumf, 13. Brickcll, 335.

every

B 0o K every great fetival, Superatition, which is apt to

-v, take hold of those palions which are most vigorous,

frequently lends its aid to confirm and strengthen
this favourite inclination. Their conjurers are ac.
cuftorned to prescribe a solemn match at play, as
one of the most efficacious methods of appearing
their gods, or of restoring the tick to health'.

and for FROM causes similar to those which render them
drking. fond of play, the Americans are extremely addicted

to drunkenne's. It seems to have been one of the
firit exertions ofJunman ingenuity to discover some
composition of a. intoxicating quality and there is
hardly any nation fit rude, or so deltitute of inven.
tion, as not to have succeeded in this fatal research.
The most barbarous of the American tribes have
been so unfortunate as to attain this art; and even
those which are so deficient in knowledge, as to be
unacquainted with the method of giving an inebri-
ating firength to liquors by fermentation, can ac-
complifh the fame end by other means. The
people of the islands of North America, and of
California, used, for this purpose, the smoke of
tobacco, drawn up with a certain instrument into
the nostrils, the fumes of which ascending to the
brain, they felt all the transports and frenzy of in-
toxication ". In almost every other part of the
New World, .the natives poffeflid the art of ex-

k CharlIv. N. Fr. iii. 262.
" Oricdo, Hill. ap. Ramus. iii. 1. Vcnrgas, i. 68.
a.ifiag. de CabecadeVaca, cap, 26. See NOTEi LXIV.

trasAin,

trading an intoxicating liquor from maize or the B o o iK
manioc root, the fame substances which they con- _
vert into bread. The operation by which they,
effect this, nearly resembles the common one. of
brewing, but with this difference, that in place of
yeft, they use a nauseous infusion of a certain quaa- ;
tity of maize or manioc chewed by their women.
The aliva excites a vigorous fermentation, and in a
few days the liquor becomes fit for drinking. It is
not disagreeable to the taste, and when swallowed
in large quantities, is of an intoxicating quality ".
This is the general beverage of the Americans,
which they dittinguiih by various names, and for
which they feel such a violent and insatiable desire,
as it is not easy either to conceive or describe,
Among polished nations, where a succession of va-
rious functions and amusements keeps the mind in
continual occupation, the desire for firong drink is
regulated, in a great measure, by the climate, and
increases or diminishes according to the variations of
its temperature. In warm regions, the delicate and
sensible frame of the inhabitants does not require
the Stimulation qs fermented liquors. In colder
countries, the conRtitution of the natives, more ro-
bust and more sluggish, sands in need of generous
liquors to quicken and animate it. But among fa-
vages, the desire of something that is of power to
intoxicate, is in every situation the fame. All the
people of America, if we except omnic finall tribes
near the Straits of Magellan, whether natives of the

Stadius ap. dc Bry, iii. ill. Lery, ibid. 175.

torrid

i O K torrid zone, or inhabitants of its more temperat

, '_s regions, or placed by a harder fate in the severe cli

mates towards its northern or southern extremity
appear to be equally under the dominion of thi!
appetite °. Such a similarity oftafte, among people
in such different situations, must be ascribed to the
influence of some moral cause, and cannot be con.
fidered as the effe&t of any physical or conflitutional
want. While engaged in war or in the chafe, the
savage is often in the most interesting situations,
and all the powers of his nature are routed to the
most vigorous exertions. But those animating
scenes are succeeded by long intervals of repofc,
during which the warrior meets with nothing that
he deems of sufficient dignity or importance to merit
his attention. He languiffcs and mopes in this sea.
son of indolence. The posture of his body is an
emblem of the state of his mind. In one climate,
cowering over the fire in his cabin; in another,
Itretched under the ihade of some tree, he doses
away his time in sleep, or in an unthinking joyless
inactivity, not far removed from it. As itrong
liquors awake him from this tdrpid itatc, give a
brisker motion to his spirits, and enliven him more
thoroughly than either dancing or gaming, his love
of them is excessive. A savage, when not engaged
in action, is a pensive melancholy animal; but as

o Gumilla, i. 257. Lozano Defcrip. de Gran Chaco, 56-

iC3. Ribas, 8. Ulloa, i. 249. 337. Marchais, iv. 436.
Fernandez Miflion. de las Chiquet. 35. Barrcrc, p. o3.
Blinco Converf. de Piritu, 31.

soon

soon as he taftes, or has a prospect of tafting, the 3 °v° o
intoxicating draught, he becomes gay and frolic- h--~
some P. Whatever be the occasion or pretext on
which the Americans aflemble, the meeting always
terminates in a debauch. Many of their festivals
have no other objet, and they welcome the return
ofthem with transports of joy. As they are not
accustomed to restrain any appetite, they set no
bounds to this. The riot often continues without
intermifiion several days; and whatever may be the
fatal effects of their excess, they never cease from
drinking as long as one drop of liquor remains.
The perobns of greatest eminence, the most dif.
tinguifled warriors, and the chiefs most renowned
for their wisdom, have no greater command of
themselves than the most obscure member of the
community. Their eagerness for present enjoy-
ment renders them blind to its fatal consequences;
and those very men, who, in other situations, seem
topofrefs a force of mind more than human, arc in
this initance inferior to children in foresight, as well
as consideration, and mere slaves of brutal appetite .
When their paflions, naturally frong, are height-
ened and inflamed by drink, they are guilty of the
most enormous outrages, and the feRtivity seldom
concludes without deeds of violence, or blood-

ihed r.

P Melendez Teforez Vcrdad. iii. 369.
' Ribar, 9. Ullo., i. 338.
Lettr. Edif. ii. 178. Torquemada Mond. lnd. i. 335.

BVT,

B o0 IK BUT, amidst this wild debauch, there is one cir.

IV.
h-y<. cumftance remarkable; the women, in most of the

American tribes, are not permitted to partake of
its. Their province is to prepare the liquor, to
fcrve it about to the guests, and to take care of
their husbands and friends, when their reason is
overpowered. This exclusion of the women from
an enjoyment so highly valued by savages, may be
justly confidered as a mark of their inferiority, and
as an additional evidence of that contempt with
which they were treated in the New World. The
people of North America, when first discovered,
were not acquainted with any intoxicating drink;
but as the Europeans early found it their intereRt
to supply them with spirituous liquors, drunken-
ness soon became as universal among them as among
their countrymen to the south; and their women
having acquired this new taste, indulge it with as
little decency and moderation as the men'.

Puttodeatl IT were endless to enumerate all the detached
the aged and
incurabl. customs which have excited the wonder of travel-

lers in America; but I cannot omit one seemingly
as singular as any that has been mentioned. When
their parents and other relations become old, or
labour under any distemper which their slender
knowledge of the healing art cannot remove, the

' Sec NOTE LXV.
t Hutchinson, HiR. of Maiacthuf. 469. Lafitau, ii. I.
Sagard, 146.

Americans

Americans cut short their days with a violent hand, i oO It
in order to be relieved from the burden of support- r-
ing and tending them. This practice prevailed
among the ruder tribes in every part of the conti-
nent, from Hudson's Bay to the river De la Platav
and however shocking it may be to hose sentiments
oftendernefs and attachment, which, in civilized
life, we are apr to confider as congenial with our
frame, the condition of man in the savage stato
leads and reconciles him to it. The lame hardships
and difficulty of procuring fubfitcnce, which deter
savages, in some cafes, from rearing their children,
prompt them to destroy the aged and infirm. The
declining state of the one is as helpless as the in-
fancy of the other. The former are no less unable
than the latter to perform the functions that belong
to a warrior or hunter, or to endure those various
diftref'es in which savages are so often involved, by
their own want of foresight and industry. Their
relations feel this, and, incapable of attending to
the wants or weaknelfes of others, their impatience
under an additional burden prompts themni'to'ex
tingui/h that life which they find it difficult tt sus-
tain. This is not regarded as a deed of crOiely,
but as an a& of mercy. An Ametican; brbkfit
with years and infirmities, conscious tharhe- 'c^
longer depend on the aid of those aroutid'hirn,
places himself contentedly in his gravei aidit:h
by the hands of his children or nearest relations
that the thong is pulled, or the blow inflited4,

which

a o o K which relkals him for ever from the sorrows of
-,~ _life".

cel IX. AFTER contemplating the rude American
their ca. tribes in such various lights, after taking a view
rad&r. of their customs and manners from so many dif.

ferent stations, nothing remains but to form a ge-
neral estimate of their charater, compared with
that of more polifled nations. A human being,
as he comes originally from the hand of nature, is
every where the fame. At his first appearance in
the fate of infancy, whether it be among the rudest
savages, or in the most civilized nation, we can
discern no quality which marks any diftinsion or
superiority. The capacity of improvement feenm
to be the fame; and the talents he may afterwards
acquire, as well as the virtues he may be rendered
capable ofexercifing, depend, in a great measure,
upon the fate of society in which he is placed.
To this itate his mind naturally accommodates it.
elf, and from it receives discipline and culture.
In proportion to the wants which it accustoms a
human being to feel, and the functions in which
there engage him, his intellecual powers are called
forth. According to the connecions which it cfta
bliuhes between him and the ret of his species, the
*ffetions of his heart are exerted. It is only by
attending to this great principle, that we can dilf

CafaIni Hillor. de N. Reyno de Gran. p. 300. Pifoe
p.. Blh Voy. 19. Gumil, i. 33.over

cover

cover what is the character of man in every dif- B o o K
ferent period of his progress. .

IF we apply it to savage life, and measure the InteUeaual
attainments of the human mind in that state by this Pwer
standard, we shall find, according to an observation
which I have already made, that the intellecual
powers of man muff be extremely limited in their
operations. They are confined within the narrow
sphere of what he deems necessary for supplying
his own wants. Whatever has not some relation
tothefe, neither attrats his attention, nor is the
objet of his inquiries. But however narrow the
bounds may be within which the knowledge of a
ivage is circumscribed, he possesses thoroughly
that fiall portion which he has attained. It was
not communicated to him by formal inftru&ion;
he does not attend to it as a matter of mere fpecu-
lation and curiosity; it is the result of his own ob.
servation, the fruit of his own experience, and
accommodated to his condition and exigencies.
While employed in the a&ive occupatioms of war
or of hunting, he often finds himself in difficult and
perilous situations, from which the effort of his
own sagacity must extricate him. He.is.frequcntly
engaged in measures, where every fep *depends
upon his own ability to decide, where he must rely
solely upon his own penetration to difce:rmi~ *
gers to which he is exposed, and upon his own.wif-
dom in providing against them. In confjque;g
ofthis, he feels the knowledge which he poffcfes,

VOL. iI. o and

B o o K and the efforts which he makes, and either in deli.

IV.
_'2 _ . beration or acion refts on himself alone.
Political ta- As the talents of individuals are exercised and

improved by such exertions, miuch political wisdom
is said to be displayed in conducting the affairs of
their fmnall communities. The council of old men
in an American tribe, deliberating upon its interests
and determining with refpe&t to peace or war, has
been compared to the senate in more polished re-
publics. The proceedings of the former, we are
told, are often no less formal and sagacious than
those of the latter. Great political wisdom is exhi-
bited in pondering the various measures proposed,
and in balancing their probabk advantagesi 'againl
the evilsof which they may be productive.' Much
address and eloquence are employed by the leaders,
who aspire at acquiring such confidence with their
countrymen, as to have an ascendant in thofi assem.
blies'. But, among savage tribes, 'the field for
displaying political talents cannot be extenrive.
Where the idea of private property is incomplete,
and no criminal jurisdiction is established, there is
hardly any function of internal government to exer
cife. Where there is no commerce, and scarcely any
intercourse among separate tribes; where enmity
ij implacable, and hostilities are carried on almof
without intcrmilfion; there will be few points of
public concern to adjust with their neighbours; and
that department of their affairs which may be deno-

Charley. N. Fr. iii. i69, &c.

3 minated

minated foreign, cannot be so intricate as to require n o o K
much refined policy in conduRing it. Where in-
dividuals are so thoughtless and improvident as
seldom to take effectual precautions for felf-pre-
servation, it is vain to expect that public measures
and deliberations will be regulated by the contem-
plation of remote events. It is the genius of fa-
vages to aft from the impulse of present paffon.
They have neither foresight nor temper to form
complicated arrangements with respect to their
future conduct. The consultations of the Ameri-
cans, indeed, are f6 frequent, and their negociations
are so many Y, and so long protrated, as to give
their proceedings an extraordinary asped of wis-
dom. But this is not owing so much to the depth
of their schemes, as to the coldness and phlegm of
their temper, which render them flow in deter-
mining'. If we except the celebrated league, that
united the Five Nations in Canada into a federal
republic, which lhall be confidered in its proper
place, we can discern few such traces of political
wisdom, among the rude American tribes, as dif-
cover any great degree of foresight or extent of in-
telletual abilities. Even among them, we shall
find public measures more frequently directed by
the impetuous ferocity of their youth, than regu-
lated by the experience and wisdom of their old men.

As the condition of man in the savage Rate is rv,,c f
unfavourable to the progrcfs of the undcrllanding,

Y See NOTE LXVI. " Charlev. N. Ir. iii. 271.

o 2 it

B o o K it has a tendency likewise, in some respects, to

IV. _L-0- check the exercise of affecion, and to 'render the

heart contraced. The strongest feeling in the
mind of a ravage is a sense of his own independ-
ence. He has sacrificed so small a portion of his
natural liberty by becoming a member of society,
that he remains, ia a great degree, the sole master
of his own actions'. He often takes his refolu-
tions alone, without consulting, or feeling any con-
ned ion with the persons around him. In many of
his operations, he stands as much detached from
the reft of his species, as if he had formed no union
with them. Conscious how little he depends upon
other men, he is apt to view them with a careless
indifference. Even the force of his mind contri-
butes to increase this unconcern, and as he looks
not beyond himself in deliberating with refpet to
the part which he ihould a&, his solicitude about
the consequences of it seldom extends farther. He
pursues his own career, and indulges his own fancy,
without inquiring or regarding whether what he
does be agreeable or offensive to others, whether
they may derive benefit or receive hurt from it.
lence the ungovernable caprice of savages, their
impatience under any species of restraint, their in-
ability to fipprefs or moderate any inclination, the
scorn or neglect with which they receive advice,
their high estimation of themselves, and their con-
tempt of other men. Among them, the pride of
independence produces almost the fame effects with

a Fernandcz Miflion. de lot Chiquit. 33.

lo interest-

intereftednefs in a more advanced state of society; B o K
it refers every thing to a man himself, it leads him ._
to be indifferent about the manner in which his
acions may.affe& other men, and renders the gra-
tification of his own wilhes the measure and end of
condut.

To the fame cause may be imputed the hardness tardnefs of

of heart, and insensibility, remarkable in all savage
nations. Their minds, rouzed only by strong
emotions, are little susceptible of gentle, delicate,
or tender affections b. Their union is so incom-
plete, that each individual ats as if he retained all
his natural rights entire and undiminished. Ifa
favour is conferred upon him, or any beneficial ser-
vice is performed on his account, he receives it
with much fatisfation, because it contributes to his
enjoyment; but this sentiment extends not beyond
himself, it excites no sense of obligation, he neither
feels gratitude, nor thinks of making any return .
Even among persons the most closely connected,
the exchange of those good offices which strengthen
attachment, mollify the heart, and sweeten the in-
tercourfe of life, is not frequent. The high ideas
of independence among the Americans nourish a
fullen reserve, which keeps them at a distance from
each other. The nearest relations are mutually
afraid to make any demand, or to solicit any ser-
vice', left it should be confidered by the other as

h Charlev. N. Fr. iii. 309.
* Oviedo Hit. lib. xvi. c. a. See NOTE LXVII.
' De la Potheric, iii. a8.

0 3 imporing

B O o K imposing a burden, or laying a reifraint upon his

Iv.
_ I-- will.
Infenfibi. I HAVE already remarked the influence of this

' hard unfeeling temper upon domestic life, with re-

tlpet to the connection between husband and wife,
as well as that between parents and children. Its
effeEts are no less conspicuous, in the performance
of those mutual offices of tenderness which the in-
firmities of our nature frequently exat. Among
some tribes, when any of their number are seized
with any violent disease, they are generally aban-
doned by all around them, who, careless of their
recovery, fly in the utmost consternation from the
supposed danger of infectione. But even where
they are not thus deserted, the cold indifference
with which they are attended can afford them little
consolation. No look of sympathy, no soothing
expreflions, no officious services, contribute to al-
leviate the distress of the sufferers, or to make
them forget what they endure . Their nearest re-
lations will often refuse to submit to the smallest
inconveniency, or to part with the least trifle, how-
ever much it may tend to their accommodation or
relief'. So little is the breafd of a savage fufcepti-
ble of those sentiments which prompt men to that

e Lettre de P. Catanco ap. Muratori Chriflian, i. 309.

Tertre, ii. 41o. Lozano, too. Herrera, dec. 4. lib. viii. c. .
dec. 5. lib. iv. c. 2. Falkner'd Defcript. of Patagonia, 98.

f Gumilla, 1. 329. Lozano, zoo.
. Garcia Origen, &c. 90. Herrera, dec. 4. lib. viii. c. 5.

feeling

feeling attention which mitigates the calamities of B o o K
human life, that, in some provinces of America, I. .
the Spaniards have found it necessary to inforce the
common duties of humanity by positive laws, and
to oblige huobands and wives, parents and children,
under revere penalties, to take care of each other
during their ficknefsh. The fame harshness of
temper is fill more conspicuous in their treatment
of the animal creation. Prior to their intercourif
with the people of Europe, the North Americans
had some tame dogs, which accompanied them in
their hunting excursions, and served them with all
the ardour and fidelity peculiar to the species. But,
instead of that fond attachment which the hunter
naturally feels towards those useful companions of
his toils, they requite their services with negle&,
seldom feed, and never caress them . In other
provinces, the Americans have become acquainted
with the domestic animals of Europe, and avail
themselves of their service; but it is universally
observed that they always treat them harshly k, and
never employ any method, either for breaking or
managing them, but force and cruelty. In every
part of the deportment of man in his savage fate,
whether towards his equals of the human species,
or towards the animals below him, we recognize
the fame character, and trace the operations of a
mind intent on its own gratifications, and regu-

h Cogulludo Hilt. de Yucathan, p. 300.
t Charley. N. Fr. iii. 119. 337.
k Ulloa Notic. American. 312.

o 4 lated

B oo K lated by its own caprice, with little attention or

- . sensibility to the sentiments and feelings of the

beings around him.
Taciturnity. AFTER explaining how unfavourable the savage

slate is to the cultivation of the understanding, and
to the improvement of the heart, I should not
have thought it necessary to mention what may be
deemed its lesser defcEts, if the character of nations,
as well as of individuals, were not often more dif-
tin&ly marked by circumstances apparently trivial
than by those of greater moment. A savage, fre-
quently placed in situations of danger and distress,
depending on himfclf alone, and wrapt up in his
own thoughts and schemes, is a serious melancholy
animal. His attention to others is small. The
range of his own ideas is narrow. Hence that taci-
turnity which is so disgusting to men accustomed to
the open intercourse of social conversation. When
they are not engaged in action, the Americans
often fit whole days in one posture, without open-
ing their lips'. When they go forth to war, or to
the chafe, they usually march in a line at rome dif-
tance from one other, and without exchanging a
word. The fame profound silence is observed
when they row together in a canoe . It is only
when they are animated by intoxicating liquors, or
rouzed by the jollity of the festival and dance, that
they become gay and convertible,

1 Voyage de Bouguer, o02. m Charlev. iii. 340.

To

To the fame causes may be imputed the refined a o o K

cunning with which they form and execute their 'V
schemes. Men, who are not habituated to a liberal cunnin.
communication of their own efntiments and wilhes,
are apt to be so distrustful, as to place little confi-
dence in others, and to have recourse to an infidi-
ous craft in accomplishing their own purposes. In
civilized life, those persons, who, by their fitua-
tion, have but a few objects of pursuit on which
their minds incessantly dwell, are most remarkable
forlow artifice in carrying on their little projects.
Among savages, whose views are equally confined,
and their attention no less persevering, those cir-
cumftances must operate still more powerfully, and
gradually accustom them to a disingenuous subtlety
in all their transactions.. The force of this is in-
creased by habits which they acquire in carrying on
the two most interesting operations wherein they
are engaged. With them war is a system of craft,
in which they trust for success to stratagem more
than to open force, and have their invention conti-
nually on the Itretch to circumvent and surprise
their enemies. As hunters, it is their constant ob-
jeC& to ensnare, in order that they may destroy.
Accordingly, art and cunning have been universally
observed as di(tinguifhing charafderiftics of all la-
vages. The people of the rude tribes of America
are remarkable for their artifice and duplicity. Im-
penetrably secret in forming their measures, they
purftue them with a patient undeviating attention,
and there is no refinement of diflimulation which

they

o o 0K they cannot employ, in order to insure fuccef.

T'he natives of Peru were engaged above thirty
years, in concerting the plan of that infurredion
which took place under the vice-royalty of the
marquis de Villa. Garcia; and though it was corn.
municated to a great number of persons in all dit:
fcrent ranks, no indication of it ever transpired
during that long period; no man betrayed his trust,
or by an unguarded look, or rash word, gave rife
to any fulpicion of what was intended". The dif.
innulation and craft of individuals is no less remark.
able than that of nations. When fet'upon deceiv-
ing, they wrap themselves up so artificially, that it
is impossible to penetrate into their intentions, or to
detec their designs °.
v;rtune. BUT if there be defeas or vices peculiar to the

savage slate, there are likewise virtues which it in-
spires, and good qualities, to the exercise of which

ndepcnrd- it is friendly. The bonds of society fit so loose
l irnt. upon the members of the more rude American

tribes, that they hardly feel any restraint. Hence
the spirit of independence, which is the pride of a
savage, and which he confiders as the unalienable
prerogative of man. Incapable of controul, and
disdaining to acknowledge any superior, his mind,
though limited in its powers, and erring in many of
its pursuits, acquires such elevation by the conscious-
ncfs of its own freedom, that he afts on ibme occa-

' Voyage de Ulloa, ii. 309.
' Gumilla, i. 16z. Charlev. iii. og9.

lions

sions with astonishing force, and perseverance, and- o o K'
dignity.

As independence nourishes this high fpifit among Forttude.
kvages, the perpetual wars in which they are en-
gaged call it forth into ation. Such long intervals
of tranquillity as are frequent in polilhed societies
are unknown in the savage state. Their enmities,
as I have observed, are implacable and immortal.
The valour of the young men is never allowed to
rust in inacion. The hatchet is always in their
hand, either for attack or defence. Even in their
hunting excursions, they must be on their guard
against surprise from the hostile tribes, by which
they are surrounded. Accustomed to continual
alarms, they grow familiar with danger; courage
becomes an habitual virtue, resulting naturally from
their situation, and strengthened by constant exer-
tions. The mode of displaying fortitude may not
be the fame in small and rude communities, as in
more powerful and civilized states. Their system
of war, and standard of valour, may be formed
upon different principles, but in no situation does
the human mind rife more superior to the sense of
danger, or the dread of death, than in its molt
simple and uncultivated state.

ANOTHER virtue remarkable among savages, is Attachment

to thecir

attachment to the community of which they are community
members. From the nature of their politicalunion,
one might expe& this tie ta be extremely feeble.

But

B o O But there are circumstances which render the infu.
i t,~ ence, ever of their loose mode of association, very

powerful. The American tribes are small; corn.
bined against their neighbours, in prosecution of
ancient enmities, or in avenging recent injuries,
their interests and operations are neither numerous
nor complex. These are objets, which the un.
cultivated understanding of a savage can compre.
hend. His heart is capable of forming connetions,
which are so little diffused. He assents with warmth
to public measures, dictated by passions similar to
those which direct his own conduc. Hence the
ardour with which individuals undertake the most
perilous service, when the community deems it ne.
ceflary. Hence their fierce and deep-rootel anti-
pathy to the public enemies. Hence their zeal for
the honour of their tribe, and that love of their
country, which prompts them to brave danger that
it may triumph, and to endure the most exquisite
torments, without a groan, that it may not be
disgraced.

Stihfanion THUS, in every situation where a human being
with their
own condi. can be placed, even the most unfavourable, there are

virtues which peculiarly belong to it; there are as-
feeions which it calls forth; there is a species of hap-
piness which it yields. Nature, with most benefi-
cent intention, conciliates and forms the mind to its
condition; the ideas and wishes of man extend not
beyond that state of society to which he is habituated.
What it prcfents as objecs of contemplation or

cnjoy-

enjoyment, fills and satisfies his mind, and he can B O O K
hardly conceive any other mode of life to be plea- -
sant, or even tolerable. The Tartar, accustomed
to roam over extensive plains, and to fubift on the
produt of his herds, imprecates upon his enemy,
as the greatest of all curses, that he may be con-
demned to reside in one place, and to be nourished
with the top of a weed. The rude Americans,
fond of their own pursuits, and satisfied with their
own lot, are equally unable to comprehend the in-
tention or utility of the various accommodations,
which, in more polished society, are deemed effen-
dal to the comfort of life. Far from complaining
of their own situation, or viewing that of men in
more improved state with admiration or envy,
they regard themselves as the itandard of excel-
ence, as beings the best entitled, as well as the
most perfetly qualified, to enjoy real happiness.
Unaccustomed to any restraint upon their will or
teir aaions, they behold with amazement the in-
equality of rank, and the subordination which take
place in civilized life, and confider the voluntary
fubmiflion of one man to another, as a renunciation,
no less base than unaccountable, of the first diflinc-
ion of humanity. Void of foresight, as well as free
from care themselves, and delighted with that state
f indolent security, they wonder at the anxious
Precautions, the unceasing industry, and compli-
ated arrangements of Europenns, in guarding
gains distant evils, or providing for future wants;
and they often exclaim against their preposterous

il!., in thus multiplying the troubles, and in-

creasing

B o OK creating the labour of life o. This preference of

'_' their own manners is conspicuous on every oc.

cafiQn. Even the names, by which the various
nations with to be distinguished, are assumed from
this idea of their own pre-eminence. The ap.
pellation which the Iroquois give to themfelvts
is, the chief of men P. Caraibe, the original
name of the fierce inhabitants of the Windward
Islands, signifies the warlike people q. The Chero.
kees, from an idea of their own superiority, call
the Europeans Nothings, or the accursed race, and
assume to themselves the name of the belovedpeople'.
The fame principle regulated the notions of the
other Americans concerning the Europeans; for
although, at first, they were filled with aftonifhl
ment at their arts, and with dread of their power,
they soon came to abate their estimation of men,
whose maxims of life were. so different from their
own. Hence they called them the froth of the sea,
men without father or mother. They supposed,
that either they had no country of their own, and
therefore invaded that which belonged to others';
or that, being destitute of the necessaries of life a:
home, they were obliged to roam over the ocean,
in order to rob such as were more amply provided,

MEN, thus satisfied with their condition, are fr

from any inclination to relinquish their own habits
or to adopt those of civilized life. The transition

* Charlev. N. Fr. iii. 3o8. Lahontar, ii. 97.
P Colden, i. 3. q Rochefort Hist. des Antilles, 45;
r Adair, Hill. of Amcr. Indians, p. 32.
* Benzon. Hist. Novi Orbis, lib. iii. c. 2t.

is too violent to be suddenly made. Even where B o

O

endeavours have been used to wean a savage from v
his own customs, and to render the accommoda-
tions ofpolifhed society familiar to him; even where
he has been allowed to taste of those pleafires, and
has been honoured with those diflinRions, which
are the chief objects of our desire, he droops and
languishes under the restraint of lats and forms, he
seizes the first opportunity of breaking loose from
them, and returns with transport to the forest or the
wild, where he can enjoy a careless and uncon-
trouled freedom'.

THUS I have finished a laborious delineation of

the character and manners of the uncivilized tribes
scattered over the vast continent of America. In
this, I aspire not at rivalling the great masters who
have painted and adorned savage life, either in bold-
ness of design, or in the glow and beauty of their
colouring. I am satisfied with the more humble
merit of having perfilled with patient industry, in
viewing my subjet in many various lights, and
colle&ting from the moif accurate observers such
detached, and often minute features, as might
enable .me to exhibit a portrait that resembles the
original.

BEFORE I close this part of my work, one ob- cnter

servation more is neceflary, in order to jiflify the w;,i^, r.
conclusions which I have formed, or to prevent the ut.,i"
miltakes into which such as cxamine them may
fall. In contemplating the inhabit.lats of a country

Charley. N. Fr. iii. 32z.

so

B 0 K so widely extended as America, great attention

, - should be paid to the divcrfity of climates under

which they are placed. The influence of this I
have pointed out with refpe& to several important
particulars, which have been the object of research;
but even where it has not been mentioned, it ought
not to be overlooked. The provinces of America
are of such different temperament, that this alone is
lufficient to constitute a diftindion between their
inhabitants. In every part of the earth where man
exists, the power of climate operates, with decisive
influence, upon his condition and character. In
those countries which approach near to the extremes
of heat or cold, this influence is so conspicuous as
to strike every eye. Whether we confider man
merely as an animal, or as being endowed with
rational powers which fit him for a&ivity and fpe-
culation, we ihall find that he has uniformly at-
tained the greatest perfection of which his nature is
capable, in the temperate regions of the globe.
There his constitution is most vigorous, his organs
most acute, and his form molt beautiful. There,
too, he poffefles a superior extent of capacit',
greater fertility of imagination, more enterprising
courage, and a sensibility of heart which gives birth
to desires, not only ardent, but persevering. In this
favourite situation he has displayed the utmost
efforts of his genius, in literature, in policy, in com-
merce, in war, and in all the arts which improve
or cimbellilh life".

u Dr. Ferguson's Essay on the Hist. of Civil Society, part iii.
C. 1. 'THI

THIS powerful operation of climate is felt mot Ba o K

fnfibly by rude nations, and produces greater es- ' v'
feWts than in societies more improved. The talents
of civilized men are continually exerted in render-
ing their own condition more comfortable; and by
their ingenuity and inventions, they can, in a great
measure, supply the defets, and guard against the
inconveniences of any climate. But the improvi-
dent savage is affcEed by every circumstance pe-
culiar to his situation. He takes no precaution
either to mitigate or to improve it. Like a plant,
or an animal, he is formed by the climate under
which he is placed, and feels the full force of its
influence,

IN surveying the rude nations of America, this

natural diltinftion between the inhabitants of the
temperate and torrid zones is very remarkable.
They may, accordingly, be divided into two great
classes. The one comprehends all the North
Americans, from the river St. Laurence to the
Gulf of Mexico, together with the people of Chili)
and a few small tribes towards the extremity of the
southern continent. To the other belong all the
inhabitants of the islands, and those fettled in the
various provinces which extend from the isthmus
of Darien almost to the southern confines of Brasil,
along the east fide of the Andes. In the former,
which comprehends all the regions of the tem-
perate zone that in America are inhabited, the
human species appears manifestly to be more per-
fcCt. The natives are more robust, more active,

VOL. ir. t more

B OO K more intelligent, and more courageous. They

. possess, in the most eminent degree, that force of
mind, and love of independence, which I have
pointed out as the chief virtues of man in his fa.
vage state. They have defended their liberty with
perlevering fortitude againit the Europeans, who
subdued the other rude nations of America with the
greatest ease. The natives of the temperate zone
are the only people in the New World who are
indebted for their freedom to their own valour.
The North Americans, though long encompassed
by three formidable European powers, still retain
part of their original possessions, and continue to
exist as independent nations. The people of Chili,
though early invaded, still maintain a gallant con-
test with the Spaniards, and have set bounds to
their encroachments; whereas, in the warmer re-
gions, men are more feeble in their frame, less vi-
gorous in the efforts of their mind, of a gentle but
dastardly spirit, more enslaved by pleasure, and
more funk in indolence. Accordingly, it is in the
trrid zone that t::e Europeans have most com-
pletely established their dominion over America;
the most fertile and desirable provinces in it are
fubjeted to their yoke; and if several tribes there
itill enjoy independence, it is either because they
have never been attacked by an enemy already fa-
tiated with conquest, and possessed of larger territo-
ries than he was able to occupy, or because they
have been saved from oppreflion by their remote
and inaccessible situation.

CONPIC UOL'

CoNSPICUouS as this difiindtion may appear be- n o o

tween the inhabitants of those different regions, it .L
is not, however, universal. Moral and political
causes, as I have formerly obfcrved, affect the dif-
position and character of individuals as eUll as
nations, fill more powerfully than the influence of
climate. There are, accordingly, some tribes, in
various parts of the torrid zone, possessed of cou-
rage, high spirit, and the love of independence, in
adegree hardly inferior to the natives of more
temperate climates. We are too little acquainted
with the history of those people, to be able to trace
the several circumstances in their progress and con-
dition, to which they are indebted for this remark-
able pre-eminence. The fact, nevertheless, is cer-
tain. As early as the first voyage of Columbus, he
received information that several of the islands were
inhabited by the Caribbees, a fierce race of men,
nowise resembling their feeble and timid neigh-
bours. In his second expedition to the New
World, he found this information to be just, and
was himself a witness of their intrepid valour .
The fame character they have maintained invari-
ably in all subsequent contests with the people of
EuropeY; and, even in our own times, we have
seen them make a gallant stand in defence of the
last territory which the rapacity of their invaders
had left in their poffeflion '. Some nations in Brasil

Life of Columbus, c, 47, 48. See N OT E LXVIII.

l Rochefort Hist. des Antilles, 531.
S See NOTE LXIX.

P 2 were

0 o O K were no less eminent for vigour of mind, and bra.
IV.
- ;- very in war'. The people of the isthmus of Darien

boldly met the Spaniards in the field, and fre-
quently repelled those formidable invaders b. Other
instances might be produced. It is not attending
to any single cause or principle, how powerful and
extensive soever its influence may appear, that we
can explain the ations, or account for the charac-
ter of men. Even the law of climate, more uni-
versal, perhaps, in its operation than any that assets
the human species, cannot be applied, in judging
of their conduct, without many exceptions.

Lery ap. de Bry, iii. 207, &c.
Herrra, dec. I. lib. x. c. 15, &c.; dec. 2. passim.

# BOOK V.

THE
HISTORY

OF
A M ER ICA.

BOOK V.
ijW HEN Grijalva returned to Cuba, he found B o O K

the armament defined to attempt the con- ,_
quest of that rich country which he had discovered, sxS8-

Prpam-

almost complete. Not only ambition, but avarice, tionofve.
had urged Velasquez to haRen his preparations; inv^in
and having such a prospect of gratifying both, he NSw Spa,.
had advanced considerable fums out of his private
fortune towards defraying the expence of the expe-
dition. At the fame time, he exerted his influence
as governor, in engaging the most diftinguilhed
persons in the colony to undertake the service'.
At a time when the spirit of the Spanilh nation
was adventurous to excess, a number of soldiers,
eager to embark in any daring enterprise, Coon ap-
peared. But it was not so easy to find a person
qualified to take the command in an expedition of

^ See NOTE LXX,

P3 so

B 0 0 K so much importance; and the character of Ve-
A; - j lafquez, who had the right of nomination, greatly

58'. increased the difficulty of the choice. Though of

most aspiring ambition, and not destitute of talents
for government, he possessed neither such courage,
nor such vigour and activity of mind, as to under-
take in person the conduct of the armament which
he was preparing. In this embarrassing situation,
he formed the chimerical scheme, not only of
atchieving great exploits by a deputy, but of fe-
curing to himself the glory of conquests which
were to be made by another. In the execution of
this plan, he fondly aimed at reconciling contra-
ditions. lie was felicitous to choose a commander
of intrepid resolution, and of superior abilities,
because he knew these to be requisite in order to
ensure success i but, at the fame time, from the
jealousy natural to little minds, he wished this per-
son to be of a spirit so tame and obsequious, as to
be entirely dependant on his will. But when he
came to apply those ideas in forming an opinion
concerning the several officers who occurred to his
thoughts as worthy of being entrusted with the
command, he soon perceived that it was impoflible
to find such incompatible qualities united in one
characer. Such as were diftinguilhed for courage
and talents were too high-fpirited to be palive in-
itruments in his hand. Those who appeared more
gentle and tradable, were destitute of capacity,
and unequal to the charge. This augmented his
perplexity and his fears, He deliberated long, and

with

with much solicitude, and was ttill wavering in his B o K
choice, when Amador de Lares, the royal trea-
furer in Cuba, and Andres Duero, his own fecre- s518.
tary, the two persons in whom he chiefly confided,
were encouraged by this irresolution to propose a
new candidate, and they supported their recom-
mendation with such afliduity and address, that,
no less fatally for Velasquez than happily for their
country, it proved successful b.
THE man whom they pointed out to him was Heiappoints

Cortcs com.

Fernando Cortes. He was born at Medellin, a nndecr.
small town in Estremadura, in the year one thou-
sand four hundred and eighty-five, and descended
from a family of noble blood, but of very mode-
rate fortune. Being originally destined by his pa-
rents to the study of law, as the most likely method
of bettering his condition, he was sent early to the
university of Jalamanca, where he imbibed some
tincure of learning. But he was soon disgusted
with an academic life, which did not suit his ardent
and restless genius, and retired to Medcllin, where
he gave himself up entirely to acive sports and
martial exercises. At this period of life, he was
so impetuous, so overbearing, and so difipated,
that his father was glad to comply with his incli-
nation, and fend him abroad as an adventurer in
arms. There were in that age two conspicuous

b B. Diaz. c. 19. Gomara Cron. c. 7. Hcrrcra, dec. z.
lib. iii. c. x .

P 4 theatres,

B o0 K theatres, on which such of the Spanilh youth as

V. v__ courted military glory might display their valour
1'lsz one in Italy, under the command of the Great

Captain; the other in the New World. Cortes
preferred the former, but was prevented by indif.
position from embarking with a reinforcement of
troops lent to Naples. Upon this disappointment
he turned his views towards America, whither he
was allured by the profpe& of the advantages which
he might derive from the patronage of Ovando',
the governor of Hispaniola, who was his kinsman.
When he landed at St. Domingo in one thousand
five hundred and four, his reception was such as
equalled his most sanguine hopes, and he was em-
ployed by the governor in several honourable and
lucrative tRations. These, however, did not fa.
tisfy his ambition; and in the year one thousand
five hundred and eleven, he obtained permiflion to
accompany Diego Velasquez in his. expedition to
Cuba. In this service he distinguished himself so
much, that, notwithstanding rome violent contefis
with Velasquez, occasioned by trivial events, un,
worthy of remembrance, he was at length taken
into favour, and received an ample conceflion of
lands and of Indians, the recompence usually
bestowed upon adventurers in the New World d.

THOUGH Cortes had not hitherto aAed in high

command, he had displayed such qualities in fc-
veral scenes of difficulty and danger, as raited unit

See NOTE LXXI. d Gomara Cron. c. i, z, 3.

g versal

versal expectation, and turned the eyes of his coun- a o o K
trymen cowards him, as one capable of performing v__
great things. The turbulence of youth, as soon 'j'
as he found objeEs and occupations fuiced to the
ardour of his mind, gradually subsided, and fettled
into a habit of regular indefatigable a&tivity. The
impetuosity of his temper, when he came to act
with his equals, insensibly abated, by being kept
under restraint, and mellowed into a cordial fol-
dierly frankness. These qualities were accompa-
nied with calm prudence in concerting his schemes,
with persevering vigour in executing them, and
with what is peculiar to superior genius, the art of
gaining the confidence and governing the minds of
men. To all which were added the inferior accom-
plifliments that strike the vulgar, and command
their refpet; a graceful person, a winning aspet,
extraordinary address in martial exercises, and a
constitution of such vigour as to be capable of en-
during any fatigue,

As soon as Cortes was mentioned to Velasquez
by his two confidents, he flattered himself that he
had at length found what he had hitherto fought in
vain, a man with talents for command, but not an
object for jealousy. Neither the rank nor the for-
tune of Cortes, as he imagined, were such that he
could aspire at independence. He had reason to
believe that by his own readiners to bury ancient
animofities in oblivion, as well as his liberality in
conferring several recent favours, he had already

gained

B o o K gained the good-will of Cortes, and hoped, by

V._^ this new and unexpeted mark of confidence, that
s*s. he might attach him for ever to his incereft.

soo he- CORTES, receiving his commission with the
!OE ot irm. warmest exprefflons of refpec and gratitude to the
daobers3. governor, immediately ere&ed his standard before

his own house, appeared in a military dress, and
assumed all the ensigns of his new dignity. His
utmost influence and activity were exerted in per.
fuading many of his friends to engage in the ser-
vice, and in urging forward the preparations for
the voyage. All his own funds, together with
what money he could raise by mortgaging his
lands and Indians, were expended in purchasing
military stores and provisions, or in supplying the
wants of such of his officers as were unable to
equip themselves in a manner suited to their rank'.
Inoffensive, and even laudable as this conduCt was,
his disappointed competitors were malicious enough
to give it a turn to his disadvantage. They repre-
sented him as aiming already, with little disguise,
at establishing an independent authority over his
troops, and endeavouring to secure their refpe& or
love by his ostentatious and interested liberality.
They reminded Velasquez of his former difenfions
with the man in whom he now reposed so much
confidence, and foretold that Cortes would be
more apt to avail himself of the power, which the
governor was inconsiderately putting in his hands,

e See NOTE LXXII.

to

to avenge part injuries, than to requite recent obii- B o o
gations. These insinuations made such impreflion v^
upon the suspicious mind of Velasquez, that Cortes ,s5s.
bfon observed some symptoms of a growing aliena-
ton and difiruft in his behaviour, and was advised
by Lares and Duero, to haften his departure, be-
fore these should become so confirmed, as to break
out with open violence. Fully fenfibkl of this
danger, he urged forward his preparations with
such rapidity, that he set fail from St. Jago de
Cuba on the eighteenth of November, Velasquez
accompanying him to the shore, and taking leave
of him with an appearance of perfelt friendihip
and confidence, though he had secretly given it in
charge to some of Cortes's officers, to keep a
watchful eye upon every part of their commander's
condut '.

CORTES proceeded to Trinidad, a small fettle- Endeavour

to deprive

ment on the fame fide of the illand, where he was him of his
joined by several adventurers, and received a sup- commia~f,
ply of provisions and military Stores, of which his
stock was flill very incomplete. He had hardly
kft St. Jago, when the jealousy which had been
working in the breast of Velasquez, grew so vio-
lent, that it was impoflible to suppress it. The ar-
mament was no longer under his own eye and
direcion; and he felt, that 'as his power over it
ceased, that of Cortes would become more abfo-

f Gomara Cron. c. 7. B. Diaz. c. 20.

lute.

B o o K lute. Imagination now aggravated every circum-
^_J. iftance, which had formerly excited suspicion: the

'5'S rivals of Cortes induftrioufy threw in reflecions

which increased his fears; and with no less art
than malice they called superstition to their aid,
employing the prediLtions of an astrologer in order
to complete the alarm. All these, by their united
operation, produced the desired effet. Velasquez
repented bitterly of his own imprudence, in having
committed a trust of so much importance to a per-
son whose fidelity appeared so doubtful, and hastily
dispatched inftru&ions to Trinidad, empowering
Verdugo, the chief magistrate there, to deprive
Cortes of his commiflion. But Cortes had already
made such progress in gaining the esteem and con-
fidence of his troops, that, finding officers as well as
soldiers equally zealous to support his authority, he
soothed or intimidated Verdugo, and was permitted
to depart from Trinidad without molcftation.

nd to lay FROM Trinidad Cortes failed for the Havana,
him under
arcLt. in order to raise more soldiers, and to complete

the vi&ualling of his fleet. There several persons
of diftinaion entered Into the service, and engaged
to supply what provisions were still wanting; but
as it was necessary to allow them rome time for
performing what they had promised, Velasquez,
sensible that he ought no longer to rely on a man
of whom he had so openly discovered his difiruft,
availed himself of the interval, which this un-
avoidable delay afforded, in order to make one

attempt

attempt more to wrest the command out of the a o o K
hands of Cortes. He loudly complained of Ver-
dugo's condut, accusing him either of childilh i5.
facility, or of manifest treachery, in suffering
Cortes to escape from Trinidad. Anxious to guard
against a second disappointment, he lent a person
of confidence to the Havana, with peremptory in.
jun&ions to Pedro Barba, his lieutenant-governor
in that colony, instantly to arrest Cortes, to fend
him prisoner to St.Jago under a strong guard, and
to countermand the failing of the armament until
he Ihould receive farther orders. He wrote like-
wife to the principal officers, requiring them to
ffift Barba in executing what he had given him
in charge. But before the arrival of his melfenger,
a Franciscan friar of St. Jago had secretly conveyed
an account of this interesting tranfaftion to Bar-
tholomew de Olmedo, a monk of the fame order,
who ated as chaplain to the expedition.

CORTES, forewarned of the danger, had time to Coftesde.
take precautions for his own safety. His first ftep (chemn,
was to find some pretext for removing from the nuohis
Havana Diego de Ordaz, an officer of great me- t'P
rit, but in whom, on account of his known at-
tachment to Velasquez, he could not confide in
this trying and delicate junture. He gave him
the command of a veifel, destined to take on board
some provisions in a small harbour beyond Cape
Antonio, and thus made sure of his absence, with.
out seeming to fufpet his fidelity. When he was

gone,

a o o K gone, Cortes no longer concealed the intentions of
,- _.j Velasquez from his troops; and as officers and fol-
*'ss. diers were equally impatient to set out on an expe-

dition, in preparing for which most of them had
expended all their fortunes, they expressed their
aRlonifhment and indignation at that illiberal jea.
lousy, to which the governor was about to facri-
fice, not only the honour of their general, but all
their sanguine hopes of glory and wealth. With
one voice they intreated that he would not aban-
don the important tation to which he had such a
good title. They conjured him not to deprive
them of a leader whom they followed with such
well-founded confidence, and offered to shed the
last drop of their blood in maintaining his autho-
rity. Cortes was easily induced to comply with
what he himself so ardently desired. He fworc
that he would never desert soldiers who had given
him such a signal proof of their attachment, and
promised instantly to conduct them to that rich
country, which had been so long the obje& of their
thoughts and wishes. This declaration was received
with' transports of military applause, accompanied
with threats and imprecations against all who Ihould
prelume to call in queflion the jurifdition of their
general, or to obftrut the execution of his designs.

The a. EvuY thing was now ready for their departure;
LLorce. but though this expedition was fitted out by the

united effort of the Spanish power in Cuba; though
every settlement had contributed its quota of men

3 and

and provisions; though the governor had laid out B o o K
considerable fums, and each adventurer had ex- v-
haufted his flock, or firained his credit, the po- 5s18-
verty of the preparations was such as must aftonilh
the present age, and bore, indeed, no resemblance
to an armament destined for the conquest of a great
empire. The fleet confited of eleven vefels;
the largest of a hundred tons, which was dignified
by the name of Admiral; three of seventy or eighty
tons, and the reft small open barks. On board of
these were fix hundred and seventeen men; of
which five hundred and eight belonged to the land
service, and a hundred and nine were seamen o0
artificers. The soldiers were divided into eleven
companies, according to the number of the ihips;
to each of which Cortes appointed a captain, and
committed to him the command of the veffil while
at sea, and of the men when on shores. As the
use of fire-arms among the nations of Europe was
hitherto confined to a few battalions of regularly
disciplined infantry, only thirteen soldiers were
armed with muflets, thirty-two were cross-bow
men, and the reft had swords and spears. Inflead
of the usual defensive armour, which must have
been cumbersome in a hot climate, the soldiers
wore jackets quilted with cotton, which experience
had taught the Spaniards to be a sufficient pro-
tetion against the weapons of the Americans.
They had only sixteen horses, ten small field-
picces, and four falconersh.

£ £ee NOTE LXXIII. h B. Diaz. c. 19.

WITIL

B 0 0 K WITH this slender and ill-provided train did
i--=., Cortes set fail, to make war upon a monarch whose
F5b.o' dominions were more extensive than all the king.
tisdepar doms subjet to the Spaniih crown. As religious
Cuba enthusiasm always mingled with the spirit of adven.

ture in the New World, and, by a combination
still more strange, united with avarice, in prompt.
ing the Spania'rds to all their enterprifcs, a large
cross was displayed in their standards, with this
inscription, Let us follow the cross, for under tIbi
sign we/flall conquer.

So powerfully were Cortes and his followers ani,

mated with both these passions, that no less eager
to plunder the opulent country whither they were
bound, than zealous to propagate the Christian
faith among its inhabitants, they set out, not with
the solicitude natural to men going upon dangerous
services, but with that confidence which arises
from security of success, and certainty of the di-
vine protecion.

Touches at As Cortes had determined to touch at every
_zumel; place which Grijaiva had visited, he fleered di-

retly towards the ifand of Cozumel; there he
had the good fortune to redeem Jerome de Agui-
lar, a Spaniard, who had been eight years a pri-
soner among the Indians. This man was perfectly
acquainted with a dialet of their language, under-
stood through a large extent of country, and pof-
feclng betides a considerable share of prudence

and
S

and sagacity, proved extremely useful as an inter- B o o K
preter. From Cozumel, Cortes proceeded to the ,'
river of Tabasco, in hopes of a reception as ,s,15

March 4.

friendly as Grijalva had met with there, and of andatTa.
finding gold in the fame abundance; but the dif- io.
position of the natives, from some unknown cause,
was totally changed. After repeated endeavours to
conciliate their good-will, he was constrained to
have recourse to violence. Though the forces of
the enemy were numerous, and advanced with ex-
traordinary courage, they were routed, with great
slaughter, in several successive actions. The loss
which they sustained, and fill more the astonish-
ment and terror excited by the deftru&ive effe6c of
the fire-arms, and the dreadful appearance of the
horses, humbled their fierce spirits, and induced
them to sue for peace. They acknowledged the
king of Castile as their sovereign, and granted
Cortes a supply of provisions, with a present of
cotton garments, some gold, and twenty female
slaves i.
CORTES continued his course to the westward, Arrives at

St. Juan de

keeping as near the ihore as poflible, in order to iuUa.
observe the country; but could discover no pro-
per place for landing, until he arrived at St. Juan
de Ulua k. As he entered this harbour a large April .
canoe, full of people, among whom were two who

'See NOTE LXXIV.
k B. Diaz. c. 31-36. Gomnra Cron. c. i8-23.' H.er.
rra, dec. 2. lib. iv. c. 11, &c.
VOL. 11. Q fcmcd

B o K seemed to be persons of ditination, approached
..._^ his Jhip with signs of peace and amity. They

's'9. came on board without fear or diftrut, and ad.

drclfTcd him in a moit rcfpetaul manner, but in a
language. altogether unknown to Aguilar. Cortes
was in the utmolt perplexity and diltrefs, at an
event of which he inltantly foresaw all the confe-
quences, and alreadly fclt the hesitation and uncer.
tainty with which he should carry on the great
schemes which he meditated, if, in his tranfaftions
with the natives, he must depend entirely upon
such an imnperfet, ambiguous, and conjectural
mode of communication, as the use of signs. But
he did not remain long in his embarrafling firua-
tion: a fortunate accident extricated him, when
his own sagacity collld have contributed little to-
wards his relief. One of the female flavcs, whom
he had received from the cazique of Tabasco,
happened to be prefcnt at the first interview be-
tween Cortes and his new guests. She perceived
his diftrcfs, as well as the confusion of Aguilar;
and as she perfeEtly underitood the Mexican lan-
guage, she explained what they had said in the
Yucatan tongue, with which Aguilar was ac-
quainted. This woman, known afterwards by the
name of Donna Marina, and who makes a con-
fpicuous figure in the history of the New World,
where great revolutions were brought about by
small caurcs and inconfid, !rable instruments, was
boi;n in one of the provinces of the Mexican em-
iirc. Having been bold as a slave in the early part

I ° 0f

of her life, after a variety of adventures lie fell B 0 K
into the hands of the Tabafcans, and had resided -_
long enough among them to acquire their language, s159*
without losing the use of her own.' Though it was
both tedious and troublerome to converse by the
intervention of two different interpreters, Cortes
was so highly pleated with having discovered this
method of carrying on some intercourse with the
people of a country into which he was determined
to penetrate, that in the transports of his joy he
confidered it as a visible interposition of Providence
in his favour'.

HE now learned, that the two persons whom he Lands hib
had received on board of his Ihip were deputies troops
from Teutile and Pilpatoe, two officers 'entrusted
with the government of that province, by a great
monarch, whom they called Montezuma and that
they were fent.to inquire what his intentions were
in visiting their coast, and to offer him what afflit-
ance he might need, in order to continue his
voyage. Cortes, struck with the appearance of
those people, as well as the tenor of the message,
allured them, in refpcaful te ins, that he approach-
ed their country with most friendly sentiments, and
came to propose matters of great importance to the
welfare of their prince and his kingdom, which he
would unfold more fully, in person, to the go-
vernor and the general. Next morning, without

B. Diaz. c. 37, 38, 39. Gomara Cron. c. 25, 26. Her-
sera, dec. 2. lib. v. c. 4.

Q_ a waiting

B o O K waiting for any answer, he landed his troops, his
L ',- horses, and artillery; and having chosen proper

151j. ground, began to erec huts for his men, and to

fortify his camp. The natives, instead of op-
posing the entrance of those fatal guests into their
country, afrifed them in all their operations, with
an alacrity of which they had ere long good reason
to repent.

Sis firfl n. NEXT day Teutile and Pilpatoe entered the
Wttl Spanish camp with a numerous retinue, and Cortes
Mxica.s. confidering them as the ministers of a great mo-

narch, entitled to a degree of attention very dif-
ferent from that which the Spaniards were ac-
cuflomned to pay to the petty caziques, with
whom they had intercourse in the isles, received
them with much formal ceremony. He informed
them, that he came as ambassador from Don Car-
los of Austria, king of Castile, the greatest mo-
narch of the East, and was intrusted with propo-
fitions of such moment, that he could impart them
to none but the emperor Montezuma himself, and
therefore required them to conduac him, without
loss of time, into the presence of their master.
The Mexican officers could not conceal their un-
easiness at a request, which they knew would be
disagreeable, and which they foresaw might prove
extremely embarraflling to their fovcreign, whose
mind had been filled with many disquieting appre-
henfions, ever since the former appearance of the
SI';lniards on his coaftls. But before they attempted

to

to dissuade Cortes from insisting on this demand, B 0 0 K
they endeavoured to conciliate his good-will, by .-.-.
entreating him to accept of certain presents, which, 's'1
as humble slaves of Montezuma, they laid at his
feet. They were introduced with great parade,
and confited of fine cotton cloth, of plumes of
various colours, and of ornaments of gold and
silver, to a considerable value; the workmanship
of which appeared to be as curious as the materials
were rich. The display of thefc produced an effedt
very different from what the Mexicans intended.
Initead of satisfying, it increased the avidity of the
Spaniards, and rendered them so eager and impa-
tient to become matters of a country which
abounded with such precious productions, that
Cortes could hardly lilten with patience to the ar-
guments which Pilpatoe and Teutile employed to
dissuade him from visiting the capital, and in a
haughty determined tone he insisted on his demand,
of being admitted to a personal audience of their
sovereign. During this interview, some painters,
in the train of the Mexican chiefs, had been dili-
gently employed in delineating, upon white cotton
cloths, figures of the ships, the hlorfes, the artil-
lery, the soldiers, and whatever else attraced
their eyes, as singular. When Cortes obfcrved
this, and was informed that there pictures were to
be sent to Montezuma, in order to convey to himn
a more lively idea of the strange and wonderful ob-
jects now presented to their view, than any words
could communicate, he resolved to render the re-

_L 3 prefcntation

B 0O 0K presentation itill more animated and interesting, by

V. u_,_. exhibiting such a fpetacle as mightgive both them
'519* and their monarch an awful impression of the ex-

traordinary prowess of his followers, and the irre.
fiftible force of their arms. The trumpets, by his
order, founded an alarm; the troops, in a moment,
formed in order of battle, the infantry performed
such martial exercises as were best suited to display
the effel of their different weapons; the horse, in
various evolutions, gave a fprcimen of their agility
and strength; the artillery, pointed towards the
thick woods which surrounded the camp, were
fired, and made dreadful havoc among the trees.
The Mexicans looked on with that silent amaze-
ment which is natural when the mind is struck with
objets, which are both awful and above its com-
prelienfion. But, at the explosion of the cannon,
many of them fled, some fell to the ground, and
all were so much confounded at the fight of men
wvhofe power so nearly resembled that of the gods,
that Cortes fculd it difficult to cornpofe and re-
afiure them. The painters had now many new
objects on which to exercise their art, and they plt
their fancy on the stretch in order to invent figures
and symbols to represent the extraordinary things
which they had fcen.

Ncgocia- MESSENGERS were immediately dispatched to
Moi'u.' Montezuma with those pictures, and a full account
pma. of every thing that had passed since the arrival of

the Spaniards, and by them Cortes sent a prelent

of

of some European curiosities to Montezuma, which, B o o K
though of no great value, he believed would be --
acceptable on account of their novelty. The 15'9.
Mexican monarchs, in order to obtain early in-
formation of every occurrence in all the corners of
their extensive empire, had introduced a refinement
in police, unknown, at that time, in Europe. They
had couriers porfed at proper stations along the
principal roads; and as thele were trained to agi-
lity by a regular education, and relieved one an-
other at moderate distances, they conveyed intel-
ligence with surprising rapidity. Though the ca-
pital in which Montezuma resided was above a
hundred and eighty miles from St. Juan de Ulua,
Cortes's presents were carried thither, and an an-
fwer to his demands was received in few days. The
fame officers who had hitherto treated with the
Spaniards, were employed to deliver this answer;
but as they knew how repugnant the determination
of their maieer was to all the schemes and wifles of
the Spanilh commander, they would not venture
to make it known until they had previously endea-
voured to sooth and mollify him. For this pur- His pro.
pose, they renewed their negociation, by introduc- l',""
ing a train of a hundred Indians, loaded with pre-
sents sent to him by Montezuma. The magnifi-
cence of these was filch as became a great monarch,
and far exceeded any idea which the Spaniards had
hitherto formed of his wealth. They were placed
on mats Ipread on the ground, in flch order, as
lhewed them to the greatest advantage. Cortes

%. 4 and

B o o K and his officers viewed, with admiration, the va.

V.
L a- 1 rious manufac&ures of the country, cotton susss so

'519- fine, and of such delicate texture, as to resemble

silk; pictures of animals, trees, and other natural
objets, formed with feathers of different colours,
disposed and mingled with filch skill and elegance,
as to rival the works of the pencil in truth and
beautyof imitation. But what chiefly attraEted their
eyes, were two large plates of a circular form, one
of massive gold representing the fun, the other of
silver, an emblem of the moon m. These were ac-
companied with bracelets, collars, rings, and other
trinkets of gold; and that nothing might be wanting
which could give the Spaniards a complete idea of
what the country afforded, with some boxes filled
with pearls, precious itones, and grains of gold un-
wrought, as they had been found in the mines or
rivers. Cortes received all these with an appear-
ance of profound veneration for the monarch by

FOIhi s whom they were bestowed. But when the Mexi-
Corltt' tO
applrocl cans, presuming upon this, informed him, that
ij capital. their mafler, though he desired him to accept of

what he had sent as a token of regard for that mo-
narch whom Cortes represented, would not give
his consent that foreign troops should approach
nearer to his capital, or even allow them to continue
longer in his dominions, the Spaniflh general de-
clared, in a manner more resolute and peremptory
than formerly, that he must insist on his first de-
mand, as he could not, without dishonour, return

n* See NOTE LXXV.

tO

to his own country, until he was admitted into the B o o
presence of the prince whom he was appointed to _
vilit in the name of his sovereign. The Mexicans, s519'
astonished at feeing any man dare to oppose that
will, which they were accustomed to confider as
supreme and irrefiflible, yet afraid of precipitating
their country into an open rupture with such for-
midable enemies, prevailed with Cortes to promise,
that he would not move from his present camp,
until the return of a messenger, whom they fcnt to
Montezuma for farther inftrutions ".

THE firmncfs with which Cortes adhered to his St:ltc of tie

original proposal, should naturally have brought mp~, t
the negociation between him and Montezuma to a tat p"'rid.
speedy ifiue, as it seemed to leave the Mexican
monarch no choice, but either to receive him with
confidence as a friend, or to oppose him openly as
an enemy. The latter was what might have been
expected from a haughty prince in poffeflion of
extensive power. The Mexican empire, at this
period, was at a pitch of grandeur to which no so-
ciety ever attained in so short a period. Though
it had subsisted, according to their own traditions,
only a hundred and thirty years, its dominion ex-
tended from the North to the South Sea, over ter-
ritories stretching, with some small interruption,
above five hundred leagues from east to weft, and
more than two hundred from north to south, com-

B. Diaz. c. 39. gomara ron. c. 27. Iierrcra,dec. ,,
lib. v. c. 5,6.

prehcnding

B 0 K prehending provinces not inferior in fertility, po.
_-._
. pulation, and opulence, to any in the torrid zone.

5'9-. The people were warlike and enterprising; the all.

thority of the monarch unbounded, and his reve.
nues considerable. If, with the forces which might
have been fuddenlv-.iternbled in such an empire,
Montezuria had fallen upon the Spaniards while
encamped on a barren unhealthy coast, unlupported
by any ally, without a place of retreat, and defti-
tute of provisions, it seems to be impossible, even
with all the advantages of their superior discipline
and arms, that they could have stood the fho(xk,
and they must either have perified in such an un-
equal contest, or have abandoned the enterprise.

ciarn.ier As the power of Montezuma enabled him to
of the mio-

mac.1 take this spirited part, his own dispositions were

such as seemed naturally to prompt him to it.
Of all the princes who had swayed the Mexican
sceptre, he was the most haughty, the most vio-
lent, and the most impatient of controul. His
subjeCts looked up to him with awe, and his ene-
mies with terror. The former he governed with
unexampled rigour, but they were imprefed with
such an opinion of his capacity, as commanded
their refpedt; and,.by many vistories over the lat-
ter, he had spread far the dread of hi- arms, and
had added several considerable provinces to his do-
minions. But though his talents miCght be ifuittd
to the tranfadions of a slate so impertctlly polifihl
as the Mexican empire, and fuflicient to condlCt

thl m

them while in their accustomed course, they were B o O K
altogether inadequate to a conjun&sire so extraordi- V
nary, and did not qualify him either to judge with 5s'9s
the difcernmcnt, or to as with the decision, requi-
site in such trying emergence.

FROM the moment that the Spaniards appeared his per-

plcxity and
on hia coair, he dilcovered symptoms of timidity trrorupo,

tshe arlival

and embarrassment. Instead of taking such refolu- of tile Spa-
tions as the conlfiouliicl of his own power, or the niardl'
memory of his former exploits, might have in-
spired, he deiibcrated with an anxiety and hefita-
tion which did not escape the notice of his meanest
courtiers. The perplexity and discomposure of
Montezuma's mind upon this occasion, as well as
the general dilinay of his fubjedts, were not owing
wholly to the imprefTion which the Spaniards had
made by the novelty of their appearance and the
terror of their arms. Its origin may be traced up
to a more remote source. There was an opinion,
if we may believe the earliest and molt authentic
Spanish historians, almost universal among the
Americans, that tome dreadful calamity was im-
Xlnding over their heads, from a race of formi-
(ible invaders 'wlr) should come from regions to-
wards the rising lun, to overrun and desolate their
country. Whether this disquieting apprehension
flowed fiom the memory of ibme natural calamity
which had alfiicted that part of the globe, and im-
prcllc(l the minds of the inhabitants with fuperfti-
tiouls fears and forebodings, or whether it was an

imagination

B 0 O K imagination accidentally suggested by the aftonilb-

V.
E\_^-- ment which the first fight of a new race of men

's'9- occasioned, it is impossible to determine. But as

the Mexicans were more prone to superstition than
any people in the New World, they were more
deeply affc¢ed by the appearance of the Spaniards,
whom their credulity instantly represented as the
instrument destined to bring about this fatal revolu.
tion which they dreaded. Under those circum-
stances, it ceases to be incredible that a handful of
adventurers should alarm the monarch of a great
empire, and all his fubjets .°

Cont;nues NOTWITHSTANDING the influence of this irn-
t:lttC. prefilon, when the meflenger arrived from the

Spanish camp with an account that the leader of
the firangers, adhering to his original demand, re-
fused to obey the order enjoining him to leave the
country, Montezuma assumed Come degree of re-
solution, and, in a transport of rage natural to a
fierce prince unaccustomed to meet with any oppo-
lition to his will, he threatened to sacrifice those
presumptuous men to his gods. But his doubts
and fears quickly returned, and initead of ilfuing
orders to carry his threats into execution, he again
called his ministers to confer and offer their advice.
Feeble and temporising mneafures will always be
the result when men aflcmble to dcliber.te in a

o Cortes RcIltione Seconda, ap. Ramus. iii. 234, 235.

Herrera, dec. 2. lib. iii. c. i. lib. v. c. 11. lib. vii. c. (.
Gomara Cron. c. 66. 9.
9 4. 4fit

siuation

ituation where they ought to a&. The Mexican B o o IK
counsellors took no effe&ual measure for expelling v-
huch troublesome intruders, and were satisfied with 319.
ilruing a more positive injunAion, requiring them
to leave the country; but this they preposterously
accompanied with a present of such value, as proved
freih inducement to remain there.

MEANWHILE, the Spaniards were not without Anxi;,ty'.d
solicitude or a variety of fcntiments, in deliberating rfio of te
concerning their own future condut. From what panai
they had already seen, many of them formed such
extravagant ideas concerning the opulence of the
country, that despising danger or hardships, when
they had in view treasures which appeared to be in-
exhaustible, they were eager to attempt the con-
quest. Others, eitimating the power of the Mexi-
can empire by its wealth, and enumerating the va-
rious proofs which had occurred of its being under
a well-regulated administration, contended, that it
would be an aa of the wildest frenzy to attack such
a stare with a finall body of men, in want of provi-
ions, unconnecRed with any ally, and already en-
feebled by the diseases peculiar to the climate, and
the loss of several of their number P. Cortes fe-
cretly applauded the advocates for bold measures,
and cherifled their romantic hopes, as such ideas
corresponded with his own, and favoured the exe-
cution of the fehemes which he had formed. From
the tirle that the suspicions of Velafqucz broke out

P B. Diaz. c. 40.

with

B o o K with open violence in the attempts to deprive him
$_, v of the command, Cortes saw the neceflity of dif.
Sclc19. solving a connetion which would obftrut and em-
conrt. barrafs all his operations, and watched for a proper

opportunity of coming to a final rupture with him.
Having this in view, he had laboured by every art
to secure the esteem and affection of his soldiers.
With his abilities for command, it was easy to gain
their esteem ; and his followers were quickly satis.
fled that they might rely, with perfetE confidence,
on the conduct and courage of their leader. Nor
was it more difficult to acquire their affetion.
Among adventurers, nearly of the fame rank, and
serving at their own expence, the dignity of com-
mand did not elevate a general above mingling with
those who aJted under him. Cortes availed himself
of this freedom of intercourse, to insinuate himself
into their favour, and by his affable manners, by
well-timed acs of liberality to some, by inspiring all
with vast hopes, and by allowing them to trade
privately with the natives q, he attached the greater
part of his soldiers so firmly to himself, that they
almost forgot that the armament had been fitted
out by the authority, and at the expence, of an-
other.

Hsl addrrfs DURING those intri-gues, Teutile arrived with
i catIy.1I the prelsnt ifomn Montezuma, and, together with
thcm on.

it, delivered the ultimate order of that monarch to
depart instantly out of his dominions; and when

Secc NOTE LXXVI.

Cortes,

Cortes, instead of complying, renewed his request B o K
of an audience, the Mexican turned from him ab-
ruptly, and quitted the camp with looks and gef- '5'9
tures which strongly expressed his lurprife and re-
fentment. Next morning, none of the natives,
who used to frequent the camp in great numbers,
in order to barter with the foldicrs, and to bring in
provisions, appeared. All fricndly corrcfpondence
seemed now to be at an end, and it was expe&ed
every moment that holti'ities would commence.
This, though an event that might have been fore-
fcen, occasioned a fucden conltclnation among
the Spaniards, which emboidened the adherents of
Vclafquez not only to murmur and cabal against
their general, but to appoint one of their number
to remonstrate openly against his imprudence in at-
tempting the conqueit of a mighty empire with
such inadequate force, and to urge the necessity of
returning to Cuba, in order to refit the fleet and
augment the army. Diego de Ordaz, one of his
principal officers, whom the malecontents charged
with this commiflion, delivered it with a soldierly
freedom and bluntness, alluring Cortes that he spoke
the sentiments of the whole army. He listened to
this remonstrance without any appearance of emo-
tion, and as he well knew the temper and wifles of
his soldiers, and foresaw how they would receive a
proposition fatal at once to all the splendid hopes
and schemes which they had been forming with
such complacency, he carried his diflimulation so
far as to fecm to relinquilh his own measures in com-

pal:lce

Bo o K pliance with the request of Ordaz, and issued orderi

V. that the army should be in readiness next day to
1tI9. reimbark for Cuba. As soon as this was known,

the disappointed adventurers exclaimed and threat.
ened ; the emissaries of Cortes, mingling with them,
inflamed their rage; the ferment became general;
the whole camp was almost in open mutiny; all
demanding with eagerness to fee their commander.
Cortes was not flow in appearing; when, with one
voice, officers and soldiers expressed their aftonilh-
ment and indignation at the orders which they had
received. It was unworthy, they cried, of the Caf-
tilian courage, to be daunted at the first aspea of
danger, and infamous to fly before any enemy ap-
peared. For their parts, they were determined
not to relinquish an enterprise, that had hitherto
been successful, and which tended so visibly to
fprcad the knowledge of true religion, and to ad-
vance the glory and interest of their country.
Happy under his command, they would follow him
with alacrity through every danger, in quest of
those settlements and treasures which he had so long
held out to their view; but if he chore rather to
return to Cuba, and tamely give up all his hopes of
diftincion and opulence to an envious rival, they
would instantly choose another general to condut
them in that path of glory, which he had not spirit
to enter.

CORTES, delighted with their ardour, took no
offence at the boldness with which it was uttered.

3 'FilThe

The sentiments were what he himself had inspired, B o o K
and the warmth of exprefiion faiisfied him that his -
followers had imbibed them thoroughly. He as- I's9
fled, however, to be surprised at what he heard,
declaring that his orders to prepare for embarking
were issued from a persuasion that this was agree-
able to his troops; that, from deference to what he
had been informed was their inclination, he had
iacrificed his own private opinion, which was firmly
bent on eftablilhing immediately a settlement on
the sea-coast, and then on endeavouring to pene-
trate into the interior part of the country; that now
he was convinced of his error; and as he perceived
that they were animated with the generous spirit
which breathed in every true Spaniard, he would
resume, with frcfh ardour, his original plan of ope-
ration, and doubted not to conduEt them, in the
career of victory, to such independent fortunes as
their valour merited. Upon this declaration,
flouts of applause testified the excess of their joy.
The measure seemed to be taken with unanimous
content; fich as secretly condemned it being obliged
to join in the acclamations, partly to conceal their
diiaffeEion from their general, and partly to avoid
the imputation of cowardice from their fellow-
soldiers '.

WITHOUT allowing his men time to cool or to EMbihea

reflte, Cortes let about carrying his dcfign into p~, mat.
execution. In order to give a beginning to a co-

B. Diaz. c. o4, 41, 41, Herrera, dec. a. lib. v. c. 6, 7.
VOL. 11. A lony,

B 0 0 K lony, he assembled the principal persons in his

V army, and by their suffrage eleced a council and
'5'9- magistrates in whom the government was to be

vetted. As men naturally transplant the institutions
and forms of the mother-country into their new
settlements, this was framed upon the model of a
Spanish corporation. The magistrates were dif-
tinguilhed by the fame names and ensigns of office,
and were to exercise a similar jurifdi&ion. All the
persons chosen were most firmly devoted to Cortes,
and the instrument of their elecion was framed in
the king's name, without any mention of their de-
pendance on Velasquez. The two principles of
avarice and enthusiasm, which prompted the Spa-
niards to all their enterprises in the New World,
seem to have concurred in suggesting the name
which Cortes bestowed on his infant settlement.
-Ie called it, 'bhe rich town of the true Cross'.

Rciigns I is THE firit meeting of the new council was ditfin-
*omiililliiio,

guifhed by a tranfa&ion of great moment. As
soon as it assembled, Cortes applied for leave to
enter; and approaching with many marks of pro-
found refpec, which added dignity to the tribunal,
and set an example of reverence for its authority,
he began a long harangue, in which, with much
art, and in terms extremely flattering to persons just
entering upon their new funtion, he observed, that
as the supreme jurifdliction over the colony which
they had planted was now vested in this court, he

* Villa rica de la vera Cruz.

confidered

confidered them as clothed with the authority, and n o o o
representing the person of their sovereign; that ac-
cordingly he would communicate to them what he 15'9
deemed essential to the public safety, with the fame
dutiful fidelity as if he were addrefling his royal
mailer; that the security of a colony fettled in a
great empire,whofe sovereign had already discovered
his hostile intentions, depended upon arms, and the
efficacy of these upon the subordination and difci-
pline preserved among the troops; that his'right to
command was derived 'from a commission granted
by the governor of Cuba; and as that had been
long since revoked, the lawfulness of his jurifdic-
tion might well be questioned; that he might be
thought to a& upon a defecive, or even a du-
bious title; nor could they trust an anny which
might dispute the powers of its general, at a junc-
ture when it ought implicitly to obey his orders;
that, moved by there considerations, he now re-
signed all is authority to them, that they, having
both right to choose, and power to confer full ju-
rifdition, might appoint one, in the king's name,
to command the army in its future operations; and
as for his own part, such was his zeal for the ser-
vice in which they were engaged, that he would
most cheerfully take up a pike with the fame hand
that laid down the general's truncheon, and con-
vince his fellow-ibldier's, that though accustomed
to command, he had not forgotten how to obey.
Having finished his discourse, he laid the commi'-
lion fronm \'elailuez upon the table, and after kiting

R 2 his

B o o K his truncheon, delivered it to the chief magitrate,

c _-- and withdrew.
1519.

andischoftn THE deliberations of the council were not long,
chief jufticce
and cap- as Cortes had concerted this important measure with
inm-;ra. his confidents, and had prepared the other members

with great address, for the part which he wished
them to take. His resignation was accepted; and
as the uninterrupted tenor of their profpcrity under
his condu& afforded the most satisfying evidence of
his abilities for command, they, by their unanimous
suffrage, ele&ted him chiefjuftice of the colony, and
captain-general of its army, and appointed his corn.
minfion to be made out in the king's name, with
most ample powers, which were to continue in force
until the royal pleasure ihould be farther known.
That this deed might not be deemed the machina-
tion of a junto, the council called together the
troops, and acquainted them with what had been
resolved. The soldiers, with eager applause, rati-
sied the choice which the council had made ; the air
resounded vith the name of Cortes, and all vowed
to shed their blood in support of his authority.

Ai, rts Ii; CORTES having now brought his intrigues to the
,itviu,. desired issue, and Ihaken off his mortifying depend-

ance on the governor of Cuba, accepted of the
commifflon, which velled in him supreme jurifdic-
tion, civil as well as military, over the colony, with
many profelions of rcfpect to the council, and gra-
tkude to the army. Together with his new com-

10 nand,

mand, he afliumed greater dignity, and began to Ba o K
exercise more extensive powers. Formerly he had V..
felt himself to be only the deputy of a fubje&; now 's9-.
he a&ted as the representative of his sovereign. The
adherents of Velasquez, fully aware of what would
be the effiec of this change in the situation of Cor-
tes, could no longer continue silent and passive
spectators of his actions. They exclaimed openly
against the proceedings of the council as illegal, and
against those of the army as mutinous. Cortes, in-
itanly perceiving the necessity of giving a timely
check to such seditious discourse by some vigorous
measure, arrested Ordaz, Efcudero, and Velasquez
de Leon, the ringleaders of this faction, and sent
them prisoners aboard the fleet, loaded with chains.
Their dependants, aftonilhed and over-awed, re-
mained quiet; and Cortes, more desirous to reclaim
than to punish his prisoners, who were officers of
great merit, courted their friendship with such affi-
duity and address, that the reconciliation was per-
fetly cordial; and, on the most trying occasions,
neither their connetion with the governor of Cuba,
nor the memory of the indignity with which they
had been treated, tempted them to swerve from an
inviolable attachment to his interest '. In this, as
well as his other negotiations at this critical con-
juncture, which decided with respect to his future
fame and fortune, Cortes owed much of his fuc-
cess to the Mexican gold, which he distributed

'B. Diam. c. 4s, 43. Gomara Cron. c. 30, 31. Herrera,
dec, z. lib. v. c. 7.

R 3 with

B o o K with a liberal hand both among his friends and his

- ,' t opponents'.

1519.

His friend- CORTES, having thus rendered the union be-
byrlzcl^J tween himself and his army indissoluble, by enga-
poalans. ging it to join him in disclaiming any dependence

on the governor of Cuba, and in repeated ats of
disobedience to his authority, thought he might
now venture to quit the camp in which he had hi-
therto remained, and advance into the country.
To this he was encouraged by an event no less
fortunate than seasonable. Some Indians having
approached his camp in a mysterious manner, were
introduced into his presence. He found that they
were sent with a proffer of friend hip from the
cazique of Zempoalla, a considerable town at no
great distance; and from their answers to a variety
of questions which he put to them, according to
his usual practice in every interview with the peo-
ple of the country, he gathered, that their mafler,
though subje&t to the Mexican empire, was im-
patient of the yoke, and filled with such dread and
hatred of Montezuma, that nothing could be more
acceptable to him than any profped of deliverance
from the oppression under which he groaned. On
hearing this, a ray of light and hope broke in upon
the mind of Cortes. I-e flaw that the great em-
pire which he intended to attack was neither per-
sealy united, nor its fovercign universally beloved.
IIe concluded, that the caulfs of diFiafrilion could

1 B. Diaz, c. 44.

1/0)s

not be confined to one province, but that in other B o o K
corners there must be malcontents, so weary of -
fubjetion, or so desirous of change, as to be ready 's'.
to follow the standard of any protedor. Full of
tlofe ideas, on which he began to form a scheme,
that time, and more perfe6t information concern-
ing the state of the country, enabled him to ma-
ture, he gave a most gracious reception to the
Zempoallans, and promired soon to visit their
cazique `.

IN order to perform this promise, it was not Marches to

necessary to vary the route which he had already Zrm""''jo
fixed for his march. Some officers, whom he
had employed to survey the coast, having disco-
vered a village named Quiabiflan, about forty miles
to the northward, which, both on account of the
fertility of the foil, and commodiousness of the
harbour, seemed to be a more proper station for
a settlement than that where he was encamped,
Cortes determined to remove thither. Zempoal'a
lay in his way, where the cazique received him in
the manner which he had reason to expet; with
gifts and careifes, like a man solicitous to gain his
good.will; with refpe&t approaching almost to ado-
ration, like one who looked up to him as a deli-
verer. From him he learned many particulars
with refpe& to the characer of Montezuma, and the
circumltances which rendered his dominion odious.
Jle was a tyrant, as the cazique told him with

B, Diaz. c. 41. Gomara Cron. c. 28.

R 4 tears,

B o o K tears, haughty, cruel, and suspicious, who treated
a__' his own fubjeds with arrogance, ruined the con.

5s9. quered provinces by excessive exations, and often

tore their sons and daughters from them by violence;
the former to be offered as victims to his gods;
the latter, to be reserved as concubines for himself
or favourites. Cortes, in reply to him, artfully
insinuated, that one great objeEt of the Spaniards
in visiting a country so remote from their own, was
to re, refs grievances, and to relieve the oppressed;
and having encouraged him to hope for this inter-
position in due time, he continued his march to
Quiabiflan.
Builds * THE spot which his officers had recommended

as a proper situation, appeared to him to be so well
chosen, that he immediately marked out ground
for a town. The houses to be ere&ted were only
huts; but these were to be surrounded with fortifi-
cations, of sufficient strength to resist the afflaults of
an Indian army. As the finishing of those fortifi-
cations was essential to the existence of a colony,
and of no less importance in prosecuting the de-
signs which the leader and his followers meditated,
both in order to secure a place of retreat, and to
preserve their communication with the sea, every
man in the army, officers as well as soldiers, put
his hand to the work, Cortes himself setting them
an example of ativity and perseverance in labour.
The Indians of Zempoalla and Quiabiflan lent
their aid; and this petty station, the parent of so

many

many mighty settlements, was soon in a state of * o o
defence z

1519.
WHILE engaged in this neceflary work, Cortes concludera

formal alli-

had several interviews with the caziques of Zem- ance wi,
poalla and Quiabifan; and availing himself of their ra ",'
wonder and astonishment at the new obje&s which
they daily beheld, he gradually inspired them with
such an high opinion of the Spaniards, as beings of
a superior order, and irresistible in arms, that, re-
lying on their protecion, they ventured to insult
the Mexican power, at the very name of which
they were accustomed to tremble. Some of Mon-
tezuma's officers having appeared to levy the usual
tribute, and to demand a certain number of human
vitims, as an expiation for their guilt in prefu-
ming to hold intercourse with those strangers whom
the emperor had commanded to leave his domi-
nions, instead of obeying the order, the caziques
made them prisoners, treated them with great in-
dignity, and, as their superstition was no less barba-
rous than that of the Mexicans, they prepared to
sacrifice them to their gods. From this last dan-
ger they were delivered by the interposition of
Cortes, who manifested the utmost horror at the
mention of such a deed. The two caziques hav-
ing now been pushed to an at of such open re-
bellion, as left them no hope of fafcty but in attach-

BE. Diaz. c. 45, 46. 48. .Gomar Cron. c. 32, 33. 37.
Herrera, dec. ., lib. v. c. 8, 9.

ing

B O K ing themselves inviolably to the Spaniards, they

V.
.-- i oon completed their union with them, by for.
''-9 mally acknowledging themselves to be vaflals of

the fame monarch. Their example was followed
by the Totonaques, a fierce people who inhabited
the mountainous part of the country. They wil-
lingly fubjeEted themselves to the crown of Castile,
and offered to accompany Cortes, with all their
forces, in his march towards Mexico Y.

His rnr. CORTES had now been above three months in
"lt,°opro- New Spain; and though this period had not been
firiation (f dillinguiflied by martial exploits, every moment
-ity l.y l
y hlid been employed in operations, which, though

l' splendid, were more important. By his ad-
dress in conduLting his intrigues with his own
:alrm, as well as his sagacity in carrying on his
llcgocia.ions with the natives, he had already laid
the foiiul;dtions of his future fuccelf. But what-
ever conlidence lhe might place in the plan which
lie had formed, he could not but perceive, that as
his title to command was derived from a ldoubtfil
authority, he held it by a precarious tenure. The
injuries which Velafques had received, were such as
would naturally prompt him to apply for redrels to
their common sovereign; and fuclh a reprcfenta-
tionl, he forelahw, might be given of his condutd,
that he had reason to apprehend, not only that he
might be degraded from his preflnt rank, but sub-

' B. Diaz. c. 47. Gomara Cron. 35, 36. Hcrrera, dec. z.
lib . v c.c. , 10, I 1.

jet-ced

fcted to puniflment. Before he began his.march, BOOK It
it was necessary to take the most effe&tul; precau- ,
tions against this impending danger. With this I'l*
view he persuaded the magistrates of the colony at
Vera Cruz to address a letter to the king, the chief
obje& of which was to justify their own condu& in
establishing a colony independant on the jurifdic-
tion of Velasquez. In order to accomplilfh this,
they endeavoured to detrat from his merit, in fit-
ting out the two former armaments under Cordova
and Grijalva, affirming that these had been equipped
by the adventurers who engaged in the expedi-
ions, and not by the governor. They contended
that the sole obje& of Velasquez was to trade or
barter with the natives, not to attempt the con-
quest of New Spain, or to fettle a colony there.
They aflerted that Cortes and the officers who
fIrved under him had defrayed the greater part of
the expence in fitting out the armament. On this
account, they humbly requelted their fovercign to
ratify what they had done in his name, and to con-
firm Cortes in the supreme command by his royal
commiflion. That Charles might be induced to
grant more readily what they demanded, they give
him a pompous description of the country which
they had discovered; of its riches, the number of
its inhabitants, their civilization and arts; they re-
late the progress which they had already made in
annexing some parts of the country situated oil the
la-coaft to the crown of Castile; and mention tie
chenmes which they had formed, as well as the ;.

3 lhopes

o °O° K hopes which they entertained, of reducing te
- y~ whole to fubje&ion . Cortes hisel wrote in a
X's9 fimihr ftrainj and as he knew that the Spanif

court, accustomed to the exaggerated reprefema.
tions of every new country by its difcovcren,
would give little credit to their splendid accounts
of New Spain, if these were not accompanied with
such a specimen of what it contained, as would
excite an high idea of its opulence, he solicited his
folditrs to relinquish what they might claim as
their part of the treasures which had hitherto been
colle&ed, in cd~er that the whole might be sent
to the king. Such was the ascendant which he
had acquired over their minds, and such their own
romantic expectations of future wealth, that an
army of indigent and rapacious adventurers was
capable of this generous effort, and offered to their
sovereign the richest prefnt that had hitherto been

Y In this letter it is aflrted, tht though a considerable

number of Spaniards have been wounded in their various en.
counters with the people of Tabarco, not one of them died,
and all had recovered in a very ihort time. This seems to
confirm what I obfcrve in p. 280, concerning the imperfedion
of the ofenfive weapons uscd by the Americans. In this letter,
the human sacrifices. offered by the Mexicans to their deities are
dfcribed minutely, and with great horror; some of the Spa-
iards, it is said, had been eye-witneffcs ofthofe barbarous rites.
To the letter is rubjoined a catalogue and description of the
presents sent to the emperor. That publifbed by Gomara
Cron. c. s9, seems to have been copied from it. Pet. Martyr
describes many of the articles in hie treatire Dc infulis nuper
inventis, p. 354, &c.

tranfintted

transmitted from the New World'. Portocarrero o o K

V.

and Montejo, the chief magistrates of the colony, .
were appointed to carry this present to Cafile, 's'-
with express orders not to touch at Cuba in their
pailage thither'.

WHILE a vessel was preparing for their de- A wpi-
psrture, an unexpeced event occasioned a gene- cod
al alarm. Some soldiers and sailors, secretly at-
ached to Velasquez, or intimidated at the profpet
of the dangers unavoidable in attempting to pene-
trate into the heart of a great empire with such
unequal force, formed the design of seizing one of
the brigantines, and making their escape to Cuba.
in order to give the governor such intelligence
as might enable him to intercept the ship which
was to carry the treasure and dispatches to Spain.
This conspiracy, though formed by persons of
low rank, was conduted with profotud secrecy;
but at the moment when every thing was ready
for execution, they were betrayed by one of their
asociates.

THOUGH the good fortune of Cortes interposed He *uftr
so seasonably on this occasion, the detecion of
this conspiracy filled his mind with most disquiet-
ing apprehensions, and prompted him to execute a
scheme which he had long revolved. He per-
ceived that the spirit of difaffe&ion fill lurked
among his troops; that though hitherto checked

* See NOTE LXXVII.
' B. Dia. c. 54. Gomara Cron. c. 40.

by

B O0 K by the uniform success of his schemes, or sup.

ViL_., pressed by the hand of authority, various events
'^19. might occur which would encourage and call it

forth. He observed, that many of his men, weary
of the fatigue of service, longed to.revifit their let-
tlements in Cuba; and that upon any appearance
of extraordinary danger, or any reverse of fortune,
it would be impossible to refirain them from return.
ing thither. He was sensible that his forces, al-
ready too feeble, could bear no diminution, and
that a very small defection of his followers would
oblige him to abandon the enterprise. After ru-
minating often, and with much solicitude, upon
those particulars, he saw no hope of success, but
in cutting off all poflibility of retreat, and in re-
ducing his men to the necefirty of adopting the
fame resolution with which he himself was ani-
mated, either to conquer or to perish. With this
view, he determined to destroy his fleet; but as he
durst not venture to execute such a bold resolution
by his tingle authority, he laboured to bring his
boldiers to adopt his ideas with refpea to the pro-
priety of this meafire. hIis address in accomplilh-
ing this was not inferior to the arduous occasion in
which it was employed. He perfiaded some, that
the ships had suffered so much by having been long
at sea, as to be altogether unfit for fcrvice; to
others he pointed out what a seasonable reinforce-
ment of strength they would derive from the junc-
tion of an hundred men, now unprofitably employed
as 1aiilors; and to all, he represented the neceflity

of

of fixing their eyes and wishes upon what was be- B o o :
fore them, without allowing the idea of a retreat _
once to enter their thoughts. With universal con- 1's9.
sent the flips were drawn ashore, and after firip-
ping them of their fails, rigging, iron works, and
whatever else might be of use, they were broke in
pieces. Thus, from an effort of magnanimity, to
which there is nothing parallel in history, five hun-
dred men voluntarily consented to be thut up in a
hostile country, filled with powerful and unknown
nations; and having precluded every means of
escape, left themselves without any resource but
their own valour and perseverance b.

NOTHING now retarded Cortes; the alacrity of
his troops and the disposition of his allies were
equally favourable. All the advantages, however,
derived from the latter, though procured by much
afliduity and address, were well nigh loft in a mo-
ment, by an indiscreet fally'of religious zeal, which,
on many occasions, precipitated Cortes into actions
inconsistent with the prudence that diftinguilhes
his character. Though hitherto he had neither
time nor opportunity to explain to the natives the
errors of their own ftpcrftition, or to inftrut t them
in the principles of the Chrilfian faith, he con.
manded his soldiers to overturn the altars and to
dlefroy the idols in the chief temple of Zenpoalla,
and in their place to ereft a crucifix anl an image

b Relat. di Cortes. Rarnur. iii. 22;. . D':.. c. , i.
Ilerrea, dec. 2, lib, v. c. , 1.

of

B o o K of the Virgin Mary. The people beheld this with

V. v'

- aftonilhment and horror; the priests excited them
S519- to arms; but such was the authority of Cortes, and

so great the ascendant which the Spaniards had
acquired, that the commotion was appeased with-
out bloodshed, and concord perfe&ly re-efta-
blifhed'.

Advances CORTiS began his march from Zempoalla on the
nto the
ountry. sixteenth of August, with five hundred men, fifteen

horse, and fix field-pieces. The reft of his troops,
consisting chiefly of such as from age or infirmity
were lets fit for aaive service, he left as a garrison
in Villa Rica, under the command of Efcalante, an
officer of merit, and warmly attached to his inte-
reft. The cazique of Zempoalla supplied him with
provisions, and with two hundred of those Indians
called Tamenres, whose office, in a country where
tame animals were unknown, was to carry burdens,
and to perform all servile labour. They were a
great relief to the Spanish soldiers, who hitherto
had been obliged, not only to carry their own bag-
gage, but to drag along the artillery by main force.
He offered likewise a considerable body of his
troops, but Cortes was satisfied with four hundred;
taking care, however, to chute persons of such note
as might prove hostages for the fidelity of their
matter. Nothing memorable happened in his pro-
grefs, until he arrived on the confines of Tlafcala.
The inhabitants of that province, a warlike people,

X. Diaz. c. 41, 42. Herrera, dec. .a lib, v. c. 3, 4

were

were implacable enemies of the Mexicans,- and had B o .o
been united in an ancient alliance with the' caziques c-'.,-
of Zempoalla. Though less civilized than. the 15t9-
subje&s of Montezuma, they were advanced in
improvement far beyond'the rude nations of Ame-
rica, whose manners we have described. They
had made considerable progress in agriculture; they
dwelt in large towns; they were not firangers to
some species of commerce; and in the imperfe':
accounts of their institutions and laws, transmitte'd
to us by the early Spanish writers, we difdern traces
both of distributive justice and of criminal jurifdic-
tion, in their interior police. But still, as the de-
gree of their civilization was incomplete, and as
they depended for subsistence not on agriculture
alone, but trusted for it, in a great mearure, to
hunting, they retained many of the qualities natu-
ral to men in this Rate. Like them, they were
fierce and revengeful; like them, too, they were
high-fpirited and independent. In consequence of
the former, they were involved in perpetual hoffili-
ties, and had but a slender and occasional inter-
course with neighbouring states. The latter in-
spired them with such detestation of servitude, that
they not only refused to stoop to a foieign yoke,
and maintained an obstinate and futccefsfbl conreft
in defence of their liberty against th 'fiiperior
power of the Mexican empire, btrthey guarded
with equal solicitude against domeftic'tyranny; and
disdaining to acknowledge sny mafler, they lived

VOL. rr. s under

B 0 0 K under the mild and limited jurifdi&ion of a council

e leted by their several tribes.

1519.

His war CORTES, though he had received information
with the
Tlcalans. concerning the martial charater of this people,

flattered himself that his profellions of delivering
the oppressed from the tyranny of Montezuma,
their inveterate enmity to the Mexicans, and the
example of their ancient allies the Zempoallans,
might induce the Tlafcalans to grant him a friendly
reception. In order to dilpofe them to this, four
Zempoallans of great eminence were rent ambaf.
fadors, to request, in his name, and in that of their
cazique, that they would permit the Spaniards to
pass through the territories of the republic in their
way to Mexico. But instead of the favourable
answer which was expected, the Tlafcalans seized
the ambassadors, and, without any regard to their
public character, made preparations for sacrificing
them to their gods. At the fame time, they assem-
bled their troops, in order to oppose those un-
known invaders, if they should attempt to make
their pafaHge good by force of arms. Various mo-
tives concurred in precipitating the Tlafcalans into
this resolution. A fierce people, shut up within
its own narrow precints, and little accustomed to
any intercourse with foreigners, is apt to confider
every stranger as an enemy, and is easily excited
to arms. They concluded, from Cortes's proposal
of visiting Mozczuma in his capital, that, not-

withstanding

withstanding, all his professions, he courted the B op K
friendship of a monarch whom they both hated and vy
feared. The imprudent zeal of Cortes in violating 's9.
the temples in Zempoalla, filled the Tlafcalans with
horror; and as they were no less attached to their
superstition than the other nations of New Spain,
they were impatient to avenge their injured gods,
and to acquire the merit of offering up to them, as
vitims, those impious men who had dared to pro-
fane their altars they contemned the small num-
ber of the Spaniards, as they had not yet measured
their own strength with that of there new enemies,
and had no idea of the superiority which they de-
rived from their arms and discipline.

CORTEs, after waiting some days, in vain, for Aug.^ a

the return of his anibaffadors, advanced into the it.
Tlafcalan territories. As the resolutions of people
who delight in war are executed with no less
promptitude than they are formed, he found troops
in the field ready to oppose him. They attacked
him with great intrepidity, and, in the first en-
counter, wounded Come of thE Spaniards, and killed
two horses; a loss, in their situation, of great mo-
ment, becatife it was irreparable. From this fpe-
cimen of their courage, Cortes saw the neceflity
of proceeding with caution. His army marched in
close order; he chose the stations, where he halted,
With attention,. and fortified every camS with ex-
traordinary care. During fourteen days he was
exposcd to altioft uninterrupted assaults, the Tlaf-

s 3 calans

B bo. calaris advancing with numerous armies, and re.

-'-~ 'newing'the attack in various forms, with a decree
5'9 ' of valour and perseverance to which the Spaniards

had feei 'nothing parallel in the New World. The
Spahilli hifdriahs describe those ficcclflve battles
with great pomp, and enter into a minute detail
bs particulars, mingling many exaggerated and in-
credible circumntances d with such as are real and
'iarvvellous. But no power of words can render
the 'recital of a combat interesting, where there is
no equality of danger; and when the narrative
closes with an account of thousands slain on the one
fide, while not a tingle person falls on the other, the
most laboured descriptions of the previous difpofi-
tion of the troops, or of the various vicissitudes in
the engagement, command no attention.

Somefingn- THERE are fonge circumstances, however, in
lar circum-
ft.ncisinit. this war, which are memiorable, and merit no-

tice, as they throw light upon the chara&ter both
of the people of New Spain, and of their con-
querors. Though the Tlafcalans brought into the
field such numerous armies as appear fuficient to
have overwhelmed the Spaniards, they were never
able to make any ihmpreflion upon their small batta-
lion. Singular as this may seem, it is not inexpli-
cable. The Tlafcalans, though addiated to war,
were, like all unpolifhed nations, fRrangers to mi-
litary order and discipline, and loft in a great mea-

See NOTE LXXVIII.

sure

sure the advantage which they might have derived B 0 K
from their numbers, and the impetuosity of their L
attack, by their constant solicitude to carry off '5s'-
the dead and wounded. This point of honour,
founded on a sentiment of tenderness natural to the
human mind, and strengthened by anxiety to pre-
serve the bodies of their countrymen from being
devoured by their enemies, was universal among
the people of New Spain. Attention to this pious
office occupied them even during the heat of com-
bat', broke their union, and diminished the force
of the impreflion which they might have made by
a joint effort.

NOT only was their superiority in number of
little avail, but the imperfection of their military
weapons rendered their valour in a great measure
inoffensive. After three battles, and many fkir-
milhes and assaults, not one Spaniard was killed
in the field. Arrows and spears, headed with flint
or the bones of siftes, flakes hardened in the fire,
and wooden swords, though deftrutive weapons
among naked Indians, were easily turned aside by
the Spanilh bucklers, and could hardly penetrate
the e/Jaupiles, or quilted jackets, which the soldiers
wore. The Tlafcalans advanced boldly to the
charge, and often fought hand to hand. Many of
the Spaniards were wounded, though all slightly,
which cannot be imputed to any want of courage

e B. Diaz. c. 65,

s 3 or

O O K or ftrcngth in their enemies, but to the defect of
V._ the arms with which they affiiled them.
1519.

NOTWITHSTANDING the fury with which the

Tlafcalans attacked the Spaniards, they seem to
have conducted their hostilities with some degree
of barbarous generosity. They gave the Spaniards
warning of their hostile intentions, and as they
knew that their invaders wanted provisions, and
imagined, perhaps, like the other Americans, that
they had left their own country because it did not
afford them subsistence, they sent to their camp a
large supply of poultry and maize, desiring them
to eat plentifully, because they scorned to attack an
enemy enfeebled by hunger, and it would be an
affront to their Gods to offer them famished vic-
tims, as well as disagreeable to themfelve to feed
on such emaciated prey'.

WHEN they were taught by the first encounter

with their new enemies, that it was not easy to
execute this threat; when they perceived, in the
subsequent engagements, that notwithstanding all
the efforts of their own valour, of which they had
a very high opinion, not one of the Spaniards was
slain or taken, they began to conceive them to be
a superior order of beings, against whom human
power could not avail. In this extremity, they had
recourse to their priests, requiring them to reveal

I Herrera, dec. 2. lib. vi. c. 6. Gomara Cron. c. 47.

the

the myiferious causes of such extraordinary events, B o o R
and to declare what new means they Ihould employ -
in order to repulse those formidable invaders. The 1s9.
priest, after many sacrifices and incantations, de-
livered this response. That there strangers were
the offspring of the fun, procreated by his ani-
mating energy in the regions of the cast; that, by
day, while cherished with the influence of his pa-
rental beams, they were invincible; but by night,
when his reviving heat was withdrawn, their vigour
declined and faded like the herbs in the field, and
they dwindled down into mortal men'. Theories less
plausible have gained credit with more enlightened
nations, and have influenced their conduct. In
consequence of this, the Tlafcalans, with the im-
plicit confidence of men who fancy themselves to
be under the guidance of Heaven, ated in con-
tradi&ion to one of their most established maxims
in war, and ventured to attack the enemy, with a
strong body, in the night-time, in hopes ofdeftroy-
ing them when enfeebled and surprised. But Cortes
had greater vigilance and discernment than to be
deceived by the rude stratagems of an Indian army.
The centinels at his out-posts, observing some ex-
traordinary movement among the Tlafcalans, gave
the alarm. In a moment the troops were under
arms, and sallying out, dispersed the party with
great slaughter, without allowing it to approach the
camp. The Tlafcalans, convinced, by fad expc,

s B. Diez. c. 66.

s 4 rience,

. o o K rience, that their priests had deluded them, and
, v-. satisfied that they attempted in vain, either to de-

s359. ceive or to vanquish their enemies, their fierceness

abated, and they began to incline seriously to
peace.

T:icTlarca- THEY were at a loss, however, in what manner
lans di -
psi to to address the strangers, what idea to form of their
.Pact. characer, and whether to confider them as beings

of a gentle or of a malevolent nature. There were
circumstances in their conduc which seemed to fa-
vour each opinion. On the one hand, as the Spa.
niards constantly dismissed the prisoners whom they
took, not only without injury, but often with pre-
sents of European toys, and renewed their offers
of peace after every vi&ory; this lenity amazed
people, who, according to the exterminating system
of war known in America, were accustomed to fa-
crifice and devour without mercy all the captives
taken in battle, and dilpofed them to entertain fa-
vourable fcntiments of the humanity of their new
enemies. But, on the other hand, as Cortes had
seized fifty of their countrymen who brought pro-
visions to his camp, and, supposing thenl to be
spies, had cut off their hands h; this bloody spec-
tacle, added to the terror occasioned by the fire-
arms and horfcs, filled them with dreadful im-
prcfiions of the ferocity of their invaders'. This

h Cortes Relat. Ramur. iii. z28. C. Gomara Cron. c. 48.
J See NOTE LXXIX.

uncertainty

uncertainty was apparent in the mode of addrefing B 0O K
the Spaniards, " If, said they, you are divinities _h
of a cruel and savage nature, we present to you zs59.
five slaves, that you may drink their blood, and eat
their lefh. If you are mild deities, accept an offer-
in, of incense and variegated plumes. If you are
men, here is meat, and bread and fruit to nouriih
you"." The peace which both parties now desired
with equal ardour, was soon concluded. The Tlaf- Concludcd
calans yielded themselves as vassals to the crown of
Catile, and engaged to assist Cortes in all his fu-
ture operations. He took the republic under his
protection, and promised to defend their persons
and pofleffions from injury or violence.

THIS treaty was concluded at a seasonable junc- Advantages
ture for the Spaniards. The fatigue of fcrvice Spnia
among a small body of men, surrounded by such
a multitude of enemies, was incredible. Half the
army was on duty every night, and even they
whose turn it was to reft, slept always upon their
arms, that they might be ready to run to their pofls
on a moment's warning. Many of them were
wounded, a good number, and among these Cortes
himself, laboured under the distempers prevalent
ill hot climates, and several had died since they Iet
out from Vera Cruz. Notwithitanding the supplies
which they received from the Tlafcalans, they were

k B. Diaz C. 70. Gomara Cro. c.47. Herrcra, dec. 2.
,iv.i. c. 7.

often

BO 0 K often in want of provisions, and so destitute of the

V necessaries most requisite in dangerous service, that

9 they had no salve to dress their wounds, but what

was composed with the fat of the Indians whom
they had slain '. Worn out with such intolerable
toil and hardships, many of the soldiers began to
murmur, and, when they refle&ed on the multitude
and boldness of their enemies, more were ready to
despair. It required the utmost exertion of Cor-
tes's authority and address to check this spirit of
despondency in its progress, and to re-animate his
followers with their wonted sense of their own fu-
periority over the enemies with whom they had to
contend ". The fubnmiflon of the Tlafcalans, and
their own triumphant entry into the capital city,
where they were received with the reverence paid
to beings of a superior order, banished, at once,
from the minds of the Spaniards, all memory of
past fuffe rings, dispelled every anxious thought
with respect to their future operations, and fully
satisfied them that there was not now any power in
America able to withstand their arms ",

CORTES remained twenty days in Tlafcala, in

citou tc order to allow his troops a short interval of repofc
flfiSdc:c. after fuich hard service. During that time, he was

employed in tranfadions and inquiries of great

I B. Diaz. c. 62. 6;.
m Cortes I'( lit. Ramus. iii. z29. E. Diaz. c. 69. Gomira
Cron. c. ,1.

D Cortc re';lt. Ra-nuf. iii. 23o. B. Diaz. c. 72.

momelcnt

moment with refpet to his future schemes. In s o o K
his daily conferences with the Tlafcalan chiefs, he i__
received information concerning every particular 'S'9'
relative to the state of the Mexican empire, or to
the qualities of its sovereign, which could be of
use in regulating his condu&t, whether he Thould
be obliged to aft as a friend or as an enemy. As
he found that the antipathy of his new allies to the
Mexican nation was no less implacable than had
been represented, and perceived what benefit he
might derive from the aid of such powerful confe-
derates, he employed all his powers of insinuation
in order to gain their confidence. Nor was any
extraordinary exertion of these necessary. The
Tlafcalans, with the levity of mind natural to un-
polilhed men, were, of their own accord, disposed
to run from the extreme of hatred to that of fond-
ness. Every thing in the appearance and conduct
of their gueRfs, was to them matter of wonder .
They gazed with admiration at whatever the Spa-
niards did, and fancying them to be of heavenly
origin, were eager not only to comply with their
demands, but to anticipate their wishes. They
offered, accordingly, to accompany Cortes in his
march to Mexico, with all the forces of the re.
public, under the command of their most expe-
rienced captains.

BUT, after beflowing so much pains on cement which he

hd aimot
ing this union, all the beneficial fruits of it were on la by his

raih sca.
X See NOTE LXXX.

the

O O K the point of being loft, by a new effusion of that
, _,_ intemperate religious zeal with which Cortes was
4''9· animated, no less than the other adventurers of the

age. They all confidered themselves as instruments
employed by Heaven to propagate the Christian
faith, and the lets they were qualified, either by
their knowledge or morals, for such a fun&ion,
they were more eager to discharge it. The pro.
found veneration of the Tlafcalans for the Spaniards,
having encouraged Cortes to explain to some of
their chiefs the dotrines of the Christian religion,
and to insist that they should abandon their own
luperftitions, and embrace the faith of their new
friends, they, according to an idea universal among
barbarous nations, readily acknowledged the truth
and excellence of what he taught; but contended,
that the T'eles of Tlafcala were divinities no less
than the God in whom the Spaniards believed; and
as that Being was entitled to the homage of Eu-
ropeans, so they were bound to revere the fame
powers which their ancestors had worshipped.
Cortes continued, nevertheless, to urge his de-
mand in a tone of authority, mingling threats with
his arguments, until the Tlafcalans could bear it
no longer, and conjured him never to mention this
again, lelt the gods ihould avenge on their heads the
guilt of having listened to such a proposition. Cor-
tes, aftonifehd and enraged at their obstinacy, pre-
pared to execute by force, what he could not ac-
compliSh by perfuafon, and was going to overturn
their altars, and cist down their idols with the fame

6 - violent

violent hand as at ZempQalla, if father Bartholomew B d o K
de Olmedo, chaplain to the expedition, had ndt
checked his inconsiderate impetuofty. He repre- 5Il9.
sented the imprudence of such an attempt in a large
city newly reconciled, and filled with people'no'lef
fuperftitious-than warlike i he' declarde, that the
proceeding at Zempoalla had always appeared to
him precipitate and unjust; that religioh was not to
be propagated by the Iword, or infidels to be con-
verted by violence; that other webapos were to be
employed in this ministry; patient inftruaion mult'
enlighten the understanding, and pious example
captivate the heart, before meh could be induced
to abandon error, and embrace the truth 9. Amidfi
scenes, where a narrow-minded bigotry appears in
such close union with oppreflion and cruelty, senti-
ments so liberal and humane foohth th mind with
unexpeted pleasure; ahd at a time when the rights
ofconfcience were little understood in the Christian
world, and the idea of toleration unknown, one is
astonished to find a Spani(h monk of the sixteenth
century among the first advocates against pe'rfcu-
tion, and in behalf of religions liberty. The re-
monifrances of an ecclefiaftit, no less refpetable
for wisdom than virtue, had their proper weight
'aith Cortes. He left the TlafCalans in the undif-
turbed exercise of their own rites, requiring only
that they should desist from their horrid pra&ice of
offering human victims in sacrifice.

P B, Diaz, c, 7. p5. 54 . c3. p. 61.

CORTES,

B o O K CORTES, as soon as his troops were fit for ser.

-. ' vice, resolved to continue his march towards Mexico,

Ads59s notwithstanding the earneR dissuasives of the Tlaf.
to CholuL. calans, who represented his deftru&ion as unavoid-

able, if he put himself in the power of a prince so
faithless and cruel as Montezumai As he was ac.
companied by fix thousand Tlafcalans, he had now
the command of forces which resembled a regulah
oa. 13. army. They dircted their course towards Cholulal

Montezuma, who had at length conrented to admit
the Spaniards into his presence, having informed
Cortes, that he had given orders for his friendly
reception there. Cholula was a considerable town,
and though only five leagues distant from Tlafcala,
was formerly an independent state, but had been
lately fubje&ed to the Mexican empire. This was
confide red by all the people of New Spain as a holy
place, the santuary and chief feat of their gods, to
which pilgrims resorted from every province, and
a greater number of human vi&ims were offered in
its principal temple than even in that of Mexico'.
Montezuma seems to have invited the Spaniards
thither, either fromt some fupertitious hope that the
gods would not fuffcr this sacred mansion to be de-
filed, without pouring down their wrath upon thoft
impious frangers, who ventured to infuk their
power in the place of its peculiar residence; or
from a belief that he himself might there attempt to

. Torquemada Monar. Ind. i. z81, zSi. ii. 291. Gomara
Cron. c. 61. Herrera, dec, a. lib. vii. c. z.

Cut

cut them off with more certain fuccesi, under the 3 0 0 a
immediate protection of his divinities. -

CORTIS had been warned by the Tlafcalans, be- Tbetkvriy

of!his proce.

fore he set out on his march, to keep a watchful dure ta
eye over the Cholulans. He himself, though re-
ceived into the town with much teeming refpeft
and cordiality, observed several circumstances in
their conduct which excited suspicion. Two of the
Tlafcalans, who were encamped at some distance
from the town, as the Cholulans refused to admit
their ancient enemies within its precincts, having
found means to enter in dirguife, acquainted Cortes,
that they observed he women and children of th-
principal citizens retiring in great hurry every night;
and that fix children had been sacrificed in the chief
temple, a rite which indicated the execution of
Come warlike enterprise to be approaching. At
the fame time, Marina the interpreter received in-
formation from an Indian woman of diftin&ion,
whose confidence she had gained, that the deftruc-
tion of her friends was concerted; that a body of
Mexican troops lay concealed near the town; that
some of the streets were barricaded, and in others,
pits or deep trenches were dug, and slightly co-
vered over, as traps into which the horses might
fall; that stones or missive weapons were collcaed
on the tops ofthe temples, with which to overwhelm
the infantry; that the fatal hour was now at hand,
and their ruin unavoidable. Cors:s, alarmed at
this concurring evidence, secretly arrested three of

13 the

a o0 K the chief priefis, and extorted from them a consef-

sion, that confirmed the intelligence which he had
's'0 received. As not a moment was to be loft, he in-

ftantly resolved to prevent his enemies, and to in-
fli& on them such dreadful vengeance as might
strike Montezuma and his subjects with terror.
For this purpose, the Spaniards and Zempoallans
were drawn up in a large court, which had been
allotted for their quarters, near the centre of the
town; the Tlafcalans had orders to advance; the
magiflrates, and several of the chief citizens were
lennt for, under various pretexts, and seized. On
a signal given, the troops rushed out, and fell upon
the multitude, dcfitute of leaders, and so much
aftonifletd, that the weapons dropping from their
hands, they flood motionless, and incapable ofde-
fence. While the Spaniards preifed them in front,
the Tlafcalans attacked them in the rear. The
fireets were filled with bloodfled and death. The
temples, which afforded a retreat to the priests and
some of the leading men, were set on fire, and they
perii:ed in the flames. This scene of horror con-
tinned two days; during which, the wretched in-
habitants suffered all that the deftru&ive rage of the
Spaniards, or the implacable revenge of their Indian
allies, could infli&. At length the carnage ceased,
after the slaughter of fix thouland Cholulans, with-
out the los, of a tingle Spaniard. Cortes then re-
leafed the magistrates, and reproaching them bit-
terly for thrir intended treachery, declared, that as
julficc w'as now lappc'afed, he' forgave the ofTfnce,

but

but required them to recal the citizens who had s oO K
fled, and re-establish order in the town. Such was a_
the ascendant which the Spaniards had acquired '5'9
over this superstitious race of men, and so deeply
were they impressed with an opinion of their fupe-
rior discernment, as well as power, that, in obedi-
ence to this command, the city was in a few days
filled again with people, who, amidst the ruins of
their sacred buildings, yielded refpe&ful service to
men, whose hands were stained with the bplod of
their relations and fellow-citizens r.

FROM Cholula, Cortes advanced directly towards oft. 29.

Advlnces

Mexico, which was only twenty leagues distant. In toward
every place through which he passed, he was re- Mexic
ceived as a person possessed of sufficient power to
ddiver the empire from the oppreflion under which
it groaned; and the caziques or governors com-
municated to him all the grievances which they felt
under the tyrannical government of Montezuma,
with that unreserved confidence which men naturally
repose in superior beings. When Cortes first ob-
served the feeds of discontent in the remote pro-
vinces of the empire, hope dawned upon his mind;
but when he now discovered filch symptoms of
alienation from their monarch near the feat of go-
vernment, he concluded that the vital parts of the

' Cortes Relat. Ramus. iii. s31. B.Diaz. c. 83. Gomara
Cron. c. 64. Herrera, dec. 2. lib. vii. c. 1, z. See NOTE
LXXXI.

VOL. 11, T constitution

B o 0 K constitution were affected, and conceived the most
2.-J- ' sanguine expectations of overturning a state, whose

15 natural strength was thus divided and impaired.

While those refleacions encouraged the general to
persist in his arduous undertaking, the soldiers were
no lels animated by observations more obvious to
their capacity. In descending from the mountains
of Chalco, across which the road lay, the vast plain

; a v;ow of Mexico opened gradually to their view. When
'''.' they first beheld this prospect, one of the molt

striking and beautiful on the face of the earth;
when they observed fertile and cultivated fields,
fretching farther than the eye could reach; when
they saw a lake resembling the sea in extent, encom-
passid with large towns, and discovered the capital
city rising upon an ifand in the middle, adorned
with its temples and turrets; the scene so far ex-
cceded their imagination, that some believed the
fanciful descriptions of romance were realized, and
that its enchanted palaces and gilded domes were
prefcnted to their fight; others could hardly per-
fiiude themfelvcs that this wonderful fpedacle was
any thing more than a dream'. As they advanced,
their doubts were removed, but their amazement
increascd. They were now fully satisfied that the
country was rich beyond any conception whiclh
they had formed of it, and flattered themfclves that
at length they flould obtain an ample recompencc
for all their services and fuffirings.

See NOTE LXXXII.

S I ·iiui

HITHERTO they had met with no enemy to op- B o oK

pose their progress, though several circumstances _..
occurred which led them to suspect that some design ,The.
was formed to surprise and cut them off. Many tionof Mon.
messengers arrived successively from Montezuma,
permitting them one day to advance, requiring them
on the next to retire, as his hopes or tears alter-
nately prevailed ; and so wonderful was this infatu-
ation, which seems to be unaccountable on any sip-
position but that of a fupcrflitious dread of the Spa-
niards, as beings of a lhperior nature, that Cortes
was almofft at the gates of the capital, before the
monarch had determined whether to receive him as
a friend, or to oppose him as an enemy. But as no
sign of open hofility appeared, the Spaniards, with-
out regarding the flultuations of Montezuma's fen-
timents, continued their march along the caufcway
which led to Mexico through the lake, with great
circumfpecion and the fl-ricteft discipline, though
without teeming to fufpet the prince whom they
were about to visit.

WHEN they drew near the city, about a thousand His firin-

tcrvicW

persons, who appeared to be of distinction, came witlt ti
forth to meet them, adorned with plumes, and clad Sp""irad.
in mantles of fine cotton. Each of there, in his
order, palled by Cortes, and saluted him accord-
ing to the mode deemed mofl rcfpctdiil and sub-
missive in their country. They announced the ap-
proach of Montezuma himself, and soon after his
harbingers came in fight. There appeared first

T tWO

B 0 0 K two hundred persons in an uniform dress, with large
{,..._
- plumes of feathers, alike in fashion, marching two

'5'39 and two, in deep silence, bare-footed, with their

eyes fixed on the ground. Thefe'were followed
by a company of higher rank, in their most showy
apparel, in the midst of whom was Montezuma, in
a chair or litter richly ornamented with gold, and
feathers of various colours. Four of his principal
favourites carried him on their Ihoulders, others
supported a canopy of curious workmanlhip over
his head. Before him marched three officers with
rods of gold in their hands, which they lifted up
on high at certain intervals, and at that signal all
the people bowed their heads, and hid their faces,
as unworthy to look on so great a monarch. When
he drew near, Cortes dismounted, advancing to-
wards him with officious haste, and in a refpe&ful
posture. At the fame time Montezuma alighted
from his chair, and leaning on the arms of two of
his near relations, approached with a flow and
stately pace, his attendants covering the street with
cotton cloths, that he might not touch the ground.
Cortes accosted him with profound reverence, after
the European faihion. He returned the salutation,
according to the mode of his country, by touching
the earth with his hand, and then killing it. This
ceremony, the customary expreflion of veneration
from inferiors towards those who were above them
in rank, appeared such amazing condescension in
a proud monarch, who scarcely deigned to con-
fidcr the reft of mankind as of the fame species

with

with himself, that all his subje&s firmly believed B oo K
those persons, before whom he humbled himself in -
this manner, to be something more than human. '5i'.
Accordingly, as they marched through the crowd,
the Spaniards frequently, and with much fatisfac-
tion, heard themselves denominated 1'eules, or di-
vinities. Nothing material passed in this first in,
terview. Montezuma conducted Cortes to the
quarters which he had prepared for his reception,
and immediately took leave of him, with a polite-
ness not unworthy of a court more refined. " You
are now," fays he, " with your brothers in your
own house; refresh yourselves after your fatigue,
and be happy until I return '." The place allotted
to the Spaniards for their lodging was a house built
by the father of Montezuma. It was surrounded
by a itone-wall, with towers at proper distances,
which served for defence as well as for ornament,
and its apartments and courts were so large, as to
accommodate both the Spaniards and their Indian
allies. The first care of Cortes was to take pre-
cautions for his security, by planting the artillery
lb as to command the dificrent avenues which led
to it, by appointing a large division of his troops
to be always on guard, and by polling centinels at
proper stations, with injundions to oblcrve the fame
vigilant discipline as if they were within fight of an
enemy's camp,

' Cortes Relat; Ram. iii. 232-235. B. Diaz. c. 83-88.
Gomara Cron. c. 64, 65. Hcrrera, dec. a. lib. vii, c. 3, 4, 5.

T 3 IN

B o0 K IN the evening, Montezuma returned to visit his

V.

_L.-.. guests with the fame pomp as in their first intcr-
Hisidealof view; and brought presents of such value, not only
the Spa- to Cortes and to his officers, but even to the pri-

vate men, as proved the liberality of the monarch
to be suitable to the opulence of his kingdom. A
ltng conference ensued, in which Cortes learned
what was the opinion of Montezuma with relpec
to the Spaniards. It was an eftablilhed tradition,
he told him, among the Mexicans, that their an-
ceftors came originally from a remote region, and
conquered the provinces now fubje2 to his domi-
nion; that after they were fettled there, the great
captain who conduced this colony returned to his
own country, promising, that at some future period
his descendants should visit them, assume the go-
vernment, and reform their confitution and laws;
that, from what he had heard and seen of Cortes
and his followers, he was convinced that they were
the very persons whose appearance the Mexican
traditions and prophecies taught them to expect;
that accordingly he had received them, not as
firangers, but as relations of the fame blood ,nd
parentage, and desired that they might confider
thiemlclvcs as maflers in his dominions, for both
himself and his fubjie&s should be ready to comply
with their will, and even to prevent their wvilhes.
Cortt:s mapde a reply in his ulial flyle, with respect
to the dignity and power of his fovcreign, and his
intcnrioln in fending him into that country ; artfully
endeavotiini, so to fralane lis diicourli, that it

Z)t

might coincide as much as possible with the idea B 0 0 K

V.

which Montezuma had formed concerning the ori-
gin of the Spaniards. Next morning, Cortes and ''9-
bome of his principal attendants were admitted to a
public audience of the emperor. The three sub-
sequent days were employed in viewing the city;
the appearance of which, so far superior in the order
of its buildings and the number of its inhabitants to
any place the Spaniards had beheld in America, and
yet so little refcmbling the ftruture of an European
city, filled them'with surprise and admiration.

MEXICO, or TLnucititlan, as it was anciently
called by the natives, is situated in a large plain,
environed by mountains of such height, that,
though within the torrid zone, the temperature of
its climate is mild and healthful. All the moisture
which descends from the high grounds is collected
in several lakes, the two largest of which, of about
niriety miles in circuit, communicate with each
other. The waters of the one are fresh, those of
the other brackilh. On the banks of the latter,
and on some small islands adjoining to them, the
capital of Montezuma's empire was built. The
access to the city was by artificial causeways or streets
formed of tfones and earth, about thirty feet in
breadth. As the waters of the lake during the rainy
season oveflowed the flat country, these causeways
were of considerable length. That of Tacuba, on
the well, extended a mile and a half; that of

T 4 Tepeaca

B o o K Tepeaca 1, on the north-west, three miles; that of

Lv-. Cuoyacan, towards the south, fix miles. On the
'5l9. east there was no causeway, and the city could be

approached only by canoes . In each of these
caufcways were openings at proper intervals,
through which the waters flowed, and over there
beams of timber were laid, which being covered
with earth, the causeway or ftrcet had every-where
an uniform appearance. As the approaches to the
city were singular, its conftrution was remarkable.
Not only the temples of their gods, but the houfcs
belonging to the monarch, and to persons of
diftindion, were of such dimensions, that, in com-
parison with any other buildings which had been
hitherto discovered in America, they might be
termed magnificent. The habitations of the com-
mon people were mean, resembling the huts of
other Indians. But they were all placed in a re-
gular manner, on the banks of the canals which
passed through the city, in rome of its diftri&s, or
on the fides of the streets which interfe&ed it in
other quarters. In several places were large open-

' I am indebted to M. Clavigero for correEing an error of

importance in my description of Mexico. From the calt,
where Tezeuco was situated, there was no caufcway, as I have
bfCerved, and yet by some inattention on my part, or on that
of the printer, in all the former editions one of the causeways
was said to lead to Tezeuco. M. Clavigero's measurement of
the length of these causeways differs somewhat from that which
I have adopted from F. Torribio. Clavig. ii. p. 7a.

* F. Torribio MS.

ings

ings or squares, one of which, allotted for the 'B o K
great market, is said to have been so spacious, that _
forty or fifty thousand persons carried on traffic s'59-
there. In this city, the pride of the New World,
and the noblet monument of the industry and art
of man, while unacquainted with the use of iron,
and destitute of aid from any domestic animal, the
Spaniards, who are most moderate in their compu-
tations, reckon that there were at leat sixty thou-
sand inhabitants x.

BUT how much soever the novelty of those ob- Tllcirdan-
jeEts might amuse or astonish the Spaniards, they ,ro "tu
felt the utmost solicitude with relped to their own
situation. From a concurrence of circumstances,
no less unexpe&ed than favourable to their pro-
grefs, they had been allowed to penetrate into the
heart of a powerful kingdom, and were now
lodged in its capital, without having once met
with open opposition from its monarch. The
Tlafcalans, however, had earneffly difluaded them
from placing such confidence in Montezuma, as to
enter a city of such a peculiar situation as Mexicd,
where that prince would have them at mercy, fliut
up as it were in a snare, from which it was impof-
fible to escape. They assured him that the Mexi-
can priests had, in the name of the gods, coun-
feled their sovereign to admit the Spaniards into

Cortes Rclat. Ram. iii. z39 D. Rela. della gran. Citta

?c Mlexico, par un Gentelhuomo del Cortcfc, Ram. ibid. 304. E.
kicrrci., dec. z. lib. vii. c. 1, &c.

6 the

B 0 O K the capital, that he might cut them off there at

V L. .one blow with perfcEt security Y. They now per-
5'9. ceived, too plainly, that the apprehensions of their

allies were not destitute of foundation; that, by
breaking the bridges placed at certain intervals on
the cautieways, or by dcftroying part of the cause-
ways themfclves, their retreat would be rendered
impracticable, and they must remain cooped up in
the centre of a hostile city, surrounded by multi.
tudes fiuflcient to overwhelm them, and without a
possibility of receiving aid from their allies. Mon-
tezuma had, indeed, received them with diftin-
guifhcd refpec. But ought they to reckon upon
this as real, or to confider it as feigned ? Even it
it were sincere, could they promise on its conti-
nuance ? Their safety depended upon the will of a
monarch in whose attachment they had no reason to
conicle; and an order flowing fiom his caprice, or
a word uttered by him in pation, might decide ir-
revocably concerning their fate .

S?;c;,tulc THESE refletions, so obvious as to occur to the
and· lr- meanest soldier, did not escape the vigilant figa-
pletxry of
Curtes. city of their general. Before he set out fiom Cho-

lula, Cortes had received advice from Villa Rica',
that (Ialpopoca, one of the Mexican generals
on the frontiers, haviin assembled an army in order
to attack tbme of the people whom the Spaniard.
had encouraged to throw off the Mexican yoke,

' II. c. SD. 5, 86. i B. Diaz. c. 9,.
' C'urtcs Rclat. Ram. iii. =35. C.

L fcalan tc

Efcalante had marched out with part of the garrison B o o
to support his allies; that an engagement had en- --
sued, in which, though the Spaniards were vi&o- '5'9
rious, Efcalante, with seven of his men, had been
mortally wounded, his horse killed, and one Spa-
niard had been surrounded by the enemy, and taken
alive; that the head of this unfortunate captive,
after being carried in triumph to different cities, in
order to convince the people that their invaders
were not immortal, had been sent to Mexico'.
Cortes, though alarmed with this intelligence, as
an indication of Montezuma's hostile intentions,
had continued his march. But as soon as he en-
tered Mexico, he became sensible, that, from an
excess of confidence in the ftiperior valour and dif-
cipline of his troops, as well as from the difad-
vantage of having nothing to guide him in an un-
known country, but the defective intelligence which
he had received from people with whom his mode
of communication was very imperfect, he had
puthed forward into a situation, where it was diffi-
cult to continue, and from which it was dangerous
to retire. Disgrace, and perhaps ruin, was the cer-
tain consequence of attempting the latter. The
lilccefs of his enterprise depended upon supporting
the high opinion which the people of New Spain
had formed with relpe& to the irresistible power of
his arms. Upon the first symptom of timidity on
his part, their veneration would cease, and Mon-

b B. Diaz. c. 93, 94. IIerrer., dec. 2. lib. viii. c. t.

tezunma,

B o 0 K tezul'a, whom fear alone restrained at present,

V.. would let loose upon him the whole force of his
's'9 empire. At the fame time, he knew that the

countenance of his own sovereign was to be ob.
rained only by a series of vi&ories, and that no-
thing but the merit of extraordinary success could
screen his condu& from the censure of irregularity.
From all these considerations, it was neceflary to
maintain his station, and to extricate himself out of
the difficulties in which one bold ftep had involved
him, by venturing upon another fiill bolder. The
situation was trying, but his mind was equal to it;
and after revolving the matter with deep attention,
he fixed upon a plan no less extraordinary than

Refclvcs to daring. He determined to seize Montezuma in his
ciz, Mo palace, and to carry him as a prisoner to the Spa-

nifh quarters. From the fuperititious veneration
of the Mexicans for the person of their monarch,
as well as their implicit submission to his will, he
hoped, by having Montezuma in his power, to
acquire the supreme direcion of their affairs; or,
at least, with filch a sacred pledge in his hands, he
made no doubt of being secure from any effort of
their violence.

I;sir mnner THIS he immediately proposed to his officers.
Ltles. The timid startled at a measure so audacious, and

raised objections. The more intelligent and refo-
lute, conscious that it was the only resource in
which there appeared any profped of safety,

warmly

warmly approved of it, and brought over their B o o K
companions so cordially to the fame opinion, that --
it was agreed inflantly to make the attempt. At U'S
his usual hour of visiting Montezuma, Cortes went
to the palaces accompanied by Alvarado, Sandoval,
Lugo, Velasquez de Leon, and Davila, five of his
principal officers, and as many truily obldiers.
Thirty chosen men followed, not in regular order,
but sauntering at rome distance, as if they had no
obje& but curiosity fmal parties were posted at
proper intervals, in all the streets leading from the
Spanish quarters to the court; and the remainder
of his troops, with the Tlafcalan allies, were under
arms, ready to sally out on the first alarm. Cortes
and his attendants were admitted without suspicion;
the Mexicans retiring, as usual, out of refpe&. He
addressed the monarch in a tone very different from
that which he had employed in former conferences,
reproaching him bitterly as the author of the vio-
lent assault made upon the Spaniards by one of his
officers, and demanded public reparation for the
loTs which they had sustained by the death of rome
of their companions, as well as for the insult offered
to the great prince whose servants they were. Mon-
tezuma, confounded at this unexpeced accusation,
and changing colour, either from consciousness of
guilt, or from feeling the indignity with which he
was treated, asserted his own innocence with great
carneltnefs, and, as a proof of it, gave orders in-
iantly to bring Qualpopoca and his accomplices
rrifbonrs to Mexico. Cortes replied, with seeming

complaisance,

uB oo K complaisance, that a declaration so refpeEtabl left
v _-,.. no doubt remaining in his own mind, but that some.

35t9' thing more was requisite to satisfy his followers,

who would never be convinced that Montezuma
did not harbour hostile intentions against them,
unless, as an evidence of his confidence and attach-
ment, he removed from his own palace, and took
up his residence in the Spanish quarters, where he
flould be served and honoured as became a great
monarch. The first mention of so strange a pro.
pofal bereaved Montezuma of speech, and almof
of motion. At length, indignation gave him ut-
terance, and he haughtily answered, " That per-
sons of his rank were not accutlomed voluntarily
to give up themselves as prisoners; and were he
mean enough to do so, his fubjets would not per-
mit such an affront to be offered to their sovereign."
Cortes, unwilling to employ force, endeavoured
alternately to sooth and to intimidate him. The
altercation became warm; and having continued
above three hours, Velasquez de Leon, an impe-
tuous and gallant young man, exclaimed with im-
patience, " Why waste more time in vain ? Let us
either fcize him instantly, or flab him to the heart."
The threatening voice and fierce gestures with
which there words were uttered, struck Monte-
zuma. The Spaniards, he was sensible, had now
proceeded so far, as left him no hope that they would
recede. His own danger was imminent, the ne-
ceffity unavoidable. He saw both, and abandoning
himfclf to his fate, complied with their requcft.

1Hii

HtS officers were called. He communicated to B o o ms

them his resolution. Though aftonilhed and as- , .
flited, they presumed not to queilion the will of 's,9-

Montczum

their matter, but carried him in llent pomp, all carricdto
bathed in tears, to the Spanifl quarters. When qlu',tn,''
it was known that the firangers were conveying
away the emperor, the people broke out into the
wildest transports of grief and rage, threatening
the Spaniards with immediate ldftruJlion, as the
punishment justly due to their impious audacity.
But as soon as Montezuma appeared with a seem-
ing gaiety of countenance, and waved his hand, the
tumult was hulhed, and upon his declaring it to be of
his own choice that he went to reside for tomen time
among his new fiiends, the multitude, taught to
revere every intimation of their sovereign's plea-
sure, quietly dilferfed .

THUS was a powerful prince fcized by a few

firangers in the midit of his capital, at noonday,
and carried off as a prisoner without opposition or
bloodihed. Hiltory contains nothing parallel to
this event, either with refpeft to the temerity of
the attempt, or the success of the execution; and
were not all the circumstances of this extraordinary
tranfation authenticated by the molt unqucftion-
able evidence, they would appear io wild and ex-
travagant, as to go far beyond the bounds of that

' B. Diaz. . 95. Gomara Cron. c. 83. Cortes Relat.
Ram. iii. p, 235, 236. Herrera, dec . . ib. viii. c. 2, 3.

probability

B o0 K probability which must be preserved even in fici.

V.
v_ - tious narrations.

1519.

Received MONTEZUMA was received in the Spanish quar.
with appa-
rntrefpe&. ters with all the ceremonious refpe& which Cortes

had promised. He was attended by his own do.
meftics, and served with his usual fate. His prin.
cipal officers had free access to him, and he carried
on every funtion of government as if he had been
at perfet liberty. The Spaniards, however, watched
him with the scrupulous vigilance which was na.
tural in guarding such an important prize d, endea-
vouring at the fame time to tooth and reconcile
him to his situation, by every external demonitra-
tion of regard and attachment. But from captive
princes the hour of humiliation and suffering is

Subjeaed never far distant. Qualpopoca, his son, and five
dsg'itie. of the principal officers who served under him,

were brought prisoners to the capital, in confe-
Dcc. 4 quence of the orders which Montezuma had ifued.

The emperor gave them up to Cortes, that he
might enquire into the nature of their crime, and
determine their punishment. They were formally
tried by a Spanish court-martial; and though they
had aced no other part than what became loyal
fubjeEs and brave men, in obeying the orders of
their lawful sovereign, and in opposing the inva-
ders of their country, they were condemned to be

D See NOTE L XXXIII,

burnt

burnt alive. The execution of such atrocious deeds Ba O K
is seldom long suspended. The unhappy vicims -
were instantly led forth. The pile on which they s'9.
were laid was composed of the weapons colleced
in the royal magazine for the public defence. An
innumerable multitude of Mexicans beheld, in
silent astonishment, the double insult offered to the
majcfty of their empire, an officer of diftin&ion
committed to the flames by the authority of ftran-
gers, for having done what he owed in duty to his
natural sovereign; and the arms provided by the
foresight of their ancestors for avenging public
wrongs, consumed before their eyes.

BUT there were not the most hocking indigni.
ties which the Mexicans had to bear. The Spa-
niards, convinced that Qualpopoca would not have
ventured to attack Efcalante without orders from
his master, were not satisfied with infliting ven-
geance on the instrument employed in committing
that crime, while the author of it escaped with im-
punity. Jult before Qualpopoca was led out to
susser, Cortes entered the apartment of Montezu-
ma, followed by some of his officers, and a soldier
carrying a pair of fetters and approaching the
monarch with a stern countenance, told him, that
as the persons who were now to undergo the pu-
nifhment which they merited, had charged him as
the cause of the outrage committed, it was necef-
fary that he likewise ihould make atonement for
that guilt; then turning away abruptly, without

VOL. 1. U waiting

B O o waiting for a reply, commanded the soldier to clap
-v.-. the fetters on his legs. The orders were infiantly
*5'9- executed. The disconsolate monarch, trained up

with an idea that his person was sacred and invio-
lable, and confidering this profanation of it as the
prelude of immediate death, broke out into loud
lamentations and complaints. His attendants,
speechless with horror, fell at his feet, bathing
them with their tears; and bearing up the fetters
in their hands, endeavoured with officious tender-
nets to lighten their pressure. Nor did their grits
and despondency abate, until Cortes returned from
the execution, and with a cheerful countenance
ordered the fetters to be taken off. As Montezu-
ma's spirits had funk with unmanly dejetion, they
now rose into indecent joy; and with an unbecom-
ing transition, he passed at once from the anguilh
of dcfpair to transports of gratitude and expreflions
of fondness towards his deliverer.

.earons of INr those transaCtions, as reprefcnted by the Spa-
¢n.Uc~. nilh historians, we search in vain for the qualities

which diftinguifli other parts of Cortes's condu&.
To usurp a jurisdiction which could not belong to
a firanger, who assumed no higher character than
that of an ambassador from a foreign prince, and,
under colour of it, to inflict a capital punifhmcnt
on men whose conduct intitled them to eflem,cn
appears an at of barbarous cruelty. To put the
monarch of a great kingdom in irons, and, after
flich ignominious treatment, suddenly to release

him,

him, seems to be a display of power no less incon- B OO K
fidetate than wanton. According to the common -.
relation, no account can be given either of the one 's9.
a&ion or the other, but that Cortes, intoxicated
with success, and presuming on the ascendant
which he had acquired over the minds of the Mexi-
cans, thought nothing too bold for him to under-
take, or too dangerous to execute. But, in one
view, these proceedings, however repugnant to
justice and humanity, may have flowed from that
artful policy which regulated every part of Cortes's
behaviour towards the Mexicans. They had con-
ceived the Spaniards to be an order of beings fiupe-
rior to men. It was of the utmost consequence to
cherish this illusion, and to keep up the veneration
which it inspired. Cortes wilhed that shedding the
blood of a Spaniard ihould be deemed the mos
heinous of all crimes; and nothing appeared better
calculated to establish this opinion, than to con-
demn the first Mexicans who had ventured to com-
mit it to a cruel death, and to oblige their monarch
himself to submit to a mortifying indignity, as an
expiation for being accessary to a deed so atro-
cious .

THE rigour with which Cortes punilhed the un- The per

which Cor-
happy persons who first presumed to lay violent te acquir-

ed.

hands upon his followers, seems accordingly to ,e5o.
have made all the impreflon that he desired. The
spirit of Montezuma was not only overawed, but

e See NOTE LXXXIV.

v 2 subdued.

B o o K subdued. During fix months that Cortes remained
L-vJ_ in Mexico, the monarch continued in the Spanifl

510-' quarters, with an appearance of as entire fatisfac.

tion and tranquillity, as if he had resided there, ncr
from constraint, but through choice. His mini-
ihers and officers attended him as usual. He took
cognizance of all affairs every order was issued
in his name. The external aspec of government
appearing the fame, and all its ancient forms being
scrupulously observed, the people were fd little fen-
fible of any change, that they obeyed the mandates
of their monarch with the fame fubmiflive reve-
rence as ever. Such was the dread which both
Montezuma and his fubjets had of the Spaniards,
or such the veneration in which they held them,
that no attempt was made to deliver their sovereign
from confinement; and though Cortes, relying on
this ascendant which he had acquired over their
minds, permitted him not only to visit his temples,
but to make hunting excursions beyond the lake,
a guard of a few Spaniards carried with it such a
terror as to intimidate the multitude, and secure
the captive monarch .

THUS, by the fortunate temerity of Cortes in

seizing Montezuma, the Spaniards at once secured
to themselves more extensive authority in the Mexi-
can empire than it was possible to have acquired
in a long course of time by open force; and they
exercised more absolute sway in the name of an-

f Cortes Relat. p. 236. E. B. Diaz. c. 97, 98, 99.

8 other

other than they could have done in their own. The B o o K
arts of polilhed nations, in subjecting such as are .-
less improved, have been nearly the fame in every *5So
period. The system of screening a foreign ufurpa-
tion, under the fanetion of authority derived from
the natural rulers of a country, the device of em-
ploying the magistrates and forms already efta-
blilhed as instruments to introduce a new dominion,
of which we are apt to boast as sublime refinements
in policy peculiar to the present age, were inven-
tions of a more early period, and had been tried
with success in the Weft, long before they were
praftifed in the East.

CORTES availed himself to the utmost of the Ue which
power which he possessed by being able to a& in the e maks of
name of Montezuma. He sent some Spaniards,
whom he judged best qualified for such commiflions,
into different parts of the empire, accompanied by
persons of diftin&ion, whom Montezuma appointed
to attend them both as guides and protectors. They
visited most of the provinces, viewed their foil and
produ&tions, surveyed with particular care the dif-
tricts which yielded gold or silver, pitched upon fe-
veral places as proper stations for future colonies,
and endeavoured to prepare the minds of the people
for submitting to the Spani(h yoke. While they
were thus employed, Cortes, in the name and by
the authority of Montezuma, degraded some of the
principal officers in the empire, whose abilities or
independent spirit excited his jealousy, and fubfti-

u 3 tuted

B o O K tuted in their place persons less capable or more
i,-- obsequious.

25;o.

ONE thing Rill was wanting to complete his fe-

curity. He wished to have such command of the
lake as might ensure a retreat, if, either from le-
vity or disgust, the Mexicans should take arms
against him, and break down the bridges or cause-
ways. This, too, his own address, and the faci.
lity of Montezuma, enabled him to accomplish.
Having frequently entertained his prisoner with
pompous accounts of the European marine and art
of ravigation, he awakened his curiosity to fee
those moving palaces which made their way
through the water without oars. Under pretext
of gratifying this desire, Cortes persuaded Mon-
tezuma to appoint some of his subje&s to fetch part
of the naval stores which the Spaniards had depo-
fited at Vera Cruz to Mexico, and to employ others
in cutting down and preparing timber. With their
affifance, the Spanish carpenters soon completed
two brigantines, which afforded a frivolous amuse-
ment to the monarch, and were confidered by Cortes
as a certain resource, if he should be obliged to
retire.

Montezuma ENCOURAGED by so many initances of the mo-
edges hrm- narch's tame fubmillion to his will, Cortes ventured
(sa varl to put it to a proof till more trying. He urged
of Spain. U

Montezuma to acknowledge himself a vassal of the
king of Castile, to hold his crown of him as fupe-

rior,

fnor, and to subjet his dominions to the payment B 0 0 K
of an annual tribute. With this requisition, the
last and most humbling that can be micle to one 's5O
poflefled of sovereign authority, Montezuma was
so obsequious as to comply. He called together
the chief men of his empire, and in a solemn ha-
rangue, reminding them of the traditions and pro-
phecies which led them to expet the arrival of a
people sprung from the fame stock with themselves,
in order to take pofReflion of the supreme power,
he declared his belief that the Spaniards were this
promired race; that therefore he recognized the
right of their monarch to govern the Mexican
empire; that he would lay his crown at his feet,
and obey him as a tributary. While uttering these
words, Montezuma discovered how deeply he was
affeAed in making such a sacrifice. Tears and
groans frequently interrupted his discourse. Over-
awed and broken as his spirit was, it still retained
such a icnfe of dignity, as to feel that pang which
pierces the heart of princes when constrained to
resign independent power. The first mention of
such a resolution itruck the afliembly dumb with
aftoniflhsent. This was followed by a fullen mur-
mur of sorrow, mingled with indignation, which
indicated some violent eruption of rage to be near
at hand, This Cortes fqreoaw, and leafonably in-
terpofed to prevent it, by declaring that his maRer
had no intention to deprive Montezuma of the
royal dignity, or to make any innovation upon the
conflitution and laws of the Mexican empire. This

u 4 assurance,

B o0 K assurance, added to their dread of the Spanifl

-_ power, and to the authority of their monarch's ex-
5s°o. ample, extorted a relucant consent from the airfcm

bly a. The a&t of fubmiflion and homage was exe-
cuted with all the formalities which the Spaniards
were pleased to prescribe h.

Theamount MONTEZUMA, at the desire of Cortes, accom-
furecoeai- panied this profefion of fealty and homage with a
t, by th magnificent present to his new sovereign; and, as-

ter his example, his tilbje&s brought in very libe-
ral contributions. The Spaniards now colleted
all the treasure which had been either voluntarily
bestowed upon them at different times by Monte-
zuma, or had been extorted from his people under
various pretexts; and having melted the gold and
silver, the value of these, without including jewels
and ornaments of various kinds, which were pre-
served on account of their curious workmanship,
amounted to fix hundred thousand pesos. The fol-

Divifonof diers were impatient to have it divided, and Cortes
it, and the
dilcontcntit complied with their desire. A fifth of the whole
occaoned. was first set apart as the tax due to the king. An-

other fifth was allotted to Cortes, as commander
in chief. The fiums advanced by Velasquez, by
Cortes, and by some of the officers, towards de-
fraying the expence of fitting out the armament,
were then deducled. The remainder was divided

* See NOTE LXXXV.
' Cortes Relat. 23j. D. B. Diaz. c. so!. Gomara Cron.
c, 92. Hcrrera, dec. 2. lib. x. c. 4,

am111n1

smong the army, including the garrison of Vera B 0 0
Cruz, in proportion to their different ranks. After I..
so many defalcations, the haire of a private man 'sn'
did not exceed a hundred pesos. This fum fell so
far below their sanguine expetations, that some
soldiers rejected it with scorn, and others murmured
so loudly at this cruel disappointment of their hopes,
that it required all the address of Cortes, and no
small exertion of his liberality, to appease them.
The complaints of the army were not altogether
destitute of foundation. As the crown had contri-
buted nothing towards the equipment or success of
the armament, it was not without regret that the
soldiers beheld it sweep away so great a proportion
of the treasure purchased by their blood and toil.
What fell to the lhare of the general appeared, ac-
cording to the ideas of wealth in the sixteenth
century, an enormous fum. Some of Cortes's fa-
vourites had secretly appropriated to their own use
several ornaments of gold, which neither paid the
royal fifth, nor were brought into account as part
ofthe common flock. It was, however, so mani-
titly the interest of Cortes at this period to make
a large remittance to the king, that it is highly
probable those concealments were not of great con-
kIquence.

THIE total umn armaffed by the Spaniards bears Reton,
no proportion to the ideas which might be formed, hy

was found
either by reflecing on the descriptions given by in ruc

small quanm.
biiorians of the ancient splendour of Mexico, or uitic,.

by

B o o K by confidering the productions of its mines in mo.

V- _ dern times. But, among the ancient Mexicans,
'5sa gold and silver were rot the standards by which the

worth of other commodities was estimated; and
deltitute of the artificial value derived from this
circumstance, were no farther in request than as
they furnilhed materials for ornaments and trinkets.
These were either consecrated to the gods in their
temples, or were worn as marks of difltintion by
their princes and some of their moil eminent chiefs.
As the confuimption of the precious metals was
inconsiderable, the demand for them was not such
as to put either the ingenuity or industry of the
Mexicans on the firetch, in order to augment their
store. They were altogether unacquainted with
the art of working the rich mines with which their
country abounded. What gold they had was ga-
thered in the beds of rivers, native, and ripened
into a pure metallic slate'. The utmost effort of
their labour in search of it was to wash the earth
carried down by torrents from the mountains, and
to pick out the grains of gold which fubidled; and
even this simple operation, according to the report
of the persons whom Cortes appointed to survey
the provinces where there was a profpet of finding
mines, they performed very unfkilfullyk. From
all those causes, the whole mass of gold in posses-
lion of the Mexicans was not great. As silver is
rarely found pure, and the Mexican art was too

! Cortes Relat. p. 236. F. B. Diaz. c. 102, 103. Gomara
Cron. c. go. k B. Diz. c. 103.

rude

rude to conduct the process for refining it in a B o o
proper manner, the quantity of this metal was still .v
less considerable'. Thus, though the Spaniards ts'
had exerted all the power which they possesed in
Mexico, and often with indecent rapacity, in order
to gratify their predominant paflion, and though
Montezuma had fondly exhausted his treasures, in
hopes of satiating their thirst for gold, the produt
of both, which probably included a great part of
the bullion in the empire, did not rife in value
above what has been mentioned '.

BUT however pliant Montezuma might be in Montezima

J

*

ad r . \ * i * inflexible

other matters, with refpet to one point he was in- withrcfpcp
flexible. Though Cortes often urged him, with torel.
the importunate zeal of a miflionary, to renounce
his false gods, and to embrace the ChriRian faith,
he always reje&ed the proposition with horror.
Superflition, among the Mexicans, was formed
into such a regular and complete system, that its
institutions naturally took fast hold of the mind;
and while the rude tribes in other parts of America
were easily induced to relinquish a few notions and
rites, so loose and arbitrary as hardly to merit the
name of a public religion, the Mexicans adhered
tenaciously to their mode of worship, which, how-
ever barbarous, was accompanied with such order
and solemnity as to render it an object of the highest
veneration. Cortes, finding all his attempts inef-

I Herrera, dec. a, lib. ix. c. 4.
· See NOTEr LXXXVI.

fctual

B 0 K fctual to flake the constancy of Montezuma, was
L-A-. so much enraged at his obstinacy, that in a tranf-

5'z0. port of zeal he led out his soldiers to throw down

the idols in the great temple by force. But the
prierts taking arms in defence of their altars, and
the people crowding with great ardour to support
them, Cortes's prudence overruled his zeal, and
induced him to desist from his rafl attempt, after
dislodging the idols from one of the shrines, and
placing in their stead an image of the Virgin Mary .

Schelnes of FROM that moment the Mexicans, who had
&,It Mexi-
s.n, to de. permitted the imprifonnent of their sovereign, and
^-ioy id. suffered the exactions of strangers without a ftrug-

gle, began to meditate how they might expel or
defiroy the Spaniards, and thought themselves
called upon to avenge their insulted deities. The
prieRs and leading men held frequent consultations
with Montezuma for this purpose. But as it might
prove fatal to the captive monarch to attempt
either the one or the other by violence, he was
willing to try more gentle means. Having called
Cortes into his presence, he observed, that now,
as all the purposes of his embassy were fully ac-
complihed, the gods had declared their will, and
the people signified their desire that he and his
followers should instantly depart out of the empire.
With this he required them to comply, or una-
voidable deltrudion would fall suddenly on their
lheads. The tenor of this unexpeded requisition, as

" Se NOTE LXXXVII.

well

well as the determined tone in which it was uttered, B 0o0 o
left Cortes no room to doubt that it was the result of L--
forne deep scheme concerted between Montezuma '5,0.
and his fubjees. lHe quickly perceived that he
might derive more advantage from a teeming com-
pliance with the monarch's inclination, than from an
ill-timed attempt to change or to oppose it; and re-
plied, with great composure, that he had already be-
gun to prepare for returning to his own country; but
as he had destroyed the veflels in which he arrived,
some time was requisite for building other flips.
This appeared reasonable. A number of Mexicans
were lent to Vera Cruz to cut down timber, and
aome Spanilh carpenters were appointed to super-
intend the work. Cortes flattered himself, that
during this interval he might either find means to
avert the threatened danger, or receive such rein-
forcements as would enable him to despise it.

ALMOST nine months were elapsed since Porto- Anxity
carrero and Montejo had failed with his dispatches , dolgr
to Spain; and he daily expeded their return witht
a confirmation of his authority from the king.
Without this, his condition was insecure and pre-
carious, and after all the great things which he had
done, it might he his doom to bear the name and
luffcr the punishment of a traitor. Rapid and
extentive as his progress had been, he could not
hope to complete the reduction of a great empire
with to liall a body of men, which by this time
dikiafcs of various kinds considerably thinned; nor

could

B o O K could he apply for recruits to the Spanish fettle-

-^-*. ments in the islands until he received the royal ap-
15'0. probation of his proceedings.

The arrival WHILE he remained in this cruel situation, anxi.
of a new
aa~et, ous about what was paR, uncertain with refpeft to

the future, and, by the late declaration of Monte-
zuma, oppressed with a new addition of cares, a
Mexican courier arrived with an account of some
ships having appeared on the coast. Cortes, with
fond credulity, imagining that his messengers were
returned from Spain, and that the completion of all
his withes and hopes was at hand, imparted the
glad tidings to his companions, who received them
with transports of mutual gratulation. Their joy
was not of long continuance. A courier from San-
doval, whom Cortes had appointed to succeed
Efcalante in command at Vera Cruz, brought cer-
tain information that the armament was fitted out
by Velasquez, governor of Cuba, and inlfead of
bringing the aid which they expeaed, threatened
them with immediate deftrution.

ittedut by THE motives which prompted Velasquez to this
vclai,-ue, violent measure are obvious. From the circum-

stances of Cortes's departure, it was impoflible not
to fufpec his intention of throwing off all depend-
ence upon him. His neglecting to transmit any
account of his operations to Cuba, strengthened
this suspicion, which was at last confirmed beyond
doubt, by the indiscretion of the officers whom

A i Cortes

Cortes sent to Spain. They, from some motive B o0o K
which is not clearly explained by the contemporary -_-
historians, touched at the ifand of Cuba, contrary 's'°O
to the peremptory orders of their general'. By
this means Velasquez not only learned that Cortes
and his followers, after formally renouncing all con-
ne&ion with him, had established an independent
colony in New Spain, and were soliciting the king
to confirm their proceedings by his authority; but
he obtained particular information concerning the
opulence ofthe country, the valuable presents which
Cortes had received, and the inviting profpeas of
success that opened to his view. Every pallion which
can agitate an ambitious mind; shame, at having
been so grossly overreached; indignation, at being
betrayed by the man whom he had felecAed as the
object of his favour and confidence; grief, for hav-
ing wafted his fortune to aggrandize an enemy;
and despair of recovering so fair an opportunity of
etabliihing his fame and extending his power, now
raged in the bosom of Velasquez. All there, with
united force, excited him to make an extraordinary
effort in order to be avenged on the author of his
wrongs, and to wrest from him his usurped autho-
rity and conquests. Nor did he want the appear-
ance of a good title to justify such an attempt.
The agent whom he sent to Spain with an account
of Grijalva's voyage, had met with a most favour-
able reception; and from the specimens which he

B B. Diaz. c. 54, SS. Herrera, dec. z. lib. v. c. 14. Co.
mara Cron. c. 96.

produced,

B 0 K produced, such. high expectations were formed
L ,- s concerning the opulence of New Spain, that Velaf.

5^°O quez was authorised to prosecute the discovery of

the country, and appointed governor of it during
life, with more extensive power and privileges than
had been granted to any adventurer from the time
of Columbus q. Elated by this diftinguifling mark
of favour, and warranted to confider Cortes not
only as intruding upon his jurifdition, but as dif.
obedient to the royal mandate, he determined to
vindicate his own rights and the honour of his so.

under the vereign by force of arms '. His ardour in carrying
command on his preparations, was such as might have been
oL Navacz. h

expeced from the violence of the paflions with
which he was animated; and in a short time an
armament was completed, confidfing of eighteen
Ihips, which had on board fourscore horsemen,
eight hundred foot soldiers, of which eighty were
musketeers, and an hundred and twenty cross-bow
men, together with a train of twelve pieces of can-
non. As Vclafquez's experience of the fatal con-
sequence of committing to another what he ought
to have executed himself, had not rendered him
more cnterprifing, he vested the command of this
formidable body, which, in the infancy of the Spa.
nifh power in America, merits the appellation of
an army, in Pamphilo de Narvaez, with inftruc.
tions to seize Cortes and his principal officers, to
fend them prisoners to him, and then to complete

1 Herrera, dec. a. lib. iii. c. 1 .
* See NOTE LXXXVIII.

the

the difcovcry and caqueft of the country in his o 0 K
name. % _.j

15S0.
AFTER a prosperous voyage, Narvaez landed his The pro-

ceeding& of

men without opposition near St. Juan de Ullua. Narvaz.
Three soldiers, whom Cortes had sent to search for April.
mines in that diftri&t, immediately joined him. By
this accident, he not only received information
concerning the progrcfs and situation of Cortes, byt
as these soldiers had made some progress in the.
knowledge of the Mexican language, he acquired
interpreters, by whose means he was enabled to
hold some intercourse with the people of the coun-
try. But, according to the low cunning of desert-
ers, they framed their intelligence with more at-
tention to what they thought would be agreeable,
than to what they knew to be true; and represented
the situation of Cortes to be so desperate, and the
difaffecion of his followers to be so general, as i0-
creased the natural confidence and presumption of
Narvaez. His first operation, however, might
have taught him not to rely on their partial ac-
counts. Having sent to summon the governor
of Vera Cruz to surrender, Guevara, a priest
whom he employed in that Service, made the rc-
quilition with such insolence, that Sandoval, an
officer of high spirit, and zealously attached .o
Cortes, instead of complying with his demans,
seized him and his attendants, and lent them in
chains to Mexico.

VOL. 11. x CORTES

B o0 K CORTES received them not like enemies, but as

V.

--v- friends, and condemning the severity of Sandoval,
C t's set them immediately at liberty. By this well-
alard. timed clemency, seconded by caresses and presents,

he gained their confidence, and drew from them
such particulars concerning the force and intentions
of Narvacz, as gave him a view of the impending
danger in its full extent. He had not to contend
now with half-naked Indians, no match for him in
war, and still more inferior in the arts of policy,
but to take the field against an army in courage and
martial discipline equal to his own, in number far
superior, acting under the fanEtion of royal autho-
rity, and commanded by an officer of known bra-
very. He was informed that Narvaez, more soli-
citous to gratify the resentment of Velasquez, than
attentive to the honour or interest of his country,
had begun his intercourse with the natives, by re-
presenting him and his followers as fugitives and
outlaws, guilty of rebellion againit their own fove-
reign, and of injustice in invading the Mexican
empire; and had declared that his chief object in
visiting the country was to punish the Spaniards
who had committed these crimes, and to rescue the
Mexicans from oppression. He soon perceived
that the fame unfavourable representations of his
charaftcr and actions had been conveyed to Mon-
tezuma, and that Narvaez had found means to as-
sure him, that as the conduct of those who kept
him under restraint was highly displeasing to the
king his master, he had it in charge not only to

3 rcfrcue

rescue an injured monarch from confinement, but B °o K
to reinstate him in the possession of his ancient ,---
power and independence. Animated with this prof- s52.
pec of being set free from fubjecion to firangers,
the Mexicans in several provinces began openly
to revolt from Cortes, and to regard Narvaez as
a deliverer no less able than willing to save them.
Montezuma himself kept up a secret intercourse
with the new commander, and seemed to court him
as a person superior in power and dignity to those
Spaniards whom he had hitherto revered as the
firif of men '

SUCH were the various afpeats of danger and Hisdclile.

rations on-
difficulty which presented themselves to the view cerninghis

own COn-

of Cortes. No situation can be. conceived more duc.
trying to the capacity and firmness of a general,
or where the choice of the plan which ought to
be adopted was more difficult. If he lhould wait
the approach of Narvaez in Mexico, deftru&ion
teemed to be unavoidable; for while the Spaniards
pressed him from without, the inhabitants, whose
turbulent spirit he could hardly restrain with all his
authority and attention, would eagerly lay hold on
such a favourable opportunity of avenging all their
wrongs. If he should abandon the capital, set the
captive monarch at liberty, and march out to meet
the enemy; he must at once forego the fruits of
all his toils and victories, and relinquish advan-

See NOTE LXXXIX.

x 2 tages

o o 0K tages which could not be recovered without erx
ti . traordinary efforts, and infinite danger. If, in-

15o10 fead of employing force, he should have recouri

to conciliating measures, and attempt an accom-
modation with Narvaez; the natural haughtiness
of that officer, augmented by consciousness of his
present superiority, sorbad him to cherilh any fan-
guine hope of success. After revolving every
scheme with deep attention, Cores fixed upon
that which in execution was most hazardous, but,
if successful, would prove most beneficial to him-
self and to his country; and with the deaifive in-
trepidity suited to desperate situations, determined
to make one bold effort for vi&ory under every
disadvantage, rather than sacrifice his own con-
quests and the Spanilh interest in Mexico.

His negoci. BUT though he foresaw that the contest must be
tle follnow terminated finally by arms, it would have been
Vr of Nar not only indecent, but criminal, to have marched

against his countrymen, without attempting to ad-
just matters by an amicable negociation. In this
service he employed Olmedo, his chaplain, to
whose character the fun sion was well suited, and
who possessed, besides, such prudence and address
as qualified him to carry on the secret intrigues in
which Cortes placed his chief confidence. Narvaea
rejeted, with scorn, every scheme of accommo-
dation that Olmedo proposed, and was with diffi-
culty restrained from laying violent hands on him
and bis attendants. He met, however, with a

more

more favourable reception among the followers of B o o Ki
Narvaez, to many of whom he delivered letters, ..
either from Cortes or his officers, their ancient ,s»o-
friends and companions. Cortes artfully accom-
panied there with presents of rings, chains of gold,
and other trinkets of value, which inspired thole
needy adventurers with high ideas of the wealth
that he had acquired, and with envy of their good
fortune who were engaged in his service. Some,
from hopes of becoming sharers in those rich spoils,
declared for an immediate accommodation with
Cortes. Others, from public spirit, laboured to
prevent a civil war, which, whatever party should
prevail, must ihake, and perhaps subvert the Spa.
nifh power, in a country where it was so imper-
fe&ly eftablithed. Narvaez disregarded both, and
by a public proclamation denounced Cortes and his
adherents rebels and enemies to their country.
Cortes, it is probable, was not much surprised at
the untraftable arrogarice of Narvaez; and, after
having given such a proof of his own pacific dif-
position as might justify his recourse to other means,
he determined to advance towards an enemy whom
he had laboured in vain to appease.

HE left a hundred and fifty men in the capital, Marche

*agaiinl him.

under the command of Pedro deAlvarado, an officer May.
of diitinguifhed courage, for whom the Mexicans
had conceived a singular degree of refpe&t. To
the custody of this slender garrison he committed a
great city, with all the wealth he had amarfed, and,

x 3 what

B 0 0 K what was fill of greater importance, the person of

,-- the imprisoned monarch. His utmost art was em-
1520. ployed in concealing from Montezuma the real

cause of his march. He laboured to persuade him,
that the firangers who had lately arrived were his
friends and fellow-fubjets; and that, after a shot
interview with them, they would depart together,
and return to their own country. The captive
prince, unable to comprehend the dcfigns of the
Spaniards, or to reconcile what he now heard with
the declarations of Narvaez, and afraid to dilcover
any symptom of suspicion or diltruft of Cortes,
promised to remain quietly in the Spanilh quarters,
and to cultivate the fame friendfllip with Alvaado
which he had uniformly maintained with him.
Cortes, with seeming confidence in this promise,
but relying principally upon the injunctions which
he had given Alvarado to guard his prifoncr
with the most scrupulous vigilance, set out from
Mexico.

Numicr ,f His firength, even after it was reinforced by the
iis troops. juntion of Sandoval and the garrison of Vera

Cruz, did not exceed two hundred and fifty men.
As he hoped for success chiefly from the rapidity
of his motions, his troops were not incumbercd
either with baggage or artillery. But as he drealcd
extremely the imprcleion which the enemy might
make with their cavalry, he had provided against
this danger with the foresight and sagacity which
diftinguith a great commander. Having obfcrved

that

that- the Indians in the province of Chinantla used B 0 0 K
spears of extraordinary length and force, he _
armed his soldiers with there, and accustomed s510.
them to that deep and compact arrangement which
the use of this formidable weapon, the best perhaps
that ever was invented for defence, enabled them
to assume.

WITH this finall but firm battalion, Cortes ad- Continues

vanced towards Zempoalla, of which Narvaez had s iec a,-
taken poffefiion. During his march, he made re- vanctd.
peated attempts towards some accommodation with
his opponent. But Narvaez requiring that Cortes
and his followers should instantly recognize his
title to be governor of New Spain, in virtue of the
powers which he derived from Velasquez; and
Cortes refuting to submit to any authority which
was not founded on a commifllon from the emperor
himself, under whose immediate protection he and
his adherents had placed their infant colony; all
thele attempts proved fruitless. The intercourse,
however, which this occasioned between the two
parties, proved of no small advantage to Cortes,
as it afforded him an opportunity of gaining some
of Narvaez's officers by liberal presents, of soften-
ing others by a semblance of moderation, and of
dazzling all by the appearance of wealth among his
troops, most of his soldiers having converted their
share of the Mexican gold into chains, bracelets,
and other ornaments, which they displayed with
military ostentation. Narvaez and a little junto of

x 4 his

Ba K his creatures excepted, all the army leaned towards

an accommodation with their countrymen. This
'50'° discovery of their inclination irritated his violent

temper almost to madness. In a transport of rage,
he let a price upon the head of Cortes, and of his
principal officers; and having learned that he was
now advanced within a league of Zempoalla with
his fmnall body of men, he confidered this as an
insult which merited immediate chastisement, and
marched out with all his troops to offer him
battle.

Attacks BUT Cortes was a leader of greater abilities and
t niht experience than, on equal ground, to fight an

enemy so far superior in number, and so much
better appointed. Havihg taken his fation on the
opposite bank of the river de Canoas, where he
knew that he could not be attacked, he beheld the
approach of the enemy without concern, and dif.
regarded this vain bravade. It was then the be.
ginning of the wet season', and the rain had poured
down, during a great part of the day, with the
violence peculiar to the torrid zone. The follow-
ers of Narvaez, unaccuRomed to the hardlhips of
military service, murmured so much at being thus
fruitlessly exposed, that, from their unfoldier-like
impatience, as well as his own contempt of his ad.
verfary, their general permitted them to retire to
Zempoalla. The very circumstance which induced

l Hackluyt, vol. iii. 467. De Laet Defer. Ind. Occid. sl1.

them

them to quit the field, encouraged Cortes to form B o o K
a scheme, by which he hoped at once to terminate '
the war. He observed, that his hardy veterans, 'S'
though standing under the torrents, which conti-
nued to fall, without a tingle tent or any shelter
whatsoever to cover them, were so far from re-
pining at hardships which were become familiar to
them, that they were till fresh and alert for ser-
vice. He foresaw that the enemy would naturally
give 'thenifelves up to repose after their fatigue,
and that, judging of the conduA of others by their
own effeminacy, they would deem themselves per-
fecly secure at a season so unfit for ation. He
resolved, therefore, to fall upon them in the dead
of night, when the surprise and terror of this un-
expeted attack might more than compensate the
inferiority of his numbers. His soldiers, sensible
that no resource remained but in some desperate
effort of courage, approved of the measure with
such warmth, that Cortes, in a military oration
which he addressed to them before they began their
march, was more solicitous to temper than to in-
flame their ardour. He divided them into three
parties. At the head of the first he placed Sando-
val; entrusting this gallant officer with the most
dangerous and important service, that of lfizing
the enemy's artillery, which was planted before
the principal tower of the temple, where Narvaez
had fixed his head-quarters. Chriftoval de Olid
commanded the second, with orders to assault the
tower, and lay hold on the general. Cortes him.

self

o o K self conduced the third and finalleft division,
V.
L^- _J which was to a&t as a body of reserve, and to sup.

'5Q. port the other two as there ihould be occasion.

Having pafled the river de Canoas, which was
much swelled with the rains, not without difficulty,
the water reaching almost to their chins, they ad-
vanced in profound silence, without beat of dium,
or found of any warlike instrument; each man
armed with his sword, his dagger, and his Chinantlan
spear. Narvaez, remiss in proportion to his fecu.
rity, had posted only two centinels to watch the
motions of an enemy whom he had such good
cause to dread. One of there was seized by the
advanced guard of Cortes's troops, the other made
his escape, and hurrying to the town with all the
precipitation of fear and zeal, gave such timely
notice of the enemy's approach, that there was full
leisure to have prepared for their reception. But,
through the arrogance and infatuation of Narvaez,
this important interval was loft. He imputed this
alarm to the cowardice of the centinel, and treated
with derision the idea of being attacked by forces
so unequal to his own. The shouts of Cortes's
soldiers, ruffling on to the assault, convinced him
at last, that the danger which he despised was real.
The rapidity with which they advanced was such,
that only one cannon could be fired, before Sando-
val's party closed with the enemy, drove them from
their guns, and began to force their way up the
steps of the tower. Narvaez, no less brave in
action than presumptuous in conduct, arniedl him-

self

seif in haste, and by his voice and example ani- o o Kt
mated his men to the combat. Olid advanced to - ~,
fulfain his companions; and Cortes himself, rulhing 's-
to the front, condu&ed and added new vigour to
the attack. The compa& order in which this
fimall body prefed on, and the impenetrable front
which they presented with their long spears, bore
down all opposition before it. They had now and over.
reached the gate, and were struggling to burst it
open, when a soldier having set fire to the reeds
with which the tower was covered, compelled Nar-
vaez to sally out. In the first encounter he was
wounded in the eye with a spear, and falling to the
ground, was dragged down the fleps, and in a
moment clapt in fetters. The cry of victory re-
founded among the troops of Cortes. Those who
had sallied out with their leader now maintained the
conflict feebly, and began to surrender. Among
the remainder of his soldiers, stationed in two
finaller towers of the temple, terror and confusion
prevailed. The darkness was so great, that they
could not diffinguifh between their friends and foes.
Their own artillery was pointed against them.
Wherever they turned their eyes, they beheld lights
gleaming through the obscurity of night, which,
though proceeding only from a variety of shining
infeds, that abound in moit and sultry climates,
their affrighted imaginations represented as nu-
merous bands of musketeers advancing with
kindled matches to the attack. After a Short re-
fiflance, the soldiers compelled their officers to

capitulate,

B o O K capitulate, and before morning all laid down their

v -1 arms, and submitted quietly to their conquerors.

1310.

The fctres THIS complete vietory proved more acceptable,
of this vic-
tory.hi as it was gained almost without bloodshed, only

two soldiers being killed on the fide of Cortes, and
two officers, with fifteen private men, of the ad-
verse fa&tion. Cortes treated the vanquilhed not
like enemies, but as countrymen and friends, and
offered either to fend them back diretly to Cuba,
or to take them into his service, as partners in his
fortune, on equal terms with his own soldiers,
This latter proposition, seconded by a seasonable
distribution of some presents from Cortes, and li-
beral promises of more, opened prospects to agree.
able to the romantic expeCtations which had invited
them to engage in this service, that all, a few par-
tizans of Narvaez excepted, closed with it, and
vied with each other in professions of fidelity and
attachment to a general, whose recent fucccfs had
given them such a tlriking proof of his abilities for
command. Thus, by a series of events no left
fortunate than uncommon, Cortes not only escaped
from perdition which seemed inevitable, but, when
he had least reason to expect it, was placed at the
head of a thousand Spaniards, ready to follow
wherever he Ihould lead them. Whoever reflecs
upon the facility with which this vi&ory was ob-
tained, or confiders with what fldden and unani-
mous transition the followers of Narvaez ranged
themfelvcs under the 1tandard of his rival, will be

apt

apt to afcrib c both events as much to the intrigues B o o s
as to the arms of Cortes, and cannot but fufpeA& L -'
that the ruin of Narvaez was occasioned, no less '2S'
by the treachery of his own followers, than by the
valour of his enemy u.

BUT, in one point, the prudent conduct and TlheMcxi
good fortune of Cortes were equally conspicuous. arnsagzt
If, by the rapidity of his operations after he began niardp.
his march, he had rot brought matters to fiuch a
speedy issue, even this decisive viCtory would have
come too late to have saved his companions whom
he left in Mexico. A few days after the dif-
comnfiUe of Narvaez, a courier arrived with an
account that the Mexicans had taken armns, and
having seized and deitroyed the two brigantines,
which Certes had built in order to secure the com-
mand of the lake, and attacked the Spaniards in
their quarters, had killed several of them, and
wounded more, had reduced to aihes their maga-
zine of provisions, and carried on hostilities with
such fury, that, though Alvarado and his men de-
fended themselves with undaunted resolution, they
must either be Toon cut off by famine, or fink
under the multitude of their enemies. This re-
volt was excited by motives which rendered it till
more alarming. On the departure of Cortes for
Zcmpoalla, the bMexicans flattered themselves,
that the long-expe&ed opportunity of restoring

1 Cortes Rclat. 242. D. B. Diaz. c. 11o-2zz. ierrera,
dec. a. lib. ix. c. a , &c. Gomara Cron. c 97, &c.

13 their

B O K their fovercign to liberty, and of vindicating their

V.

--. ~ country from the odious dominion of strangers,
*s50. was at length arrived; that while the forces of their

oppressors were divided, and the arms of one party
turned againfl the other, they might triumph with
greater facility over both. Consultations were held,
and schemes fubrned with this intention. The Spa.
niards in Mexico, conscious of their own feeble
ncfs, fufpe&cd and dreaded those machinations.
Alvarado, though a gallant officer, pofeffed nei-
ther that extent of capacity, nor dignity of man-
ners, by which Cortes had acquired such an ascend-
ant over the minds of the Mexicans, as never al-
lowed them to form a just estimate of his weakness
or of their own strength. Alvarado knew no mode
of Supporting his authority but force. Initead of
employing address to disconcert the plans or to
sooth the spirits of. the Mexicans, he waited the
return of one of their solemn festivals, when the
principal persons in the empire were dancing, ac-
cording to custom, in the court of the great tem-
ple; he seized all the avenues which led to it, and,
allured partly by the rich ornaments which they
wore in honour of their gods, and partly by the
facility of cutting off at once the authors of that
conlsiracy which he dreaded, he fell upon them,
unarmed and unfuifpicious of any danger, and maf.
sacred a great numnber, none escaping but such as
made their way over the battlements of the temple.
An aftion so cruel and treacherous filled not only
the city, but the whole empire, with indignation

and

and rage. All called aloud for vengeance; and B 0° K
regardless of the safety of their monarch, whose
life was at the mercy of the Spaniards, or of their 153'
own danger in assaulting an enemy who had been
so long the obje& of their terror, they committed
all those ats of violence of which Cortes received
an account.

To him the danger appeared so imminent, as Hemirclles

back to tim

to admit neither of deliberation nor delay. He set capi,,l
out instantly with all his forces, and returned from
Zempoalla with no lets rapidity than he had ad-
vanced thither. At Tlafcala he was joined by two
thousand chosen warriors. On entering the Mexi-
can territories he found that difaffe&tion to the
Spaniards was not confined to the capital. The
principal inhabitants had deserted the towns through
which he passed; no person of note appearing to
meet him with the usual refpe&; no provision was
made for the subsistence of his troops; and though
he was permitted to advance without opposition,
the solitude and silence which reigned in every
place, and the horror with which the people avoid-
ed all intercourse with him, discovered a deep-
rooted antipathy, that excited the most just alarm.
But, implacable as the enmity of the Mexicans
was, they were so unacquainted with the science
of war, that they knew not how to take the proper
measures, either for their own safety or the deftruc-
tion of the Spaniard.. Uniniltii:Lc, by their for-
mer error in admitting a formidable enemy into

their

B o o K their capital, instead of breaking down the cautc.

ways and bridges, by which they might have in.

,so. closed Alvarado and his party, and have effectually
junc 24. flopt the career of Cortes, they again luffcred hin

to march into the city without moletation, and to
take quiet pofeffion of his ancient station.

Improper 1T'H tranlports of joy with which Alvarado and
condludt of
cert,. his soldiers received tieir companions cannot be

expressed. Both parties were ib much elated, the
one with their seasonable deliverance, and the othtr
with the great exploits which they had atchieved,
that this intoxication of success seems to have
reached Cortes himself; and he behaved on this
occasion neither with his ufilal sagacity nor atten.
tion. He not only neglected to visit Montezuma,
but imbittered the iIifult by expreiflons full of con-
tempt for that unfortunate prince and his people.
The forces of which he had now the command,
appeared to him so irresistible, that he might assume
an higher tone, and lay afidc the mask of modera-
tion, under which he had hitherto concealed his
designs. Some M:xicins who understood the
Spanish language, heard the contemptuous words
which Cortes uttered, and reporting them to their
countrymen, kindled their rage anew. They were
now convinced that the intentions of the general
were equally bloody with those of Alvarado, and
that his original purpose in visiting their country,
had not been, as he pretended, to court the ali-
ance of their sovereign, but to attempt the con-

quest

quest of his dominions. They resumed their arms B o O K
with the additional fury which this discovery in- ..
spired, attacked a considerable body of Spaniards Thsoie
who were marching towards the great square in hoRfilityof
which the public market was held, and compelled ans.
them to retire with some loTs. Emboldened by
this success, and delighted to find that their op-
pressors were not invincible, they advanced next
day with extraordinary martial pomp to aftault the
Spaniards in their quarters. Their number was
formidable, and their undaunted courage still more
so. Though the artillery pointed against their nu-
merous battalions, crowded together in narrow
streets, swept off multitudes at every discharge;
though every blow of the Spanilh weapons fell
with mortal effec upon their naked bodies, the
impetuosity of the assault did not abate. Frelh
men rushed forward to occupy the places of the
Qlain, and meeting with the fame fate, were fuc-
ceeded by others no less intrepid and eager for
vengeance. The utmost effort of Cortes's abilities
and experience, seconded by the disciplined valour
of his troops, were hardly sufficient to defend the
fortifications, that surrounded the post where the
Spaniards were stationed, into which the enemy
were more than once on the point of forcing their
way.

CORTES beheld, with wonder, the implacable niaref of

ferocity of a people who seemed at first to submit 'ni,.
tamely to the yoke, and had continued so long

VOL. 1. Y paflive

B o0 K pafllve under it. The soldiers of Narvaez, who
t. * fondly imagined that they followed Cortes to share

JS°' iin the spoils of a conquered empire, were aso.

nifled to find that they were involved in a dan.
gefous war, with an enemy whose vigour was still
unbroken, and loudly execrated their own weakness,
in giving such easy credit to the delusive promires
of their new leader '. But surprise and complaints
were of no avail. Some immediate and extraor-
dinary effort was requisite to extricate themselves
out of their present situation. As soon as the ap-
proach of evening induced the Mexicans to re-
tire, in compliance with their national cufftom of
ceasing from hostilities with the setting fun, Cortes
began to prepare for a rally, next day, with such a
considerable force, as might either drive the enemy
out of the city, or compel them to liften to terms
of accommodation.

Cortes at. HE condu&ed, in person, the troops destined
eacks them
without for this important service. Every invention known
ruccs,.

in the European art of war, as well as every pre-
caution, suggested by his long acquaintance with
the Indian mode of fighting, were employed to
ensure success. But he found an enemy prepared
and determined to oppose him. The force of the
Mexicans was greatly augmented by frelh troops,
which poured in continually from the country, and
their animosity was in no degree abated. They
were led by their nobles, inflamed by the exhorta-

B. Diaz, c. )z6.

ions

tions of their priests, and fought in defence of B o K
their temples and families, under the eye of their v,
gods, and in pretence of their wives and children. 's5.
Notwithstanding their numbers, and enthusiastic
contempt of danger and death, wherever the Spa-
niards could close with them, the superiority of
their discipline and arms obliged the Mexicans to
give way. But in narrow streets, and where many
of the bridges of communication were broken
down, the Spaniards could seldom come to a fair
rencounter with the enemy, and as they advanced,
were exposed to /howers of arrows and stones from
the tops of houses. After a day of incessant exer-
tion, though vast numbers of the Mexicans fell,
and part of the city was burnt, the Spaniards,
weary with the slaughter, and harafed by multi-
tudes which fucceflively relieved each other, were
obliged at length to retire, with the mortification
of having accomplilhed nothing so decisive as to
compensate the unusual calamity of having twelve
soldiers killed, and above sixty wounded. Another
sally, made with greater force, was not more effec-
tual, and in it the general himself was wounded in
the hand.

CORTBS now perceived, too late, the fatal er- Montezuma
ror into which he had been betrayed by his own ""i
contempt of the Mexicans, and was satisfied that
he could neither maintain his present station in the
centre of an hostile city, nor retire from it without
the most imminent danger. One resource still re-

Y 2 mained,

3 o o K mained, to try what effec the interposition of

V. ,.-. Montezuma might have to soothe or overawe his
Sla0 subje&s. When the Mexicans approached next

morning to renew the assault, that unfortunate
prince, at the mercy of the Spaniards, and reduced
to the fad neceflity of becoming the instrument of
his own disgrace, and of the slavery of his peopley,
advanced to the battlements in his royal robes, and
with all the pomp in which he used to appear on
solemn occasions. At fight of their sovereign,
whom they had long been accustomed to honour,
and almost to revere as a god, the weapons dropt
from their hands, every tongue was silent, all
bowed their heads, and many prostrated themselves
on the ground. Montezuma addressed them with
every argument that could mitigate their rage, or
persuade them to cease from hostilities. When he
ended his discourse, a fullen murmur of difappro-
bation run through the ranks; to this succeeded
reproaches and threats; and the fury of the multi-
tude rising in a moment above every restraint of
decency or refpeet, flights of arrows and volleys of
ftoncs poured in so violently upon the ramparts,
that before the Spanish soldiers, appointed to cover
Montezuma with their bucklers, had time to lift
them in his defence, two arrows wounded the un-
happy monarch, and the blow of a stone on his
temple struck him to the ground. On feeing him
fall, the Mexicans were so much aftonilhed, that,

· Sec NOTE XC,

with

with a transition not uncommon in popular tu- B 0O K
mults, they passed in a moment from one extreme -
to the other, remorse succeeded to insult, and they ls*.
fled with horror, as if the vengeance of Heaven
were pursuing the crime which they had com-
mitted. The Spaniards, without molestation, car-
ried Montezuma to his apartments, and Cortes
hastened thither to console him under his misfor-
tune. But the unhappy monarch now perceived
how low he was funk, and the haughty spirit which
ieemed to have been so long extint, returning, he
(corned to survive this las humiliation, and to
protra& an ignominious life, not only as the pri-
soner and tool of his enemies, but as the object of
contempt or detestation among his fubjets. In a
transport of rage he tore the bandages from his
wounds, and refused, with such obstinacy, to take
any nourishment, that he soon ended his wretched
days, rejecing with disdain all the solicitations of
the Spaniards to embrace the Christian faith.

UPON the death of Montezuma, Cortes having New con.
loft all hope of bringing the Mexicans to an ac-
commodation, saw no profpea of safety but in at-
tempting a retreat, and began to prepare for it.
But a sudden motion of the Mexicans engaged
him in new conflics. They took poffelfion of a
high tower in the great temple which overlooked
the Spaniff quarters, and placing there a garrison
of their principal warriors, not a Spaniard could
stir without being exposed to their milfile weapons.

Y 3 From

B O K From this post it was necessary to difodge them

V.
L i-. at any risk; and Juan de Efcobar, with a nume.

s52. rous detachment of chosen soldiers, was ordered to

make the attack. But Efcobar, though a gallant
officer, and at the head of troops accustomed to
conquer, and who now fought under the eyes of
their countrymen, was thrice repulsed. Cortes,
sensible that not only the reputation, but the safety
of his army depended on the success of this aflault,
ordered a buckler to be tied to his arm, as he
could not manage it with his wounded hand, and
rushed with his drawn sword into the thickest of
the combatants. Encouraged by the presence of
their general, the Spaniards returned to the charge
with such vigour, that they gradually forced their
way up the steps, and drove the Mexicans to the
platform at the top of the tower. There a dread-
ful carnage began, when two young Mexicans of
high rank, observing Cortes as he animated his
soldiers by his voice and example, resolved to fa-
crifice their own lives in order to cut off the author
of all the calamities which desolated their country.
They approached him in a supplicant posture, as
if they had intended to lay down their arms, and
seizing him In a moment, hurried him towards the
battlements, over which they threw themselves
headlong, in hopes of dragging him along to be
dashed in pieces by the fame fall. But Cortes, by
his firength and agility, broke loose from their
grasp, and the gallant youths perifled in this ge-
nerous though unfucccfsful attempt to save their

country.

country . As soon as the Spaniards became maf- B 0 K
ters of the tower, they set fire to it, and, without . _
farther molestation, continued the preparations for So10
their retreat.

THIS became the more necessary, as the Mexi- The Spa

niardsan-

cans were so much astonished at the la effort rof the dontity.
Spanish valour, that they began to change their
whole system of hostility, and, instead of incefalnt
attacks, endeavoured, by barricading the streets,
and breaking down the causeways, to cut off the
communication of the Spaniards with the continent,
and thus to starve an enemy whom they could not
subdue. The first point to be determined by Cor-
tes and his followers, was, whether they ihould
march out openly in the face of day, when they
could discern every danger, and fee how to regu-
late their own motions, as well as how to resist the
aflaults of the enemy; or, whether they Lhould en-
deavour to retire secretly in the night? The latter
was preferred, partly from hopes that their national
superstition would reifrain the Mexicans from ven-
turing to attack them in the night, and partly from
their own fond belief in the preditions of a private
soldier, who having acquired universal credit by a

i M. Clavigero has censured me with asperity for relating
this gallant aflon of the two Mexicans, and for supposing that
there were battlements round the temple of Mexico. I related
the attempt to destroy Cortes on the authority of Her. dec. a.
lib. x. c. 9. and of Torquemada, lib. iv. c. 69. I followed
them likewire in supposing the uppermost platform of the tem-
ple to be encompaifed by a battlement or rail.

Y 4 fmattcring

B 0 0 K smattering of learning, and his pretensions to aflro-
h--~ logy, boldly assured his countrymen of success, if

'520. they made their retreat in this manner. They be-

gan to move, towards midnight, in three divisions.
Sandoval led the van; Pedro Alvarado, and Ve-
lafquez de Leon, had the condu&c of the rear;
and Cortes commanded in the centre, where he
placed the prisoners, among whom were a son and
two daughters of Montezuma, together with fcveral
Mexicans of diftindion, the artillery, the baggage,
and a portable bridge of timber, intended to be
laid over the breaches in the causeway. They
marched in profound silence along the causeway
which led to Tacuba, because it was (horcer than
any of the reft, and lying most remote from the
road towards Tlafcala and the f a-coaft, had been
left more entire by the Mexicans. They reached
the first breach in it without molestation, hoping
that their retreat was undiscovered.

Attacked BUT the Mexicans, unperceived, had not only
by the
hyMexicn watched all their motions with attention, but had

made proper dispositions for a most formidable at-
tack. While the Spaniards were intent upon
placing their bridge in the breach, and occupied in
conducting their horses and artillery along it, they
were suddenly alarmed with the tremendous found
of warlike instruments, and a general ihout from
an innumerable multitude of enemies; the lake was
covered with canoes; flights of arrows, and ihow-
ers of flones poured in, upon them from every

quarter

quarter; the Mexicans rush'ing forward to the B O O K
charge with fearless impetuosity, as if they hoped v-vd
in that moment to be avenged for all their wrongs. 's*'
Unfortunately the wooden bridge, by the weight
of the artillery, was wedged so fast into the stones
and mud, that it was impossible to remove it.
Dismayed at this accident, the Spaniards advanced
with precipitation towards the second breach. The
Mexicans hemmed them in on every fide, and
though they defended themselves with their usual
courage, yet crouded together as they were on a
narrow causeway, their discipline and military skill
were of little avail, nor did the obscurity of the
night permit them to derive great advantage from
their fire-arms, or the superiority of their other
weapons. All Mexico was now in arms, and so
eager were the people on the deftruftion of their
oppressors, that they who were not near enough
to annoy them in person, impatient of the delay,
pressed forward with such ardour, as drove on their
countryrten in the front with irresistible violence.
Fre(h warriors instantly filled the place of such as
fell. The Spaniards, weary with slaughter, and
unable to sustain the weight of the torrent that
poured in upon them, began to give way. In a mo-
ment the confusion was universal; horse and foot,
officers and soldiers, friends and enemies, were
mingled together; and while all fought, and many
fell, they could hardly distinguish from what hand
the blow came,

CORT£ES

B 0 0 K CORTES, with about a hundred foot soldiers and

V.

aI few horse, forced his way over the two remain-

;5ri. ing breaches in the causeway, the bodies of the
&Am, dead serving to fill up the chasms, and reached the

main land. Having formed them as soon as they
arrived, he returned with such as were yet capa-
ble of lervice, to assist his friends in their retreat,
and to encourage them, by his pretence and ex-
ample, to persevere in the efforts requisite to cffet
it. He met with part of his soldiers, who had
broke through the enemy, but found many more
overwhelmed by the multitude of their aggressors,
or perilhing in the lake; and heard the piteous la-
mentations of others, whom the Mexicans, having
taken alive, were carrying off in triumph to be
sacrificed to the god of war. Before day, all who
had escaped assembled at Tacuba. But when the
morning dawned, and dilcovered to the view of
Cortes his shattered battalion, reduced to less than
half its number, the survivors deje&ed, and most
of them covered with wounds, the thoughts of
what they had fufered, and the remembrance of
so many faithful friends and gallant followers who
had fallen in that night of sorrow', pierced his
foul with such anguish, that while he was forming
their ranks, and ilfuing some necessary orders, his
sbldiers observed the tears trickling from his
eyes, and remarked, with much fatisfa&ion, that

NAoche Triflc is the name by which it is till diftihguilebd in
New Spain.

I X while

while attentive to the duties of a general, he was B o o K
not insensible to the feelings of a man. V J

3520.

IN this fatal retreat many officers of diftinsion andlofs.

perilhed ', and among there Velasquez de Leon,
who having forsaken the party of his kinsman, the
governor of Cuba, to follow the fortune of his
companions, was, on that account, as well as for
his superior merit, refpEted by them as the second
person in the army. All the artillery, ammunition,
and baggage, were loft; the greater part of the
horses, and above two thousand Tlafcalans, were
killed, and only a very frmall portion of the trea-
sure which they had amafled was saved. This,
which had been always their chief objecl, proved
a great cause of their calamity; for many of the
soldiers having so overloaded themselves with bars
of gold as rendered them unfit for a&ion, and re-
tarded their flight, fell, ignominiously, the vi&ims
of their own inconsiderate avarice. Amidst so
many disasters, it was rome consolation to find that
Aguilar and Marina, whose fun&ion as interpreters
was of such essential importance, had made their
escape .

THE first care of Cortes was to find some lhelter Difficult.

for his wearied troops; for as the Mexicans infested S,,totI
them on every fide, and the people of Tacuba

* Sec NOTE XCI.
b Cortes Rclat. p.. 48. B. Diaz . c. 128. Gomara Cron.
c. 109. llcrrcra, dec 2., lib.x. c. ii, i.

began

B 0 0 K began to take arms, he could not continue in his

preient station. He direted his march towards
5J's the riling ground, and having fortunately disco-

vered a temple situated on an eminence, took pof-
session of it. There he found not only the shelter
for which he wished, but, what was no less wanted,
some provisions to refresh his men; and though
the enemy did not intermit their attacks through-
out the day, they were with less difficulty prevented
from making any impreflion. During this time
Cortes was engaged in deep consultation with his
officers, concerning the route which they ought to
take in their retreat. They were now on the weft
fide of the lake. Tlafcala, the only place where
they could hope for a friendly reception, lay about
fixty-four miles to the east of Mexico c; so that
they were obliged to go round the north end of the
lake before they could fall into the road which
led thither. A Tlafcalan soldier undertook to be
their guide, and conduated them through a coun-
try, in some places marlhy, in others mountainous,
in all ill-cultivated and thinly peopled. They
marched for fix days with little respite, and under
continual alarms, numerous bodies of the Mexi-
cans hovering around them, sometimes harassing
them at a distance with their misfile weapons, and
sometimes attacking them closely in front, in rear,
in flank, with great boldness, as they now knew
that they were not invincible. Nor were the fa-.
tigue and danger of those incessant conflits the

* Villa Segnor Ttatro Americanos, lib, ii, c. i s.

worlt

worst evils to which they were exposed. As the B o o K
barren country through which they passed afforded -
hardly any provisions, they were reduced to feed '°'*
on berries, roots, and the stalks of green maize;
and at the very time that famine was deprefling
their spirits and waiting their strength, their fitua-
tion required the most vigorous and unremitting
exertions of courage and acivity. Amidst those
complicated distresses, one circumstance supported
and animated the Spaniards. Their commander
sustained this fad reverse of fortune with unshaken
magnanimity. His presence of mind never forsook
him; his sagacity foresaw every event, and his vi-
gilance provided for it. He was foremost in every
danger, and endured every hardship with cheer-
fulness. The difficulties with which he was fur-
rounded seemed to call forth new talents; and his
soldiers, though despairing themselves, continued
to follow him with encreafing confidence in his
abilities.

ON the sixth day they arrived near to Otumba, Bauicof
not far from the road between Mexico and Tlaf-
cala. Early next morning they began to advance
towards it, flying parties of the enemy frill hang-
ing on their rear; and, amidst the insults with which
they accompanied their hostilitics, Marina remarkedc
that they often exclaimed with exultation, " Go on,
robbers; go to the place where you liall quickly
meet the vengeance due to your crimes." The
meaning of this threat the Spaniards did not comn

prchend,

BOO K prehend, until they reached the summit of an

V.^ eminence before them. There a spacious valley
1510- opened to their view, covered with a vast army,

extending as far as the eye could reach. The
Mexicans, while with one body of their troops
they harassld the Spaniards in their retreat, had
assembled their principal force on the other fide of
the lake; and marching along the road which led
diretly to Tlafcala, polled it in the plain of Otum-
ba, through which they knew Cortes mufl pass.
At the fight of this incredible multitude, which
they could survey at once from the riling ground,
the Spaniards were aflonifhed, and even the boldest
begin to despair. But CorteS, without allowing
leisure for their fears to acquire strength by reflec-
tion, after warning them briefly that no alternative
now remained but to conquer or to die, led them
instantly to the charge. The Mexicans waited
their approach with unusual fortitude. Such, how-
ever, was the superiority of the Spanilh difciplinc
and arms, that the imprefflon of this finall body
was irrcfillible; and whichever way its force was
directed, it penetrated and dispersed the most nu-
merous battalions. But while these gave way in
one quarter, new combatants advanced from an-
other, and the Spaniards, though successful in
every attack, were ready to fink under those re-
peated efforts, without feeing any end of their toil,
or any hope of victory. At that time Cortes ob-
served the great (tandard of the empire, which was
carried before the Mexican general, advancing;

and

and fortunately recollecting to have heard, that on B o o K
the fate of it depended the event of every battle, .
he assembled a few of his bravest officers, whose 's.
horses were still capable of service, and placing
himself at their head, pulhed forward towards the
standard with an impetuosity which bore down
every thing before it. A chosen body of nobles,
who guarded the standard, made rome refitancc,
but were soon broken. Cortes, with a stroke of
his lance, wounded the Mexican general, and
threw him to the ground. One of the Spanilh
officers alighting, put an end to his life, and laid
hold of the imperial standard. The moment that
their leader fell, and the standard, towards which
all direced their eyes, disappeared, an universal
panic itruck the Mexicans, and, as if the bond
which held them together had been dissolved,
every ensign was lowered, each soldier threw away
his weapons, and all fled with precipitation to the
mountains. The Spaniards, unable to pursue them
far, returned to collec the spoils of the field,
which were To valuable, as to be rome compensation
for the wealth which they had loft in Mexico; for
in the enemy's army were most of their principal
warriors, dressed out in their richest ornaments, as
if they had been marching to assured vicory. Next July I
day, to their great joy, they entered the Tlafcalan
territories .

' Cortes Relt. p. 219. B. Diaz. c. 1s8. Gorur Cron.
t. . Hcrrera, decc. . lib. x. c. 12, 13.

BUT,

OO K BUT, amidit their fatisfaEtion in having got
.- _ beyond the precinds of an hostile country, they
sPon could not look forward without solicitude, as they

of the Spa- were fill uncertain what reception they might meet
niards in
alafcaia. with from allies, to whom they returned in a con-

dition very different from that in which they had
lately set out from their dominions. Happily for
thenl, the enmity of the Tlafcalans to the Mexi-
can name was so inveterate, their desire to avenge
the death of their countrymen so vehement, and
the ascendant which Cortes had acquired over the
chiefs of the republic so complete, that, far from
entertaining a thought of taking any advantage of
the diflreffed situation in which they beheld the
Spaniards, they received them with a tendernels
and cordiality which quickly diflipated all their
suspicions.

Rew deli. SOME interval of tranquillity and indulgence was
Corten. now absolutely necessary; not only that the Spa-

niards might give attention to the cure of their
wounds, which had been too long negle&ed, but
in order to recruit their strength, exhausted by
such a long fucceflion of fatigue and hardships.
During this, Cortes learned that he and his com-
panions were not the only Spaniards who had felt
the effets of the Mexican enmity. A confider-
able detachment, which was marching from Zem-
poalla towards the capital, had been cut off by the
people of Tepeaca. A smaller party, returning

,iX ~ from

from Tlafcala to Vera Cruz, with the share of the B o o K
Mexican gold allotted to the garrison, had been _
surprised and destroyed in the mountains. At a 'x5s1
jun&ure when the life of every Spaniard was of
importance, such lofles were deeply felt. The
schemes which Cortes was meditating rendered
them peculiarly aflictive to him. While his ene-
mies, and even many of his own followers, confi-
dered the disasters which had befallen him as fatal
to the progress of his arms, and imagined that
nothing now remained but speedily to abandon a
country which he had invaded with unequal force,
his mind, as eminent for perfcverance as for enter-
prise, was still bent on accomplilhing his original
purpose, of fubjedting the Mexican empire to the
crown of CaRile. Severe and unexpected as the
check was which he had received, it did not ap-
pear to him a sufficient reason for relinquishing
the conquests which he had already made, or
against resuming his operations with better hopes
of success. The colony at Vera Cruz was not
only safe, but had remained unmolested. The
people of Zempoalla and the adjacent diftrists
had discovered no symptoms of defecion. The
I'lafcalans continued faithful to their alliance. On
their martial spirit, easily rouzed to arms, and in-
flamed with implacable hatred of the Mexicans,
Cortes depended for powerful aid. He had fill
the command of a body of Spaniards, equal in
number to that with which he had opened his way
into the centre of the empire, and had taken pof.

VOL. 11. z filrlon

I

B 0 o K fcffion of the capital; so that with the benefit of

i_ greater experience, as well as more perfec& know-
5s20. ledge of the country, he did not despair of quickly

recovering all that he had been deprived of by un-
toward events.

hr! mea- FULL of this idea, he courted the Tlafcalan
t"ks. . chiefs with such attention, and distributed among

them so liberally the rich spoils of Otumba, that he
was secure of obtaining whatever he should require
of the republic. lie drew a small supply of am-
munition, and two or three field-pieces, from his
stores at Vera Cruz. He dispatched an officer of
confidence with four ihips of Narvaez's fleet to
IIifpaniola and Jamaica, to engage adventurers,
and to purchase horses, gunpowder, and other
military stores. As he knew that it would be vain
to attempt the reduction of Mexico, unless he
could secure the commland of the lake, he gave
orders to prepare, in the mountains of Tlafcala,
materia;l for building twelve brigantines, so as they
might be carried thither in pieces ready to be put
together, and launched when he flood in need of
their firvice.

,it;nous BL r while, with provident attention, he was
:,po t', taking those necessary fleps towards the execution

of his mcafires, an obltacle arose in a quarter
where it was lead expected, but most formidable.

'Cotes Relat. p. 253, E. Gomara Cron. c. 117.

Thr

The spirit of discontent and mutiny broke out in B o K
his own army. Many of Narvaez's followers were V.
planters rather than soldiers, and had accompanied 1520-
him to New Spain with sanguine hopes of obtain-
ing settlements, but with little inclination to en-
gage in the hardflips and dangers of war. As
the fame motives had induced them to enter into
their new engagements with Cortes, they no
sooner became acquainted with the nature of the
Iervice, than they bitterly repented of their
choice. Such of them as had the good fortune
to survive the perilous adventures in which their
own imprudence had involved them, happy in
having made their escape, trembled at the thoughts
of being exposed a second time to similar cala-
mities. As soon as they discovered the intention'
of Cortes, they began secretly to murmur and
cabal, and waxing gradually more audacious,
they, in a body, offered a remonstrance to their
general againfl the imprudence of attacking a
powerful empire with his lhattered forces, and
formally required him to lead them back direytly
to Cuba. Though Cortes, long pradifed in the
arts of command, employed arguments, intreatics,
and presents, to convince or to soothe them;
though his own soldiers, animated with the spirit
of their leader, warmly fccondcd his endca-
vours; he tfund their fears too violent and
leep-rooted to be: removed, and the utmost he
could cfietl: was to prevail with them to defer
tlleir departure tf(r foine time, on a1 1lromiile that

7z ? he

B 0 K he would, at a more proper junture, difmniHrf

as should desire it.

1 520.

IMeans he THAT the malcontents might have no leisure to
rmpioyhr brood over the caules of their difaffecion, he re-
confidence. solved instantly to call forth his troops into aftion.

He proposed to chastise the people of Tepeaca for
the outrage which they had committed, and as the
detachment which they had cut off happened to be
-compoled mostly of soldiers who had served under
Narvaez, their companions, from the desire of ven-
geance, engaged the more willingly in this war.
August. He took the command in person, accompanied by

a numerous body of Tlalcalans, and in the space
of a few weeks, after various encounters, with great
slaughter of the Tepeacans, reduced that province
to fubjetion. During several months, while he
waited for the supplies of men and ammunition
which he expected, and was carrying on his pre-
parations for coiltrucltiing the brigantines, he kept
his troops constantly employed in various expedi-
tions against the adjacent provinces, all of which
were conducted with an uniform tenor of success.
By these, his men became again accustomed to
victory, and resumed their wonted sense of fupe-
riority; the Mexican power was weakened; the
Tlafcalan warriors acquired the habit of aaing in
conjuntion with the Spaniards; and the chiefs of
the republic delighted to fee their country enriched
with the spoils of all the people around them, and
aitonifhed every day with fresh dilcoveries of the

irrefiltibkl

irrefiflible prowess of their allies, they declined no B o K
effort requisite to support them. r

thoe preparatory arrangements, however, Strengthen

ALL throf preparatory arrangements, however, Strengthend -

though the most prudent and efficacious which the reinforce-
situation of Cortes allowed him to make, would ments.
have been of little avail, without a reinforcement
of Spanish soldiers. Of this he was so deeply fen-
fible, that it was the chief objet of his thoughts
and wishes; and yet his only profpe& of obtaining
it from the return of the officer whom he had sent
to the isles to solicit aid, was both distant and un-
certain. But what neither his own sagacity nor
power could have procured, he owed to a series of
fortunate and unforeseen incidents. The governor
of Cuba, to whom the success of Narvaez appear-
ed an event of infallible certainty, having sent two
imall lhips after him with new inftrutions, and a
supply of men and military stores, the officer whom
Cortes had appointed to command on the coast,
artfully decoyed them into the harbour of Vera
Cruz, seized the vessels, and easily persuaded the
soldiers to follow the standard of a more able
leader than him whom they were deflined to join'.
Soon after, three ships of more considerable force
came into the harbour separately. These belonged
to an armament fitted out by Francisco de Garay,
governor of Jamaica, who, being poffefled with the
rage of discovery and conquest which animated
every Spaniard fettled in America, had long aimed

f B. Diaz. c. 131.

z3 at

B o K at intruding into some diftri& of New Spain, and

V-. dividing with Cortes the glory and gain of annexing
J'51- that empire to the crown of Castile. They unad-

vifedly made their attempt on the northern pro-
vinces, where the country was poor, and the peo-
ple fierce and warlike; and, after a cruel fucceflion
ofdifafters, famine compelled them to venture into
Vera Cruz, and cast themselves upon the mercy of
OCtober S. their countrymen. Their fidelity was not proof

against the splendid hopes and promises which had
seduced other adventurers, and as if the spirit of
revolt had been contagious in New Spain, they
likewise abandoned the master whom they were
bound to serve, and inlifted under Cortes . Nor
was it America alone that furnished such unexpeted
aid. A ship arrived from Spain, freighted by some
private merchants with military stores, in hopes of
a profitable market in a country, the fame of whose
opulence begun to spread over Europe. Cortes
eagerly purchased a cargo which to him was inva-
luable, and the crew, following the general exam-
ple, joined him at Tlafcala'.

FROM those various quarters, the army of Cor-

tes was augmented with an hundred and eighty
men, and twenty horses, a reinforcement too in-
considerable to produce any confcqucnce which
would entitle it to have been mentioned in the
history of other parts of the globe. But in that

t Cortes Rclat. 253, P. B. Diaz. c. 133.
h Ibid. c. 136.

of

of America, where great revolutions were brought B O, C

K

about by causes which seemed to bear no propor- L--_
tion to their effecEs, such small events rife into im- £s5'O
portance, because they were sufficient to decide with
relped to the fate of kingdoms. Nor is It the least
remarkable initance of the ingular felicity confpi-
cuous in many passages of Cortes's story, that the
two persons chiefly initrumental in furnishing him
with those seasonable supplies, should be an avowed
enemy who aimed at his deftru&ion, and an envious
rival who wified to supplant him.

THE firit effet of the junEtion with his new fol- Numberof

lowers was to enable him to dismiss such of Nar- his iones.
vaez's soldiers as remained with reluctance in his
service. After their departure, he still mustered
five hundred and fifty infantry, of which fourscore
were armed with muskets or cross-bows, forty
horsemen, and a train of nine field-pieces'. At the
head of these, accompanied by ten thousand Tlafca-
lans and other friendly Indians, Cortes began his
march towards Mexico, on the twenty-eighth of
December, fix months after his difaflrous retreat
from that city k.

NOR did he advance to attack an enemy unpre- Prcpara.

pared to receive him. Upon the death of Monte- 'Mexican,
zuma, the Mexican chiefs, in whom the right of forftlir
elcaing the emperor was veted, had inflantly

Cortes Relat. z55, E.
k Rclat. z56, A. B. Diaz. c. 137.

z 4 raifie

B o o K raised his brother Quetlavaca to the throne. His

V.
_ W avowed and inveterate enmity to the Spaniards

J150. would have been sufficient to gain their suffrages,

although he had been less diftinguilhed for courage
and capacity. He had an immediate opportunity
of ihewing that he was worthy of their choice, by
conduaing, in person, those fierce attacks which
compelled the Spaniards to abandon his capital;
and as soon as their retreat afforded him any respite
from action, he took measures for preventing their
return to Mexico, with prudence equal to the spirit
which he had displayed in driving them out of it.
As from the vicinity of Tlafcaa, he could not be
unacquainted with the motions and intentions of
Cortes, he observed the storm that was gathering,
and began early to provide againrt it. le repaired
what the Spaniards had ruined in the city, and
strengthened it with such new fortifications as the
ikill of his fubje6ts was capable of ere&ting. Beside
filling his magazines with the usual weapons of war,
he gave diretions to make long spears headed with
the swords and daggers taken from the Spaniards,
in order to annoy the cavalry. He summoned the
people in every province of the empire to take
arms against their oppressors, and as an encourage-
ment to exert themselves with vigour, he promised
them exemption from all the taxes which his pre-
deceffors had imposed'. But what he laboured
with the greatest earnestness was, to deprive the

* Cortes Relat. p. z3, B. z54, A. B. Diaz. c. 140.

Spaniards

Spaniards of the advantages which they derived BO o K
from the friendship of the Tlafcalans, by endea -
vouring to persuade that people to renounce all 3rm-
connetion with men, who were not only avowed
enemies of the gods whom they worshipped, but
who would not fail to fubje& them at last to the
lame yoke, which they were now inconsiderately
lending their aid to impose upon others. These
representations, no less striking than well founded,
were urged to forcibly by his ambasadors, that it
required all the address of Cortes to prevent their
making a dangerous imprcfrion .

BUT while Quetlavaca was arranging his plan of
defence, with degree of foresight uncommon in
an American, his days were cut ihort by the finall-
pox, This distemper, which raged at that time in
New Spain with fatal malignity, was unknown in
that quarter of the globe, until it was introduced
by the Europeans, and may be reckoned among
the greatest calamities brought upon them by their
invaders. In his flead the Mexicans raised to the
throne Guatimozin, nephew and fon-in-law of
Montezuma, a young man of such high reputation
for abilities and valour, that in this dangerous crisis,
his countrymen, with one voice, called him to the
supreme command".

As Coon as Cortes entered the enemy's territo- 5s1.

Cortes ad.
ries, he discovered various preparations to obftru& vances to-

wardsMcx.

B. Diaz. c. 129. Herrera, dec. z. lib. x. c. 14. . . o.
P B. Diaz. c. 130.

his

B o0 K his progress. But his troops forced their way with

V- little difficulty, and took possession of Tezeuco,
15 zX the second city of the empire, situated on the

banks of the lake about twenty miles from Mexi-
co °. Here he determined to eftablifl his head-
quarters, as the inoft proper station for launching
his brigantines, as well as for making his approaches
to the capital. In order to render his residence
there more secure, he deposed the cazique or chief,
who was at the head of that community, under
pretext of some defect in his title, and fubttituted
in his place a person whom a faction of the nobles
pointed out as the right heir of that dignity. At-
tached to him by this benefit, the new cazique and
his adherents served the Spaniards with inviolable
fidelity p

-Iiaopera. As the preparations for conftruting the brigan-
tons tlow
.ndau tines advanced slowly under the unflilful hands of

Ibldiers and Indians, whom Cortes was obliged to
employ in aflilfing three or four carpenters who
happened fortunately to be in his service, and a,
he had not yet received the reinforcement which
he expected from Hispaniola, he was not in a con-
dition to turn his arms directly againif the capital.
To have attacked, at this period, a city to popu-
lols, to well prepared for defence, and in a fitua-
tion of lich peculiar itrcngth, must have cxpoi.d

Vo illa S'nor Tlhcatro Animricano, i. 156.

i' Corte. Rlat. 7;,6, ..c. B. Diaz. c. 137. (;omar Cron.
C. 121. Icircra, lIcc. 3. c. i.

iii

his troops to inevitable deftruEtion. Three months B OK
elapscd before the materials for the brigantines -
were finished, and before he heard any thing with s.1'.
refpe& to the success of the officer whom he had
sent to Hispaniola. This, however, was not a
season of inaction to Cortes. He attacked fuccef-
fively several of the towns situated around the lake;
and though all the Mexican power was exerted to
obftrut his operations, he either compelled them
to submit to the Spanilh crown, or reduced them
to ruins. The inhabitants of other towns he endea-
voured to conciliate by more gentle means, and
though he could not hold any intercourse with them
but by the intervention of interpreters, yet, under
all the disadvantage of that tedious and imperfe&
mode of communication, he had acquired such
thorough knowledge of the state of the country, as
well as of the dispositions of the people, that he
conducled his negociations and intrigues with afto-
nifling dexterity and luccets. Moit of the cities
adjacent to Mexico were originally the capitals of
irnall independent Rates; and some of them having
been but lately annexed to the Mexican empire,
still retained the remembrance of their ancient li-
berty, and bore with impatience the rigorous yoke
of their new masters. Cortes having early observed
symptoms of their cdifaflclion, availed himself of
this knowledge to gain their confidence and friind-
ship. By oficring, with confidence, to deliver
them from the odious dominion of the Mexicans,
and by liberal promilss of more indulgent treat-

ment,

B 0 0 K ment, if they would unite with him against their

V. L"1- oppressors, he prevailed on the people of several
'5Z' considerable diftrits, not only to acknowledge the

king of Castile as their sovereign, but to supply
the Spanish camp with provisions, and to strengthen
his army with auxiliary troops. Guatimozin, on
the first appearance of defctlion among his subje&s,
exerted himself with vigour to prevent or to punish
their revolt; but in spite of his efforts, the spirit
continued to spread, The Spaniards gradually ac-
quired new allies, and with deep concern he be-
held Cortes arming against his empire those very
hands which ought to have been ative in its de-
fence; and ready to advance againit the capital at
the head of a numerous body of his own fubjefts 9.

WHILE, by those various methods, Cortes was

gradually circumscribing the Mexican power in
such a manner that his profpe& of overturning
it seemed neither to be uncertain nor remote, all
his schemes were well nigh defeated, by a confpi-
racy no less unexpeEted than dangerous. The
soldiers of Narvaez had never united perfe6tly with
the original companions of Cortes, nor did they
enter into his measures with the fame cordial zeal.
Upon every occasion that required any extraordi-
nary elfort of courage or of patience, their spirits
were apt to fink; and now, on a near view of what

i Cortcs Relat. 256-260. B. Diaz. c. 137-140. Go.
maraCron. c. iz2, 123. clerrcra, dec. 3. lib. i. c. i, z.

tlcy

they had to encounter, in attempting to reduce a B o o x

V.

city so inaccessible as Mexico, and defended by a _..
numerous army, the resolution even of those among
them who had adhered to Cortes when he was de-
ferted by their associates, began to fail. Their fears
led them to presumptuous and unfoldier-like dif-
cuffions concerning the propriety of their general's
measures, and the improbability of their fuccefi.
From these they proceeded to censure and invec-
tives, and at last began to deliberate how they
might provide for their own safety, of which they
deemed their commander to be totally negligent.
Antonio Villefagna, a private soldier, but bold,
intriguing, and strongly attached to Velasquez, art-
fully fomented this growing spirit of difaffetion.
His quarters became the rendezvous of the mal-
contents, where, after many consultations, they
could discover no method of checking Cortes in
his career, but by afaffinating him and his molt
considerable officers, and conferring the command
upon some person who would relinquith his wild
plans, and adopt mealures more consistent with the
general security. Despair inspired them with cou-
rage. The hour for perpetrating the crime, the
persons whom they destined as vitims, the officers
to succeed them in command, were all named;
and the conspirators signed an affbciation, by which
they bound themselves with molt solemn oaths to
mutual fidelity. But on the evening before the
appointed day, one of Cortes's ancient followers,
who had been reduced into the conspiracy, touched

13 with

B 0 K with compunction at the imminent danger of a man
V. whom he had long been accustomed to revere, or
'sn. struck with horror at his own treachery, went pri-

vately to his general, and revealed to him all that
he knew. Cortes, though deeply alarmed, dif-
cerned at once what conduce was proper in a fitua-
tion so critical. He repaired instantly to Ville-
fagna's quarters, accompanied by some of his moRl
trusty officers. The astonishment and confusion of
the man at this unexpected visit anticipated the
confeflion of his guilt. Cortes, while his attendants
seized the traitor, snatched from his bosom a paper
containing the aflociation, signed by the confpira-
tors. Impatient to know how far the defection
extended, he retired to read it, and found there
names which filled him with surprise and sorrow.
But, aware how dangerous a ftrid scrutiny might
prove at such a juncture, he confined his judicial in-
quiries to Villefagna alone. As the proofs of his guilt
were manifest, he was condemned after a ihort trial,
and next morning he was seen hanging before the
door of the house in which he had lodged. Cortes
called his troops together, and having explained to
them the atrocious purpose of the conspirators, as
well as the justice of the punishment inficited on
Villefilgna, he added, with an appearance of satis-
faftion, that he was entirely ignorant with refpelt
to all the circumstances of this dark tranfaftion, as
the traitor, when arrcftcd, had suddenly torn and
swallowcd a paper which probably contained an
account of it, and under the fcvercif tortures pof-

, ifelled

fefled such conltancy as to conceal the names of n o oK'
his accomplices. This artful declaration restored v'
tranquility to many a breast that was throbbing, 'sZ'
while he spoke, with confcioufncfs of guilt and
dread of detection; and by this prudent modera-
tion, Cortes had the advantage of having disco-
vered, and of being able to observe such of his
followers as were diiiafected; while they, flatter-
ing themselves that their palt crime was unknown,
endeavoured to avert any lfflpicion of it, by re-
doubling their activity and zeal in his service'.

CORTES did not allow them leisure to ruminate H;, ing,
an what 1had happened; and as the most effeAual "r prpara-

tionj for

means of preventing the return of a mutinous fpi- briadin
rit, he determined to call forth his troops imme-
diately to action. Fortunately, a proper occasion
for this occurred without his seeming to court it.
Hie received intelligence that the materials for
building the brigantines were at length completely
linifhed, and waited only for a body of Spaniards
to conduct them to Tezeuco. The command of
this convoy, confifing of two hundred foot fol-
diers, tifteen horsemen, and two field-pieces, he
gave to Sandoval, who, by the vigilance, activity,
and courage which hie nanifctcd on every occa-
lion, was growing daily in his confidcnce, and in
the eifim:ition of his fellow-.foldiers. l'he firvice
was no less lingulir than ilmportant; the beams,
tle planks, the malls, the cordagc, the Jails, tile

r Cortes Rclat. 28,, C. B. Dii z. c. :1 . i i..cra, dec. 3.
Jib. i. c. i.

iron -

B'O o K iron-work, and all the infinite variety of articles
_- requisite for the conltru&ion ofthirteen brigantines,

5 1-. were to be carried sixty miles over land, through a

mountainous country, by people who were unac-
quainted with the ministry of domestic animals, or
the aid of machines to facilitate any work of la.
hour. The Tlafcalans furnished eight thousand
fiamener, an inferior order of men destined for ser-
vile talks, to carry the materials on their mhoul-
ders, and appointed fifteen thousand warriors to
accompany and defend them. Sandoval made the
disposition for their progress with great propriety,
placing the Tamcnes in the centre, one body of
warriors in the front, another in the rear, with con-
fiderable parties to cover the flanks. To each
of these he joined rome Spaniards, not only to as-
sift them in danger, but to accustom them to re-
gularity and subordination. A body so numerous,
and so much encumbered, advanced leisurely, but
in excellent order; and in some places, where it
was confined by the woods or mountains, the line
of march extended above fix miles. Parties of
Mexicans frequently appeared hovering around
them on the high grounds; but perceiving no
prospect of fuccel's in attacking an enemy conti-
nually on his guard, and prepared to receive them,
they did not venture to moles him; and Sandoval
had the glory of conduaing safely to Tezeuco, a
convoy on which all the future operations of his
countrymen depended'.

Cortes Relat. 260, C. E. B. Diaz. c. 140.

THIS

THIS was followed by another event of no less B O K

moment. Four ships arrived at Vera Cruz from v
Hispaniola, with two hundred soldiers, eighty Re^sa
horses, two battering cannon, and a considerable new rein.

« * * i

., ,?I ,1 , . forcement.

supply of ammunition and arms'. Elevated with
observing that all his preparatory schemes, either
for recruiting his own army, or impairing the force
of the enemy, had now produced their full effect,
Cortes, impatient to begin the siege in form, has-
tened the launching of the brigantines. To fa-
cilitate this, he had employed a vast number of
Indians for two months in deepening the small ri-
vulet which runs by Tezeuco into the lake, and
in forming it into a canal near two miles in length';
and though the Mexicans, aware of his intentions,
as well as of the danger which threatened them,
endeavoured frequently to interrupt the labourers,
or to burn the brigantines, the work was at last
completed". On the twenty-eighth of April, all The bri.
the Spaniih troops, together with the auxiliary In- launtldc
dians, were drawn up on the banks of the canal;
and with extraordinary military pomp, rendered
more solemn by the celebration of the molt sacred
rites of religion, the brigantines were launched.
As they fell down the canal in order, Father 01-
medo blessed them, and gave each its name.
Every eye followed them with wonder and hope,
until they entered the lake, when they hoitRed their

Cortes Relat. 259, F. 262, D. Gomara Cron. c. 129.
' See NOTE XCII. 2 B. Diaz. c. 140.

VOL. It. A A fails,

B o O K fails, and bore away before the wind. A general

V-y fhihout of joy was raised; all admiring that bold in.
'52^' ventive genius, which, by means so extraordinary

that their success almost exceeded belief, had ac-
quired the command of a fleet, without the aid of
which Mexico would have continued to set the
Spanihf power and arms at defiance y.

Dirro6tions CORTES determined to attack the city from three
ferthcfieg, different quarters; from Tepeaca on the north fide

of the lake, from Tacuba on the weft, and from
Cuyocan towards the south. Those towns were
situated on the principal causeways which led to the
capital, and intended for their defence. He appointed
Sandoval to command in the first, Pedro de Alva.
rado in the second, and Chriftoval de Olid in the
third; allotting to each a numerous body of Indian
auxiliaries, together with an equal division of Spa-
niards, who, by the junaion of the troops from
Hispaniola, amounted now to eighty-fix horsemen,
and eight hundred and eighteen foot soldiers; of
whom one hundred and eighteen were armed with
muflkets or cross-bows. The train of artillery con-
filed of three battering cannon, and fifteen field-
pieces g. He reserved for himself, as the ltation of
greatest importance and danger, the conduct of
the brigantines, each armed with one of his small
cannon, and manned with twenty-five Spaniards.

Y Corte Relat. a66, C. Herrera, dec. 3. lib. i. c. 5.
Gomara Cron. c. 129.

' Cortes Relat. 266, C.

As

As Alvarado and Olid 'proceeded towards the B o K

posts assigned them, they broke down the aque-- v.
du&s which the ingenuity of the Mexicans had '5",
ereted for conveying water into the capital, and by
the distress to which this reduced the inhabitants,
gave a beginning to the calamities which they were
destined to susser '. Alvarado :,nd Olid found dhe
towns of which they wcrc ordered to take poflfellon
deserted by their inhabitants, who had fled for safety
to the capital, where Guatimozin had colleced the
chief force of his empire, as there alone he could
hope to make a successful sand against the formi-
dable enemies who were approaching to afault
him.

THE first effort of the Mexicans was to destroy Mexicn,

the fleet of brigantines, the fatal effets of whose sttk th
operations they foresaw and dreaded. Though the
brigantines, after all the labour and merit of Cortes
in forming them, were of inconsiderable bulk,
rudely constructed, and manned chiefly with land-
men, hardly possesTd of /kill enough to conduc
them, they mutt have been objeas of terror to a
people unacquainted with any navigation but that
of their lake, and polefeed of no vessel larger than
a canoe. Neceflity, however, urged Guatimozin
to hazard the attack; and hoping to supply by
numbers what he wanted in force, he aflembled
such a multitude of canoes as covered the face of

' Cortes Relat. 267, B. B. Diaz. c. 150. Herrera, dec. 3.
lib. i. c. 15.

A A trhr

B 0 0 K the lake. They rowed on boldly to the charge,
. ,__ while the brigantines, retarded by a dead calm,

sz5.- could scarcely advance to meet them. But as the
R(pulrcd. enemy drew near, a breeze suddenly sprung up;

in a moment the fails were spread, the brigantines,
with the utmoRt cafe, broke through their feeble
opponents, overset many canoes, and dissipated
the whole armament with such slaughter, as con-
vinced the Mexicans, that the progress of the Eu-
ropeans in knowledge and arts rendered their fupe-
riority greater on this new element, than they had
hitherto found it by land b

s;ing,,.r FROM that time Cortes remained master of the
plan otcth lake, and the brigantines not only preserved a
'llegc communication between the Spaniards in their dif-

ferent stations, though at considerable distance from
each other, but were employed to cover the cause-
ways on each fide, and keep off the canoes, when
they attempted to annoy the troops as they ad-
vanced towards the city. Cortes formed the bri-
gantines in three divisions, appointing one to cover
each of the itations from which an attack was to be
carried on againif the city, with orders to second the
operations of the officer who commanded there.
Il'rom all the three stations he puflied on the attack
against the city wikh equal vigour; but in a manner
ib very different from the conduct of sieges in regu-
lar war, that he himself seems afraid it would appear

b Cortes Rclat. 267, C. B Diaz. .i So. GomauCron.
c. 131. Hcrrcra , dec. 3. lib. i. c. 7.

110

no less improper than fingulbr, to persons un- B o o K
acquainted with his situation c. Each morning his V
troops assaulted the barricades which the enemy zait
had erected on the causeways, forced their way
over the trenches which they had dug, and through
the canals where the bridges were broken down,
and endeavoured to penetrate into the heart of the
city, in hopes of obtaining some decisive advantage,
which might force the enemy to surrender, and
terminate the war at once; but when the obstinate
valour of the Mexicans rendered the efforts of the
day ineffecual, the Spaniards retired in the even-
ing to their former quarters. Thus their toil and
danger were, in some measure, continually renew-
ed ; the Mexicans repairing in the night what the
Spaniards had destroyed through the day, and re-
covering the posts from which they had driven
them. But neceflity prescribed this flow and un-
toward mode of operation. The number of his
troops was so small, that Cortes durt not, with a
handful of men, attempt to make a lodgment in a
city where he might be surrounded and annoyed
by such a multitude of enemies. The remem-
brance of what he had already suffered by the ill-
judged confidence with which he had ventured into
filch a dangerous situation, was still frefl in his
mind. The Spaniards, exhausted with fatigue,
were unable to guard the various poRls which they
daily gained; and though their camp was filled

' Cortes Rclat. 270o, F.

A A 3 with

B o O K with Indian auxiliaries, they durst not devolve this

V. _ charge upon them, because they were so little ac-
Sti*- customed to discipline, that no confidence could

be placed in their vigilance. Besides this, Cortes
was extremely solicitous to preserve the city as
much as pofllble from being destroyed, both be-
cause he destined it to be the capital of his con-
quefis, and wished that it might remain as a mo-
nument of his glory. From all these confidera-
tions, he adhered obstinately, for a month after
the siege was opened, to the system which he had
adopted. The Mexicans, in their own defence,
displayed valour which was hardly inferior to that
with which the Spaniards attacked them. On land,
on water, by night and by day, one furious con-
lAi& succeeded to another. Several Spaniards were
killed, more wounded, and all were ready to fink
under the toils of unintermitting service, which
were rendered more intolerable by the injuries of
the season, the periodical rains being now set in
with their usual violence d.

Indeavours ASTONISHED and disconcerted with the length
ityk thc and difficulties of the siege, Cortes determined to
"o"m. make one great effort to get poffefiion of the city,

before he relinquishcd the plan which he had hi-
therto followed, and had recourse to any other
mode of attack. With this view, he sent inftruc-
tions to Alvarado and Sandoval to advance with

d B. Diaz. c. 15!.

7 , . their

·heir divisions to a general afrault, and took. the B o o K
command in person of that posted on the causeway -
of Cuyocan. Animated by his presence, and the Z*,-
expecation of some decisive event, the Spaniards
pulbed forward with irresistible impetuosity. They
broke through one barricade after another, forced
their way over the ditches and canals, and having'
entered the city, gained ground incessantly, in
spite of the multitude and ferocity of their oppo-
nents. Cortes, though delighted with the rapidity
of his progress, did not forget that he might till
find it neceflary to retreat; and in order to secure
it, appointed Julien de Alderete, a captain of
chief note in the troops which he had received from
Hispaniola, to fill up the canals and gaps in the
causeway as the main body advanced. That offi-
cer, deeming it inglorious to be thus employed,
while his companions were in the heat of action and
the career of victory, negleted the important
charge committed to him, and hurried on, incon-
fiderately, to mingle with the combatants. The
Mexicans, whose military attention and skill were
daily improving, no Iboner observed this, than they
carried an account of it to their monarch.

GUATIMOZIN instantly discerned the confe- Repuifce

quence of the error which the Spaniards had com-
mitted, and, with admirable presence of mind,
prepared to take advantage of it. He commanded
the troops posted in the front to flackcn their es-
forts, in order to allure the Spaniards to pulh for-

A A 4 ward,

B 0 0 K ward, while he dispatched a large body of chosen
,_ warriors through different streets, some by land,
'*s5- and others by water, towards the great breach in

the causeway, which had been left open. On a
signal which he gave, the priests in the principal
temple struck the great drum consecrated to the
god of war. No sooner did the Mexicans hear its
doleful folernn found, calculated to inspire them
with contempt of death and enthusiastic ardour,
than they rushed upon the enemy with frantic rage.
The Spaniards, unable to resist men urged on no
less by religious fury than hope of success, began
to retire, at firit leisurely, and with a good coun-
tenance; but as the enemy pressed on, and their
own impatience to escape increased, the terror and
confulion became so general, that when they ar.
rived at the gap in the causeway, Spaniards and
Tlafcalans, horsemen and infantry, plunged in
promiscuously, while the Mexicans rushed upon
them fiercely from every fide, their light canoes
carrying them through shoals which the brigantines
could not approach. In vain did Cortes attempt
to stop and rally his flying troops; fear rendered
them regardless of his entreaties or commands.
Finding all his endeavours to renew the combat
fiuitlcfs, his next care was to save some of those
who had thrown themselves into the water; but
while thus employed, with more attention to their
situation than to his own, fix Mexican captains
suddenly laid hold of him, and were hurrying him
off in triumph and though two of his officcrs

rescued

rescued him at the expence of their own lives, he B 00 K
received several dangerous wounds before he could .m.
break loose. Above sixty Spaniards perilhed in ,its',n.
the rout; and what rendered the disaster more duabkio
affli&ing, forty of these fell alive into the hands
of an enemy never known to thew mercy to a
captive *.

THE approach of night, though it delivered the Thoscwiao

dejected Spaniards from the attacks of the enemy, acrifiek t
ushered in, what was hardly less grievous, the the godof
noise of their barbarous triumph, and of the hor-
rid festival with which they celebrated their vic-
tory. Every quarter of the city was illuminated
the great temple shone with filch peculiar fplen-
dour, that the Spaniards could plainly fee the
people in motion, and the priests busy in hastening
the preparations for the death of the prisoners.
Through the gloom, they fancied that they dif-
cerned their companions by the whiteners of their
skins, as they were stript naked, and compelled to
dance before the image of the god to whom they
were to be offered. They heard the shrieks of
those who were sacrificed, and thought that they
could distinguish each unhappy victim, by the
well-known found of his voice. Imagination added
to what they really saw or heard, and augmented
its horror. The most unfeeling melted into tears

Cortes Relat. p. 273. B. Diaz. c. js1. Gomara Cron.
c. 138. Hcrrcra, dec,3. lib.i. c. o.

of

A 0 0 K of compaflion, and the stoutest heart trembled at

V.-^ the dreadful fpetacle which they beheld'.

ANt CORTES, who, besides all that he felt in com-
Cthemes '
and effors mon with his fo'diers, was oppressed with the ad-
Mcxic',i. ditional load of anxious refletions natural to a ge-

neral on such an unexpeted calamity, could not,
like them, relieve his mind by giving vent to its
anguish. He was obliged to afitume an air of tran-
quillity, in order to revive the spirit and hopes of
his followers. The junciure, indeed, required an
extraordinary exertion of fortitude. The Mexi-
cans, elated with their victory, sallied out next
morning to attack him in hiis quarters. But they
did not rely on th! ebiorts us their ov.n arms alone.
They fcnt the heads of the Spaniards whom they
had sacrificed, to the lcadin- men in the adjacent
provinces, and airurced them that the god of war,
appeased by the blood of their invaders, which
had been flicd so plentifiully on his altars, had de-
clared with an audible voice, that in eight days
time those hated enemies Ihould be finally deltoy-
ed, and peace and prosperity re-ctlablilhed in the
empire.

:,,E, c }- A PREDICTIION uttered with such confidence, anti
a n ted by in terms so void of ambiguity, gained universal crc-
tiinny es his
Indi.n dit among a people prone to luperfition. The

zeal of the provinces, which had already declared

Sec NOTE XCIII.

againll

agalnft the Spaniards, augmented; and several B o o
which had hitherto remained inctive, took arms,
with enthulfaftic ardour, to execute the decree of '5.
the gods. The Indian auxiliaries who had joined
Cortes, accustomed to venerate the fame deities
with the Mexicans, and to receive the responses of
their priests with the fame implicit faith, abandon-
ed the Spaniards as a race of men devoted to cer-
tain deftruftion. Even the fidelity of the Tlafca-
lans was shaken, and the Spanish troops were left
almost alone in their stations. Cortes, finding that
he attempted in vain to dispel the superstitious fears
of his confederates by argument, took advantage,
from the imprudence of those who had framed the
prophecy, in fixing its accompliihment so near at
hand, to give a firiking demonstration of its falsity.
He suspended all military operations during the
period marked out by the oracle. Under cover of
the brigantines, which kept the enemy at a distance,
his troops lay in safety, and the fatal term expired
without any dilater c.

MANY of his allies, ashamed of their own cre- Herega:l,

their tricnd-

dulity, returned to their station. Other tribes, n'ipr,
judging that the gods who had now deceived the
Mexicans, had decreed finally to withdraw their
protection from them, joined his fiandard; and
such was the levity of a simple people, moved by
every flight impression, that in a ihort time after

z B. Diaz. c. 153. Gomara Cron . c. 138.

fucll

Bo o K such a general defe&ion of his confederates, Cortes

v. aw himself, if we may believe his own account, at
1521. the head of a hundred and fifty thousand Indians.

andadoptsa Even with such a numerous army, he found it ne-
new (fytcm
of attack. celfary to adopt a new and more wary system of

operation. Instead of renewing his attempts to
become master of the city at once, by such bold but
dangerous efforts of valour as he had already tried,
he made his advances gradually, and with every
potfible precaution against exposing his men to any
calamity similar to that which they still bewailed.
As the Spaniards pushed forward, the Indians re-
gularly repaired the causeways behind them. As
loon as they got poffefion of any part of the
town, the houses were instantly levelled with the
ground. Day by day, the Mexicans, forced to re-
tire as their enemies gained ground, were hemmed
in within more narrow limits. Guatimozin, though
unable to stop the career of the enemy, continued
to defend his capital with obitinate resolution, and
disputed every inch of ground. The Spaniards
not only varied their mode of attack, but, by or-
dersof Cortes, changed the weapons with which
they fought. They were again armed with the
long Chinantlan spears, which they had employed
with such success againit Narvaez; and, by the firm
array in which this enabled them to range them-
selves, they repelled, with little danger, the looif
aifault of the Mexicans: incredible numbers of them
fell in the conliias which they renewed every day '.

b Cortes clat. . z7 , C. 276, F. B. Dint. c. 153

While

While war wafted without, famine began to con- B o o K
fume them within, the city. The Spanilh brigan- ....j
tines, having the entire command of the lake, ren- 's"z
dered it almost impossible to convey to the besieged
any supply of provisions by water. The immense
number of his Indian auxiliaries enabled Cortes to
shut up the avenues to the city by land. The
stores which Guatimozin had laid up were exhaust-
ed, by the multitudes which had crowded into the
capital, to defend their sovereign and the temples
of their gods. Not only the people, but persons
of the highest rank, felt the utmost ditreffes of fa-
mine. What they suffered, brought on infeftious
and mortal distempers, the last calamity that visits
besieged cities, and which filled up the measure of
their woes'.

BUT, under the pressure of so many and such Courageand

various evils, the spirit of Guatimozin remained C',tun,,f-
firm and unfubdued. He rejeted, with scorn, 'in
every overture of peace from Cortes; and, disdain-
ing the idea of submitting to the oppressors of his
country, determined not to survive its ruin. The
Spaniards continued their progress. At length all July 7.
the three divisions penetrated into the great square
in the centre of the city, and made a secure lodge-
ment there. Three-fotrths of the city were now
reduced, and laid in ruins. The remaining quar.
ter was so closely pressed, that it could not long

Cortes Relat. 276, E. 277, F. B. Diaz. 155. Gomart
Cron. c, 14.1

withfland

B o O K withstand afiailants, who attacked it from their new
a, c station with superior advantage, and more alured
5*21. expectation of success. The Mexican nobles, soli.

citous to save the life of a monarch whom they
revered, prevailed on Guatimozin to retire from a
place where resistance was now vain, that he might
route the more distant provinces of the empire to
arms, and maintain there a more successful struggle
with the public enemy. In order to facilitate the
execution of this measure, they endeavoured to
amuse Cortes with overtures of fubmifion, that,
while his attention was employed in adjusting the
articles of pacification, Guatimozin might escape
unperceived. But they made this attempt upon a
leader of greater sagacity and discernment than to
be deceived by their arts. Cortes fufpeaing their
intention, and aware of what moment it was to de-
feat it, appointed Sandoval, the officer on whose
vigilance he could most perfectly rely, to take the
command of the brigantines, with ftri& injunctions
to watch every motion of the enenq. Sandoval,
attentive to the charge, observing. some large ca-
noes crowded with people rowing across the lake
with extraordinary rapidity, instantly gave the fig-
nal to.chace. Garcia Holguin, who commanded
the fwifteft-failing brigantine, soon overtook them,
and was preparing to fire on the foremost canoe,
which seemed to carry some person whom all the
He i taken reft followed and obeyed. At once the rowers dropt

their oars, and all on board, throwing down their
arms, conjured him with cries and tears to forbear, as

tle

the emperor was there. Holguin eagerly seized B O K
his prize, and Guatimozin, with a dignified com- -_
pofure, gave himself up into his hands, requesting '15"
only that no insult might be offered to the empress
or his children. When condu&ed to Cortes, he
appeared neither with the fullen fierceness of a bar-
barian, nor with the dejeetion of a supplicant. "I
have done," siid he, addrefiing himfelfto the Spa-
nilh general, "'what became a monarch. I have
defended my people to the last extremity. Nothing
now remains but to die. Take this dagger," lay-
ing his hand on one which Cortes wore, " plant
it in my breast, and put an end to a life which can
no longer be of us c."

As soon as the fate of their sovereign was Agunft 3.

known, the refiltance of the Mexicans ceased; 'rhcity.
and Cortes took poffeflion of that small part of
the capital whicli yet remained undeftroyed. Thus
terminated the filge of Mexico, the most memora-
ble event in the conqcuelt of America. It conti-
nued fcventy-five days, hardly one of which passed
without fume extraordinary effort of one party in
the attack, or of the other in the defence of a city,
on the fate of which both knew that the fortune of
the empire depended. As the ftrmggle here was
more obstinate, it was likewise more equal, than
any between the inhabitants of the Old and New
Worlds. The great abilities of Guatimozin, the

k Cortes Rclat. 279. B. Diaz. c. 156. Gomara Cron.
c. 12. lcerrcra, dec. 3. lib. ii. c. 7.

number

B 0 K number of his troops, the peculiar situation 6f his

;----. capital, so far counterbalanced the superiority of
'SI" the Spaniards in arms and discipline, that they must

have relinquished the enterprise, if they had trusted
for success to themselves alone. But Mexico was
overturned by the jealousy of neighbours who
dreaded its power, and by the revok of fubjets
impatient to shake off its yoke. By their effe&ual
aid, Cortes was enabled to accomplilh what, with.
out luch support, he would hardly have ventured
to attempt. How much soever this account of the
reduction of Mexico may detraa, on the one hand,
from the marvellous relations of rome Spanish wri.
ters, by ascribing that to simple and obvious causes
which they attribute to the romantic valour of their
countrymen, it adds, on the other, to the merit and
abilities of Cortes, who, under every disadvantage,
acquired such an ascendant over unknown nations,
as to render them instruments towards carrying his
schemes into execution'.

Sralo^lnf THE exultation of the Spaniards, on accom-
:hl booty,
and diftp- plifhing this arduous enterprise, was at firit excef-
pointment oftespa- five. But this was quickly damped by the cruel
nlird'. disappointment of those sanguine hopes, which had

animated them amidit so many hardships and dan-
gers. Instead of the inexhaustible wealth which
they expe&ed from becoming masters of Monte-
zuma's treasures, and the ornaments of so many
temples, their rapacioulhefs could collec only an

'See NOTE XCIV.

4 incon-

inconsiderable booty amidst ruins and defolaton". B o o t
Guatimozi9, aware of his impending fate, had or- _
dered what remained of the riches amassed by his IsL
ancestors to be thrown into the lake. The Indian
auxiliaries, while the Spaniards were engaged in
conflit with the enemy, had carried off the mos
valuable part of the spoil. The fum to be divided
among the conquerors was so small, that many of
them disdained to accept of the pittance which fell
to their share, and all murmured and exclaimed;
some, agGnfl Cortes and his confidents, whom they
fufpe&ed of having fecredy appropriated to thei
own use a large portion of the riches which fhoauld
have been brought into the commron stock; others,
against Guatimozin, whom they accused of obfti.
nacy, in refuting to difover the place where he
had hidden his treasure.

ARGUMENTS, intreaties, and promises were cm- Ouatimotin

ployed in order to soothe them, but with To little tortured.
effe&, that Cortes, from foliciude to check this
growing spirit of discontent, gave way to a deed
which stains the glory of all his great acions.
Without regarding the former dignity of Guati-
mozin, or feeling any reverence for those virtues
which he had displayed, he fubje6ted the unhappy
monarch, together with his chief favourit, to tor-
ture, in order to force fror them a discovery of

a The gold and filvr, according to Cortes, amounted only
to 120,000 pfo,, Relat. A8o A. a fum much inferior to that
which the Spaniards had formerly divided in Mexico.

VOL. .
1. a the

B 0 0 K the royal treasures, which it was supposed they had
L--%~ concealed. Guatimozin bore whatever the refined

*s'1. cruelty of his tormentors could infli&, with the in-

vincible fortitude of an American warrior. His
fellow-fufferer, overcome by the violence of the
anguish, turned a dejected eye towards his master,
which seemed to implore his permiflion to reveal
all that he knew. But the high-fpirited prince,
darting on him a look of authority mingled with
scorn, checked his weakness by asking, " Am I
now reposing on a bed of flowers ?" Overawed
by the reproach, the favourite persevered in his
dutiful silence, and expired. Cortes, ashamed of
a scene so horrid, rescued the royal victim from the
hands of his torturers, and prolonged a life reserved
for new indignities and sufferings".

Al the prohe THE fate of the capital, as both parties had
empircrub- foreseen, decided that of the empire. The pro-
nmt.

vinces submitted one after another to the con-
querors. Small detachments of Spaniards march-
ing through them without interruption, penetrated
in different quarters to the great Southern Ocean,
which, according to the ideas of Columbus, they
imagined would open a short as well as easy paflage
to the East Indies, and secure to the crown of Ca-

cortes stile all the envied wealth of those fertile regions";
forms krhemesof and the active mind of Cortes began already to
new disco.

vcrs man B. Diaz. c. 157. Gomara Cron. c. 146. Herrera.

dec. 3. lib. ii. c. 8. Torquem. Mon. Ind. i. 574.

' Cortes Rclat. 280, D, &c. B. Dian. c. 157.

13 form
*~ ~~~~1

form fchemcs for attempting this important dif- a o O

'SIV.

HE did not know, that during the progress of which are

his vi&orious arms in Mexico, the very scheme, of by Mel.
which he began to form some idea, had been un. 'an
dertaken and accomplished. As this is one of the
most splendid events in the history of the Spanish
discoveries, and has been produ&ive of efftees pe-
culiarly interesting to those extensive provinces
which Cortes had now fubje&ted to the crown of
Castile, the account of its rife and progress merits
'a particular detail.

FERDINAND MAGALHAENS, or Magellan, a

Portuguese gentleman of honourable birth, having
frrved several years in the East Indies, with dif-
tinguifhed valour, under the famous Albuquerque,
demanded the recompence which he thought due
to his services, with the boldness natural to a high-
spirited soldier. But as his general would not grant
his suit, and he expe&ted greater juflice from his
sovereign, whom he knew to be a good judge and
a generous rewarder of merit, he quitted India
abruptly, and returned to Lilbon. In order to
induce Emanuel to liften more favourably to his
claim, he not only stated his past services, but of-
sered to add to them by conducting his country.
men to the Molucca or Spice Islands, by holding a

Hlcrrcra, dec. 3. lib. ii. c. 7.Gomara Cron. . 149.

a B 2 wcftcrly

B o K westerly courfc; which he contended would be both

v' . ihorter and less hazardous than that which the Por-
1521. tuguefe now followed by the Cape of Good Hope,

through the immense extent of the Eatern Ocean.
This was the original and favourite projet of Co-
lumbts, and Magellan founded his hopes of fuccei
on the ideas of that great navigator, confirmed by
many observations, the result of his own naval ex-
perience, as well as that of his countrymen in their
intercourse with the East. But though the Portu-
guefe moparchs had the merit of having first
awakened and encouraged the spirit of discovery in
that age, it was their destiny, in the course of a
few years, to reje& two grand schemes for this
purpose, the execution of which would have been
attended with a, great accefflon of glory to them.
selves, and of power to their kingdom. In confe-
quence of some ill-founded prejudice against Ma-
gellan, or of some dark intrigue which contempo-
rary hiftoripns have not explained, Emanuel would
neither bestow the recompence which he claimed,
nor approve ofthe scheme which he proposed; and
difmiircd him with a disdainful coldness intolerable
to a man conscious of what he deserved, and ani-
mated with the sanguine hopes of success peculiar
to those who are capable of forming or of condu&t-
ing new and great undertakings. In a transport of
,5,, resentment, Magellan formally renounced his alle-

giance to an ungrateful master, and fled to the
court of Caltile, where he expe&ed that his talents
would be more jutly eitimatcd. lIe endeavoured

to

to recommend himself by offering to exeticte, un- a o o0
der the patronage of Spain, that scheme, which he I--
had laid before the court of Portugal, the accorm- is«t.
plilhment of which, he knew, would wound the
monarch against whom he was exasperated in the
moR tender part. In order to establish the juftnefr
of his theory, he produced the fame arguments
which he had employed at Liftoni acknowledging,
at the fame time, that the undertaking was both
arduous and expensive, as it could not be attempted
but with a squadron of considerable force, and vic-
tualled for at least two years. Fortunately, he ap-
plied to a minister who was not apt to be deterted,
either by the boldness of a design, or the e*pence
of carrying it into execution. Cardiiial Xlmenesy
who at that time direted the affairs of Spain, dif-
cerning at once what an increase of wealth and
glory would accrue to his country by the ficeefs of
Magellan's proposal, litened to it with a noft fa-
vourable ear. Charles V. on his arrival in his Spa-
ni(h dominions, entered into the measure with no
less ardour, and orders were ifmued for equipping a
proper squadron at the public charge, of which
the command was given to Magellan, whom the
king honoured with the habit of St. Jag6 and the
title of Captain-General P.

ON the tenth of August one thousand five hun- Hisvoyage.

drcd and nineteen, Magellan failed from Seville

P Herrera, dec.. . lib. ii. c. 19. lib. iv. . 9. Gomara

HilR. c. 9. Dalrymplc's Collea. of Voyages to the South
Pacific Ocean, vol.i. ip. , &c.

B B 3 with

Bo o K with five ihips, which, according to the ideas of

. the age, were deemed to be of considerable force,
J'5I. though the burden of the largest did not exceed

one hundred and twenty tons. The crews of the
whole amounted to two hundred and thirty-four
men, among whom were some of the molt Ikilful
pilots in Spain, and several Portuguese sailors, in
whose experience, as more extensive, Magellan
placed till greater confidence. After touching at
the Canaries, he stood directly south towards the
equinoctial line along the coast of America, but
was so long retarded by tedious calms, and spent
so much time in searching every bay and inlet for
that communication with the Southern Ocean which
he wished to discover, that he did not reach the
,zo2. river De la Plata till the twelfth of January. That

spacious opening through which its vast body of
water pours into the Atlantic allured him to enter;
but after failing up it for some days, he concluded,
from the shallowness of the stream and the fresh-
ness of the water, that the wifhcd-for firait was not
situated there, and continued his course towards the
fputh. On the thirty-firft of March he arrived in
the port of St. Julian, about forty-eight degrees
south of the line, where he resolved to winter. In
this uncomfortable station he loft one of his fqua-
dron, and the Spaniards suffered so much from the
excessive rigour of the climate, that the crews of
three of his (hips, headed by their officers, rose in
open mutiny, and infifed on relinquishing the
visionary projecq of a desperate adventurer, and

returning

returning diretly to Spain. This dangerous in- B O o K
furreAtion Magellan suppressed, by an effort of
courage no less prompt than intrepid, and inflited 's"'
exemplary punishment on the ringleaders. With
the remainder of his followers, overawed but not
reconciled to his scheme, he continued his voyage
towards the south, and at length discovered, near
the fifty-third degree of latitude, the mouth of a
strait, into which he entered, notwithstanding the
murmurs and remonstrances of the people under
his command. After failing twenty days in that
winding dangerous channel, to which he gave his
own name, and where one of his Ihips deserted
him, the great Southern Ocean opened to his
view, and with tears of joy he returned thanks to
Heaven for having thus far crowned his endeavours
with success I,

BUT he was fill at a greater distance than he

imagined from the objet of his withes. He failed
during three months and twenty days in an uni-
form direcion towards the north-west, without dif.
covering land. In this voyage, the longest that
had ever been made in the unbounded ocean, he
suffered incredible distress. His stock of provi-
lions was almost exhausted, the water became
putrid, the men were reduced to the lhorteft al-
lowance with which it was possible to fultain life,

q Herrera, dec. a. lib. iv. c. so. lib.ix. c. so, &c. Go-
mara Hil. c. 92. Pigafcett Viaggio ap. Ramus. il. p. 351,
cc.

"B 4 and

B O 0 c and the scurvy, the molt dreadful of all the mals.

V.
-', _ dies with which sea-faring people are affli&ed, be-
J5"s. gan to spread among the crew. One circumtance

alone afforded them some consolation; they en-
joyed an uninterrupted course of fair weather, with
such favourable winds, that Magellan bestowed on
that ocean the name of Pacific, which it still retains.
When reduced ts such extremity that they must
have funk under their sufferings, they fell in with
arI., 6. a cluster of Small but fertile islands, which afforded

them refreshments in such abundance, that their
health was soon re-eftablilhed. From there isles,
which he called Do los Ladrones, he proceeded on
his voyage, and soon made a more important dif-
covery of the illands now known by the name of
the Philippines. In one of there he got into an
unfortunate quarrel with the natives, who at-
tacked him with a numerous body of troops well
armed; and while he fought at the head of his
.Apil i6. men with his usual valour, he fell by the hands of

those barbarians, together with several of his prin.
cipal officers,

THE expedition was prosecuted under other

commanders. After visiting many of the smaller
isles scattered in the eafern part of the Indian
h'ov. g. ocean, they touched at the great island of Borneo,

and at length landed in Tidore, one of the Mo-
luccas, to the aflonifhment of the Portuguese,
who could not comprehend how the Spaniards, by
holding a westerly course, had arrived at that fc-

I1 questercd

questered feat of their most valuable commerce, a o o
which they themfclves had discovered by failing Zvj
in an opposite direction. There, and in ihe ad- ',s'
jacent isles, the Spaniards found a people ac-
quainted with the benefits of extensive trade, and
willing to open an intercourse with a new nation.
They took in a cargo of the precious spices, which
are the diftinguithed production of those islands;
and with that, as well as with specimens of the
rich commodities yielded by the other countries
which they had visited, the Viitory, which, of the Jan. as.
two ships that remained of the squadron, was most
fit for a long voyage, set fail for Europe, under
the command of Juan Sebastian del Cano. He
followed the course of the Portuguese, by the
Cape of Good Hope, and, after many disasters
and sufferings, he arrived at St. Lucar on the
seventh of September one thousand five hundred
and twenty-two, having failed round the globe in
the space of three years and twenty-eight days .

THOUGH an untimely fate deprived Magellan

of the fatisfaAion of accomplishing this great un-
dertaking, his contemporaries, just to his memory
and talents, ascribed to him not only the honour
of having formed the plan, but of having fur-
mounted almost every obstacle to the completion
of it; and in the present age his name is still

I Herrera, dec. 3. lib. i.c. 3. 9, lib. iv. c. i. Gomaru
Cron. c. 93, &c. Pigafetta ap Ramus. ii. p. 361, &c.

ranked

0 0 K ranked among the highest in the roll of eminent
V.
~L.- and successful navigators. The naval glory of

'5'2 Spain now eclipsed that of every other nation;

and by a singular felicity ihe had the merit, in
the course of a few years, of discovering a new
continent almost as large as that part of the earth
which was formerly known, and of ascertaining by
experience the form and extent of the whole terra-
queous globe,

THE Spaniards were not satisfied with the glory

of having first encompassed the earth; they ex-
pe&ed to derive great commercial advantages from
this new and boldest effort of their maritime skill.
The men of science among them contended, that
the spice islands, and several of the richest coun-
tries in the East, were so situated as to belong of
right to the crown of Castile, in consequence of
the partition made by Alexander VI, The mer-
chants, without attending to this difcuflion, en,
gaged eagerly in that lucrative and alluring com-
merce, which was now opened to them. The
Portuguese, alarmed at the intrusion of filch for-
midable rivals, remonstrated and negociated in
Europe, while in Asia they oblltruted the trade of
the Spaniards by force of arms. Charles V. not
fuifficicntly inftru&ed with respeCt to the import-
ance of this valuable branch of commerce, or
diftra&ted by the multiplicity of his schemes and
operations, did not afford his subje&s proper pro-
tction. At last, the low slate of his finances, ex-

haufted

haufted by the efforts of his arms in every part of B o O K
Europe, together with the dread of adding a new *.
war with Portugal to those in which he was already '51
engaged, induced'him to make over his claim of
the Moluccas to the Portuguese for three hundred
and fifty thousand ducats. He reserved, however,
to the crown of Castile the right of reviving its
pretensions on repayment of that fum; but other
objects engrossed his attention and that of his fuc-
cefoirs; and Spain was finally excluded from a
branch of commerce in which it was engaging with
sanguine expetations of profit'.

THOUGH the trade with the Moluccas was relin-

quilhed, the voyage of Magellan was followed by
commercial effetes of great moment to Spain.
Philip II. in the year one thousand five hundred
and sixty four, reduced those islands which he dif-
covered in the Eastern Ocean to fubjeaion, and
eftablilhed settlements there; between which and
the kingdom of New Spain, a regular intercourse,
the nature of which lhall be explained in its proper
place, is iill carried on. I return now to the
trapftiops in New Spain.

AT the time that Cortes was acquiring such ex- An order to

supersede

tcnfive territories for his native country, and pre- conrt,
paring the way for future conqiefts, it was his fin-
gular fate not only to be destitute of any commis-
sion or authority from the sovereign whom he was

F Herrera, dec. 3. lib. vi. c. I, &c. dec. 4. lib. v, c. 7, &c.

fcrving

B o K serving with such successful zeal, but to be regarded

_'j as an undutiful and Seditious subjec. By the in-
S'2- fluence of Fonseca, bilhop of Burgos, his condut

in afibming the government of New Spain was
declared to be an irregular usurpation, in contempt
of the royal authority; and Chriftoval de Tapia
received a commission, impowering him to super-
fede Cortes, to seize his person, to confiscate his
cffeCts, to make a ftriEt scrutiny into his proceed-
ings, and to transmit the result of all the enquiries
carried on in New Spain to the council of the In-
dies, of which the bishop of Burgos was president.
A few weeks after the reduction of Mexico, Tapia
landed at Vera Cruz with the royal mandate to
firip its conqueror of his power, and to treat him
as a criminal. But Fonseca had chosen a very
improper instrument to wreak his vengeance on
Cortes. Tapia had neither the reputation nor the
talents that suited the high command to which

which he he was appointed. Cortes, while he publicly ex-
clud". pressed the most refpe&ful veneration for the em.

peror's authority, secretly took measures to defeat
the effec of his commission; and having involved
Tapia and his followers in a multiplicity of nego-
ciations and conferences, in which he sometimes
had recourse to threats, but more frequently em-
ployed bribes and promises, he at length prevailed
on that weak man to abandon a province which he
was unworthy of governing'.

t -errera, dec. 3. lib. iii. c. 16. dec. iv c. I. Cort. Relat.
011, B. B. iaz. c. 158,

BUTl

But, notwithstanding the fortunate dexterity with B 0 K

V.

which he had eluded this danger, Corte wufo fin- *-_
fible of the precarious tenure by which he held his f
power, that he dispatched deputies to Spain, with rt.lt*
a pompous account of the fucccfs of hisarans, with May 4s.
farther fpccimens of the produ&ions of the coun.
try, and with rich presents to the emperor, as the
earnest of future contributions from his new con..
quest; requesting, in recompence for all his ser-
vices, the approbation of his proceedings, and that
he might be entrusted with the government of
those dominions, which his condu&, and the valour
of his followers, had added to the crown of Castile.
The juncure in which his deputies reached the
court was favourable. The internal commotions
in Spain, which had disquieted the beginning of
Charles's reign, were just appeased'. The minis-
ters had leisure to turn their attention towards
foreign affairs. The account of Cortess -viteries
filled his countrymen with admiration. The ex-
tent and value of his conquelts became the objec
of vast and interesting hopes. Whatever slain he
might have contra&ced, by the irregularity of the
fReps which he took in order to attain power, was
so fully effaced by the splendor and merit of the
great a&tions which this had enabled him to per.
form, that every heart revolted at the thought of
infli&ing any censure on a man, whose services ead.i
tied him to the highest marks of diftinioa.. The
public voice declared warmly in favour of his pre-

U His, of Chartes V. vol. ii. b. ii.

tensions,

B o o K tensions, and Charles arriving in Spain about this
- .~, time, adopted the sentiments of his subje&s with a
ans. youthfil ardour.; otwithftanding the claims of
pointed Velasquez, and the partial representations of the
geieal and bilhop of Burgos, the emperor appointed Cortes
Goeremorof
New Spain. captain-general and governor of New Spain, judg-

ing that no person, was so capable of maintaining
the royal authority, or of eftablilhing good order
both among his Spanish and Indian fubjets, as the
victorious leader whom the former had long been
accustomed to obey, and the latter had been taught
to fear and to refpe& x.

H;CrIcmes EVEN before his jurifdicion received this legal
range. fan&ion, Cortes ventured to exercise all the powers
me"'t. of a governor, and by various arrangements, en-

deavoured to render his conquest a secure and be-
neficial acquisition to his country. He determined
to establish the feat ofgovernment in its ancient fta-
tion, and to raise Mexico again from its ruins; and
having conceived high ideas concerning the future
grandeur of the state of which he was laying the
foundation, he began to rebuild its capital on a
plan which hath gradually formed the most magni-
ficent city in the New World. At the fame time,
he employed ikilful persons to search for mines in
different parts of the country, and opened some
which were found to be richer than any which the
Spaniards had hitherto discovered in America. He

a Herrera, dec. 3. lib. iv. c. 3. Gomara Cron. c. 16+, 16y.
B. Diaz. 167, 168.

detached

detached his principal officers into the remote pro- B o O K
vinces, and encouraged them to fettle there, not
only by bestowing upon them large tracs of land, 'ss"
but by granting them the fame dominion over the
Indians, and the fame right to their service, which
the Spaniards had assumed in the ifiands.

IT was not, however, without difficulty that the Jnfurreai

Mexican empire could be entirely reduced into oMhc,
the form of a Spanifli colony. Enraged and ren- andcruelty
dered desperate by oppreflion, the natives often. niard.
forgot the superiority of their enemies, and ran to
arms in defence of their liberties. In every con-
test, however, the European valour and discipline
prevailed. But fatally for the honour of their
country, the Spaniards sullied the glory redound-
ing from these repeated vitories by their mode
of treating the vanquished people. After taking
Guatimozin, and becoming masters of his capital,
they supposed that the king of Castile entered on
pofleflion of all the rights of the captive monarch,
and affec6ed to confider every effort of the Mexicans
to assert their own independence, as the rebellion
of vassals against their sovereign, or the mutiny of
laves against their master. Under the fanftion of
those ill-founded maxims, they violated every
right that Ihould be held sacred between hodile
nations. After each infurre&ion, they reduced the
common people in the provinces which they sub-
dued, to the molt humiliating of all conditions,
that ofperfonal feTvitude. Their chiefs, filppofed

to

B 0 0 K to be more criminal, were punilhed with greater

V.
*- _-. fieverity, and put to death in the most ignominious

a or the most excruciating mode, that the info-

lence or the cruelty of their conquerors could de-
vise. In almost every diRfrit of the Mexican
empire, the progress of the Spanish arms is marked
with blood, and with deeds so atrocious, as dif-
grace the enterprising valour that conducted them
to success. In the country of Panuco, sixty ca-
ziques or leaders, and four hundred nobles, were
burnt at one time. Nor was this Lhocking barba-
rity perpetrated in any sudden sally of rage, or by
a commander of inferior note. It was the a& of
Sandoval, an officer whose name is entitled to
the second rank in the annals of New Spain, and
executed after a solemn consultation with Cortesj
and to complete the horror of the scene, the chil-
dren and relations of the wretched victims were
assembled, and compelled to be speCtators of their
dying agonies Y. It seems hardly poflible to ex-
ceed in horror this dreadful example of severity;
but it was followed by another, which affecCed
the Mexicans still more sensibly, as it gave them
a mnoft feeling proof of their own degradation,
and of the small regard which their haughty
matiers retained for the ancient dignity and fplen-
dour of their state. On a flight suspicion, con-
firmed by very imperfect evidence, that Guati-
mozin had formed a Icheme to shake off the yoke,
and to excite his former fubjets to take arms,

r Cortes Relat. 291, C. Gomara Cron. c. 15;.

Cortes,

Cortes, without the formality of a trial, ordered B O K
the unhappy monarch, together with the caziques 'v-
of Tezeuco and Tacuba, the two persons of greatest ,s32
eminence in the empire, to be hanged; and the
Mexicans, with astonishment and horror, beheld
this disgraceful punishment inflicted upon persons,
to whom they were accustomed to look up with
reverence, hardly inferior to that which they paid
to the gods themselves z. The example of Cortes
and his principal officers encouraged and justified
persons of subordinate rank to venture upon com-
mitting greater excesses. Nuno de Guzman, in
particular, stained an illustrious name by deeds of
peculiar enormity and rigour, in various expedi-
tions which he conduced'.
ONE circumitance, however, saved the Mexi- Firftobjea

of indufs:-y

cans from farther consumption, perhaps from one mog the
is complete, as that which had depopulated the Colquerr.
islands. The first conquerors did not attempt to
search for the precious metals in the bowels of the
earth. They were neither sufficiently wealthy to
carry on the expensive works, which are requisite
for opening those deep recefes where nature has
concealed the veins of gold and silver, not fuffi-
ciently skilful to perform the ingenious operations
by which those precious metals are separated from
their refpeclive ores. They were faisfied with-the

' GomaraCron. c. 170. B. Diaz. c. 177. Herrera, dec. 3.
lib.viii. c.9. See NOTE XCV.

' Herrera, dec. 4 k paflim.
VOL. 1. c c more

B o O K more simple method, praftifed by the Indians, of

V.
i-y- ~ walhing the earth carried down rivers and torrents

15*' from the mountains, and collecting the grains of

native metal deposited there. The rich mines of
New Spain, which have poured forth their trea.
lures with fu:h profusion on every quarter of the
globe, were not discovered for several years after
12, , . the conquest b. By that time, a more orderly go.

vernment and police were introduced into the co-
lony; experience, derived from former errors, had
suggested many useful and humane regulations for
the protection and preservation of the Indians;
and though it then became necessary to increase
the number of those employed in the mines, and
they were engaged in a species of labour more
pernicious to the human constitution, they suffered
lets hardlhip or diminution than from the ill-judged,
but less extensive, schemes of the first conquerors.
rieir po. WHILE it was the lot of the Indians to susser,

their new matters seem not to have derived any
considerable wealth from their ill-condu&ed re-
searches. According to the usual fate of first set.
tiers in new colonies, it was their lot to encounter
danger, and to itruggle with difficulties; the fruits
of their viEtories and toils were reserved for times
of tranquillity, and reaped by successors of greater
industry, but of inferior merit. The early hifto-
rians of America abound with accounts of the sus-

b JIerrera, dec. 8. lib. x. c. 21.

1~i ~ fcring!

ftilings and of the poverty of its conquerors c. In o o CK
New Spain, their condition was rendered more _
grievous by a peculiar arrangement. When 's^-
Charles V. advanced Cortes to the government of
that country, he at the fame time appointed certain
commiflioners to receive and admlinifter the royal
revenue there, with independent jurifdieiond.
These men, chosen from inferior (tations in various
departments of public bulinefs at Madrid, were so
much elevated with their promotion, that they
thought they were called to ad a part of the firlt
consequence. But being accustomed to the mi-
nute formalities of office, and having contraCted
the narrow ideas suited to the sphere in which they
had hitherto moved, they were astonished, on ar-
riving in Mexico, at the high authority which s154.
Cortes exercised, and could not conceive that the
mode of administration, in a country recently sub-
dued and fettled, must be different from what took
place in one where tranquillity and regular govern-
ment had been long established. In their letters,
they represented Cortes as an ambitious tyrant, who
having usurped ajurifdition superior to law, aspired
at independence, and by his exorbitant wealth and
extensive influence, might accompliih those dif-
loyal schemes which he apparently meditated".
There insinuations made such deep impreflion upon
the Spanilh ministers, most of whom had been

' Cortes Relat. :83, F. B. Diaz. c. 209.
d Herrera, dec. 3. lib. iv. c. 3.
' Herrera, dec. 3. lib. v. c. 14.

c c 2 formed

B O o K formed to buflnefs under the jealous and rigid ad.

=
.- ministration of Ferdinand, that, unmindful of all
524.' Cortes's past services, and regardless of. what he

was then suffering in conducting that extraordinary
expedition, in which he advanced from the lake of
Mexico to the weitern extremities of Honduras',
they infused the fame suspicions into the mind of
their mailer, and prevailed on him to order a so.
lemn inquest to be made into his conduc, with
powers to the licentiate Ponce de Leon, entruted
is25. with that commission, to seize his person, if he

fliould find that expedient, and fend him prifoncr
to Spain '.

Cortes re. THE sudden death of Ponce de Leon, a few
turn to days after his arrival in New Spain, prevented the

execution of this commiflion. But as the objetof
his appointment was known, the mind of Cortes
was deeply wounded with this unexpeced return
for services, which far exceeded whatever any sub-
jeat of Spain had rendered to his sovereign. He
endeavoured, however, to maintain his station, and
to recover the confidence of the court. But every
perlbri in office, who had arrived from Spain since
the conquest, was a spy upon his conduct, and
with malicious ingenuity gave an unfavourable re-
presentation of all his actions. The apprehensions
,,,( of Charles and his minilters increased. A new

commiflion of enquiry was issued, with more ex-

See NOTE XCVr.
llerrera, dec. 3. lib. viii. c. 14, 15.

} )tenltie

tensive powers, and various precautions were taken B O O K
in order to prevent or to punish him, if he Ihould :,'
be so presumptuous as to attempt what was incon-. '5s8
fiftent with the fidelity of a fubje& a. Cortes be-
held the approaching crisis of his fortune with all
the violent emotions natural to a haughty mind,
conscious of high desert, and receiving unworthy
treatment. But though some of his desperate fol-
lowers urged him to assert his own rights against
his ungrateful country, and with a bold hand to
frize that power which the courtiers meanly ac-
cufed him of coveting , he retained such self-
command, or was atuated with such sentiments of
loyalty, as to rejec their dangerous counsels, and
to chufe the only course in which he could secure
his own dignity, without departing from his duty.
He resolved not to expose himself to the ignominy
of a trial, in that country which had been the scene
of his triumphs; but without waiting for the ar-
rival of his judges, to repair dire&ly to Castile,
andi commit himself and his cause to the justice and
generosity of his sovereign .

CORTES appeared in his native country with the.Hisrecep.
splendour that suited the corwneror of a mighty tion thcrc.
kingdom. He brought with iim a great part of
his wealth, many jewels and ornaments of great

h Herrera, dec. 3. lib. viii. c. 15. dec. 4. lib.ii. c. I.
lib iv. c.9, lo. B. Diaz. c. 172. 196. GomaraCron.c. i66.

B. Diaz. c. 194.
k ierrera, dec. 3. lib. iv. c. 8.

c c 3 value,

B o o K value, several curious produdtions of the country

V.
,..J - and was attended by some Mexicans of the first

s52s. rank, as well as by the molt considerable of his

own officers. His arrival in Spain removed at once
every suspicion and fear that had been entertained
with refpet to his intentions. The emperor, hav-
ing now nothing to apprehend from the designs of
Cortes, received him like a person whom confci-
ournefs of his own innocence had brought into the
presence of his master, and who was entitled, by
the eminence of his services, to the highest marks
of dilintion and refpe&. The order of St. Jago,
the title of Marquis del Valle de Guaxaca, the
grant of an ample territory in New Spain, were fuc-
ceflively bellowed upon lhim; and as his manners
were corre& and elegant, although lie had passnd
the greater part of his life among rough adven-
turers, the emperor admitted him to the fime fa-
miliar intercourse with himftlf, that was enjoyed
by noblemen of the first rank "n

S$ttlemUet BUT, amidst thofi external proofs of regard,
vernnt in symptoms of remaining distrust appeared. Tholgh
,NwSpan. Cortes earneflly solicited to be reiifltated in the

government of New Spain, Charles, too sagacious
to commit such an important charge to a man
Whom he had once suspected, peremptorily refuild
to invert him again with powers which he miglt

I See NOTE XCVII.
m Ieirrera, dec. 3. lib. iv. c. i. lib, vi. c. .4. . DiJ
c. t96. Gorm. Cron. c. 182.

fill(

find it impossible to controul. Cortes, though o o, t
dignified with new titles, returned to Mexico with v,

,

diminiihed authority. The military department, 153
with powers to attempt new discoveries, was left in
his hands; but the supreme direcion of civil affairs
was placed in a board, called The Audience of New
Spain. At a subsequent period, when, upon the
increase of the colony, the exertion of authority
more united and extensive became necessary, An-
tonio de Mendoza, a nobleman of high rank, was
sent thither as viceroy, to take the government into
his hands.

THIS division of power in New Spain, proved, as Ncw

was unavoidable, the source of perpetual diffen- ofcts.
tion, which embittered the life of Cortes, and
thwarted all his schemes. As he had now no op-
portunity to display his a&ive talents but in at-
tempting new discoveries, he formed various
schemes for that purpose, all of which bear impref-
sions of a genius that delighted in what was bold
and splendid. He early entertained an idea, that,
either by steering through the gulf of Florida
along the east coast of North America, omre strait
would be found that communicated with the weft-
ern ocean; or that, by examining the isthmus of
Darien, rome pafflge would be discovered between
the North and South Seas". But having been dif-
appointed in his expectations with refpe6t to both,
he now confined his views to such voyages of dif-

" Cortes Relat. Ran. ili, 294, B.

c c covcry

B o o K covery as he could make from the ports of New
,, -1 Spain in the South Sea. There he fitted out fuc-
s530. ceffively several small squadrons, which either pe-

rifhed in the attempt, or returned without making
5r36. any discovery of moment. Cortes, weary ofentruft-

ing the conduct of his operations to others, took
the command of a new armament in person, and,
after enduring incredible hardships, and encoun-
tering dangers of every species, he discovered the
large peninsula of California, and surveyed the
greater part of the gulf which fCparates it from
New Spain. The discovery of a country of such
extent would have reflected credit on a common
adventurer; but it could add little new honour to
the name of Cortes, and was far from satisfying
the sanguine expectations which he had formedo.
Difguited with ill success, to which he had not
been accustomed, and weary of contesting with
154C. adversaries to whom he confidered it as a difgracc

to be opposed, he once more fought for redress in
his native country.
His death. BUT his reception there was very differcnt from

that which gratitude, and even decency, ought to
have secured for him. The merit of his ancient
exploits was already, in a great measure, forgot-
ten, or eclipsed by the fame of recent and more
valuable conquefis in another quarter of America.
No service of moment was now expected from a
man of declining years, and who began to be un-

0 Herrera, dec. 5. lib. viii. c. 9, lo. dec. 8. lib. vi. c. 14.
Vcncgas ifi. ol Calforn. i, a . Lorcnzana HiR. p. 322,&c.

fortunate

fortunate. The emperor behaved to him with BO K
cold civility; his ministers treated him, sometimes .-v-.
with neglect, sometimes with insolence. His '5s.
grievances received no redress; his claims were
urged without effec; and after several years spent
in fruidles application to ministers and judges, an
occupation the most irksome and mortifying to a
man of high spirit, who had moved in a sphere
where he was more accustomed to command than
to solicit, Cortes ended his days on the second of,
December one thousand five hundred and forty-
seven, in the fixty-fecond year of his age. His
fate was the fame with that of all the persons who
diftinguifihed themselves in the discovery or con-
quef of the New World. Envied by his contem-
poraries, and ill requited by the court which he
served, he has been admired and celebrated by
succeeding ages. Which has formed the most just
estimate of his charater, an impartial consideration
of his ations must determine.

4

A~~

C.~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~- 0"~..

p ó~~
~~~. ___..

# NOTES AND ILLUSTRATIONS.

NOTES

AND
ILLUSTRATIONS.

NOTE I. p. 3.
THE height of the molt elevated point in the Pyrenees

is, according to M. Cassini, fix thousand fix hun-

dred and forty-fix feet. The height of the mountain
Gemmi, in the canton of Berne, is ten thousand one hun-
dred and ten feet. The height of the Peak of Tenerife,
according to the measurement of P. Feuille, is thirteen
thousand one hundred and feventy-cight feet. The height
of Chimborazzo, the mos elevated point of the Andes, is
twenty thousand two hundred and eighty feet; no less than
seven thousand one hundred and two feet above the highest
mountain in the ancient continent. Voyage de D. Juan
Ulloa, Observations Astron. et Phyfiq. tom. ii. p. 114.
The lihe of congelation on Chimborazzo, or that part of
the mountain which is covered perpetually with snow, is
no less than two thousand four hundred feet from its fum-
mit. Prcvot. Hist. Gener. des Voyages, vol. xiii. p. 636.

NOTE II. p. 4.
AS aparticular description makes a stronger impreflion

than general afi'rtions, I ihall give one of Rio de la

Plata by an cye-witnefs, P. Cattaneo, a Modenefe Jesuit,
who landed at Buenos Ayres in 1749, and thus represents
what he felt when such new objects were first preSfnted to

hil

his view. "' While I resided in Europe, and read in books
of history or geography that the mouth of the river De la
Plata was an hundred and fifty miles in breadth, I con.
fidered it as an exaggeration, because in this hemifpbere
we have no example of such vast rivers. When I ap.
proached its mouth, I had the most vehement desire to
ascertain the truth with my own eyes; and I have found
the matter to be exadly as it was represented. This I
deduce particularly from one circumstance: When we
took our departure from Monte-Video, a fort situated
more than a hundred miles from the mouth of the river,
and where its breadth is considerably diminishcd, we failed
a complete day before we difcovcred the land on the op-
pofite bank of the river; and when we were in the middle
of the channel, we could not discern land on either fide,
and saw nothing but the sky and water, as if we had been
in some great ocean. Indeed, we ihould have taken it
to be sea, if the fresh water of the river, which was tur-
bid like the Po, had not satisfied us that it was a river.
MIoreovcr, at Buenos Ayres, another hundred miles up
the river, and where it is still much narrower, it is not
only impoflible to discern the oppofitc coast, which is in-
deed very low and flat; but one cannot perceive the
houfrs or the tops of the Reeples in the Portuguese fettlc-
ment at Colonia on the other fide of the river." Lettera
prima, published by Muratori, II Chriftiaucfimo Fclice,
&c. i. p. 257.

NOTE III. p. 7.
N WEWFOUNDLAN), part of Nova Scotia and Canada,

are the countries which lie in the fame parallel

of latitude with the kingdom of France; and in every
part of these the water of the rivers is frozen during
winter to the thickness of several feet; the earth is covered
with s(now as deep; almost all the birds fly, during that

season,

season, from a climate where they could not live. The
country of the E&kimaux, part of Labrador, and the coun-
tries on the south of Hudson's Bay, are in the fame pa-
rallel with Great Britain; and yet in all these the cold is
so intense, that even the industry of Europeans has not
attempted cultivation.

NOTE IV. p. to.
A COSTA is the first philosopher, as far as I know, who

endeavoured to account for the different degrees of

heat in the old and new continents, by the agency of
the winds which blow in each. Hist. Moral. &c. lib. ii.
and iii. M. de Buffon adopts this theory, and has not
only improved it by new observations, but has employed
his amazing powers of descriptive eloquence in embellish-
ing and placing it in the moR striking light. Some re-
marks may be added, which tend to illustrate more fully
a do6rine of much importance in every inquiry concern-
ing the temperature of various climates.

WHEN a cold wind blows over land, it must in its pas-

sage rob the surface of some of its heat. By means of
this, the coldness of the wind is abated. But if it con-
tinue to blow in the farle direifon, it will come, by de-
grees, to pass over a surface already cooled, and will sus-
fcr no longer any abatement of its own keenness. Thus
as it advances over a large tracl of land, it brings on all
the severity of intense frost.

LET the fame wind blow over an extensive and deep

Sea; the superficial water mufl be immediately cooled to
a certain degree, and the wind proportionally warmed.
But the superficial and colder water becoming fpecificaly
heavier than the warmer water below it, descends; what
is warmer supplies its place, which, as it comes to be

cooled

cooled in its turn, continues to warm the air which
pales over it, or to dimini/h its cold. This change of
the superficial water, and fucceflive ascent of that which is
warmer, and the consequent fucceflive abatement of cold-
ness in the air, is aided by the agitation caused in the sea
by the mechanical aaion of the wind, and also by the
motion of the tides. This will go on, and the rigour of
the wind will continue to diminish until the whole water
is so far cooled, that the water on the surface is no longer
removed from the a&ion of the wind, fast enough to hin-
der it from being arreted by frost. Whenever the surface
freezes, the wind is no longer warmed by the water from
below, and it goes on with undiminiihed cold.

FROM those principles may be explained the severity of

winter frosts in extpnfive continents; their mildness in
small islands; and the superior rigour of winter in those
parts of North America with which we are best ac-
quainted. In the north-west parts of Europe, the severity
of winter is mitigated by the weft winds, which usually
blow in the months of November, December, and part of
January.

ON the other hand, when a warm wind blows over

land, it heats the surface, which mufl therefore cease to
abate the fervour of the wind. But the fame wind blow-
ing over water, agitates it, brings up the colder water
from below, and thus is continually losing somewhat of
its own heat.

BUT the great power of the sea to mitigate the heat of

the wind or air palling over it, proceeds from the follow-
ing circumstance, that on account of the transparency of
the sea, its surface cannot be heated to a great degree by
the fun's rays; whereas the ground, fubjceed to their
influence, very soon acquires great heat. When, there-

fore,

fore, the wind blows over a torrid continent, it is soon
raied to a heat almost intolerable; but during its paflage
over an extensive ocean, it is-gradually cooled; so that
on its arrival at the farthcet ihore, it is again fit for re-
fpiration.

THOSE principles will account for the sultry heats of

large continents in the torrid zone; for the mild climate
of ilands in the fame latitude; and for the superior warnth
in summer which large continents, situated in the tema
perate or colder zones of the earth, enjoy, when com-
pared with that of iaands. The heat of a climate depends
not only upon the immediate effeCt of the fun's rays, but
on their continued operation, on the effet which they
have formerly produced, and which remains for foam
time in the ground. This is the reason why the day is
warmest about two in the afternoon, the summer warmest
about the middle of July, and the winter coldest about
the middle of January.

THE forests which cover America, and hinder the fun-

beams from heating the ground, are a great cause of the
temperate climate in the equatorial pans. The ground,
not being heated, cannot heat the air; and the leaves,
which receive the rays intercepted from the ground, have
not a mass of matter sufficient to absorb heat enough t£r
this purpose. Betides, it is a known fat, that the vege-
tative power of a plant occasions a perspiration from the
leaves in proportion to the heat to which they are ex-
posed ; and, from the nature of evaporation, this perfpi-
ration produces a cold in the leaf proportional to the per.
(piration. Thus the effetl of the leaf in heating the air
in contat with it, is prodigiously diminished. For thole
obefrvations, which throw much additional light on this
curious gubjet, I am indebted to my ingenious friend,

Mr.

Mr. Robifon, professor of natural philosophy in the uniw
verfity of Edinburgh.

NOTE V. p. io.
THE climate of Brasil has been described by two emi-

nent naturalists, Pifo and Margrave, who observed

it with a philosophical accuracy, for which we search in
vain in the accounts of many other provinces in America.
Both represent it as temperate and mild, when compared
with the climate of Africa. They ascribe this chiefly to
the refreshing wind which blows continually from the sea.
The air is not only cool, but chilly through the night, in
so much, that the natives kindle fires every evening in
their huts. Pifo de Medicina Brafilienfi, lib. i. p. x, &c.
Margravius Hiftor. Rerum Natural. Brafiliae, lib. viii.
c. 3. p. 264. Nieuhoff, who resided long in Brasil,
confirms their description. Churchill's Collection, vol. ii.
p. 26. Gumilla, who was a missionary many years
among the Indians upon the river Oronoco, gives a
similar description of the temperature of the climate there.
Hilt. de l'Orenoque, tom. i. p. 26. P. Acugna felt a
very confidcrable degree of cold in the countries on the
banks of the river Amazons. Relat. vol. ii. p. 56. M.
Biet, who lived a considerable time in Cayenne, gives a
similar account of the temperature of that climate, and
ascribes it to the fame cause. Voyage de la France,
Equinox, p. 330. Nothing can be more different from
there descriptions than that of the burning heat of the
African coast given by M. Adanfon. Voyage to Senegal,
pallim.

NOTE

NOTE VI. p. I.
Two Frcnch frigates were sent upon a voyage of

discovery in the year I739. In latitude 44° south,

they began to feel a considerable degree of cold. In lati-
tude 48°, they met with islands of floating ice. Hiltoire
des Navigations aux Terres Aufrales, tom. ii. 256, &c.
Dr. Halley fell in with ice in latitude 59°. Id. tom. i.
p. 47. Commodore Byron, when on the coast of Pata-
gonia, latitude 50° 33' south, on the fifteenth of Decem-
ber, which is midsummer in that part of the globe, the
twenty-firft of December being the longest day there,
compares the climate to that of England in the middle
of winter. Voyages by Hawkefworth, i. 25. Mr. Banks
having landed on Terra del Fuego, in the Bay of Good
Success, latitude 55Q, on the sixteenth of January, which
corresponds to the month of July in our hcmifphere, two
of his attendants died in one night of extreme cold, and
all the party were in the mort imminent danger of perifl-
ing. Id. ii. 51, 52. By the fourteenth of March, cor-
responding to September in our hemisphere, whiter was
set in with rigour, and the mountains were covered with
snow. Ibid. 72. Captain Cook, in his voyage towards
the South pole, furniflies new and striking instances of
the extraordinary predominance of cold in this region of
the globe. "Who would have thought (fays he) that
an island, of no greater extent than seventy leagues in
circuit, situated between the latitude of 54° and 55°,
should in the very height of summer be, in a manner,
wholly covered, many fathoms deep, with frozen snow;
but more cfpecially the S. W. coast ? 'The very summits
of the lofty mountains were cased with snow and ice; but
the quantity that lay in the valleys is incredible and at

VOL. I. n D the

the bottom of the bays, the coast was terminated by a wall
of ice of considerable height." Vol. ii. p. 217.

IN tome places of the ancient continent, an extraordi-

nary degree of cold prevails in very low, latitudes. Mr.
Bogle, in his embafly to the court of the Delai Lama,
paired the winter of the year 1774 at Chamnanning, in
latitude 31 39' N. He often found the thermometer in
his room twenty-nine degrees under the freezing point by
Fahrenheit's scale; and in the middle of April the stand-
ing waters were all frozen, and heavy showers of snow
frequently fell. The extraordinary elevation of the coun-
try seems to be the cause of this excessive cold. In tra-
velling from Indoflan to Thibet, the ascent to the funi.
mit of the Boutan Mountains is very great, but the
descent on the other fide is not in equal proportion.' The
kingdom of Thibet is an elevated region, extremely bare
and desolate. Account of Thibet, by Mr. Stewart, read
in the Royal Society, p. 7. The extraordinary cold ui
low latitudes in America cannot be accounted for by the
fame cause. Those regions are'not remarkable for eleva-
tion. Some of them are countries depreifed and level.

THE mos obvious and probable cause of the superior

degree of cold, towards the southern extremity of Ame-
rica, seems to be the form of the continent there. Its
breadth gradually decreases as it (tretches from St. Anto-
nio southwards, and from the bay of St. Julian to the
Straits of Magellan its dimensions are much contra&ed.
On the eafl and welt (ides, it is washed by the Atlantic
and Pacific Oceans. From its southern point it is pro.
bable that a great extent of tea, without any considerable
trat of land, reaches to the Antar&ic pole. In whichever
of there direaious the wind blows, it is cooled before it
approaches the Magellanic regions, by palling over a vafl

body

body of water, nor is the land there of such extent that it
can recover any considerable degree of heat in its progress
over it. These circumstances .concur in rendering the
temperature of the air in this diftri& of America, more
similar to that of an insular, than to that of a continental
climate, and hinder it from acquiring the fame degree of
summer heat with places in Europe and Asia, in a corre-
fponding northern latitude. The north wind is the only
one that reaches this part of America, after blowing over
a great continent. But from an attentive survey of its
position, this Will be found to have a tendency, rather to
diminish than augment the degree of heat. The foutherh
extremity of America is properly the termination of the
immense ridge of the Andes, which ftetehes nearly in a
dire& line from north to south, through the whole extent
of the continent. The most sultry regions in South Ame-
rica, Guiana, Brasil, Paraguay, and Tucuman, lie many
degrees to the east of the Magellanic regions. The level
couhtry of Peru, which enjoys the tropical heats, is situ-
ated conliderably to the weft of them. The north wind
then, though it blows over land, does not bring to the
southern extremity of Aterica, an increase of heat col-
lected in its pailage over torrid regions; but before it ar-
rives there, it must have swept along the summits of the
Andes, and comes impregnated with the cold of that frozen
region.

THoua6g it be now dernonftrated that there is no south.

ern continent in that region of the globe which it was
supposed to occupy, it appears to be certain from Captain
Cook's discoveries, that there is a large trat of land near
the south pole, which is the source of most of the ice
spread over thevaft fouthrn ocean. Vol. ii. p. 230, 239,
&c. Whether the influence of this remote frozen con-
tinent may reach the southern extremity of America,

D 2 and

and effect its climate, is an inquiry not unworthy of at-
.tention.

NOTE VII. p. 14.
jM CONDAMIN, is one of the latest and moR accurate

observers of the interior tate of South-Ame-

rica. s After descending from the Andes (fays he),
one beholds a vast and uniform profpea of water and ver-
dure, and nothing more. One treads upon the earth, but
does not fee it; as it is so entirely covered with luxuriant
plants, weeds, and ihrubs, that it would require a confi-
derable degree of labour to clear it, for the space of a foot."
Relation abrege d'un Voyage, &c. p. 48. One of the
singularities in the soreRs is a fort of osiers, or withs, called
bejucos by the Spaniards, liane: by the French, and nibke
by the Indians, which are usually employed as ropes in
America. This is one of the parasitical plants, which
twists about the trees it meets with, and rising above their
highest branches, its tendrils descend perpendicularly, trike
into the ground, take root, rife up around another tree,
and thus mount and descend alternately. Other tendrils
are carried obliquely by the wind, or some accident, and
form a confusion of interwoven cordage, which refemblcs
the rigging of a ship. Bancroft, Nat. Hifl. of Guiana,
99. These withs are often as thick as the arm of a man.
Ib. p. 75. M.Bouguer's account of the foreits in Peru
perfectly resembles this description. Voyage' au Peru,
p. 16. Oviedo gives a similar description of the foreils in
other parts of America. Hifl. lib. ix. p. 144. D. The
country of the Moxos is so much overflowed, that they
are obliged to reside on the summit of some riling ground
during some part of the year, and have no communication
with their countrymen at any distance. Lettres Edifiantes,
tom. x. p. 87. Garcia gives a full and jult defcriptionl

of

of the rivers, lakes, woods, and marries in those countries
of America which lie between the tropics. Origen de los
Indios, lib. ii. c. 5. § 4, S. The- incredible hardships to
which Goucalez Pizarro was exposed in attempting to
march into the country to the eaf of the Andes, convey a
very striking idea of that part of America in its original
uncultivated state. Garcil. de la Vega, Royal. Comment.
of Peru, part ii. book iii. c. 2-5.

NOTE VIII. p. 17.
TnE animals of America seem not to have been al-

ways of a size inferior to those in other quarters of

the globe. From antlers of the moofe-deer which have
been found in America, it appears to have been an animal
of great size. Near the banks of the Ohio, a considerable
number of bones of an immense magnitude have been
found. The place where this discovery has been made
lies about one hundred and ninety miles below thejuntion
of the river Scioto with the Ohio. It is about four miles
distant from the banks of the latter, on the fide of the
marsh called the Salt Lick. The bones lie in vast quanti.
ties about five or fix feet under ground, and the firatum is
visible in the bank on the edge of the Lick. Journalof
Colone George Croglan, MS. pene me. This spot seems to
be accurately laid down by Evans in his map. These
bones must have belonged to animals of enormous bulk;
but naturaliRts being acquainted with no living creature of
such size, were at first inclined to think that they were
mineral fubRances. Upon receiving a greater number of
specimens, and after infpecing them more narrowly, they
are now allowed to be the bones of an animal. As the
elephant is the largest known quadruped, and the tulks

D D 3 which

which were found nearly resembled, both in form and
quality, the tusks of an elephant, it was concluded that the
carcases deposited on the Ohio were of that species. But
Dr. Hunter, one of the persons of our age best qualified to
decide with refpe&t to this point, having accurately exa-
mined several parcels of tuiks, and grinders, and jaw.
bones, tent from the Ohio to London, gives it as his opi-
nion, that they did not belong to an elephant, bqt to some
huge carnivorous animal of an unknown species. Phil.
Transact. vol. Iviii. p. 34. Bones of the fame kind, and as
remarkable for their size, have been fpund near the mouths
of the great rivers Oby, Jenifeia, and Lena, in Siberia.
Stralhreinberg, Dejcript. of north and eaj? parts of Europe
and AJia, p. 402, &c. The elephant seems to be confined
in his rage to the torrid zone, and never multiplies be-
yond it. In such cold regions as those bordering on the
frozen Tea, lie could not live. The existence of such large
animals in Arperica might open a wide field for conjecure.
The more we contemplate the face of nature, and confider
the variety of her productions, the more we must befatis-
fled that astonishing changes have been made in the
terraqueous globe by convulsions and revolutions, of which
no account is preserved in history.

NOTE IX. p. iS.

HIs degeneracy of the domestic European animals
in America may be imputed to some of these causes.

In the Spanish settlements, which are situated either
within the torrid zone, or in countries bordering upon
k, the increase of heat, and divcrfity of food, prevent
fieep and( hornle cattle from attaining the fame size ns
il Europe. They seldom become so fat, and thcir fiefl is

H not

not so juicy, or of such delicate flavour. In North Ame-
rica, where the climate is more favourable, and similar to
that of Europe, the quality of the grafies which spring up
naturally in their paflure-grounds is not good. Mitchell,
p. i r. Agriculture is still so much in its infancy, that
artificial food for cattle is not aifed in any quantity. Du-
ring a winter, long in many provinces, and rigorous in all,
no proper care is taken of their cattle. The general treat-
nent of their horses and horned cattle is injudicious and
harih in all the English colonies. These circumfances
contribute more, perhaps, than any thing peculiar in the
quality of the climate, to the degeneracy of breed in the
horses, cows, and sheep, of many of the North American
provinces.

NOTE X. p. 19.

N the year S 18, the island of Hispaniola was afflicted
with a dreadful visitation of those deftruaive insets,

the particulars of which Herrera describes, and mentions a
singular instance of the superstition of the Spanish planters.
After trying various methods of exterminating the ants,
they resolved to implore protetion of the faints; but as
the calamity was new, they were at a loTs to find out the
faint who could give them the mot effectual aid. They
cast lots in order to discover the patron whom they should
invoke. The lots decided in favour of St. Saturninus.
They celebrated his festival with great solemnity, and im-
mediately, adds the historian, the calamity began to abate,
-Ierrcra, dec. 2. lib. iii. c. I5. p. 107.

P D4 NOTE

NOTE XI. p. 2i

HE author of Recherches Philofophiques fur les Ame-
ricains supposes this difference in heat to be equal to

twelve degrees, and that a place thirty degrees from the
equator in the old continent, is as warm as one situated
eighteen degrees from it in America, tom. i. p. x I. Dr.
Mitchell, after observations carried on during thirty years,
contends that the difference is equal to fourteen or fifteen
degrees of latitude. Present State, &c. p. 257.

NOTE XII. p. 21.
JANUARY 3d, 1765, Mr. Bertram, near the head of

St. John's river in East Florida, observed a frost so

intense, that in one night the ground was frozen an inch
thick upon the banks of the river. The limes, citrons,
and banana trees, at St. Auguftin, were destroyed. Ber-
tram's Journal, p. 20. Other infiances of the extraordi-
nary operations of cold in the southern provinces of North
America are colle&ed by Dr. Mitchell. Present State,
p. 206, &c. February 7th, 1747, the' frost at Charief-
town was so intense, that a person having carried two
quart bottles of hot water to bed, in the morning they
were split to pieces, and the water converted into solid
lumps of ice. In a kitchen, where there was a fire, the
water in a jar in which there was a large live eel, was
frozen to the bottom. Almost all the orange and olive
trees were destroyed. Description of South-Carolina, 8vo.
Lond. x761.

t iNOTE

NOTE XIII. p. 22.
A REMARKABLE instance of this occurs in Dutch

Guiana, a country every where level, and so low,

that during the rainy seasons it is usually covered'with
water near two feet in height. This renders the foil so
rich, that on the surface, for twelve inches in depth, it is
a stratum of perfet manure, and as such has been tranf-
ported to Barbadoes. On the banks of the Effequebo,
thirty crops of ratan canes have been raised successively,
whereas in the Weft Indian ifands not more than two is
ever expeted from the richest land. The expedients by
which the planters endeavour to diminiih this excessive
fertility of foil are various. Bancroft, Nat. Hist. of
Guiana, p. 1o, &c.

NOTE XIV. p. 34.
MVULLER seems to have believed, without sufficient

evidence, that the Cape had been doubled, tom. L

p. i, &c.; and the Imperial Academy of St. Peters-
burgh give some countenance to it, by the manner in
which Tfchu.otJ/oi-nof is laid down in their charts. But
I am aflured, from undoubted authority, that no Ruffian
veflel has ever failed round that cape, and as the country
of ITfcutki is not subjet to the Ruffian empire, it is very
imperfealy known.

NOTE XV. p. 38.
W1 Is this the place for entering into a long and in.

tricate geographical disquisition, many curious ob.
servations might arise from comparing the accounts of the

two

two Rulian voyages, and the charts of their refpetive
navigations. One remark is applicable tp both. We can-
not rely with absolute certainty on the position which they
aflign to several of the places which they visited. The
weather was so extremely foggy, that they seldom saw the
fun, or stars, and the position of the islands and supposed
continents was commonly determined by reckoning, not
by observation. Behring and Tfchirikow proceeded much
farther towards the east than Krenitziu. The land difio.
vcrcd by Behring, which he imagined to be part of the
American continent, is in the 236th degree of longitude
from the first meridian in the isle of Ferro, and in 582
;8" of latitude. Tfchirikow came upon the fame coast in
longit. 24t", lat. 56'. Muller, i. 248,249. The former
must have advanced 6o degrees from the Port of Petro.
pawlowfki, from which he took his departure, and tie
latter 65 degrees. But from the chart of Krenitzin's voy-
age, it appears that lie did not fail farther towards the east
than the 208th degree, and only 32 degrees from Petro-
pawlowlki. In 174, Bellring and Tfchirikow, both in
going and returning, held a course which was mostly to
the so.uth of that chain of islands, which they discovered;
aud observing the mountainous and rugged aspea of the
head-lands which they descried towards the north, thcy
supposed them to be promontories belonging to tome part
of the American continent, which, as they fancied,
ftrctched as far south as the latitude 56. In this manner
they are laid down in the chart publilhed by Muller, and
likewise in a manuscript chart drawn by a mate of Beh-
ring's fliip, communicated to me by Mr. Professor Ro-
bison. But in I7.69, Krcritzin, after wintering in the
ifand Alaxa, flood so far towards the north in his return,
that his course lay through the middle of what Blhring
and '1Tfchirikow had fuppolied to be acontinsnt, which lie
found to be an open fca, and that they had miilaken rocky'

illes

iles for the head-lands of a continent. It is probable, that
the countries discovered in 74x, towards the east, do not
belong to the American continent, but are only a conti-
nuation of the chain of ilands. The npmberofvolc~ao
in this region of the globe is remarkable. Therre are fve
ral in Kamchatka, and not one of the iflande, great or
small, as far as the Ruffian navigation extends, is without
them. Many are a&ually burning, and the mountains
in all bear parts of having been once in a state of erup-
tion. Were I disposed to admit fiuch conjecures as have
found place in other enquiries concerning the peopling of
America, I might suppose that this part of the earth, havy
ing manifestly suffered violent convulsions from earth-
quakes and volcanos, an isthmus, wich may have
formerly united Asia to America, has been broken, and
formed into a cluster of islands by the shock.

IT is singular, that at the very time the Ruffian naviga.

tors were attempting to make discoveries in the north-west
of America, the Spapiards were prosecuting the fame de.
sign from another quarter. In 1769, two small v'ele
failed from Loretto in California to explore the coats of
the country to the north of that peninsula. They advanced
io farther than the port of Monte-Rey in latitude 36. But,
in several fucccffive expeditions fitted out from the port of
St. Bias in New Galicia, the Spaniards have advanced as
far asthe latitude 58. Gazrta de Madrid, March 19, and
May 14, 1776. But as the journals of those 'voyages
have not yet been publiihed, I cannot compare their pro.
grefs with that of the Ruffians, or (hew how near the ha-
vigators of the two nations have approached to each other.
It is to be hoped, that the enlightened minilter, who has
now the direcaion of American affairs in Spain, will not
withhold this information from the public.

NOTE

NOTE XVI. p. 39.
O sU knowledge of the vicinity of the two continents of

Afla and America, which was very imperfeC when I

published the history of America in the year 1777, is now
complete. Mr. Cox's Account of the Ruffian Difcove-
rics between Asia and America, printed in the year 1780,
contains many curious and important fats with refpet to
the various attempts of the Ruffians to open a communica-
tion with the New World. The history of the great Voy.
age of discovery, begun by Captain Cook in 1776, and
completed by Captains Clerk and Gore, published in the
year 1 780, contnunicates all the information that the curio-
fity of mankind could desire with regard to this subjet.

AT my requef, my friend Mr. Playfair, Profeflor of

Mathematicks in the TIniverfity of Edinburgh, has com-
pared the narrative and charts of those illustrious naviga-
tors, with the more imperfet relations and maps of the
Ruffians. The result of this comparison I communicate
in his own words, with much greater confidence in his
scientific accuracy than I could have ventured to place in
any observations which I myself might have made upon the
subjet.

"' THE discoveries of Captain Cook in his last voyage

have confirmed the conclusions which Dr. Robertson had
drawn, and have conneced together the fa&s from which
they were deduced. They have now rendered it certain
that Behring and Tfchirikow touched on the coast of Ame.
rica in 1741. The former discovered land in lat. 589 28',
and about 236" east from Ferro. He has given such a de-
scription of the Bay in which he anchored, and the high
mountain to the westward of it, which he calls St. Elias,

that

that though the account of his voyage is much abridged in
the Engliih translation, Captain Cook recognized the place
as he failed along the Western coast of America in the year
1778. The isle of St. Hermogenes, near the mouth of
Cook's river, Schumagins Isles on the coast of Alahdka, and
Foggy Isle, retain in Captain Cook's chart the names which
they had received from the Ruffian navigator. Cook's
Voy. vol. ii. p. 347.

"' TSCHIRIKOW came upon the fame coast about 2° 30'

farther south than Bchring, near the Mount Edgecumbe of
Captain Cook.

W' WITH regard to Krenitzin, we learn from Coxe's

Account of the Ruffian Discoveries, that he failed from
the mouth of the Kamtchatka river with two (hips in the
year 1768. With his own Ihip he reached the island
Oonolafhka, in which there had been a Ruffian settlement
since the year r762, where he wintered probably in the
fame harbour or bay where Captain Cook afterwdsa,an-
chored. The other ship wintered at Alafhka, wllchwas
supposed to be an ifand, though it be in fa& a partof the
American continent. Krenitzin, accordingly, returned
without knowing that either of his (hips had been on the
coast of America; and this is the more surprising, because
Captain Cook has informed us that Alalhka is underRood
to be a great continent both by the Ruffiansand the na-
tives at Oonolaika.

'c ACCORDING to Krenitzin, the thjp which had win-

tered at Alalhka had hardly failed 320 to the eastward of
the harbour of St. Peter and St. Paul in Kamtchatkm;
but, according to the more accurate charts of Captain
Cook, it had failed no less than 3 7 17' to the eastward of
that harbour. There is nearly the fame mistake of 5° in

the

the longitude which Krenitzin alligns to Oonolafhka. It
is remarkable enough, that in the chart of those seas, put
into the hands of Captain Cook by the Ruffians on that
island, there was an error of the fame kind, and very
nearly of the fame extent.

" BUT what is of moit consequence to be remarked on

this fubje& is, that the discoveries of Captain Cook have
fully verified Dr. Robertson's conjecture, " that it is pro.
bable that future navigators in those seas, by steering far-
ther to the north than Behring and Tfchirikow or Kre-
nitzin had done, may find that the continent of America
approaches still nearer to that of Asia." Vol. ii. p 44. It
has accordinglybeen found that these twocontinents, which
in the parallel of 55°, or that of the southern extremity
of Alafhka, are about four hundred leagues asunder, ap-
proach continually to one another as they fretch together
toward the north, until, within less than a degree from
the polar circle, they are terminated by two capes, only
thirteen leagues distant. The east cape of Asia is in lati-
tude d& 6, and in longitude 190o 22' east from Green-
wich ; the western extremity of America, or Prince of
Wales Cape, is in latitude 659 46', and in longitude 19I1
45S, Nearly in the middle of the narrow strait (Behring's
Strait) which separates theie captcs are the two islands of
St. Diomede, from which both continents may be seen.
Captain King informs us, that as he was failing through
this strait July 5, 779, the fog having cleared away, he
enjoyed the plealure of feeing from the ship the continents
of Asia and America at the fame moment, together with
the islands of St. Diomede lying between them. Cook's
Voy. vol iil. p. 244.

cc BEYOND this point the ftralt opens towards the
Arctic Sea, and the coasts of Asia and America diverge

so

to fast from one another, that in the parallel of 69° they
are more than one hundred leagues asunder. Ib. p. 277.
To the sooth of the strait there are a number of iflahds,
Clerke's, King's, Anderson's, &c. which, as well as
those of St. Diomede, may have facilitated the migration
of the natives from the one continent to the other. Cap
tain Cook, however, on the authority of the Ruffiais at
Oonolafhka, and for other good reasons, has diminished the
number of islands which had been inserted in former
charts of the northern Archipelago. He has also placed
Ahfhka, or the promontory which stretches from the con-
tinent of America S. W. towards Kamtchatka, at the dif-
tance of five degrees of longitude farther from the coast of
Asia than it was reckoned by the Ruffian navigators.

" TB geography of the Old and the New World is

therefore equally indebted to the discoveries made inthis
memorable voyage; and as many errors have been correaed,
and manydeficiencies supplied by meansofthefedifcoveries,
so the accuracy of some former observations has been efta-
bliflied. The basis of the map of the Ruffian Empire, as far
as regarded Kamtchatka, andthecountryof the Tfchutzki,
was the porition of four places, Yakttfli, Ochotz, Bolche-
relk, and Petropawlowl;i, which had been determined by
the altronomer Kraflilnicow in the year 1744. Nov; Co-
ment. Petrop. vol. iii. p. 465, &c. But the accuracy of his
observations was contested by M. Engel, and M. Robert
de Vaugondy Coxe Append. i. No. a. p. 267, 272;
and the former of these geographers ventured to take away
no lcfs than 28 degrees from the longitude, which, on the
faith of Krafiflnicow's observations, was assigned to the
caftern boundary of the Ruffian empire. With how lite
reason this was done, will appear from confidering that
our Britilh navigators, having determined the position of
Petropawlowiki by a great number of very accurate obfer
vations, found the longitude of that port iS8°43'E. from

sri~ ~ Green.

Greenwich, and its latitude 530 i'; agreeing, the fit to
lefsthan evenminutes, and the second to less than half ami-
nute,with the calculations ofthe Ruflianaftronomer: a coin-
cidence which, in thefituationof foremote a place, doesnot
leave an uncertaintyof more than four English miles, and
which, for the credit of science, deserves to be particularly
remarked. The chief error in the Ruffian maps has been
in not extending the boundaries of that empire fufliciently
towards the east. For as there was nothing to connec
the land of the Tfchutzki and the north-caft point of
Asia with those places whereof the pofition.had been care-
fully ascertained, except the imperfect accounts of Beh-
ring's and Synd's voyages, conGderable errors could not
fail to be introduced, and that point was laid down as
not more than 23* z' cast of the meridian of PetrQpaw-
.lowlki. Coxe App. i. No. 2. By the observations of
Captain King, the difference of longitude between Petro-
pawlowiki and the East Cape is 3 1 9' that is 8' 7' greater
than it was supposed to be by the Ruffian geographers."-
It appears from Cook's and King's Voy. iii. p. 272. that
the continents of Asia and America are usually joined to-
gether by ice during winter. Mr. Samwell confirms this
account of hisfuperior officer. "At this place, viz. nearthe
latitude of 660 N. the two coasts are only thirteen leagues
asunder, and about midway between them lie two islands,
the distance from which to either chore, is short of twenty
miles. At this place, the natives of Asia could find no
difficulty in pafling over to the opposite coast, which is in
light of their own. That in a course of years such an
event would happen, either through design or accident,
cannot admit of a doubt. The canoes which we saw
among the Tfchutziki were capable of performing a much
longer voyage; and, however rude they may have been at
some distant period, we can scarcely suppose them unequal
to a palrage of fix or seven leagues. People might have
been carried over by accident on floating pieces of ice.

'They

They might also have travelled across on fledges or On
foot; for we have reason to believe that $he Irait is en-
tirely frozen over in the winter;.fo that during that sea.
son, the continents, with refpe& to the communication
between them, may be confidered as one land." Letter
from Mr, Samwell, Scots Magazine for i788, p. ,604.
It is probable that this intcrcfting portion of geographical
knowledge will, in the course of a few years, receive far.
ther improvement. Soon after the publication of Captain
Cook's last voyage, the great and enlightened Sovereign
of Rulfia, attentive to every thing that may contribute to
extend the bounds of science, or to render it more !aceu
rate, formed the plan of a new voyage .of discovery, in
order to explore those parts of the ocean lying between
Asia and America, which Captain Cook did not vlfit, to
examine more accuratelythe islands which ftetch from one
continent almost to the other, to survey the north-east
coast of the Ruffian empire, from the mouth of the Ko-
vyma, or Kolyma, to the North Cape, and to fettle, by
astronomical observations, the position of each plaee worth
notice. The conduc of this important enterprize is eomrn
mitted to Captain Billings, an English officer in the Ruf-
fian service, of whose abilities for that station it will be
deemed the belt evidence, that he accompanied Captain
Cook in his last voyage. To render the expedition more
extensively useful, an eminent naturalif is appointed to
attend Captain Billings. Six years will be requfilte for
accomplihing the prpofes of the voyage. Coxe Supple
ment to Russia Difcqeries, p. 27, &c.

NOTE XVII. p. 54.
F Rw travellers have had such opportunity of ob.

serving the natives of America, in its various dif.
triss, as Don Aptonio Ulloa. In a work lately pub-

VOL. II. E E lilhed

lifhed by him, he thus describes the charateriftical sea-
tures of the race: " a very small forehead, covered with
hair towards its extremities, as far as the middle of the
eye-brows; little eyes; a thin note, small and bending
towards the upper lip; the countenance broad; the ears
large; the hair very Mack, lank, and cearfe; the limbs
well turned, the feet fmnall, the body of just proportion;
and altogether smooth and free from hair, until old age,
when they acquire Come beard, but never on the cheeks."
Noticias Americanas, &c. p. 307. M. IC Chevalier de
Pinto, who resided several years in a part of America which
Ulloa never visited, gives a iketch of the general afpe&
of the Indians there. " They are all of copper colour,
with some diversity of ihade, not in proportion to their
distance from the equator, but according to the degree of
elevation of the territory which they inhabit. Those who
live in a high country are fairer than those in the marshy
low lands on the coait. Their face is round, farther re-
moved, perhaps, than that of any people from an oval shape.
Their forehead is fnall, the extremity of their ears far from
the face, their lips thick, their nose flat, their eyes black,
or of a chefnut colour, small, but capable of discerning ob-
jects at a great distance. Their hair is always thick and
fleck, and without any tendency to curl. They have
no hair on any part of their body but the head. At the
first aspet, a southern American appears to be mild and
innocent, but on a more attentive view, one difcovcrs in
his countenance something wild, distrustful, and fullen."
MS. penes me. The two portraits drawn by hands very
different from those of common travellers, have a near re-
semblance.

NOTE

TOTE XVII. p. 55

MAZING accounts are given of the persevering (peed
of the Americans. Adair relates the adventures of

a Chikkafah warrior, who tun through woods and over
mountains, three hundred computed miles, in a day and a
half and two nights. His. of Amer. Ind. 396,

NOTE XI. p. 6o.
M. GobiN LE JEUNE, who resided fifteen years

among the Indians of Peru and Quito, and twenty

years in the French colony of Cayenne, in which there is
a contfant intercourse with the Galibis and other tribes on
dte Orinoco, observes, that the vigour of constitution
among the Americans is exatly in proportion to their ha-
bits of labour. The Indians, in warm climates, such as
those on the coasts of the South Sea, on the river of Ama-
zons, and the river Orinoco, are not to be compared for
Rrength with those in cold countries; :-.d yet, fays he,
boats daily set out from Para, a Portuguese settlement on
the river of Amazons, to ascend that river against the ra-
pidity of the stream, and with the fame crew they proceed
to San Pablo, which is eight hundred leagues distant. No
crew of white people, or even of negroes, would be found
equal to a tafl of such persevering fatigue, as the Portu-
guefe have experienced, and yet the Indians, being accuf.
tomed to this labour from their infancy, perform it. MS.
mtnir ma.

NOTE XX. p.66.
DON ANTONIO ULLOA, who visited a great part of

Peru and Chili, the kingdom of New Granada, and

fcveral of the provinces bordering on the Mexican gulf,
while employed in the fame service with the French ma-

B Z 2 thematicians

thematicians during the space of ten years, and who after.
wards had an opportunity of viewing the North-Ame.
ricans, asserts, " that if we have seen one American, we
may be said to have seen them all, their colour and make
are so nearly the fame." Notic. Americanas, p. 3o8.
A more early observer, Pedro de Cieca de Leon, one of
the conquerors of Peru, who had likewise traversed many
provinces of America, affirms, that the people, men and
women, although there is such a multitude of tribes or
nations as to be almost innumerable, and such diversity of
climates, appear nevertheless like the children of one
father and mother. Chronica del' Peru, parte i. c. 19.
There is, no doubt, a certain combination of features, and
peculiarity of afpeet, which forms what may be called a
European or Asiatic countenance. There must likewise
be one that may be denominated American, common to
the whole race. This may be supposed to strike the tra-
veller at first fight, while not only the various shades,
which ditinguifh people of different regions, but the pe-
culiar features which discriminate individuals, escape the
notice of a transient observer. But when persons who had
refded so long among the Americans concur in bearing tef-
timony to the similarity of their appearance .in every cli-
mate, we may conclude that it is more remarkable than that
of any other race. Seelikewife Garcia Origen de los In-
dies, p. 54. 242. Torquemada Monarch. Indiana, ii. 571.

NOTE XXI. p. 69.

IE LCHEVALIER DR PINTO observes, that in the
* interior parts of Brasil, he had been informed that

some persons resembling the white people of Darien have
been found; but that the breed did not continue, and their
children became like other Americans. This race, how-
ever, is very iniperfefly known. MS. pint mr.

NOTE

NOTE XXII. p.72.

HE testimonies of different travellers, concerning the
Patagonians, have been collcted and stated with a

considerable degree of accuracy by the author of Recherches
Philofophiques, &c. tom. i. 281, &c. iii. I8r, &c.
Since the publication of his work, several navigators have
visited the Magellanic regions, and, like their predecefiors,
differ very widely in their accounts of its inhabitants. By
Commodore Byron and his crew, who failed through the
Straits in 1764, the common size of the Patagonians was
estimated to be eight feet, and many of them much taller,
Phil. Tranfat. vol. Ivii. p. 78. By Captains Wallis and
Carteret, who actually measured them in i 766, they were
found to be from fix feet to fix feet five and seven
inches in height. Phil. Trani vol. Ix. p. 22. These,
however, seem to have been the very people whose size
had been rated so high in the year 1764; for several of
them had beads and red baize of the fame kind with what
had been put aboard Captain Wallis's sbip, and he natu.
rally concluded that they had got these from Mr. Byron.
Hawkcfw. i. In 1767 they were again measured by M.
Bougainville, whose account differs little from that of
Captain Wallis. Voy. 129, To there I (hall add a tef-
timony of great weight. In the year 1762, Don Ber-
nardo Ibagnez de Echavarri accompanied the Marquis de
Valdelirios to Buenos Ayres, and resided there several
years. He is a very intelligent author, and his reputation
for veracity unimpeached among his countrymen. In
speaking of the country towards the southern extremity of
America, " By what Indians," fays he, " is it possessed?
Not certainly by the fabulous Patagonians, who arc sup-
posed to occupy this diftrit. I have from many eye-wit.
Pcffeswhohav lived among thoe Indians and trdded much

E 3 with

with them, a true and accurate dcfcription of their pcrfons,
They are of the fame stature with Spaniajrs. I never saw
one who rose in height two varas and two or three inches,"
i. ¢. about 8o or 81.332 inches Engliffi, if Echavarri
makes his computation according to the vara of Madrid.
This agrees nearly with the measurement of Captain Wal.
lis. Reyno Jefuitico, 238. Mr. Falkner, who resided
as a missionary forty years in the Southern parts of Ame-
rica, fays, that " the Patagonians, or Puelches, are a large.
bodied people; but I never heard of that gigantic race which
others have mentioned, though I have seen persons of all the
different tribes of southern Indians." Introd. p. 26. M.
Dobrizhoffer, a Jesuit, who resided eighteen years in Para-
guay, and who had fcen great numbers of the various tribes
which inhabit the countries situated upon the Straits of
Magellan, confirms, in every point, the testimony of his
brother miflionary Falkner. Dobrizhofferenters into some
detail with refpea to the opinions of several authors con.
cerning the stature of the Patagonians. Having mention-
ed the reports of some early travellers with regard to the
extraordinary size of some bones found on that coast,
which were supposed to be human; and having endea-
voured to ihew that these bones belonged to some large
marine or land animal, he concludes, " de hifce ollibus
crede quicquid libuerit, dummodo, me fuafore, Patagonec
pro gigantibus definas habere." Hiftoria de Abiffonibus~
vol. ii. p. 19, &c.

NOTE KXIII. . 76.
ANTONIO SANCHEZ RIBEIRO, a learned and ingeni-

ous physician, published a dificrtation in the year

z765, in which he endeavours to prove, that this disease
was not introduced from America, but took its rife in Eiu-

rope,

rope, and was brought on by an epidemical and malignant
disorder. Did I chufe to enter into a disquisition on this
fubje&, which I Should not hate mentioned, if it had not
been intimately connected with this part of my inquiries,
it would not be difficult to point out rome mistakes with
refped to the sacs upon which he founds, as well as some
errors in the consequences which he draws from them. The
rapid communication of this disease from Spain over Eu-
rope, seems however to resemble the progress of an epide-
mic, rather than that of a disease transmitsed by inferior.
The first mention of it is in the year 1493, and before the
year 1497 it had made its appearance in molf countries of
Europe, with Cuch alarming fymptomi as rendered it ne.
ceffary for the civil magiltrate to interpose, in order to
check its career.-Since the publication of this work, a fe.
cond edition of Dr. Sanchez's Dissertation has been com-
municated to me. It contains several additional fads in
confirmation of his opinion, which is supported with such
plaufble arguments, as render it a subjed of inquiry well
deserving the attention of learned physicians,

NOTE XXIV. p. 80.

HE people of Otaheite have no denomination for any
number above two hundred, which is sufficient for
their tranfations. Voyages, by Hawkefworth, ii. 228,

NOTE XXV. p. 87.
As the view which I have given of rude nations is

extremely different from that exhibited by very re-

fpetable authors, it may be proper to produce rome of the
many authorities on which I found my description. Tho
manncrs of the savage tribes in America have never been

E E 4 viewed

viewed by persons more capable of observing them with
difcermment, than the philosophers employed by France and
Spain, in the year 1735, to determine the figure of the
earth. M. Bouguer, D. Antonio d'Ulloa, and D. Jorge
Juan, resided long among the natives of the lealf civilized
provinces in Peru. M. de la Condamine had not only the
fame advantages with them for observation, but, in his
voyage down the Maragnon, he had an opportunity of
inspecting th state of the various nations feated on its
banks, in its vast cqurfe across the continent of South
America. There is a wonderful resemblance in their re-
presentation of the character of the Americans. "' They
are all extretnely indolent," fays M. Bouguer, " they
are stupid, they pass whole days fitting in the fame place,
without moving, or speaking a single word. It is not
easy to describe the degree of their indifference for wealth,
and all its advantages. One does not well know what
motive to propose to them, when one would persuade
them to perform any service. It is vain to offer them
money; they answer, that they are not hungry." Voyage
au Perou, p. 102. " If one confiders them as men, the
narrowness of their underltanding seems to be incompa-
tible with the excellence of the foul. Their imbecility
is so visible, that one can hardly form an idea of them
different from what one has of the brutes. Nothing dif-
turbs the tranquillity of their fouls, equally insensible
to disasters and to prosperity. Though half-naked, they
are as contented as a monarch in his molt splendid array.
Riches do not attrac them in the smallest degree, and
the authority or dignities to which they may aspire arc so
little the objecs of their ambition, that an Indian will
receive with the fame indifference the office of a judge
(Alcade) or that of a hangman, if deprived of the former
and appointed to the latter. Nothing can move or change
them, Intcreft has no power over them, and they often

reful'c

refuse to perform a small service, though certain of a
great recompence. Fear makes no impression upon them,
and refpe& as little. Their disposition is Co singular that
there is no method of influencing them, no means of rous,
ing them from that indifference, which is proof against
all the endeavours of the wisest persons; no expedient
which can induce them to abandon that gross ignorance,
or lay aside that careless negligence, which disconcert the
prudence and disappoint the care of such as are attentive
to their welfare." Voyage d'Ulloa, tom. i. 335, 356.
Of those singular qualities he produces many extraordi-
nary instances, p. 336-347. " Insensibility," fays M. de
la Condamine, "is the basis of the American characer.
I leave others to determine, whether this should be dig-
nified with the name of apathy, or disgraced with that
of stupidity. It arises, without doubt, from the small
number of their ideas, which do not extend beyond their
wants. Gluttons even to voracity, when they have where-
withal to satisfy their appetite. Temperate, when ne-
ceffity obliges them to such a degree, that they can en-
dure want without seeming to desire any thing. Puflla-
nimous and cowardly to excess, unlefi when they are ren-
dered desperate by drunkenness. Averse to labour, indif-
ferent to every motive of glory, honour or gratitude;
occupied entirely by the obje& that is present, and always
determined by it alone, without any solicitude about futu-
rity ; incapable of foresight or of reflecion ; abandoning
themselves, when under no restraint, to a puerile joy,
which they express by frisking about, and immoderate fits
of laughter without object or design, they pass their life
without thinking, and grow old without advancing be.
yond childhood, of which they retain all the defecs. If
this description were applicable only to the Indians in some
provinces of Peru, who are laves in every refpcc but the
pame, one might believe, that this degree of degeneracy

was

was occasioned by the fcrvile depende.ce to which they
are reduced the example of the modern Greeks being
proof how far servitude may degrade the human species.
But the Indians in the missions of the Jesuits, and the fa-
vages who still enjoy unimpaired liberty, being as limited
in their faculties, not to fay as stupid as the other, one
cannot obfervc, without humiliation, that man, when
abandoned to simple nature, and deprived of the advan.
tages resulting from education and focicty, differs but little
from the brute creation." Voyage de la Riv. de Amaz.
52, 53. M. de Chanvalon, an intelligent and philofo-
phical obfcrver, who visitel Martinico in 1751, and re-
fided there fix years, gives the following description of the
Caraibs: " It is not the red colour of their complexion, it
is not the singularity of their features, which constitutes
the chief difference between them and us. It is their ex-
;cflive simplicity it is the limited degree of their faculties.
Their reason is not more enlightened or more provident
than the inftint of brutes. The reason of the most gross
pcafants, that of the negroes brought up in the parts of
Africa most remote from intcrcourfe with Europeans, is
such that we difcoyer appearances of intelligence, which,
though imperfet, is capable of increase. But of this the

niderflanding oft Caraibs seems to be hardly fufccptible. If

found philosophy and religion did not afford us their light,
if we were to decide according to the first impreflion which
the view of that people makes upon the mind, we fhoul4
be disposcd to believe tlat they do not belong to the fame
fpi-cies with us. Th'lir flupid eyes are the true mirrour of
th(ir fiiuls; it appears ti be without funeions. Their in-
diolcnl-c is cxtrcnc ; they li iv never the leat fSolicitude
about the moment whiich is to succeed that which is prc-
sent" Voyage a l. Martinique, p. 44, 45. 51. M.
de la Ilordc, Terrre, an(d Rocliefort, confirm this defcrip-
tion. " The charartcrillics of the Californians, fays P,

Vencgas,

Vcnegas, " as well as of all other Indians, are fupidity
and insensibility; want of knowledge and refle&ion; in-
constancy, impetuosity, and bindnefs of appetite; an ez-
ceflive sloth, and abhorrence of all labour and fatigue; an
excessive love of pleasure and amusement of every kind,
however trifling or brutal; pusillanimity, and, in fine, a
most wretched want of every thing which constitutes the
real man, and renders him rational, inventive, tradable,
and useful to himself and society. It is not easy for Euro-
peans, who never were out of their own country, to con-
ceive an adequate idea of those people: for, even in the
leaf frequented corners of the globe. there is not a na-
tion so tupid, of such contracted ideas, and so weak both
in body and mind, as the unhappy Californians. Their
nderftanding comprehends little more than what they
fee; abtra&t ideas, and much less a chain of reasoning,
being far beyond their power; so that they scarce ever
improve their first ideas, and these are in general falfe,or
at least inadequate. It is in vain to represent to them
any future advantages which will result to them from doing
or abstaining from this or that particular immediately
present; the relation of means and ends being beyond
the Rretch of their faculties. Nor have they the least
notion of pursuing such intentions as wil procure them-
fclves some future good, or guard them against future
evils. Their will is proportional to their faculties, and
all their pafiFwa move in a very narrow sphere. Ambi-
tion they have none, and are more desirous of being ac-
counted frong than valiant. The objects of ambition
with us, honour, fame, reputation, titles, posts, and dif-
tindions of fupcriqrity, are unknown among them ; so
that this powerful Spring of action, the cause of so much
seeming good and real evil in the world, has no power
here. This difpoftioo of mind, as it gives them up to
an amazing languor and lafitudc, their lives fleeting away

in

in a perpetual inactivity and detestation of labour, so It
likewise induces them to be attracted by the firR objeC
which their own fancy, or the persuasion of another,
places before them ; and at the fame time renders them as
prone to alter their resolutions with the fame facility.
They look with indifference upon any kindness done
them; nor is even the bare remembrance of it to be ex.
peaed from them. Iu a word, the unhappy mortals may
be compared to children, in whom the developement of
season is not completed. They may indeed be called a
nation who never arrive at manhood." Hit. of Cali-
sorn. Engl. Tranfl. i. 64. 67. Mr. Ellis gives a iimilar
account of the want of foresight and inconsiderate difpo-
fition of the people adjacent to Hudson's Bay. Voyage,
p. 194 '95.

THE incapacity of the Americans is so remarkable,

that negroes from all the different provinces of Africa are
observed to be more capable of improving by inftrution.
They acquire the knowledge of several particulars which
the Americans cannot comprehend. Hence the negroes,
though saves, value themselves as a superior order of be-
ings, and look down upon the Americans with contempt,
as void of capacity and of rational discernment. Ulloa
Notic. Americ. 322, 323.

NOTE XXVI. p. 93.
D R OzT7TIOFFIR, the last traveller, I know, who has

residcd among any tribe of the ruder Americans, has

explained so fully the various reasons which have induced
their women to suckle their children long, and never to
underltake rearing such as were feeble or distorted, and even
to dcftroy a confidcrable number of their offspring, as to

throw

throw great light on the observations I have made, p. 72,
73iHift. de Abifionibus, vol. ii. p. 107. 221. So deeply
were these ideas imprinted in the minds of the Ame-
ricans, that the Peruvians, a civilized people, when com-
pared with the barbarous tribes, whose manners I am de-
scribing, retained them; and even their intercourse with
the Spaniards has not been able to root them out. When
twins are born in any family, it is still confidced as an
ominous event, and the parents have recourse to rigorous
aas of mortification, in order to avert the calamities with
which they are threatened. When a child is born with
any deformity, they will not, if they can possibly avoid its
bring it to be baptized, and it is witn difficulty they can
be brought to rear it. Arriaga Extirpac. de la Idolat. del
Peru, p. 32, 33.

NOTE XXVII. p. 98.
T HE number of the fish in the rivers of South America

is so extraordinary, as to merit particular notice.

" In the Maragnon (fays P. Acugna) filh are so plentiful,
that, without any art, they may take them with the hands."
p. 138. " In the Orinoco (fays P. Gumilla), bcfides an
infinite variety of other sis, tortoise or turtle abound in
such numbers, that I cannot find words to exprcfs it. I
doubt not but that such as read my account will ac-
cufe me of exaggeration: but I can affirm that it is
as difficult to count them, as to count the funds on
the banks of that river. One may judge of their num-
ber by the amazing consumption of them; for all the na-
tions contiguous to the river, and even many who are
at a distance, flock thither at the season of breeding, and
not only find fulfenance during that time, but carry of

great

great numbers both of the turtles and of their eggs, &c."
Hilt. de l'Orenoque, ii. c. 22. p. 59. M. de la Coqa-
mine confirms their accounts, p. 159.

NO T E XXVIII. p. 98.
piso describes two of these plants, the Cururuape, and

the GuajaMa-Timbo. It is remarkable, that though

they have this fatal effecf upon fishes, they are so far from
being noxious to the human species, that they are used in
medicine with success. Pifo, lib. iv. c. 88. Bancroft
mentions another, the Hiarree, a small quantity of which is
sufficient to inebriate all the fish tola considerable distance,
so that in a few minutes they float motionless on the fur-
face of the water, and are taken with cafe. Nat. Hist. of
Guiana, p. so6.

NOTE XXIX. p. tot.
R EMARKABLE instances occur of the calamities which

rude nations susser by famine. Alvar Nugnez Ca-

beca de Vaca, one of the most gallant and virtuous of the
Spanilh adventurers, rcfided almost nine years among the
savages of Florida. They were unacquainted with every
species of agriculture. Their subsistence was poor and
precarious. "4 They live chiefly (fays he) upon roots of
different plants, which they procure with great difficulty,
wandering from place to place in search of them. Some-
times they kill game, sometimes they catch sinh, but in
such small quantities, that their hunger is so extreme as
compels them to eat spiders, the eggs of ants, worms,
lizards, serpents, a kind of unauous earth, and I am per-
fuaded, that if in this country there were any ftoncs, they

13 would

would swallow these. They preserve the bones of filhes
and serpents, which they grind into powder, and eat.
The only season when they do.not susser much from fa-
mine, is when a certain fruit, which he calls Tunat, is
ripe. This is the fame with the Opuntia, or prickly pear,
of a reddish and yellow colour, .vith a sweet insipid taste.
They are Sometimes obliged to travel far from their usual
place of rcfidence, in order to find them." Naufragias,
c. xviii. p. 20, 2i, 22. In another place, he observes that
they are frequently reduced to pass two or three days with-
out food, c. xxiv. p. 27.

NOTE XXX. p. 103.
M . FERMIN has given an accurate description of the

two species of manicc, with an account of its cul-

ture, to which he has added some experiments, in order
to ascertain the poisonous qualities of the juice extracted
from that species which he calls the bitter cai.tva. Among
the Spaniards it is known by the name of Tura brava.
Defcr. deSurin. tom. i. p. 66.

NOTE XXXI. p. 1o3.

THE plantain is found in Asia and Africa, as well as
in America. Oviedo contends, that it is not an in-

digenous plant of the New World, but was introduced
into the ifand of IIifpaniola, in the year 15z6, by
father Thomas de Berlanga, and that he transplanted it
from the Canary Islands, whither the original flips had
been brought from the East Indies. Oviedo, lib. viii.
c. I. But the opinion of Acofta and other naturalists,
who reckon it an American plant, seems to be better

founded.

founded. Acolta Hilf. Nat. lib. iv. 2 . It was cultic
vated by rude tribes in America, who had little intercourse
with the Spaniards, and who were destitute of that inge-
nuity, which disposes men to borrow what is useful from
foreign nations. Gumil. iii. x86. Wafer's Voyage,
p. 87.

NOTE XXXII. p. IO5.
]T is remarkable, that Acofta, one of the most acca.

rate and bef-informed writers concerning the Weft

Indies, affirms, that maize, though cultivated in the con-
tinent, was not known in the islands, the inhabitants of
which had none but caffada bread. Hist. Nat. lib. iv.
c. x6. But P. Martyr, in the first book of his first De-
cad, which was written in the year 1493, upon the re-
turn of Columbus from his first voyage, expressly men-
tions maize as a plant which the islanders cultivated,
and of which they made bread, p. 7. Gomara likewise
asserts, that they were acquainted with the culture of
maize. Hiftor. Gener. cap. 28. Oviedo describes maize
without any intimation of its being a plant that was not
natural to Hispaniola. Lib. vii. c. i.

NOTE XXXIII. p. 112.
N tw HOLLAND, a country which formerly was

only known, has lately been visited by intelligent

obfervcrs. It lies in a region of the globe where it
must enjoy a very favourable climate, as it stretches from
the loth to the 38th degree of northern latitude. It is of
great extent, and from its square form must be much
more than equal to all Europe. The people who inha-
bit the various parts of it appear to be of one race.

6 They

They are evidently ruder than most of the Americans;
and have made still less progress in improvement and the
arts of life. There is not the leaf appearance of culti-
vation in any part of this vast region. The inhabitants
are extremely few, so that the country appears almost
desolate. Their tribes are still more inconfderable than
those of America. They depend for subsistence, almost
entirely, on fishing. They do not fettle in one place5
but roam about in quest of food. Both sexes go stark-
nakod. Their habitations, utensils, &c. are more (imple
and rude than those of the Americans. Voyages, by
Hawkefworth, iii. 622, &c. This, perhaps, is the coun-
try where man has been discovered in the earliest flage of
his progress, and it exhibits a miserable fpccimen of his
condition and powers in that uncultivated Rate. If this
country (hall be more fully explored by future navigators,
the comparison of the manners of its inhabitants with
those of the Americans will prove an inftruotive article
in the history of the human species,

NOTE XXXIV. p. 112.
p GABRIIL MAREST, who travelled from his station

among the Illinois to Machillimakinac, thus describes

the face of the country: " We have marched twelve days
without meeting a single human creature. Sometimes we
found ourselves in vast meadows, of which we could not
fee the boundaries, through which there flowed many
brooks and rivers, but without any path to condtit us.
Sometimes we were obliged to open a paflage across thick
forests, through bushes, and underwood filled with briaru
and thorns. Sometimes we had to pass through deep
marshes, in which we funk up to the middle. After being
fatigued through the day, we had the earth for our bed#
or a few leaves, exposed to the wind, tlhe tin, and all

VOL, 11, Ir ths

the injuries of the air." Lettr. Edifiantes, ii. 360. Dr.
Brickell, in an excursion from North Carolina towards
the mountains, A. D. 1730, travelled fifteen days without
meeting with a human creature. Nat. Hist, of North Ca-
rolina, 389. Diego de Ordas, in attempting to make
a efttlement in South America, A. D. 1532, marched fifty
days through a country without one inhabitant. Herrera,
dec. 5. lib. i. c. i.

NOTE XXXV. p. 114.
I STRONGLY fufpea that a community of goods, and

an undivided store, are known only among the rudest

tribes of hunters; and that as soon as any species of agri-
culture or regular industry is known, the idea of an ex-
clufive right of property to the fruits of them is intro-
duced. I am confirmed in this opinion by accounts which
I have received concerning the state of property among
f!le Indians in very difFerent regions of America. " The
idea of the natives of Brasil concerning property is, that
if any pcrlon cultivate a field, he alone ought to en-
joy the produce of it, and no other has a title to pretend
to it. If an individual or family go a-hunting or filb-
ing, what is caught belongs to tlic individual or to tle
family, and they communicate no part of it to any but to
their cazique, or to such of their kindred as happen to be
indifpoled. If any pcrfon in the village come to their
hut, he may fit down freely, and cat without alking
liberty. But this is the consequence of their general
principle of hospitality ; for I never observed any parti-
tion of the increase of their fields, or the produce of
the chace, which I could confider as thl reullt of any
idea concerning a community of goods. On the contrary,
they are so much attached to what they deem to be thLir
property, that it would be extremely dangerous to c,:-
troach upon it. As far as I have fcct, or call learln,

9 tthere

9~~~~~~

there is not one tribe of Indians in South America, among
whom that community of goods which has been so highly
extolled is known. The circumstance in the govern-
ment of the Jesuits, most irksome to the Indians of Pa-
raguay, was the community of goods which those fathers
introduced. This was repugnant to the original ideas
of the Indians. They were acquainted with the rights
of private exclusive property, and they submitted with
impatience to regulations which destroyed them." M.
le Cheval. de Pinto, MS. penes me. " Atual poflf-
sion (fays a missionary who resided fcvcral years among
the Indians of the Five Nations) gives a right to the foil,
but whenevcr a pofleflbr fees fit to quit it, another has as
good right to take it as he who left it. This law, or
cullom, refpeas not only the particular spot on which he
ere&s his house, but also his planting.ground. If a man
has prepared a particular spot of ground, on which he
designs in future to build or plant, no man has a right
to incommode him, much less to the fruit of his labours,
until it appears that he voluntarily gives up his views.
Blut I never heard of any formal conveyance from one
Indian to another in their natural state. Thd limits of
every canton is circumscribed; that is, they are allowed
to hunt as far as such a river on this hand, and such a
mountain on the other. This area is occupied and im-
proved by individuals and their families. Individuals,
not the community, have the use and profit of their own
labours, or success in hunting." MS. of Mr. Gideon
Hawley, penes me.

NOTE XXXVI. p. 115.

HIS difference of temper between the Americans and
negroes is so remarkable, that it is a proverbial fay-
ing in the French islands, " Regarder un fauvage de

F v 2 travcrs,

travers, c'cft le battre; le battre, c'eft le tuer; battrc
un negre, c'f le nourrir." Tertre, ii. 490.

NOTE XXXVII. p. Ix6.
THE description of the political state of the people of

Cinaloa perfectly resembles that of the inhabitants

of North America. 1' They have neither laws nor kings
(fays a miflionary who resided long among them) to pu-
nifh any crime. Nor is there among them any species
of authority, or political government, to restrain them
in any part of their condut. It is true, that they ac-
knowledge certain Caziques, who are heads of their fa-
milies or villages, but their authority appears chiefly in
war, and the expeditions against their enemies. This
authority the Caziques obtain not by hereditary right, but
by their valour in war, or by the power and number of
their families and relations. Sometimes they owe their
pre-eminence to their eloquence in displaying their own
exploits." Ribas Hiftor. de las Triumph. &c. p. 1.
The state of the Chiquitos in South America is nearly the
fame. " They have no regular form of government, or
civil life, but in matters of public concern they liften
to the advice of their old men, and usually follow it.
The dignity of Cazique is not hereditary, but conferred
according to merit, as the reward of valour in war. The
union among them is imperfect. Their society resembles
a republic without any head, in which every man is
master of hilnfelf, and, upon the least lifguft, separates
from those with whom lie itemed to be connedted." Rc-
lacion Iiftorical de las Milliones de los Chiquitos, por P.
Juan Patr. Fernandez, p. 32, 33. Thus, under very dif-
ferent climates, when nations arc in a similar state of
society, their inflitutions and civil government aflame
the famn form.

NOTE

NOTE XXXVII. p.131.
cf I HAVE known the Indians (fays a person well ac-

quainted with their mode of life) to go a thousand

miles for the purpose of revenge, in pathless woods,
over hills and mountains, through huge cane swamps, ex.
posed to the extremities of heat and cold, the vicissitude
of seasons, to hunger and thirst. Such is their over-
boiling revengeful temper, that they utterly contemn all
those things as imaginary trifles, if they are so happy as
to get the scalp of the murderer, or enemy, to satisfy the
craving ghosts of their deceased relations." Adair's Hiit.
of Amer. Indians, p. 1io.

NOTE XXXIX. p. 131.
IN the account of the great war between the Algo.-

quins and Iroquois, the atchievements of Pi&aret, a

famous chief of the Algonquins, performed mostly by him-
self alone, or with one or two companions, make a capital
figure. De la Potherie, i. 297, &c. Colden's Hist. of
Five Nations, 125, &c.

NOTE XL. p. 134.
THE life of an unfortunate leader is often in danger,

and he is always degraded from the rank which ho
had acquired by his former exploits. Adair, p. 388.

NOTE XLI. p. 134.
As the ideas of the North Americans, with reflet to

the mode of carrying on war, are generally known;

I have founded my obfcrvations chiefly upon the teltimony
of the authors who describe them. But the fame maxims
took place among other nations in the New World. A
judicious miflionary has given a view of the military ope.

r F 3 rations

rations of the peple iln Gran Chaco, in South America,
perfeclly finilar to those of the Iroquois. " They are
much addicted to war (fays he), which they carry on fre-
quently among thenisllvcs, but perpetually agaiiift the Spa-
niarus. But they may rather be called thieves than fol-
diers, for they never make head ag;inft the Spaniards,
unless when they can afltult them by stealth, or have
guarded against any mischance by spics, who may be called
indcfatigable ; they will watch the settlements of the Spa-
niards for one, two, or three years, observing by night
every thing that paltfs with the utmost fulicitude, whe-
ther they may expct rcfiftance or not, and until they arc
perfectly secure of tlh event, they will not venture upon
an attack; so that when they do give the afCault, they are
certain of success, and free from all danger. These spies,
in order that they may not be observed, will creep on
all-four like cats in the night; but if they are discovered,
make their escape with much dexterity. But, although
they never chufe to face the Spaniards, if they be fur-
rounded in any place, whence they cannot escape, they
will fight with defperatc valour, and fell their lives very
dear." Lozano Defcrip. del Gran Chaco, p. 78.

NOTE XLII. p. 136.
LERY, who was an cye-witnefs of the proceedings

of the Toupinambos, a Brafilinn tribe, in a war againll

a powerful nation of their cucnmics, dcfcribes their courage
and ferocity in very striking terms. Ego cum Gallo al-
tero, paulo curiofius, magno noltro periculo (si cnim ab
hoflibus capti aut le fuiflimus, devorationi fuifiemus de-
voti), barbaros noftros in militian euntes comitari volui.
Hi, numero 4000 capita, cum hoftibus ad littus dccer-
tarunt, tanta ferocitate, ut vel rabidos ct furiosos quofquc
fupcrarent. Cum primum hostes copfpcxere, in magnps

atque

atque cditos ululatus perruperunt. Haec gens adeo sera.
eft & truculenta, ut tantifper dum virium vel tantillum
reftat, continuo dimicent, fugamque nunquam capeffant.
Qod a natura illis inditum efle reor. Teftor interea me,
qui non femel, turn peditum turn equitum copias ingen-
tes, in aciem inftrutas hic confpexi, tanta nunquam vo-
luptate videndis peditum legionibus armis fulgentibus,
quanta turn pugnantibus iftis percuffum suisse. Lery Hist,
Navigat. in Brasil. ap. deBry, iii. 07, 208, 209.

NOTE XLIII. p. 137.

T was originally the practice of the Americans, as
well as of other savage nations, to cut off the heads

of the enemies whom they flew, and to carry them away
as trophies. But, as they found these cumbersome in their
retreat, which they always make very rapidly, and often
through a vast extent of country, they became satisfied with
tearing off their scalps. This custom, though moftpreva-
lent in North America, was not unknown among the
Southern tribes. Lozano, p. 79.

NOTE XLIV. p. 142.

HE terms of the war-fong seem to be di&ated by the
fame fierce spirit of revenge. " I go to war to re-

venge the death of my brothers; I (hall kill; I (hall ex-
terminate; I (hall burn my enemies; I (hall bring away
flavcs; I (hall devour their heart, dry their flesh, drink
their blood; I (hall tear off their scalps, and make cups
of their lkulls." Boffu's Travels through Louisiana,
vol. i. p. o02. I am informed, by persons on whoef
testimony I can rely, that as the number of people in the
Indian tribes has decreased so much, almost none of their
prisoners are now put to death. It is confidered as bet-

F F 4 ter

ter policy to spare and to adopt them. Those dreadful
scenes which I have described occur now so rarely, that
missionaries and traders who have resided long among the
Indians, never were witneffis to them.

NOTE XLV. p. r43.
AL. the travellers who have visited the most unci-

vilized of the American tribes, agree in this. It

is confirmed by two remarkable circumstances, which oc-
curred in the conquellt of different provinces. In the ex-
pedition of Narvaez into Florida in the year 1528, the
Spaniards were reduced to ftch extreme diltrefs by fa.
mine, that, in order to preserve their own lives, they eat
such of their companions as happened to die. This ap-
peared so shocking to the natives, who were accustomed
to devour none but prisoners, that it filled them with hor-
ror and indignation againtf the Spaniards. Torquemada
Monarch. Ind. ii. p. 584. Naufragios de Alv. Nugnez
Cabeca de Vaca, c. xiv. p. 15. During the siege of
Mexico, though the Mexicans devoured with greediness the
Spaniards and Tlafcalans, whom they took prisoners, the
utmost rigour of the famine which they fuiffcred could not
induce them to touch the dead bodies of their own coun-
trymen. Bern. Diaz. del Castillo Conquilt. de la N. El,
pagna, p. x56.

NOTE XLVI. p. 144.

ANY singular circumstances concerning the treat-
ment of prisoners among the people of Brasil, are

contained in the narrative of Stadius, a German officer
il the service of the Portuguese, published in the year
1556. He was taken prisoner by the Toupiniamibo, and
remained in captivity nine years. He was often present

at

at those horrid festivals which he describes, and was def-
tined himself to the fame cruel fate with other prisoners.
But he saved his life by extraordinary efforts of courage
and address. De Bry, iii. p. 34, &c. M. De Lery,
who accompanied M. De Villegagnon in his expedition to
Brasil, in the year 1556, and who resided some time in
that country, agrees with Stadius in every circumstance of
importance. He was frequently an eye-wirnefs of the
manner in which the Brafilians treated their prisoners. De
Bry, iii. 210. Several striking particulars omitted by
them, are mentioned by a Portuguese author. Purch,
Pilgr. iv. 1294, &c.

NOTE XLVII. p. 148.

HOUGH I have followed that opinion concerning
the apathy of the Americans, which appeared to me

most rational, and supported by the authority of the most
refpe&able authors, other theories have been formed with
regard to it, by writers of great eminence. D. Ant,
Ulloa, in a late work, contends, that the texture of the
skin and bodily habit of the Americans is such, that they
are less sensible of pain than the reft of mankind. He
produces several proofs of this, from the manner in which
they endure the most cruel chirurgical operations, &c.
Noticias Americanas, p. 313, 314. The fame obferva-
tion has been made by surgeons in Brasil. An Indian,
they fay, never complains under pain, and will bear the
amputation of a leg or arm without uttering a single
groan. MS. penes me.

NOTE XLVIII. p. x5o.

ins is an idea natural to all rude nations. Among
the Romans, in the early periods of their common-
wealth, it was a maxim that a prisoner, " turn deceflifn

videtur

vildtur cum captus eft." Digest. lib. xlix. tit. 15. c. 18.
And afterwards, when the progress of refinement rendered
them more indulgent with refpe& to this article, they
were obliged to employ two ficions of law to secure the
property, and permit the return of a captive, the one
by the Iex Cornelia, and the other by the Jus Poftliminii,
Heinec. Elcm. Jur. Civ. sec. ord. Pand. ii. p. 294.
Among the negroes the fame ideas prevail. No ransom
was ever accepted for a prisoner. As soon as one is taken
in war, he is reputed to be dead ; and he is so in effect to
his country and his family. Voy. du Cheval. des Mar-
chais, i. p. 369.

NOTE XLIX. p. 151.
THE people of Chili, the most gallant and high-fpl-

rited of all the Americans, are the only exception

to this observation. They attack their enemies in the open
field; their troops are ranged in regular order; their bat-
talions advance to the charge not only with courage, but
with discipline. The North Americans, though many of
them have fubflituted the European fire-arms in place of
their own bows and arrows, till adhere to their ancient
maxims of war, and carry it on according to their own
peculiar system. But the Chilefe nearly refcmble the
warlike nations of Europe and Aria in their military opc-
rations. Ovalle's Relation of Chili. Church. Coll. iii.
p. 71. Lozano's Hilt. Parag. i. 144, 145.

NOTE L. p. 155.

EH.RHRRA gives a remarkable proof of this. In
Yucatma, the men are so solicitous about their dress,

that they carry about with them mirrors, probably made
of flone, like those of the Mexicans, Iec. iv. lib. iii.
c. 8. in which they delight to view tllemfelves; but the

women

women never use them. Dec. iv. lib. x. c. 3. He takes
notice, that among the fierce tribe of the Panches, in the
new kingdom of Granada, none but diftinguiihed warriors
were permitted either to pierce their lips and to wear
green stones in them, or to adorn their heads with plumes
of feathers. Dec. vii. lib. ix. c. 4. In some provinces of
Peru, though that empire had made considerable progress
in civilization, the Htate of women was little improved.
All the toil of cultivation and domeRfic work was de-
volved upon them, and they were not permitted to wear
bracelets, or other ornaments, with which the men were
fond of decking themselves. Zarate Hist. do Peru, i.
p. I5, x6.

NOTE LI. p. i55.

HAVE ventured to call this mode of anointing and
painting their bodies, the dresS of the Americans.

This is agreeable to their own idiom. As they never stir
abroad if they are not completely anointed; they excuse
themselves when in this situation, by faying, that they
cannot appear because they are naked. Gumiila Hist. de
]'Orenoque, i. 191.

NOTE LII. p. i56.
SoME tribes in the province of Cinaloa, on the gulf of

California, teem to be among the rudest people of Ame-

rica united in the social ltate. They neither cultivate
nor sow; they have no houses in which they reside.
Those in the inland country subsist by hunting; those on
the fea.coalt chiefly by fishing. Both depend upon the
spontaneous productions of the earth, fruits, plants, and
roots of various kinds. In the rainy season, as they have
no habitations to afford them flelter, they gather bundles
of reeds, or strong grass, and binding them together at one
end, they open themn at the other, and fitting them to

their

their heads, they are covered as with a large cap, which
like a pent-house throws off the rain, and will keep them
dry for several hours. During the warm season, they
form a shed with the branches of trees, which protects
them from the sultry rays of the fun. When exposed to
cold they make large fires, round which they seep in the
open air. -liftoria de los Triumphos de Nueftra Santa Fe
entre Gentes las mas barbaras, &c. por P. And. Perez de
Ribas, p. 7, &c.

NOTE LIII. p. 158.
Tir.sr. houfcs rcfemibl barns. " We have meafired

some which were a hundred and fifty paces long, and

twvcrty paces broad. Above a hundred persons refde in
fomc of them." Wilson's Account of Guiana. Purch.
Pilgr. vol. iv. p. 1263. Ibid. 1291. " The Indian
houses," lays Mr. Barrcrc, " have a most wretched ap-
pearance, and are a striking image of the rudeness of early
times. Their huts are commonly built on some riling
ground, or on the banks of a river, huddled rometimes to-
gether, sometimes straggling, and always without any cr-
der. Their aspeCt is melancholy and difagreeablc. One
secs nothing but what is hideous and savage. The uncul.
tivated fields have no gaiety. The silence which reigns
there, unless when interrupted by the disagreeable notes of
birds, or cries of wild beasts, is extremely dismal." Re-
lat. de la France Equin. p. 146.

NOTE LIV. p. 160.
SOME tribes in South America can fend their arrows to

a great dillance, and with considerable force, without

the aid of the bow. They make use of a hollow reel,
about nine feet long, and an inch thick, which is called a
Sarbacane. In it they lodge a finall arrow, with omne un-

5 s1'uii

spun cotton wound about its great end; this confines the
air, so that they can blow it with astonishing rapidity, and
a sure aim, to the distance of above a hundred paces.
Thefc small arrows are always poisoned. Fermin. Defer.
de Surin. i. 55. Bancroft's HiR. of Guiana, p. 281, &c.
The Sarbacane is much used in some parts of the East
Indies.

NOTE LV. p. i6o.
I MIGHT produce many infRanccs of this, but bfall

satisfy myself with one, taken from the Eikimaux.
Their greatest ingenuity (fays Mr. Ellis) is (hewn in the

structure of their bows, made commonly of three pieces of
wood, cach making part of the fame arch, very nicely and
exatly joined together. They are commonly of fir or
larch; and as this wants strength and elasticity, they sup-
ply both by bracing the back of the bow, with a kind of
thread, or line, made of the sinews of their deer, and the
bow-string of the fame materials. To make them draw
more stiffly, they dip them into water, which causes both
the back of the bow and the itring to contraC, an!d con-
fequently gives it the greater force; and as they pra&ise
from their youth, they lhoot with very great dexterity."
Voyage to Hudson's Day, p. 138.

NOTE LVI. p. z61.

F.CESSITY is the great promptcr and guide of man-
kind in their inventions. Therc is, however, such

inequality in some parts of their progrcfs, and some na-
tions get so far the itart of others in circumftanccs nearly
similar, that we must ascribe this to some events in their
story, or to some peculiariy in their situation with which
we are unacquainted. 'he people in the island of Ota-

lcite,

heite, lately discovered in the South Sea, far excel most of
the Americans in the knowledge and pracice of the arts of
ingenuity, and yet they had not invented any method of
boiling water; and having no velTel that would bear the
fire, they had no more idea that water could be made hot,
than that it could be made solid. Voyages by Hawkef-
worth, i. 466. 484.

NOTE LVII. p. 161.
ONE of there boats, which could carry nine men, weigh.

ed only sixty pounds. Gofnol. Rclat. des Voy. a
la Virgin. Rec. de Voy. au Nord, tom. v. p. 403.

NOTE LVIII. p. 163.
A REMARKABLE proof of this is produced by Ulloa. In

weaving hammocks, coverlets, and the other coarse

cloaths, which they are accustomed to manufa&ture, their
industry has discovered no more expeditious method, than
to take up thread after thread, and after counting and fort-
ing them each time, to p.iss the woof between them, so
that in finifhiing a (mall piece of those fluffs, they frequent.
ly spend more than two years. Voyage, i. 336. Ban.
croft gives the fame description of the indians of Guiana,
p. 255. According to Adair, the ingenuity and dispatch
of the North American Indians are not greater, p. 422.
From one of the engravings of the Mexican paintings in
Purchas, vol. iii. p. 0 o6. I think it probable that the
people of IMexico were unacquainted with any better or
more expeditious mode of weaving. A loom was an in-
vention beyond the ingenuity of the molf improved Ame-
ricans. In all their works they advance so slowly, that one
of their artists is two months at a tobacco-pipe with his
knife before hu finihcs it. Adair, p. 423.

wOTE

NOTE LIX. p. 165.

SHE article of religion in P. Lafitau's Moeurs des
- Sauvages, extends to 347 tedious pages in quarto.

NOTE LX. p. I68.

HAVE referred the reader to several of the authors
ss.ho dcfcribe the most uncivilized nations in America.

Their teflimony is uniform. That of P. Ribas concerning
the people of Cinaloa, coincides with the reft. " I was
extremely attentive (fays he), during the years I resided
among them, to ascertain whether they were to be confi-
dered as idolaters; and it may be affirmed with the moid
perfea cx.flCncfs, that though among some of them there
may be traces of idolatry, yet others have not the lealt
knowledge of God, or even of any false deity, nor pay
any formal adoration to the Supreme Being, who exercifcs
dominion over the world ; nor have they any conception
of the providence of a creator or governor, from whom
they expcd in the next life the reward of their good, or
the puniflimcnt of thcir evil deeds. Neither do they pub-
licly join in any ae of divine wornfip." RibasTriumphos,
&c. p. i6.

NOTE LXI. p. i69
-T IE people of Brasil were so much affrighted by thun-

der, which is frequent and awful in their country, as

well as in other parts of the torrid zone, that it was not
only the object of religious reverence; but the most ex-
prelfive name in their language for the Deity, was Toupan,
the fame by whilc thcy diflinguilhed thunder. Pifo de
Mledcc. Brasil, p. 8. Nicuholf. Church. Coll. ii. p. 132.

NOTE

NOTE LXII. p. 177.

,T the account which M. Dumont, an eye-witncfs, gives
of the funeral of the great chief of the Natchez, it anp

pears, that the feelings of the persons who suffered on that
occasion were very different. Some solicited the honour
with eagerness; others laboured to avoid their doom, and
leveral saved their lives by flying to the woods. As the
Indian Bramins give an intoxicating draught to the wo-
men, who are to be burnt together with the bodies of their
husbands, which renders them insensible of their approach.
ing fate, the Natchez obliged their victims to swallow
several large pills of tobacco, which produce a similar cf.
fed. Mem. de Louis. i. 227.

NOTE LXIII. p. 184.
ON some occasions, particularly in dances instituted for

the recovery of persons who are indisposed, they are

extremely licentious and indecent. De la Potherie Hist.
&c. ii. p. 42. Charley. N. Fr. iii. p. 319. But the
nature of their dances is commonly such as I have de-
fcribed.

NOTE LXIV. p. 186.
T HE Othocmacras, a tribe feated on the banks of the

Orinoco, employ for the fame purpose a composition,

which they call Ytipa. It is formed of the feeds of an un-
known plant, reduced to powder, and certain shells burnt
and pulverized. The effecs of this when drawn up into
the nostrils are so violcnt, that they resemble madness ra-
ther than intoxication. Gumilla, i. 286.

NOTE

NOTE LXV. p.190.
THouGH this observation holds true among the

greater tart of the southern tribes, there are some in

which the intemperance of the women is as excelfive as
that of the men. Bancroft's Nat. Hist. of Guiana,
p. 275.

NOTE LXVI. p. T95.
EVEN in the mos intelligent writers concerning the

manners of the Anmericans, one meets with inconfift-

ent and inexplicable .L -cumftances. Thejefuit Charlevoix,
who, in consequence of the controversy between his order
and that of the Franciscans, with refpe& to the talents and
abilities of the North Americans, is disposed to represent
their intelleftual as well as moral qualities in the molt fa-
vourable light, asserts, that they are engaged in continual
negociations with their neighbours, and conduc there with
the most refined address. At the fame time he adds, " that
it behoves their envoys or plenipotentiaries to exert their
abilities and eloquence, for if the terms which they offer
are not accepted of, they had need to stand on their guard.
It frequently happens, that a blow with a hatchet is the only
return given to their propositions. The envoy is not out
of danger even if he is so fortunate as to avoid the stroke,
he may expe6 to be pursued, and if taken, to be burnt."
Hist. N. Fr. iii. 251. What occurs vol. ii. p. 277. con-
cerning the manner in which the Tlafcalans treated the
ambaliadors from Zempoalla, corresponds with the faa re-
laiod by Charlevoix. Men capable of such ats of vio-
lence, seem to be unacquainted with the first principles
upon which the intercourse between nations is founded i
and initead of the perpeturl negociations which Charlevoix
mentions, it seems almost impollible that there should be
any correspondence whatever among them.

toL.I. c NOTE

NOTE LXVII. p. 97.

T is a remark of Tacitus concerning the Germans,
' Gaudent muneribus, fed nec data imputant, nec ac-

ceptis obligantur." C. 2 . An author who had a good
opportunity ofobferving the principle which leads savages
neither to express gratitude for favours which they had re-
ceived, nor to expec any return for such as they bestowed,
thus explains their ideas: " If, fay they, you give me
this, it is because you have no need of it yourself; and as
for me, I never part with that which I think neceflary to
me." Memoir fur le Galibis; Hilt. des Plantes de Ia
Guiane Francoise par M. Aublet, tom. ii. p. I lo.

NOTE LXVIII. p. 211.
A ND. BERNALDES, the contemporary and friend of

Columbus, has preserved some circumstances con-

cerning the bravery of the Caribbees, which are not men-
tioned by Don Ferdinand Columbus, or the other historians
of that period, whose works have been published. A
Caribbean canoe, with four men, two women, and a boy,
fell in unexpetedly with the fleet of Columbus in his second
voyage, as it was steering through their islands. At first
they were struck almost stupid with aftonilhment at such a
firange fpefacle, and hardly moved from the spot for above
an hour. A Spanish bark, with twenty-five men, ad.
vanced towards them, and the fleet gradually surrounded
them, so as to cut off their communication with the (hore.
*' When they saw that it was impollible to escape (fays
the historian), they seized their arms with undaunted re-
solution, and began the attack. I use the expreflion, with
undaunted reflution, for they were few, and beheld a vast
number ready to assault them. They wounded several of
the Spaniard*, although they had targets, as well as other

defensive

defenive armour; and even after their canoe was overfeti
it was with no little difficulty and danger that part of them
were taken, as they continued'to defend themselves, and
to use their bows with great dexterity while swimming in
the sea." Hist. de D. Fern. y Yfab. MSS, c. z 19.

NOTE LXIX. p. 21.
A PROBABLE conjeaure may be formed with refpea

to the caiue of the distinction in character between

the Caribbees and the inhabitants of the larger islands. The
former appear nmanifcftly to be a separate race. Their lan.
guage is totally different from that of their neighbours in
the large ilands. They themselves have a tradition, that
their ancestors came originally from rome part of the con.
tinent, and having conquered and exterminated the an-
cient inhabitants, took poffefllion of their lands, and of
their women. Rochefort, 384. Tertre, 360. Hence
they call themselves Banaree, whi h signifies a man come
from beyond sea. Labat. vi. 131. Accordingly, the
Caribbees fill use two diftin& languages, one peculiar to
the men, and the other to the women. Tertre, 361. The
language of the men has nothing common with that spoken
in the large islands. The dialcft of the women confider-
ably resembles it. Labat. 129. This strongly confirms
the tradition which I have mentioned. The Caribbees
themselves imagine, that they were a colony from the Ga-
libis, a powerful nation of Guiana, in South America.
Tertre, 361. Rochefort, 348. But, as their fierce man-
ners approach nearer to those of the people in,the northern
continent, than to those of the natives of South America;
and as their language has likewise some affinity to that
spoken in Florida, their origin flhould be deduced rather
from the former than from the latter. Labat. 128, &c.
Herrera, dec. i. lib. ix. c. 4. In their wars, they still

G c 2 observe

observe their ancient practice of destroying all the malest
and preserving the women either for servitude or for
breeding.

NOTE LXX. p. 213.
OUR knowledge of the events which happened in the

conquest of New Spain, is derived from sources of

information more original and authentic than that of any
tranfafion in the history of America. The letters of
Cortes to the Emperor Charles V. are an hiitorical monu-
ment, not only first in order of time, but of the greatest
authenticity and value. As Cortes early assumed a com-
mand independant of Velasquez, it became necessary to
convey such an account of his operations to Madrid, as
iniglit procure hii the approbation of his sovereign.

THE firfl of his dispatches has never been made public.

It was sent from Vera-Cruz, July i6th, 1519. As I
imagined that it might not reach the Emperor, until he
arrived in Germany, for which lie set out early in the year
1520, in order to receive the Imperial crown; I made
diligent search for a copy of this dispatch, both in Spain
and in Germany, but without fucccfs. This, however, is
of let's confequencc, as it could not contain any thing very
material, being written so soon after Cortes arrived in New
Spain. But, in searching for the letter from Cortes, a
copy of one from the colony of Vcra-Cruz to the Emperor
has been discovered in the Imperial library at Vienna. Of
this I have subjoined fume account at the close of the Notes
to the third volume. The second dispatch, dated OCtober
30th, 1520, was published at Seville, A. D. 1522, and
the third and fourth soon after they were received. A La-
tin translation of them appeared in Germany, A. D. 1532.
Ramufio soon after made them more generally known, by
inserting them in his valuable collecion. They contain a

regular

regular and minute history of the expedition, with many
curious particulars concerning the policy and manners of
the Mexicans. The work 'does honour to Cortes; the
ityle is simple and perspicuous; but as it was manifestly
his interest to represent his own ations in the fairest
light, his vitiories are probably exaggerated, his lolfe
Jiminifhed, and his ads of rigour and violence fofttncd.

THE next in order is the Croiica de la Nueva Efpagna,

by Francisco Lopez de Gomara, published A.D. 1554.
Gomara's historical merit is considerable. His mode of
narration is clear, flowing, always agreeable, and fpme-
times elegant. But .he is frequently inaccurate and credu-
lous; and as he was the domestic chaplain of Cortes after
his return from New Spain, and probably composed his
work at his desire, it is manifest that he labours tomagnify
the merit of his hero, and to conceal or extenuate such
tranfa&ions as were unfavourable to his charaaer. Of
this Herrera accuses him in one instance, Dec. ii. lib. iii.
c. 2. and it is not once only that this is conspicuous. He
writes, however, with so much freedom concerning several
measures of the Spanish court, that the copies both of his
Hiftoria de las Indias, and of his Cronica, were called in
by a decree of the council of the Indies, and they were
long confidered as prohibited books in Spain; it is only of
late that licence to print them has been granted. Pinelo
Biblioth. 589.

THE Chronicle of Gomara induced Bernal Diaz del

Castillo to compose his Hiforia Verdadera de la Conquifta
de la Nueva Efpagna. He had been an adventurer in each
of the expeditions to New Spain, and was the companion
of Cortes in all his battles and perils. When he found
that neither he himself, nor many of his fellow-foldiers,
vwre once mentioned by Gomara, but that the fame of all

G G 3 their

their exploits was ascribed to Cortes; the gallant veteran
laid hold of his pen with indignation, and composed his
true hiflory. It contains a prolix, minute, confused nart
rative of all Cortes's operations, in such a rude vulgar style
as might be expe6ted from an illiterate soldier, But as he
relates tranfalions of which he was witness, and in which
he performed a confderable part, his account bears all the
marks of authenticity, and is accompanied with such a plea-
sant naivete, with such interesting details, with such amuf-
ing vanity, and yet so pardonable in an old soldier who had
been (as he boasts) in a hundred and nineteen battles, as
renders his book one of the molf singular that is to be found
in any language,

PET. Martyr ab Angleria, in a treatifc de Infulis nuper

inventis, added to his Decadcs de Rebus Oceanicis & Novo
Olbe, gives some account of Cortes's expedition. But he
proceeds no farther than to relate what happened after his
first landing. This work, which is brief and flight, seems
to contain the information transmitted by Cortes in his
first dispatches, embellished with several particulars com-
municated to the author by the officers who brought the
letters from Cortes.

BUT the book to which the greater part of modern his,

torians have had recourse for information concerning the
conqucft of New Spain, is Hiftoria de la Conquifta de
Mexico, por D. Antonio de Solis, firfl published A. D.
1684. I know no author in any language whose literary
fame has rifcn so far beyond his real merit. Dc Solis is
reckoned by his countrymen one of the purest writers in
the Cafgilian tongue; and if a foreigner may venture to
give his opinion concerning a matter of which Spaniards
alone are qualified to judge, he is entitled to that praise.
ButJ though hi language be corrrcft hi4 tafc in compositio»n

3 i

i far from being jus. His periods are so much laboured as
to be often siss, and sometimes tumid; the figures which
he employs by way of ornament, arc frequently trite or im-
proper, and his observations superficial. These blemishes,
however, might easily be overlooked, if he were not defec-
tive with respeCt to all the great qualities of an historian.
Destitute of that patient indutry in research, which con-
duts to the knowledge of truth; a stranger to that impar-
tiality which weighs evidence with cool attention; and
ever eager to eftabliih his favourite system of exalting the
character of Cortes into that of a perfect hero, exempt
from error, and adorned with every virtue; he is less so-
licitous to discover what was true, than to relate what
might appear splendid. When he attempts any critical
difcufllon, his reasonings are fallacious, and founded upon
an imperfef view of fads. Though he sometimes quotes
the dijatches of Cortes, he seems not to have consultod
them; and though he sets out with some censure on Gomara,
he frequently prefers his authority, the most doubtful of
any, to that of the other contemporary historians.

BuT of all the Spaniih writers, Herrera furnishes the

fullest and most accurate information concerning the con-
quest of Mexico, as well as every other tranfa&lon of
America. The industry and attention with which he con-
fulted not only the books, but the original papers and pub-
lic records, which tended to throw any light upon the sub.
je& of his inquiries, were so great, and he usually judges
of the evidence before him with so much impartiality and
candour, that his decads may be ranked among the most
judicious and useful historical collections. If, by attempt-
ing to relate the various occurrences in the New World
in a ftri& chronological order, the arrangement of events
in his work had not been rendered so perplexed,difconnet-
ed, and obscure, that it is an unpleasant tafl to collect from
diffcrent parts of his book, and piece together the detached

s G 4 ihreds

shreds of a tory, he might julfly have been ranked among
the most eminent historians of his country. He gives an
account of the materials from which he composed his
work, Dec. vi. lib. iii. c. 19.

NOTE LXX. p. 216.

oaRrES purposed to have gone in the train of Ovando

when he set out for his government in the year

1502, but was detained by an accident. As he was at-
tempting in a dark night to scramble up to the window of
a lady's bed-chamber, with whom he carried on an in.
trigue, an old wall, on the top of which he had mounted,
gave way, and he was so much bruised by the fall as to be
unfit for the voyage. Gomara, Cronica de Ia Nueva
Efpagna, cap. I.

NOTE LXXII. p. 218.
CORTEs had two thousand pesos in the hands of An.

drew Duero, and he borrowed four thousand. These

fums are about equal in value to fifteen hundred pounds
sterling; but as the price of every thing was extremely
high in America, they made but a scanty flock when ap-
plied towards the equipment of a military expedition.
Herrera, dec. ii. lib. iii. c. 2. B. Diaz, c. 20.

NOTE LXXIII. p. 223.
THE names of those gallant officers which will often

occur in the subsequent Itory, were Juan Velasquez

de Leon, Alonfo Hcrnandez Portocarrero, Francisco de
Montejo, Chriftoval de Olid, Juan de Efcalantc, Fran-
cisco de Morla, Pedro de Alvarado, Francisco de Salccda,
Juan de Efcobar, Gines de Nortes. Cortes himself com-
manded the Capitana, or Admiral. Francisco de Orozco,

an

an officer formed in the wars of Italy, had the command
of the artillery. The experienced Alaminos aded as chief
pilot.

NOTE LXXIV. p. 225.
IN thole different conflits, the Spaniards loft only two

men, but had a considerable number wounded. Though

there be no occasion for recourse to any supernatural caufc
to account either for the greatness of their victories, or the
smallness of their loss; the Spanish hiftoriana fail not to
ascribe both to the patronage of St. Jago, the tutelar
Saint of their country, who, as they relate, fought at the
head of their countrymen, and by his prowess gave a turn
to the fate of the battle. Gomara is the first who men-
tions this apparition of St. James. It is amusing to obfervc
the embarrassment of B. Diaz de Castillo, occasioned by
the struggle between his fuperitition and his veracity. The
former disposed him to believe this miracle, the latter re-
firained him from attesting it. " I acknowledge, fays he,
that all our exploits and victories are owing to our Lord
Jesus Christ, and that in this battle there was such a num-
ber of Indians to every one of us, that if each had thrown
a handful of earth they might have buried us, if by the
great mercy of God we had not been protected. It may
be that the person whom Gomara mentions as having ap-
peared on a mottled grey horse, was the glorious apoftie
Signor San Jago or Signor San Pedro, and that I, as
being a finner, was not worthy to fee him. This I know,
that I saw Francifca de Morla on such a horse, but as an
unworthy tranfgrcffor, did not deserve to fee any of the
holy apostles. It may have been the will of God, that it
was so as Gomara relates, but until I read his Chronicle I
never heard among any of the conquerors that such a thing
had happened." Cap. 34.

NOTg

NOTE LXXV. p.232.
SVERAL Spanifl historians relate this occurrence in

such terms, as if they wished it should be believed, that

the Indians, loaded with the presents, had carried them
from the capital in the fame flort space of time that the
couriers performed that journey. This is incredible, and
Gomara mentions a circumflance which (hews, that no-
thing extraordinary happened on this occasion. This rich
present had been prepared for Grijalva, when he touched
at the fame place some months before, and was now ready
to be delivered, as soon as Montezuma sent orders for that
purpofc. Gomara Cron. c. xxvii. p. 28.

ACCORDING to B. Diaz del Castillo, the value of the

silver plate representing the moon, was alone above twenty
thousand pesos, about five thousand pounds flerling.

NOTE LXXVI. p. 238.

THIS private traffic was diredly contrary to the in.

T rut&ions of Velafqucz, who enjoined, that whatever

was acquired by trade fliould be thrown into the common
flock. But it appears, that the fuldicrs had each a private
aflbrtment of toys, and other goods proper for the Indian
trade, and Cortes gained their favour by encouraging this
under-hand barter .
B. Dia, c. 41,

NOTE LXXVII. p. 253.
GOMARA has published a catalogue of the various ar-

ticcs of which this present confi(ted. Cron. c. 49..

P. Martyr ab Angleria, who saw them after they were
brought to Spain, and who seems to have examined them
with great attention, give¢ a description of each, which is

curious,

curious, as it conveys some idea of the progress which the
Mexicans had made in several arts of elegance. De Infulis
nupcr inventis Liber, p. 354,&c.

N O T E LXXVIII. p. 260.
T HERE is no circumstance in the history of the con.

quest of America, which is more quefionable than

the account of the numerous armies brought into the field
against the Spaniards. As the war with the republic of
Tlafcala, though of short duration, was one of the most con-
iderable whichthe Spaniards waged in America, the account
given of the Tlafcalan armies merits some attention. The
only authentic information concerning this is derived from
three authors. Cortes, in his second dispatch to the em-
peror, dated at Segura de la Frontera, Oftober 30, 1520,
thus eRimates the number of their troops; in the first battle
6ooo0 in the second battle 1oo,ooo; in the third battle
ISo,ooo. Relat. ap. Ramus. iii. 228. Bernal Diaz del
Castillo, who was an eye-witners, and engaged in all the
afions of this war, thus reckons their numbers; in the
first battle 3000, p. 43; in the second battle 6000oo, ibid.
in the third battle 50,000, p. 45. Gomara, who was
Cortes's chaplain after his return to Spain, and published
his Cronica in 1552, follows the computation of Cortes,
except in the second battle, where he reckons the Tlafca-
lans at 8o,ooo, p. 49. It was manifeflly the interclt of
Cortes to magnify his own dangers and exploits. For it
was only by the merit of extraordinary services, that he
could hope to atone for his irregular condut, in assuming
an independent command. Bern. Diaz, though abundant.
ly dirpofed to place his own prowess, and that of his fellow-
conquerors, in the motl advantageous point of light, had not
the fame temptation to exaggerate; and it is probable, that
his account of the numbers approaches nearer to the truth,

The

The assembling of an army of 5o,0oo men requires many
previous arrangements, and such provision for their subsist-
cnce as seems to be beyond the foresight of Americans.
The degree of cultivation in Tlafcala does not seem to
have been so great, as to have furnished such a vast army
with provisions. Though this province was so much bet-
ter cultivated than other regions of New Spain, that it was
called the country of bread; yet the Spaniards in their march
¢uffered such want, that they were obliged to fubfit upon
Tunas, a species of fruit which grows wild in the fields.
ierrera, Dec. ii. lib. vi c, 5. p. 182.

NOTE LXXIX. p. 264

iTHESE unhappy victims are said to be persons of dif-
tinlion. It seems improbable that so great a num-

ber as fifty should be employed as spies. So many prison-
crs had been taken and difmifled, and the Tlafcalans had
sent so many metfages to the Spaniih quarters, that there
appears to be no reason for hazarding the lives of so many
considerable people, in order to procure information about
the position and itate of their camp. The barbarous man-
ner in which Cortes treated a people unacquainted with
the laws of war established among polished nations, appears
so shocking to the later Spanish writers, that they diminifli
the number of those whom he punilhed so cruelly. Her-
rera fays, that he cut off the hands of seven, and thumbs
of some more. Dec. ii. lib. ii. c. 8. De Solis relates,
that the hands of fourteen or fifteen were cut off, and the
thumbs of all the reft. Lib. ii. c. 20. But Cortes him-
self, Relat. p. 228, b. and after him Gomara, c. 48, as-
firm, that the hands of all the fifty were cut off.

N0'1'E

NOTE LXXX. p. 267.
THE horses were object& of the greatest aftonfthment to

all the people of New Spain. At first they imagined

the horse and his rider, like the Centaurs of the ancients,
to be some monstrous animal of a terrible form; and sup-
posing that their food was the fame as that of men,
brought flesh and bread to nourish them. Even after they
discovered their mistake, they believed the horses devoured
men in battle, and when they neighed, thought that they
were demanding their prey. It was not the interest of the
Spaniards to undeceive them. Herrera, dec. ii. lib. vi.
C. II.

NOTE LXXXI. p. 273.

ACCORDING to Bart. de las Casas, there was no rca
Afon for this massacre, and it was an a& of wanton
cruelty, perpetrated merely to strike terror into the people
of New Spain. Relac. de la Deftruyc. p. x7, &c. But
the zeal of Las Casas often leads him to exaggerate. In
opposition to him, Bern. Diaz, c. 83, afTerts, that the first
miflionaries sent into New Spain by the emperor, made a
judicial enquiry into this tranfaaion; and having examin-
ed the priests and elders of Cholula, found that there
was a real conspiracy to cut off the Spaniards, and that the
account given by Cortes was exactly true. As it was the
objcta of Cortes at that time, and manifestly his interest,
to gain the good.will of Montezuma, it is improbable, that
he Thould have taken a ftcp which tended so visibly to alie-
nate him from the Spaniards, if he had not believed it to
be nccefl'ry for his own preservation. At the fame time,
the Spaniards who served in America had such contempt
for the natives, and thought them so little entitled to the
common rights of men, that Cortes might hold the Cho-
lulans to be guilty upon flight and imperfect evidence.

9 sThce

The severity of the punishment was certainly exceflive and
atrocious.

NOTE LXXXII. p. 274
fT Hrs description is taken almost literally from Bernal

Diaz del Castillo, who was so unacquainted with the

art of cbmpofition, as to be incapable of embellishing his
narrative. He relates in a simple and rude style what paffl
ed in his own mind, and that of his fellow-foldiers, on
that occasion , "And let it not be thought firange, fays
he, that I should write in this manner of what then hap.
pened, for it ought to be confidered, that it is one thing
to relate, another to have beheld things that were never
before seen, or heard, or spoken of among men." Cap. 86.
p. 64, b.

NOTE LXXXIII. p. 288.
B DIAs del CaRillo gives us Come idea of the fatigue

and hardihips they underwent in performing this, and

other parts of duty. During the nine months that they
remained in Mexico, every man, without any diftin&ioh
between officers and soldiers, slept on his arms in his
quilted jacket and gorget. They lay on mats, or fraw
spread on the floor, and each was obliged to hold himself
as alert as if he had been on guard. " This, adds he, be-
came so habitual to me, that even now in my advanced
age, I always sleep in my clothes, and never in any bed.
When I visit my Enconienda, I reckon it suitable to my
rank, to have a bed carried along with my other baggage,
but I never go into it; but, according to custom, I lie in
my clothes, and walk frequently during the night into the
open air, to view the flars as I was wont when in service."
Cap. o08.

NOTE

NOTE LXXXIV. p. 29f.
CoRTES himself, in his fecdhd dispatch to the emperor;

does not explain the motives which induced him ei-

ther to condemn Qualpopoca to the flames, or to put
Montezuma in irons. Ramus. iii. 236. B. Diaz is silent
with refpe& to his reasons for the former and the only
cause he assigns for the latter was, that he might meet
with no interruption in executing the sentence pronounced
against Qualpopoca, c. xcv. p. 75. But as Montezuma
was his prisoner, and absolutely in his power, he had no
reason to dread him, and the insult offered to that monarch
could have no effec but to irritate him unnecessarily. Go.
mara supposes, that Cortes had no other objet than to oc-
cupy Montezuma with his own distress and sufferings, that
he might give less attention to what besel Qualpopoca.
Cron. c. 89. Herrera adopts the fame opinion. Dec. ii.
lib. viii. c. 9. But it seems an odd expedient, in order to
make a person bear one injury, to load him with another
that is greater. De Solis imagines, that Cortes had no-
thing else in view than to intimidate Montezuma, so that
he might make no attempt to rescue the vifims from their
fate; but the spirit of that monarch was so submissive, and
he had so tamely given up the prisoners to the disposal of
Cortes, that he had no cause to apprehend any opposition
from him. If the explanation which I have attempted to
give of Cortes's proceedings on this occasion be not admit-
ted, it appears to me, that they must be reckoned among
the wanton and barbarous ats of oppreflion which occur
too often in the history of the conqucit of America.

NOTE LXXXV. p. 296.
D- Soils afterts, lib. iv. c. 3. that the proposition of

doing homage to the King of Spain, came from
Monteuma himself, and was made in order to induce the

Spaniards

Spaniards to depart out of his dominions. He describeS
his conduC on this occafon, as if it had been founded upon
a scheme of profound policy, and executed with such re-
fined address, as to deceive Cortes himself. But there is no
hint or circumstance in the contemporary historians, Cor-
tes, Diaz, or Gomara, to jultify this theory. Montezu-
ma, on other occasions, discovered no such extent of art
and abilities. The anguish which he felt in performing
this humbling ceremony is natural, if we suppose it to
have been involuntary. But, according to the theory of
De Solis, which supposes that Montezuma was executing
what he himfeli had propored, to have assumed an appear-
ance of sorrow, would have been preposterous and incon-
liftent with his own design of deceiving the Spaniards.

NOTE LXXXVI. p. 299.
IN Several of the provinces, the Spaniards, with all their

induitry and influence, coulk collec no gold. -In

others, they procured only a few trinkets of small value.
Montezuima assured Cortes, that the present which he of-
sered to the king of Castile, after doing homage, consisted
of all the treasure amafled by his father; and told him,
that he had alrcady distributed the reft of his gold and
jewels among the Spaniards. B. Diaz, c. 104. Gomara
relates, that all the filvcr colleced amounted to 500 marks.
Cron. c. 93. This agrees with the account given by
Cortes, that the royal fifth of silver was loo marks. Re-
lat. 239, B. So that the fum total of silver was only
4006 ounces, at the rate of eight ounces a mark, which
demontfrates the proportion of silver to gold to have been
exceedingly small.

OTE

NOTE I.YL VIL . p300.
DE Sols, lib. iv. c. calls in question the truth of

this tranfafion, from no better rtafon than that it

was inconfiftentwith that prudence which dlinguilhes the
charaster of Cortes. But he ought to have recolleced
the impetuosity of his zeal at Tlafcala, which was no less
-imprudent. He aflerts, that the evidence for it reft upon
the testimony of B. Diaz del Castillo, of Gomara, and of
Herrera. They all-concur indeed, in mentioning this in-
cenfiderate ftep which Cortes took; and they had good
reason to do so, for Cortes himself relates this exploit in
his second dispatch to the Emperor, and seems to glory in
it. Cort. Relat. Ramus. iii. 140, D. This is one in-
stance, amhong many, of De Solis's having consulted with
little attention the letters of Cortes to Charles V. from
wliich the molt authentic information with refpet to
his operations must be derived.

NOTE XXXVIII. p. 304.
HrlRRtA and De Solis suppose, that Velasquez

was encouraged to equip this armament against Cor-

tes, by the accounts which he received from Spain con-
cerning the reception of the agents sent by the colony of
Vera Cruz, and the warmth with which Fonseca bishop of
Burgos had espoused his interest, and condemned the pro.
ceedings of Cortes. Herrera, dec. ii. lib. ix. c. i8. De
Solis, lib. iv. c. S. But the chronological order of events
refutes this supposition. Portocarrero and Montejo failed
from Vera Cruz, July 26, 15i9. Herrer, dec. ii. lib. v.
c. 4. They landed at St. Lucar in Otober, according to

VOL. ii. x i Herrera,

Herrera, ibid. But P. Martyr, who attended the court
at that time, and communieated every occurrence of mo-
ment to his correspondents day by day, mentions the arri-
val of these agents for the first time, in December, and
speaks of it as a recent event. Epift. 65o. All the his.
torians agree, that the agents of Corfes had their first au-
dience of the Emperor at Tordefillas, when he went to
that town to visit his mother in his way to St. Jago do
Compoftella. Hertera, dec. ii. lib. v. c. 4. De Solis,
lib. iv. c. 5. But the emperor set out from Valladoltd
for Tordefillas, on the i ith of March 152o0 and P. Mar-
tyr mentions his having seen at that time the presents made
to Charles, Epift. i66S< The armament tinder Narvaez
failed from Cuba in April 1520. It is manieft then, that
Velasquez could not receive any account of what pansed
in this interview at Tordefillas, previous to his hoftiie pre-
parations againit Cortes. His real motives seem to be
those which I have mentioned. The patent appointing
him Adelantado of New Spain, with such extensive powers,
bears date November 13, 1519. Herrera, dec. ii. lib. iii.
c. i i. He might receive it about the beginning of Janu-
ary. Gomara takes notice, that as soon as this patent wa
delivered to him, he began to equip a leet and levy fdrces.
Cron. c. 96.

NOTE LXXXIX. p. 30.
Dr. Bolis contehds, that as Narraez had no interpreters,

lie could hold ho intercoutfe with the people of the

provincesj nor converse with themi it any way but by signs,
atld that it was equally lilpoffttle for him to carry on any
communication With MonteiUlta. Lib. Iv. c. 7. But it
is upon the authority of Cortes himrelf that I relate all the
particulate of NaYraet's cmrelondence both with Mon-

tczuma

tezuma arid with his fubjces in the maritime provinces.
Retat. Ramus. iii. 244, A. C. Cortes affirms, that there
was a mode of intercoutfe between arvaez and the Mexi-
cans, but Hoes not explain how it was carried on. Bernal
Diaz supplies this defeat, and informs us, that the three
deserters who joined Narvaez aeted as interpreters, having
acquired a competent knowledge of the language, c. 0o.
With his usual minuteness, he mentions their names and
characers, and relates, in chaptet 122, ho* the$ were
punithed for their perfidy. The Spaniards had tow resided
above a year among the Mexicans; and it is not surprising,
that several among them fhotild have madefome proficiency
in speaking their language. This seens to have been the
cafe. Herrera, dec. ii lib. t. c. I. Both B. Diaz, who was
present; and Herrera, the most aciurate and bet informed
of all the Spanish writers, agree with Cortes in his account
of the secret corrcfpondence carried on with Mortezuma;
Dec. ii, lib. ix. c; t8, g1. De Solis seems to coilfider it
as a discredit to Cbrtes, his hero, that Montezuma fhourc
have been ready to engage in a correspondence with Nar&
Vaez. He supposes that monarch to have contrated such
a wonderful affetion sot the Spaniards, that he was not
solicitous to be delivered from them. After the indignity
with which he had been treated, such an affleilon is incre.
dible ; and even De Solis is obliged to acknowledge, that
it must be looked upon as one of the miracles which Go4
had wrought to facilitate the conqucft, lib, iv. c. 7. The
truth is, Montezuma, however much overawed bT his
dread of the Spaniards$ was extremely impatient to rmeove
his liberty.

m n
tt NOTE

NOTE XC. p. 324.
THESE words I have borrowed from the anonymous

Account of the European Settlements in America,

published by Dodfley, in two volumes, 8vo. a work of so
much merit, that I should think there is hardly any writer
in the age who ought to be ashamed of acknowledging
himself to be the author of it.

NOTE XCI. p.331.

pHE contemporary hiitorians differ considerably with

refpec to the loss of the Spaniards on this oecafion.

Cortes, in his second dispatch to the emperor, makes the
number only 50o. Relat. ap. Ramus. iii. p. 249, A.
But it was manifestly his interest, at that juncure, to
conceal from the court of Spain the full extent of the loss
which he had sustained. De Solis, always studious to
diminish every misfortune that besel his conntrymen,
rates their loss at about two hundred men. Lib. iv. c. 19.
B. Diaz affirms, that they loft 870 men, and that only
440 escaped from Mexico, c. 128. p. 1o8, B. Palafox,
bishop of Los Angeles, who seems to have enquired into
the early tranfaaions of his countrymen in New Spain,
with great attention, confirms the account of B. Diaz,
with refped to the extent of their lors. Virtudes del In.
dio, p. 22. Gomara states their los at 450 men. Cron.
c. zo9. Some months afterwards, when Cortes had re.
ceived several reinforcements, he mustered his troops,
and found them to be only 590. Relat. ap. Ramus. iii.
p. 255, E. Now, as Narvaez brought 880 men into
New Spain, and about 400 of Cortcs', soldiers were

tlihel

then alive, it is evident, that his loss, in the retreat from
Mexico, must have been much more considerable than
what he mentions. B. Dtaz, solicitous to magnify the
dangers and sufferings to which he and his fellow-con-
querors were exposed, may have exaggerated their loss;
but, in my opinion, it cannot well be estimated at less
than 600 men.

NOTE XCII. p. 353.

COME remains of this great work are still visible, and
8 the spot where the brigantines were built and launched,
is (ill pointed out to strangers. Torquemada viewed them.
Monarq. Indiana, vol. i. p. 531.

NOTE XCIII. p. 362.
THE station of Alvarado on the causeway of Tacuba

was the nearest to the city. Cortes observes, that

there they could difindly observe what passed when their
countrymen were sacrificed. Relat. ap. Ramus. iii. p. 273,
E. B. Diaz, who belonged to Alvarado's division,
relates what he beheld with his own eyes. C. s12.
p. 148, b. I49, a. Like a man whose courage was so
clear as to be above suspicion, he describes with his usual
simplicity the impression which this fpedacle made upon
him. ,' Before, fays he, I saw the breaRs of my com-
panions opened, their hearts, yet fluttering, offered to an
accursed idol, and their flesh devoured by their exulting
enemies; I was accustomed to enter a battle not only
without fear, but with high spirit. But from that time I
never advanced to fight the Mexicans without a secret
horror and anxiety; my heart trembled at the thoughts of
the death which I had seen them susser," He takes care

HH3 to

to add, that as soon as the dombat began, his terror went
off; and, indeed, his adveturous bravery on every
pcoafion is full evidence of this. B. Diaz, c. 156.
p. 157, a.

NOTE XCIV. p. 368.

ONE circumstance in this siege merits particular no.
~ tice. The account which the Spanish writers give
of the numerous armies employed in the attack or defence
of Mexico, seems to be incredible. According to Cortes
himself, he had at one time 15g,ooo auxiliary Indi4ns in
his service. Relat. Ramus. iii. 275, E. Gomara as-
ferts, that they were above 200,000. Cron. c. 136.
Herrera, an author of higher authority, fays, they were
about 200,000.. Dec. iii. lib. i. c. 19. None of the
contemporary writers ascertain explicitly the number of
persons in Mexico during the ficge. But Cortes on fe-
Feral occasions mentions the nunmber of Mexicans who
were slain, or who perished for want of food; and, if
we may rely on those circumstances, it is probable that
Rbove two hundred thousand muds have been ihpt up in
the town. But the quantity of provisions neceflhry for
the subsistence of such vast multitudes afVfimbled in one
place during three months, is so grcat, and it requires so
piuch foresight and arrangement to collec these, and lay
them up in maga:zines, so as to be certain of a regular
fiipply( that one can hardly believe that this could be ac-
oomplilhed in a country where agriculture was so im-
perse& as in the Mexican empire, where therc were no
tame animals, and by a people naturally so improvident,
and so incapable of executing a complicatcd plan as the
gpoft Improved Americans. The Spaniards, with all
their care and attention, fared very poorly, and were

often

often reduced to extreme ditrefs for want of provisions.
B. Diaz, p. 142. Cortes Rclat.'271, D. Cortes on
one occasion mentions sightly the subsistence of his army;
and after acknowledging that they were often in great
want, adds, that they received fipplies from the people
ps the country, of fish, and of some fruit, which he calls
the cherries of the country. Ibid. B. Diaz fays, that
they had cakes of maize, and ferafas de la tierra; and
when the season of these was over, another fruit, which
he calls Tunai; but their mod comfortable subsistence
was a root whic! the Indians ife as food, to which he
gives the name of .uilitef, p. 142. The Indian auxi-
liaries had one means of fubfiflence more than the Spa-
piards. They fed upon the bodies of the Mexicans whom
they killed in battle, Cort. Relat. 176, C. B. Diaz
confirms his relation, and adds, that when the Indians
returned from Mexico to their own country, they car.
tied with them large quantities of the fiefi of the Mexi,
cans salted or dried, as a mod acceptable present to their
friends, that they might have the pleasure of feeding
upon the bodies of their enemies in their feRivals, p. 157.
De Solis, who seems to confider it as an imputation of
discredit to his countrymen, that they Should at in con.
cert with auxiliaries who fed upon human flu/h, is soli,
citous to prove, that the Spaniards endeavoured to pre-
vent their aflociates from eating the bodies of the Mexi-
cans, lib. v. c. 24. But he has no authority for this
from the original hiforians. Neither Cortes himself, nor
P. Diaz, seem to have had any such scruple; and, on
many occasions, mention the Indian repasts, which were
become familiar to them, without any mark of abhorrence.
Even with this additional lock of food for the Indians, it
was hardly poflible to procure subsistence for armies
amounting to such numbers as we find in the Spanifl
writerq. perhaps the bft solution of the diffculty is, tq

adopt

adopt the opinion of B. Diaz del Castillo, the most artless
of all the Hifloriadbres primitives. "< When Gomara
(fays he) on some occasions relates, that there were so
many thousand Indians our auxiliaries, and on others, that
there were so many thousand houses in this or that town,
no regard is to be paid to his enumeration, as he has no
authority for it, the numbers not being in reality the fifth
of what he relates. If we add together the different num-
bers which he mentions, that country would contain more
millions than there are in Castile." C. 129. But though
rome considerable deduction ihould certainly be made from
the Spanish accounts of the Mexican forces, they must have
been very numerous; for nothing but an immense fupe-
riority in number could have enabled them to withstand
a body of nine hundred Spaniards, conduced by a leader
of such abilities as Cortes.

NOTE XCV. p.385.
IN relating the opprefflve and cruel proceedings of the

conquerors of New Spain, I have not followed B. de

las Casas as my guide. His account of them, Relat. dc
la Deftruyc. p. 18, &c. is manifestly exaggerated. It is
from the testimony of Cortes himself and of Gomara,
who wrote under his eye, that I have taken my account
of the puniflment of the Panucans, and they relate it
without any disapprobation. B. Diaz, contrary to his
usual custom, mentions it only in general terms, c. 162.
Herrera, solicitous to extenuate this barbarous ation of
his countrymen, though he mentions 63 caziques, and
400 men of note, as being condemned to the flames,
aflerts, that thirty only were burnt, and the reft pardoned.
Dec. iii. lib. v. c. 7. But this is contrary to the testimony

rs

,of the original historians, particularly of Gomara, whom
it appears he had consulted, as he adopts several of his
expressions in this passage. The punifiment of Guati.
mozin is related by the most authentic of the Spanilh
writers. Torquemada has extraled from a history of
Tezeuco, composed in the Mexican tongue, an account of
this tranfa'ion, more favourable to Guatimozin than that
of the Spaniih authors. Mon. Indiana, i. 5'5. Accord-
ing to the Mexican account, Cortes had scarcely a shadow
of evidence to jultify such a wanton aa of cruelty.
B. Diaz affirms, that Guatimozin and his fellow-fuf-
ferers afierted their innocence with their las breath,
and that many of the Spanifl soldiers condemned this
aaion of Cones as equally unneceflary and unjust, p. 200,
b. 201, a.

NOTE XCVI. p. 388.
THE motive for undertaking this expedition was, to

punish Chriftoval de Olid, one of his officers, who

had revolted against him, and aimed at eftablithing
an independent jurifdi&ion. Cortes regarded this in-
furre&ion as of such dangerous example, and dreaded
so much the abilties and popularity of its author, that
in person he led the body of troops destined to suppress
it. He marched, according to Gomara, three thou-
sand miles, through a country abounding with thick
forests, rugged mountains, deep rivers, thinly inhabited,
and cultivated only in a few places. What he suffered
from famine, from the hostility of the natives, from the
climate, and from hardships of every species, has nothing
in history parallel to it, but what occurs in the adventures.

2 of

of the other discoverers and conquerors of the Ner
World. Cortes was employed in this dreadful fcrvic
above two years, and tlough it was not diftinguiihed by
any splendid event, he exhibited, during the course of it,
greater personal courage, more fortitude of mind, more
perfcverance and patience, than in any other period or
scene in his life. Hcrrera, dec. iii. lib. vi. vii. viii. ix.
Gomara Cron. c. 163-177. B. Diaz, 174-190.
Cortes, MS. penes me. Were one to write a life of
Cortes, the account of this expedition should occupy a
splendid place in it. In a general history of America, as
the expedition was productive of no great event, the
mention of it is sufficient.

NOTE XCVII. p. 390.

CCORDING to Herrera, the treasure which Cortes

, brought with him, confifed of fifteen hundred
marks of wrought plate, two hundred thousand pesos
of fine gold, and ten thousand of inferior flandard, many
rich jewels, one in particular, worth forty thousand pefosl
and several trinkets and ornaments of value. Dec. ivd
lib. iii. c. 8. lib. iv. c. I. He afterwards engaged to give
a portion with his daughter of a hundred thousand
pesos. Gomara Cron. c. 237. The fortune which he
left his sons was very considerable. But, as we have be.
fore related, the fum divided among the conquerors on
the firit reduction of Mexico was very small. There
appears then to be some reason for fufpecing that the
accusations of Cortes's enemies were not altogether
destitute of foundations They charged him with hayv
ing applied to his own use a disproportionate thare of
the Mexican spoils; with having concealed the royal

treasures

treasures of Montezuma and Guatimozin; with defraud.
ing the king of his fifth and robbing his followers of
what was due to them. Herrera, dec. iii. lib. viii. c. IS;
dec. iv. lib. iii. c. 8. Some of the conquerors themselves
entertained suspicions of the fame kind, with refpef tq
this part of his condut. B. Diaz, c. 157.

END OF THE SECOND VOLMfI.
