THE
H I S T O R Y

OF
SCO TLAND

DURING THE REIGNS OF
Queen M A R Y and of King JAMES VI.

TILL
His AccESSION to the Crown 'of ENGLAND.

WITH A
REVIEW of the SCOTTISH HISTORY previous to that Period;

And an APPENDIX containing ORIGINAL PAPERS.

IN TWO VOLUMES.
By WILLIAM ROB ERTSON, D. D.

Minister of LA D YE S T E R', Edinburgh.

VOLUME I.
THE FOURTH EDITION.

LONDO N:
Printed for A. M I L L A R, in the Strand.

M DCC LXI,

# PREFACE.

PR E F A C E
I Deliver this book to the world with all the

diffidence and anxiety natural to an Author

on publishing his first performance. The time
I have employed, and the pains I have taken,
in order to render it worthy of the public ap.
probation, it is, perhaps, prudent to conceal,
till it be knqwn whether that approbation shall
ever be b&etowed upon it.

BUT as I have departed, in many instances,

from former Historians, as I have placed faas
in a different light, and have drawn characters
with new colours, I ought to account for this
condut to my readers; and to produce the evi-
dence, on which, at the distance of two cen-
turies, I presume to contradict the testimony of
less remote, or even of cotemporary historians.

THE tranfations in Mary's reign gave rife to

two parties, which were animated against each
other with the fiercest political hatred, embit-
tered by religious zeal. Each of these pro-
duced historians of considerable merit, who
adopted all their sentiments, and defended all
their a&tions. Truth was not the sole obje&
of these Authors. Blinded by prejudices, and

A 2 heated

heated by the part which they themselves had
aced in the scenes they describe, they wrote
an apology for a faction, rather than the hifto-
ry of their country. Succeeding Historians
have followed these guides almost implicitly,
and have repeated their errors and mifrepre-
fentations. But as the fame passions which
inflamed parties in that age have descended to
their posterity; as almost every event in Mary's
reign has become the object of doubt or of
dispute; the eager spirit of controversy soon
discovered, that without tome evidence more
authentic and more impartial than that of
Historians, none of the points in question could
be decided with certainty. Records have there-
fore been searched, original papers have been
produced, and public archives, as well as the
repositories of private men, have been ransack-
ed by the zeal and curiosity of writers of dif-
ferent parties. The attention of Cecil to col-
leat whatever related to that period, in which
he aaed io conspicuous a part, hath provided
such an immense frore of original papers for
illutirating this part of the Englifl and Scot-
tith history, as are almost sufficient to satisfy
the utmost avidity of an Antiquarian. Sir Ro-
bert Cotton (whose library is now the pro-
perty of the public) made great and valuable
additions to Cecil's collection; and from this
magazine, Digges, the compilers of the Cab-
bala, Anderlon, Keith, Haynes, Sorbes, have
drawn moif of the papers which they have
printed. No Hi2'cor of Scotland, that merits
any degree of attention, has appeared since

these

these collections were published. By consult-
ing them, I have been enabled, in many in-
stances, to correct the inaccuracies of former
Historians, to avoid their mistakes, and to de-
ted their misrepresentations.

BUT many important papers have escaped

the notice of those industrious Colledors, and
after all they have produced to light, much
still remained in darkness, unobserved or un-
published. It was my duty to search for these,
and 1 found this unpleasant talk attended with
considerable utility.

THE library of the honourable faculty of

Advocates at Edinburgh, contains not only a
large collection of original papers relating to
the affairs of Scotland, but copies of others
no less curious, which have been preserved by
Sir Robert Cotton, or are extant in the pub-
lic offices in England. Of all these, the Cu-
rators of that library were pleated to allow
me the perusal.

THOUGH the British Mufaum be not yet

open to the public, Dr. Birch, whose oblig-
ing disposition is well known, procured me
access to that noble collection, which is worthy
the magnificence of a great and polished na-
tion.

THAT vast and curious collection of papers

relating to the reign of Elizabeth, which was
made by Dr. Sorbes, and of which he publish-

ed

ed only two volumes, having been purchased,
since his death, by the Lord Viscount Royfton,
his Lordship was io good as to allow me the
use of fourteen Volumes in Quarto, containing
that part of them which is connected with my
subject.

SIR Alexander Dick communicated to me a

very valuable collection of original papers, in
two large Volumes. They relate chiefly to the
reign of James. Many of them are marked
with Archbishop Spotfwood's hand; and it ap-
pears from several paflages in his history, that
he had perused them with great attention.

MR. Calderwood, an eminent Presbyterian

Clergyman of the last century, compiled an
History of Scotland from the beginning of the
Reign of James V. to the death of James VI.
in fix large Volumes; wherein he has inserted
many nppers of consequence, which are no
where else to be found. A copy of this hifto-
ry, which frill remains in manuscript, in the
possession of the Church of Scotland, was put
into my hands by my worthy friend the Reve-
rend Mr. George Withart, principal Clerk of
the Church.

SIR David Dalrymple not only communi-

cated to me the papers which he has collet-
ed relating to Gowrie's conspiracy; but by ex-
plaining to me his sentiments with regard to
that proLiemnatical paflage in the Scottish hifto-
ry, has enabled me to place that tranfadion in

a light

a light which difpells much of the darkness and
confusion in which it has been hitherto involv-
ed.

MIR. Goodall, though he knew my senti-

ments with regard to the conduct and charac-
ter of Qleen Mary to be extremely different
from his own, communicated to me a Volume
of manuscripts in his possession, which con-
tains a great number of valuable papers copied
from the originals in the Cottonian Library
and Paper Office, by the late Reverend Mr.
Crawford, Regius Professor of Church History
in the University of Edinburgh. I likewise
received from him the original Register of let-
ters kept by the Regent Lennox during his ad-
ministration.

I HAVE consulted all these papers, as far as

I thought they could be of any use towards il-
lustrating that period of which I write the his-
tory. With what success I have employed
them to confirm what was already known, to
ascertain what was dubious, or to determine
what was contraverted, the public muftjudge.

I MIGHT easily have drawn, from the dif-

ferent repositories to which I had access, as ma-
ny papers as would have rendered my Appen-
dix equal in size to the moll bulky collection
of my predecessors. But I have satisfied my-
self with publishing a few of the most curious
among them, to which I found it necessary
to appeal as vouchers for my own veracity.

None

None of these, as far as I can recollet, ever
appeared in any former collection.

I HAVE added to the Appendix a Critical

DLjertation concerning the murder of King Henry,
and the genuineness of the Queen's letters to Both-
well. The faats and observations which re-
late to Mary's letters, I owe to my friend Mr.
John Davidson, one of the Clerks to the Signet,
who hath examined this point with his usual
acuteness and industry.

THE

# BOOK I. Containing a Review of the SCOTTISH History previous to the Death of JAMES V.

THE
T H E
H I S T 0 R Y

0 F
SCOTLAND.

BOOK I.
Contaning a Review of the SCOTTISH Hif/ory pre-

vious to the Death of J A M E S V.

H E first ages of the Scottfil history are BOOK L.
dark and fabulous. Nations, as well as - ~
,1 - - 1 1 IT The originl

men, arrive at maturity by degrees, and the of nations
events, which happened during their infancy or ear- fabulous

and ob.

ly youth, cannot be recollefted, and deserve not to fcure.
be remembered. The gross ignorance, which an-
ciently covered all the North of Europe, the con-
tinual migrations of its inhabitants, and the fre-
quent and destructive revolutions which these occa-
sioned, render it impoflible to give any authentic
account of the origin of the different kingdoms now
efablifhed there. Every thing beyond that short
period, to wh;ch well attested annals reach, is ob-

VOL. . B fcure

BooK I. fcure; an immense space is left for invention to
'v`v occupy; each nation, with a vanity inseparable

from human nature, hath filled that void with
events calculated to display its own antiquity and
lustre. And hifory, which ought to record truth
and to teach wisdom, often sets out with retailing
fictions and absurdities.

Origin of THE Scots carry their pretensions to antiquity as
the Scots. high, as any of their neighbours. Relying upon

uncertain legends, and the traditions of their bards,
still more uncertain, they reckon up a series of kings
several ages before the birth of Christ; and give a
particular detail of the occurrences, which happened
in their reigns. But with regard to the Scots, as
well as the other northern nations, we receive the
earliest accounts on which we can depend, not from
A. D. S. their own, but from the Roman authors. When

the Romans, under Agricola, first carried their arms
into the northern parts of Britain, they found it pof-
fef'ed by the Caledonians, a fierce and warlike peo-
ple; and having repulsed, rather than conquered
them, they erected a frong wall between the firths
of Forth and Clyde, and there fixed the boundaries
of their empire. Adrian, on account of the diffi-
c:aly of defending s.uch a distant frontier, contract-
A. D. 121. ed the limits of the Roman province in Britain, by

builing a second wall, which ran between New-
ca.fle and Carlisle. The ambition of succeeding
Emperors endeavoured to recover what Adrian had
abandoned; and the country between the two walls
was alternately under the dominion of the Romans,

6 and

and the Caledonians. About the beginning of the BooK I.
fifth century, :he inroads of the Goths and other ' -
Barbarians obliged the Romans, in order to defend
the centre of their empire, to recal those legions,
which guarded the frontier provinces; and at that
time they quitted all their conquests in Britain.

THEIR long residence in the island had polifled, A. D; 42.

in some degree, the rude inhabitants, and the Bri-
tons were indebted to their intercourse with the Ro-
mans, for the art of writing, and the use of num-
bers, without which it is impossible long to preserve
the memory of past events.

NORTH BRITAIN was, by their retreat, left un-

der the dominion of the Scots and Piats. The for-
mer, who are not mentioned by any Roman author,
before the end of the fourth century, were probably
a colony of the Celtae or Gauls: their affinity to
whom appears from their language, their manners,
and religious rites; circumitances more decisive,
with regard to the origin of nations, than either fa-
bulous traditions, or the tales of ill-informed, and
credulous Annalists. The Scots, if we may believe
the common accounts, fettled at first in Ireland;
and, extending themselves by degrees, landed at
last on the coaIts opposite to that island, and fixed
their habitations there. Fierce and bloody wars
were, during several ages, carried on between them
and the Picts. At length, Kenneth II. the sixty- A. D, '3s.
ninth King of the Scots (according to their own fa-
hulous authors) obtained a complete victory over

B 2 the

Boo;KI. the Piets, and united under one monarchy, the
'- .V' whole country, from the wall of Adrian, to the

northern ocean. And his kingdom became known
by its present name, which it derived from a people
who at first fettled there as strangers, and remained
long o'fcure and inconsiderable.

History of FRoM! this period the history of Scotland would
Scotland merit some attention, were it accompanied with any
peculiarly
obscure. certainty. But as our remote antiquities are invol-

ved in the lame da;-knefs with those of other nations,
a calamity peculiar to ourselves has thrown almost
an equal obfcuriry over our mQre recent transactions.
This was occasioned by the malicious policy of Ed-
.-ard I. of England. Towards the end of the thir-
teenth century, this monarch called in question the
independence of Scotland; pretending that that
kingdom was held as a fief of the crown of Eng-
land, and fubjecced to all the conditions of a feudal
tenure. In order to establish his claim, he seized
the publ.c archives, h= ransacked churches and mo-
nafleris, and getting poffeflon, by force, or fraud,
of many hillorical monuments, which tended to
prove the antiquity or freedom of the kingdom, he
carried fom.n of them into F nland, and commanded
the ret to be burned *. An universal oblivion of
past tranfalions might have been the effcLt of this
fatal ,eent, but some imperfec Chronicles had
efcapeC the riae of Edward ; foreign writers had re-
corded some important faGts relating to Scotland;
and the traditions concerning recent occurrences were

fresh

fresh and worthy of credit. These broken fragments BO0K I.
John de Fordun, who lived in the fourteenth cen-
tu;ry, colleEted with a pious industry, and from them
picked out materials, which he fbrmed into a regu-
lar history. His work was received by his country-
men with applause; and, as no recourse could be
had to more ancient records, it supplied the place of
the authentic annals of the kingdom. It was copi-
ed in many monasteries, and the thread of the nar-
rative was continued, by different monks, through the
subsequent reigns. In the beginning of the fixtecnth
century, John Major and Hecor Boethius published
their histories of Scotland, the former a fuccinEt and
dry writer, the latter a copious and florid one, and
both equally credulous. Not many years after, Bu-
chanan undertook the fame work; and if his accu-
racy and impartiality had beln, in any degree, equal
to the elegance of his tafRe, and to the purity and
vigour of his stile, his history might be placed on a
level with the mort admired compositions of the an-
cients. But, infcead of rejeEting the improbable
tales of Chronicle writers, he was at the utmost pains
to adorn them ; and hath clothed with all the beau-
ties and graces of fition, tlofe legends, which for-
merly had only its xildne. s and extravagance.

THE history of Scotland may properly be dividedF,,r
into four periods. The first reaches from the ori-mkb

1r a 3s in tll

gin of the monarchy, to the reign of Kenneth II. Scottifl
The second fromn Kenneth's conquer ofthe Pits, to'""°'
the death of Alexander 1II. The third extends to

B 3 the

BOOK I. the death of James V. The last, from thence to the
1.0' accession of James VI. to the crown of England.

THE firfr period is the region of pure-fable and

conjecture, and ought to be totally neglected, or be
abandoned to the industry and credulity of antiqua-
ries. Truth begins to dawn in the second period,
with a light, feeble at first, but gradually increaf-
ing; and the events which then happened, may be
fnig:y!v touched, but merit no particular or labori-
ous enquiry. in the third period, the history of
Scotl1nd, chiefly by means of records preserved in
England, becomes more authentic: not only are
events relatei, but their causes and effects explained 1
the charact:rs of the actors are displayed; the man-
ners of the age described; the revolutions in the
conflitrion pointed out: and here every Scotfinan
fliouli begin not to read only, but tq study the his-
torv or his country. During the fourth period, the
afairs of Scotland weere so mingled with those of
other nations, its situation in the political state of
Europe was lo important, its influence on the ope-
rations of the neighbouring kingdoms was so visible,
that its hiiory becomes an objet of attention to
Fcrein.ers; and without some knowledge of the va-
rious and extraordinary revolutions which happened
there, they cannot form a just notion either of the
mo-fr illustrious events, or of the characers of the
most difainguifhed personages in the fSxteenth cen-
tury.

TI r

TIIE following history is confined to the last ofBooK I.

these periods : To give a view of the political state ^ ne

,

of the kingdom, during that which immediately of the third
preceded it, is the design of this preliminary Book. aEra'
The imperfeEt knowledge which firangers have of
the affairs of Scotland, and the prejudices Scotfinen
themselves have imbibed with regard to the various
revolutions in the government of their country, ren-
der such an introduction equally necessary to both.

THE period, from the death of Alexander III.

to the death of James V. contains upwards of two
centuries and an half, from the year I286, to the
year 1542.

IT opens with the famous controversy concern-Rire of the
ing the independence of Scotlaid. Before the union controvelfy

concerning
of the two kingdoms, this was a question of much the inde-

pendence of

importance. If tlhe one crown had been confidered Scotland.
not as imperial and independent, but as feudatory
to the other, a treaty of union could not have been
concluded on equal terms, and every advantage
which the dependent kingdom procured, must have
been esteemed the concelfion of a Sovereign to his
vassal. Accordingly, about the beginning of the
present century, and while a treaty of union between
the two kingdoms was on foot, this controversy was
agitated with all the heat, which national animofities
naturally inspire. What was then a fubjeEt of feri-
o.is concern, the union of the two kingdoms hath
rendered a matter of mere curiosity. But though
the objects, which at that time warmed and interelc-

B 4 ed

BOOK I. ed both nations, exist no longer, a question which
'-v-''appeared so momentous to our ancestors, cannot be

altogether indifferent or uninftrudtive to us.

SOMIE of the northern counties of England were

early in the hands of the Scottish Kings, who, as
far back as the feudal customs can be traced, held
these poffefions of the Kings of England, and did
homage to them on that account. This homage
due only for the territories which they held in Eng-.
land, was in no wife derogatory from their royal dig-
niity. Nothing is more suitable to feudal ideas, than
that the fame person should be both a Lord and a
Vafzal, independent in one capacity, and dependent
in another . The Crown of England was without
doubt imperial and independent, though the Princes
who wore it were, for many ages, the vafTals of the
Kings of France; and, in consequence of their pof-
leflions in that kingdom, bound to perform all the
services, which a feudal Sovereign has a title to ex-

A very ;ngil;!lr proof of this occurs in the French hiilory.

Arpin fold the vicompte of the city Bourges to Philip I. who
did homage to the Count of Sancerre for a part of thele lands,
which held of tnat Nobleman, A. D. too. I belie:e that no
example, of a King's doing homage to one of his own fubjeAs,
ii to be met with in the hiliorie either of England or Scotland.
Philip le Bei abl:fhc this practice in France A. D. 13oz. He-
t.at .brege' C;h-c-nr; . Sorme\;hat similar to this, is a charter of
the Abbot of Mclrofs, A. D. 1 ;5, conflituting James V. the
B.i'fflor Stew2rd of that Abbey, veiRing in him all the powers
which pertancdr to that o:Ece, and requiring him to be anfver-
able to the Abbot so hi; excrcife of the fame. A-ri.L. / zbl.

as. The fame was the condition of the Monarchs BOOK 1.
of Scotland; free and independent as Kings, but, as Y
polreffing Englifl territories, valfals to the King of
England. The English Monarchs, satisfied with
their legal and uncontroverted rights, were neither
capable, nor had any thoughts of usurping more.
England, when conquered by the Saxons, being di-
vided by them into many small kingdoms, was in no
condition to extend its dominion over Scotland,
united at that time under one Monarch. And though
these petty principalities were gradually formed into
one kingdom, the reigning princes exposed to con-
tinual invasions of the Danes, and often subjected
to the yoke of those formidable pirates, seldom turn-
ed their arms towards Scotland, and were utterly in-
capable of establishing new rights in that country.
The first Kings of the Norman race, busied with
introducing their own laws and manners into the
kingdom which they had conquered, or with main-
taining themselves on the throne which tome of them
pofieffed by a very dubious title, were as little soli-
citous to acquire new authority, or to form new
pretensions in Scotland. An unexpe&ed calamity
that besel one of the Scottish Kings first encouraged
the English to think of bringing his kingdom under
dependence. William King of Scotland being tak-
en prisoner at Alnwick, Henry II. as the price of his
liberty, not only extorted from him an exorbitant
ransom, and a promiie to surrender the places of
greatti strength in his dominions, but compelled
him to do homage for his whole kingdom. Ri-
chard I. a generous Prince, solemnly renounced this

claim

BooK I. claim of homage, and absolved William from the
'--"-hard conditions which Henry had imposed. Upon

the death of Alexander III. near a century after, Ed-
ward I. availing himself of the fitlation of afairs in
Scotland, acquired an influence in that kingdom
which no E.nglih Monarch before him ever posses-
led, and imitating the inreretted policy of Henry,
rather than the magnanimity of Richard, revived the
claim of lovereignty to which the former had pre-
tended.

p-:t,!i-'ns MARGARET of Norway, Grandauight.r of Alex-
'.d Sa eo ander, and heir to his crown, did not long survive
c-: :e' himn. The right of fuccemon belonged to the de-

fiendatns of David Earl of iTiunington, third son
of King David I. Among these, Robert Bruce,
and John Baliol, two illusrious competitors for the
crown, appeared. Bruce was the son of Isabel Earl
David's second daughter; Baliol, the grandson of
Margaret the elder daughter. According to the
rules of ficcefion vwhich are now ealiaified, the
right of Baliol was preferable, and notwithstanding
Bruce's plea of being nearer in blood to Earl David,
Baliol's claim, as the representative of his mother
and grandmother, would be deemed inconteftible.
But in that age, the order of succession was not as-
certained with the fame precision. The question ap-
peared to be no iefs intricate, than it was important.
And though the prejudices of the people, and per-
haps the laws of the kingdom, favoured Bruce, each
of the rivals was lipported by a powerful farion.
Arms a'one, it was fbared, must terminate a difiute
too weighty for the laws to decide. But, in order

to

to avoid the miseries of a civil war, Edward was BooK .
chosen umpire, and both parties agreed to acquiesce w
in his decree. This had well nigh proved fatal to
the independence of Scotland; and the nation, by
its eagerness to guard against a civil war, was not
only exposed to that calamity, but almolt subjected
to a foreign yoke. Edward was artful, brave, en-
terprifing, and commrnnded a powerful and martial
people, at peace with the whole world. The anar-
chy which prevailed in Scotland, and the ambition of
competitors ready to sacrifice their country in order
to obtain even a dependent Crown, invited him first
to seize, and then to fubjeEt the kingdom. The au-
thority of an umpire, which had been unwarily be-
flowed upon him, and fronm which the Scots dread-
ed no dangerous conf;quences, enabled him to exe-
cute his schemes with the greater facility. Under
pretence of examining the question with the utmost
iboemnity, he summoned all the Scottish Barons to
Norham, and having gained some, and intimidated
others, he prevailed on ail who were present, not
excepting Bruce and Baiiol, the competitors, to ac-
knowledge Scotland a fief of the English Crown,
and to swear fealty to him as their Sovereiniz or Liege
Lcrd. This ftep led to another frill more impor-
tant. As it was vain to pronounce a sentence which
hl had not power to execute, Edward demanded
p oilcfion of the kingdom, that he might be able to
deliver it to him whose right should be found prefer-
able. And such was the pufilanimity of the nobles,
anl the impatient ambition of the competitors, that
both assented to this firange demand, and Gilbert de
pJmfi-aville, Earl of Angus, was the only man, who

refused

BooK I. reruied to flirrender the castles in his custody to the
s'~'~" enemy of his country. Edward finding Baliol the

milA obsequious and the leaf: formidable of the two
competitors, soon after gave judgment in his favour.
Bal]ol on.e more profefied hiinfclf the vafial of Eng-
land, and fuibmitted to every condition, which the
Sovereign whom he had now acknowledged was
plealed to prescribe.

EDW.ARD, having thus placed a creature of his

own upon the throne of Scotland!, and compelled the
nobles to renounce the ancient liberties and indepen.
dence of their country, had reason to conclude that
his dominion was now fully established. But he be-
gan too soon to assume the malter; his new vassals,
fierce and independent, bore with impatience a yoke,
to which they were not accustomed. Provoked by
his haughtineis, even the paFlive spirit of Baliol be-
gan to mu:iny. But Edward, who had no longer
use for fic:h a p.geant King, forced hin to resign the
Crown, and openly attempted to seize it as fallen to
himsef, by the rebellion of his vassal. At that cri-
tical perioJ, arose Sir William Wallace, a hero, to
whom the fond ad iraticn of his co;ntrymen hath
a'cribed many fabulou; aSt; of prowess, though his
real valour, as well as integrity and wifdorm, is such,

n.- n°'.:s not th.e heightenings of ficlion. He, al-
n'o:f f:rI. veztured to tal<e arms in defence of the
h:inOd.oml, 1and his .oidnri revived the spirit of his
cJ un:-y-n n. A-t ianl, Robert Bruce, the grandlbn
of him -.'no l:oodl in comnetition w ith Baliol, appear
e t.o 2-"n ' 'i. , own rijhts, and to vindicate the ho-
-.":.- : -i' co'-:r)'. j .he :-ocbie, afrnmed of their

former

former baseness, and inraged at the many indigni- BooK I.
ties offered to the nation, crowded to his standard. '--
In order to crush him at once, the English Monarch
entered Scotland, at the head of a mighty army.
Many battles were fought, and the Scots, though
often vanquished, were not subdued. The ardent
zeal with which the nobles contended for the inde-
pendence of the kingdom, the prudent valour of
Bruce, and above all a national enthufiafin inspired
by fu1c a cause, baffled the repeated efforts of Ed-
ward, and counterbalanced all the advantages which
he derived from the number, and wealth of his sub-
jeccs. And though the war continued with little in-
termiftion upwards of seventy years, Bruce and his
poflerity kept pof'effion of the throne of Scotland,
and ruled with an authority not inferior to that of
its former Monarchs.

BUT whIile the sword, the ultimate judge of all

disputes between contending nations, was employed
to terminate this controversy, neither Edward nor
the Scots seemed to diftruf the jufticc of thcir cause
and both appealed to history and records, and from
these produced, in their own favour, such evidence,
as they pretended to be unanswerable. The letters
and memorials addressed by each party to the Pope,
who was then reverenced as the common father, and
often appealed to as the common judge of all Chri-

atian Princes, are still extant. The fabulous tales

of the early British history; the partial testimony of
ignorant Chroniclers; fuppofiitious treaties and chaT-
ters; are the proofs, on which Edward founded his
'ie to the fovereigntv of Scotlanli; n rd the homage

don^

BooK I. done by the Scottish Monarchs for their lands in
<"-rT England, is prepofterouily supposed to imply the

Ii.:!ection of their whole kingdom ". Ill founded,
however, as their right was, the English did not fail
to revive it, in all the subsequent quarrels between
the two kingdoms; while the Scots disclaimed it
with the utmost indignation. To this, we must im-
pute the ferce and implacable hatred to each other,
which long enfiamed both. Their national antipa-
thies were excited, not only by the usual circumfian-
ces of frequent hostilities, and reciprocal injuries;
but the English confidered the Scots as raffals who
had presumed to rebel, and the Scots, in their turn,
regarded the English, as usurpers who aimed at eii-
flaingr their country.

r;o*. AT the time, V.wken Robert Bruce began his reign

ka:e f: 'e- in Scotland, the Lime fo;-m of government was efta-
kingdom
we.n ;uce blifhed in all the kingdoms of Europe. And the

snj f..rprifing similarity in their constitution and laws

demonflrates that the nations which overturned the
Roman empire, and erected these kingdoms, though
divided into diferent tribes, and distinguished by
di.:'erln: names, were originally the fame people.
W!-en we take a viewv of the feudal system of laws
and policy, that flupendous and singular fabric
crected by them; the fir.r objeft that strikes us is the
King. And when we are told that he is the sole
Fproriezor of all the lands within his dominions, that
ail li fu'oijecs derive their poffeflFons from him,

? :'.r:.cr^.'_ ITi :i::.c^.l -'.' cc'.cc'n..i:'g te Independency,
iac.

and

nnd in return consecrate their lives to his service; BooK I.
when we hear that all marks ofdiftintion, and titles -
of dignity, flow from him as the only fountain of
honour; when we behold the most potent peers, oa
their bended knces, and with folded hands, swear-
ing fealty at his feet, and acknowledging him to be
their Sovereign, and their Liege Lord ; we are apt to
pronounce him a powerful, nay an absolute Mo-
narch. No conclusion, however, would be more
rash,' or worse founded. The genius of the feudal
government was purely ariftocratical. With all the
ensigns of royalty, and with many appearances of
despotic power, a feudal King was the most limited
of ail Princes.

BEFORE they sallied out of their own habitations Or;g;n of

to conquer the world, many of the northern nations che Fend
seem not to have been subject to the government of ment, and

its ariflo-

kings *; and even where monarchical government cratical ge-
was eftablilhed, the prince pofeffed but little autho- niu,'
rity. A general rather than. a king, his military
command was extensive, his civil jurifdition almost
nothing t. The army which he led was not com-
posed of soldiers, who could be compelled to serve,
but of such as voluntarily followed his standard $.
These conquered not for their leader, but for them-
flves ; and being free in their own country, renoun-
ced not their liberty when they acquired new fettle-
ments. They did not exterminate the ancient in-
habitants of the countries, which they subdued, but

* ss. lib. vi. c. 23. t Tacit. de Mor. Germ. c. 7. I 1.

C-cf. ibid.

seizing

BOOK I. seizing the greater part of their lands, they took

Lzv3- their persons under protecion. And the difficulty

of maintaining a new conquest, as well as the dan-
ger of being attacked by new invaders, rendering it
necessary to be always in a posture of defence, the
form of government which they established was al-
together military, and nearly resembled that to which
they had been accufsomed in their native country.
Their general still continuing to be the head of the
colony, part of the conquered lands were allotted to
him ; the remainder, under the name of beneficia or
fiefs, waw divided amongst his principal officers. As
the common safety required that there officers ihould,
upon all occasions, be ready to appear in arms, for
the common defence, and should continue obedient
to their general, they bound themselves to take the
field, when called, and to serve him with a number
of men, in proportion to the extent of their territo-
ry. Theie great officers, again parcelled out their
lands among their followers, and annexed the fame
condition to the grant. A feudal kingdom was pro-
perly the encampment of a great army; military
ideas predominated, military subordination was efta-
blifhed, and the possession of land was the pay which
soldiers received for the-r personal service. In con-
sequence cf hefe notions, the possession of land was
granted during pleasure only, and kings were elec-
tive. In other words, an officer disagreeable to his
gcneirtl was deprived of his pay, and the person who
v.as mot capz.ble of conduting an army, was cho-
ifn to co:mma d i. Such vere the first rudiments,
or in-farnc, of fudral government.

BUT

BUT long before the beginning of the fourteenth BOOK ID

century, the feudal system had undergone many -
changes, of which the following were the most con-
fiderable. Kings formerly eleEtive, were then here-
ditary; and fiefs granted at first during pleasure, de-
iccnded from father to son, and were become per-
petual. These changes, not less advantageous to
the nobles, than to the p;i: ce, made no alteration in
the ariflocratical spirit of the feudal constitution.
The King, who at a distance, seemed to be invested Genetl

caures

with majesty and power, appears, on a nearer view, whichllim
to possess none of those advantages, which bellow on ted the

power of

monarchs their grandeur and authority. His reve- the feudal
nues were scanty; he had not a standing army and m"onarch
he enjoyed no proper jurifdicion.

AT a time when pomp and splendor were un- Theirre've

known, even in the palaces of kings ; when the of- lue werd
ficers of the crown received little salary besides the
fees and perquifires of their office; when embalfies
to foreign courts were rare; when armies were com-
posed of soldiers who served without pay; it was not
necessary that a king should possess a great revenue i
nor did the condition of Europe, in those ages, al-
low its princes to be opulent. Commerce made
little progress in the kingdoms, where the feudal go-
vernment was established. Institutions, which had
no other objet but to inspire a martial spirit, to
train men to be soldiers, and to make arms the only
honourable profession, naturally discouraged the com-
mercial arts. The revenues, arising from the taxes
imposed on the different branches of commerce, were
by consequence inconsiderable; and the prince's

C treasury

BooK I. treasury received little supply from a source, which,
''--' among a trading people, flows with such abundance,

and is almot inexhaustible. A fixed tax was not levi-
ed even on land; luch a burthen would have appeared
intolerable to men who received their estates, as the
reward of their valour, and who confidered their ser-
vice in the field as a full retribution for what they
poeff1ed. The king's demsfjnes, or the portion of
land which he frill retained in his own hands unalie-
nated, furnished fubfif.ence to his court, and defray-
ed the ordinary expence of government*. The
only stated taxes which the feudal law obliged vas-
fals ro pay to the king, or to those of whom they
held their lands, were three; one when his eldest
son was made a kn'ght; another when his eldelt
daughter was married; and a third in order to ran-
fom him if he ifould happen to b- taken prisoner.
Besides hefe, the king received the feudal casualties
of the ward, marriage, &c. of his own vaflals. And,
on some extraordinary occasions, his fubjets grant-
ed him an aid, which they diftinguilhed by the iiame
cf a beirt'c.e'.r, in order to declare that he received
ir not in coniLquince of any right, but as a gift,
flowing from their good-will ±. All there added
together, produced a revenue, scanty and precarious,
which far from en.nb!ing the king to a:tcnTpt any
thing that could excite the jealousy or fear of the
nobles, kept him in continual indigence, anxiety,
and dependence.

Crig. de Feud. lib. 1. Dic':. D. DU Canre G'ofiT voc. Do
minrieum. - Eu Cange vAc. Auxi'ium.

NOR

NOR could the king supply the defect of his reve- BOOK I.

nues, by the terror of his arms. Mercenary, troops T"e'jd
and tlanding armies were unknown as long as the no i.irding

Tarmies.

feudal government fublfited in vigour. Europe was
peopled with foldicrs. The vassals of the king, and
the fub-vaffals of the barons were all obliged to carry
arms. And while the poverty of princes prevented
them from fortifying their frontier towns, while a
campaign continued but a few weeks, and while a
fierce and impetuous courage was impatient to bring
every quarrel to the decision of a battle, an army,
without pay, and with little discipline, was sufficient
for all the purposes both of the security and of the
glory of a nation. Such an army, however, far
from being an engine at the king's disposal, was
often no less formidable to him, than to his ene-
mies. The more warlike any people were, the
more independant they became; and the fame per-
sons being both soldiers and fubjets, civil privileges
and immunities were the consequence of their victo-
ries, and the reward of their martial exploits. Con-
querors, whom mercenary armies, under our pre-
sent forms of government, often render the tyrants
of their own people, as well as the scourges of man-
kind, were commonly, under the feudal conflitu-
tion, the most indulgent of all princes to their uib-
jests, because they stood most in need of their assist-
ance. A prince whom even war and victories did
not render the masser of his own army, poffefied no
shadow of military power during times of peace.
His disbanded soldiers mingled with his other sub-
iccts; not a tingle man received pay from him;
many ages elapsed even before a guard was appoint-

C 2 ed

BOOs: I. ed to defend his person ; and deflitute of that great

infirument of dominion a fandiing army, the au-
thority of the king continued always feeble, and was
often contemptible.

Their jurif- NOR were rhefe the only circumflances, which
diaon was contributed towards depressing the regal power. By
h-m/ed.

the feudal system, the king's judicial authority was
extremely circumscribed. At first, princes seem to
have been the supreme judges of their people, and,
in person, heard and determined all controversies
among them. The multiplicity of causes soon made
it necessary to appoint judges, who, in the king's
name decided matters, that belonged to the royal
iurifdiction. But the Barbarians, who over-ran Eu-
rope, having destroyed mors of the great cities, and
the countries which they seized being cantoned out
among powerful barons, who were blindly follow-
ed by numerous vassals, whom, in return, they
were bound to protect from every injury; the ad-
minifrration of justice was greatly interrupted, and
the execution of any legal lentence became almost
impraccicabke. Theft, rapine, murder, and difor-
der of all kinds prevailed in every kingdom of Eu-
rope, to a degr-e alhnoft incredible, and scarce com.
patible with the. fiafiftence of civil society. Every
offender fheitered hinfif under the protection of
some pow-ers- chieftain, who screened him from
the pursuits of -'u'lice. To apprehend, and to pu.
nifh a criminal, often required the union and effort
of half . kingdom . In order to remedy theef

evils,

.A rC.-'-..'-'e i.'i.nrce of this occurs in the following his
tory, ,b ia.e ao ute ,car 15 i. Mvary, having appointed a cour

0

evils, many persons of distinCtion were entrusted BooK I.
with the administration of juflice within their own
territories. But what we may presume was, at first,
only a temporary grant, or a personal privilege, the
incroaching spirit of the nobles soon converted into a
right, and rendered hereditary. The lands of some
were ereted into Baronies, those of others into Re-
galities. The jurifdicion of the former was exten-
five, that of the latter, as the name implies, royal,
and almost unbounded. All causes, whether civil
or criminal, were tried by judges, whom the lord
of the regality appointed; and if the king's courts
called any person within his territory before them,
the lord of regality might put a flop to their pro-

of jullice to be held on the borders, the inhabitants of no lets
than eleven counties were summoned to guard the person, who
was to a& as judge, and to enable him to enforce his decisions,
p. 234. The words of a proclamation, which afford such a con-
vincing proof of the feebleneos of the feudal government, deserve
our notice.- " And because it is necessary for the execution cf
her Highness' commandments and service, that her juRfice be
well accompanied, and her authority sufficiently fortified, by the
concurrence of a good power of her faithful fubjeas-Therefore
commands and charges all and sundry Earls, Lords, Barons,
Freeholders, Landed-men, and other Gentlemen, dwelling with-
in the said counties, that they, and every one of them, with
their kin, friends, servants, and houfhold men, well bodin in
feir of war in the moit fubllantiou, manner, [i. e. compleatly
armed and provided,] and with twenty days vi&cals to meet
and to Sass forward with him to the borough of Jedburgh, and
there to remain during the said space of twenty days, and to re-
ceive such direction and commands, as ihall be given by him to
them in our Sovereign Lady's name, for quietness of the coun-
try; and to put the fame in execution under the pain of losing
their life, lands and goods." Keith's Hillt. of Scotland, 198.

C 3 ceedings,

: I. ceedings, and by the privilege of repledgingg, remove
,--- the cause to his own court, and even punish his

va:i`l, if he fubmitred to a foreign jurisdiction *
T-,s almost every question, in which any perorn,
who resided on the lands of the nobles, was inte-
rceied, beir g determined by judges appointed by the
noS.es tremillves, their vaflals were scarce sensible
ofb ii:g, in any degree, ubject to the crown. A
ftu-'i kingdom was plit into many small principa-
li:es, almost incLe:endCent, and held together by a
fe-ble and comrncnly an imperceptible bond Qs
union. And the king wvas not only stripped of the
au:hori:y annexed to th;e person of a.fuprcme judge,
but his revenue fuLrsed no small diminution, by the
l:ss cI thuie pecuniary emoluments, which were, in
rha: age, due to the person who adminiftred justice.

I-: the fame proportion that the king funk in

power, the nobles role towards independence. Not
satisfied with having obtained a hereditary right to
their fiefs, which they formerly held during plea-
sure, their amb;tion aimed at something bolder, and
by introducing e;itails, endeavoured, as far as hu-
man ingenuity and invention can reach that end, to
render their poiTfefions unalienable and everlasting.
As they had full power to add to the inheritance
tranfrmitted to them from their ancerfors, but none to
diminish it; time alone, by means of marriages,
legacies, and other accidents, brought continual ac-
ceffons of wealth, and of dignity; a great family,
ike a river, became considerable from the length of

Cr:ig. lib. iii. Dieg. 7.

45

its course, and as it rolled on, new honours and new BOOK I-
property flowed successively into it. Whatever in- "
fluence is derived from titles of honour, the feudal
balons, ii':'cwie poffciffd in an ample manner.
These marks of dl':intion are, in their own nature,
either ofcial or personal, and being annexed to a
particular charge, or bestowed by the admiration of
mankind upFon illuflrious characters, ought to be
appropriated to thele. But the son, however un-
worthy, could not bear to be tfripped of that ap-
pellation, by which his father had been dittinguifh-
ed. His prefimprion claimed, what his virtue did
not merit; titles of honour became hereditary, and
addc:l new lul-re to nobles already in pofleiTion of
too nmuch power. Something more audacious, and
more extravagant fRill remained. The supreme di-
rection of all affairs, both civil and military, being
committed to the great officers of the crown, the
fame and fafery of princes, as well as of their peo-
ple, depended upon the fidelity and abilities of these
officers. But such was the preposterous ambition
of the nobles, and so successful even their wildest
attempts to aggrandize themselves, that in all the
kingdoms where the feudal institutions prevailed,
most of these offices were annexed to great fami-
lies, and held, like fiefs, by hereditary right. A
person whose undutiful behaviour rendered him odi-
ous to his prince, or whose incapacity exposed him
to the contempt of the people, often held a place of
power and trust, of the greatest importance to both.
In Scotland, the offices of Lord Justice General,
Great Chamberlain, High Steward, High Confia-

C 4 ble,

BooK I. ble, Earl Marshal, and High Admiral, were all he-
'v` reditary; and in many counties, the office of Sheriff

was held in the fame manner.

NOBLES, whose property was so extensive, and

whose power so great, could not fail of being tur-
bulent and formidable. Nor did they want inftru-
mnents for executing their boldest designs. That
portion of their lands, which they parcelled out
among their followers, supplied them with a nu-
merous band of faithful and determined vassals;
while that, which they retained in their own hands,
enabled them to live with a princely splendour. The
great hall of an ambitious baron was often more
crowded than the court of his sovereign. The
firong cafiles, in which they resided, afforded a fe-
cure retreat to the discontented and seditious. A
great part of their revenue was spent upon multi-
tudes of indigent, but bold retainers. And if at ary
time they left their retreat, to appear in the court
of their sovereign, they were accompanied, even in
times of peace, with a vast train of armed follow-
ers. The usual retinue of William the sixth Earl
of Douglas consisted of 2000 horle. Those of
the other nobles were magnificent and formidable
in proportion. Impatient of Subordination, and
forgetting their proper rank, such potent and haugh'
ty barons were the rivals, rather than the subjects al
their prince. They often despised his orders, in.
fulted his person, and wrested from him his crown
And the history of Europe, during several ages.
contains liktle eife, but the accounts of the wars ant

revo.

Revolutions, occasioned by their exorbitant ambi- BOOK L
tion.

BUT, if the authority of the barons far exceeded Theirpow-

its proper bounds in the other nations of Europe, we er geater
may affirm that the balance which ought to be pre- than inany
served between a king and his nobles was entirely loft odthr kins-
in Scotland. The Scottish nobles enjoyed, in com-
mon with those of other nations, all the means for
extending their authority which arise from the arif-
tocratical genius of the feudal government. Betides
these, they possessed advantages peculiar to them-
fclves; the accidental sources of their power were
considerable; and singular circumstances concurred
with the spirit of the constitution to aggrandise them.
To enumerate the most remarkable of these, will serve The partSi
both to explain the political state of the kingdom, iusrof
and to illustrate many important occurrences, in the this.
period now under our review.

I. THE nature of their country was one cause of The nature

the power and independence of the Scottish nobility. cuthy.
Level and open countries are formed for servitude.
The authority of the supreme magistrate reaches
with ease to the most distant corners, and when na-
ture has erected no barrier, and affords no retreat,
the guilty or obnoxious are soon detected, and
punished. Mountains, and fens, and rivers set
bounds to despotic power, and amidit there, is the
natural feat of freedom and indepcndeincc. In such
places, did the Scottish nobles usually fix their refi-
dence. By retiring to his own castle, a mutinous
baron could defy the power of his fovereigh, it be-

8 ing

Boo;r I. ing impracticable to lead an army, through a bar-

ren country, to places, almot inaccessible to a single
man. The fame causes, which checked the pro.
grefs of the Roman arms, and rendered all the es-
forts of Edward I. abortive, often proteted the
Scottish nobles from the vengeance of their prince;
and they owed their personal independence, to those
very mountains and marshes, which saved their
country from being conquered.

The rmal II. THE want of great cities in Scotland contri-
number o buted not a little to increase the power of the nobi-
_rea: cities.

lity, and to weaken that of the Prince. Where-
ever numbers of men assemble together, order must
be established, and a regular form of government
inflituted, the authority of the mag;firate must be
recognized, and his decisions meet with prompt and
full obedience. Laws and subordination take rife
in cities; and where there are few cities as in Po-
land, or none as in Tartary, there are few or no
traces of any fort of police. But under the feudal
governments, commerce, the chief means of asem-
bling mankind, was neglected; the nobles, in or-
der to flrengthen their influence over their vaflals,
resided among them, and seldom appeared at court
where they found a superior, or dwelt in cities,
where they met with equals. In Scotland, the rich
courties in the South lying open to the English, no
town situated there could rife to be great or popu-
lous amidst continual inroads and alarms: the re-
lidence of our monarchs was not fixed to any par-
ticular place; many parts of the country were bar-
ren and uncultivated ; and in consequence of there

peculiar

peculiar circumstances, added to the general causes BooK I.
flowing from the nature of the feudal institutions, -
the towns in Scotland were extremely few, and very
inconsiderable. The vassals of every baron occupi-
ed a distinct portion of the kingdom, and formed
a separate and almost independent society. Instead
of giving aid towards reducing to obedience their
seditious Chieftain, or any whom he took under his
protetion, they wevce a:l in arms for his defence, and
obftrudted the operations of justice to the utmost.
The prince was obliged to connive at criminals,
whom he could not reach; the nobles, conscious
of this advantage, were not afraid to offend; and
the dificulty of punihling almost all;red them of
impunity.

II. THE division of t!-, country into clans had The infi-
no small effect in rendering the nobles considerable. tution of

Clans.

The nations, which over-ran Europe, were original-
ly divided into many small tribes; and when they
came to parcel out the lands which they had con-
quered, it was natural for every chieftain to bestow
a portion, in the first place, upon those of his own
tribe or family. These all held their lands of him;
and as the safety of each individual depended on the
general union, these small Societies clung together,
and were distinguished by some common appellation,
either patronymical, or local, long before the intro-
du&tion of firnames, or ensigns armorial. But when
these became common, the descendants and relations
of every Chieftain affimed the fame name and arms
with him; other vassals were proud to imitate their
example, and by degrees they were communicated

to

BooK I. to all those who held of the fame superior. Thu
'Yv4 ' clanfhips were formed ; and in a generation or two

that consanguinity which was, at first, in a grea
measure, imaginary, was believed to be real. Al
artifcial union was converted into a natural one
men willingly followed a leader, whom they regard
ed both as the superior of their lands, and the chic
of their blood, and served him not only with the si
delity of vassals, but with the affecion of friends
In the other feudal kingdoms, we may observe fuel
unions, as we have described, imperfetly formed
but in Scotland, whether they were the produ&io0
of chance, or the effect of policy, or introduced b
the Irith colony above-mentioned, and ftrengthene
by carefully preserving their genealogies both ge
nuine and fabulous, clanthips were universal. Sucl
a confederacy might be overcome, it could not b
broken; and no change of manners, or of govern
ment, has been able, in some parts of the kingdom
to dissolve associations which are founded upon pre
judices so natural to the human mind. How for
midable were nobles at the head of followers, whc
counting that cause just and honourable which thei
chief approved, were ever ready to take the field
his command, and to sacrifice their lives in defenc
of his person, or of his fame ? Againit such men,
kingcontended with great disadvantage, and that col
service, which money purchases, or authority extorts
was nct an equal match for their ardour and zeal.

The f.all IV. THE smallness of their number may be rmen
numbierof tioned among the causes of the grandeur oF'th

Scottish nobles. Our annals reach not back t th

sirs

first division of proFerty in the kingdom; but so far BooK I.
as -ve can trace the matter, the original possessions 0'vT
of the nobles seem to have been extensive. The an-
cient Thanes were the equals and the rivals of their
rince. Many of the earls and barons, who fuc-
ceeded them, were masters of territories no less am-
ple. France and England, countries wide and ser-
tile, afforded settlements to a numerous and power-
ful nobility. Scotland, a kingdom neither extensive
nor rich, could not contain many such overgrown
proprietors. But the power of an aristocracy always
diminishes, in proportion to the increase of its num-
bers; feeble if divided among a multitude; irre-
fiftible if centered in a few. When nobles are nu-
merous, their operations nearly resemble those of the
people, they are roused only by what they feel, not
by what they apprehend; and submit to many ar-
bitrary and oppressive ats, before they take arms
against their sovereign. A fma'l body, on the con-
trary, is more sensible, and mo;e impatient; quick
in discerning, and prompt in repelling danger; all
its motions are as sudden, as those of the other are
flow. Hence proceeded the extreme jealousy, with
which the Scottish nobles -.berved their monarchs,
and the fierceness with which they opposed their
incroachments. Even the virtue of a prince did not
render them lets vigilant, or less eager to defend
their rights ; and Robert Bruce, notwithstanding
the fPl1,dor of his viEtories, and the glory of his
name, was upon the point of experiencing the vi-
gour of their resistance, no less than his unpopular
Idecendent James III. Betides this, the near alli-
ance of the great families, by frequent intermar-

riages-
t~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~z

BOOK I. riages, was the natural confcquence of their small

L"'''numbrr. And as confa.:guinity was, in those ages,

a powerful bond of union, all the kindred of a
nobleman interested themfulves in his quarrel, as a
common cause, and every contest the king had,
though with a single baron, soon drew upon him
the arms of a whole confederacy.

ITheir V. THOSE natural connexions both with their
klagues and
combina- equals, and with their inferiors, the Scottish nobles

strengthened by a device, which if not peculiar to
themselves, was at least more frequent among them,
than in any other nation. Even in times of pro-
found peace, they formed associations, which when
made with their equals, were called leagues of mu-
tual defence; and when with their inferiors, bondsof
manienit. By the former, the contracting parties
bound themselves mutually to aflift each other, in
all causes, and against all persons. By the latter,
protection was stipulated on the one hand, and fide-
lity and personal service promised on the other'.
Self-prefervation, it is probable, forced men at firil
into these confederacies, and while disorder and ra-
pine were universal, while government was unsettled,
and the authority of laws little known or regarded,
near neighbours found it necessary to unite in this
manner for their security, and the weak were ob-
liged to court the patron.ge of the strong. By de-
grees, these airociations became so many alliances
of.;;- lve and defensive against the throne; and as
their obligation was held to be more facred'than any

' .\..t- Pt. 15.''r i. A. 43. P. 1555.

tic

tie whatever, they gave much umbrage to our Kings, BOOK I.
and contributed not a little to the power and inde- '"-
pendence of the nobility. In the reign of James II.
William the eighth earl of Douglas entered into a
league of this kind with the earls of Crawford, Ross,
Murray, Ormond, the lords Hamilton, Balveny,
&c. and so formidable was this combination to the
king, that he had recourse to a measure no less vio-
lent than unjust, in order to dissolve it.

VI. THE frequent wars between England and Tle fre-

Scotland proved another cause of augmenting the with Eng
power of the nobility. Nature has placed no bar- land
rier between the two kingdoms; a river, almost
every where fordable, divides them towards the east
on the weft they are separated by an imaginary line.
The small revenues of our kings prevented them
from fortifying, or placing garrisons in the towns
on the frontier; nor would the jealousy of their sub-
ects have permitted such a method of defence. The
barons, whose estates lay near the borders, confider-
ed themselves as bound both in honour and in inte-
reft to repell the enemy. The wardenjhips of the
different sarches, offices of great trust and dignity,
were always beflowed on them. This gained them
the leading of the warlike counties in the south;
and their vassals, living in a state of perpetual hofti-
lity, or enjoying at best an insecure peace, became
more inuled to war than even the reft of their coun-
trymen, and more willing to accompany their chief-
tain in his most hardy and dangerous enterprizes.
it was the valour, no less than the number of their
followers, that rendered the Douglases great. The

3 nobles

BooK I. nobles in the northern and midland counties were

_-v-' often dutiful and obsequious to the crown, but our

monarchs always found it impracticable to subdue
the mutinous and ungovernable spirit of the bor-
derers. In all our domeltic quarrels, chose, who
could draw to their fide the inhabitants of the south-
em counties, were sure of victory; and conscious of
this advantage, the lords who possessed authority
there, were apt to forget the duty which they owed
their sovereign, and to aspire beyond the rank of
fubjeas.

The re- VII. THE calamities which besel our kirgs con.
quent mi- tributed more than any other cause to diminish the
norities
which hap-royal authority. Never was any race of monarchs

sned in- so unfortunate as the Scottish. Of fix successive
-cotland.

princes, from Robert III. to James VI. not one died
a natural death; and the minorities, during that
time, were longer, and more frequent, than ever
happened in any other kingdom. From Robert
Bruce to James VI. we reckon ten princes; and
seven of there were called to the throne, while they
were minors, and almost infants. Even the moR
regular and best established governments feel fenfi-
bly the pernicious effe&s of a minority, and either
become languid and inactive, or are thrown into
violent and unnatural convulsions. But, under the
imperfect ?.,d ill adjusted system of government in
Scotland, t.,efe efficts were still more fatal; and the
fierce and mutinous spirit of the nobles, unrefrain-
ed by the authority of a king, scorned all fdbjeEtion
to the delegated jurifdiEtion of a regent, or to the
feeble commands of a minor. The royal authority

was

was circumscribed within narrower limits than ever; BOOK I.
the prerogatives of the crown, naturally inconfider- '-v-
able, were reduced almost to nothing; and the arif-
tocratical power gradually rose upon the ruins of the
monarchical. Left the personal power of a regent
flould enable him to a& with too much vigour, the
authority annexed to that office, was sometimes ren-
dered inconsiderable, by being divided ; or if a
single regent was chosen, the greater nobles, and
the heads of the more illustrious familiec, were fel-
dom raised to that dignity. It was often conferred
upon men, who possessed little influence, and excit-
ed nojealoufy. They, conscious cf their own weak-
ness, were obliged to overlook tome irregularities,
and to permit others ; and in order to support their
authority, which was destitute of real flrength, they
endeavoured to gain the most powerful and aative
barons, by granting them pollefions and immuni-
ties, which raised them to still greater power. When
the king himself came to assume the reins of go-
vernment, he found his revenues wailed or alienat-
ed, the crown lands seized or given away, and the
nobles so accustomed to independence, that after the
firuggles of a whole reign, he was seldom able to
reduce them to the fame state, in which they had
been at the beginning of his minority, or to wrest Review f
from them what they had usurped during that time. the events
If we take a view of what happened to each of our to the
kings, who was so unfortunate as tQ be placed in "nbi dur

t · ing each mi-

this situation, the truth and importance of this ob-norty.
servation will fully appear.

VoL. I. D THS

BOOK I. THE minority of David II. the son of Robert
L-v'' Bruce, was didturbed by the pretensions of Edward
Dp.d 1. Baliol, who, relying on the aid of England, and on

the support of some disaffected barons among the
Scots, invaded the kingdom. The success which
at first attended his arms, obliged the young king
to retire to France; and Baliol took poffefion of the
throne. A small body of the nobles, however, con-
tinuing faithful to their exiled prince, drove Baliol
out of Scotland, and after an absence of nine years,
David returned from France, and took the govern-
ment of the kingdom into his own hands. But
nobles, who were thus waiting their blood and trea-
sure in defence of the crown, had a right to the un-
disturbed polcliffon of their ancient privileges; and
even some title to arrogate new ones. It seems to
have been a maxim, in that age, that every leader
might claim as his own, the territory which his
sword had won from the enemy. Great acquifi-
tions were gained by the nobility in that way ; and
to these the gratitude and liberality of David added,
by diffributing, among such as adhered to him, the
vast poFefeons which fell to the crown by the for-
feiture of his enemies. The family of Douglas,
which began to rife above the other nobles, in the
reign of his father, augmented both its power and
its property, during his minority.
1,4;. JAMIES I. was seized by the English during the

continuance of a truce, and ungenerously detained
a priforer, almost nineteen years. During that pe-
riod, the kingdom was governed, firit by his uncle
Robert duke of Albany, and then, by Murdo his

son,

son. Both there noblemen aspired to the crown, BOOK I.
and their unnatural ambition, if we may believe -V
most of our historians, not only cut short the days
of Prince David, the King's elder brother, but pro-
longed the captivity of James. They flattered them-
felvcs, that they might ftep with less opposition in-
to a throne, when almost vacant S and, dreading
the King's return, as the extinction of their autho-
rity, and the end of their hopes, they carried on
the negociations for obtaining his liberty, with ex-
treme remissness. At the fame time, they neglect-
ed nothing that could either sooth or bribe the no-
bles to approve their scheme. They slackened the
reins of government, they allowed the prerogative
to be encroached upon ; they fiffered the molf ir-
regular ats of power, and even wanton instances
of oppression, to pass with impunity they dealt
out the patrimony of the crown among thole whose
enmity they dreaded, or whose favour they had
gained; and reduced the royal authority to a slate
of imbecillity, from which succeeding monarchs la-
boured in vain to raise it.

DURING the minority of James II. the admini- J43,.

flration of affairs and the custody of the King's Ja""'"
perlbn were committed to Sir William Crichton,
and Sir Alexander Livingflon. Jealousy and diC-
cord were the effets of their conjuna authority,
and each of them, in order to fl-rengthen himself
bestowed new power and privileges upon the great
men, whose aid he courted. While the young Earl
of Douglas, encouraged by their divisions, erected
a fort of independent prinrip'ality \vwih the king.

1) 2 drn ;

BooR. I. dom ; and forbidding his vassals to acknowledge any

authority but his own, he created Knights, appoint-
ed a privy council, namrd officers civil and mili-
tary, assumed every ensign of Royalty, but the title
of King, and appeared in public with a magnifi-
cence more than royal.
,^o.· ELIGiT persons were chosen to govern the king-

dom during the minority of James III. Lord
Boyd, however, by fcizing the person of the young
King, and by the ascendant which he acquired over
him, ioon engrofled the whole authority. He
formed the ambitious projea of raiTing his family
to the fame pitch oF power and grandeur with those
of the prime nobi!iv ; and he efrcted it. While
intent on this, hs relaxed the vigour of govern-
m:nt, and the Barons became accullomed, once
more. to anarchy and independence. The power,
which Bovd 1had been at so much pains to acquire,
was of no long cntinluance, and the fall of his
am:il.l, accordin; to the fate of favourites, was
lil.'den anti delruclIv; but uion its ruins, the
}am:l; or H.:milton rose, which sion attained the
ligheft rak in the kingdom.

As the minorirv of James V. was longer, it was
' ' like.i:e more turb'ul-nt than those of the preced-

ing k:ngs. And ithl ccntending nobles, encour-
ag.d or protecdi either by the King of France, or
of England, formed tl emielves into more regular
stations. sa-d disregar-ded more than ever the re-
Rfraints Ls o:d.r and authority. The French had
t..i adv-a; ge cf e.i.- one, devoted to their interest,

raised

raised to be regent. This was the Duke of Albany, BooK I.
a native of France, and a grandson of James 1I. ~
But Alexandler Lord Home, the mroft eminent of
all the Scottish peers, who survived the fatal bat-
tle of Flowden, thwarted all his measures, during
the firif years o! his adminif-ration ; and the in-
trigues of tie QCueen Dowager, fillcr of Henry VIII.
rendered the latter part of it no less fleble Thouigh
Iupported by French auxiliaries, the n'obles clefpied
his authority, and regardelfs either of his threats, or
his entreaties, peremptorily refuted, two several
times, to enter England, to the borders of which
kingdom he had led them. Provoked by these re-
peated instances of contempt, the regent abandon-
ed his troublesome flation, and retiring to France,
pr;ferred the tranquillity cf a private life, to an
ofice deflitute of real authority. Upon his retreat,
Douglas Earl of Arcgus became master of the
King's perfn, and governed the kingdom in his
name. Many eftorts were made to deprive him of
his utlrped authority. Buc the numerous vffals
;and friends of his family adlered to him, because
lie divided with them the power and emoluments
of his ouce; the people reverenced and loved the
name of Douglas ; he exercised, without the title of
regent, a fuller and more abfo!ute authority than any

hol0 had enjoyed that dignity ; and the ancient, but
danerous pi-e eminence of the )ouglae.-s, ieemed
to 'bc rLftored.

To these, and to many other caUtSif, omitted or
auno'.lcved by us, did the Scott;ifi nobility owe that
exorbitant ,and uncommon power, o- v\hich infiances

1) 3 occur,

BoOK I. occur, so frequently, in our history. Nothing how-

ever, demonstrates so fully the extent of their power,
as the length of its duration. Many years after the
declension of the feudal fitlemrs in the other king-
doms of Europe, and when the arms or policy of
Princes had, every where, shaken, or laid it in
ruins, the foundations of that ancient fabric remain-
ed, in a great measure, fi-m and untouc';cd in Scot-
land.

T i7 TI THE powers, which the feudal inflitutions vest-

da! ncn,-s ed in the nobles, soon became intolerable to all the
hbtcamb- I: Princes of LEurope, v.who longed to posiess some-
tolrable to
.ncts,. thing more than a nominal and precarious autho-

rity. Their impatience to obtain this, precipitated
Henry III. of England, Edward II. and tome other
weak Princes, into rash and premature attempts
against the privileges of the Barons, in which they
were difippointed, or pciilfhcd. Princes, of greater
a ilities, were content to mitigate evils which they
could nor cure, they fought occupation for the tur-
bulent spirit of thCiir obie-, in freiuent wars ; and
allowed their fiery courage to evaporate in foreign
expeditions, which if they brought no other advan-
tage, secured at least domelric trrnquill'iy. But,
time and accidents rpened the feudal governments
i-- or eT.eirudion. Towards the end of the fifteenth

to

;,.:'-: c pre

century, and begninng of the fixteentii, all the

;o-'-s fc:- Pri::ces oi Euro-e attacked, as if by concert, the
-:.: - ,l In

,:nc, ..-. power of tZeir nbes. en of genius then under-
:. :::a. took with ilicceif, !what their unskilful predecessors

lhad at:empted in vain. Lewis XI. of France, the
';ci' profound and the noft adventrous genius of

1. that

that age, began, and in a single reign, almost cor- BooK I.
pleated the scheme of their deftrution. The sure 'V'
but concealed policy of Henry VII. of England
produced the fame efifet. The means, indeed, em-
ployed by these monarchs were very difflerent., The
blow, which Lewis struck, was sudden and fatal.
The artifices of Henry resembled those flow poilbns,
which waste the constitution, but become not mor-
tal till some dillant period. Nor did they produce
confcquences less oppolite. Lewis boldly added to
thl crown whatever he wrested from the nobles.
Henry undermined his Barons, by encouraging them
to fell their lands, which enriched the commons,
and gave them a weight in the legislature unknown
to their predcceflbrs. But while there great revolu- But the no-

c]~ . i . bles conti-

tions were carrying on in two kingdoms, with nue to ga-
which Scotland was intimately conneaed, no alte- ter

fliength in

ration happened there; the King neither extended Scotland,
hlis own prerogative, nor enabled the commons to
encroach upon the aliftocracy ; the nobles not only
retained their ancient privileges and poflffilons, but
d.aily made new acquisitions.

TlHIs was not owing to the inattention of our Our K;ngs

endeavour-

Princes, or to their want of ambition. 'hey were ed to ex-
abundantly sensible of the exorbitant power of the tend the

''

_ 1

*

t royal au-

nobility, and extremely solicitous to humble that thorty,
order. They did not, however, possess means sus-
iicint for accomplifling that end. The reolurces
of our monarchs were few, and the progre!s which
they made inconsiderable. But as the number of Cencra
their followers, and the extent of their jurifdialion, means to-

wards this
were the two chief circumstances which rendered end.

D 4 the

BooK I. the nobles formidable; in order to counterbaltancb.

C'-'V the one, and to refrain the other, all our Kings.

had recourse to the faie expedients.

Er.ccu-r I. A-. iOxc nobles of a fierce courage, and of un-
di'cord a- polished manners, firroundeJ with valals bold and
mrng the
nbJ,. licentious, h-iom they were bound by interest and

honour to prote&, the caules of discord were many
and unavoidable. And as the contending parties
could seldom agree in acknowledging the authority
of any common sUperior or judge, and their impa-
tient spirit would leIdom wait the flow decisions of
juflice, th:ir quarrels w-cre uifualy terminated by the
sword. Thz offend d Baron assemblcd his vassals,
and wafted the lands, or ifed the blood of his ene-
my. To forgive an injury, was mean, to forbear
revengc; infamou: s or covardly %. HInce quarrels

The spirit of revence ,;as encoaraged, not only by the

mann: s, but swht is mo!e remarkable, by the laws of those
ages. If ar.ny Feron t; cught the prFL£cution of an injury offer-
ed to his ;am;., tol to tro:bllo:r.e, or tzo dangcrous, the Salique
laws permrit:ej him p.'li-<ly to defif from uem-ndini venJe-
ance ; bat ;nh fme amc , in oder to punish his cowardice, and
v.art of artecion to his fa: niy, deprived hi;n of the right of
fucc':lEon. Henut. ibregc Chronol. p. i8. Among the An-
g'.o-Saxons, we si-.. a finuhLr iniiitution diai:;il;.ed by the
r.ame of /

Ja.:tiu'. ; a volu'tar association, the oGjec whereof

\as ti-e pe'.on-.l Iccuriy cf thciz who joined in it, and which

r.e atcbienei;

c ovcii leli at athat time rendered receflary.

:.\m,,ind oicr r "g- ic
.on,, which are contaired in ol:e of thole

.f:

! e.-::-, t-.: o!!lowing cfervcs notice. " if ar v aiFociate
',al! : :- h:r e:.t or d.:k - tn a pcrfon who h!as killed any mnem-
hcr of thr.c' ;.U.,.an, u;ls in the rrefence of the King, the
Bifhcp, cr t". C ' pnt, and unless he can prove that he did not
know the pFrsr,. i;: h;i: pay a great fine." Hicks Dissert.
Epi::'- .:.c .d
. . Lig. Septentr. vol. i. a. z.

were

ere transmitted from father to son, and under the BooK I.
anle of deadly feuds, subsisted for many generations, '-v-
ith unmitigated rancour. It was the interest of
he crown to foment rather than to extintgifh these
.uarrels, and by scattering or cherishing the feeds
f discord among the. nobles, that union which
svould have rendered the aristocracy invincible, and
which muRt at once have annihilated the preroga-
ive, was effeEtually prevented. To the fame cause,
mur Kings were indebted for the fucccfs, with which

ihey sometimes attacked the imoft powerful chief-

lains. They employed private revenge to aid the
impotence of public laws, and arming against the
,erfon who had incurred their displeasure, those ri-
gal families which wishcd his fall, they rewarded
hieir frvice, by sharing among them the spoils of
e vanquiflied. But this expedient, though it
erved to humble individuials, d:d not weaken the
odyl of the nobility. Those, who were now the
iltrments of their Prince's vengeance, became, in
hort time, the objecas of his fear. Having ac-
Mtiied power and wealth by serving the crown,
ey, in their turn, set up for independence: and
.uicll there might be a fluctuation of power, and
1propert ; though o'd families fell, and new
cs role upon their ruins ; the rights of the ariflo-
,rcy remained intire, and its vigour unbroken.

II. As the admllinill-ation of jutice is one of the ,xtn th,
cpt powerfi!l ties between a King and his fubjeRs, jurifdtion

of the

our monarchs were at the utmoll pains to cir King's

urmfcrib te tle jurifdiaion of the Barons, and to ou'ts.
ttceid that of the crown. TI;e external forms of

flib-

Boor I. subordination, natural to the feudal system, favour.
_t-"V ed this attempt. An appeal lay from the judge

and courts of the Barons, to those of the King,
The right, however, of judging in the first infance,
belonged to the nobles, and they easily found meansto
defeat the effiet of appeals, as well as of many other
feudal regulations. The royal jurisdiction was al.
most confined within the narrow limits of the King's
demesnes, beyond which, his judges claimed indeed
much authority, but possessed next to none. Our
Kings were sensible of these limitations, and bore
them with impatience. But it was imponible to
overturn in a moment, what was so deeply rooted;
or to firip the nobles, at once, of privileges which
they had held so long, and which were wrought al.
moo2 into the frame of the feudal contlitution. To
accomplish this, howsever, was an object of uni-
form and anxious attention to all our princes.
James I. led the way, here, as well as in other in.
fiances, towards a more regular and perfect police.
He made choice, among the estates of parliament,
of a certain number of persons, whom he diflin.
g.tithed by the name of Lords of Sefon2, and ap.
pointed them to hold courts for determining civil
caules, three times in the year, and forty days ata
time, in whatever place he pleated to name. Their
jurifdic&ion extended to all matters, which formerly
came under the cognizance of the King's council,
and being a committee of parliament, their deci-
sions were final. James II. obtained a law, annex-
ing all regalities, which should be forfeited, to the
crown, and declaring the right of jurisdiction to be
unalienable for the future. James III. imposed fe-

verc

re penalties upon those judges appointed by the BOOK I.
arons, whose decisions mould be found on a re- '
iew to be unjust; and by many other regulations,
deavoured to extend the authority of his own
turt*. James IV. on pretence of remedying the
conveniencies arising from the ihort terms of the
urt of Session, appointed other judges called
c-ds of daily council. The Serion was an ambula-
ry court, and met seldom: the Daily Council, was
ed, and far constantly at Edinburgh ; and though

lot composed of members of parliament, the fame
owers, which the Lords of beffion enjoyed, were
leied in it. At last, James V. erected a new
irt, that still fubifts, and which he named the
.'!lege of yufJice, the judges or Senators of which
ere called Lords of Council and Seffon. This court
ot only exercised the fame jurisdiction which for-
erly belonged to the Seflion and Daily Council,
t new rights were added. Privileges of great
nportance were granted to its members, its forms
ere prescribed, its terms fixed, and regularity,
wer and splendor conferred upon it. Tie per-
s constituted judges in all these different courts,
3d, in many respects, the advantage of those who
riefied in the courts of the Barons i they were
ore eminent for their skill in law, their rules of
occeding were more uniform, and their decisions
ore confitent. Such judicatories became the ob-
cs of confidence, and of veneration. Men wil-
ngly submitted their property to their determina-
cn, and their incroachments on the jurifdicions of

A2. 26. P. 146,. Act. 9l P. 1493. A. 9;. P 1487.

the

BOOK I. the nobles were popular, and for that lreafon fuc

C--' "* cefsful. By devices of a similar nature, thejurifdic

tion of the nobles in criminal causes was restrained
and the authority of the court of yufticiary extend
ed. The crown, in this particular, gaining insen.
sibly upon the nobles, recovered more ample autho.
rity; and the King, whose jurifdition once refem.
bled that of a Baron, rather than that of a fove.
reign , came more and more to be confidered

* The most perfec idea of the feudal fyflem of governmet:

may be attained by attending to the ltate of Germany, and
the hiflory of France. In the former, the feudal inftitutio
still fubfilt with great vigour; and though altogether abolilhe
in the latter, the public records have been so carefully prefen'ee
that the French lawyers and antiquaries have been enabled, wvi
more certainty and prccifion, than those of any ether countryi
Europe, to trace its rife, its progrcfs, and revolutions. In Ge
many. every principality may be con!idered as a f.ef. and allit
great Princes as v-asals, holding of th- Empror. They pore.
all the feudal privileges; their fiefs are perpc:ual; theirju:i
dicjions within their own territories, feparale and extensive;
the great ofices of the empire arc all hereditar., and annen.c
to particular families. At the fame time, the Emperor retail
many of the prerogatives of the feudal monarchs. Like the=]
his claims and pretensions are innumerable, and his pover fma"l
his jurifdidicn wi-hin his own demesnes, or hereditary countric
is compleat ; beyond the bo.nds of t'-efc it is a'mos notbini
And so rermanen: are fedali principles, that aithough the fe
dal system be overturned in almot every particular Itate in Gei
many, and although its Princes have all become absolute, th
origina! feudal confituz icn of the empire liil remnain:, and ide:
peculiar to that form of governmen:, dirct all its operation,
and determine the rights of all its Plince=. Our obfervatiorl
with regard to the limi:ed jurifdicion of Kings under the fe.
dal governments, are greatly illuit-ated by what happenedi
France. The fcebLenefs and dotage of the descendants of Cha
lemiai r,e crcomLagesd the PeerS to usurp an independent juriidi

tie;

,e head of the community, and the supreme dif- Book I.
enler of juflice to his people. These acquisitions t r

our Kings, however, though comparatively

reat, were in reality inconsiderable; and notwith-
anding all their efforts, many of the separate ju-
ifdiions possessed by the nobles remained in great
gour; and their final abolition was reserved to a
ftant and more happy period.

BUT betides these methods of defending their pre- Eac of our
gative, and humbling the aristocracy, which may ingse

n 0 '' "'"./ pursued

confidered as common to all our Princes, we some plan
all find, by taking a review of their reigns, that nling the
most every one of our Kings, from Robert Bruce nobles.
James V. had formed some particular fyitem for
pressing the authority of the nobles, which was
e object both of their jealousy and terror. This
nduEt of our monarchs, if we reft satisfied with
e accounts of their hittorians, must be confidered
flowing entirely from their resentment against
articular noblemen ; and all their attempts to hum-
Ie them, must be viewed as the rallies of private
ffion, not as the consequences of any general

on. Nothing remained in the hands of the crown; all was
z d by them. When Hugh Capet arcendcd the throne, A. D.
7. he kept pofTeftion of his private patrimony the Comt6 of
Paris, and all the jurifdidton, which the Kings his successors
crcifcd for fGmne time, was within its territories. There were
1) four towns in France, where he could eftablilh Grands
illis, or royal judges; all the other lands, towns, and bail-
ges belonged to the nobles. The methods to which the French
onarchs had recourse for extending their jurifdiclion were
adlv iinilar to those employed by our Princes. Henaut's
brl-cg, . 6 1, &c. De L'Efprit des Loix, Liv. Mo. ch. 20, &c.

plan

BooK I. plan of policy. But, though some of their a&ior
*_-~- may be imputed to those passions, though the diffe|

rent genius of the men, the temper of the times
and the state of the nation necessarily occa{ione|
great variety in their schemes, yet, without bein
chargeable with excessive refinement, we may as

This pro-- firm that their end was uniformly the fame. An
ed by a re-
iew oft the project of reducing the power of the ariftocra
events in Sometimes avowed, and pursued with vigour; sorn
rcigns. times concealed, or seemingly suspended was nev

altogether abandoned.

Robert No Prince was ever more indebted to his nobi
Br=. than Robert Bruce. Their valour conquered

kingdom, and placed him on the throne. His gr
titude and generosity bestowed on them the lands!
the vanquished. Property has seldom undergoo
greater or more sudden revolutions, than those}
which it was Iubje&, at that time, in Scotland
Edward I. having forfeited the estates of molt l
the ancient Scottish Barons, granted them to h
English fubjeAs. These were expelled by the Scot
and their lands seized by new masters. Amidi
such rapid changes, confufon was unavoidabl
and many pofeffed their lands by titles extremel
defective. During one of those truces between t
two nations, occasioned rather by their being weal
of war, than desirous of peace, Robert formedi
scheme for checking the growing power and weald
of the nobles. He summoned them to appear, a2
to shew by'whar rights they held their lands. The
assembled accordingly, and the question being pa
they started up, at once, and drew their fworl

"G B

( By these, said they, we acquired our lands, and BooK I.
it th efe we 'will defend them." The King, in- . -"
imidated by their boldness, prudently dropt the
rojeFt. But so deeply did they resent this attack
pon their order, that notwithstanding Robert's po-
|ular and splendid virtues, it occasioned a danger-
us conspiracy against his life.

DAVID his son, at first an exile in France, after- David II.
ards a prisoner in England, and involved in con-
inual war with Edward III. had not leisure to at-
nd to the internal police of his kingdom, or to
hink of retrenching the privileges of the nobility.

OUR historians have been more careful to relate Rob=,t t,
e military, than the civil tranfations of the reign
f Robert II. Skirminfies and inroads of little con-
lqucnce, they describe minutely, but with regard
o every thing that happened, during several years
f tranquillity, they are altogether silent.

TMEi feeble adminifr-ation of Robert III. mult Robert II!t
Ikcwie be pafied over slightly. A Prince, of a
ean genius, and of a frail and sickly conflitution,
'as no fit person to enter the lifts with ative and
atial barons, or to attempt wresting from them
ny of their rights.

I THE civil transaCtions in Scotland are better j,,,,
nown since the beginning of the reign of James I.
nd a compleat series of our laws supplies the de-
Les of our historians. The English made tbme
mends for their injuflice in detaining that Prince a

pri-

BOOK I. prifoener, by their generous care of his education

_'VV Dt:ring his long residence in Eng'and, he had an

opportunity of obserVing the feudal system in a more
advanced state, and refined from many of the in.
perfections which fti l adhered to it, in his own
kingdom. He saw there nobles great, but not in-
dependent; a King powerful, though far from ab
solute ; he saw a regular adminiltration of govern.
ment; wile laws enated ; and a nation flourifhin
and happy, because all ranks of men were accuf
tomed to obey them. Full of these ideas, he re
turned into his native country, which presented
him a very different scene. The royal authority
never great, was now contemptible, by havingbeel
so long delegated to regents. The ancient patni
mony, and revenues of the crown, were almo
total alienated. During his long absence, th
name of a King was little known, and less regard.
ed. The licence of many years had rendered tht
nobles independent. Univerlal anarchy prevailed
The weak v. ere exposed to the rapine and oppref
sion of the firong. In every corner some barbarou
chieftain ruled at pleasure, and neither feared thd
King, nor pitied the people *.

JAM.ES was too wife a Prince to employ ope
force to correct such inveterate evils. Neither tc

A cotemporar . Ionkifh v;-iZer defcribcs t;hef calamidi

ve-v iee'r: l., n l.i r!'de Latin. In diebus illis, non erat
i- i. : .' .'-:-_'ibe: po:°::iorumn jun:orem oppreflit; et totua

-- '- .-, latrocinium ; honmicidia, depradationes, i

c;'..:- . 't; '...- : . :niaeficia remanferunt impunita ; et juftitia r'
i. .

: -.-.: : . o
.'nos reg'i exu'.;'it. Chartular. Morav. api

- ? ....

mne"]

men, nor the times would have born it. He ap- BooK I
plied the gentler, and less offensive remedy of laws --'".
and statutes. In a parliament held immediately
after his rerurn, he gained the confidence of his
people, by many wife laws, tending visibly to re-
elablifh order, tranquillity and jultice in the king-
idot. But, at the fame time, that he endeavoured
o secure these blessings to his fubjeEts, he disco-
ered his intention to recover those poffefions of
which the crown had been unjustly bereaved; and
or that purpoe obtained an a& by which he was
ipowered to summon those, who had obtained
rown lands during the three last reigns, to produce
he rights by which they held them -. As this
ature threatened the property of the nobles, ano-
her which passed in a subsequent parliament, aimed
dreadful blow at their power. By it, the leagues
nd combinations, which we have already described,
nd which rendered the nobles so formidable to
e crown, were declared unlawful -. Encouraged
y this success in the beginning of his enterprize,
ames's next f-ep was fill bolder and more decisive.
uring the fitting of parliament, he seized at once,
is cousin Murdo Duke of Albany, and his sons;
he Earls of Douglas, Lennox, Angus, March,
nd above twenty other Peers and Barons of prime
ank. To all of them, however, he was immedi-
tely reconciled, except to Albany, and his sons,
nd Lennox. These were tried by their Peers, and
cndemned; for what crime is now unknown.
[heir execution struck the whole order with terror,
nd their forfeiture added vast pofifnions to the

Ac. 9 . P. 1424. 3. . 4.
VTOL. I. F. crown.

BooK I. crown. He seized, likewise, the earldoms of Bu.
WV.\ chan and Strathern, upon different pretexts; and

that of Mar fell to him by inheritance. The pati-
ence and inactivity of the nobles, while the King
was proceeding so rapidly towards aggrandizing the
crown, are amazing. The only obftrution he met
with was from a flight insurrection headed by thb
Duke of Albany's youngest son, and that was easily
fupp.refed. The splendor and presence of a King
to which the great men had been long unaccustomed,
inspired reverence: James was a Prince of great
abilities, and conducRed his operations with much
prudence. He was in friendship with England,
and clof-ly allied with tie French King: He wa
adored by the people, who enjoyed unusual fecuriy
and happineis under his administration: And all
his acquisitions, however fatal to the body of the
nobles, had been gained by attacks upon ihdividu.
als; were obtained by decisions of law; and being
founded on circumilances peculiar to the person5
who fuffcred, might excite murmurs and apprehen.
lions, but afforded no colourable pretext for a ge.
neral rebellion. It was not io with the next artempr
which the King made. Encouraged by the facility
with which he had hitherto advanced, he venturei
upon a measure that irritated the whole bcdy of the
nobil:ty, and which the event thews either to havi
been entered into with too much precipitancy, 0i
to have been carrikd on with too much violence
The father of George Dunbar Earl of March hac
taken arms against Robert III. the King's father
but t'at crime had been pardoned, and his land
reflorcd by Robert! Duke of Albarn. James, or

pre

pretext that the regent had exceeded his power, and BooK T.
tha t i was the prerogative of the King alone to par- "'
don treason, or to alienate lands annexed to the
rown, obtained a sentence declaring the pardon to
: void, and depriving Dunbar of the earldom.
flany of the great men held lands by no other right
han whiat they derived from grants of the twoDukes
f Albany. Such a decision, though they had rca-
n to expect it in consequence of the statute which
c King had obtained, occasioned a general alarm.
loughl Dunbar was, at prefenr, the only sufferer,
e precedent might be extended, and their titles to
Ifelfions, which they confidered as the rewards of
cir valour, might be fubjested to the review of
§urts of law, whose forms of proceeding, andju-
Sfdicion, were in a martial age little known, and

rremely odious. Terror and dilcontent spread
fIt upon this discovery of the King's intentions;
e common danger called on the whole order to
iite, and to make one bold sand, before they were

'lipped fucceflively of their acquisitions, and re-
iIced to a state of poverty and insignificance. The

valence of these sentiments among the nobles
couraged a few desperate men, the friends or fol-
'ers of those who had been the chief sufferers
der the King's administration, to form a confpi-
y againcf his life. The firfi uncertain intelligence
this was brought him, while he lay in his camp
ore Roxburgh castle. He durst not confide in
Xles, to whom he had given so many causes of

ft, but instantly dismissed them and their vas-
and retiring to a monastery near Perth, was
I after murdered there, in the most cruel man-

t E 7 ner.

BOOK I. ner. All our historians mention, with aftonifth
'->-v ' ment, this circumstance of the King's difbandin

his army, at a time, when it was so necessary so
his preservation. A King, fay they, furroundd
with his Barons, is secure from secret treason, ani
may defy open rebellion. But those very Barn
were the persons whom he chiefly dreaded; and
is evident, from this review of his adminiftratio
that he had greater reason to apprehend danger, th
to expect defence, from their hands. It was
misfortune of James, that his maxims and ma
ners were too refined for the age in which he live
Happy! had he reigned in a kingdom moreci y
lized; his love of peace, of justice, and of el
gance, would have rendered his schemes fuccefsfil
and instead of perishing because he had attempt
too much, a grateful people would have applaud
and seconded his efforts to reform and to impro'
them.
James II CRICHTON, the molt able man of those, i

had the direction of affairs during the minorit
James II. had been the minister of James 1.
well acquainted with his resolution of humblingl
nobility. He did not relinquish the design,
he endeavoured to inspire his pupil with the f2
sentiments. But what James had attempted to
fee slowly, and by legal means, his son and Cr
ton pursued with the impetuosity natural to SO
men, and with the fierceness peculiar to that l
*William the sixth Earl of Douglas was the
victim to their barbarous policy. That young
bleman (as we have already observed) content

the authority of an infalt prince, almost openly re- BooK I.
nounced his allegiance, and aspired to independence. VJ
5Crichton, too high-fpirited to bear such an insult,

but too weak to curb or to bring to justice so pow-
erful an offender, decoyed him by many promises
o an interview in the caltle of Edinburgh, and,
otwithfianding these, murdered both him and his
rother. Crichton, however, gained little by this
sct of treachery, which rendered him universally
cdious. William the eighth Earl of Douglas was
o less powerful, and no less formidable to the
rown. By forming the league which we already
entioned with the Earl of Crawfurd and other
arons, he had united against his Sovereign almost
one half of his kingdom. But his credulity led
im into the fame snare, which had been fatal to
he former Earl. Relying on the King's promises,
who had now attained to the years of manhood,
nd having obtained a safe conduct under the great
eal, he ventured to meet him in Stirling castle.
James urged him to difiolve that dangerous confe-
deracy into which he had entered; the Earl obfti-
nately refused; " If you will not," said the en-
aged monarch, drawing his dagger, " this shall ;"
and flabbed him to the heart. An action so un-
worthy of a King filled the nation with aftoniffiment,
and with horror. The Earl's vassals ran to arms
with the utmost fury, and dragging the safe con-
duf, which the King had granted and violated, at
a horle's tail, they marched towards Stirling, burnt
the town, and threatened to besiege the castle. An
accommodation ensued, on what terms is not known.

E 3 But

BooK I. But the King's jealousy, and the new Earl's power
bS W< and refeatment, prevented it from being of long

continuance. Both took the field, at the head of
their armies, ard met near Abercorn. That of the
Earl, composed chiefly of borderers, was far fupe.
rior to the King's both in number, and in valour;
and a single battle muff, in all probability, have
decided whether the house of Stewart or of Douglas
was henceforth to poffeis the throne of Scotland.
Bu:, while his troops impatiently expeted the fig
nal to engage, the Earl ordered them to retire to
their camp, and Sir James Hamilton of Cadyow,
the person in whom he placed the greatest confidence,
convinced of his want of genius to improve an op-
Fprt:nity, or of his want of courage to seize a
crown, deserted him that very night. This exam-
ple was followed by many; and the Earl, despised,
or forsaken by all, was soon driven out of the king-
dom, and obliged to depend for his subsistence, on
the friendship of the King of England. The ruin
of th's great family, which had so long rivalled
and overawed the crown, and the terror with which
fbch an example of unficcefsful ambition filled the
*nobles, secured the King, for some time, from op-
pofirion; and the royal authority remained uncon-
trouled and almost absolute. James did not susser
this favourable interval to pass unimproved he
procured the content of parliament to laws more
advantageous to the prerogative, and more fubver-
five of the privileges of the aristocracy, than were
ever cloained by any former or subsequent monarch
of Scotland.

BY

BY one of there, not only all the vast possessions of BOOK I.

the Earl of Douglas were annexed to the crown, but --
il prior and future alienations of crown lands were
eclared to be void, and the King was impowered to
eize them at pleasure, without any process or form
f law, and oblige the poiTeffors to refund what-
Yer they had received from them *. A dreadful
|nitrument of oppression in the hands of a Prince.

| ANOTHER law prohibited the wardenship of the
narches to be granted hereditarily; restrained, in
?everal instances, the jurisdiction of that office; and
xtended the authority of the King's courts t.

BY a third, it was enacted that no Rega!ity, or
xclufive right of adminiftring justice within a man's
|wn lands, should be granted in time to come, with-
iut the content of parliament :, a condition, which
rnplied almost an express prohibition. Those no-
les who already possessed that great privilege, would
aturally be follicitous to prevent it from becoming
:ommon, by being bestowed on many. Those,
Who had not themselves attained it, would envy
others the acquisition of such a flattering diftinStion;
nd both would concur in rejecting the claims of
Sew pretenders.

B- a fourth act, all new grants of hereditary of-
ices were prohibited, and those obtained since the
eath of the last King were revoked §.

i
ASq. pI. P. I45. t Ibid. At. 4z. 1 Ibid. Al. 43.

E 4 EACH

BooK I. EACH of these flatutes undermined some of the

- great pillars, on which the power of the aristocracy

refted. During the remainder of his reign, this
Pr:nce purlued the plan which he had begun, with
the utmost viigour; and had not a sudden death,
occasioned by the splinter of a cannon which burl
near him at the siege of Roxburgh, prevented his
progress, he wanted neither genius nor courage to
perfect it: an, S'cotland mig't, in all probali-
lity, have been the first kingdom in Europe, whici
would have seen the subversion of the feudal
fy fcm.
.i jT .A lES III. discovered no leTs eagerness than his

father or grandfather to humble the nobility; but
far inferior to either of them in abilities and address,
he adopted a plan extremely impolitic, and his
reign was disastrous, as well as his end tragical.
Under the feudal governments, the nobles were
not only the King's ministers, and possessed of all
the great offces of power or of trust 3 they were,
likewise, his companions and favourites, and scarce
any but them approached his person, or were en.
titled to his regard. But James, who both feared
and hated his nobles, kept them at an unusual dif.
tan: e, and bestowed every mark of confidence and
agfe t on upon a few mean persons, of profeffioin
f) dishonourable, as ought to have rendered then
unworthy of his pretence. Shut up with these, is
his cafile of Stirling, he seldom appeared in public
ani amluf:d himself with architreure, music, anc
o:-er nrtz, which were then little esteemed. Thi
nob.es cih;:Ji t:!e power and favour of these mini

ons

ons, with indignation. Even the sanguinary mea- BOOK I.
'ures of his father provoked them less than his -'V"'
legleCt Individuals alone suffered by the former;
by the latter, every man thought himself injured,
because all were contemned. Their discontent was

tnuch heightened by the King's recalling all rights
:o crown lands, hereditary offices, regalities, and
very other concefflon, which was detrimental to
his prerogative, and which had been extorted during
is minority. Combinations among themselves,
ecret intrigues with England, and all the usual
eparlatives for civil war, were the effets of their
efcntment. Alexander Duke of Albany, and John
avl of Mar, the King's brothers, two young men
f turbulent and ambitious spirits, and incensed
gainft James, who treated them with the fame
oldness as he did the other great men, entered
ceply into all their cabals. The King dete&ed
heir designs, before they were ripe for execution,
nd seizing his two brothers, committed the Duke
f Albany to Edinburgh castle.- The Earl of Mar
aving remonstrated with too much boldness against
ihe King's conduct, was murdered, if we may be-
ieve our hiCtorians, by his command. Albany,
apprchlenfive of the fame fate, made his escape out
of the calfle, and fled into France. Concern for the
King's honour, or indignation at his measures, were
perhaps the motives, which first induced him to
join the malecontents. But James's attachment to
'avourites rendering him every day more odious to
the nobles, the prospeCt of the advantages which
might be derived from their general difaffeAion,
added to the resentment which he felt on account

of

Eoo: I. of his brother's death, and his own injuries, soon
"V% " inspired Albanv with more ambitious and criminal

thoughts. He concluded a treaty with Edward IV
of England, in which he assumed the name ol
Alexander King of Scots, and in return for the
afiftance which was promised him towards dethron.
ing his brcther, he bound himself, so soon as he
was put in possession cf the kingdom, to swear
eal.l: and to do homage to the English monarch,
to renounce the ancient alliance with France, to
contract a new one with England, and to iurrenderi
some of the firongefl castles, and most valuabl
counties in Scotland . That aid, which the Duke
lb bafily purchased at the price of his own honourI
and the independence of his country, was pundh.
ally granted him, and the Duke of Gloucel!er with
a powerful army conduted him towards Scotland,
The danger of a foreign invasion obliged James to
impiore the afliftance of thoft nobles whom he had
3o long treated with contempt. Some of them were
in close confederacy with the Duke of Albany, and
approved of all his pretenfrons. Others were im
Fatient for any event, which would restore their or-
der to its ancient pre-eminence. They took the
si-ld, however, at the head of a powerful armyof
their followers, but with a stronger disposition to
redrers their own grievances, than to annoy the erne
my; and with a fixed resolution of punishing those
rrmtions, whose insolence they could no longer to.
lerate. This resolution they executed, in the carrm
near Lawder, with a military dispatch and rigour

' Abercr. Mart. Atch. v. ii. 443.

Hav

laving previously concerted their plan, the Earls Boor-'I.
f Angus, Huntly, Lenox, followed by almost all -V
he Barons of chief note in the army, forcibly en-
:red the apartment of their Sovereign, seized all
is favourites, except one Ramsay, whom they
ould not tear from the King, in whole arms he
Dok fhelrer, and without any form of trial, hanged
hem instantly over a bridge. Among the most
emrarkable of those who had engrofTed the King's
ffetion, were Cochran a mason, Hommil a taylor,
~eonard a smith, Rogers a musician, and Torfifan
fencing-mafter. So despicable a retinue discovers
e capricioufnlefs of James's charaner, and accounts
or the indignation of the nobles, when they be-
|ed the favour, due to them, bestowed on such un-
'orthy objects.

JAMIES had no reason to confide in an army so
Itte under his command, and difiiffing it, Ihut
im flf up in the cattle of Edinburgh. After va-
ous intrigues, Albany's lands and honours were
length reltored to him, and lie seemed even to
iave rcgaincd his brother's favour, by tome impor-

int fervics. But their friendliip was not of long
luration. James abandoned himrflf, once more,
the guidance of favourites ; and the fate of thole
ho had i;!ffcred at Lawder, did not deter others,
orm courting that dangerous preecminence. Al-
ny, on pretext that an attempt had been made to
ke away his life by pcifon, fled from court, and
tiring to his castle of Dunbar, drew thither a
:ter number of Barons than attended on the
ing lhnllfelI. At the fame time, he renewed his

former

BOOK I. former confederacy with Edward ; the Earl of An.

Lt/,/ gus openly negotiated that infamous treaty; other

Barons were ready to concur with it; and if the
sudden death of Edward had not prevented Alba.
ny's receiving any aid from England, the crown of
Scotland would probably have been the reward of
this unworthy combination with the enemies of his
country. But, inflead of any hopes of reigning in
Scotland, he found, upon the death of Edward
that he could not reside there in safety, and flying
first to England, and then to France, he seems from
that time to have taken no part in the affairs ofhis
native country. Emboldened by his retreat, the
King and his Miniflers multiplied the insults whic
they offered to the nobility. A standing guard,
thing unknown under the feudal governments, and
inconsistent with the familiarity and confidenc
with which monarchs then lived amidst their nobles
was raised for the King's defence, and the comman
of it given to Ramsay, lately created Earl of Both
well, the fame person who had so narrowly efcapd
when his companions were put to death at Lawdet
And, as if this precaution had not been sufficient,
a proclamation was issued forbidding any perfonto
appear in arms within the precincts of the court,
which, at a time, when no man of rank left hi
own house without a numerous retinue of arnm
followers, was, in effect, debarring the.nobles from
all access to the King. James, at the fame time
bccan:e fonder of retirement than ever; and funi
in inolence, or fuperflition, or attentive only t

Fcr:elias, 3S.:

amuf

amusements, devolved his whole authority upon his BOOK I.
favourites. So many injuries provoked the most '-
considerable nobles to take arms, and having per-
fuaded or obliged the Duke of Rothfay, the King's
eldest son, a youth of fifteen, to set himself at
their head, they openly declared their intention of
depriving James of a crown, of which he had dif-
covered himself to be so unworthy. Rouzed by
this danger, the King quitted his retirement, took
the field, and encountred them near Bannockburn;
but the valour of the Borderers, of whom the army
of the malecontents was chiefly composed, soon
put his troops to flight, and he himself was slain
in the pursuit. Suspicion, indolence, immoderate
attachment to favourites, and all the vices of a fee-
ble mind, are visible in his whole conduct; but the
character of a cruel and unrelenting tyrant seems
to be unjustly affixed to him by our historians.
His neglect of the nobles irritated, but did not
weaken them; and their discontent, the immoderate
ambition of his two brothers, and their unnatural
confederacies with England, were sufficient to have
disturbed a more vigorous administration, and to
have rendered a prince of superior talents un-
happy.

THE indignation, which many persons of rank

expressed against the conduct of the conspirators, to-
gether with the terror of the sentence of excommu-
nication which the Pope pronounced against them,
obliged them to use their victory with great mode-
ration and humanity. And being conscious how
dletertable the crime of imbruing their hands in the

blood

BooK I. former confederacy with Edward; the Earl of An.

"V", gus openly negotiated that infamous treaty; other

Barons were ready to concur with it; and if the
sudden death of Edward had not prevented Alba.
ny's receiving any aid from England, the crown of
Scotland would probably have been the reward of
this unworthy combination with the enemies of his
country. But, instead of any hopes of reigning in
Scotland, he found, upon the death of Edward,
that he could not reside there in safety, and flying
first to England, and then to France, he seems from
that time to have taken no part in the affairs ofhi
native country. Emboldened by his retreat, tht
King and his Miniflers multiplied the insults whic
they offered to the nobility. A standing guard,
thing unknown under the feudal governments, an,
inconsistent with the familiarity and confidenc
with which monarchs then lived amidst their nobler
was raised for the King's defence, and the command
of it given to Ramsay, lately created Earl of Both.
well, the fame person who had so narrowly escaped
when his companions were put to death at Lawda
And, as if this precaution had not been sufficient
a proclamation was issued forbidding any person ti
appear in arms within the precincts of the court'
which, at a time, when no man of rank left hi
own house without a numerous retinue of arrne
followers, was, in effect, debarring the.nobles fror
all access to the King. James, at the fame tirn
bccan.e fonder of retirement than ever; and fun
in indolence, or fuprftrition, or attentive only t

e rFc.:.c.i-s, Sia.

arnu~

amusements, devolved his whole authority upon his BOOK I.
favourites. So many injuries provoked the most J
considerable nobles to take arms, and having per-
fiaded or obliged the Duke of Rothfay, the King's
eldest son, a youth of fifteen, to set himself at
their head, they openly declared their intention of
depriving James of a crown, of which he had dif-
covered himself to be so unworthy. Rouzed by
this danger, the King quitted his retirement, took
the field, and encountred them near Bannockburn;
but the valour of the Borderers, of whom the army
of the malecontents was chiefly composed, soon
put his troops to flight, and he himself was slain
in the pursuit. Suspicion, indolence, immoderate
attachment to favourites, and all the vices of a fee-
ble mind, are visible in his whole conduEt; but the
charaser of a cruel and unrelenting tyrant seems
to be unjustly affixed to him by our historians.
His neglet of the nobles irritated, but did not
weaken them ; and their discontent, the immoderate
ambition of his two brothers, and their unnatural
confederacies with England, were sufficient to have
disturbed a more vigorous administration, and to
have rendered a prince of superior talents un-
happy.

THE indignation, which many persons of rank

exprefled against the conduEt of the conspirators, to-
gether with the terror of the sentence of excommu-
nication which the Pope pronounced againrf them,
obliged them to use their victory with great mode-
ration and humanity. And being conscious how
dceteflable the crime of imbruing their hands in the

blood

BOOK I. blood of their Sovereign appeared, they endeavour.
--, ed to regain the good opinion of their countrymen

and to attone for their treatment of the father, be(
j3rr.e iv. their loyalty and duty towards the son. They pa.

ced him intlantiv on the throne, and the whole king.
dom loon united in acknowledging his authority.

JAM.ES IV. w.as naturally generous and brave; h

felt, in an high degree, all the passions which ani.
mate a young and noble mind. He loved magni.
ficence, he delighted in war, and was eager to ob-
tain fame. During his reign, the ancient and here
ditary enmity between the King and nobles seems
aimofi entirely to have ceased. He envied not thei;
splendor, becaufc it contributed to the ornament ci
his cou. t; nor did he dread their power, which he
confidered as the security of his kingdom, not as an
object of terror to himself. This confidence, on his
part, met with the proper return of duty and as-
fetion, on theirs; and, in his war with England,
he experienced how much a King, beloved by his
nobles, is able to perform. Though the ardour of
his courage, and the spirit of chivalry, rather than
the prospect of an) national advantage, were the
motives of that expedition; such was the zeal of his
subjects for the King's glory, that he was followed
by as gallant an army. as ever any of his anceflors
had led upon English ground. But tho' James
himfclf formed no scheme dangerous or detrimen-
tal to the aristocracy, his reign was diftinguified by
an event, extremely fatal to it; and one accidental
blow humbled it more than all the premediated at-
tacks of preceding Kings. In the rash and unfor-

6 tunate

:unate battle of Flowden, a brave nobility chose ra- BOOK I.
:her to die, than to delert their Sovereign. Twelve
Karls, thirteen Lords, five eldelt ftns of noblemen,
tnd an incredible number of barons, fell with the
King . The whole body of the nobles, long and
i[Lfibly, felt this dilfarer ; and if a Prince of full

!,e had then ascended the throne, their conflerna-

!ion and feebleness would have afforded him advan-
!ges, which no former monarch ever poffefled.

BUT James V. who fSucceeded his father, was an James v;
ant of a year old ; and though the office of re-
ewt was conferred on the Duke of Albany, a man
f genius and enterprize, a native of France, and
ccuftomed to a government where the power of the
ing was already great; though he made many
old attempts to extend the royal authority ; though
be put to death Lord Home, and banished the Earl
If Angus, the two noblemen of greatest influence in
he kingdom, the aristocracy loft no ground under
iis administration. A stranger to the manners, the
tvw, and the language of the people whom he was
alled to rule, he ated, on some occasions, rather
ke a Viceroy of the French King, than the gover-
or of Scotland ; but the nobles asserted their own
rivileges, and contended for the interest of their
untry, with a boldness, which convinced him of
Scir independence, and of the impotence of his own
uthority. After several unsuccessful struggles, he
oluntarily retired to France, and the King, being
en in his thirteenth year, the nobles agreed that

* Abr. ii. 540.

he

BOOK I. he mhould assume the government, and that eighl

persons should be appointed to attend him by turni
and to advise and aflift him in the adminiftrationo
public affairs. The earl of Angus, who was one.
that number, did not long remain satisfied with sue
divided power. He gained some of his colleague
removed others, and intimidated the reft. Whe
the term of his attendance expired, he fill retaine
authority, to which all were obliged to submit,
cause none of them was in a condition to dispute'
The affection of the young King was the only thi:
wanting, to fix and perpetuate his power. But
active and high spirited Prince Submitted, with gri
impatience, to the refiraint, in which he was ke:
It ill suited his years, or disposition, to be confin
as a prisoner, within his own palace; to be treati
with no refpedt; and to be deprived of all powa
He could not, on some occasions, conceal his is
dignation and resentment. Angus foresaw thath
had much to dread from there, and as he couldn
gain the King's heart, he resolved to make sure';
his person. James was continually surrounded b
the Earl's spies and confidents; many eyes watche
all his motions, and observed every flep he too
But the King's eagerness to obtain liberty eludeda
their vigilance. He escaped from Falkland, an
fled to the castle of Stirling, the residence of-t
Queen his mother, and the only place of ftreng
in the kingdom which was not in the hand of'tl
Douglases. The nobles, of whom some were infli
enced by their hatred to Angus, and others byth!
respect for the King, crowded to Stirling, and h
court was soon filled with persons of the greateftd

7 Eintio

tinstion. The Earl, though afFoniifed at this on- BooK I.
expecaed revolution, rcfolv(d, at first, to n:.ake one
bold pufhl for recoveiing his authljr'tv. 1,b march-
ing to Stirling at the head of his so'lo v-s ; ut he
av.nnted either courage, or llrength to execute this
re!bolution. In a pailiam'.-nt held cbon afctr, le and
his adherents were attaintd, and after escaping from
jmany dangers, and enduring much miieiry, he was
at length obliged to fly into England for refbge.

JAMIr had now not only the name, but, tlhoutgh

extremely young, the full authority of a King. He
was inferior to no Prince of that age in gracefilnefs
of pt:rfon, or in vigour of mind. His undler; and-
ing was good, and his heart warm ; the sorner
capable of great improvement, and the latter sis-
ceptible of the best impfl-fions. But according to
the usual fate of Princcs who are called to the throne
in their infancy, his education had been neglected.
His private preceptors were more ready to flatter,
than to inflruct him. It was the interest of those
who governed the kingdom, to prevent him fronn
knowing too much. And the Earl of .'.ngus, in
order to divert him from business, gave him an early
tafe for such pleasures, as afterwards occupied and
engrossed him more than became a King. Accord-
ingly, we discover in James all the features of a
grat, but uncultivated spirit. On the one hand,
violent paflions, implacable resentment, an immo-
derate desire of power, and the utnmof! rage at dif-
appointment. On the other, love to his people,
zeal for the punishment of private oi'prcfibrs, con-

'VoiL, I. i' fidcence

BooK I. fidence in his favourites, and the most engaging

openn.fs and affability of behaviour.

\WHAT he himself had surfered from the exor.

bitant power of the nobles led him early to imitate
his predecefTors, in their attempts to humble them.
The plan he formed for that purpose was more
profound, more systematic,. and pursued with great.
er constancy and fteddinefs, than that of any of
his ancestors. And the influence of the events
in his reign upon those of the subsequent period,
render it necessary to explain his conduct, at greater
length, and to enter into a more minute detail oi
his actions. He had penetration enough to disco.
ver those defects in the schemes, adopted by former
Kings, which occasioned their miscarriage. The
example of James I. had taught him, that wife laws
operate slowly on a rude people, and that the fierce
spirit of the ieudal nobles was not to be subdued b
these alone. The effects of the violent measures ot
lames II. convinced him, that the oppreficon of one
great family is apt either to excite the suspicion and
refenrment of the other nobles, or to enrich with is
spoils some new family, which would loon adopt
the Iamne sentiments, and become equally formidable
to the crown. He saw, from the fatal end of
James III. that neglect was still more intolerable to
the nobles than opprefion, and that the minifiryof
new men and favourites was both dilhonourable, and
dangerous to a Prince. At the fame time, he felt
that the authority of the crown was not sufficient to
counterbclance the power of the ariflocracy, and
that without some new acceiion of strength, h'

8 could

Coulld expec no better success in the struggle than his BooK I.
ancestors. In this extremity, he applied himself to '
the clergy, hoping that they would both relish his
plan, and concur, with all their influence, in ena-
bling him to put it in execution. Under the feudal
government, the church being reckoned a third
elate, had its representatives in parliament; the
number of thefi was considerable, and they possessed
great influence in that assembly.' The superstition
of former kings, and the zeal of an ignorant age,
had beltowed upon ecclefiaflics, a great proportion
f the national wealth, and the authority which
hey acquired by the reverence of the people, was
iperior even to that which they derived from their
iches. This powerful body, however, depended
ntirely on the crown. The Popes, notwithflanding
heir attention to extend their usurpations, had ne-
lecded Scotland as a distant and poor kingdom, and
ermitted its kings to exercise powers, which they
ifputed with more considerable princes. The Scor-
ifh monarchs had the sole right of nomination to
acant bifhopricks and abbeys *; and James natu-
illy concluded, that men who expeted preferment
rom his favour, would be willing to merit it, by
|romoting his designs. Happily for him, the nobles
lad not yet recovered the blow which fell on their
)rder at Flowden, and if we may judge either from
heir condu&t, or from the character given of them
y Sir Ralph Sadler the English envoy in Scotland,
hey were men of little genius, of no experience in

Cufinefs, and incapable of acting either with una-
* Epifl. Reg Scot. I. 197, &c. Act. 125. P. 1540.

I F 2 nimity,

BooK 1. nimitv, or with vigour. Many of the clergy, c
'V- ' thel other hand, were distinguished by their gre

abilities, and no lels by their ambition. Varioi
causes of dilguft had arisen between them and ti
nobles, who defpiied their charaaer, and envi
their power, or their wealth. By acting in conce
with the kin-, they not only gratified him, b
avenged themlelves, and hoped to aggrandise thi
own order, by deprefYng those, who were their ft
rivals. Secure of so powerful a concurrence, Jan
ventured to proceed with greater boldness. Int
firfc heat of refLntment, he had driven the Earl
Angus out of the kingdom; and sensible that a p
son, io far superior to the other nobles in abilit!
might create many obstacles, which would reta
or render ineffectual all his schemes, he folem
swore, that he would never permit him to ret,
ir.to Scotland, and, notwithstanding the repea
solicitations of the king of England, he adhered
his vow with unrelenting obstinacy. He then
ceeded to repair the 'ortifications of Edinburgh,S
ling, and other castles, and to fill his magaz
\with armls a.-d arnmunition. Having taken t
p-recau-;ons by way of defence, he began to t
the nrbility with the utmost coldness and refe
Thocf cfies, which they were apt, from long
feiTon, to confrder as appropriated to their or
-.'r r novw b2owed on ccclefiaftics, who alone
sefied th e King's ear, and together with a few gei
men cf inrc:ior rank, to whom he had comrn
cat.ii :.i hclermes, were entru'red with the man
rmen. oi all public atairs. These ministers
chcfin with j'lc'gment ; and Cardinal Beatoun,

s[on became the mos eminent among them, was a BooK I.
man of superior genius. They served the King with '
fidelity, they carried on his measures with vigour,
ivith reputation, and with success. James no longer
oncealed his contempt of the nobles, and suffered
ho epportunity of mortifying them to escape. Slight
fti;.nces were aggravated into real crimes, and pu.
sin-ccl with severity. Everyaccufation against per-
oIls of rank was heard with pleasure, every appear-
unce of guilt was examined with rigour, and every
rial proved fatal to those who were accused: the
aninling IHepburn Earl of Bothwell for reasons ex-
erinely frivolous, the beheading the Master of
'orbcs without iufficient evidence of his guilt, and
he condemning Lady Glamis, a sifter ofthe Earl
f Angus, to be burnt for the crime of witchcraft,

wf wlich even that credulous age believed her inno-
(cnt, are monuments both of the King's hatred of
:hc nobility, of the severity of his government, and
If the firetches he made towards aloblute power.
y tlhe: a5ns of authority, he tried the spirit of the
ob!cs, and how mtch they were willing to bear.
'heir patience increased his contempt for them, and
iic(i to the ardour and boldness with which he
?I'lIcdl his plan. Meanwhile they observed the
ndlcncy of his fchnemics with concern, and with re-
[iKecllnt; but the King's Ilgacity, the vigilance of
is mIllilicrs, and the want of a proper leader, made
i (lingcrus to concert any measures for their de-
Ihnce, and impossible to act with becoming vigour.
Jame; and his counsellors, by a false nep which they
to);,, pr.elnted to them,n at length, an advant:ae
v. Ichl thely did not fail to improve.

F 3 ". oi vzi,

BOOK 1. MOTIVES, which are well known, had prompted

Lv3 - Henry VIII. to disclaim the Pope's authority, and

to seize the revenues of the regular clergy. His
system of reformation satisfied none of his fubjets,
Some were enraged because he had proceeded so far,
others murmured because he proceeded no farther;
and by his imperious temper, and alternate perfecu-
tions of the zealots for Popery, and the converts
to the Protestant opinions, he was equally formi.
dable to both. Henry was afraid that this general
diltatisfaction of his people might encourage his
enemies on the continent to invade his kingdom,
He knew that both the Pope and Emperor courted the
friendship of the King of Scots, and endeavoured to
engage h'm in an alliance against England. He
resolved, therefore, to disappoint the effects of their
negotiations, by entering into a closer union with
his nephew, and for that purpose lent ambaffidors
into Scotland, to propose a personal interview with
him at York. It was plainly James's interest to
accept of this invitation ; the assistance of so power-
ful an ally, the high honours which were promised]
him, and the liberal subsidies he might have obtain.
ed, would have added no little dignity to his do-
mefiic government, and must have greatly facilitat-
ed the execution of his favourite plan. On the
other hand, a war with England, which he had
reason to apprehend, if he rejected Henry's offers ci
friendship, was inconsistent with all his views. This
would bring him to depend on his barons; an arm)'
could not be railed without their affiltance : to call
nobles inctn'ed againlt their prince into the field,
was to unite his enemies, to make them sensible of

their

their own strength, and to afford them an opportu- BooK I.
nity of revenging their wrongs. James, who was --v-
not ignorant that all there consequences might fol-
low a breach with England, litlened at firrf to Hen-
ry's proposal, and consented to the interview at
York. But the clergy dreaded an union, which
must have been elfabliflhed on the ruins of the
church. Henry had taken great pains to infuse in-
to his nephew his own lentiments concerning reli-
gion, and had frequently follicited him, by ambaf-
fadors, to renounce the usurped dominion of the
lope, which was no less diflonourable to princes,
than grievous to their fubjeRs. The clergy had
hitherto, with great addrcfs, diverted the King from
regarding thelc follicirttiuns. But, in an amicable
conference, Henry expteced, and they feared that
James would yield to his irtreaties, or be convinced
by his arguments. They knew that the revenues of
the church were an alluring objea to a Prince, who
wanted money, and who loved it; that the pride
and ambition of ecciefiaftics raited the indignation
of the nobles ; that their indecent lives gave offence
to the people; that the Proteflant opinions were
fprcading fast throughout the nation ; and that an
universal defection from the eftablifled church,
would be the consequence of giving the smallest de-
gree of encouragement to these principles. For
these reasons, they employed all their credit with
the King, and had recourse to every artifice and in-
finuation, in order to divert him from a journey,
which must have been so fatal to their intereil.
They endeavoured to inlpire him with fear, by
magnifying the danger to which he would expose

F 4 his

BEoK I. hi, psrfoa, 5v yenturin To far into IEngland, with.

V.- (:: :.:.v scu:t; bu thec word of a Prince, who
..... : i.':j.itcJ every tr:inQ, venerablc andtl sacrd in
r.:,t', c v.a .'o In;: , r to lc trulscd ; and by way
0of1C' ni e: o en ; ri-

tC( iun-s which he might have

r C i: '.: .l;: : r

e' -r t cy o-iC 'rc nl an annual dona.

tiv- (.: .. i: crowns ; the' ipromil-.d to contri-
li-ui'- i. :.: '. r ,..iis c:r i-i;: on a w.r with lFng.

...a.I. !, .
t;:_ ;'.d :,;;m ,: t- ' -.Cct of ira.

r.;:;i; hes, c..;-..n n Ir.m tiK toroite.re of perlbns,

v.ho v.erc to bc c-i ilcl.iimnd ali heretic.

I;i,: ;C<.5 Jbv ,

lv cc.;

, .'i:ons, janeTs broke hVi

,;-.' . c.: -t \. :h Ir C ri r' ., v.i :a, i: cxxpeclttion 0&
rm er:-: him.- h.d alr. ai.! co:--c to York and tha:

.-;! . .! i.:p. ..toent .;.;rch relfnted the affron;,

b). I.,ciarirn v. ar nagai.. Scotiand. I-Tis army wa
,n", r:.d'iv to invasde the kingdom. Tames was cb.

, t,) l,.v recourse to the nobles, ior the defence

cf i1 dirminiols. At his command, they aftmblhd
rt. i:- 1 ilo'.vrs ; but with the lame difrofitions,
vih ch h.:d ani-mated their anccfiors in the reign oi
Tlanes II and v.irh a till reflution of imitating
their example, by p'.ninfi:-g those to whom they
irp-:F't ri til ,rie-vances, o which they had reali':
to c'mnll.-: ;: asnd if the i'king's lnirifrs laJ, no:

'-n . ;.c'n of abilities, fliperior to those of fta:es 1.
r-..': c- :' .fu..ILable i.ntfref even with their crcnn-;:.

v. : c-.:l :'.otr agree an-nr. thcmfelves what vi-icr
i;' i.:. 'c., the campn o: Fala would have been .

r '

;. r'l.nt cf l..a dcr, for the daring c.-

":-..:.

. : -, :t:.' n- i!ity on the prerogative ci

tih-- i.-' .'; .- *..t h his ini''ici's n were farved l-
t'. *
- :- .'';
.:"'- ':l.] il.on .irothcr c po, ;ri-

S'q

ti, of discovering to the King, their diffatisfation BooK I.
ith his government, and their contempt of his au-

iy. Scarcity of provisions, and the rigour of

e eafon having obliged the English army which
ad invaded Scotland, to retire, James imagined
iat he could attack them, with great advantage, in
eir rctreat; but the principal barons, with an ob-
in::y and disdain, which greatly aggravated their
fobciience, refilfed to advance a ftep beyond the
nits of thcir own country. Provoked by this in-
Et to hiiiielf, and fulpicious of a new conspiracy
;!i;:fr his ministers, the King instantly disbanded

namy, wMhich paid so little regard to his orders,
id retl lrcncd abruptly into the heart of the kingdom.

AN ambitious and high spirited Prince could not

look iich a mortifying affront. His hopes of fuc-
-s had been rafi, and his despair upon a difap-
intlient \was cxcefnive. He felt himlelf engaged
;: un cilceihliy war with }'.n^iandl, which, inilead

eiNtll g(, him the laurels and triuimnhs lthat Ie ex-

ecacl, hl(a begun with fuchl circunilhanccs, as en-

in':0;!y. thl inlolencc of his luljccts, and expoled
I;;l tlie Icorn of his enemiis. I-eI saw how vaii

! i ::c.j'.;i l all his projcts to ihumble tlhe nobies
''c.n, .:'i tlhat, thouhl in timies of peace, a I'riice
)'y : ca.ivotur to dcprel- themi, they wiil rilt, dur-
,; v.,, to thir formner importance and dli nity.
p'.tic,,cc, srcentniment, indignation filled his bolbmi
: ::'.is. j'llhc violence of thelc p:llions altered his
;i':': ', :ii.l, t;clrhlaps, impaired his rcaln. l-Ie
' :
::'.v, pn fii en, and retired. lie ficmed,

u'il ti: day, to be fIvallowed up in :profouod

Imccditaiuion,

BooK I. meditation, and through the night, he was disturb.
L'-v ed with those visionary terrors, which make imprefi

sion upon a weak understanding only, or a diforde
ed fancy. In order to revive the King's spirits,
inroad on the western borders was concerted by
ministers, who prevailed upon the Barons in t
neighbouring provinces, to raise as many troops
were thought necessary, and to enter the enemy
country. But nothing could remove the King
aversion to his nobility, or diminish his jealou
of their power. He would not even entrust thei
with the command of the forces which they hag
assembled; that was reserved for Oliver Sinclai
his favourite, who no sooner appeared to tak
possession of the dignity conferred upon him
than rage and indignation occasioned an univerfs
mutiny in the army. Five hundred English, whi
happened to be drawn up in fight, attacked ti
Scots in this disorder. Hatred to the King, an
contempt of their general, produced an effect,
which there is no parallel in history. They over
came the fear of death, and the love of liberty; ar
ten thousand men firrendered to a number so if
inferior, without striking a tingle blow. No man
was defircus of a victory, which would have bee
acceptable to the King, and to his favourite; set
endeavoured to save themselves by flight ; the Eng
lifh had the choice of what priolners they pleased u
take; and almost every person of distinction, w}i
was engaged in the expedition, remained in the;
hands. This aftonilfing event was a new proof [t
the King of the general disaffection of the nobility,
and a new discovery of his own weakness, and war

^,

f authority. Incapable of bearing these repeated BooK I.
litIts, he found himself unable to revenge them.
he deeperf melancholy and despair succeeded to
e furious transports of rage, which the sirs2 ac-
unt of the rout of his army occasioned. All the
olent pafrions, which are the enemies of life,
preyed upon his mind, and wafted and consumed a
outhful and vigorous constitution. Some authors
that age impute his untimely death to poison
t the difcafcs of the mind, when they rife to an
ight, are often mortal; and the known eff:ts of
fappointment, anger, and resentment upon a fan-
ine and impetuous temper, sufficiently account for
s unhappy fate. " His death (fays Drummond)
roveth his mind to have been raised to an high
rain, and above mediocrity; he could die, but
,uld not digest a diiafter." H-ad James survived
is misfortune, one of two things must have hap-
!ned: either the violence of his temper would have
gg:,aed him openly to attack the nobles, who
ouki have found in IFIcnry a willing and powerful
otctor, and have derived the fame asTiltance from
m, which the malecontents, in the succeeding
ign, did from hi, daughter Elizabeth ; in that
fe, a dangerous civil war wvould have b'cn the
Irtain consequence. Or, perhaps, neceflity might
ve obliged him to accept of H-enry's offers, and

reconciled to his nobility. In that event the
urch would have fallen a sacrifice to their union,
Reformation, upon Henry's plan, would have
en established by law, a great part of the tempo-
lites of the church would have been seized, and

the

BooK I. the friendship of the King and Barons would have
~y-w' bbeen cemented by dividing its spoils.

Su CH were the efforts of our Kings, towards re.

ducing the exorbitant power of the nobles. If they
were not attended with success, we must not, so,
that reason, conclude that they were not conduced
with prudence. Every circumstance seems to have
combined against the Crown. Accidental event
concurred with political causes, in rendering thebeii
concerted measures abortive. The affafnation of on
King, the sudden death of another, and the fatal d"i
pair of a third, contributed no leis than its ow
natural firength, to preserve the aristocracy fror
ruin.

AMIrDST these tru:ggles, the influence which o

Kings possessed in their parliaments, is a circuit
stance seemingly inexplicable, and which merits pa:
ticular attention. As these affimblies were compo0
ed chiefly of the nobles, they, we are apt to ini
gine, must have dictated all their dccifions; bu;
infiea. of this, every King found them obfcquioc
to his will, and obtained such laws, as he efteen¢i

c--.n:r: ncccfiry !-or exten iing his authority. All thirn

. s:t.rr were ccnductled thzre with dispatch and unanimitr
:<.~,, ,and, in ncne of our historians, do we find an i;

:--. iance of any opposition formed against the courti

l.:l'..A:liT:, or mrention of any difficulty in carryiri

r',r; ----!: tle meafurcs which were agreeable to ti:
I.i::. - in order to account for this singular rfa,:
i: rn: -.!' v to cnquir. into the origin and confit'
;:.,-i r_ c i .'.r.Janm ; . -

Tg

THE genius of the feudal government, uniform BOOK I.

i; all its operations, produced the fame effcts in Te -
small, as in great societies; and the territory of a sons of it.
Baron, was, in miniatur-, the model of a kingdom.
He possessed the right ofjurifdition, but those, who
'depended on him, being free men, and not slaves,
could be tried by their Peers only; and, therefore,
his valfals were bound to attend his courts, and to
afift oth in pafring and executing his fcntences.
'When assembled, on there occasions, they establish-
ed, by mutual consent, such regulations, as tended
to the welfare of their finall society; and often
granted, voluntarily, such iupplies to their Superior,
as his necemities required. Change now a single
name: in place of Baron, substitute King, and we
behold a Parliament in its first rudiments, and ob-
serve the first exertions of those powers, which its
members now possess as Judges, as Legislators, and
as dispensers of the public revenues. Suitable to
this idea, are the appellations of the Kin;o's Court *,
and of the King's Great Council, by which, Parlia-
ments were anciently ditlinguiflied; and suitable to
this, li!ewli-e, were the constituent members of
which it was composed. In all the feudal king-
doms, thole who held of the King in chief were
bound, by the condition of their tenure, to attend
I nd to afrifl in his courts. Nor was this eftecmed a
prviicge, but a service. It was exacted likewise of
Bishops, Abbots, and the greater ecclesiastics, who
ho!lilg vast porfeflions of the Crown, were deemcd
fijil to the fame burden. Parliaments did not
continue long in this state. Cities gradually acquir-
edr v-eaith, a confidcrable rnare- of the public taxes

Du Cange, Voc, Curia.

were

BooK I. were levied on them, the inhabitants grew into elti

".' a mation, and being enfranchised by the Sovereign

a place in Parliament was the consequence of the
liberty, and of their importance. But as it woul
have been absurd to confer such a privilege, or t
impose such a burden on a whole conmtmnity, ever
burrough was permitted to chl.e one or twoof it
citizens to appear in the name of the corporation
and the idea of reprefertation was first introduced ii
this manner. An innovation, still more important
naturally followed. The vassals of the Crown wct
originally few in number, and extremely powerfull
but as it is impossible to render property fixed and
permanent, many of their pofleffons came, gradu.
ally, and by various methods of alienation, to h
split and parcelled out into different hands. Hene
arose the diftin-tion between the Greater and tbh
Leser Barons. The former were those who retain
ed their original fiefs undivided, the latter were the
new and lets potent vaiTals of the Crown. Boa
were bound, however, to perform al feudal fervicei,
and, of consequence, to give attendance in Parlia.
ment. To the lesser Barons, who formed no incon.
fiderable body, this was an intolerable grievance.
Barons Sometimes denied their tenure, burroughs re.
nounced their right of electing, charters were ob
tained, containing an exemption from attendance;
and the anxiety, with which our ancestors endea
voured to get free from the obligation of fitting in
Parliament, is surpassed by that only, with which
their posterity solicit to be admitted there. In order
to accommodate both parties, and, at once, to fe
cure to the King a sufficient number of member

'i

n his great council, and to save his vassals frotm an BOOK I.
innecefary burden, an easy expedient was found '"
ut. The obligation to personal attendance was
ontinued upon the Greater Barons, 'from which the
effer Barons were exempted, on condition of their
leing, in each county, a certain number of Re-
refeniatives, to appear in their name. Thus a Par-
ament became compleat in all its members, and
as composed of Lords Spiritual and Temporal, of
nights of the hires, and of Burgesses. As many
iufes contributed to bring government earlier to
erfe6tion in England, than in Scotland; as the ri-
ur of the feudal institutions abated sooner; and
defecs were supplied with greater facility in the
ne kingdom, than in the other; England led the
ay in all these changes, and Burgesses, and
nights of the mire appeared in the Parliaments of
at nation, before they were heard of in ours.
urgeffes were first admitted into the Scottish Parlia-
lents by Robert Bruce*; and in the preamble to the AD3. 36,
ws of Robert III. they are ranked among the con-
ituent members of that assembly. The Lesser Ba 1427.
ns were indebted to James I. for a statute ex-
mpting them fiom personal attendance, and per-
:itting them to elec representatives; the exemp-
on was eagerly laid hold on, but the privilege was
) little valued, that, except one or two instances,
lay neglected during i60 years; and James VI.
iri obliged them to fend representatives regularly
Parliament .

I* Abercromby, i. 635.
1 Efl ays on Brit. Antiq. EiT. II, Dalrymp. Hilt. of Feud.
0op. ch. 8.

A SCOT-

BOOK I. A SCOTTISH Parliament, then, confided anm
1*-1v3 ently of Great Barons, of Ecclesiastics, and a fl

representatives of burroughs. Nor were these divi
ed, as in England, into two houses, but compo;
one assembly, in which the Lord Chancellor prefi
ed *. And, in rude ages, when the science of g
vernment was extremely imperfect, among a ma
tial people, unacquainted with the arts of peac
firangers to the talents which make a figure in i
bate, and despising them, Parliaments were not h
in the fame estimation as at present; nor did haug
ty Barons love those courts, in which they appear
with such evident marks of inferiority. Parliame
were often hastily assembled, and it was, proba
in the King's power, by the manner in which
issued his writs for that purpose, to exclude t
who were averse from his measures. At a
when deeds of violence were common, and the
ftraints of law and decency were little regarded,
man could venture with safety to oppose the
in his own court. The Great Barons, or Lords

* In England, the Peers and Commons seem early to

met in ierarate houses; and James I. who was fond of imi:
ing the English in all their cuitoms, had probably an inten
of introducii:g some considerable diflinction between theGrj
and Lesser Barons in Scotland ; at leaf he determined that
confuhiatior.s hould not be carried on under the direction of
fame President; for by his law, A. D. 1327. it is proie
"that oat of the Commiffloners of all the fnires ihall be c
a wife ard expert man, called the Common Speaker of the
limnent, who !hall propose all and sundry needs and causes,
tainir.g t the Commons in the Parliament or general counr
No such Speaker, it would teem, was ever chosen; and br
fubfequen: law the Chancellor was declared perpetual Pre
of Parliamnent.

Par!

arliament, were extremely few; even so late as the BoOK I.
eginning of the reign of James VI. * they amount- ---..
d only to fifty three. The Ecclefiatfics equalled
hem in number, and being devoted implicitly to
he Crown, for reasons which have been already
xplained, rendered all hopes of victory in any
ruggle desperate. Nor were the nobles themselves
anxious, as might be imagined, to prevent acts
f Parliament favourable to the royal Prerogative;
onfrious of their own firength, and of the King's
ability to carry there acts into execution without
eir concurrence, they trusted either to elude, or to
ontemn them ; and the statute revoking the King's
roperty, and annexing alienated juriflidtions to the
rown, repeated in every reign, and violated and
efpifed as often, is a standing proof of the impo-
nce of laws, when opposed to power. So many
ncurring causes are uhffcienr, perhaps, to account
r the ascendant, which our Kings acquired in Par-
ament. But without having recourse to any of
efe, a tingle circumstance, peculiar to the confli-
tion of the Scottilh Parliament, the mentioning
f which we have hitherto avoided, will abundantly
plain this sac, seemingly so repugnant to all our
ealnings concerning the weakness of the King, and
e-power of the nobles.

As far back, as our records enable us to trace the
nflitution of our Parliaments, we find a commit-
e, distinguished by the name of Lords of Articles.
was their business to prepare, and to digest all
atters which were to be laid before the Parlia-
ent; every motion for a new law was first made
+ And. Coll. v. i. pref. 40.
VOL. I. G there,

BOOK I. there, and approved or rejected by them at pleasure;

v'v- * fwhat they approved was formed into a bill, and pre.

sented to Parliament; what they rejected could no
be introduced into the house. This committee owe
the extraordinary powers vested in it, to the militat
genius of the ancient nobles; too impatient to sub
mir to the drudgery of civil business, too impetu
ous to observe the forms, or to enter into the det
necessary in conducting it, they were glad to
that burden upon a small number, while they then
selves had no other labour than simply to give, c
to refuse their fan&ion to the bills, which were pr
sented to them. The Lords of Articles, then, n
only directed the whole proceedings of Parliamen
but poflefied a negative before debate. That co
mittee was chosen and constituted in such a mann
as put this valuable privilege entirely in the Kin
hands. It is extremely probable, that the King on
had the sole right of nominating the Lords ofAi
tides *. They came afterwards to be elected

* IT appears from authentic records, that a Parliatnent '

appointed to be held March I2, 1566, and that the Lords-
Articles were chosen and met on the 7th, five days before
afLembling of Parliament. If they could be regularly elecled
long before the meeting of Parliament, it is natural to concl
that the Prince alone possessed the right of electing them. Tk
are two different accounts of the manner of their elecion at
time, one by Mary herself, in a letter to the Archbihfop
Glasgow, " We, accompanied with our nobility for the
, past to the Tolbuith of Edinburgh, for holding of our

liament on the 7ah day of this instant, and cleaed the LA
Articu!ars." If we explain there words, according to

Grammar, we must conclude that the Queen herself el
them. It i-, however, more probable that Mary meant to
that the nobles then present with her, viz. her privy counfell

e Parliament, and consisted of an equal number Book I.
ut of eaci; eflate, and most commonly of eight 'V
empora! and eight Spiritual Lords, of eight repre-
ntarives of burrouglt, rn.d of th- eight great offi-
rs of the Crown. Of this body, the eight eccle-
stics, together with the officers of the Crowni
ere entirely at the King's devotion, and it was
rce pofJble that the choice could fall on such
mporal Lords and Burgesses as would unite in
polition to his measures. Capable either of in-
encing their election, or of gaining them when
tfcdi the King commonly found the Lords of
ticles no less obsequious to his will, than his own
vy council, and by means of his authority with
mn, he could put a negative upon his Parliament
fore debate, as well as after it; and what may
m altogether incredible, the most limited Prince
Europe actually poffefled, in one inflance, a pre-
gative which the most abfulutlu could never at-

To

otiers, eieced the Lords of Article-. Keith's Hilt. of Scot-
d, pJ 33. The other account is Lord Rutheten's, who exprefly
rms t;: i tie Qceen herelf eledted them. Keith's Append.
. Whether vwe embrace the one or the other of these opi-
n-, is of it, confquence. if the privy coumIellors and nobles
:nlbing the court had a tight to elecft the Lords of Articles, it

equally advantzaceous for the Crown, as if the Prince had
the foie nomination of them.

HAi, NG deduced the history of the committee of Lords Of
iices, a, low as the fubje& of this preliminary book required,
ay be agreeable, perhaps, to some of my readers, to know
fuLl<;i.;nt variarions in tii, singular initilution, and the po-
:al ule which our Kings made of these. When Parliaments

nm re

iorc numneous, and mo-e confidcrable by the adm:Dfion
t, cprc'cnri.,ii,..e of tile Lefijr Barons, the prcfervrng their

G 2 ilfluence

BOOK I.. To this account of the internal conflitution c
t---, ~ Scotland, it will not be improper to add a viewe
State of
Europe at the political slate of Europe at that period, whe;
the bezin- the followino history commences. A thorouo!

ning of the 0t

i6th cen- knowledge of that general system, of which ever
tury' kingdom in Europe forms a part, is not less r

quifite towards understanding the history of a mr

tio,

influence over the Lords of Articles became, likewise, an ob,
of greater importance to our Kings. James \ 1. on prete
that the Lords of Articles could not find leisure to confider
great multitudie of affairs laid before them, obtained an
appointing four pcrfons to be named out of each e/late,
fnould meet twenty day, before the commencement of Pai
ment t, to receive all supplications, &c. and rejecting whati
thought frivolous, should engross in a book what they thos
worthy the a:tention of the Lords of Articles. No provision
made in the act for the choice of this felet body, and the
would, ofcourfe, have claimed that privilege In 1633, Wt
Charles I was beginning to introduce these innovation: w
gave so much offence to the nation, he dreaded the oppoi
of his Parliament, and in order to prevent that, an artifice
made ufo of to Itcure the Lords of Articles for the Crown.
Temporal Peers * ere appointed to chure eight Bilhops and
Bishops eight Peers, these fix:e-n met together, and elected
Kniohts of the thire, and eight BurgeiTcs, and to these thne
of.cers v ere added as uSu.l. if we can only suppose eight!
fors offt) numercus a bo!dy, as the Peers of Scotland wer;3
come, b: t'.at time, actached to the crurt, these, it is obr
would be the men whom the Bishops would chute, and of
querce, the xvhole Lords of Articles were the tools and cre
of the King. This practice, so inconsistent with libern,
aboiifhed during the civil \ar; and the flatute of James VI.
repcaled. After the Refloration, Parliaments became more
vile than ever. \What was only a temporary device, in
reign o- Charles I. was, then, converted into a standing

For my part, fays the author from whom I have bor

t Aft. zz2. P. 1594.

on, than an acquaintance with its peculiar govern- BooK I.
ent and laws. The latter may enable us to com- '_
rehend domeflic occurrences and revolutions, but
ithout the former, foreign tranfacions muff be al-
ogether mysterious and uninteiligible. By attend-
g to this, many dark palfages in our history may
e placcd in a clear light; and where the bulk of
iftorians have seen only the effedt, we may be able

doifcover the cause.

TIrE ftbverfion of the feudal government in
rance, and its declension in the neighbouring king-
oms occasioned a remarkable alteration in the po-
tical Lfate of Furope. Kingdoms, which were in-
nfiedrrahle when broken, and parcelled out among
obles, acquired firmnnefs and strength, by being
nited into a regular monarchy. Kings became
nfcious of their own power and importance. They
editated schemes of'conqueft, and engaged in wars
a diilance. Numerous armies were raised, and
reat taxes imposed for their subsistence. Confider-
le bodies of infantry were kept in constant pay;
at service grew to be honourable; and cavalry, in
hich the tlrength of European armies had hitherto
onfifted, though proper enough for the short and
oluntary excursions of Barons who served at their

many of there pnrticulars, I flould have thought it IcT crimi-
nal in our RclRcration Patriamrent, to have openly beloncwd
upon the King a negative before debate, than, in such an un-
dechand artificial manner, to betray their co:l'ituer.ts, and
the nation." i)ats on Brit. Antiq. 55. It is probable, ]ow-
cr, fiom a letter of Randolph's to Cecil lo. Aug.i h6o, print-
d in the Appendix, that this Parliament had some appearance of
rtient precedent to julify their unworthy conduat.

G 3 own

BOOK I. own expence, were found to be unfit either for rnak,

Thv ;ing, or defending any important conquest.

IT was in Italy, that the powerful monarchs o

France and Spain ani Germany first appeared o
make a trial of their new strength. The divifon
of that country into so many small states, the lux.
ury of the people, and their effeminate aversion
arms invited their more martial neighbours to
easy prey. The Italians, who had been accustom.
ed to mock battles only, and to decide their quar
rels by innocent and bloodless victories, were ati
nifhed at the fight of real war; and as they coul
not resist the torrent, they suffered it to take i
course, and to spend its rage. Intrigue and poli
supplied the want of ftrengh; and necessity an
felf-prefervation led that ingenious people to
great secret of modern politics, by teaching the
how to balance the power of one Prince, by throw
ing that of another into the opposite scale. By thi
happy device, the liberty of Italy was long preferv
ed. The scales were poised by very skilful hands
the smallest variations were attended to, and nD
Prince was allowed to retain any superiority, thi
could be dangerous.

A SYSTEM of conduc, pursued with so mudi

success in Italy, was not long confined to that coun1
try of political refinement. The maxim of prei
serving a balance of power is founded so mudc
upon obvious reasoning, and the situation of Eu
rope rendered it so necessary, that it soon becamei
matter of chief attention to all wife politicians

Evel

Every ftep any Prince took was observed by all his BOOK I.
leighbours. Ambassadors, a kind of honourable '-v-
pies, authorized by the mutual jealousy of Kings,
efided almost constantly at every different court,
,nd had it in charge to watch all its motions. Dan-
,ers were foreseen at a greater distance, and pre-
rented with more ease. Confederacies were formed

humble any power which rose above its due pro-
ortion. Revenge or felf-defence were no longer
e only causes of hostility, it became common to
ke arms out of policy; and war, both in its com-
encement, and in its operations, was more an
xercife of the judgment, than of the passions of
en. Almost every war in Europe became gene-
a], and the most inconsiderable states acquired im-
orance, because they could add weight to either
ale.

FRANCIS I. who mounted the throne of France
the year 515, and Charles V. who obtained the
mperial crown in the year i519, divided between
em the strength and affections of all Europe.
heir perpetual enmity was not owing either to per-
nal jealousy, or to the caprice of private passion,
iut was founded so much in nature and true policy,
hat it fubfilted between their posterity for several
ages; and, notwithstanding their present acciden-
al and unnatural union, must again revive. Charles
ucceeded to all the dominions of the house of Au-
tria. No family had ever gained so much by wife
and fortunate marriages. By acquisitions of this
kind the Austrian Princes rose, in a fiort time,
from obscure Counts of Hapfiourg, to be Arch-

G 4 dukes

BOOK I. own expence, were found to be unfit either for mak,

1Y ing, or defending any important conquest.

IT was in Italy, that the powerful monarchs of

France and Spain anu Germany first appeared to
make a trial of their new strength. The division
of that country into so many small flates, the lux.
ury of the people, and their effeminate averfionto0
arms invited their more martial neighbours to as
easy prey. The Italians, who had been accustom.
ed to mock battles only, and to decide their qua.
rels by innocent and bloodless victories, were aflo
nifhed at the fight of real war; and as they coul
not resist the torrent, they suffered it to take is
course, and to spend its rage. Intrigue and poliq
supplied the want of strength; and neceflity an
felf-prefervation led that ingenious people to t
great secret of modern politics, by teaching the4
how to balance the power of one Prince, by throw,
ing that of another into the opposite scale. By thi
happy device, the liberty of Italy was long preferv4
ed. The scales were poised by very skilful hands,
the smallest variations were attended to, and no
Prince was allowed to retain any superiority, tha!
could be dangerous.

A SYSTEM of conduct, pursued with so mud

success in Italy, was not long confined to that coun
try of political refinement. The maxim of pr.
serving a balance of power is founded so mud
upon obvious reasoning, and the Situation of Eu
rope rendered it so necessary, that it soon became
matter of chief attention to all wife politician

Eyeir

very itep any Prince took was observed by all his BOOK I.
leighbours. Ambassadors, a kind of honourable tv-d
ies, authorized by the mutual jealousy of Kings,
eided almost constantly at every different court,
nd had it in charge to watch all its motions. Dan-
ers were foreseen at a greater distance, and pre-
ented with more ease. Confederacies were formed

humlble any power which rose above its due pro-
orrion. Revenge or felf-defence were no longer
e only causes of hostility, it became common to
ke arms out of policy; and war, both in its corn
encement, and in its operations, was more an
ercife of the judgment, than of the passions of
en. Almost every war in Europe became gene-
a, and the most inconsiderable states acquired im-
rtance, because they could add weight to either
ale.

FRANCIS I. who mounted the throne of France
nthe year I515, and Charles V. who obtained the
mperial crown in the year i519, divided between
hem the flrength and affections of all Europe.
heir perpetual enmity was not owing either to per-
nal jealousy, or to the caprice of private passion,
ut was founded so much in nature and true policy,
hat it fubfifed between their posterity for several
ges; and, notwichlfanding their present acciden-
al and unnatural union, muff again revive. Charles
ucceeded to all the dominions of the house of Au-
ria. No family had ever gained so much by wife
nd fortunate marriages. By acquisitions of this
ind the Austrian Princes role, in a flhort time,
ro0m obscure Counts of Hapfblourg, to be Arch-

G 4 dukes

BooK I. dukes of Austria, and Kings of Bohemia, and were
~L--~ in pof'efiion of the imperial dignity by a fort of he.

reditary right. Befies these territories in Germany,
Charles was heir to the crown of Spain, and toall
the dominions which belonged to the house of Bur.
gundy. The Burgun.iiln provinces engrossed, at
that time, the riches and commerce of one half of
Europe; and he drew from them, on many occa.
sions, those immense isms, which no people with.
out tra.e and liberty ar' able to contribute. Spain
fur:ifhed him a gallant and hardy infantry, to whofc
diicip:ine he was indcbted for all his conquests
And at the fame time, by the discovery of the new
world, a vein of wealth was opened to him, which
all the extravagance of ambition could not exhaul,.
Th:ee advantages rendered Charles the firit Prince
in Europe ; but he wished to be more, and openly
alpired to uni'.'erlfl monarchy. His genius was of
thai k'nd which ripens slowly, and lies long con.
cea'ed; but it grew up without observation, toan
unexpected height and vigour He poffefred, i
an em'nert degree, the chara-teriftic virtues of all
the diferent races of Princes to whom he was al-
lied. In forming his schemes, he discovered all
the fubtiety and penetration of Ferdinand his grand-
father ; he pursued them with that obstinate and in-
flexible perievcrance which has ever been peculiar
to the Af;:rian blood ; and in executing them, hi
could e.m oy the magnanimity and boldness of his
B3ur'u.ician A:;-cc-fors. His abilities were equal
to his nower, and neither of them would have been
in:-erio- to ihis design, had not Providence, in pity
to mankind, and in order to preserve them from

the

ie worst of all evils, Universal Monarchy, raised BOOK I1'4
p Prancis 1. to defend the liberty of Europe. His --'
bminions were less extensive, but more united than
e Emperor's. His fubjets were numerous, ac-
e, and warlike, lovers of glory, and lovers of
eir King. To Charles power was the only object
desire, and he pursued it with an unwearied and
Ills indultry. Francis could mingle pleasure and
gance with his ambition, and though he negleft-
some advantages, which a more phlegmatic or
re frugal Prince would have improved, an active
dintrepid courage supplied all his defees, and
cked or defeated many of the Emperor's designs.

THE reft of Europe observed all the motions of
fe mighty rivals, with a jealous attention. On
one fide, the Italians saw the danger which
eatened Christendom, and in order to avert it,
recourse to the expedient, which they had often
ployed with success. They endeavoured to di-
e the power of the two contending Monarchs

equal scales, and by the union of several finall
es, to counterpoise him, whole power became
great. But, what they concerted with much
dom, they were able to execute with little vigour;
intrigue and refinement were feeble fences against
incroachments of military power.

ON the other fide, Henry VIII. of England held
balance with less delicacy, but with a stronger
id. He was the third Prince of the age in dig-
Y and in power; and the advantageous situation
l'is dominions, his domestic tranquillity, his

im-

BOOK I. immense wealth, and absolute authority renders

-

-'~ ~
i him the natural guardian of the liberty of Europ

Each of the rivals courted him with emulation; h
knew it to be his interest to keep the balance even
and to restrain both, by not joining intirely wid
either of them. But he was seldom able to redun
his ideas to pratice; he was governed by capric
more than by principle; and the pallions of ti
man were an overmatch for the maxims of t
King. Vanity and resentment were the great fprin!
of all his undertakings, and his neighbours eafj
found the way, by touching these, to force hi
upon many rash and inconsistent enterprises. H
reign was a perpetual series of blunders in politia
and while he esteemed himself the wifeit Princel
Europe, he was a constant dupe to those, who foul
it necessary, and could submit to flatter him.

IN this situation of Europe, Scotland, which l

hitherto wafted her flrength in the quarrels betwe
France and England, emerged from her obfcurit
took her station in the system, and began to hi
some influence upon the fate of distant nation
Her assistance was, frequently, of consequence!
the contending parties, and the balance was ofi
so nicely adjusted, that it was in her power to iri
it lean to either fide. The part afigned her,
this juncture, was to divert Henry from carryi
his arms into the continent. That Prince, havi
routed the French at Guinegat, and inveated T
rouenne, France attempted to divide his forces, I
engaging James IV. in that unhappy expedid
which ended with his life. For the fame reafo

Franl

jancis encouraged and aflifted the Duke of Al- BOOK I.

y, to ruin the families of Angus and HIome, '
hich were in the interest of England, and would
illingly have persuaded the Scots to revenge the
ath of their King, and to enter into a new war
th that kingdom. Henry and Francis having
ited not long after against the Emperor, it was
e interest of both Kings, that the Scots should
tinue inaftive; and a long tranquillity was the
t of their union. Charles endeavoured to break
s, and to embarrass Henry by another inroad of
Scou;. For this end, he made great advances
James V. flattering the vanity of the young
onarch, by eleEting him a Knight of the Golden
eece, and by offering him a match in the impe-
family; while, in return for these empty hod
urs, he demanded of him to renounce his alliance
th France, and to declare war against England.
t James, who had much to lofc, and who could
in little by embracing the Emperor's proposals,
efted them with decency, and keeping firm to
ancient allies, left Henry at full liberty to aft
n the continent with his whole strength.

HENRY himself began his reign, by imitating
example of his ancestors with regard to Scot-
Id. He held its power in such extreme contempt,
at he was at no pains to gain his friendflhip; but
the contrary, he irritated the whole nation, by
iving the antiquated pretensions of the crown of
ngland to the sovereignty over Scotland. But his
nexperience, and the example of his enemies,
ive him a higher idea of its importance. It was

im-

BooK I. impolfible to defend an open and extensive frontier
~Y'' against the incursions of an active and martial pe

ple. During any war on the continent this oblig
him to divide the strength of his kingdom.
was necessary to maintain a kind of army of obfer
vation in the north of England; and after all prt
cautions, the Scottish borderers, who were fuperi
to all mankind in the practice of irregular
often made successful inroads, and spread terroran
desolation over many counties. He fell, at las
ipon the true secret of policy, with respect toSc0
land, which his predecessors had too little penet
tion to discover, or too much pride to emple
The situation of the country, and the bravery
the people made the conquest of Scotland impo
ble; but the national poverty, and the violence
fation rendered it an easy matter to divide, and
govern it. He abandoned, therefore, the forrt
design, and resolved to employ the utmost addrs
in executing the latter. It had not yet become
nourable for one Prince to receive pay from al
ther, under the more decent name of a fubfidi
But, in all ages, the fame arguments have be
good in courts, and of weight with ministers, fa
tious leaders, and favourites. What were the ark
ments, by which Henry brought over so many
his interest during the minority of James V. i
know by the original warrants still extant *, fort
mirting considerable fums into Scotland. By'
proper distribution of these, many persons of
were gained to his party, and a fartion which hc
secret correfponderce with England, and recei'

Burn. Hilf. Ref. v. i p.

1 its directions from thence, appears henceforward BOOK I.
our domestic contests. In the sequel of the his- vo
ry, we shall find Henry labouring to extend his
Ptuence in Scotland. His successors adopted the
me plan, and improved upon it. The affairs of

etwo kingdoms became interwoven, and their

terests were often the fame. Elizabeth divided
er attention almost equally between them, and the
uthority, which ihe inherited in the one, was not
reater than that, which she acquired in the other.

THE I

# BOOK II.

THE
HIS T O R Y

O F
cOT LA N D.

B O 0 K II.

ARY Queen of Scots was born a few days BOOK
before the death of her father James V. jI.
e situation in which he left the kingdom alarmed --a

Dec. ir4,

ranks of men, with the profpet of a turbulent 54,.14
d difatrous reign. A war against England had Birth of
Ien undertaken without necessity, and carried on state of the
hout success. Many persons of the first rankking°""
d fallen into the hands of the English, in the un-
rtunate rout near the firth of Solway, and were
1 prisoners at London. Among the reft of the
bles there was little union, either in their views,
in their affections; and the religious disputes, oc-
sioned by the opinions of the reformers, growing
ery day more violent, added to the rage of those
.ions which are natural to a form of government
arly ariftocratical.

THE

BOOK THE government of a Queen was unknown i

II. Scotland, and did not imprint much reverence
al_
T the minds of a martial people. The governmen

of an infant Queen was still more destitute of rea
authority; and the prospect of a long and feebl
minority invited to faction by the hope of impunity
James had not even provided the common remedl
against the disorders of a minority, by committing
to proper persons the care of his daughter's. educa
tion, and the adminifiration of affairs in her name
Though he saw the clouds gathering, and foretold
that they would quickly burst into a storm, he wN
so little able to disperse them, or to defend his daugh.
ter and kingdom against the imminent calamities
that, in mere despair, he abandoned them both ti
the mercy of fortune, and left open to every pre:
tender, the office of Regent, which he could no
fx to his own fatisfa&ion.

Prenfions CARDINAL Beatoun, who had for many year
of Cardinal been confidered as prime minister, was the first whc
Beatoun to
theregen- claimed that high dignity ; and in support of hi,
c'I pretensions, he produced a testament ", which b

himself had forged in the name of the late King
and without any other right, instantly affumedthi
title of Regent. He hoped, by the assistance ofthi
clergy, the countenance of France, the connivanq
of the Queen Dowager, and the support of th
whole Popish faction, to hold by force, what hi
had seized on by fraud. But Beatoun had enjoy*
power too long to be a favourite of the nation
Those among the nobles who wished for a Refor

Sadler's Lett. 161.

inatio

mation in religion dreaded his severity, and others S oOK t-
confidered the elevation of a Churchman to the II,
Ihigheft office in the kirgdom as a depreflion of 'v '.
themselves. At their iriftigation, James Hamilton
Earl of Arran, and next heir to the Queen, rouzed
himftlf from his inacivity, and was prevailed on
to aspire to that fratiori, to which proximity of
blod gave him a natural title. The nobles, who Earl ofat-
were assembled for that purpose, unanimously cor- ran chofeli
'erred on him the office of regent; and the public
oice applauded their choice,

No two men ever differed znore widely in dirpo'- charalet
tion and character, than the Earl of Arran and of eatoutid
ardinal Beatoun. The Cardinal was by nature of
moderate ambition; by long experience he had
quired address and refinement; and insolence
ew upon him from continual success. His high
ation in the church placed him in the way of great
mployments; his abilities were equal to the great-
t of these; nor did he reckon any of them to be
bove his merit. As his owrn eminence was found-

upon the power of the church of Rome, he was
zealous defender of that fuperititon, and for the
me reason an avowed enemy to the docrine of the
eformers. Political motives alone determined him
support the one, or to oppose the other. His
rly application to public business kept him unac-
ainted with the learning arid controversies of the
;e; he gave jtdgment, however, upon all points
dispute, with a precipitancy, violence, and rigour,
hich cotemporary historians mention 'with indig-
tion.
\'OL. I. - TES

B o o K THE charaaer of the Earl of Arran was, in al.

II. most every thing, the reverse of Beatoun's. He

of A~rr. was neither infected with ambition, nor inclined to
Of Arran.

cruelty : The love of ease extinguished the former,
the softness of his temper preserved him from the
latter. Timidity and irresolution were his predo.
minant failings, the one occasioned by his natural
constitution, and the other arising from a conscious.
ness that his abilities were not equal to his station,
With these dispositions he might have enjoyed and
adorned private life; but his public conduCt wai
without courage, or dignity, or consistence. Tlx
perpetual slave of his own fears, and, by confequenc,
the perpetual tool of those, who found their advan.
tage in pracifing upon them. But as no other per.
son could be set in opposition to the Cardinal, wid
any probability of success, the nation declared '
his favour with so general a consent, that the arg
sices of his rival could not withriand its unitd
strength.

s.i-e; of The Earl of Arran had scarce taken poffefis
Henry th of his new dignity, when a negociation was openo
VIII., ith
regard to with England, which gave birth to events of t
cotland. most fatal consequence to himfclf, and to the king

dom. After the death of James, Henry VII
was no longer afraid of any interruption from Scc
land to his designs againcf France; and imime
ately conceived hopes of rendering this fecuriry p
petual, by the marriage of Edward his only I
with the young Queen of Scots. He commui
cated his intention to the prisoners taken at SolwJ
and prevailed on-them to favour it, by theproiri

of liberty, as the reward of their success. In the B o o K
mean time, he permitted them to return into Scot- II.
land, that, by their presence in the Parliament "''v
which the Regent had called, they might be the
better able to persuade their countrymen to fall in
with his proposals. A cause, entrusted to such able
and zealous advocates, could not well miss of com-
ing to an happy issue. All those who feared the
Cardinal, or who desired a change in religion, were
fond of an alliance, which afforded protection to
the dotrine which they had embraced, as well as

their own persons, against the rage of that power-
l and haughty Prelate.

BUT Henry's rough and impatient temper was Illcondua-
ncapable of improving this favourable conjuncture. edby him-
ddrefs and delicacy in managing the fears, and
0llies, and interests of men, were arts with which
e was utterly unacquainted. The designs he had
rmed upon Scotland were obvious from the mar-
iage which he had proposed, and he had not dex-
riry enough to dilguife, or to conceal them. In-
eal of yielding to the fear or jealousy of the Scots,
hat time and accidents would soon have enabled
im.to recover, he, at once, alarmed and- irritated
e whole nation, by demanding that the Queen's
rfon should be immediately committed to his cuf-
y, and that the government of the kingdom
ould be put in his hands during her minority.
HENRY could not have prescribed more ignomi- odious to

the Scots,

ous conditions to a conquered people, and it is no though in
onder they were rejected, with indignation, by part a,-

H 2 men them.

B o o i men ¥who scorned to purchase an alliance with Eng.

II. land, at the price of their own liberty. The par.
0 liament of Scotland, however, influenced by the

nobles who returned from England; desirous of
peace with th-t kingdom; and delivered, by the
jMari j. Regent's confining the Cardinal as a prisoner, from

any opposition to which he might have given rife;
consented to a treaty of marriage and of union, but
upon somewhat a more equal footing. And after
tome dark and untuccefsful intrigues, by which his
ambassador endeavoured to carry off the young
Queen and Cardinal Beatoun into England, Henry
vas obviged to give up his own Fropofals, and t
accept of theirs. On his fide, he consented thz
the Queen should continue to reside in Scotland,
and himself remain excluded from any ihare in td
government of the kingdom. On the other hand,
the Scots agreed to fend their sovereign into England
as soon as Ihe attained the full age of ten years, and
instantly to deliver fix persons, of the first rank, to
be kept as hoilages by Henry till the Queen's arrp
val at his court.

THE treaty was fiill so manifeflly of advantag

£ivrected
tby Ih: Ke- to England, that the Regent loft much of the pub
sant. lie confidence by consenting to it. The Cardinal

who had now recovered liberty, watched for fud
an opportunity of regaining credit, and he did ns
fail to cultivate and improve this to the utmno
Ocrcoy- He complained loudly, that the Regent had h

ar- ra\ed the kingdom to its most inveterate enemi:e

and Sacrificed its honour to his own ambition. H
foretold the extinction of true catholic reliio:

Und

under the tyranny of an excommunicated heretic; B o o K
bbut above all, he lamented to lee an ancient king- 1I.
dom contenting to its own slavery, descending into "'
the ignominious station of a dependent province;
and, in one hour, the weakness or treachery of a
single man surrendering every thing. for which the
Scottish nation had struggled and fought during so
many ages. These remonstrances of the Cardinal
were not without effect. They were addressed to
prejudices and passions which are deeply rooted in
the human heart. The fame hatred to the ancient
enemies of their country, the fame jcaloufy of na-
tional honour, and pride of independence, which,
at the beginning of the present century, went near
to prevent the Scots from consenting to an union
with England, upon terms of great advantage, did,
at that time, induce the whole nation to declare
against the alliance which had been concluded. In the
one period, an hundred and fifty years of peace be-
tween the two nations, the habit of being fubjeted
to the fame King, and governed by the fame max-
ims, had considerably abated old animofities, and
prepared both people for incorporating. In the
other, injuries were still fresh, the wounds on both
fides were open, and, in the warmth of refentmenr,
it was natural to seek revenge, and to be averse from
reconcilement. At the Union in I707, the wis-
dom of parliament despised the groundless murmurs
occasioned by antiquated prejudices; but in 1543,
the complaints of the nation were better founded,
and urged with a zeal and unanimity, which it is nei-
therjuft, nor safe to disregard. The rage of the
people rose to such an height, that the English am-

H 3 baflador

B o o K baffador could hardly be proteEed from their in.

11. fults. The clergy contributed a great fum towards
i4r @- preserving the church from the dominion of a Prince,

whose fyfiem of Reformation was so fatal to their
power. The nobles, after having mortified the
Cardinal, so lately, in such a cruel manner, were,
now, ready to applaud and to fccond him, as the
defender of the honour and liberty of his country.

He excites ARGYLL, Huntly, Bochwell, and other power.
aimoR the ful Barons declared openly against the alliance with
whole na-
tion againif England. By their afiftance, the Cardinal seized
theEnlii. on the persons of the young Queen and her mother,

and added to his party the splendor and authority
of the royal name *. He received, at the fame
time, a more real accession to his strength, by the
arrival of Matthew Stewart Earl of Lennox, whose
return from France he had earnestly follicited. This
young nobleman was the hereditary enemy of the
house of Hamilton. He had many claims upon
the Regent, and pretended a right to exclude him,
not only from succeeding to the Crown, but to de-
prive him of the possession of his private fortune.
The Cardinal flattered his vanity, with the profpeEt
of marrying the Queen Dowager, and affeaed to
treat him with so much respect, that the Regent
became jealous of him as a rival in power.

THIS suspicion was artfully heightened by the

Abbot of Paisley, who returned into Scotland some
time before the Earl of Lennox, and ated in con-
cert with the Cardinal. He was a natural brother

Kei:h's ETi. of Scotl. 30.

or

of the Regent, wirh whom he had great credit; a- B o o K
warm partizan of France, and a zealous defender 11.
of the established Religion. He to6k hold of the
Regent by the proper handle, and endeavoured to
bring about a change in his sentiments, by working
upon his fears. ' he desertion of the nobility, the
difaffeEtion of the clergy, and the rage of the peo-
ple; the resentment of France, the power of the
Cardinal, and the pretensions of Lennox, were all
represented with aggravatioh, and with their molt
threatning aspet.

MEAN while, the day appointed for the ratifica-

tion of the treaty with England, and the delivery
of the hoflages approached, and the Regent was
still undetermined in his own mind. He acted to
the lafl, with that irresolution and inconsistence,
which is peculiar to weak men, when they are so
unfortunate as to have the chief part in the condu&t
of difficult affairs. On the 25th of August, he
ratified the treaty with Henry, and proclaimed the
Cardinal, who still continued to oppose it, an ene-
my to his country. On the 3d of September, he Obliges.the
secretly withdrew from Edinburgh, met with the Rgent to
Cardinal at Callender, renounced the friendship of the friend-
England, and declared for the interests of France *. Pglwinth

HENRY, in order to gain the Regent, had not

Ifpared the molt magnificent promises. · He had of-
sered to give the Princess Elizabeth in marriage to
his eldest son, and to constitute him King of that
part of Scotland, which lies beyond the river Forth.

* Sadler, 339, 356.

11 4 But

BOOK But upon finding his interest in the kingdom to belefG

I. considerable than he had imagined, the English mo.

narch began to trea: him with little refpec. The
young Queen was now in the cuflody of'his ene.
mies, who grew every day more numerous and more
popular. Fhey formed a separate court at Stirling,
and threatened to elec another Regent. The French
King was ready to afford them his protection, and
the nation, out of hatred to the English would
have united in th:eir defence. In this ficuation, the
Regent could not retain his authority, without
sudden change of his measures ; and though he en.
deavoured, by ratifying the treaty, to prelerve the
appearances of good faith with England, he was
obliged to throw hinmfef into the arms of the party,
which adhered to France.

And toper- SooN after this sudden revolution in his political
pi3rones. principles, the Regent changed his fcntiments con.

cerning religion. "I he spirit of controversy was
then new and warm; books of that kind were ea-
gerly read by men of every rank ; the love of no-
velty, or the convition of truth, had led the Re-
gent to express great elteem for the writings of the
Reformers; a:-.d having been powerfully supported
by those who had embraced their opinions, he, in
order to gratify them, entertained, in his own fami-
ly, two of the mit noted preachers of the Protef-.
tant doctrine, and, in his firil Parliament, content,
ed to an aFt, by which the laity were permitted to
read the cri tures in a language which they under-
stood. Tru;: needed on'y a fair hearing to be an
over-match for error. 'Absurdities, which had long

im-

inpofed in the ignorance and credulity of man- B o o K
indl, were detected and exposed to public ridicule; II.
nd under the countenance of the Regent, the Re- Vr
rrmation made great advances. The Cardinal ob-
rved its progress with concern, and was at the ut-
oft pains to obftruEt it. He represented to the
Regent his great imprudence in giving encourage-
tent to opinions, so favourable to Lennox's preteh-
ins; that his own legitimacy depended upon the
klidity of a sentence of divorce, founded on the

3ope's authority; and that by suffering it to be

|lled in queRtion, he weakened his own title to the
Iccelion, and furnilhed his rival with the only ar-

|ment, by which it could be rendered doubtful *.
hefe insinuations made a deep impression on the
gent's timorous spirit, who, at the profpe2 of
h imaginary dangers, was as much startled as
Cardinal could have wilhed; and his zeal for
Protestant religion was not long proof againit
fear. lie publickly abjured the doctrine of the
formers in the Franciscan church at Stirling, and
lared not only for the political, but the religious
nions of his new confidents.

THE pretensions of the Earl of Lennox to the fucceftlon
e thus founded. Mary, the daughter of James 1. was
ried to James Lord Hamilton. Elizabeth, a daughter of that
riage, was the wife of Matthew Earl of Lennox, and the
lent Earl was her grandson. The Regent was likewise the
dfon of the Princess Mhary. But his father having married
et Beaton the Regent's mother, after he had obtained a di-
ce from Elizabeth Home his former wife, Lennox pretended
t the sentence of divorce was unjust, and that the Regent,
1g born while Elizabeth Home was still alive, ought to be
le.-ed , i'icmiei.ate. Crawf. Peer 92z.

ITi E

B o o K THE Protestant dotrine did not susser much

II. his apoftacy. It had already taken so deep rod
--v in the kingdom, that no discouragement or feveriq

could extirpate it. The Regent indeed confentd
to every thing, that the zeal of the Cardinal though;
necessary for the preservation of the established reli.
gion. The Reformers were persecuted with all ti
cruelty, which superstition inspires into a barbarou
people. Many were condemned to that dread
death, which the church has appointed for the pu
nifihment of its enemies; but they suffered with;
spirit so nearly resembling the patience and fortitu
of the primitive martyrs, that more were convetn
than terrified by such spectacles.

Beatoun THE Cardinal, however, was now in poffiesl
engrosses of every thing his ambition could desire; and ea
the chief diretionofercifed all the authority of a Regent, without
affairs envy of the name. He had nothing to fear fro

the Earl of Arran, who having by his inconfhan
forfeited the public esteem, was contemned by
half of the nation, and little trusted by the oth&
The pretensions of the Earl of Lennox were
only thing which remained to embarrass him. H
had very successfully made use of that nobleman
work upon the Regent's jealousy and fear, but
he no longer stood in need of such an inftrume
he was willing to get rid of him with decency. Le
nox soon began to fufpec his intention; promif
flattery, and refpe& were the only returns he
hitherto received for substantial services; but atlA
the Cardinal's artifices could no longer be conc
cd, and Lennox, instead of attaining power

4 di

gnity himself, saw that he had been employed B o o K
ly to procure these for another. Resentment and II.
appointed ambition pushed him on to seek revenge
that cunning prelate, who, by sacrificing his in-
eft, had so ungenerously purchased the Earl of
rran's friendship. He withdrew, for that reason,
rm court, and declared for the party at enmity
th the Cardinal, which, with open arms, received
onvert, who added so much lustre to their cause.

THE two factions which divided the kingdoms
re still the fame, without any alterations in their
ws or principles; but, by one of those strange
olutions, which were frequent in that age, they
, in the course of a few weeks, changed their
ers. 'Ihe Regent was at the head of the par-
ans of France and the defenders of Popery, and
nnox in the fame flation with the advocates for
Englilh alliance, and a reformation in religion.
e one laboured to pull down his own work,
ich the other upheld with the fame hand, that
hitherto endeavoured to destroy it.

,ENNOX'S impatience for revenge got the start
the Cardinal's ativity. He surprised both him
the Regent by a sudden march to Edinburgh
h a numerous army; and might easily have
ffhed them, before they could prepare for their
Ence. But he was weak enough to liften to pro-
fas for an accommodation; and the Cardinal
used him so artfully, and spun out the treaty to
h a length, that the greater part of the Earl's
tps, who served, as is usual wherever the feudal

infti-

B o o K institutions prevail, at their o\n expence, desert

II. him ; and in concluding a peace, instead of givin
'"J~ the law, he was obliged to receive it. A feco

attempt to retrieve his affairs ended yet more unfo
tunately. One body of his troops was cut to piece
and the reft dispersed; and with the poor
mains of a ruined party, he must either have ful
mitted to the conqueror, or have fled out of
kingdom, if the approach of an English army
not brought him a short relief.

Henry in- HENRY was not of a temper to bear tamely
vades Scot- indignity, with which he had been treated,
land.

by the Regent and Parliament of Scotland. w
at the time when they renounced their alliance
him, had entered into a new and triter confe
racy with France. The rigour of the season reta
ed for some time the execution of his vengean
But in the spring, a considerable body of infant
which was destined for France, received orders
fail for Scotland, and a proper number of caval
was appointed to join it by land. The Reg
and Cardinal little expeted such a visit. They
trusted that the French war would find employm
for all Henry's forces ; and, from an unaccounta
security, were wholly unprovided for the dsef
of the kingdom. The Earl of Hartford, alead
fatal to the Scots in that age, commanded this
my, and landed it, without opposition, a few mi
Mtay , above Leith. He was quickly master of thatpla

; and marching directly to Edinburgh, entered

with the fame ease. After plundering the adjae
counlT: the richilit, and most open in Scotland,

on fire both these towns; and upon the-approach B o o K
some troops gathered together by the Regent, II.
this booty on board the fleet, and with his land 'Y-
rces retired safely to the English borders, deliver-
g the kingdom, in a few days, from the terror of
invasion, concerted with little policy, carried on-
great expence, and attended with no advantage.
Henry aimed at the conquest of Scotland, he
ined nothing by this expedition ; if the marriage
had propoled, was still in his view, he loft a
eat deal. Such a rough courtship, as the Earl of
unrly humorouny called it, disgusted the whole
tion; their aversion for the match grew into ab-
orrence; and exasperated by so many indignities,
e Scots were never, at any period, more attached
France, or more alienated from England.

THE Earl of Lcnnox alone, in spite to the Re-
nt and French King, continued a correspondence
ith England, which ruined his own interest, with-
ut promoting Henry's. Many of his own vassals
referring their duty to their country before their as-
Ection to him, refused to concur in any design to
vour the public enemy. And after a few feeble
nd unsuccessful attempts to disturb the Regent's
dminifration, he was obliged to fly for safety to
ecourt of England, where Henry rewarded ser-
ices which he had the inclination, but not the
ower to perform, by giving him in marriage his
ece the Lady Margaret Douglas. This unhappy
ile, however, was destined to be the father of a
ace of kings. He saw his son Lord Darnley
ntnt the throne of Scotland, to the perpetual ex-

clufion

B o oK clufion of that rival who now triumphed in h

II. ruin. And, from that time, his posterity have ht

-
sthe sceptre in two kingdoms, by one of which

was cast out as a criminal, and by the others
ceived as a fugitive.

A peace MEAN while hoffilities were continued by bo,
conc d. nations, but with little vigour on either fide. '1

historians of that age relate minutely the circui
fiances of several skirmishes and inroads, which
they did not produce any considerable effe&, at t!
distance of time, deserve no remembrance*.
last an end was put to this languid and inactive wr

THOUGH this war was distinguished by no importantora

cifive action, it was, however, extremely ruinous to individui
There fill remain two original papers, which give us fomei'
of the miseries, to which the most fertile counties in the kiq
dom were exposed. by the sudden and deftru&ive incurfionrs
the borderers. The firfl Ieems to be the report made to HeE
by the Englifli wardens of the marches, for the year 1544,1
contains their exploits from the zd of July, to the 17th of E
vember. The account it gives of the different inroads, orh
rajs, as they are called, is very minute; and in conclufon, I
fum total of mischief they did is thus computed:

Towns, towers, fledes, barnekyns, parylhe-churches,

baftel-houfes ca:t down or burnt -

Scots slain - - -
Prisoners taken . i
Nolt, i. e. horned cattle, taken - - o,]
Sheep - - ,
Nags and geldings - - ,
Goats - - - st
Bolls of corn - - -
[nfight-gear, i. e. holhold furni:ure, not reckoned.

Haynes' fate papers, 4

1

a peace, in which England, France, and Scot- B o o
nd were comprehended. Henry laboured to ex- II-
ude the Scots from the benefit of this treaty, andJune i154.
reserve them for that vengeance, which his at-
ntion to the affairs of the continent had hitherto
layed. But although a peace with England was
the last consequence to Francis I. whom the Em-
ror was preparing to attack with all his forces,
was too generous to abandon allies, who had
ed him with fidelity, and he chore rather to pur-
afe Henry's friendship with disadvantage to him-
If, than to leave them exposed to danger. By
elding tome things to the interest, and more to
ie vanity of that haughty Prince; by submission,
ttery, and address, he, at length, prevailed to
ye the Scots included in the peace agreed upon.

AN event which happened a short time before the The mur-
nclufion of this peace, rendered it more accept- derof Bca-

toun.

The other contains an account of an inroad by the Earl of
artford, between the 8th and 23d of September, i54 g; the
ative is more general, but it appears that he had burnt,
ad, and deltroyed in the counties of Berwick and Roxburgh
ay,
Monalleries and Friar-houfcs - * 7
Castles, towers, and piles -16
Market towns - 5
Villages - 243
Milns - - - 3
Hospitals - 3
I there were cast down or burnt. Haynes '2. As the Scots
re no less skilful in the practice of irregular war, we may
nclude that the damage which they did in England was not in-
rfiderable; and that their raids were no less wasteful, than
kJrfrays of the Englilh.

able

B o o K able to the whole nation. Cardinal Beatoun h

I not usCd his power with moderation, equal to th

prudence by which he attained it. Notwithfand
ing his great abilities, he had too many of the pal
sions and prejudices of an angry leader of a factio
to govern a divided people with temper. Hisrt
fentment againit one party of the nobility, his in
lence towards the reft, his severity to the Reformen
and, above all, the barbarous and illegal executi:
of the famous George Wifhart, a man of honou
able birth, and of primitive fanaity, wore out
patience of a fierce age ; and nothing but a bo
hand was wanting to gratify the public wish byi
deftrution. Private revenge, inflamed and fans
fled by a false zeal for religion, quickly fuppli
this want. Norman Lefly, the eldest son of
earl of Rothes, had been treated by the Cardin
with injustice and contempt. It was not the tempr
of the man, or the spirit of the times, quietly todi
gefi an affront. And as the profefimon of his adver
fa, r screened him from the effeics of what is callk
an honourable refenrment, he resolved to take th
iftisfaEtion, which he could not demand. This x
solution deserves as much censure, as the fingul
courage and condu&t with which he put it in exe
cution excite wonder. The Cardinal, at that time
resided in the castle of Saint Andrews, which he ha
fortified at great expence, and in the opinion ofth
age had rendered it impregnable. His retinue M
numerous, the town at his devotion, and the neigh
bouring country full of his dependents. In thi
situation, sixteen persons undertook to surprise hi
caflle, anUl to a.TaifTnate him.mcif, ; and their ficeli

as equal to the boldness of the attempt. Early in B o o k
e morning they seized on the gate of the castle, II.
hich was set open to the workmen who were em- ''
oyed in finilhing the fortifications; and having
laced sentries at the door of the Cardinal's apart-
ent, they awakened his numerous domestics one by
e, and turning them out of the castle, they with- siay l2o
t noise, or tumult, or violence of any other per- I546
n, delivered their country, though by a most un-
ftifiable action, from an ambitious man, whole pride
as insupportable to the nobles, as his cruelty and
inning were the great checks to the Reformation.

His death was fatal to the Catholic religion, and TheRegenh
the French interest in Scotland. The fame zeal attempts irs

vain tofeiz.
r both continued among a great party in the na- the mut-

derers.

n, but when deprived of the genius and authority
so skilful a leader, was of small consequence.
thing can equal the consternation which a blow
unexpeCted occasioned among his adherents;
ile the Regent secretly enjoyed an event, whicl
oved out of his way a rival, who had not only
ipfed his greatness, but almost extinguished his,
er. Decency, however, the honour of the
urch, the importunity of the Queen Dowager and
rfaction, his engagements with France, and,
ve all thele, the desire of recovering his eldest
p, whom the Cardinal had detained for some time
St. Andrew's in pledge of his fidelity, and wlio,
ether with the castle, had fallen into the hands
the conipirators, indtuced him to take arms in or-
r to revenge the death of a man he hated.
,'o, I. J, HE

B o o K HE threatned vengeance, but was unable to ex

II. cute it. One part of military science, the art of
-v--.' tacking fortified places, was then unknown in SCG

land. The weapons, the discipline and impetuof
of the Scots, rendered their armies as unfit
sieges, as they were active in the field. An hu
dred and fify men, which was the greatest numi
t:.e conlpirators ever assembled, resifted all the
fbrts of the Regent for five months *, in a pla
:hich a single battalion, with a few battering c
non, would now reduce in a few hours. Thiste
ous siege was concluded by a truce. The Reg
undertook to procure for the conspirators an ab
lution from the Pope, and a pardon in Parliame
and upon obtaining these, they engaged to sura
der the castle, and to set his lon at liberty.

IT Is probable, that neither of them were finc

in this treaty. On both fides, they fought oni'
amuse, and to gain time. The Regent had appi
to France for affifance, and expeted soon to h
the conspirators at mercy. On the other hand,
Leflv and his associates were not at firfi incited
Henry to murder the Cardinal, they were, in
fcquel, powerfully supported by him. Notsw
fianding the silence of cotemporary hifiorians, t
are violent prcfumptions of the former; of the
ter tlere is undoubted certainty -. During
siege, the conspirators had received from Engl
supplies both of money and provisions; and
Henry was preparing to renew his proposals

' FLt. Reg. Scot, 2. 379. t Keith, 6o.

cer¢

cerning the marriage and the union he had projec:- B o o ig
ed, and to second his negotiations with a numerous II-
army, they hoped, by concurring with him, to be 'i'
in a situation, in which they would no longer need
a parden, but might claim a reward.

THIE death of I-enry blafled all these hopes. It

happened in the beginning of next year, after a anuaryzg,

ign of greater splendor than true glory; buffling, '57'
thugh not active; oppressive in domeflic govern-

cnt, and in foreign politics wild and irregular.
But the vices of this Prince were more beneficial to
maniined, than the virtues of others. I-is rapaci-
ifnefs, his profusion, and even h's tyranny, by
epreiing the ancient nobility, and by adding new
roperty and power to the Commons, laid the foun-
ations of the British liberty. 1-1is other passions
ontributed no less towards the downfal of Popery,
nd the eftabliflment of religious freedom in the na-
ion. His relentmentled him to ab)lifh the power,
nd his covetousness to seize the wealth of the
hutch; and by withdrawing there supports, made
teal', in the following reign, to overturn the whole
bric of iuperftition.

FRANCIS I. did not long survive a Prince, who
ad been alternately his rival and his friend; but
is successor Henry II. was not neglectful of the
rench interest in Scotland. He sent a confider- Troops art
ble body of men, under the command of Leon ri, freom
trozzi, to the Regent's afifftance. By their long
xpcrience in the Italian and German wars, the
tr'nch had become as dextrous in the conduct of

I 2 sieges,

B o o R sieges, as the Scots were ignorant ; and as the bold

II. ness and despair of the conspirators could not defen
V-- them against their superior art, they, after a fiho

Fo-ce th- rcfiftance, fur-endered to Strozzi, who engaged, i
caniI of St. dhe name of the King his master, for the securitys
Andrews to
fu'rendrr. their lives; and as his prisoners transported them int

France. The cafile itself, the monument of Bea
toun's power and vanity, was demolished, in obed
ence to the canon law, which, with admirable p
licy, denounces its anathemas even against the houl
in which the sacred blood of a Cardinal happens
be shed, and ordains them to be laid in ruins *.

THE archbifloprick of St. Andrew's was befRo

ed by the regent upon his natural brother John H;
milton Abbot of Paisley.

-e-:.ri:h THE delay of a few w-eeks would have favedt
,-r Eng- conspirators. Those Ministers of Henry VIII. w]

had the chief direction of affairs during the min
ritv of his son Edward VI. conducted themfevi
with regard to Scotland, by the maxims of theirl
.atier, and refo!ved to frighten the Scots into
treaty, w-hich they had not abilities or address
bring about by any other method.

BL-T beforee e roceed to relate the events wli

their invasion of Scotland occasioned, we fhalllt
ro take notice of a circumstance unobserved by,
temporary hi'rorians, but extremely remarkable
the -fcov.-r- it makes of the fentimernts and fpi

P ,.,. r IIit. Ref i.
1 .

vhich then prevailed among the Scots. The con- B o o K
fpirators against Cardinal Beatoun found the Re- II-
gent's eldest son in the caffle of St. Andrew's; and '
s they needed the protection of the Englifi, it was
to be feared that they might endeavour to purchase
it, by delivering to them this important prize. The

irefumptive heir to the Crown, in the hands of the
vowed enemies of the kingdom, was a dreadful
.rofpecl. And, in order to avoid it, the Parlia-

sent fell upon a very extraordinary expedient. By
n aft made of purpose, they excluded " the Re-
gent's eldest son from all right of fuccefflon,
public or private, so long as he should be detain-
ed a prisoner, and substituted in his place, his
other brothers, according to their seniority, and
in failure of them, those who were next heirs to
the Regent *." Succession by hereditary right
an idea fb obvious and so popular, that a nation
Idom ventures to make a breach in it, but in cafes
fextrene ncceffity. Such a necessity did the Par-
ament discover in the pre :nt situation. Hatred
England, founded on the memory of past hofti-
ties, and heightened by the finart of recent inju-
es, was the national passion. This dictated that
ncommon statute, by which the order of lineal
/ccefsTon was so remarkably broken. The modern
eories, which represent this right as divine and
nalienable, and that ought not to be violated upon
hy consideration ;whatsoever, fcem to have been
icn altogether unknown.

* Epift. Reg Scot. z. 359.

I 3 IN

B o o K IN the beg'nning of September, the Earl of Hart.

11. ford, now Duke of Somerilr, and Protccqtor of Eng.

s.ot -;r ]and, entered. Scotland at the head of 18,ooo men,
inac-!' :y an :, at til e fime time, a fleet of 6o fiips appeared

g on the coai, to second his land forces. The Scots

had fur ibme time observed this storm gathering,
and were prepared for it. Their army was almoR
double to i:ac of the enemy, and posted to the great.
eft adva-age on a rising ground. above Miufclburgh,
nor far from the banks o, the river Fiik;e. Both rhefe
circumfiances alarmed the Luuke of Somerlet, who
saw his danger, and would willingly have extricated
himfeif out of it, by a new overture of peace on con.
litions ext-crrely reaionable. But this moderation
bzing imputed to fear, his proposals were rejefed
with that scorn, which the confidence of success in.
fplrcs; and if the conduct of the Regent, who comr
manded the ScLttifh army, had been in any degre
equal to his confidence, the cietruction of the Eng
lifh must have been inevitable. They were in a f
tuation, p eciti-y iimrilar to that of their countrymrr
under Oliver Cromwell, in the following century
The Sco:s had choicn their ground so well, thati
was impc;fbie to !orce them to give battle; a feo
days had exhaufled the forage and provision of
narrow country ; the fiect could only furnish a scant
and precarious fubfiftcnce; a retreat therefore wa
neceiTary ; but di'Cgrce, and perhaps ruin, wereth
confcquences of retreating.

ON bo:h these occasions, the national heat aa

imnFeoctlry of t;,e Scors saved the Englifl, and pre
c:p:artW:r tl.e.r own country into the utmost dang

%t

he undisciplined courage of the private men be- B o o K
nme impatient at the fight of an enemy. rl he Ge- II.
ral was afraid of nothing, but that the English- '"te'
otdld escape from him by flight; and leaving his Pinkey.
rong camp, he attacked the Duke of 5omerfet September
ar Pinkey, with no better success than his rashness 10', 47.
served. The ProteCtor had drawn up his troops
a gentle eminence, and had now the advantage
ground on his fide. The Scottish army consist-
almost intirely of infantry, M, hose chief weapon
s a long spear, and for that reason tleir files
re very deep, and tlhir ranks close. 1 hey ad-
nced towards the enemy in three great bodies, and
they passed the river, were considerably exposcd
the fire of the English fleet, which lay in the
y of ,iuffelburgh, and had drawn near the shore.
he English cavalry, flushed with an advantage
ich they had gained in a fkirmiflih ome days be-
e, began the attack with more impetuosity, than
od condut. A body so firm and compa& as the
ots, easily resifted the imprefflon of cavalry, broke
em, and drove them off the field. The Englifl
Fantry, however, advanced, and the Scots were at
ce exposed to a flight of arrows, to a fire in flank
m 400 foreign Fusileers who served the enemy,
d to their cannon which were planted behind the
antry, on the highest part of the eminence. The
pth and clofcnefs of their order making it impof-
le for the Scots to stand long in this situation;
e Earl of Angus, who commanded the vanguard,
deavoured to change his ground, and to retire to-
ards the main body. But his friends unhappily
illook this motion for a flight, and fell into con-

I 4 furlon.

B o o K fusion. At that very instant, the broken cavali

II having rallied, returned to the charge; the so
^Vr' pursued the advantage they had gained; the pro

pest of vitory redoubled the ardour of both: and
in a moment, the rout of the Scottish army becan
universal. and irretrievable. The encounter in t
field was not long, nor bloody; but in the purfui
the Enclifh discovered all the rage and fiercene
which national antipathy, kindled by long emul
tion, and inflamed by reciprocal injuries, is apt
infpirc. The pursuit was continued for five hour
and to a great dilance. All the three roads, I
which the Scots fled, were firewed with spears a
fNords, and targets, and covered with the bod
of the slain. Above Io,0oo men fell on thisda
one cf the most fatal Scotland had ever seen. A f
were taken prisoners, and among there some pertf
of diftincion. And the ProteEtor had it now
his power to become master of a kingdom, out
which, not many hours before, he was almofti
liged to retire with infamy *

B

* THE f.lloxing rafTage in a curious and rare journal of

P;cec&cr's cxpedition into Scotland, uritten by W. Patten,
was 3oir.ed in comrmifion xith Cccil, as Judge Marshal of
armra, .and printed in I S, deserves our notice; as it gii
just idea of the militar dcicipline of the Scots at that i
" E wht ka. as:er I le-r.ed, iecially touching their order,
anmour, a-r_ :heir m-r.ner as v. ell of going to ofiend, as oftz
ing to defend, I have tho:ght r.eceffary here to utter. H
bt.i.:ers h:ve they few or ncne, and appoint their fight mofR
rmc]; l; a 'vs a-foot. They come to the field well furnifi
.-:.hi jck ar.ld :..u, dagger and buckler, and swords all b
and th.r., of exceedirg £cod temper, and universally so maW

BUT this victory, however great, was of no real B o K
tility, for want of skill, or of leisure, to improve II.
. Every new injury rendered the Scots more a- Tei' -
erse from an union with England ; and the Pro- tory of

little bene-

&Eor negleced the only measure, which would fit to the
ave made it necessary for them to have given ngl"fh.
eir consent to it. He amused himself in wafting
e open country, and in taking or building several
etty cafles; whereas by fortifying a few places
hich were accessible by sea, he would have laid
he kingdom open to the English, and, in a short
me, the Scots must either have accepted of his

ice, that as I never saw none so good, so think I it hard to de-
ire the better. Hereto every man his pike, and a great kercher
rapped twice or thrice about his neck, not for cold, but for
utting. In their artay towards joining with the enemy, they
ling and thrust so near in the fore rank, Ihoulder and shoulder
*0ether, with their pikes in both their hands ftreight afore them,
nd their followers in that order so hard at their backs, laying
eir pikes over their foregoers shoulders, that, if they do a fail
discovered, no force can well withstand them. Standing at
efence they thrust flouldcrs likewise so nigh together, the fore
nks well nigh to kneeling, stoop low before, their fellows be-
jind hol ing their pikes with both hands, and therewith in their

eft their bucklers, the one end of the pike againit their right
ot, and the other against the enemy breaft-high; their followers
roing their pike points with them forward; and thus each with
tcr so rnih as space and place will susser, through the whole
ard, so thick, that as easily (hall a bare finger pierce through
he fin of al angry hedge hog, as any encounter the front of
neir pikes." Olher curious particulars are found in thisjournal,
omr which Sir John Hayward ha; borrowed his account of this
Ixpdition. Life of Edward VI. z79, &c.

The length of the Scots pike or spear was appointed by AA
P. 147 1. to be fix ells; i e. eighteen feet fix inches.

terms,

B o o R terms, or have submitted to his power. By fuchan

1I. improvement of it, his vicory at Dunbar gave
^C r~ Crcmwell the command of Scotland. The battl

of Pinkey had no other cffect but to precipitate the
Scots into new engagements wi:h France. y
situation of the English court may, indeed, be plead
ed in excuse for the Duke of Somerset's condu,
That cabal of his enemies, which occasioned histri.
gical end, was already formed; and while he t.
umphed in Scotland, they secretly undermined hi
power and credit at home. Self-prefervation, ther.
fore, obliged him to prefer his safety before hi
fame, and to return without reaping the fruits ofhi
victory. At this time, however, the cloud bl
over; the conspiracy by which he fell was noty
ripe for execution; and his presence fufpendedi
effec for some time. The supreme power frill
maining in his hands, he employed it to recover
opportunity, which he had loft. A body of troops
by his command, seized and fortified Haddingtou,

April, a place, which, on account of its distance from tA
'354. sea, and from any English garrison, could not

defended without great expence and danger.

Forces the MEAN while the French gained more by thede
Scctsin:oa feat of their allies, than the English did by thd
cloferunion
with victory. After the death of Cardinal Beatou,
France. Mary of Guise, the Queen Dowager, took a con

fiderable share in the direction of affairs. She w'
warmly attached by blood, and by inclination,
the French interest; and, in order to promote
improved with great dexterity every event whi
occurred. The spirit and strength of the Scots WeI

broke

tken at Pinkey; and in an aflembly of nobles B o o K
ich met at Stirling to conlult upon the situation II.
the kin-,dom, all eyes were turned towards France, '
prufpe&t of safety appearing but in assistance
im thence. But Henry II. being then at peace
h Fngland, the Queen represented that they
Id not expect him to take part in their quarrel,
upon views of personal advantage ; and that
hout extraordinary concessions in his favour, no
fiance in proportion to their present exigencies
id be obtained. The prejudices of the nation
Ierfully seconded these representations of the
cen. What often happens to individuals took
e among the nobles in this convention; they
e swayed entirely by their pafTions, and in order
gratfy them, they deserted their former prin-
es, and disregarded their true interefl. In the
lnce of refentmenr, they forgot that zeal for
independence of Scotland, which had prompted
mto rejeft the proposals of Henry VIII. and by
ring, voluntarily, their young Queen in mar- And to of-
e to the Dauphin eldefi son of Henry II. and ser their

Queen in

ich was still more, by proposing to fend her marriage
ediately into France to be educated at his court, tplhe au-
y granted, from a thirst of vengeance, what for-
ty they would not yield upon any consideration
heir own safety. To gain at once such a kingdom
corland, was a matterof no small consequence to
ice. Henry, without hesitation, accepted the
rs of the Scottifl ambassadors, and prepared
the vigorous defence of his new acquisition. Six
ufand veteran soldiers, under the command of
nfieur Deffi, afifted by some of the best officers,

who

B o o K who were formed in the long wars of Francis I.

II. rive. at Leith. They served two campaigns in Sc

V land, with a spirit equal to their former fame. B

their exploits were not considerable. The Sc
soon became jealous of their designs, and neglef
to support them with proper vigour and the c
tion of the Engcifh, in acing wholly upon thed
fenfive, prevented them from attempting any entu
prize of consequence ; and obliged them to exhau
their strength in tedious sieges, undertaken un
many disadvantages. Their efforts, however,w
not without some benefit to the Scots, by comet
ling the English to evacuate Haddingtoun, and
surrender several small forts, which they possessed
different parts of the kingdom.

BUT the consequences of these operations of

troops were fill of greater importance to the Fre
King. The diversion which they occasioned e
abled him to wrest Boulogne out of the hands
the English; and the influence of his army in Sc
land obtained the concurrence of Parliament i
the overtures made to him, by the assembly of
bles at Stirling, concerning the Queen's marri
with the Dauphin, and her education at the co
of France. In vain did a few patriots remonfi
againit luch extravagant concessions, by which Sc
:,-. tr;ty land was reduced to be a province of France; a

r Henry, from an ally, railed to be maiter of
cr::u cd. kingdon ; by which, the friendship of France

came more fatal than the enmity of England;
every tliu.Y was fondly given up to the one, r
had be::: br.veiv defended against the other.

lo

oint of so much confetquence was hastily decided, B o o K
a Parliament, assembled in the camp before Had- II.
ngtoun: the intrigues of the Queen Dowager, the Ju"
al of the clergy, and resentment against England, 548.
d prepared a great party in the nation for such a
p; the French General and Ambaflador, by their
erality and promises, gained over many more.
he Regent himself was weak enough to sloop to
offer of a pension from France, together with
e title of Duke of Chatelherault in that kingdom.
considerable majority declared for the treaty, and
interest of a faction was preferred before the ho-
ur of the nation.

HAVING hurried the Scots into this rafi and fa-,
resolution, the source of many calamities to them- to be edu-

cared in

vcs, and to their Sovereign, the French allowed France.
em no time for reflection or repentance. The
t, which had brought over their forces, was frill
Scotland, and without delay, convoyed the Queen
o France. Mary was then fix years old, and by her
ucation in that court, one of the politest, but mofI
rrupted in Europe, ffe acquired every accompliflh-
ent that could add to her charms as a woman, and
ntrafted many of those prejudices, which occasion-
her misfortunes as a Queen.

FROM the time that Mary was put into their
nds, it was the interest of the French to fufPer
e war in Scotland to languish. The recovering
the Boulonnois was the object Henry had most
heart; and a flight diversion in Britain was sus-
.nt to divide the attention and firength of the

English,

/

B o o K Englilh, whose dometic factions deprived both t

II. arms and counciis of their accustomed vigour. T

government of England had undergone a greatt
volution. The Duke of Scmerfet's power had be
acquired with too much violence, and was exerd
with too little moderation, to be of long continual
Many good qualities, added to great love of
country, could not attone for his ambition in ufu
ing the sole direction of affairs. Many of them
eminent courtiers combined against him; and
Earl of Warwick their leader, no lets ambiti
but more artful than Somerset, conducted his
furcs with so much dexterity, as to raise himself
on the ruins of his rival. Without the invid
name of Protector, he succeeded to all the p0
and influence, of which Somerset was deprived,
he quickly found peace to be necessary for thee
blifhment of his new authority, and the execut
of the vas designs he had conceived.

Pace con- HENRY was no stranger to Warwick's fituati
eluded. and improved his knowledge of it to good purp

in conducting the negociations for a general pe
He prescribed what terms he pleased to the End
Minister, who scrupled at nothing, however ad(i

March 4, tageous to that Monarch and his allies. Engi
1550. consented to restore Boulogne and its dependep,

to France, and gave up all pretensions to atr¢
of marriage with the Queen of Scots, or to thee
quest of her country. A few small forts, of wh
the English troops had hitherto kept possession,
razed; and peace between the two kingdoms'
eflablifhcd on its ancient foundation.

X Be

BOTr the Blitifi nations loft power, as well as Bo o o
eputation, by this unhappy quarrel. It was on Ii.
oth fides a war of emulation and resentment, ra-
her than of interest ; and was carried on, under the
nluence of national animofities, which were blind
o all advantages. The French, who entered into

with greater coolness, conduEted it with more
;ill; and by dcxte-oufly availing themselves of
cry circumstance which occurred, recovered pof-
(ionof an important territory which they had loft,
d added to their monarchy a new kingdom. The
bition of the Englifl Minister betrayed to them
e former; the inconsiderate rage of the Scots a-
ainlt their ancient enemies berfowed on them the
tter; their own address and good policy merited
mh.

IMlMEDIATELY after the conclusion of the peace, The Scots
e French forces left Scotland, as much to their own beoef

jealous ¢,f

tisfaction, as to that of the nation. The Scots soon the French,
und, that the calling to their assistance a people
ore powerful than themselves, was a dangerous ex-
dient. They beheld, with the utmofr impatience,
ose who had come over to proteat the kingdom,
king upon them to command in it; and on many
cations they repented the rash invitation they had
iven. The peculiar genius of the French nation
eightened this disgust, and prepared the Scots to
,row off the yoke, before they had well begun to
el it. The French were, in that age, what they
e in the present, one of the most polished nations in
urope. But it is to be observed, in all their expe-
rions into foreign countries, whether towards the

f outh

B oo K south or north, that their manners have been re.

II. markably incompatible with the manners of eveq

other people. Barbarians are tenacious of their owr
customs, because they want knowledge and taste t
discover the reasonableness and propriety of custom
which differ from them. Nations, which hold t
firtf rank in politeness, are frequently no less ten.
cious out of pride. The Greeks were so in t
ancient world; and the French are the fame
the modern. Full of themselves; flattered by
imitation of their neighbours; and accustomed
confider their own modes as the standards of el
gance, they scorn to disguise, or to lay aside ti
dilfinguifhing manners of their own nation, or;
make any allowance for what may differ from the
among others. For this reason, the behaviour
their armies has, on every occasion, been infuppo0
able to strangers, and has always exposed themt
hatred, and often to deltruction. In that age, tk
over-ran Italy four several times, by their valo,
and loft it, as often, by their insolence. The Scot
naturally an irascible and high-fpirited people,
who, of all nations, can least bear the rhoft dife
insinuation of contempt, were not of a temper
admit all the pretensions of such assuming guelt
The symptoms of alienation were soon visible; th
seconded the military operations of the French troo
with the utrrot coldness, and their disgust grewi
sensibly to a degree of indignation that could hard
be restrained; and on occasion of a very nii
accident, broke out with fatal violence. A p
vate French soldier engaging in an idle quar
with a citizen of Edinburgh, both nations to

art

.ms, with equal rage, in defence of their country- B oo K
en. The Provost of Edinburgh, his son, and fe- II.
ral citizens of diftinftion, were killed in the fray ;
d the French were obliged to avoid the fury of
|e inhabitants, by retiring out of the city. Not-
1 thftanding the ancient alliance of France and Scot-

d, and the long intercourse of good offices be-
en the two nations, an aversion for the French
k its rife at this time, among the Scots, the es-
s whereof were deeply felt, and operated power-
ly through the subsequent peiiod.

FROI the death of Cardinal Beatoun, nothing progrersof
been said of the slate of religion. While the teRefor-
with England continued, the clergy had no lei-
e to moleit the Proteflants; and they were not
considerable enough to expect any thing more
connivance and impunity. The new dootrines
re ill in their infancy; but during this short in-
al of tranquillity, they acquired strength, and
anced, by large and firm fieps, towards a full
blihnment in the kingdom. The first preachers
init popery in Scotland, of whom several had
eared during the reign of James V. were more
nent for zeal and piety, than for learning. Their
uaintance with the principles of the Reformation
partial, and at second hand; some of them had
educated in England; all of them had borrow-
their notions from the books published there;

in the si-ft dawn of the new light, they did not
ture far before their leaders. Eut, in a flort
e, the doctrines and writings of the foreign Re-
ers became generally known; the inquisitive
|OL. I. K genius

B o o K genius of the age prested forward in quest of truth

11. the discovery of one error opened the way to other

'"r" tthe downfal of one impoflure drew many after it

the whole fabric, which ignorance and fuperfitiQ
had erected in times of daiknefs, began to totte
and nothing was wanting to compleat its ruin, but
daring and tivse leader to diret the attack. Such.
the fimousJohnKnox,who, w-ith better qualificatio:
of learning, and ore extensive views than anyof
predecessors in Scotland, poffeiLn d a natural intrepi`
tJ of mind, w-hich sea him above fear. He began
public mininiry at St. Andrew's in the year 1;.
with that ficcefs, which always accompanies a
and -.op!lar eloquence. Instead of amiuin hin
with lopping the branches, he struck diretly at
root of popery, and attacked both the doftriner
difcipFine of the eftabliflcd church, with a vc
rnence peculiar to himself, but admirably fuitabli
the .t -nper ancd ..lhes of the age.

. N adver:fay ib formidabie as Knox, would:

1h;ave c:a.1;' ertcaItd the.l rage of the clergy, who0
fsrved the tnenerc and prorefs of his opinio
wvir'h .he u-nmoi concern. But, at sirs, he re
for si'set into the cafi'e of St. Andrew's, and w
the confpir?.tors kept pofleclion of it, preached p$
lick'.l under their protection. The great revolti
in Eniln , which followed upon the death
Ilenr\ VIII. contributed no less than the zeali
-_nox, towa!'ds c'rmolifling the Popish church;
Sco:la.d. H:'r.ry had loosened the chains, E
i:'-t-ne,-di the s-yoke of Popery. The Ministers of'
sorn Fd'.ard VI. caq them off altogether, ande'

loll 17. .i.

lfilhed the Protestant religion upon aimoft tile fame Bo o K
ooting, whereon it now flands in that kingdom. II.
Ihe influelce of this example reached Scotland, and kV
e happIy efflc s of ecclefiaflicai liberty, in the one
ticil, inlpired the other with an equal desire of e-
vering it. The Reformers had, hitherto, been
lired to conduct themselves with the urmoit cau-
on, and feldorm ventured to preach, but in private
iues, and at a distance from court; they gained
dit, as happens on the firfl publicatiun of every
w reliioen, chiefly among perlbns in the lower

ld middle rank of life. But fe-eral noblemen of
greatest d;ftinAion, having, a'l'ot this time,
pnly efpouled their princi-les, they were no longer
dcr the ncceffity of ating with the nfame reserve;
td with more lcurirty and encouragement, they
dlikcwifc greater fuccels. Thel means of acquir-
. and fpredding knowledge became more com-
on, and the spirit of innovation, peculiar to that
riod, grew every day bolder and more universal.

liHAPPILY for the Reformation, this spirit was
I under lome refraint. It had not yet attained
inefs and vigour, futicient to overturn a system,
nded on the deepeli policy, and fuplported by
emolt formidable power. Under the prehent cir-
mfiances, any attempt towards act;on i iulls have
n lata! to tl e Protestant doStrincs; and it is no
aill proof of the aurhcriry, as well as penetration
the heads of the party, that they were able to
rain the zeal of a fiery and impetuous people, till
t critical and mnatLre junture, when every flep
y took was decisive and fuccef,ful.

IK 2. MEAN-

B o o K MO IANXW LE their cause received reinforcemen

11. from two different quarters, whence they never could
^'r " have expeeted it. The ambition of the house of

Gui-e, and the bigotry of Mary of England ha.
tened the subversion of the i'apal throne in Scot.
land ; and by a singular disposition of Providence
the perlbos who opposed the Reformation in eve
other pa: t or Europe with the fiercest zeal, wer
ma2i i -2'ru:Jents for advancing it in that kingdom

T- q:2n : IAR--

n y of Guiic pof'eifed the fame bold andaf.

3.a";J'7 pirilng spirit, which difcinguifned her family. B
'.. - -= of in her it :.-sas fofrened by the female character, an

acco.-npanied with greater temper and address. He
b:oilers, in order to attain the high objects at whict
trev aimed, ventured upon such daring meafur
as i;ted their great courage. Her designs upon
/uprem;e pov.er were concealed with the utmoftcar
and advanced by address and refinements morent
tural to her sex. By a dextrous application oftho
talents, fie had acquired a considerable influeC
on the councils of a nation, hitherto unacquaine
witih the government of women; and without
finali;st right to any share in the administration
atfs.irs, had engrossed the chief diretion of the
into her o;vn hands. But she did not long refli
tisied with the enjoyment of this precarious pow
which the fickleness of the Regent, or the amtbio
of tl:ofe v. ho governed him, might so easily diftur
and fie began to set on foot new intrigues, with
defegn of un 'ermining him, and of opening toh
fe:f a way to succeed him in that high digni
Her brothers entered warmly into this scheme,

- .fc

ipported it with all their credit at the court of B o o K
France. The French King willingly concurred in II.
imafnlre, by which he hoped to bring Scotland "
nrirely under management, and in any future broil
tith England, to turn its whole force upon that
ingdom.

Ix order to arrive at the desired elevation, the
tuleen Dowager had only one of two ways to chuti;
ither violently to wrest the power out of the hands
f tile Rtgcnt, or to o'tain it by his consent. Un-
er a minority, and among a warli:e and factious
eople, the former was a very uncertain and dan-
grous experiment. The latter appeared to be no
ess impracticable. To perfiade a man voluntarily
o abdiicate the fuprcme power ; to ddcend to a le-
ei with those, above whom le was raised; and to
econtent with the second place where he hhah held
he firll, may well pass for a wild and ciim. rical
rojct. This, however, the Queen attempted;
nd the prudence of the attempt was fuiic;ently
uftified by its success.

THE Regent's inconstancy and irresolution, toge-
hr with the calamities which had befallen the

rpgdom under his adnmiiifiration, raised the pre-

rdices both of the nobles and of the people again:L
in, to a great height ; and the Queen cl cretly
orn,',ed these with much indullry. All who wish-

for a change met with a gracious reception in
'r court, and their fpirlt of diiTc"ction was nou-
i(l:d by such liopes and promises, as, in every Iae,
mlpic on the credulity of the factious. 'The fa- crts tile

Ki vourers tlf"'fmels.

B o o K vourers of the Reformation being the most nume,

II. rous and Jpreading body of the Regent's enemies,
y she applied to them, with a particular attention;

and the gentleneis of her disposition, and seeming
indifference to the reiigious points in dispute, made
all her promises of protection and indulgence pass
upon them for sincere. Finding so great a partof
the nation willing to fall in with her measures, the
Que]een let out for France, under pretence of viit
'oa. ,is. inJ her daughter, and tool along with her tho:

noblemen, who p-ofieled the greatest poer and
credit among their countrymen. Softened by thi
plealures of an elegant court, flattered by the civi
lities of the French King, and the caresses of t,
houie of Guile, and influenced by the feafonabl,
diffribution of a few favours, and the liberal pro
mise of many more, they were brought to approve
of all the Queen's pretensions.

WHILE file advanced by there flow but sure fteK

the Regent either did not foresee the danger whid
threatened him, or neglected to provide againftit
The first discovery of the train which was lai,
came from two of his own confidents, Carnegie
Kinnaird, and Panter Bishop of Ro£s, whom t'
CQ'een had gained over to her interest, and the
employed as the most proper instruments for obtai
ing hi; consent. The overture was made toh'
in zte name of the French King, enforced by p
p.r tlireatenings, in order to work upon his natu
ti.. iit, and vwectened by every promise that co
ri,:-e.ci Ihmn to a proposal so disagreeable. On
one h.:i n, ilhe coiii marion of his French title,

gtq
&

;ther with a considerable pension, the parliamentary B o o K
cknowledgment of his right of fucceflion to the II.
rowvn, and a public ratification of his conduct '"v
urinrg hisregency, were offci-ed him. On the
tilhcr hand, the difplcafure of the French King,
l: power and popularity of the Queen Dowager,
le difaffction of the nobles, with the danger of an
iter-reckoning, were represented in the ltrongeft

oloirrs.

IT was not poTble to agree to a proposal so ex-
|aordinary and unexpeEted, without some previous

!tigle; and had the Archbishop of St. Andrew's
tcn prelcnt to fortify the irresolute and paffve fpi-
tof the Regent, he would, in all probability, have
]jefred it with didlain. Happily for the Queen,

!c iagacity and ambition of that Prelate could, at
is time, be no obfiruction to her views. SHe was
ing at the point of death, and in his absence, the
Ifluence of the Queen's agents on a flexible tem-
r countcrballanced several of the itrongeft pas-
ios in the human mind, and obtained his content
D a voluntary surrender of the supreme power.
AFTER gaining a point of such difficllty, with

tD0~~~ t3)~~~~~ 'Dec. 155i.

inich cafe, the Quren returned into Scotland, in
i cxip:)ation of taking immediate poffcffion of
InV dlS: gi!ty. BPit, by this time, the Archbi-
o of Sr. AndriLw's had recovered of that diftem-
r, which the ignorance of the Scottiih physicians
d pronounced to be incurable. This he owed to
asliPance of the famous Cardan, one of those
i-uilar adventurers in philosophy, of whom Italy

K 4 pro-

B o o E produced so many about this period. A bold ge.

II. nius led him to forne useful discoveries, which me.
L-W- rit the esteem of a more discerning age; a wild ima.

gination engaged him in those chimerical science
which drew the admiration of his cotemporarie
As a pretender to astrology and magic, he wasre.
vered and consulted by all Europe; as a proficient
in natural philosophy, he was but little known
The Archbishop, it it probable, confidered him
a powerful magician, when he applied to him
relief; but it was his knowledge as a philofophg
which enabled him to cure his disease .

TOGETHER with his health, the Archbishop

covered the entire government of the Regent, an
quickly persuaded him to recal that difhonoura
promise, which he had been reduced by the artifi
of the Queen to grant. However great her fu
prize and indignation were, at this fresh instance
his inconstancy, she was obliged to dissemble,
the m'ght have leisure to renew her intrigues wi
all parties; with the Protestants, whom she favo
ed and courted more than ever; with the nobles,
whom lih rendered herself agreeable by vario
arts; and with the Regent himself, in order tog
whom, she employed every argument. But wha
ever impressions her emissaries might have made

* Cardan himfcif was more desirous of being confidered as

Astrologer than a Philoophier; in his book Dc Gcnituris, wei
a calculation of the Archbi'hop's nativity, from which he I
tends both to have prediaed his di:eafe, and to have effefled
cure. He received, fiom the Archbishop, a reward of 1
crowns. A great rim in that age. De itta fJa, p. 3 z

I,3z

e Regent, it was no easy matter to over-reach or B o o K
o intimidate the Archbishop. Under his manage- II.
ent, the negociations were spun out to a great 'v-
ength, and his brother maintained his station with
iataddrefs and firmness, which its importance so
11e merited. The universal defection of the no-
lity, the growing power of the Protestants, who
1 adhered to the Queen Dowager, the reiterated
liciations of the French King, and, above all,
e interposition of the young Queen, who was now
tering the twelfth year of her age, and claimed a
ght of nominating whom she pleased to be Re-
nt, obliged him, at last, to resign that high of-
ce, which he had held many years. He obtained, Prevails on
awver, the fame advantageous terms for himself, to resign
hich had been formerly stipulated. his office.

IT was in the Parliament which met on the Ioth She obtains
April, 1554, that the Earl of Arran executed ykegen
is extraordinary resignation ; and at the fame time
ary of Guise was railed to that dignity, which
Ideen so long the object of lher wishes. Thus,

l

th ; .:ci o .n r

.: ;-rob?.tin, a woman, and a stranger,

35 ivarcal to the lupienfe auti.. icy over a fierce
d tu-bu'cnt people, who seldom submitted, with-
rclu.ance, to th-e legal and ancient government
theii native Monarchs.

V\\HLE the QQueen Dowager of Scotland contri- Reforma-
Ited so much towards the progress of the Refor- tion conti-
ation, by the protection which she afforded it, muae great
bm motives of ambition ; the English Queen, by progress.
'r i'difcreet zeal, filled the kingdom with persons

3 active

B o o K ac^ive in promoting the fame cause. Mary afciade

II. the throne of England, on the death of her brother
C* IdEdward, and soon after married Philip II. of SDain

July 6,
1553. To the persecuting spirit of the Romish fuperPtiion,

and the fierceneis of that age, she added the privatl
resentment of her own, and of her mother's fu.
ferings, with which ihe loaded the Reformed Reli.
gion; and the peevishness and severity of her natu.
ral temper carried the acrimony of all these paffiom
to the utmost extreme. The cruelty of her perse
cution equalled the deeds of those tyrants, who
have been the greatest reproach to human nature
The bigotry of her clergy could scarce keep tae
with the impetuosity of her zeal. Even the unre
lenting Philip was obliged, on some occafions,t
mitigate the rigour of her proceedings. Mani
among the mroti eminent Reformers suffered fortr
doctrines which they had taught; others fled froe
the Rorm. To the greater part of there, Switze
land and Germany opened a secure asylum ; and
a few, out of choice or neceflity, fled into Sc
land. What they had seen and felt in Engla
did not abate the ,warmth and zeal of their ind
nation against Popery. Their attacks were bol
and more successful than ever; and their do&ri
made a rapid progreis among all ranks of men.

THESEE dol'rienes, calculated to rectify the op

niar.s, and to reform the manners of mankind, h
hitherto produced no other effects; but they f
began ,o opera.te with greater violence, and pro
the o.canf , no: o.Ily of subverting the eftablift
r- l.ign; bu; oui' f;ain the throne, and endangs

the kindom. The causes which facilitated the B o o K

3trod;ction of these new opinions into Scotland, II.
id which ciffeminated them so fast through the A ,o
ttion, merit, on that account, a particular and the political
|relul inquiry. The Reformation is one of the vchiclon_
leatet events in the history of mankind, and in tribu"edto-
S. 'wards that.
hatever point of light we view it, is inltructive

intrrelting.

THE revival of learning in the isth and I6th
nturies rouzed the world from that lethargy, in
ich it had been funk for many ages. The hu-
n mind felt its own strength, broke the fetters of
thoricy by which it had been so long retirained,

venturing to move in a larger sphere, pushed
inquiries into every subjeA, with great boldness,
d iilprifing success.

No fooncr did mankind recover the capacity of
rcifing their reason, than religion was one of the
o!je&ts which drew their attention. Long be-
e Luther published his famous Theses, which
ok the Papal throne, science and philosophy had
orien, to many of the Italians, the impoflure
.t',i;rdity of the established fuperlition. That
tie andi refining people, satisfied with enjoying
lt difcoverizs in secret, were little disposed to as-
ne the dangs roLus character of Reformers, and
cGuded the knowledge of truth to be the prero-
ireof the wife, while vulgar minds must be over-
ed and governed by popular errors. But, animat-
with a more noble and disinterested zeal, the Ger-
in Theologian boldly ereced the tandard of truth,

and

B o K and upheld it with an unconquerable intrepidit

II. which merits the admiration and gratitude of all fuc.
~'^ ceeding ages.

THE occasion of Luther's being first disgust

with the tenets of the Romish church, and how
from a small rupture, the quarrel widened into
irreparable breach, is known to every one who
been the least c;:nverfant in history. From tl
heart of Germany, his opinions spread, with aso
nilming rapidity, all over Europe; and where
they came, endangered or overturned the ancie
but ill founded system. The vigilance and adds
of the court of Rome, and the power and bigo
of the Austrian family, suppressed these notions
their first appearance, in the southern kingdoms
Europe. But the fierce spirit of the north, irrit
by multiplied impositions, could neither be mo
fled by the fame arts, nor subdued by the fame fore
and encouraged by some Princes from piety, and
others out of avarice, it easily bore down the fe
opposition of an illiterate and immoral clergy.

THE superstition of Popery seems to have gro

to the most extravagant height, in those coun
which are situated towards the different extremi
of Europe. The vigour of imagination, and
fibility of frame, peculiar to the inhabitants
southern climates, rendered them susceptible of
deepest imprelfions of fuperrtitious terror arnd
dulity. Ignorance and barbarity were no less
vourable to the progress of the fame spirit, amn
the northern nations. They knew little, and

iifpofed to believe every thing. The most glaring B 0 o
bl urdities did not shock their gross underfiandings, 1I.
nid the most improbable fiCtions were received with VV
Implicit affint and admiration.

ACCORDINGLY, that form of Popery, which pre-
ailedin Scotland, was of the most bigotted and
liberal kind. T.hose doctrines which are most apt
;,nck tile human understanding, and those legends
,hichll frthli exceed belief, were proposed to the
e,'e , ;:rhout any attempt to palliate or disguise
lem; nor did they ever call in question the reason-
bends of the one, or the truth of the other.

THE power and wealth of the church kept pace
th the progress of superstition; for it is the na-
re of that spirit to obfcrve no bounds in its re-
ed and liberality towards those, whose character it
erems sacred. The Scottish Kings early demon-
ated how much they were under its influence, by
ir vafl additions to the immunities and riches of
clergy. The profuse piety of David I. who
quired on that account the name of Saint, tranf-
rred almost the whole crown-lands, which were at
at rime of great extent, into the hands of eccle-
aftics. The example of that virtuous Prince was
liated by his successors. The spirit spread among
I orders of men, who daily loaded the priefihood
ith new possessions. The riches of the church all
er Europe were exorbitant; but Scotland was one
those countries, wherein they had farthest exceeded
ejufl proportion. The Scottish clergy paid one
as of every tax imposed on land ; and as there is

no,

B o o K no reason to think that, in that age, they would

II. loaded with any unequal share of the burden,

may conclude, that, by the :ime of the Reform
tion, little less than one half of the property in t
nation had fallen into the hands of a society, wh
is always acquiring, and can never lose.

THE nature, too, of a considerable part of th

property extended the influence of the cler
Many eltates, throughout the kingdom, held
the church; church-lands were let in lease at an
rent, and were peffeffed by the younger sons,
descendants of the be; families *. I he conne
between fijoerior and -'va1, between landlord
tenant, cret-d dependencies, and gave rife to
union of great advantage to the church ; and
estimating the influence of the Popish ecclesias
over the nation, these, as well as the real am
of their revenues, must be attended to, and ta
into the account.

THIS extraordinary share in the national prop

was accompanied with proportionable weight in
supreme council of the kingdom. At a time,w
the number of tem:;oral Peers was extremely fm
and when the Lesser Barons and representatives
Burroughs seldom attended Parliaments, the Ec
fiaftics formed a considerable body there. And
appears from the ancient rolls of Parliament,
from the manner of chufing the Lords of Artic
that the proceedings of that high court must h
been, in a great measure, under their dire&tion
o Kei:h, z 2. Not. (b). t Spots. Hil. of the Ch. of Scot.

TsI
7

Tiis reverence due to their sacred character, B o o K
hicih was often carried incredibly far, contributed II.
o0 a little towards the growth of their power.
he lignity, the titles, and precedence of the Po-
ti clergy are remarkable, both as causes and es-
cs of that dominion, which they had acquired
er the reft of mankind. They were regarded by
e credulous laity as beings of a superior species;
ey were neither fubjeet to the fame ]aws, nor
iedby the fame judges. Every guard, that reli-
ion could supply, was placed around their power,
eirpoffeffions, and their persons ; and endeavours
ere uted, not without success, to represent them

as equally sacred.

TIE reputation for learning, which, however
onfiderable, was wholly engrotfed by the clergy,
ed to the reverence which they derived from
igion. The principles of found philosophy, and
a juit taste, were altogether unknown ; in place
l tefe, were fubfiituted studies, barbarous and
inlnrutive ; but as the ecclcfiatics alone were
nrxcrlmnt inl them, this procured them esteem;

a very little knowledge drew the admiration of
de ages, which knew nothing. War was the
e profeflion of the nobles, and hunting their chief
lufement; they divided their time between these;
acquaintcd with the arts, and unimproved by
nce, they disdained any employment foreign from
irary afiairs, or which required rather penetra-
Dn ad address, tian bodily v;gour. Wherever
formner were lnccciary, the clergy were entrusted;
tlcT they alone were properly qualified for the

rr .i.,

B o K trust. Almost all the high offices in civil govern.

II. ment devolved, on this account, into their hands
b-t The Lord Chancellor was the first subject in tl

kingdom, both in dignity and in power. From
the earlie2r ages of the monarchy, to the death
Cardinal Beatoun, fifty-four persons had held th
high office; and of there, forty-three had beenec.
clefiaftics *. The Lords of Session were suprem
Judges in all matters of civil right; and by its oi
ginal conftirution, the President and one half oft
Senators in this court were churchmen.

To all this we may add, that the clergy bei

separated from the reft of mankind by the lawv
celibacy; and undiftraEfed by those cares, and u.
incumbered with those burdens which occupy
oppress other men, the interest of their order
came their only object, and they were at full leif
to pursue it.

THE nature of their function gave them access

all persons, and at all seasons. They could empl
all the motives of fear and of hope, of terror
of consolation, which operate most powerfully :
the human mind. They haunted the weak and
credulous; they besieged the beds of the ficka
of the dying. They suffered few to go out of
world without leaving marks of their liberality
the church; and taught them to compound wi
the Almighty for their fins, by bellowing ric
upon those, who called themselves his servants,

v Crawf. Offic. of State.

1VT.'

WHEN their own industry, or the superstition of B o o r
,mnkind failed of producing this effec-t, the eccle- 1a
iatics had influence enough to call in the aid of '"
w. Whoever died inteflate, was presumed to have
eftined his moveables to pious uses. The church
ook pofleffon of them. The children, the wife,
he crcdtors of the person deceased were often ex-
ludel from any flare in what was esteemed a fa-
red nroperty . As men are apt to trust to the
|ontinuance of life with foolish confidence, and

lhil(iflly shun every thing, that forces them to
,ink of their mortality, many die without fettling
heir affairs by will; and the bold usurpation of the
lergy in this cafe, of which there are fiequent
efliges in our laws, though none in our historians,
ay be reckoned among the most plentiful sources
the wealth of the church.

AT the fame time, no matrimonial or teflamen-

|ry catife could be tried but in the spiritual courts,

d by laws which the clergy themselves had framed.
hepenalty, too, by which the decisions of thele
iurts were enforced, added to their authority. A
ntcnce of excommunication was no less formida-
e, than a sentence of outlawry. It was pronounced

many occasions, and against various crimes:
bd efides excluding those, upon whom it fell, from

hrillian privileges, it deprived them of all their
|ghts as men, or as"citizens; and the aid of the
iIuar power concurred with the superstition of man-
nid, in rendering the thunders of the church no
;is dcftru :ive than terrible.

* 1iT:ays on Blit. Antiq. 174.
VOL. I. L Tó

B o o K To these general caulcs, may be attributed the

1I. immense growth both of the wealth, and powero
h^"' the Popish church; and without entering into any

more minute detail, this may serve to discover the
foundations, on which a ftrucure so frupendous wa
ereced.

BUT though the laity had contributed, by thr

own fuperlfition and profuseness, to raise the clerg
from poverty and obscurity to riches and eminene,
they began, by degrees, to feel and to murmur.
their incroacllm2nts. No wonder haughty and mar
rial Barons should view the power and poffefli
of the church with envy; and regard the lazy as
inacRive charafter of churchmen with the uttn
contempt. While, at the fame time, the indecel
and licentious lives of the clergy gave great
just offence to the people, and considerably abate
the veneration, which they were accustomed toyi
to that order of men.

I:.!E.-:SE wrealth, extreme indolence, gross iogn

rance, and, above all, the severe injunrtion of a
libacy, had concurred to introduce this corrupti
of morals among the clergy; who, presuming
much upon the flbmiffion of the people, were
no pains either to conceal, or to disguise theiro
vices. According to the accoints of the Refo
ers, confirmed by frveral Popish writers, the mn
open and ficndalous dissolution of manners p
vai'cd among the Scottish clergy *. Cardinal B

, . zsc:. =-. K cith A ppend. 2::, zo5. Lefl. de Reb.G
S:ct. - ;z.

to.

i oru, with the fame public pomp, which is due to B o o K

t legitimate child, celebrated the marriage of his II-
natural d.ti.ghter with the Earl of Crawfulrd's ron *
and, if we may believe Knox, he publickly conti-
nueed to tle end of his days a criminal correfpon-
tderce with her mother, who was a woman of rank.
Thle Other prelates seem not to have been more re-
gul:r and exemplary than their Primate t.

MEN of such charaters ought, in reason. to have
en alarmed at the first clamours raiftd against their
wn morals, and the doftrines of the church, by
he Protestant preachers ; but the Popish ecclesias-
its, either out of pride or ignorance, neglcced
ie proper methods for silencing them. Instead of
forming their lives, or disguising their vices, they
&cted to despise the censures of the people. And
hile the Reformers, by their mortifications and
ifterities, endeavoured to refemblc the first propa-
ators of Chriltianity, the Popifli clergy were com-
?red to all those persons, who are most infamous,

The marriage articles fubfcrlbed with his own hand, in
h.lic, re calls her m;y daughtcr, arc till extant. Keith, p. 42.

t A remrarkable proof of the dissolute manners of the clergy
toind in the public records. A greater number of letters of
.'...::i. eias granted during the firlf thirty years after the
snr:ation, than during the whole period, that has elapsed
ce that time. Thefc were obtained by the sons of the Popish
r'y, The ecclefialtics, who were allowed to retain their be-
e S, aiienated them to tieir children; who, when they ac-
,ire, w eallh, were desirous that the slain of illegitimacy might
{a iiger remain upon their families. In Kei.th's C.aiohinre cf
i c:;Bi.' iops, we find several irfanccs of such alirnaticns
'tirhl lands, by the Popih incu;nbcri., to their nr.aura

L, 2 ia

B o o K in hiflory, for the enormity and scandal of ther

Ii. crimes.

ON- the other hand, instead of mitigating the ri.

gour, or colouring over the absurdity of the eRa.
bliihed doctrines; instead of attempting to found
them upon scripture, or to reconcile them to reason;
they left them without any other support or recoGm
mendation, than the authority of the church, and
the decrees of councils. The fables concerning
purgatory, the virtues of pilgrimage, and the rr.
rits of the faints, were the topics, on which the
infiRed in their discourses to the people; and ti
duty of preaching being left wholly to Monks i
the lowest and most illiterate orders, their comr,
fitions were still more wretched and contemptible,
than the fubjets on which they insisted. Whi
the Reformers were attended by crowded and a!.
miring audiences, the Popish preachers were eith
universally deferred, or listened to with scorn.

THE only device which they employed in or&

to recover their declining reputation, or to c
firm the wavering faith of the people, was equai!
imprudent and unsuccessful. As many doftrini
of their church had derived their credit, at firt
from the authority of false miracles, they now eD
deavoured to call in there to their aid . Buttho!
lying wonders, which were beheld with unfuflpi
o-s a. miration, or heard with implicit faith,i
times of darknegs and of ignorance, met with

* 5 w. r.''.oo<3. 61;-

very diferent reception, in a more enlightened pe B o o K
rod. The vigilance of the Reformers detected 1I
thcfe impoflures, and exposed not only them, but
the cause, which needed the aid of such artifices, to
ridicule.

As the Popish ecclesiastics became more and more
tlle obje&s of hatred and of contempt, the dif-
courses of the Reformers were listened to as so many
calls to liberty; and betides the pious indignation
whlich they excited against those corrupt doctrines,
* hi'h had perverted the nature of true Christianity;
belides the zeal, which they inspired for the know-
ledge of truth, and the purity of religion; they
gave rife also, among the Scottish nobles, to other
vews and passions. They hoped to shake off the
oke of ecclesiastical dominion, which they had
ong felt to be oppressive, and which they now dif-
overed to be unchristian. They expected to re-
over pofeffion of the church revenues, which they
vere now taught to confider as alienations made by
ecr ancestors, with a profusion no less undifcern-
ng than unbounded. They flattered themselves,
hat a check would be given to the pride and lux-
ry of the clergy, who would be obliged, hence-
rward, to confine themselves within the sphere,
eculiar to their sacred character. An aversion for
ie etablifhed church, which flowed from so many
oncurring causes, which was raised by confidera-
ons of religion, and heightened by motives of po-
cy, spread fall through the nation, and excited a
pirt, that burst out, at last, with irresistible vio-
ence.

L 3 RELI-

B o K RFI.ic.a.s conrfdcrati.ns, alone, were fufimcicnt

II. to hav. rouzcd ti'is f;irit. The points in contro.
'= -t- ver\v w-ith the chu ;ih o IRome were ol lo much

iinport.;nce to the hlpp;nc"i of mankind, and so
cli ntial to ( hri i.:it.\, th..t they metited all the
zeal with which the R. ormers contended in order
to efibiifii thc.ii. But the Ic.tolinnation havirg
been rcpr;-c:.t.id .s lthe efic ot f;Tne wild and en.
thufiaic frkr.z! in thl human tnmind, this attempt
to account for ihe tag. r;.ss and izeal with whic
our anc.i; o s el'brac .ind p i-cp.gart ci the l'rotel.
tant doct;-i:'s, bv tr.in'g a viewC of the politica'
moiiv'.s C 1jn", _.hiich iirrlu ncd them, and b
f'tev, -.:r .; - rn.-.i: .!lv tTh- - primp-.ipcd them to ;
v.:.h '!o .:ch

' r';-c. \ill no:, p":'h:a.ps. be eflcem

CeJ n t iL, eLr'''v .rc!o;:. \'xc

ni w

return
the cou. oCi tli .JitOiv.

T -: ,ueen s c¢:vation to the oiEce of Reete

s;e"i; to h--vc trantlorted her, at firll, beyond tbi
know.n pru'.: ce, a"d n-oc'erati;n of her cliarair.

T- .c

She bei.n .:er ac-mini.-ration, by conferring upt

R ~: '- iO- oe gcrnrs feve;al ofc; o t rust and of dignit,;

.I.r' .-. ltep, s\hich bo:h :r-on t he inability of ftrangerstl
fc. u ',- -lfclharae t ;efe of.ccs with vigour, and from t:
F':':- ..- envy nhich their preferment exci:es among the r.-

t.ves, is never attended with good conlequence,
Viimort was rr.aae onmptroller, and entrusted wit
the management of the public revenues; B0on
was appointed Govzrnor of O.kney; and Rubl
honoured with the cuflody of the Great Seal, w
the title of Vice Chancellor *. It was with t

L-:'-.. de Reb. Gecr. Scot. 189.

;ighcl indignation, that the Scots beheld offices of Bo o K
the grcatcll eminencc and authority, dealt out among II.
t-llagcrs. By thcle promotions they conceived the r

|icen to have ofifred an insult both to their under-

alidings, and to their courage; to the former, by

lppoling them unfit for those flations, vwhich their
ncellors had filled with lb much dignity; to the
attcl, by imagining that they were ame

t enough

oc to complain of an afFi'ont, which, in no former
e, would have been tolerated with impunity.

W\HI!.,t thelr nminis were in this disposition, an
nc;ilicnt happened which inilamcd their aversion
rom l'reiicn councils to tlhi ]igcflef degree. Ever
ince the ftimous contclt between the houSes of Va-
;cis :;d 'lanl:tag,.net, the French lhad be:n accuf-
ormcd to cmbarrals the Lngiifl], and to divide their
cengtil by the fuddlcn and formidable incursions of
heir allies, tie Scots. I-ut, as there inroads were
'corn attended with any real advantage to Scot-
and, and exposed it to the dangerous refcntment

a po.'erful neighliour, the SccOts began to grov
els tralable than formerly, and scruplcd, any lon-
Cr, to i:rve an ambitious ally at the price of their
.'n quiet and lecurity. The change, too, which
'as daiiy introducing into the art of war, rendered
he alniilance of the Scottifi forces of lels import-
1: to the French Monarch. For thef£ rcalbns,
Ic,,ry havin g rcxlvCed upon a war with Philip II.

. . oiltei;l, that the Queen of F.nglaind vwuuld
. p.irt in her nhuiband's quarrel, was extremcly

:'.c:tols to flcure, in Scotland, the afl':ance of
hu!n troo)ps, Vwhich would be more at his command

I. 4 t!an

B o o K than an undisciplined army, led by chieftains w':

II. were almost independent. In prosecution of th
"'"ddefign, but under pretence of relieving the noble

from the expence and danger of defending the bo
5-1 ders, the Queen Regent proposed, in Parliamen

to register the value of lands throughout the king
dom, to impose on them a small tax, and to app
that revenue towards maintaining a body of regul
troops, in constant pay. A fixed tax upon land
which the growing expence of government hathii
trocuced into almost every part of Europe, w
unknown, at that time, and seemed altogether ii
consistent with the free and independent spirit oft]
feudal government. Nothing could be more {hoct
ing to a generous and brave nobility, than the cn
trusting, to mercenary hands, the defence of th(
territories which had been acquired, or prefcrve
by the blood of their ancestors. They received t.
prcpoial with the urmoft indignation. About 3.
of the Lesser Barons repaired in a body to the Quoe
Regent, and represented their sense of the intend
innovation, wiih that manly and determined bol
ne's, which is natural to a free people, in a manr
age. Alarmed at a remonstrance delivered in
firm a tone, and supported by such formidable nui
bers, the Queen prudently abandoned a fchen
which she found to be universally odious. Ast
Queen herfelt was known perfectly to underfRa
the circu:nflances and temper of the nation, t
measure was imputed wholly to the suggestions
her foreign counsellors; and the Scots were rea
to proceed to the most violent extremities agai

T

TIrE French, instead of extinguishing, added B o o K
l to the flame. ' They had now commenced hof- II.
ities against Spain, and Philip had prevailed on Attmp
CeQ'een of England, to reinforce his army with to engage

·^

,, , ,T the king-

conrfiderable body of her troops. In order to de. dom in a
vc him of this aid, Henry had recourse, as :he Var with

England.

ojeaed, to the Scots; and attempted to excite
m to invade England. But, as Scotland had
ithinr to dread from a Princess of Mary's chaiac-
, who, far from any ambitious scheme of dif-
rbi!g her neighbours, was wholly occupied in
|dL-avouring to reclaim her heretical fubje&ls; the
Ibles, who were assembled by the Queen Regent

Newbottle, listened to the solicitations of the

Eench Monarch with extreme coldness, and pru-
,ntly declined engaging the kingdom in an enter-
ize lo dangerous and unnecessary. What she
uld not obtain by persuasion. the Queen Regent
_oulght about by a stratagem. Notwithstanding
e peace which subsisted between the two king-
nms, flie commanded her French soldiers to re-
ild a small fort near Berwick, which was appoint-
,by the last treaty, to be razed. The garrison
Bcrwick rallied out; interrupted the work; and
'gaed the adjacent country. This insult rouzed
.fiery spirit of the Scots, and their promptness
revenge the least appearance of national injury
PIpared, in a moment, the wife and pacific refb-
tiois which they had so lately formed. War was
termined, and orders infrantly given for raising a
melous army. But before their forces could as-
nble, the ardor of their indignation had time to
0oi, and the English having discovered no inten-

tion

B o o Ktion to push the war with vigour, the nobles

II. fumed their pacific fvftem, and resolved to stand
' r together upon the defensive. The', marched to

banks of the Tweed, they prevented the incurti
of the enemy, and having done what they thoug
furficient for the safety and honour of their coun
the Quiecn could not induce them, either byheri
treaties, or her artifices, to advance another ftep,

WVHHILE the Scots perfitled in their inactiv

D'Oyfel, the Commander of the French tro
who pofifeied entirely the confidence of the Qu
Regent, endeavoured, with her connivance, to
gage the two nations in hostilities. Contrary to
orders of the Scottish General, he marched over
Tweed with his own soldiers, and invested \W
a sgrrifon of the English. The Scots, infbad
fecondi-g lhis attempt, were enraged at his pref:
tion. The Queen's partiality towards Fraiace
long been fuipected; but it was now visible tha:
wan:only sacrificed the peace and safety of Scotl
to the interefl of that ambitious and afiumingi
Under the feudal governments, it was in ca=:
that subjects were accultomed to address the bol\
remonsiranc-s to t!i:r Sovereigns. \ hile .r
wers in t:icr hands, they felt their own ftreing
and at that time ali their reprefentarions of grievar
carried the autho;-:tv of commands. On thisoie
sion, t g ion o

the

indignati o

of th e out

such vi-lence, that the Queen, perceiving all
tempts to engge th:em in action to be vain, abrui
ly difmilCed her army, and retired with the utm
shame and dilguft; having discovered the impotd

h.r own authority, without effecting any thing B o o
c., could be of advantage to France. II.

T is oifervable, that this fir2t inlRance of con-
pt for the Regent's authority can, in no degree,
i:rnlt'l to tie influence of the new opinions in
.c'n. As the Queen's pretensions to the Re-
c ii been principally tiipportd by thofi who
)Ir:;i tile Refornmation, and as she still needed
1 or a counterpoise to the Archbishop of St.
revw's, andl the partizans of the house of IIamil-
; t;,: '.ere now treated by her with great re-

n, ar etven admitted to no inconsiderable fhlare
,r ta. ctil and confidence. Kirkakly of Grange,
i;e other uirviving conspirators againit Cardi-
Eeatoun, \ere, aboLt this tirc, recalled by her
l ba:iiihment; aniad, throvt1h her connivance,
Pirtesiant preachers eljoyed r.n interval of tran-
.t, which was of great aidvantage to their cause.
et'c by thl.ie inltances o? the Qucen's modera-
, ail h.n.nit:v, t!e Frotefriants lett to others the
e (, rcnlonl rating ; and the leaders of the op-
te facilon set tirh- the fir-ii example of disputing
will of their Sovereign.

s the Queen Regent f-lt how limited and pre- The
otis her auihoiity was, wvile it depended on the "'era
[e o thelee contraliy Iactions, fle endeavoured to with the
blinl it on a broader and more secure Foundatior n,
l:afrening the conclusion of her daughter's mar-
e 'wth ithe Dauphin. Amiable as the Queen of
is then was, in the bloom of youth ; and confi-
ab.e as the territories were, whlich ihe would have

adicd

B o o added to the French monarchy; reasons were

II. wanting to difluade Henry from compleating
TV^'~ first plan of marrying her to his son. The(

flable Montmorency had employed all his inter
defeat an alliance, which refe&aed so much lufil
the Princes of Lorrain. He had represented the
polfihility of maintaining order and tranquillit
mong a turbulent people, during the absence of
Sovereign; and for that realon, had advised H
to befiow the young Queen upon one of the P,
of the blood, who, by residing in Scotland, ,
preserve ithat Kingdom an uleful ally to Fr
which, 't-y a nearer union to the Crown, wouli
come a mutinous and ungovernable proving
B"t, at this time, the Conltable was a prifoia
the hands of the Spaniards, and the Princes of
rain were at the height of their glory; and thti
fluence, seconded by the charms of the young QR
triumphed over the prudent, but envious rei
ftrances of their rival.

D.C T4, THE French king accordingly applied to thel
1557. liament of Scotland, which appointed eight of

members + to represent the whole body of the n~i
at the marriage of the Queen. Among the peri
on whom the public choice conferred this honour
character, were some of the most avowed andz

Melv. alem. 15.

t Viz. The Archbishop of Glasgow, the Bishop of Rof.,

Eifhop of Crkney, the Earls of Rothes and Cafils, Lord S
ing, Lord Seton, the Prior of St. Andrew's, and John r
of Dun.

ss advocates for the Reformation; by which, may B o o K
ellinjated the degree of refpe& and popularity, II.
ich that party had now attained in the kingdom. "V~
e infitruions of the Parliament to those Commis-
ers fill remain *, and do honour to the wisdom
integrity of that assembly. At the fame time
they manifested, with respeCt to the articles of
rri::ge, a laudable concern for the dignity and in-
fl of their Sovereign, they employed every pre-
ion which prudence could diEtate, for preferv-
the liberty and independence of the nation, and
securing the fuccefflon of the Crown in the house
amilton.

ITH regard to each of these, the Scots obtain- Artifices of
vhatever fatisfation their fear or jealousy could the Frenct
and. The young Queen, the Dauphin, and riage rea-
King of France ratified every article, with thetY'
ffolemn oaths, and confirmed them by deeds
rm, under their hands and feals. But on the
of France, all this was one continued scene of
icd and elaborate deceit. Previous to these pub-
transactions with the Scottish deputies, Mary had
n persuaded to subscribe privately three deeds,
ally unjust, and' invalid; by which, failing the
sos her own body, she conferred the kingdom
cot!and, with whatever inheritance or fuccefion
[ht accrue to it, in free gift upon the Crown of
nce, declaring all promises to the contrary, which
n-ceiity of her affairs, and the follicitations of
fL. 'jets had extorted, or might extort from her,

* Keith, Append. 13.

Ct0

B o o n. to be void and of no obligation *. As it gives.

II. a proper idea of the character of the French c

-" under Henry II. wve may observe that the Kingh

self, the Keeper of the Great Seals, the Duke
Guile, and the Cardinal of Lorrain, were the
sons engaged-in conduaing this perfidious and
honourable project. The Queen of Scots was
only innocent actor in that scene of iniquity.
youth, her inexperience, her education in a so
country, and her deference to her uncle's will,
vindicate her, in the judgment of every impa
person, from any imputation of blame on that
count.

THIS grant, by which Mary bestowed thei

ritance of her kingdom upon firangers, wascon
ed with the utmost care from her fubjeEts.
seem, however, not to have been unacquainted
the intention of the French to overturn the fettle
of the succession in favour of the Duke of Chats
rault. The zeal, with which the Archbifhopoi
Andrews opposed all the measures of the Queen
gent, evidently proceeded from the fears and si
cions of that prudent prelate, on this head t.

-A.r; :, TIHE marriage, however, was celebrated
1558. great pomp; and the French, who had hitherto

sected to draw a veil over their designs upon

Corps Diplomat. tom. v. 2z. Ke-h, ;3.

' About this time, the French seem to have had someJd

cf rev. c

i :''.e .rl of i ernox's pretension, to the Sucic

in orec: t i-':.i;m:a:c and alarm the Duke of Chat '-3
Hra.r, :- -, 2 1 . F-h'res Collea. vo!. i. I89.

· .~: .C:) 2~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ '

',

I
S~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~:

, began now to unfold their intentions without B o o K
alifguife. In the treaty of marriage, the depu- II.
iiad agreed that the Dauphin should afluime the
e of King of Scotland. This they confidered
as aan honorary title ; but the French laboured
nnex to it some solid privileges and power. They
fed that the Dauphin's title should be publickly
ognized; that the Crown Matr'inonia] fnould be
ferred upon him; and that all the rights pertain-
to the husband of a Queen should be veiled in
person. By the laws of Scotland, a person who
ried an heirefs-kept possession of her estate dur-
his own life, if he happened to survive her and
children born of the marriage *. This was cal-
the ccrtiefy of Scotland. The French aimed at
ying this rule, which takes pl:ce in private in-
tances, to the succession of the kingdom; and
items to be implied in their demand of the
.'! [alitrimonial, a phrase peculiar to the Scot-
l;itiorians, and which they have neglected to
lain, As the French had reason to expe diffi-
is in carrying through this measure, they began
jilbnding the deputies who were then at Paris.
Fnglifl, in the marriage articles betweeen their
n and Philip of Spain, had set an example to

oae, of that prudent jealousy and rcf rve, with
h a foreigner should be admitted so near the

te. Pil of the fame ideas, the Scotiih depu-

had, in their oath of aliegiance to the TDauphin,
ci'l1 themselves with rem. lrable caution -.
ir an;v:(r W'as in the fame filrit, rcfipcjful, but
; ir t, (icovered a sixcJ reiulution oi consent-

' ibl - '.:, .Tp - 20:ing

ing

B o o K ng to nothing, that tended to introduce any a

II. ration in the order of fucceflion to the Crown.

FOUR of the deputies * happening to die be

they returned into Scotland, this accident wasu
verfally imputed to the effects of poison, which
supposed to have been given them by the emifl
of the house of Guile. The hiflorians of all nat
discover an amazing credulity with refpet toti
of this kind, which are so well calculated to pl
the malignity of some men, and to gratify thel
of the marvellous which is natural to all, that,
every age, they have been swallowed withoute
mination, and believed contrary to reason.
wonder the Scots Ihould easily give credit to a
picion, which received such firong colours of
bability, both from their own resentment, andfro
the known character of the Princes of Lorrain,
little scrupulous about the justice of the ends w
they pursued, or of the means which they empl
ed. For the honour of human nature, it mi
however, be observed, that as we can discover
motive, which could induce any man to perpet
such a crime, so there appears no evidence to p
that it w;,s committed. But the Scots ofthat
inurenced by national animofities and prejut
were incapable of examining the circumstances oft
ca!e with calmness, or of judging concerning i
with candour. All parties agreed in believing
French to !ave been guilty of this deteftableatid
anr- it is obvijous how much this tended to incr

T The oP. ,p of Orkney, :he Ear! of Rothcs. the Eir
C. I- an". Lc i- Flemir.ng.

he aversion for them, which was growing amongB o o K
all ranks of men. II.

NOTWITHSTANDING the cold reception which TheRegent
eir proposal concerning the Crown Matrimonial Prevails or
et with from the Scottish deputies, the Frenchment ta
entured to move it in Parliament. The partizans Novem,9,
f the House of Hamilton, suspicious of their de-
gns upon the fuccefion, opposed it with great zeal.
ut a party, which the feeble and unsteady conduct
f their leader had brought under much difreputa-
on, was little able to withstand the influence of
rance, and the address of the Queen Regent, fe-
nded, on this occasion, by all the numerous adhe-
nts of the Reformation. Betides, that artful
rinces dressed out the French demands in a less
fnfive garb, and threw in so many limitations, as
emed to render them of small consequence. These
ther deceived the Scots, or removed their scruples i
d in compliance to the Queen, they passed an act,
nferring the Crown Matrimonial on the Dauphin;
d, with the fondest credulity, trufled to the frail
curity of words and statutes, against the dangerous
croachments of power *

THE A& of Parliament is worded with the utrnoit care,
h a viev to guard againit any breach of the order of Succef-
. But the Duke, not relying on this alone, entered a solemn
otelation to secure his own right, Keith, 76. It is plain,
t he fufpeetcd the French of having some intention to set aside
right of succession; and, indeed, if they had no design of
kind, the eagerness with which they urged their demand,

Ochi.cli r,
8.~ o;, T. M / THE

BOOK THE concurrence of the Protestants, with

II. Queen Regent, in promoting a measure so acc

"'"""" able to France, while the Popish clergy, under
Continues
to court influence of the Archbishop of St. Andrew's, op
the Prote-

5ants." ed it with so much violence I, is one of those si

lar circumstances, in the conduct of parties,
which this period is so remarkable. It maybe'
fcribed, in some degree, to the dextrous man
ment of the Queen, but chiefly to the moder
of those who favoured the Reformation. The
teftants were, by this time, almost equal to the
tholics both in power, and in number; and,
fcious of their own strength, they submitted
impatience to that tyrannical authority, with
the ancient laws armed the ecclesiastics againlt
They longed to be exempted from this oppr
jurifdiclion, and publickly to enjoy the libert
professing those opinions, and of exercising that
ship, which so great a part of the nation deemg
be founded in truth, and to be acceptable to
Deity. This indulgence, to which the wholes
of priestly authority was opposed, there were
two ways of obtaining. Either violence mul
tort it trom the reluctant hand of their Sove
or by prudent compliances, they might exl
from her favour, or her gratitude. The fors
an expedient for the redress of grievances, to
no nation has recourfe.fuddenly ; and fubjeci
dom venture upon resistance, which is their lt
medy, but in caits of extreme necefity. On!
occasion, the Reformers wifely held the opp
course, and by their zeal in forwarding the Q,

t Melv. 47.

I dfc

igns, they hoped to merit her protection. This B o o K
position the Queen encouraged to the utmost, and II.
used them so artfully with many promises, and -
e conceflions, that, by their assistance, he fur-
unted in Parliament the force of a national, and
aps alaudablejealoufy, which would, otherwise,

wayed with the greater number.

NOTHER circumstance contributed somewhat to
ire the Regent such considerable influence in
Parliament. In Scotland, all the bishoprics,
hose abbeys which conferred a title to a feat in
ament, were in the gift of the Crown *. From
me of her accession to the regency, the Queen
ept in her own hands almott all those which
e vacant, except such as were, to the great
of the nation, beflowed upon foreigners.
gthefe, her brother the Cardinal of Lorrain
tained the abbeys of Kelfo and Melrofs, two
most wealthy foundations in the kingdom t.
s condut, she thinned the ecclefiaftica! bench ,
was entirely under the influence of the Arch-
of St. Andrew's, and which, by its numbers
thority, usually hr.d great weight in the house,
render any opposition it could give, at that
f little consequence.

Earl of Argyll, and James Stewart Prior
Andrew's, one the most powerful, and the

,~:^ I. - F Lefly, 202.
:':ea f'om the rolls of this Parliament, which Lefly
:' ull one, that only fcven Bishops and sixteen Abbots

M 2 other

B o o a other the most popular leader of the Prote

II. were appointed to carry the Crown and other en

-
'' of royalty to the Dauphin. But from this

were diverted by the part they were called to
a more interesting scene, which now begins to

Elizabeth BEFORE we turn towards this, it is necef
succeed to obierve, that on the 7th of November, iM
the Crawn
oiEnland. England finished her short, and inglorious

Her sifter Elizabeth took possession of the
without opposition; arid the Protefiant religit
once more, established by law in England,
acceiffon of a Queen, who, under very difi
cumftancts, had given strong indications o
eminent qualities, which, in the sequel, r
her reign to illutirious, attrated the eyes of
rope.' Among the Scots, both parties obfe
first motions with the utmost concern, as thq
foresaw that she would not remain long an
rent fpedator of their transactions.

UNDER many discouragements, and m

prefiTon, the Reformation advanced towar
efrablifliment in Scotland.. All the lowcou
most populous, and, at-that time, the moil
part of the kingdom, was deeply tinctured
Protestant opinions; and if the fame iM
were not made in the more distant counti
owing to no want of the fame difpofidioo
the people, but to the scarcity of preaclh
most indefatigable zeal could not satisfy th
of thole, who desired their inrtructions. .
people bred to arms, and so prone to rnut

s; and in an age, when religious passions had B o o K
en fich strong poffefion of the human mind, II
moved and agitated it with so much violence; v
peaceable and regular demeanor of so numerous
rty is truly astonishing. From the death of Mr.
ick Hamilton, the first who fuff-red in Scotland
the Protestant religion, thirty years had elapsed,
during Sb long a period, no violation of public
r or tranquillity had proceeded from that sec *;
though rouzed and irritated by the most cruel
eses of ecclesiastical tyranny, they did, in no in-
ce, transgress thole bounds cf duty which the
prescribes to fuljecs. Besides the prudence of
rown leaders, and the protection which the
en Regent, from political motives, afforded
, the moderation of the Archbishop of St. An-
's encouraged this pacific disposition. That
late, wofe private life cotemporary writers tax
agreat irregularities it, governed the church, for
e years, with a temper and prudence of which
re are few examples in that age. But some time
re the meeting of lafi Parliament, the Arch-
op departed firom those humane maxims, by
ch ie had hitherto regulated his conduct; and
th-r, in spite to the Queen, who had entered in-
fclofe an union with the Protestants, or in com-
nce mith the importunities of his clergy, he let

ail the rage of persecution against the Reform-
sentenced to the flames an aged priest, who had

The murder of Cardinal Beatoun was occasioned by private
nge, and being contrived and executed by sixteen persons
' cannot, with justice, be imputed to the whole Protestant

* hKnox, Buchanan, Keith, 208.

M 3 been

B o o K been convicted of embracing the Protestant opinion

II. and summoned several others, fufpe&ed of thef
se^'" crime, to appear before a fynod of the clergy, whi

was soon to convene at Edinburgh.

NOTHING could equal the horror of the Prot

ants at this unexpeced and barbarous execution,
the zeal, with which they espoused the defenceo
cause, that now seemed devoted to deftruti
They had immediate recourse to the Queen Regs
and as her success in the Parliament, which was
about to meet, depended on their concurrence,
not only sheltered them from the impending flo
but permitted them the exercise of their relig
with more freedom than they had hitherto enjoy
Unsatisfied with this precarious tenure, by wi
they held their religious liberty, the Protestants
boured to render their possession of it more f
and independent. With this view, they determi
to petition the Parliament for some legal protet
against the exorbitant and oppressive jurifdicton
the ecclesiastical courts, which. by their arbit
method of proceeding, funded in the canon la
were led to Sentences the most shocking to huma
tv, b\- maxims the most repugnant to justice. B
th. ucueen, who dreaded the cffeAs of a debate
this lelicate fubje&, which could not fail of excit
high and dar.gerous paffons, prevailed on the l
ers c, the party, by new and more solemn promil
of - protection, to desist from any application
Parii.ment, w '.er "'.eL:' numbers and influence wuoi
in all Fruba.bility, have procured them, if not!

en~

,tire redress, at least, some mitigation of their grie- B o o K
inces.

THEY applied to another assembly, to a convoca-
In of the Popish clergy, but with the fame ill fuc-
'fs, which hath always attended every proposal for
eformation, addressed to that order of men. To

Rndon usurped power, to renounce lucrative error,
sacrifices, which the virtue of individualb has,
nime occasions, offered to truth; but from any
;iety of men, no such effort can be expected. The
iruptions of a society, recommended by common
liry, and justified by univerlal practice, are view-
by its members, without shame, or horror; and
formation never proceeds from themselves, but
always forced upon them by some foreign hand.
table to this unfeeling and inflexible spirit, was
behaviour of the convocation in the present
junEture. All the demands of the Protestants
re rejeed with contempt; and the Popifhi clergy,
from endeavouring, by any prudent concessions,
sooth and to reconcile such a numerous body,
rted the doarines of their church, concerning
e of the most exceptionable articles, with an
timed rigour, which gave new offence *.

DURING the fitting of the convocation, the Pro-
ants firet began to .suspect some change in the
gent's disposition towards them. Though joined
th them for many years, by interest, and united,
tiley conceived, by the firongeft ties of affection
of gratitude, she discovered, on this occasion,

" Keith, 81.

M 4 evident

B o o K evident symptoms, not only of coldness, but of

II. growing disgust and aversion. In order to account

,,v'~ for this, our historians do little more than produc
I559- tht trite observations concerning the influencei

prosperity to alter the character, and to corrupt tA
heart. 'I he Qleen, fay they, having reached tB
utmost point to which her ambition aspired, ,
longer preserved her accustomed moderation, but
with an insolence usual to the fortunate, laok
down upon those, by whose assistance she had b
enabled to rife so high. But it is neither in the
pravity of the human heart, nor in the ingratiru
or the Queen's disposition, that we muff search
the motives of her present conduct. These w
derived from another, and a more remote fou
wshich, in order to clear the subsequent tranfa&io
,we fnall endeavour to open with some care.

A.,iio,,s T nHE ambition of the Frinces of Lorrain had
v,,-°ot he no less fuccersful, than daring; but all their fche
Pr nces of
Li-.ain. were dit'inguifhed by being vast and unbound

Though strangers at the court of France, their e
nent qualities had railed them, in a short time,
an height of power, superior to that of all o
fubjerts, and had placed them on a level even
the Princes of the blood themselves. The chur
the army, the revenue, were under their direfti
Nothing but the royal dignity remained unattain
and they were elevated to a near alliance with it,
the marriage of the Queen of Scots to the Dauphi
In order to gratify their own vanity, andto rend
their niece more worthy the heir of France, theyt

foot her claim to the Crown of England, which B o o K
s founded on pretences not unplaufible. II.

THE tragical amours and marriages of Henry I559'
1I. are known to all the world. Moved by the
prces of his love, or of his resentment, that in-
lent and arbitrary Monarch had divorced or be-
ded four of the fix Queens, whom he married.
orJer to gratify him, both his daughters had been
lared illegitimate by ACt of Parliament; and
, with that fantastic inconsistence which diftin-
ifies his chara&er, he, in his last will, whereby
was impowered to fettle the order of fuccefion,
led both of them to the throne, upon the death
their brother Edward ; and, at the fame time,
[ng by the posterity of his eldefc sifter Margaret
ueen of Scotland, he appointed the line of fuccef-
to continue in the descendents of his younger
cr, the Dutchess of Suffolk.

I. consequence of this destination, the validity
ercof was admitted by the English, but never
ognized by foreigners, M.ary had reigned in Eng-
d, without the least complaint of neighbouring
nces. But the fame causes, which facilitated her
efion to the throne, were obstacles to the eleva-
n of her sifter Elizabeth, and rendered her posses-
n of it precarious and insecure. Rome trembled
the Catholic faith, under a Protestant Queen of
h eminent abilities. The fame superstitious fears
rmed the court of Spain. And France beheld,
th indignation, a throne, to which the Queen of
ots could forms so many pretensions, occupied by

a rival,

B o o K a rival, whose birth, in the opinion of all good C

II. tholics, excluded her from any legal right of
~'-^'~ cession. The impotent hatred of the Roman P

tiff, or the how councils of Philip II. would h
produced no sudden or formidable effet. The e
dent and impetuous ambition of the Princes of
raint, who, at that time, governed the court
France, was more decisive, and more to be dre

They per- ed. Instigated by them, Henry, soon after
fuade Mary
to aumrn death of Mary, persuaded his daughter-in law
the title of her husband, to assume the title of King and
Queen of
England. of England. They affected to publish this to

Europe. They used that flyle and appellation
public papers, some of which Rill remain *.
arms of England were engraved on their coin
plate, and born by them on all occasions. No
parations, however, were made to support this
politic and premature claim. Elizabeth was are
feated on her throne; ihe possessed all the intrepi
ty of spirit, and all tle arts of policy, which
necessary for maintaining that flation. England.
growing into reputation for naval power. The
rine of France had been utterly negleted; z
Scotland remained the only avenue, by which

Reolve to territories of Elizabeth could be approached.
England. was on that fide, therefore, that the Princes of L

rain determined to make their attack ; and,
using the name and pretensions of the Scottish Qyu
they hoped to rouze the English Catholics, forr
dable at that time by their zeal and numbers, I

Anders. Diplom. Scot. No. 63 & 164.
t Sorbes, Collet. i. z53. 277.

ex3i

[afperated to the utmost against Elizabeth, on ac- B o o K
int of the change which she had made in the na- II.
Pnal religion.

1559.
iIT was vain to expeEt the assistance of the Scot- In order to

this, necef-

h Protestants to dethrone a Queen, whom all Eu- fary to
pe esteemed the guardian and defender of the re- check the

:Reforma-

med faith. To break the power and reputation tion in
that party in Scotland, became, for this reason, Scotland.
eceffary ftep towards the invasion of England.
th this the Princes of Lorrain resolved to open
ir scheme. And as persecution was the only me-
d for suppressing religious opinions, known in that
,or dictated by the despotic and sanguinary fpi-
of the Romish superstition, this, in its utmofl
lnce, they determined to employ. The Earl of
yll, the Prior of St. Andrew's, and other lead-
of the party, were marked out by them for im-
iate detruEtion *; and they hoped, by punish-
them, to intimidate their followers. Infiruc-
sfor this purpose were sent from France to the
:en Regent. That humane and sagacious Prin-
condemned a measure, which was equally vio-
and impolitic. By long residence in Scotland,
had become acquainted with the eager and im-
ent temper of the nation; she well knew the
er, the number, and popularity of the Protef-
laders; and had been a witness to the intre-
and unconquerable resolution which religious
our could inspire. What, then, could be gain-
by rouzing this dangerous spirit, which, hither-

* Sorbes i. z12.

to,

B o o K to, all the arts of policy had scarce been able to re.

II. strain? If it once broke loose, the authority[ a

*^^ " Regent would be little capable to subdue, or even
1559. to moderate its rage. And if, in --.I r. quellit,

foreign forces were called in, t"i; v.jlld give the
alarm to the whole nation, irritated already at tih
excessive power which the French poffcffed in ti
kingdom, and suspicious of all their designs. A
midst the shock which this might occasion, far fro
hoping to exterminate the s rotefrant dotrine,
would be well if the whole fabric of the eftablil
church were not shaken, and perhaps overtur
from the foundation. These prudent remonftran
made no imprefion on her brothers; precipi
but inflexible in all their resolutions, they infilled
the full and rigorous execution of their plan. M
paflionately devoted to the intcreft of France,
ready, on all occasions, to sacrifice her own opimi
to the inclinations of her brothers, prepared toe
cute their commap .'-, with implicit submission'
and, contrary to her own judgment, and to all
rules of found policy, (he became the instrument
exciting civil commotions in Scotland, which en
with the ruin of the French power, and of the
pish religion in that kingdom.

The Re-ent FROMr the time of the Queen's competition
avers her the Regency with the Duke of Chatelherault,
withrega-d Popish clergy, inder the direction of the Arci
to the Pro- shop of St. Andrew's, had fct themielves in opp

fition to all her measures. Her first ftep towa

· Me!. .8. MIem. de Caftlenau. ap. Jcbb, vol. ii 446.

ithe execution of her new scheme, was to regain their B o o
favour. Nor was this reconcilement a matter of II.
difficulty. The Popish ecclesiastics, separated from '--
the reft of mankind by the law of celibacy, the 559
boldest and most successful invention of human po-
licy; and combined amongthemfelves in the closest
and most sacred union; have been accustomed, in
every age, to sacrifice all private and particular pas-
sions to the dignity and interest of their order. De-
lighted, on this occasion, with the profpe&t of tri-
umphing over a fation, whose encroachments they
had long dreaded, and animated with the hopes
of re-establishing their declining grandeur on a
firmer basis; they, at once, cancelled the memory
of past injuries, and engaged to second the Queen
in all her attempts to check the progress of the Re-
formation. The Queen, being secure of their assist-
ance, openly approved of the decrees of the convo-
cation, by which the principles of the Reformers
were condemned ; and at the fame time, ihe issued
a proclamation, enjoining all persons to observe the
approaching festival of Easter, according to the Ro-
mifh ritual.

As it was no longer posSible to.miftake the Queen's

intentions, the Protestants, who saw the danger ap-
proach, in order to avert it, employed the Earl of
Glencairn, and Sir Hugh Campbell of Loudon, to
expostulate with her, concerning this change, to-
wards severity, which their former services had so
little merited, and which her reiterated promises gave
them no reason to expet. She, without disguise or
apology, avowed to them her resolution of extirpat-
ing the Reformed religion out of the kingdom.

And,

B o o K And, upon their urging her former engagement

II. with an uncourtly, but honest boldness, The o f

s5 forgot her usual moderation, as to utter a sentiment
559 which, however apt those of royal condition may

to entertain it, prudence should teach them to con
ceal as much as possible. " The promises of Prince
fays she, ought not to be too carefully remember,
nor the performance of them exated, unless it fu?
their own conveniency."

Sommons THE indignation, which betrayed the Queen in
preachs this rash expreflion, was nothing in comparifond
to appear that, with which she was animated, upon heari

eso . that the public exercise of the Reformed! Religioi

had been introduced into the town of Perth, A
once, Ihe threw off the mask, and commanded
the Proteflant preachers in the kingdom to be funl
moned to a court of justice, which was to be hel
at Stirling on the tenth of May. The Protestant,
who, from their union, began, about this time, l
be difiinguifhed by the name of the CONGREGATION
were alarmed, but not intimidated by this danger;
and inRantly resolved not to abandon the men, 0t
vhom they were indebted for the most valuable o
all bleflings, the knowledge oftruth. At thattime,
there prevailed in Scotland, with respect to criminal
trials, a cuRfom, introduced, at first, by the inlli
tutions of vassalage and clanfhip, and tolerated,
afterwards, under a feeble government; any person
accused of a crime was accompanied to the place of
trial, by a retinue of his friends and adherents, as
fembled for that purpose, from every corner of the
kingdom. Authorized by this ancient pracice, the

-, - Reformed

leformed convened, in great numbers, 'to attend B o o K
eir paflors to Stirling. The Queen dreaded their II.
pproach with a train so numerous, though unarm- 55

I, and in order to prevent them from advancing,
empowered John Erskine of Dun, a person of
inent authority with the party, to promise, in
r name, that fie would put a stop to the intended
al, on condition, the preachers and their retinue
vanced no nearer to Stirling. Erfline, beihg con-
ced himself of the Queen's sincerity, served her
th the utmost zeal. And the Protestants, averse
m proceeding to any a& of violence, listened
th pleasure to so pacific a proposition. The
eachers, with a few leaders of the party, remain-
at Perth; the multitude, which had gathered
m different parts of the kingdom, dispersed, and
ired to their own habitations.

BUT, notwithitanding this solemn promise, the Break a
een, on the tenth of May, proceeded to call to Pwhi'hthey
a the persons who had been summoned, and upon had relied.
ir non-appearance, the rigour of justice took
ce, and they were pronounced outlaws. By this
noble artifice, so incompatible with real dignity,
fdo inconsistent with that integrity which Should
evail in all tranfaftions between Sovereigns and
eir fiubje&s, the Queen forfeited the esteem and
nfidence of the whole nation. The Protestants,
>cked no less at the indecency, with which she
>lated the public faith, than at the danger which
reatened themselves, prepared boldly for their
=n defence. Erskine, enraged at having been
a:e the inflrument for deceiving his party, instant-

ly

B o o K Iy abandoned Stirling, and repairing to Perth,

II. ed to the zeal of his associates, by his repref

^^/~^ tions of the Queen's inflexible resolution to sup
1559' their religion.

This occa- THE popular rhetoric of Knox powerfully sea
furrealon ed his representations: He having been carr
Perth. prisoner into France, together with the other pe

taken in the castle of St. Andrew's, soon mad!
escape out of that country; and residing fom
in England, sometimes in Scotland, had, at
been driven out of both kingdoms by the ra
the Popish clergy, and was obliged to retire to
neva. Thence he was called by the leaders
Protestants in Scotland; and, in compliance
their solicitations, he set out for his native cou
where he arrived a few days before the tril
pointed at Stirling. He hurried instantly top
to share with his brethren in the common d
or to aflift them in promoting the common
While their minds were in that ferment, whic
Queen's perfidiousness and their own danger
sioned, he mounted the pulpit, and by a vehe
harangue againtt idolatry, inflamed the muli
with the utmost rage. The indifcrction of api
who, immediately after Knox's sermon, wasl
paring to celebrate mass, and began to decorai
altar for that purpose; precipitated them into
mediate action. With tumultuary, but irrfil
violence, they fell upon the churches in that
overturned the altars, defaced the picures, E
in pieces the images; and proceeding nextt
monasteries, they, in a few hours, laid thole f

4

Ious fabrics almoff level with the ground. This B o o K
btous infurreftion was not the effe& of any con- II.
t, or previous deliberation: censured by the re-
rmed preachers, and publickly condemned by the 59
sons of molt power and credit with the party,
uft be regarded merely as an accidental eruption
popular rage *.

:ur to the Queen herself, there proceedings ap- TheRegent
ed in a very different light. Betides their ma- ainf the
ft contempt for her authority, the Protestants
violated every thing in religion, which she
emed venerable or holy; and, on both there ac-
nts, the determined to inflit the severest venge-
on the whole party. She had already drawn
troops in French pay to Stirling; with these,
what Scottish forces she could levy of a sudden,
marched directly to Perth, in hopes of furprif-
the Protestant leaders, before they could assem-
heir followers, whom out of confidence in her
genuous promises they had been rashly induced
ifmifs. Intelligence of these preparations and
aces was soon conveyed to Perth. The Pro-
nts would, gladly, have soothed the Queen, by
eses both to herself, and to the persons of great-
redit in her court; but finding her inexorable,
with great vigour, took measures for their
defence. Their adherents, animated with zeal
ligion, and eager to exFofe themselves in so
a cause, flocked in such numbers, to Perth,
they not only secured the town from danger,

| * Knox, Hid. 127, i28.
iOL. L N but,

B o o s but, within a few days, were in a condition to taie

II. the field, and to face the Queen, who advanc!
C'^ with an army 700oo frong.
159.

NEITHER party, however, was impatient toe,

gage. The Queen dreaded the event of a battl
wi;h men, whom the fervour of religion'raifed abo
the fen!e of fear, or of danger. The Proteflai
beheld with rcgret, thz Earl' of Argyll, the Pri
of St. Andrew's, and some other eminent perfo
of thdir party, ilfll adhering to the Queen; a
defriiure of their aid and counsel, declined h
zarding an action, the ill success of which mig
have proved the ruin of their cause. The prof
of an accommodation was for these reafonshig
acc-jib'.e to both fides : Argyll and the Prior,
were th- Queen's commiflioners for conducting
negcciation, eetm to have been sincerely desirous
reconciling the contending factions; and the E
of Glhncairn arri'. ing unexpectedly with a power
reinforcem ent to the Congregation, augmented
A '-', Queen's ea:erneis for peace. A treaty wasacco

ir.!lv concl:ued, in v, hich it was flipulated, t
both armies fhoul ;! be disbanded, and the gates
Perth f:t open to the Queen; that indemnity fhi
be g-a:::ed to trh ir.'abitanrs of that city, and
all others concer.ed in the late infurretion; that
French garrison rMould be left in Perth, and
Fr.:.: s.- ioldicers ?rould ap:ro:-ch witrhin three r
c0 t.-'-

t: .-.ce; and that a . :'rlia.ment hould in

':.-: 1. b idCli l, i; o:r'der to comrr.nc whatever d
re:cr n;-ivht ft:ll! re.:a. i

< T
..-

THE Leaders of the Congregation, diftrufiful ofB o o K
the Qeeen's sincerity, and sensible that conceflions, II,
.owinig not from inclination, bu' extorted by the V

559.

!,ncefity of her affairs, cou'd n't long remain in May 29.
force, entrred into a new association, by wh:ch they
bound themlnives, on the first infringement of the
resent treaty, or on the leafr appearncc of danger
toheir religion, to rcafitcble their followcrs, and
o take arms in liefence of what they ctieemed the
aufc of God, and of their country .

THE Q0ueen, by her condut, demonRrated these Brokcn by
recautions to be the result of no groundlels or un- the Regent,
ceffiry fear. No sooner were the Protestant forces
ifmiffcd, than the broke every article in the trcaty;
re introduced French troops into lerith, fined iome
ithe inhabitants, banished others, removed the

lagtrates out of ofice, and, on her retiring to
tling, flie left behind her a garrison of 600 men;
;ith orders to allow the exerciie of no oler reli-
on than the Roman Catholic. The ftuation of
erth, a place at that time of foije frcength, and
town thie mosot proper of any in the kingdom fcr
e riation of a garrison, eenms to have allured the
uen to thlis unjustifiable, and ill-judged breacl
public faith ; which fie endeavoured to colour,
alledging that the body of men left at Perth was
tirty composed of native Scots, though kept in
' by the King of France.

THE_ Queen's scheme began gradually to unfold
W'is now apparent, that not only the religion, but

t '}[;cx, ,S.

N 2 the

B o o r the liberties of the kingdom were threatened; and

II. that the French troops were to be employed as in.
A 'Y ~ itruments for subduing the Scots, and wreathingthl
I559. yoke about their necks. Martial as the genius

the Scots then was, the poverty of their count
made it impossible to keep their armies long asem.
bled; and even a very small body of regular tro
might have proved formidable to the nation, thon
confiding wholly of soldiers. But, what num
of French forces were then in Scotland, at w
times, and under what pretexts they returned, as
having left the kingdom in the 1550, we can
with any certainty, determine. Cotemporary
torians often felec, with little judgment, the
cumftances which they transmit to pofterity;a
with respect to matters of the greatest curiosity
importance, leave succeeding ages altogether in
dark. We may conjeture however, from si
passages in Buchanan, that the French and Scoa
French pay, amounted at least to 3000 men, ui
the command of Mons. D'Oyfel, a creature of
house of Guise; and they were soon augmentd
a much more formidable number.

THE Queen, encouraged by having so coni

able a body of well disciplined troops at her c
mand, and infrigated by the violent ccunfól
D'Oyfel, had ventured, as we have obierved,
violate the treaty of Perth, and, by that ralh adt
once more threw the nation into the most dange

The ro- convulsions. The Earl of Argyll and Prior of
tef"ans a- Andrew's inrtantly deserted a court, where faith
arins,e honour seAmed to them to be no longer regas

Thle Barons from the neighbouring counties repair- B o o
d to them, the preachers rouzed the people to II.
rms, and wherever they came, the fame violent ^
perations, which accident had occasioned at Perth, 59
ere now encouraged out of policy. The enraged
ultitude was let loose, and churches and monas-
ries, the monuments of ecclesiastic pride and lux-
ry, were sacrificed to their zeal.

IN order to check their career, the Queen, with-
ut losing a moment, put her troops in motion;
it the zeal of the Congregation got the start, once
ore, of her vigilance and activity. In that war-
ike age, when all men were accustomed to arms,
ad on the least profpe&t of danger were ready to
un to them, the leaders of the Protestants found
odifficulty to raise an army. Though they set
utfrom St. Andrew's with a slender train of an
undred horse, crowds flocked to their standards
rm every corner of the country through which
hey marched, and before they reached Falkland, a
illage only ten miles distant, they were able to meet
he Queen with superior force *.

THE Queen, furprized at the approach of so for-
idable a body, which was drawn up by its leaders
fuich a manner, as added greatly in appearance
its numbers, had again recourse to negociation.
he found, however, that the preservation of the
roelfant religion, their zeal for which had at first
uzed the leaders of the Congregation to take
rTis, was not the only object they had now in

"Knox, 141.

N 3 view.

B o o K view. T'hey were animated with the warmest low

II. of civil liberty, which they conceived to be in im.
.--v-- minent danger, from the attempts of the French

159' forces; and thele two pailons mingling, added e.
arired:-. ciproca'iv to each other's strength. -Together w'it
irg ivi; -Ir more enlar-ed notions in religion, the Reformation;
Iigiols filled the human mind with more liberal and gene.

rous senti. ents concerning civil government. Thi
genius of Popery is extremely favourable to te
pow-er of Princes. 'he implicit fubmiffinn to all
her decrees, which is exacted by the Romish Churchi
prepares and breaks the mind for political servitude;
and the doCrrines of the Reformers, by overturning
the established system of superstition, weakened t
firmest foundations of civil tyranny. That bo
spirit of enquiry, which led men to reject theoloi.
cal errors, accompanied them in other sciences, a
discovered every where the fame marly zeal
truth. A new study introduced at the fame ti
added greater force to the spirit of liberty. M
became acquainted with the Greek and Roman a
thors, xwho delcrihed exquisite models of freec-
vernnment, far fuiperior to the inaccurate and oppe
five siftem eflablifhed by the feudal law; anJd p
duced such illustrious examples of public virtue,
wondrfully suited both the circumstances, and ii
rit or that age. Many, among the most emin

eformers, were thenmiflves considerable maiersi
ancient learning; and all of them eagerly adop
the maxims and spirit of the ancients, with reg
to government i. T'he most ardent love of lib-,

a c'.

T' .-..-:..:!· 'c -:::'. :Kr.n of a.,cicn: Fo!icy was thle orc
r -' in. '. :.:.. - '-... C:.:c:.':i:-g ltc J.-cr;.;mcnt erf i/:

comrpanied the Protestant religion, throughout all B o o K
progres ; and wherever it was embraced, it II.
e:zed an independent spirit, which rendered men "l-
teive to their privileges as fuibjecs, and jealous '559
the incroachments of their Sovereigns. Knox,
di the other preachers of the Reformation, inFused
nerous ientiments concerning government into the
inOJ of their hearers, and the Scottish Barons, na-
rll i'ce and bold, were prompted to assert their
ghts with more fieedom and boldness than ever.
lead of obeying the Queen Regent, who had en-
ined them to lay down their arms, they demand-
not only the redress of their religious grievances,
[as a preliminary toward fettling the nation, and
curing its liberties, required the immediate expul-

onof the French troops out of Scotland. It was
ot in the Qleen's power to make tb important a
nceflion, without the concurrence of the French
on;arch; and as some time was requisite in order to
ain that, she hoped, during this interval, to re-
i..e luch reinforcements from France, as would
sei the accompliniment of that design, which

he d twice attempted with unequal lfrength.
an iihile, she agreed to a ceilation of arms for une
ghIt days, and, before the expiration of there,
g;ige to traniport the French troops to the south

l'"c;i, co:formablc to the mr.xims of the anciclnt legislators,
i!:ci1 modei.n (i:-er '- l, I:s proved to be ill-founded, he pro.
gunc' tihe Lci;It!(oi 1 women to the fuprcime authority, to

!::., O r'- ':ri:u' (; ;'cool 1,I'.Cime'llnt. 1lis plinciplcs, au-

l:::, lit i ]

x. lmi lcs \t'Il' 111 d'..tVII n

f io lll :c;eit \lrjiters.
: :.:c obhc:-:.a:io n:a 1' i-c made i;h reciard to Buchanan's

' )":.C , !)

-. ,' .'/,; r' ' ': o ,.r.

s It it founded not on the
-';.cf ic.Ida, but of anricnt nvo;cmcn¢t.

, .T1 fidec

B o o K fide of the Forth; and to fend commifflonerstq

II. St. Andrew's, who Ihould labour to bring all diffe

rences to accommodation. As the hoped, by mean
I559- of the French troops, to overawe the ProteftanU

in the southern counties, the former article in ti
treaty was punctually executed; the latter, having
been inserted merely to amuse the Congregation, was
no longer remembered.

A fre-nd BY there reiterated and wanton instances of pa
ay ""o fidy, the Queen loft all credit with her adversaries

and no safety appearing in any other course, i
again took arms with more inflamed resentment
and with bolder and more extensive views. Tk
removing of the French forces had laid opens
them all the country situated between Forth a
Tay. The inhabitants of Perth alone remaining
fubjedted to the insolence and exaftions of thega.
rifon, which the Queen had left there, implord
the affiltance of the Congregation for their reid
Thither they marched, and having, without e
required the Queen to evacuate the town in term
of the former treaty, they prepared to besiege iti
form. The Queen employed the Farl of Hund
and Lord Erskine to divert them from this ener
prize. But her wonted artifices were now of
avail; repeated so often they could deceive nolon
ger; and without listening to her offers, the Pro
teftants continued the siege, and soon obliged
garrison to capitulate.

- d AFT ER the loss of Perth, the Queen endeavor
;-:'i; of ed to s.{ize Stirling, a place of tome Itrengths ar4'

Pr.p~-s sroa

tn its command of the only bridge over the B o o K
0oth, of great importance. But the leaders of 1I.

Congregation, having intelligence of her de- =' '
n, prevented the execution of it, by an hasty 5;9
arch thither, with part of their forces. : The in-
abiants, heartily attached to the cause, fetopen
them the gates of their town. Thence they
vanced, with the fame rapidity, towards Edin-
urgh, which the Queen, on their approach, aban-
ed with precipitation, and retired to Dunbar.

THE Proteflant army, wherever it came, kind-
,or spread the ardour of Reformation, and the
most excefles of violence were committed upon
urches and monasteries. The former were spoiled
every decoration, which was then esteemed fa-
d; the latter were laid in ruins. We are apt, at
is distance of time, to condemn the furious zeal
the Reformers, and to regret the overthrow of
many flately fabrics, the monuments of our an-
ftors magnificence, and among the noblest orna-
ents of the kingdom. But, amidst the violence
a Reformation, carried on in opposition to legal
thority, some irregularities were unavoidable; and
rhaps no one could have been permitted more
oper to allure and interest the multitude, or more
tal to the grandeur of the established church.
owever ablurd and ill-founded the speculative'
ors of Popery may he, some inquiry and atten-
n are requisite towards discovering them. The
ufesand corruptions, which had crept into the
blic worship of that church, lay more open to ob-
vation, and by striking the senses, excited more

4 Lnuni-

B o o K.univetral difufr. Under the long reign of He

II. thenifmn, superstition f ems to have exhausted its t
w-^^^ lent of invention, so that when a superstitious fpii
559' fcized Christians, they were obliged to imitate tl

Heathens in the pomp and magnificence of the
ceremonies, and to borrow from them the ornamen
and decorations of their temples. To the pure a
simple worship of the primitive Chriltians, the
succeeded a Ipecies of f]plndidt idolatry, nearly n
fembling tholf pagan originals, whence it had ba
copied. The contrariety of such obiervances,
the spirit of Chriitianity, was almoif the firt thin!
in the Romish fvltem, which awakened the indio
nation of the lReformers, who applying to thei
the denunciat:ons in the Old Telfament againftido
latry, imagined that they could not endeavourl
suppressing them, with too much zeal. No id
could be mora acceptable to the multitude, than
overturn those feats of superstition; they ran w;:
emulation to perform it, and happy was the mn
whose hand was most adventrous and iuccefsfuii
e .ecutin; a :nork efl.cmed so pious. Nor dild th
led.rs i. o.:r to r:Lr'rin this impetuous fpirir
Reformation. irregular and violent as its faiie
were, they tended directly to that end whicht'
had in view ; for by demoiifhing the monaftei
th,:rou,: out the kingdom, and letting at liberty)th
wretched inrl.bitants, they hoped to render itia
pom.-bie ever to rcbiild the one, or to re-affcn;b
th, o:!:.::.

BL-r amnidc: thlie irregular proceedings, a c
cu;:.;; v.--, v.'._'> h cd:-s honour to the condul :

mamnity of the leaders of the Congregation, de- B o o r
res notice. They so far restrained the rage of II.
eir followers, and were able so to temper their "---
at and zeal, that few of the Roman Catholics 5
re exposed to any personal insult, and not a single
an suffered death *.

AT t;e fame time, we discover, by the facility
h which these great revolutions were effected,
violently the current of national favour ran to-
rds the Reformation. No more than 300 men
rched oIu of Perth under the Earl of Argyll
Prior of St. Andrew's t ; with this inconfider-
e force they advanced. But wherever they came,
peoplejoined them in a body ; their army was
orn less numerous than 5000 men ; the gates of
ery town were thrown open to receive them; and,
thour friking a single blow, they took pofeflion
,th capital of the kingdom.

rTI! rapid and astonishing success seems to have June 2
:TurIged the Reformers to extend their views,

to rife in their demands. Not satisfied with
Ir firlt claim of toleration for their religion, they
v, citn'y, aimed at establishing the Protcflant
:rire on the ruins of Popery. For this reason,
dietermincd to fix their residence at Edinburgh ;
by their appointment, Knox and some other
acnla taking pofleffion of the pulpits, which
b:n aibandoned by the affrightened clergy, de-
:]*:ei against the errors of Popery, with such

Lefiy, 2 31. Keith, 94.

7 ser-

B o o fervent zeal, as could not fail of gaining maI

II. proselytes.
1559' IN the mean time, the Queen, who had pr.

dently given way to a torrent which Ihe couldn
resist, observed with pleasure, that it now began
subside. The leaders of the Congregation L.
been above two months in arms, and by the
pences of a campaign, protracted so long bey
the usual time of service in that age, had exhal
all the money, which a country, where riches
not abound, had been able to supply. The mul
tude, dazzled with their success, and conch
the work to be already done, retired to their
habitations. A few, only, of the more zealous
wealthy Barons remained with their preachers
Edinburgh. As intelligence is procured in
wars with little difficulty, whatever was tranfa
at Edinburgh, was soon known at Dunbar.
the Queen, regulating her own conduce by the
tuation of her adversaries, artfully amused t
with the profpet of an immediate accomm
tion; while, at the fame time, ihe, by fu
delays, spun out the negociations for that pu
to such a length, that, in the end, the party d
led to an inconsiderable number, and, as if
had been already re-efiablifhed, became careleS
military discipline. The Queen, who watched
such an opportunity, advanced, un.xpectedly,
a sudden march in the night with all her so
and appearing before Edinburgh, filled that
with the urmoft consternation. The Protet
weakened by the imprudent dispersion of their

low

wers, durst not encounter the French troops in B o o K
eopen field ; and were even unable to defend an II.
fortified town, againlt their assaults. Unwilling, ."
wever, to abandon the citizens to the QiQeen's
rcy, they endeavoured, by facing the enemies
y, to gain time for colleting their own afolci-
s. But, the Queen, in spite of all their resist-
ce, would have easily forced her way into the
vn, if the seasonable conclusion of a truce had
tprocured her admission, without the effusion of

THEIR dangerous situation easily induced the A third
ngregation to liften to any overtures of peace; "treaty
d as the Queen was looking daily for the arrival
a strong reinforcement from France, and ex-
fted great advantages from a cefnlation of arms,
e also agreed to it upon no unequal conditions.
ogether with a suspension of hoflilities, from the
th of July to the loth of January, it was ftipu-
ted, in this treaty, that, on the one hand, the
roteftants should open the gates of Edinburgh
xt morning to the Queen Regent; remain in du-
I ulbjection to her government; abstain from all
ture violation of religious houses; and give no
terruption to the established clergy, either in the
fcharge of their functions, or in the enjoyment
their benefices. On the other hand, the Qu.een
eed to give no molestation to the preachers'or
roeflors of the Protestant religion; to allow 'no
her form of worship in Edinburgh but the Re-
rmed; and to permit the free and public exercise
it all over the kingdom. The Queen, by these

liberal

B o o liberal conceflions in behalf of their religion, ho

11. to tooth the Protestants, and expected; from indul

ing their favourite paflion, to render them rno
1559 compliant with refpec to other articles, particula

the expulsion of the French troops out of Scotla
The anxiety which the Queen expressed for retai
ing this body of men, rendered them, more
more, the objects of national jealousy and averfi
The immediate expulsion of them was there
demanded a-new, and with greater warmth; b
the Qteen, taking advantage of the difrrefs of
adverse party, eluded the request, and would co
sent to nothing more, than that a French garg
Ihould not be introduced into Edinburgh.

THE desperate state of their affairs, inpofed

the Congregation the necessity of agreeing to
article, which, however, was very far from givi
them fatisfaEtion. Whatever apprehensions these
had conceived, from retaining the French forces
the kingdom, were abundantly jutfified during
late commotions. A small body of those troop
maintained in constant pay, and rendered form:d
ble by regular discipline, had checked the prog,
of a martial people, t'ough animated with z
both for religion and liberty. The finallef addi
tion to their number, and a confiderableonel
daily expe.ted, might prove fatal to public liberi
and Scotland might be exposed to the danger ofb
ing reduced from an independent kingdom, tot'
mean condition of a province, annexed to the e
pire of its powerful ally.

I\ order to provide against this imminent cala- B o o K
ncv, the Duke of Chatelherault, and Earl of HI.
undly, immediately after concluding the truce,
efired an interview with the chiefs of the Congre- 55
tion. These two noblemen, the most potent, at
ar time, in Scotland, were the leaders of the
art, which adhered to the established church.
hev had followed the Queen, during the late com-
otions, and having access to observe more nar-
wly the dangerous tendency of her councils, their
bhorence of the yoke which was preparing for
-ir country, surmounted all other considerations,
i de(ermined them rather to endanger the reli-
on v;lhich they professed, tlan to give their aid
wir's the execution of her pernicious designs.
hep'lpoceeded farther, and promised to Argyll,
cncairn, and the Prior of St. Andrew's, who
ereappointed to meet them, that if the Queen
otld, with her usual insincerity, violate any arti-
in the treaty of truce, or refuse to gratify the
ihles of the whole nation, by difmifiing her French
oois, rl!ey would, then, infantly join with their
n.r:, r.en, in compelling her to a measure, which
e pr'- c iafety, and the preservation of their li-
rres, rendered necessary *.

A.OUT this time, died Henry II. of France; juy s
1i lrhen lie had adopted a filienl with regard to
eair-s of Scotland, which would, in all proba-
'i, have re(lored union and tranquillity to that
P.'nom --. Towards the close of his reign, the
r'rc; of Lorrain began, visibly, to decline in
· '*:-:'::, t ' +ft Mcv-. J9

a-

B o o K favour, and the Constable Montmorency, by tk

II. assistance of the Dutchels of Valentinois, recovera

* ~'" that ascendant over the spirit of his master, whict
! 559' his great experience, and his faithful, though oftu

unfortunate services, seemed jultly to merit. Thii
prudent minister imputed the infurretions in Sct.
land wholly to the Duke of Guise and Cardinlof
Lorrain, whose violent and precipitant counci
could not fail of transporting, beyond all boung
of moderation, men, whose minds were poffefl
with that jealousy, which is inseparable from t
love of civil liberty, or inflamed with that ard
which accompanies religious zeal: And, in or
to convince Henry, that he did not load his rivet
with any groundlcfs accusation, he prevailed tohan
Melvil , a Scottish Gentleman of his retinue, d
patched into his native country, with infrucli
to observe the motions both of the Regent, and
her adversaries; and the King agreed to reguli
his future proceedings, in that kingdom, byMl
vil's report.

DID history indulge herself in there fpeculatio

it would be amusing to enquire what a differ
direction might have been given by this refolutic
to the ratocnal spirit; and to what a different iss
Melvil's reporr, which would have set the cond
of the malecontents in the most favourableligh
might have conducted the public disorders. P
haps, by gent'e t eacment, and artful policy,
progress of ;i:e Reformation might have
checked, and eSotland brought to depend u

The Auti._; . t'e Miemoirs.

Frang

ra:;ce. Perhaps, by gaining possession of this B o o K
cvlue, the French might have made their way into II.
,r, land, and, under colour of fupponting Mary's ""
t! to the Crown, they might have re-ettablifed 559
lo:ran Catholic religion, and destroyed the hi-
|rties o; that kingdom. But, into this boundlces
Id of fancy and conjecture, the Iii)or-ian must
ake no 2xcuruons ; to relate real occurrences, and
ex'plain their real caurfs and effects, is his pecu-
lianld only province.

TltE tragical and untimely death of the French Accefion
r,narch put an end to all moderate and pacific toani se
teslrncs, with regard to Scotland. The Duke of Crown of
lii, and the Cardinal his brother, upon the ac-
sion of Francis 1I. a Prince void of genius, and
;toutt expcrience, afTFimed the chief direcaion of
ncl! naflirs. Allied so nearly to the throne, by
!:e marriage of their niece the (Quc-en of Scots
thr thc young King, they now wanted but little
i .al d'gnity, and nothing of regal power.

r;s o.'e.r did not long remain inactive in

fir hlnds. The fame vast fchen-es of arnbi-
n, 'iiica they liad planned out under the for-

reign, were again refiumc d; and they were
bcrd, by pofteiSng such am;le authority, to pur-
t them \nith more 'igour, and greater probabi-
of fucccfs. They beheld, with infinite regret,
prroglrels of the Protestant religion in Scotland

-nfitlie what an unfurmourtable obstacle it
iti prove to their designs, they bent all their.:
'ngth to clicck its growtil, before it rose to any
a,;. hciji-t. For this pl-irpol-, they carried on
VOL. 1. 0 their

B o o : t'-e r crep?.ratons v.ith all possible expedition, arn

II e-'...'i.'o d the (Ou:n thuir lifler, to expet, in
~J", "
f-:-t time, ti' jrr: al cf an army, so powerful,a

-'' : zel c
I ;he:r adverflries, however deferatr,

v. ojiui .ot venture to oppose.

NOR were the Lords of the Congregation ei'r

i-noran- o' thooe violent counsels, which prevaild
i:: t:e court of France since the death of Hen,
or cjae-e.s oi providing against the danger, whi
threlenWLd t'Iem.from that quarter. The fucctfs~
their cause. as well as their personal safety, depen
ing entirely on the unanimity and vigour of ti
o',.; refolusions, they endeavoured to guard agai
div sion, and to cement together more closely,
entering into a itricter bond of confederacy
mutual derence. Two persons concurred in
new association, who brought a great acceffionb
of reputation a:,d of power to the party. T1
were the Duke of Chatelherault, and his eldest
the Earl of Arran. This young nobleman, hA
incg refi:id f)me years in France, where heco
m:nnided the Scortiih Guards, had imbibed the l
t la:n,t opinions concerning religion. Hurried ao
by the heat of youth, and the zeal of a profld)
he had uttered lentiment%, with refpec to the poi
in controverfi, which did not suit the temperof
bigotted court, intent, at that junEture, on the
tintio)n of the Protestant religion; in order to
complifh which, the greatest excesses of viok
vwre committed. The church was suffered to wr
its utmof' fury utpon all who were fufpecced of
refy. Courts were erected in different parrs

Frac

rance, to take cognizance of this crime, and by B o o K
hirfentences, several peribns of diflinEtion were II.
ndcmned to the flames. .,9-

1559;

BLT, in order to inipire more unixserfal terror,
e Princes of Lorrain resolved to felea, for a fa-
ifice, some person, whose fall might convince all
nks of men, that neither splendor of birth, nor
inence in flation, could exempt from punish-
:nr, those who should be guilty of this unpar-
onable transgression. The Earl of Arran was the
rfbn defLined to be the unhappy vibtim *. As he
as allied to one throne, and the presumptive heir
another; as he possessed the first rank in his own
untry, and enjoyed an honourable flati6n in
ance; his condemnation could not fail of mak-
g the desired impression on the whole kingdom.
t the Cardinal of Lorrain having let fall some
prefflons, which raised Arran's suspicions of the
:ign, he elcaped the intended blow by a timely
ght. Indignation, zeal, resentment, all prompt-

him to seek revenge upon there persecutors
himnilf and of the religion which he pro-
fd; and as he passed through England, on his
trn to his native country, Elizabeth, by hopes
d promises, inflamed those passions, and sent him
ck into Scotland, animated with the fame impla-
ble aversion to France, which possessed a great
rt of his countrymen. He quickly communi- Eari ofA--
ted these fcntiments to his father the Duke ofranjoins

the Protes-

hatelherault, who was already extreamly disgusted sants.
Thuan. lib. xxiv. p. 462. Edit. Francof.

0 32. Witkh

B o o K with the m-afrues carrying on in Scotland; and

II. it was the fatz of that nobleman to be governed,

everi inilance, by tho;i about him, he now lifferi
3 9- himself to be drawn from the Queen Regent; ai

having joined the Congregation, was confider
froilm that time, as the head of the party.

BUT v. ih reipeSt to him, this diftillion Wn

merely nominal. James Stev'art, Prior of St..l
dr.v's, \vas tlhe perfln .who moved and acuas
th. wholuc bu.iy or thle Protestants, among whcr
he pofi;Tlcd th.it ui!bounded confidence, which ii
fircninous .aiderence to their interec', and his gr-
abilities, io jiluFul merited. li vas the na:i
son rs Jamn.s cV. i y a d-aughter of .ord ErPfir;
and as that amorous Monarch, had left fire
others a biuren upon the Cro\vn, ti;ey were al'
Itined for che chuich, wh.re they could be:;!e
in ifacions of cignity and afiluence. In conleque
of this reil'lu :o, the I'rio-y of St. Andrew's
been conierrie upon Jame.,: but, during lo tLi
periot, he C..oni bc..me dilguti d with the inrd
and rert;:imer.t o, a monailic lite; and his ente.r
ing ge:;is called him ibrth, to act a principal
on a nmce public and conspicuous theatre.
ic-ne, in -i.ch lie appeared, required talents cif
ierent kinls: , i!itary vi;:tue, and political difCC
nienr, ve:e t'cuaily necefiary in cruer to render
i!!'rioul:s. 11 :-.: hle pol'!-iid in an emircnt deg

t
u te n-: - .- iqutftionab!e p ifonal biaver',
aed t; r.a: i;i.l:A i: tle ar-t ouf ar, and in evre
terpr.ze lhis .:rms w.cre cr\.;ojcd \irh z success. i
l.-_>c.:y _n . . ..
c.at,.on :n civil afidirs enabled

mijtR the reeling and turbulence of fa2tions, to hold B o o K
),olr0rot!s course. While his boldnes in defence 11.
the Reformation, together with the decency, and "'"
yen everity of his manners, securcd himn the re-
t:,tion of being sincerely .trncrcdt to religion,
itlnut which, it was impoflible, in that age, to
in an a!cendant over mankind.

IT was not without reason, that the OQeen dread-
the enmity of a man, so capable to obstruct
rdefigns. And as flme could not, with all her
| idrf, make the leaf: imprtflion on his fidelity to
aflbciats, (he endeavourcd to Ic-lnn his influ-
ce, and to scatter among them the i'edas of jea-
u; anld (diftrulF, by inrinulating thait rte ambition
t;e Prior, alpired bheyond the condition of a
b-s,: and aimed at nothing le;s than the Crown
ir.

AN accuiation so improbable gai;;ed but little
di:. Whatever thoughts of this kind, the pre-
P.:ion of unexpeced lilcccis, and his elevation
tie: highefc dignity in the kingdom, may be al-
gedto have inspired, at any tubfequent period,
is certain that, at this junCturc, he could form no
h vatl design. To dethrone a Queen, who was
al heir to an ancient race of inonarclhs; who
been guilty of no aEtion, by which fie could.
s-i thi: eftecm and ai'fe6tion of her tihjects ; who
lad employ, in defence oF her rights, tie forces
a kingdom, much more powerful than her own;
to lubfitute, in her place, a perlbn, whom the
te'imacy of his birth, by the pratlicc of all ci-

0 3 vilizcd

B o o K vilized nations, rendered incapable of any inhe

11. rance, either public or private was a projec, s

T chimerical, as the moil: extravagant ambition wouli
9. icarce enc:rr.,n, and could never conceive to

pra ticable. he promise, too, which the Prt
made tc Melvil, of residing conitantly in Fram
on conaiuiin thl pubhic grievances were redreffd';
the confidence reposed in him by the Duke ofC'2
telherauit and his fun, the presumptive heirs to
Crown; and the concurrence of almost the wh:
Scottish nobles, in promoting the measures,
w:lich h' gave c:i:;c ro the French court, go
towards his viniication from thole illegal andi
minal d.lfins, wxh the imputation of which,
QiQeen endeavoured, at that time, to load him.

TrC;:- ar- TI-: arrival of a thousand French soldiers co:
I': 'r'-c'd penf'atd, in some dcgree, for tha lo's wlhich
;o-i:;y Queen fuItained by the defect;on of the Dukn

Charelherault. These were, immediately, c
mand-d :o fo;i [fy Leirh, in which place, on acct
of its commodious harbour, and its situation in
neighbourhood of Edinburgh, and in a plir
country, the Queen refulved to fix the headq
ters of -er foreign forces. This unpopular i
fire, by the manner of executing it, was rend
still more unpopular. In order to bring thet
entirely under their command, the French tC
out a great part of the ancient inhabitants,
ta!;:ng pfclTcicon of the houses, which they had
liged them to abandon, prelernted, to the vieW
the Scots. two obje:-s equally irritating and 0o

ey:, 3·:i.

,ie; on the one hand, -a number of their country- B o o T
,n expelcl their habitations by viol-nce, and II.
vandering without any certain abode; on the other, '
c(olony of foreigners, fettling, with their wives
d children, in the heart of Scotland, growing
to ltren.gth by daily reinforceme.:t.q, and openly
:r-)inrg a yoke, to which, without some timely
,x :i.:n or national spirit, the whole kingdom muit,
) nccfrnit, lubmit.

1i wrs with deep concern that the Lords of the The Prote-
ogirgaTaon beheld this bold and decisive ftep, monl,-at
;n by the Queen Regent: nor did they hesitate, a-ainf
mjmnent, whether they should employ their whole
rcngth, in one generous eFbort, to rescue their re-
igi)n anu liberty from impending deftrucion. But,
order to jutlify their own conduct, and to throw
; bl.ame entirely on their adversaries, they refolvid
| pri':rvc the appearances of decency and respect
.;..rJs their superiors, and to have no rccourle to
rim witllout the mofL urgent and apparent necef-
;1. They joined, with this view, in an address
oheRegent, representing, in the itrongelt termis,
Jir iihtisf·action vwith the mcafures fhc w.is pur-
ing, and be'eeching her to quiet the fears and
a ouis of the nation, by defiling from fortirt ing
.:,l. 'Ihe Queen, conscious of her precent jd-
'i;ageous situation, and tlated with the hopes of
P' lIccours, was in no dilpofition for liltenin8 to
;::a.'ns, utterly incoftfielnt w.itih I;er views, ..nd
:- ' w:th that bold importunity, ^ hich is so littli
...alc to lPrinces.

0 4 T1JE

B o o K THE suggestions of her French Counfdllors con.

IT. tribt.ed, uirhout doubt, to alienate her still farther

t-"J from an; !iheme of accommodation. As the Oueen

!5-;9.
ThnRgent 'as ready, on all occasions, to di!cover an extrao0.

:S s -inarv defcrence for the opinions of her countrymen

t-. r rt-
r-.:..:..- her brothers, who knew her secret diiapprobation 0

the violent m:afirrts thry were driving on, tr,
care to place near her such persons, as betrayed h;,
bv their insinuations, into many actions, which he
ow-n unbiaTed judgment would have highly coa.
deamned. And as their success in the prefentjunc.
ture, when all things were haltening towards a c.
iis, depende;d entirely on the Queen's firmness, t'
Princes of Lorrain dil not trufi wholly to the ,i.
fiuece of their ordinary agents; but, in order:?
add the greater weight to their counfeis, they cl!ai
in aid the Ministers of religion ; and, by the aut'l!
ritr of their sacred characser, tifey hoped eCectelt?
to recommend to their filler, that system of feveri
v-hich they had efloufed ". With1 this view, b:
under pretence of confounding the Proteftanrs b
the fkil; of such able maiters in controversy, th?
appointed several French divines to reside inSeot
land. At the head of these, and with the charac
ter of legate from the Pope, was Pellev- Bithop
Amiens, and afterwards Archbishop and Cardinl
of Sens, a f':.rious bigot, servilely devoted totih
houlF of Guise, and a proper inltrumcnt for re
comi.nending or executing the molt outrageo
rneaiures.

_e.:, l> ;. C-..lr. au, J Jcbb, vol. ii. 4t5. 47
t Da; i.:, BSr;-rc.e.

A .,r,

A,,IDsT the noise and danger of civil arms, these B o o K
ctors had little opportunity to dilplay their ad- II.
: in the use of their theological weapons. But .-r?'
,e ga^e no small offence to the nation by one of 559
:r at'ons. They persuaded the Queen to seize
chlurch of St. Giles in Edinburgh, which had
,it2ce, ever since the late truce, in the hands of
p oi0reiants; and having, by a new and solemn
Icrat.ion, purified the f.ibric from the po;lhtion,
t ,whch they ifupofed the profane minillra.tions
tIL. i'roteiiants to have defiled it, they, in direEt
1traui'tioin to one article in the late treaty, re-
^a.i.'ld thc:e the rites of the uomifh church.
i;, atded to the inliiiference, and even contempt,
li wich the Queen received their remornflraiiccs,
ir.ccd the Lords of the Congregation, that it
r0o only vain to expe&t any re-refs of their
evances at her hands, but abfolutcly necefrary to
e arms in their own deftnce,

il: eager and impetuous spirit of the nation, as They t.ke
a1 tvcry consideration of good policy, prompt- ar,"' in

their own

hiil rto take this bold ilep without delay. It ceifcne.
but a imall part of the French auxiliaries which
as yet arrived. 1 he fortifications of Leith,
:gh adlvancing far, were flill far from being
p'eat Unler these circum:ta-ces of difadvan-
, they conceived it pofiible to firprize the
ten's party, and, by one sudden and decisive
w, to arc'vent all future bloouifl-d and conten-

Fu;l of these expectations, they advanced

i yv towards Edinburgh with a nunierous arnv.
i: was no easy matter to dceivc e an advcrlary, otober 6.

so

B o o K so vigilant and attentive as the Queen Regex

II. Wich her us'ual fagaciry, she both foresaw the dai
tC--.r ger, and took the only proper course to avoid

9'S Intiead of keeping the field against enemies, sup

rior in n,,mber, and formidable on a day of bat'
by the ard-.ur of their courage, lhe retired ii
Leith, anJ determined patiently to wait the ar;i
of new reinforcements. Slight and unfinished as
fortimications of that town then were, she dir
dread the eforts of an army, provided nri
with heavy cannon, nor with military stores,
utterly ignorant of the method of attackinog
place fortified with more art than thoie anc
towers, ere:ted all over the kingdom, in drte
or private property aagainft the incursions of L
di:ti.

NOR did the Queen, mean while, neglea

have recour.e to those arts, which she had o
employed, to weaken or divide her adversaries.
private solicitations and promises, she shook
fidelity, or abated the ardor of some. By opec
proach and accusation, [he blafled the reputa
and diminished the authority of others. Here
saries were every where at work, and, notwithft
ing the zeal for religion and liberty, which a
animated the nation, they seem to have labo0
not without success. We find Knox, about
period, abounding in complaints of the lukea'
and languid spirit, which had begun to fpreai
mong his party*. But if their zeal flackeneda
tie, a::d fufftred a momentary intermission, it

* .Knox, I So.

, 1l!,~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~i

lazed up with frefll vigour, and rose to a greater B o o K
¢iht than ever. 1I.

-559.

|THE QCLeen herself gave occasion to this, by the Renew
Iv which file made to a new remonstrance from tl;ir re-
eLorJs of the Congregation. Upon their arri- ces.
al t I;iinburgh, they once more represented to
e the dangers arifng from the increase of the
re:ch troops, the fortifying of Leith, and her
|hcr measures, which they conceived to be deflruc-
ve to the peace and liberty of tle kingdom ; and

this address, they spoke in a firmer tone, and
'o'ed more openly than ever, their resolution of
roceJing, to the utmost extremities, in order to

a: stop to such dangerous encroachments. To
r;i.nonitrance of this nature, and urged with so
:.;: boldness, the Queen replied in terms no less
grous and explicit. She pretended that she was
t accountable to the confederate lords for any
rt of :er conduct ; and upon no representation
:tl;irs, would she either abandon measures,
I':h ihe deemed neccfiTry ; or dismiss forces,
lc'i lhe found useful ; or demolifl a fortification,
!ic! migiht prove of advantage. At the fame
le, fle rcquired them, on pain of treason, to dif-

But with-

::d the forces which they had affemnbled. out success;

THIS haughty and imperious file founded harsh-
!o Scottill nobles, impatient, from their national

caracr, of the fiightfft appearance of injury;

cuilomd, even from their own Monarchs, to the
1 :i0eC'tAuil treatment; and poffefring, under an
'i.c:-a';cal f orm of government, such a ihare of

power

B o o K power as equalled, at all times, and often contcl.

^I. led that of the sovereign. They were sensible, l

once, of the indignity offered to themfelve;, and
I559.

alarmed with this plain declaration of the Queeil
intentions; and as there now remained b;,t on.,t
to take, they wanted neither public spirit nor ref.
tion to take it.
Pt.bt.ate BUT, that they might not seem to depart fro

ou"r':'"Cg t;e established forms of the conflirition, for whick
.-hich they even amidst their molt violent opCrations, mend.

to
tak:. ways retain the greatest reverence, they afTenble

the whole Peers, Ba:ons, and Rep-resentatives
Oaober,:. burroughs who adhered to their party. Thefefor.

ed a convention, which exceeded in ntlm'er, ai
equalled in dignity, the usual meetings of parl
m-nt. The leaders cf the Conosreation laid bes
them t then which the Qucen had given
anf\.er to their remonltrance; represented the
voidable ruin, which the meafiiues, (he the
avowed and juflifice, would biing upon the ki,
dom; and requiring their direction with renarid
the obedience d :e to an adminiflratiLn so unjufist
oppref-ive, they fubmitied to their decision, a q
tion, one of the mofr delicate and intereftingt'
can pofiiblv fall under the consideration of f'ie

THIS aflembly proceeded to decide, with no

dispatch, tlan unanimity. Strangers to those for
which protracL bulfnefs ; unacquainted with the a
which make a figure in debate; ani mnuch ml
fitted for aeicn, than d;i*ourle; a warlike pe?
alwavs .^..1.c.. to a co:.;:. ioln, and br-ing their c

libere.i::

j.ati.;;)I ro the fliorteft iffie. It was the work B o o ic
:) (of ;o- day, to examine and to relblve this nice II.
roh',m, concerning the behaviour of ubjecis to-

i.,.i a rul.lr who abuses his power.. But, however 1559
b;.u:r t.Cir proceedings may appear, they were not
iicure o solemnity. As tie deternmination of the
|inr in oubt, was conceived to be no less the of-

(c r divines, than of laymen, the former were
lei to amil with their opinion. Knox and Wil-
x aptcjretl fr the whole order, and pronounced,
iot[ heletation, both from the preccpts anc ex-

n in fcriipur-c, that it was lawful for fubljets
t ona to refif: tyrannic.,l princes, b-;t to deprive
ein f that authority, which, in their hands, be-
nics an infirument for derfroying those, whom
c A.imighty ordjincd them to protet, The de-
lo;i of p[rllons, revered ib highly for their sacred
i.r.tcl, but more for their zeal and their piety,
;i Irrl '.cight vitKh the whole iaflembly. Nor
ti:; i'h.'itl tile comimiion indilclriminiate manner of
.:;,i ;; conllnt, every pr-bn prcfent was called
l';i tuirn to decIare his -niti ments, and rising up
or.:;, all gave their fauri'-ags, without one dif-
ri;l; voice, for dcpriving the Queen of the of- They de-

·IS.~~~~~~~~~

. ,,

, . , /, \prive ilthe

e if R gcent, which fle had exerciscd so much ,Qee, of
... dctrl-:mct of the kingdom i* the oni.ce

° o cf Regent.

T.4is extraordinary sentence was owing no less Th rihts
t!e loee of liberty, than to zeal for religion. In of thellC

§» ,, * r condu,.

I' t- of deprivation, religious grievances are
tiy nicnrtioned ; and the dangeoous incroach-
tzs of the Queen upon the civil con .itution are

* Kno:, i?4.

!Fr-

B o o K produced, by the Lords of the Congregation,

II. order to prove their conduct to have been not onl
C-'" / just, but necessary. The introducing foreign troO

559' into a kingdonm, at peace with all the world;t

seizin, and fortifying towns in different parts oftd
country; t';e promoting firangers to offices ors
power and dignity; the debasing the current cci,'
the subverting the antient laws ; the imporingofna
and burdensome taxes i and the attempting to f
due the kingdom, and to oppress it's liberties,
open and repeated afts of violence, are enumera
at great length, and placed in the ftrongeftli
On all these accounts, the Congregation mainta.
that the nobles, as counsellors by birth-right tor
monarchs, and the guardians and defenders ofI
constitution, had a right to interpose; andthg
fore, by virtue of this right, in the name of
King and Queen, and with many expreflions
duty and submission towards them, they depr
the Queen Regent of her office, and ordained, t
for the future, no obedience ihould be given ro'
commands--. r

The tandard of money in Scotland was continually a.~

In the 6ith of James V. A.D. I;29, a pound weightcf
vhen coined, produced io3 pounds of current money.
under the Queen Regent's adminilraiton, A. D. 1556, as
weight of go!d, although the quan;tity ofaliov vascor,:J-
encreafed, projuced 1441. current money. In I2zg,a,
weight of silver, when coined, produced 9 . 2 s.; butin ;
it produced i !. current money. Ruddim. Prrfat. ad.l.i
Diplomat. Szoti.. p. 80, 81. from vhich it appears, th,;
coniplaint, which the malecontents o.ten repeated, wasn
genber deSitute of foundation.

t iM. Calcelnau, after condemning the dangerous cOuatL
the Prir.- - es Lo.rain ,ith regard to the affairs of Sco!.'?

kcc;,:K

V .i.-.'T as this action may appear, there wanted B o o K

-.ri.,ci:!cs in the constitution, nor precedents in II.
t;illi 'of Scotland, to juflify and to authorize it. 'V/
,iir the ariftocratical form of government efta- 1'
;::.i among the Scots, the power of the Sove-
gn was extremely limited. The more confider-
t roblcs were themlelves petty Princes, poflefing
e:;i;ir jurifJictions, almost independent of the
vn, and followed by numerous valSals, who, in
rv contei, espoused their chieftain's quarrel, in
oftion to the King. Hence the many instances
th- impotence of regal authority, which are to
!fou(nd in the Scottish hiflory. In every age, the
ls not only claimed, but exercised the right of
itraing the King. Jealous of their privileges,
eager to take the field in defence of them, every
r in adniniftration was observed, every encroach-
r. ulon the rights of the aristocracy excited in-
nition, and no Prince ever ventured to transgress
cund.iries, which 'the law had prescribed to
rogati-e, without meeting reft[ance, which shook,
oertirned his throne. Encouraged by the spirit
the conilicution, and countenanced by the ex-
p:e o their ancestors, the Lords of the Con-
aieon thourht it incumbent on them, at this
wirc, to inquire into the mal-administration of
(ueen legent, and to preserve their country
being enslaved or conquered, by depriving

'*.': , vwith lhis usual candour, that the Scots decnared war
r..: t':c t.'¢cn Reeent, radher from a desire of vindicating
'.;l liibcaics, than fiom any motive of rcligion. Alem.

3 her

Bo o K her of the power to execute such a pernicia

II. scheme .
1559-. The a.t of depri-ation, and a le:ter from the LordisG:

Congregation to the Qeen Regent, are still extant, Knor, i
They dilcover not only, that masculine and undaunted i:
natural to men capable of so bold a resolution; but are reat
able for a precision, and vigour ofexpreffion, which v.e:;,
prized to meet with in an age so unpolilhed. The fame r
vation may be made with refpcd to the other public paa:
that period. The ignorance or bad taste of an age mav r-:
the compositions of authors by profession obscure, orafi-
or absurd; but the language of business is nearly the faj:
all times; and wherever men think clearly, and are thorGi
interefied, they exp-cf. themfei es with perspicuity and fa;

# BOOK III.

THE
,H I S T 0 R Y

O F
CCOT LA N D.

B O OK Iii.

11 E I ords of the Congregation soon found, B o o K
th;at their zeal had engaged them in an under- III.
|r, which it was beyond their utmotl ability to-
!i:ljifn. The French garrison, despising their The55n-
I'rot, but irregular forces, refused to surrender gregation

involved in

h. ar.n to depart out of the kingdom i nor were diticultied .
[lc:n'.cl.cntly fikilful in the art of war to reduce
]pice lby force, or possessed of the artillery, or
airnrs, requisite for that purpose; and their fol-
crs, tlhogh of undaunted courage, yet being ac-
1to:d to decide every quarrel by a battle, were
g",1 to tile fatigues of a long campaign, and
i?;icanle impatient of she severe and conifant
j lrcth a siege requires. Thle Queen's emisia-
UL1. Ii ries,

B o o i rles. who found it easy to mingle with their coun.

III. trnym-n, were at th- utmoti pains to heightenthe
'~~ dcrr:ufl, which (.iicovered irtelf at first in murmu

}9' ani complaints, but on occasion of the want ofro

ney for payirng the army, bro!¢e out into open mu
tiny. The molt eminent leaders were scarce fccu
from the unbridled infolknce of the soldiers; i
iobme of inferior rank, interposing too rafily in
dur to quell th-m, were torn in pieces by theirrag
Dicord, coniernation, and perplexity reigned ini
camp of the Reformers. The Duke, their Gene
funk, \\iih his usual timidity, under the terror
apiproaching danger, and discovered manifest fvo
toms of repeinta;:ce for his rashness, in efpou
futch a defperat: cause.

Aporj. ;o Ix this situation of their affairs, the Congregat
!.zatbcei had ricotrfe to Elz7abeth, from whose protec
for a f7. ft -

rc they could derive their only reasonable hopes ofi

cels. Some of their more sagacious leaders, ha'
so releen that the party might probably be invo
in great dificulties, had endeavoured to fecurea
iource in any such exigency, by entering intoa
cret correspondence with the court of England
Elizabeth, aware of the dangerous designs w
the Princes of Lorrain had formed againf
Crown, was early f:nfible of how much importa
it would be, not only to check the progress of
French in Scotland, but to extend her own in.t
in that kingdom 4-; and perce;ving how effeaiu
the present infbrrecoions would contribute tore

i urn Iti:. Ref. '. Append. 2-S. Keith, Append.::
t 'ce As'pen1. io. I.

defeat the schemes formed against England, she B o o K
enedl with pleasure to there applications of the II.
2!ecortents, and gave them private assurances of -.,-~
welful support to their cause. Randolph ., an 55
ent extremely proper for conducting any clark in-
?ue, was dispatched into Scotland, and residing
rety among the Lords of the Congregation, ob-
ced and quickened their motions. Money seem -
to be the only thing they wanted at that time;
dir was owing to a seasonable remittance from
gland L, that the Scotriih nobles had been enabled
take the field, and to advance towards Leith.
t as Elizabeth was diflruftful of the Scots, and
dious to preserve appearances with France, her
idiJes were beflowed at first with extreme fiuga-
. The subsistence of an army, and the expen-
ofa siege soon exhausted this penurious supply,
w'hich the Lords of the Congregation could make
eadlition from their own funds; and the ruin
1 iiyierfion of the party must have instantly fol-
ed.

x order to prevent this, Cockburn of Ormiflon le rend,
fetir, with the utmoff expedition, to the gover- t"'nl r
of the town and castle of Berwick. As Ber- of roney,
W';as, at that time, the town of greatest impor-
eon the Scottifil frontier, Sir Ralph Sadler and
Jm'es Crofts, persons of considerable figure,
cniployed to command there, and were (ntru if-
i.h a discretionary power of iupplying the Scot-
'Tra.econtents, according to the exigency of their
}L;:, Anpend. 29. t KPnox, 21+. Kcith, Append. 41.

! P 2 affirs.

B o n K afj:r;. From :hem Cockburn received ooocro

III. bul little to the advantage o' his party. The;
'~ ors Bothwall, by thie t uern's intigarion, lay ini

-wh:i;,, for him on his return, diflerfed his follows
ire-e:;-t- woun:'ej hii, and carried off the money.
cd.

T!:IS unexrect-d ditappointment proved fatl

the p rrv. In mere dcefpair, tome of the more
ious ..rtem: ted co a!haul: Leith, but the French
them back wich difrace, Itized their cannon,
puirfing them to the gates of Edinburgh, were
the puin. o! entering along with them. All he
ror and conr.fuon, vhich the profpea of pillas
ors iralTacre can excite in a place taken by si
fil-id t-e city on this occasion. 'I he inhabitants
from the enemy by the opposite gate; the ftrI
the Congregation were irresolute and dismayed;
the Qrcen's partizans in the town openly ins
both. At 2las, a few of the nobles ventered to'
the enemy, \nho, after plundcring some hloub
tlhe fiibcrb;, retired wtih thleir booty, and dtin
te city from t'.is drcadful alarm.

A SEcoND fl;irmifn, ,hich happened asew

after, was no less unfortunate. The French fnto
derac'-nment to intercept a convoy of provisionss
was d-figned for Edinburgh. The Lords ofthei
grega'ion, having intelligence of this, march
a'l hn:lie with a cornfderab'e body of their
and falling upon the enemy between Reftalr'r
Leith, with more gallantry than good conduct,
almoif furrcunded by a second party of French,
advanced in orde r to fupportc [heir own mIn

js situation, a retreat was the only thing which B o o K
!id lave the Scots; but a retreat ovtr nanrfhy III.
'ndj, and in the face of an eremy superior in "/' -,
mhrr could not long be coniuLced with oi(cr. I559'
>I}ihll bolyl of the enemy hung ,pon their rear, They .etie
r anld foot fell into the utlnoft confusion, and ir fro"" Leith

in coifu-

ris cnrily owing to the caution of the French, ion.

a any of the party escaped being cut in piec-s.

ON tlis second blow, the hopes and spirits of the
,ngreation lunk altogether. They did not think
ernf.es secure, even within the walls of Edi1n-
rh, but instantly determined to retire to flonme
c at a greater dil-ance from the enetmy. In vain
the i'rior of St. Andrew's, and a few others op-
e this cowardly and ignominious flighr. lTe
ad ofthe present danger prevaIltd over both the
it of honour, and zeal for the cause. At mid-
t, they set out from Edinburgh, in great con- Novm. 6.
on, and marched witlout halting till they arriv-
ai :tirling.

li2'.:G this lafl infurreaion, the great boly of
co cifh nobility jo:ned the Congregation. The
rds Cecon and Borthwick were the only persons
rank who took arms for the Queen, and afiiiled
;n defending Leith *. Bothwell openly favour-
s!er cause, but ref:d(d at his own house. The

oF Huntly, conformable to the crafry policy

i: diftinguiflies his character, amured the lead-
of the Congregation, whom he had engaged to

I'cilbA, Append. 3 r.

P 3 affit,

B o o K aiif, with many fair promises, but never joi

III. them with a single man *. The Earl of Morton,
"-"-~" nmenmber of the Congregation, fuctuated in a si

- o irrei0lution, and d;d not aEt heartily for theco

mon cauCe. Lord Erskine, Governor of EdinbuR
ca''le, though a Proteltant, maintained a neutra!i
v.hich he esteemed becoming the dignity of hist
fice; and having bten entrusted by Parliament
the command of the principal fortress in the i;i
dom, he rcfolved that neither faction should get
into their hands.

A

. ;,'ir A FEcw days before the retreat of the Cong
i''''': ticn, the Q(ueen suffered an irreparable loss br
(ce=n= d-fection cf her principal Secretary, William il

....er. j'r. ia of Lcthiinton. His zeal for the Rcformidt

]iglon, togcthcr with his warm remonstrances agi
the vioa;nt meailires which the Queen was carr
on, exp 1d1 i.'im so much to her resentment,
to that or her iFrench Counsellors, that lie, fiuft
i';g his i fe to i-; in danger, withdrew fecretlyi
1 .erth, cr.l Led to the Lords of the Congregaticne
a'd they, with open arms, received a convert, wi
..b:it.cs ..:deed both fircngth and reputation toti
c:.'e. \:aiiland had early applied to public
n-is a'nlra,!e' natural ta'ents, improved by an
c :ainrnc:.e w.-itri ti-e libe-al arts and, at a time
;:':, wvln lhis couiitrynven of the fame quality'
f.lo..ings ;'-,e p'ea_,furs of the chace, or fervi'g

\:..-en:urers in the armies of France, he was ad
.: inLo a:1 the iccreIs of the cabinet, and put u

level with persons of the most consummate expe- B o o K
nce in the management of aftairs. 1-'e posiTsed, 111.
an eminent degree, that intrepid spirit, which '
ieights in pursuing bold designs, and was no less 1559
afler of that political art and dexteriry which is
ce!ilry for carrying them on with success. But
sce qualities were deeply tinatured with the neigh.
uring vices. H-is address sometimes degenerated
toca;niling; his acuteness bordered upon excess of
btlcry and refinement; his invention, over fertile;
ge(ed to him, on foine occasions, chimerical sys-
Is of policy, little suitable to the genius of the
; and his enterprising spirit engaged him in pro-
is vafl and splendid, but beyond his utmoift
ver to execute. All the cotemporary writers, to
tever faction they belong, mention him with
admiration, which nothing could have excited
the greatest superiority of penetration and abi-

es.

TiE precipitate retreat of the Congregation in-
ased, to such a degree, the terror and confusion
idi had seized them at Edinburgh, that before
ey cached Stirling, their army dwindled to an
onfijer-able number. The fpii it of Knox, how-
er, !ill remained undaunted and erect, and
ving moounted the pulpit, he addrefled to his
ornding liearers, an exhortation which wonder-
'y animated and revived them. The heads of
s discourse are inserted in his history *, and afford
triking example of the boldness and freedom of

K* nox, 193.

P . reproof

B o o K reproof assumed by the first Reformers, as wella

III. Ipecimen of his own skill in chufing the topics
.,--- fitted to influence and rouze his audience.
1559-

The Lords A MEETING of the leaders being called, to
ohit[ol-; r fider what course they should hold, now thatth8
a..' .gain own resources were all exhausted, and their deft
be:h. tion appeared to be unavoidable, without fore

aid; they turned their eyes once more to Enola
and resolved to implore the assistance of Eliza
towards finishing an enterprize, in which they
so fatally experienced their own weakness, and
firengrh of their adversaries. Maitland, as the
able negociator of the party, was employed in
embassy. In his absence, and during the inai
season of the year, it was agreed to difmiis theirr
lowers, worn out by the fatigues of a canpa
which had so far exceeded the ufial tcme of rri
But, in order to preserve the counties most dv
to their inrereft, the Prior of St. Andew's,
part of the leaders, retired into Fife. The D
of Chate!:eiault, with the rect, fixed his refid
at Hamilton. There was little need of Maitl
adtcrefi or eloquence to induce Elizabeth to take
country under her protction. She observed
prevalence of the French counsels, and the preo
of their arms in 'cotland, with great concern;
as fie well foresaw the dangerous tendency ofib
fcheres in that kingdom, ihe had already conli
a resolution with regard to the part she herfelfw'
ac, if their power there flould grow rfill nore
midab!e.

I order to give the Queen and her Privy Coun- B o o K
il a full and ditlinct view of any. important matter III.
lhich miwhht come before them, it seems to have
ecn the prafice of Elizabeth's Ministers to prepare So5i.9'
emorials, in which they clearly Itated the point I'cb de-

termincd

der deliberation, laid down the grounds of the er to affit
andud, which they held to be moil: reasonable, th!"e
d propolcd a method for carrying their plan into
ecuton. Two papers of this kind, written by Sir
illiam Cecil with his own hand, till remain *;
He are intited, " A short discussion of the weighty
matter of Scotland," and do honour to the in-
ftry and penetration of that great MiniRfer. The
otives, which determined the (Qeen to espouse so
aimly the defence of the Congregation, are repre-
nted with perlpicuity and force; and the confe-
uences of suffering the French to eitablilh them-
ives in Scotland, are prediaed with great accuracy
d discernment.

HIr lays it down as a principle, agreeable to the
wsboth of God and of nature, that every society
ath a right to defend itself, not only from prelent
ngers, but fiom such as may probably ensue; to
ich, he adds, that nature and reason teach every
ince to defend himself by the fame means, which
s dversaries employ to distress him. Upon there
unCs, he eflablifhes the right of England to in-
rpfe iL the afairs of Scotland, and to prevent the
nquef of that kingdom, at which the French
nly aimed. 'l'he French, he observes, are the
' B.n 'vl. iii. Apcnd, z. Keth, Append. 24.

ancient

B o o K ancient and implacable enemies of England, H

III. tilities had subsisted between the two nations f/
*~~ _j many centuries. No treaty of peace, into whi

559.' they entered, had ever been cordial or sincere

good effcct was therefore to be expefed from
peace lately agreed upon, which being extorted
present necessity, would be negligently obsen
and broken on the slightest pretences. In av
short time, France would recover its formeroi
lence; and though now drained of men and mo&
by a tedious and unsuccessful war, it would quick
be in a condition for acting, and the reillels
martiil genius' of the people would render ac
receffary. The Princes of Lorrain, who at
time had the entire direction of French affairs,
animated with the molt virulent hatred againfti
English nation. They openly called in quefiion0
legitimacy of the Queen's birth, and by advanó
the title and pretensions of their niece the Queen
Scotland, studied to deprive Elizabeth of her Cro
VWith this view, they had laboured to exclude
Engiifh from the treaty of Chateau en Caminb
and en'.eavoured to conclude a separate peace i'
Spain. They had persuaded Henry II. to per
his daughter-in-law to assume the title and arms
<Qucen of England; and even since the conclu
of t:e peace, they had iollicited at Rome, ando
tained a bull, declaring Elizabeth's birth tobeii
gCtimate. And though the wildom and mod'era:
of the Constable Montmorency had, for fometii
checked their career, yet theft restraints being r
removed by the death of Henry II. and the dili
of his ZMinifter, the utmof' excess of violenceiv

be dreaded from their furious ambition, armed B o o K
ith overeign power. Scotland is the quarter, III.
ence they can attack England with inmot advan- 'V

A war on the borders of that country ex- 55

bs France to no danger, but one unsuccessful ac-
n there may hazard the Crown, and overturn the
vcrnmc.nt of England. In political conduEt, it
chitillh to wait till the defitns of an enemy be
efor execution. The Scottish nobles, after their

Rs efforts, have been obliged to quit the field;
far from expelling tle invaders of their liber-
, they behold the French power daily increasing,
must at lait cease from struggling any longer in
ontcft so unequal. The invading of England
1 immediately foilow the reduction of the Scot-
malecontents, by the abandoning of whom to
mercy of the French, Elizabeth will open a
y for her enemies into the heart of her own king-

a, and expose it to the calamities of war, and

danger of conquest. Nothing therefore remain-
but to meet the enemy while yet at a dillance from
:gland, and by supporting the Congreation with
owerfRl army, to render Scotland the theatre of
ar, to cru f the designs of the Princes of Lorrain
their inf'ancy, and, by filch an early and unex-
ed ciibr, to expel the French out of Britain,
ore their power had time to take root, and grow
to any formidable height. But as the matter
Cf as much importance, as any which could
under the consideration of an Englifi Monarch,
Onm .an mature counsel were necefiry in the first
C!, :!'nd afi!.rw.arn s vigour and expedition in con-

duct;

B o o K duct; the danger was urgent, and, by losing;

III. single moment, might become unavoidable *
1559. THESE arguments produced their full eff;Cun

on Elizabeth, who was jealous, in an extrelr,
gree, of every pretendet to her Crown, and no
anxious to preserve the tranqiuii' .- anal appin ^
her fubjets. From thele motives f'- ha, u a;-ai
granting the Congregation an carly fiU;'y ;,;
ney; and from the fame pr;i.- es fie dcterrn'.i
in their present exigency, to a,o;d rtem mor,
fectual aid. One of Maitland's attendants s.;
flantly d;fpatched into Scotland with the flrong
affurar.ces of her protection, and the Lord., o
Congregation were dtfired to fend cormifiion-rs
to England, to conclude a treaty, aid to fttie
operations of the campaign, with the Duke ofiNn
folk .

MEAN while, the Queen Regent, fiom wDi

The Queen
Dowager no motion of the Congregation could long bec
frd",h 1l cealed, dreaded the fuccels of this negociation ni
Frrnch the court of England, and ibrcfaw !;ow little
tr(:p5 ao- rsth
gain t would be able to resist the united effort of the
th.mn. kingdoms. For this reason lhe determined, if

fible, to get the start of Elizabeth ; and by vent
ing, notwithfsanding the inclemency of the win
fealbn, to attack the malecontents in their prd

The argumerts xhich the Scots cmp!ryed, in o:'

o':;.in E!'zabeth's aflilancc, arc urtce.l \ ith great ocle, ina
per of M'itland's. Sea Arpcndix, No II.

t Ke:--:h, i,4. ,

d.i:(,,'

fperf-d and helpless situation, Ihe hoped to putB o o K
end to the war, before the arrival of their English III.

I559.

A CONSIDERABLE body of her French forces,
ho were augmented, about this time, by the ar-
al of the Count de Martigues, with a thousand
ierne foot, and some cavalry, were commanded to
arch to Stirling. Having there crofled the Forth,
y proceeded along the coast of Fife, destroying
d plundering, with excessive outrage, the houses
d linds of those whom they esteemed their ene-
ies, life was the molt populous and powerful
|nty in the kingdom, and most devoted to the
ogregation, vw.o had hitherto drawn from thence
eir mot considerable supplies, both of men and
rvifions; and therefore, betides punishing the dif-
CtiIon of the inhabitants, by pillaging the coun-
, the French proposed to seize and fortify St. An-
Cr"'s, and to leave in it a garrison sufficient to bridle
mutinous spirit of the province, and to keep pof-
on of a port situated on the main ocean.

B UT on this occasion, the Prior of St. Andrew's,
rd l uthvcn, Kirkaldy of Grange, and a few of
n.molt active leaders of the Congregation, per-
r'.cld, by their bravery and good conduct, a ser-
ic of the itmoUft importance to their party. Hav-
g affcmbled fix hundred horse, they infcfted the
r.nch with continual incursions, beat up their
'Irt-rs, i;.terceprtd their convoys of provisions,
t 0i' ;thtir [traggling parties, and lb hlarrafed them

w ith

B oo K with perpetual alarms, that they prevented them
III. more than three weeks from advancing .
I560. AT lafi the Prior, with his feeble party,

constrained to rctiie, and the French set out fro
Kirkaidv, and began to move along the coalte
wards St. Andrew's. They had advanced but
Januar;y3.fesv miks, wvhen from an eminence they deeried

poweriul fleet fleering its course up the lirth
Forth. As they knew that the Marquis D'El
was, at that time, preparing to fail for Scotl
with a numerous army, they haflily concluded
these ships belonged to him, and gave way toj
moil immoderate transports of joy, on the p.of'
of this long-expefed succour. Their great g,
were already fired to welcome their friends, and
ipread the tidings and terror of their arrival amn
their enemies, when a small boat from the oppo
coall landed, and blalted their premature and hor
lived triumph, by informing them, that it was

Tr!eEnri.h fleet of England which was in fight, intended
ftea-rives the aid of the Congregation, and was soon to
:tlnce. followed by a formidable land army -.

THROUGHOUT her whole reign, Elizabeth

cautious, but decisive ; and by her promptitudei
executing her resolutions, joined to the deliberat
with which she formed them, her adminifrati
became remarkable. no lels for its vigour, than
kis filfdom. No sooner did fie determine to ai
her protciion to the Lords of the Congregatio

§ K..OX, 20. -4 Knox. 203.
4 't!:

an they experienced the aaivity, as well as the B o o K
rent of her power. The season of the year would III.
it 'nit her land army to take the field ; but left ' 56
Frenchl should, in the mean time, receive new
nl(icemcnts, flie inflantly ordered a strong fqua-
1 to cruize in the Firth of Forth. She seems,
her inliruclions to Winter her Admiral, to have
en deiious of prefcrving the appearances offriend-
p toward. tlhe 1 rench *. But these were only ap-
irances; if any French fleet should attempt to
d, he was commanded to prevent it, by every aft
hostility and violence. It was the fight of this
lilaon, which occasioned at first so much joy
ong the French, but which soon inspired them
h lilch terror, as saved Fife from the effects of
r venge(ance. Apprehensive of being cut off
m thir companions on the opposite fore, they
reated towards Stirling with the utmonf precipi-
ion, and, in a dreadful season, and through roads
oil im:,alfTble, arrived at Leith, harrafsed and
lialed with fatigue t.

THr FIrnlih feet cast anchor in the road of
it' anMd continuing in that itation till the con-
fiRn o1 pIacc, both prevented the garrison of
i:h firom7 rceiving luccours of any kind, and con-
cr,'ily facilitated the operations of their own for-
by land.

0oo0 after the arrival of the English squadron, Theyccn-
(-'ommi ninoners of the Congregation repaired to peace aih

EnF!and .

;ci;h, Apccnix 4. t -
Knox, - Feb. 7.

Ber w;ck,

B o o K Berwick, and concluded with the Duke of Norfaf

IIT. a treaty, the bond of that union with Elizaber
'-,- which was of so great advantage to the cause. T(

I560' give a check to the dangerous and rapid progress

the French arms in Scotland, was the profeffedd
fgn of the contracting parries. In order to t
the Scots engaged never to fuffcr any cloferu1
of their country with France; and to defend the
selves to the uttermost against all attempts of c
quell; and for their afliftance, Elizabeth prom
to employ, in Scotland, a powerful army, whi
the Scots undertook to join with all their forces;
place in Scotland was to remain in the hands of
Engiifh wshatever should be taken from the enc
was either to be razed, or kept by the Scots, at
choice; if any invasion should be made upon E
land, the Scots were obliged to alffif Elizabeth
part of their forces; and to ascertain theirfai
obL;'varnce of the treaty, they bound themselves
deliver hostages to Elizabeth, before the marcd
her army into Scotland ; in conclusion, the
made many protestations of obedience andloy'
Fowards their own Queen, in every thing not in
fiflent with their religion, and the liberties of
country .

The tng- THE English army, consisting of fix thous
lith army foot, and two thouland horse, under the comm
LeYith. of Lord Grey of W'ilton, entered Scotland early

l he Spring. 'I he members of the Congregation

fembled from all parts of the kingdom to meet

K nox, 217.

Ii

allies; and having joined them with great tnul- B o o K
udes of their followers, they advanced together III.
wards Leith. The French were little able to keep 56o-
efield again(t an enemy so much superior in num-
r. A strong body of troops, deltined for their
ijf, had been scattered by a violent florm, and
d either perished on the coast of France, or with
culty had recovered the ports of that kingdom *.
they hoped to be able to defend Leith, till the
ices of Lorrain should make good the magnifi-
tpromifes of affitance, with which they daily
ouraged them ; or till scarcity of provisions fiould
Rfain the English to retire into their own coun-
In order to haften this latter event, they did
negleft the usual, though barbarous precaution
diftrefling an invading enemy, by burning and
ng wafe all the adjacent countryt. The zeal,
ever, of the nation frustrated their intentions;
r to contribute towards removing their oppref-
the people produced their hidden stores to sup-
their friends; the neighbouring counties sup-
every thing necessary, and far from wanting
since, the Englifll found, in their camp, all
of provisions, at a cheaper rate, than had for
time been known in that part of the king-

v the approach of the English army, the Queen
ent retired into the cartle of Edinburgh. Her

was now in a declining slate, and her mind
en and depressed by the misfortunes of her ad.

,:em. deCal._clo. 40 t Knox, 22z. t Knox, ibid.
OL. . Q. mini-

B o o K ministration. To avoid the danger and fatigue of

III. ficge, she committed herself to the protection
L"3 ' Lord Erskine. This nobleman still preserved
5°' *neutrality, and by his integrity and love of

country, merited equally the esteem of both par
He received the Queen herself with the utmoR
nour and respect, but took care to admit nof
retinue, as might endanger his command of
cattle *.
A^.; 6. A FEW days after they arrived in Scotland,

Englilh invested Leith. The garrison, flhui
within the town, was alinoft half as numerous as
army which fat down before it, and by an obfi
defence protraced the siege to a great length.
circumstances of this siege, related by cotempo
historians, men without knowledge or experience
the art of war, are often obscure and imperfect,
at this distance of time are not considerable enm
to be entertaining,

ir first the French endeavoured to keep p

sio,. of the Hawk Hill, a riling ground not far:
A,:.. . tant from the town, but were beat from it

great flaugllter, chiefly by the furious attack of
Scottilh cavalry. Within a few days, the Fre
had their full revenge; having sallied outwid
firong body, they entered the English trenc
broke their troops, nailed part of their cannon,
killed at least double the number they had elt
the former skirmish. Nor were the Englifhi

Fobcs Collea. vol..I. .53. Kith, 122.

L fortu

rtinate in an attempt which they made to take the B o o K
ce by aflault; they were met with equal courage, III.
repulsed with considerable loTs. From the de- 6

1560.

I of these circumt[ances by the writers of that age, May 7.
s easy to observe the different characters of the
ench and English troops. The former, trained
war, under the aclive reigns of Francis I. and
enry II. defended themselves not only with the
svery, but with the skill of veterans. The latter,
o had been more accustomed to peace, frill pre-
ed the intrepid and desperate valour peculiar to
nation, but discovered few marks of military
ius, or of experience in the practice of war.
ry misfortune or disappointment during the siege
be imputed to manifest errors in conduct. The
ces of the besieged in their sally was owing en-
y to the security and negligence of the English:
y of their officers were absent; their soldiers had
their fations; and the trenches were almost
hout a guard. The ladders, .which had been
vided for the assault, wanted a great deal of the
esrry length; and the troops employed in that
ice were ill flpported. The trenches were open-
at First, in an improper place ; and as it was
nd expedient to change the ground, both time
labour were loft. The weakness of their own
erals, no less than the strength of the French
rifon, rendered the progress of the English won-
fullyflow. The length, however, of the siege, and
lols of part of their magazines by an accidental
, reduced the French to extreme distress, which the

Q 2z prospect

Bo o o prospect of relief made them bear with admira

III. fortitude.

°60. W'HILE the hopes and courage of the Frenchp

traAed the siege so far beyond expectation, thele
ers of the Congregation were not idle. By new
fociations and confederacies, they laboured r
perfectly to unite their party. By publickly rani
ing the treaty concluded at Berwick, they end
voured to render the alliance with England firm
indissoluble. Among the subscribers of theft
pers, we find the Earl of Huntly, and forne o0
who had not hitherto concurred with the C
gregation in any of their measures *. Seyeral
thele Lords, particularly the Earl of Huntly,
adhered to the Popish church; but on this occa
neither their religious sentiments, nor their so
cautious maxims, were regarded; the torrent of
tional relentment and indignation against the Fr
hurried them on }.

* Brn. vol. i.i. aS-. Knox, z:i.

t The dread of tile French power did, on manyoc

furmounz the zeal, \whclh the Catholic nobles had forthe
ligion. Ecuilcsi the p;eic"ltisc evidence for this, arising
the n:e~,oral nentirncd ' uy E'irnet, Hill. of the Refoi
vol. iii. 2Ri. and publilid by him, App. p. 27S; the i
tions of Elizabeth to Randolph her agent, put it bey0o
doubt, that man zeae.ious I'apiFis thought the alliance witi
iand to be neceff'rv or pr cfLrving the liberty and indepen
cf thi k.gdom. XK'-i.i, 1r. Huntly himself began ac
roncence \itwh Eli/abeth's MiniiecrF, before the march od

i:-.'.:..:.:. ; ir.o Sc 'tr.;.d, II^.'nes's S:tte P.a-c:s, z'
See .'-.r^- No. IiI.

THE Queen Regent, the instrument, rather thanB o o K
hecaufe of involving Scotland in those calamities, III.
ider which it groaned at that time, died during o

heat of the siege. No Princess ever posse.cd Dca~h and
i.ities more capable of rendering hel- adminifira. cl';.aacrof
on illuRtrious, or her people happy. Of muc!h Il)o er
ifcernment, and no less address; of great intrepi- June io-
ity, and equal prudence; gentle ant humanc, with-
ir weakness; zealous for her relition, without bi-
otry; a lover ofjuflice, without rigour. One cir-
umftance, however, and that, too, the excess of a
irte, rather than any vice, poisoned all thcfe great
ialities, and rendered her government unfortunate,
nd her name odious. Devoted to the interest of
rance, her native country, and attached to the
rinces of Lorrain her brothers, with most paflion-
e fondnels; she departed, in order to gratify them,
ro every maxim, which her own wisdom or hu-
:nity would have approved. She outlived, in a
rit nmeafre, that reputation and popularity, which
id Inmoothed her way to the higlhe flation in the
ngdom; and many examples of falfhood, and
re of severity, in the latter part of her adminiftia-
on, totally alienated from her the afifecions of a
roplc, who had once placed in her an unbounded
onhidnce. But, even by her enemies, thefa un-
uiifilble a.ions were imputed to the facility, not
othe nmalignity of her nature ; and while they taxed
r brotllchr, and I'rench counfcllors, with rafhnecs
liU cruelty ; thcy ilill allowed her the pi-ailc of pru-
n.ce and oif Icnity *. A few days before her dctath,

* Euchan. .:-.

0.3 n,-~~~~~~~~!i·

B o o K she desired an interview with the Prior of St. A.

III. drew's, the Earl of Argyll, and other chiefs of tl
'I6 "" Congregation. To them she lamented the fatal ifl

of those violent councils, which she had been oblig
ed to follow ; and, with the candour natural to ag
nerous mind, confeifed the errors of her own id
ministration, and begged forgiveness of those,
whom they had been hurtful; but, at the fame ti
lhe warned them, amidst their struggles for liben
and the shock of arms, not to lole fight of t
loyalty and subjection, which was due to their o
reign *. The remainder of her time, the emploI
in religious meditations and exercises. She eveni
vited the attendance of Willox, one of the
eminent among the Reformed preachers, listened
his instructions with reverence and attention, ,
prepared for the approach of death with a decent l
titude.

Motives of NOTHING could now save the French troops, !.
the French
to conclude up in Leith, but the immediate conclusion of
a peae.. peace, or the arrival of a powerful army from

continent. The Princes of Lorrain amused t'p
party in Scotland, with continual expectations of
latter, and had thereby kept alive their hopes
their courage. But at last, the fimation of Fra
rather than the terror of the English arms, or
remonftranccs of the Scottish malecontents, c
strained them. though with reluctance, to turn t
thoughts towards pacific councils. The Protefa
in France were, at that time, a party formidable

* L;s;, de Rebus Gc.. Scot. 222. t Knox, zzS,

er number, and more by the valour and enter- B o o K
risng genius of their leaders. Francis II. had III.
eated them with extreme rigour, and discovercd, -C-
y every flep he took, a fettled resolution to extir- 5°
te their religion, and to ruin those who professed

At the profpe&t of this danger to themselves,

ndto their cause, the Protestants were alarmed,
rt ior terrified. Animated with zeal, and inflam-
with resentment, they not only prepared for their
wn defence, but resolved, by some bold aftion, to
nticipate the schemes of their enemies; and as the
rinces of Lorrain were esteemed the authors of all
e King's violent measures, they marked them out,
be the first victims of their indignation. Hence,
nd not from any disloyalty to the King, proceeded
e famous conspiracy of Amboise ; and though the
ig:lance and good fortune of the Princes of Lor- Malcl ,5
in discovered and disappointed that design, it was
fy to observe new storms gathering in every pro-
ince of the kingdom, and ready to burst out with
1 the fury and outrage of civil war. In this situ-
on, the ambition of the house of Lorrain was cal-
dofffrom the thoughts of foreign conquests, to
esrd the honour and dignity of the French crown,
ni intead of fending new reinforcements into Scot-
nd, it became necefnary to withdraw the veteran
rops already employed in that kingdom *.

I order to conduc an affair or so much impor- The nego-
nce and delicacy, the Princes of Lorrain made ciations for

. that pur-
,ice of Monluc Bishop of Valence, and of the pose.

* Lefly, 224.

Q 4 Sicur

B o o x Sieur de Randan. As both these, especially the for,

III. mer, were reckoned inferior to no persons ot tha
;,,-' age, in addrels and political refinement; Eliza

150' cpptofid to them AmbalTadors of equal abilities

Cecil her Prl-ne Mliniter, a man perhaps ofi
greatefr ca-acity who had ever held that offce
and \W'oton Dean of Cantcrbury, grown old
the art or ne;gciating under three successive !i
narl-cs. The iinterefts of the French and Engli[
courts v,-re lbon adjustcd by men of so great dx.
terity in bulnefla; and as F-rance easily confentedQ
vwithdra:-. thnci fbrces, which had been the chi
cc.ca:.on clf the war; t';e other points in difpu,
bt.,'ccn tlat kingdom and England, were notmi:
ltrs or tedious, or of difficult dilcuffion.

T :r. g-: .. nces of the Congr.gation, and thFa

denandn~s upon their own Sovererigns for redress, e.
Fr-'.cy ' o;?i-r time, and required to be treated ;i5
.-. ;o!e dneiica;:- hand. After lo many open atterni?
.:orie.i on h- commird of the King and QLi.,
. .. "-': "' Cv,: -:"n th1' ancient coniticution, aa

L ;-: t-. ;cii:, on xv.'ich they had embraced

t'>-. Sr, t:r'i. r.ob'es co.:.ld not th:!nk themfclves 1;
clr;, v.-..;o'.: n xir. -

Ic;. .e rnev. barrier agaiinf it

:::'.:r c-.cro.c- nns o.. If real to.;.er. But the ie
. i..-.-- .-;..-d cs aiccoii;li.'!:- th's v.ere not l Jo
"*** -'':- . '' -. aCh a.-.;. :,;iTlWo:s conf.lderedtheen'

Lt .'.:;;, 1-) ;m'y tr.-av vy, dl f.l1bjO s. and with rebe's,

r. :. -
' ,.. ::'."..;:.! tunvorthv tie' .;iiirY' of a C

y
o aS
V-.ci; -: ::.. : ir- r ik ules on :ii:s !;cad mi' t

.Ro hs
;-;h, cnC.5 j might hae.

i'-'. : :. . , i; r t ini - ri.ncc of b

F..:- ; ..*;- '_*-.
-... : I' .:'ij ed? an etxpe.-Y".

ich seemed to provide for the security of the sub- B o o ic
without derogating from the honour of the III.
ce. The Scottifli nobles agreed, on this occa- 6"

i56o.

to pais from the point of right and privilege, Articles of
to accept the redress of their grievances, as athe treaty,
t;!r of favour. Whatever additional security
r anxiety for personal safety, or their zeal for
iic liberty, prompted them to demand, was
td in the name of Francis and Mary, as a&s
tleir royal favour and indulgence. And left
clions of this kind should seem precarious, and
: to be retracted by the fame power, which
matie them, the French Ambassador agreed to
: them in the treaty with Elizabeth, and
oby to bind the King and Queen inviolably to
Sre them r.

relating this transaction, cotemporary hiftori-
have confounded the concefions of Francis and
r to their Scottish subjects, w th the treaty be-
nFrance and .ngland ; the latter, besides the
icain of former treaties betwen the two king-
5, and ltipulations \\ith regard to the time and
er .f removing both armies out of Scotland,
airei an article, to which, as the source of
y inm;otant events, we shall often have occa-
to rrler. '1 he right of Elizabeth to her crown
t'iery, ack.no;w.:el ed in the strongest terms;
Ira;.c:s a:ci vl ary foiemnlv engage, neither to
me ;te title, nor to bear the arms of King and
a of ELngiand, in any time to comle.

i' - l: , Ih , t13, ,Hc.

Ho-

B o o r HONOURABLE as this article was for Elizabeth

III. herself, the conditions she obtained for her allies tk

'"^v'' Scots were no lets advantageous to them. Mon.
i ;60.
Jly 6. ' uc and Randan conented, in the name of Franc

and Mary, that the French forces in Scotland thoL
instantly be sent back into their own country, a
no foreign troops be hereafter introduced intothi
kingdom, without the knowledge and content
Parliament; that the fortifications of Leith a
Dunbar should immediately be rczsd, and no n
fort be erected without the permifilon of Parh
ment; that a Parliament should be held on
first day of August, and that aflembly be deemi
as valid, in all refpeEts, as if it had been called b
the express commandment of the King and Queen
that, conformable to the ancient laws and cuso.
of the country, the King and Qucen should nord,
dare war, or conclude peace, without the concu
rence of Parliament; that, during the Queen's a
fence, the administration of government should
vested in a council of twelve perfcns, to be cho
out of twenty-four named by Parliament, seven
which council to be eleted by the Queen, andfi
by the Parliament; that hereafter, the King a
Queen should not advance foreigners to places
trust or dignity in the kingdom, nor confer the
sices of Treasurer or Comptroller of the reven
upon any ecclefiatic; that an ad of oblivion, a
lifhing the guilt and memory of all offences, co
mntted since the 6th of March, t558, "hould
pased in the ensuing Parliament, and be ratified
the King and Q:cuen; that the King and QUe
should not, under colour of punishing any vioilt:

f their authority during that period, seek to de- B o o K
rive any of their fubjeats of the offices, benefices, III.
retaates which they now held; that the redress ',
ueto churchmen, for the injuries which they had 156
ufained during the late infurreFtions, should be
ft entirely to the cognizance of Parliament. With
egard to religious controversies, the Ambassadors
eclared that they would not presume to decide, but
ernitted the Parliament, at their first meeting, to
aine the points in difference, and to represent
hir sense of them to the King and Queen *.

Tofuch a memorable period, did the Lords of Te, effeas
e Congregation, by their courage and perseverance, of it
ondut an enterprize, which, at first, promised a
ry different issue. From beginnings extremely
eble, and even contemptible, the party grew by
grees to great power; and being favoured by
ny fortunate incidents, baffled all the efforts of
eir own Queen, aided by the forces of a more
nfiderable kingdom. The sovereign authority was,
ythis treaty, transferred wholly into the hands of the
ongreation; that limited prerogative, which the
rown had hitherto pofeffed, was almost entirely
inihilared; and the ariffocratical power, which al-
as predominated in the Scottish government, be-
e supreme and incontroulable. By this treaty,
o, the influence of France, which had long been
much weight in the affairs of Scotland, was
tearly diminished, and not only were the present
ncroachments of that ambitious ally restrained, but,

a Keith, 137, &c.

by

B o o K by confederating with England, protection wasp

III. vided against any future attempt from the fa
'~-6"- quarter. At the fame time, the controversies

religion being left to the consideration of Parliam
the Proteftan:s might reckon upon obtaining wh
ever decision was most favourable to the opini
which they professtd.

A FEW days after the conclusion of the trea

both the French and English armies quitted S
land.

A Parlia- THE eyes of every man in that kingdom
rcnt held. turned towards the approaching Parliament.

meeting, summoned in a manner so extraord
at such a critical junture, and to deliberate u
matters of so much consequence, was expe&ed
the utmost anxiety.

A SCOTTISH Parliament, suitable to'theario

tical genius of the government, was properly
assembly of the nobles. It was composed of
shops, Abbots, Barons, and a few commrr ffi
of burroughs, who met altogether in one h
The Leffir Barons, though pofefied of a right
be prelent, either in person, or by their repre
tives, seldom exercised it. The cxpence ofatl
ing, according to the fashion of the times, w
numerous train of vassals and dependants; the
a:tention of the age, to any legal or regular fy
or government ; but above all, the exorbitant

ith : ors tie re.ter nobles, who had lr.ivn
v;.'!ol'. !. '., into their own hands, nma.e tki

\\

ilee of so little value, as to be almost neglected. B o o K
appears from the ancient rolls, that during times IlL
tranquillity, few commiflfoners of burroughs, 0
d almost none of the Lesser Barons appeared in
rliament. The ordinary adminiitration of go-
rnment was abandoned without scruple orjealoufy,
the King and to the Greater Barons. But in ex-
ordinary conjun&ures, when the struggle for li-
ertywas violent, and the spirit of opposition to
e Crown rose to an height, the Burgesses and
tier Barons were rouzed from their inativity,
d ood forth to vindicate the rights of their coun-

The turbulent reign of James III. affords ex-

mples in proof of this observation *. The pub-
cindignation against the rash designs of that weak
d ill-advifed Prince, brought into Parliament,
ides the Greater nobles and prelates, a confider-
e number of the Lesser Barons.

THE fame causes occasioned the unusual conflu-
ce of all orders of men to the Parliament, which
et on the first of August. The universal passion
liberty, civil and religious, which had seized the
tion, suffered few persons to remain unconcerned

ators of an assembly, whose acts were likely to
rove decisive with refpet to both. From all cor-
rs of the kingdom, men flocked in, eager and
etermined to aid, with their voices in the senate,
e fame cause, which they had defended with their
ords in the field. Besides a full convention of

'es, Temporal and Spiritual, there appeared the
presentatives of almost all the burroughs, and

* Ke;ith, 14-.

above

B o o K above an hundred Barons, who, though of thelef.

III. ser order, were Gentlemen of the first rank and
'~~V - fortune in the nation .

1560.

THE Parliament was ready to enter on bufinerl

with the utmost zeal, when a difficulty was started
concerning the lawfulness of the meeting.
Commiffloner appeared in the name of -theKin
and Queen, and no signification of their conlent an
approbation was yet received. These were deeme
by many, efrenrial to the very being of a Parliamen
But, in opposition to this sentiment, the expre
words of the treaty of Edinburgh were urged, b
which this assembly was declared to be as valid, i
all refpecs, as if it had been called and ap
pointed by the express command of the Kingan
(Queen. As the adherents of the Congregatio
great!y our-numbered their adversaries, the latte
opinion prevailed. Their boldest leaders, and tho
of moll approved zeal, were chosen -o be Lords
the Artic'es, who formed a committee of ancien
uife, and of great importance in the Scottish Parla
mrnt. The deliberations of the Lords of the Ar
ticles were carried on with the mors unanimousa
actlive zeal. The ac of oblivion, the nominatia
of twenyr four persons, out of whom the counci
entrulted with supreme authority, was to be eleted
and every other thing prescribed by the late treat
or which ierned necefTary to render it effEc&ul

ai; rr- pafi'ed without dispute or delay. The article ofre
c--r. :, ligion employed longer tin:e, and was attended wi

- reat..r dihcu-ly. It -as brought into Parliaentis

" X.i;i I !

petition from those who had adopted the prin- B o o K
ipls of the Reformation. Many do6trines of the III.
ifh church were a contradiction to reason, and a --~
ifgrace to religion; its discipline had become cor- 1560°
upc and oppressive; and its revenues were both ex-
rbiant and ill applied. Against all there, the Pro-
tants remronftrated with the utmost severity of
ile, which indignation at their absurdity, or expe-
jiece of their pernicious tendency, could inspire;
ddencouraged, by the number and zeal of their
iends, to improve such a favourable jundture, they
med the blow at the whole fabric of Popery; and
fought the Parliament to interpose their authority
orre&ifying these multiplied abuses *.

SEVERAL prelates, zealously attached to the an-
ient superstition were present in this Parliament.
t during there vigorous proceedings of the Pro-
jitants, they flood confounded, and at a gaze,
d persevered in a silence which was fatal to their
u(e. They esteemed it impoflible to resist or di-
ertthat torrent of religious zeal, which was still
its full strength; they dreaded that their oppo-
iin would irritate their adversaries, and excite
imn to new acts of violence; they hoped that the
ng and Queen would soon be at leisure to put a
topo the career of their insolent fubjecs, and that,

fter the rage and havock of the present storm, the
ormer tranquillity and order would be restored to
hechurch and kingdom. They were willing, per-
Iap, to sacrifice the docrine, and even the power

* Knox, 237.

of

B o o K of the church, in order to ensure the safety of the

III. own persons, and to preserve the possession of tho0

revenues, which were frill in their hands. Froi
560. whatever motives they acted, their silence, whic

was imputed to the consciousness of a bad cau
afforded matter of great triumph to the Proteftan
and encouraged them to proceed with more boldn
and alacrity *.

THE Parliament did not think it enough to co

demn those doctrines mentioned in the petition
the Protestants; they, moreover, gave the fanti
of their approbation to a Confession of Faith p
fenrte to them by the Reformed teachers t, an
composed, as might be expected from such ae
formance at that junture, on purpose to exposet
absurd tenets and practices of the Romish churl
By another at, the jurisdiction of the ecclefiafi
courts was abo!ifhed, and the caufcs, which so
moerly came under their cognizance, were tr
ferred to the decision of civil judges s. By ath
statute, the exercise of religious worship, accord
to the rites of the Romish church, was prohibi
The manner in which the Parliament inforced
observation of this law discovers the zeal of th
assembly; the first transgression fubjeaed the off
der to the forfeiture of his goods, and to a cor
ral punishment, at the discretion of the judge; ba
nifhment was the penalty of a second violation
the law; and a third act of disobedience was
dared to be capital §. Such .strangers were mi

" K.o, 2o . t Id. ibid. 1 Keith, 12j. § Knox, 2;

tthat time, to the spirit of toleration, and to the B o o K
SWs of humanity; and with such indecent haste 11I.
d the very persons, who had just escaped the ri- ,'-
or of ecclesiastical tyranny, proceed to imitate 15
gae examples of severity, of which they themfdves

so justly complained.

THE vigorous zeal of the Parliament overturned, with re-
asew days, the ancient system of religion, whichrd to tle

. 0 · revenues of

d been established so many ages. In reforming the chlurch.
edocrtine and discipline of the church, the no-
eskept pace with the ardor and expectations even
KnIox himself. Btic their proceeeings, wih re-
a to thefv, were' riot more rapidcand impetuous;
n thy were flow and dilatory wlien they entered
the consideration' of cclefiaf'ical revenoes.
ong the lay membels, foime were already en-
ed with the spoils of the church, and others
voured in expectation the wealthy benefices which

remained untouched. The alteration in reli-
nhad afforded many of the dignified ecclesiastics
msfeves, an opportunity of gratifying their ava-
or ambition. The demolition of the monafte-
having set the Monksi at liberty from their
nemcent, they inltantly dispersed all over the
gdom, and commonly betook themselves to some
aremployment. The Abbot, if he had been
rtunate as to embrace the principles of the Re,
ation from conviction, or so cunning as to es-
fethem out of policy, flized the whole reve-
of the fraternity, and, except what he allowed
't.c fubnftence of a few superannuated Monks ,

Keith, .I.96. Append. 90o, 191.
1, I, I R applied

B o o K applied them entirely to his own use. The propD

III. fal, made by the Reformed teachers, for applyidO
560. these revenues towards the maintenance of Minister

the education of youth, and the support of tli
poor, was equally dreaded by all these orders o
men. They opposcd it with the utmost warmth
and by their numbers and authority, easily prevaile
on the Parliament to give no ear to such a difagre
able demand *. Zealous as the first Reformc
were, and animated with a spirit superior tot
low considerations of irtereft, they beheld th
early symptoms of felfihnefs and avarice amo
their adherents, with indignation; and we find Ks
expressing the utmost sensibility of that contemn
with which they were treated by many, from wh
he expected a more generous concern for the fuc
of religion, and the honour of its Minifterst.

The AlD1 FFA DIFFICULTY hath been started, with regard
ty of tils the aCts of this Parliament, concerning relia
cnlei in This difficulty, frivolous in itself, and at this

;ion tance of time of no importance, is founded on

words of the treaty of Edinburgh. By that,
Parliament was permitted to take into confidera'
the Rate of religion, and to signify their fentime
of i: to the King and Queen. But, instead of
senting their desires to their Sovereigns, in thehui
ble form of a supplication or address, the Pari
ment converted them into so many acts; whi
although they never received the royal assent,
tained, all-over the kingdom, the weight and

See Append. No. IV. -- Knox, z39, 256

they

Ilority of laws. In compliance with their injunc- B o o g:
tions, the cftablifled system of religion was every III.
here overthrown, and that recommenced by the ~
:eformers introduced in its place. The partiality 56
d zeal of the people overlooked or supplied any
i;c: in the form of there acts of Parliament, and
el:ired the obfcrvance of them more universal
han ever had been yielded to the statutes of the
ot regular or constitutional assembly. By those
rocaedings, it must, however, be confefecd, that
eParliament, or rather the nation, violated the
! article in the treaty of Edinburgh, and even
xcded the powers which belong to subje&s. But
hen once men have been accustomed to break
rough the common boundaries of fubjec'Lion ; and
ier minds are inflamed with the passions which
w asr inspire ; it is mere pedantry or ignorance
,easur!e their condud by those rules, which can
pp'icd, only where government is in a slate of
Gerand tranquillity. A nation, when obliged to
;lcy licch extraordinary efforts in defence of its
ties, avails itself of every thing which can pro-
te this great end ; and the neceflity of the cafe,
the importance of the object, juitify any de-
:ture from the common and established forms of
conflitution.

l co'nfquence of the treaty of Edinburgh, as Ambaf.a-
as by the ordinary forms of business, it became do'r, te,

by the Par.

fr)y to lay the proceedings of Parliament be- liament to
the King and Queen. For this purpose, Sir'ac
.es Sandilands of Calder Lord St. John, was
:oited to repair to the court of France. After

R 2 hold-

B o o K holding a course so irregular, the nobles had nrore
III. son to flatter themselves that Francis and Mar

ó-"' would ever approve tl eir condut, or confirm i(

' by their rovai aTient. The reception of their Am

baffador was no other than they might have expe.
ed. He was treated by the King and Queen wid
the utmost coldness, and difmifiLd without obtaia.
ing the ratification of the Parliament's proceedingE
From the Princes of Lorrain and their partizan
be endured all the scorn and insult, which it wa
natural for them to pour upon the party he repr
sented *

And o Ei:- THOUGH the Earls of Morton, Glencairn, a
zabthe. Maitland of Lethington, the Ambassadors of d

Parliament to Elizabeth their Protectress, met'i
a very different reception; they were not morefu
cefsful in one part of the negotiation intrudfed
their care. The Scots, sensible of the fecurityw:ic
they derived from their union with England, W
desirous of rendering it indissoluble. With l
view, they empowered these eminent leadel:s of tI
party, to tei-ify to Elizabeth their gratitude
that seasonable and effectual aid which fle had
o rded theml , and at the fame time, to beseech h
to render the friencdf:ip between the nations per
tual, by condccending to marry the Earl ofArra
v-ho, though a fu'jec, was nearly allied to
roval family of 'cotland, and, after Mary, theu
doubted heir to the Crown.

To the former rart of this comnmigion El:zak
lilrened v.i h the .rn.oi faisfaction, and encour

* · E-uc
. .z. C,:c1h -27.

,) Scots, in any future exigency, to hope for the B o o K
c0tinuance of her good offices; with regard to the III.
ga;r, n: discovered those sentiments to which she '*
d'c'redi throughout her whole reign. Averse from 1560.
;arrian, as fomc pretend through choice, but
cire probably out of policy, that ambitious Prin-
c:( would never admit any partner to the throne;

idcig!hred with the entire and uncontrolled ex-

irci of pow.er, fie iacrificed to the enjoyment of
;r, the hopes of rranfnitting her Crown to her
vn poftcrity. The marriage with the Earl of
or.r't couldi not be attended with any such extra-
-; iy acdvintagc, as to fliake this rciolurion ; flme
clined it, therefore, but with many expressions of
od-wil! towards the Scottfil nation, and of rc-

t for A'rr:n hilmelf -.

To;. - .'R D tihe conclution of this year, diflinguifhi . ,e dea
I-v To many remarkable events, there happened of Francis
eos great importance. On the 4th of Decem- '
s. died I rancis 1I, a Prince of a feeble conftitu-
;, and of a mean underf'anding. As he did not
tei any issue by the Queen, no incident could

been more fortunate to those, who, during

. lte commotions in Scotland, had taken part
.!.i :ce Congregation. Mary, by the charms of
t: aunt, had acquired an entire ascendant over
.hihand ,; and as she transferred all her influence
t er unc!s the Princes of Lorrain, Francis fol-
.1i them implicitly in whatever track they were
frtl to lead him. The power of France, under
5 dfi:'ction, alarmed the Scottifn malcontents,

* T;r:n. 3. Append. 53o. Keith, 154, &c.

R 3 with

B o o K wih apprehensions of danger, no less formidlabI

III. than well founded. The intestine disorders which

ó-'*' raged in France, and the seasonable interposition of
5°' England in behalf of the Congregation, had hi.l

therto prevented the Princes of Lorrain from carry.
ing their designs upon Scotland into execution. But
under their vigorous and decisive administration, it
was impofiible that the commotions in France could
be of long continuance, and many things migh
fail in to divert : iizabeth's attention, for the future
from the affairs of Sco:land. In either of thef
event:, the Scots \v ould fiand exposPd to all the ven.
geance, which the ref.entrmenti of the French cour
couid infliit,. The blow, however'long fulfendd,
was unavoidable, and muii fall at last with redoub
led weight. From this prospect and expectation
danger, the Scots were deiivered by the deatho
Francis; the ancieint confederacy of the two king
doms had aiready been broken, and by this event
the only bond of union which remained was diffolv
ed. Catherine of ,.cdi-is, vwo during the mino
rity of Charles IX. her second son, engrossed th
entire direc ion or the Fr.nch councils, was f
frum any thoug: s of vinjicating tie Scoti
Queen's auL:hority. Caiheiine and Mary had bn
riva's in pow.er during the reign of FIrancis 1I. an
had contendi d for the govtrnment of that wm
and un.rxpcrienccd Prince but as th;e charms ofth
wife eifily triumph'ed over the authority of the mo
ther, Cacherine could never forgive fitch a disc
pointreni in htr favourire pa.T'on, and beheld now
.wi:h secret p!eafin.e, the cditcult and perplexins
scene, on wc!;ih her datgqter-in-law was about t

entrt

irner. Mary, overwhelmed with all the forrowB o o K
which so fad a reverse of fortune could occasion, III
9tghted by the Queen mother *; and forsaken by ~ó".
the tribe of courtiers, who appear only in the fun- Mary re-
,ine of prosperity, retired to Rheims, and there, tires from
nfolikude, indulged her grief, or hid her indigna- Fance.
con Even the Princes of Lorrain were obliged to
ontraft their views; to turn them from foreign to
]dornefic objeats; and instead of forming vast pro-
e;b with regard to Britain, found it necessary to
hink of acquiring, and eftablifling an interest with
he new adminiflration.

IT is impossible to describe the emotions of joy,
hich, on all these accounts, the death of the French
Monarch excited among the Scots. They regarded
as the only event, which could give firmness and
'bility to that system of religion and government,
&hich was now introduced; and it is no wonder
temporary historians should ascribe it to the im-
ediate care of Providence, which, by unforeseen
xpedients, can secure the peace and happiness of
Ingdoms, in those situations, where human pru-
nce and invention would utterly despair t.

AcOUT this time, the Protestant church in Scot- Efablilh-
nd began to assume a regular form. Its princi- ment of
es had obtained the fan&ion of public authority, Pan chchr-
jd some fixed external policy became necessary for govern-
egovernment and preservation of the infant so- mt
ity, The model introduced by the Reformers,
Ecred extremely from that, which had been so
'enat, 340o. Ca.feln. 44t f nox, 259.

R 4 long

B o o K long eftabi;fhed. The motives, which induced them

III. to depart so far from the ancient system, deferveto
'" " be ex1lained.
1560.

As the vices of the clergy had, at first, exciter

the indignation of man'ind, and rouzed that spirit
of enquiry, vwich proved so fatal to the whole
Popish system : as this disgust at the vices of ec.
clcf;alfics was blon transferred to their persons, and
histing from them, by no violent tranftion, fcttled
at iaft on the o ,ccs which they enjoyed ; the effects
of the Reformation would naturally have extendedl
not cnly to t;-e cicctrie, uit to the government!
of the Pop:fh church; and. the fame fiirit whicH
abolished the former, would have overturned the
ai:er. i'.t, ;n a great part of Germany, in Eng.
]nd,', and in the northern kingdoms, its operations
wvere ciecked by tl:e power and policy of their Prin.
ces; and the ancient Episcopal jurisdiction, undrj
a few limitat.ons, was flill continued in tho0e
churches. The EpisCopal hierarchy appears to be
more conrormable to the prac&ice of the church, l nce
Chriii.ianity became the established religion of the Ro.-
man empire. The ecclefiaflical government was, at
that time, plainly copied from the civil; the firfl not
only borrowed its form, but derived its authority;
irom the latter; and the diccefes and jurisdictions ofi
Patriarchs, Archbishop., and Bishops, corresponded
with the divif;on and conftrution of the empire. In
Switzerland, and the Low-countries, the nature oi
the government allowing full scope to the genius ci
the Reformator., all pre-eminence of order in the

church

urch was destroyed, and an equality eftabliihed B o o K
ore suitable to the spirit of republican policy. The III.

on of the primitive church suggested the .'_v'

e, and furnished the model of the latter system, 5
!ich has since been called Prefl7yterinn. The firfc
rifians, oppreTed by continual perfccutions, and
)ied to hold their religious assemblies by ftealrh,
in corners, were contented with a form of go-
,mment extremely simple. The influence of reli-
nconcurred, with the sense of danger, in ex-
guibling among them, the spirit of ambition, and
preserving a parity of rank, the effit of their
gerigs, and the cause of many of their virtues.
vin, whose decisions were received, among the
oellants of that age, with incredible fubmifion,
te patron and restorer of this scheme of ec-
!Jfic.l policy. ' he church of Geneva, formed

;r his eye, and by his direi%;on, was elleemed
mol: perfect modcl of this government; and
ox, who, during his rcfidence in that city, had
iei aind admired it, warmly recommended it to
i:.;:tation of his countrymen.

.,:oXG tlle Scottish nobility, rome hated the per-
:, ..1 o:hcrs coveted tle wealth of the dignified

Py; and by abolishing that order of men, the

er indulecd their resentment, and the latter hop-
to g:atl their avarice. The people, inflamed
ithe most violent aversion to Popcry, and ap-
rngof every scheme that departed fartheftl fiom
pra-cice of the Romish church, were delighted
a fr lenm, so admirably fiuited to their predomi-
Vitl1on. While the friends of civil liberty be-

held,

B o o heI, with pleasure, the Protestant clergy pF.liia:

III. down, with their own hands, that fabric of eccl,

x'. . a1iical power, which their predeceifors had rearc
156O. with so much art and indufiry; and Clattered thea,

selves, that by leinding their aid to firip churchrrm
of their dignity and wealth, they might entirelyd,
liver the nation from their exorbitant and oppreilv
jurif.:ic"tion. The new mode of government ears
made its way among men, thus prepared, bythb
various interests and pafions, for its reception.

B-BT, on the firfl ilnroduction of his fyfiemn, Kn

did not deem it ex-pedient to depart altogether fro
the ancien: form *. Inflead of Bishops, heprop
ed to efablrtn ten or twelve Superintendants ind
ferent parts of the kingdom. These, as the na,
implies, vWre in;mFowrerd to in-pcca the life and Ju
trine of the other clergy. They presided in thei
ferior judicatories cf the church, and performed
veral other parts of the Lpifcolal funition. Th
jurifdicticn, however, extendcd to f`cred things
ly; they claimed no feat in 'arliament, and p
tended no right to the dignity, or revenues, of t
former B;no.s.

THZ numer of interior cltrgy, to whom th ca

cf parochial duty could be comnmitted, was 11ill
tremely fn:all; the': had embraced the principles nt
Reformation at di!cr-eint times, and from varoi
motives; durng the public commotions, they w
fca:tered, mr-;rely by chance, over the different pr

£?p.:;''..ood , i.S.

nces of the kingdom; and, in a few places only, B o o K
re formed into regular classes or societies. The III.
, General nffembly of the church, which was held 16
s year, bears all the marks of an infant and un- Decem. o.
r;ecl Ibciety. The members were but few in
umber, and of no considerable rank; no uniform
confitent rule seems to have been obierved in
Betilg them. From a great part of the kingdom
representatives appeared. In the name of some
ire counties, but one person was present; while,
o'her places, a single town or church sent several
unibers. A convention, so feeble and irregular,
(d poflefs no great authority; and conscious of
own weakneis, the members put an end to their
bates, without venturing upon any decision of
,ch importance *.

lx order to give greater firength and consistence 1561.
h r ?relicyterian plan, Knox, with the aflifance
iiSj brLctien, composed the first book of difci-
c, nhich contains the model or platform of the
nded policy T. They presented it to a conven-
of etates, which was held in the beginning of
i'er. W.hatever regulations were proposed with Jan. i5.
:! to ecclesiastical discipline and jurifdiEtion,
-id have easily obtained the fantion of that as-
biv; but a design to recover the patrimony of
church, which is there insinuated, met with a
different reception.

. vain did the clergy display the advantages
;ch wou!d accrue to the public, by a proper ap-

;<c:t'i, ,i9,S. t' Snotfi. 15o.

plication

B o 0 K plication of ecclefiafiical revenues. In vain did the

III. propose, by an impartial distribution of this fund
L/5ó 1.to promote true religion, to encourage learning, am

to upport the poor. In vain did they even intr
mingle threatnings of the divine difpieafure, again
the unjuli detainers of what was appropriated to
sacred u Ie '1 he nobles held fast the prey, whic
they had leizcd; and bestowing upon the proposs
the name of a devout iitaocination, they asseted
confider it, as a project altogether visionary, a
treated it with the utnioft scorn *

T:- Q-een THIS convention appointed the Prior of St. A
ri`. rni -o drew's to repair to the Queen, and to invite her
Sbc:lar.. return into her native country, and to assume

reins of government, which had been too longco
mitted to other hands. And though Icme of
lubjects dreaded her return, and ot;ers forefawda
gerous consequences w.ith which it might be aten
ed ', the bulk of them desired it with so much
dor, that the invitation was given with the great
appearance of unanimity. But the zeal ofthe R
man Catholics got the start of the Prior in payi
court to Mary ; and Lefly, afterwards bifrcp,
iRof, who was commissioned by them, arrivedb
fore him, at the place of her residence . Le
endeavoured to infule into the Queen's mind sus
cions of her Protelant liibjeCs, and to persuade
to t:;row herself entirely into the arms of those 5
l':creds to h-er o-'n religion. IFor this purpose,
infired that fne lhould land at Aberdeen; and

' -}ee::. -' ' .; A.-Dpp.:iX, No V. i Les,::

Proteflant doctrines had made no considerable B o o K
rgrels in that part of the kingdom, he gave her III.
ijrace of being joined, in a-fwwiays, by 20,000 1

; and flattered her, that with iuch an army, I561
,cDuragcd by her preitnce and autiority, she might
i;) overturn the Reformed Church, before it was
:av eittled on its foundations.

BUT at this juncture, the Princes of Lorrain were
otdiloled to liften to this extravagant and dange-
s proposld. Intent on defending themfclves a-
:til Cathierine of lMcdics, whose infiiious policy
¢emploved in undermining their exorbitant pdw-
thsy had no leisure to attend to the affairs of
:oaidl, and wificed their niece to take pofflcfion
lier kingdom, with as little difrurbance as pof-
1. The French officers, too, who had served
Scotland, difEinaded Mary from all violent mea-
es; and, by representing the power and number.
ite Protelants to be iirefilib!c, determined her
court them by every art; and rather to employ
leading men of that party as her Ministers, than
provoke them, by a fruitless opposition, to be-
e her enemies *. Hence proceeded the confi-
rcc and afrTeion, with which the Prior of St.
'r.c's was received by the Queen. His repre-
;tion of the state of the kingdom gained great
t; andl LefRy beheld, with regret, the new chan-
in whichi court favour vas likely to run.

ANOTHER Convention of Frfatcs was held. in
:Y. The arrival of an Ambatlhd r from France,

* Mc'.v. 61.

seems

Bo o K seems to have been the occasion of this meeting

III. He was inftrucred to follicit the Scots to renew te
LoV e ancient alliance with France, to break their ne

confederacy with England, and to restore the Popi
ecclesiastics to the poffeflon of th-ir revenues, an
the exercise of their funt&ions. It is no easy ma,
to form any conjecture concerning the intentions
the French court, in making these extraordinarya
ill-timed propositions. They were rejeted wi
that scorn, which might well have been expect
from the temper of the nation *.

IN this Convention, the Protestant clergy did

obtain a more favourable audience than former
and their profpet of recovering the patrimony oft
church fsil remair.ed as distant and uncertain as ee
But with regard to another point, they found
zeal o[ the nobles in no degree abated. The boo
of discipline seemed to require, that the monunen
of Popery, which fiill remained in the kingdo
should be demolified T; and, though neithert
fame pretence of poiicy, nor the fame ungovernab
rage of the people, remained to justify or exculet t
barbarous havoc, the Convention, confidering :ev
religious fabric as a relict of idolatry, passed fa
tence upon them by an act in form; and perfo
the most remarkable for the activity of their ze
were appointed to put it in execution. Abbies, a
thedrals, churches, libraries, records, and event
sepulchres of the dead, perished in one corm0a
ruin. The first form of popular insurrec"tion, thotg

Knox, 269, z2-. t Spotfwocd, 153.

imrp

nlxtous and irreftiible, had extended only to a B o o K
cout U.s, and soon spent its rage; but now a Ill.
e:berate and universal rapine ccmpleated the de- - /'
:,'tion of every thing, venerable and magnificent,
,hich had efcnped its violence '.

I the nean time, Mary was in no hatre to re- Mary be-
rn into Scotland. Accustomed to the elegance, pare for it
iKci.or, and gaiety of a polite court, the still fond-
.lingercd in France, the scene of all these enjoy-
ens, and contemplated, with horror, the barba-
ii of her own country, and the turbulence of her
bcbts, which presented her with a very different
ac of things. The impatience, however, of her
ople, the persuasions of her uncles, but above all,
eAudied and mortifying neglect, with which she
as treated by the Queen Mother, forced her to
link of beginning this disagreeable voyage t. But

file she was preparing for it, there were sown be-
een her and Elizabeth, the feeds of that personal
lousy and discord, which imbittered the life, and
-rtened the days of the Scottish Queen.

Tilt ratification of the late treaty of Edinburgh or;g;n of'
as the immediate occasion of this fatal animosity; the discord

between

e true causes of it lay much deeper. Almost her and
vcr article, in that treaty, had been executed by Elizabeth
t' parties, with a scrupulous exaanefs. The for-
^ations of Leith were demolished, and the armies
France and England withdrawn within the ap-
inted time. The grievances of the Scottish male-
' SFo:rwcod, 174. t Brantome, Jebb, vol. ii. 482.

Ix contents

B o o R contents were redreflbd, and they had obtained what

III. ever they could demand for their future fecurit,
,".,.- WVith regard to all tlefe, Mary could have il:.

D 6i. reason to decline, or Elizabeth to urge, the rati ;;

tion of the treaty.

THE sixth article remained the only source o

contest and difficulty. No Minister ever enere
more deeply into the fchemcs of his Sovereign, o
pursued them with more dexterity and fucccfs teh
Cecil. In the conduc& of the negociation at Edin
burgh, the fiund understanding of this able poli
cian had proved greatly an overmatch for Monluc
refinements in intrigue, and had artiully inducedt.
French Ambassadors, not only to acknowledge t,,
the Crowns of England and Ireland did of right
long to Elizabeth alone, but also to promise, thati;
all times to come, Mary should abstain from ufi
the titles, or bearing the arms of those kingdoms.

THE ratification of this article .-ould have bk

of the noft fatal con!equence to Mary. The Cro
of Eng:and was an object worthy of her ambitio
Her pretensions to it gave her great dignity and i
portance in the eyes or all Europe. By many, h
tite was esteemed preferable to that of Elizabe
Among the English themselves, the Roman Cat.0
!ics, who formed, at that time, a numerous anda
tive party, openly espoused this opinion; and ev
the Protestants, who fupporred Elizabeth's throne
could not deny, the Queen of Scots to be her immt
diate heir. A proper opportunity to avail hers
cf all these advantages, could not, in the course

thirg

tl;ings, be far distant, and many incidents might B o o K
ili n, to bring this opportunity nearer than was 111.
eFpeatc. In tllefe circumflances, Mary, by ra-"""

iin tle article in dispute, would have loft that

aI which file had hitherto held among neighbour-
u Plinccs; the zeal of her adherents mult have
[radually cooled ; and The might have renounced,
rom that moment, all hopes of ever wearing the
ng!ifh crown.

NoNE of these beneficial consequences escaped the
netrating eye of Elizabeth, who, for this reason,
d recourse to every thing, by which ihe could hope
iher to sooth or frighten the Scottish Queen into
compliance with her demands; and if that Prin-
is had been so unadvised as to ratify the rath con-
llions of her AmbafT.adors, Elizabeth, by that
ed, would have acquired an advantage, which,
rder her management, must have turned to great
ccount. By such a renunciation, the question,
i:h regard to the right of fuccefflon, would have
n left altogether open and undecided; and, by
eans of that, Elizabeth might either have kept her
valin perpetual anxiety and dependance, or, by
e authority of her Parliament, The might have
roken in upon the order of lineal fucceflion, and
anlierred the Crown to some other descendant of
eroyal blood. The former conduct she obfcrved
wards James VI. whom, during his whole reign, she
ld in perpetual fear and fubjeation. The latter, and
ore rigorous method of proceeding, would, in all
robability, have been employed against Mary,
VOL. I. S whom,

B o K whom, for manv reasons, she both envied and hat.

III. ed.
1561 . NOR was this fep beyond her power, unprece.

dented in the history, or inconfiflent with the con-
flitution of England. Though fucceflion by here.
ditary right be an idea so natural and so popular,
that it has bcen efablifhed almost in every civiiizca
na:ion, ye England afrords many memorable in
stances of deviations from that rule. The Crown o
that kingdom having once been seized by the ha,,
of a conqueror, this invited the bold and enterprl;
in, in every age to imitate iuch an illustrious ex.
ample of fortunate ambition. From the tirmeoi
W\illim the Norman, the regular course of deflent
had seldom continued through three successive reigns
Those Princes, whose intrigues or valour opened to
them a way to the throne, called in the authorin'to
the great council of the nation to confirm their d.
bious tilies. Hence, parliamentary and heredity
right became in Fnrglnd of equal consideration.
That great afembly claimed and actually possessed
power of a:tering the order of regal succession; ad
even bo late as Henry VIII. an aA of Parliament
had auttorized that capricious Monarch to fetl
the ord.er of fuccefion at his pleasure. The Eng.
lifh, jealous of their religious liberty, and averli
from the dominion of strangers, would have eager
Iv adopt-d the passions of their Sovereign, an
migl:t have been easily induced to exclude the Scot
t:nfi line from the right of succeeding to the Crown
Theie ieem to have been the views of both Queesl

8 1

ani tlhee were the difficulties which retarded the ra- B OOK
irca;don of the treaty of Edinburgh. III.

BU'T, if the sources of their discord were to be 156
traced no higher than this treaty, an inconfidcrable
Iarcration in the words of it, might have brought the
Fitelcnt question to an amicable, ifie. The indefinite
Pa3d ambiguous expression, which Cecil had inserted
iio0the treaty, might have been changed into one
trore limited, but more precise; and Mary, inftcad
Go promiling to abltain from bearing the title of
(;:cin cf England in all times to come, might have
ga.cld not to afifune that title, dluring the life of
l iiz.beth, or the lives of her lawful pofl-eriy,

SucI- an amen,'ment, however, did not suit the
v'ews of either Queen. Though Mary had been
tb:i]ed to suspend, for some time, the prosecution
oi her ttle to the Engchifl crown, flhe had not, how-
ever, relinquified it. She determined to revive her
chim, on the firll profpeat of success, and was un-
iiiig to bind herself, by a positive engagement,
,.t to take advantage of any fi1ch fortunate occur-
r.ce, Nor would the alteration have been more
cceptable to Elizabeth, who, by agreeing to it,
ira!d have tacitly recognized the right of her rival
'alccrnd the throne alter her decease. But neither
:e Scortifh nor Engifh Queen durif avow these tc-
:' feniments of their hearts. Anyopen dilcovery
Ian inclinarion to diflurb the tranquillivy of Eng-
:3, or to wrein the sceptre out of L lizbcth's
i.ds, might have proved fatal to Mary. Any sus-

a:in of a dS-fgn to alter the order of succession,

S 2 and

B o o , anc to set aside the claim of the Scottish Queen

Iii. would l-ave exposed Elizabeth to much and deen-.

ed cenfare, ard have raited up against her man
andr dangerous el emies. These, however carefully
conceak! , or artfully disguised, were, in all proba
b:liry, the re.l rr.otivcs which determined the on
Quc n to follicit, and the other to refute the rati.
cario:a of the treaty, in its original form ; while nei
ther had recourse to that explication of it, whicht
an heart u:.warped by po'itical interest, and si
c:relv d--frous of union and concord, would ha'
appeared Ib obvious and natural.

Bur though considerations of interest firftoc

sioned this rupture between the British Queens,
valfhip of another kind contributed to widen
breach, ar. A female jealousy increaftd the viokl
of their political hatred. Elizabeth, with alltho
extraordinary quaiities, by which she equalled
ur-paffed such of her sex, as have merited the gra
e's renown, discoverc-d an admiration of her o
person, to a degree, which women of ordinary
derftandings either do not entertain, or pruden
endeavour to conceal. Her attention to dress,
solicitude to diiplay her charms, her love of fiatte
were all excessive. Nor were thele weakneffesc
fined to that period of life, when they are morep
donable. Even in very advanced years, the wil
woman of that, or perhaps of any other age, w
the garb, and affected the manners of a girl

Johnston Hilt. Rer. Britan. 34f, .47. Carte. val. iii.
Catalogue of Ro al and Noble Autl;rs. Article E£,'-

Thot

Tiiough Elizabeth was as much inferior to Ma.ry, B o o K
i bealtr, and gracefulness of person, as ihe excel- IiI.

her in political abilities, and in the arts of go- '--1

vr;mrent, she was weak enough to compare herflf
jiii the Scottish Queen * and as it was impoflible
f could be altogether ignorant how much Mary
i-;ed by the comparison, she envied and hated her
rival, by whom fie was eclipsed. In julging
t:lie conduct of Princes, we are apt to ascribe too
:ch to political motives, and too little to the pas-
ens which they feel in common with the reft of
anikincl. In order to account for Elizabeth's pre-
nt, as well as her subsequent conduci towards
ary, we must not always confider her as a Queen,
enmul sometimes regard her as a woman.

ELIZABETH, though no stranger to Mary's diffi-
Uties wIth respect to the treaty, continued to urge
r, by repeated applications, to ratify it t. Mary,
ner various pretences, frill contrived to gain time,
1nto elude the request. But while the one Queen
:;itied with persevering importunity, and the other
.a-d with artful delay, they both studied an ex-
:.e politeniefs of behaviour, and loaded each other
1l profffilons of fiferly love, with reciprocal de-
r::iops of unchangeable esteem and amity.

: was not long before Mary was convinced, that, Elizabeth
:. Pirir!ces, tlhefe exprefions of fiiendfhip arc r'fuf'
:nm,'nly f:r dillant from the heart. In failirig condut.
>m France to Scotland, the couCfe lies along t-ie

' Mbtil, 98. t Keith, i57, i60, &c.

S 3 Lng;liih

B o o z English coat. In order to be safe from the infui

III. cf the Engliflh Reet, or in cafe of tempefluous wea
J1~6I.~ ther, to secure a retreat in the harbours of that king

dom, Mary sent M. D'Oyfcl to demand of Eiiza
beth a fa'e condu&t during her voyage. This re
cueft, which decency aor.e obliged one Prince t
.ant to ano.her, Elizabeth rejected, in such a rr,aa
ner, as gave rife to no flight suspicion of a defin
either to obftruEc the passage, or to intercept the per
son of the Scottish Queen *

Mar-; .-- Tiis ungenerous behaviour of Elizabeth Ekii

r.s ,.: r .'ary with ind'nr.aticn, but did not retard
hnrdo

but did rot retard hiuae

parture from Fr3nce. She was accompanied to Ca
]ais, the place where she embarked, in a manneriliti
able to her dignirv, as the Queen of two poweij
kingdoms. Six Princes of Lorrain her uncles, wij
many of the most eminent among the French nob!o
v;ere in her retinue. Catherine, who secretly r
ioiced at her departure, graced it with every circiu
fPance of mgnificecen and respect. After bid;i
adieu to her mourning attendants, with a fad lear
a:;.c ees bathed in tears, Mary left that kingdo0
the ihcrt, bu. o:ly scene of her life, in which l
t-ne smiled upon her. While the French coafico
tinuaci in fight, she ir.n:ntly gazed upon it, a
rr. .r-ng, in a thoughful posture, on that heigh
fartune whlence she had fallen, and presaging,
h:.ps, the diiaiers and calamities which irnbiter]
t.- remainder of h-r days, fie sighed often, a
cr.ed out, " Farewel France ! Larewel beloved coul

4S-:<--, !-!. Cam.den. See Appendix. N°. V!

.......~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~t .

try, which I shall never more behold !" Even B o o K
shen ihe darkness of the night had hid the land III.
fcm her view, she would neither retire to the cabin, 561.
or taste food, but commanding a couch to be pla-
ce( on the deck, lie there waited the return of day,
,:;h the utiloft impatience. Fortune soothed her
on thi occasion ; the galley made little way during
t'ce iirht. In the morning, the coast of France
,as will within fight, and The continued to feed her
nmelncholy with the prospect; and as long as her
ves could diftinguilh it, to utter the fame tender
txfreffions of regret . At last a briflk gale arose,
'i the favour of which for some days, and afrer-
xrard tunder tile covert of a thick fog, Mary eicaped
the English fleet, which lay in wait to intercept
hr -; and on the r 9th of A ugu ft, after an absence A rives in

, . '

-

, . . Scotland.

of near thirteen years, landed ia;ely at Leith in her
natie kingdon.

M:Arv was received by her fuLbjeccs with shouts
aJ acclannations of joy, and with every demontra-
t!cn of welcome and regard. But as her arrival was
r.expec ted, and no suitable preparation had been
,ra'e for it, they could not, with all their eribrts,
ide from her the poverty of the coun"ry, and were
oi'ged to conduc:t lhr to tle palace of Holyrood-
hu!e wvith little pomrp. The Queen, accuflomed
''oiI her infancy to lfplendor and magnificence, and
ir, of them, as was nr.ural at her age, could not
'rIp obfcrving the change in her situation, anid lcm-

to e, d;cply aficctlt v i;h it .

,rsan;nie, -*"'3. 1 hil' hiniv:.e!was in the famc " ' ,v ;'titlh
.' .s ;:iu. ; Goa.i!, Vol. i I -. Uaikln. 455. ; Gr.:ne .,.;.

S .4 Nr.V.

Bo sK NEVER did any Prince ascend the throne at

III. juncture which called for more wisdom in councl
itC -v or more courage and steadiness in ation. The rag
s--:os:' of religious controversy was flill unabated. Th
k:r'-'^: memrory of past oppression exasperated the Protef

tan.ts; the smart of recent injuries rendered the Pa
pifts defFerate; both were zealous, fierce, and irre
concircabie. ' he absence of their Sovereign ha
accuicmed the nobles to independence; and, dur
in-l the !ate commot ions, they had acquired fucha
incrcal7 of weakth, as threw great weight into th
fcali cr the ariiiocracy, which stood not in neec
of any acc.:fon of power. The kingdom had loni
been under I:,e government of Regents, who exer
ciled a delegated jurifdióion, attended with littleau
thoriry, and which inlpired no reverence. A ftat
of pure anarchy had prevailed for the two last year
without a Regent, without a fIu.reme council, with.
out the power, or even the form of a regular go
vernment '. A licentious fpirir, unacquainted witl
f2bor:!ination, and disdaining the restraints of i
and juflice, had spread among all ranks of men
The infi:ence of France, the ancient ally of th
kingdom, was withdrawn or defiifed. The Englilh
of enemies become confederates, had grown inta
confidnce with the nation, and had gained anal
ccndant over all its councils. The Scottish Mo
narchs did not derive more splendor or power fron
the friendship of the former, thafi they had reafo
to dread injury and diminution from the interpoi
tion of the latter. Every consideration, whether

- Keith, Appendix 9z.

inte:e.l

trefi, or of self preservation, obliged Elizabeth B o o K
depress the royal authority in Scotland, and to lIl.
ate the Prince perpetual difficulties, by foment- -ó
g the spirit of disaffection among the people.

IN this posture were the affairs of Scotland, when
cadminiftration fell into the hands of a young
ueen, not nineteen years of age, unacquainted
ih the manners and laws of her.country, a firanger
herrfubjeCts, without experience, without allies,
almost without a friend.

O the other hand, in Mary's situation we find
e circumstances, which, though they did not
a.ce thele disadvantages, contributed, however,
a,;:'iare them; and, with skilful management,
iitr have produced great effets. Her subje&s,
Jcculomed so long to the residence of their Prince,
n:not only dazzled by the novelty and splendor
t'ie royal pretence, but inspircd with awe and re-
eace. Besides the places of power and profit
:''cd by the favour of a Prince, his protection,
i;.aniliarity, and even his smiles, confer honour
:'in rhe hearts of men. From all corners of
klnCrdom, the nobles crowded to testify their
anid aftlf&ion to their Sovereign, and studied,
s'ery art, to wipe out the memory of past mif-
':uc, and to' lay in a flock of future merit. The
urements and gaiety of her courr, which was
dl with the most accomplished of the French no-
k, who had attended her, began to soften and
:poifh the rude manners of the nation. Mary
': f fcielffed many of these qualifications, which

raise

B o o K raise affetion, and procure etieem. The beaun

III. and gracefulness of her person drew universal ad
^.r'" miration, the elegance and politeness of her man

36 . ners commanded general refpec'. To all the charm

of her own sex, she added many of the accomplil
ments of the other. The progrels file had madei
all the Arts and Sciences, which were then efieeT
necelTary or ornamental, was far beyond what
commonly attained by Princes; and all her ot
qualities were rendered more agreeable by a cour
ous affability, which, without lcfcning the digni
of a Prince, steals on the hearts of subjects w!th
bewitching insinuation.

FROM. these circumf'nances, notwithifanding

threatening aspect of affairs at Mary's return
Scotland, notwithstanding the clouds which ga2
ed on every hand, a political ob!erver would
predi&ed a very difrfrent issue of her reign;
whatever sudden gusts of faction he might havce
Setted, he would never have dreaded the deirud
violence of thar iLorm which tfllowed.

.WHILE all parties were contending who sho

diicover the moif dutiful attachment to the Qu
the zealous and impatient spirit of the age br
out in a remarkable initance. On the Sunday
her arrival, the Queen commanded mass to be
lebrated in the chapel of her palace. The iirtL
mour of this occ.fionrd a secret murmuring am
the Proteitants .who attended the court; compI
and threarninr s soon followed; the servants
ing to the chapel nwere iniuited and abused; and

b prior of St. Andrew's had not seasonably inter- B o o K
0ftd, the rioters might have proceeded to the ut- III.
oQ excefles *.

IT is impossible, at this difrance of time, and
:ier circumstances Ib very different, to conceive
e violence of that zeal against Popery, which then
o;1:1ed the nation. Every inflanceofcondefcenfion
o the Papifs was esteemed an aft of apoftacy, and
ttoicration of a single mass pronounced to be
ore formidable to the nation than the invasion of
thoufand'armed men . Under the influence of
:i: opinions, many Proteflants would have ven-
-ri to go dangerous lengths; and, without at-
ep:ing to convince their Sovereign by argument,
rto reclaim her by indulgence, would have abrupt-
denied her the liberty of worshipping God in that
an: er, which alone lie thought acceptable to him.
ut the Prior of St. Andrew's, and other leaders of
c party, not only restrained this impetuous spirit;
at, in Ipite of the murmurs of the people, and
e exclamations of the preachers, obtained for
aQjeen and her domeflics the undiftubed exer-

of the Catholic religion. Near an hundred

ars at'er this period, when the violence of religi-
as animofities had begun to fubfidc, when time
a the progress of learning had inlarged the views
the human mind, an English house of Com-
ans refused to indulge the wite of their Sovereign
the private use of the mass. The Protestant
ders 'elferve, on this occasion, the praile both of
ti:m and of moderation for conduct so different.

* Knox, 284, - Ibid. 287.

But,

B o o r But, at the fame time, whoever reflects upon tb,

1II. encroaching and sanguinary spirit of Popery, wlil
t/"'~. be far from treating the fears and caution of t'i

more zealous Reformers as altogether imaginair
and destitute of any real foundation.

THE Proreftants, however, by this compliac

with the Queen's prejudices, obtained a prociamr
tion highly favourable to their religion. The Rk
formed doctrine, though established all over t.
kingdom, had never received the countenance
Aregft 25. fanEtion of royal authority. On this occasion, t,

Queen declared any attempt towards an alteration
subversion of it, to be a capital crime *.

5sh M- THE Queen, conformable to the plan which ha
F'oyi cny been concerted in France, committed the admin
i- hei.,d fi-.aton of affairs entirely to Protestants. H
,r'"1"" council was filled with the most eminent perfocns

that party ; not a tingle Papist was admitted into a
degree of confidence +. The Prior of St. Andre
and Maitland of Lethington seemed to hold
firit place in the Queen's affetion, and pofi
all the power and reputation of favourite Minifie
Iler choice could not have fallen upon perfonsmo
acceptable to her people ; and, by their prudenta
vice, Mary conduded herself with so much mod
ration, and deference to the sentiments of the n
tin, as could not fail of gaining the afection
her .ubjects ~, the firmest foundation of a Princ
power, and the only genuine bource of his happin
and glory.

dit.h, 504. , Knox, ~;., : Lefty, :3c

A cc

A CORDIAL reconcilement with Elizabeth wasB oo a
rother objeEt of great importance to Mary; and 1I.
:otlglh fle seems to have had it much at heart, in -
hebeginning of her administration, to accomplish Attempt
h a deiirable conjuncion, yet many events oc- o s'" Ei-
red to widen, rather than to close the breach,vour.
he formal offices of friendship, however, are iel-
om negle&ed among Princes, and Elizabeth, who
ad attempted so openly to obflruct the Queen's
o2ge into Scotland, did not fail, a few days after
r arrival, to command Randolph to congratulate
r sa'fe return. Mary, that ihe might be on equal
ens with her, sent Maitland to the Englilh court,
i;i many ceremonious expressions of regard for
iizabeth *. Both the Ambassadors were received
it: the utmost civility; and, on each fide, the
iroieions of kindness, as they were made with lit-
sincerity, were listened to with proportional

edit.

BOTH were intrufied, however, with something,
1ore than mere matter of ceremony. Randolph
rged Mary, with fiefi importunity, to ratify the
aty of Edinburgh. Maitland endeavnured to
.ul. Elizabeth, by apologizing for the dilatory

orilult of his Mistress with regard to that point.
ne mulltp!icity of public aftairs since her arrival in
olia:;d, the importance of the question in dispute,
d the a'-fnce of many noblemen, with whom The
rs obliged in decency to consult, were the pre-
Ceces ofered in excuse for her condut ; the real

* Keith, 1 8 , &-c.

causes

B o o K catses of it were those, which have already bk

III. mentioned. But in order to extricate herself out,
6 -,' theie difficulties, into which the treaty of Edinburo

had led her, Mary was brought to yield apoin
which formerly she seemed determined never to gi
up. She instructed Maitland to signify herwiiin
nets to disclaim any right to the ,rown of Englan
during the life of Elizabeth, and the lives ofh
poflerity; if, in failure of these, she were decla
next heir by act of parliament *.

REASONABLE as this proposal mightappear

Mary, who thereby precluded herself from ditlu
ing Elizabeth's pofefelcn of the throne, noth,
could be more inconsistent with Elizabeth's inter
or more contradictory to a paiTion, which predo
nated in the character of that Princess. Notrwi
flanding all the great qualities which threw such I
tre on her reign, we may observe, that she
tintured with a jealousy of her right to the Cro
which often betrayed her into mean and ungener
actions. The peculiarity of her situation heigh
ed, no doubt, and increased, but did not inn
this pafion. It descended to her from Henry V
her grandfather, whom, in several features of
character, fne nearly resembled. Like him ihe l
sered the title by which fen held the Crown to
main ambiguous and controverted, rather than
mit it to parliamentary di;cuffion, or derive any
dition to her right, from such authority. Li
him, she obfcrved every pretender to the fuccef0
not only with that attention, which prudence r

C C. .::en. _-. Bch. 3 fcri

ies; but with that aversion which suspicion in- B o o K
;i, The present uncertainty with regard to the III.
;of fiiccelion, operated for E:lizabeth's advan- '-56
, both on her fubljei s, and on her rivals. A-

t.ithe former, every lover of his country re:

cld her life as the great iec.trity of the national
iau.qtity; and chose rather to acknowledge a
e which was culbious, thnn to search for one that
unknown. The latter, while nothing was de-
, were held in dependence, and obliged to
: 'er. The manner in which she received this
;.,7,ed propol.,l of the Scortifh sQueen, was no
r than might have been expected. She rej;ic-
itin a peremptory tone, rith many expressions
,relbluiion never to permit a point of ib much
ac, to be touched.

A0O-T this time, the (Qeen made her pubiic Sept. i
;.'into Edinburghl with great pomp. Nothing
r. eleted, which could exp-cfs the duty and as-
c.on oi the citizens towards tlicir Sovereign. But
if tlicfe demionirations of regard, the genius
le;nimentts of the nation discovered themrfevc.,
circumstance, which, though inconsiderable,
.: not to be overlooked. As it was the mode
r',e times to exhibit many paneants at every pub-
cr.n nity; most of thecl on thiis occaion, were
:rived to be representations of the vengeance
ri :e Almighty hath infii ted upon idolaters -

'n v;hile they fludied to amulf and to flatter the
ln, her subjects could not refrain fron tefiifv-

ing~c

B o o K ing their abhorrence of that religion which she pro

III. fefled.

i56I.
Rerains T o restore the regular administration of juftic
the icence and to reform the internal police of the counti
of the bor-
derers. became the next object of the Queen's care. T

laws enacted for preservation of public order, a
the fccurity of private property, were nearly
fame in Scotland, as in every other civilized coun
But the nature of the Scottish constitution, the
potence of regal authority, the exorbitant power
the nobles, the violence of faction, and the fie
manners of the people, rendered the execution
these laws feeble, irregular, and partial. In
counties which border on England, this defef
mofl apparent; and the cdnfequences of it
sensibly felt. The inhabitants, firangers to in
try, averse from labour, and unacquainted with
arts of peace, fbfifted intirely by spoil and pill
and being confederated in septs or clans, con
ted there excesses not only with impunity, bute
with honour. During the unsettled state of
kingdom from the death of James V. this dan
ous licence had grown to an unusual height;
the inroads and rapine of those freebooters were
come no lets intolerable to their own country
than to the English. To restrain and punish
outrages, was an a&ion equally popular in
kingdoms. The Prior of St. Andrew's was
person chosen for this important service, and e
ordinary powers, together with the title of
Queen's lieutenant, were vested in him for
purpose.

21

OTHING can be more surprising to men, accuf-.B o o K
one to regular government, than the preparations III.
ade on this occasion. They were such as might ,"'
expecqed in the rudest and most imperfect slate
f ocicty. The freeholders of eleven several coun-

ai, with all their followers completely armed, vere
nlimoned to afilft the Lieutenant in the discharge
lfhis ofice. Every thing resembled a military ex-
c,:on, rather than the progrcfs of a court ofjuf-
et. The Prior executed his commission with
ch vigour and prudence, as acquired him a great
creafc of reputation and popularity among his
untrynen. Numbers of the banditti suffered the
riliment due to the;r crimes; and, by the impar-
land ri-orous administration oi justice, order and
anquilliry were reflored to that part of the king-
am,

DURING the absence of the Prior of St. Andrew's, Tle PapitB
leaders of the Popish faftion seem to have taken attempt, in
me steps towards insinuating themselves into the ivnfavour
en's tavour and confidence t. But the Arch-with her.
p of Sr. Andrew's, the most remarkable per-
in the party for abilities and political address,
rceived with little favour at court; and what-
rfecr.t partiality the Queen might have towards
e who professed the fame religion with herself,
di'overed no inclination, at that time, to take
administration of afifirs out of the hands, to
ici Ihe had already committed it.
T;s cold reception of the Archbiflop of St.

w''s was owing to his connection with the
' wch, 1b99. t Ibid. 2G3.

lvo~t IbId. 2T h
VotCJ~~I .T house

B o o house of Hamilton; from which the Queen was

Ill. much alienated. The Duke of Guise and the Car.

dinal could never forgive the zeal, with which th,
Duke of Chatelherault and his son the Earl of Arrn
had espoused the cause of the Congregation. Prince
seldom view their successors without jealoufyand
distrust. The Prior of St. Andrew's, perhaps,
dreaded the Duke as a rival in power. All there
causes concurred in infusing into the Queen's mind
an aversion for that family. The Duke, indulgin
his love of retirement, lived at a distance froi
court, without taking pains to insinuate himfe
into favour ; and though the Earl of Arran open
aspired to marry the Queen, he, by a most unpar
donable act of imprudence, was the only noblema
of difinction w.ho opposed Mary's enjoying the
ercife of her religion; and by rashly entering a pu
lic protestation against it, entirely forfeited her
vour . At the fame time, the fordid parfimo
of his father obliged him either to hide himielf
lome retirement, or to appear in a manner un
coming his dignity as fiirf Prince of the blood,
his high pretensions as iuitor the Queent
love, inflamed by disappointment, and his impa
ence. exa, .erated by neglect, preyed gradually
his rea:bn ; and, after many extravagancies, bro
out at Lai. il ungovernable frenzy.
r:;. -:, Tov.'.:: :: the end of the year, a Convention

Eftra:es s . eas ld chiefly on account of ecclefiafi
a.-.hs. The aficmbly of the church, which fai
* thre ..ne time, presented a petition, containing

' ;l:.:: ::;, 3-, Knox, :85. t Keith, Tc6

deinsa

dcenalnis with refpeat to the fupprefring of Popery, B o o K
|e cncouraging the Proteitant religion, and the III.
poviding for the maintenance of the clergy *. The '~"6
lilt was a matter of great importance, and the fleps 56
tken towards it deserve to be traced.

THOUGH the number of Proteflant preachers A n re
asnow considerably increased, many more weregulation

concerning

ill wanted, in every corner of the kingdom. No the reve-
galprovifion having been made for them, they nuts ftlleh
had hitherto drawn a scanty and precarious subsist-
lnce tom the benevolence of their people. To
fir the Ministers of an eftablithed church to con-
inue in this slate of indigence and dependence, was
nindecency equally repugnant to the principles of
Jigion, and to the maxims of found policy; and
ould have justified all the imputations of avarice,
.:h which the Reformation was then loaded by its
emies. The revenues of the Popish church were
'only fund, which could be employed for their

;es; but during the three last years, the slate of
ele wvas greatly altered. A great majority of Ab-
I, Priors, and other heads of religious houses,
d, either from a ferife of duty, or from views of
left, renounced the errors of Popery; and, not-
irhlhanding this change in their sentiments, they
taied their antient revenues. Almost the whole
r er of Bishops, and several of the other dignita-

Ri till adhered to the Romish fuperfticion: and

hough debarred from every spiritual function, con-
I:ued to enjoy the temporalities of their benefices.
5'.e laymen, especially thore who had been active
rtl.ooting the Reformation, had, under various

* Keith. 210.

T z pre-

B o'o K pretei ces, and amidst the licence of civil wars, c

III. into their hands possessions, which belonged to th

"- church. And thus, before any part of the ancie
:36' ecclefiaflical revenues could be applied towards t

maintenance of the Protetfant Ministers, manydi
ferent interests were to be adjufled; many claims
be examined ; and the prejudices and passions oft
two contending parties required the application o
delicate hand. After much contention, the foll
ing plan was approv-ed by a majority of voices,a
aca-uie:ced in even by the Popish clergy themfel
An exact account of the value of ecclefiaflical
ne.ces through'out the kingdom was appointed
bz taken. The present incumbenrs, to whate
party they adhered, were allowed to keep poffefi
two thirds of the;r whole revenue were reserved
rhtir own utfe, the remainder was annexed to
Crovn ; and out of that, the Queen undertook
afign a fuflcient maintenance for the Protet
ckr:y *.

As moit of the Biflops and several of theo

d!Sniniaries were flil firmly attached to the F
religion, the extirpation of the whole order, ra
'.ian an a't of such extraordinary indulgence, m
have been expected from the zeal of the preach
and from the spirit d-which had hitherto animated
nat'on. But, on this occasion, other principlcs
l.iucctd the operation of such as were purely
ciojs. Zeal for liberty, and the love of we
two pafEcns extrcmuly oppofire, concurred in
t:ri;-: ir.,n the Prorellant leaders to fall in wi'h

.*-..; ' 'i- : ',J- . I -.. I-r. 1x, ;9+.

pn, which deviated so manifeltly from the max- B o K

s, by which they had hitherto regulated their Ill.
cundue. r

-.

!r the Reformers had been allowed to at with-
ut controul, and to level all distinctions .in the
thurc, the immense revenues annexed to ecclesias-
cal dignitics could not, with any colour ofjutlice,
ae been retained by those in whose hands they
o wwere ; but mult either have been distributed
'song the Protestant clergy, who performed all
:geous offices, or must have fallen to the Queen,

rom the bounty of whose ancellors, the greater
srtof them was originally derived. The iorner
ieme, however suitable to the religious spirit of
iaay among the people, was attended with mani-
Iodanger. The Popifl ecclesiastics had acquired
,iare in the national property, which far exceeded
epropoirion that was confillent with the happi-
'.s of the kingdom; and the noblks were dcter-
rred to guard against this evil, by preventing the
urn of those vast polenlions into the hands of the
urch. Nor was the latter, which expoled the
:itution to more imminent hazard, to be avoid-
.wi;h leis care. Even that circumscribed prero-
c;,e, which the Scott;lI Kings possessed, was the
;;: of jealousy to the nobles. If they had al-

Cr
ie Crown to seize the spoils of the church,
:c an increase of power must have followed that

icJron of property, as would have raised the royal
hllority above controul, and have rendered the
'i hlimited P'rince in Europe the mol ;:bfotute

rn.· tncent. The rei;n of I icnry VIII. pre-

T 3 sected

B o o sented a recent and alarming example of this nature;

III. The wealth which flowed in upon that Prince, from
-'*rt'" th fi.ippre!lon of the monaferies, not only change

t:.e maxims of his government, but the temperof
his mind ; and he wvho had formerly submitted tr
his Parliamner:ts, and courted his people, dictated,fren
that time, to the former, with intolerable inioblnce
and tyrannized ov-r the latter with unprecedent=
fever:ty : and if hi pFolicy had not been extrem-ei
fhort-fightied, if he had not squandered what he a
quired, wi:h a pro:ufion equal to his rapacioufnef
and which defeared his ambition, he might hay
effablilhed de'.po iln in England, on a basis fobroi
and strong, as all the efforts of the fubjecs woa
never have bcLn able to shake. In Scotland, whe
the riches of the clergy bore as great a proportio
to tie wealth of the kingdom, the acquisition
church-lands would have been of no less importan
to the Crowvn. an:d no less fatal to the ariftocrny
The nobles, for tlis rcafon, guarded againlf lfu
an i;,creafe of the royal power, and thereby fecur
their own indepecrienece.

As.ARICE T.in^ced itself with their concern

the intcreft of their order. The re-uniting t
pocfi:ons cf the ch.urch to the Crown, or the b
flowing them on the Protestant clergy, would ha
bLen a fatal blow both to those nobles, who had,b
frald or viocin:e, seized part of there revenues, andl
those Abhots and Priors who had totally renounce
th-ir ecclefrL.s:ical character. But as the plan, whiC
was proi'ofd, gave some sanction to their ufurl
t ons, t'n- j-o.7o0:cd it w:!h th-eir utilofi insuienu

I'r

TCe popilh ecclesiastics, though the lopping off a B o o K.
ihiri o' their revenues was by no means agreeable III.
0 them, consented, under their present circum- i5ró
;rces, to sacrifice a part of their poffcffions, in
oer to purchase the secure enjoyment of the re-
irinder; and after deeming the whole irrecovrably
l0:, they confidered whatever they could retrieve as
o much gain. Many of the ancient dignitaries
were men of noble birth; and as they no longer
crertained hopes of restoring the Popish religion,
itev wished their own relations, rather than the
Crown, or the Protestant clergy, to be enriched with
tinepoils of the church. They connivtd, for this
rai0n, at the encroachments of the nobles; they
een aided their avarice and violence; they d:alt
o' the patrimony of the church among their own
ations, and by granting feus and perpetual ]cafes
cilands and tithes, gave, to the utimot of their
nwer, some colour of legal poffieffon, to what was
iornerly mere usurpation. Many vefliges of such
icnations still remain*. The nobles, with the
concurrence of the incumbents, daily extended their
te.croachments, and gradually stripped the ecclesias-
;s of their richest and most valuable poffeflions.
Es.n that third part, which was given up in order
I silence the clamours of the Proteltant clergy,
a".j to be some equivalent to the Crown for its
c1ims, amounted to no considerable fum. The
i'.'l. due by the more powerful nobles, especially
b; such as had embraced the Reformation, were
.Motl universally remitted. Others, by producing
::'uulent rentals; by estimating the corn, and

i' iith, 507. Spit'w. x75.

'
4 other

B o o K other payments in kind, at an under value; and by

ilI. the connivance of collectors; greatly diminifled;
--''f -t the charge agai:fft themselves *: and the nobles hadi
]ó 'much r.afon to be satisfied with a device which, atl

so small expence, secured to them such vast pof.
fefeons.

T'e ?r OR- NOV were the Protestant clergy considerable gain-
~0 ~in.'": ers by this new regulation; they found it to bea
by it. inroe ca'y matter to kindle zeal, than to extinguii

avarice. Those very men, whom formtrly they
had fwaved with abfoliute authority, were now deaf
to all their r mon:trances. The Prior of St. An-
drew's, the Farl of Argyll, the Earl of Morton,
and Maitland, all the most zealous leaders of the
Congregation, were appointed to assign, or, as
.-as called, to mr.s.'v tlheir flipends. An hundred
n:erks Scorttin was the allowance which their libe
ralirv arofrded to the genernlity of Minillers. To
a few three hundred mer's were grantedt. - Aou
twen;lt-four thousand pounds Scottifli appears
have been the whole fum allutted for the mainte
nance of a national church established by law, ana
esteemed, throughout the kingdom, the true churci
of God+. Even this fum was paid with little ex
a rnefs, and the Ministers were' kept in thefamn
poverty and dependance as formerly.

rc~2. THE gentleness of the Qtueen's adminifration

D..iTiicn and the elegance of her court, had mitigated, i
nobsg :h: fme degree, the ferocity of the nobles, and ac

nobles.

* Kr]ih, Apend. 18S. S . :: 183. Knox, 5:
t* Keith, .F"ppcrd. i&8. cu1mC d

tliioed them to greater mildness and humanity; B o o oK
bie, at the fame time, her presence and authority II.
rea check to their factions and tumultuary spirit. ~^
a, as a state of order and tranquillity was not 562
a:ural to the fcudal aristocracy, it could not be of
^ continuance ; and this year became remarkable
rthe moit violent eruptions of intestine discord
d animosity.

AMIONG the great and independent nobility of
o[2nd, a Monarch could poflefs little authority,
d exercise no extensive or rigorous jurifiicdtion.
he inttrfering of interest, the unfirttled ttlae of
rop-rtv, the frequency of public conmmotions, and
ei:rcenefs of their own manners, obwWci, among
eere.it families, the feeds of many quarrels and
nentions. These, as we have already oblerved,
re decided not by law, but by violence The
rd-d Baron, without having recourip to the 'Vio-
rch, or acknowled .ing his superior authorirv, as-
ibled his own followers, and invaded the lands
his rival in an hostile manner. Together with
Seltate and honours, every nobleman tranfinitted
ce hereditary feud to his posterity, who were
nd in honour to adopt and to prosecute it with
iime inveterate rancour.

Scn a dlifention had subsisted between the house
'lamiirtn and the Eari of Pothwell, and was
,igltened by mutual injuries during the late com-
0:icns *. Both the Earl of Arran and Bothwell
'r-?ning to be in waiting at the fame time, their

Keitfh, 2 ! .

fol-

B o o K followers quarrelled frequently in the streets of Edin

III. burgh, and excited dangerous tumults in that cits

.'- ~ At lat, the mediation of their friends, particulari
Fe1bary. Knox, brought about a reconcilement, but a

unfortunate one to both there noblemen .

A FEw days after, Arran came to Knox, an

with the utmost terror and confusion, confeffedfil
to him, and then to the Prior of St. Andrew's
that, in order to obtain the sole direction of affairs
Bothwell and his kinrilen the Hamiltons, had con
spired to murder the Prior, Maitland,,and theothe
favourites of the (tuean. The Duke of Chatelhe
rauit regarded the Prior as a rival, who had up
planted himr in the Queen's favour, and whofill
that place at the helm, which he imagined to
cue to hinmeif, as firt PIrince of the blood. Both
well, on account of the personal injuries which
had recive d from the Prior during the late co
motions, was no leis exasperated against him. B
whether he and the IHamiltons had agreed to cerne
their new alliance, with the blood of their comma
enemy, or khether the conlpiiacy exilted onl'
the frantic and cdifordered imagination of the
of Arran, it is i:;npofible, amidit the contraditi
or hiitorians, and the dcifesivenefs of records,
fitively to deternine. Among men inafamed 'i
resentment, and impatient for revenge, rash expre
sions might be uttered, and violent and crimi;
expedients pr.poled; and on that foundation,
ran s distempered fancy might ear the whole
perf'lucdture of a conspiracy. All the perlons a

. K.o:x;, :,9.

fed, denied their guilt with the utmost confidence. B 6 o o
BIt the known characters of the men, and the vio- II.
ent Ipirit of the age, added greatly to the probabi-
' of the accusation, and abundantly justify the 5
ri.'u of the Queen's Ministers, who confined
B:Y ,vell, Arran, and a few of the ringleaders, in
-rate prisons, and obliged the Duke to surrender
itrong castle of Dunbarton, which he had held
r since the time of his resigning the Office of
egnet *.

' HE designs of the Earl of Huntly againit theTheEarlof
'ior of St. Andrew's were deeper laid, and pro- Hu"tly's

enmity to

,cd more memorable and more tragical events. thleQeen's
eorge Gordon Earl of Huntly, having been one Mini'ers
f the nobles who conspired against James III. and
io raised his son James IV. to the throne, enjoy-
a great share in the confidence of that generous
rif.c-. By his bounty, great accessions of wealth
-d :ower were added to a family, already opulent

"d powerful. On the death of that Monarch,

lexander the next Earl, being appointed Lord
eutenant of all the counties beyond Forth, left
other nobles to contend for offices at court;
retiring to the north, where his estate and in-
uence lay, resided there, in a kind of princely in-
eendence. The Chieftains in that part of the
ridom dreaded the growing dominion of such a
gdcrous neighbour, but were unable to prevent
E ncroachments. Some of his rivals he secretly
lermined, others he subdued by open force. His
' ro-, o/,, 308. Keith, 202. t Crawf. Oficers of

1,~':,~ ;ó.~rflate

estate

B o o K elate far exceeded that of any other subjea, an

III. his fiperiorities and jurisdictions extended overman

k""ó ' of the northern counties. With power and possel
.3 ' sions so immense, under two long and feeble mine

rities, and amidst the shock of civil commotion;
the Earls of Huntly might have indulged the mol
elevated hopes. But happily for the Crown, a
active and enterprising spirit was not the characte
riftic of that family, and whatever object their am
bition miLht have in view, they chose rather toac
quire it by political address, than to seize it openl
and by force of arms.

THE conduct of George the present Earl, duritn

the late commotions, had been perfectly fuitabl
to the character of the famiiy, in that age, dubi
ous, variable, and crafty. \;hile the success
the Lords of the Congregation was uncertain, h
affiled the Queen Rege-t in her attempts to cru
them. XV hen their affairs put on a better afpcl
he pretended tojoin them, but never heartily favour
ed their cause. He was courted and feared byeac
of the contending parties; both connived at h
encroachments in the north; and, by artifice an
force, which he well knew how to employ alte
nately, and in their proper places, he added ever
day to the exorbitant power and wealth which
possessed.

HE observed the growing reputation and auth

rity of the Prior of St. Andrew's, with the grea
eft jealousy and concern, and confidered hin as
rival who had engrofied that share in to

Queen

Queen's confidence, to which his own zeal for the B o o K
Popith religion seemed to give him a preferable ti- Ill.
ie, Personal injuries soon increased the mifunder- ' ---
tanding occasioned by rivalfhip in power. The
Queen having determined to reward the services
of the Prior of St. Andrew's, by creating him an
Earl, she made choice oi Mar, as the place whence
he ihluld take his title ; and, that he might be bet-
ter abe to support his new honour, bestowed upon
him, at the fame time, the lands of that name. Feb. Io,
These were part of the royal demesnes *, but the
Earls of Huntly had been permitted, for several
years, to keep poieffion of them i. On this occa-
ion, the Earl not only complained, with some rea-
son, of the lots which he sustainrd, but had real
caule to be alarmed at the intrusion of a formidable
neighhour into the heart of his territories, who
might be able to rival his power, and excite his op-
preid vassals to shake off his yoke.

AN incident, which happened soon after, encreaf- June 2;.
ed and confirmed Huntly's suspicions. Sir John
Gordon, his third son, and Lord Ogilvie had a dif-
pute about the property of an estate. This dispute
became a deadly quarrel. They happened unfor-
ianately to meet in the streets of Edinburgh, and
being both attended with armed followers, a fcufflc
enfred, in which Lord Ogilvie was dangerously
'cunded by Sir John. The Magifrates seized both
the ofenders, and the Queen commanded them to
be ftricly confined. Under any regular govern-

* CrawfP Peer. z97. t Euch. 334.

6 rent,

B o o K ment, such a breach of public peace and order would

IlI. expose the person offending, to certain punishment
1-'56 At this time, tome severity was necessary, in orde

to vindicate the Queen's authority from an infultl
the most heinous which had been offered to it, since
her return into Scotland. But in an age accuffomi
ed to licence and anarchy, even this moderateexerl
tion of her power in ordering them to be kept i
cuitody, was deemed an act of intolerable rigour
and the friends of each party began to convene thei:
vassals and dependants, in order to overawe, or
frustrate the decisions of justice *. Mean whil
Gordon made his escape out of prison, and flyin
into Aberdeerihire, complained loudly of the indig
nity with which he had been treated; and as al
the Queen's acions were, at this juncture, impui
to the Earl of Mar, this added not a little to th
resentment, which Huntly had conceived again
that nobleman.
Asg.ol. AT the very time when these paflions fermente

with the utmost violence, in the minds of the Ea
of Huntly and his family, the Queen happened
set out on a progress into the northern parts of t
kingdom. She was attended by the Earls of Mara
Morton, Maitland, and other leaders of that party
The pretence of the Queen, in a country where
name greater than the Earl of Huntly's :had bees
heard of, and no power superior to his had been ex
ercifed, for many years, was an event, ofitfelf, a
bundanrly mortifying to that haughty nobleman

' Kci;w', 2Z3.

EI

l, while the Queen was entirely under the direc- B o o K
on of Mar, all her actions were more apt to be III.
nilirprcecnted, and construed into injuries; and a
ioul;nd circumflances could not but occur to awa- I562.
en luntly's jealousy, to offend his pride, and to
idame his resentment. Amidst the agitations of so
any violent passions, some eruption was unavoid-
b!c.

O- Mary's arrival in the north, Huntly employ-
his wife, a woman capable of executing the com-
iflon with abundance of dexterity, to tooth the
Queen, and to intercede for pardon to their son.
Bt the Queen peremptorily required, that he should
adin deliver himself into the hands of justice, and
I;)on her clemency. Gordon was persuaded to
do ;; and being enjoined by the Queen to enter
'i.fcif prisoner in the castle of Stirling, he promised
\icwlie to obey that command. Lord Erfline,
i'ar's uncle, was, at that time, Governor of this

hr. The Queen's severity, and the place in which

le appointed Gordon to be confined, were inter-
prted to be new marks of Mar's rancour, and

ngmented the hatred of the Goldons againt him.

MEAN time, Sir John Gordon set out towards sept. ,.
Striiing; but inflead of performing his promise to
tle ()Qceen, made his escape from his guards, and
returned to take the command of his followers, who

rere rising in arms, all over the north. These were

ctl,eil to fccond and improve the blow, by which
· iathcr proposed, secretly, and at once, to cut off
.ir.: Morton, and Maitland, his principal adver-

saries.

I

B o o K fanes. The time and place for perpetrating th'

111. horrid deed were frequently appointed ; but the exe

'--' cuting of it was wonderfully prevented, by some o
I562. those unforeleen accidents, which so often occur t

diiconcert the fchcmes, and to intimidate the heart
of assassins *. Iis own house at Strathbogi
was the last and moil convenient scene, appointe
for committing the intended violence. But, on he
journey thlider, thle Oieen heard of young Gordor,

ight and rebcllion, and refuiing, in the first tran
porrs of her indignation, to enter under the fathter
roof, by that fortunate expression of her refentmenq
iav-ed her l\iinifters from unavoidable deftruEtion

Ta-r a-ms THE ill fUiccefs of thefc efforts of private reveng

irainl h precipitateJ Huntly into open rebellion. As h
tu tn.

Quezn was entirely under the direction of his rival]
it was impofitble to work their ruin, without viola
ing the allcgi:.nce which he o.-wd his Sovereiga
On her arr;val t Inverness, the commanding ofic
in the caflle, by -iuntly's orders, shut the gates
gainft h; r. NMary w ias obliged to lodge in the towr
which was open and deiencldcs; but this, too, ¢
quickly furrouni,'cd by a multitude of the Eari's so
lowers t . he u;.mo'o consternation seized d
Queen, r-lho was attended by a very slender trail
She every moment expectd the approach of the ri
bcl., and forre ilips were already ordered intoti
river to fLcure her eicape. The loyalty of theMo0
roes, Frazers, 2Mac;intofrhs, and some neighboul

eih, z;o.CiT- K

23.0 . j K t. + Cratf. Off

ce3st3
Slate, ci, -,.

'in

jn c;ans, who took arms in her defence, saved her B o o K
;ron thi:; danger. By their aflifiance, ihe even for- III.
cJ th:e cafile to ifrrender, and inflicted on the Go- ,ó
r:'ncr tle punifhnment which his insolence dcifrved. 5

Tils open ac' of disobedience was the occasion
fa .na.llre more galling to i-luntly than any the
ctin h:id hitherto taken. Lord Elrfline, iaving
r:nc:deci a right to the earldom of Mar, Stewart
e.ind it in is favour; and at the fame time Mary
ci:'errii t!;on him the ticle of Earl of Murray, with
;!i":at' annexed to t halt diinity, vwhich had been
n': pofitcroil of the larl of HIuntly since the year
: '. IFriom this he co:;cl'iucdd that his family
2 ili evoted to dctlrufion ; and dreading to be
r:pped, gradually, of tholfe pofielfions, wiich, in
cwIid of thtir services, the gratitude of the Crown
ad l:celowed on him!-lF, or his ancefcors, be no

;i!" ifcd Ilis intentions, but, in de!lance of

,(.Q:c n's proclamation, openly took arms. In-

,i ofr iclding those places of firength, which

;.ry rcciuilrd him to iurren:er, Ihis dlulowers dif-
{.'1, or Clit in pieces thei- parties which ilie cdiitatch-
*n t.'ike poiieiiion of them -; and he hinsfelf, ad-
-:c.ng wvi;!i a confidierabie body of men towards
':r.!t:c, to whkch pllace the Queen was now re-
.,i, filled her fm..l1 court with confLernation.
n:rra hdl only a handcifl of men in whom he
co:,idle +. In ord-:r to form thie appearance

all armn, lie was obliged to call in the afif'.nce
I t: nilbouring carons ; but as most of these

-
l' . cc: . 9,x lr,'x,

59. + K eit , z20.
.';: . TJ eitleF

B o o K eiher favoured Huntly's designs, or flood in a

I!I. of his power, from them no cordial or effeclual 1
.-v.. vice could be expected.
1502.
Oeob. . Ws. ITH there tro ps however, Murray, whocou

gain nothing by delay, marched briskly towards
enemy. He found them at Corrichie, posted
great advantage; he commanded his northern al
ciates infiantly to begin the attack; but on the f
motion of the enemy, they treacherouny turnedthd
backs; and Huntly's followers, throwing aside t
spears, and b-eaking their ranks, drew their fwor

He is ie- and rufied forward to the pursuit. It was ti;
ftda Y thaay t Lt Murray gave proof both of fleady coura
the Earl e !3
u.rr.ay. and of prudent conducL. He flood immoveal

on a rising ro.nd, vwith the finall but trusty h
of his adh-rents, who prelenting their spears to
enemy, received them with a determined reiolui
which they litEle expeted. 'Ihe Highland tnL
sword is not a v.eapon fit to encounter the Scot
spar. In every civil commotion, the fuperiio
of t'e latter has been evident, and has always
cidtd the contest. On this occasion, theirregu
attack of Huntly's troops was easily repulftd
]'urray's firm battalion. Before they recove
from the confusion occasioned by this unforeseen
fiaince, tholc who had begun the flight, willinl
regain- their credit with the victorious party, fell
on them, and compleated the rout. Huntly hi
filr, who was extremely corpulent, was trodder
death in the pursuit. His sons, Sir John and Ad
were taken, and Murray returned in triumpS
Aberdeen with his prisoners.

THE trial of men taken in aEtual rebellion against B o K
heir Sovereign was extremely flort. Three days III.
fLer tie battle, Sir John Gordon was beheaded at 56.

ix562.

bTrdien. His brother Adam was pardoned on
Ccount of his youth, Lord Gordon, who had been
riv' to his father's designs, was seized in the south,
ud upon trial found guilty oftrea!on; but, through
hie (ueen's clemency, the punishment was remit-
e - T-he first Parliament proceeded againIt this
reat family, with the utmost rigour of law, and re-
ucd their power and fortune to the lowest ebb *.

As

'This conspiracy of the Earl of Huntly is one of the most in-
ac ndl myltieriou- paflages in the 3cottifl hillory. As it was
ta''iiionl pureiy donmellic, and in which the Englilh were

in:ereitcd, fev original paners concerning it have been
-J in Cccil's Cnll!etion, the great flrrehoufie of evidence and
;/rm::;ioto with regard to the aliilirs of this peliod.

Ec:innan fuppofs Mary to have formed a design about this
e., o: rllo! ing Muiny. and of employing the power of
'taI of Huntly for this purpofc. But his account of this
ii tr2ltlac/ion appeals to be io void of truth, and even of

,i

I y, a, to di serve no lerious examination. At that time,

:;a :icdl pow er, and seems to have had no inclination to
-itmsv atn of violence upon her biotler.

Tao other hv.pohefes have been advanced, in order to ex-

 tLis matter; but they appear to be equally removed from

:1,

1 It cannot well be conceived, that the Queen's journey to
'r:.h \w;;a a fheme concerted by Murray, in order to ruin

o'.:! 'F Htntly. . Huntly had refiJed at ccurt alnmo;

; isc the Queen's return. Keith, ic,8. Append. 175,
This vas the proper place in which to have seized
T'o a.iac'- him in Abeideenflhire, the feat of his power,

U z and

B o K As the fall of the Earl of Huntly is the moos im.

III. portant event of this year, it would have been im.
1562. ard in the mifi cf his vaii's. xas a project equally S'

frd .an-.d hazard;ou. 2. 'T he QCeen \ as not accomeatp:icd ;i:,!
a bod-. of t :oons, czFabDe f art:cm.itng anv thing ag:iir
Huntlv bv vi-.'er.ce; her train was not more numerous, iht2
was uiha! in irmer cf greateit trar.nqiliitr, Keith, 230. 3. T.,e;
remain ;:.: o oii;:'nl lI;t; .-x ith r.g.id to this conlipra:v, ax.
from Ranioph ti:e E;ngl; I'Rieent, and anot!her from :1i
land, Lao cdire'en tn Ccci!. 'The tal'k of I!untly's in:eafrei
nc:n:icr -. treeforable. Rrnn',olph rmentiors his repeated at
rcmps to ailLi!,nate iJurr?.., &c. No hint is given of any p
vicu- r c-!i::i rn, ,i';n-cd b.-. iri's minilt.rs, to ruin Hatur
ar.d h .r..'.-. IL..l ar.v !'ch dc'ign ever exicfed, it \iaR R
c'c:':' c:::. t') ha:.e d::-c red it; no- vwould Maiiland ,i
Iab a-cc/ to ccrc.l2 it ircm ihe Eziliih fccretary. Kei:h,z2:
2j 2.

11. To r'.nrc t':-a the Farl of IIuntly hadi laid ary pla2

fciz:np rt-e Queen, anq h-r Mir.il.cr, fenls to be no k i
rr.:.'-' !: . I On t'ie (Qeen's arrival in tlhe north, lie labot
I-n i .cd c-. ;.ct, to :i a her faxnur, anl( to obtain a parccn
hio tcn .

K :ox, ;i:,. a. Ii- met ti'e QOeen, frft at Aberde

r.:. ti:en a.: Ri eicn- , lnhiii:cr he wvould not ha- e ventured
cotn, nr. 'Ie harboa'red nr.x ftch trc; icnabie rcrolution. R(
31 t . . Si-s :c,:r iuc; v.as irr.ef(lute rani w-aveinza, like tr::
a rr.n .c,;ce.d v an c::frcn dan

brcrcn Laer, net like ore

c',.:7 a c .'ccr:cd l-an. i. The imolt conniderable pesii
i.; .'.-n -,_!.:-. -d to ;he '::e',p, an.n found surety to o'et
c.-nt-:-ac' . J ::!z, z:6. Had the Fail been previcuiy dit
mirr'ie o rn i.c ::r- a g; aeain2 the Queen, cr- to feie herl M
^t-r. :i i *'-:r' l- l hIe xvould have imnarted it to his prir
's:3i. c:. , ra.c.:- .''ui thc; !h.a\e dc!erted him in this manner.

Fcr r':.. rc:.' ns, 'e have. on the or. hand, vindicated

!FI:a c £.I;;:r:v :':c . ar.e dei:berare it-.:entisn of ruining the
m.' :' C.: . :. :-: on the or:cr hand, we have imputet
v: :.. ' ::-.'u.:- t'

t :-c La;! r.s IJu-.tlv, to a sudden flar c:
f- r.:: . :. v.:.'.at c::ar.i.g .'im with an)y pe.emedi:ated p-

pS1

roper to interrupt the narrative, by taking notice B o o K
0Ifi.lr tranlfations, which may now be related with III.
q.n3l prop iety. 562

I t.e beginnil.ng of filmimer, Mary, who was de- An inter-
:ic.us of cnering into a more intimate correfpon- vitw be-

:c;.nd familiarity with Elizabeth, employed zabeth and
.;i:;itn to defi;-e a peironal interview with her,Mary pro-
o;c;.llhrc in the north of LEngland. As this pro-

,1 cou'd nut bI rjcctetd with decency, the time,
ir. pl.ice, and the circuLmflanccs of the meeting were
ini'i ly agreed upon. But Elizaleti was prudent
e.oughi not to admit into her kingdom, a rival,
i,o otitfhone her!clf, so far, in beauty, and grace-
fi:,le:s of peri' n; and who excelled, so emiinently,
iali the arts of insinuation and address. Under pre-
ence of being confined to London, by the attention
Iuich flme was ob'igecd to give to the civil wars in
ranre, le put off the interview for that season *,
and revented her fubjeccts irom freing the Scottish
Quen, the charms of whose appearance, and beha-
riar, fle envied, and had some rcafon ro dread.

DURINC this year, the Afembly of the church june .
ret rtwicc. In both these meetin gs, v.ere exhibited Dcn). 5.
ai;,y comnplaints of the poverty and dependence of the
cnlurch; and many murmurs again.ls the negligence
cr avarice of tlofe, who had been appointed to col-
lci, and to ditlribute the fmiall fund, appropriated
tir the maintenance of preachers -. A petition,
craving redress of their grievances, was pi efented to

Kc:it,, 216, t Knox, 37i, 373.

U 3 the

B o o , the Queen; but without any effect. There was no

III. reason to expect that Mary would discover any for.

.--6 wardnefs to grant the requests of filch lupplicants
156 ' And as her M;nisters, though all most zealous l'ro.

teftants, were theml-lves growing rich on the inhe.
ritance of the church, they were equally regardless
of the indigence and demands of their brethren.

i56ó. MARY had now continued above two years in
Negocia- slate of widowhood. Her gentle adminiitration had
tions wi;h
regard to secured the hearts of her fubjtcts, who were impa.
ha-Oeen's tient for h r mnrriage, and wished the Crown to dei

scend in the right line from their ancient Monarchis
She herself was the most amiable woman of the agq
and the fame or her accompliihments, together with
the favourable c:rcumr:ance of her having one king,
dom already in her pole..on, and the profpeft o
mounting the throne of another, prompted many
difiErent Princes to fclicit an allance so illuflrious
Sco:land, by its situation, threw so much weigh
and power into whatever scale it fell, that allEu
rope waited v ith solicitude for Mary's determina]
tion; and no event in that age excited fironger po
litic-a! fears and jealousies; none interested mor0
deeply the pFiions of several Princes, or gave rifetd
more contraditory intrigues, than the marriage o|
the Scottish Queen.

She is roli. THE Princes of the house of Aultria remember
':.~e 'y ed w'hat vaif projects the French had founded o
Pr'rces. tie-ir former aliar.e xvil th the QuLeen of Scots; a.

thii':.h ." ;.;ciun'Xpc:d dcat>, nrfI olf Henry and :''

o

ofFrancis, had hindered these from taking efi&-t, B o o K
yet if Mary should again make choice of a husband !II.
amongo the French Princes, the fame d-:fgns miight -'?"

ri :1563'

be revived and prosecuted with better success. 5
Is order to prevent this, the Emperor entered in- By the

Archduke

to a negociatiun with the Cardinal of Lo;'rain, who clurles.
had proposed to marry the Scotrifi Queen to the
Archduke h harles, Ferdinand's third fun The mat-
ter was communicated to M;ary ; and Melvil, who,
at that time, attetided the Elector Palatine, wras
commanded to enquire into the charaAer and fitua-
tion of the Archduke "
PHILIP II. though nolefs apprehenr-ve of Mary's By Don

C0~~~

rlJ~~~ Carlos of

falli;g once more into the hands o/ Fr;nce, envied Spain.
his unclc I-erdinand the acquiLition ! f l important
aprize; and as his own insatiable amb;t;on gr'afpoe
at all the kingdoms of Europe. he emplo)ye hi- .m-
baffador at the French court, to solicit the Princes
of Lorrain in behalf of his son Don Carlos, at that
timie, the heir of all the extensive dominions, which
belonged to the Spanish monarchy t.

CATHERINE of Medicis, on the other hand, By the
dreaded the marriage of the .'cottifh Queen with Dke of

Anjou.

any of the Austrian Princes, which would have ad-
d.d so much to the power and pretenfons of that
ambitious race. Her jealousy of the r';-inces of
Lorrain rendered her no less averse from ai ..'liance,
which, by securing them the prote&tion of the Em-

'1:M'v.63, 65. Keith, 239. See Append. No. VII.
t (Cafcln. 461. Addit. aLabor. o50, 503.

U 4 peror

B o o ; peror or King of Spain, would give new boldnefsto

III. their enterprising spirit, and enable them to fetthe
~""'~' power or the Cro.vn, which they already rivalled

at open defiance: And as file was afraid that the
fpl-ndid proposals of the Austrian family woul
dazzle the yorng Queen, she instantly difpatche
Cafltenau into Scotland, to offer her in marnra
the Duke of Aniou, the brother of her former hus.
band, who loon aiter mountdci the throne of France'

5:ar-y'se- M.j\'!A attentively weighed the pretenfionsof
conc.r.il. many riv.ls. The archduke had little to recom

mend him, but his high birth. The example
Henry VIII. was a warning against contracrtin
rnarr;:ge with the brother of her former hufbandJ
nor cou d fi:z- bkar thne thoughts of appearing i
Fra.ce, in a rlan inferior to that wlhich she had io:
menrlv hlcid in that ki:g-dom. She listened therefo:e
with partiality, to the Spanish propositions, and t
pro:pca of such va' r power and dominions flattere
the ambition of a young and aspiring Princess.

THREE fe-eral circurmf'ances, however, concur

red to divert Mary from any thou!ghts of a foreig
alliance.

THE first of tclif w.as the murder of her uncl

the Duke of Gui.e. The violence and ambition 0
t.'.t nobleman had involved his country in a cvi
w-ar; w-h ch w as co:;'dlctcd with furious animoir!
:-.d va;'ious success. At iaft the Duke laid fieget

C.-.l-. nau, 46i.

Orlesr,

rans, the bulwark of the Protestant caute ; and B o o K
5hd reduced that city to the last extremity, when III.
vwas a/faffinated' by the frantic zeal of Poltrot. ,-,
1,s blow proved fatal to the Queen of Scots. Tile I563
o.ng Duke was a minor; and the Cardinal of
orrin, though subtle and intriguing, wanted that
nrnttc and enterpriing courage, which rendered
; smtin;n of his brother lb formidab]e. Cathe-
, i::fead of encoutragi;ng the ambition, or fur-
ei., the pretensions of her daughter-in-law, took
i;:.i:re in mortifying the one, and in diflppointing
re o:ler. In tiis situation, and without such a
:o;tor, it became necefiary for Mary to contract
cr views, and to proceed with caution; and what-
rr profpe't of advantage might allure her, she
.c:; venture upon no dangerous or doubtful mea-
A!.

Thi, second circumstance, which weighed with Tlcve;,w
!, wais the opinion of the Queen of England. of"liza-

beth.

hi: mlrriage of the Scottiffi Queen intereflted Eli-
Set nmor- deeply than any other Prince; and she
-'vd all her deliberations concerning it with
Tmoft anxious attention. She herself tefes early
hte formed a resolution of living unmarried, and
e cover-ed no finall inclination to impcIe the
!:lawv on the Queen of Scots. She had already
erienced what use might be-made of Mary's
wer and pretensions, to invade her dominions, and
'liurb her poffefnion of the Crown. The death
Fra cis I. had happily delivered her from this
;i'., which fle determined to guard againit for
;.l':c,; with the utmost care. As tl:e refllcfs

anlbi-

B o o K ambition of the Austrian Princes, the avowed an

III. bigotted patrons of the Catholic fuperifition, mad
.'y her, in a particular manner, dread their neighbou

' hood, she inftrucated Randolph, to remonstrate,

the strongest terms, against any alliance with the
and to acquaint Mary, that as she herself wou
confider such a match to be a breach of theperfo
friendlhip, in which they were lo happily united;
the English nation vould regard it, as the diffil
tion of that confederacy which now fubfifed b
tween the two kirgdoms: That, in order to p
serve their own religion and liberties, they wou
in all probability, take some flep prejudicial
her right of iuccefion, which, as she wellkne
they neither wanted power nor pretences to
validate, and set aside. This threatening was
companied with a promise, but expressed in v
ambiguous terms, that if Mary's choice of ah
band should prove agreeable to the English ni
Elizabeth would appoint proper persons to exa
her title to the succession, and, if well found
command it to be publickly recognized. She
served, however, a mysterious silence concern
the person, on whom she wifled the choiceof
Scottish Queen to fall. The revealing of this fe
was refcrved for some future negociation. M
while he threw out some obscure hints, that a
tive of Britain, or one not of princely rank, w0
be her safest and most inoffensive choice '. An
vice offered with such an air of superiority and c(
mand, mortified, no doubt, the pride of the S1

Kc:th, 242, 24;.

I QIeen. But, under her present circumnrances, B o o K
ewas obligd to bear this indignity. Deftituce of II.
forei;n afliftance, and i;t.Cnt upon the Engliih -
ceellion, the great object of her wifies and ambi- 5 3-
on, it became necessary to court a rival, whom,
ithout mani:eft imprudence, she could not venture
ofiind.

THE inclination of her own subjects was another, The senti-
dnotthe least considerable circumifance, which cal- herosof
d for Mary's attention at this conjunllure. 'I hey fubjeas.
d een taught, by the fatal experiment of her former
arriage, to dread an union with any great Prince,
hose poswr might be employed to oppress their
li.on and liberties They trembled at the thoughts
a match w;th a foreigner; and if the Crown
ould be firengthened by new dominions or allian-

, rhe foresaw that the royal prerogative would
be Itretched beyond its ancient and legal limits.

heir eagernels to prevent this could scarce fail of
rov.ing them into the arms of England. Eliza-
h would be ready to afford them her aid, towards
.a in a measure so diiagreeable to herself.
'.s easy for them to seize the person of the So-
:iga. By the affillance of the English fleet, they
cl render it difficult for any foreign Prince to
n in Scotland. The Roman Catholics, now an
confitcrable party in the kingdom, and dispirited
tile olos of the Earl of Huntly, could give no
,,ruieon to their designs. To what violent ex-
"s, the national abhorrence of a foreign yoke
-;t hlave been carried, is manifest from the tranf-

a tions

B o o K ations both previous, and subsequent to theprefen

III. period.

i -6_ .
' 3
6 FOR there reasons, Mary laid aside, at that tim

all thoughts of foreign alliance, and seemed il
to lacrifice h-r own ambition, in order to reao
the jealousies of Elizabeth, and to quiet tie fears
her own lubjects.
A par:;.- THE Parliament met this year, for the firfl tim,

~'th-i ' since the Queen's return inro Scotland. Mary'sa
May 2.6.

ministration had hitherto been extremely popul
Her Miinif.ers poiTeflcd the confidence of the
ticn; and, by consequence, the proceedings ofth
alTemb'y were conducted with perse& unanir.i
The grant of the earldom of Murray to t-e Pr
of St. Andrew's was confirmed: the Earl of Hu
ly, and fevcral of };is vafinls and dependanrt, v.
attainted: the attainder again:- Kirkaldy of Gran
and some of his accomplices in the murder of C
dinal Beatoun, was rcverled : the act of oblivi
mentioned in the treaty of rdin'urgh, received
royal sanction. But Mary, who had determir
never to ratiiy that treaty, toolk care that this fanai
flho:u not be deemed any acknowledgment of
validity; she granted her consent merely incon
fcenfion to the Lords in Parliament, who, on th
knees, besought her to allay the jealousies and
prehensions of her fuhjccts, by such a grai
a-,w -..

* }i:-.:, 55c. - Spotfwv i8S.

\5 attempt was made, in this Parliament, to B o o K
rcre the Queen's afent to the laws eftablilhing IlLT
protlsant religion. Her Ministers, though zea-
n Proteslants themselves, were aware that this N1563'
jd not be urged without manifest danger and im- de'ermined

with regard

>iudence. The had conrented, throtgh their infu- to religion.

, to tolerate and protcrt the retormed doctrine.
ie;' had even prevailed on her to imprilon and
ofcoite the Archbishop of St. Andrew's, and Prior
ifWhithorn, for celebrating mass contrary to her
roclamation ". Mary, however, was still paflion-
e]ydevotedto the Romish superstition; and though,
:or political motives, flhe had granted a temporary
ortc'rion to opinions, which she disapproved, there
ore no grounds to hope that she would agree to
ihblifh them for perpetity. The moderation of
o0fe vw.ho profcflid it, was the Ieft method for re-
o.ciiing the Queen to the Protestant religion.
mie might abate her bigotry. Her prejudices

sg.:t wear off gradually, and at last she might

i1i to the wifhles of her people, what their impor-
:n:y or their violence could never have extorted.
hanv laws of importance were to he proposed in
'arianicnt; and to defeat all these, by such a fruit-
5 and ill-timed applicat:on to the Queen, would
ave been equally injurious to individuals, and de-
icental to the public.

TaI zeal of the proteliant clergy was deaf to all '.hic o-
lb considerations of pdlicy. Eager and impa- fr.,1i

ce, IT-
.nr, it brooked no delay: Severe and inflexible, it

Kcith, 239.

would

B o o K would condescend to no compliances. The leadin

Ill. men of that order infifled, that this opportunity
.- -. establishing religion by law, was not to be negold
1563. ed. They pronounced the moderation ofthecour

tiers, apoftacy; and their endeavours to gain ti
Queen, they reckoned criminal and servile. Knoi
solemnly renounced the friendship of the Earl 4
Murray, as a man devoted to Mary, and foblind
ly zealous for her ferv:ce, as to become regardle
of those objecEs which he had hitherto efleemed mo
sacred. 'his rupture, which is a strong proof
Murray's sincere attachment to the Queen at th
period, continued above a year and an half *

THE preachers being disappointed by the men

whom they placed the greatest confidence, ga
vent to their indignation in their pulpits. Th
ecchoed more loudly than ever, with declararil
against idolatry; with dismal presages concernin
the Queen's marriage with a foreigner; and wil
bitter reproaches against those, who, from interd
ed motives, had deferred that cause, which ths

Ar oca- once reckoned it their honour to support. Ti
sons a tu- people, inflamed by such vehlment declamation
thepecplg which were diCtated by a zeal more sincere th

prudent, proceeded to rash and unjustifiable ats
violence. During the Queen's absence, on apro
grefs into the weft, mals continued to be celebrate
Au-grl. in her chapel at Holy-rood-houfe. The multitul

of those who openly resorted thither, gave gre
offence to the citizens of Edinburgh, who, brinj

t-nox, 33. f
1 fre

eefrom the refiraint which the royal presence im- B o o K
d, aflembled in a riotous manner, interrupted III.
firvicc, and filled such as were prefenr, with the il6e
,roft conlternation. Two of the ringleaders in this 563
muit were seized, and a day appointed for their
Kb;ox, who esteemed the zeal of these persons Knox tried

on that ac-

W:able, and their conduct meritorious, confidered count, but
en as fuifferers in a good cause; and in order to acquitted,

Octobcr 8.

een them from danger, he issued circular letters,
iring all who profefred the true religion, or were
ocerned for the preservation of it, to assemble at
in.burgh on the day of trial, that by their pre-
.-c, tlhey might comfort and affifl their diftrefied
r;:;;-n -t. One of these letters fell into the Queen's
ads. To assemble the fubjets without the au-
ri;y of the Sovereign, was construed to be trea-
rn, a resolution was taken to profccute Knox
rt:at crime, before the Privy Council. Happily Decem, i5.
Irlim, his judges were not only zealous Protest-
!rs, but the very men, who, during the late com-
.ohcns, had openly resifted, and set at defiance the
:een's authority. It was under precedents, drawn
m their own conduft, that Knox endeavoured to
ittr himself. Nor would it have been an easy
atter for these Counsellors to have found out a
icion, by which they could censure him, with-
'tco.ndemning themselves. After a long hearing,
x was unanimoufny acquitted. Sinclair Bishop of
/f., and President of the Court of Seflion, a zea-

* Knox, 3,>. t Ibid. 236.

lous

B o o K lous Papif, heartily concurred with the other Co

III. fcllors in lhis decision *; a remarkable fad, wvhi
'"' shows the unsettled 'late of government in that a2

53 the low condition to which regal authority wasthe

funk; and the impunity with which fubjets mio
inla:ie thoe rights of the Crown, which are no
held sacred.

1-61. THE marriage of the Scottish Queen continu
Negocia- still to be the object of attention and intriim
tions W,-,h
egard to Though Elizabeth, even while the wished to dir,
th e_-n's Mary, treated h r with a disgustful reserve; thou:

Th e kept her, without necefflry, in a state ofi
pence; and hinted often at the person, whom
defiined to be her husband, without directly m
tioning his name; yet Mary framed all her aaio
to express such a prudent relpect for the Engli
Qu-een, that foreign Princes began to imagine Ihe
given herclfd up implicitly to her directioni- T
profpeC of this union alarmed Catherine of Medic
Though Cat:hrine had taken pleasure, all along,
doing ill offces to the Queen of Scots; though
after the Duke of G uile's death, file had put upon
a n;ofi mortifying indgnity, by stopping t!e pa
ment of her dowry, by depriving her subject
Duke of Chatelherault of his pension, and by
flowinog the command of the Scottish Guards o
Frenchman +; she resolved, however, to prev
this dangerous conjunction of the Eritifll Qee
For this purpole, ffle now employed all her art
appease Mary 1j, to whom she had given so rr

* Knox, .3-. t Keith, ziS. + Id. 244
ji Sec T.pen:dix, N°. \VIII.

uses of offence. The arrears of her dowry were 13 o o K
nltanty paid; more punctual remittances were pro- III.
;fed fcr the future; and offers made, not only to 56"-
tlore, but to extend the privileges of the Scottish
tion in France. It was easy for Mary to pene-
re into the motives of this sudden change; she
ll knew the character of her mother-in-law, and
iid little stress upon professions of friendship, which
ace from a Princess of such a false and unfeeling

THE negociation with England, relative to the
arriage, fufiered no interruption, from this appli-
ion of the French Queen. As Mary, in com-
aince to her fubjeds, and pressed by the ifrongeft
ntives of interest, determined speedily to marry,
,izabeth was obliged to break that unaccountable
ince, which she had hitherto asseted. The fe- March.
t was disclosed, and her favourite Lord Robert Elizabeth

recom-
luley, afterwards Earl of Leiceffer, was declared mends Lei.

eftler to her

ibe the happy man, whom the had chosen to so. a h's-
the huiband of a Queen courted by so many band.
rirces *.

ELIZABETH'S wisdom and penetration were re-
arable in the choice of her Ministers; in diftin-
ilhing her favourites, those great qualities were
conspicuous. She was influenced in two cafes
°ppofite, by merit of very different kinds. Their
pacity for business, their knowledge, their pru-
ce, were the talents to which alone the attended,

L.cith, 25X .
'oL, I, ir

B o o K in chufing her Ministers; whereas beauty and grace

II. fulness of person, polished manners, and court,
*-V ~ address, were the accomplishments on which she be

-' towed her favour. She aded in the one cafe witl

the wisdom of a Queen, in the other, she disco
vered the weakness of a woman. To this Leicef
ter owed his grandeur. Though remarkable nsi
ther for eminence in virtue, nor superiority of abi
lities, the Queen's partiality distinguished him o0
every occasion. She raised him to the highest ho
nours, flie bestowed on him the most importantemn
ploymerrts, and manifested an affection so difpro
portionate to his merit, that, in the opinion ofthi
age, it could be accounted for only by the power,
planetary inPfiuece*.

.1y C-- THE h:gh spirit of the Scottilhl Queen couldn
fended at well bear the F rft overture of a match with a fui

je&. Her own rank, the splendor of her form
marriage, and the solicitations, at this time, of
many powerful Princes, crouded into her though!
and made her sensibly feel how humbling and d
refpeEtful Elizabeth's proposal was. She diff
bled, however, with the English Resident; a
tho!ugh she declared, in ifrong terms, what a
gradation she would deem this alliance, whichbrou
along with it no advantage, that could justify
neglec of her own dignity, she mentioned theE
of Leicester, notwithstanding, in terms full
refpe& t.

= Camden, 4)-. t Keith, 25z.

E.LIZ.ZBE

ELIZABETH, we may presume, did not wifl that B o o
1eproofjal should be received in any other man- III.
,*After the extraordinary marks she had given '
her own attachment to Leicester, and while he Elizabeth'
iill in tile very height of favour, it is not pro- views in
,bic lhe could think seriously of bestowing him mending
nun another. 'Twas not her aim to persuade, but hi."
a!y to amuse Mary *. Almost three years were
:riFd since her return into Scotland; and though
ic ted by her tibjec's, and courted by the great-
ftPrinces in Europe, fle had hitherto been pre-
n:cd from marrying, chiefly by the artifices of
izabeth. And if, at this time, the English
ien could have engaged Mary to liften to her
*o:oltl in favour of Leicester, her power over this
;:':re of her own would have enabled her to pro-
.tthe negociation at pleasure; and by keeping
rrial unmarried, fie would have rendered the
ofc'c of her fucceilion lets acceptable to the

LEcEsrTER's own fiuation was extremely deli-
:,and emlbarafling. To gain poffefiion of the
o.. .nmiab'c woman of the age, to carry away this

rzCrom so many contendling Princes, to mount
:th:one of an ancient kingdom, might have flat-
di til ambition of a fubje&', much more confi-
be ;:han him, He saw ail there advantages, no
't; and, in secret, tley made their full im-
:.:. i

on iin. But, without offending Elizabeth,

I;'-.: not venture on the most diltant discovery
i.c l.n:i;rnrts, or take any siep towards facili-
!'.: 2.-A, ti.

X 2 tating

B o o K tating his acquisition of objects so worthy of d

lII. fire.
564-' ON the other hand, Elizabeth's partiality towar

him, which she was at no pains to conceal*, mig
inlpire him with hopes of attaining the supren
rank in a kingr'om, more illustrious than Scotlan
Elizabeth had often declared, that nothing buth
resolution to lead a tingle life, and his beingbo
her own fuhject, would have hindered herfromch
sing the Earl of Leicester for a husband. Sui
considerations of prudence are, however, often si
mncunted by love; and Leicefler might flatterhi,
lClf, that the violence of her affecion wouldi
length triumph both over the maxims of pol:
and the scruples of pride. These hopes induc
him, now and then, to conclude the proposal of
marriage with the Scottish Queen to be a prcj
for his destruction and he imputed it to the mall
oI Cecil, who, under the specious pretence of d

i:ng him honour, intended to ruin him in the g
pinion both of Elizabeth and Mary t.

A nrE 4ATY of marriage, proposed by oneQu?
.-;;o d readed its fuccels; listened to by ano:hi

:c.-o V-was fccrct!v, determined against it; and fcai
I.'ir-e.' bv tlh man himself, whose interest and
p::.:ion it v-as calculated, in appearance, to pI
n-o:e; coulJ not, under so many unfavourablec
C :;.ti'nccs, ihe bi'ought to a fortunate iflfe. BI
L:z;. chI r.nd n.ia:rv continued, however, to
:. ' e-i.:?.1 di;ulaticn. The former, noti

'

'-" t-

, '
Ibid. ioi.

st:nj;

lsing her fears of losing Leicester, solicited B o o K
?nmly in his behalf. The latter, though she be- III.
;n aout this time to cart her eyes upon another ''ó

1564.

¢I5: of England, did not, at once, venture si-
;. to rcjeA Elizabeth's favourite.

Tii person towards whom Mary began to turn rary en-
ti thoughts, was Henry Stewart Lord Darnlv, tertains

thioughts of

i.et son of the earl of Lennox. That nobleman, marrying
:Aing been driven out of Scotland under the re- .ordD ''
-anc of the Duke of Chatelherault, had lived in
ailhinent for twenty years. His wife, Lady
f.raret Douglas, was Mary's most dangerous ri-
1 in her claim upon the English fuccefion. She
:; the daughter of Margaret, the elleft sifter of
nry VIII. by the Earl of Angus, whom that
tjan married after the death of her husband
imes IV. In that age, the right and order of
ccellion was not fettled with the fame accuracy,
sat present. Time, and the decision of alioft
ery cafe that can possibly happen, have at last in-
suced certainty into a matter, which, naturally,
'ubject to all the variety, arising from the caprice
lawyers, guided by obscure, and often imagina-
analogies. Lady Lennox, though born of a fe-
,d marriage, was one degree nearer the royal
o0d of England, than Mary. She was the daugh-
, Mary only the grandaughter of Margaret.
his was not the only advantage over Mary which
a" Lennox enjoyed. She was born in England,
^ by a maxim of law in that country, with re-
:" o private inheritances, " whoever is not born
l l:. and, or at leaPt of parents, who, at the

X 3 tilL.e

Bo o Kt time of his birth, were in the obedience of th

III. King of England, cannot enjoy any inheritancei

'2 _'_ the kingdom *." This maxim, Hales, an Eno
I5ó4' lith lawyer, produced in a treatise, which he pub

lifihd at this time, and endeavoured to applyitt,
the right of Il!ccrion to the Crown. In;iapriva
cause, there pretexts might have given rife to alcel
and doubtful litigation ; where a Crown was at flake
such nice difputcs and subtleties were to be avoid)
with the utmoiL care. If Darnly should happent
contract an alliance witil any of the powerfil famr
lies in Eng!.n:', or should publickly profess ti
Prozeft'ant relirion, these plausible and popular t
pics might be lo urged, as to prove fatal toti
pretensions of a roreigner, and of a Papist.

MARY was aware of all this; and in ordert

prevent any canger from that quarter, had ear
endeavoured to cultivate a friendly correfponde
with the fami!v of Lennox. In the year i562
both the Earl and the Lady Margaret were takenin
cuflody by Elizabeth's orders, on acccunt of th
holding a secret correspondence with the Scotti
Qceen.

Eiz....ll FR o.I the rime that Mary became sensible ofit
pl2-i-d' dificulties, nwhich w.ould attend her marrying a

w: reign Prince, f-e entered into a still closer connexil

wx.:ti the Earl of Lennox t, and invited him to r
turn into Scotland. This fihe endeavoured to 0cl
c i from Eli;ab.:h ; but a tranfacion of so m11,

S~~ . \~~~--.~T ,- ,
'

i

r ·i
K'-i

importance did not escape the notice of that dif- B o o K
cerning Princess. She observed, but did not in- I!I.
terrupt it. Nothing could fall in more per- 1~564
fectly with her views, concerning Scottish as-
fairs. She was pleated to ice the pride of the
Scottish Queen stoop, at last, to the thoughts of
taking a subjet to her bed. Darnly was in no situ-
ation to excite her jealousy, or her fears. His fa-
tier's estate lay in England, and by means of this
pledge, she hoped to keep the negociation entirely
in her own hands, to play the fame game of arti-
iice and delay, which she had planned out, if her
recommendation of Leicester had been more fa-
vourably received.

As before the union of the two crowns, no sub-
ject of one kingdom could pass into the other with-
out the permission of both Sovereigns; no sooner
cid Lennox, under pretence of prolecuting his
wife's claim upon the earldom of Angus, apply to
Elizabeth for her licence to go into Scotland, than
le obtained it. Together with it, she gave him
letaers, warmly recommending his person and cause
ro Nary's friendship and protection *. But, at the
fame time, as it was her manner to involve all her
tranlactions with regard to Scotland, in some de-
grsc of perplexity and contradiction; she warned
Aary, that this indulgence to Lennox might prove
iatal to herself, as his return could not fail of re-
viving the ancient animosity between him and the
lioule of Hamilton.

Keith, 255, 263.

X 4 'THI

B o O K THS admonition gave umbrage to Mary, anc

III. drew from her an angry reply, which occasioned
5 ..--~ for some time, a total interruption of all correspond.

1 ence between the two Queens *. Mary was not a

little alarmed at this; she both dreaded the effeds
of Elizabeth's resentment, and felt sensibly the dif.
advantage of being excluded from a free intercourse
with England, where her Ambassadors had, ail
along, carried on. with some success, lecret nego.
ciations, which increased the number of her parti.
zans, and paved her way towards the throne. In
order to remove the causes of the present difficulty,
Melvil was sent express to the court of England,
He found it no difficult matter to bring about a re-
concilement; and soon re-effablifhed the appearance,
but not the confidence of friendship, which was all
that had subsisted, for some time, between the two
Queens.

DURING this negociation, Elizabeth's profeflions

of love to Mary and Melvil's replies in name of his
Mistress, were made in the language of the warm-
elt and molt cordial friendship. But what Meivil
truly observes, with respect to Elizabeth, maybe
extended without injustice to both Queens. " There
was neither plain dealing, nor upright meaning, but
great dissimulation, envy and fear t-."

Lennoxar- LENNOX, however, in consequence of the licence
rlvc in which he had obtained, set out for Scotland, and
co:!Land.

was received by the Queen, not only with the re-
spect due to a nobleman, so nearly allied to the royal

* }-o:h, 2:3. ,:elv. 83. + Mehl. 104.

nily, but treated with a distinguished familiarity, B o o K
ich could not fail of inspiring him with more III.
evared hopes. The rumour of his son's marriage '^""
the Queen began to spread over the kingdom; and
ceves of all Scotland were turned upon him, as the
;heros their future Master. The Duke of Cha-
herault was the first to take the alarm. He con-
cred Lennox, as the ancient and hereditary ene-
vof the house of Hamilton; and, in his gran-
ir, (aw the ruin of himself and his friends. But
0Queen interposed her authority to prevent any
iontt rupture, and employed all her influence to
ng about an accommodation of their differences .

THE powerful family of Douglas no less dread-
i ennox's return, from an apprehension, that he
eid wrest the earldom of Angus out of their
ds. But the Queen, who well knew how dan-
.:us it would be to irritate Morton, and other
t men of that name, prevailed on Lennox to
xhafe their friendship, by allowing his Lady's
imn upon the earldom of Angus to drop t.

AFTER these preliminary steps, Mary ventured December.
ca:l a meeting of Parliament. The aft of for-
re, passed against Lennox in the year 1545,
S epealed, and he was publickly restored to the
ours and estate of his ancestors $.

THE ecclesiastical transactions of this year were
considerable. In the assemblies of the church, JDUe s5

Decem. z5,
Keith, 259. + Id. 268. Not. (). f ee Appen-

the

B o o K the fame complaints of the increase of idolatry,

III. fame representations concerning the poverty of
~'"'- clergy, were renewed. The reply which the Qui
T-c-,. v mad- to these, and her promises of redress, w
f'- :.-ou more satisfying to the Protefrants, than any ti

' had hitherto obtained . But, notwithstanding I
o declarations in their favour, they could not h

harbouring many suspicions concerning Mary's
signs against their religion. She had never on
coniented to hear any preacher of the reformedd
trine. She had abated nothing of her bigotted
tachrrent to the Romish faith. The genius of t
iuperf.itcin, averts, at all times, from tolerati
w.'as, in that age, fierce and unrelenting. M;
had given her friends on the Continent repeated
furances of her refulution to re-eftablith the Cati
lic church'-. She had industriously avoidedev
opportuni.y of ratifying the acts of Parliament 15
in favour of the Reformation. Even the protecti
which ever since her return, fle had afforded
Protefstnt rtligion, was merely temporary, and
clareJ by her ov.'n proclamation to be of force, o
" till she hould take some final order in the n
ter of religion .'' The vigilant zeal of the prea
crs wvas inattentive to none of these circumfrar
The coldneis of their principal leaders, who w
at this time, entirely devoted to the court, ad
to their jealousies and fears. These they uttere
the people, in language which they efleemed
able to the necefiity of the times, and which
Queen reckoned diirefpectful, and insolent.

Kcii; :, 3, 5'. t Carte, vol i.i 41i . '
5; -', .leo.

r

etilng of the General Assembly, Maitland pub- B o o K
,icly accused Knox of teaching seditious dotrine, III.
rcerning the right of fubjets to refif2 those So- '- "
er:dns, who trespass againfi the duty which they 5

,o the people. Knox was not backward to jus-
;V wihat he had taught. And upon this general
dC:rinc of refiflance, so jus in its own nature, but
b dalicate in its application to particular cafes, there
r:d a debate, which admirably displays the ta-
,nts and charaEter of both the difoutants; the
:I;eneis of the former, embellished with ltarning,
r prone to subtlety, the vigorous undcrftanding
ir te latter, delighting in bold sentiments, and fu-
.i cr o all fear *.

ITwo years had already been consumed, in fruic-
is negociations concerning the marriage of the Dimrnui.
o:tilh Queen. Mary had full leisure and oppor.- ion bohof

Elizabeth

Panit to discern the fallacy and deceit of all Eliza- and Mary,
thl's proceedings, with refpet to that affair. But, il'renar'd

to her ma:-

rorder to set the real intentions of the Englifll riage.
:en in a clear light, and to bring her to some
piict declaration of her sentiments, Mary, at Feb. S.
i, ntimatcd to Randolph, that, on condition her
giht of succession to the Crown of England were
libkly acknowledged, fihe was ready to yield to
jifoicirations of his Miflrefs in behalf of Leicef-
jr. Nothing could be farther than this from the
.d and intention of Elizabeth. The right of
cuiTlon was a mystery, which, during her whole

en, her jealousy preserved untouched, and unex-
,iu.d. She had promised, however, when she

!Knox, 349. Kei:h, z53.

sirs-

B o o . first began to interest herfeif in the marriage of th

III. Scottlfh Queen, all that was now demanded. Ho

c/'x/i to retreat with decency, how to elude her formerof
155 ser, was, on that account, not a little perplexing,

THE facility, with which Lord Darnly obtaine

permifflon to visit the court of Scotland, was owing
in all probability, to that embarrassment. Frcn
the time of Melvil's embafly, Lady Lennox hac
warmly solicited this liberty for her son. Elizao!l
was no stranger to the ambitious hopes, with whicr
that young nobleman flattered himftlf. She hai
received repeated advices from her Ministers, ofti'
ientiments, wvi-ich Mary began to entertain in h
favour *. It was entirely in her power, to prt
vent his fi;-ring out of London. In the prefae
conjuncture, however, nothing could be of mor
advanrage to her, than Darnly's journey into Sco
land. She had already brought one actor upond
stage, who, under her management, had, for
long time, amused the Scottish Queen. She hop
no lets absolutely, to direct the motions of Darnl)
who was likewise her subjec ; and again to invoiv
Mary in all the tedious intricacies of negociatioi
These motives determined Elizabeth and her MI
nifters to yield to the Solicitations of Lady Lennol

D7:1:y 3r- BUT this deep laid scheme was in a moment di
rive in concerted. Such unexpected events, as the fan

of poets ascribes to love, are, at tome times, real
produced by that passion. An affair, which hi
been the object of to many political intrigues, a

hj moved and interested so many Princes, was B o o K

Iaft decided by the sudden liking of two young III.
ferfns. Loid Darnly was, at this time, in the r65
it bloom and.vigour of youth. In beauty, and
racefulnefs of person, he furpafcd all his cotem-
o!aries; he excelled, eminently, in such arts, as
sdd ca! and elegance to external form, and which
c:able it not only to dazzle, but to please. Mary ains the
Zs of an age, and of a temper, to feel the full Q_,en's
ow'er of there accomplishments. The impreifon
hich Lord Darnly made upon her, was visible,
onm the time of their first interview. The whole Feb. 3,.
tfinefs of the court was to amuse, and entertain
iis iliIltrious guect * ; and in all those scenes of
icty, Darnly, whose qualifications were altoge-
[h:r fuprficial and showy, appeared to great ad-
rantage. His conquest of the Queen's heart be-
rne compleat; and inclination now prompted her
co.nclude a marriage, the first thoughts of which
ad been suggested by considerations merely po-
:ical.

ELIZABETH contributed, and perhaps not with-
otd:dfin, to increase the violence of this pafTion.
con after Darnly's arrival in Scotland, fhc, in re-
trn to that mieffige, whereby Mary had signified
:r lingnefs to accept of Leicester, gave an an-
wer, in such terms, as plainly unravelled her ori-
i5,l i::tention in that intrigue S1. She promised, if
he Scotll Queen's marriage with Leicester should
a;e Flace, to advance him to great honours; but
.i:i rcg:.rd to her title to the English succession,

' .:, (9. t i Kc:h, 2-o. Append. 1;8.

If.e

B o o K fie Cwould neither susser any legal inquiry to b

III. nade concerning it, nor permit it to be publicly
J/' recognized, till she herfeil should declare her refoj

' lution never to narry. Notwithstanding Elizabeth',

former promills, Mlary had reason to expefteve
thing continccd in this reply ; her high spirit, how
ever, coul]l not bear, with patience, such a crue
diifovrUr of the contempt, the artifice, and mock
cry, w:th whichi, under the veil of friendship, fb
had been so long abuied. She burst into tears o
indignation, and exprefled, with the utmost biter
nv!s, her sense of that disingenuous craft, whit
liad been employedi to deceive her*.

Ti : nr.. Lrall eiSec. of this indignation was toad

to the ir';1:uofity -ivh which flie pursued herow
fic-ir -. i;'ndel by resentment, as well as bylor
fh. ob.:.;-;.: no dei-Its in the man, whom fke ha
choicf and began to take the necefiary steps to
.wards acci:nmpl:ishing her design, with all the impa
tience, nr.irj-l to those paflions.

As L..r:i; .-.. s- o nea-rly related to the Que

r '. c-encn la':,' .-r ;l it n ceffary to obtain the Pope
difien!. i:on, be-ore the cilebracion of the marrig
Fcr t-lis Furp:fe, i!:e early set on foot a negoc
tion v.i:a the court of iRome t.

T i .-:--', SHE V-S bw lfy, at the fame time, in procurin
:: .':t'. cc.ifnct cf the Franch King and his i.nohe
r:.-::::. jl:1.-;-:- communicated her design, and the motiv

v :c'n due:ermined her choice, to Caftelnau the Frenc

' r; :':, A.':enr'. 159,. ±t Card.t 395,

A'
1~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~t

,bafitdor, she employed him, as the most pro- B o o K
person, to bring his court to fall in with her III.
:ws. Among other arguments to this purpose, C-~.4

Z.D t:> 1565.

afelnau mentioned Mary's attachment to Darnly,
hich he represented to be so violent and deep-
ted, that it was no longer in her own power to
alk oft the match *. Nor were the French Mi-
ers backward in encouraging Mary's passion.
er pride would never stoop to an alliance with a
bjeci of France. By this choice, they were delio
rd from the apprehension of a match with any
the Aultrian Princes, as well as the danger of
close an union with Elizabeth; and as Darnly
rosesTd the Roman Catholic religion, this suited
bigotted schemes which that court had adopted.

WHILE Mary was endeavouring to reconcile foDany ds-
Ein courts to a measure which she had so much at guss feve-

ra31 of tilhe

rart; Darnly, and his father, by their behaviour, nobles,
relraifing up enemies at home, to obflruE it.
ernox had, during the former part of his life, dif-
vered no great compass of abilities, or political wis-
om; and appears to have been a man of a weak un-
:rianiing, and violent pafions. Darnly was not
perior to his father in understanding, and all his
Ctons were still more impetuous +. To there, he
ded( that insolence, which the advantage of exter-
alform, when accompanied with no quality more
uable, is apt to inspire. Intoxicated with the
)ren's favour, he began already to assume the
'-ugh'inefs of a King, and to put on that imperi-

Ca'r!nr. 454 -1- Keifh, 272, 273.

0015

B o o K ous air, which majesty itself can scarce render to

III. lerable.

part: ulal;y IT was by the advice, or at leafs with the consen
Murray. Of Murray, and his party, that Lennox had bee

invited into Scotland *; and yet, no sooner did
acquire a firm footing in that kingdom, than
began to enter into secret cabals with rhofe nobl
men, who were known to be avowed enemies
Murray, and with regard to religion, to be eith
neutrals, or favourers of Popery-, Darnly, iti
more imprudent, allowed some rash expreffionsco
cerning those favours, which the Queen's boun
had conferred upon Murray, to escape him {.

BUT, above all there, the familiarity whichDar

ly cultivated with David Rizio the Italian, cont
buted to increase the suspicion and difguftof
nobles.

s r-* ;,f TJiE low birth, and indigent condition oft
R z:3', rs- man, placed him in a flacion, in which he ou
'our' naturally to have remained unknown to pofteri

But what fortune called him to aft, and to susser
Scorland, obliges history to descend from its d
-iity, and to record his adventures. He was
son of a musician in Turin, and having accomp
nied the Piedmontefe Ambassador into Scotlan
gained admission into the Queen's family, by
ikill in music. His servile condition had tau
him fuppleneis of spirit, and insinuating manne

r.x, ,-. _eiu, :- . t K.eith, 27z. : Id

He quickly crept into the Queen's favour, and her B o o K
rench Secretary happening to return at that time III,
It his own country, was preferred by her to that' '
fce. I-e now began to make a figure in court, 1565
ad to appear as a man of weight and consequence.
he whole train of suitors and expectants, who
ave an extreme sagacity in discovering the paths,
vhich lead most direcly to success, applied to him.
is recommendations were observed to have great
eucnce over the Queen, and he grew to be con-
dered, not only as a favourite, but as a Minister.
or was Rizio careful to abate that envy, which
ways attends such an extraordinary and rapid change
!fortune. He studied, on the contrary, to dif-
ay the whole extent of his favour. He asseted
atalk often, and familiarly, with the Queen in
bli, He equalled the greatest and most opulent

ibjes, in richness of dress, and in the number of

isattendants. He discovered, in all his behavi-
r, that aftiming insolence, with which unmerited
operity inspires an ignoble mind. It was with
eutmot indignation that the nobles beheld the
wer; it was with the utmost difficulty, that they
rated the arrogance of this unworthy minion.
Ten in the Queen's pretence they could not for-
r treating him with marks of contempt. Nor
ta i his exorbitant power alone, which exasperated
ecots. They confidered him, and not without
on, as a dangerous enemy to the Proteflant re-
gin, and suspeCted that he held for this purpose,
siet correspondence with the court of Rome *

* Buchan. 340. Melv. 1074
VOL. ,. y Il

B o o K IT was Darnly's misfortune to fall under the ma

III. nagrment of this man, who, by flattery and aifi.
'-""'- duitv, easily gained on his vanity, and inexperience.
D^-.: . Rizio's whole influence on the Queen was employ.
co.nea.n ed in his behalf, and contributed, without doubt

towards establishing him more firmly in her assec-
tions *. But whatever benefit he might reap from
his patronage, it did not counterbalance the con.
tempt, and even the infamy, to which he was exJ
posed, on account of his familiarity with such ani
upfsart.

THOUGH Darnly daily made progress in th

Queen's affetions, she conducted herself, however
with such prudent reserve, as to impose on Ran.
dolph the English Resident, a man otherwise shrewd
and penetrating. It appears from his letters atthi
period, that he entertained not the leat fufpicio
of the intrigue which was carrying on; and gav
his court repeated assurances, that the Scottfl
Queen had no design of marrying Darnly-. li
the midst of his security, Mary dispatched Mai
land to signify her intention to Elizabeth, andt
folicik her consent to the marriage with Darnl
This embassy was the first thing, which opened th
eyes of Randolph.

April is. ELIZABETH affected the greatest furprize at th
Elizabeth sudden resolution of the Scottish Queen, but with
declares a- -
gains the out reason. The train was laid by herself, and sI

-eW, e had no cause to wonder when it took effet. Sh
wlh.Darn-exprtfed, at the fame time, her disapprobation

* '.clv, In, i Keith, 275. and Appcnd. 159

te match, in the strongest terms; and pretended B o o K
toforcfee many dangers and inconveniencies arising II.
fom it, to both kingdoms. But this, too, was ,--,
mere affetation. Mary had often and plainly de-
clared her resolution to marry. It was impossible
he could make any choice more inoffensive. The
danger of introducing a foreign interest into Britain,
which Elizabeth had b juRtly dreaded, was entirely
a0idedl. Darnly, though allied to both Crowns,
and possesed of lands in both kingdoms, could be

rnnidable to neither. It is evident, from all thege
arcumftances, that Elizabeth's apprehensions of

grger could not possibly be serious ; and that, in
ill her violent declarations against Darnly, there was
rnch more of grimace than of reality *.

THERE were not wanting, however, political
motives of much weight, to induce that wife Prin-
!ess to put on the appearance of great displeasure.
kMary, intimidated by this, might perhaps delay
her marriage; which Elizabeth desired to obltrut
with a weakness that little suited the dignity of her
mind, and the elevation of her character. Betides,
the tranquillity of her own kingdom was the great
dift of Elizabeth's policy; and by declaring her
' Lven the Hiflorians of that age acknowledge, that the

otss.le of the Scottish Queen with a subjeól was far from be-

idi;.grccablc to Elizabeth. Knox, 369, 373. Buchan. 339.
aielnau, who, at that time, was well acquainted with the idi-
togues of both the British courts, asserts, upon grounds of great
biabiiity, that the match was wholly Elizabeth's own work;
~'i,;. +')2. and that /he rejoiced at the accomplishment ofit,
'to rom the lettets of her own Ambafladors. Keith, 28c,

Y 2 dif

3--r
B o o . diffatisfacion with Mary's condut, she hoped t

III. alarm that party in Scotland, which was attached

v to the English interert, and to encourage such ol
'55' the nobles, as secretly disapproved the match, openi

ly to oppose it. The feeds of discord would, b
this means, be scattered through that kingdo
Interline commotions might arise. Amidst the
Marv could form none of those dangerousfchem
to which the union of her people might h
promptel her Elizabeth would become theu
Fire between the Scottish Queen, and her conten
ing subjects. And England might look on, wi
fecuritv, while a storm, which she had raif
wafted the only kingdom, which could poffiblyd
turb its peace.
Ma>y . IN prosecution of this scheme, she laid bes

.her Privy Council the message from the Scot
Queen, and consulted them with regard to the
fwer she mtould return. Their determination, it
easy to conceive, was perfectly conformable to
fccret views. They drew up a remonftranceagai
the intended match, full of the imaginary dang
with wh'ch that event threatened the kingdom

Sen. s
Throgmor- N-or did she think it enough, to signify herdil
ton- 0'ib probation of the measure, either by Maitl

Mary's Ambassador, or by Randolph, her
Resident in Scotland; in order to add more
nity to the farce which she chose to a&, the
pointed Sir Nicholas Throgmorton her Ambaffa
Extraordinary. She commanded him todeclare
the strongest terms, her diffatisfation with the

' Kcil, 274. See Append. NM X.

g1i

which Mary proposed to take; and, at the fame B o o K
lime, to produce the determination of the Privy III.
Council, as an evidence that the sentiments of the

il

nation were not different from her own. Not long 1563.
ifer, she confined Lady Lennox as a prisoner first
i her own house, and then sent her to the Tower *.

INTELLIGENCE of all this reached Scotland, be-
fore the arrival of the Englifli Ambassador. In the
firltranfports of her indignation, Mary resolved,
ro longer, to keep any measures with Elizabeth;
and sent orders to Maitland, w.ho accompanied
Throgmorton, to return instantly to the English
ourt, and, in her name, to declare to Elizabeth,
hat after having been amused 'b long to so little
purpose; after having been fooled, and imposed on
fgrofsly by her artifices; she was now resolved to
gatify her own inclination, and to aflk no other con-
int, but that of her own fubje'ts, in the choice of

husband. Maitland, with his usual sagacity,
frefaw all the effects of such a rash and angry mef-
e, and ventured rather to incur the difpleafire
fhisMiftrefs, by dilbbeying her commands, than
obe made the instrument of tearing asunder, so
iolently, the few remaining ties, which ifill linked
together the two Queens t.

MARY herself soon became sensible of her error.
he received the English Ambassador with refpeót:
ulfified her own conduct with decency; and though
unalterable in her resolution, she affedted a wonder-

' Keth, Append, i6r: i Id. 16c.

Y 3 ful

B o o K ful solicitude to reconcile Elizabeth to the rneaure

III. and even pretended, out of complaisance toward
I-'6 her, to put off the consummation of the marria

'-65 for some months *. It is probable, however, ha

the want of the Pope's dispensation, and the profpe
of gaining the content of her own fubjec's, we
the real motives of this delay.
I.urray's THIS consent Mary laboured with the utmost in

.,cn :o duftry to obtain. The Earl of Murray was th

person in the kingdom, whose concurrence was
the greatest importance; but she had reason to sea
that it would not be procured without extreme dili
culkv. From the time of Lennox's return int
Scotland, Murray perceived that the Queen's assec
ticns began gradually to be estranged fromhi
Darnly, Athol, Rizio, all the court favourit
combined against him. His ambitious spirit coul
not brook this diminution of his power, which
former services had so little merited. He retired i
to the country, and gave way to rivals, with who
he was unable to contend t. The return of t
Earl of Bothwell, his avowed enemy, who had
accused of a design upon his life, and who had rei
ed for some time in foreign countries, obliged hi
to attend to his own safety. No intreaty oft
Queen could persuade him to a reconcilement wi
that noben.an. He insisted on having him broug
to a -ubiic trial, and prevailed, by his importuni
to have a day fixed for it. Bothwell durst not a
pear in opposition to a man, who came to the pl

'c,.1, AF=nds :x S. t Id. 2,2, 274. Append. '

4~~~~~~~~

oftrial, attended by 5000 of his followers on horse- B o o K
back. He was once more constrained to leave the III.
ingdom ; but, by the Queen's command, the fen-
tence of outlawry, which is incurred by non-appear-
ance, was not pronounced against him *.

MARY, sensible, at the fame time, of how much May s,
importance it was, to gain a subject so powerful
and so popular as the Earl of Murray, invited him
back to court, and received him with many demon-
Rrations of refpea and confidence. At last she de-
fired him to set an example to her other fubjeóts by
Subscribing a paper, containing a formal approba-
don of her marriage with Darnly. Murray had
many reasons to hesitate, and even to withhold his
afent, Darnly had not only undermined his credit
Rith the Queen, but discovered, on every occasion,
arooted aversion to his person. By consenting to
his elevation to the throne, he would give him lich
an accession of dignity and power, as no man wil-
lingly bestows on an enemy. The unhappy confe-
quences which might follow upon a breach with
England were, likewise, of considerable weight with
Murray. He had always openly preferred a confe-
deracy with England, before the ancient alliance
with France. By his means chiefly, this change in
thefyftem of national politics had been brought
about. A league with England had been establish-
td; and he could not think of sacrificing, to a rafl
and youthful paflion, an alliance of so much utility
to the kingdom ; and which, he and the other nobles

* Keith, ibid. 16o.

Y 4 wc-e

B o o were bound, by every obligation, to maintaine

III. Nor was the interest of religion forgotten on this
C'" occasion. Mary, though surrounded by Protestant

Counsellors, had found means to hold a dangerou
correspondence with foreign Catholics. She ha
even courted the Pope's proteRion, who had fen
her a subsidy of 8000 crowns t. Though Murra
had hitherto endeavoured to bridle the zeal of tr
reformed clergy, and to set the Queen's condutii
the most favourable light, yet her obtfinate adh
rence to her own religion, could not fail of alarm
ing him, and by her resolution to marry a papi
the only hope of reclaiming her, which remained
was for ever cut off. Each of these consideration
had its influence on Murray, and all of them deter
mined him to decline complying, at that time, wit
the Queen's request.

'f- T4,. THE convention of nobles, which was affembl
A C.n- en- a few days after, discovered a greater disposition
tLon oif he
nosb:s ap- gratify the Queen. Many of them, without hefita
Fe -r-of tion, expressed their approbation of the intende
x:-"ae match; but as others were startled at the fame dan

gers which had alarmed Murray, or were influence
by his example, to refuse their content, anoth
Convention was appointed at Perth, in order tod
liberate more fully concerning this matter :.

MEAN while, Mary gave a public evidence

her own inclination, by conferring upon Darn
titles of honour peculiar to the royal family. Th

Keit:, 169. t Id. z2c, Melv. 114.
T Kci:h, zSj. Knox, j73'

OPC.

,pption she had hitherto met with, and the many B o o .
rivances employed to thwart and disappoint her III.
lnation, produced their usual effeEt on her heart, óV'
confirmed her passion, and increased its vio- 156
e. he simplicity of that age imputed an assec-
, so excessive, to the influence of witchcraft*.
as owing, however, to no other charm, than
irrefiflible power of youth and beauty, over a
1un and tender heart. Darnly grew giddy with
isprolperity. Flattered by the love of a Queen,
,d the applause of many among her fubjedts, his
tural haughtiness and insolence became infupport-
e, and he could no longer bear advice, far less
ontradicion. Lord Ruthven, happening to be
firis person who informed him that Mary, in
er to tooth Elizabeth, had delayed, for some
e, creating him Duke of Albany, he, in a fren-
of rage, drew his dagger and attempted to flab

. It required all Mary's attention, to prevent

is falling under that contempt, to which such be-
riour deservedly exposed him.
Ix no scene of her life was ever Mary's own ad- Mary's ad-

dress in

is more remarkably displayed. Love sharpened gaining her
'r invention, and made her study every method of ruja'
iring her subje&s. Many of the nobles she wor
vher address, and more by her promises. On
me the bellowed lands, to others She gave new
les of honour . She even condescended to court
Protestant clergy; and having invited three of
eir fuperintendants to Stirling, she declared, in
Keiih, 283. t Ibid. Append. 160. T Ibid. 283.

strong

B o o K frong terms, her resolution to protect their religiol

III. expressed her willingness to be present at a confl
-6-
r rence upon the points in doctrine which were di

' puted between the Protestants and Papists, and wei

so far as to show some desire to hear such of the
preachers, as were most remarkable for modera
tion *. By these arts, the Queen gained wonder
fully upon the people, who, unless their jealousy l
railed by repeated injuries, are always ready to vie
the actions of their Sovereign with an indulgent eyi

ON the other hand, Murray and his affocia

were plainly the dupes of Elizabeth's policy. Sl
talked in so high a strain, of her displeasure at th
intended match; she treated Lady Lennox with
much rigour; she wrote to the Scottish Queen
such strong terms; the recalled the Earl of Lenn
and his son, in such a peremptory manner, andwi
Iuch revere denunciations of her vengeance, ifth
should presume to disobey t; that all there exp
sions of aversion fully persuaded them of her
cerity. This belief fortified their scruples with
spect to the match, and encouraged them to opp
it. They began with forming among themfde
bonds of confederacy and mutual defence; they
tered into a secret correspondence with the Engli
Resident, in order to secure Elizabeth's affiftan
when it mhould become needful $; they endeavou
to fill the nation with such apprehensions of d
ger, as might counterbalance the influence of th
arts, which the Queen had employed.

Knox, 373. t Keith, 28z, zS6.
4. Ibd. ;S8, z9:, 25z.

1BrttS)

BESIDES there intrigues, there were secretly car- B o o K
eon, by both parties, dark designs of a more crimi- II.
nature, and more suitable to the spirit of the age. r
rnly, impatient of that opposition, which he im- Schemes of
td wholly to Murray, and resolving at any rate Darl"y and

* " *' Murray a-

get rid of such a powerful enemy, formed a plot gainit each
assassinate him, during the meeting of the Con- the'
tion at Perth. Murray, on his part, despairing
prevenring the marriage by any other means,
, together with the Duke of Chatelherault, and
Earl of Argyll, concerted measures for seizing
arnlv, and carrying him a prisoner into England.

IF either of these conspiracies had taken effect, this
vention might have been attended with confequen-
sextremely tragical; but both were rendered abor-
re, by the vigilance or good fortune of those againit
horn they were formed. Murray, being warned of
danger by some retainers to the court, who still
toured his interest, avoided the blow, by notgoing
Perth. Mary, receiving intelligence of Murray's
arprizc, retired with the utmoti expedition, along
thDarnly, to the other fide of Forth. Confci-
s, on both fides, of guilt, and inflamed with re-
tinent, it was impossible they could either forget
violence, which themselves had meditated, or
rgive the injuries, intended against them. From

monent, all hope of reconcilement was at an
d, and their mutual enmity burif out with every
mptom of implacable hatred *.

ON

The reality of these two opposite conspiracies has given
: to many disputes and much contradition. Some deny

that

4

B oo K Ox 0 Mary's return to Edinburgh, the fumnmon

III. her vassals by proclamation, and solicited them t

6

-' her letters, to repair thither in arms, for the pR
i565.
My f, m tetion of her person against her foreign and d(
mons her mefi
vasals to
take arms
against that any design was formed against the life of Murray; otht
Murray. call in question the truth of the conspiracy against Darnl

There seem, however, to be good reasons for believing bot
though the zeal and credulity of party-writers have added
each, many exaggerated circumstances. The following ar
ments render it probable, that some violence was intended
gainft Murray.

I. This is positively asserted by Buchanan, 34+. 2. TheEn

lish Resident writes to Cecil, that Murray was assuredly info
ed that a design was laid to murder him at Perth, and defcri
the manner in which this' plot was to have been execu
Keith, 287. 3. Murray himfe!fconftant!y and publicklyfi
ed, that such a design was formed againtl his life. Keith, A
io8. And though he was called upon by the Queento br
legal evidence of his assertion, and a safe condut offered
while he came to court for that purpose; Ibid. yet whoe
confiders Murray's situation, and the spirit of thote whom
in court at that time, will scarce deem it any proof of his g
that he did not chute to riik his person on such security. 4.
furious passions of Darnly, the fierceness of his relentment, wh
fcrupied at no violence, and the manners of the age, render
inputation of such a crime less improbable.

II. That Mlurray and his affociares had resolved to fe

Darnly's person appears with still greater certainty; i. F'
the express testimony of M M\il, r z. although Bucha
p. 341, and Knox, p. 3-7, assec, without any reason, tore
sent this an an idle rumour. 2. The question wias put to
dolph, whether the Governor of Berwick would receive Len
and his son, if they were carried prisoners to that place.
pla;il. shews, that some such design was in hand, and Rand
did not discourage it by the anfiver which he gave, Keith, 2
;. The precipitation, with which the (.een retired, and

eftic enemies *. She was obeyed with all the B o o x
romptnefs and alacrity, with which fubjefts run to III.

in Ihe gave for this sudden flight, are mentioned by Ran- I565.
.h. Keith, z91. 4. A great part of the Scottish nobles,
damong these the Earls of Argyll and Rothes, who were
infeives privy to the design, aftert the reality of the confpira-

Good. vol. ii. 558.

All thlee circumstances leave little room to doubt of the truth
both conspiracies. But we may observe how far this proof,
ough drawn from public records, falls fIort, on both fides, of
!aland formal evidence. Buchanan and Randolph, in their
cunts of the conspiracy against Murray, differ widely in al-
l eecry circumstance. The accounts of the attempt upon
rly, arc not more confiflent. Melvil alledges, that the de-
of the conspirators was to carry Darnly a prisoner into Eng-
; the proposal made to Randolph agrees with this. Ran-
Iph fays, that they intended to carry the Queen to St. An-
i.'s, and Darnly to Caille Campbell. The Lords, in their
idaration, affirm the design of the conspirators to have been to
urder Darnly and his father, to confine the Queen in Loch-
eduring life, and to usurp the government. To believe
plicitly, whatever they find in an ancient paper, is a folly to
:A, Antiquaries are extremely prone. Ancient papers, how-
t, often contain nothing more than the slanders of a party,

the lie of the day. The declaration of the nobles referred
isofthis kind; it is plainly rancorous, and written in the very
a of faction. Many things asserted in it, are evidehtly false,
exaggerated. Let Murray and his confederates be as ambi-
us as sve can fuppole, they mufl have had some pretences,
d r!atfible ones too, before they could venture to imprison
ie Sovereign for life, and to seize the reins of government;
,at that time, the Qgeen's conduct had afforded no colour-
e excuse for proceeding to such extremities. It is, likewise,
aarkable, that in all the proclamations against Murray, of
ich lo many are published in Keith, Appendix 1o8, &c. nci-
r the violent attempt upon Darnly, ncr that which he is al-
t'kd to have formed againit the Queen herself, are ever once
e:.;,:!acd.

* Keith, 258.

defend

B o o 0K defend a mild and popular administration. T}

III. popularity, however, the owed in a great mneafu
565 to Murray, who had dire&ed her adminilfrah

55with great prudence. But the crime of oppofi

her marriage, obliterated the memory of his form
services; and Mary, impatient of contradic'ioj
and apt to confider those who disputed her will,;
enemies to her person, determined to let him fe
the whole weight of her vengeance. For this pui
pose she summoned him to appear before her upo
a short warning, to answer to such things as fhouldE
laid to his charget. At this very time, Murral
and the Lords who adhered to him, were affemb
at Stirling, to deliberate what course they bou
hold, in such a difficult conjuncture. But the
rent of popular favour ran so strongly againt the
and, notwithstanding some fears and jealousies, t
prevailed in the nation such a general disposition
gratify the .Cueen, in a matter which so nearlyco
cerned her, hat, without coming to any otherc
clufion, than to implore the Queen of England'spr
teEtion, the) put an end to their ineffetual con
tations, and returned every man to his own houf

TOGETHER with this discovery of the weak

of her enemies, the confluence of her fubjets fro
all corners of the kingdom, afforded Mary an ag
able proof of her own strength. While the Qu
was -in this prosperous situation, ihe determined
bring to a period, an affair, which had so long
grossed her heart, and occupied her attention.

* Keith, Append. ioS.

I

2gth July, the married Lord Darnly. The ce- B o o K
ny was performed in the Queen's chapel, ac- III.
ing to the rites of the Romish church; the 5
F's bull, dispensing with their marriage, having Celebrates
npreviouny obtained *. She issued, at the her mai-
me time, proclamations, conferring the title ofDarnly.
igof Scots upon her husband, and command-
g tat henceforth all writs at law ihould run in
joint names of King and Queen t. Nothing
be a stronger proof of the violence of Mary's
e, or the weakness of her councils, than this last

Whether she had any right to chufe a hus-
, without consent of Parliament, was, in that
,a matter of some dispute :; that the had no right
confer upon him, by her private authority, the
and dignity of King; or, by a simple procla-
tion, to raise her huiband to be the Master of
people, seems to be beyond all doubt. Fran-
II. indeed, bore the fame title. It was not,
ever, the gift of the Queen, but of the nation
the consent of Parliament was obtained, before
ventured to assume it. Darnly's condition, as a
jest, rendered it frill more necessary to have the
urrence of the supreme Council in his favour.
ch a violent and unpreceden'ted firetch of prero-
ive, as the substituting a proclamation in place
an aft of Parliament, might have jnftly alarmed
nation. But the Queen possessed so entirely the
idence of her iubjeats, that, notwithstanding all
clamours of the malecontents, no symptoms of
neral discontent appeared on that account.

Keih, 307. t Anderson, I. 3i. See Append. N0 Xr.
3 Bcchan. 3TEEN

EvEN

B o o K EVxEN amidlt that scene of joy, which always ac

III. companies successful love, Mary did not susser th
t 7- j course of her vengeance againfl the maleconten

I5 ' nobles to be interrupted. Three days after th

marriage, Murray was again summoned to court
under the severest penalties, and upon his non-ap
pearance, the rigour of justice took place, andhl
wa-s dec;ared an out-law . At the fame time, thi
Queen set at liberty Lord Gordon, who everfin,
his father's iniurredtion in the year 1562, had bee
detained a prilbner; she recalled the Earl of Suthe4
land, who, on account of his concern in that coi
ipiracy, had fled into Slanders; and ffie permit
Bothwell to return again into Scotland. Thefir
and last of these, were among the mol pwer
iubjec&s in the kingdom, and all of them anima
vwih implacable hatred to Murray, whom th
edeemed the enemy of their families, and the auth
of their own sufferings. This common hatred
came the foundation cf the strictest union with
Queen, and gained them an ascendant over all
courcils. Murray himself confidered this confe
racy with his avowed enemies, as a more certain
dication than any measure she had yet taken, of
inexorable resentment.

..--.e, a- TIHE malecontents had not yet openly taken
gaI.r ":L-- arms . But the Queen having ordered her sI
ray and h:i

cLaes. je

" Keith, 309, 310.

- After :her fr-uitefs consultation in Stirling, the Lords

tired tj the. owin houses. Kci;h, ,ci. Murray was rtillat
Andrew' s on Ju)y zz. Keith, 306. EBy the places of redi

s to march against them, they'were driven toB o o K
thelalt extremity. They found themselves unable I1I.
make head against the numerous forces, which 65
laryhad assembled.; and fled into Argylefhire, in
peaation of aid from Elizabeth, to whom they
d ecretly dispatched a messenger, in order to im-
Iore her immediate assistance *.

MEAN while, Elizabeth endeavoured to emba- Elizabeth
Mary, by a new declaration of disgust at her interpose.
nduft. She blamed both her choice of Lord vour
rnly, and the precipitation with which she had
ncluded the marriage. She required Lennox and
Irny, whom the fill called her fubjets, to re-
m into England; and at the fame time, the warm-
interceded in behalf of Murray, whose behaviour
represented to be not only innocent, but laud-
te. his message, so mortifying.to the pride of
Queen, and so full of contempt for her husband,
:srendered iill more insupportable, by the petu-
t and saucy demeanour of Tamworth, the per-
who delivered it t. Mary vin'dicated her own
tdut with warmth, but with great strength of
son; and rejected the interceflion in behalf of
urray, not without sign, of resentment at Eliza-

tp. ppointed for the inhabitants of the different counties,
r, , it appears that the Queen's intention was to march
i.tCe. tie county in which Murray, Rothes, Kirkaldy, and
rciier -of the malicoiitents resided. Keith, 3io. Their
l': .!to t.: welt, Keith, 312, prevented this expedition, and
*:r.el rendezvous was altered.' Keith, 30.

3'2;;i , , Knox, 30. t Carnd. 398.
1. I, Z beth's

B o'o K beth's pretending to intermeddle in the internal go.

III. vernment of her kingdom *.
I565.

SHE did not, on that account, intermit in the

leafr the ardour, with which she pursued Murray
and his adherents' . They now appeared openlyin
arms; and havi!g received a frmall supply in monei
from Elizabeth i, were endeavouring to raise thei'
followers in the western counties. But Mary's vi
gilance hindered them from assembling in any conj
fiderable body. All her military operations, at that
time, were concerted with wildom, executed witd
vigouor, and attended with success. In order toen
courage her troops, ihe herlelf marched alonga'it
them, rode with loaded piRols I!, and endured
the fatigues of war with admirable fortitude. He
alacrity inspired her forces with an invincible ref
lution, which, together with their superiority i
number, deterred the malecontents from facing the
in the field; but having artfully passed the Queen'
army, they marched with great rapidity to Edi
burgh, and endeavoured to rouze the inhabitants
that city to arms. The Queen did not susser the
to remain long unmolested ; and, on her approac
they were forced to abandon that place, and rei
in confusion towards the western borders §.

Keith, Append. 99.

t The mot coi-.derable persons who joined Murray, we

tne Duke cf Cnaielherault, the Earls of Argyll, Genca
Ro:hes; Lord Boyd and Cchilerce; the Lairds of Grar
Cur. i.glrnmhed, Balcomie, Carmylie, Lawers, Bar, Dreghoi
Pittarrow, Conmp:ro'ler, ann3 the Tutor of Pitcur. Knox, 3S

I.G-:, ox,;o. I K1i:ih, Append. 64. Id. 315.

. it was uncertain, for some time, what rout B o o K
!J hd taken, Mary employed that interval in pro- III.
:,( for the security of the counties in the heart 'i'"
/:he kingdom. She seized the places of firength Tiey ae
c!i belonged to the rebels; and obliged the con- ortied t
table Barons in those shires, which she most sus- England.
:-l, to join in alfociations for her defcnce *
ing tius left all the country behind her in
quiility, she, with an army 8,ooo strong,
c:ed towards Dumfries, where the rebels then

Dui. Itng their retreat, they had sent letters
CSr (tuen, from almost every place where they

,:J, lull of fubmision, and containing various
:;ies towards an accommodation. But Mary,
od0:ermined not to let flip such a favourable op-
:.ni:y of crushing the mutinous spirit of her sub-
, rejec:cd them with disdain. As fle advanced,
i.alecontents retired: and, having received no
;iual aid from Elizabeth t, they despaired of oaob. .,o
0tC!clr means of safety, fled into England, and
:themselves under the protection of the Earl of
.o:d, Warden of the marches.

0OTHING, which Bedford's personal friendflip They meet
;>urray could supply, was wanting to render with unex-

peeled ill

*retreat agreeable. But Elizabeth herself treat- teatment
nm w ith extreme negle. She had fully gain- from liEa-
r-enrd, and, by their means, had excited such
idand jealoulies among the Scots, as would,
i probability, long distract and weaken Mary's
:cs. ilcr bufinels now, was to save appear-
i'* - ..i'..(d. r 13. t See Appendix, No XII. XlII.

Z ances

B o o K beth's pretending to intermeddle in the internal go-.

III. vernment of her kingdom i'
565.: SHE did not, on that account, intermit in th

leaif the ardour, with which fle pursued Murra
and his adherents'-. They now appeared openlvi
arms; and having received a small supply in mon
from Elizabeth , t'cre endeavouring to raifethei
followers in the welfern counties. But Mary'svi
gilance hindered them from aslembling in any con
fiderable body. All her military operations, at tha
time, were concerted with wisdom, executed wit
vigour, and attended with success. In order to en
courage her troops, fle hcrfelf marched alongvit
them, rode with loaded pistols 1, and endured
the fatigues of war with admirable fortitude. He
alacrity inspired her forces with an invincible refo
lution, which, together with their superiority
number, deterred the maleconrents from facing the
in the field ; but having artfully pafied the Queen
army, they marched with great rapidity to Edin
burgh, and endeavoured to rouze the inhabitants

.
. S that city to arms. The Queen did not susser the

to remain long unnolefted ; and, on her approac
they were forced to abandon that place, and re
in confiuion towards the western borders §.

Kei:h, Append. 99.

i The mo:t considerable persons who joined Murray, we

the Duke cf C'ha'elherault, the Earls of Argyll, Glencar
Re:hes; Lord Boyd and Ochiliree; the Lairds of Grac
Cu-. in-;'2nhead, Balcomie, Carmylie, Lawers, Bar, DreghoF
Pi:tar:o'., Comptro'ler, an3 the Tutor of Pitcur. Knox, j

.r .a:;, .- o. 11 Kzith, ApSend. 6j. Id. 3

gs

. it was uncertain, for some time, what rout B o o K
iv liLd taken, Mary employed that interval in pro- I1I.
i.rg for the security of the counties in the heart --r
:'e kingdom. She seized the places of strength Thcy ae
;ici belonged to the rebels; and obliged the con-

Cbt'edl°

:ra!r Baronss in those shires, which she most sus- England.
:Z, to ijin in afoiciations for her defence .
i:'i. thuls left all the country behind her in
lnliity, file, with an army 18,ooo firong,
c;cld towards Dumfries, where the rebels then

: Dining their retreat, they had sent letters

:C Qieen, from almost every place where they
:.J, lull of fiubmifflon, and containing various
ra;'es towards an accommodation. But Mary,
de:erlmined not to let flip such a favourable op-
;niy of crushing the mutinous spirit of her sub-
V, rejectcd them with disdain. As she advanced,
mr.alecontents retired: and, having received no
.l aid from Elizabeth , they despaired ofoeob. 2o.
ctcr means of safety, fled into England, and
[!hemfelves under the protecion of the Earl of
o-d, Warden of the marches.

OT:INc, which Bedford's personal friendihip They meet
.".lurray could supply, was wanting to render 'vitl ux-
retreat agreeable. But Elizabeth herself treat- t,,eatm
^l c.with extreme neglct. She had fully gain- teor iEli a-
'rend, and, by their means, had excited such
Gd and jealousies among the Scots, as would,
i probability, long distract and weaken Mary's
':::s. lLcr business now, was to save appear-

- .:.;Tend. 13. ti See Appendix, N XI. XTIIL

Z 3 ances,

B o o Ki ances, and to justify herself to the Ministers o

III. France and Spain, who accused her of fomenting
'vJ" the troubles in Scotland, by her intrigues. The

D exp-dient she contrived for her vindication, strong

ly displays her own character, and the wretched con
dition of exiles, who are obliged to depend on a so
reign Prince. Murray, and Ilamiiton, Abbot o
Kil\ inning, being appointed by the other fugitive
to wait on Elizabeth, instead of meeting with thai
welcome recepticn which was due to men, who
out of confience in her promises, had hazardec
their lives and fortunes, could not even obtain thi
favour of an audience, until they had meanly con|
sented to acknowledge, in the presence of the F enj
an Spanifhl Ambassadors, that Elizabeth had give
th=m no encouragement to take arms. No soon1
did they make this drciaration, than she aftonihir
them with this rep!y, " You have declared th
truth; I am far from setting an example of re'e
lion to my own subjects, by countenancing tho
who rebel against their lawful Prince. The treafo0
of wvhich you have been guilty, is detestable; a
as trairors I banish you from my presence*." No:
w tir1handing this scene of farce aid of falfhood,
diffhonourable to all t'.e persons who a&ced a part
it, Elizaberh prmnitted the malecontents peaceab
to reside in her dominio:, luspplied them fccret
with money, and renewed her ;rLercefion with t
Scottish Queen in their favour '-

THE advan:ag e he ad gai:ed over them did
satisfy Iary ; she relb!lved to foolow the blow, ai

* Mieiv. IIZ:. t Knox, 389i ,

oprevent a party, which she dreaded, from everB o o K
,covering any footing in the nation. With this III.
view, Ihe called a meeting of Parliament; and in 65
order that a sentence of forfeiture might be legally 56
cronounced against the banished Lords, she fum-
roned them, by public proclamation, to appear be- Decemb. r
ore it *.

THE DulKtof Chatelherault, on his humble ap-
F!ication, obtained a separate pardon ; but not with-
ot difficulty, as the King violently opposed it. He
,w.sobliged, however, to leave the kingdom, and
torefide for some time in France --.

THE numerous forces which Mary brought into
he field, the vigour with which flie acted, and the
knKgh of time she kept them in arms, resemble the
eiorrs of a Plince with revenues much more confi-
irable than those which she possessed. But armies
were then levied and maintained by Princes, at linall
charge. The vassal followed his superior, and the
bperior attended the Monarch, at his own expence.
Sx hundred horsemen, however, and three corn
pnies of foot, betides her guards, received regular
pay from the Queen. This extraordinary charge,
!:ether with the deburfements occafoned by her
arriage, exhausted a treasury, which was far fiom
ting rch. In tiis exigency, many devices vwere fal-
kupon for railing money. P ir.,: '.'.r-e levied on the
wxt of St. Andrew's, Perth, and lii.li D, ' vhich
vtr susp)ected of favouring the malecontents. £' : ,!r-
-1-lwtaxwas imposed on the burroughsthroughot. tthe

* Keith, 3'j. + Knox, 389.

Z 3 in

B o o K kingdom; and a great fum was demanded of t

Il . -ciizens of Edinburgh, by way of loan. This

,

'-v,'T precedentrd exaction alarmed the citizens. Tt
' 3°5 had rtcourfe to delays, and started difficulties,

order to evade it. These Mary construed to
aSts of avowed disobedience, and instantly cornrri
ted several of them to prison. But this fcveriy di
nor subdue the undaunted spirit of liberty, v;{ic
prevailed among the inhabitants. The Queen
obliged to mortgage to the city, the juprisri
of the town of Leith, by which she obtaiied
considerable lrim of money %. The thirds rs
clefiaftical benefices proved another Iburce, wlens
t:-e Queen derived iobe supply. About this tin
v.e fnd the i'rotefant clergy complaining more bi
terly than ever of their poverty. The arrmy, it
probable, exhaufied a great part of that fund, whic
was appropriated for their maintenance -.

THE assemblies of the church were not incoi
^. cerned spectators of the commotions of this turbuien

year. In the meeting June 24, several of the ral
content nobles were present, and seem to have ha
great inPfuence on their decisions. The high tai
in which the afiembly addressed the Queen, cn
impute e cnly to those fears and jealcufies, withr
gard to religion, which they endeavoured to idniiu
into the nation. The assembly complained, ui:
son-e bitterntes, of the flop which had been putt
the progress of the Reformation by the Queen's ar
rival in Scotland ; they required not only the to:a
fppref.ion of the Popish worlhip throughout ti

_ -x,; ..
5,3, 56. t, Mi;,. Hil.. of Ldi b-r .

kin -

igdomn, but even in the Queen's own chapel; and B o o K
beikcs the legal establishment of the Protestant re- III.
;cion, they demanded that Mary herself should -T
¢iblickly embrace it. The Queen, after some de- 55
iberation, replied, that neither her conscience, nor
,:r ntcrefl, would permit her to take such a tfep
he former would for ever reproach her for a
c..nge, which proceeded from no inward convic-
ron; the latter would susser by the offence, which
her spoftacy muff give to the King of France, and
er other allies on the continent *.

IT is remarkable, that the prosperous situation of
the Queen's affairs, during this year, began to work
bm.e change in favour of her religion. The Earls
ci Lennox, Athol, and Caffils, openly attended

f-s; fie herself afforded the Catholics a more

iaowcu protection than formerly; and, by her per-
iilson, some of the antient Monks ventured to
preach publickly to the people t.

* Knox, 374, 376. t Id. 389, 390.

Z4 T HE

# BOOK IV.

THE
HI STORYv

o F
C 0 T L A N D,

B O OK IV.

S the day appointed for the meeting of Par- B o K
liament approached, Mary and her Ministers IV.
e employed in deliberating concerning the course se
ch it was moit proper to hold with regard to the 15r66.
*d nobles. Many motives prompted her to set liberations
bounds to the rigour of justice. The malecon- ,,,"ei
shad laboured to deferat a scheme, which her0obls.
et conspired with her passions in rendering dear
her; they were the leaders of a p'arty, whose
dfhip she had been obliged to court, wh'ile the
their principles in abhorrence; and they were
my attached to a rival, whom ie had good rea-
both to fear and to hate.

BUT,

B o O K BUT, on the other hand, several weighty confi

IV. derations might be urged. The noblemen, whop
~lv' fate was in suspense, were amnng the mofapwerff
1566. subjects in the kingdom; their wealth great, the|

connections extensive; and their adherents nume
rous. They were now at mercy, the ohjets f
compassion, and suing for pardon with the mo
humble submission.

IN those circumfRances, an aEt of clemency woul

exalt the Queen's character, and appear no less fple
did among foreigners, than acceptable to her ow
subjects. Mary herself, though highly incenfei
was not inexorable; but the King's rage was in.
placable and unrelenting. They were folicitedl
behalf of the fugitives, from various quarters. Mo§
ton, Ruthven, Maitland, and all who had beg
members of the Congregation, were not forget
of their ancient union with Murray, and his fello
sufferers; nor neglecful of their safety, which th
esteemed of great importance to the kingdom. M
vil, who at that time poffefied the Queen's co
dence, seconded their solicitations. And Murra
having fooped so low as to court Rizio, that
vourite, who was desirous of securing his proteai
againit the King, whose displeasure he had lat
incurred, seconded the intercessions of his ot
friends, with the whole of his influence'. T
interposition of Sir Nicholas Throgmorton, w
had lately been Elizabeth's Ambassador in Scotda
in behalf of the exiles, was of more weight than

Melv. 125.

Hs

tliefi, and attended with more success. Throgmoi-- B o o K
ton, out of enmity to Cecil, had embarked deeply IV.
in all the intrigues which were carried on at the ó?7
English court, in order to undermine the power and
credit of that Minister. He espoused, for this rea-
oon, the cause of the Scottish Queen, towards whole
ille and pretensions the other was known to bear
itle favour; and ventured, in the present critical
jcnture, to write a letter to Mary, containing the
moRl salutary advices with regard'to her conduct.
He recommended the pardoning of the Earl of
Murray and his associates, as a measure no less pru-
dent than popular. An aCtion of this nature, fays
k, the pure effect of your Majesty's generosity,
will spread the fame of your lenity and moderation,
iid engage the Englifi to look towards your accef-
Lon to their throne, not only without prejudice, but
lith desire. By the fame means, a perfec har-
mony will be restored among your own subje&s,
rio, if any rupture ihould happen with England,
till fere you with that grateful zeal, which your
demency cannot fail of inspiring *.

THESE prudent remonfirances of Throgmorton, sherolve
which his reputation for wisdom, and known at- to treat

them with

thment to the Queen, added great authority, clemency.
adea deep imprel]ion on her spirit. Her cour-
ts cultivated this happy disposition, and prevailed
(her, notwithfianding the King's inflexible tem-
p, to sacrifice her own private resentment to the
ttceffion of her subjects, and the wishes of her
Iedst. With this view, the Parliament, which

* Melv. 1 9, t Id. 125.
4 had

B o o K had been called to meet on the 4th of Februarl

IV. was prorogued to the 7th of April *; and in th
6-6 mean time,. mhe was busy in confidering the mann(

and form in which she should extend her favour t
the Lords who were under disgrace.

,sdiverted THOUGH Mary discovered, on this occasion,
from this mind naturally prone to humanity, and capable (
resolution . .
by the foi-forgiving, me wanted firmness, however, to ref
Firtionsc o the influence, which was fatally employed to difa
ber zeal for point the effects of this amiable disposition. Ab
opery. this time, and at no great distance from each oth
cbrary 3. two envoys arrived from the French King. T

former was intrusted with matters of mere ceremo
alone; he congratulated the Queen on her ma
riage, and invested the King with the ensigns of t
order of St. Michael. The instructions of the la
ter related to matters of more importance, and pr
duced greater effecs t.

AN interview between Charles IX. and his Sit

the Queen of Spain had been often proposed; ar
after many obstacles arising from the opposition
political interest, was at last appointed at Bayonn
Catherine of Medicis accompanied her son;
Duke of Alva attended his Mittrefs. Amidf t
scenes of public pomp and pleasure, which seem
to be the sole occupation of both courts, a fche
was formed, and measures concerted, for exte
nating the Hugonots in France, the Protestants
the low countries, and for fuppreffling the Reform
tion throughout all Europe . The ative poli

Goad. vol. i. 224.. t Keith, 3S5. Append i'
. Tbhun. lib. 37. |

fpope Pius IV. and the zeal of the Cardinal of B ooK
rrain, confirmed and encouraged dispositions, so IV.
iirable to the genius of the Romish religion, and '''
beneficial to their own order. 66

IT was an account of this holy league which the fe-
(nd French envoy brought to Mary, conjuring her,
tthe fame time, in the name of the King of France,
ad the Cardinal of Lorrain, not to restore the lead-
of the Protestants in her kingdom to power and
Tour, at the very time when the Catholic Princes
re combined to destroy that set, in all the coun-
tes of Europe *.

POPERY is a species of false religion, remarkable:
r the strong. possession it takes of the heart. Con-
rived by men of deep infight into the human cha-
acter, and improved by the experience and obfer-
fiion of many successive ages; it arrived at last to
idegree of perfection, which no former system of
kpcrftition had ever attained. There is no power
ithe understanding, and no passion in the heart,
which it does not present objects, adapted to
Gule, and to intreeft them.-i Neither the love of
ieafure, which, at that tire, prevailed in the court
fFrance, nor the pursuits of ambition which oc-
rpied the court of Spain, had secured them from
e dominion of bigotry. Laymen, and courtiers,
'ere agitated with that furious and unmerciful
zal, which is commonly confidered as peculiar to
tc'.eailtics; and Kings and Ministers thought them-

* Melv. 126.

fel ves

3

B o o K selves bound, in conscience, to'bxtirpate the'rsi

IV. tefeant doctrine. Mary herself was dieeply titured
.-óó. with all the'prejudices of Popery; a pafonate at
I366' tachment to that fuperfitiribn'i vifibli: 'every p"ar

of her character, and runs through all the scenes of
her life: she was devoted, too, with 'ttie 'tmo
flbnfiffionto the Princes of Lorrain, her' uncles
and had been accustomed, from her infancyr, toli
ten to all their advices, with a filial retpeEt Th
profpeL of restoring the pu'blic exercise of her oy
religion, the p!rafure of complying with her.uncle
and the hopes of gratifying the French MInarch
whom the present situation of her affairs in Englan
made it necessary to court, counterbalanced all th
prudent considerations which had formerly wdghe
vith her. She inftanrly joined the confeerac
which had been formed for the destruction of th
Prote..tnts, and altered the whole plan of her con
duc, with regard to Murray and his adherents*.

To this fatal resolution may be imputed all th

subsequent calamities of Mary's life. Ever finc
her return into Scotland, fortune may be said
have been propitious to her, rather than adverse
E:ad if her prosperity did not rife to any great height

had, however, suffered no confiderabe' interrup

tion. A thick and fettled cloud of adversity, wi
few gleams of hope, and none of real enjoyment
covers the remainder of her days. '

A P.i|:3a-

lm.dto t'- THE effeEts of the new system, which Maryha
nin' the adop.-d, m ere soon visible. The time of the pro
ex:isd l

* See Arper.dix, N° X:V,

rogatioS

tion of Parliament was shortened; ;and by a B o.o' x
proclamation, the. izth of March was fixed. iV.
iits meeting *. Mary resolved, without any fur- t. 6.
r delay, to proceed to the attainder of the rebel
rs, and, at the fame time, determined to take
e steps towards the.re-eftablifhment of the Ro-
M religion in Scotland t. The Lords of the.
ices were chosen, as usual, to prepare the bufi-

js which was to-come before the Parliament.
eywere all persons, in whom the Q5ueen could
fide, and bent to promote her. designs. The
.nof Murray and his party seemed. now inevita-
and the danger of the Reformed Church im-

hen, when arn event unexpectedly happened,

ich aved both. .'if we regard either the barba-
of that age, when such ats of violence were

*Keith, 326.

It is not on the authority of Knox alone, that we charge
Qjeen with the design of re-eflablifhing the Roman Catho-
Eigian. He, indeed, asserts that the altars, which should
been ereecd in the church of St. Giles, were already pro-
3, 94. i. Mary herself, in a letter to the Archbishop of
'ow her Ambaflador in France, acknowledges, " that in
Parliament, Ihe intended to have done some good, with re-
torelloring the old religion." Keith, 331. 2. The Spi-
Loids, i. e. the Popish ecclesiastics, had, by her authority,
ed their ancient place in that afrembly, ibid. 3. She had
the confederacy at Bayonne, Keith, Append. 167. 4. She
ed mars to be celebrated in different parts of the kingdom,
[and declared that she would have mass free for all men who
dhear it, Good. vol. i. 274. 5- Blackwood, who was fur-
by the Archbishop of Glasgow with materials for writing
partrre de Marie, affirms that the Queen intended to have
'red, in this Parliament, if not the re-establishment of the
iic religion, at leaf something for the ease of Catholics,
.voi. ii. 204.

com-

B o o K common, or the mean condition of the unhap

IV. person who suffered, the event is little remarkabl

óód but if we refle& upon the circumstances with:whii

i'566.

Andpre- it was attended, or upon the confequences:whii
vented by followed it, it appears extremely memorable; at
the confpi-
racy agina the rife and progress of it deserve to be traced wii

Ro great care.

Darnl]ylofe DARNLY'S external accomplishments had eXcite
the Q ueen's
ago.ion. that sudden and violent passion which raised him t

the throne. But the qualities of his mind correi
ponded ill with the beauty of his person. of;
weak understanding, and without experience, coni
ceited at the fame time of his own abilities, ant
ascribing his extraordinary success entirely to his dii
tinguifhed merit. All the Queen's favour madeni
imprefflon on such a temper. All her gentlenel
could not bridle his imperious and ungovernabl
spirit. All her attention to place about hin
persons capable of directing his conduct, coul
not preserve him from ramh and imprudent ad
tions *. Fond of all the amusements, and evqe
prone to all the vices of youth, he became, b]
degrees, carclefs of her person, and a ftrang
to her company. To a woman, and a Queed
such behaviour was intolerable. The lower f
had stooped in order to raise him, his beldavio
appeared the m-re ungenerous and criminal. Anl
in proportion to the tfrength of her first affe&iol
wsas the violence with which her disappointed paffilo
now operated. A few months after the marriage

Good. vo1. i.
i 12.

thei

din doTnelic quarrels began to be observed. The B o o K

exravagance of Darnly's ambition gave rife to IV.

l. Instead of being satisfied with a rnare in the 6
idmniftation of government, or with the title of 6
Kinag which Mary, by an unprecedented firetch of
gowcr, had conferred on him, he demanded the
Crown Matrimonial with most insolent importunity*.
And though Mary alledged that this gift was be-

iond her power, and that the authority of Parlia-

Bent must be interposed to bestow it, he wanted
tither underfianding to comprehend, or temper to
,nit fojufl a defence; and often renewed and urged
!i; request.

Rlzro, whom the King had at first talen into surpeea
-at confidence, did not humour him in these fol- lzio to cbe
|s. By this, he incurred Henry's difplceafure;.of ic.
ai as it was impoflible for Mary to behave to-

trds her husband with the fame affetion, which
tinguilhed the firit and happy days of their union,
imputed this coldners, not to his own behaviour,
ich had so well merited it, but to the insinuations.
Rizio. Mary's own condua confirmed and
rengthened these suspicions. She treated this
rnCer with a familiarity, and admitted him to a

in her confidence, to which neither his first
adition, nor the office fie had lately beltowed
n him, gave him any title. He was perpetually
her pretence, intermeddled in every business, and,
ietier with a few favourites, was the companion
all her private amufcments. The haughty Ipirit
Dar!nly could not bear the intrusion of such an

Keith, -;z,. Knox, 404.
VoL. 1, A a up-

B o o K upfart; and impatient of any delay, and unrf

IV. strained by any scruple, he inflantly resolved to g

'..-',~ rid of him by violence.
1566.

Rizio hat- AT the fame time, another detignn which too
fiends of its rie from very different motives, was carrying 0
the exiicd againLt the life of Rizio. Morton, Ruthven, Linc
nobles.

fay, and Maitland, were the contrivers of it. I
all former commotions they had been ftridly unite
with Murray, though in the late infurreftion the
had deserted him, for various reasons. Morto
was nearly allied to the family of Angus, and dur
ing the minority of the present Earl, afted as Chii
of the name of Douglas. Ruthven was marrie
to the King's aunt. Lindsay's wife was of the fam
blood. Ali these had warmly concurredwiththeQuet
in promoting a marriage, which did so much ho
nour to the house of Douglas, and naturally expel
ed, that under a King of their own blood, tl
chief management of affairs would be committed
them. Maitland, with his usual sagacity, forefa
that Mlurray's opposition to the match would prot
dangerous and ineffecbual; but whoever ruled
court, he hoped, by his dexterity and talents,
render himself necefharv and of importance. Thd
were all equally disappointed in their expe&taioil
The King's headltrong temper rendered him inc{
pable of advice. The Queen could not help di
trusting men who had been so long anid so ian
mately connecTed with Murray, and gave hers
up entirely to luch Counsellors as complied with'
her inciinations. The return of that nobleman al
his foilowers was therefore the only event wh

cou

ild restore Morton, Maitland, and their aflocsites B 6 oa
dtheir former ascendant over the Queen's councils, IV.
or this reason, nothing could be more mortifying " '
dthem, than the resolution which Mary had taken
treat the exiles with rigour. This they imputed
Rizio, who, after he had engaged to aid Murray
th all his interest, was now the most active in-
mnient in promoting the measures which were
ncerted for the ruin of that nobleman. This of-
uos zeal compleated the disgust which they had
ceived against him, and inspired them with
ughts of vengeance, in no wife suitable tojuftice,
humanity, or to their own dignity.

WHILE they were ruminating upon their scheme, They e6ciOi
King communicated his resolution to be avenged bine in or

d_ er to mut-

Rizio to Lord Ruthven, and implored his assist- der hima

,and that of his friends, towards the exeeu-
of this design. Nothing could be more accept-
le to them than this overture. They saw at once
the advantages they would reap, by the concur-
e of such an associate. Their own private re-
geupon Rizio would pass, they hoped, for an
of obedience to the King; and they did not
pair of obtaining the restoration of their banished
nds, and security for the Protestant religion, as
price of their compliance with his will.

BUT as Henry was no less Eckle, than rash, they
tated for frme time, and determined to advance
farther, without taking every possible precaution
their own safety. They did not, in the mean
e, siser the King's refenentnt to abate, Mort

A a tot,

B o o K ton, who was inferior to no man of that intriguil

IV. age, in all the arts of insinuation and address, tod

5 the young Prince under his management.
' 566.

wrought upon his ruling passion, ambition to o
tain the Matrimonial Crown. He represented Rii
credit with the Queen to be the chief and only
ftacle to his success in that demand. This mini
alone, he iaid, possessed her confidence; and out
complaisance to him, her fubjeas, her nobility,
even herhufband,were excluded from anyparticipa
of her secret councils. Under the appearanceo
confidence merely political, he insinuated, and
King perhaps believed, that a familiarity of quit
different and of a very criminal nature might
concealed *. Such various and complicated pal

r

'Of all our hiltorians, Buchanan alone avowedly ac

Marv of a criminal iove for Rizio, 3, 344. Knox fig
inir.uates that ilch a suspicion was entertained, 391. M
in a conversation ith thfe Qucen, intimates that he was
her familiarity with Rizio might b- liable to mieconliru&tion,
The King himfeif seems, both bv \eelvil's account, ard by
expofulation with the Qjeen, which Ruthven mention
have iven crecit to :th!ee fuficions, Melv. 127. Keith,
pend 12-, 124. That the King's suspicions were lDnt
l!;:e\.ile evident from the paper published Append. No.
lut, in opo';tion to these iluipicions, a'd they are nothing
we may obfer.e that Rauiet the .Queen's French Secretary
Cd;nifle.i Irom her ierice, and Rizio advanced to thatofi
December '

S . KJith 258. It was in conf.cq:eace ci

prefermrne.t, iha: I.h acqui.ed his great credit ,ifh theQ
itcilv. 1C7. Darnly arrived in Scotland about two month
icr., Keitl, 7 5. T 'e (Qeen immediately conceived forh
P i'-n, v.;..ch had

. all t.e if'mptnms of genuine and vi

io'.'e. i-r.oc .--i. i t;is pafion, and p-rooted the mariage
.: - i: r- .

- : i. Dur i'c cme months after te

'r.r; !-..:'.Q- .- ,
o...' . f.:: L-. .:lv 'corftinued. She

.. . i~~~~~~~~~~~a

in the King's bosom, with the utmost fury. B o o K:
became more impatient than ever of any delay, IV.
deven threatened to strike the intended blow with .-V
own hand. At last, preliminaries were fettled
both fides, and articles for their mutual security
reed upon. The King engaged to prevent the
inder of the banilhed Lords, to consent to their
rn into Scotland, to obtain for them an ample
mifon of all their crimes, and to support to the-
oft of his power, the religion which was now
hliflied in the kingdom. On their parts, they
rtook to procure the Crown Matrimonial for
ry, to secure his right of succession, if the
ten should die before him, and to defend that
ht to the uttermost, againr whatever person
ud presume to dispute it; and if either Rizio,
:any other person, should happen to be killed in
fccuting of the design, the King promised to ac-
Mledge himself to be the author of the enter-
e, and to prote&t those who were embarked
it *.

NOTHING now remained but to concert the plan Perpetrate
operation, to chufe the aclors, and to assign them thlatc'lm

7

- 0 in t'c
rparts in perpetrating this detestable crime. Q(,c.n'

palace.

ed with child. From this enumeration of circumalances,
pears almofft impofiible that the Queen, unlc!s we suppose
0 have been a woman utterly abandoned, could carry- oi
lriminal intrigue with Rizio. But the filenct of R;id(;iph
Englith Resident, a man abundantly ready to menrion, and
'ggravate Mary's faults, and who doe, not once insinuate
her coMfidence in Rizio concealed any thing criminal, is in
i'f i nt vindication of her innocence.

* Good. vol!'i. 266.

A a 3 Evert

J '^~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~x,

B o o x Every eircumftance here paints and characerizes th

IV. manners and men of that age, and fills us with hot

- ror at both. The place, chosen for committng
566' such a deed, was the Queen's bedchamber. Thougl

Mary was now in the sixth month of her pregnancy
and though Rizio might have been feizedelfer
without any difficulty, the King pitched 'upon th
place, that he might enjoy the malicious plafiure

u

reproaching Rizio with his crimes before the Queerr
face. The Earl of Morton, the Lord High Chard
cellor of the kingdom, undertook to dire& an ei
terprize, carried on in defiance of all the laws
which he was bound to be the guardian. T
Lord Ruthven, who had been confined to his b
for three months, by a very dangerous distemper, an
who was still so feeble that he could scarce walk,
bear the weight of his own armour, was entrust
with the executive part; and while he himself ne
ed to be supported by two men, he came abroad
commit a murder in the pretence of his Sovereig

ON the gth of March, Morton entered the co

of the palace with an hundred and sixty men;
without noifc, or meeting with any refintance, sei
all the gates. While the Queen was at fupperw
the Counrefs of Argyll, Rizio, and a few dom
tics, the King suddenly entered the apastinieht,
a private passage. At his back, was Ruthven, c
in complete armour, and with that ghastly and ho
rid look which long sickness had given him. Th
or four of his most trusty accomplices follow
him. Such an unusual appearance alarmed th
who were present. Rizio instantly apprehended th

he was the viEtim at whom the blow was aimed; .B o K
and in the utmost. consternation retired behind the IV.
.Queen, of whom he laid hold, hoping that the re- 566
verence due to her person might prove some pro-
eCion to him. -The conspirators had proceeded
oo0 far to be rpeftrained by any consideration of that
kind. Numbers of armed men rushed into the
chamber. RuFhven drew his dagger, and with a
furious mien and voice, commanded Rizio to leave
aplace of which he was unworthy, and which he
had occupied too long. Mary employed tears, and
«ntreaties, -and threatenings, to save her favourite.
But, notwithstanding all. these, he was torn from
her by violence, and before he could be dragged
through the next apartment, the rage of his ene-
mies put an end to his life, piercing his body with
ffty fix wounds *.

ATHOL, Huntly, Bothwell, and other confidents
of the Queen who lodged in the palace, were
larmed at the uproar, and filled with the utmost
terror on their own account; but either no violence
was intended against them, or the conspirators durst
not shed the noblest blood in the kingdom, in the
fame illegal manner with which they had ventured
to take the life of a stranger. Some of them were
dismissed, and others made their escape.

TIE conspirators, in the mean time, kept pof They con-
felion of the palace, and guarded the Queen with fine the

Queen her.

ie utmost care. A proclamation was published celf.
by the King, prohibiting the Parliament to meet on

* See Appendix, No. XV. "

A a 4 the

B o o K the day appointed; and measures were taken by

IV- him for preventing any tumult in the city,*: Mur-

ray, Rothes, and their followers being informed ot
1566.

every ftep taken against R izio, arrived at Edinburgh
next evening. Murray was graciously received both
by the King and Queen. By the formeri on ac-
count of the Articles which had been agreed upon
between them; by the latter, because (he hoped to
prevail on him, by gentle treatment, not -to take,
parr wit' the murderers of Rizio. Their'power
hfe flill set. and dreaded ; and the insult which theyi
ha.d offered to her authority, and even to her per-;
ion, jo fjr cxceeiled any ciime she could impute to.

IMurray', that in hopes of wreaking her vengeanceq
-1 tri;n), she became extremely willing to bere-i
concilcd to him. The obligations, however, which
Murray lay under to men, who had hazarded their4
lives on his account, engaged him to labour forl
their safety. The Queen, who scarce had the li-i
berty of choice left, was perfiaded to admit Mor i
ton and Ruthven into her presence, and to granti
them the promise of pardon in whatever terms theyl
should deem neceliary for their own security.

THE King, mean while, flood astonished at the

boldness and success of his own enterprize, and un-
certain what course to hold. The Queen observed

Set cn his irresolution, and availed herself of it. She erm-
gains hd poyed all her art to disengage him from his new
K:r-, and

t

w he'

makes her aITociates- His consciousness of the insult which hej
cf4a'. h.id offered to so illufirious a benefaarefs, inspired

him '.ith uncomn;on facility and complaisance. In!

e c.., A:rend. iz6.

spite

pite of all the warnings he received to distrust the B o o K.
ueen's artifices, she prevailed on him to difmirs IV.
ie gards which the conspirators had placed on her 1 6.
erfon; and that fame night he made his escape
pong with her, attended by three persons only, and
taired to Dunbar. The scheme of their flight had March rT,
en communicated to b'untly and Bothwell, and
hsv were quickly joined by thern, and several other
ithe nobles. Bothweil's estate lay in that cor-
!eros the kingdom, ahd his followers crouded to
ieir Chief, in such numbers, as soon enabled the'

een to set the power of the conspirators at de-

'ince.

THIS ILudden flight filled them with inexprcffible Is reconcil.
)ilrnation. They had obtained a promise of par- ed oltloe
:n; and it now appeared from the Queen's con- bles.
'it, that nothing more was intended by this pro-

tife, than to amuse them, and to gain time. They'
:ntured, however, to demand the accompliSqfment
i it; but their mellenger was detained a prisoner,
d the Queen advancing towards Edinburgh, at
Aihead of 8000 men, talked in the highest firain
frefrntment and revenge. She had the address,
the fame time, to separate Murray and his afib-
tes from the conspirators against Rizio. Senfi-
!e that the union of there parties would form a
nrederacy, which might prove formidable to the
own, she expressed great willingness to receive the.
rmer into favour;. towards the latter, she declared ,,iacch 19.
erelf inexorable. Murray and his followers wereT! ,
loess wiliing to accept of pardon, on her terms.. giinitRzio
: to.i..i-rators against Rizio, deurived of every ,n nd.

re-

B-o-'oik-refource, and incapable of relftlance,- fed- -precpi.

IV. tately to Newcastle, having thus changed situation!
* 566 with Murray and his party, who .left that placei

-few-days before. .

No man so remarkable for wisdom, and evenfo
cunning as the Earl of Morton, ever engaged in

o.. re unfortunate enterpdize. Deserted .bgfely bi

the King, who now denied his knowledge of thl
conspiracy, by public proclamations; and abandoni
ed ungenerously by Murray and his party *, hewag
obliged to fly from his native country, to refig
the highest office, and to part withone of the mo
opulent fortunes in the kingdom.

0 N her return to Edinburgh, Mary began

proceed againrt thole concerned in the murder
Rizio, with the utmost rigour of law. But,
praise of her clemency, it muf be observed, th
only two persons, and there of no considerable ran
suffered for this crime t.

IN this conspiracy there is one circumtanc

which, though somewhat detached, deserves not
be forgotten. In the confederacy between the Kin
and the conspirators, the real intention of.:whic
was afalSination, the preserving of the Reforme
Church is, nevertheless, one of the most confider
able articles; and the fame men who were preparin
to violate one of the first duties of morality,
seaed the highest regard for religion. Hitory re
lates these extravagancies of the human minid, with

* Mcel. 13:. t Keith, Appendix i5o, 334.

out pretending to justify, or even to account for Be- oKc
them; and regulating her own opinions by the eter- IV.
tal and immutable laws of jufice and of virtue, ^'566"
points out such inconsistencies, as features of the
ge which she describes, and records them for the
inltrution of ages to come.
As this is the second instance of deliberate affaf- An account

of the fre-

ination which has occurred, and as we shall here- quency of
after meet with many othei instances of the fame affainau-

ons in that

crime, the causes which gave rife to a practice so age.
hocking to humanity, deserve our particular at-
tention. Resentment is, for obvious and wife rea-
sons, one of the strongest passions in the human
mind. The natural demand of this passion is, that
the person who feels the injury should himself in-
Bi& the vengeance due on that account. The per-
mitting this, however, would have been defirudive
to society; and punishment would have known no
bounds, either in severity, or in duration. For this
reason, in the very infancy of the social fiate, the
sword was taken out of private hands, and com-
mitted to the Magistrate. But, at firif, while laws
aimed at restraining, they really strengthened the
principle of revenge. The earliest and most fim-
ple punishment for crimes was retaliation; the of-
fender forfeited limb for limb, and life for life.
The payment of a compensation to the perfun in-
jured, succeeded to the rigour of the former infti-
tution. In both there, the gratification of private
revenge was the objeCt of law; and he who fuiffered
the wrong, was the only person who had a right to
pursue, to exa&c, or to remit the ,punishment.

While

B o o f While laws allowed such full scope to the revenge of

IV. one party, the interests of the other were not neg-
'^"^" lec&ed. If the evidence of his guilt did not amount

566. to a full proof, or if he reckoned himself to be

unjustly accused, the person to whom a crime was
imputed had a right to challenge his adversary toi
single combat, and on obtaining the vi&ory, vin-|
dicated his own honour. In almost every confider-i
able cmufe, whether civil or criminal, arms were ap.
pealed to, in defence, either of the innocence, or0
the property of the parties. Juffice had feldomi
occafon to use her balance; the sword alone de-]
cided every contest. The pafiFon of revenge was
nourished by all these means, and grew, by daily
indulgence, to be incredibly strong. Mankind be-
came habituated to blood, not only in times of war,
but of peace; and from this, as well as other
causes, contracted an amazing ferocity of temper,
and of manners. This ferocity, however, made i
necessary to discourage the trial by combat; to abo-
lifh the payment of compensations in criminal cafes;
and to think of some milder method of terminating
disputes concerning civil rights. The punishments
fir crimes became more revere, and the regulations
concerning property more fixed; but the Princes,
yhofe province it was to inflid the one, and to
enforce the other, possessed little power. Great of-
fenders derpifcd their authority; smaller ones fhel
t-red themselves under the jurifdi6tion of those,
from whose proteCtion they expected impunity. The
adlminittration of justice was extremely feeble and
<iilarory. An attempt to punish the crimes of
hie.ftain, or even of his vafaTls, often excited re-

bellions

bellions and civil wars. To nobles, haughty and B o o K
independent, among whom the causes of discord 1V.
were many and unavoidable, who were quick in 566
discerning an injury, and impatient to revenge it;
who esteemed it infamous to submit to an enemy;
and cowardly to forgive him; who confidered the
tight of punishing those who had injured them, as
a privilege of their order, and a mark of indepen-
dence; such flow proceedings were extremely unfa-
tisfatory. The blood of their adversary was, in
their opinion, the only thing which could wash away
an affront; where that was not shed, their revenge
was disappointed, their courage became fufpeEted,
and a stain was lefc on their honour. That ven-
geance, which the impotent hand of the Magistrate
could not infli&, their own could easily execute;
under governments so feeble, men assumed, as in a
Rate of nature, the right of judging, and redress-
ing their own wrongs. And thus assassination, a
crime of all others the most deftrutive to society,
came not only to be allowed, but to be deemed ho-
nourable.

THE history of Europe, during the I4th and
Z;th centuries, abounds with detestable instances of
this crime. It prevailed chiefly among the French
and Scots, between whom there was a close inter-
rourfe at that time, and a surprising refembiance in
their national characters. In 1407, the only bro-
ther of the King of France was murdered publickly
in the fireets of Paris; and so far was this horrible
action from meeting with proper punishment, that-an'
erinent lawyer was allowed to plead in defence of

it

B o o K it before the Peers of France, and avowedly t

IV. maintain the lawfulness of assassination. In 1417

SV^° it required all the eloquence and authority of the
1566- famous Gerfon, to prevail on the Council' of Con;

stance to condemn this proposition, " That the
are some cafes in which assassination is a virtue more
meritorious in a Knight than in a Squire, and mor
reritorious in a King than in a Knight*." The
number of eminent persons who were murdered i
France and Scotland, on account either of private
or political, or religious quarrels, during the '5st
and i6th centuries, is almost incredible. Even as-
ter those caules, which first gave rife to thisbarba
rous pracice were removed; after the jurifditio
of Magifrates, and the authority of laws were bet-
ter established, and become more universal; afte
the progress of learning and philosophy had polilhf
ed the manners, and humanized the minds of men|
this crime continued in some degree. It was to
wards the close of the 7th century before it dif1
appeared in France. The additional vigour, which
the royal authority acquired by the accession o
James VI. to the throne of England, seems to hav
put a stop to it in Scotland.

THE influence, however, of any national Cuftorm,

both on the underflanding and on the heartland
how far it may go towards perverting or extinilh
ing moral principles of the greatest- inpottance, is
remarkable. The authors of tho e'ages -have pe-
fedly imbibed the sentiments of their cotempora
ries, with regard to affafination; and they, who

L I.'Enfant. Hist. Ccnc. de Conft.

ha

leisure to refle&, and to judge, appear to: be noBo o K:

more shocked at this crime, than the persons, who IV.
ommitted it during the heat and impetuosity of '""'
afion. Buchanan relates the murder of Cardinal 1566.
katoun, and of Rizio, without expressing those
elings which are natural to a man, or that indig-
iation which became an historian*. Knox, whose
Iind was fiercer and more unpolilhed, talks of the
lathof Beatoun and of the Duke of Guise, not
nly without censure, but with the utmost exulta-
lion . On the other hand, the Bishop of Ross
mentions the assassination of the Earl of Murray,
with some degree of applause $. Blackwood dwells
ipon it, with the most indecent triumph, and as-
ribes it direEtly to the hand of God jI. Lord Ruth-
en, the principal acor in the conspiracy against
izio, wrote an account of it some short time be-
re his own death, and in all his long narrative
aere is not one expreflion of regret, or one fymp-
sm of compunction for a crime no less dif-
bnourable, than barbarous**. Morton, equally
nilcy of the fame crime, entertained the fame fein-
nments concerning it; and in his last moments,
either he himself, nor the Ministers who attended
im, seem to have confidered it as an action which
alled for repentance ; even then he talks of David's
lugter as coolly, as if it had been an innocent or
commendable deed. tt. The vices of another age,
?lonifh and shock us; the vices of our' own be-
Ome familiar, and excite little horror. I re-

'Buchan. 295, 34.- t Knox, 334. I Anders
; '. 11 Jebb. z. z53. " Keith, Append. X I
t Crawf. Mem. Append.

turn

B o o K turn from this digression to the course of the'hit

1V. tory.

1566. THE charm, which had at fir' attached th
Queen's Queen to Darnly, and held them for some time i
hbtred to
Darnly in- an happy union, was now entirely dissolved; an
creaes. love no longer covering his follies and vices with i

friendly veil, they appeared to Mary in their ful
dimension and deformity *. Though Henry pub
lifhed a proclamation, disclaiming any knowledge
of the conspiracy against Rizio, the Queen was full]
convinced, that he was not only acceffry to th,
contrivance, but to the commission of that odiouI
crime t. That very power, which, with libera
and unfufpicious fondness, the had conferred upo
him, he had employed to insult her authority,
limit her prerogative, and to endanger her person
Such an outrage, it was impossible any woman cou
bear or forgive. Cold civilities, secret distrust, fre
quent quarrels, succeeded to their former tranfpor
of affection and confidence. The Queen's favour
were no longer conveyed through his hands. Th
crowd of expectants ceased to court his patronage
which they found to avail so little. Among th
nobles, some dreaded his furious temper, othe
complained of his perfidioufinefs; and all of the
deSpised the weakrefs of his understanding, and th
inconstancy of his !-,;rt. Tile people themfelve
observed tome parts cf his conduct,: which litd
faied the dignity of a King. Addi&ed to drunke
nets, beyond what the manners of that age coul
bear, and indulging irregular pations, which eve

* Se: Appc:;:i.-:, N° :vx'I. t Keith, 35o.

re licentiousness of youth could not excuse, he, by B o o K
his indecent behaviour, provoked the Queen to the IV.
utmof i and the paflions which it occasioned, of- '" ""
ten forced tears from her eyes, both in public and 56
in private *. Her aversion for him increased every
day, and could be no longer concealed. He was
often absent from court, appeared there with little
splendor, and was trusted with no power. Avoid-
ed equally by thole who endeavoured to please the
Queen, who favoured Morton and his associates, or
who adhered to the house of Hamilton; he was
klft almost alone in a neglected and unpitied so-
litude t.

ABOUT this time a new favourite grew into great The rife o
credit with the Queen, and soon gained an ascendant Bothwe11'S

I>

, , r I. J 1-- *r favour.

over her heart, which encouraged his enterprising
genius to form designs that proved fatal to himself,
anrd the occasion of all Mary's subsequent misfoi-
tunes. This was James Hepburn Earl of Both-
well, the head of an ancient family, and by his ex-
tensive possessions and numerous vassals, one of the
most powerful noblemen in the kingdom. Even in
that turbulent age, when so many vast projects were"
laid open to an aspiring mind, and invited it to ac-
tion, no man's ambition was more daring than Both-
Well's, or had recourse to bolder or more singular
expedients for obtaining power. When almost every
person of distinction in the kingdom, whether Pa-
pit or Protestant, had joined the Congregation in
opposing the dangerous encroachments of the

Keith, 329. t Melv. 131, &c.
VO, I. . B b rtrcnch

B o o - French upon the liberties of the nation, he, though

IV. an avowed Protestant, adhered to the Queen Re.
~"'"- ' gent, and acted with vigour on her fide. The fc-

-6. ° cess which attended the arms of the Congregationhav-

ing obliged him to retire into France, he was taken
into the Queen's service, and continued with her
till the time or her return into Scotland *. From{
that peiio, every itep of his conduct towards Mary
was reinarx\ab'y dutiiul; and amidff all the shift-
inrs ors ,.iin, we fcarcclv c-'er find him holdingj
any courle which could be osTensive to her. When
liurray's proceedings with regard to her marriaoge
g-.\ve .:mbrag to the Queen, flhe recalled Bothwell
fr:-m that banif;lment into which (he had with re-
lutance driven him, and confidered his zeal and
abilities as the most powerful supports of her au-
thoritv. \Vhen the conspirators againti Rizio feiz-
ed her perion, he became the c,,ief instrument of
recovering her libertv, and served her, on that oc-
cation, with 'b much fidelity and success, as made
the deepef' impreiTion on her mind, and greatly in-
creased the confidence which fie had hitherto placed
in him -. Her gratitude loaded him with marks o
her bounty; she railed him to offces of profit an
oi trufr, and tranfafted no matter of importanc
~itlhout his advice T. By complailance, and afi{
duiry, he confirmed and fortified thele disposition
of the Q:een in his favour, and insensibly paved
the way towards that vast project, which his immo4
d&rate ambition had perhaps already conceived, and
vhich, in spite of many diffcultics, and at the exi
pence or many crimes, he at I-ft accomplished.
' Andcrf. 1.93. t lb. 1. 9,93. i Melv. 1I3. Kno-,;.1j

TFs

THE hour of the Queen's delivery now approach- B o o K
id. As her palace was defended only by a slender IV.
guard, it seemed imprudent to expose her person, -566
at this time, to the insults she might susser in a
;ingdom torn by fa&cions, and prone to mutiny.
For this reason, the Privy Council advised the Queen
: fix her residence in the castle of Edinburgh, the
rongefi fortress in the kingdom, and the most pro-
pr place for the security of her person . In order
torender this Security more perfect, Mary laboured
ioextinguifi the domeflic feuds which divided some
of the principal nobles. Murray and Argyll were
|:zfperated against Huntly and Bothwell, by reci-
:rocal and repeated injuries. The Queen, by her
uthority and entreaties, effected a reconcilement
among them, and drew from them a promise to
fury their discords in everlasting oblivion. This
.concilement Mary had so much at heart, that she
adc it the condition on which ihe again received
Murray into favour -.

0N the i th of June, Mary was delivered of her Birth of
only son James, a Prince whose birth was happy for James VI
te whole Island, and unfortunate to her alone.
His acceflion to the throne of England united the
^o divided kingdoms in one mighty monarchy,
d eftahlified the power of Great Britain on a firm
oundation. While she, torn early from her son by
tecruelty of her fate, was never allowed to in-
MUlge those tender passions, nor to taste those joys
hich ill the heart of a mother.
*Keith, 335 ft Ibid. 335. Append. 1;9.

B b 2 MEL-

B o K sMELVIL was infiantly dispatched to London with

IV. an account of this event. It struck Elizabeth, at
~- 5 first in a fenfrble manner; and the advantage and I
1 366 fuperioriry which her rival had acquired by the birth

of a son, forced tears from her eyes. But before
Melvil was admitted to audience, she had so far re-
covered the command of herself, as to receive him i
not only with decency, but with excessive cheerful-
ness; and willingly accepted the invitation which
Mary gave her, to Rtand godmother to her son. .

A s Mary loved splendor and magnificence, ihe

resolved to celebrate the baptism of the young Pririce
with great pomp ; and for that purpose sent invi-
tations of the fame kind to the French King, and
to the Duke of Savoy, the uncle of her former
husband.

'The-Queen THE Queen, on her recovery, discovered no
continues change in her sentiments with respect to the Kingt.
to trea-
Darly- The death of Rizio, and the countenance he had
with indif- ;gven to aation so insolent and unjustifiable, were
ference and
Degea. frill fresh in ler memory. She was frequently pen

five and dejected ¢. And though Henry sometime
attended at court, and accompanied her in her pro-
grefles through different parts of the kingdom, h1
met with little reverence from the nobles, whil
Mary treated him with the greatest reserve, anddi
not fu ier him to possess any authority 11. The
breach between them became every day more ap
parent §. Attempts were made toward a reconcile

M!. 133. t See Append. No XVII. : Ibid. 4S.
1 Keith, ;-3. Meel. 132, § Keith, Append. It9.

ment

nlent, particularly by Caftelnau the French Am-B o o K
baflador; but after such a violent rupture, it was IV.
found no easy matter to bind the nuptial knot a-new 1 56
and though he prevailed on the King and Queen to
pass two nights together *, we may, with great pro-
bability, pronounce this appearance of union, to
!which Caftelnau trusted, not to have been sincere;
we know with certainty that it was not lafling.

BOTHWELL, all this while, was the Queen's prime Her attachl
confident. 'Without his participation no business ment to

Bothwell

Wis concluded, and no favour befiowed. Together inclIafes
'irhl this ascendant over her councils, Bothwell, if
wre may believe the cotemporary hilforians, acquired
no les sway over her heart. But at what precise
time, this ambitious Lord sirs2 allowed the senti-
ments of a lover to occupy the place of that duty
ad respect which a subjed owes his Sovereign ; or
when Mary, intead of gratitude for his faithful ser-
vices, felt a pafion of another nature riling in her
bosom, it is no easy matter to determine. Such de-
licate transitions of paflion can be discerned only by
iofe, who are admitted near the persons of the par-
ties, and who can view the secret workings of the
heart with calm and acute observation. Neither
Knox nor Buchanan enjoyed there advantages. Their
humble fRation allowed them only a diflant access to
tle Queen and her favourite. And the ardor of
their zeal, and the violence of t!eir prejudices, ren-
der their opinions rash, precipitate, and inaccurate.
Itis by the effects of this reciprocal passion, rather

* KIC.tl, Append. :1'6

B b
t thian

B o o K than by their accounts of it, that subsequent hifto.

IV. rians can judge of its reality.
Dbb ADVFNTPOUS as Bothwell's project to gain the

Queen may appear, it was formed and carried ori
under very favourab'e circumstances. Mary wasi
young, gay, and affable. She possessed great fen-
fibiliry of temper, and was capable of the utmost|
tenderness of affectic n. She had placed her love on|
a very unworthy object, who requited it with ingra-
titude, and treated her with neglei, with insolence,
and with brutality. All these she felt, and resent-
ed. In this situation, the attention and complaif-
ance of a man, who had vindicated her authority,
and protected her person; who entered into all herX
views, who soothed all her passions, who watched
and improved every opportunity of inflnuating his
design, and recommending his pafilon *, could
scarce fail of making an impreflion on a heart of
such a frame as Mary's.

The KiCng T: r haughty spirit of Darnly, nursed up in flat-.
reo;ves :o tery, and accutilopd to command, could not bear
leave Sce:-
i. Sc the contempt under which he had now fallen, and

the flare of infigniscance to which he saw himfelfl
reduccI. B:.t in a country, where he was univer-
f!1a- h^:te. or defpif d, he could never hope to form
a p r-,', which woull second any attempt he might
r-...e to rcove;-r sv:-er. He addreffe himself, there-
..re, to th: Pope, and to the Kings of France and
5C;^ .n, .i;h m2nr- profeffons of his own zeal for
.:2 C..:h5;ic rVT 0 on, and with bitctr complaints a

* .:.:: :. 3, ?.- ta.

%ainli. 0a a

galnft the Queen, for neglecing to promote that B o o K
irteret : And soon after, he took a resolution, IV-
eqliil:y wi'd and desperate, of embarking on board I66
a !:ip, which he provided, and of flying into foreign
l.;rts. it is almost impossible to form any fatisfac-
toi. conliccdiure concerning the motives which influ-
ence a capricious and irregular mind. He hoped,
perhaps, to recomnmend himself to the Catholic
lrinces on the continent, by his zeal for religion,
and that they would employ their interest towards
rcin.fating him in the polTeffion of that.power which
he had lulr. Perhaps, he expe&ed nothing more
than the comfort of hiding the disgrace under which
he 'was now fallen, among flrangers, who had never
been xitnicEls of his former prosperity.

HE communicated the design to the French Am.- His capri-
haiTador Le Croc, and to his father the Earl ofcOu^brh-
Lennox. They both cndcavcured to diffwade him
icin it, but without fucccfs. Lennox, who seems,

.11eil as his son, to have loft the Queen's con-

cld;ce, and who, about this time, was feldomi at
olurt, instantly communicated the matter to her
,'a ktter. ienry, who had refused to accom-
P.n Q

the Quecn from Stirling to Edinburgh, was

,c.';iel albfr:t from court. I-ie arrived there, how-
tr:;, on the fame day she received the account of

;.: i.. :ndcd flight. But he was more than uiually

\;..y;ard and peei d scrupling to enter the
la.ce, unless cerltain Lords who attended the Queen
vere difnifTed, Mary was obliged to meet him

I Knox, 399.
B b 4 with-

B o o K.without the gates. At last he-fuffered her to.0on.

IV. dud him into her own apartment. She endeavoui-

66< ' ed to draw from him the reasons. of the ftrang:re.
56 solution which he had taken,. and. to ,divert-.him

from it. In spite however of all her arguments and
intreaties, he remained silent and inflexible. -Nxt
day the Privy Council, by her 'dire&tion, expofhs-
lated with him on the fame head. He persisted,.
notwithstanding, in his sullenness and obtinacy;
and neither deigned to explain the motives of his:
conduct, nor signified any intention of altering it.i
As he left the apartment, he turned towards the;
Queen, and told her, that Ihe should not iee his'
face again, for a long time. A few days after, hed
wrote to Mary, and mentioned two things as grounds!
of his disgust. She herself, he said, no longer ad-!
mitted him into any confidence, and had deprived!
him of all power; and the nobles, after her example,,
treated him with open neglec, so that- he appearedj
in every place without the dignity and splendor ofal
King.

Mhsry en- NOTHING could be more mortifying to Maryi
dearours to
pr-ven° h;s than this intended flight of the King's, which woiild
j;'^cd have spread the infamy of their dometic' quarrel all

over Europe. Compassion for a Monarch who
would then appear to be forced into exile by her
neglec and ill usage, might have difpofed'nankind
to entertain sentiments concerning the causes of their
discord, little to her advantage. In order;-there-
fore, to prepossess the mihds-of'her'alltei an'"toi
screen her reputation from any censure with which
Darnly might endeavour to load it, ite Privy coun-

cil

dl transmitted a narrative of this whole transaction, B o o K
t0th to the King, and.-to the Queen Mother of IV.
Fance. It is drawn with great art, and sets Mary's '1'
conduct in the. most favourable point of light . 1566

ABoUT this. time, the licence of the borderers cal-
dfor redress; and Mary resolving to hold a court
ofjuftice at Jedburgh, the inhabitants of several ad-
icent counties were summoned to attend their Sove-
ign in arms, according to cutom t-. Bothwell
was, at that: time, Lieutenant or Warden of all the
marches, an office among the most important in the
kingdom; and though usually divided into three
iilind governments, bestowed by the Queen's fa-
rour upon him alone. In order to display his own
[aloir and adtivity in the difcharge-of this truif, he
tempted to seize a gang of banditti, who, lurk-
ing among the marihes of Liddefdale, infested the
Raltof the country. But while he was laying hold
of one of those desperado's, he was wounded by Oaober,6.
n in several places, so that his followers were ob-
igd to carry him to Hermitage castle. Mary in-
ndtly flew thither, with an impatience which strong-
i'marks the anxiety of a lover, but little suited the
ignity of a Queen t. Finding that Bothwell was

threatened

K eith, 345, 347. t- Ibid. 353. Good. vol. i. 302.
The distance betveen Jedburgh and Hermitage is 8 Scotti:h
les, through'a couitry almost impassable. - The season of the
!r was far advanced. Bothwell seems to have been wounded
afcuffle, occasioned by the despair of a single man, rather
an any open infurretion of the borderers. It does not appear
a: the Q(een was attended thither by any considerable train.
i any military operation been necessary, as is supposed,

Good.

B o o K threatened with no dangerous symptom, she returi

IV. ed that fame day to Jedburgh. The fatigue of fu(
"ó a journey, added to the anguish of mind ihe h,

5 suffered on Eothwell's account, threw her ne:

morning into a violent fever *. Her life was defpai
ed of, but her youth, and the vigour of her conft
tution, refi',ed the malignity of her disease. Durin
the continuance of the Queen's illness, the Kinl
I'ovemb.t. who resided at Stirling, never came near Jedburgh]

and when he afterwards thought fit to make his aE
pearance there, he met with such a cold receptio0
as did not encourage him to make any long fayi
Mary soon recovered ftrcrgth enough to return alor
the eastern borders to Dunbar.

WVTHILE she resided in this place, her attentio

was turned towards England. Elizabeth, notwith
franding her promise, and even proclamations totl
contrary, not only allowed, but encouraged Moi
ton and his associates to remain in Englandll. Marj
on the other hand, afforded her protection to fever|
English fugitives. Each Queen watched the mc
tions of the other with a jealous attention, and t
cretly countenanced the pratices, which were ca
rying on, to disturb the administration or her riva

C-G'v. v i. -4. W': oliiJ have been extremely improper
r:iqlue t.e Queen's ,ccfon in an expedition againfl thieves.
soon as the Queen fcui:d Bothwell to be in no danger, the l
:,antiv returned; and after this we hear no more of the infurre
tisn, ror have we any proof that the rioters tookirefuge
England. No other reason but that which we have produce
ieems m .lcient to account for the Qceen's condut.

Keith, 5.1i, 35z. I Ibid. Append. 133.
Knov. T- 1i Cald. ol. ii. 15.

F0

FOR this purpose, Mary's Ambassador, Robert B o o i
Mel il, and her other emissaries, were extremely IV.
tive and successful. We may impute, in a good "66"

1566.

gree, to their intrigues, that spirit which appear- The Eng-
in the Parliament of England, and which raised ]ilh Parlia-
Rtorm that threatened Elizabeth's domestic tran- vours Ma-
uillt', more than any other event of her reign, y's preent
ld required all her art and dexterity to allay it. succession.

ELIZABETH had now reigned eight years, with-
Get discovering the least intention to marry. A vio-
btdiftemper, with which she had lately been feiz-
i, having endangered her life, and alarmed the
iaion with the profpeF of all those calamities which
ieoccafioned by a disputed and dubious fuccefflon;
motion was made, and eagerly listened to in both
aufes, for addressing the Queen, to provide againfi
y such danger in times to come, either by figni-
ring her own resolution to marry, or by consenting
Io2n aft eftablifhnin the order of succession to the
Crown *. Her love to her subjeCts, her duty to
e public, her concern for poflterity, it was pre-
,ded, not only called upon, but obliged her to
akone of there steps. The insuperable aversion
Ihich the had all along discovered for marriage,
Bade it improbable that she would chufe the for-

;eri and if the complied with the latter request, no
ite to the Crown could, with any colour ofjuftice,
tfct in opposition to that of the Scottish Queen.
'UIbeth was sagacious enough to fee the remotest
rcw::uences of this motion, and observed them

* D'Eives Tou;n. ofParl. io5.

with

Bo o K with the greatest anxiety. Mary, by refilfing

IV. often to ratify the treaty of Edinburgh, had plain
' intimtated a design of embracing the firif promifin

' opportunity for prosecuting her right to the Englii

Crown; and by her secret negociations, she ha
gained many to favour her title `. All the Roma
Catholics ardently wished for her fuccefion. HI
gentleness and humanity had removed many of tho:
apprehensions which the Protestants entertained o
account of her religion. The court faction, whic
envied the power of Cecil, and endeavoured to wrei
the administration out of his hands, advanced ti
pretensions of the Scottifl Queen in opposition t
him. The union of the two kingdoms was adefir4
able object to all wife men in both nations; andtli
birth of the young Prince was a security for the con
tinuance of this blessing, and gave hopes of its pei
petuity.

ElizabethsU UNDER there circumstances, and while the natio
perplex:ty
on t.'-ha-, was in such a temper, a parliamentary declarationc
cu.L.. Mary's title would have been highly detrimental

Elizabeth. The present unsettled Rtate of the fuc
ceflion left much in her power. Her refentmer
alone night have gone far towards excluding an
of the competitors from the Crown ; and the drea
of this had hitherto reflrained, and overawed tt
ambition of the 'cottiflh Queen. But if this chec
should be removed, by the legal acknowledgmer
of her title, Mary would be at fu;i liberty to purft
her dangerous designs, and to aa without flear
re,:-ve. Her partizans were already rmeditain

?S.'!~:]fc'. 3r;6.

- sch~~~~~rm;~~~

jmes for infurreEtions in different parts of theB'o ok'K
igdm *; and an aa of Parliament, recognizing 1V.
irihts of that Princess, whose pretensions they 6
ioured, would have been nothing less than a fig- 5
Iro arms ; and, notwithstanding Elizabeth's just
xie to the affetions of her fubjedts, might have

aken and endangered her throne.

WHILE this matter remained in fufpence in both Mary en-
ouses, an account of it was transmitted to Mary deavoursto
Melvil her AmbaiT'ador. As she did not want this oppor-
vrocates for her right, even among those who were tunit.
;ar Elizabeth's person, ile endeavoured to culti-
nte the difpoficion which appeared towards fettling
eright of succession in her favour, by a letter to
Privy Counsellors of England. She expressed
sit a grateful sense of Elizabeth's friendship, which
eafcribes chiefly to their good offices, with their
svereign, in her behalf. She declared her refolu-
_on to live in perpetual amity with England, with-
turging or pursuing her claim upon the Crown,
,y farther than should be agreeable to the Queen.
lut, at the fame time, as her right of fuccefion
as undoubted, she hoped it would be examined
!h candour, and judged of with impartiality. The
iobles who attended her wrote to the Englith Privy
Council in the fame frain t. Mary artfully gave
:efe letters the air of being nothing more than a
claration of her own, and of her fubjets gratitude
:wards Elizabeth. But as she could not be igno-
rn of the jealousy and fear with which Elizabeth

" Melv. 147. t Keith, 354. Append. 136.

observed

B o o K observed the proceedings of Parliament, a flep si

IV. uncommon as this, of one Prince's entering intd
1 66. public correspondence with the Privy Counsellors oi

another, could not be otherwiie conltrued than as
taken with an intention to encourage the spirit whicl
had already been railed among the English. Inthi
light it seems to have appeared to Elizabeth her
self A. But the dilpofition of her people renderini
it necessary to treat Mary's person with great de
cency, and her title 'vwith much regard, she me
tioned it to her only in the softest language.

Elizabeth NOTHING, however, could be a more cruel mo
fths aend tification to a Princess of Elizabeth's characer, th
gains her
Parlia- the temper which both houses of Parliament disco

vered on this occasion. She bent all her policy t
defeat, or elude the motion. After allowing th
firit heat of their zeal to evaporate, she called int
her pretence a certain number of each house. Sh
toothed and carefled t'lem ; he threatened and pro
mifed; she remitted subsidies which were due; anl
refused those which were offered; aid in the en
prevailed to have this formidable motion put off so
that fefiton. Happi'y for her, the condu& of th
Scottish Queen, and the misfortunes which befe
her, prevented the revival of such a motion in an
future Parliament t.

MEAN time, in order to preserve the reputatio
of impartiality, and that fle might not drive Ma

* Keith, 37.
t D'Ewes Joarn. Ic4.--3o. Camd. 3g9: Melv. '19
-iHanes, 4i6.

int(

I,

0 any desperate measure, she committed to the B o o XK
0ower one Thornton, who had published something IV.
rogatory to the right of the Scottish line ; and 'ó"" :

1566.

ni5ed her displeasure against a member of the
ife of Commons, who seemed, by some words in
speech, to glance at Mary-.

AMIDST all her other cares, Mary was ever soli- An extra-

ous to promote the interest of that religion which sep" oar
profcffed. The re-establishment of the Romilh Mary's in

favour o£

brine seems to have been her favourite passion; Popery.
dthough the design was concealed with care, and
ducted with caution, ihe pursued it with a per-
ering zeal. At this time, she ventured to lay
ie somewhat of her usual reserve; and the aid
ich fie expected from the Popish Princes, who
dengaged in the league of Bayonne, encouraged
to take a ftep, which, if we confider the temper
ithe nation, appears to be extremely bold. Hav-
*formerly held a secret correspondence with the
r of Rome, she now resolved to allow a Nun-
ofrom the Pope publickly to enter her dominions.
irdnal Laurea, at that time Bishop of Mondovi,
sthe person on whom Pius V. conferred this of-
, and along with him he sent the Queen a pre-
t of 20,000 crowns . It is not the character of
Papal court, to open its treasury upon distant or
aginary hopes. The business of the Nuncio in
Wtland could be no other, than to attempt a re-
nciliation of the kingdom to the Romish fee.
'us Mary herself understood it; and in her an-

Camdi. 401. t Haynes, 449.
' \ita Card. Laur. ap. Burn. vol. iii. 32;.

4 fwer

B o o K fver to a letter which she received from the Pop

IV. after exprefling her grateful sense of his patern
~.,ó.. care and liberality, she promises that she would ben
166' her whole strength towards the re-establishment an

propagation of the Catholic faith; that she woul
receive the Nuncio with every possible demonftr
tion of refled, and concur, with the utmost vigo§i
in all his designs towards promoting the honourl
God, and retloring peace to the kingdom; that
would celebrate the baptism of the Prince, accord
ing to the ceremonies which the Romish ritual p
icriben, hoping that her fubjets would be taug
by this example, again to reverence the facramn
of the church, which they had tb long treated w
contempt; and that she would be careful toin
early into her son the principles of a sincere lo
and attachment to the Catholic faith *. But thou
the Nuncio was already arrived at Paris, and h
sent over one of his attendants with part of them
ney, the Queen did not think the juncure pro
for his reception. Elizabeth was preparing.to fe
a magnificent embassy into Scotland, against
time of the Prince's baptism, and as it would h
been improper to offend her, fle wifely contdw
under various pretences, to detain Laurea at Paris
The ccnvurfions into which the kingdom was thro
soon after, made it impossible for him to pursue
journey any farther.

AT the very time that Mary was secretly ca
ing on these negociations for subverting the Refo

* Conai Vitx Maris ap. Jebb. vol. ii. 5 .
e K.ihi, Append. 135.

ed Church, she did not scruple publickly to employ B o oK
her authority towards obtaining for its Ministers a IV.
more certain and comfortable subsistence*. Dur- ', '
ing this year, she iffned several proclamations and 66.
ads of council for that purpose, and readily approv-
d of every scheme which was proposed for the
nore efTRetual payment of their stipends. This
part of her conduct does little honour to Mary's in-
egrity; and though justified by the example of
Princes, who often reckon falfhood and deceit a-
|ong the necessary arts of government, and even
isthorifed by the pernicious casuistry of the Roman
Church, which transfers breach of faith to heretics,

nom the lift of crimes, to that of duties, such dif-
:mulation, however, must be numbered among
§ofe blemishes which never fiain a truly great and
enerous character.

As neither the French nor Piedmontefe Ambaf- December.
Jors were yet arrived, the baptism of the Prince Hera''erfi

Hon for :he

as put off from time to time. Mean while Mary King ex-
Sed her residence at Craigmillar t. Such a. re- Ceffie.
emnent, perhaps, suited the present temper of her
ind, and induced her to prefer it before her own
lace of Holy-rood-houle. Her aversion for the
ng grew every day more confirmed, and was be-
e altogether incurable. A deep melancholy fuc-
eded to that gaiety of spirit, which was natural to
r. The rashness and levity of her own choice,
d the King's ingratitude and obstinacy, filled her
ith hame and with despair. A variety of palions

' Keith, 56i, 562. Knox, 401. ' Keith, 355.
VOL. I. C c preyed

B o o K preyed at once on a mind, all whose sensations wert

IV. exquisite, and all its emotions strong, and often ex)
..ó. torted from her, the last wish of the unfortunate
1566. that life itself would come to an end *.

A divorce MURRAY^ and Maitland observed all those work
between
them pro- ings of passion in the breast of the Queen, an
poyd. conceived hopes of turning them to the advantag

of their ancient associates, Morton, and the othe
confpiratorz against Rizio. They were flill in b
nifhment, and the Queen's refentmenr against the
continued unabated. Murray and the Secreta
flattered themselves, however, that her inclinatio
to be separated from Darnly would surmount th
deep-rooted aversion, and that the hopes of an eve
so desirable might induce her to be reconciled to t
conspirators. It was easy to find reasons, in
King's behaviour, on which to found a sentence
divorce. This sentence they had interest enough
obtain, and to procure the ratification of it in Pa
liament. In return for this service, they propo
to stipulate with the Queen -to grant a pardon
Morton and his followers. The design was fiftt
all communicated to Argyll, who, as well as Mu
ray, owed his return into Scotland to the confpir
cy against Rizio. Huntly and Bothwel, who
that time direCted all Mary's councils, were lik
wife admitted into the concert. They joined to
ther in making the overture to the Queen, and e
forced it with all Maitland's eloquence t.. B
Mary, however desirous of obtaining that deliv
ance from Darnly's caprices, with which they

' Keth. Pref. vii. -+ Anders. vol. iv. Part ii. ISS.

6

voured to allure her, had nevertheless good rea- B o o K
I for rejecing the method, by which they pro- IV.
fd to accomplish it. The birth of her son had '1-566
atly strengthened her claim upon the Engliflh
cefflon, and encouraged the abettors of it to ap.
arwith greater boldness, and to aft with more
sour. She could scarce hope to be divorced from
husband, without throwing some imputation on
son. This might open a new dispute with re-
dto the fucceflion, and put it in the power of
abeth and her Ministers to call in queflion the
ce's legitimacy, or at leafr to fubje& it to all
delays and cavils of a judicial inquiry. The
of these inconveniencies weighed with Mary,
determined her rather to endure her hard fate,
nto seek relief, by venturing on such a dange-
s experiment.

THE Earl of Bedford, and the Count de Brienne,
English and French Ambassadors, being arriv-
Mary set out for Stirling, to celebrate the bap-
of her son. Bedford was attended by a numerous
Splendid train, and brought presents from Eli-
th, suitable to her own dignity, and the respect
which she affected, at that time, to treat the
nof Scots. Great preparations had been made
Miary, and the magnificence displayed by her on
occasion, exceeded whatever had been formerly
wn in Scotland. The ceremony itself was per- Decem. 17.
ed according to the rites of the Romish Church.
neither Bedford, nor any of the Scottish nobles
professcd the Protestant religion, entered with-

Cc 2 in

B o o K n the gates of the chapel *. The spirit of that as

IV. firm and uncomplying, would not, upon any

'5 ducement, condescend to witness an aftion, whii
I-566.

it esteemed idolatrous.

The King's HENRY'S behaviour, at this juncture, perfeC
capricious discovers the excess of his caprice, as well as of i
behaviour
at the bap- folly. He chore to reside at Stirling, but confir
tifm of the
Prine. himself to his own apartment; and as the Que

distrusted every nobleman who ventured to conve
with him, he was left in absolute solitude. Nothi
could be more singular, or was less expeted, tl
his chu!ing to appear in a manner, that both p
lifhed the contempt under which he had fallen,
by exposing the Queen's domestic unhappinels
the obfcrvation of so many foreigners, looked 1
a ftep taken on purpose to mortify and to offend
Mary felt this insult sensibly; and notwithftand
all her efforts to assume the gaiety which suited
occasion, and which was necessary for the polite
ception of her guests, she was sometimes oblige
retire, in order to be at liberty to indulge her
row, and give vent to her tears t. The King
perfilted in his design of retiring into foreign pa
and daily threatened to put it in execution $.

Keith, 360. t Ibid. Pref vii.

t Canrden affirms, 401. that Bedford was commranid

Elizabeth not to gieve Darnly the title of King. As this
an inig;;iv, not :o be borne, either by Mary or herhull
it hath been after;ed to be the cause of the King's absence
the ceremnui- of h;s son's a; rilmn. Keith. 3bc. Good.
Biut, s. No {uch thing is to be found among Bedford's in

ti

THE ceremony of witnessing the Prince's baptism B o o K
as not the sole business of Bedford's embassy. His IV.
Rrusions contained an overture, which ought to 156
ae gone far towards extinguishing those jealousies Elizabeth
hich had so long subsisted between the two Queens. endeavours

to acco'-

[he treaty of Edinburgh, which has been so often modare her
ntioned, was the principal occasion of there. The dwith Mary
irit, however, which had risen to such an height
the late Parliament, the power of the party which
Iured the Scottish Queen's title, the number
acivity of her agents in different parts of the
dom, alarmed Elizabeth, and induced her to
o any advantage, which the ambiguous and

the original of which fill remains. Keith, 356. 2. Bed-
' advice to the Queen by Melvil is utterly inconfifient with
den's assertion. Melv. 153. Melvil's account is confirmed
Elizabeth's inftrutions to Sir Henry Norris, where she as-
that she commanded Bedford to employ his bell offices to-
s reconciling Mary to her husband, which he had attempt-
o0 no purpose. Digges's Compl. Ambafs. p. 13. A paper
Ihed Append. N° XVIII. proves the fame thing. 3. Le
the French Resident mentions the King's absence, but with-
giring that reason for it, which has been founded on Camden's
ds, though, if that had been the real one, he would scarce
failed to mention it. His account of this matter is that
h I have followed, Keith, Pref. vii. 4. He informs his
:, that on account of the difference betwixt the King and the
en, he had refused to hold any further correspondence with
formrer, thoqgh he appears, in many instances, to have been
great confident. ibid. 5. As the King was not present at
baptism, he seems to have been excluded from any share in
ordinary administration of business. Two acs of Privy
ncil, one on the zoth, and the other on the zl if of Decem.
are found in Keith, 56z. They both run in the Queen's
e alone. The King seems not to have been present. This
not be owing to Elizabeth's inftruEions to Bedford.

C c 3 artful

B o o K artful expressions in that treaty might afford he

IV. Nothing was now demanded of Mary, but to re
1566. nounce any title to the Crown of England durin

Elizabeth's life, and the lives of her posterity; whc
on the other hand, engaged to take no ftep, whic
might prove injurious to Mary's claim upon the fuc
cession *

MARY could not, with decency, rejeEt a props

fition so equitable; she infilled, however, that El|
zabeth should order the right upon which she clainr
ed to be ]cgally examined, and publickly recognize|
and particularly that the tetiament of Henry VII
whereby he had excluded the descendants of his eld
eft sifter the Queen cf Scotland, from the place di
to them in the order of succession, might be pr
duced, and confidered by the English nobilit
lViary's Niiniftcrs had credulously embraced an op
nion, that this testament which they so justly col
ceived to be injurious to their Mistress, was a me'
forgery and on different occasions had urged Ei
zabeth to produce it. Mary would have sussen
considerably by gaining this point. I he origii
tefEament is still extant, and not the least doubtc
be entertained of its genuineness and authentici!
But it was not Elizabeth's intention to weaken
to set aside the title of the house of Stewart. S.
aimed at nothing more, than to keep the quefii
concerning the iuccemfon perplexed and undecidc
and by induitrioufly eluding this request, she d
real service to Mary's cause -.

· Keith, 356. t lbid. 361, 3 , Note c ) Murdin. 31

F1
F

A FEW days after the baptism of the Prince,Morton B o o K
d all the other conspirators against Rizio obtained IV.
eir pardon, andleave to return into Scotland. Mary, "
ibo had hitherto continued inexorable to every in- 1566;
|aty in their behalf, yielded at last to the folicita-
ns of Bothwell *. He could hope for no success
those bold designs on which his ambition refolv-
to venture, without drawing aid from every quar-

By procuring a favour for Morton and his

ociates, of which they had good reason to despair,
expc&ed to secure a band of faithful and deter-
ned adherents.

THE King still remained at Stirling, in solitude,
under contempt. His impatience in this fitua-
n, together with the alarm given him, by the ru-
ur of a design to seize his perbon, and confine
i to prison ', was the occasion of his leaving
t place in an abrupt manner, and retiring to his
her at Glasgow. June 25.
Two Assemblies of the Church were held during

Decem. 25.

year. New complaints were made, and upon Church as-
d grounds, of the poverty and contempt under fairs.
ich the Protefiant clergy were suffered to lan-
it. Penurious as the allotment for their sub-
tence was, they had not received the least part
what was due for the preceding year j. Nothing
than a zeal, ready to endure and to susser every
g for a good cause, could have persuaded men
adhere to a church, so indigent and so neglected.

Good. vol. i. 140. Melv. 154. t Keith, Pref. viii.
t Ibid. 562.

C c 4 The

B o o KThe extraordinary expences, occasioned by th

IV. Prince's baptism, had exhausted the Queen's trea
L'"- fury, and the fums appropriated for the fubfifenc

of the clergy were diverted into other channes
The Queen was therefore obliged to prevent th
just remonstrances of the aflembly, by falling oi
some new method for the relief of the church. Some
symptoms of liberality, some stretch towards mun
ficence might have been expe&ted in an alignmen
which was made with an intention of soothing an l
flencing the clergy. But both the Queen and th,
nobles held fast the riches of the church which the]
had seized. A fum, which, at the highest computati
on, can scarce be reckoned equal to gooo9000 . sterling
was deemed fuficienr for the maintenance of a whol
national church, by men who had lately seen fingl
monafieries possessed of revenues far superior in va
lue.

THE ecclesiastics in that age bore the grie¢ance

which affeEted themselves alone with astonishing pa
tience, butwherever the Reformed religion was threat
ened, they were extremely apt to be alarmed, and t
proclaim, in the loudef manner, their apprehension
of danger. Ajuft occasion of this kind was give
them, a short time before the meeting of theAffe
bly. The usurped and oppreflive jurifdicidon ofth
spiritual courts had been abolished by the;.Parlia
meat i560, and Commiffaries were appointed:
hear and determine the causes which. formerlyca
under their cognizance t. Among the fewjias-o
that Parliament, to which Mary had paid any re

* Keith, 5;'2. t Id. 152.

gard

ard, this was one. She had confirmed the autho- B o o
riy of the Commiffaries, and had given them in- IV.
iruEtions for direcing their proceedings *, which
are frill of great authority in that court. From that
dime there judges had continued in the uninterrupted
:xercife of their funcion, when of a sudden the
Queen issued a proclamation, restoring the Arch-
bihop of St. Andrews to his ancient jurifdi&tion,
and depriving the Commiffaries of all authority t.

A MOTIVE which cannot be juflified, rendered
the Queen not unwilling to venture upon this rath
oction. She had been contriving, for some time,
how to re-effablifh the Popish religion; and the re-
loring the ancient ecclesiastics to their former jurif-
diction, seemed to be a considerable Rep towards
tiat end. The motive which prompted Bothwell,
to whose influence over the Queen this action muff
e chiefly imputed $, was fiill more criminal. His
tnterprifing ambition had already formed that bold
design, which he. soon after put in execution, and
the use which we shall hereafter find him making
of that authority, which the Popifli ecclesiastics re-
gained, discovers the reasons of his present conduEt,
in contributing to revive their power. The Pro-
teRant clergy were not unconcerned fpeEtators of an
event, which threatened their religion with unavoid-
able deftrution ; but as they despaired of obtain-
ing the proper remedy from the Queen herself, they
addressed a remonstrance to the whole body of the
Protestant nobility, full of that ardent zeal for re-
ligion, which the danger to which it was exposed at

Keith, 25z, t Knox, 403. Id, ibid.

that

B o o that time, seemed to require *. What effecs this

IV. vehement exhortation might have produced, we

L" v'have no opportunity of judging, the attention of
I5tb6' the nation being quickly turned towards events of;

another, and more tragical nature.

The King IMMEDIATELY upon the King's leaving Stirling,
Gfas f at and before he could reach Glasgow, he was seized
1567. with a dangerous distemper. The symptoms which

attended it were violent and unusual, and in that
age it was commonly imputed to the effeEts ofpoi-J
font. It is impossible, amidst the contradictions
of historians, to decide with certainty concerning its
nature- or its cause I. His life was in the utmost|

Keith, 567. t Melv. 154. Knox, 401.

Buchanan and Knox are pofirive that the King had been

poisoned They mention the black and putrid pustules which!
broke out aUl over his body. Buchanan adds, that Abernethy
the King's ph)fician plainly declared that poison was the cause
of these symptoms, and that the QEeen refused to allow her own
physician to attend him, Buch. 349. Knox, 401. 2. Blackwood
Caufin. &c. Jebb, vol. i. 24, 59. afiert, that the small pdoxwas
the disease with which the King was seized. -He is called a
PecJk"/ man in the Queen's letter, Good. vol. ii. 5I. The rea-
fen given by French Paris for lodging the King at the Kirk of
Field, viz. left the young Prince should catch the infection if he
staid in the palace, seems to favour this opinion, AndeS. vol. ii.
193. Carte hentions it as a proof of Mary's tenderness to her
hulband, that;though (he rever had the small pox herself, fe j
ventured to attend him, vol. iii. 446. This, ifit had beefi true,
would have afforded a good pretence for not visiting hbi fiooner;
but Mary had the small pox in her infancy, Sadler's- Letters.
3. Biihop Lefly affirms, that the King's disease was the French
pox, Keith, 364. Note (b). In that age, this disease was efleem-
ed so contagious, that persons infeced with it w4ere removed
ih:eut the walls of cities.

dan-

danger; but after languishing for some weeks, the B o o K
vigour of his conflitution surmounted the malignity IV.
of the disease.

I567.

MARY'S negle& of the King, on this occasion, Ncgleeed
was equal to that with which he had treated her dur- by Mary.
ing her illness at Jedburgh. She no longer felt
that warmth of conjugal affection which prompts to
eympathy, and delights in all those tender offices
which sooth and alleviate sickness and pain. At
thisjuncture, she did not even put on the appear-
ance of this pafilon. Notwithstanding the King's
danger, she amused herself with excursions to diffe-
rent parts of the country, and suffered near a month
to elapse before she visited him at Glalgow. By
that time, the violence of the distemper was over,
and the King, though weak and languishing, was
out of all danger.

THE breach between Mary and her husband was The breach
not occasioned by any of those flight disgusts, which thetrie-
interrupt the domestic union, without dissolving it parbe.
altogether. Almost all the passions, which operate
wirh greatest violence on a female mind, and drive
it to the most dangerous extremes, concurred: in
raiGing and fomenting this unhappy quarrel. Ingra-
titude for the favours she had bestowed, contempt
of her person, violations of the marriage-vow, en-
croachments on her power, conspiracies against her.
favourites, jealousy, insolence, and obstinacy, were
the injuries of which Mary had great reason to cobm-
plain. She felt them with the utmost sensibility;
and added to the anguish of disappointed love, they

pro-

B o o K produced those symptoms ofdefpair which we have

IV. already described. Her resentment against the King

'"-T seems not to have abated from the time of his leav.
1567. ing Stirling. In a letter written with her own hand,

to her ambassador in France, just before she set out
for Glaigow, no tokens offudden reconcilement ap.
pear. On the contrary, ihe mentions, with orme
Jan. o. bitterness, the King's ingratitude, the jealousy with

which he observed her actions, and the inclination
he discovered to disturb her government, and at the
fame time talks of all his attempts with the utmost
scorn *.

vir::'. " AFTER this discovery of Mary's sentiments, it
King at
cGiagcw. was scarce to be expe&ed that fbe would visit the

King, or that any thing but marks of jealousy and
distrust should appear in such an interview. This,
however, was far from being the cafe; she not only
visited Henry, but, by all her words and ations,
endeavoured to express an uncommon affetion for
him: And though this made impression on the cre-
dulous spirit of her husband, no less flexible, on
some occasions, than obstinate on others; yet, to
those who are acquainted with the human heart,
and who know how seldom and how slowly such
wounds in domestic happiness are healed, this fud-
den transition will appear with a very fuifpicious
air, and will be confidered by them as the effet of
artifice.
herdis- - BUT it is not on suspicion alone, that Mary is

charged with dissimulation in this part of her con-

* Keith, Fref. viii.

duct.

dc:t. Two of her famous letters to Bothwell were B o o K
written during her flay at Glasgow, and fully lay IV.
open this scene of iniquity. He had so far succeeded
in his ambitious and criminal design, as to gain an 567.
absolute ascendant over the Queen; and in a fitua-
ilon, such as Mary's, merit not so conspicuous, ser-
vices of far inferior importance, and address much
leIs insinuating than Bothwell's, may be supposed to
steal imperceptibly on a female heart, and entirely
to overcome it. Among those in the higher ranks
of life, scruples with regard to conjugal fidelity are,
unhappily, neither many, nor strong: Nor did the
manners of that court, in which Mary had been
educated, contribute to increase or to fortify them.
The amorous turn of Francis I. and Henry 1I. the
wildness of the military character in that age, and
the liberty of appearing in all companies, which be-
gan to be allowed to women, who had not yet ac-
quired that delicacy of sentiment, and those polish-
ed manners, which alone can render this liberty in-
nocent, had introduced, among the French, a 'icen-
tioufnefs of morals that rose to an afionifhing height.
Such examples, which were familiar to Mary from
her infancy, could hardly fail of diminishing that
honor of vice which is natural to a virtuous mind.
The King's behaviour would render the first ap-
proach of forbidden sentiments less shocking; resent-
ment, and disappointed love, would be apt to re-
preflnt whatever toothed her revenge, asjuftifiable
on that account; and so many concurring causes
might, almost imperceptibly, kindle a new passion
in her heart.

BUT

B OO K BUT whatever opinion we may form with regard

IV. to the rife and progress of this passion, the letters

6 themselves breathe all the ardour and tenderness oi

i567.
The mo- love. The affecion which Mary there expresses for
ves of it. Bothwell, fully accounts for every subsequent part

of her conduct; which, without admitting this cir.
cumflance, appears altogether mysterious, incon-
fiftent, and inexplicable. That reconcilement with
her husband, of which, if we allow it to be genuine,
it is impolsible to give any plausible account, is dif-
covered, by the Queen's own confession, to have
been mere artifice and deceit. As her aversion for
her husband, and the suspicious attention with which
she observed his conduEt, became universally known,
her ears were officioufy filled, as is usual in such
cafes, with groundless or aggravated accounts of his
actions. By some, she was told, that the King in-
tended to seize the person of the Prince his son, and
in his name to usurp the government; by others
she was assured, that he resolved inflantly to leave
the kingdom; that a vessel was hired for this pur-
pose, and lay in the river Clyde ready to receive
him *. The last was what Mary chiefly dreaded.
Henry's retiring into a foreign country must have
been highly dishonourable to the Queen, and would
have entirely disconcerted Bothwell's measures.
While he resided at Glasgow, at a distance from
her, and in that part of the kingdom where the in-
terest of his family was greatest, he might, with
more facility, accomplish his designs. In order,
therefore, to prevent his executing any such wild
scheme, it was necessary, to bring him to some place

- 5'Xe;i:. Pic£. vwhi.

where

where he would be more immediately under her own B o o K
eye. For this purpose, she first employed all her IV.
t to regain his confidence, and then proposed to I"ó
emove him to the neighbourhood of Edinburgh, rai 567n

o Prevails on

under pretence, that there he would have easier ac- him to
cess to the advice of physicians, and that ihe her- Edinburgh.
elf could attend him without being absent from
ier ton %. The King was weak enough to susser
iimfclf to be persuaded; and being still feeble and
incapable of bearing fatigue, was carried in a litter
!o Edinburgh.

THE place prepared for his reception was a house,
longing to the Provost of a collegiate church,
called Kirk of Field. It flood almost upon the
lme spot where the house belonging to the Princi-
pal of the University now stands. Such a situation,
n a rising ground, and at that time in an open
leld, had all the advantages of healthful air to re-
1ommend it; but, on the other hand, the solitude
o the place rendered it extremely proper for the
tommiffion of that crime, with a view to which, it
:ems manifestly to have been chosen.

MARY continued to attend the King with theHe ismur-
rft afliduous care. She seldom was absent from dered thre.
im through the day; she slept several nights in the
chamber under his apartment. She heaped on him
many marks of tenderness and confidence, as, in
agreat measure, quieted those suspicions which had
f0long disturbed him. But while he was fondly
oidulging in dreams of the return of his former

" Good. vol. ii .

hap-

B o o K happiness, he flood on the very brink of deftruc

IV. tion. On Sunday the ninth of February, abou

ó-W' eleven at night, the Queen left the Kirk of Field
567' in order to be present at a marque in the palace

At two next morning, the house in which the Kin(
lay was blown up with gunpowder. The noise ane
shock, which this sudden explosion occasioned, alarn
ed the whole city. The inhabitants ran to the plac
whence it came. The dead body of the King!
with that of a servant who slept in the fame roodm
were found lying in an adjacent garden, withoutthi
city wall, untouched by fire, and with no bruise o
mark of violence.
1Tcharac- SucH was the unhappy fate of Henry Stewar

Lord Darnly, in the twenty first year of his age
The indulgence of fortune, and his own extern
accomplishments, without any other merit, hai
raised him to an height of dignity, of which h
was altogether unworthy. By his folly and ingrati
tude, he loft the heart of a woman who doated oi
him to difiraEtion. His insolence and inconftancj
alienated from him such of the nobles as had con
tributed most zealously towards his elevation. Hi
levity and caprice exposed him to the scorn of thi
people, who once revered him as the descendant o
their ancient Kings and heroes. Had he died a na
tural death, his end would have been unlamented, ani
his memory have been soon forgotten; but th
cruel circumstances of his murder, and the remii
ness with which it was afterwards avenged, hay
made h;s name to be remembered with regret, ani

5 hay

gae rendered him the objeEt of pity to which he B o o xI
d otherwise no title. I V.

.567.

EVERY one's imagination was at work to guess Bothwe7l
h0 had contrived and executed this execrable deed. and the
ie suspicion fell, with almost a general content, p'ed of'
Bothwell*, and some refletions were thrownthe murder,
i, as if the Queen herself were no firanger to the
me, Of Bothwell's guilt there remains the ful-
evidence, that the nature of the ation will ad-
t, The Queen's known sentiments with re-
d to her husband, gave a great appearance of
bability to the imputation with which she was
~ed t.
Two days after the murder, a proclamation was

by the Queen, offering a considerable reward
ay person who should discover those who had
guilty of such a horrid and detestable crime 4;
though Bothwell was now one of the greatest
e&s in the kingdom, formidable on account of
own power, and protected by the Queen's fa-
, it was impossible to suppress the sentiments
indignation of the people. Papers were as-
to the most public places of the city, accuf-
him of the murder, and naming his accom-
; pitures appeared to the fame purpole, and
les were heard in the middle of the night, charg-
|him with that barbarous aEtion. But the au-

* Melv. i55. Anders. vol. i. 156.

See Dirfrtation concerning the murder of Henry 1Darnly,
egcnuinenefs of Mary letters to Bothwell. Appendix.
Anderr. vol. i. 36.
'01, I. D d thors

B o o K thors of these rumours did not confine their accu.

1V. fations to Boahwell alone, they insinuated that tht
//' Q-,een herself was accessory to the crime *. Thi
1567' bjld accusation, which so directly attacked Mary';

repu:ation, drew the attention of her council; ani
by engaging them in an inquiry after the authors
thefc libels, diverted them from searching for thi
murderers of the King. It could scarce be ex
peeLd thai Mary, h -erff would be extremely solid
tous to discover t'crfe who had rid her of an hui
band, whom ihe had so violently hated. It wa
Bothwell's interest, who had the supreme directi;
of this, as well as of all other afairs, to'ftifle ar
suppress whatever evidence should be offered, ai
to cover, if possible, the whole tranfaAion und|
the veil of darkness and of silence. -Some inquir
however, was made, and some persons called b!
fore the council; but the examination was con'dui
ed with the most indecefA remiTfnefs, and in fui
a manner, as to let in no light upon that scene(
guilt f.

IT was not her own subjects alone who fufi:e&r
IMar of having been acceiTorv to this unna
crime; nor did an opinion, so difhonourabie to
chara ler, owe its rife and progress to the eal
and malice of her factious nobles. The report
the manner and circumstances of the King's ml
der spread quickly over all Europe, andieven
rthit age, which was accufRomcd to deeds of
lence, i excited univ'er!al horror. As her unhap

Ar. .- e i. 1. . + I.
. v i. ;S. t Id.

iv- i^' '^- ~~~~~~~~brej

breach with her husband had long been matter of B o o K
public diftouife, the first conje&ures which were IV.
sor,ned with regard to his death, were extremely to 567'
her disadvantage. Her friends, at a loss what apo.

y to offer for her condu&t, called on her to pro-
tcute the murderers with the utmost diligence, and
apeaed that the rigour of her proceedings would
prove the best and fullest vindication of her inno-
(ence *

LENNOX, at the fame time, incited Mary to ven- Lennox ac-
eance with incessant importunity. This nobleman cures Both-

well of the
d shared in his son's disgrace, and being treated King's

I Mary with negle&, ulually resided at a distance murder

iom court. Rouzed, however, by an event no
s shocking to the heart of a father, than fatal to
ihis schemes of ambition, he ventured to writeSeb.
the Queen, and to offer his advice with re-

to the most effectual method for discovering

dconvicting those who had so cruelly deprived
m of a son, and her of a husband. He urged
to prosecute those who were guilty, with vi-
ur, and to bring them to a speedy trial; he de-
red his own suspicion of Bothwell, and of those
o were named as his accomplices; he required
at, out of regard to decency, and in order to en-
urage evidence to appear against them, the per-
saccufed of such an atrocious crime should be
lnmitted to custody, or at least excluded from her
urt and presence t.

| .ARY was then at Seaton, whither she had re-
d artcr the burial of the King, whole body was

A' !"i;, Pref. ix. t Id. 359.

Dd 2 ,.

B o O K deposited among the Monarchs of Scotland, in a]

IV. private, but decent manner *. The former part o

ó-^ the Earl's demand, could not, on any pretence,
1567' eluded; and it was refclved to bring Bothwel imr

mediately to trial. But, instead of confining hic

ary con- to any prison, Mary admitted him into allhe

tinu-s to t h lslLO 411
fvour him. councils, and allowed a person, univerally reputed

the murderer of her husband, to enjoy all the fecu
rity, the dignity, and the power of a favourite~
The offices which Bothwell already possessed, gavl
him the command of all the south of Scotland'
The castle of Edinburgh, however, was aplace i
too much consequence, not to wish it in his own
power. The Queen, in order to prevail on th|
Earl of Mar to surrender it, conrented to put th|
.ar:h g9 person of the young Prince in his hands, and imr

mediately bestowed the government of that impo0
tant fortress upon Bothwell :. So many tepsi
her conduct, inconsistent with all the rules of pru
dence, and of decency, muff be imputed to an e
cess either of folly or of love. Mary's know
character fully vindicates her from the former; o
the latter, many and tfriking proofs soon appeared.

a,-ncs so No direct evidence had yet appeared again
his [r!. Bothwell; but as time might bring to light tl

circumnfances of a crime, in which so many
complices were concerned, it was of great impot
ance to hurry over the trial, while nothing mo
than general fulpicions, and uncertain furmile
could be produced by his accusers. For this re

A
' ,.;e's. vol i. 23. 4 Id. ibid. 40, &c.
it-d i-'re. 6, KZ-kth,;. ;I

fol

on, in a meeting of Privy Council held on the 28th B o o x,
of March, the i 2th of April was appointed for the IV.
day of trial. And tho' the law allowed, and the -
manner in which criminal caures were carried on in 567.
that age required a much longer interval, it appears,
fron several circumftantes, that this short space was
considerably contracted, and that Lennox had only
eleven days warning to prepare for accusing a per-
in, so far superior to himself, both in power and
in favour *. No man could be leTs in a condition
to contend with an antagonist who was thus sup-
ported. Though Lennox's paternal estate had been
reltored to him, when he was recalled into Scotland,
ii seems to have been considerably impaired during
his banishment. His' vassals, while he resided in
England, had been accuflomed to some degree of

The aft of Privy Council, appointing the day of Bothwell's

[ial, bears date March the zSth, which happened on a Thurf-
day, Anders. vol. i. o5. The Queen's warrant to the mefengeri,
i.mpowering them to summon Lennox to be present, is dated on
the zgth. Anders. vol. ii. 97. He was summoned by public
proclamation at the cross of Edinburgh on the fame day. Ibid.
Ioo. He was fammoned at his dwelling-houfes in Glasgow
and Dumbarton the 3oth of March, the ift and zd days of
April. Ibid. iol. He was summoned at Perth, April ift, Ibid. loz.
Though Lennox resided at that time 40 miles from Edinburgh,
the citation might have been given him sooner. Such an unne-
ceffary delay affords some cause for suspicion. 'Tis true, Mary,
in her letter, March z4th, invited Lennox to come to Edinburgh
tre ensuing week; this gave him warning some days sooner,
that she intended to bring on the trial without delay. But the
p:ecife time could not be legally, or certainly known to Lennox
sooner than 11 or 2 days, before the day on which he was re-
q:ired to appear. By the law and practice of Scotland, at that
tame, parties were summoned in cafes of treason 40 days previous
Gc the trial.

D d3 inde-

B o K independance, and he had not recovered that abfo.

IV. lute ascendant over them, which a feudal chief ufu-
óC*0 ally possessed. He had no reason to expe& the con-
I567. currence of any of those faftions into which the

nobles were divided. During the ihort period of
his son's prosperity, he had taken such fleps as gave
rife to an open breach with Murray and all his ad-
herents. The partizans of the house of Hamiltonl
were his hereditary and mortal enemies. Huntly
was linked in the closest confederacy with Bothwell ;
and thus, to the disgrace of the nation, Lennox
flood a!one in a cause, where both honour and hu-.
manity called lo loudly on his countrymen to fe-
cond him.

IT is remarkable too, that Bothwell himself wasi

prefrnt, and fat as a member in that meeting o
Privy Council, which gave directions with regard|
to the time and manner of his trial; and he still
enjoyej nor only full liberty, but was received into
the (Queen's prectnce with the fame diftinguilhed
familiarity as formerly . '

L-nro N-OTHI ;C could be a more cruel disappointment
c-A.' a to the withes and resentment of a father, than fucli

a premature trial ; every itep towards which seemed
to be taken by directions from the person who was
himself accused of the crime, and calculated on
purpose to conceal rather than to decteC his guilt.
Lennox forelaw what would be the issue' of this
mock inquiry, and with how little safety to himfeif
or success to his cause, he could venture to appeal

.An;cr;: vx. i. 5c, 52z.

or

o the day prefixed.- In his former letters, though B o o K
under expressions the most respectful, some fymp- IV.
tcms of his diftrufiing the Queen may be disco- I"'-
tvred. He spoke out now in plain language. He 67
complained of the injury done him, by hurrying
on the trial with such illegal precipitation. He re-
prelented once more, the indecency of allowing
Bothwell, not only to enjoy personal liberty, but to
retain his former influence over her councils. He
pgain required her, as the regarded her own honour,
togive some evidence of her sincerity in profecut-
ing the murder, by confining the person who was,
0o good grounds, suspectcd to be the author of it;
ad, till that were done, he significd his own refo-
lution not to be present at a trial, the manner and
circumstances of which were so irregular, and unfa-
isf'dcbory *.

I-E seems, however, to have expecL.d little fuc- AppEis icor
els from this application to Mary; and therefore, 'hi l's'

poret to Eli,

at the fame time, besought Elizabeth to interpose, zabcth.
in order to obtain such a delay as he demanded t.
Nothing can be a stronger proof, how violently he
fufp)cced the one Q3?een, than his submitting to
inmplore the aid of the other, who had treated his
fun with the utmost contempt, and himself and fa-
mily with the greatest rigour. Elizabeth, who was
never unwilling to interpose in the affairs of Scot-
land, wrote initantly to Mary, advised her to delay
the trial for some time, and urged, in such firong
terms, the fame arguments which Lennox had used,
as might have convinced her to what an unravour-
,A;dcri. vol. i. 5j. t Good. vol. ii. 352.

D d 4 able

Bo o K able conftruEtion her condut would be liable, if

IV. she perillted in her present method of proceed.
wrV ing a.
I567.
The trial NEITHER her intreaties, however, nor those ofl
Fo-eeds. Lennox, could prevail to have the trial put off.

On the day appointed, Bothwell appeared, but with
such a formidable retinue, that it would have been
dangerous to condemn, and impoflible to punish
him. Betides a numerous body of his friends and
vaffils aftembled, according to custom. from diffe-
rent parts of the kingdom, he was attended bya
bard of hired soldiers. who marched with flying
colours along the streets of Edinburgh f. A court
of justice was held, with the accustomed formali-
ties. An indictment was presented against Bothwell,
and Lennox was called upon to make good his ac-
cufation. In his name appeared Robert Cunning-
ham, one of his dependants. He excused his Maf-
ter's absence, on account of the shortness of the
time, which prevented his assembling his friends and
vassals, without whose afliftance he could not, with
safety, venture to set himself in opposition to such a
powerful antagonist. For this reason, he desired
the court to stop proceeding, and protested, that
any lentence which should be pased at that time,
ought to be deemed illegal and void. Bothwell,
on the other hand, insisted, that the court ihould
infiantly proceed to trial. One of Lennox's own
letters, in which he craved of the Queen to prose-
cute the murderers without delay, was produced.

Anders. Fref. o6. See Appendix, N° XIX. + Anerf.
vol. i. 135.

Cun-

Cunningham's objections were over-ruled; and the B o o K
ury, consisting of Peers and Barons of the first rank, IV.
found Bothwell not guilty of the crime. ·

1567.

No person appeared as an accuser, not a single Botlweii is
witness was examined, nor any evidence produced acquitted.
gainft him. The'jury, under these circumflances,
culd do nothing else but acquit him. Their ver-
2, however, was far from gratifying the wishes,
r silencing the murmurs of the people. Every
ircumftance in the trial gave grounds for fnfpicion,
ad excited indignation; and the judgment pro-
:ounced, instead of being a proof of Bothwell's
unocence, was esteemed an argument of his guilt.
hfquinades and libels were affixed to different pla-
s, expressing the Sentiments of the public, witli
ie utmbft virulence of language.

THE jury themselves seem to have-been a-ware of
ie censure, to which- their proceedings would be
lpofed; and, at the fame time, that they return-
d their-verdict acquitting Bothwell, the Earl of
Caithnels protested, in their name, that no crime
Quld be imputed to them on that account, because
o accuser had appeared, and -.no proof was brought
: the indictment. He took notice, likewise, thac
,e ninth instead of the tenth of February was men-
!oned in the indictment, as the day on which the
turder had been committed.' A circumfrance,
'iclh discovers the extreme inaccuracy of thoTf
to0 prepared the indictment and at a time when
otn were disposed, and not without reaion, to be

sus-

B o o suspicious of every thing, this small matter contri.

IV. buted to confirm and to increase their fufpicons *.
156 7 EVEN Bothwell himself did not rely on thejudg.

ment which he had obtained in his favour, as a full
vindication of his innocence. Immediately after
his acquittal, he, in compliance with a custom
which was nor then obsolete, published a writing,
in which he offered to fight, in single combat, any
Gentleman of good fame, who should presume to
accuse him of being accefiory to the murder of the
King.

MARY, however, continued to treat him, asif

he had been cleared by the most unexceptionable
and fatisfacory evidence. The ascendant he had
sained over her heart, as well as over her councilsj
was more visible than ever; and Lennox, who
could not expect that his own person would be fast
in a country where the murder of his son had been
absolved, without regard to justice; and loaded with
honours, in contempt of decency fled with precii
pitation towards England t.
A Pzrlia. T w o days after the trial, a Parliament was held

at the opening of which the Queen diftinguifhe(
Bothwell, by appointing him to carry the fceptr'
before her t. Most of the Ats passed in this As
fembly, were calculated on purpose to strengthel
his party, and to promote his designs. He ob
tained the ratification of all the pofTeffions and ho

* othw. Trial. And-rf. vol. i. c7, &e. t Keith 37
No:e (.;'. T Id. ibid.

noui

nours which the partiality of the Queen had con- B o o K
ferred upon him; and the adt to that effeEt con- IY.
rained the ftrongefl declarations of his faithful ser- tó ;'ó

1567,

vices to the Crown, in all times pals. The fur-
render of the cattle of Edinburgh by Mar was con-
firmed. The law of attainder against Huntly was
repealed, and he, and his adherents, were restored
o the estates and honours of their ancestors. Se-
reral of those who had been on the jury which ac-
quitted him, obtained ratifications of the grants
made in their favour; and as pasquinades daily mul-
tpliei, a law pascd, whereby those, into whose
.nds .,ny paper of that kind fell, were command-
d intfantly to de troy it; and if, through their
reglec, it ihould be allo.ved to spread, they were
iu:ject-d to a capital punifhmclt, in the lame man-
er as If they had been the original authors -I.
BUT the absolute dominion, which Bothwell had Remark-

able law in

icquired over Mary's mind, appeared in the clearet favour of
aanner, by an aft in favour of the PrcteRant reli- the Refor-

mation.

gion, to which, at this time, she gave her afient.
Mary's attachment to the Romish faith was uniform
And flperftitious; she had never laid aside the de-
ign, nor loft the hopes of retloring it. She had,
of late, come under new engagements to that pur-
poe, and in consequence of there, had ventured
pon some steps more public and vigorous than any
ie had formerly taken. But Bothwell was prompt-
ed, by powerful motives, to promote this law.
He had been guilty of crimes, which rendered him
the object of just and universal detestation. He

t Keith, 280.

was

Bo o K was meditating others, which he easily forefawl

IV. would heighten the public indignation against him.[
-'--' By this popular law, he might hope to divert;.or

-' 7. to delay the resentment of the nation, and flattered

himself, that the obtaining this unexpeced and le.-
gal security for the Protestant religion, :would atone
for much guilt, silence the clamours of the-clergy
and induce the people to connive at, or to tolerat|
his crimes. The act itself was so favourable to thd
doctrine of the Reformers, that the Parliament~
which met next year, under very different leaders4
could substitute nothing stronger or more explicit
in its place; and thought it sufficient to ratifya
word for word *. To pass such an a&, was ut§
terly inconfitent with all the maxims which Mar
followed in every other period of her life; but what|
could never be extorted from her by the folicita|
tions of the Assemblies of the church, or by the
intreaties of her people, the more powerful influ
ence of Bothwell now obtained t.

*Parl. I. Jac. VI. c. 31.

t Euchanan, Hist. 3;;, not only omits taking any noiceo

this lw, but aiTerts, that the QOeen, though flie had given pro0
mises in favour of the reformed religion, refused to permit an)
aft tc pa's in support of it, and even dismissed the deputies o0
the church with contempt. Sporfwood, o22. and Caldenvood,
vol. iii. 41. both affirm the fame thing. It would not have beec
neceflary to observe this instance of Buchanan's inaccuracy; bu
that an author so conversant in our laws as Spotfwood,: and one
so i:.dufirious as Calderwood, should commit fuch'an error, whent
not onV tLhe original ffatute was extant in the records of Mar)
Parliament, but eve:; when the printed adt of- Murray's Parliameni
was bDzure their eyes, is remarkable. Even Buchana himfe
has -;akn rc.ice of this act. Detectio, p. 8.

EVER R

EVERY ftep taken by Bothwell had hitherto been B o o K
attended with all the success which his most sanguine IV.
mifhes could expe&. He had entirely gained the ""

1567.

Queen's heart; the murder of the King had ex- Bothwel
cited no public commotion; he had been acquitted prevails on

the nobles

by his peers of any mhare in that crime; and their to recom-
decision had been, in some fort, ratified in Parlia- mend him

as an hus-

ment. But in a kingdom, where the regal autho- band to the
rty was so extremely limited, and the power of the Qeen.
nobles so formidable, he durst not venture on the
last aion, towards which all his ambitious projeas
tended, without their approbation. In order to fe- April 19.
cure this, he,- immediately after the dissolution of
Parliament, invited all the nobles who were present
to an entertainment. Having filled the house with
his friends and dependants, and surrounded it with
armed men *, he opened to the company his inten-
tion of marrying the Queen, whose content, he told
them, he had already obtained; and demanded their
approbation of this match, which, he said, was no
less acceptable to their Sovereign, than honourable
to himfelf-t. Huntly and Seaton, who were privy
to all Bothwell's schemes, and promoted them with
the utmtoftceal; the Popish ecclesiastics, who were
absolutely devoted to the Queen, and ready to sooth
all her passions, initantly declared their fatisfadion
with what he had proposed. The reft, who dread-
ed the exorbitant power which Bothwell had acquir-
ed, and observed the Queen's growing affetion to-
wards him in. all her actions, were willing to make
a merit of yielding to a measure, which they could
neither oppose, nor defeat. Some few were con-

Good. vol. i . Anders. vol. i. 94.

found-

B o o K founded and inraged. But, in the end, Bothwel,

IV. partly by promises and flattery, partly by terrorand

- force, prevailed on all who were present to subscribe
1567 a paper, which leaves a deeper stain 'thari any oc-

currence irr that age, on the honour and chara6tr of
the nation.

THIS paper contained the strongest declarations

of Bothwell's innocence, aind the most ample ac.
knowledgment of his good services to the kingdom.
If any future accusation should be brought against
him, on account of the King's murder, the sub
scribers promired to stand by him as one man, and
to hazard their lives and fortunes in his defence.
They recommended him to the Queen, as the most
proper person (he could chute for a husband; and
if the should condescend to beltow on him that mark
of her regard, they undertook to promote the mar-
riage, and to join him with all their forces, in op-
posing any person who endeavoured to obftru& it .
Among the subscribers of this paper, we find tome
who were the Queen's chief confidents, others who
were firangers to her counsels, and obnoxious to
her displeasure; some who faithfully adhered to
her, through all the vicifiitudes of her fortune, and
others who became the principal authors of her sus-
ferings; some passionately attached to the Romifl
fuperfition, and others zealous advocates for the
Protefant faith -f. No common interest can be sup-
posed to have united men of such opposite princi-
ples and partirs, in recommending to their Sove-
reign a bIep so injurious to her honour, -and so fatal

. Ar..rro. o 1,u i. e-7. 1- Keith, 3 2.

to
3

to her peace. This strange coalition was the effet B o o K
of much artifice, and must be confidered as the IV.
boldest and most masterly firoke of Bothwell's ad- 1 6
dress. It is observable, that amidst all the aherca- 567
tions and mutual reproaches of the two parties which
arose in the kingdom, this unworthy tranfaaion is
seldom mentioned. Conscious on both fides, that
in this particular, their condu&t could ill bear exa-
mination, and would redound little to their fame,
they always touch upon it unwillingly, and seen
desirous that it should remain in darkness, or be
buried in oblivion. But as so many persons, who,
both at that time, and ever after, possessed the
Queen's favour, subscribed this paper, the suspicion
becomes firong, that Bothwell's ambitious hopes
were neither unknown to Mary, nor disapproved
by her *.

THESE

*Of all the different fyflems with regard to this tranftacion,

hat of Camden seems to be the least accurate, and the worst
founded. He supposes that Bothwell was hated by Murray,
Mlorton, &c. who had been his associates in the murder of the
King, and that they now wanted to ruin him. He affirms, a:
the fame time, that the subscriptions to this paper were obtained
by them, out of fear that Bothwell might fink in his hopes, and
betray the whole bloody secret. 404. But besides the abfurdi-
ty of supposing, that any man's enemies would contribute tc-
wards raising him to fich high dignity, on the uncertain hours
of afterwards depriving him of it; besides the impossibility of
acconiplifhing fiuch a marriage, if it had been either unknown
ta the Queen, or disagreeable to her; we may observe that this
'.;ppofition is deitroyed by the direc tefiimony of the Queen
' cfelr, who ascribes the consent of the nobles to Bothwell's arti-
;es, t /.o u, rchafned it by givring them to underfland that zwe Svere
,.':t ther -:ith. Anders. vol. i; 94. It would have been no
i.,i.!i adva.:a.gec to Mary, if Ihe could have represented the con-

ftnt

, o Kr THESE fcfpicions are confirmed by the most di.
IV. re& proof. Melvil, .at that time, enjoyed a confil

'^d derable share in her favour. He, as well as his
i567' brother, kept a secret correspondence ia England,

with those who favoured her pretensions to that
Crown. The rumour of her intended, marriage
with Bothwell having spread early in that kingdom,
excited universal indignation ; and Melvil received
a letter from thence, which rep.resented, inr..the.
ilrongeft terms, what would be the fatal effets, of;
such an imprudent ftep. He put this letter intoithe.
Queen's hands, and inforced it with the utmost
warmth. She not only disregarded these remon-
firances, but communicated the matter to Bothwell.
and Melvil, in order to save his life, was obliged
to fy from court, whither he durst not return, till
the Eari's rage began to abate *. At the fame time,

Eli-

sent of the nobles to have been their own voluntary deed. It
i: ftiil more i'rprifing to ind Lefly ascribing this paper to Mur.
ray and his fac'cn. Ander. vol. i. 26. The Bilhop himfelfwas
one of the persons who subscribed it. Keith, 383. TheKing's
cc:rr.ifioncrs, at the coaference held at York 568, pretended
thct none of the nobles, except the Earl of Huntly, would sub-
fc-:rb this paper till a warrant from the Queen was produced,
bv hich they were allowed to do so; this warrant they had in
their cc:lody. and exhibiteJ. Ander. vol. iv. Part ii. 59. This
di-rs from Buchanan's account, who supposes that all the nobles
prerent fabfcribed the paper on the t9th, and that, next day,
they obtained the approbation of what they had done, by way
cf fecu-;.uy to themselves, -;.

Melv. 156. According to Melvil, Lord Hcrreis like-

w.;e remonstrated against the marriage, and conjured the
Q en. on his knees, to lay aside all thoughts of such a dif.
h.ac -'c.e alli.ince. 156. Bat it has been observed, that Her-
r:, ;Is c.e cr te; no'ies v.ho subscribed the bond, April 19.

Keith,

Elizabeth warned Mary of the danger and infamy B o o K
0 which flhe would expose herself, by such an in- IV.
eccent choice; but an advice from her met with "
jill leis regard . 5 67
THREE days after the rising of Parliament, Mary tothweIl

carries tWO
vent from Edinburgh to Stirling, in order to visit Qe.en by

force to

ie Prince her son, Bothwell had now brought his Dun,.
hemes to full maturity, and every precaution be-
g taken, which could' render it safe to venture on
i last and decisive fep, the natural impetuosity of
s pirit did not fuffeer him to deliberate any lon-
r. Under pretence of an expedition against the
ee-booters on the borders, he assembled his fol-
wers; and marching out of Edinburgh with a
o1fand horse, turned suddenly towards Linlith- April
p, met the Queen on her return near that place,
perfed her slender train without refifiance, seized
her person, and conduaed her, together with a

tih, 33. z. That he is one of the witneiTes to the mar-
ic articles between the Queen and Bothwell, May 14. Good.
iii. 6x. 3. That he fat in council with Bothwell, May 17.
lh, 3S6. But this remonstrance of Lord Herreis against the
riage happened before these, made by Melvil himself, 157.
'vil's remonfirance muRf have happened some time before the
e:ing of Parliament; for after offending Bothwell, he retired
m court; he allowed his rage time to subside, and had again
edthe Queen, when ihe was seized, April 24. 158. The
ewhich must have elapsed, by this account of the matter,
; perhap, sufficient to have gained Herreis, from being an
:poler, to become a promoter of the marriage. Perhaps Mel-
i'may have committed some mistake with regard to this fact,
'far as relates to Lard Herreis. He could not well be mif-
tea with regard to what himself did.

* Anders. vol. i. 105.
VOL, 1. E e few

B o o F few of her courtiers, as a prisoner to his castle

IV. of Dunbar. She expressed neither furprize, nor
"'>s" terror, nor indignation, at such an outrage corn.
1567. mitted on her person, and such an infolt offered to

-her authority, but seemed to yield without itruggle
or regret -. Melvil was, at that time, one of hei
attendants ; and the officer by whom he was seized
informed him, that nothing was done without th|
Queen's own consent f. If we may rely on the letter
published in Mary's name, the scheme had bee
communicated to her, and every ftep towards it wa
taken wich her participation and advice $.

BOTH the Queen and Bothwell thought it of at

vantage to employ this appearance of violence.
afforded her a decent excuse for her conduct; a
while fle could plead that it was owing to forcer
ther than choice, she hoped that her reputatio
among 'foreigners at least, would escape without ce
sure, or be exposed to less reproach. Bothw
could not help diltrufting all the methods which
hitherto been used, for vindicating him from ai
concern in the murder of the King. Somethis
was frill wanting for his security, and for quietir
his guilty fears. This was a pardon under the Gre
Seal. By the laws of Scotland, the most heino
crime must be mentioned by name in a pardon, ai
then all leficr offences are deemed to be includ
under the general clause, and all other crimes wb,
fiscer It. To seize the person of the Prince, is hig
treason; and Bothwell hoped, that a pardon

K :to.- ,

l i3Md'v. t 1. . Good. vcl. ii.

:, P.:z!. ',.! T IV

a '. c.('.
.

.'~~~~~~
- ~~~~~~~talnl

,tined for this, would extend to every thing of which B o o K
ie had been accused ". IV.

1-. 67.

BOTIHWELL, having now got the Queen's pe:'fon is 'iverccd
no his hands, it would have been unbecoming ei- f, li 1e

own wife.

her a politician or a man of gallantry to have de-
!ved confuinmating his schemes. For t!;is purpose,
Sinftantly commenced a suit, in order to obtain a
(tence of divorce from his wife Lady Jean Gor-
don, the Earl of Huntly's sifter. This procis was April z2.
crried on, at the fame time, before Proteslant and
Popirh judges; before the former, in the court of
ommiffaries; and before the latter, in the spiritual
ourt of the Archbifhlop of St. Andrew's, whose
iridiction the Queen had lately reflored. The
tEexts which he pleaded were trivial, or fcanda-
ibs. But his authority had greater weight than
ce ijiftice of his cause ; and in both courts, sentence

divcrce was pronounced, with the fame indecent
rd f!fpicious precipitancy -.

\WHILE this infamous transaction was carrying
, the Queen resided at Dunbar; detained as a
}i!oner, but treated with the greateRt respect. Soon y .
iftr Bothwell, with a numerous train of his de-
ndants, condusted her to Edinburgh ; but inflead
flodging her in the palace of Holy-rood-houle,
*conveyed her to the castle, of which he was go-
rnor. The discontent of the nation rendered this
,caution necessary. In an house unforlified, and
i easy access, the Queen might have been rescued
ti!!hjit difficulty out of his hands. In a place of

''r:'rf. vol. iv. Parrii. 61. f- And. 1. 132.

E e 2 strength,

B o o K strength, she was secured from all the attempts

IV. his enemies.
1567 ONE frmall difficulty still remained tobe furmour

ed. As the Queen was kept in a fort of captivi
by Bothwell, a marriage concluded in that cond
tion might be imputed to force, and be held inv
.y 1. . lid. In order to obviate this, Mary appeared

the court of session, and in presence of the Cha
cellor, the other judges, and several of the nobilit
declared that she was now at full liberty ; and thoug
Bothwell's violence in seizing her person had,
first excited her indignation, yet his refpecful b
haviour since that time had not only appeased h
resentment, but determined her to raise him
higher honours I

,s C,:-d \ WiAT these were fbon became public. Theti
.1_ ~. of Duke of Orkney was conferred upon Bothwel

and on the Ith of May his marriage with t
iQueen, which had to long been the objec of
w-;fes, and the motive of his crimes, was folen
;.zzd. The ceremony was performed, in publ
according to the ri:is of the Protestant Church,
Adam Bothwell bishop of Orkney, one of the f
prelates who had embraced the Reformation, a
on the fame day, was celebrated in private, acco
ing to the forms prescribed by the Popish religior
The boldness with which Craig, the Minister s
was commanded to publish the banns, tefif
againSf the design ; the small number of the nob
v. i:t were prefint at the marriage; and the fu

* .: d. i . t. i Id, 136. 2. 276.

ad difrefpetful silence of the people, when the B o o K
)een appeared in public; were manifest fymp- IV.
:ms of the violent and general diffatisfacEion of "'1
or own subje&s. The refusal of Du Croc the I567'
trench ambassador to be present at the nuptial cere-
,ony or entertainment discovers the sentiments of
ier allies, with regard to this part of her condu&t;
ad although every other action in Mary's life could
?justified by the rules of prudence, or reconciled
, the principles of virtue, this fatal marriage would
stain an inconteftible proof of her rashness, if not
i her guilt.

MARY'S first care was to offer some apology for
her conduE, to the courts of France and England.
The inftruCcions to her ambassadors frill remain, and
ie drawn by a masterly hand. But under all the
ctificial and false colouring she employs, it is easy
o discover not only that many of the fReps she had
aken were unjustifiable, but that she herself was
conscious that they could not be justified *.

THE title of King was the only thing, which was
not bestowed upon Bothwell. Notwithstanding her
attachment to him, Mary remembered the in-
conveniencies which had arisen from the rash ad-
vancement of her former husband to that honour.
She agreed, however, that he should sign, in token
of content, all the public writs iftued in her name t.
This was nothing more than mere form, but, to-
gether with it, he possessed all the reality of power.
The Queen's person was in his hands; she was fur-

And. I. 89. t Good. z. 6o.

E e 3 rounded

B o o r rounded mo:-e clotely than ever by his creatures

. no :e of her liibjccts could obtain audience withou
- ],:s per.mi.?:;on; an;, un:efs in his own presence

' none but his c nfidents were permitted to convert

with her . The Scottish Monarchs were accultom
ed :.o live among their fulbjcts as fathers or as equals
without cdi;rui, and with little f(ate ; armed guard
fianmi-ig at the doors of the royal apartment, diffi
ciiCy Gr accei;, diitance and retirement, were thing
unkno'.vn, aidL unpopular.
Ende.-avL-rs T -rs - p:ecautions were necefTary for.fecuring tc

,,:t. . Bothwel the pow-er, which he had acquired. Bur,
"i.....'i - withour being manrer of the person of the young

Prince, he eateemed all that he had gained tobe
precarious and uncertain. The Queen had com4
mnitred her son to the care of the Earl of Mar,
Th-i d.-. _irv- and loyalty of that nobleman were too
wed! kn..c r to expect that he would be willing to
put t;ec prince into the hands of the man, who was
ib vioi-n-:v fut-ite.fi ol having murdered his fatherJ
Botriwch;l, low\vc-r, laboured to get the Prince into
hi- pc.ver, v.:th an anxiety, which gave rife to the
b acklct furpi.o'r's. 11 liis address as well as au4
thrir; were cm :':Ied to periuade, or to force Marj
irnto a co;snlance '.ith h:s demands t. And it is
no li!iht pro^i bo'h of ti;e firmnels and dexterity
of th-tc robleman, that he preserved a life of so
mutch iir:,zrta::ce to the nation, from lying at the
mn'ercy o_ a man, whom fear or ambition might
have prompted to violent attempts against it.

.
AXi::£ '. 1. 15. -r MeWv, 16-. Buch. 361.

THi

THE eyes of neighbouring nations were fixed, at B o o K
tiat time, upon the great events, which had hap- IV.
pned in Scotland, during three months. A King l6
murdered, with the utmost cruelty, in the prime of General in-
is days, and in his capital city; the person sus dignation

which the

ecled of that odious crime suffered not only to ap- Queen's
pear publickly in every place, but admitted into the xcited:
Presence of the Queen, diftinguifhled by her favour,
1ndentrufted with the chief direcAion of her as-
aiirs; fubjecqted to a trial, which was carried on
iith molt shameless partiality, and acquitted by a
sentence, which served only to confirm the fufpici-
ons of his guilt ; divorced from his wife, on pre-
tnces fiivolous, or indecent; and after all this, in-
Read of meeting with the ignominy due to his ac-
tions, or the punishment merited by his crimes, per-
mitted openly, and without opposition, to marry a
Queen, the wife of the Prince whom he had affaf-
inated, and the guardian of those laws which he
had been guilty of violating. Such a quick fuc-
cefion of incidents, so singular, and so detestable,
is not to be found in any other hiflory. They left,
in the opinion of foreigners, a mark of infamy on
the character of the nation. The Scots were held
in abhorrence all over Europe; they durr scarce
appear any where in public; and after fuffcring so
many atrocious deeds to pass with impunity, they
were universally reproached as men void of courage,
or of humanity, as equally regardles .of the repu-
tation of their Quleen, and the honour of their

CollntrVy .

'* A;.i'f. vo'. i. Iz1, s_
I 4. Mci. 163. See Appendix,

F, e 4 'l:TSE

Bo o THESE reproaches rouzed the nobles, who ha/

IV. been hitherto amused by Bothwell's artifices, or in
'156 timidated by his power. The manner in which he
The nhes exerciscd the authority which he had acquired, his
comb. e a- repeated attempts to become master of the Prince's
gainft h-r -
and .Boh- person, together with some rash threatenings againfI
="-'" him, which he let fall *, added to the violence and

promptness of their resolutions. A considerable
body of them assembled at Stirling, and entered into
an afiociation for the defence of the Prince's perobn.
Argyll, Athol, Mar, Morcon, Glencairn, Home,
Lindsay, Boyd, Murray of Tullibardin, Kirkaldy
of Grange, and Maitland the Secretary, werethe'
heads of this confederacy t. Stewart Earl of Athol
was remarkable for an uniform and bigotted attach
ment to popery, but his indignation on account
the murder of the King, to whom he was nearlyi
allied, and his zeal for the safety of the Prince,
overcame, on this occasion, all considerations of re-
ligion, and united him with the most zealous Pro-
reftants. Several of the other nobles acted, with-I
out queflion, from a laudable concern for the safety!
of the Prince, and the honour of their country.
But the spirit which some of them discovered, dur-!
ing the fubfe-uent revolutions, leaves little roomi
to doubt, that ambition or resentment were the
real motives of thtir conduc't; and that, on many
occasions, while they were pursuing ends just and
necessary, they were acruated by principles and pas-
sions altogeth-er unjuftifidble.

a hMe!v;l, i 51. t Kci:h, 394. '

THU

THE first accounts of this league filled the Queen B o o K
and Bothwell with great consternation. They were IV.
ro frangers to the sentiments of the nation, with '";'
rripe6 to their conduct; and though their marriage57
had not met with public opposition, they knew that
it had not been carried on without the secret dif-
gust and murmurings of all ranks of men. They
foresaw the violence with which this indignation
would burst out, after having been so long sup-
pressed; and in order to prepare for the storm,
vlary issued a proclamation, requiring her fubjets May 8.g
to take arms, and to attend her husband by a day
appointed. At the fame time, the published a fort
of manifelto, in which she laboured to vindicate
her government from those imputations with which
it had been loaded, and employed the ftrongeif
terms to express her concern for the safety and wel-
fare of the Prince her son. Neither of these pro.
duced any considerable effed. Her proclamation
was ill obeyed, and her manifesto met with little
credit *.

THE confederate Lords carried on their prepara- The Queen
tions with no less activity, and with much more and Both-

~~~~~r Wr~~~~~

. ~ei r el tire

iticcefs. Among a warlike people, men of so much to Dunbar.
power and popularity found it an easy matter to raise
an army. They were ready to march before the
Queen and Bothwell were in a condition to resist
Item. The cattle of Edinburgh was the place whi-
ther the Queen ought naturally to have retired, and
there her person might have been perfectly safe.
D'.t the confederates had fallen on means to shake,

* Keith, 387, 395, 396.

or

B o o or corrupt the fidelity of Sir James BalfoQur the de-

IV. puty governor, and Bothwell durst not commit to
P'"v'Y him such an important trust. He conduEted the

T 567. Queen to the castle of Borthwick, and on the ap.

pearance of Lord Home, with a body of his fol-
lowers, before that place, he fled with precipitation|
to Dunbar, and was followed by the Queen difguif.
ed in men's cloaths. The confederates advanced to-
wards Edinburgh, where Huntly endeavoured, in
vain, to animate the inhabitants to defend the town
against them. They entered without opposition,
and were instantly joined by many of the citizens,
whose zeal became the firmest support of their'
cause .

IN order to set their own conduct in the most fa-

vourable light, and to rouze the public indignation
against Bothwell, the nobles published a declaration
of the motives which had induced them to take
arms. All Bot'hwell's past crimes were enumerated,
all his wicked intentions displayed and aggravated,
and every true Scotsman was called upon tojoin
them in avenging the one, and in preventing the
other

MEA. while, Bothwell aflembled his forces at

Dunbar, and as he had many d-pendants in that
corner, he soon gathered such strength, that he ven-!
tured to advance towards the confederates. Their
troo: s were not numerous ; the suddenness and fe-
crecy of their enterprize gave their friends at a dil-
vance no time to join them; and as it docs not ap-

t Kei.h, 3 9,. t r.dcr i. i
\.1 i 12S.

pear

pear that they were supported either with money or B;o o .i
fed wich hopes by the Queen of England, ,they. iV..
could not, have kept long in a body. 'But on the ^'"
other hand, Bothwell durst not rifque a delay*.
His army followed him with relutalnce in this quar-
el, and served him with no cordial affe&!on ; so
,at his only hope of success was in furprizing the
enemy, or in striking the blow before his own troops.
had leisure to recollect themselves, or to imbibe the.
lame unfavourable opinion of his actlons, which
had spread over the reft of the nation. These mo-
;ives determined the Queen to march forward, with.
an inconsiderate and fatal speed.

ON the first intelligence of her approach,. the The nobles
confederates advanced to meet her. They found her march a-

gainft

forces drawn up on the fame ground which the them.
English had occupied before the battle of Pinkie.JUY 's'
The numbers on.both fides were nearly equal; but
there was no equality in point of discipline. The
Queen's army consisted chiefly of a multitude, hafti-
ly afThmbled, without courage or experience in war.
The troops of the confederates were composed of
Gentlemen of rank and reputation, followed by
tieir most trusty dependants, who were no less brave
'."an zealous -.

Du Croc the French Ambassador, who was in An accoai-
ihe field, laboured, by negociating both with the modr(ion
Queen and the nobles, to put an end to the quarrel
without the effusion of blood. He represented to
the confederates the Queen's inclinations towards

tUith, 40!. -t Cald. vol. ii. 4t?, 19.

peace,

B o o peace, and her willingness to pardon the offences

IV. which they had committed. Morton replied, with'
5óV warmth, that they had taken arms- ndt against

567the Queen, but against the murderer of her hus-

band, and if he were given up to justice, or banish-
ed from her pretence, she should find them ready
to yield the obedience which is due from fubjeEts to
their Sovereign. Glencairn added, that they did
not come to ask pardon for any offence, but to pu-
nifh those who had offended. Such haughty answers
convinced the ambassador, that his mediation would
be ineffeatual, and that their passions were too high
to allow them to liften to any pacific propositions,
or to think of retreating after having proceeded so
far *.

THE Queen's army was posed to advantage, on

a riling ground. The confederates advanced to the
attack resolutely, but slowly, and with the caution
which was natural on that unhappy field. Her
troops were alarmed at their approach, and disco-
vered no inclination to fight. Mary endeavoured
to animate them ; he wept, she threatened, she re
proached them with cowardice, but all in vain. A
few of Bothwell's immediate attendants were eagei
for the encounter the reft flood wavering and irre
solute, and some began to steal out of tie field
Bothwell attempted to inspirit them, by offeringt
decide the quarrel, and to vindicate his own inno
cence in tingle-combat with any of his adve/riafis
Kirkaldy of Grange, Murray of Tullibardin, an
- Lord Lindsay conterided for the h6nour of enter

Keith, qoi.

In

ing the lifts against him. But this challengeB oo
proved to,,be a mere bravade. Either the confci- IV.
oufnefs of..guilt deprived Bothwell of his wonted 'rv'
courage,, or the ,Queen by her authority, sorbad 567
the combat *.

AFTER the symptoms of fear discovered by her
followers, Mary would have been inexcusable, had
Ihe hazarded a' battle. To have retreated in the
face of an enemy, who had already surrounded the
hill on'whichi'he flood, with part of their cavalry,
was utterly impracticable. In 'this situation, she
was undei the cruel necessity of putting herself into
the hands of those fubjecs who had taken armns
against her. She demanded an interview with Kir-
kaldy, a brave and generous man, who command-
ed an 'advanced body of the enemy. He, with
the consent and in name of the leaders of the party,
promised that; on condition she would dismiss Both-
well from her presence, and govern the kingdom by
the advice of her nobles, they would honour and
obey her as their Sovereign t.

DURING this parley, Bothwell took his last fare- Bothwen

well of the Queen, and rode off the field with a bligedto
few followers. This dismal reverse happened ex-
aftly one month after that marriage, which had
cost him so many crimes to accomplish, and which
leaves so foul a stain on Mary's memory.

Cald vol. ii. o5. t Good. vol, ii. 164. Melv. x6;.

As

B o o K As -oon as Bothwell retired, Mary surrendered

IVi to Kirkaldy, who conducred her toward the con-

o~. 7 federte army, the' leaders of which received her

Mary for- wth- much respect; and Morton, in their name,
rendhe-s made ample profeflions of their future loyalty and
to the no-
bles. obedience *. But she was treated by the common

foidiers with the utmost insolence and indignity;
As ihe -marched along, .they poured upon her all the
opprobrious names, which are beltowed only on the
Iok.eil and most infamous criminals. Wherever
Ihe-turned her-eyes, they held up before her a stand-
ard, on.which was painted the dead body of the
late King, firecched on the ground, and the young
Prince kneeling.before it, and uttering these words,
" Judge and reveEge my cause, OLord!" Mary
turned with horror from such a shocking fight.
She began already to feel the wretched condition to
w-bicn a captive Prince is reduced. She uttered the
muso bitter cornp!aints,.fhe melted into tears, and could
scarce be kept from finking to the ground. The
confederates carried her towards Edinburgh, and,
in spite of many delays, and after looking with the
fondness and credulity natural to the unfortunate for
fomre extraordinary relief, she arrived there. The
r" reer were covered with multitudes, whom zeal or

. turoflty had drawn together, to behold such an

iunufual scene. The Queen, worn out with fatigue,
'covered with dust, and bedewed with tears, was
·expdfed'as a fpecacle to her own subjects, and led
to the Piovorls'houfe. ' Notwithttanding all her
arguments and intreaties, the fame standard was

aCGnd. v-l! ii. 6.rr d

sealrerie

carried before her, and the fame insults and re- B o o a
proaches repeated. A woman, young, beautiful, IV.
and in diffrefs, is naturally the object of compassion. '-
The comparison of their present misery with their 5674
former splendour, usually softens us in favour of
lluftrious sufferers. But the people beheld the de-
plorable situation of their Sovereign with infenfibi-
ity; and so strong was their persuasion of her guilt,
and so great the violence of their indignation, that
the sufferings of their Queen did not, in any de-
gree, mitigate their resentment, or procure her that
sympathy, which is seldom denied to unfortunate
Princes *

" Melvil, i66. Buch. 364.

TH E

# BOOK V.

THE
H t S T 0 Rt V

O F
CO T L A N Dd

B OOK V.
TH E confederate Lords had proceeded to such B o o 0

extremities against their Sovereign, that it V.

now becarie almost impossible for them either to --
/op Ihort, or to pursue a course less violent. Ma- D567.er
ny of the nobles had refused to concur with them tions of th}

noblet con-

their entelprize; others openly condemned it. cerning th;
A small circuhiftance might abate that indignation ieon.
ith which the multitude were, at present, animat-
d against the Queen, and deprive them of that po-
ular applause which was the chief foundation of
eir power. These considerations inclined some of
em to treat the Queen with great lenity.
VOL, L, F Bfw

B o o K BuT, on the other hand, Mary's affef-lon forBoth.

V. wcil continued as violent as ever; Ihe obIlinately re-

ó-x fuled to hearken to any proposal for dissolving their
56' marriage, and determined not to abandon a man, fcr

who:e lovve he had already sacrificed so much *
If they fiould allow her to recover the fupreime
power, the first exertion of it would be to recal
Bothwell; and they had reason, both from his re.
fentment, from her conduct, and from their own, to
exDec& the severest effecs of her vengeance. Theft
considerations surmounted every other motive; and
reckoning themfzlves absolved, by Mary's incur-
able a:rtchn-ent to Borhwell, from the engage;
ments which they had come under when she yieldl
ed herfeif a prisoner, they, without regardiig th
duty which they owed her as their Queen, and
without conflting the reft of the nobles, carried
her next evening, under a strong guard, to th(

TF.-i-n- cafile of Lochlevin, and signed a warrant to WVil
pr'on, hr liam Douglas the owner of it, to detain her as a pri
in L,:.:e-
v:n. ioner. This castle is situated in a small ifland,.ii

the midile of a lake. Douglas, to whom it belong
ed, was a near relation of Morton's, and had mar
ried the Earl of Murray's mother. In this place
under strict custody, with a few attendants, anm
subjected to the insults of a haughty woman, whi
boafled daily of being the lawful wife of James V
Mary fuiTered all the rigour and miseries of capti
vity -.

Kei;h, 1 6,
419, 49. Melv. i67. See Append. N° XX

f K.t'h, 403. No: '^'.

I: ,:,ll

IMMEDIATELY after the Queen's imprisonment, B'"o o K
theconfederates were at the utmoff p.ins to tsrengthen .
their party ; they entered into new bon-,s of aficia- '"n"
tion; 'they aifumed the title of Lor-ds -of t'e secret 57
Ccuicil, and without any other rig'tt, arrogated to
themselves the whole regal authority. One of their
Irft acs of power was to search the city of Edin-
burgh for those who were concerned in the murder
of the King. This shew of zeal gained reputation
to themselves, and threw an oblique refleAion on the
Qleen for her remissness. Several fu peted persons
¢cre seized. Captain Elacl.cdder and three others
rere condemned and executed. But no discovery
of importance was made. If we believe some his-
torians, they were conviEted by sufficient evidence.
If we give credit to others, their sentence was un-
uft, and they denied, with their lafi breath, any
knowledge of the crime, for which they suffered .

AN unexpected accident, however, put into the
hands of Mary's enemies what ti ey deemed the ful-
kft evidence of her guilt. Bothwell having left, in
the castle of Edinburgh, a caflke", containing several
sonnets and letters written with the Queen's own
hand; he now sent one of his confidents to bring
to him this precious depofite. But as his mefen-
er returned, he was intercepted, and the casket
sized by Mort:;n -P. 1 he contents of it were a!-
ways produced by the party, as the most ample
jiutification of their own conduct, and the molt an-

Cald. vol. ii.i. 3. Crawf. Mem 35.
t Anderi. vol. ii. 9z, Good. vol. ii. so.

F f 2 fwerable

B o o K fwerable proof of their not having loaded their So-

V. vereign with the imputation of imaginary crimes *

567. BUT the confederates, notwithstanding their extra-

some of the
nobles fa- ordinary success, were still far from being perfetly
oulrh' t at ease. That so small a part of the nobles should

pretend to dispose of the person of their Sovereign,
or to assume the authority which belonged to her,
without the concurrence of the reft, appeared to
many of that body to be unprecedented, and pre-
fumpruous. Several of these were now assembled
at Hamilton, in order to deliberate what course they
mhould hold, in this difficult conjuncture. The
confederates made tome attempts towards a coalition
with them, but without effect. They employed
the mediation of the assembly of the Church, to
draw them to a personal interview at Edinburgh,
but with no better success. That party, however,
though its numbers were formidable, and the power
of its leaders great, soon loft reputation by the want
of unanimity and vigour; all its consultations eva-
porated in murmurs and complaints, and no scheme
was concerted for obftruting the progress of the
confederates 1.

Eizabe-h THERE appeared some profpeat of danger fron
interposes another quarter. This great revolution in Scotland
in her be-

bhaf. had been carried on without any aid from Eliza

beth, and even without her knowledge s. An
though she was far from being displeased to fee th
affairs of that kingdom embroiled, or a rival, who0

e See Dissertation at the end of the Appendix.
- Keith., I Id. 41 .

he hated, reduced to distress; she neither wished B o o K
that it should be in the power of the one facion en- V.
tirely to suppress the other, nor could she view the " 6
Reps taken by the confederates without great of-
fence. Notwithffanding the popular maxims by
which she governed her own fubjests, her notions
of royal prerogative were very exalted. The con-
federates had, in her opinion, encroached on the au-
thority of their Sovereign, which they had no right
to controul, and had offered violence to her person,
which it was their duty to esteem sacred. They had
set a dangerous example to other fubjeas, and
Mary's cause became the common cause of Princes *.
If ever Elizabeth was influenced with regard to the
affairs of Scotland, by the feelings of her heart, ra-
ther than by considerations of interest, it was on this
occasion. She instantly dispatched Throgmorton Jun= 3c.
into Scotland, with powers to negociate both with
the Queen, and with the confederates. In his in-
Sructions there appears a remarkable solicitude for
Mary's liberty, and-even for her reputation t. And
the choice of an Ambassador, so devoted to the in-
terest of the Scottish Queen, proves this solicitude
to have been sincere. But neither Elizabeth's friend-
sip, nor Throgmorton's zeal, were of much avail
t Mary. The confederates foresaw what would be
the effeEts of these good offices; and that the Queen,
lated by the profpeEt of protection, would rejet
with scorn the overtures which they were about to
make her. They, for that reason, preremptorily
denied Throgmorton access to their prisoner; and

+ Keith, 41z, 415 -I Id. 4 ,1.

F f 3 wlh-

B o o K what propositions he made to them in her behalf;

v. t;ey either refufid, or eluded :

-... ,r?, i _N while thley eliberated with the utmost
t,':.-:: a:'-.x'iev. concerning the feitlement of the nation,

:. and the future dc ilot of he e ueen's person. Eli-

zabe:h, ob!::rvitg that Throgmo:ton made no pro-
grt- in h.is negociat.ons with them, and that they
xoul;d lit:en to nor.e of his demands in Mary'sfa-
vour, turned towards that party of the nobles who
were amb at Hamilton, incited them to take.
armrs in order to re oile their Queen to liberty, and-
pro'riied to a:.n: them in such an attempt, to the
ut.rmufc of her Fp.'er . But they discovered no
grrtcr e:n:on or vigour than formerly, and behav-
in 1.:e men- who h-d given up all concern either
for their Queen or their country, tamely allowed an
inconf:cerable part of their body, w hether we confi-.
der i. v.kh refjctc to numbers, or to power, to.fettle
tile government of the kingdom, and to dispose of
th:e Qcueen's peri'n at pleasure. Many consultations
were Leld, and various opinions arose with.regard:
to earc of these. Some seemed desirous of adher-
Ing to the plan on which the confederacy was atfirit
formed ; and after punishing te murderers of the
Kirg. and dii7olving the marriage with Bothwell;
af:r :oV;id:ng for r- safety of the young Prince,
an. t:. L;Li-;:- of tl- Firo:efrant religion; they
r"c i.d :oc re eilab:ii tih- Queen in the possession
of i.cr i.- . >.:c.ri;y. i hrl success with which
;" .- a'::.'
ha. 7be _ ac.c:p;a_.i.ad, inspired others

: 'I I. . ' t Scc Appnr dix, N0 XXII.

.ith

with bolder and more desperate thoughts, and no- B o o K
thing less would satisfy them than the trial, the con- V.
,ermnation and punishment of the Queen herself, '"6
=s the principal conspirator against the life of her 7
husband and the safety of her son *: the former was
Maitland's system, and breathed too much of a pa-
dtic and moderate spirit, to be agreeable to the
temper or wishes of the party. The latter was re-
commended by the clergy, and warmly adopted by
many laics; but the nobles durst not, or would not
venture on such an unprecedented and audacious
deed t.

BOTH parties agreed at lafi upon a scheme, nei- Theyoblige

l tie Queen

ther so' moderate as the one, nor so daring as tlhe t'orefsCe
other. Mary was to be persuaded or forced to re- gsov'n-
Egn the Crown; the young Prince was to be pro-
claimed King, and the Earl of Murray was to be
appointed to govern the kingdom during his mino-
rity, with the name and authority of Regent. With
regard to the Queen's own person, nothing was de-
termined. It seems to have been the intention of
the confederates, to keep her in perpetual imprison-
ment; but in order to intimidate herself, and to
overawe her partizans, they fRill reserved to them-
selves the power of proceeding to more violent ex-

tremes.

* Keith, 420, 421, 422, 582.
t- The intention of putting the Queen to death seems to have

been carried on by some of her fubjeas: at this time we often find
I lizabeth boafling that Mary owed her life to her interposition.
Diggcs's Compl. Amb. 14, &c. See Appendix, NI XVIII.

F f4 IT

B o o K IT was obvious to foresee diffculties in the exe-

V. cution of this plan. Mary was young, ambitious,
L" hiih-fp.rired, and accustomed to command,. To
1367' induce her to acknowledge her own incapacity for

governing, to renounce the dignity and power which
Ihe was born to enjoy, to become dependant on her
own itbjec-s, to consent to her pwn bondage' and
to invert thole persons, whom she confidered as the
authors of all her calamities, with that honour and
authority of which The herself was stripped, were
points hard to be gained. These, however, the
confederates attempted, and they did not want
means to insure success. Mary had endured, for
several weeks, all the hardships and terror of a pri-
son; no profpe&t of liberty appeared; none of her
fibjects had either taken arms, or so much as soli-
cired her reief ; no person in whom The could
confide was admitted into her presence; even the
Ambassadors of the French King and Queen of
England were refused access to her. In this solitary
fbte, without a counsellor or a friend, under the
pressure of diftres, and the apprehension of danger,
it was natural for a woman to hearken almost to
any overtures. The confederates took advantage
of !hr condition, and of her fears. They employed
Lord Lnclay, the fiercest zealot in the party, to
communicate their scheme to the Queen, and tq.
ob:;in her fubcription to those papers which were
nec.ffarv for rendering it effecual. He executed
his comrniflon with harshness and brutality. Cer-
tain death was before Mary's eyes, if The refused to
comply with his demands. At the fame time, ihe

-x 'a C,:,, 4j - ;25..^.as

was

as informed by Sir Robert Melvil, in name ofB o o K
thol, Maitland, and Kirkaldy, the persons among V.
e confederates who were most attentive to her in- ló*
reft, that a resignation extorted by fear, and grant- 57
I during her imprisonment, was void in law, and
ight be revoked so soon as fle recovered liberty.
hrogmorton, by a note which he found means to
nvey to her, suggested the fame thing *. Defe-
ace to their opinion, as well as concern for her
Tn safety, obliged her to yield to every thing
iich was required, and to sign all the papers which
indfay presented to her. By one of these, the re-
gned the Crown, renounced all hare in the go-
nment of the. kingdom, and consented to the
onation of the young King. By another, he july 24.
pointed the Earl of Murray Regent, and confer-
d upon him all the powers and privileges of that
gh office. By a third, Ihe substituted some other
bleman in Murray's place, if he should refute the
,our which was designed for him. Mary, when
iubfcribed there deeds, was bathed in tears; and
ile she gave away, as it were with her own hands,
sceptre which Ihe had swayed so long, ihe felt a
ng of grief and indignation, one of the feverefl-t
haps, which can touch the human heart t.

THE confederates endeavoured to give this refig- jamcs vr,
cion all the weight and validity in their power, by cr°,neud
roeeding without delay to crown the young Prince. ray chlorf
he ceremony was performed at Stirling, on theRegen''
)ih of July, with much solemnity, in pretence of

Keith, 425. Note (b). Melv. 169.
t Ibid. 430. Cravf. Mern. 38.

gl!

B o o K all the nobles of the party, a considerable nunmbe

V. of lesser Barons, and a great aiTembly of the people.

ó*--
- From that time, all public writs were issued, and

the government carried on, in name of James VI *:

No revolution so great was ever effectd wird

more ease, or by means so unequal to the end. Id
a warl:ke age, and in lets time than two months,
a part of the nobles, who neither possessed the chief
power, nor the greatest wealth in the nation, and
who never brought 3000 men into the field, seized
imprisoned, and dethroned their Queen, and with|
out shedding a single drop of blood, set her son, a
infant of a year old, on the throne.

Reasonings DU'RING this rapid progress of the confederates:
of ho'h

I . the eyes of all the nation were turned on them, with

aftonifnment; and various and contradictory opil
nions were formed, concerning the extraordinary
feps which they had taken.

EVEN under the ariftocratical form of govern

ment, which prevails in Scotland, said the favourl
ers of the Queen, and notwithstanding the exorbi1
tant privileges of the nobles, the Prince possessed
considerable power, and his person is treated witi
great veneration. No encroachments should bi
made on the former, and no injury offered to the
latter, but in cafes where the liberty and happinsli
of the nation clnnot be secured by any other means
Such cafes seldom exist, and it belongs not to an)
part, but to the whole, or at least to a majority 0]

the society, to judge of their existence. By' whatB o o
,cion could it be pretended, that Mary had invad- V.
ed the rights .or property of her fubjeds, or what 'ó""
scheme had she formed against the liberty and con-
'icution of the kingdom ? Were fears, and fufpi-
Rions, and surmises, enough-to jultify the imprison-
:g, and the deposing a Queen, to whom the-Crown
descended from so long a, race of Monarchs? The
principal author of whatever was reckoned culpable
n hcr conduc&, was now driven from her presence.
The murderers of the King m:ght have been brought
:o condign punishment, the safety of the Prince
have been secured, and the Protestant religion have
b.rn eftabliffied, without wresting the sceptre out
o her hands, or condemning her to perpetual im-
prifbnment. 'Whatever right a free Parliament
.ight have had to proceed to such a rigorous con-
clufon, or whatever name its determinations might
have merited, a sentence of this nature, palTed by
asew nobles, without acknowledging or confiilting
t,'e reft of the nation, mufl be deemed a rebellion
against the government, and a conspiracy against
the person of their Sovereign.

THE partizans of the confederates reasoned very
difi.rently. 'Tis evident, said they, that Mary
cit'er previously gave consent to the King's mur-
der, or did afterwards approve of that horrid action.
Her attachment to Bothwell, the power and honours
with which she loaded him, the manner in which
,ie suffered his trial to be carried on, and the inde-
cent speed with which she married a man, stained
with so many crimes, raise firong suspicions of the

former,

B o o former, and put the latter beyond all doubt. To

V. have suffered the supreme power to continue in the
`" ` hands of an ambitious man, capable of the most at-

t:ocious and desperate actions, would have been dif-
graceful to the nation, dishonourable to the Qkeen,!
and dangerous to the Prince. Recourse was, there-l
fore, had to arms. The Queen had beeri compel-
led to abandon a husband, so unworthy of herself,
But her affection toward him still continuing un-
abated; her indignation against the authors of this
separation being visible, and often exprefied in the
strongest terms; they, by restoring her to heran.
dent authority, would have armed her with power
to destroy themselves, have enabled her' to recal
Bothwell, and have afforded her an opportunity of
pursuing schemes fatal to the nation, with greater
eagerness, and with more success. Nothing, there-
fore, remained, but by one bold action to deliveri
themselves and their country from all future fears.|
The expedient they had chosen was no lefs'refpet-:
ful to the royal blood, than necessary for the public
safety. While one Prince was set aside as incapable-
of governing, the Crown was placed on his' head,
who was the undoubted representative of their an-
cient Kings.

WH A TEVER opinion posterity may'form on com-

paring the arguments of the two contending parties,
whatever sentiments we may entertain concerning
the jufice or necefTity of that course which thecon-
federates held, it cannot be denied that their con-
duct, so far as regarded themselves, was extremely
prudert. Other expedients, less rigorous towards

Mar)',

lIary, might have been found for fettling the na-. B o o r.
ion; but, after the injuries they had already offer- V.
td the QuAeen, there was none so effectual for fe- '-*"
curing their own safety, or perpetuating their own 1 57.
power.

To a great part of the nation, the conduct of
the confederates appeared not only wife, but just.
The King's accession to the throne was every where
proclaimed, and his authority submitted to without
opposition. And though several of the nobles were
Lill assembled at Hamilton, and seemed to be entering.
into some combination against his government, an
fociation for supporting it. was formed, and signed
by so many persons of power and influence through-
out the nation, as entirely discouraged the attempt *.

THE return of the Earl of Murray, about this Murray as
ime, added strength to the party, and gave itfumes the

govern-

a regular and finished form. Soon after the mur- ment
der of the King, this nobleman had retired in-
to France, upon what pretence historians. do not
mention. During his residence there, he had held
a close correspondence with the chiefs of the confe-
deracy, and, at their desire, he now returned. He
Seemed, at first, unwilling to accept the office of
Regent. This hesitation cannot be ascribed to the
scruples either of diffidence, or of duty. Murray
wanted neither abilities to entitle him, nor ambition
to aspire to this high dignity. He had received the
first accounts of his promotion with the utmost fa-

*Anders. vol. ii. 231.

tisfac-

B o o K tisfation; but by appearing to continue for fomn

V. days in fufpence, he gained time to view with at.
-"óv. tention the ground on which he was to a ;' to bal.
I367' lance the strength and resources of the two contend-

ing factions, and to examine whether the founda.
tion on wh:ch his future fame and success must ref,
were found and firm.

BEroRE he declared his final resolution, he wait-

ed on Mary at Lochlevin. This visit, to a sifter,
and a Queen, in a prison, from which he had neitheri
any intention to relieve her, nor to mitigate the ri-i
gour of her confinement, may be mentioned amongi
the circumstances, which discover the great want of|
delicacy and refinement in that age. Murray, who|
was naturally rough and uncourtly in his mannere,l
expoftulated to warmly with the Q(een concerning
her past conduct, and charged her faults so home
upon her, that Miar, who had flattered .herself
with more gentle and brotherly treatment from him,
melted into tears, and abandoned herself entirely to
despair '. I his interview, from which Murray
could reap no political advantage, and wherein he
discovercd a spirit so revere and unrelenting, may
be reckoned among the most bitter circumflances in
Mary's life, and is certainly one of the mos un-
juflifiable in his condult.

SOON after his return from Lochlevin, Murray
cu 2-.. accepted the office of Regent, and began to a& in

that character without op:position.

f Kei'h, 9'. lb' 445, 446.

AMIDST

AMIDsT so many great and unexpected events, B o o K
th fate of Bothwell, the chief cause of them all, V.
ha.h been almost forgotten. After his flight firom
the confederates, he lurked for some time among F,, of
iis vassals in the neighbourhood of Dunbar. But Bth'l"'''
Fnding it impoRible for him to make head, in
;hzt country, against his enemies, or even to secure
kir.felf from their pursuit, he fled for shelter to his
I:nfinan the Bishop of Murray; and when he, over-
swed by the confederates, was obliged to abandon
him, he retired to the Orkney isles. Hunted from
place to place, delerted by his friends, and accom-
panied by a few retainers, as desperate as himself,
he fiffered at once the miseries of infamy, and of
want. His indigence forced him upon a course which
added to his infamy. He armed a few small lips,
which had accompanied him from Dunbar, and at-
tacking every veffll which fell in his way, endea-
roured to procure fubfiftencc for himself and his
followers by piracy. Kirkaldy and Murray of Tul-
iibardin were sent out againfl him by the confede-
rates; and surprising him while he rode at anchor,
scattered his small fleet, took a part of it, and ob-
liged him to fly with a tingle ihip towards Norway;
On that coast he fell in with a vessel richly laden,
and immediately attacked it; the Norwegians failed
with armed boats to its assistance, and after a def-
perate fight, Bothwll and all his crew were taken
prisoners. His name and quality were both un-
known, and he was treated at first with all the in-
dignity and rigour, which the odious crime of pi-
racy merited. His real character was soon discover-

ed;

B o o K ed; and though it saved him from the infamou

V. death to which his associates were condemned, i

L-ó- could neither procure him liberty, nor mitigate th,
I567. hardships of his imprisonment. He languished ter

years in this unhappy condition ; melancholy and
despair deprived him of reason, and at last he ended
his days, unpitied by his countrymen, and urnafitfl
ed by strangers *. Few men ever accomplished
their ambitious projects by worse means, or reaped
from them less satisfaction. The early part of his
life was restless and enterprising, full ds danger and
of vicissitudes. His enjoyment of the grandeur, to
which he attained by so many crimes, was extreme'
ly short; imbittered by much anxiety, and disquiet-
ed by many fears. In his latter years, he fufferedl
the most intolerable calamities, to which the wretch.
ed are fubje:, and from which persons who have
moved in so high a sphere are commonly exempted.

SUccefsof THE good effects of Murray's acceflion to the
the Re- regency were quickly felt. The party forming for
gent's ad-
miniftra. the Queen was weak, irresolute, and disunited; and
lion. no sooner was the government of the kingdom in

the hands of a man, so remarkable both for his abi-
lities and popularity, than the nobles of whom it
was conppofed loft all hopes of gaining ground, and
began to treat separately with the Regent. So many
of them were brought to acknowledge the King's au-
thority, that scarce any appearance of opposition tothe
established government was left in the kingdom. Had
they adhered tothe Queen with any firmness, it is pro-
bable, from Elizabeth's disposition at that time, that

* Melv. 163.
! fe

i;, would have afforded them such afifrtance as B o o K
might have enabled them to face their enemies in V.
the field. But there appeared so little vigour or'

1567.

harmony in their councils, that lhe was discouraged
froml espousing their cause; and the Regent taking
a;ivantage of their situation, obliged them to sub-
mit to his government, without granting any terms,
ei:her to themselves, or to the Queen *.

THE Regent was no lets successful in his attempt,
to get into his hands the places of strength in the
kingdom. Balfour, the deputy-governor, furren-
5ered the castle of Edinburgh; and as the reward
of his treachery, in deserting Bothwell his patron,
obtained terms of great advantage to himself. The
Governor of Dunbar, who discovered more fidelity,
was soon forced to capitulate ; some other small forts
surrendered without resistance.

THIS face of tranquillity in the nation encourag- APailia-
ed the Regent to call a meeting of Parliament. No- men.

Decem, 1 5.

thing was wanting to confirm the liing's authority,
and the proceedings of the confederates, except the
approbation of this fupremie court; and after the
ficcels which had attended all their measures, there
could be little doubt of obtaining it. The num-
ers that resorted to an Afhmbly, which was called
to deliberate on matters of so much importance, were
great. The meeting was opened with the utmof
iolemnity, and all its acts passed with much unani-
mity. Many, however, of the Lords who had dif-

Keith, 447, 45j, 463.
VOL, L G g covered

B o o K covered the warmest attachment to the Queen, were

V. present. But they had made their peace with the
ó- Regent. Argyll, Huntly, and Herreis acknow-
567' ledged, openly, in Parliament, that their behaviour

towards the King had been undutiful and criminal*.
Their compliance, in this manner, with the mea-
fures of the Regent's party, was either the condi-
tion on which they were admitted into favour, or
intended as a proof of the sincerity of their recon-
clement.

cr-.r-. 1I'HE Parliament granted ever)- thing the confede-
tilh iro- rates couli demand, either for the faiety of their!
c:-=.ngs et i
;h. ccnt- own persons, or the security of that form of govern-j

d ment which they had established in the kingdom,

Mary's resignation of the Crown was accepted, and
declared to be valid. The King's authority, and{
Murray's etleion, were recognized, and confirmed.
The imprisoning the Queen, and all the other pro-
ceedings of the confcderatos, were pronounced law-
ful. The letrers which Mary had written to Botht
xwell were produced, and fie was declared to be acr
cefilry to the murder of the Kingt. At the fame
time, all the acts of Parliament 1560, in favourol
the Prcteftant religion were publickly ratified; new
flatutes to the fime purpose were enacted. An(
noth.ing tha: could contribute to root out the re
mains of Popery, or to encourage the growth o
the Refcrmation, wias neglected.

e ld.rf. vol. iv i,;. See A??ind!::, ?--XXIUI.

: ;... :: '.. ."-:Arl. v:! !i. :.vc

0~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

li~~?1X 1,~- i

IT is observable, however, that the fame parsi- B o o K
monious fpiirt prevailed in this Parliament, as in V.
that of 1560. The Protestant clergy, notwith- tó

,567;

landing many discouragements, and their extreme
poverty, had, for seven years, performed all reli-
gious offices in the kingdom. The expedients fal-
len upon for their subsistence had hitherto proved
inefifc'ual, or were intended to be so. But, not-
withflanding their known indigence, and the warm
remonstrances of the Assembly of the church, which
met this year, the Parliament did nothing more for
their relief, than prescribe rome new regulations con-
cerning the payment of the thirds of benefices,
which did not produce any considerable change in
the situation of the clergy.

A FEW days after the dissolution of Parliament, 156g.
four of Bothwell's dependants were convicted of J"ua"'y l
being guilty of the King's murder, and suffered
death as traitors. Their confessIons brought to light
:many circumstances relative to the manner of com-
.ritting that barbarous crime; but they were per-
hns of a low rank, and seem not to have been ad-
mitted into the secrets of the conspiracy *.

NOTWITHSTANDING the universal fubmriffion to
the Regent's authority, there still abounded in the
kingdom many secret murmurs and cabals. The
Partizans of the house of Hamilton reckoned Mur-
!?,'s promotio:n an injury to the Duke of Chatel-
e.rault, who, as firfti rince of the blood, had, in

. nderf. vol. ii. 165.

0 gr 2 theui

B o o K the;r opinion, an undoubted right to be Regent.

V. The length and rigour of Mary's sufferings began

'"y, to move many to commiserate her cafe. All who

leaned to the ancient opinions in religion dreaded
the effe.is of Murray's zeal. And he, tho'his abi-
litits were great, did not possess the talents requisite
for foo:hing the rage or removing the jealousies of
the iifiercort actions. By insinuation, or address,
he nmiCht have gained or fofened many, who had
oppoid him ; but he was a stranger to these gentle
arts. His virtues vere severe; and his deportment
towards his Lquals, especially after his elevation to
the regcncy, difrant and haughty. This behaviour
oieer.dcd oibne of the nobles, and alarmed others,
The Q urtn's faction, which had been so easily dif-
perfed, began again to gather, and to unite, and
was secretly favoured by some who had hitherto zea.
loufly co;;curred with the confederates .

:.u2T; SI-CH wvas the favourable disposition of the na-
'-'.! tion towards the Q wieen, when she recovered her
:-'.'-.n- liberty, in a manner no eles i nu;prifing to her friends,

than unex ected by h.r enemies. Several attempti
had bocn n-.de to procure her an opportunity oi
escaping, which ibme unforeleen accident, or th(
vigilance of her keepers, llad hitherto disappointed
At las, [Mary emylnVcd all her art to gain Georg
Douglas her keeper's brother, a youth of eighteen
As her manners were naturally affable and infinuat
ing she treated him with the most flattering diftinc
tion; she even allowed him to entertain the m0o
ambitious hopes, by letting fall some expressions,

' .lev . i- -.

If she would chufe him for her husband *. At his B o o E.
age, and in such circumfrances, it was impossible V.
to refill such a temptation. He yielded, and drew t 'vx
others into the plot. On Sunday the 2d of May, 56
while his brother fat at supper, and the reft of the
family were retired to their devotions, one of his ac-
complices found means to steal the keys out of his
brother's chamber, and opening the gates to the
Queen and one of her maids, locked them behind
her, and then threw the keys into the lake. Mary
ran with precipitation to the boat which was prepar-
ed for her, and on reaching the shore, was received
with the utmost joy, by Douglas, Lord Seaton, and
Sir James Hamilton, who, with a few attendants,
waited for her. She instantly mounted on horse-
back, and rode full speed towards Niddrie, Lord
Seaton's feat in Weft-Lothian. She arrived there
that night, without being pursued, or interrupted.
After halting three hours, ihe set out for Hamilton;
and travelling at the fame pace, she reached it next
morning.

ON the first news of Mary's escape, her friends Arrives at
whom, in their present disposition, a much smaller Hamiltn,

and raises a

accident would have rouzed, ran to arms. In a few numerous
days, her court was filled with a great and fplendidarmy'
train of nobles, accompanied by such numbers of
followers, as formed an army above 6000 strong.
In their pretence, file declared that the resignation
oi the Crown, and other deeds fle had signed dur-
ing her imprisonment, were extorted from her by

* Keith, 469.

G g 3 fear.

B o o K fear. Sir Robert Melvil confirmed her declaration;

V. and on that, as well as on other accounts, a coun-
--v- cil of the nobles and chief men of her party pro-
56.' nounced all these tranfaE&ions void and illegal. Atthe
\' ay s fame time, an association was formed for the defence

of her person and authority, and subscribed by nine
Earls, nine Bilhops, eighteen Lords, and many
gentlemen of distinction *. Among them, we find
several who had been present in the last Parliament,
and who had signed the counter-affociation in de.
fence of the King's government; but such sudden
changes were then so common, as to be no matter
of reproach.

Corf:t-n:- AT the time when the Queen made her escape,

_:,,.:>' the Regent was at Glasgow, holding a court ofjuf-
.::r.inti. rice. An event so contrary to their expeatations,

and so fatal to their schemes, gave a great shock to
his adherents. Many of them appeared wavering
and irresolute; others began to carry on private ne-
gociations with the Queen; and some openly re-
volted to her fide. In so dificult a juncture, where
his own fame, and the being of the party depend-
ed on his choice, the regent's molt faithful affoci-
ates were divided in opinion. Some advised him
to retire, without loss of time, to Stirling. The
Queen's a:my was already strong, and only eight
nriles distant; the adjacent country was full of the
friends and dependents of the house of Hamilton,
and other Lords of the CQeen's facion ; Glasgow
was a large and unfortified town; his own train
confiRted of no greater number than was usual in

Kei:h, 475.

times

times of peace; all these reasons pleaded for a re- B o o K
treat. But on the other hand, arguments were V.
urged of no inconsiderable weight. The citizens of Ió
G!afgow were well affeced to the caue ; the vassals 5
or Glencairn, Lennox, and Semple lay near at
hand, and were both numerous, and full of zeal i
succours might arrive from other parts of the king-
dom in a few days; in war, fuccels depends upon
reputation, as much as upon numbers; reputation
is gained, or loft, by the first siep one takes; in
his circumfiances, a retreat would be attended
with all the. ignominy .of a flight, and would at once
dispirit his friends, and inspire his enemies with
boldness. In such dangerous exigencies as this, the Hispruden;
superiority of Murray's genius appeared, and en- condua.
abled him both to chufe with wildom, and to aft
with vigour. I-He declared against retreating, and
fixed his head quarters at GlaIgow. And while he
amused the Queen for some days, by pretending to
hearken to some overtures, which she made for ac-
commodating their differences, he was employed,
with the utmost induitry, in drawing together his
adherents, from different parts of the kingdom. He
was soon in a condition to take the field; and
though far inferior to the enemy in number, he
confided so much in the valour of his troops, and
the experience of his officers, that he broke off the
negociation, and determined to hazard a battle '.

AT the fame time, the Queen's generals had
commanded her army to move. Their intention

* BG.dgan. 3w9.

G g 4 was,

B o o K wa., to conduEt her to Dunbarton-cafile, -a place of

V. oreat strength, which the Regent had not been ableto
./p'v wrcft out of the hands of Lord Fleming the gover-

56.' nor; but if the enemy should endeavour to inter-

rupt their march, they resolved not to decline an
engagement. In Mary's situation, no resolution
could be more imprudent. A part only of her for-
ces was assembled. bluntly, Ogilvie, and the nor-
thern clans were soon expected; her sufferings had
removed, or diminished the prejudices of many
among her subjects; the address with which the
surmounted the dangers that obffructed her escape,
dazzled and interested the people; the sudden con-
fluence of so many nobles added lustre to her cause;
fne might assuredly depend on the friendship and
countenance of France; she had reason to expect
the protection of England; her enemies could not
pofibly look for support from that quarter. She
had much to hope from pursuing flow and cautious
measures; teyc had every thing to fear.

BUT Mary, whose hopes were naturally sanguine,

and her passions impetuous, was so elevated by her
sudden transition from the depth of distress, to such
an unuLual appearance of prosperity, that she never
doubted of success. Her army, which was almost
double to the enemy in number, consisted chiefly
of the Hamiltons, and their dependants. Of these
the archbishop of St. Andrew's had the chief di-
retiion, and hoped, by a victory, not only to-crufh
Murray, the ancient enemy of his house, but to get
the person of the Queen into his hands, and to oblige
ler, eiTher to marry one of the Duke's sons, or at

leaf
6

leaf to commit the chief direction of her affairs to B o o K
himself. His ambition proved fatal to the Queen, V.
to himself, and to his family *. s

1568.

MARY'S imprudence, in resolving to fight, was Battle of

not greater than the ill conduct of her generals in LaZtfid"
the battle. Between the two armies, and on the
road towards Dunbarton, there was an eminence
called Langfide-Hill. This the Regent had the
precaution to seize, and posted his troops in a small
village, and among some gardens and inclofures ad-
jacent. In- this advantageous situation he waited
the approach of the enemy, whole superiority in
cavalry could be of no benefit to them, on such bro-
ken ground. The Hamiltons, who composed the
vanguard, ran so eagerly to the attack, that they
put themselves out of breath, and left the main
battle far behind. The encounter of the fpearmen
was fierce and desperate; but as the forces of the
Hamiltons were exposed, on the one flank, to a
continued fire from a body of mufqueteers, attack-
ed on the other by the Regent's most choice troops, T,,l
and not fipported by the reft of the Queen's army, Queens'

army de-

they were loon obliged to give ground, and the rout featcd.
immediately became universal. Few victories, in
a civil war, and among a barbarous people, have
been pursued with lets violence, or attended with
lces bloodshed. Three hundred fell in the field; in
the flight scarce any were killed. The Regent and
his principal officers rode about, beseeching the fol-
diers to spare their countrymen. The number of
prisoners was great, and among them many persons

* Anders. vol. iv. 32. Melv. 181.

of

B o o K of ditinction. The Regent marched back to Glaf-

V. gow, and returned public thanks to God for this

great, and, on his fide, almost bloodless victory *

x568'
Her flight DURING the engagement, Mary stood on a hill,

at no great distance, and beheld all that paifed in
the field, with such emotions of mind as are not
easily described. When the saw the army, which
was her last hope, thrown into irretrievable confu-
sion, her spirit, which all her past misfortunes had
not been able entirely to subdue, funk altogether.
In the utmost consternation, she began her flight,
and so lively were her impreflions of fear, that she
never closed her eyes till The reached the abbey of
Dundrenan in Galloway, full sixty Scottish miles
from the place of battle+.

THESE revolutions in Mary's fortune had been

no less rapid, than singular. In the (hort space of
of eleven days, ihe had been a prisoner at the mercy
of her most inveterate enemies ; she had seen a pow-
erful army under her command, and a numerous
train of nobles at her devotion; and now the was
obliged to fly, in the utmost danger of her life, and
to lurk, with a few attendants, in a corner of her
kingdom. Not thinking herself safe, even in that
retreat; her fears impelled her to an action, the
most unadvised, as well as the most unfortunate in
her whole life. This >-as her retiring into England,
a ftep, which, on many accounts, ought to have
appeared to her raffi and dangerous.

· Keith, 477. f Id. 481.
-s8 BEFORE

BEFORE Mary's arrival in Scotland, mutual dif- B o o
trust and jealousies had arisen between her and Eli- V.
zabeth. All their subsequent tranfastions had con- I 68

1568.

cributed to exasperate and inflame these paflions. Reoives
She had endeavoured, by secret negociations and in- retiring
rrigues, to disturb the tranquillity of Elizabeth'sland.
government, and to advance her own pretensions to
the English Crown. Elizabeth, who pofreffed
greater power, and acted with less reserve, had
openly supported Mary's rebellious subjects, and
fomented all the dissensions and troubles in which
her reign had been involved. The maxims of po-
licy still authorized that Queen to pursue the fame
course; as by keeping Scotland in confusion, she
ffectually secured the peace of her own kingdom.
The Regent, after his viaory, had marched to Edin-
burgh, and not knowing what course the Queen had
taken, it was several days before he thought of pur-
suing her *. She might have been concealed in that
retired corner, among subje&s devoted to her in-
rtreft, till her party, which was dispersed rather than
broken by the late defeat, should gather such
,lrength, that she could again appear with safety at
their head. There was not any danger, which she
ought not to have run, rather than throw herself
into the hands of an enemy, from whom she had
already suffered so many injuries, and who was
prompted both by inclination, and by interest, to
enewv them.

BUT, on the other hand, during Mary's confine-
melnt, Elizabeth had declared againit the proceedings

Crawf. MAem, 59.

Of

B o 0 K of her subjects, and foiicited for her liberty, with a

V. warmth which had all the appearance of sincerity.

8-'^ She had invited her to take refuge in England, and
1568. had promised to meet her in person, and to give her

such a reception as was due to a Queen, and an
ally *. Whatever apprehension Elizabeth might
entertain of Mary's designs, while she had power
in her hands, she was, at present, the object, not
of fear, but of pity; and to take advantage of her
fituarion, would be both ungenerous and inhuman.
The horrors of a prison were fresh in Mary's me-
mory, and if she fould fall a second time into the
hands of her subjects, there was no injury to which
the presumption of success might not embolden
them to proceed. To attempt escaping into France,
was dangerous; and, in her situation, almost im-
possible; nor could she bear the thoughts of ap.
pearing as an exile, and a fugitive, in that king-
dom, where she had once enjoyed all the splendor
of a Queen. England remained her only asylum;
and, in spite of the intreaties of Lord Herreis,
Fleming, and her other attendants, who conjured
her, even on their knees, not to confide in Eliza-
beth's promiifs or generosity, her infatuation was
invincible, and she resolved to fly thither. Herreis,

Her recep- by her command, wrote to Lowther the deputy-
i r- governor of Carlife, to know what reception he

would give her; and, before his answer could re-
turn, her fear and impatience were so great, that
she get into a fifher-boat, and with about twenty
My 76. attendants, landed at \\:irkington in Cumberland,

Camr. 4. Andcrr.
A vol. iv. 99. 120. Murdin, 369.

and

ani thence the was conduced with many marks ofB o o ,
rel)!et to Carlisle *. V.

1568.

So soon as Mary arrived in England, she wrote Elizabeth
a long letter to the Queen, representing, in thedeliberates

concerning
strongest terms, the injuries which she had suffered the man-

ner of

from her own subje&s, and imploring that pity and treatig
allitance which her present situation demanded l-. her
An event so extraordinary, and the conduct which
might be proper in consequence of it, drew the at-
tention, and employed the thoughts of Elizabeth
and her council. If their deliberations had been in-
fluenced by considerations of justice or generosity
alone, they would not have found them long or in-
tricate. A Queen vanquished by her own subjects,
and threatened by them with the loss of her liberty,
or of her life, had fled from their violence, and
thrown herself into the arms of her nearest neigh-
bour and ally, from whom she had received re-
peated assurances of friendship and proteEtion. These
circumstances entitled her to respect and to compaf-
sion, and required that she mhould either be restored
to her own kingdom, or at least be left at full li-
berty to seek aid from any other quarter. But with
Elizabeth and her counsellors, the question was not,
what was most just or generous, but what was most
beneficial to herself, and to the English nation.
Three different resolutions might have been taken,
with regard to the Queen of Scots. To re-infiate
her in her throne, was one; to allow her to retire
into France was another; to detain her in England,
was a third. Each of there drew consequences as-

' Keith, 453. Anders. vol. iv. a. t Id. 29.

ter

B o o K ter it, of the urmoft importance, which were exa.

V. mined, as appears from papers frill extant -, with
ótSV that minute accuracy, which Elizabeth's Ministers
568' employed in all their consultations upon affairs of

moment.

To restore Mary to the full exercise of the royal

authority in Scotland, they observed, would render
her more powerful than ever. The nobles who
were most firmly attached to the Engliff interest,
would quickly feel the utmost weight of her re-
fentment. And as the gratitude of Princes is fel-
dom strong or lafiing, regard to her own interest
might soon efface the memory of her obligations to
Elizabeth, and prompt her to renew the alliance of
theScottifh nation with France, and revive her own
pretensions to the English Crown. Nor was it pof-
fible to fetter and circumscribe the Scottish Queen,
by any conditions that would prevent there dangers.
Her party in Scotland was numerous and powerful.
Her return, even without any support from Eng-
land, would inspire her friends with new zeal and
courage; a single vicory might give them the fu-
periority, which they had loft by a tingle defeat,
and render Mary a more formidable rival than ever
to Elizabeth.

THE dangers arising from suffering Mary to re-

tire into France, were no less obvious. The French
King could not refute his aEiflance towards reftor-
ing his sifter and ally to her throne. Elizabeth
would, once more, fee a foreign army in the ifiand,

* Anierrf. vol iv. 34. ), . :Oe.-

over-

orerawing the Scots, and ready to enter her king- B o o K
do m; and if the commotions in France, on account V.
of religion, were fettled, the Princes of Lorrain 1

1568.

might resume their ambitious proje&ts, and the united
forces of France and Scotland might invade Eng-
!and, where it is weakest and most defenceless.

NOTHING therefore remained but to detain her Rerfoles t
ia England; and to permit her either to live at li- detain her
berty there, or to confine her in a prison. The inEngland.
former was a dangerous experiment. Her court
would become a place of resort to all the Roman
Catholics, to the difaffeted, and to the lovers of in-
novation. Though Elizabeth affeecd to represent
Mary's pretensions to the English Crown as altoge-
ther extravagant and ill-founded, ile was not ignorant
that they did not appear in that light to the nation,
and that many thought them preferable even to her
own title. If the aaivity of her emiflaries had
gained her so many abettors, her own personal in-
fluence was much more to be dreaded ; her beauty,
her address, her sufferings, by the admiration and
pity which they would excite, could not fail of
making many converts to her party *.

'TWAS indeed to be apprehended, that the treat-

ing Mary as a prisoner would excite universal in-
dignation against Elizabeth, and that by this unex-
ampled severity towards a Queen, who implored,
and to whom fle had promised her proteaion, ihe
would forfeit the praise of jufice and humanity,
which was hitherto due to her adminiflration. But

Anders. vol. i:v. S6 , 60.

the

B o o K the Englilh Monarchs were often so solicitous to fe-

V. cure their kingdom against the Scots, as to be little
t'~~' scrupulous about the means which they employed

568' for that purpose. Henry IV. had seized the heir

of the Crown of Scotland, who was forced, by the
violence of a storm, to take refuge in one of the
ports of his kingdom; and, in contempt of the
rights of hospitality, without regarding his tender
age, or the tears and intreaties of his father, de-
taintd him a priobner for many years. This action,
though detested by posterity, Elizabeth resolved
now to imitate. Her virtue was not more proof
than Henry's had been, against the temptations of
interest; and the poflelion of a present advantage
was preferred to the profpet of future fame. The
fatisfation which fe felt in. mortifying a rival,
whose beauty and accompliihments she envied, had,
perhaps, no less influence than political confidera-
tions, in bringing her to this resolution. But, at
the fame time, in order to screen herself from the
censure which this conduct merited, and to make
her treatment of the Scottish Queen look like the
effct' of necessity, rather than of choice, she deter-
mined to put on the appearance of concern for her
interest, and of deep sympathy with her sufferings.
,May :c. WITH this view, she instantly dispatched Lord

Scroope warden of the weft marches, and Sir Fran-
cis Knollys her Vice-chamberlain, to the Queen of
Scots, with letters full of expreflions of kindness
and condolence. But, at the fame time, they had
private instructions to watch all her motions, and to
take care that she {hoikid not escape into her own

king-

dingdonm *. On their arrival, Mary demanded aB o o K
personal interview with the Queen, that she might V.
lay before her the injuries which she had suffered, '- J

i568.

and receive fiom her those friendly offices which she Ma,.y de-
had been encouraged to expe&. They answered, ma"nd ad-

mittance

that it was with reluctance this honour was at pre- into Eliza-
lnt denied her ; that while ffe lay under the impu- bne5 prC
ration of a crime so horrid, as the murder of her
husband, their Mistress, to whom he was so nearly
allied, could not, without bringing a stain upon her
own reputation, admit her into her presence; but
as loon as (le had cleared herself from that asper-
lion, they promised her a reception suitable to her
dignity, and aid proportioned to her diftreis -.

NOTING, could be more frivclous than this pre- S!:e cfies
:race. It was the orcaFion, however, of leading tl; ':,

ca to !I.¢f

t!ne tQeen of Scots into the snare, in which Elizat- conrua..
bchl and her Miniis wiflhed to intang!e her.
Mary exprcifed the utmost furprize at this unexpec-
td manner of evading her iqueli; but a, fihe
could not believe so many profillnions of friend-
i.'ip to be void of lincerity, 11:e frankly offered to
fulbmit her cause to thel cognizance of Elizabeth,
and urdertook to produce fiich proofs of her own
in:cccnce, and of th: fa;fhood of the accusations
brought againli her, as should fully remove the fcru-
p'es, and latisfy the delicacy of the English Queen.
This was the very point to which Elizabe;-h labour- E;zrbe!:
ed to bring the matrer. By this appeal of the t.kes J-

vant,:ns of

[c :tifil Qupen, Pie became the umpire between her tis offer.
and her fubje6ls, and had it entirely in her own

" .ndlrT. vol iv. 3.6, 70, 9z. t Ibid. vol. iv. 8. ;i.
\OL. J. H h powver

B o o K power to protract the inquiry to any length, and

V. to perplex and involve it in endless difficulties. In

the mean time, flie was furnished with a plausible
'3 'prtence for keeping her at a distance from court,

and for refuting to contribute towards replacing her
on her throne. As Mary's conduc had been ex-
tremely incautious, and the presumptions of her
guilt were many and strong, it was poflible her sub-
je.s might make good their charge against her;
and if this should be the result of the inquiry, she
would, thenceforth, cease to be the object of regard,
or of compafion, and the treating her with cold-
ness and neglect would merit little censure. In a
matter so dark and mysterious, there was no proba-
bility that lary could bring proofs of her innocence,
so incontesed, as to render the conduct of the Eng-
linh Qeen altogerher culpable. And perhaps, her
imrpatience under r-raint, her suspicion of Eliza-
bt'-.'h's -ar;'i-, or her dilcovery of her artifices,
mi.l:. en--ge i;'r in. fich cabals, as would jutify

t-

='-= -.*i5,5 he- '
-* zrca:cr rlgcur.

ELIZ EETH C.,1; fore'aaw 2ll those advantages,

-Vci,1i ;:ouid arie fonui an incquiry into the conduA
of the Scctziln Q: een, carriedl on under her direc-
t;on. There v;r.s icie danger, however, that Mary
mr!igt dilccver her fecrct intentions too loon, and
by receding from the .c. r which Ihe had made, en-
deavcur to (c.ia;prS,)p them. But even in that
event, she determined not to drop the inquiry, and
had thought of fevcral diTrent expedients for car-
rying i; on. The Countref of Lenncx, convinced
that Mary was acceiobry io the murder of her son,

1 and

and thirsting for that vengeance which it was natural B o K
for a mother to demand, had implored Elizabeth's V.
julice, and solicited her, with many tears, in her ''~
own name, and in her husband's, to bring the
Scottish Queen to a trial for that crime *. The pa-
rents of the unhappy Prince had ajuft right to pre-
ser this accusation; nor could she, who was their
nearest kinswoman, be condemned for listening to
so equitable a demand. Betides, as the Scottish no-
bles openly accused Mary of the fame crime, and
pretended to be able to confirm their charge by sus-
ficient proof; it would be no difficult matter to pre-
vail on them, to petition the Queen of England to
take cognizance of their proceedings against their
Sovereign ; and it was the opinion of the English
council, that it would be reasonable to comply with
ahe reqiueft t. At the fame time, the obsolete claim
cf the superiority of England over Scotland began
to be talked of; and, on that account, it was prc-
;:ndcd that the decision of the contest between
Mary and her fubjets belonged of right to Eliza-
leth!. But though Elizabeth revolved all these ex-
peflients in her mind, and kept them in reserve to
be made use of as occasion might require, she wish-
ei that the inquiry into Mary's conduct should ap-
pear to be undertaken purely in compliance with her
cG.n demand, and in order to vindicate her inno-
Cence; and so long as that appearance could be pre-
f:rted, none of the other expedients were to be em-
,!oycd.

Camr. 4Z1. Hayncs, 469. t And. vol v. . 7.

H h z WTHE

B o o K WHEN Mary consented to submit her cause to

V. Elizabeth, she was far from fufpeEting that any bad
C'"" consequences could follow, or that any dangerous
356. pretensions could be founded on her offer. She ex-

peEted that Elizabeth herself would receive, and
examine her defences *; fne meant to confider her
as an equal, for whole fatisfac.ion she was willing
to explain any part of her condufc, that was liable
to censure ; not to acknowledge her as a superior,
before whom she was bound to plead her cause. But
Elizabeth put a very dinferent lense on Mary's of-
ser. She confidered he! self as chosen to be judge in
the controversy between the Scottifi Queen and her
subjects, and began to act in that capacity. She
proposed to appoint commifnioners to hear the plead-
ings of both parties, and wrote to the Regent of
Scotland, to imnpower proper perfouns to appear be-
fore them, in his name, and to )poduce what hei
could alledge in vindication of his proceedings'
againl his Sovereign.

,Mia.:y.:t- M.I. A '. h:, hitlerto, relied with unaccountable
b'jo7.1- credulity en El:zabct 's profemfons of regard, and
bti'.i cc- e.xpected thI-t i many !Li.nd speeches would, at last,

be accomainied v,i h some flitable actions. But'
th;i proFpo.!l entirely undeceived her. She plainly
perceivcd the artifice of Elizabeth's conduct, and
iaWv ha.t a diminution it would be to her own ho-
nour, to appear on a level with her rebellious fib-
jcts, andi to ind togetler with them at the bar of
a superior and a judge. Sihe retracted the offer
w-hich fne h.d! made, and which had been perverteJ

- ;.:.- 'o'. o. i, .

to a purpose so contrary to her intention. She de- B o o K
manded, with more earnerfnefs than ever, to be ad- V.
mirted into Elizabeth's presence; and wrote to her, 56S
in a firain very different from what ihe had for- junu 3.
merly ulfd, and which fully discovers the grief and
in 'ignation that preyed on her heart. " In my

present situation, lays she, I neither will, nor can

"reply to the accusations of my fubjecls. I am
' ready, of my own accord, and cut of fiiendfhip

to you, to satisfy your fcrup!es, and to vindicate

" my own conducit. My fubjel-s are not my equals;
"nor will I, by ifbmni:ting my cause to a judicial
" trial, acknowledge them to be so. I Psed into
" your arms, as i.;to those of my nearel relation,

and most perfec t+ricnd. I did you honour, as

" i imagined, in chufing you preferably to any
" other irince, to be the refRorer of an itjured
" Qeecn. W\as it ever known that a Prince was
" blamed for hearing, in person, the complaints of
" those who appealed to his juf.ice, againf: the
" f;:!e accusations of thlir enemies ? You admitted
"into your presence my bastard brother, . ho had

been guilty of rebellion; and you deny me that

"honour ! God forbid that I should be the occa-
" sion of bringrng any stain upon your reputation.
"I expected that your manner of treating me

would have added lufire to it. Suffer me either

"to implore the aid of other Princes, who'e deli-
"cacy on this head, will be leTs, and their resent-
" ment of my wrongs greater; or let me receive
' from your hands that afiiftance, which it becomes

you, more tlan any other Prince, to grant; and

11 h 3 by

o o K" by that benefit, bind me to yourself in the indif-
V. soluble ties of gratitude *"

r1C ST- THIS letter somewhat disconcerted Elizabeth's
z:,2be. s plan, but did not divert her from the profccution

c.,..:.n or ir. She la:dh e e matter before the Privy Coun-

l"' cil, and it was t:;ere ietermined, notwitchfanding
the in:reaties and remnonf rancits of the cottilhQueen,
to go on with the inquiry into her conduct, and till
that were finihted, it was agreed that Elizabeth could
not, confiiter.nly v i;h er oAwn honour, or with the
fafetv of her governmer.t, either give her the affit-
ance which /he demanded, or permit her to retire
out of the kingdom. ;, nd left the Ihould have an
oppornunky of cfcaping, while she resided so near
Scotland, it was thought adcvi:eable to remove her
to some place, at a greater diftarnce from the bor-
ders T.

P..r:- .WHILE the Englihn court was occupied in there

ingR if t-e deliberations, the Regent did not neg'ect to improve
g..:;, e the victory at Lan;.de. That event was of the

. ;2I..r utmost irmp;r:ance tb'him. It not only drove the

QSeen her-kl out of the kingdom, but left her ad-
herrets d:fperfcd, and without a leader, at his
rrercy. Hie feermed re'obved, at sirs, to proceed
against them wiih the utmost rigour. Six persons
of fbome wisntiinon, who had been taken prisoners
in the bat.le, were tritd, and condemned to death
;s rebels against the King's government. They

cw-ee led to the p;ice of exc!ution, but by the pow-
eriul intUiccifiuil of Knox they obtained a pardon.

* Ar'_e::. , iv.

i .- . t -
t J. i[.'. 1c2.

Ha-

Hamilton of Bothwellhaugh was one of the num- B o o K
ber, who lived to give both the Regent and V.
Knox reason to repent of this commendable act of'
lenity 568.

SooN after, the Regent marched with an army,

consisting of 4000 horle and Iooo foot, towards
the weft borders. The nobles in this part of the
kingdom were all of the Queen's faction; but as
they had not force sufficient to obfiruct his progress,
he must either have obliged them to submit to the
King, or would have laid wate their lands with fire
and isord. But Elizabeth, whose interest it was to
keep Scotland in confusion, by preserving the ba-
lance between the two parties, and who was endea-
vouring to tooth the Scottifn Queen by gentle treat-
nent, interposed at her desire. After keeping the
field two weeks, the Regent, in compliance to the
Engliih Ambassador, dismissed his forces; and an
expedition, which might have proved fatal to his
opponents, ended with a few acts of feverityt.

THE resolution of the English Privy Council with Mary car-
regard to Mary's person, was soon carried into exe- tned to Bol-

ton.

cution; and, without regarding her remonflrances
or complaints, ihe was conducted to Bolton, a caf-
tie of Lord Scroop's, on the borders of Yorkshire.
In this place, her correspondence with her friends in
Scotland became more difficult, and any profpec of
making her escape was entirely cut off. 'he now
felt herself to be entirely in Elizabeth's power, and
though treated as yet with the relpet due to a Queen,
* Cald. vol. ii. 99. t Ibid. t And. vol. iv. i4.

I-I h 4 her

B o o K her real condition was that of a priforier. Mary

V. knew what it was to be deprived of liberty, and
t--' dreaded it as the worfi of all evils. While the re-

156 ' membrance of her late imprisonment was flill lively,

and the terror of a new one filled her mind, Eliza-
beth thought it a proper juncture to renew her for-
:y -;.. mrer propoficion, thae she would susser the Regent

and his adherents to be called into England, and
consent to their being heard in defence of their own
condu&t. And on her part, she promised, whatever
should be the ifie of this inquiry, to employ all
her power and influence towards replacing Mary on
her throne, under a few limitations, which were

Ar- 't--: far from being unreafbnable. Fear, impatience,
an i ~:

3 " ty
hb ...'- despair, as well as this soothing promire, with which

',r the proposition was accompanied, induced the Scot-

t.fh Queen to comply *

He. c 'T.- II : order to Ferfuade Elizabeth that she desired no-
mu'aion thincg so much as to render the union between them as
rirdo re- c!ofe as poffibe, she shewed a disposition to relax

"n' s^nrevwhat in cne point, wirh regard to which, during

all her past and subsequent misfortunes, she was
uniformly inflexib!e. She expressid a great vene-
ration for the liturgy of the church of England;
Ihe was often preient at religious worship, accord-
ing to the rites of the reformed church ; made
choice of a Protestant clergyman to be her chap.
lain; heard him preach aga.in fthe errors of Popery
vith attention and seeming pieafure; and discovered
all the symptoms of an approaching conversion .

* Ande.s. vol. iv. Ico I-Tr.-r, -3. - t .Anders.
*ol!.'i;. l!;. Havnc', '-Suc

Such

Such was Mary's known and bigotted attachment B o o
ro the Popish religion, that it is impossible to believe V.
her sincere in this part of her conduct; nor can any 563.
thing mark more strongly the wretchedness of her
condition, and the excess of her fears, than that they
betrayed her into diflimulation, in a matter concern-
ing which her sentiments were, at all other times,
icrupuloufly delicate.

AT this time the Regent called a Parliament, in Augut i-.

ZD A Parlia-

order to proceed to the forfeiture of those who re- mentin
fused to acknowledge the King's authority. The Sctland'
Queen's faction was alarmed, and Argyll and
HIuntly, whom Mary had appointed hur lieutenants,
the one in the south, and the other in the north of
Scotland, began to assemble forces to obrcruA this
meeting. Compassion for the Queen, and envy at
those who governed in the King's name, had added
so much strength to the party, that the Regent
would have found it difficulr to ,vithftand its efforts.
But as Mary had submitted her cause to Eliza-
beth, she could not refuse, at her dcflre, to com-
mand her friends to lay down their arms, and to
wait patiently till matters were brought to a ducifion
in Ergland. By procuring this cefittion of arms,
Elizabeth afforded as seasonable relief to the Re-
gent's fation, as she had formerly given to the
()ueen's '".

THE Regent, however, would not conlfnt, even

at Elizabeth's requef&, to put off the nmeting of
a:irliament. But we may ascribe to her influence,

* Anders. vol, iv, Iz2,

as

B o o K as well as to the eloquence of Maitland, who la-

V. boured to prevent the one half of his countrymen
''r' from exterminating the other, any appearances
15 6' of moderation which this Parliament discovered. in

its proceedings. The most violent opponents of
the King's government were forfeited ; the reft were
allowed still to hope for favour +.

Elizabeth -No sooner did the Queen of Scots submit her
requires
the Regcst cause to her rival, than Elizabeth required the Re-
to defnd gent to fend to York, deputies properly infruced
his con- &
dut. for vindicating his conduct, in pretence of her com-

miflioners. It was not without hesitation and anxi-
ety, that the Regent contented to this measure.
His authority was already established in Scotland,
and confirmed by Parliament. To susser its vali-
dity now to be called in question, and fuibjeted to
a foreign jurifdiacion, was extremely mortifying.
To accuse his Sovereign before firangers, the an-
cient enemies of the Scottish name, was an odious
task. To fail in this accusation was dangerous; to
succeed in it was disgraceful. But the strength of
the adverse faction daily increased. He dreaded the
interposition of the French King in its behalf. In
his situation, and in a matter which Elizabeth had
so much at heart, her commands were neither to he
disputed, nor disobeyed .

r:- he. THE neceflity of repairing in person to York
<z.S ~a added to the ignominy of the rsep which he was ob-

c.-liged to take. Ali his associates declined the office;

they were unwilling, it vwould seem, to expose them-

* Buch. 371. t Buch. 372. See ApSend, NOXXV.

selves

selves to the odium and danger with which it was B o K
easy to foresee that the discharge ot it would b: at- V.
tended. unlels he himfelr conl;nted to share these ''"
in common with them. The Earl of Dorton, scpt.s.
Bothwell Bishop of Orkney, Fitcarn Commenda-
tor of Dunfermling, and Lord Lindsay were joinedi
vwith him in commission. Macgill of Rankleilor
and Balnaves of Halhill, tvwo eminent Civiiians,
George Buchanan his faithful adhcrent, a man
whose genius did honour to the age, Maitland, and
fcveral others, were appointed to attend them as
afliftants. Maitland owed this diftint:on to the
Regent's fear. r ther than to his affection. He had
warmly remonfl rated against this measure. He
wished his country to continue in frirndfhip with
England, but not to become dependant on that na-
tion, He was desirous of re-establishing the Queen
in some degree of power, not inconsistent with thac
which the King poflcfled; and the Regent could
nor, with safety, leave. be'ind him a man, whose,
views were so contrary to his own, and who, by
his superior abilities, had acquired an influence in
the nation, equal to that, which others derived
from the antiquity and power of their families *.

M.ARY impowered Lefly Bilhop of Ross, Lord
Livingflon, Lord Boyd, Lord Herreis, Gavin H-a-
miiton Commendator of Kilwinning, Sir John
Gordon of Lochinvar, and Sir James Cockburn of
Skirling, to appear in her name -

Buch. 372. Anders. vol.iv. 35. MeW. 186, i83.
t Anders. vol. iv, 33.

JELIZA-

B o K ELIZABETH nominated Thomas Howard Duke

V. of Norfolk, Thomas Ratcliff Earl of Suffex, and
`ó5' Sir Ralph Sadler, her Commiffloners to hear both

parties.

The ccn- THE fourth of Octobcr was the day fixed for
ference at
York. opening the C;.ference. The great abilities of the

deputies on both fides, the dignity of the judges
before whom they were to appear, the high rank
of the persons whose cause v.as to be heard, and
the importance of the points in dispute, rendered
the whole tranfaccion no lets illustrious, than it was
singular. The situation in which Elizabeth ap-
peared, on this occasion, firikes us with an air of
magnificence. Her rival, an independant Queen,
and the heir of an ancient race of monarchs, was
a prisoner in her hands, and appeared, by her am-
baffadors, before her tribunal. The Regent of
Scotland, who represented the majesty, and possessed
the authority of a King, flood in person at her bar.
And the fate of a kingdom, whofc power her an-
ceftors had often dreaded, but could never subdue,
was now absolutely at her disposal.

Views cf THE views, however, with which the' several
the die-
rent F- parties contented to this conference, and the issue
tes. to which they expeced to bring it, were extremely

different.

MA-RY'S chief objet was the recovering her for-

mer authority. This induced her to consent to a
mealule, again:f which flhe had long firuggled
Elizabeth's rromifes gave her ground for entertain-

in:

ing hopes of being restored to her kingdom; inB o o K
order to which, she would have, willingly, made V.
many conceffons to the King's party; and the in- "68.
fluence of the English Queen, and her own impa-
tience under her present situation, might have led
her to many more *. The Regent aimed at no-
thing but fecuringElizabeth's prote6tion to his party,
and seems not have had the most distant thoughts
of coming to any composition with Mary. Eliza-
beth's views were more various, and her schemes
more intricate. She seemed to be full of concern
for Mary's honour, and solicitous that fie should
wipe off the aspersions which biemifhed her charac-
ter. This ffie pretended to be the intention of the
conference ; amusing Mary, and eluding the soli-
citations of the French and Spanish ambassadors in
her behalf by repeated promi!es of assisting her, as
toon as she could venture to do so, without - bring-
ing disgrace on herself. But, under this veil of
friendship and generosity, Elizabeth concealed fen-
timents of a different nature. She expeced that the
Regent would accuse Mary of being acceflbry to
the murder of her hufhand. She encouraged him,
as far as decency would permit, to take this defpe-
rate frep t. And as this accusation might termi-
nate two different ways, she had concerted measures
for her future conduft suitable to each of these. If
the charge against Mary fiould appear to be well
founded, she resolved to pronounce her unworthy
of wearing a Crown, and to declare that fie would

Anders. vol. iv. 33. GooJ. vol. ii, 337. i 1 Anders.
vol. iv. 11, 45. Haynes, 487.

never

B o o K never burthen her own conscience with the- guilt of

V. an action so detestable, as the restoring her 'to her

- kingoom *. If it should happen, that what her
'68. accuf:rs alledged, did not amount to a proof of

gti:, bur only of mal-aJminiftration, she deter-
mined to set on foot a treaty for restoring her, but
on such conditions, as would render her for ever
dependant on England, and the slave of her own
fujects -. And as every ifep in the progress of
the conference, as well as the final result of it, was
in her own power, Ihe would till be at liberty to
chufe which of these courses she would hold; or if
there appeared to be any danger or inconveniency in
pFriing either of them, fie might protract the
v.ho'e cause by endless delays, and involve it in in-
extricable perplexity.

Comnpl1.n- TH conference, however, was opened with much
of r;e folemntY. But the very first ftep discovered it to
Q-een'5
ct ,.ibi- be E:izaIbeh's intention to inflame, rather than to
C:.t t:: e'::-'nlulh the dilTentions and animofities among the
RSger.. SC.-Cs. No endeavours were used to reconcile the

cr-:--:.:ing parties, or to mollify the fierceness of
th!- i. 1;rd, b b ring'ng the Queen to offer pardon
fir . il' wa2s pass, or her fubjccts to promise more
oac .br d:tif:T! obedience for the future. On the contrary,

M.ary's comnmii.ontrs were permitted to prefer a
complaint againi tle Regent and his party, con-
taining an en merattcn of their treasonable actions,
o. their seizing her perfcn b, force of arms, com-
irrtinz heer to prison, cc.melling her to resign the
Crov-;n, and rr.aing use of her son's name to colour

5,: -i-£ . ;
* .":, , r - bd. 16.

their

their usurpation of the whole royal authority. And B o o K
of all these enormities, they required such speedy V.
and effe&ual redress, as the injuries of one Queen 15ó.*
demanded from the justice of another *.

IT was then expe&ed that the Regent would have
disclosed the whole circumstances of that unnatural
crime, to which he pretended the Queen had been
accessory, and would have produced evidence in sup-
port of his charge. But far from accusing Mary,
the Regent did not even answer the complaints
brought against himself. He discovered a relutance
at the undertaking that office, and flarted many
doubts and scruples, with regard to which, he de-
manded to be resolved by Elizabeth herfelft. His
reserve and hesitation were no less surprising to the
greater part of the English commissioners than to
his own associates. They knew that he could not
vindicate his own conduce without charging the
murder upon the Queen, and he had not hitherto
shown any extraordinary delicacy on that head. An
intrigue had been secretly carried on, since his arri-
val at York, which explains this mytfery.

THE Duke of Norfolk was, at that time, theintrigues o
most powerful and most popular man in England. Norfoll

llr~~~~~~~~~ with the

His wife was lately dead; and he began already to Regent.
form a project, which he afterwards more openly
avowed, of mounting the throne of Scotland, by a
marriage with the Queen of Scots. He saw the
infamy which would be the consequence of a pub-
lic accusation against Mary, and how prejudicial it

* Anders. vol. iv. 2, f Haynes, 478.

might

B o o K might be to her pretensions to the English fuccef-

V- sion. In order to save her this cruel-mortifcation
%'7" -he applied to Maitland, and expressed his astonish

' ment at feeing a man cf so much reputation for

wisdom, concurring with the Regent in a measure
so dishonourable to themfclves, to their Queen, and
to their country; submitting the public transactions
of the nation to the judgment of foreigners; and
publishing the ignominy, and exposing the faults of
their Sovereign, which they were bound, in good
policy, as well as in duty, to conceal and to cover
It was easy for ,M\aitland, whose sentiments were the
fame with the Duke's, to vindicate his own con-
duct. He assured him, that he had employed all
his credit, to d;Thade his countrymen from this
meafrre ; and would {till contribute, to the utmost
of his pawer, to divert them from it. This en-
couraged Norfolk to con'.muncate the matter to the
Regent. He repeated and enforced the fame argu-
ments which he had used with Maitland. He warned
him of the danger to which he muf expose himself,
by fich a violent aEtion as the public accusation of his
Soxvereign. Mary would neverforgive a man, who had
endeavoured to fix such a brand of infamy on her cha-
ra:t-r. If she ever recovered any degree of power,
his de::ruct:ion would be inevitable, and he would
juftlv merit i: at her hands. Nor would Elizabeth
screen him from this, by a public approbation of
his conduct. For whatever evidence of Mary's

u.lt lhe might produce, she was resolved to give no
denritrive lentence in the cause. Let him only de-
mand that the matter fhotuid be brought to decisions
i:nnedui.itly afier hearing the proof, and he would

be

he fully convinced how faire and inridious her 'in- B 6 o 0-
tendons were, ahd, by consequence, how improper V.
it would be for hifi to appear as the accuter of his 1568;
bwn SovePrign *. The candour which Norfolk
seemed to difcbver in these remonftrarices, as well
as the truth which they contained, made a deep im-
prefidri on the Regent. He daily received the
firongeft afftirances of Mary's wiilingnefs to be re-
conciled tb hiiim, if he abftalned frofm accusing her
offuch ari odious crime, together with denouhcia-
tions of her iirrcohcileable hatred; if he acted a con-
trary part -. All there considerations cohcurred iil
determining him to alter his purpose, and to make
trial of the expedient which the Duke had fuggeift
ed.

HE demanded, therefore, to be informed, before oaobe 9;

he proceeded farther, whether the English comiinif-
fioners were impowered to declare the Queen guilty~
by a judicial act; whether they would promise to
pass sentence, withbut delay; whether the Queen
Should be kept under such restraint, as to prevent
her from disturbing the government nov established
in Scotland; and whether Elizabeth, if hie approv-
ed of the proceedings of the King's party, would
engage to proteEt it for the future :. The paper
containing these demands was signed by himself
alone, without communicating it to any of his at-
tendants; except Maitland and Melvil §. Nothing
could appear more natural than the Regent's folici-

* Mclv. 187. Haynes, 573. 1 Anders. yoLi. i7.
Good. vol ii. ii . 7See Append. NT XXVI.

t Anderl. vol. iv. 55. § Ibid. 56. Mec. 190.
VLt: I. t i tude,

B o o K tude, to know on what footing he flood. To have

V. ventured on a ftep so uncommon and dangerous, as

L.\~ the accusing his Sovereign, without previously as-
jsó8.

cerraining that he might take it with safety, would
have been unpardonable imprudence. But Eliza-
beth, who did not expec that he would have mov-
ed any such difficulty, had not impowered her com-
missioners to give him that fatisfadfion which he de-
manded. It became necessary to transmit the arti-
cles to herself, and by the light in which Norfolk
placed them, it is easy to fee that he v-ifhed that
they should make no flight impreflion on Elizabeth
and her Ministers. " Think not the Scots, said
" he, over-fcrupulous or precise. Let us-view their
"conduct, as we would wish our own to be viewed
" in alke situation. The game they play is deep;
" their estates, their lives, their honour are at Rake.

It is now in their own power to be reconciled to

" their Queen, or to offend her irrecoverably, and
" in a matter of so much importance, the utmost

d' degree of caution is not excessive *.

WHILE the English commissioners waited for ful-

ler infirutions with regard to the Regent's demands,
he gave in an answer to the complaint, which had
been offered in name of the Scottish Queen. It was
expressed in terms perfectly conformable to the fyfeem
which he had at that time adopted. It contained
no insinuation of the Queen's being accessory to the
murder of her husband; the bitterness of stile
peculiar to the age w as considerably abated
and though he pleaded, that the infamy of th(

' Anderl vol. iv . 77.

mar-

marriage with Bothwell, made it necessary to take B o o K
arms in order to dissolve it; though Mary's attach- V.
ment to a man so odious justified the keeping her 5ó'
for some time under restraint; yet nothing more
was said on these fubjets than was barely requisite in
his own defence. The Queen's commissioners did
not fail to reply*. But while the article with re- Oaoberl 7
gard to the murder remained untouched, these were
only skirmishes at a distance, of no consequence to-
wards ending the contest, and were little regarded
by Elizabeth or her commifnioners.

THE conference had, hitherto, been conducted in The confe.
a manner which disappointed Elizabeth's views, and rence te-

nmo"ed to

produced none of thele discoveries which she had w-alnin.
expected. The diflance between York and Lon- nr.
don, and the necessity of consulting her upon every
difficulty which occurred, consumed much time.
Norfolk's negociation with the Scottif Regent,
however secretly carried on, was not, in all proba-
bility, unknown to a Princess so remarkable for her
sagacity in penetrating the designs of her enemies,
and feeing through their deepest schemes -. In-
ilead, tlerefore, of returning any answer to the Re-
gent's demands, the resolved to remove the confe-
rence to 'eftminfter, and to appoint new commis-
fioners, in whom she could more absolutely con-
fide. Both the Scottifl Queen and the Regent
were brought, without difficulty, to approve of this
resolution :.

* Ander. vol. iv. 6q, Po. -f Good. vol. ii. I(.

.Anl. vol. iii. '
:[ HI-ayncs, 4Q. Arnd'-i. ol. iv. ct.

I i 2 V'sE

B o o K WE often find Mary boasting of the superiority

V. of her commiffloners during the conference at York,

S^^ and how, by the trength of their arguments, they

confounded her adversaries, and silenced all their
cavils *. The dispute flood, at that time, on a
a footing, which rendered her vi&ory not only ap-
parent, but easy. Her participation of the guilt of
the King's murder was the only circumstance, which
could juflify the violent proceedings of her subje&s.
And while they industriously avoided mentioning
that, her cause gained as much as that of her adver-
saries loft by suppressing this capital argument.

ELIZABETH resolved that Mary should not enjoy

the fame advantage in the conference to be held at
Weftminfier. She deliberated with the utmost anxi-
ety, how she might overcome the Regent's scruples,
and persuade him to accuse the Queen. She confi-
dered of the most proper method for bringing Mary's
commissioners to answer such an accusation; and as
The iorefaw that the promises with which it was ne.
ceffary to allure the Regent, and which it was im-
possible to conceal from the Scottish Queen, would
naturally exasperate her to a great degree, ihe de-
termined to guard her more narrowly than ever;
and though Lord Scroop had given her no reason
to diftrult his vigilance or fidelity, yet because he
was the Duke of Norfolk's brother-in law, she
thought it proper to remove the Queen as soon as
posSible to Tuthbury in Staffordshire, and commit
her to the keeping of the Earl of Shrewsbury, to
whom that castle belonged +.

Gac3. vol. ii. i86, 2S4, 3?. t Haynes, 487.

MARYP

MARY began to fufpeEt the design of this second B o o K

conference; and notwithrfanding the fatisfacion she V.
expressed at feeing her cause taken more immediate- 1r68
ly under the Queen's own eye *, she framed her Mary's us-
inftrutions to her commiffloners, in such a man- lczbeth"s
ner, as to avoid being brought under the neceflity intentions.
Of answering the accusation of her fubjets, if they Oaoberzi.
ihould,be so desperate as to exhibit one againfi hert.
These suspicions were soon confirmed by a circum-
fiance extremely mortifying. The Regent having
arrived at London, in order to be present at the
conference, was immediately admitted into Eliza-
beth's pretence, and received by her, not only with'
refpe&, but with affection. This Mary justly con-
f:dered as an open declaration of that Queen's par-
tiality towards her adversaries. In the first emo- Novem.z2.
tions of her resentment, she wrote to her commis- Cla'ms a

personal

fioners, and commanded them to complain, in the audience of
pretence of the English nobles, and before the am-izabe
bafsadors of foreign Princes, of the usage the had
hitherto met with, and the additional injuries which
she had reason to apprehend. Her rebellious sub-
jects were allowed access to the Queen, ihe was ex-
cluded from her pretence; they enjoyed full liberty,
she languished under a long imprisonment; they
were encouraged to accuse her, in defending herself
she laboured under every disadvantage. For these
reasons the once more renewed her demand, of be-
ing admitted into the Queen's pretence; and if that
were denied, she inftrutled them to declare, that
she recalled the content she had given to the con-

* Anders vol. iv. 95. J' Good. oii. 3g9.

I i 3 fcrence

B o o K ference at Weftminfler, and protested, that what-

V. ever was done there, should be held to be null and

invalid *.
1568.

THIS, perhaps, was the rmof prudent resolution

Mary could have taken. The pretences on which
she declined the conference were plausible, and the
juncAure for offering them well chosen. But either
the Queen's letter did not reach her commissioners
in due time, or they iutfered therfnelves to be de-
ceived by Elizabeth's profefiions of regard for their
Mistress, and consented to the opening of the con-
ference
Novean.:>. To the commifrmoners who had appeared in her

name at York, Elizabeth now added Sir Nicholas
Bacon keeper of the Great Seal, the Earls of Arun-
del and Leiceser, Lord Clinton, and Sir William
Cecil I. The difficulties which obstructed the pro-
ceedings at York were quickly removed. A satis-
tying anfwver was given to the Regent's demands;
nor was he so much disposed to hesitate, and raise
objections as formerly. His negociation with Nor-
folk had been discovered to Morton by some of
Mary's attendants, and he had communicated it to
Cecil i1. His personal safety, as well as the conti-
nuance of his power, depended on Elizabeth. By
favouring Mary, file might, at any time, ruin him,
and by a question which she artfully Carted, con-
cerning the person who had a right, by the law of

*Good vo i..

v i. S. Ander., v:. iii. zi .

. Id. voL iv. v5. M
A . i 19:.

Scot-

Scotland, to govern the kingdom during a minority, B o o K
ihe let him fee, that even without restoring the V.
Queen, it was an easy matter for her to deprive I568
him of the supreme direction of affairs *. These 568
considerations, which were powerfully seconded by
most of his attendants, at length determined the
Regent to produce his accusation against the Queen.

H E endeavoured to lessen the infamy, with The R-

which he was sensible this aftion would be attend- sent ahe
ed, by protesting, that it was with the utmost re- QOeenof
luclance he undertook this disagreeable task; that foryto her
his party had long suffered their conduft to be mif- huiand's

n

*' '-' murder.

construed, and had borne the worst imputations
in silence, rather than expose the crimes of their
Sovereign to the eyes of itrangers ; but that now
the insolence and importunity of the adverse faction
forced them to publish, what they had hitherto,
though with loss to themselves, endeavoured to con-
ceal t. These pretexts are decent; and had the par-
ty discovered any delicacy or reserve, with regard to
the Queen's actions, in the reft of their conduct,
might have passed for the real principles by which
they were influenced. But their former treatment to
the Queen renders it impossible to give any credit
to these professions. And the Regent, it is plain,
was drawn by the necelfity of his affairs, and Eli-
zabeth's artifices, into a situation, where no liberty
of choice was left him; and was obliged either to
acknowlege himself to be guilty of rebellion, or to
rharge Mary with having committed murder.

* Haynes, 481. - Andc f. vol. iv. il;.

I i . THeI

B o o K THE accusation itself was conceived in the strong1

V. elt terms. Mary was charged, not only wvith-hav
óy'' ing consented to the murder, but with being accef-
I5 fory to the contrivance and execution of it. Both,

well, it was pretended, had been screened from the
pursuits ofjuftice by her favour; and she had form-
ed designs no less dangerous to the life of the young
Prince, than subversive of the liberties and conti-
tution of the kingdom. If any of these crimes
should be denied, an offer was made, to produce
the most ample and undoubted evidence in confir-
mation of the charge A.
;o- m.:g. AT the next meeting of the commissioners, the

Earl of Lennox appeared before them; and after
bewailing the tragical and unnatural murder of his
son, he implored Elizabeth's juflice against the
Queen of Scots, whom he accused, upon oath, of
being the author of that crime, and produced pa-
pers, which, as he pretended, would make good
what he alledged. The entrance of a new ator on
the stage, to opportunely, and at a juncture so cri.
tical, can scarce be imputed to chance. This con-
trivance was manifestly Elizabeth's, in order to in-
crease, by this additional accusation, the infamy 9o
the Scottish Queen t.

er c.- M-ARY'S commiflioners expressed the utmost fur-

minTioon.s prize and indignation at the Regent's presumption,
iefufe to ' '
;nswmer. in la'ing the Qeen with calumnies, which, as they

'-.b 4, anrffirmecd, Ihe had so little merited. But, inflead of

.tempr... to vindicate her honour, by a reply to

: ? -
.n _.r'.ivx.,. !,-19, . - Id; ibid, 1z2.

the

the charge, they had recourse to an article in their B o o E;
intruftions, which they had formerly neglected to V.
mention in its proper place. They demanded an '5ó
audience of Elizabeth; and having renewed their
Mistress's request, of a personal interview,'they pro-
tested, if that were denied her, against all the fu-
ture proceedings of the commissioners *. A pro-
teltation of this nature, offered just at the critical
time, when such a bold accusation had been prefer-
red against Mary, and when the proofs in support
of it were ready to be examined, gave reason to sus-
pet that the dreaded the event of that examination.
This suspicion received the strongest confirmation
from another circumstance; Ross and Herreis, be-
fore they were introduced to Elizabeth, in order to
make this protetfation, privately acquainted Leicef-
ter and Cecil, that as their Mistress had, from the
beginning, discovered an inclination towards bring-
ing the differences between herself and her subje&s
to an amicable accommodation, so the was still de-
firous, notwithstanding the Regent's audacious ac-
cufation, that they should be terminated in that
manner t.

SUCH moderation is scarce compatible with the
strong resentment, which calumniated innocence na-
turally feels; or with that eagerness to vindicate it-
self, which it always discovers. Ii Mary's fitua-
tion, an offer so ill-timed muff be confidered as a
confeflion of the weakness of her cause. The known

*Anderson, vol. iv 133, 15 .
'i Ibid.i. .13. Cabbala, 157.

'haX

B o o chara6ter of her commissioners exempts them from

V, the imputation of folly, or the suspicion of treache-

v ry Some secret conviction, that the conduct of

their Mistress could not bear so strict a scrutiny,
seems to be the most probable motive of this im-
prudent proposal, by which they endeavoured to
avoid it.
Decenb. 4. IT appeared in this light to Elizabeth, and as-

forded her a pretence for rejecting it. She told
Mary's commiffloners, that, in the present juncture,
nothing could be so dishonourable to their Mistress,
as an accommodation; and that the matter would
teem to be huddled up in this manner, merely to
suppress discoveries, and to hide her shame; nor
was it possible that she could be admitted, with any
decency, into her pretence, while she lay under the
infamy of such a public accusation.

UPON this repulse, Mary's commissioners with-

drew; and as they had declined answering, there
seemed now to be no further reason for the Regent's
producing the proofs in support of his charge. But
without getting there into her hands, Elizabeth's
schemes were incompleat; and her artifice for this
purpose was as mean, but as successful as any fihe
had hitherto employed. She commanded her con-
missioners to testify her indignation and displeasure
at the Regent's presumption, in forgetting so far
the duty of a subject, as to accuse his Sovereign of
such atrocious crimes. He, in order to regain the
good opinion of such a powerful protectress, offered
to shew that his accusations were not malicious, nor

ill-

ill-grounded. Then were produced, and delivered B o o -.
to the English commissioners, the ads of the Scot- V.
tih Parliament in confirmation of the Regent's au- i5ó8.
thority, and of the Queen's resignation; the con-
sessions of the persons executed for the King's mur-
der ; and the fatal casket which contained the let-
ters, sonnets, and contracts, that have been already
nentioned.

ELIZABETH having got these into her poffeflion, Elizabeth

began to lay aside the expressions of friendship and t"reats M

Z:1

. with great-

refpel which she had hitherto used in all her letters er rigour
to the Scottilh Queen. She now wrote to her in
such terms, as if the presumptions of her guilt had
amounted almost to certainty; she blamed her for
refusing to vindicate herself from an accusation
which could not be left unanswered, without a ma-
nifeft injury to her character; and plainly intimat-
ed, that unless that were done, no change would be
made in her present situation *. She hoped that such
a discovery of her sentiments would intimidate Mary,
Xwho was scarce recovered from the shock of the Re-
gent's attack on her reputation, and force her to con-
firm her resignation of the Crown, to ratify Murray's
authority as Regent, and to content that both herself
and her son should reside in England, under her
protection. This scheme Elizabeth had much at
heart; fie proposed it both to Mary and to her
commiinioners, an neld neg d no argument, nor ar-
tifice, that could possibly recommend it. Mary
saw how fatal this would prove to her reputation,
to her pretensions, and even to her personal safety.

t Anderson, vol. iv. 179, 183. Good. vol ii. 2z0.

She

B o o R She rejeted it without hesitation. " Death, said

V. " she, is less dreadful than such an ignominious
C6. " ftep. Rather than give away, with my own

c c" hands, the Crown which descended to me from
"my ancestors, I will part with life; but the last
"words I utter, shall be those of a Queen of Scot-
"land .

AT the fame time she seems to have been sensible

how open her reputation lay to censure, while she sus-
sered such a public accusation to remain unanswered;
and though the conference was now dissolved, she
impowered her commiiioners to present a reply to
the allegations of her enemies, in which she denied,
in the strongest terms, the crimes imputed to her;
2ce4=L2-. and recriminated upon the Regent and his party,

by accusing them of having devised and executed
the murther of the King t. The Regent and his
associates asserted their innocence with great warmth.
Mary continued to insist on a personal interview, a
condition which she knew would never be grant-
ed t. Elizabeth urged her to vindicate her own
honour. But it is evident from the delays, the eva-
sions, and subterfuges, to which both Queens had
recourse by turns, that Mary avoided, and Eliza-
beth did not desire to nake any further progress in
the irquiry.

1560.
rFbr. 2. TE_ Regent was now impatient to return into
thfmget Scotland, where his adversaries were endeavouring,
the Regent
Witlhct: ei- in his abferice, to raise some commotions. Before
ther ap-
provirng or HaYP.es, si. See Append.x, No XXVII. Good. vol.
condemn- .-

SOr~hm r

;

Z.1

0n- t °° Z.

'

2+-8i. lbid. 283.

inghis con- l !.o . ..

. d. 283
duae. Cabbala, I -.

· - - h~~~~~~~~~~1

he set out, he was called into the Privy Council, B o o X
to receive a final declaration of Elizabeth's senti- V.
ments. Cecil acquainted him, in her name, that óV

1569.

on one hand nothing had been objeced to his con-
dut&, which she could reckon detrimental to his
honour, or inconsistent with his duty; nor had he,
on the other hand, produced any thing sgainft his
Sovereign, on which the could found an unfavour-
able opinion of her actions; and for this reason, the
resolved to leave all the affairs of Scotland, precisely
in the fame situation, in which she had found them,
at the beginning of the conference. The Queen's
commissioners were dismissed much in the fame
manner *.

AFTER the attention of both nations had been

fixed so earnestly on this conference, upwards of
four months, such a conclusion of the whole ap-
pears, at first fight, trifling and ridiculous. No-
thing, however, could be more comformable to
Elizabeth's original views, or more subservient to
her future schemes. Notwithstanding her seeming But ecretI.
partiality, she had no thoughts of continuing neu- upports hi

party.

ter; nor was she at any loss on whom to bestow
her protection. Before the Regent left London, she
supplied him with a considerable fum of money, and
engaged to support the King's authority, to the ur-
most of her power t. Mary, by her own conduct,
fortified this resolution. Enraged at the repeated
instances of Elizabeth's artifice and deceit, which
she had discovered during the progress of the con-
ference, and despairing of ever obtaining any fuc-

* Good. 2, 31i. 33'. Id, z13. Carte, 3. 478.

cOUr

B o o K cour from her, she endeavoured to rouze her owri

V. adherents in Scotland to arms, by imputing such

'^ '^ designs to Elizabeth and Murray, as could not
1569. fail to inspire every Scotciiman with indigna.

tion. Murray, she pretended, had agreed to con-
vey the Prince her son into England; to furren.
der to Elizabeth the places of greatest fttengrh in
the kingdom ; and to acknowledge the dependance
bs the Scottish upon the English nation. In return
for this, he was to be declared the lawful heir of
the Crown of Scotland ; and, at the fame time, the
question with regard to the English succession was
to be decided in favour of theEarl of Hartford, who
had promised to marry one of Cecil's daughters.
An account of there wild and chimerical projets was
spread industriously among the Scots. Elizabeth,
perceiving it was calculated of purpose to bring her
government into diferputation, laboured to destroy
its effects, by a counter-preclamation, and became
more disgusted than ever with the Scottish Queen *.

Eforts of THE Regent, on his return, found the kingdom
iry's,. a in the utmost tranquillity. But the rage of the
herents a-
sa;r.ft him. Queen's adherents, which had been suspended in

expectation that the conference in England would
terminate to her advantage, was now ready to break
out with all the violence of civil war. They were
encouraged, too, by the appearance of a leader,
whose high quality and pretensions intitled him tc
great authority in the nation. This was the Duke
of Chattlherault, who had resided for tome years ir

Hay-ne., 5c3, . See Append. NQ XXVIII.

France

France, and was now sent over by that court,' Wist B Od o
a small supply of money, in hopes that the pirefenie V.
of the first nobleman in- the kingdom would I'.
frengther the Queen's fa6tion. Elizabeth had de-
tained him in England, for some months, unrder
various pretences,. but was obliged at last to su'ser
him to proceed on his journey. Before his depar-
ture, Mary tnvefted him with the hSgh dignity of
her Lieuteriant General it Scotland, together with Feb. 25,
the fantastic title of her adopted father.

THE Regent did not give him time to forr 'his His vigo-

party into any regular body. He assembled an ar-t r eau.;ks
my, with his. ufal expedition, and marched ;to her party.
Glasgow. The followers of Argyll and Httidty,
who composed the chief part of the Queen's- face
tion, lying:in very diitant corners of the kingdomi
and many of the Duke's dependants having fallen;
or having been taken in the battle of Lahgfide, the
poiFit.and frrength of his adherents was totally b-roa
ken, and an accommodation with the Regent was
the only thing, which could prevent the deflruction
of his estate and vassals. This was effected without
difficulty; and on no unreasonable terms. The
Duke proriilid to acknowledge -the atthority both
of the Kiig and of the Regent; and to claim no
jurifditiori inconsequence of the commission, which
he had reeived from the Queen. The Regent
bound himself to repeal the aat, which had passed
for attainting several of the Queen's adherents ; to
restore all, who would fi;bmit to the King's govern-
ment, to the poffc-fion of their efhtcs and honours;
and to hold a Convention, vwherein ail the difrren-

~~~8 ~~~~~~c,'

B o o r cesbetween the two parties should be fettled by muntal

V. content. The Duke gave hostages for his faithful

6f '

performance of the treaty; and, in token of their fini
569' cerity, he and Lord Herreis accompanied the Regent

to Stirling, and visited the young King. The Re.
gent set at liberty the prisoners taken at Langfide *.

ARGYLL and Huntly refused to be included in

this treaty. A secret negociation was carrying on,
in England, in favour of the captive Queen, with
so much success, that her affairs began to wear a
better aspec, and her return into her own kingdom
seemed to be an event not very distant. The French
King had lately obtained such advantages over the
Hugonots, that the extinction of that party appear-
ed to be inevitable, and France, by recovering do-
meftic tranquillity, would be no longer prevented
from protecting her friends in Britain. These cir-
cumftances not only influenced Argyll and Huntly,
but made so deep an impreflion on the Duke, that
he appeared to be wavering and irresolute, and
plainly discovered that he wished to evade the ac-
complifhment of the treaty. The Regent saw the
danger of allowing the Duke to shake himself loose,
in this manner, from his engagements; and instant-
ly formed a resolution equally bold, and politic.
He commanded his guards to seize Chatelherault in
his own house in Edinburgh, whither he had come,
in order to attend the Convention agreed upon; and,
regardless either of his dignity as the first nobleman
in the kingdom, and next heir to the Crown, or of
the promises of personal security, on which he had

* Cabbala, 161. Crawf. Mem. ro6.
7 taie

relied, committed him and Lord Herreis, prisoners B-o o K
to the castle of Edinburgh *. A blow so fatal and V.
unexpeted dispirited the party. Argyll submitted
to the King's government, and made his peace with Apil 6,.
the Regent, on very easy terms; and Huntly, be-
ing left alone, was at lafi obliged to lay down his
arms.

SOON after, Lord Boyd returned into Scotland, July .

A proporal

and brought letters to the Regent both from the in favur
English and Scottish Queens. A Convention wasof M'ary

t) _Licens. A Convention rejeiecd

held at Perth, in order to confider them. Eliza-
beth's letter contained three different proposals with
regard to Mary; that she should either be restored
to the full pofeffion of her former authority; or be
admitted to reign jointly with the King her son ; or at
least be allowed to reside in Scotland, in some decent
retirement, without any share in the administration of
government. These overtures were extorted by the
importunity of Fenelon the French ambassador, and
have some appearance of being favourable to the
captive Queen. They were, however, perftetly
suitable to Elizabeth's general system with regard to
Scottish affairs. Among propositions so unequal
and disproportionate, she easily saw where the choice
would fall. The two former were rejected; and
long delays muff necessarily have intervened, and
many difficulties have arisen, before every circum-
stance relative to the last could be finally adjusted t.

* Crawf. Mem. i i. Mclv. 202,

1' Spotfw, 230.
VOL, I. K k MARY

B o o K MARY, in her letter, demanded that her marri-

V. age with Bothwell ihould he reviewed by the pro-
.69- per judges, and if found invalid, ihould be diffolv-

569. ed by a legal sentence of divorce. This fatal mar-

riage was the principal source of all the calamities
she had endured for two years; a divorce was the
only thing which could repair the injuries, her re-
putation had suffered by that ftep. It was her in-
terest to have proposed it early ; and it is not easy
to account for her long silence with refpeat to this

Norfolk's point. Her particular. motive for proposing it, at
sh"em, so this time, began to be so well known, that the de-
marrying
he Queen mand was rejected by the Convention of estates.
of Scot..

They imputed it not so much to any abhorrence of
Bothwell, as to her eagerness to conclude a marriage
with the Duke of Norfolk.

THIS marriage was the objeEt of that secret ne-

gociation in England, which we have already men-
tioned; but, like all those concerted for the relief
of the Queen of Scots, it ended tragically. The
fertile and projecting genius of Maitland first con-
ceived this scheme. During the conference at York,
he communicated it to the Duke himself, and to
the Bilhop of Ross. The former readily closed
with a fciheme, so fattering to his ambition. The
lanner confidered it as a probable device for restoring
his l-iftrefs to liberty, and replacing her on her
throne. Nor was Mary, with whom Norfolk held
a correfponclence, by means of his sifter Lady
Scroop, averSs from a measure, which would have
rcfoored her ro her kingom, with so much fplen-

dor.

dot *. The sudden removal of the conference from B o K
York ro Westminster furpended, but did not break V.
off this intrigue. Maitland and Ross were fill the -'ó
Duke's prompters, and his agents; and many let- 9
ters and love-tokens were exchanged between him
and the Queen of Scots.

BUT as he could ndt hope, that under an admi- Conceals it

from Bliza'

niftration so vigilant as Elizabeth's, such an intrigue beth.
could be kept long concealed, he attempted to de-
ceive her by the appearance of openness and candor,
an artifice which seldom fails of success. He men-
tioned to her the rumour, which was spread of his
marriage with the Scottiih Queeri; he complained
of it as a groundless calumny; and disclaimed all
thoughts of that kind, with many exprefflons full
of contempt, both for Mary's character, and domi-
nions. Jealous as Elizabeth was of every thing re-
lative to the Queen of Scots, ihe seems to have cre-
dited these professions t. But, instead of difconti-
nuing the negociation, he renewed it with greater
vigour, and admitted into it new associates. Among
these was the Regent of Scotland. He had given
great offence to Norfolk, by his public accusation
of the Queen, in breach of the concert into which
he had entered at York. He was then ready to re-
turn into Scotland. The influence of the Duke, in
the North of England, was great. The Earls of
Northumberland and Weflmoreland, the most
powerful noblemen in that part of the kingdom,

* Camd. 419. Haynes, 573 State Trials, I. 73.
t Haynes, 574. State Trials, i. 79i SO.

K k 2 threat-

B o o s threatened to revenge upon the Regent, the injuries

V. which he had done his Sovereign. In order to fe-

cure his safe retreat, he addressed himself to Nor-
I569. folk, and, after some apology for his pas condur,

he insinuated that the Duke's scheme of marrying
the Queen his filler was no less acceptable to him,
than beneficial to both kingdoms; and that he would
concur, with the utmost ardor, in promoting so de-
firable an event *. Norfolk heard him with the cre-
dulity, natural to thole, who are passionately bent up-
on any design. He wrote to the two Earls to desist
from any hostile attempt against Murray, and to
that he owed his passage through the Northern
Counties, without disturbance.

Gains the ENCOURAGED by his success in gaining the Re-
consent of gent, he next attempted to draw the English nobles
the Eng-
lisa nobles. to approve his design. The nation began to despair

of Elizabeth's marrying. Her jealousy kept the
question with regard to the right of fuccefrion un-
decided. The memory of the civil wars, which
had desolated England for more than a century, on
account of the disputed titles of the houses of York
and Lancafer, was till recent. Almost the whole
ancient nobility had perished, and the nation itself
had been brought to the brink of deftrucion, in
that unhappy contest. The ScottifhQueen, though
her right of succession was generally held to be un-
doubted, might meet with formidable competitors.
She mright marry a foreign and a Popish Prince,
and bring both liberty and religion into danger.

:- -'.;ers5. 3 .But

But,

But, by marrying her to an Englishman, a zealousB o o K
Proteffant, the most powerful and most universally V.
beloved of all the nobles, an effectual remedy seemed ""
to be provided against all these evils. The greater 5
part of the Peers, either directly, or tacitly, ap-
proved of it, as a salutary project. The Earls of
Arundel, Pembroke, Leicester, and Lord Lumley
subscribed a letter to the Scottish Queen, written
with Leicester's hand, in which they warmly re-
commended the match, but insisted, by way of
preliminary, on Mary's promise, that the should at-
tempt nothing, in consequence of her pretensions to
the English Crown, prejudicial to Elizabeth or to
her posterity; that she flould content to a league
offensive and defensive between the two kingdoms;
that the fmould confirm the present eftablifiment of
religion in Scotland; and receive into favour such
of her fubjecs as had appeared in arms against her.
Upon her agreeing to the marriage, and ratifying
there articles, they engaged that the English nobles
would not only concur in restoring her, immediate-
ly, to her own throne, but in securing to her that
of England, in reversion. Mary readily consented
to all there proposals, except the second, with regard
to which, the demanded some time for consulting
her ancient ally the French King *.

THE whole of this negociation was industriously

concealed from Elizabeth. Her jealousy of the
Scottifl Queen was well known, nor could it be ex-
reEted, that she would willingly come into a mea-

* Andcrf. vol iii. 5;. Camd. 4:0.

K k 3 lure,

B o oK sure, which tended so visibly to save the reputation?

V. and to increase the power of her rival. But, in a

V matter of so much consequence to the nation, the

taking a few steps without her knowledge, could
scarce be reckoned criminal; and while every peifon
concerned, even Mary and Norfolk themselves, de-
clared that nothing should be concluded without ob-
taining her content, the duty and allegiance of sub-
jecs seemed to be fully preserved. The greater
part of the nobles regarded the matter in this light.
Those who conducted the intrigue, had farther and
more dangerous views. They saw the advantages
which Mary procured by this treaty, to be present
and certain; and the execution of the promises
which she came under, to be distant and uncertain.
They had early communicated their scheme to the
Kings or France and Spain, and obtained their ap-
probation *. A treaty, concerning which they con-
fulted foreign Princes, while they concealed it from
their own Sovereign, could not be deemed innocent.
They hoped, however, that the union of so many
nobles would render it neceflary for Elizabeth to
comply; they flattered themselves, that a combina-
tion so strong would be altogether irresistible; and
such was their confidence of success, that when a
plan was concerted, in the north of England, for
rescuing Mary out of the hands of her keepers,
Norfolk, who was afraid that if she recovered li-
berty, her sentiments in his favour might change,
used all his interest to dissuade the conspirators from
attempting it .

r Anders vol. iii. 63. 1- Camd, 40.

IN

IN this situation did the affair remain, when Lord B o o K

Boyd arrived from England; and, besides the let- V.
ters which he produced publickly, brought others L..~
in cyphers from Norfolk and Throgmorton to the 569.
Regent, and to Maitland. These were full of the
most sanguine hopes. The whole nobles of Eng-
land concurred, faid'they, in favouring the design.
Every preliminary was adjusted; nor was it possible
that a scheme so deep laid, conducted with so much
art, and supported both by power and by numbers,
could miscarry, or be defeated in the execution.
Nothing now was wanting, but the concluding ce-
remony. It depended on the Regent to haften that,
by procuring a sentence of divorce, which would
remove the only obstacle that flood in the way.
This was expe&ed of him, in,consequence of his
promise to Norfolk; and if he regarded either his
interest or his fame, or even his safety, he would
not fail to fulfil these engagements *

BUT the Regent was now in very different cir-

cumftances, from those which had formerly induced
him to affect an approbation of Norfolk's schemes.
He saw that the downfal of his own power must be
the firfl consequence of the Duke's success. And
if the Queen, who confidered him as the chief au-
thor of all her misfortunes, should recover her an-
cient authority, he could never expect favour, nor
scarce hope for impunity. No wonder he declined
a ftep so fatal to himself, and which would have

llaynes, jz5. Spots. 230. See Appendix. N? XXIX.

K k 4 etla-

B o o K etabtlihed the grandeur of another on the ruins of

V. his own. This refusal occasioned a delay. But,
i-,~. as every other circumstance was fettled, the Bishop

' of 1:'o1, i; name of his Mistress, and the Duke, in

perfln, dclared, in prei-rnce of the French Ambaf-
iaior, their mutual conient to the marriage, and a
contrac to this purpose was signed, and entrusted
to the keening ot the Ambassador .

Aui-;:'; TUE intrigue was now in so many hands, that it
dicovers could nor long remain a secret. It began to be
the DZD
th 'egn ar.' wh:fpered at court; and Elizabeth calling the Duke
deictitsi. into her prifence, expressed the utmost indignation

at his conduct, and charged him to lay aside all
thoughts of prosecuting such a dangerous design.
Soon after, Leicester, who perhaps had counte-
nanced the project with no other intention, re-
vealed the whole circumstances of it to the Queen.
Pembroke, Arundel, Lumly, and Throgmorton
were confined, and examined. Mary was watched
more narrowly than ever; and Hastings Earl of
Huntington, who pretended to dispute with the
Scottiih Queen, her right to the fuccefflon, being
joined in commission with Shrewsbury, rendered her
imprifonn:ent more intolerable, by the excels of his
vigilance and rigour t. The Scottish Regent,
threatened with Elizabeth's displeasure, meanly be-
trayed the Duke; put his letters in her hands ; and
furnished all the intelligence in his power . The
Duke himself retired first to Howard-houfe, and

Carts, vol i. iii . t Ha)nes, 52;, 526, 530, 532,
See Append. N- XXX.

then,

then, in contempt of a summons to appear before B o o 4
the Privy Council, fled to his feat in Norfolk. In- V.
timidated by the imprisonment of his afTociates; 56
coldly received by his friends in that county; un-
prepared for a rebellion; and unwilling perhaps to
rebel; he hesitated for some days, and at last obeyed
a second call, and repaired to Windsor. He was oe. 3.
first kept as a prisoner in a private house, and then
sent to the Tower. After being confined there up-
wards of nine months, he was released upon his
humble submission toElizabeth, giving her apromife,
on his allegiance, to hold no farther correspondence
with the Scottish Queen *. During the progress
of Norfolk's negociations, the Queen's partizans in
Scotland, who made no doubt of their issuing in
her restoration to the throne, with an increase of
authority, were wonderfully elevated. Maitland Maitland

imprisoned

was the foul of that party, and the person, whose by the Re-
activity and abilities the Regent chiefly dreaded. gent
He had laid the plan of that intrigue, which had
kindled such combustion in England. He conti-
nued to foment the spirit of diiaffcction in Scotland,
and had seduced from the Regent Lord Home,
Kirkaldy, and several of his former associates.
While he enjoyed liberty, the Regent could not
reckon his own power secure. For this reason, he
employed Captain Crawfurd, one of his creatures,
to accu1e him of being acccffory to the murder of
the King ; and under that pretence carried him a
prisoner to Edinburgh. He would soon have been
brought to trial, but was saved by the friendflhip of

* Haynes, 5:o, 597,

Kif .

B o o K irkaldy, governor of the cafile, who, by pretend-

V. ing a warrant for that purpose from the Regent,

got him out of the hands of the person, to whose
care he was committed, and conducted him into the
castle, which, from that time, was entirely under
Maitland's command. The loss of a place of so
much importance, and the defection of a man so
eminent for military skill as Kirkaldy, brought the
Regent into some difreputation, for which, how-
ever, the success of his ally Elizabeth abundantly
compenfared.

A rebelion THE intrigue carried on for restoring the Scottifi
ugainss Eli-
z2beTh by Queen to liberty having been discovered, and dif-
mary', ad- appointed, an attempt was made, to the fame pur-

pose, by force of arms; but with no better success.
The Earls of Northumberland and Westmorland,
though little distinguished by their personal merit,
were two of the most ancient and powerful of the
English peers. Their estates in the northern coun-
ties were great, and they possessed that influence
over the inhabitants, which was hereditary in the
popular and martial families of Percy and of Nevil.
They were both attached to the Popish religion, and
discontented with the court, where new men, and a
new system prevailed. Ever since Mary's arrival in
England, they had warmly espoused her interest,
and zeal for popery, opposition to the court, and
commiseration of her sufferings, had engaged them
in different plots for her relief. Notwithstanding
the vigilance of her keepers, they held a close cor-
refpondtnce with her, and communicated to her all

their

their designs *. They were privy to Norfolks' B 6 o x
schemes; but the caution with which he proceeded did V.
not suit their ardour and impetuosity. The liberty
of the Scottish Queen was not their sole object. 56
They aimed at bringing about a change in the -eli-
gion, and a revolution in the government of the
kingdom. For this reason, they solicited the aid of
the King of Spain, the avowed and zealous patron
of Popery in that age. Nothing could be more de-
lightful to the restless spirit of Philip, or more ne-
ceffary towards facilitating his schemes in the Ne-
therlands, than the involving England in the con-
furion and miseries of a civil war. The Duke of
Alva, by his direction, encouraged the two Earls,
and promised, so soon as they either took the field
with their forces, or surprised any place of firength,
or rescued the Queen of Scots, that he would sup-
ply them both with money, and a strong body of
troops. La Mothe, the governor of Dunkirk, in
the disguise of a sailor, founded the ports where it
would be most proper to land. And Chiapini Vi-
telli, one of Alva's ablest officers, was difpatche4
into England, on pretence of fettling some com-
mercial differences between the two nations; but
in reality, that the rebels might be sure of a
leader of experience, so soon as they ventured to
take armst-.

THE condu& of this negociation occasioned many Defeated
meetings and messages between the two Earls. Eli-

* Haynes, 595. Murdin, 44, 62, &c.
t Carte, vol. iii. 489, 490. Camd. 421.

zabeth

B o o x zabeth was informed of these; and though she fu£-

V. pected nothing of their real design, she concluded

that they were among the number of Norfolk's
confidents. They were summoned, for this reason,
to repair to court. Conscious of guilt, and afraid
of discovery, they delayed giving obedience. A
second, and more peremptory order was issued.
This they could not decline, without shaking off
their allegiance. And as no time was left for deli.
v. 9. beration, they infrantly erected their standard against

their Sovereign. The re-establishing the catholic
religion; the fettling the order of fuccefIion to the
Crown; the defence of the ancient nobility; were
the motives they alledged tojuftify their rebellion-t.
Many of the lower people flocked to them, with
such arms as they could procure; and had the ca-
pacity of the leaders been, in any degree, equal to the
enterprize, it muff have soon grown to be extremely
formidable. Elizabeth ated with prudence and
vigour; and was served by her fubjefts with fidelity
and ardor. On the first rumour of an insurrection,
Mary was removed to Coventry, a place of strength,
which could not be taken without a regular siege;
a detachment of the rebels, which was sent to ref-
cue her, returned without success. Troops were as-
fembled in different parts of the kingdom; as they
advanced, the malecontents retired. In their re-
treat their numbers dwindled away, and their spirits
funk. Despair and uncertainty whither to dire&
their flight, kept together for rome time, a fnall
body of them, among the mountains of Ncrthum-

f S:r.7 e, vel. i. 47..

berlanr.d.

berland. But they were at length obliged to dif-B o o K
perse, and the chiefs took refuge among the Scot- V;
tifh borderers. The two Earls, together with the '-
Countess of Northumberland, wandering for some Dec. i'
days in the waftes of Liddifdale, were plundered by
the banditti, exposed to the rigours of the season,
and left destitute of the necessaries of life. Weft-
morland was concealed by Scot of Buccleugh and
Ker of Ferniherft, and afterwards conveyed into
the Netherlands. Northumberland was seized by
the Regent, who had marched with rome troops
towards the borders, to prevent any impreflion the
rebels might make on those mutinous provinces *.

AMIDST so many surprising events, the affairs Of Church ah.

the church, for two years, have almost escaped our fairs.
notice. Its General Assemblies were held regularly;
but no business of much importance employed their
attention. As the number of the Protestant clergy
daily encreafed, the deficiency of the funds, set
apart for their fubfiftance, became greater. Many
efforts were made towards recovering the ancient
patrimony of the church, or at leafs so much of it,
as was poiteffed by the Popish incumbents, a race
of men, who were, now, not only useless, but bur-
denfome to the nation. But though the manner in
which the Regent received their addresses and comr-
plaints, was very different from that to which they
had been accustomed, no effectual remedy was pro-
vided; and while they suffered intolerable opprefflon,
and groaned under extreme poverty, fair words,

* Cabbala, 17'. Camd. 422.

and

B o o i and liberal prorifes, were all they were able to 6b'-

.tain.

1570. ELIZABETH began now to be weary of keeping
tefoles to such a dangerous prisoner as the Scottish Queen.
give up
Mary o During the former year, the tranquillity of her go-
the Regent. vernment had been disturbed, first by a secret com-

bination of some of her nobles, then by the rebel-
lion of others; and she often declared, not with-
out reason, that Mary was the bidden cause of both.
Many of her own subjects favoured, or pitied the
captive Queen; the Roman Catholic Princes on the
continent were warmly interested in her cause. The
detaining her any longer in England, she foresaw,
would be made the pretext or occasion of perpetual
cabals and insurrections among the former, and
might expose her to the hostile attempts of the lat-
ter. She resolved, therefore, to give up Mary into
the hands of the Regent, whose security, no less
than her own, depended on preventing her from re-
ascending the throne. The negociation for this
purpose was carried some length, when it was dif-
covered by the vigilance of the Bishop of Ross, whoi
together with the French and Spanish Ambaffadorsj
remonstrated against the infamy of such an actions
and represented the surrendering the Queen to her
rebellious subjects, to be the fame thing, as if Eli-
zabeth hould, by her own authority, condemn her
to instant death. This procured a delay; and the
murder of the Regent prevented the revival of that
design t.

- Cald. rol. ii. So, &-c. t Carte, vol. iii, 491. An-
erf. vol. iii. R.

HA-

HAMILTON of Bothwellhaugh was the person B o o. K
who committed this barbarous aaion. He had been V.
condemned to death soon after the battle of Lang- ~~
fide, as we have already related, and owed his life But h7eis
to the Regent's clemency. But part of his estate murdered.
had been bestowed upon one of the Regent's fa-
vourites, who seized his house, and turned out his
wife naked, in a cold night, into the open fields,
where, before next morning, she became furiously
mad. This injury made a deeper impression on him,
than the benefit he had received, and from that mo-
ment he vowed to be revenged upon the Regent.
Party-rage strengthened and inflamed his private re-
fentment. His kinifnen the Hamiltons applauded
the enterprize. The maxims of that age justified
the most desperate course he could take to obtain
vengeance. He followed the Regent for some time,
and watched for an opportunity to strike the blow.
He resolved at last to wait till his enemy should ar-
rive at Linlithgow, through which he was to pass
in his way from Stirling to Edinburgh. Ie took
his stand in a wooden gallery, which had a window
towards the street; spread a feather-bed on the floor,
to hinder the noise of his feet from being heard;
hung tp a black cloth behind him, that his ihadow
might not be observed from without; and after all
this preparation, calmly expected the Regent's ap-
proach, who had lodged during the night in a house.
not far distant. Some indiftint information of the
danger which threatened him, had been conveyed
to the Regent, and he paid so much regard to it,
that he resolved to return by the fame gate through

y~7~~~ whick
7

B o o K which he had entered, and to fetch a compass round

V. the town. But as the croud about the gate was

great, and he himself unacquainted with fear, he
57°' proceeded diretly along the street; and the throng

of the people obliging him to move very slowly,
gave the assassin time to take so true an aim, that
he shot him with a tingle bullet, through the lower
part of his belly, and killed the horse of a gentle-
man who rode on his other fide. His followers in-
ftantly endeavoured to break into the house whence
the blow had come, but they found the door strong-
ly barricaded ; and before it could be forced open,
Hamilton had mounted a fleet horse, which flood
ready for him at a back-paffage, and was got far
beyond their reach. The Regent died the fame
night of his wound.
siischarac- THERE is no peffon, in that age, about whom

historians have been more divided, orwhofe character
has been drawn wi:h such opposite colours. Personal
intrepidity, military skill, sagacity and vigour in
the administration of civil affairs, are virtues, which
even his enemies allow him to have pofltffed, in an
eminent degree. His moral qualities are more du-
bious, and ought neither to be praised, nor cenfur-
ed, without great reserve, and many distinctions.
In a fierce age, he was capable of using victory
with humanity, and of treating the vanquished with
moderation. A patron of learning, which, among.
marnial nobles, was either unknown, or despised.
Zealous for religion, to a degree, which diftinguifll-

Buchan, 385. C awf, Mem, 12i4,

ed

ed him, even at a time, when professions of thatB o o K
kind were not uncommon. His confidence in his V.
friends was extreme, and inferior only to his libe- "
rality towards them, which knew no bounds. A 1570'
disinterested passion for the liberty of his country,
prompted him to oppose the pernicious fyPtem, which
the Princes of Lorrain had obliged the Queen-
mother to pursue. On Mtary's return into Scotland,
he served her with a zeal and affetion, to which he
sacrificed the friendship of those who were most at-
tached to his person. But, on the other hand, his
ambition was immoderate and events happened,
that opened to him vast profpefts, which allured his
enterprising genius, and led him to actions, incon-
fiftent with the duty of a fubje&. His treatment
of the Queen, to whose bounty he was so much in-
debted, was unbrotherly and ingrateful. The de-
pendance on Elizabeth, under which he brought
Scotland, was disgraceful to the nation. He de-
ceived and betrayed Norfolk, with a baseness un-
worthy of a man of honour. His elevation to such
unexpe&ed dignity, inspired him with new passions,
with haughtiness and reserve; and instead of his na-
tural manner, which was blunt and open, he as-
sected the arts of dissimulation and refinement.
Fond, towards the end of his life, of flattery, and
impatient of advice, his creatures, by soothing his
vanity, led him astray, while his ancient friends
stood at a distance, and predited his approaching
fall. But, amidst the turbulence and confusion of
that facious period, he dispensed justice with so
much impartiality, he reprefled the licentious bor-

VOL. 1. L 1 derers

B o o Kderers with so much courage, and established such

V. uncommon order and tranquillity in the country,

l-- that his administration was extremely popular, and
1570' he was long and aflfeionately remembered among

the commons, by the name of the Good Regent.

The END of the FIRST VOLUJ4E,
