I S

T

0

R

q33Y~ 3P3
Y 1

0 1 T H IE
R

E

I G

N

O F T 11 1'
EMPEROR CHARLES

V.

By WILLIAM ROBERTSON, D. D.
PRINCIPAL of theUniverfityofEDiN B U Ra H, and Hi sToRlo-

O R A P H R to His MAJESTY for SCOTLAND.

VO L.

II.
DU B L I

N:
Printed for WM. WATSON, and THOMAS EWING, Booksellers, in Capel-

street, and SAMUEL WATSON, Bookseller, in Dame-ftreet.

M DCC LXIX
H

UJpC
'1' I1 .

# BOOK I.

THE
. I J

T

0
O F T H E

1 . .

R
.1 i .' ' .!

,
. ,

E
. , l .;

I

G
I.

N

j

i: 0 FT H E

P nQRP

U n A -D T S.

0 Tv

~'. R C H .,A

;. ,

11 ;

, I

B OO K I.
CHAHA RLES V. \Was bbrn a GChent on the twenty-

fourth day of Febrtary, i the e

ear one thouland five

~ hundred. His sither, Philip the Handsome, Archduke

of Austria, was the son of the Emperor Maximilian, and of
Mary, the only child of Charles the Bold, the last prince of tie
' house of Burgundy. His; mother, Joanna, was the second daugh-
ter of Ferdinand and Isabella, king and queen of Castile and
'Aragoh.
,;. ' ..: : I ' r

A LONG train
this young prince

VoL. II.

*. *
. 1

of fortunate events had opened the way for
e to the inheritance of more extensive domi-

' :B nions,

BOOK I.

Birth of
Charles V.

His domi-
nion, and the
events by
which he ac-
qujred them.
n ;

rI '

, 1

.. , . ... . ;' .
-

R

Y

. ,

.
- 1

nions, than any European Monarch, since Charles the Great, had
possessed. Each of his anceflors had acquired kingdoms or pro-
vinces, towards which their profpet of fucceflion was extremely
remote. The rich poffenions of Mary of Burgundy were destined
for another family, the having been contraced by her father
to the only son of Lewis XI. of France; but that capricious mo-
narch, indulg;ng his hatred to her: family, chose rather to strip
her of part of her territories by force, than to secure the
whole by marriage ; and this mifcondut, fatal to his
posterity, threw all the Netherlands and Franche Comte into the
hands of a rival. Isabella, the daughter of John II. of Castile, far
from having any profpe6d of'that inble inheritance which Ihe
transmitted to her grandson, pased the early part of her life in
obscurity and indigence; but the Caftlians exasperated against
'her brbther Henry IV. an ill-advifed and vicious prince, publickly
charged him with impotence, and his queen with adultery; and,
upon his demise, rejecing Joanna, whom the king had uniformly,
and even on his death-bed, 'owned to be his lawful daughter, and
whom an assembly of the states had acknowledged to be the heir
of his kingdom, tley obliged ,her to retire, into ,Portugal, and
placed Isabella on the.,throne of Castile. Ferdinand 'owed 'the
crown of Aragon to the unexpected death 'of his elder brother,
and acquired the kingdoms of Naples and .Sjiily by violatijg the
faith of treaties, and disregarding the ties of. blood. , To all these
kingdoms, Christopher Columbus, by an effort of.genius aqd of
intrepidity, .he boldest and moit successful that is recorded in
the annals of mankind, added a new world, the wealth of:,wlich
was one considerable source of the power and grandeur of the Spa-
nith monarchs. ' ' .

DoN JOHN, the only son of Ferdinand and Isabella, and their
eldest daughter, the queen of Portugal, being cut off in the

flower

*I

BOOK I.

Philip and
Joanna, his
father and
mother, visit
Spain.

flower of youth, all their hopes centered in Joanna and her
poterity. But as her husband, tie Arclduke, was a itranger to
the Spaniards, it was thought expedient to invite him into
Spain, that by residing among them, he might accustom him-
self to their laws. and manners; and it was expected that the
Cortes, or aflembly of: ates, whose authority was then so great
in Spain, that no title to the crown was. reckoned valid unless it
received their fanaion, would acknowledge his right of fuccef-
sion, together with, that of the Infanta, his wife. Philip and
Joanna, pafling through France in their way to Spain, were
entertained in that kingdom with the utmpft magnificence.
The Archduke did homage to Lewis XII. for the earldom of
Slanders, and took his feat as a peer of the realm in the parlia-
ment of Paris. Thley were received in Spain with every mark
of honour that the parental affecion of Ferdinand and Isabella,
or the refped of their fubjeAts cotild devise; and their title to
the crown was oon after acknowledged by the Cortes of both
kingdoms. ,

BuT amidst there outward appearances of fatiSfaion and joy,

rome secret uneasiness preyed upon the mind of each of there
princes. The stately and reserved ceremonial of the Spaniffl
court, was so burdensome to p, a prine young, gay, afble,
fond of society and peafure, that he soon began t6 exprcfs a
desire of returnidg to his native country, the manners of which
were more suited to his temper. Ferdinand, observing the declinl
ing'healtli of his queen, with' whose lifehliis rightto t he goviern-
ment of 'CaiRilemiuft cease, afilf foresaw, that a priice of
Philip's difpoftioli,' Ind who a'lready dikcovered an extreme
impatience to reign, would never content to his retaining any
degree of authority ii that kingdom and the profped of this

B diminution

BOOK I.
*__

Ferdinnnd
jealous of
Phlip'o
power.

3

gIooK I.., diminution of iis pover, wakened thejealoufy of that ainbitioui

monarch.

IsAbella's Col- ISABELLA belleld, with the sentiments natural to a mother,
licitude, with
refpca to him the indlfference and negliedt with which the; Arolcduke treated
daughter lee 'datlhter, who was destitute of all tliofe beautties of perfoil,

and'all tliofe accomplishments of mind, which fix the affetions
of an hutband. Her tinderftaiding, always weak,, was often
disordered. She doated oli Philip with flch, ah excess of childifi
aid impertifieiit fondhef, ais excited disgust ,,ther th'an affectioni.
Her jealo\i'f, for hliich he- :hlltfbald's biehlit4ur gate hier too
mui' auiife, was proo'iot6oid to her l6vel! did 6ftien bdke' dii
in the noft 'eitravagant atio6ns. :Ifbfilla, i'o'i :fefie ds
her defect, dotild fi't help pitying h'6r' otdition- hlch was
ibon rendere'd al'together deplorable, by the archdtke's abi'pt
resolution of setting out in'the middle of' Win'ter.for: Flandera,
and of leaving' her in Stain. Isabella intreated him not to aban-
don his wife to grief and melancholy, which might prove' fatal
to her, as she was near the time of her delivery. -Joanna con-
jured him .to put off his journey for three days only, that he
might have the pleasure of celebrating the festival of Christmas
in his.company.. Ferdinand, after representing the imprudence
of his leaving Spain, before ihe had time to become acqltainte
with the genius, or to gain, the aiet&ions of the people who
were one day'to be his subje&s, besought him, at teqal, not to.pas
through France, with which kingdom he was then -at open war.
Philip, witliout. regarding either the dictates, o,;humaity,., or
the niaxims of prudence, persisted in hiis;.purpfe, ,and on tile
twenty-fecond of December set out for the Low Countries, .b tlhe
way of France '.

a etti Martyris Anglerii Epit l 2p,$ '3.
4

FROM the moment of his departure, Joanna funk into a deep

and fullen melancholy , and while he was in that situation, bore
Ferdinand her second son, for whom the power'of his brother
Charles afterwards procured the kingdoms of Hungary and
Bbhemia, and to whom he at last transmitted the Imperial
sceptre. Joanna was the only perCon in Spain who discovered
no joy at the birth of this prince. Insensible to that, as well
as to every other pleasure, hle was wholly occupied with the
thoughts of returning to her husband; nor did lie, in any de-
gree, recover tranquillity of mind, till (he arrived at Brussels next
year'.

PHJLIP, in pasing through France, had an interview with

:iLewis X11. and signed a treaty with him, by which he hoped
that .all tle differences between France and Spain would be finally
tdrminiaretd. But 'Ferdinanid, hote affairs, at that time, were
-extremely rofperous in Italy, iwhere the superior genius of
Gonfalvo de Cordova, the great captain, triumphed on every
'occaion over 'the atnrs of France, did ot pay the least regard
to what his 'fon-in-law had conseluded, and carried on hofilities
with greater ardour than ever.

FROM this time Philip seems hot to have taken any .pat in

the affairs of Spain, waiting in quiet, till the death either of
Ferdinand or of Isabella hould open the way to one,of their
thrones. The latter of these events was not far distant. The
untimely death of her children had made a ideep impflion
,on the mind of lfabella, and (he could' derive :but, little con-

fplation for the losses (he had sustained either frdn, her 'daughter
Joanna, whose infirmities daily increased, or from her fon-in-

b Id. pift. zS5.
c Mariana, lib. 7. c ir, 14. Flechier Viede Ximen. I. 191.

Fo09g I.

Disorder of
Joanna's
mind.
Birth of Ser-
dinand, after-
wards Em-
peror.

1504.

Death of,
Isabella.
law,

5

*BOOK I.

.

Her will, ap-
pointing Ser-
dinand regent
of Catile.

law, who no longer preervcd even the appearance of a decent re-
fpet towards that unhappy princess, her spirits and health began
gradually to decline, and after languishing ome months, he
died at Medina del Campo on the twenty-fixth of November,
one thousand five.hundred and four. She was no less eminent
for virtue, than for wisdom; and whether we confider her
behaviouras a queen, as a wife, or as a mother, she is justly
entitled to the high encomiums bellowed on her by the Spanish
historians ".

A FEW weeks before her death, she made her last will, and

being sensible of Joanna's incapacity to afflime the reigns of govern-
ment into her own hands,. and having no inclination to commit
them to Philip, with whose condut Ihe was extremely dissatisfied,
the appointed Ferdinand regent or adminifirator of the; affairs
of Castile till her grandson Charles attained the age of twenty;
she bequeathed to him likewise one half of the revenues that
should arise from the Indies, together with the grand masterships
of the three military orders ; dignities, that rendered those who
poffefled them almost independent, and which Iabella had, for
that reason, annexed to the crown'. But before he signed a deed
so favourable to Ferdinand, he obliged him to swear that he
would not, by a second marriage, or by any other means, endea-
vour to deprive Joanna or her posterity of their right offucceflion
to any of his kingdoms'.

IMMEDIATELY upon the queen's death, Ferdinand resigned

the title of King of Castile, and commanded Joanna and Philip
to be publickly proclaimed the sovereigns of that kingdom. But,

d P. Mart. Ep. 279. c P. Martyr. Ep. 277. Mar. Hilt. lib. C. c. . 1. Ferreras
Hist. Gener. d'Efpagne, tom. viii. 263. fMar. Hist. lib. 8. c. 14.

at
6

at the fame time, he assumed the charaaer of Regent, in confe-
quence of Isabella's testament, and not long after he prevailed
on the Cortes of Castile to acknowledge his right to that office.
This, however, he did not procure without difficulty, nor with-
out discovering such symptoms of alienation and disgust among
the Castilians as filled him with great uneasiness. The union
of Castile and Aragon, for almost thirty years, had not so
entirely extirpated the ancient and hereditary enmity which
subsisted between the natives of these kingdoms, that the Cafti-
lian pride could submit, without murmuring, to the government
of a king of Aragon. Ferdinand's own character, with which
the' Castilians were well acquainted, was far from rendering his
authority desirable. Suspicious, discerning, severe and parsi-
monious, he was accustomed to observe the most minute actions of
his subje&s with a jealous attention, and to reward their highest
services with little liberality; and they were now deprived of
Isabella, whose gentle qualities, and partiality to her Castilian
subje&s, often tempered his austerity, or rendered it tolerable.
The maxims of his government were especially odious to the
Grandees; for that artful prince, sensible of the dangerous
privileges conferred upon them by the Feudal inltitutions, had
endeavoured, by extending the royal jurifdition, by protecting
their injured vaflals, by increasing the immunities of cities, and
by other measures equally prudent, to curb their exorbitant power
From all there causes, a formidable party among the Caflilians
united against Ferdinand, and though those who compoed it, had
not hitherto taken any publick itep in opposition to him, he
plainly saw that upon the least encouragement from their new
king they would proceed to the most violent extremities.

BooK I.

Ferdinand ac-
knowledged
as regent by
the Cortes.

SOS.

TheCa(tilians
dissatisfied.
g Marian. lib. 28. c. 12.

NOR ,

7

BooK I.

Philip endea-
votw to obh
tain the go-
vernment of
Castile.

He requires
Ferdinand to
resign the
regency.

NOR was there les agitation in the Netherlands upon receiving

the accounts of Isabella's death, and of Ferdinand's having!
allumed the government of Castile. Philip was not of a tem.
per tamely to susser himself to be fpplanted by the unnatural
ambition of his father-in-law. If Joanna's infirmities, and the
nonage of Charles rendered them incapable of government, he,
as a hulland, was the proper guardian of his wife, and as a
father, the natural tutor of his son. Nor was it sufficient to
oppose to there just rights, and to the inclination of the people
of Castile, the authority of a testament, the genuineness of
which was perhaps doubtful, and its contents certainly iniqui-
tous. A keener edge was added to Philip's resentment, and
new vigour infused into his councils by the arrival of Don John
Manuel. He was Ferdinand's ambassador at the Imperial court,
but upon the first notice of Isabella's death repaired to Brussels,
flattering himself that in the court of a young and liberal prince,
he might attain to powers and honours which he could never hope
for in the service of an old and frugal master. He had early
paid court to Philip during his residence in Spain, with such
afliduity as entirely gained his confidence; and having been trained
to business under Ferdinand, could oppose his schemes with equal
abilities, and with arts not inferior to those for which that mo-
narch was ditinguifhedh.

BY his advice, ambalfadors were dispatched to require Ferdi-

nand to retire into Aragon, and to resign the government of
Castile to those persons whom Philip should entrust with it till
his arrival in that kingdom. Such of the Castilian nobles
as had discovered any diflatisfaction with Ferdinand's admini-
ftration, were encouraged by every method to oppose it. At the

h Zurita Anales de Aragon, tom. vi. p. 12.

fame
8

fame tine a treaty was concluded with Lewis XII. by! which Philip
flttered.himfelf that he had secured the friendlhip and afliftance of
that monarch.

MEANWHILE, Ferdinand employed all the arts of address 'and

policy, in order to retain the power of which he had got poltellion.
By means of Chopchillos, an Aragonian gentleman, he entered into
a private negociation with Joanna, and prevailed on that weak
princess to confirm, by her authority, his right to the regency. But
this intrigue did not escape the penetrating eye of Don John Ma-
nuel; Joanna's letter of content was intercepted; Conchillos was
thrown into a dungeon; and he herself confined to an apartment
in the palace, and all her Spanish domefticks secluded from her
pretence'.

THE nortification. which the discovery of this scheme occa.

iloned to Ferdinand, was much increased by his obferying the pro-
grefs that Philip's emissaries made in Castile. Some of the nobles
retired to their castles; others to the towns in which they had in-
fluence; they formed themselves into confederacies, and began to
assemble their valfals. Ferdinand's court was almost totally desert-
ed; not a person of diftin&ion but Ximenes, archbishop of Toledo,
the duke of Alva, and the marquis of Denia, remaining there
while the houses of Philip's ambafiadors were daily crowded with
those of the highest rank.

EXASPERATED at this universal defection, and piqued, per.

haps, at feeing all his schemes defeated by a younger politician,
Ferdinand resolved) in defiance of the law of nature, and of
decency, to deprive his daughter and her posterity of the crown

i P. Mart. Ep. 287. Zurita Anales vi. p. 14.

Ferdinand
abandoned
by the Cafti.
lian nobles.

Ferdinand
resolves to
mairy, in or-
der to ex-
clude his
daughter from
the throne.
Boo I.

..._..,.'

9
voL. II.

c

of

Boo K L of Catile, rather than renounce the regency of that kingdom.

His plan for accomplilhing this was no less bold, than the inten-
tion itself was wicked. He demanded in marriage Joanna, the
supposed daughter of Henry IV. on the belief of whose illegiti-
macy, Isabella's right to the crown of Caffile was founded; and
by reviving the claim of this princess, in opposition to which he
himself had formerly led armies, and fought battles, he hoped
once more to get poleffion of the throne of that kingdom. But
Emanuel, King of Portugal, in whose dominions Joanna resided,
being married to one of Ferdinand's daughters by Isabella,
refused his consent to that unnatural match; and the unhappy
princess herself, having loft, by being long immured in a convent,
all relish for the objects of ambition, discovered no less aversion

Marries a to it a.
niece of the
French King.

THE resources, however, of Ferdinand's ambition, were not
exhausted. Upon meeting with a repulse in Portugal, he turned
towards France, and fought in marriage Germaine de Foix, a
daughter of the viscount of Narbonne, and of Mary, the filter of
Lewis XIL The war which that monarch had carried on against
Ferdinand in Naples, had been so unfortunate, that he listened
with joy to a proposal, which furnished him with an honourable
pretence of concluding peace: And though no prince was ever
more remarkable than Ferdinand for making all his passions
bend to the maxims of interest, or become subservient to the
purposes of ambition, yet so vehement was his resentment against
his fon-in-law, that in order to be revenged of him, by detach.
ing Lewis from his interest, and in order to gain a chance of
excluding him from his hereditary throne of Aragon, and the
dominions annexed to it, he was ready once more to divide Spain

k Sandov. Hist. of Civil Wars in Castile. Lnd. 1655. p. 5. Zuria anales de
Aagon, tomn vi. 213.

into
o10

into separate. kingdoms, though the union of there was the great BooK L
glory of his reign, and had been the chief. objec of his ambition; V
he contented to restore the Neapolitan nobles of the French sadi-
on to, their poffelions and honours;, and submitted to the ridicule of
marrying, in an advanced age, a princess of eighteen'.

THE conclusion of this match, which deprived Philip of his

only ally, and threatened him with the loss of so many king-
doms, gave a dreadful alarm to him, and convinced Don John Ma-
nuel that there was now a neceilty of taking other. measures with re-
gard to the affairs of Spain m. He accordingly. inftru&ed the Fle-
mifh ambafladors in the court of Spain, to testify the itrong defie
which their master had of terminating all differences between him
and Ferdinand in an amicable manner, and his willingness to con-
sent to any conditions that would re-establish the friendship which
ought to subsist between a father and a fon-in-law. Ferdinand, A treatv hl

tmeen r-

though he had made and broken more treaties than any prince of dinCaed nd
of any age, was apt to confide so far in the sincerity of other Philip.
men, as to be always extremely fond of a negociation. He liften-
ed with eagerness to there declarations, and' oon concluded a trea-
ty at Salamanca; in which it was stipulated, that the govern- No. z4.
ment of Caffile should be carried on in the joint names of Joanna,
of Ferdinand, and of'Philip; and that the revenues of the crown,
and the right of conferring offices, should' be liared between Ferdi-
nand and Philip by an equal d'vifion ".

NOTH-INOG however, was farther from Philip's thoughts 1 o6.

than to observe this treaty. His sole intention in proposing it Joh land
was to amuse Ferdinand, and to prevent him from taking any eil for Spain.

P. Mart. Ep 293. 290. Mariana lib 28 c. 16,17. m P. Mart. Ep 293.
° Zurita Anales de Aragon, vi. 19. B. Mart. Ep. 293, 294.

C

mcafures

BOOK I.

April a8.

The nobillity
of Callile
declare for
Philip.

measures for obstructing his voyage into Spain. It had that effe&t
Ferdinar 1, sagacious as he was, did not for ome time fufpe& his
design and though when he perceived it, he prevailed on the
king of France not only to remonstrate against the archduke's
journey, but to threaten hostilities if he undertd6k it though he
solicited the duke of. Gueldres to attack his fon-in law's domini-
ons in the Low Countries, Philip and his consort nevertheless set
fail with a numerous fleet, and a good body of land forces.
They were obliged by a violent tempest to take (helter in England,
where Henry VII. in compliance with Ferdinand's folici:titioAs, de-
tained them upwards of three moths ° t

at lat they were per-

mitted to depart, and after a more' prosperous voyage, they
arrived in safety' at' Corunna in Galicia, nor durst Ferdinand at-
tempt, as he had ohce intended, to Oppptfe thei'r'laniding 'y force.
of arms.

...-. , ~. i' . , - I :! i : l

. ..

THE CaRilian nobles, who had been obliged hitherto to con,

ceal or to dissemble their sentiments, now declared openly in
favour of' Philip. From every .correr of 'the k gdom persons
of the higleft rank, with.,umerous retinues of thir. vaflals,,
repaired to their new king. Tlie treaty of Salamanca was uni-
verfally condemned, and all agreed to exclude from the govern-
ment .of CafRile a prince, .who by conrenting to disjoin Aragon
and Naples from that crown, discovered so little concern for its

. ..... ' ' i .. .. j!,,,

true interests. Ferdinand, mean while, abaidoned by almost
all the Castilians; disconcerted by their revolt and uncertain
whether hl e fihuld ipfaceably rlinqui( hij pover,,r take arns ,

i .il ,qrder to ,mni,taip, it, .eareftly. licit, an, interview,w it his
fon-in-law, who by advice of Manuel Rudioufly avoided it.

*
: · Fetter. Hist viii. . 85.i .,,,' ' :

.. :. Convinced
12

Convinced at last, by feeing the number and zeal of Philip's
adherents daily increase, that it was vain to think of refiting
such a torrent, he consented by a treaty, to resign the regency of
Castile into the hands of Philip, to' retire into his hereditary
dominions of Aragon, and to refl satisfied with the mafterhips
of the military orders, and that ffare of the revenue of the
Indies, which Isabella had bequeathed to him. Though an inter-
view between the princes was no longer neceflary, it was agreed
to on both fides from motives of decency. Philip repaired to
the place appointed with a splendid retinue of the Castilian nobles,.
and a considerable body of armed men. Ferdinand appeared.
without any pomp; attended by a few followers, mounted on
mules, and unarmed. On that occafibn don John Manuel had;
the pleasure of displaying before the monarch whom he had de,-
ferted, the extensive influence he had acquired over his new mafler:.
While Ferdinand suffered in prfcnce of his former fubjeas the
two most cruel mortifications whichl an artful and ambitious prince
can feel; being at once over-icached in conduct, and stripped of'
powerP..

No'r long after, he retired into Aragon; and hoping that

some favourable accident would soon open the way for his return
into Castile, lie took care to protest; though with great secrecy,.
that the treaty concluded with his fn-ir-law, being extorted by
force, ought to be deemed void of all obligation'.

PHILIP took pofnflion of' his new auithority witli a youthful
joy. The unhappy Joanna, from whom lie derived'it, remained
during all these contests, under the' dominion of a deep melan-

p Zurta Analesde Arag. vi 64. Mar. lib. 28. c. 19,2 z. P. Matt. ep 304, 305, &c.
s Zurita Anales de Arag. vi. p. 68. Ferrer. Hist. viii. 290.

BOQK I.

June 27.

Ferdinand re.
signs the re-
gency of
Cafttle and
retires to
Aragon

Julj..

Philip. and!
Joanin.a ac-
know(ldged'
as king and
queenby thec

'orteCt.
cloly ;,

It

B oo I1

Death of
Philip.

Sept. 2;.

Th
oiJ
min
Crei

choly; {he was fildom. allowed to appear in, publick; her father,
though he. had often desired it, was refused access to her; and
Philip's chief objet was to, prevail on the Cortes to declare her
incapable of government,, that an undivided, power might be
lodged, in his ands,, till his son should attain to full age. Bt
fucih was the partial attachment of the Castilians to their native
.rincefs; that though Manuel had the address to gain some memr
bers of the Cortes assembled at Valladolid, and others were
willing. to. gratify their new sovereign in his first request, the
great body of the repreentatives refused their, content to a decla-
xation.which they thought so injurious to.the blood of their mo-
narchs'. They, were unanimous, however, in acknowledging
Joanna and Philip, qeen and king of Castile, and their son Charles
ptince of Afuriw.

THIS wa. almost the only memorable event during Philip's

administration. A fever, occasioned by a debauch, put an end to
biflif: if the; twenty-eigthyear of his age, not having enjoyed
the regal dignity which he had been so eager to obtain full three
months '.

ediforder TiHE wlhole. royalauthority in Catile ought of cure to have
roanna'a
d in- devolved, upon. Joanna. But the shock occafidned 'by. a disaster

ea unexpe&fed, the depth. of her husband compleated tlie dif-
order of her uderftandipg,, and her incapacity for government.
During all the time of Philip's sickness, no intreaty could pre-
vail. on her, though in. the sixth. month of. her pregnancy, to
leayo him- for a. moment. When he expired,' ho.ever, 'dhe did

.. not. hed one tear,,or utter a tingle groan. i'r grlef"was fileit
,; ' Zuriat Analer de AAag: yi. p. 75. s Marian lib. 281 C. 23.

aid

. , , , t -~~~~,,
14

and fettled. She continued to watch the dead body with the fame
tenderness and attention as if it had been alive', and though at
alft she allowed it to be buried, he 'bon removed it from the
tomb to her own apartment, There it was laid upon a bed of
'fate, in a splendid dress; and having heard from tome monk a
legendary tale of a king who revived after he {lad been dead
fourteen years, he kept her eyes almost coiftantly fixed on the
'body, waiting for the happy moment of its return to lift. Nor
was this capricious affetion for her dead htifband less tintured
with jealousy, than that which he had born to him while alive.
'She did not permit any of her female attendants to approach
the bed on which his corpse was laid; Ihe would not illffer any
woman who did not belong to her family to enter the apart.
ment; and rather than grant that privilege to a midwife, ho'
a very aged one had been chosen of purpose, she bore the prin.
cess Catharine without any other alliftance than that of her own
domestics".

A WOMAN in such a tate of mind was little capable of go-

verning a great kingdom; and Joanna, who nrade it her sole
employment to bewail the loss, and to pray for the foul of her
husband, would have thought her attention to public affairs an
impious neglect of those duties which the owed to him. But
though he declined assuming the adminiitration herself, yet, by
a firange caprice of jealousy, fle refused to commit it to any
other person; and no intreaty of her fubjeds could persuade her
to name a regent, or even to sign such papers as were necefTary
for the execution ofjuftice, and the security of the kingdom.

t P. Mart. Ep. 316.
u Mar. Hilt.lib. 29. c.3 & 5. P. Mart. Ep. 318, 324, 328, 332.

THE

BOOK 1.

She is inca-
pable of go-'
vernment.

;t5

Boo I.

cT V ---. THE death of Philip threw the Caffilians into the greatef

Mthe meror perplexity. It was necessary to appoint a regent, both on account.
andFerdinand of Joanna's frenzy, and the infancy of her son; and as there was
competitors
for the re- not among the nobles, any person so eminently dilfinguifhed as to

g be called by the public voice to that great office, all naturally

turned their eyes either to Ferdinand, or to the Emperor Maximi-
lian. The former claimed that dignity as administrator for his
daughter, and by virtue of the testament of Isabella; the latter
thought himself the legal guardian of his grandson, whom, on
account of his mother's infirmity, he already confidered as king
of Castile. Those who had lately compelled Ferdinand to resign
the government of the kingdom, trembled at the thoughts of his
being restored so soon to his former dignity. They dreaded the
return of a monarch, not apt to forgive, and who to those defets
with which they were already acquainted, added that resentment
which the remerrbrance of their behaviour, and refletion upon
his own disgrace, muff naturally have excited. Though none of
these objections held againit Maximilian, he was a itranger to
the laws and manners of Castile, and destitute of troops and
money to support his pretensions, nor could his claim be admit-
ted without a public declaration of Joanna's incapacity for
government, an indignity, to which, notwithstanding the noto-
riety of her distemper, the delicacy of the Castilians would never
content.

DoN JOHNX MAN'UE, however, and a few of the nobles,

who confidered themselves as most obnoxious to Ferdinand's
displeasure, declared for Maximilian, and offered to support his
claim with all their interest. Maximilian, always enterprizing
and decisive in council, though feeble and dilatory in execution,
eagerly embraced the offer. But a series of ineffecual nego-

ciations

'7

ciations was the only consequence of this tranlaaion. The Em- BooK 1.
peror, as usual, asserted his rights in a high strain, promised a great V
deal, and performed nothing'
A FEW days before the death of Philip, Ferdinand had set out Ferd;nandab-

sent, on a

for Naples, that, by his own pretence, he might put an end, with visit to his
the greater decency, to the vice-royalty of the great captain, Naple:°'s
whose important.fervices, and cautious conduct, did not screen
him from the suspicions of his jealous master. Though an
account of his fonn-n-aw's death reached him at Porto-fino, in
the territories f Genoa, he was so fqllicitous to discover the
secret intrigues which he supposed the great captain to har been
carrying on, and to establish his own authority on a firm foun-
dation in the Neapolitan dominions, by removing him from the
supreme command thyre, that rather than difcpntinue his voyage,
he chose to leave Caitile in.a state of anarchy, and even to rifqne,
by this delay, his obtaining poffeflion of the government of that
kingdom '.

NOTHING but the great-abilities and prudent conduct of his

adherents, could have prevee.te4 the bad effects of this absence.
At the head of thefe-was Ximenes, archbishop of Toledo. who, Acquires te

regency of
though he had been raised to that dignity by Isabella, contrary Caftilechiefly

through tie

to the inclination of Ferdinand, and though he could have no influence of
expectation of enjoying much power under his jealous admi- cardinal

Ximenes.

niftration, was nevertheless so dilinterefted, as to prefer the welfare
of his country before his own grandeur, and to declare, that
Castile could never be Co happily governed as by a prince, whom
long experience,-rendered thoroughly acquainted with its true
interest. His zeal t bring over his countrymen to this opinion,
induced him to lay aside somewhat of his usual austerity and

X Mariana, lib. 29. c. 7. Zurita Anales de Arag. vi. 93.
v Zurita Anales de Arag. vi. p. 8.
VoL. II. D haughtnefs,

BooK I.

1507.

Aug. .

Furdinand re-
turns to Spain.

His prudent
adminiltta-
tion.

Conquef of
Oran.
i'9o.

hauglitiecfs. He condescended, on tllis occasion, to court the
difatfeaed nobles, and employed address, as well as arguments,
to perfilade them. Ferdinand seconded his endeavours with
great art; and by concefions to some of the grandees, by pro-
mises to others, and by letters full of complaisance to all, he
gained many of his most violent opponents'.; And thbugh many
cabals were formed, and some commotions excited, yet when
Ferdinand, after having fettled the affairs of Naples, arrived in
Castile, he entered upon the adlminitration without opposition.
The prudence with' which he exeRifed his 'authority in that
kingdom, equalled the good fortfine! by which he had recovered
it. ' By a moderate, but ifeady ad'miiiisrt'idtn, free"from' partiality
and from refefitment, he entirely reconciled the'Caftilians to'his
person, and secured to them, 'd'iuing the' retainder of his iif,
as much doimetic tranquillity, :as; was 'consisten't 'ith 'thd genius
of the feudal government; which' fitll :bfifted among them in full
vigour. : '
, '

NOR was the preservation of tranquillity in his hereditary

kingdoms, the only, obligation whieh' the' aarth'duke Charleslo'ed
to the wife: regency of his grandfather,; ihe' had the fatisfa'tion,
during that period, of feeing very! imnportant 'acquisitions added
to the domini6ns over whi'ch he was' to'reign.. On the coast of
Barbary, Oran, and othe. conuiefs' of ib imall value, iwere
annexed to the crown of: Castile by cardinal Ximenes, who,, with
a pirit very uncommool i a .monk, led in person a numerbus
army against the Moors of that country and, with agenerofity
and magnificence still more singular, defrayed the wliole expence
of the, expeditibn out of his own revenues.' 'Wlile in Europe,
Ferdinand, under pretences both frivolous ('nd:,xnjitl, a'nd ,by
artifices the mdft flanieful and treatherous,'' expelied' 'Jlin

z Zurita Anales de rag. i. p, 87. 94. 109. ' * Mariaha, lib.:29. c o.
b Mariana, lib. 29. c. 18. . .'. ,; ,

.
i ' . I ,,

*~.~~~ ...,:; ! l:d'A l!ert
l8

d' Albert, the lawful fovcreign, from the throne of Navarre;
and seizing on that kingdom, extended the limits of the Spanil
monarchy from the Pyrenees on the one hand, to the frontiers of
Portugal on the other. y.

IT was not, however, the defire-of aggrandizing the Archduke,

which influenced Ferdinand in this, or in any otlher of his actions.
He was more apt to confider that young prince as a rival, who
might one day wrest out of his hands the government of Castile,
than as a grandson, for whose behoof he was entrusted with the
adminiisration. This jealousy soon begot aversion, and even
hatred, the symptoms of which lie was at no pains to conceal.
Hence proceeded his immoderate joy when his young queen was
delivered of a on, whose life would have deprived Charles of
the crowns of Aragon, Naples, Sicily, and Sardinia and upon
the untimely death of that prince, he discovered, for the fame
reason, an exceflive solicitude to have other children. This
impatience of his hastened, in all probability, the acceflion of
Charles to the crown of Spain. Ferdinand, in order to procure
a blefling, of which, from his advanced age, and the itempe-
rance of his youth, he could have little profpet, had recourse to
his physicians, and by their prescription took one of those potions,
which are supposed to add vigour to the constitution, though
they more frequently prove fatal to it. This was its effe&
on a frame so feeble and exhausted as that of Ferdinand; and
though he survived a violent disorder which it at first occasioned,
it brought on such an habitual languor and dejecion of mind,
as rendered him averse from any serious attention to public
affairs, and fond of frivolous amuCcments, on which he had nt
hitherto bestowed much timed. Though he now despaired of
having any on of his own, his jealousy of the Arclduke did

c Mat. lib. 30. c. it. 12. 19. 24. 1 Zurita Anales de Arag. vi. 347.
P. Mart. Ep 31. Argenfola Analede Arragon, lib. . p. 4.

D . not

BOOK I.

Acquifiion of
Navarre.

Ferdinand
jealous of I,
grandson
Charlea.

t 509.
IS13

19

Book I.

1515.

Endeavours
to exclude
hipi from the
Spanifhking-
doms, by a
will in favour
of Ferdinand.

Is persuaded
to alter that
will.

not abate, nor could he help viewing him' witth at avetfion,
which princes often bear to their fuccefiors. In order to gratify
this unnatural palion, he made a will, appointing princeFerdi-
nand, who having been born aidVducated in Spain,' was much
beloved by the Spaniards, to be regent of all his kingdoms, till
the.arrival of the archduke his brother; and by the fame deed
he fettled upon him the grand-mafterfhip'of the three military
orders. 'the former 6f there grants might have put it in his power
to hgve diputed the throne with his brother ; the latter would in
any event, have rendered him ;almno independent.

FERDl4'ARbD retained to the last that jealous' love of power,

'which was so remarkable through his whole life. Unwilling to
resign it, 'even at, the approach of death,. he removed continually
from place to place, in order to fly from his distemper, or to
forget it; and though.his ftrength.declined every days none of
his attendants durst mention his, condition ; nor would he admit
his father confessor, who thought such silence criminal and
unchristian, in his presence. At last the danger became so
imminent, that it could be no longer concealed. Ferdinand
received the intimation with a decent fortitude; and touched,
perhaps, with compunction at the injustice he had done his
grandson, Qr influenced by the honet. remonstrances of Carvajal,
Zapata and Vargas, his most ancient and faithful counsellors,
who represented to him that by investing prince Ferdinand with
the regency, he would ifallibly entail a civil war on the two
brothers, and by bestowing on him the grand mastership of the
military orders, would strip the crown of its noblest ornament
and chief strength, he conented to alter his will in. both there
particulars. By a now., deed he left, Charles the sole heir of all
his dominions, and allotted to prince Ferdinand, instead of that
throne of which he thought himself almost secure, an incon-

* - , ,-' fideablc

fiderable eftablilhment of fifty thousand ducats a year". He died Boo K. 1.
a few hours after signing this will, on the twenty third day of
January, one thousand five hundred and sixteen. and dies.

CHAxRLES, to whom such a noble inheritance descended by his Education of

Charlea V.

death, was near the full age of sixteen. He had hitherto re-
fided in the Low Countries, his paternal dominions. Margaret
of Austria, his aunt, and Margaret of York, the sifter of
Edward IV. of England, and widow of Charles the Bold, two
princeses of great virtue and abilities, had the care of forming
his early youth. Upon the death of his father, Philip, the
Flemings committed the government of the Low Countries to
his grandfather, the Emperor Maximilian, with the name rather
than the authority of regent . Maximilian made choice of
William de Croy lord of Clievres to superintend the education
of the young prince his grandson . That nobleman poFenfed, in
an eminent degree, the talents which fitted him for such an
important office, and discharged the duties of it with great
fidelity. Under Chievres, Adrian of Utrecht aced as preceptor.

This

e Mar. Hilt. Lib. 30. c. ult. Zurita Anales de Arag. vi. 401. P. Mart. Ep. 56;,
566. Argenfola Anales de Arag. lib i. p. i i.

t Pontius Heuterus Rerum Auftriacarum, lib. xv. Lov. 1649. lib. 7. c. 2. p. 1 55.
g The French historians, upon the authority of M. de Bellay, Merm. p. 1 . have

unanimously afterted that Philip, by his last will, having appointed the King of
France to have the diretion of his son's education, Louis XII. with a .dfinterefted-
ners, suitable to the confidence reposed in him, named Chievres for that.office.
Even the president Henaut has adopted this opinion. Abregh Chron. A.:D. 15 7.
Varillas, in his usual manner, pretends to have soen Philip's testament. Ptrat. de
I'education des Princes, p. i6. But the Spanish, German and Flemifl hiltotdans
concur in contradicting this na'ertion of the Frenoh authors. It appears frqn Hou-
terus, a contemporary Flemifit historian of great authority, that Louis X11. ly con-
senting to the marriage of Germaine de Foix with Ferdinand, had loft much.of that
confidence which Philip had once placed in him ; that this disgust was incrcafed by
the French King's giving in marriage to the count of Angoulme his eldest daughter,
whom he had formerly ;bethrothed to Charles, Heuter. Rer. Aufr. lib. v. is ;
That the French a short time before Plilip's death, had violated the peace, whic

fubfilted

1

Booi , This preferment, which opened his way to the highest dignities

an Ecclesiastic can attain, he owed not to his birth, for that was
extremely mean; nor to his interest, for he was a stranger .to
the arts of a court; but to the opinion which his countrymen
entertained of his learning. He was indeed no inconsiderable
proficient in those frivolous sciences which, during several centu-
ries, assumed the name of Philosophy, and published a com-
mentary, which was highly esteemed, upon The Master of the
Sentences, a famous treatise of Petrus Lombardus, and confidered
at that time, as the standard system of metapyfical theology.
But whatever admiration hefe procured him in an illiterate age,
it was oon found that a nman accustomed to the retirement of a
college, unacquainted with the world, and without any tincture
of afte or elegance, was by no means qualified for rendering
science agreeable to a young prince. Charles, accordingly,
discovered an early aversion to learning, and an .xceflive fond-
,ness for those violent and martial exercises, to excel in which
was at that time, the chief pride, and almost the only study of

fubfifed between them and the Flemings, and Philip had complained of this injury,
and was ready to resent it. Heuter. ibid. All these circumntances render it im-
probable that Philip, who made his will a few days before he died, Heuter, p. !s2,
should commit the education of his son to Louis XII. In confirmation of these
plausible conjetures, positive testimony can be adduced. It appears from Heuterus,
that Philip, when he set out for Spain, had entrusted Chievres both with the care
of his son's education, and with the government of his dominions in the Low Coun-
tries. Heuter. lib. vii. p. 153. That an attempt was made, soon after Philip's
death, to have the Emperor Maximilian appointed regent, during the minority of
his grandson, but that being opposed, Chievres seems to have continued to discharge
both the offices which Philip had committed to him, Heut. ibid. 53, i 5. That
in the beginning of the year 1 508, the Flemings invited Maximilian to accept of the
regency, to which he consented, and appointed his daughter Margaret, together
vith a council of Flemings, to exercise the 'upreme authority, when he himnelf
hould, at any time, be absent. He likewise named Chievres as governor, and
Adrian of Utrecht as preceptor to his son, Heut. ibid. 55, 57. What Heuterus
relates with refpeft to this matter is confirmed by Moringus in Vita Adriani,
spud Analeta Cafp. Burmanni de Adriano, cap. to; by Balandus, Chronic.
Brabant. ibid. p. aS i and by Halaus Annal. Brab. vol. ii. 520, &c.

persons

persons of rank. Chievres encouraged this tafe, either from a
desire of gaining his pupil by indulgence, or from too flight an
opinion of the advantage of literary accomplishments . He
inftruded him, however, with great care in the arts of govern-
ment; he made him study the history not only of his own king-
doms, but of those with which they were connected; he accuf-
tomed him, from the time of his assuming the government of
Slanders in the year one thousand five hundred and fifteen, to
attend to business he persuaded him to peruse all papers relating
to public affairs :to be present at the deliberations of his privy-
counsellors, and to propose to them himself those matters, con-
cerning which he required their opinion ". From such an
education, Charles contracted habits of gravity and recollection
which scarce suited his time of life. The first openings of his
genius did not indicate that superiority which its maturer ago
displayed . He did not discover in his youth that impe-
tuofity of spirit which commonly ushers in an a&ive and enter.
prizing manhood. Nor did his early obsequiousness to Chievres,
and his other favourites, promie that capacious and decisive
judgment, which afterwards directed the' affairs of one half of
Europe. But his subjeCts, dazzled with the externalccomplilh-
ments of a graceful figure and manly .addrefi, and viewing his
character with that partiality which is always shown to princes
during their youth,' entertained sanguine hopes of his adding
lustre to those crowns which descended to him' by the death. of
Ferdinand. ' :

THE kingdoms of Spain, as.is evident from the view whc!. I

have given of their political constitution, .were, at that time, in a

g Jovii Vita Adriani, p. 91. Struvii Corpus, Hil. GCerm., ii. 967, P. euter.
Rcr. Aufr. lib. 7. c. 3. p. 15.

b Memoires de Bellay, 8vo. Par. 1 573 . . P. Heuter. lib. viii. c. 1. p. 84.
i P. Martyr, Ep. 569, 655. situation,

BooK I.

The first
openings of
his charaf&r.

State of Spain -
requires vi-
gorous adini--
niftration.

a3

situation, hich required an administration, no leTs vigorous than
prudent. The feudal institutions which had been introduced into
all its differnt provinces by the Goths, the Suevi, and the.Van-
dals, fubifted in great force. The nobles, who were powerful
and Warlike, had long possessed all the exorbitant privileges, which
these institutions veRsed in their order. The cities i'n Spain were
Fiore nutmerous and mlore 'considerable, than the gnius of feudal
g6vernteht, naturally an enemy to commerce, and to regu-
lar police, eemed to admit. The personal rights, and political
influence, which the inhabitants of 'there cities had acquired,
iwre extetfive." The r6yal!prerogative circlumforibed by the pri.
vileges 'of ih iibbility, and.by the pretenfiong of the 'people, was
confined within very narrow limits. Under such a form of go-
ternment, the principles of discord were many,; the bond of tnibn
ias extreinely Peeble,' and Spain felt not only all the inconveni-
encits ccafi6ned by the defets in the feudal system, but was
tXpbofed to difioder arifirg from the. peculiarities in its own conhfti
titi6n.

Dultkio the lIdg administration of Ferdinand, 'no internal com-

miotin, 'it is true, had arisen in Spain. 'His superior abilities epa.
bled'hir to restrain the turbulence of the nobles, and to moderate
thejealoufy of the commons; and by the. wisdom of his domestic
goiedrnmen't, by the (sagacity with which he conduaed his foreign
bperations, and by; the opinion that his fubjeAs Entertained of both,
he preserved among them a degree of tranquillity, greater than
was natural to a constitution, in which the feeds of disorder
were so .copi6uly. mingled. ,But, by the death of Ferdinand,
, these reiftaiits wtre at.'once withdrawn; and faction and difcon.

tent, from being long repressed, were ready to break out with sier-
cer animosity.

IN

Book I.
^.siicrf^.s3s

IN order to prevent there evils, Ferdinand had in his lad will ,BOOK L

taken a most prudent precaution,. by appointing cardinal Ferdinand
Ximenes, archbihop of Toledo, to be sole regent of Castile, till hadappoint.

ed cardinal

the arrival of his grandson in Spain. The singular character of Ximcne Re.
this man, and the extraordinary qualities which marked him out gcnt.
for that office, at such a juncture, merit a particular description.
He was descended of an honourable, not of a. wealthy family; His rfe and
and the.circumitances of his parents, as well as his own inclina- charater.
tions, having determined: him to enter into the church, he early
obtained benefices of great value, and which placed him in the
way of the highest preferment. All there, however, he renounced.
at once; and after undergoing a very severe noviciate, assumed.
the habit of St. Francis in a monastery of Obfervantine friars,. one
of the. most rigid orders in the Romilh Church. There he oon
became eminent for his uncommon austerity. of manners, and.
for those excesses of superstitious devotion, which are the proper.
charateriftics of the monastic life.. But notwithstanding these
extravagancies,, to which weak and enthusiastic minds alone are
usually prone, his understanding, naturally penetrating and:
decisive, retained its full vigour, and acquired him such great au-
thority among his own order, as raised him to be their pro-
vincial.. His reputation for fanaity, soon procured him the
office of father confelfor to tle queen Isabella, which he accepted:
with the utmost reluctance. He preserved. in a court the fame.
austerity of manners,, which had distinguished him in the cloister.
He continued to make all his journies on foot; he fubfifed only
upon alms, his ats of mortification were as severe as ever and,
his pennances as rigorous. Ifabella,.pleafed with her choice, con-
ferred on, him, not long after, the Archbifhoprick of. Toledo,
whiich,. next to the Papacy, is the richest dignity in the church
of Rome. This honour lie declined with a firmness,. which
nothing but the authoritative injuntion of the Pope was able to

VOL. II. E' overcome:.

aS

overcome. Nor did this height of promotion change his man-
ners. Though obliged to display in public that magnificence
which became his flation, he himfell retained his monastic
severity. Under his pontifical robes he constantly wore the
coarse frock of St. Francis, the rents in which he ued to patch
with his own hands. He at no time used linen; but was com-
monly clad in hair-cloth. He slept always in his habit, most
frequently on the ground, or on boards, rarely in a bed. He
did not tate any of the delicacies which appeared at his table, but
satisfied himself with that simple diet which the rule of his order
prercribed k. Notwithstanding these peculiarities, so opposite to
thie maniers of the world, he poifefIed a thorough knowledge of
its affairs; atid no 'sooner was he called by his station, and by
the high opinion which Ferdinand and Isabella entertained of
him, to take a prihcipal (hare in the administration, than he dif-
played talents for business, which rendered the fame of his wis.
dom equal to that of his fancity. Bold and original in all his
plans, his-political conduct flowed from his real charaCter, and
partook both of its virtues and its defects. His extensive genius
figgeted to him chemnes, vast and magnificent. Conscious 6f
the integrity of his intentions, he purrued these with unremiit-
tihg and undaunted firtnnefs. Accftomfed from hib early youth
to mortify his own pafltohs, he howed little indulgence towards
those of other then. Taught by his system of religion to check
ten his most Innocent desires, he Was the enemy of every thing
'ib which he could' afix the name ot' elegance and pleaftre; and,
though free fim any' fuipicibn of cruielty, he discovered in all
his commerce with the world a evere inflexibility of mind, and
atffterity of tharacter, peculia!' to the moniafic: protfelon, and
which can'- catce be conceived in a country Wvhere that'is un-
'know*n. ' ; ; ,
k Hiftoire de I'adiiniftration du Card. Ximen. par Mich. Baudier, 4to. 16S. p. 13.

SUCH

$3aoK L.
%^ o v.

SUrCH was the man to whom Ferdinand committed the regency BOOK I.

of Caltile, and though he was then near fourscore, and perfectly Cardinal
acquainted with the labour and difficulty of the office, his natural Adrian ap,

pointed regins

intrepidity of mind, and zeal for the public good, pr6mpted him by Chatles.
to accept of it without hesitation:. And though Adrian of Utrecht,
who had been sent into Spain a few months before the death of
Ferdinand, produced full powers from the archduke to assume the
name and authority of regent upon the demise of his grandfather i
Iich was the aversion of the Spaniards to the government of a
firanger, and so unequal the abilities of the two competitors, that!
Adrian's claim would at once have been rejected, if Ximenes him-
self, from complaisance to his new master, had not consented to
acknowledge him as regent, and to carry on the government in
conjuntion with him. By this, however, Adrian acquired a dig- Xmenes obl.

tains the folw

nity merely nominal; and Ximenes, though he treated him with direaion of
great decency, and even refpet, retained the whole power in his ass lr.
own hands'.

THE Cardinal's firfl care was to observe the motions of the His precanuo

tions agamini

Infant Don Ferdinand, who having been flattered with so near a the infant
profpet of the supreme power, bore the disappointment of his Don Ferdi-

nand.

hopes with greater impatience than could have been expected of
a prince so yung. Ximenes, under pretence of providing more
effecually for his safety, removed him from Guadalupe, the;
place in which he had been educated, to Madrid, where he fixedi
the residence of the court. There he was under the cardinal's own;
eye, and his condutl, with that of his domestics, were watched
with the utmost attention ..

THE first intelligence he received from the Low Countries,,
gave greater disquiet to the Cardinal, and convinced him how

I GOpmetlls de reb. geR. Ximoqii, p. 50o. fol. Compl. 1569.
m Miniana Contin. Marianx, lib. i. c. a. Bgudier, His. de Ximenes, p. 8.

E 2 difficult

BOOK I.

Charles a-
fumes the ti-
tle of King.

Recognized
through the
influence of
Ximenes.
April 1 3

difficult a talk it would be to condud the affairs of a young
prince, under the influence of counsellors unacquainted with the
laws and manners of Spain. No sooner did the account of Ser-
dinand's death reach Bruiels, than Charles, by the advice of his
Flemiih ministers, resolved to aume the title of King. By the
laws.of Spain, the sole right to the crowns both of Caltile and of
Aragon, belonged to Joanna; and though her infirmities dif-
qualified her from governing, this incapacity had not been
declared by any public a of the Cortes of either kingdom; so
that the Spaniards confidered this resolution, not only as a dired
violation of their privileges, but as an unnatural usurpation in a
son on the prerogatives of a mother, towards whom, in her pre-
sent unhappy situation, he manifested a less delicate regard than
her fubjets had always expressed", The Flemish court, how-
ever, prevailed both on the Pope and on the Emperor to addrefe
letters to Charles as king of Castile; the former of whom, it
was pretended, had a right, as'head of the church; and the lat-
ter, as head of the empire, to confer this title; and inftrutions
were lent to Ximenes, to prevail on the Spaniards to acknow-
ledge it. Ximenes, though he had earnestly remonstrated against
the measure, as equally unpopular and unneceflary, resolved to
exert all his authority and credit in carrying it into execution,
and immediately assembled such of the nobles as were then at
court. What Charles required was laid before them; and when,
instead of complying with his demands, they began to murmur
againRf such an unprecedented encroachment on their privileges,
and to talk high of the rights of Joanna, and their oath of alle-
giance to her, Ximenes hastily interposed, and with that firm and
decisive tone which was natural to him, told them, that they were
not now called to deliberate, but to obey; that their sovereign
did not apply to them for advice, but expeted fubmiflion and
" this day, added he, Charles hall be proclaimed King of Castile'

n P. Mart. Ep. 568.

in
8

In Madrid, and the reft of the cities will follow its example."
On the spot he gave orders for that purpose and notwithftand-
ing the novelty of that pra&ice, and the secret discontent of many
persons of diftintion, Charles's title was universally recognized.
In Aragon, where the privileges of the fubje& were more exten-
five, and the abilities and authority of the archbishop of Sara-
golfa, whom Ferdinand had appointed regent, were far inferior
to those of Ximcnes, the fame obfequioufilef to the will of
Charles did nt appear, nor was he acknowledged there under
any other character but that of Prince, till his arrival in Spain

XIMENES, though poflelled only of delegated power, which,

from his advanced age, he could not expect long to enjoy,
assumed, together with the character of regent, all the ideas
natural, to a monarch, and adopted schemes for extending the
regal authority, which lie pursued with as much intrepidity and
ardour, as if he himself had been to reap the advantages result-
ing from their success. The exorbitant privileges of the Cafti-
lian nobles, circumscribed the prerogative of the prince within
very narrow limits. These the cardinal confidered as so many
unjust extortions from the crown, and determined to reduce them,
Dangerous as the attempt was, there were circumstances in his
situation which promised him greater fuccefi than any king of
Castile could have expeted. His frit and prudent cconomy
of his archiepifcoal revenue', furnished him with more ready
money, than the crown could at any time command the fantity
of his manners, his charity and munificence, rendered him the
idol of the people ; and the nobles them/elves, not fufpeting any
danger from him, did not observe his motions with the fame
jealous attention, as they would have watched those of one of
their monarchs.

BOOK 1.

His chcmie
for extending
the prerogRa-
tive.

o Gometlus, p. 2, &c. BudierHif. de Ximen. p. r:a.
P P. Mart. Ep. 572.

IMME-

a9

BooK I. IMMEDIATELY upon his acceflion to the regency,. several of
Bydeprng the nobles, fancying that the reins of government would of con-
By deprefling
the nobility. sequence be somewhat relaxed, began to aemble their valfals,

and to prosecute, by force of arms, animofities and pretensions.
which the authority of Ferdinand had obliged them to dissemble,
or to relinquish. But Ximenes, who had taken'ifito pay a good
body of troops, opposed and defeated all their designs with unex-
peaed vigour and facility; and though he did not treat the
authors of there disorders with any cruelty, he forced them to
aCts 'of fubmifion, extremely mortifying to the haughty spirit of
Castilian grandees.

By forming a BUT while the Cardinal's attacks were confined to individuals,
bodyof trob s'
depending on and every a of rigour was justified by the appearance of necef-
the crown. fity, founded on the-forms of justice, and tempered with a mix-

ture of lenity, there was scarce room for jealousy or complaint.
It was not. so with his next. measure, which, by itriking at a pri-
vilege eflential to the nobles :'gave a general alarm to the whole
order.' By the feudal conftitutioi, the military power was
lodged in the hands of the nobles, and men of an inferior. condi-
tion were alled' into the field only as their vassals, and to follow
their banners.' A king with. scanty. revenues, and a limited pre-
rogativ,' 4depended n .thefe;potet barons' in all his operations.
It. was with their forces he attacked.his enemies, and with them:
he defended his own kingdom ; and while at the head of troops
attached only, to their own lords, and accustomed to obey no
other commands, his authority was precarious, and his effbrts
feeble. From. this state Ximenes resolved to deliver the crown;
and as rhercenary flanding. armies were unknown under. the fu.
dal governments and would, have been. odious to a martial and
generous people, he ilfued a proclamation, commanding every.
city in Castile t9 enrox. a. crtiir. ntxmbmh of, its .Hrgefs, in
order that they might be trained to the use of, armson. Smdays

and

and holidays; he e'naged to prbvid'e officers to command them
at the publick ekp'ence and as ah 'ehcotriagement to the private
men proifed them an exemption froih 'all teh and iiplitioni.
The freqYent icurfions of the Mo6ts 'froi Arica, indh tli tf e's-
fity of having some force ready to oppoe tlhem,; tiethlhed a plui-
fible perence for this innovation. The object trally .in iewv
was to secure the ki't a body of troops indepe'nAint boflil ibakrois,
i'rd which might 'serve to .couhtrbalamie 'theii 'ibwer': 'Th~
'nobles were tdt inoYait ot his intEetidn, ind !ffA.v 'loW etec-
tually the fcef'e he had a'dopted would aecOmplifl hiis end ; but
as a nmeafure which had the pidus appeirnce of tefAiting the pro-
grts bo the Infidel was ext6iielr pophlar, iand k any oppofl-
'tion to it arifing'froi their order alboe, would haie been imp-
ted Wholly tb interested !iotives, thiey endeavbured 'to excite ihe
cities themselves to refute obedience, and to rimont'tate against
the proclamnation, as incodflent with tlieir charters and privi-
leges. In cbnfequence of their iftlgtiilH' Sitbgs, VlladoliJ,
ahd feveal othler cities, roe i opeti Aftlity. S6bre 6f the
grandees declared themselves their protectors. Violent emlon-
ftrances were presented to the King. His Fletifsh counsellors
'Were' alarmed. Ximenes alone continued firm and undaunted
and partly by tror, partly by ihtteaty; by fore in 'some iih-
fances, and' by 'forberanhce in' others, he prevailed on all the
refractory cities to comply '. During his adminiRration, he con-
tinued t6 execute his plan with vigour, but soon after his death it
'as'entitely dropt. ' : ' : jii

.1 i " ' ' ; ) ' ' i, .' ' '' i1 , 'i , . ,,'

Hs; s fucefs in this scheme f(r reducing the exorbitant power

of the nobility, encouraged him to attempt a diminution of their
poeffions, which were no, less exorbitant. During,i the contests

q Mihian CoitinuatorMirina'fol. Haig:'I3 j. . ''
, .r P. Mart. Ep 556, &c. Gomctius, p. 160, &c.

and

O66K t.

By recalling
the grants of
former mo-
narchs to the
nobility.

1

BooK L and disorders inseparable from the feudal govetlrnznt, the no-
'\"*-' bles, ever attentive to their own interest, and taking advantage

of the weakness and distress of their monarchs, had seized ome
parts of the royal demesnes, obtained grants of others, and giadu-
ally wrested almost the whole out of the hands of the prince, and
annexed them to their own estates. The rights by which most of
the grandees held these lands, were extremely defective; it was
from rome successful usurpation, which the crown had been too
feeble to dispute, that many derived their only titles to pofeflion.
An enquiry carried back to the origin of there encroachments,
which were almost co-eval with the feudal system, was impracticable;
and as it would have stripped every nobleman in Spain of great
part of his lands, it muift have excited a general revolt.. Such a
ftep was too bold, even' for the enterprizing genius of Ximenes.
He confined himself to the reign of Ferdinand; and beginning
with the pensions granted during that time, refused to make any
farther payment, because all right to them expired with his life.
He then called to account those who had acquired crown lands
under the administration of that monarch, and at once resumed
whatever he had alienated. The effects of there revocations
extended to.many persons of great rank; for though Ferdinand
was a prince of little generofiy, ,yet Heand Iabella having been
raised to the throne of Castile. by a .powerful, fation. of the
nobles, they were obliged to. reward the zeal of their adherents
with great-liberality, and the royal demesnes were their only
fund for that purpose. The addition made to the rvenue of
the crown by these revocations, together with his own frugal
ceconomy, enabled' Ximenes not only to difchaige all 'the debts
which Ferdinand had left, and to remit considerable fums to
Slanders, but 'to pay the officers of his new militia, and to et-
blifli magazines more numrous, and better. funifhed .with artil-

.. , -

. -

. " '

" lery
32

I

lery, arms, and warlike stores, than Spain had ever pos'esed in
any former age '. The prudent and disinterested application of
there ums was a full apology to the people for the rigour with
which they were exaCted.

THE nobles, alarraed at there repeated attacks, thought it

neceflary to take precautions for the safety of their order. Many
cabals were formed, loud complaints wer iuttered, and desperate
resolutions taken; but before they proceeded to extremities,
they appointed ome of their number to examine the powers in
consequence of which the Cardinal exercised ats of such high
authority. The admiral of Castile, the duke de Infantado, and
the conde de Benevento, grandees of the first rank, were en-
trusted with this commifion. Ximenes received them with
cold civility, and in answer to their demand produced the
testament of Ferdinand by which he was appointed regent, to-
gether with the ratification of that deed by Charles. To both
there they objected; and he endeavoured to establish their validity.
As the conversation grew warm, he led them insensibly towards
a balcony from which they had a view of a large body of troops
under arms, and of a formidable train of artillery. " Behold,
fays he, pointing to there and raising his voice, the powers
which I have received from his catholick majesty. With these
I govern Castile; and with these I will govern it, till the king
your master and mine takes pofeflion of his kingdom '." A
declaration so bold and haughty silenced them, and aftonilhed
their abociates. To take arms against a man aware of his danger,
and prepared for his defence, was what despair alone would
dictate. All thoughts of a general confederacy against the
Cardinal's administration were laid aside; and except from some

r Flechier Vie de Ximen. ii. 6o.
VOL. IL

s Flech. ii. 55x. Ferreras, Hit. viii. 433.
F flight

Boo K .

The roblqa
oppose his
inacaures.

But without
fuccefi.

33

BOOK I.
t W..,

Thwarted by
Charles's
Flemith mi-
nifters.

An additional
number of
regents ap-
pointed.

flight commotions, excited by the private resentment of particu-
lar noblemen, the tranquillity of Castile suffered no interrup-
tion.

IT was not only from the opposition of the Spanish nobility

that obstacles arose to the execution of the Cardinal's schemes; he
had a confiant struggle to maintain with the Flemish ministers,
who presuming upon their favour with the young king, aimed
at direding the affairs of Spain, as well as those of their own
country. Jealous of his great abilities, and independent spirit,
they confidered him rather as a rival who might circumscribe
their power, than as a minister who by his prudence and vigour
was adding to the grandeur and authority of their master.
Every complaint against his adminiitration was listened to with
pleasure by the courtiers in the Low Countries. Unnecessary
obftrudions were thrown by their means in the way of all his
measures, and tho' they could not either with decency or safety
deprive him of the office of regent, they endeavoured to lessen his
authority by dividing' it. They soon discovered that Adrian of
Utrecht, already joined with him in office, had neither genius nor
spirit fifficient to give the least check to his proceedings; and
therefore Charles by their advice added to the commiflion of re-
gency La Chau, a Flemish gentleman, and afterwards Amerftorf
a nobleman of Holland ; the former diftinguitled for his address;
the latter for his firmness. Ximenes, though no stranger to, the
malevolent intention of the Flernih courtiers, received them
with all the external marks of diflintion due to the office with
which they were invelted; but when they came to enter uponQ
business, he abated nothing of that air of superiority with which
he had treated Adrian, and fiill retained the sole direction of
affairs. The Spaniards, more averse, perhaps, than any other

people
34

people to the government of trangers, approved of all his efforts
to preserve his authority i and even the nobles, influenced by
this national paflion, and forgetting their jealousies and difcon-
tehts, chose rather to fee the fitpreme power in the hands of one
of their countrymen, whom they feared, than in those of
foreigners, whom they hated.

XIMENES, though engaged in such great schemes of domestic'

policy, and embarrafed by the artifices and intrigues of the
Flemi(h ministers, had the burden of two foreign wars to sup-
port. The one was in Navarre, invaded by its unfortunate
monarch, John d'Albret. The death of Ferdinand, the absence
of Charles, and the discord and difaffe&ion which reigned among
the Spanish nobles, seemed to present him with a favourable
opportunity of recovering, his dominions. The Cardinal's vigi-
lance, however, defeated a, measure so well .oncerted. lFore-
feeing the danger to which that,kingdom might be exposed, one
of his first as of administration was to order thither a confider-
able body of troops. While the king was employed with one
part of his army in the siege of St. Jean Pied en Port, Villalva,
an officer of great experience and courage, attacked the other by
furprize, and cut it to pieces. The king inRantly retreated
with precipitation, and an end was put to the war . But
as Navarre was filled at that time with towns and castles, slightly
fortified, and weakly garrisoned, which being unable to resist an
enemy, served only to furnish him with places of retreat';
Ximenes, always bold and decisive in his measures, ordered
every one of these to be dismantled, except Pampeluna,: the for-
tifications of which he proposed to render very strong. To this
uncomfnon precaution. Spain owes the pofieflion of Navarre.

r P. Mart. Ep. 570.

F The

BOOK I.

Ximenes re-
retains the di-
retion o a-
fairs.

His uccefiful
war in Na.
varrC.

35

Bbo I. Thle French, since that period, have often entered, and have as

' ^' often over-run the open country ; but while they were exposed

io all the inco'nveniencies attending an invading army, the Spa-
niards have easily drawn troops from the neighbouring provinces to
dppofe them; and the French, being deiRitute of strong towns to
which they could retire, have been obliged to abahdon their con-
quest with as much rapidity as they gained it.

His operati TriE War which he carried on in Africa, againt the famous
ons in Africa
left fortunate. hdventurer Horuc Barbarofia, who, sori a private corsair, raised

hitifielf by his flinular val ur and addrdef, to be king of Algiers
'aid ii uii, was far fom'being ejually fi¢ccEfsful. 'the ill con-
'iiut of the Spanilh geieral, kand the ralh ValBr 6f h1h troops,
:pr'iented Barbaroflh With an easy victory. Many 'periflied in
tHte battle, m6re in the eteat 'and the remainder returned into
-Sain covereid with infamry. The magnanimity, however, with
W'hich :th Cardiil b6'e this disgrace, the only one he exp'e-
rinced dring his administration, added new lulture to his cha-
rafter'. Great cormpofure of temper under a difappointnent,
Was ht expe&d'ed fr6m a: man Co remark:ible for the eagernes
'atid impatience wi'h

t ilich he iYge'd oh the 'exeutionof all his

' fcTiemes .

Corruption of
the Flemith
ruinifters,par-
sicularly of
Chievres.

Tts difatter was foQ forgqtten ; while the condut& of the

Flmijfh court proved 'the cfre of conftant.uneafnefs, notonly
to the' Cardinal, but to the:whole $panili natin., All the, great
qualities of Chievres, te prime rpinifter and favourite of the
young king, were sullied with an ignoble and fordid avarice.
Thq,acceflion of his;marfter t tlep crown of $piain, opened,a new

' Gometius, lib. vi . p.79

and
36

and copious source for the gratification of this palion. During
the time of Charles's residence in Slanders, the whole tribe of
pretenders to offices or to favour retorted thither. They soon
discovered that, without the patronage of Chievres, it was vain
to hope for preferment nor did they want sagacity to find out
the proper method of securing him. Vast ums of money were
drawn out of Spain. Every thing was venal, and disposed of to
the highest bidder. After the example of Chievres, the inferior
Flemish ministers engaged in this traffick, which became as gene-
ral and avowed, as it was infamous'. The Spaniards were filled
with rage when they beheld offices of great importance to the
welfare of their country, set to Tale by Rrangers, unconcerned for
its honour or its happiness. Ximenes, disinterested in his whole
administration, and a stranger, from his native grandeur of
mind, to the paflion of avarice, inveighed with the utmost bold.
ness against the venality of the Flemings. He represented to
the King in strong terms, the murmurs and indignation which
their behaviour excited among a free and high-fpirited peoples
and besought him to fat out without loss of time for Spain, that,
by his presence, he might dissipate the clouds which were gather-
ingall over the kingdom.

CHARLES was fully sensible that he had delayed too long to

take pofteniion of his dominions in Spain. Powerful obstacles,
however, flood in his way, and detained him in the Low Coun-
tries. The war. which the league of Cambray had kindled in
Italy, still fubifted though, during its course, thearmies of all
the parties engaged in it, had taken different diretions. France
was now in alliance with Venice, which it had at first combined
to destroy. Maximilian and Ferdinand had for Come years car-

t Miniana, Contin. . a. u P. Mart. Ep. 76.

ried

BOOK I.

Charles per.
fuaded by
Ximees (o'
visit Spain,.
,.

BOOK

A peace con-
cluded with
France.

Aug. 13,
i5s6.

tied on hostilities against France, their original ally, to the valour
of whose troops the confederacy owed all its success. Together
with his kingdoms, Ferdinand transmitted this war to his grand-
son; and there was reason to expe6t that Maximilian, always
fond of new enterprizes, would persuade the young monarch to
enter into it with ardour. But the Flemings, who had long
pofTefled an extensive commerce, which during the league of
Cambray, had grown to a great height upon the ruins of the
Venetian trade, dreaded a rupture with France; and Chievres,
sagacious to discern the true interest of his country, and not
warped on this occasion by his love of wealth, warmly declared
for maintaing peace with the French nation. Francis I.
destitute of allies, and follicitous to secure his late conquers in
Italy by a treaty, listened withjoy to the first overtures of accom-
modation. Chievres himself conducted the negociation in the name
of Charles. Bouffer appeared as plenipotentiary for Francis.
Each of them had presided over the education of the prince
whom he represented. They had both adopted the fame pacific
system; and were equally persuaded that the union of the two
monarchs was the happiest event for themselves, as well as for
their kingdoms. In such hands the negociation did not languish.
A few days after opening their conferences at Noyon, they con-
cluded a treaty of confederacy and mutual defence between the
two monarchs; the chief articles in which were, that Francis
should give in marriage to Charles his eldest daughter, the prin-
cess Louise, an infant of a year old, and as her dowry, hfould
make over to him all his claims and pretensions upon the king-
dom of Naples; that in consideration of Charles's being already
in poffeilon of Naples, he hould till the accomplishment of the
marriage, pay an hundred thousand crowns a year to the French

king;
38.

king; and the half of that fum annually, as long as the princess
had no children; that when Charles lhall arrive in Spain, the
heirs of the king of Navarre may represent to him their right to
that kingdom; and if he do not give them fatisfation, Francis
shall be at liberty to aift them with all his forces . This alli-
ance not only united Charles and Francis, but obliged Maximilian,
who was unable alone to cope with the French and Venetians, to
enter into a treaty with those powers, which put a final period to
that bloody and tedious war which the league of Cambray had oc-
cafioned. Europe enjoyed a few years of universal tranquillity, and
was indebted for that blefling to two princes, whose rivallhip and
ambition kept it in perpetual discord and agitation during the re-
mainder of their reigns.

By the treaty of Noyon, Charles secured a safe paflage into

Spain. It was not, however, the interest of his Flemish mini-
fters, that he flould visit that kingdom soon. While he resided
in Slanders, the revenues of the Spanih crown were spent there,
and they engrossed, without any competitors, all the efflts of
their monarch's generosity; their country became the feat of
government, and all favours were dispensed by them. Of all
there advantages, they run the rifque of feeing themselves
deprived, from the moment that their sovereign entered Spain.
The Spaniards would naturally aflume the direction of their own
affairs; the Low Countries would be confidered only as a pro-
vince of that mighty monarchy; and they who now distributed
the favours of the prince to others, must then be content to receive
them from the hands of ftrangel's. But what Chievres chiefly
wiffied to avoid was, an interview between the:king and Ximene.
On the one hand, the wisdom, the integrity, and the magnani-

39

BOOK .

TheFleminga
avers to
Charles's visit
to Spain. ,

Afraid of
Ximeieie.
x Leonard Recueil des Traitez, tonm ii. 69.

mity

40
BOOK I. mity of that prelate, gave him a wonderful ascendant over the

minds of men; and it was extremely probable, there great quali-
ties, added to the reverence due to his age and office, would com-
mand the refpea of a young prince, who, capable of noble and
generous sentiments himself, would, in proportion to his admira-
tion of the Cardinal's virtues, leflen his deference towards persons
of another chara&er. Or, on the other hand, if Charles hould
allow his Flemish favourites to retain all the influence over his
councils which they at present poffffeed, it was easy to foresee that
the Cardinal would remonstrate loudly against such an indignity to
the Spanish nation, and vindicate the rights of his country with
the fame intrepidity and success, that he had aferted the preroga-
tives of the crown. For there reasons, all his Flemish counsellors
combined to retard his departure; and Charles, unfufpicious, from
want of experience, and fond of his native country, suffered him-
self to be unnecessarily detained in the Netherlands a whole year
after signing the treaty of Noyon.

THE repeated intreaties of Ximenes, the advice of his grand-

father Maximilian, and the impatient murmurs of his Spanilh sub-
jets, prevailed on him at last to embark. He was attended not
only by Chievres, his prime minister, but by a numerous and
splendid train of the Flemilh nobles, fond of beholding the gran-
deur, or of sharing in the bounty of their prince. After a danger-
ous voyage, he landed at Villa Viciofa, in the province of Asturias,
and was received with such loud acclamations of joy, as a
new monarch, whose arrival was so ardently desired, had reason
to expet. The Spanish nobility resorted to their overeign from
all parts of the kingdom, and displayed a magnificence which the
Flemings were unable to emulate .

y P. Mart. Ep. 599. 6or.

XIMENES,

I ;i7.

Charles em-
barks for
Spain.
Sept. 13.

XIMEN E, who confidered the presence of the king as the
greatef bleling to his dominions, was advancing towards the
coast, as fast as the infirm slate of his health would permit, in
order to receive him. During his regency, and notwithstanding
his extreme old age, he abated, in no degree, the, rigour or fre-
quency of his mortifications; and to there he added such laborious
assiduity in bufiners, as would have worn out the most youth-
ful and vigorous constitution. Every day he employed several
hours in devotion; he celebrated mars in person; he even allotted
Come space for Rudy. Notwithstanding there occupations he regu-
larly attended the council; he received and read all papers pre-
sented to him; he dictated letters and inftrutions; and took
under his infpedion all business, civil, ecclesiastical, or military.
Every moment of his time was filled up with some serious em-
ployment. The only amusement in which he indulged himself
by way of relaxation after business, was to canvass, with a few
friars and divines, ome intricate article in fcholafRic theology.
Wafted by such a course of life, the infirmities of age daily
grew upon him.. On his journey, a violent oittrder seized
him at Bos Equillos, attended with uncommon symptoms; which
his followers confidered as the effet of poison, but could not
agree whether the crime ought to be imputed to the hatred
of the Spanish nobles, or to the malice of the Flemish courtiers.
This accident obliging him to flop short, he wrote to Charles,
and with his usual boldness advised him to dismiss all the fRran-
gers in his train, whose numbers and credit gave offence already
to the Spaniards, and would ere long alienate the, affetions of
the whole people. At the fame time, he earnestly defied to
have an interview with the king, that he might inform him of the
slate of the nation, and the temper of his subjects. To pre-

z Miniana, Contia. lib. . . .

BoOK .

H a Flemish
minilters en-
deavour to
prevent an in-
terview with
Ximcncs.

Charles's in-
gratitude to
Ximcnes.

41
VOL. II.

G

vent

BOOK I. vent this, tot only the Flemings, but the panifh'grahdees,
'"' employed all their address, and industriously kept Charles at

distance from Aranda, the place to which the Cardinal had
removed. Through their suggestions, 'every measure that he
recommended was rejected; the utmost care was taken to
make him feel, and to point out to the whole intion, 'that his
power was on the decline; even in things purely 'trivial, such a
choice was always made, as was deemed most disagreeable o
him. Ximenes did not bear this treatment with his usual for-
titude of..fpirir. Conscious of his own integrity and merit, he
expected a more grateful return from a prince, to whom he
delivered' a kingdom more flourishing than it had been i any
former' age, and authority more extensive and better established,
than the most illustrious of his ancestors had ever poefleed. He
could not, therefore, on many occasions, refrain from giving
vent to his indignation and complaints. He lamented the fate
of his country, and foretold the calamities it would susser from
the insolence, the rapaciousness, and ignorance of frangers.
While his mind was agitated by there paflions, he received a letter
from the king, in which, after a few cold 'ahd formal exprefions
of regard, he was allowed to retire to his diocese that after a life
of such continued labour, he might end his days in tranquillity.
This message proved fatal to Ximenes. His haughty mind, it ,is
His death.

probable, would not survive disgrace; perhaps his generous
heart could not bear the profpea of the misfortunes ready to fall
on his country. Whichsoever of these opinions we embrace,
Nov. 8. certain it is that he expired a few hours after reading the letter .

The variety, the grandeur, and the fuccef 9f his schemes, during
a regency of only twenty months, leave it doubtful, whether his

s Marfaillier Vie de Ximenes, p. 447. Gometius lib. vii p. zo6, &c. Baudiet
Hilt. de Ximen. p. o8.

sagacity
4%

43

sagacity in council, hi prudence in condut, or hip boldness in BOOK 1.
execution, deserve the greatest praise. His reputation is till .
high in Spain, not only for wisdom, but for fantityl and he is
the only prime minister mentioned in history, whom his contem-
poraries reverenced as a faint", and to whom the people under his
government ascribed the power of working miracles.

SOON after the death of Ximenes, Charles made his publick 1518.
entry, with great pomp, into Valladolid, whither he had fum- Ctvalad hld
moned the Cortes of Caftie. Though he aflumed on all occasions
the name of king, that title bad never been acknowledged in the
Cortes: The Spaniards confidering Joanna as poffelfed of the ole
right to the crown, and no example of a son's having enjoyed the
title of king during the life of his parents occurring in their his-
tory, the Cortes discovered all that crupulous refpe& for ancient
forms, and that avertion to innovation, which are conspicuous in
popular afemblies. The presence, however, of their prince, the
address, the artifices, and the threats of his ministers, prevailed
on them at last to declare him king, in conjunction with his mno- Declare
ther, whose name they appointed to be placed before that of her
son in all publick acts; and declare that, if at any future pe-
riod she should recover the exercise of reason, the whole royal au-
thority hould return into her hands. . At the fame time, they voted
a free gift of fix hundred thousand ducats to be paid in three years,
a furn more considerable than had ever been granted to any former
monarch b

NOTWITHSTANDING this obsequiousness of the Cortes to Dicontent of

the will of the king, the mot' violent symptoms of difraisfa&ion , the Caulfs
with his government began to break out in the kingdom. of it

a Flechier, Vie de Ximen. if. 746.
P. Mart. Ep. 608. Sandov. p. 12.

b Miniana, Contin. lib. i. c. 3.

Chievres
G

44

Chievres had acquired over the mind of the young monarch the
ascendant not only of a tutor, but of a parent. Charles seemed
to have no sentiments but those which his minister inspired, and
scarce uttered a word but what he put into his mouth. He was
constantly surrounded by Flemings; no person got access to him
without their permiiflon; nor was any admitted to audience but
in their presence. As he spoke the Spanish language very imper-
fetly, his answers were always extremely hort, and often deli-
vered with hesitation. From all there circumstances, many of
the Spaninrds were led to believe that he was a prince of a flow
and narrow genius; some pretended to discover a trong refem-
blance between him and his mother, and began to whisper that
his capacity for government would never be far fperior to hers;
and though they who had the best opportunity of judging con-
cerning his character, maintained, that notwithstanding such
unpromising appearances, he poflelfed a large fund of knowledge
and sagacity'; yet all agreed in condemning his partiality
towards his countrymen, and his attachment to his favourites
as unreasonable and immoderate. Unfortunately for Charles,
there favourites were unworthy of his confidence. To amass
wealth seems to have been their only aim; and as they had rea-
son to fear, that either their master's good fente, or th6 indigna-
tion of the Spaniards, might oon abridge their power, they
hastened to improve the present opportunity, and their avarice
was the more rapacious, becaue they expected their authority
to be of no long duration. All honours, offices and benefices,
were either engrossed by the Flemings, or publickly fold by
them. Chievres, his wife, and Sauvage, whom Charles, on the
death of Ximenes, had imprudently raited to be chancellor of
Castile, vied with each other in all the refinements of extortion

c Sandoval, p. t3. P. Mart. Ep. 6SS.

and

BOOK I.
sS_

45

and venality. Not only the Spanilh hiltorians, who, from re-
fentment, may be fufpeaed of exaggeration, but Peter Matyr
Angleria, an Italian, who resided at that time in the court of
Spain, and who was under no temptation to deceive the persons
to whom his letters are addressed, give a description which is
alrioft incredible, of the insatiable and shameless covetoutgefs of
the Flemings. Acccording to Angleria's calculation, which he
asserts to be extremely moderate, they remitted into the Low
Countries, in the space of ten months, no less a fum than a mil-
lion and one hundred thousand ducats. The nomination of
William de Croy, Chievres' nephew, a young man not of cano.
nical age, to the Archbilhoprick of Toledo, exasperated the
Spaniards more than all these exactions. They confidered the
elevation of a firanger to the head of their church, and to the
richest benefice in the kingdom, not only as an injury, but as
an insult to the whole nation and both clergy and laity, the
former from interest, the latter from indignation, joined in exclaim-
ing against it '.

CHARLES leaving Caltile thus disgusted with his adminiftra-

tion, set out for SaragoFa, the capital of Aragon, that he might
be present in the Cortes of that kingdom. On his way thither,
he took leave of his brother Ferdinand, whom he ent into
Germany on the pretence of visiting their grandfather, Maxi-
milian, in his old age. To this prudent precaution, Charles
owed the preservation of his Spanish dominions. During the
violent commotions which arose there oon after this period,
the Spaniards would infallibly have offered the crown to a
prince, who was the darling of the whole nation; nor did

BOoK I.

Charles holds
the Cortes of
Atagon.

d Sandoval, 28-31. P. Mart. Ep. 6o8 6 , 6 613, 614, 622, 623, 639. Mi-
nlana, Contin. lib i. . 3. p, 8.

Ferdinand

BOOK I. Ferdinand want ambition, or counsellors, that would have prompt;

ed him to accept of this offer .

The Arago- THE Aragonefe had not hitherto acknowledged Charles as
nefe more un-
tratable tban king, nor would they allow the Cortes to be assemblcd in his
the Castilian. name, but in that of the Jufiza, to whom, during an inter-

regnum, this privilege belonged . The opposition Charles had
to struggle with in the Cortes of Aragon, was more violent and
obstinate than that which he had overcome in Castile; after
long delays, however, and with much difficulty, he persuaded
the members to confer on him the title of king, in conjuntion
with his mother. At the fame time he bound himself by that
solemn oath, which the Aragonefe exaced of their king, never
to violate any of their rights or liberties. When a donative was
demanded, the members were Rill more intractable; many
months elapsed before they would agree to grant Charles two
hundred thousand ducats, and that fum they appropriated so
trialy for paying debts of the crown, which had long been for-
gotten, that a very small part of it came into the King's hands.
What had happened in Castile taught them caution, and deter-
mined them rather to satisfy the claims of their fellow citizens,
how obsolete soever, than to furnish strangers the means of en-
riching themselves with the spoils of their country s.

DURING there proceedings of the Cortes, ambassadors arrived

at Saragofla from Francis I. and the young king of Navarre,
demanding the reflitution of that kingdom in terms of the treaty
of Noyon. But neither Charles, nor the Castilian nobles whom
he consulted on this occasion, discovered any inclination to part

e P. Martyr, Ep. 619 Ferreras, viii. 460.
s P. Martyr, Ep. 615-634.

rP. Martyr, Ep. 6o%.

with
46

with this acquisition. A conference held soon after at Mont-
pelier, in order to bring this matter to an' amicable ilue, was
altogether fruitless; and while the French urged the injustice of
the usurpation, the Spaniards were attentive only to its impor-
tance h.

FROM Aragon, Charles proceeded to Catalonia, where lie
wafted as much time, encountered more difficulties, and gained
less money. The Flemings were now become To odious in every
province of Spain by their exa&tins, that the desire of mortifying.
them, and of disappointing their avarice, augmented the jea-
lousy with which a free people usually condu&t their delibera.
tions.

THE Castilians, who had felt most sensibly the weight and

rigour of the opprefive schemes, carried on by the Flemings,
resolved no longer to submit with a tameness fatal to themselves,
and which rendered them the objets of scorn among the reft of
the Spaniards. Segovia, Toledo, Seville, and several other cities
of the first rank, entered into a confederacy for the defence of
their rights and privileges; and notwithstanding the silence of
the nobility, who, on this occasion, discovered neither the publick
spirit, nor the resolution which became their order, they laid before
the king a full view of the itate of the kingdom, and of the mal-
administration of his favourites. The preferment of firangers,,
the exportation of the current coin; the increase of taxes, were
the grievances of which they chiefly complained; and: of there
they demanded redress with that boldness, which is natural to a
free people. These remonstrances, presented at first at Saragola,
and renewed afterwards at Barcelona, Charles treated with great

BoOK I.

omStg.on

ComB;nation
of the Cafti
lians ngainft
the Flemilhb
ministers.
h P. Martyr, Ep. 60o, 633, 640.

ineglet..

neglect. The confederacy, however, of these cities at this junc-
ture, was the beginning of that famous union among the commons
of Castile, which not long after threw the kingdom into such violent
convulsions, hook the throne, and almost overturned the conftitu-
tion '.

SOON after Charles's arrival at Barcelona, he received the ac-

count of an event which interested him much more than the mur-
murs of the Castilians, or the scruples of the Cortes of Catalonia.
This was the death of the Emperor Maximilian; an occurrence
of small importance in itself, for he was a prince conspicuous nei-
ther for his virtues, his power, nor his abilities; but rendered
by its consequences more memorable than any that had happened
during several ages. It broke that profound and universal peace
which then reigned in the Christian world; it excited a rival(hip
between two princes, which threw all Europe into agitation, and
kindled wars more general, and of longer duration, than had hi.
therto been known in modern times.

THE revolutions occasioned by the expedition of the French

king, Charles VIII. into Italy, had inspired the European princes
with new ideas concerning the importance of the Imperial dig-
nity. The claims of the Empire upon ome of the Italian flates
were numerous; its jurifdidion over others was extensive; and
though the former had been almost abandoned, and the latter
seldom exercised, under princes of no abilities, and of little influ-
ence, it was obvious, that in the hands of an Emperor poffefied
of power or genius, they would be employed as engines for
stretching his dominion over the greater part of that country.
Even Maximilian, feeble and unsteady as his conduct always

i P. Martyr, Ep 630. Ferreral, viii. 464.

was,

BOOK I.

Death of the
Emperor Maximilian.

Jauuary It.
48

49

was, had availed himfelfof the infinite pretensions of the Empire,
and had reaped advantage. from every war and every negociation
in Italy during his reign. There considerations, added to the
dignity of the station, confessedly the first amoing Christian princes,
and to the rights inherent in the office, which, if .exerted with vi-
gouir were far from being inconsiderable, rendered the Imperial
crown more than ever an objet of ambition.

NOT long before his death, Maximilian had discovered great

solicitude to preserve this dignity in he Austrian family,: and to
procure the kingl of Spain ,to be chosen his successor. But he
himself having never: been crowned by the Pope, a ceremony
deemed essential in that age, was confidered only as Emperor
etli and though historians did not attend to that diltindion,
neither the Italian nor : German chnery! bestowed any other
title upon him than that of King of the Romans and, no example
occurring in history of any person's being chosen a fuccelfor to a
king of the Romans, the Germans, always tenacious of their forms,
and unwilling to confer upon Charles an office for which their con-
fitution knew no, name, obstinately refused to gratify Maximilian
in that pointk,

BY his death, this difficulty was at once removed, and Charles

openly aspired to that dignity which his grandfather had
attempted, without success, to secure so-. him. At the fame time,
Francis I.' a powerful rival, entered the lifts against him; and the
attention of all Europe was fixed upon this competition, no less
illustrious from the high rank of the candidates,'than from the
importance of' he prize for which they contended. Each of
them' urged his p'reterifions with sanguine expedtations, and with

k Guicciatdini, lib. 3. p. i, Hist. Gener. 'Allemagne, par P. Barre, tom.
viii. part . . t087. 'P, Heuter, Rer. Autr. lib. vii. c. 17 . p. l9. ib. viii. c. A.

VOL I 1 n.)o
VOL. II. H no

ooK I.1

Maximili~a
had endea-
voured to e-
cure the inl-
perial crown
to his grand-
son.

Charles and
Francis .
colletitora
for the em-
pire.

tJ

Boo K L no unpromiing pro(pec of success. Charles confidered the Impe-
Pretensions rial crown as belonging to him of right, from its long continuance
nd hopes of in the Austrian line; he knew that none of the German princes
Charles.

pofieifed power or influence enough to appear as his antagonist
he flattered himself, that no consideration would induce the
natives of Germany to exalt any foreign prince to a dignity,
which during so many ages had been deemed peculiar to their
own nation; and least of all, that they would confer this honour
upon Francis I. the sovereign of a people whose genius, and
laws, and manners, differed so widely from those of the Germans,
that it was scarce pofible to establish any cordial'union between
them; he trusted not a little to the effect of Maximilian's nego-
ciations, which though they did not attain their end, had pre-
pared the minds of the 'Germans for his elevation to the imperial
throne; but what he relied on 'as his chief recommendation,
was the fortiuate fitaatibn f his hereditary dmnirions in Ger-
many, which served as a natural barrier to the Emiipire ~ganft the
encroachmnttes of the Turkish power. The conquests, the abili-
ties, and the ambition f iultin Setin II. rhd spread overEurope,
at that time, a general and well founded alarm. By his victories
over the Mamalukes, and the extirpation of that gallant-body of
men, he had not only added Egypt and Syria to his empire, but
had Secured to it fudh a degree of internal tranquillity, that he
was ready to turn agaift Christendom the whole force of his
arms, which nothing had hitherto been able to resist: The most
effetual expedient for flopping the progress of this torrent,
seemed to be the election of an Emperor, possessed of extensive
territories in that country, where its first imprefflon would be
felt, and who, besides, could combat this formidable enemy with
all the forces of a powerful monarchy, and with all the wealth
fumifhed by the mines of the new world, or the commerce of
the Low Countries. These were the. arguments by which

Charles
50o

EMPEROR CHARLES V.

Charles publickly supported his claim; and to men of integrity Boo 1.
'ad reflection, they appeared to be not only plausible, but con-
vincing. He did not, however, trlft the fucces of his cause
to there alone. Great fums of money were remitted from Spain;
all the refinements and artifice cf negociation were employed;
and a considerable body of troops kept on foot by the states o f
the Circleof Suabia, was secretly taken into his pay. The venal
were gained by presents; the objecions of the more scrupulous
were answered or eluded; and some feeble princes were threaten-
ed and over-awed'.

ON the other hand, Francis supported his claim with equal Of Franci,.

eagerness, and no less confidence of its being well founded. His
emissaries contended that it was now high time to convince the
Princes of the house of ;Austria -that the Imperial crown was
elecive, and not hereditary; and that other'perfons might aspire
to an honour which their arrogaiice had come t6 regard as the
property of their family; that it required a overeign of mature
judgment, and of approved abilities, to hold' the reins of govern-
ment in a country where :fuc 'unknown opinions concerning
religion had been published, as had thrown the minds of men
into an uncommon agitation, which threatened the most violent
effects; that a young prince, without experience, and who had
hitherto given no specimens of his genius for command, was
no equal match for Selim, a monarch, grown old in the art f
war, and in 'the course of victory ; whereas a king, who in
his early youth had triumphed over the valour and discipline
of the Swiss, till then reckojned invincible, would be an anta-
gonift not unworthy of the Conqueror of the Eaf; that the

i Guic. lib. 13. 59. Sleidan, Hil. of the Reformat. 14. StruviiCorp. HiR.
German. ii 971. Not. ao.

H'2

fire

BooK I. fire and impetuosity of the French cavalry, added to the difci-

C""^ " pline and flability of the German infantry, would form an

army so irrefiible, that intead of waiting the approach of
the Ottoman forces, it might carry hostilities into the heart
of their dominions; that the eation of Charles would be in-
confitent with a fundamental constitution, by which the person
who holds the crown of Naples, is excluded from aspiring to
the Imperial dignity ; that 'his elevation to that honour would
soon kindle a war in Italy, on account of his pretensions to the
dutchy of Milan, the effects of which could not fail of reach-
ing the Empire, and might prove fatal to it . Bt' while his
ambassadors enlarged upon these and other topicks of the fame
kind, in all the courts of Germany, Francis, sensible of the
prejudices entertained against him as a foreigner, unacquaint-
ed with the German language or manners, , endeavoured
to overcome there, and to. gain the favour. of the princes by
immefie gifts, and by infinite promises. As the expeditions
method oftranfinitting money, and the decent mode-of conveying
a bribe by bills of exchange was then little known?. the French
ambassadors travelled with a train of horss loaded with treefure,
an equipage not very honourable for that prince by whom they
were employed, and infamous for those to whom they were sent "

Viers and THE other European princes could not reriaii indifferent
intereR of - ase-e
other fates. fpecators of a contef, the decision of which f6 .nearly affected

them. Their commonn interft ought naturally to have formed
a general combination, in order to diappoint both competitors,
and to prevent either of them from oblaining such a pre-
eminence in power and dignity, as'fiiight pirove dangerous tp the
liberties of Europe. But the ideas wit1D refpe 'to a proper diftri-

Guicc lib. 3. 60. Sleid. p. 16. Geor. Sabini de eke& Car. V. Hiloria apu.
Scaidii Script Rer. German. vol. ii. p. 4.

lMernoires de Marech de Fleuranges, p. 296.

bution and balance of power were so lately introduced into the Boo K. I.
system of European policy, that they were not hitherto objets '
of sufficient attention. The paflions of some princes, the want of
foresight in others, and the fear of giving offence to the candidates,
hindered such a salutary union of the powers of Europe, and
rendered them either totally negligent of the publick safety,
or kept them from exerting themselves with vigour in its
behalf.

THE SwisS Cantons, though they dreaded the elevation of either Of the Swifr.
of the contending monarchs, and though they wished to have seen
some prince whose dominions were lets -extensive, and whose power
was more moderate, feated on the Imperial throne, were prompted,
however, by their hatred of the French nation, to give an open
preference to the pretensions of Charles, while they used their ut-
most influence to fruifrate those of Francis °.

THE Venetians easily discerned, that it was the interest of ojfthe Vencr

tians.

their republick to have both the rivals set aside; but their jealousy
of the house of Austria, whose ambition and neighbourhood. had
been fatal to their grandeur, would not permit them to a up to
their.own Ideas, and led them hastily to give the sanction of their
approbation to the claim of the French king.

IT was equally the interest, and more in the power of Henry Of Henry

VIII. of England, to prevent either Francis or Charles from
acquiring a dignity which would raise them so far above other
monarchs. But though Henry often boasted, that he held the
balance of Europe in his hand, he had neither the eady atten-
tion, the accurate difcernrment, nor the difpaflipnate temper
which that delicate fundtion required. On'this occasion it mor-
tified his vanity so much, to fee himself excluded from that noble

r Sabinus, p. 5.

competition

53

B K .
L competition which reflected such honour upon the two antagonists,

that he took the refoluion of fending an ambassador into Ger-
many, and of declaring himself a candidate for the Imperial
throne. The ambassador, though loaded with caresses by the
German princes and the Pope's nuncio, informed his master, that
he could hope for no success in a claim which he had been so late
in preferring; and Henry, imputing his disappointment to that
circumstance alone, and soothed with this ostentatious display of
his own importance, seems to have taken no farther part in the
matter, either by contributing to thwart both his rivals, or to pro-
mote one of them P.
Of Leo X. LEO X. a pontiff no less renowned for his political abilities,

than for his love of the arts, was the only prince of the age who
observed the motions of the two contending monarchs with a
prudent attention, or who discovered a proper solicitude for the
public safety. The Imperial and Papal jurifdition interfered in
so many instances, the complaints of usurpation were :so numer-
ous on both fides, and the territories of the church owed their
safety so entirely to the weakness of their neighbours, add so
little to their own force, that nothing was so formidable to the
court of Rrome as an Emperor of extensive power, or f an enter-
prizing genius. Leo trembled at the prospect of beholding the
Imperial crown placed on the head of the king of Spain and of
Naples, and the master of the new world; nor was he lels afraid
of feeing a king of France, who was duke of Milan and iord of
Genoa, exalted to that dignity. He foretold that the elecion
of either of them would be fatal to the independence of the holy
fee, to the ieace of' Italy, and perhaps to the liberties of Eu'rpe.
To opp6fe them, iowever, required addres'and caution in prd-

pM r drFlecuraF s,
, 3 4. Herbert, Hil of Henry VIIL

portion

portion to the greatness of their power, and their opportunities BooK I.
of taking revenge. Leo was defective in neither. He secretly '
exhorted the German princes to place one of their own number
on the Imperial throne, which many of them were capable of
filling with honour; he put them in mind of the conititution by
which the Kings of Naples were for ever excluded from that dig-
nity 'q he warmly exhorted the French King to perfirf in his claim,
not from any desire that he should gain his end, but as he foresaw
that the Germans would be more disposed to favour the king of
Spain, he hoped that Francis himself, when he discovered his own
chance of success to be desperate, would be flimulated by resent-
ment and the spirit of rivallhip, to concur with all his interest
in raising some third person to the head of the Empire; or on the
other hand, if Francis hould make unexpected progress, he did
not doubt but that Charles would be induced by similar motives
to at the fame part; and thus by prudence and attention, the
mutual jealousy of the two rivals might be so dextroufly ma-
naged, as to disappoint both. But this scheme, the only one
which a prince in Leo's situation could adopt, though concerted
with great wisdom, was executed with little discretion. The
French ambafladors in Germany fed their maker with vain hopes;
the Pope's nuncio, being gained by them, altogether forgot the
inftrutions he had received; and Francis persevered so long and
so obstinately in urging his own pretensions, as rendered all Leo's
measures abortive'.

SUCH were the hopes of the candidates, and the views of the The Diet

assembles.

different princes, when the diet was opened according to form at June 17tb.
Frankfort. The right of chufing an Emperor had long been

q Goldafti Constitutiones liperiales. Francof. 1673. vol. i. 439.
r Guicciar. lib. 13. 161.

veiled

55

Boo K I.

Views of the
Elecors.

Offer the
imperid
crown to Fre-
derick of
S&ony.

vetled in seven great. princes, distinguished by the name of Elec-
tots, the origin of whose office, and the nature and, extent of
their powers, have already been explained. These were, at that
time, Albert of Brandenburgh, archbishop of Mentz; Herman
count de Wied, archbishop of Cologne; Richard de Griefsen.
klau, archbishop of Treves, Lewis, king of Bohemia; Lewis,,
count Palatin of the Rhine; Frederick, duke of Saxony; and
Joachim I. marquis of Brandenburgh. Notwithstanding the art-
ful arguments produced by the ambafadors of the two kings in
favour of their refpe6tive matters, and in spite of all their: folici-
tations, intrigues, and presents, the Electors did not forget that.
maxim on which the liberty of the German constitution. was
thought to be founded. Among the members of the Germanick
body, which is a great republick compoed of states almost in-
dependent, the first principle of patriotism is to depress and li-
mit the power of the Emperor'; and of this idea, so natural un-
der such a form of government, a German politician seldom loses
fight. No prince of considerable power, or extensive dominions,
had for rome ages been raised to the Imperial throne; and to this
prudent precaution many of the great families in Germany owed
the fplerdor and independence which they had acquired during
that period. To elect either of the contending monarchs, would'
have been a gross violation of that alutary maxim; would have
given to the Empire a matter, instead of an head; and would
have reduced themselves from the rank of equals, to the condition
of fubjets.

FULL of there ideas, they all turned their eyes towards Frede-

rick, duke of Saxony, a prince of such eminent virtue, and abi-
lities, as to be distinguished by the name of the Sage, and with
one voice offered him the Imperial crown. He was not dazzled

with
56

t

57

with that objet, which monarchs so far fiperior to him in
power courted with such eagerness ; and after deliberating upon
tle matter a hort time, he rejected it with a magnanimity and
disinterestedness, no lefe singular than admirable. Nothing, he
observed, could be more impolitic, than an obstinate adherence to
a maxim which, though found and just in many cafes, was not
applicable to all. In times of tranquillity, aid he, we wifl for
an Emperor who has not power to invade our liberties ; times of
danger demand one who is able to secure our safety.. Tle
Turkish armies, led by a gallant and vi6torious monarch, are
now afiembling. They are ready to pour in upon Germany
with a violence unknown in former ages. New conjunctures
call for new expedients. The Imperial sceptre must be com-
mitted to ome hand more powerful than mine, or that of any
other German prince. We poTefs neither dominions, nor reve-
nues, nor authority which enable Us to encounter such a formi..
dable enemy. Recourse must be had in this exigency to one of
the rival monarchs. Each of them can bring into the field
forces sufficient for our defence. But as the king of Spain is of
German extraftion, as he is a member and prince of the empire
by the territories which descend to him from his grandfather as
his dominions stretch along that frontier which lies molt exposed
to the enemy;. his claim is preferable, in my opinion, to that of
a stranger to our language, to our blood, and to our country ;
and therefore I give my vote to confer on him the Imperial
crown.

THis opinion, dictated by such uncommon generosity, and

supported by arguments so plausible, made a deep impreflion on
the Electors. The king of Spain's ambassadors; sensible of the
important service which Frederic had done their mafler, ent

VOL, II, I him

Booi. L..

who rejeCts it.

and refureany
prerent from
Charles's am-
balladors.

BOOK I. him a considerable fum of money, as the firt token of that

'Cv * prince's gratitude. But he who had greatness of mind to refuse

a crown, disdained to receive a bribe; and upon their intreating
that, at least, he would permit them to deitribute part of that
fum among his courtiers, he replied, that he could not prevent
them from accepting what should be offered, but whoever took
a single florin hould be difmifed nexr morning from his ser-
vice .

Further deli- No prince in Germany could now aspire to a dignity, which
beraeions of Frederick had declined for reafois applicable to them all. It

remained to make a choice between the two great competitors.
But besides the prejudice in Charles's favour arising from his
birth, and the situation of his German dominions, he owed not a
little to the abilities of the cardinal de Gurk, and the eal of
Erard de la Mark, bilhop of Liege, two of his ambafidors who
bad conduaed their negotiations with more prudence and addtefs,
than those entrufled by the French king. The former, who
had long been. the minister. and. favoutite. of 'Maximiliain, was
well,:acquvinted with the: art of managing th:e OermsaSf

'and
the latter having beax disappointed of a cardiial's hat. by Franci.

r P. Daniel, an historian ofconfiderable name, seems to call in question the trth

ofthis ctobit of Predbick'd befixviotr, bicaurei if is hot 'nieniondd by Georgius Sa-
biup in. hio,hioy of tbheltflQnand coronation ps pharlesV I tonh. ii p 3. But no
great ftres ought to be laid on an onifiiln in a superficial author, wlofre treatise,
tbsgh Idfihiied with the natne of history, conhaihs hnly flicb an nccount 'of the cO-
remonial of Charles's eleftion as is usually publilhed in Germany on like occofions
Scard. Rer. Germ. Script v. 2. p. . The teftiniony of Eralinus, lib. 13. epift. 4.
and that of Sleidan, p. s1. aie express. eckendoif in his Commentarius Hiftoricus

*:; -' ; ' l
^ pologetiuade Luthranifim,,p. 121. has examined:this ft wl liufilal in-

'. . ii '; ;'i dlury, and has, eablilhe its truth by, the inot undoubted evidefFe. T9 these

'' ,' i t4(flmbnies;'*ish ihi 'has c6llet'e; 'I iay add he decdflve'on',of cardinal Cajetan,

thepoR;a legqte at Frnkfh4tt, ln his tcer Jiuly tb. 1'9; :' kpiftr'es au Princes
&c. recuelliqs par Rufcelli, traduisfi par Beltorref. Par, 157. p,6o. ,

mloy0ed
58

employed all the malicious ingenuity with which the desire of
revenge inspires an ambitious mind, in thwarting the meafiurs
of that monarch. The Spanish party among the Eledors daily
gained ground; and even the Pope's nuncio, being convinced
that it was vain to make any farther opposition, endeavoured to
acquire some merit with the future Emperor, by offering volun-
tarily, in the name of his malter, a dispensation to hold the
Imperial crown in conjun&tion with that of Naples .

ON the twerty-eighth of June, five months and ten days after

the death of Maximilian, this important contest, which had held
all Europe in fufpence, was decided. 'Six of the Electors had
already declared for the king of Spain, and the archbishop f
Treves, the only firm adherent to the French interest, having at
last joined his brethren, Charles was by the unanimous voice of
the Elecoral college raised to the Imperial throe '.

BUT though the Ele6tors consented, from various motives,

to promote Charles to that high station, they discovered at the
fame time great jealousy of his extraordinary power, and
endeavoured, with the utmost solicitude, to provide againit his
encroaching on the privileges of the Germanick body. It had
long been the custom to demand of every new Emperor a con-
firmation of these privileges, and to require a promise that he
would never violate them in any inltance. While princes, who
were formidable neither from extent of territory, nor of genius,
poTrrefed the Imperial throne, a general and verbal engagement
to this purpose was deemed sufficient security. But under an
Emperor so powerful as Charles, other precautions seemed necef-
6 Freheri Rer. German, Scriptores, vol. iii. 17 . cur. Struvii Argent. 1717. GianonM
Hill. of Naples, . 498.
t Jac. Aug. Thuan. Hil. ui temporia. Edit, Bulkley, lib. . c. 9.

BOOK ,.

They chufe
Charles elR-
peror.

* q

They are ap.
prehenfive of
is power,
and take pre.
cautions
against it.

*
I a

fary.

BOOK 1.

The eletion
notified to
Charles.

hI effec up
an him.

fary. A Capitulation or claim of rights was formed, in which
the privileges and immunities of the eleAtors, of the princes of
the empire, of the cities, and of every other member of the Ger-
manick body are enumerated. This capitulation was immediately
signed by Charles's ambafladors in the name of their master, and
he himself at his coronation confirmed it in the most solemn manner.
Since that period, the Electors have continued to prescribe the
fame conditions to all his fuccefors; and in Germany the Capitu-
lation or mutual contrat between the emperor and his fubjeas, is
confidered as a itrong barrier against the progress of the imperial
power, and as the great charter of their liberties to which they
often appeal.

THE important intelligence of his election was conveyed in

nine days from Frankfort to Barcelona, where Charles was still
detained by the obstinacy of the Catalonian Cortes, which had
not hitherto brought to an ilfue any of the affairs that came
before it. He received the account with the joy natural to a
young and aspiring mind, on an acceflion of power and dignity
which raifed'him To far above the other princes of Europe.
Then it was that those vast profpe&s which allured him during
his whole adminitration began to open, and from this era we
may date the formation, and are able to trace the gradual pro-
grefs of a grand system of enterprizing ambition, .which renders
the history of his reign so worthy of attention.

A TRIVIAL circumtance first discovered the effects of this

great eevation upon the mind of Charles. In all the publick
writs which he iflued as king of Spain he assumed the title of

u Pfeliel Abrege de ' Hilt. de Droit Publique d'Allemagne 590. Limnei Capitulat.
lnper. pitlres dea Princes e.r Rufcelli, p, 60.

Majfte
'6o

'Majefy, and required it fm his fubjets'as a mark of their red BOQK .
fpe. Before that time, all the monarchs of Europe were satis-
fled with the appellation of Highnfs, or Grace but the vanity of
other courts oon led them to imitate the example of the Spa-
nilh. The epithet of Majesty is no longer a mark ofpre.emi-
nence. The most inconsiderable monarchs in Eurdpeienjoy.it, and
the arrogance of the greater potentates has invented no higher de-
nomination U.

TH E Spaniards were far from viewing the promotion of, their TheSpaniard

King. to the Imperial throne with the fame; fatisfagion whioh dith thies
he himself felt. To be deprived of the preence of their fove- event.
reign, and to be fubjeted to the government ef.a viceroy and
his council, a species of adminiftratinr .ften oppreive,. and al-
ways disagreeable, were tle immediate and necessary .colfequences;
of this new dignity. To fee the blood of their countrymen fed.
in quarrels wherein the nation had no concern, to behold its trea-
ures wafted in upporting the,,fplendour of a foreign title, and.
to be. plunged in. the chaos of Italian, and German po'iticst wer
effe&s, of this event almost as uavoidable. From all these confi.
derations, they concluded, that nothing could have happened
more pernicious to the Spanifl nation and the fortitude and pub-
lick spirit of their ancestors, who, in the Cortes of Castile, prohi-
bited Alfonzb the Wife from leaving the kingdom, in order to re- .
ceive the Imperial crowri were ftefn mentioned with the highest; /
praise, and pronounced to- be extremely worthy of imitation at thisi
juncture "

.BUT Charles; without regarding .ho fentipnet6 or murmul!r
of his Spanish fubjets, accepted. of the Imperial dignity which.

u Minianz Cbntin. Mar. p. i3; Ferreras viii. 47 . Memoire Hi.de la HouCl;
sale, tom. is p. S3.&.. wSandoval, i. p. 32. Miniana, Contin. p. 14.;

the
. ' . . s . '

65

Bo~ K's1

November.

Their difcon-
tent increases.

i: .

An infurrec-
tion in Valen-
cia.

the cout Paltine, atithe.hpad of a foltmn embassy, oftergd. him
in tlihbameoft helEletor.' and .declarqd his intentin of setting
out soon for Geimany, in: order to take pollflion of t.; This
wap the move neeffary,l ;because according to the forms of bc
German cnifltuion, kn , could not, before. te roesangy si
publitkcoaonaion, exiedife any ad ofjurifdicion or authority .

THEIR certainknowledge of this resolution augrnmenited tlh

disgust of the Spaniards; and a fullen and refratory spirit pre-
vaiilbd among pefott tfiall ranksi The Pope: haviing .gmated
the king he"'tteths'.o all" ecclefiafical benefices in':Caftile;to
afli: him in''carrying' on war with greater vigour against the
Turks, a convocation oftlie clergy unanimouly refufd to levy
that tfut; upon pretence that i 'oigt n&*er to ibe': eiitaed but
at thole'times when Chritendotin was adtually invaded b the In-
fidels, and though ieo;,' n order to support his authority, laid
the kingdohm under an interdict, so little regard was paid to a cen-
sure which was universally deemed uhjuft, that Charles himself
applied to have It takehn 'bi 'and thts 'the' Spanifl ciergy', besides
their merit in oppong the 'ulirpations ofti e pope, and'dflregaid-
ing the influence of the crown, gained he' exemption which hey
had claimedy.

** !

*-

.

.

. t· ,

';

,

THE. cammotions ;whichl;arofe. in the kingdom of, Valencia,

annexed to the rown qs. Aragon,: were. morq, formidable, and
produced, more dangeous and, lasting . effe,, A. editious
monk having by his sermons excited the citizens of Valencia,
the capital city, to take arms, and to punish certain criminals in
a ttimultuary mibaner, the tpeple:plealtd vith/ thid eidrcife'of
power and' w'ih fich a discovery of their own iniportance, hot,
only refifed to lay down their, arms, but formed. themselves ino
troops and ompanies 'that they might be regularly trained ,t6.
x Sabinus. P. Barre, viii. o85. y P. Martyr, Ep. 462. Ferrerns viii. 473.

martial

martial exercises. To obtain some security against the oppreflon
of the grandees was the motive of this association, and proved a
powerful bond of union,; for as the ariftocratical privileges and
independence were more compleat in Valencia than in any other
of the Spanish kingdoms, the nobles, being scarce accountable
fbr their conduct to any superior, treated the people not only as
vaflals but as slaves. They were alarmed, however, at the fuc-
cess of this unexpected infurretion, as it might encourage the
people to atteiipt shaking off the yoke; but as they could not
repress them without taking arms, it became necefhary to have
recourse to the Emperor, and to desire his pernilion to attack
them. At the fame time the people made choice of deputied
to represent their grievances, and to implore the protecion of
their sovereign. Happily for the latter, they arrived at c6urt
when'Charles Was exasperated to an'!high degree agailft tie
nobles. As he was eager to visit Geriany, where t hipreihce
becarme evry day more cefl4ary, and a is tis Flenifh ch'ourfiers
were still more impatient to return into their native counter,
and to carry thither. the, spoils they had amassed in' Castile, it'
was impoffblle for him to hold the Cortes of 'Valenci i eRp6in.
He had 'for,' that reason empowered the' cadi'al Adidn to' r-
present hini in that assembly, and il his na'mne t6 receive thei:r
oath of allegiance, to confirm their privileges with the ufial
folemnities, and to demand of thein a free gft S; lt the Valeh-
cian nobles, who confidexed` this meaure as an ihdignity to theit'
country, which was no lets 'entitled, tlhan lis- other kitgdos,
to the honour. of their fovcfeign's pr'efence,'declred-' tbh !by
the fundamental laws of tlie conftiitrion thie cdul& heither.
acknowledge a person who was 'abfeht'as kirin: n grant'hih!
any subsidy, and to this declaration they adhered'! ith an' haughty
and inflexible obstinacy. Charles,. piqued by 'ti't behavioul,
decided in favour of the people, and ralfily authorized them to.
cohtiue in arms. Their deputies returned in triumph, and were:

received

BOOK I.

5I20.
Its progress .

BOOK I.

The Cortes
of Castile
summoned to
meet in Ga-
licia.

.received by their fellow-citizens as the deliverers of their country;
and the insolence of the multitude increaring with their success,
they expelled all the nobles out of the city, committed the govern-
ment to magistrates of their own election,' and entered into an as-
fociation distinguished by the name of Gerinanada or Brotherhood
which proved the source not only of the wildest disorders, but of
the most fatal calamities in that kingdom'.

MEANWHILE, the kingdom of Castile was agitated with no

less violence. No sooner was the Emperor's intention to leave
Spain made known, than several cities of the first rank resolved
to remonstrate against it, and to crave redress once more of those
grievances which they had formerly laid before him. Charles
artfully avoided admitting their deputies to audience; and
as he saw from this circumstance, how difficult it would be at
thisjunture to restrain the mutinous spirit of the greater cities,
he summoned the Cortes of Castile to meet at Compoftelia in
Galicia. His only reason for calling that assembly, was the
hope of obtaining another donative; for as his treasury had been
exhausted in the fame proportion that the riches of his ministers
increased, he could not, without rome additional aid, appear in
Germany with splendour suited to the Imperial dignity. To
appoint a meeting of the Cortes in so remote a province, and to
demand a new subsidy before the time for paying the f6rmer
was expired, were innovations of a most dangerous tendency;
and among people jealous of their liberties, and accustomed to
supply the wants of their sovereigns with a very frugal hand,
excited an universal alarm. The magistrates of Toledo remon-
ftrated against both these measures in a very high tone; the
inabitants of Valladolid, who expected that the Cortes should
have been held in that city, were so enraged that they took

P. Martyr, Ep. 65t. Ferreras viii. 476,485.

arms
6i

arms in a tumultuary manner; and if Charles with his foreign
counsellors had not fortunately made their escape during a vio-
lent tempef, they would have maffncred all the Flemings, and
have prevented him from continuing his journey towards Com-
poftella.

EVERY city through which they passed, petitioned againt

holding a Cortes in Galicia, a point with regard to which
Charles was inflexible. But though the utmost influence had
been exerted by the ministers, in order to procure a choice of
representatives favourable to their designs, such was the temper
of the nation, that at the opening of the aflembly, there appeared
among many of the members unusual symptoms of ill humour,
which threatened a fierce opposition to all .the meafires of. the
court. No representatives were sent by 'Toledo, for the lt,
according to which, by ancient cuitom, the elddti6n was deter.
mined in that city, having fallen upon two perions, devoted to
the Flemish ministers, their fellow-citizens refused to grant them
a commiflion in the usual form, and in their stead made clioice.
of two deputies, whom they empowered to repair to Compoftella,
and to protest against the lawfulness of the Cortes assembled
there. The representatives of Salamanca refused to take the
usual oath of fidelity, unless Charles consented to change the
place of meeting. Those of Toro, Madrid, Cordova, and leveral
other places, declared the demand of another donative to be
unprecedented, unconstitutional, and unneceflhry. All the arts,
however, which influence popular aflnmblics, bribes, promies,
threats, and even force we employed in order to gain mem-
bers. The nobles, soothed by the rcpecfful assiduity with which
Chievres and the other :Flemings payed court to them, or infti.
gated by a mean jealousy of that spirit of independence which
they saw rising among the cormmons, openly favoured the pre-

VOL. II. K . tenflons

The'proceed -
ings of that
afembly.

April .

The difhffcc-
tion of the
Calilians in-
crcafes. PoQK I.

6s

tenfons of the court, or at the utmost did not oppose them ; and
at last, in contempt both of the sentiments of the nation, and
of the ancient forms of the constitution, a majority voted to
grant the donative for which the Emperor had applied '. Toge-
ther with this grant, the Cortes laid before Charles a reprefenta-
tion of those grievances whereof his people craved redrss; but
he, having obtained from them all he could expect, paid no atten-
tion to this ill-timed petition, which it was no longer dangerous
to disregard b.

es ap. As nothing now retarded his embarkation, he disclosed his
I regente
g his intention with regard to the regency of Castile during his absence,

which he had hitherto kept secret, and nominated cardinal
Adrian to that office. The viceroyalty of Ayagon he conferred
on Don John de Lanuza; that of Valencia on Don Diego de

Mendoza Conde de Melito. The choice of the two latter was uni-
verfally acceptable but the advancement of Adrian, though the
only Fleming who had preserved any reputation among the Spa-
niards, animated the Castilians with new hatred against foreigners;
and even the nobles, who had so tamely suffered other inroads
upon the constitution, felt the indignity offered to their own order
by his promotion, and remonstrated against it as illegal. But
Charles's desire of visiting Germany, and the impatience of his
ministers to leave Spain, were now so much increased, that with-
out regarding the murmurs of the Castilians, or even taking tiime
to provide any remedy against an infurreftion in Toledo, which
at that time threatened, and afterwards produced most formidable

ibarks effects, he failed from Corogna on the t.wenty-feond,.of May;
Low
ie,. and by setting out so abruptly in queit of anevw rown, he endan,

gered a. more important one of which he Was already in pof.
leflion . ;

a P. Martyr, Ep. 663. Sandoval, p. 3a, &c.
c . Martyr, Ep 670. Sandov. 86.'

t' Sandoval, S43

I .

b
BOOK I.

C~s

Charl
points
durinj
abfcrd

and en
for the
Counti
66

# BOOK II.

T H E
I S

E

T
OF THE

I

OF THE
EMPEROR CHARLES

B O O K II.
M ANY concurring circumRtances, not only called Charles's

thoughts towards the affairs of Germany, but rendered

his presence in that country necessary. The EleEors grew impa-
tient of so long an interregnum his hereditary dominions were
disturbed by intestine commotions. and the new opinions con-
cerning religion, made such rapid progress as required the most
serious consideration. But above all, the motions of the French
king drew his attention, and convinced him that it was necessary
to take measures for his own defence, both with speed and with
vigour.

WHEN Charles and Francis entered the lifts as candidates for the

Imperial dignity, they conduaed their rivalfhip with many profef-
sions of regard for each other, and with repeated declarations that
they would not susser any tincture of enmity to mingle itself with
this honourable emulation. " We both court the fame littlcfs,"
said Francis, with his usual vivacity, " each ought to urge his

K 2 suit

BOOK II.
Charls's pre-
fence in er-
many necef-
fary.

Rife nd pro-
grefs of the
rivnllip be-
tween Charles
n3d Francis I.
H

R

X
R

G

N

V.
3

BOOK II.

Their delibe-
rations. pre-
viour:to tlhe
commence-
ment of hofti-
lities.

ftit with all the address of which he is mailer; the most fortu.
nate will prevail, and the other must reft contented'." But
though two young and high-fpirited Princes, and each of them
animated with the hope of success, might be capable of forming
such a generous resolution, it was oon found that they promised
upon a moderation too refined and difinterciled for human nature.
The preference given to Charles in the fight of all Europe, mor-
tified Francis to the highetl degree, and inspired him with all
the paflions natural to disappointed ambition. To this was
owing the personal jealousy and rivallhip which subsisted between
the two monarchs during their whole reign; and the rancour of
there, added to a real opposition of interefi, and to nmany unavoid-
able causes of discord, involved them in almofi perpetual hostilities.
Charles had paid no regard to the principal article in the treaty of
Noyon, by refuting oftener than once to. dojuftice to John d'Albret,
the excluded monarch of Navarre, whom Francis was bound in
honour, and promptd by interest t restore to hs thStole. The
Ffeneh. Iking had pretenfiong to te crown of Napls ot: w4hich
Fetdinand' had deprived' his predecefibr by a mbft ujljtiftaIblt
breach of faith. The mperorr might reclaim the¢ daoliy f Milun'
as a fief of the empire, .whieh. F'ancis-had feieed;, nd'ftilk'.ept
in poffeflio6n, withoutl having received iveftirtnro . Cliales conll
fidered the dutehy of Brgtndy as the ptimonial: d-i'ff. fs Iis
ancestors wreflted from tlihem by rhe unjut policy of Lewiis'XI. md.
observed with the greatest jeatoufy the frift. aonne&ions wliilhi
Francis had formed with the duke of Gueldres, the hereditsriy
enemy of his family.

WHEN the sources of discord: were f mray tand vtrioute, pee

could be of no Ibng continuance even between pri n 's the most
exempt from ambition or emulation. But. as. tlhe Ihoolk betwecn

d Guic. lib. 13. p. i59.

two
68

two such mighty antagonists, could not fail of being both defpe-
rate and dangerous, they both discovercd no small solicitude
about its consequences, and took time not only to collect, and to
weigh their own firength, and to compare it with that of their
adversary, but to secure the friendship or afliftance of the other
European powers.

THE Pope had equal reason to dread the two rivals, and aw

that he who prevailed, would become absolute nmafer in Italy.
If it had been in his power to engage them in hostilities, with-
ouxt rendeting Lombardy the theatre of war, nothing would have
been rmore agreeable to him than to fee them wadte each other's
strength in endles quarrels. But. this was impollible. Leo
foresaw that on the first rupture between the two monarchs, the
armies of France and Spain would take the field in the Milanese,
and while the scene of their operations were so near, and tlie sub-
jet for which they contended o interesting. to him, he could
not long remain neuter. He was obliged therefore to adapt his
plan of conduct to his political situation. He courted and soothed
both the Emperor and king of France with equal industry and ad-
dress and tho' warmly solicited by each of them, he assumed all
the appearances of entire impartiality, and attempted to conceal
his real sentiments under that profound diflimulation which
feoms to have been asseted by mot of the Italian politicians in
that age.

THE views and interest of the Venetians were not different

from those of the Pope ; nor were they less folicitots to prevent
Italy from becoming the cfat of war, and tleir-own republick
from being involved in the quarrel. But throughl ll Leo's arti-
sices, and notwithstanding his high pretensions to a perfect neu-
trality, it as visible that he leaned towards the Emperor, from
whom he had both more to fear and more to hope than from

Franis;

BOOK I.

They nego-
ciate with the
Pope.

With the
Venctians.

69

BOOK II. Francis ; and it was equally manifest, that if it became neceflary to

'"3 take a fide, the Venetians would, from motives of the fame nature,

declare for the king of France. No considerable aflitance, how-
ever, was to be expe&ed from the Italian states, who were jea-
lous to an extreme degree of the Transalpine powers, and careful
to preserve the balance between them, unless when they were
reduced to violate this favourite maxim of their policy by the
certain profpet of great advantage to themselves.

With Henry
VIII.

The great
power of that
monarch.
His character.

But the chief attention both of Charles and of Francis, was

employed in order to gain the king of England, from whom each
of them expected afliftance more effecual, and afforded with lel's
political caution. Henry VIII. had ascended the throne of that
kingdom in one thousand five hundred and nine, with such cir-
cumltances of advantage, as promied a reign of distinguished
felicity and splendour. The union in his person of the two
contending titles of York and Lancaster, and the alacrity and
emulation with which both factions obeyed him, not only
enabled him to exert in his domestic government a degree of
vigour and authority which none of his predeceflors could have
safely assumed; but permitted him to take a share in the affairs
of the continent, from which the attention of the English had
long been diverted by their unhappy divisions. The immense
treasures which his father had amafled, rendered him the most
wealthy prince in Europe. The peace which had subsisted
under the cautious administration of that monarch, was of fuffi-
cient length to recruit the nation after the desolation of the civil
wars, bu' had not enervated its spirit; and the English, ashamed
of having'fo long rendered their own country a scene of discord
and bloodshed, were eager to display their valour in Come foreign
war, and to revive the memory of the victories gained by their
ancestors. Henry's own temper perfetly suited the state of his
kingdom, and the disposition of his fubjeas. Ambitious, aive,

enterprizing
-o0

enterprizing and accomplished in all the martial exercises which
in that age formed a chief part in the education of persons of
noble birth, and inspired them with an early love of war, be
longed to engage in real action, and to signalize the beginning
of his reign by some remarkable exploit. An opportunity of
this kind oon presented itself; and the victory at Guinegate,
and the successful sieges of Teroiienne and Tournay, though of
little utility to England, refleced great lustre on its monarch,
and confirmed the idea which foreign princes entertained of his
power and importance. So many concurring causes, added to
the happy situation of his own dominions, which secured them
from foreign invasion; and to the fortunate circumstance of his
being in poffelion of Calais, which served not only as a key to
France. but opened an easy paflage into the Netherlands, ren-
dered the King of England the natural guardian of the liberties
of Europe, and the arbiter between the Emperor and French
monarch. Henry himself was sensible of this singular advan-
tage, and convinced, that in order to preserve the balance even,.
it was his office to prevent either of the rivals from acquiring,
such fiperiority of power as might be fatal to the other, and.
formidable to the reft of Christendom. But he was destitute of.
the penetration, and still more of the temper, which such a.
function requiired. Influenced by caprice, by vanity, by resent-
ment, by affletion, he was incapable of forming any regular and.
extensive system of policy, or of adhering to it with steadiness.
His measures seldom resulted. from attention to the general wel-.
fare, or from a deliberate regard to his own interest, but were.
diCtated,by paflions which rendered him blind to both, and pre.
vented his gaining that afcendarit in the.. affairs of Europe,. or,
from reaping such advantages to himself, as a prince of greater art,,
though with inferior talents, might have easily secured..

AtLL

BOOK 1I.

7

BOOK II. ALL the impolitic steps in Henry's administration mudt not,
And ofhis however, be imputed to defects in his 9wn character; many of
miniller car- them were owing to the violent palions and insatiable ambition
dinal Wolfey.

of his prime minister and favourite cardinal Wolfey. This man,
from one of the loweit ranks in life, had risen to an height of
power and dignity, to which no English subjedt ever arrived;
and governed the haughty, presumptuous and untradable spirit
of Henry with absolute authority.. Great talents, and'of very
different kinds, fitted him for the two oppfit' iations of
minister, and of favourite. His profound j[ltd tfnt lhis tn,
wearied industry, his thorough acquaintat. wii-'.the itate
of the kingdom, and his extensive kno'wlee of' the views
and interests of foreign courts, qualified him for that uncon-
trouled direction of affairs with which he was intruded. Te
elegance of his manners, the gaiety of his conversation, his'
insinuating address his love of magnificence, and his profici-
ency in those parts of literature of which Henry was fond,
gained hinm the affection and confidence of the young mon-
arch. Wolfey was' far from employing this vft and alniblt
royal power, ;to promnote either the true interest of the nation,
or the realgrandeur of his.-mfer. Rapacious at the fame time,
and profuse, he was insatiable in desiring wealth. Of boundless
ambition, he aspired after new honours with an eagerness un-
abated by his former success; and being rendered presumptuous
by his uncommon elevation, and the ascendant he had gained
over a prince, who scarce brooked advice from any other person,
he discovered in his whole demeanour the. most overbearing
haughtiness and pride. To these pafllons he himself 'tcrificed
every consideration; and whoever endeavoured to obtain his
favour, or that of his master, found it necessary to tootl and to
gratify them.

As

As .all the !fttes ,!f propa fQought Hnry's. frinldfbip: t thn

time; all courtted lhi i winifer with inacedjble tention. aql
o.bfequioufiefe, nd trove by pre sets,, l:y promises, Qr by
flattery t work upon lhis avariqe, hip ambition, or his prij4e .
Francis had i the year one thousand five hundred and eiglteen
employed Bonnivet, admiral..of France, one bfi hi: raofe accom-
plifhed and. artful courtiers, to gain the 'laughty prelate, He
iimfelf beftowe oh him every mark of refpced and confidence.
He consulted him with xegard to his most important affairs, and
received his refpnfes with - implicit deference. , ,By hefe arts,
together with the grant of a large pension. Francis, feeured the
Cardinal, who persuaded lis master to furrender'Tournay to
France, to conclude a treaty of marriage between his daughter
the .princess .Mary and..the Dauphiip .and. to consent to a personal
interview with. the' French kingt. .,rqm 'that tiiie;,-thehnoft
familiar intercourse fibfiftedl between the: two courts T Franois,,
sensible of the great value of Wolsey's. friendship, ,laboured to
secure the continuance of it by every pofble ,cxpxenion, of re-
gar4, bestowing on hi tin a!l is .letrrqs:th,;hoQourable.pp a-
itions qs Fathe Tuer,,

u and Governor.
. ,: , ,!

CHARLES observed the prdgrtbf of this iinion' with'th utmost

jealousy and concern. His near relation to the king of England
gave him some title -to his friendlhip, aind soon after his 'ncceibn-
to the throne of Caftil , 'ie' had attempted to ingratiate hiiiflf/
with Wolfey y fettling on him' a pension of three thoufaid livres.
His chief solicitude at present was to preventtlie intended inter-
view, the effects of which 'upon two young princes, whose hearts
were no less feptible of friendflp!1 than 'their manners w'erc
capable of' inspiring it, he extremely dreaded. But after mahy
'delayS occasioned y difficulties about the cerei onial, and by the

e Fiddes's Iife of Wolfey, 166. Rymer's Foedera, xiii. 7 8.
f Herber's Hitl. of Henry VIII. 3o;;, Rlyq er,'(ii.,624.
VOL. 1U. L anxious

The court
paid to Wol-
IcybyFrancis.
',; : .

4,

And by
Charles.

7:3

BOOK II. anxious precautions of both courts for the safety of their re-

fpeive overeigns, the time and place of meeting were at last
fixed. Messengers had. been sent to different courts inviting all
comers, who were gentlemen, to enter the lifts at tilt and tourna-
ment, against the two monarchs and their knights; and both
Francis and Henry loved the splendour of there fpeCacles too well,
and were too much delighted with the graceful figure they made
on such occasions, to forego the .pleasure or glory which they
expected from such a singular and brilliant assembly. Nor was
the Cardinal less fond of displaying his magnificence in the pre-
fence of two courts, and of discovering- to the two nations the
extent of his influence.over both their monarchs. Charles finding
it impossible to prevent the interview, endeavoured to disappoint
its effects, and to pre-occupy the favour of the Englilh mon-
arch and his minister, by an a of complaisance still more

Chutes visits flattering. and more uncommon. Having failed from Cdrunni,
England. as has already been related, he fleered his course directly to-

wards England, and relying wholly on Henry's generosity for
May 6th. his own safety, landed at Dover. This unexpe&etd visit' fur-

prized the nation. Wolfey, however, was well, acquainted with
the Emperor's intention. A negociation, unknown to the
historians of that age, had been carried on between him and the
court of Spain, this visit had been concerted, and Charles
granted the Cardinal, whom he calls his moJf dear friend, an
additional pension of seven thousand ducatss Henry, who was
then at Canterbury, in his way to France, immediately dispatched
Wolfey to Dover, and being highly pleased with an event so
soothing to his vanity, hastened to receive, with suitable reipect,
a guest who had placed in him such unbounded confidence.
Charles, to whom time was precious, staid only four days in
England: But during that hort space, he had the address not

g Rlner, zili. 714 .

only
;74

only to give Henry favourable impreflions of his character and
intentions, but to. detach Wolfey entirely from the intcrft of
the French king. All the grandeur, wealth and power, which
the Cardinal poflefled, did not satisfy his ambitious mind, while
there was fill one ftep higher to which an ecclesiastic could acend.
The papal dignity had for ome time been the objec of his wifles,
and Francis, as the most effectual method of securing his friend-
ship, had promised to favour his pretensions, on the first vacancy,
with all his interest. But as the Emperor's influence in the college
of cardinals was greatly fiuperior to the French king's, Wolfey
grasped eagerly at an offer which that artful prince had nade him
of exerting it vigorously in his behalf; and allured by this prof-
pee, which under the pontificate of Ieo, tiill in the prime of
his life, was a very distant one, hl entered with warmth into all
the Emperor's schemes. No treaty, however, was concluded at
that time, between the two monarchs; but Henry, in'return for
the honour which Charles had done him, promised to visit him in
some place of the Low Countries, immediately after taking leave
of the French king.

His interview with that prince was in an open plain between

Guifies and Ardres, where the two kings and their attendants,
displayed their magnificence with such emulation, and profufie
expence, as procured it the name of the Field of the Cloth of
Gold. Feats of chivalry, parties of gallantry, and such exercises
and pastimes as were in that age reckoned manly or elegant,
rather than serious business, occupied both courts during eigh-
teen days that they continued together. Whatever imprefiion

the

h The French and English historians describe the pomp of this interview, and the

various fpetacles with great minuteness. One circunitance mentioned by the
marechal de Fleuranges, who was present, and which appears singular in the pre-
sent age, is commonly omitted. ' After the tournaments," fays he, " the French
and Englilh wrestlers made their appearance, and wrestled in presence of the Kings,
and the ladies and as there were many stout wrestlers there, it afforded excellent

L 2 paaime;

BOOK II.

Insinuates
himself into
favour both
with the King
and Wolfey.

June.7th.
nterview be-
tween Henry
and Francis.

75

BOOK n.

July 1o.

Henry's ideas
of his own
importance.

the engaging manriners of Francis, and the liberal and tinfulfi-
cibus.confidence with which lie treated Henry, made on the
mind of that monarch, was oon effaced by Wolsey's artifices,
or by the interview which he had with the Emperor at Grave-
lines; which was conduted by Charles with less pomp than
that near Guifnes, but with greater ttention tbihis'polltical in-
terest.

T H I s afliduity with which the two greatest monarchs in

Europe paid court to Henry, appeared to,:l im a plain acknow-
leedgepent that he held the b.lance in his and, and convinced
him of thejuftnefs of the motto he had chosen, "That who-
ever he favoured would certainly prevail." In this opinion he
was confirmed by an offer which Charles made of submitting
any diitrence that migt arie between him ahd Francis'to his
sole arbitration. Nothing could have the appearance of greater
candour and moderation, than the choice of a judge who was
reckoned the common friend of both. But as the tEmperor had
now atiached W ey iientirely to his' ;ntereft, 'no proporal' co'Id
be more insidious, nor, as appeared by the fequiiel,' ibore atil b
*the French king'.

Coronatiqn of.
the Emperor.
OCtober 23.

CHARLES, notwithstanding his; partial fondness for the Nether-

lands, the place of his nativity, made no long fltay there, a'n'd
after receiving the homage and congratulations of his ountry-
men, hastened to Aix-la-Chapelle, the place appointed by' the
golden bull for the coronation of the Emperor. There, in pre-

pastime ; but as the Kiig of France had neglected to bring any wrestlers out of
Bretagne, the Englilh gained the prize.-After this, the Kings of France and Eng-
land retired to a tent, where they drank together, and the King of England seizing
the King of France by the collar, said, "My brotber, I muf .rrrfle'with you," and
endeavoured'once or twice to trip up his heels; but the King of France, who is
a dextrous wrestler, twifted'him round, and threw him on the earth with prodigious
violence. 'The King of England wanted to reniew th6 combat, but was prevented.
Memotres de Fleuranges,: Iz"2ParIs, 1753. p. 329.

i Herbert, 7.

fence
16

fence of an assembly more numerous and splendid than had BooK 11.
appeared on any former occasion, the crown of Charlemagne was
placed on his head, with all the pompous solemnity which the
Germans assec in their publick ceremonies, and which they deem
essential to the dignity of their Empire k.

ALMOST at the fame time, Solyman the Magnificent, one of

the most accomplished, enterprizing, and vicoriousof the Turkish
princes, a constant and formidable rival to the Emperor, ascended
the Ottoman throne. It was the peculiar glory of that period
to produce monarchs the most illustrious, that have at any one
time appeared in Europe. Leo, Charles, Francis, Henry and
Solyman were each of them poufefed of talents which would
have rendered any age in which they happened to flourish, con-
fpicuous. But such a conilellation of great princes sied n-
common lustre on the sixteenth century. In every contest, great
power and great abilities were set in opposition and the
effeas of valour and conduct on one fide, counterbalanced by
an equal exertion of the fame qualities on the other, not only
occasioned such a variety of events as render the history of that
period interesting, but served to check the exorbitant progress of
any of those princes, and to prevent their attaining fluch pre-emi-
nence in power as would have been fatal to the liberty and hap-
piness of mankind.

THE first at of the Emperor's administration was to appoint

a Diet of the empire to be held at Worms on the sixth of January,
one thousand five hundred and twenty-one and in his circu-
lar letters to the different princes, he informed them that he had
called this aflembly in order to concert with them the most pro-

Solyman the
Magnificent
ascends the
Ottoman
throne.

Diet called. to
meet at
Worms.

k Hartman Maurus Relatio Coronat. Car. V. ap. Goldaft. Polit. Imperial. Franc.
1614. fol. p. 264.

per

BOOK 1n.

Rife of the
Reformation.

per measures for checking the progress of those new and dangerous
opinions, which threatened to disturb the peace of Germany, and
to overturn the religion of their ancestors.

CHARLES had in view the opinions propagated by Luther and

his disciples since the year one thousand five hundred and even-
teen; and as these led to that happy reformation in religion
which rescued one part of Europe from the papal yoke, miti-
gated its rigour in the other, and produced a revolution in the
sentiments of mankind, the greatest as well as the most beneficial
that has happened since the publication of Christianity, the events
which at first gave birth to these opinions, and the causes which
rendered their progress so rapid and successful, deserve to be
confidered with minute attention.

To overturn a system of religious belief founded on ancient

and deep-rooted prejudices, supported by power, and defended
with art and industry; to establish in its room doctrines of the
most contrary genius and tendency; and to accomplish all this,
not by external violence or the force of arms, are operations
which historians the least prone to credulity and superstition,
must ascribe to that Divine Providence which can, with infinite
ease, bring about events that to human sagacity appear impossible.
The interposition of heaven in favour of the Christian religion
at its first publication, was manifested by miracles and prophecies
wrought and uttered in confirmation of it: And though none of
the reformers poflefTed, or pretended to possess, these supernatural
gifts, yet that wonderful preparation of circumstances which dif-
posed the minds of men for receiving their doctrines, that singular
combination of causes which secured their success, and enabled
men destitute of power and of policy to triumph over those who

employed.
78

employed both against them, may be confidered as no flight proof BOO K II.
that the fame hand which planted the Christian religion, protected
the reformed faith, and reared it, from beginnings extremely fee-
ble, to an amazing degree of Rrength and maturity.

I was from causes, seemingly fortuitous, and from a source From incon-
very inconsiderable, that all the mighty effecs of the Refor- iderable bc-

ginnng.

mation flowed. Leo X. when raised to the papal throne, found
the revenues of the church exhausted by the vast projets of his
two ambitious predeceflors, Alexander VI. and Julius II and his
own temper, naturally liberal and enterprizing, rendered him
incapable of that severe and patient oeconomy which the situation
of his finances required. On the contrary, his schemes for
aggrandizing the family of Medici, his love of splendour, his
taste for pleasure, and his magnificence in rewarding men of
genius, involved him daily in new expences, in prder to provide
a fund for which, every device, that the fertile invention of
priests had fallen upon to drain the credulous multitude, was A .

l ofin-

tried. Among others, he had recourse to a sale of Indulgences. dulgences
According to the doctrine of the Romifi church, all the good e byX
works of the Saints, over and above those which were necessary
towards their own justification, together with the infinite merits
of Jesus Christ, are deposited in one inexhauflible treasury. The
keys of this were committed to St. Peter and to his successors the
Popes, who may open it at pleaufre, and by transferring a portion
of this superabundant merit to any particular person, for. a fum.
of money, may convey to him either the pardon of his own fins,
or a release for any one in whom he is interested,. from the pains
of purgatory. Such indulgences were first invented in the
eleventh century by Urban II. as a recompence for those who.

went.

79

BooK I.
·_-Q;_

went in person upon the wild enterprize of conquering the Holy
Land. They were afterwards granted to those who hired a soldier
for that purpose; and in process of time were bellowed on such
as gave money for accomplishing any pious work enjoined by the
Pope'. Julius II. had bestowed Indulgences on all who contri-
buted towards building the church of St. Peter at Rome ; and as
Leo was carrying on that magnificent and expensive fabric, his
grant was founded on the fame pretence ".

THE promulgating of these Indulgences in Germany, toge-

ther with a hare in the profits arising from the ale of them, was

So conduted assigned to Albert, eletor of Mentz and archbishop of Magde-
as to give burg, who, as his chief agent for retailing them in Saxony,
fence. employed Tetzel, a Dominican friar, of licentious morals, but

of an ative spirit, and remarkable for his noisy and popular elo-
quence. He, aflifted by the monks of his order, executed the
commiflion with. great zeal and success, but with little discretion
or decency; and though by magnifying exceflively the benefit
of their Indulgences", and by disposing of them .at a very low

,price

i HiRory of the Council of Trent, by F. Paul, p. 4.
m Palavic. Hit. Cone. Trident. p. 4.
n As the form of there Indulgences, and.the benefits which they were supposed

to convey are unknovn in protestant countries, and little understood, at present,
in several places where the Roman catholic religion is eftablilhed, I have, for the
information of my readers, ;translated the.form.of absolution ued by Tetwel.
"May our Lord Jesus Chrit have mercy upon thee, and absolve thee by the me-
rits of his most holy palion. And I by his authority, that of his blessed apostles
.Peter and'Paul, and of the most holy Pope, granted and committed to me in these
parts, do absolve thee, frft from all eccleiallic#l censures in whatever manner they
have'been incurred, and theh from all thy fins, traifgreflions' and excehfes, how
enormoui foevet they may be,. even from suCh as are reserved for the' cognizance of
the holy fee, ad aS far all the keys of the holy church extend, I remit to you .al
puniament which yu deserve in Purgatory on their.account, and I rellore you to the
holy sacraments of the church, to the unity of the faithful, and to'that innocence and
purity which you pofef'edatbaptifnm,fo that when you die the gatesofpunilhment hall

be
-80

price, they carried on for ome time an extcnfivc and lcrative BOOK 11.
traffick among the credulous multitude, the ext:avagance of their " -
afIertions, and the irregularities in their conduct, came at Inlf
to. give general offence. The princes and nobles were irritated
at feeing their vassals drained of' o much wealth, in order to
replenish the treasury of a profuse pontiff. Men of piety regret-
ed the delusion of the people, who being taught to rely for
the pardon of their fins on the Indulgences which they pur-
chased, did not think it incumbent on them either to abound in
faith, or to pratife holiness. Even the most unthinking were
shocked at the scandalous behaviour of Tetzel and his aflociates,
who often squandered in drunkennes, gaming, and low debau-
chery, those fums which were piously bellowed in hopes of
obtaining eternal happiness; and all began to with that lbme

be Ihut, and the gates of the paradise of delight hall be opened, and if you hall not
die at present, this grace hall remain in full force when you are at the point of
death. In the name o the Father and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Seckend.
Comment. lib. i. p. 14.

The terms in which Tetzel and his aociates described the benefits of Indulgen-

ces, and the neceflity of purchasing them are so extravagant, that they appear to
be almost incredible. If any man (said they) purchases letters of indulgence, his
foul may reft recure with refpet to its alvation. The fouls confined in purgatory,
for whose redemption indulgences are purchased, as soon as the money tinkles in
the chefi, infantly escape fron that place of torment, and acend into heaven That
the efficacy of indulgences was o great, that the molf heinous fins, even if one
should violate (which was ipofible) the Mother of God, would be lenitted and
expiated by them, and the person be freed both from punilhneint nd guilt. That
this was the unspeakable gift of God, in order to reconcile men to hiiifell. That
the cross ereted by the preachers of indulgences, was as efficacious as the crof of
Christ. Lo the heavens are open if you enter not now, when will you enter ?
For twelve pence you may redeem the foul of your father out of purgatory ; and
are you so ungrateful, that you will not rescue you parent fro torment ? If you
had but one coat, you ought to frip yourself inllantly, and fell it, in order to pur-
chafe such benefits, &c. These, and many such extravagant exprellions, are Iielet.
ed out of Luther's worhs by Chemnitiu. in his Examen Concilii Tridentini pud
Hern. Vonder Hardt. Hist. Liter. Reform. pars iv. p. 6. The Iame author hans
publilhed several ofTetzel's Discourses, which prove that thefc ceprcflions were
neither singular nor exaggerated. Ibid. p, 14,

VOL. I. M check

check were given to this commerce, no less detrimental to focicty
than deltruEtive to religion.

SUCH was the favourable juncture, and o disposed were the

minds of his countrymen to liften to his discourses, when Martin
Luther first began to call in question, the efficacy of indulgences,
and to declaim against the vicious lives and false do&trines of
those who promulgated them. He was a native of Eifleben in
Saxony, and though born of poor parents, had received a learned
education, during the progress of which he gave many indications
of uncommon vigour and acuteness of genius. As his nmind was
naturally susceptible of serious impreflions, and tintured with
,somewhat of that religious melancholy which delights in the soli-
tude and devotion of a monastic life, he retired into a convent of
.Augustinian. friars, and without fuffiring the intreaties. of his
'parents to divert him from what he thought hlis dury to Gbd, he
assumed the habit of that order. There he acquired; great repu.
tation, not only for piety, but for his love of knowledge, and
unwearied application to study. He had been taught the scholastic
plhilofophy and theology which were then in vogue-by veiy able
minaters, and wanted i'ot penetration to' comprehend all the
niceties and distinCtions with which they abound; but his uider-
standing, naturally found, and superior to every thing fiivolous,
soon became dilguted with the(e subtile and uninftrutive sciences,
and fought for ome more solid foundation of knowledge. and of
piety in the holy scriptures. Having found a copy of the Bible,
which lay neglected in the library of his monafitry, he aban-
doned all other pursuits, and devoted himfalf to- the study of it,
with flicl eagerness and afliduity, as aftolnified the rmonlks, Who
were little aceuftomed to derive their theological notions from
that source. The great progress which lie Imade in this uncom-

mon

'2

BOOK II.

First appear-
ance of Lu-
ther and his
charaAer.

mon course of study, augmented o much the fame both of his
fandity and of his learning, that Frederick, ElcEor of Saxony,
having founded an university at Wittemberg on the Elbe, the
place of his residence, Luther was chosen first to teach plilofophy,
and afterwards theology there, and discharged both offices in such
a manner, that he was deemed the chief ornament of- that o.
ciety.

WHILE Luther was at the height of his reputation and autho-

rity, Tetzel began to publish Indulgences in the neighbourhood
of Wittemberg5 and to aferibe to them the fame imaginary vir.
tues, which had, in other places, imposed on the credulity,
of the 'people. As Saxony was not more enlightened than
the other provinces of Germany, Tetzel met with prodigiouo
success there. It was with tile utmost concern. that Luther
beheld the artifices of those who fold, and the finlplicity of.tliofa.
who bought, Indulgences. The opinions of Thomas Aquilna
and the other fchoolmen, on which the dotrine of indulgence
was founded, had already loft much of their authority with him;
and the Scriptures, which he began to confider as the great Rfan-
dard of theological truth, afforded no countenance to a practice,
equally subversive of faith and of morals. His warm and impe-
tuous temper did not susser him long to conceal such important
discoveries, or to continue a silent fpetator of the delusion of his
countrymen. From the pulpit in the great church of Wittem-
berg he inveighed bitterly against the irregularities and vices of
those who publifled indulgences; he ventured to examine the
4ocrines which they taught, and pointed out to the people the
danger of relying for salvation upon any other means than those
appointed by God in his word. The boldness and novelty of
there opinions drew great attention, and being recommended by
the authority of Luther's personal character, and delivered with

BooK II.

I-I oppit
the siop of
Indolgnccz.
M

a popular

BOOK II.

He publishes
his theses
agtinft them.

Supported by
his own order

THE REIGN OF THE

a popular and persuasive eloquence, they made a deep impression
on his hearers. Encouraged by the favourable reception of his
dotrines among the people, he wrote to Albert, elector of Mentz,
and archbilhop of Magdeburg, to vwhoe jurifdition that part of
Saxony was subjeE, and remonstrated warmly against the false
opinions and wicked lives of the preachers of Indulgences; but
he found that prelate too deeply interested in their success to
correc their abuses. His next attempt was to gain the suffrage
of men of learning. For this purpose, he published ninety-five
theses, containing his sentiments with regard to Indulgences
These he proposed, not as points fully eltablifhed, or of undoubt-
ed certainty, but as fubjets of inquiry and disputation; he
appointed a day, on which the learned were invited to impugn
them either in person, or in writing; and subjoined to the
whole, solemn protestations of his high refped for the apostolic
fee, and of his implicit fubmiflion to its authority. No opponent
appeared at the time perfixed; the theses spread over Germany
with astonishing, rapidity; they were read with the greatest
eagerness; and all admired the boldness of the man who had ven-
tured to call in question the plenitude of papal power, and to at-
tack the Dominicans, armed with all the terrors of inquisitorial
authority '.

The Friars of St. Augustine, Luther's own order, though ad-

dited with no less obsequiousness than the other monastic fra-
ternities to the papal fee, gave no check to the publication of these
uncommon opinions. Luther had by his piety and learning ac-
quired extraordinary authority among lis brethren; lie professed
the highest regard for the authority of the Pope; his professions

a Lutheri Opera Jena, 1612. vol. i. prafat . 2. . 66. Hill. of Counc. of
Tseat by F. Paul, p. 4. Seckend. Corn. Apol. p. 16.

were

were at that time sincere; and as a ecret enemity, excited by
interest and emulation, subsists among all the monastic orders in the
Romifl church, the Augustinians were highly pleated with his in-
vectives against the Dominicans, and hoped to fee them exposed to
the hatred and scorn of the people. Nor was his overeign the
Ele&tor of Saxony, the wisest prince at that time in Germany, difla-
tisfied with this obftru&ion which Luther threw in the way of the
publication of indulgences. He secretly encouraged the attempt,
and flattered himself that this dispute among the Ecclefiaticks them-
selves, might give some check to the exactions of the court of
Rome, which the secular princes had long, though without fuc-
cess, been endeavouring to oppose.

MANY zealous champions immediately arose to defend opinions

on which the wealth and power of the church were founded, against
Luther's attacks. In opposition to his theses, Tetzel published
counter-thefes at Francfort on the Oder ; Eccius, a celebrated Di-
vine of Augsburg, endeavoured to refute his notions; and Prierias,
a Dominican friar, master of the sacred palace and Inquisitor general,
wrote against him with all the virulence of a scholastic disputant.
But the manner in which they conduted the controversy, did little
service to the cause. Luther attempted to overturn Indulgences by
arguments founded in reason, or derived from scripture; they pro-
duced nothing in support of them but the sentiments of fchoolmen,
the conclusions of the canon law, and the decrees of Popes '. The,
decision ofjudges so partial and interested, did not satisfy the people,
who began to call in question the authority even of these venerable
guides, when they found them landing in direct opposition to the
dictates of reason, and the determinations of the divine law ' *

BoOK II.

Many endea-
vour to coni
fute him.

MEAN

b F. Paul. p. 6. Seckend. p. 40. Palavic. p. 8. c Seckend. p. 3o.
* Guicciardini has aerted two things with regard to the first promulgation of

indulgences

85

BPK It,

The court of
Rome t firfl
diftega Luther,

M ANWH1L , these novelties in Luther's dotrines hich

interested all Germany, excited little attention and no alarm in
rds indulgences . That Leo bestowed a gift of the profits arising from the sale of in-

dulgences in Saxony, and the adjacent provinces of Germany upon his fiftcr Ma-
dalen the wife of Fnancefcetto Cibo. Guic. lib. 13. 1i8. 2. That Arcemboldo,
Genoese ecclesiastic, who had been bred a merchant and f(ill retained all the arts of
that profeldion, was appointed by her to collet the money which (hould be raired,
F. Paul has followed him in both thfee particulars, and adds that the Augustinians
in Saxony had been immemorially employed in preaching indulgences, but that Ar-
cemnboldo and his. deputies, hoping to gain more by committing this trust to the
Dominicans, had made their bargain with Tetzel, and that Luther was prompted at
first to oppose Tetzel and his aociates, by a desire of taking revenge for this injury
offered to his order. F Paul, p. 5. Almoal all the hi ftorias since that time, popils
as well as proteRant, have, without examination, admitted these assertions to be
true upon their authority. But notwithstanding the concurring testimony of two
authors Co eminent both for exatinefs and veracity, we may observe,

1. That Felix Contolori who searched the pontifical archives of purpose, could

not find this pretended grntin any of those registers where it nmug nceflirily
have been recorded, Palav, p. 5.-2. That the profits arising from Indulgences in
Saxony and the adjacent countries, had been granted not to Magdalen, but to Albert
archbilhopof Mentz, who had the right of nominating those who published them.
Seck. p. 12. Luth. Oper. . praf. p. . Palav. p. 6.-3. That Arcemboldo never
had concern in the publication of Indulgences in Saxony ; his diftric was landers
and the Upper and Lower Rhine. Seek. p. 14. Palav. p. 6.-4. That Luther
and his adherents never mention this grant of Leo's to his sifter, though a circum-
fiance of which they could carce have been ignorant, and which they would have
been careful not to suppress.-5. The publication of Indulgences in Germany was
not usually committed to the Aug[tiniaps. The proniulgation of them at three
different periods under Julius 1I. was granted to the Franciscans; the Dominicans
had been employed in the fame office a ihort time before the present period. Palav.
p. 46, 6. The promulgation of those Indulgences which ecited Luther's indignar
tion was entruRed to the archbishop of Mentz in conjunction with the guardian of the
Prancifcans but the latter having declined accepting of that trust, the sole right
became vfted in the archbishop. Palav. 6 Seck. 16, 17.-7. Luther was not in-
higated by his fVpeiorp among the Augustinians to attack the Dominicans their ri-
vale, or to depreciate indulgences because they were promulgated by them his op-
position to their opinions and vices proceeded from more laudable motives. Seek.
p. 5, 32. Lutheri Opera . p. 64. 6. 8. A diploma of indulgences is published
by Herm. Von der Hardt, from which it appears that the name of the guardian of
the Franciscans is retained together with that of the arcbbi(hop, altlopgh the for.,
mer did not a. The limits of the country to which their commiflions extended,
vip, the dioceses of Mentz, Magdeburg, Halberfladt, and the territories of the
marquis of Brandeburgh, are mentioned in that diploma. Hist. Literaria Reformat.
pars iv, p. p14

the

the court of Rome. Leo, fond of elegant and refined pleasures,
intent upon great fchemnes of policy, a stranger to theological con-
troverfies, and apt to despise them, regarded with the utmost in-
difference the operations of an obscure Friar, who, in the heart
of Germany, carried on a scholastic disputation in a barbarous
lile. Little did he apprehend, or Luther himself dream, that the
effets of this quarrel would be so fatal to the papal fee. Leo im-
puted the whole to monastic enmity and emulation, and seemed
inclined not to interpose in the contest, but to allow the Augufti-
nians and Dominicans to wrangle about the matter with their ufuial
animosity.

THE solicitations, however, of Luther's adversaries, exasperated

to an high degree by the boldnes and severity with which he
animadverted on their writings, together with the furprizing pro-
grefs which his opinions made in different parts of Germany, rouzed
at last the attention of the court of Rome, and obliged Leo to take
measures for the security of the church against an attack that ap-
peared now too serious to be despised. For this end, he fum.
moned Luther to appear at Rome, within sixty days, before the
auditor of the chamber, and the fame Pererin who ihtd tit'ten
hgainfi hiri, whom he empowered to examine his dotrine's and
to decide concerning them. He wrote, at the fame ti'me, to the
PElecor of Saxony, befeeing him not to proted a man Whdfe
heretical and profane tenets were b shocking to pious cars; anid'
enjoined the Provincial of the Auiguftinians to check by his autlio-
rity the rafinefs of an arrogant monk, which brought disgrace
upon the order of St. Augutline, and gave offence and disturbance
to the whole church.

BOOK II.

The progrels
of Luther'a
opinions.

He is fuin-
anoned to ap-
pear at Rome.
FROM

87

BOOK II.

The Pope
empowers his
legate to try
him in Ger-
many.

Luther ap-
pears before
he legate.

FROM the strain of these letters, as well as from the nomina-

tion of a judge so prejudiced and partial as Prierias, Luther easily
saw what sentence he might expect at Rome. He discovered,
for that reason, the utmost solicitude, to have his cause tried in
Germany, and before a less fufpeded tribunal. The university
of Wittemberg, anxious for the safety of a man who did so much
honour to their society, wrote to the Pope, and after employing
several pretexts to excuse Luther from appearing at Rome
intreated Leo to commit the examination of his doctrines to rome
persons of learning and authority in Germany. The Elecor
requested the fame thing of the Pope's legate at the' diet of
Augsburg; and as Luther himself, who, at that time, was so far
from having any intention to disclaim the papal authority, that
he did not even entertain the smallest suspicion concerning its
divine original, had written to Leo a most fubmiflive letter, pro-
mifing an unreserved compliance with his will, the Pope gratified
them so far as to empower his legate in Germany, cardinal
Cajetan, a Dominican, eminent for scholastic learning, and pas-
fionately devoted to the Roman fee, to hear and determine the
cause.

LUTHER, though he had good reason to decline a judge cho-

fen among his avowed adversaries, did not hesitate about appear-
ing before Cajetan, and having obtained the Emperor's safe
conduc, immediately repaired to Auglburg. The Cardinal
received him with decent refpet, and endeavoured at first to
gain upon him by gentle treatment: But thinking it beneath
the dignity of his Ration to enter into rny formal dispute, he
required him, by virtue of the apostolic powers with which he
was cloathed, to retuat the errors he had uttered with regard to
Indulgences, and the nature of faith; and to abstain, for the

future,

0
B8s

EMPEROR CHARLES V.

future, from the publication of new and dangerous opinions.
Luther, fully persuaded of the truth of his own tenets, and con-
firmed in the belief of them by the approbation they had
met with among persons conspicuous both for their learning and
piety, was furprized at this abrupt mention of a recantation
before any, endeavours were used to convince him that lie was
mistaken. - He had flattered himself, that in a conference con-
cerning the points in dispute, with a prelate of fich dillinguifhed
abilities, he would be able to remove many of those imputations
with which the ignorance or malice of his antagonifis had loaded
him ; but the high tone of authority which the Cardinal aflimed,
extinguilhed at once all hopes of this kind, and cut off every
profpe& of advantage from the interview. His native intre-
pidity of mind, however, did rot desert him. He declared,
with the utmost firmness, that he could not,' with a safe con-
science, renounce opinions which he believed to be true , nor
(hould any consideration ever induce him to do what would be.
so base in itself, and o offensive to God. At the fame time, he
continued to express no less reverence than formerly for the
authority of the apostolic fee i he signified his willingness to
fibmit the whole controversy to certain universities. which le
named, and promised neither to write nor to preach for the future
concerning Indulgences, provided his adversaries were likewise
enjoined to be silent with refpca to them . All there offers
Cajetan disregarded or rejected, and frill infilted prcrmptorily on
a simple recantation, threatening him with ccclefiaftical censures,
and forbidding him to appear again in his prcfence, unless he
resolved instantly to comply with what he required. This
haughty and violent manner of proceeding, as well as other cir.
cumftances, gave Luther's friends such strong reasons to fiifpet,

d Luth. Oper. vol. i. p. 164.
VOL. II.

Boo Kz. ii.

His intrepid
behaviour.
c Ibid . p19. .

that
N

89

B o o K II. that even the Imperial safe condut, would not be able to prote&

him from the legate's power and resentment, that they pre-
vailed on him to withdraw secretly from Augsburg, and to return
His appeal. to his own country. But before his departure, according

to a form of which there had been ome examples, he prepared
a solemn appeal, from the Pope ill-informed at that time con-
cerning his cause, to the Pope when he should receive more full
information with refpet to it .

CAJETAN, enraged at Luther's abrupt retreat, and the publica-
ported by the tion of his appeal, wrote to the Eletor of Saxony, complaining

enor ;of of both; and requiring him, as he regarded the peace of the

church, or the authority of its head, either to fend that seditious
monk a prisoner to Rome, or to banish him out of his territo.
ries. It was not from theological cnfiderations that Frederick
had hitherto countenanced Luther; he seems to have been much
a firanger to controversies of that kind, and to have been little
interested in them. His protection flowed almost entirely, as
hath been already observed, from political motives, and was
afforded with great secrecy and caution. He had neither heard
any of Luther's discourses, nor read any 'of his books; and
though all Germany resounded with his fame, he had never once
admitted him into his presence I. But upon this demand which
the Cardinal made, it became necefary to throw off omewhat
of his former reserve. He had been at great expence, and had
beflowed much attention on founding a new university, an object
of considerable importance to every German prince ; and foresee-
ing how fatal a blow the removal of Luther would be to its repu-
tation , he, under various pretexts, and with many profeflions

f Sleil. Hifl. of Reform p 7. Seckend. p. 4. Luth. Oper. i. 163.
g Seekend. p. 27. Slcid. Hilt. p. z. h Seckend. p. 59.

of
9

of eltee;i for the Cardinal, and of reverence for the Pope, declined
complying with either of his requests, and openly discovercd great
concern for Luther's safety '.

T H E inflexible rigour with which Cajetan infifed on a fim-

ple recantation, gave great offence to Luther's followers in that
age, and hath since been censured as imprudent, by several Po-
pilh writers. But it was ipofible for the legate to ad another
part. The judges before whom Luther had been required to
appear at Rome, were so eager to display their zeal against his
errors, that, without waiting the expiration of the sixty days al-
lowed him in the citation, they had already condemned him as
an heretick . Leo had in several of his brieves and letters, flig-
matized him as a child of iniquity, and a man given up to a re-
probate sense. Nothing les, therefore, than a recantation could
save the honour of the church, whose maxim it is never to aban-
don the smallest point it has eflablifled, and which is even pre-
cluded, by its pretensions to infallibility, from having it in its
power to do so.

LUTHER'S situation, meanwhile, was filch as would have filled

any other person with the moR disquieting apprehensions. He
could not exped that a prince so prudent and cautious as Fre-
derick would, on his account, set at defiance the thunders of the
church, and brave the papal power which had crulhed some of
the mofl powerful of the German Emperors. IHe knew what
veneration was paid, at that time, to ecclefiatlical decisions; what
terror ecclesiastical censures carried along with them, and how
easily there might intimidate and flake a prince, who was rather

i Sleid. Hilt. p. o. Lutl. Oper. i. 172.

Eocri II.

Modiveg of
the eg ice's
conduit.

Lnther's per-
ious situation.
k Luth. Oper. i. t61.

his

9I

BOOK II.

He appeals
to a general
council,

A new bull in
favour of In-
dulgences.

his proteaor from policy, than his disciple from convition. If
he hould be obliged to quit Saxony, he had no profpet of any
other asylum, and must stand exposed to whatever punifrhent the
rage or bigotry of his enemies could inflit. Though sensible of
his danger, he discovered no symptoms of timidity, or remifnefs,
but continued to vindicate his own condut and opinions, and to
inveigh against those of his adversaries with more vehemence than
ever'.

BUT as every ftep taken by the court of Rome, particularly the

irregular sentence by which he had been so precipitately declared,
a heretick, convinced Luther that Leo would oon proceed. to the
most violent measures against him, he had recourse to the only ex-
pedient in his power, in order to prevent the effec of the Papal
censures. He appealed to a general council, which he affirmed to
be the representative of the catholic church, and superior in power
to the Pope, who being a fallible man, might err, as St. Peter,,
the most perse& of his predecessors, had erred"'..

IT oon appeared, that LUTHER had not formed rafl conjectures

concerning the intentions of the Romi(h church. A bull, of a
date prior to his appeal, was issued by the' Pope, in which he
magnifies the virtue and efficacy of Indulgences in terms as-
extravagant as any of his predecefiors had ventured to use in
the darkest ages; and without applying such palliatives, or men-.
tioning such conceiflons as the jun&ture seemed to call for, he
required all Christians to aflent to what he delivered as the doc-
trine of the Catholic church, and. fubjefted thofc who hould
hold or teach any- contrary opinion to the heaviest ecclefiafical
censures.

I Seckend. p. 59.

Sid. Hill. A. Luth.MOper. i, Og

AMONGN
92

AMONG Luther's followers, this bull, which they confidered BOOK II.

as an unjustifiable effort of the Pope in order to preserve that rich M i
branch of his revenue which arose from Indulgences, produced death ofad-

vantage to

little effec. But, among the reft of his countrymen, such a clear Luther.
decision of the sovereign Pontiff against him, and enforced by
such dreadful penalties, must have been attended with confe-
quences very fatal to his cause; if there had not been pre-
vented in a great measure by the death of the Emperor Maxi-
milian, whom both his principles and his interest prompted to
support the authority of the holy fee. In consequence of this
event, the vicariat of that part of Germany which is governed by
the Saxon laws, was committed to the Elector of Saxony; and
under the shelter of his friendly administration, Luther not only
enjoyed tranquillity, but his opinions were fliffered, during the
inter-regnum which preceded Charles's election, to take root in
different places, and to grow up to some degree of strength and
firmness. Leo too, to whom the election of an Emperor was a
point more interesting than a theological controversy, which he
did not underfiand, and of which he could not foresee the confe-
quences, being extremely solicitous not to irritate a Prince of fuich
considerable influence in the electoral college as Frederick, disco-
vered a great unwillingness to pronounce the entehce of excommu-
nication against Luther, which his adversaries continually demand-
ed with the most clamorous importunity.

To there political views of the Pope, as well as to his natural Surpenfion of
aversion from evere measures, was owing the fufpenfirn of any proceedings

against Lu.

further proceedings against Luther for eighteen months. Per- thcr.
petual negociations, however, in order to bring the matter to
some amicable iflue, were carried on during that space. The
manner in whic' these were conduted having given Luther
many opportunities of observing the corruption of the court of
Rome; its obstinacy in adhering to eftablilhed errors; and its

indifference

93

BOOK II. indifference about truth, however clearly proposid, or strongly
He begins to proved, he began to utter rome doubts with regard to the divine
n the a qui- original of the Papal authority. A public disputation was held up..
authority. on this important queltion at Leipfick, bet.veen Luther and Ecci-

us, one of his most learned and formidable antagonifls; but it was
as fruitless and indecisive as such scholastic combats usually prove.
Both parties boasted of having obtained the vitory; both were
confirmed in their own opinions; and no progress was made to-
wards deciding the point in controversy .

Reformation NOR did this spirit of mutiny against the docrines and ufurpati-
n Switzier- ons of the Romish church, break out in Saxony alone; an attack
land.

no less fierce, and occasioned by the fame causes, was made upon
them about this time in Switzerland. The Franciscans being en-
trusted with the promulgation of Indulgences in that country, exe-
cuted their commiflion with the fame indiscretion and rapacioufGefs,
which had rendered the Dominicans so odious in Germany. They
proceeded, nevertheless, with uninterrupted success till they arri-
ved at Zurich. There Zuinglius, aman not inferior to Luther
himself in zeal and intrepidity, ventured. to oppose them; and bc-
ing animated with a republican boldness, and free from those re-
ftraints which fubje&ion to the will of a Prince imposed on the
German reformer, he advanced with more daring and rapid steps
to overturn the whole fabrick of the established religion °. The
appearance offuch a vigorous auxiliary, and the progress which he
made, was, at first, matter of great joy to Luther, though on the
other hand, the decrees of the universities of Cologne and Louvain,
which pronounced his opinions to be erroneous, afforded great cause
of triumph to his adversaries.

a Luth. Oper .
i. 99.

o Sleid. Hil. 22. Seckend. 59.

BUT
94

BUT the undaunted spirit of Luther, acquired fresh vigour

from every inflance of opposition; and pulhing on his inquiries
and attacks from one docrine to another, he began to shake the
firmest foundations on which the wealth or power of the church
were eftablifled. Leo came at last to be convinced, that all
hopes of reclaiming him by forbearance were vain ; several pre-
lates of great wisdom exclaimed no less than Luther's personal
adversaries against the Pope's unprecedented lenity in permitting
an uncorrigible heretic, who during three years had been endea-
vouring to subvert every thing sacred and venerable, still to
remain within the bosom of the church; the dignity of the papal
fee rendered the molt vigorous proceedings neceflary; the new
Emperor, it was hoped, would flpport its authority; nor did it
seem probable that the Eletor of Saxony would so far forget his
usual caution, as to set himself in opposition to their united
power. The college of cardinals was often afembled, in order to
prepare the sentence with due deliberation, and the most able
canons were consulted how it might be exprefled with the
most unexceptionable formality. At last, on the fifteenth of June,
one thousand five hundred and twenty, tle bull o fatal to the
church of Rome, was iufled. Forty-one propositions, extracted
out of Luther's works, are therein condemned as heretical,
scandalous, and offensive to pious ears;. all persons are forbidden
to read his writings, upon pain of excommunication; such as
had any of them in their custody, are commanded to commit
them to the flames; and he himself, if he did not, within sixty
days, publickly recant his errors, and burn his books, is pro-
nounced an obstinate heretic; is excommunicated, and delivered'
unto Satan for the deftruion of his fleh ; and all secular Princes
are required, under pain of incurrilig the fame censure, to seize
his person, that he might be punished as his crimes deserved P.

p Palavic. 27. Luth. Oper .
i, 43.

'rTli

BooK II.

Luther's bold-
nes, and pro-
greft.

Bull ofex-
communica-
tion publilhed
against hin.

BooK II. THE publication of this bull in Germany excited various paffi-
The eset of ons in different places. Luther's adversaries exulted, as if his par-
this in Ger- ty and opinions had been crushed at once by filch a decisive blow.
many,

His followers, whose reverence for the papal authority daily dimi-
nifhed, read Leo's anathemas withlmore indignation than'terror.
In some cities, the people violently obftruced the promulga-
tion of the bull in otiers, those who attempted to publish it
were insulted, and the bull itself torn in pieces, and trodden under
foot .

and upon THIS sentence, which he had for some time expected, did
Luther.
Nov. 7. not disconcert or intimidate Luther. After renewing his appeal

to a general council, he published remarks upon the bull of
excommunication; and being now persuaded that Leo had been
guilty both of impiety and injustice in his proceedings against
him, he boldly declared the Pope to be that man of fin, or Anti-
christ, whose appearance is foretold in the New Testament he
declaimed against his tyranny and usurpations with greater vio-
lence'than ever; he exhorted all Christian Princes to shake off fucl
an ignominious yoke; and boasted of his own happinefi in being
marked out as the objet of ecclefiafical indignation, because he
had ventured to aftert the liberty of mankind. Nor did he confine
his expreflions of contempt for the papal power to words alone;
Leo having, in execution of the bull, appointed Luther's books
to be burnt at Rome, he, by way of retaliation, aflembled all the
professors and students in the university of Wittemberg, and with
great pomp, and before a vast multitude of fpe1ators, cast the
voluhmes of' the canon law, together with the bull of exccmfmu-
nication into the flames; and his example was imitated in several
cities of Germany. The manner in which he justified this action

q Seckend. p. 116.

was
'96

was Rill more provoking than the ation itself. He colleted from
tile canon law ome of the most extravagant propositions with re-
gard to the plenitude and omnipotence of the Pope's power, and
the ubordination of all secular jurifdi&ion to his authority, and
published these with a commentary, pointing out the impiety of
such tenets, and their tendent evident to subvert all civil go-
vernment'.

SUCH was the progress which Luther had made, and such

the fate of his party, when Charles arrived in Germany. No
secular Prince had hitherto embraced Luther's opinions; no
change in the eltablifhed forms of worfllip had been introduced ,
and no encroachments made upon the polefeions or jurisdiction
of the clergy; neither party had yet proceeded to action; and
the controversy, though condu&ed with great heat' and' pailion
on both fides, was fill carried on with its proper weapons, with
theses, disputations, and replies. A deep impreflion, however,
was made upon the minds of the people; their reverence for
ancient institutions and dotrines was shaken; and the materials
were already scattered which produced the 'combutilon that fooh
fpreid' over all Germany. Students crowded from' very pro-
vince of the Empire to Wittembergi and under Lutler himself,
Melahnthon, Carloftadius, 'and other 'matters, then rckoned
eminent, imbibed opinions, which, on tlieir refur, they propa-
gated among their countrymen, who listened to them with that
'fond attention, which truth, when accompanied with novelty, na-
turally commands'.

DURING the course of these tranfafions, the court of Rome,
though under the dire&tion of one of its ablest Pontiffs, neither

i

r Luth. Oper. ii. 316.
VOL. II.

s Seckend. 59.

formed
0

State ofthe
Reformation'
when Charles
arrived in
Germany.

Reflclions
upon the con-
du:l of lthe
court'of
Rome,

BOOK II,

98

formed its fehemes with that profound sagacity, nor executed
them with that steady perseverance, which had long rendered it
the most perseet model of political wisdom to the rcft of Europe.
When Luther began to declaim against Indulgences, two diffe-
rent methods of treating him lay before the Pope; by adopting
one of which the attempt, it is probable, might have been
crushed, and by the other it might have been rendered innocent.
If Luther's first departure from the doctrines of the church had
instantly drawn upon him the weight of its censures, the dread
of there might have restrained the Elector of Saxony from pro-
teeting him, might have deterred the people from listening to his
discourses, or even might have overawed Luther himself; and his
name, like that of many good men before his time, would now
have been known to the world only for his honest but ill-timed
effort to corre&t the corruptions of the Romish church. Or on
the other hand, if the Pope had early testified ome displeasure
with the vices and excefles of those who had been employed to
publish Indulgences; if he had forbidden the mentioning of
controverted points in discourses, addressed to the people; if he
had enjoined the disputant§ on both fides to be silent if he had
been careful not to. rifque the credit of the church by defining
articles which had hitherto been left undetermined, Luther would,
probably, have ftopt short at his first discoveries: He would not
have been forced in felf-defence to venture upon uew ground, and
the whole controversy might poflibly have died away ifenfibly;
or being confined entirely to the schools, might have been carried
on with as little detriment to the peace and unity of the Romilh
church, as that which the Franciscans maintain with the Domi-
nicans, concerning the immaculate conception, or that between
the Jansenists and Jesuits concerning the operations of grace.
But Leo, by fluctuating between there opposite systems, and by
embracing them alternately, defeated the effeas of both. By

an
BOOK II.

an improper exertion of authority, Luther was exafpetated, but
not restrained. By a mistaken exercise of lenity, time was given
for his opinions to spread, but no progrers made towards reconci-
ling him to the church; and even the sentence of excommunicati-
on, which at another juncture might have been decisive, was de-
layed so long, that it became at lad scarce an object of terror.

SUCH a series of errors in the measures of a court, seldom

chargeable with mistaking its own true interest, is not more
aftonihing than the wisdom which appeared in Luther's conduct.
Though a perse f Rranger to the maxims of human prudence,
and incapable, from the impetuosity of his temper, of observing
them, he was led naturally by the method in which he made his
discoveries, to carry on his operations in a manner which con-
tributed more to their success, than if every ftep he took had
been prescribed by the most artful policy. At the time when
he set himself to oppose Tetzel, he was far from intending that
reformation, which he afterwards effected; and would have
trembled with horror at the thoughts of what at lat he
gloried in accomplishing. The knowledge of truth was not
poured into his mind, all at once, by any special revelation; he
acquired it by industry and meditation, and his progress, ofcon-
sequence, was gradual. The doctrines of Popery are so closely
connected, that the exposing of one error conducted him natu-
rally to the .detection of others; and all the parts of that artificial
fabric were. so linked together, that the pulling down of one
loosened the foundation of the reft, and rendered it more easy
to overturn them. In confuting the extravagant tenets con-
cerning Indulgences, he was obliged to inquire into the true cause
of our justification and acceptance with God. The knowledge

0 2 of

BOOK 1I.

and upon the
conduEt of
Luther.

99

BOOK 1I. of that, discovered to him by degrees the inutility of pilgrimages
L;""C'^ and pennances; the vanity of relying on the interceflion of faints;

the impiety of worlhipping them; the abuses of auricular conftf-
sion; and the imaginary existence of purgatory. The detectlon
of so many errors, led him of course to confider the character of
the clergy who taught them; and their exorbitant wealth, the
severe injuncion of celibacy, and the intolerable rigour of mo-
nastic vows appeared to him the great sources of their corruption.
From thence, it was butone ftep to call in question the divine
original of the papal power, which authorized and supported
such a system of errors. As the unavoidable result of the
whole, he disclaimed the infallibility of the Pope, the decisions of
fchoolmen, or any other human authority, and appealed to the
word of God as the only tandard of theological truth. To this
gradual progress Luther owed his success. His hearers were not
shocked at first by any proposition too repugnant to their ancient
prejudices, or too remote from eftablilhed opinions. They were
condu&ted insensibly from one doctrine to another. Their faith and
convition were able to keep pace with his discoveries. To
the fame cause was owing the inattention, and even indifference,
with which Leo viewed Luther's first proceedings. A dire or
violent attack upon the authority of the church, would have
drawn upon him at once the whole weight of its vengeance; but
as this was far from his thoughts, as he continued long to profess
great refpe& for the Pope, and made repeated offers of fubmif-
sion to his decisions, there seemed to be no reason fpr apprehend-
ing that he would prove the author of any dcfperate revolt; and
he was suffered to proceed ftep by ftep, in undermining the confti-
tution of the church, till the remedy applied at last came too late
to produce any effect.

BUT
100

BUT whatever advantages Luther's, cause derived either fror, BOOK I
the mistakes of his adversaries, or from his own goQd condut, An Inquiry
the sudden progress and firm eftablilhment of hlis dotines, mft into the

caufea which
not be ascribed to tlefe alone. The fame corruptions in the contributed

tot Ioprogref,
church of Rome which lie condemned, had bee. a,,tacke long tof the prlor

mation.

before his appearance, and the fame ,opinions .wllichl hle.now; pro- lat
pagated, had been published in different placesi and, were fp-
pcr:ed by the fame arguments. WValdus in the twelfth century,
Wickliff in the fourteenth, and Huss' in the fifteenth, had
inveighed againit the errors of Popery with great boldness, and
confuted them with more ingenuity and learning than could
have been expected in those illiterate ages in which they flou-
rifhed. But all there premature attempts towards a reformation
proved abortive. Such feeble light;, incapable of dispelling the
darkness which then covered the church, were'fdon extinguished.;
and though the doctrines of these pious men produced. some
effe&s, and left rome traces in the country where they taught,
they were neither extensive nor co.nsiderable. Many powerful
causes contributed to facilitate Luther's progress,' wliicb. either
did not exist, or did not operate with full force in, their days;
and at the critical and mature juncure when 'llc nppeated, cir-
cumftances of every kind concurred in rendering each ftep he took
fucceifful.

THE long ard Icandalous fchifin which divided, the cluirch, The long
during the latter part of the fourteenth, and the beginning ,of fchifil in the

a0 t beginning fourreenth

the fifteentl centuries, had a great cflect in diminifling the century.
veneration with which the world had been accuflomed to' view
the papal dignityi Two or three contending Pontiffs roaming
about Europe ;at a time; fawning on the Princes whom they
wanted to gain; squeezing the countries which acknowledged

their

101

BtosB II.

-Ot I.

The pontifi-
cates of Alex-
ander VI. and
of Julius II.

their authority; excommunicating their rivals, and curfingthofe
who adhered to them, discredited their pretensions to infallibility,
and exposed both their.perfons and their office to contempt, The
laity, to whom all parties appealed, came to learn that ome right
of private judgment belonged to them, and acquired the exercise
of It o far as to chufe, among there infallible guides, whom they
would please to follow. The proceedings of the councils of Con-
stance and Basil, spread Rill wider this disrespect for the Romish
fee, and by their bold exertion of authority in depofirig and electing
Popes, taught the world that there was in the church a jurifdi&ion
superior even to the papal power, which they had long believed to
be supreme.

THE wound given on that occasion to the papal authority

was scarce healed up, when the pontificates of Alexander VI.
and Julius II. both able princes, but detestable ecclefiatics,
raited new scandal in Christendom. The profligate morals of
the former in private life; the fraud, the injustice and cruelty
of his publick administration, place him on a level with those
tyrants, whose deeds are the greatest reproach to human nature.
The latter, though a firanger to there odious passions which
prompted his predecefor to commit o many unnatural crimes,
was under the dominion of a restless and ungovernable ambi-
tion, which scorned all considerations of gratitude, of decency, or
of justice, when they obftruted the execution of his schemes.
It was scarce pofible to be firmly persuaded that the infallible
knowledge of a religion, whose chief precepts are purity and
humility, was deposited in the breafs of the impious Alexander,
or the overbearing Julius. The opinion of those who exalted
the authority of a council above that of the Pope spread wonder-
fully under their pontificates: And as the Emperor and French

Kings,
102

Kings, who were alternately engaged in hostilities with there active
pontiffs, permitted and even encouraged their 'ubjeds to expose
their vices with all the violence of invedive, and all the petulance
of ridicule, men's ears being accftored to these, were not (hocked
with the bold or ludicrous discourses of Luther and his followers
concerning the papal dignity.

NOR were such excesses confined to the head of the church

alone. Many of the dignified clergy both secular and regular,
being the younger sons of noble families, who assumed the
ecclesiastical character for no other reason but that they found in
the church stations of great dignity and affluence, were accustomed
totally to neglect the duties of their office, and indulged them-
selves without reserve in all the vices to which great wealth
and idlenes naturally give birth. Though the inferior clergy
were prevented by their poverty from imitating the expensive
luxury of their superiors, yet gross Ignorance and low debauchery
rendered them as contemptible as the others were odious . The
revere and unnatural law of celibacy, to which both were
equally fibjet&, occasioned such irregularities, that in several
parts of Europe the concubinage of priests was not only permit-
ted, but enjoined. The employing of a remedy so contrary to
the genius of the Christian religion, is the strongest proof that
the crimes it was intended to prevent were both numerous and
flagrant. Long before the sixteenth century, many authors of

t The corrupt slate of the church prior to the Reformation, is acknowledged by

an author, who was both abundantly able to judge concerning this matter, and who
was not over forward to confers it. " For some years (fays he) before the Lutheran
and Calvinific heretics were published, there was not (as contemporary authors tef-
tify) any severity in ecclesiastical judicatories, any dlfcipline with regard to morals,
any knowledge of (acred literature, any reverence for divine things, there was not
almot any religion renaining." Bellarninus Concio. xxviii Oper. tom. vi. col. 296.
edit. Colon. 617. apud Gerdefii Hill. Evang. RenovFlt vol. i. p. 25.

BOOK II.

The immoral
lives of the
clergy.
great

Io3

great name and authority give such descriptions of the diflolute
amorals of the clergy, as seem almost incredible in the present
age . The voluptuous lives of ecclesiastics occasioned great
scandal, not only because their manners were inconsistent with
their sacred characer ; but the laity being accustomed to fee several
of them raised from the lowet stations to the greatest affluence,
did not hew the fame indulgence to their exceffcs, as to those of
perfodns p6fefifed of hereditary wealth or grandeur; and viewing
their condition with nrore envy, they censured their crimes with
greater severity. Nothing, therefore, could be more acceptable
to Luther's hearers, than the violence with which he exclaimed
iagainft the immoralities' of churchmen, and every person ih his
audience could, from. his own observation, confirm the truth of

,his invectives.

: .,THE scandal of these crimes, was greatly increased by the
fcility with which those who committed them, obtained par-
don. In all the European, kingdoms, the impotence of the civil

u Ceuturn Gravanmina.' Nat. German. in Pafciculo Rer. Expetend. & iPuglen-

,darum,'per Ortuinum Gratiumf vol. i. 361. See innumerable passages to\the fame
purpose in the appendix, or second volume, publilhed by Edw. Brown., See also
Herm. Von der Hardt, Hilt. Lit. Reform. pars iii. and the vail collections of Wal-
chiusin his four volumes of Monimenta medii avi. 6btting. 1757.

The authors I have quoted enumerate the vices of the clergy. When they ven-

tured upon crimes, they would not be scrupulous with respect to the decorum of
behaviour. Accordingly their neglect of the decent conduct suitable to their pro-
felion, (ems to have given great offence. In order to il'ulsiate thisl:lhall transcribe
one pafrage, because it is taken not fiom any author whose pirofefled purpose it
was to describe the improper condut of the clergy ; and who from prejudice or
artifice may be supposed to aggravate the charge against them. The Emperor
Charles IV. in a letter to the archbihop of 'Mentz, A. D. 359. exhorting him to
reform the disorders of the clergy, thus expresses himself: " De Chrifti patti.
monio, ludos, haRiludia & torneamenta exercent habitum militarem cum prc-
textis aureis & argenteis geltant, & calceos militares conmam & barbam nutriunt,
&nihil quod ad vitam & ordinem ecclefiaflicum fpeftat, oftendunt. Militaribus fe
duntaxat & fecularibus actibus, vita & moribus, in fuz falutis difpendium, & gene-
rale populi fcaridalum, immifcent. Codex Diplomaticus Anecdotorum, per Val.
Ferd, Gudenum. 4to. vol. iii. p. 438.

magifrate,
A04

30Kos Ii.
1~

The facility
with which
there immo-
ralities were
pardoned.
1

magilnrate, under forms of government extremely irregular BooK II.
and turbulent, made it necefary to relax the rigour of justice, , -
and upon payment of a certain fine or composition prescribed
by law, to remit farther punifhmcnt, even of the molt atrocious
crimes. The court of Rome, always attentive to the means of
augmenting its revenues, imitated this practice, and by a pre-
pofterous accommodation of it to religious concerns, granted
its pardons to fuclh tranfgrefors as gave a film of money in order
to purchase them. As the idea of a composition for crimes was
then familiar, itlt' strange traflick was To far from hlocking
mankind, that it Coon became general; and to prevent any im-
position in carrying it on, the officers of the Roman chancery
publifled a book, containing the precise furn to be exaced for
the pardon of every particular fin. A deacon guilty of murder was
absolved for twenty crowns. A biflop or abbot might afuflinate
for three hundred livres; Any ecclefialic might commit unclean-
nes, though with the most aggravating circumRfances, for the
third part of that fum. Even such flocking crimes, as occur
seldom in human life, and perhaps exist only in the impure
imagination of a cafilift, were taxed at a very moderate rate.
When a more regular and perfect mode of dispensing justice
came to be introduced into civil courts, the practice of paying a
composition for crimes went gradually into disuse; and mankind
having acquired more accurate notions concerning religion and
morality, the conditions on which the court of Rome bestowed
its pardons appeared impious, and were confidercd as one great
source of ecclesiastical corruption ".

x Fafcicul. Rer. Expet. & Fug. . 355. J. G. Schelhornii Anlmnit. Literar.

Francof. 1725. vol. ii. 369. DiAion. de Bayle. Atic. Bauck & Tuppius,.'l'axa
Cancellar. Romanse, Edit. Francs. 1651. palim.

VOL. II.

105
p

THIS

BOOK II.

The exorbi-
tant wealth of
the church,

r

particularly in
Germany,

THIS degeneracy of manners among the clergy might, per-

haps, have been tolerated with greater indulgence, if their
exorbitant riches and power had not enabled them at the fane
time, to oppress all other orders of men. It is the genius of
fuperfiition, fond of whatever is pompous or grand, to set no
bounds to its liberality towards persons whom it eteems sacred, '
and to think its expreflions of regard defective unless it hath
raised them to the heighth of wealth and authority. Hence
flowed the extensive revenues and jurisdiCtion pollfled by the
church in every country of Europe, and which were become
intolerable to the laity from whose undifcerning bounty they
were at first derived.

TilE burden, however, of ecclesiastical oppreflion had fallen

with fch peculiar weight on the Germans, as rendered them,
though naturally exempt from levity, and tenacious of their
ancient customs, more inclinable than any people in Europe
to liften to those who called on them to assert their liberty.
During the long contests between the Popes and Emperors
concerning the right of investiture, and the wars which there
occasioned, most of the considerable German ecclesiastics joined
the papal faction; and while engaged in rebellion against the
head of the Empire, they seized the Imperial revenues, and
usurped the Imperial jurisdiction within their own dioceses.
Upon the re-eitablifhment of tranquillity, they still retained
these usurpations, as if by the length of an unjust poflefion they
had acquired a legal right to them. The Erperors, too feeble
to wrest them out of their hands, were obliged to grant them
fiefs of there vast territories, and they enjoyed all the immuni-
ties and honours which belonged to feudal barons. By means
of there, many bishops and abbots in Germany were not only

ecclesiastics,
io6

ecclesiastics, but princes, and their character and manners par-
took more of the licence, too frequent among the latter, than of
the fantity which became the former Y.

THE unsettled ate of government in Germany, and the fre-

quent wars to which that country was exposed, contributed
in another manner towards aggrandizing Ecclesiastics. The
only property during there times of anarchy which enjoyed
security from the opprefion of the great, or the ravages of war,
was that which belonged to the church. This was owing, not
only to the great reverence for the sacred character prevalent in
those ages, but to a fuperRitious dread of the sentence of excom-
mutication, which the clergy was ready to denounce against all
who invaded their poenions. Many observing this, made a
surrender of their lands to ecclesiastics, and consenting to hold
them in fee of the church, obtained as its vassals a degree of
safety, which without this device they were unable to procure.
By such an increase of the number of their vasals, the power of
ecclesiastics received a real and permanent augmentation; and
as lands, held in fee by the limited tenures common in those
ages, often returned to the persons on whom the fief depended,
considerable additions were made in this way to the property of
the clergy '.

THE solicitude of the clergy in providing for the fafcty of

their own persons, was flill greater than that which they dif-
played in securing their pofleions; and their efforts to attain it
were fill more filctefsful. As they were consecrated to the priestly
office with much outward solemnity; were distinguished from
the reft of mankind by a peculiar dress and manner of life; and

where the
clergy ulurped
a great part
of the pro-
perty.

The vail per-
fonal immu-
nities of
ccclefiaicks.

y F. Paul, Hiltory of Ecclefiall Benefices, p. 107. z F. Paul, Hil. of
Eccles. Benef. p. 66. Boulainvilliers, Etat de Prance, tom. i. 169. Lond. 1737.

P arrogated

BOOK II.
\_cc~

107

BOOK II. arrogated to their order many privileges which do not belong to

err ~other Chriltia: s, they naturally became the objeas of exceflive

veneration. As a filperftitious spirit spread, they were regard-
ed as beings of a fiperior species to the profane laity, whom
it would be impious to try by the fame laws, or to subjed to the
fame punishments. This exemption from civil jurifdidion,
granted at first to ecclesiastics, as a mark of refpet, they soon
claimed as a point of right. This valuable immunity of the
priefihood is aferted, not only in the decrees of Popes and coun-
cils, but was confirmed ie the most ample form by many of the
greatest Emperors '. As long as the clerical charater remained,
the person of an ecclesiastic was sacred; and unless he were
degraded from his office, the unhallowed hand of the civil judge
durst not touch him. But as the power of degradation was
lodged in the spiritual courts, the difficulty and expence of
obtaining fuich a sentence, too often secured offenders of absolute
impunity. Many aililmed the clerical character for no other
reason, than that it might screen them from the punifmnent
which their actions deserved b. The German nobles complained
loudly, that there anointed malefaaors, as ,they call themc, fel-
dom suffered capitally, even for the mofi atrocious crimes, and
their independence on the civil magistrate is often mentioned in
their remoflrances, as a privilege equally pernicious to society,
and to the morals of the clergy.

Their en- WHILE the clergy asserted the privileges of their own order
eroa hmenr with so much zeal, they made continual encroachments upon
on the jurif-
diion of the those of the laity. All causes relative to matrimony, to teita-

ity. rnlents, to usury, to legitimacy of birth, as well as those which

a Goldafli Conftitut. Imperial. Francof. 673. vol. ii. 92, 107.
, Rymer'a Fdera, vol. iii S3 z. c Centum Gravam. § 31.

concerned
108

Concerned ecclesiastical revenues, were thought to be Co con-
nedted with religin, that they could be trie4.,only in the.fpiri-
tual courts. Not satisfied with this ample ,j'ifAij91, . vlhicl
extended to one half of the fubjeds which gave riie to litigation
among men, the clergy, with wonderful industry, and by a tllu-
and iventjpns,: endeavoured to drew all, otlxer pauses .intolJtheir
Own cour '1 ; ,,al as. they .rhad: engroTed, tlfli'w vhol, l'learnig
known in therdarkl, ages, the Jfpiitual judges erce commonll do
far superior in knowledge and abilities to those employed in the
fegulap couts, tlht:,the ipeple at first favoured any.firetch that
was mde, to'bring thleii. affairs: under the. cogiizance of a judi.
cature, oh the deciflons f. wlhioL tllhy could rely with' fuperiot
confidence. , Thus tle interet'' of the church, and the !neli'natioli
of the .peple, conourring to elude the jurifdii1ioin of the lay-
inagitrate,: idbn ;,leduioed! it d lnAoftl to Hbthinig.' :Cy nmehs ! 'ds
this, vaftlpower accr'Ted.,to ihe eiaf;ics,' and' nt tlconflderable
addition was made to their revmjui bciufllH' paidlii tlofc' ges
to such asadminifteredjuftice. , ' ; ' -

:.THE,: pnalty by which .tle spiritual iout d ellforccd; their fen-

tences, . added: to:,them i grieat weigtt and iterros, .;lThe- cenfilre
of excommunicatiois .kas inltituted originally for'.pvcfirvilng the
purity of;the church.;: that obstinate offenders, whose impiotu
tenets or profane lives were a reproach to Christianity, might
be cut off froml the lbciety of the faithful: This, ccclcfiafics did
not scrupl.e to Lonjvert intoban engine for. promoting their ,wn
po.we, iand,' iuliicdi it on tlhe 1oll frivolokxs occafoios.; Who,
eier ldepifed any of thiri decisions, gven concerning civil
.. matters,., immccliatvly .iacu rcd tilsi .tjrcndft l; ;bnfire,, which not

only excluded themn from all the privileges of a Chriflian, but
.. . ,. ),' ) 1

., .

..

. ; .
d Giannonc Hifi'.iof ' nie,; book x;x, 3. ' "'-'"'cnii; GfiViain. § 9, 56, 64.

* * cpri vc,.

log

BooK .II.
_J^.

The dreadful
elffcisof fpiri
tual ccnfurea.

BOOK IL deprived them of their rights as men and citizens ; and the dread

of this rendered even the most fierce and turbulent spirits obsequious
to the authority of the church.

The devices
ofecclefiaftics
to secure their
usurpations.

The German
ecclefiatics
moflly so-
reigners.

NoR did the clergy negle& the proper methods of preserving the

wealth and power which they had acquired with such industry
and address. The poleffions of the church, being consecrated
to God, were declared to be unalienable; so that the funds of a
society which was daily gaining, and could never loe, grew to
be immense. In Germany, it was computed that the ecclefiafics
had got into their hands more'than half of the national propertyg.
In other nations, the proportion varied ; but the ffare belonging to
the church was every where prodigious. These vast poflflions
were not subjet to the burdens imposed on the lands of the laity.
The German clergy were exempted by law from all. taxes , and
if on any extraordinary emergence, Ecclefiafics were pleased to
grant any aid towards upplying the publick exigencies, this was
confidered as a free gift flowing from their own generosity, which
the civil magistrate had no title to demand, far less to exa&.
In consequence of this strange solecism in government, the laity
in Germany had the mortification to find themselves loaded with
exceflive impositions, because those who pofiefred the greatest pro-
perty were freed from any obligation to support, or defend the
state.

GRIEVOUS, however, as the exorbitant wealth and nume-
rous privileges of the clerical order were to the other members
of the Germanick body, they would have reckoned it ome miti-
gation of the evil, if they had been possesed only of ecclesiastics

f Centum Gravam. § 34. g Centum Gravam. a8. h Centun
Gravam. Ibid. GoldaRi Contt. Imper. ii. 79, o8. Pfeffel Hit. du Droit Publ. 350. 374.

refading
r.10

residing among themselves, who would have been lets apt to
make an improper use of their riches, or to exercise their rights
with unbecoming rigour. But the biflops of Rome having early
put in a claim, the boldest that ever human ambition suggested,
of being supreme and infallible heads of the Christian church; they,
by their profound policy and unwearied perseverance, by their
address in availing themselves of every circumstance which
occurred, by taking advantage of the superstition of some
Princes, of the neceflities of others, and of the credulity of the
people, at length eftablilhed their pretensions in opposition
both to the interest and common sense of mankind. Germany
was the country which thcfe Ecclesiastical sovereigns governed
with most absolute authority. They excommunicated and depo-
fed fomc of its most illustrious Emperors, and excited their sub-
je&s, their ministers, and even their children to take arms against
them. Amidst thee contests, the Popes continually extended
their own immunities, and spoiled the secular Princes of their
most valuable prerogatives, and the German church felt all the
rigour of that opprefiion which flows from subjection to-foreign
dominion, and foreign exactions.

THE right of conferring benefices, hich the Popes usurped

during that period of confusion, was an acquisition of great impor-
tance, and exalted the ecclesiastical power upon the ruins of the
temporal. The Emperors and other princes of Germany had
long been in pofeflion of this right, and it served to increase both
their authority and their revenue. But by wvrefting it out of
their hands, the Popes were enabled to fill the Empire with heir
own creatures they accustomed a great body of every prince's
fubjeds to depend not upon him but upon the Roman fee; they
bestowed the richest benefices in every country upon Itrangers,

and.

BOOK II.

Nominatedby
the Pope.

Ill

Boo L and drained their wealth to supply the luxury of a foreign

court. Even the patience of the most superstitious ages muti-
nied under such oppreilion; and o loud and frequent were the
complaints and murmurs of the Germans, that the Popes, afraid
of irritating them too far, consented, contrary to their usual
practice, to abate somewhat of their pretensions, and to reft
satisfied ith the right of nomination to those benefices which
happened to fall vacant during fix months in the year, leaving
the disposal of the remainder to the princes and other legal
patrons i.

The epe- BUT the court of Rome easily found expedients for eluding
dients for te-
trainng this an agreement which put such restraints on its power. The
powesr ictfGe pracice of reserving certain benefices in every country to the
trua. Pope's immediate nomination, which had been long known,

and often complained of, was extended far beyond its antient
bounds. All the benefices potfefled by Cardinals, or any of the
nurmerous oicers in the Roman court; those held by persons
who happened to die at Rome, or within thirty miles of that
city on their journey to or from it; those which became vacant
by translation, with many others, were included in that number;
and Julius II. and Leo stretching the matter to the utmofs, often
collated to beneices where the right of reservation, had not been
declared, on pretence of having mentally relerved this pri\ilege
to themselves. The right of reservation, however, even with
this etenfion, had certain limits, as it could be exercised only
where the benefice was actually vacant, and therefore, in order
to render the exertion of papal power unbounded, expeilative
grates, or mandates nominating a person to succeed to a benefice
upon the first vacancy that should happen, were brought into

, F. Paui, Hifl. Eccles. BeneC 704. Gold. Co:Itit. Imper. i. 4S.

u11-.
112

use. By means of thele, Germally was fiiled with pcri.::s BEo K i.
dependi:'og onl tlhe court of Roeri , lfrom xhich it received thlcl.
rcs\xinonary grants, pri::,s were dcianuded, i: a grecrt degic.,
of their preio.!:ivcs, and the rlghts of jla\-patrons were pre-cce':-
pie:d, and rendered i..A. centirLly : .

THE manner in ,l hicli thel: extraordinary powers v;c:c cxer- \'er:ali of

cifed, rend-ered thecm ill nmore odious and itoleabe. The t!'c court o
avarice and extortion of the court of Rome were become excel-
five almost to a proverb. The lle of benefices was so notorious
that no paiis were taken to conceal, or to dilguife it. Com-
panies of merchants openlly purchaled t' e bencfics of dillret
diftrirs in Germany from the Pope's minifeirs, and retailed them
at an advanced price. Pious men bcheld with deep regret
there fimoniacal transactions, so unworthy the ministers of a
chriffian church; while politicians complained of the loss flf
tained by the exportation of so much wealth in that irreligious
traffick.

THE frms'indeed, which the court of Rome drew by its flated it irainel
and' legal impositions from all the countries dhat acknowledged °' co

tits of their

its athority, were so conliderable, that it is not strange that they wealth.
murmured at the ifralleft addition made to them by unnecefliry
or illicit means. Every eccleiaftical person, upon his admiilion to
his benefice, paid annats or one year's rent of his living to the Pope,
and as that tax vas exacted with great rigour, its amount was
prodigious. To this mist be added the frequent demands made
-by the Popes of free-gifts from the clergy, togetlier with the
eitrac'dinary levies' of tenths' upon ecclGfiaftial 'benefices,- on

kCentum Gravam. 2 . Fafcic. Rer. Expet. &c. 34. Gold. Conft. IRpper. i.9 i.
4,4;405 F. 'auil, Hilt of Eccl. Beif. i67, 199. 1 Fafcic Rer. Expel i 359.
VoL;' . IQ pretence

;,

BOOK II.

_

pretence of expeditions againit the Turks, seldom intended, or
carried into execution; and from the whole, the vast proportion of
the revenues of the church which flowed continually to Rome, may
be eitimated.

The unlted SucH were the dilfolute manners, the exorbitant wealth, and
ofie; of all
these cause:. power, and privileges of the clergy before the reformation;

such the- oppreflive rigour of that dominion which the Popes had
established over the chriflian world; and such the sentiments
concerning them that prevailed in Germany, at the beginning of
the sixteenth century. Nor has this Iketch been copied from the
controversial writers of that age, who, in the heat of disputation,
may be fufpeded of having exaggerated the errors, or of having
misrepresented the conduCt of that church whichlthey .laboured to
overturn it is formed upon more authentick evidence, upon the
memorials and remonstrances of the Imperial diets, coolly enume-
rating the grievances under which the Empire groaned, in order to
obtain the redress of them. Diffatisfation must have risen to a great
height among t;he people, when these grave aflemblieq xprefed
, therfelves.with such aqrimony.; and if they demandeid;thel aboli-
tion.of thefe.enormities witih so nuch vehemence, the people, we
may be.affured, uttered their sentiments and desires in bolder and
. more virulent language. .. .,

Men prepared To, men thus prepared for. taking off the yoke, Luthfe address-
to embrace '

' '

Luther's ed, himself with certainty of success.; As, they,had !ong.fel., it
opinions, -eight,, an4;jborn it ,with impatience, they listened w.ih joy t;o the

;first propPfalfor, pro,curing eliv,.race. Hencq po9ceeded,;the
fond and eager reception that his doctrines met with, and the rapi-
'dwt y wih which they pread over al; the' provins : f :

X.

and to tole- .v . te im ity and fierceness of Luther's spirit, his con-

and to tole- .~v~. t)ie impetuosity and fierceness of Luther's spirit, his con-
rate his de- ' n a
f hde. fidence in alerting his own opinions, and the arrogance and

contempt
114

contempt wherewith he treated all who differed from him, which,
in ages of greater moderation and refinement, have been reckoned
defects in the character of that reformer, did not appear exceflive
to his contemporaries, whose minds were itrongly agitated by
those interesting controversies which le carried on, and who had
themselves endured the rigour of papal tyranny, and seen the cor-
ruptions in the church against which he exclaimed.

NoR were they greatly offended at that gross scurrility with

which his polemical writings are filled, or at the low buffoonery
he sometimes introduces into his gravet discourses. No dispute
was managed in those rude times without a large portion of the
former, and the latter was common, even on the most solemn
occasions, and in treating the most sacred fubjets. So far were
either of them from doing hurt to his cause, that inveftive and
ridicule had some effet, as well as more laudable arguments, in
exposing the errors of popery, and in determining mankind to
abandon them,

BESIDES all these caufes;of Luther's rapid progress, arising

from the nature of his enterprize, and the juncture at which he
undertook it, he reaped advantage from ome foreign and adven-
titious circumstances, the beneficial influence of which none of
his'forerunners in the fame course had enjoyed. Among there
may be reckoned the invention of the art of printing, about half
a century before his time. By this fortunate discovery, the faoi-
lity of acquiring and of propagating knowledge, was wonder_
fully increased, and Luther's books, which must otherwise have
made their way slowly and with uncertainty into distant couni
tries; spread at once all over Europe. Nor wee they read only
by the rich and the learned, who alone had access to books before

QL 2 that

The effe of
the invention
of printing

,on thep

I foration.
BooK II.
x,__J

115

BOOK It. that invention; they got into the hands of the peoplei who, upon

c-Y ^ this appeal to them as judges, venturedi to, axamine.andi. to reject

many do6trines, which they had; formerly been required to. b.lieve
without being taught to understand. them.

THE revival of learning a.t, tle. fame. period, was, circunm-

An] of the
revival of stance extremely friendly to tl)p Reformation. The study of
learning. the ancient Greek and Roman authors, and the discovery of that

liberal and found knowledge which they contain,, ro.iz.ed the
human mind from, the profound lethargy in which i had;b.cen
funk during. several centuries. Mankind seem,, at tt, period, to
have recovered the powers of inquiring and, of thinking, facul-,
ties of which they had. long loft the use; and fond of the acqui-
fition, they exercised; them with great boldpefs on ll fubjefts,
They were not now, afraid of entering an uncommon path,. or.
of embracing, a new. opinion. Novelty appears, at this times
rather. to have been a recommendation to a doctrine; and instead
of being startled when the daring hand of Luther drew aside,
or tore the veil which covered eftablifled errors, the genius of
the. age applauded and aided. the attempt. Luther, though a
firanger. to elegance in taste or composition, zealously promoted
the cultivation of ancient literature; and sensible of its, being
necessary in studying the scriptures, he himself had acquired
considerable knowledge both in the Hebrew and Greek tongues.
Melanthon, and some other of his disciples, were eminent pro-
ficients in the polite arts and as the fame barbarous monks
who opposed the introduction of learning into Germany, set
themselves with equal fierceness against Luther's opinions, and
declared the good reception of the one to be the effect of the pro-
grefs which the other had made, the cause of learning and of the
Reformation came to be confidered as closely connected, and, in

every
tt6

every cuntry,, had- the famefricids ,nd- the ;fame oneiose;. ,Thi,, BoK.,IL.:
enabled the refirmQrs to, carry; on tl)er cppste f atifirl .Wji great.
superiority.. Erudition,, indu('ry,, accuraoy :of: fentimnmt,. puriry
of composition, and even wit and'raillery, wero:,pollUy tupon. their
fide, and triumphed,withl ease over illitera tew;m ks, wlhofrud.,
arguments, exprefcd in a perplexed and barbarous file, were
foutd inlufficient for the defence of a fftem. the:enorf whith,
all the arr and ingenuity of its: later and more learhed advdoati
have not been able to palliate.

TAT. bold, spirit of. enquiry, which.,the. revivall of Elearning,:

excited' in Europe,. was so, favourable, to the Reformation, that
Luther was aided in his progress. and mankind' were prepared..
to, embrace his doatrines, by. persons, who did not, wiftil ficefTe,
to, hisl undertaking. The: greater part of the;d ingeniious' men'1
who applied to the study' of ancient literature, tard: the :cloflE
of the fifteenth century, and the beginning of the fifteenth,
though they had no intention, and perhaps no with, to overtttlh'
the established system of irligion, 'had discovered tli abfudity
of many tenets and' pra6tices ath6rized' by tie, churclj, i'ad:
perceived the futility of those arguments, by which illiterate
monks endeavoured to defend them. Their contempt of thefee
advocates for the received errors, led them frequently to expoe'::
the opinions which they supported, 'and to ridicule' tliir opiniobne:.
with the utmost freedom and severity. By this nmenwereiptei
pared for the more serious attacks made upon them by' Luther,
and their reverence both for the doctrines and 'persons! againf.
whom he inveighed, was considerably abated.' Thisiwas particu.,
larly the cafe in Germany. When the first attempts were made.
to revive a taste for ancient learning in that country, the Eccle-
fiaftics there, who were still more ignorant than their breihren
on the other fide of the Alps, set themselves to oppose its progress

with

1P71

BOOK IL with more aive zeal ; and the patrons of the new studies, in

return, attacked them with greater violence. In the writings of
Rechlia, Hutten, and the other revivers of learning in Germany,
the corruptions of the church of Rome are censured with an acri-
mony of style, little inferior to that of Luther himself '.

FRom the fame cause proceeded the frequent strictures of

Erafnus upon the errors of the church, as well as upon the
ignorance and vice of the clergy. His reputation and autho-
rity were so high in Europe at the beginning of the sixteenth
century, and his works were read with such universal admira-
tion, that the effect of thee deserves to be mentioned as one of
the circumstances, which contributed most considerably towards
Luther's success. Erasmus, having been destined for the church,
and trained up in the knowledge of Ecclesiastical literature,
applied himself more to theological inquiries than any of the
revivers of learning in that age. His acute judgment and vast
erudition, enabled him to discover many errors, both in the doc-
trine and worship of the Romish church. Some of there he
confuted wi:h great solidity of reasoning, and force of eloquence.
Others he treated as objeLcs of ridicule, and turned against them
that irrefiftable torrent of popular and satirical it, of vhich he
had the command. There was scarce any opinion or practice of
the Romi!h church which Luther endeavoured to reform, but
what had been previously animadverted upon by Erasmus,
and had afforded him subject either of cenl're or of raillery.
When Luther first began his attack upon the cl.i-ch, Erafinus
seemed to applaud his conduct; he courted the fiiLndfhip of
feveralof his disciples and patrons; and condemned the bha-

r Gerdefius Hist. Evang. renor. voi i- p. 14', -. Stckend. lib. i. p. c3.
Vonder Hardt. Hil. Literar. Reform. parr ii.

viour
I S

viour and spirit of his adversaries '. He concurred openly with BOOK II.
him in inveighing against the fchool-divines, as the teachers of a
system equal!y u edifying and obscure. He joined him in endea-
vouring to turn the attention of men to the study of the holy scrip-
tures, as the only standard of religious truth .

VARIOUS circumstances, however, prevented Erasmus from

holding the farme course with Luther. The natural timidity of
his temper; hs wa:t of that force of mind which alone can
prompt a ma l to alTume the character of a reformer,'; his excef-
five deference for pcrfons in high station; his dread of losing the
pensions a.ld other emoluments which their liberality had confer-
red upon him; his extreme love of peace, and hopes of reform-
ing abuses gradually, and by gentle methods; all concurred in
determining him to repress and to moderate the .eal, with which
he had once been animated against the errors of the church .and
to aume the character of a mediator between Luther and his
opponents. But though Erasmus soon began to censure Luther
as too daring and impetuous, and was at last prevalled upon to
write against him, he muff, nevertheleRf, be confidered as, his
forerunner and auxiliary in this war upon the church. He
first scattered the feeds, which Luther cherished and brought to
maturity. His raillery and oblique censures, prepared the way

g Seckend. lib. i. p. 40, 96.
h Vonder. Hardr. Hiflor. Literar. Reform. -parsl i. Gerdes. Hil. Erang. Rehov.
i. 147.

E afinus himself is candid enough to acknowledge this: ' Luther, fays he. has

given us many a who'efome docrine. and nmay a good counsel. I wish he had not
defeated the effet of them by intolerable faults. But if he had written every thing
in the moll unexceptionable manner, I had no inclinalion to die: (or the fake of
truth Every man hath not the courage requisite to mike a,martay; and l.air a-
fraid, that if I were put to the trial. 1 Ihould imitate St. Peter." Epifl. Erafmi in
Jortin's Life of Erafin. vol. i. p. z73.
k Jortin's Life of Eafius, vol. i. p. 58.

sot

BOOK ii. for Luther's invectives and more direct atta-ks. In this light

Erafhus appeared to the zealous defenders of the Romilh church in
his own times '. In this light he must be confidered by every per-
son conversant in the history of that period.

I- this long enumeration of the circumtances which com-

bined in favouring the progress of Luther's opinions, or in
rweakening the resistance of his adversaries, I have avoided enter-
ing into any difiufion of the theological doctrines of popery,
and have not attempted to shew how repugnant they are to the
spirit of Christianity, and how deftitate of any fou-dation in'
reason, in the worcd of God,- or in the practice of 'the primitive
church, learing these topics entirely to ecelefiaftical historians,
to whose province they peculiarly belong. But when we add
,ie 'effeit othfefe religiouis considerations to the -inflience of
'politica cause it is obvious that the united operation of both
-on te hi&an rAnd, mufit ' hve been sudden and 'rrefifible.
Anri thotgh, to Luther's conTemporaries, wvho were too near
perhaps to-the scene, or too deeply interefed in it, to trace
.caues 'iib accacury, c or- to exiamine them with coolness, the
-'rpiditt wih which his' opi-ions spread appeared to be so uac-
countable, -that some bf'them imputed it to a certain uncommon
and malignant poiftion of the stars, which scattered the spirit of
giddiness and innovation over the world ", it is evident, btat their
fuGcef-was tbh ratuial effet of-nany powerful causes prepared
by peculiar pro\idence, and happily confpirii:g to that end.
This attempt to investigate thefe-ca7ufes, and to throw, light on

.. . 1

V- 6lrctdt.tH lis5 Ltitemrar. Rtfenm pa. i. p 2:
* iJevi Hifb6,.lltts5~3. tL. 1 *

I'4 i
'.

- i I ' ' : ]
120

an event so singular and important, will not, perhaps, be deemed BooK II
an iunnecefary digression. -I return from it to the course of the
history.

THE Diet at Worms conduated its deliberations with that flow Proceedings

of thed ct at

formality peculiar to lcch allmblies. Much time was fperl in \o,,,,,
eftabiilhing ome rgulations with regard to the iitcrn;al police
of the Empire. Thejurifdiction of the Imperial chamber was
confirmed, and the forms of its proceeding rendered more fixed
and regular. A council of regency was appointed to allift Ser-
dinand in the government of the Empire during his brother's
absence; which, from the extent of the Emperor's dominions, and
the multiplicity of his affairs, was ah event that might be frequently
expeced . The state of religion was then taken into confide-
ration. There were not wanting some plausible reasons which
might have induced Charles to have declared himself the protec-
tor of Luther's cause, or at least to have connived at its progress. The Empe-

ror s views
If he had pofeffed no other dominions but those which belonged with regard

'

* 'i to Luther.

to him in Germany, and no other crown betides the Imperial, Luher
he might have been disposed perhaps tb favour a man, who aerted
so boldly the privileges and immunities for which the Empire
had struggled so long with the Popes. But the vast and dan-
gerous schemes which Francis I. was forming against him, made
it necessary for him to regulate his conduc by views more exten-
five than those which would have suited a German prince; and
it being of the utmof importance to secure the Pope's friend-
fiip, this determined him to treat Luther with great severity,
as the most effefual method of soothing Leo into a concurrence

Pont. Heuter. Rer. Aufir. Lib. rili. c. i.. 95I. PfeffelAbrege Chronol. p. 598.
VOL. 1I.

R

BOOK II.

lie is fum-
moned to ap-
pear.

March 6,

His undaunt-
ed fpiiit.

His reception
at Worm3.

with his measures. His eagerness to accomplish this, rendered
him not unwilling to gratify the Papal legates in Germany, who
insisted that, without any delay or formal deliberation, the diet
ought to condemn a man whom the Pope had already excommu-
nicated as an incorrigible heretick. Such an abrupt manner of
proceeding. however, being deemed unprecedented and unjust
by the members of the diet, they made a point of Luther's ap-
pearing in person, and declaring whether he adhered or not to
those opinions, which had drawn upon him the censures of the
church0. Not only the Emperor, but all the princes through
whose territories he had to pass, granted him a fafe-condu&t; and
Charles wrote to him at the fame time, requiring his immediate
attendance on the diet, and renewing his promises of protecion
from any injury or violence . Luther did not hesitate one mo-
ment about yielding obedience, and set out for Worms attended
by the herald who had brought the Emperor's letter and fafe-con-
dut. While on his journey, many of his friends, whom the fate
of Huss, under similar circumstances, and notwithstanding the
fame security of an Imperial fafe-conduct, filled with follicitue,
advised and intreated him not to rush wantonly into the midst of
danger. But Luther, superior to such terrors, silenced them with
this reply, " I am lawfully called," said he, " to appear in that
city, and thither will I go in the name of the Lord, though as
many devils as there are tiles on the houses, were there combined
against me ."

THE reception he met with at Worms, was such as he might

have reckoned a full reward of all his labours, if vanity and
the love of. applause had leen the principles by which he was
· P. Mart. Ep. 722.

P Luth. Oper. ii. 41.

q Luth. Oper. ii. 412.

influenced.
l22

influenced. Greater crowds aflcmbled to behold him, than had
appeared at the Emperor's publick entry his apartments were
daily filled with princes and personages of the highest rank',
and he was treated with all the refpet paid to those who possess
the power of direcing the underfanding and sentiments of
other men; an homage, more sincere, as well as more flatter-
ing, than any which pre-eminence in birth or condition can com-
mand. At his appearance before the diet, he behaved with
great decency, and with equal firmness. He readily acknow-
ledged an excess of vehemence and acrimony in his controver-
fial writings, but refused to retract his opinions unless lie were
convinced of their falflood; or to content to their being tried by
any other rule than the word of God. When neither threats
nor entreaties could prevail on him to depart from this refolu-
tion, some of the ecclesiastics proposed to imitate the example
of the council of Constance, and by punifling the author of this
pestilent heresy, who was now in their power, to deliver he
church at once from such an evil. But the members of the diet
refuting to expose the German integrity to fresh reproach by
a second violation of publick faith; and Charles being no
less unwilling to bring a tain upon the beginning of his admi-
niftration by such an ignominious aion, Luther was permitted to
depart in safety'. A few days after he left the city, a severe edit
was publifled in the Emperor's name, and by authority of the diet,
depriving him as an obitinate and excommunicated criminal of all
the privileges he enjoyed as a filbje6t of the Empire, forbidding
any prince to harbour or protect him, and requiring all to concur
in seizing his perlon as soon as the term fpecified'in his fafe-condult
was expired'.

rSeckend. 156. Luth.Oper 414. s F. Paul, FHi. ofCounc. p. 13.
Seckend. 160. t Gold. Conft. Imperial. ii. 408.

R BUT

BOOK II.

The manner
of'hs appear-
alnce.

April 6.
Edit againht
hinm.

123

BOOK II. BuT this rigorous decree had no considerable effect, the exe-
He is seized, cution of it being prevented partly by the multiplicity of occu-
and concealed
atnd Wnbulg. pations which the commotions in Spain, and the wars in Italy

and the Low Countries, created to the Emperor; and partly by
a prudent precaution employed by the Elector of Saxony,
Luther's faithful patron. As Luther, on his return from Worms,
was pafling near Altenltein in Thuringia, a number, of horsemen
in mass rushed suddenly out of a wood, where the Elector had
appointed them to lie in wait for him, and surrounding his com-
pany, carried him, after difmifing all.his attendants, to Wart-
burg, a trong castle not far distant. There the Eletor ordered
him to be supplied with every thing neceflary or agreeable, but
the place of his retreat was carefully concealed, until upon a
change in the political situation of Europe, the fury of the
preett storm against him began to abate. In this solitude, where
he remained nine months, and which he frequently called his
Patmos, after the name of that island to which the apostle John
was banished, he exerted his usual vigour and.induftry in de-
fence of his doctrines, or in confutation of his adversaries, pub-
lifhing several treatises, which revived the spirit of his followers,
aftoiifhed to a great degree, and disheartened at.the sudden dif-
appearance of their leader.

Progress or DURING his confinement,. his opinions continued, to gain
hi opinion, ground, acquiring the ascendant in almost every city of Saxony.

At this time, the Auguftjnians of Wittemberg, with the appro-
bation of the university, and the connivance of. the Eletor,
ventured upon the fir tep towards "an alteration in the efta-
blifhed forms of publick worflip,, by abolishing the celebration of
private males, and by giving the cup as well as the bread to the
laity in adminiftring the facramlent of the Lord's supper.

WHATEVER
124

WHATEVER consolation the courage and success of his dif-

ciples, or the progress of his doctrines in his own country afford-
ed Luther in his retreat, he there received information of two
events which considerably damped, his joy, as they seemed to lay
insuperable obstacles in the way of propagating his principles
in the two most powerful kingdoms in Europe. One was, a
solemn decree, condemning his opinions, publfihed by the uni-
verfity of Paris, the most ancient, and at that time the most
respeCtable of the learned societies in Europe., The other was,
the answer written to his book concerning the- Babylonifh cap-
tivity by Henry VIII. of England. That young monarch, hav-
ing been educated under the eye of a suspicious father, who,
in order to prevent his attending to business, kept him occupied
in the tudy of literature, still retained a greater love ofilearn.
ing, and, stronger habits of application to it, than are common
among Princes of so acive a disposition, and such violent pafllons
and being ambitious of acquiring glory of every kind; as well as
zealously attached to the Romilh church, and highly exasperated
against Luther, who had treated Thomas Aquinas, his favourite
author, with great contempt, he did not think it enough to
exert his royal authority in opposing the opinions of the reformer,
but resolved likewise to combat them with foholaftic weapons.
With this view .he published his treatise on the Seven Sacra4
ments, which, though forgotten at present, as books of contro-
verfy always are, when the occasion which produced them is past.
is not destitute of polemical ingenuity and acuteness, and' was
represented by the flattery of his courtiers to be; a .work of' such
wonderful science and learning, as exalted him no less above other
authors in merit, than he was distinguished among.them by his
rank. The pope, to whom it was presented. with the greateRf
formality in full consistory, fp.ke of it. in such terms, as if it had.

been.

BOOK IL

Decree of the
university of
Paris con-
dening
them.

Henry VIII.
writer againf
them.

125

Boo K IL

Luther's reply
to both.

State of as-
fairs between
Charles and
Francis.

been ditated by immediate inspiration; and as a testimony of
the gratitude of the church for his extraordinary zeal, conferred
on him the title of Defender of the Faith, an appellation which
Henry oon forfeited in the opinion of those from whom he
derived it, and which is still the title of his fucceflbrs, though
the avowed enemies of those opinions, by contending for which
he merited that honourable diftintion. Luther, who was not
overawed either by the authority of the University, or the dig-
nity of the Monarch, soon published his animadversions on both
in a file no less vehement and severe than he would have used
in confuting his meanest antagonist. This indecent boldness
instead of shocking his contemporaries, was confidered by them
as a new proof of his undaunted spirit; a controversy managed
by disputants so illustrious, drew more general attention; and
such was the contagation of the spirit of innovation, diffused
through Europe in that age, and o powerful the evidence which
accompanied the doctrines of the reformers on their first publica-
tion, that, in spite both of the civil and ecclesiastical powers
combined against them, they daily gained converts both in France
and in England.

HOWEVER desirous the Emperor might be to put a stop to

Luther's progress, he was often obliged, during the diet at Worms,
toturn his thoughts to matters fill more interesting, and which
demanded more immediate attention. A war was ready to break
out between him and Francis in Navarre, in the Low Countries,
and in Italy; and it required either great address to avert
the danger, or timely and wife precautions to resist it.
Every circumstance, at that juncture, inclined Charles to prefer
the former measure. Spain was torn with intestine commotions.
In Italy, he had not hitherto ficured the afiftance of any one

ally.
I.26

ally. In the Low-Countries, his fubjets trembled at the
thoughts of a rupture with France, the fatal effets of which on
their commerce they had often experienced. From there con-
fiderations, as well as from the solicitude of Chievres during his
whole adminifiration to maintain peace between the two
monarchs, proceeded the Emperor's backwardness to com-
mence hostilities. But Francis and his ministers did not breatle
the fame pacific spirit. He easily foresaw that concord could
not long subsist, where interest, emulation, and ambition con-
spired to difiolve it; and he posseed several advantages which
flattered him with the hopes of surprising his rival, and of over-
powering him before he could put himself in a posture of defence.
The French King's dominions, from their compaa situation,
from their fubjedion to the royal authority, from the genius of
the people, fond of war, and attached to their overeign by every
tie of duty and affection, were more capable of a great or sudden
effort, than the larger but disunited territories of the Emperor,
in one part of which the people were in arms against his mini-
fters, and in all his prerogative was more limited than that of his
rival.

THE only princes, in whose power it was to have kept down,

or to have extinguished this flame on its first appearance, either
neglectcd to exert themselves, or were active in kindling and
spreading it. Henry VIII. though he asseted to assume the
name of mediator, and both parties made frequent appeals to
him, had laid aside the impartiality which suite'd that character.
Wolfey, by his artifices, had eranged him bo'e tirely from the
French King, that he secretly fomented the difidrd which he ought
to have compoeed, and waited only for some decent pretext to join.
his arms to the Emperor's '.

BOOK II.

Henry Vllt.
favours the
Emperor.

..s Life of Wolfey, .',
a Herbert Fiddse* Life of Wolfecy,. 25p

Lu~o's

Ia7

BOOK II.

Leo hesitates
between the
rival.s

LBo's endeavours to excite discord between the Emperor and

Francis ere more avowed, and had greater influence. Not
only his duty, as the common father of Christendom, but his
interest as an Italian potentate, called upon the Pope to at as
the guardian of the public tranquillity, and to avoid any measure
that might overturn the system, which after much blood(hed,
and many egociations, was now eftablified in Italy. Accord-
ingly Leo, who instantly discerned the propriety of this conduct,
had formed a fcherie un Clitrle's prdititioi t the Iperial
dignity, of rendering hiimfelf the umpire betweeil the rivals, by
soothing them alternately, while he eitered iint no lodfe confe-
deracy with either; and a Pontiffldfs anmbitious ahd enterprizing,
might have saved Europe from many calamities by adhering to
this plan. But this high-fpirited prelate, wh6 was still in the
prime of life, longed paflinately to dittiiiguifh is sottifitte
by some flendid actio. He was impatient t Wath a*ay the
infamy of having loft Parrma atd Placentia, the acqdifitio of
which cflected so much lustre on the adminiftrationr of his pre-
deceffor Julius. He beheld, with the indignation natural. to Ita-
lians in that age, the dominion which the Transalpine, or as they
in imitation of the Roman arrogance denominated them, the
baibarous nations, hid attained in Italy. He flatterc'd himself,
that after aITifirlg the one monarch to itrip the other of his p'of-
feflions in that country, he might find means of driving out the
victor in his turn, and acquire the glory of restoring ftaly to the
liberty and happiness it enjoyed before the invasion of Charles
VIII. when every fiate was governed by its native princes, or its
own law6, and unacquainted with a foreign yoke. Extra vagaint
and chimerical as this projet may seem, it was the favourite
objet of almost every Italian eminent for genius or enterprize
during great part of the sixteenth century ; they vainly hoped,
that by superior {kill ii '"the' atifices and refinements of negocia-

tion,

EMPEROR CHARLES V.

I29

tion, they would be able to baffle the efforts of nations, ruder BOOK II.
indeed than themselves, but mich more powerful and warlike. So
alluring was the profpet of this to Leo, that notwithstanding
the gentleness of his disposition, and his fondness for the pleasures
of a refined and luxurious ease, he hastened to diiturb the peace
of Europe, and to plunge himself in a dangerous war, with an
impetuosity scarce inferior to that of the turbulent and martial Ju-
lius .

IT was in Leo's power, however, to chufe which of the mon-

archs he would take for his confederate agaitnft the other. Both
of them courted his friendship; he wavered for ome time
between them, and at first concluded an alliance with Francis.
The object of this treaty was the conquest of Naples, which
the confederates agreed to divide between them. The Pope, it
is probable, flattered himself that the brifl and active spirit of
Francis, seconded by the fame qualities in his fubjets, would
get the tfart of the flow and wary councils of the Emperor, and
that they might over-run with ease this detached portion of his
dominions, ill provided for defence, and always the prey of
every invader. But whether the French King, by discovering
too openly his suspicions of Leo's sincerity, disappointed there
hopes; whether the treaty was only an artifice of the Pope's, to
cover the more serious negociations he was carrying on with
Charles; whether he was enticed by the profpec of reaping
greater advantages from an union with that prince; or whether
he was oothed by the zeal which Charles had manifefRed for the
honour of the church in condemning Luther; certain it is, that Concludes a
le oon deserted his new ally, and made overtures of friendship, treaty wvith'
though with great secrecy, to the Emperor . Don John Manuel,

bGuic .

1. 4. p. 173. c Guic, lib. 1. p. 175. Mem, d Bellay, Par. i573. P. 34.
VOL. II. S the

BOOK II. the fame man who had been the favourite of Philip, and whose

address had disconcerted all Ferdinand's schemes, having been
delivered, upon the death of that monarch, from the prison to
which he was confined, was now the Imperial ambaflador at
Rome, and fully capable of improving this favourable difpofi-
tion in the Pope to his master's advantage d. To him the con-
dud of this negociation was entirely committed, and being
carefully concealed from Chievres, whose aversion from a war
with France would have prompted him to retard or defeat it, an
May 8. alliance between the Pope and Emperor was quickly concludede.

The chief articles in this treaty, which proved the foundation of
Charles's grandeur in Italy, were, that the Pope and Errperor,
should join their forces to expel the French out of the Milanese,
the poffefion of which should be granted to Francis Sforza, a
son of Ludovico the Moor, and who had resided at Trent since
the time his brother Maximilian had been difpolfeffed of his
dominions by the French king; that Parma and Placentia
should be restored. to the church ; that the Emperor should
assist the Pope in conquering Ferrara; that the annual tribute
paid by the kingdom of Naples to the Holy See hould be in-
created; that the Emperor should take the family of Medici
under his protection; that he should grant to the Cardinal of
that name a pension of ten thousand ducats upon the arch-
bilhoprick of Toledo; and fettle lands in the kingdom of
Naples to the fame value upon' Alexander the natural son of
Lorenzo de Medici.

Death of THE tranfa&ing an affair of such moment without his parti-
Chievres. the cipation, appeared to Chievres so decisive a proof of his having
Emperor's fa-
vourite and loft the acendant which he had hitherto maintained over the
rninillter.

d Jovii VitaLeonis libiv. p, 89. eGuic. i. 14, 181. Mer. de. Bellay,
p, 24. Du Mont Corps Diplorn. tom. iv. uppl. p. 96.

mind
130

mind of his pupil, that his chagrin on this account added to Boo I.
the melancholy with which he was overwhelmed on taking a
view of the many and unavoidable calamities attending a war
against France, is fid to 1h.vc hortened his days'. But though
this, perhaps, may be only the conjedure of historians, fond of
attributing every thing tlat befals illustrious personages to extra-
ordinary causes, and of ascribing even their diseases and death
to the effet of political pallions, which oftener difttrb the en-
joyment than they ab ..ge the period of life, it is certain that
his death at this critical juncture extinguished all hopes of
avoiding a rupture with France '. This event, too, delivered
Charles from a minister, to whose authority he had been accuf-
tomed from his infancy to submit with fiuch implicit deference,
as checked and deprelfed his genius, and retained him in a Rate
of pupillage, unbecoming both his years and his rank ; but tiss
restraint being removed, the native powers of his mind weir
allowed to unfold themselves, and he displayed fiCli great talents,
both in council and in execution, as exceeded the hpes of his
contemporaries h, ahd command the adtniration of posterity.

WHILE the Pope and Emperor were preparing, in confe-

quence of their secret alliance, to attack Milan, hostilities com-
menced in another quarter. The children of John d'Albret
King of Navarre having often demanded the restitution of
their hereditary dominions, in terms of the treaty of Noyon,
and Charles having as often eluded their request upon very fri-
volous pretexts, Francis thought himself authorized by that
treaty to aflift the exiled family. The junture appeared ex-
tremely favourable for such an enterprize. Charles was at a

f Belcari Comment, de reb. Gallic. 483
lib. viii. c. ni. p. 97. h P. Mart. Ep. 735.

Commence-
ment of hofti-
lities in
Navarre.
6 P. Hcuter. Rer. AuRriae.

difiance

t31

BOOK II. distance from that part of his dominions; the troops usually
'^^ flationed there had been called away to quell the commotions

in Spain ; the Spanish malcontellts warmly follicited him to invade
Navarre', in whicha considerable faction was ready to declare
for the descendants of their ancient monarchs. But in order to
avoid, as much as poflible, giving offence to the Emperor, or King
of England, Francis directed forces to be levied, and the war to
be carried on, not in his own name, but in that of Henry d'Albret.
The conduct of there troops was committed to Andrew de Foix,
de l'Efparre, a young nobleman, whom his near alliance to the
unfortunate King whose battles he was to fight, and what was
still more powerful, the interest of his filler, madame de Chateau-
briand, Francis's favourite mistress, recommended to that impor-

Progress of tant trust, for which he had neither talents nor experience. But
the French as there was no army in the field to oppose him, he became

master, in a few days, of the whole kingdom of Navarre, with-
out meeting with any obftrucioi but from the citadel of Pam-
peluna. The additional works to this fortress begun by Ximenes,
were still unfinished ; nor would its flight resistance have deserved
notice, if Ignatio Loyola, a Bifcayan gentleman, had not been
dangerously wounded in its defence. During the progress of a
lingering cure, Loyola happened to have no other amusement
than what he found in reading the lives of the faints: The effect
of this on his mind, naturally enthusiastic, but ambitious and
daiing, was to inspire him with such a desire of emulating the
glory of there fabulous worthies of the Romillh church, as led
iiim into the wildest and most extravagant adventures; which
terminated at last in instituting the society of Jesuits, the most
political and best regulated of all the monastic orders, and from

P. Mart. Ep, 711.

whicl
J32

which mankind have derived more advantages, and received BooK II.
greater hurt, than from any other of these religious fraternities.

I F, upon the reducion of Pampeluna, L'Efparre had been Th!e enter

satisfied with taking proper precautions for securing his conquest, Ca
the kingdom of Navarre might still have remained annexed to
the crown of France, in reality, as well as in title. But, pulhed
on by youthful ardour, and encouraged by Francis, who was
too apt to be dazzled with success, he ventured to pals the con-
fines of Navarre, and to lay siege to Logrogno, a small city in
Castile. This rouzed the Castilians, who had hitherto beheld the
rapid progress of his arms with great unconcern, and the diffin-
sions in that kingdom being almost composed, both parties ex-
erted themselves with emulation in defence of their country; the
one that it might efface the memory of past misconduct by their
present zeal; the other that it might add to the merit of having
subdued the Emperor's rebellious ilbjes, that of repulsing his
foreign enemies. The sudden advance of their troops, together
with the gallant defence made by the inhabitants of Logrogno,
obliged the French general to abandon his rash enterprize. The

They are de-

Spanish army; which increased every day, harassing him during feated, and
his retreat, he, inflead of taking shelter under the cannon of Pam- N^vearrt of
peluna, dr waitiig the arrival of some troops who were marching
to join him, attacked the Spaniards, though far superior to him
in number, with great impetuosity, but with o little conduct,
that his forces were totally routed, he himself, together itll his
principal officers, was taken prif.ner, and Spain recovered pof-
fellion of Navarre in fill shorter time than the French hld spent in
the coiqucf of it .

i. Mom. de Bcllay, p.' a. P. Mart. Ep. 76.

W\H 1r L

z3S

BOOK II.
HoRilities be-

n in the

Low Coun-
tries.

WHILE Francis endeavoured to justify his invafiol of Navarre,

by carrying it on in the name of Henry D'Albret, he had recourse
to an artifice much of the fame kind, in attacking another part
of the Emperor's territories. Robert de la Marck, lord of the
small but independent territory of Bouillon, situated on the fron-
tiers of Luxembourg and Champagne, having abandoned Charles's
service on account of an encroachment which the Aulic council
made on his jurifdi&ion, and having thrown himself upon France
for protetion, was easily persuaded, in the heat of his resentment,
to fend a herald to Worms, and to declare war in form against
the Emperor. Such extravagant insolence in a petty prince fur-
prized Charles, and appeared to him a certain proof of his having
received promises of powerful support from the French King.
The justness of this conclusion oon became evident. Robert with
troops levied in France, by the King's connivance, though seem-
ingly in contradiction to his orders, entered Luxembourg, and after
ravaging the open country, laid siege to Vireton. Of this Charles
complained loudly, as a diret violation of the peace subsisting be.
tween the two crowns, and summoned Henry VIII. in terms of the
treaty concluded at London in the year one thousand five hundred
and eighteen, to turn his arms againift France as the first aggressor;
and though Francis pretended that he was not answerable for
Robert's conduct, whose army fought under his own standards,
and in his own quarrel, and who, contrary to an express prohibi-
tion, had seduced ome fubjets of France into his service; Henry
paid so little regard to this evasion, that the French King, rather
than irritate a prince whom he still hoped to gain, commanded de
la Marck to diband his troops'.

1 Mee. de Bellay, p. 22, &c. Mem. de Fleuranges, p. 335, &c.

TH ;
' 34

THE Emperor, meanwhile, was afrembling an army to chastise BOOK 11.

Robert's insolence. Twenty tlousand men under the count of
Naflau invaded his little territories, and in a few days become
masters of every place in them but Sedat. After making him
feel so sensibly the weight of his matter's indignation, Natfau
advanced towards the frontiers of France; and Charles knowing
that he might presume so far on Henry's partiality in his favour,
as not to be over-awed by the fame fears which had restrained
Francis, ordered his gene.al to besiege Moufon. The cowardice
of the garrison having obliged tlhe governor to surrender almost
without refitance, Naflau inverted Mezicres, a pace at that time Mezieres by,
of no considerable strength, but so advantageously situated, that tle lnpe'
by getting polfeflion of it the Imperial army might have pene-
trated into the heart of Champagne, in which there was scarce
any other town capable of obft:utiig its progres. Happily for
Fra:lce, its monarch, sensible of the importance of this fortress,,
and of the danger to which it was exposed, committed the defence'
of it to the chevalier Bayard, distinguished among his'contem-
poraries by the appellation of T7e Knight Witiout ear, and with-
out reproach M. This man, whose prowess in combat, whose
punctilious honour and formal gallantry, bear a nearer refem-
blance, than any thing recorded in history, to the character
ascribed to the heroes of chivalry, pofeffled all the talents which
form a great general. Thele he had many occasions of exerting
in the defence of Mezieres; partly by his valour,. partly by
his conduct, he protraced the siege to a great length, and in the
end obliged the Imperialists to raise it, with ifamy and loss'. Raifcid,
Francis at the head of a numerous army soon retook Moufon, and
entering, the Low-Countries, made fevcral conquefis of small
importance. In the neighbourhood of Valenciennes, through

m Ocuvres de Brantome, toni, vi . n Me. de Bellay, p. 25, &c.

an

135

BOOK I - an excess of caution, an error with which he cannot be often

-1' charged, he loft an opportunity of cutting off the whole Imperial

army ; and what was still of more consequence, he disgusted the
constable Bourbon, by giving the command of the van to the duke
D'Alenson, though this post of honour belonged to Bourbon, as a
prerogative of his office.

Augu(t. DURING there operations in the field, a congress was held at

Congress at Calais under the mediation of Henry VIII. in order to bring
Calais, under
the mediation all differences to an amicable issue; and if the intentions of the
of England, mediator had corresponded in any degree to his profeflions, it

could scarce have failed of producing rome good effect. Henry
committed the sole management of the negociation, with unli-
mited powers, to Wolfey; and this choice alone was sufficient to
have rendered it abortive. That prelate, bent on attaining the
papal crown, the great objet of his ambition, and ready to facri-
fice every thing in order to gain the Emperor's interest, was so
little able to conceal his partiality, that if Francis had not been
well acquainted with his haughty and vindictive temper, he
would have declined his mediation. Much time was spent in
inquiring who had begun hostilities, which Wolfey affeced to
represent as the principal point and by throwing the blame of
that on Francis, he hoped to justify by the treaty of London,
any alliance into which his master ihould enter with Charles.
The conditions on which hostilities might be terminated, came

without any
cffea. next to be confidered; but with regard to these, the Emperor's

proposals were such as discovered either that he was utterly averse
from peace, or that he knew Wolfey would approve of whatever
should be offered in his name. He demanded the reftittion of
the dutchy of Burgundy, a province, the pofeflion of which

o P. Mart. Ep. 747. Mem. de Bellay, 35.

would
i36

137

would have given him access into the heart of the kingdom;
and required a discharge of the homage due to the crown of
France for the counties of Slanders and Artois, which none of
his anceltors had ever refuted, and which he had bound himself
by the treaty of Noyon to renew. These terms, to which an
high-fpirited prince would scarce have listened, after the difalfers
of the most unfortunate war, Francis rejected with great dif-
dain; and Charles ihewing no inclination to comply with the
more equal and moderate propositions. of the French monarch,
that he fghuld restore Navarre to its lawful prince, and withdraw
his troops from the siege of Tournay, the congress broke up
without any other effect, than that which attends unsuccessful
negociations, the exasperating of the parties, whom it was in-
tended to reconcileP.

DURING the ontinuance of the congress, Wolfey, on pre-

tence that the Emperor himself would be more willing to make
reasonable conceflions than his ministers, made an excursion to
Bruges, to meet that monarch. He Was received by Charles,
who knew his vanity, with as much refped and magnificence as
if he had been King of England. But instead of advancing the
treaty of peace by this interview, Wolfey, in his master's name,
concluded a league with the Emperor againfi Francis; in which
it. was tipulated, that Charles hould invade France on the fide
of Spain, and Henry in Picardy, each with an army of forty
thousand men; and that, in order to strengthen their union,
Charles should espouse the Princess Mary, Henry's only child,
and the apparent heir of his dominions . Henry produced no
better reasons for this measure, equally unjust and impolitic, than
the article in the treaty of London, by which he pretended that

pP. Mart. E., 739. Herbert.
VOL, II.

T

BOOK II.
:.;C

League a-
gaint France
between the
Emperor and
Henry VIII.
q Rymer, Feeder. xiii. Herbert.

he

tooK II. he was bound to take arms against the French King as the first

~'-v aggressor; and the injury which he alledged Francis hid done

him, in permitting the duke of Albany, the head of a faction il
Scotland which opposed his interest, to return into that king-
dom. He was influenced, however, by other consideration's.
The advantages which accrued 6 his subject from minitaining
an exat neutrality, or the honour that resulted to himself frori
ating as th arbiter between contending princes, appeared to
his youthful imagination so inconfideiable, wliten compared with
the glory which Chirle ihand Francis reaped from leaiing'iiaries
6r conqidring provinces, that he Aetermined to remain ho longer
in a state ds inactivity. I1aving once 'taken this resolution, his
inducements to prefer in alliance ivith Charles were obvious. He
had no claim upon any part of that Prince's dominions, most of
which were so situated, that he could not attack them withqut
great difficulty and diadvantage. whereas several maritime pro-
vinces of France had been long in the hands of the Engli(h
monarchs, whose pretensions, even to the crown of that king-
dom, were not altogether forgotten; and the poffeflion of Calais
not only gave him easy acceis into some of there provinces, but
afforded him, in cafe of any difater, a secure retreat. While
'Charles attacked France upon one frontier, Henry flatterel him-
self that he 'would findl little resistance on the otber, and that
the glory of re-annexing to the crown of England 'the ancient
inheritance'of its monarchs on the continent, was reserved for
his reign. Wolfey artfully encouraged there vain'hopes, vhich
'led his master into fich 'meatures as awere hioft fubfervenit 'to
his own ieret rchemcs; aind the Eng'lihi,' wboe hereditary ani-
moity against the French was apt to 'rekiiindle on every occao6n,
lid not disapprove 'of the'rrtial'rpi'it oftheiirfovereign.

ME'AN-
j1 ,'

139

MaNarWHILE the league between the Pope and Emperor pro.

duced great effcits in Italy, and rendered Lombardy the chief
theatre of war. There was, at that time, such contrariety be-
tween the character of.the French and'Italians, that the latter sub-
mitted .to the government of the former with greater impatience,
than hcy xprelced under the dominion of other foreigners. The
phlegm of the Qermnans and gravity of the Spaniards, suited their
jealous temper and ceremonious manners better than the French
gaiety, too prone to gallantry, and too little attentive to decorum.
Lewis XII, however, by the equity and gentleness of his admi-
niftratlon, and by granting the Milanese more extensive privi-
leges than they had enjoyed under their native princes, had over-
come, in a great measure, their prejudices, and reconciled them
to the French government. Francis, on recovering that dutchy,
did not imitate the example of his.prcdeceflbr; and though too
generous himself to oppress his people, his confidence in his
favourites, and his negligence in examining into the condu6t of
those whom he.entrufted with power, emboldened them to ven.
ture upon many ats of opprefion. The government of Milan
was committed by him to Odet de Foix, Marechal de Lautrec,
another brother of Madame de Chateau-Briand, an officer of great
experience and reputation, but haughty, imperious, rapacious
and incapable either of listening to advice, or of bearing contra-
di6tion. His insolence and exactions totally alienated the
affe&ions of the Milanese from France, drove many of the con-
fiderable citizens into banishment, and forced others to retire for
their own safety. Among the last was Jerome Merone, vice-
chancellor of Milan, a man whose genius for intrigue and
enterprize distinguished him in an age and country, here vio-
lent facions, as well as frequent revolutions, affording great
scope for such talents, produced or called them forth in great
abundance. He repaired to Francis Sforza, whose brother Maxi-

T 2 milian

Boo IL

Hot'litii in
taly.

The MitaneI
digusled ith
the rench'
government.

BOOK II. milian he had betrayed; and fufpecing the Pope's intention of

attacking the Milanese, although his treaty with the Emperor
was not yet made publick, proposed to him, in name of Sforza,
a scheme for furprizing several places in that dutchy by means
of the exiles, who, from hatred to the French, and from attach-
ment to their former masters, were ready for any desperate
attempt. Leo not only encouraged the attempt, but advanced
a considerable fum towards the execution of it; and when through
unforeseen accidents it failed of success in every part, he allowed
the exiles who had assembled in, a body, to retire. to Reggio,
which belonged at that time to the church. The Marechal de
Foix, who commanded at Milan in absence of his brother Lautrec,
who was then in France, tempted with the hopes of catching at
June 4.

once as in a snare, all the avowed enemies of his master's govern-
ment in that country, ventured to march into the ecclesiastical
territories, and to invest Reggio. But the vigilance and good
conduc of Guicciardini the historian, governour of that place,
obliged the French general to abandon the enterprize with dif-

ThePopede- grace Leo, on receiving this intelligence, with which he was
Cares against highly pleased, as it furnished him a decent pretext for a rup-

Franis. ture with France, immediately assembled the consistory of Car-

dinals, and complaining bitterly of the hostile intentions of the
French King, and magnifying the Emperor's zeal for the
church, of which he had given a recent proof by his proceedings
against Luther, declared that he was constrained in felf-defence,
and as the only expedient for the security of the ecclesiastical
iate to join his arms to those of that prince. For this purpose,
he now pretended to conclude a treaty with Don John Manuel,
although it had really been signed ome months before this time;
and he publickly excommunicated De Foix, as an impious inva-
der of St. Peter's patrimony.

Guic. lib. xiv. 183. Mere. de Bellay, p.. 8, &c.

LEO
14o

LEO had already begun preparations for war by taking into BOOK I.

pay a confiderablq body of Swiss but te Imperial troops ad- war in the
vanced so slowly from Naples and Gernany, that it was the Milanese.
middle of autumn before the army took the field under thq
command of Prosper Colonna, the most eminent of the Italian
generals, whose long experience and extreme caution were op-
posed with great propriety to the impetuosity of the French. . In
tlie mean' time, De Foix dispatched 'courier after courier to
inform the King of the danger which 'was approaching.' Francis,
whose forces were either employed in the Low-countries, or
assembling on the frontiers of Spain, and who' did :'not expect
so sudden' an attack in that quarter, efit ambafladora to.hisallies
the SwiCs,' to procure from them the' immediateletry.of an
additional body of troops; and commanded Lautrec to ;repair
forthwith to his governments That general, who was well ac-
quainted with the great negle& of oeconomy in the dmiiniftrt-
tion of the King's finances, and who knew how much 'th& troops
in the Milanese had already suffered from the want of their pay,
refused to set out, unless the fum of three hundred thoufaid
'crowns was immediately put intr' his hands. .But. the'King,
Louise of, Savoy, his mother, aid Semblancay,' the fuperinten-
dant of finances, having promised, even with antoath, that on
his arrival at Milan he sh'ould fin'd :renitthnces for the film which
he demanded; upon the faith of this, 'hei'ddpartedi- Unhappily
for France, Louise, a woman deceitful,: vindi6tie, rapacious and
capable of sacrificing any thin'gto the' gratifieatiof:of bet':paf-
sions, but who had acquired an absolute ascendant over her. son
by her maternal tenderness, her careof his education,' and her
great abilities, was resolved not to perform thfs protiife.
Lautrec having incurred her difpaleaire by hlis'liauhtinefsin
neglecting to pay court to her and br the &frdoin with'whichl
he talked concerning ome of her adventures in gallantry, he,

in

141

14 THE 1REIGN OF THE

Book It. in order to deprlvehim of the honour which he might have gained
L-v by a uccefsful defence of the Milanese, seized the three hundred

thoufhud crowns destined for that service, and detained them for
her own use.

Pro e. LAUTRaC, notwithtanding this crud disappointment found
ProgreCT of
the mp- means to amble a onfiderable army, though far inferior

rla. in number to that of the confederates. He adopted the

plan of defence aoft fuitableto his situation, avoiding a pitched
battle with the greatest care, while he harrafied the enemy con-
tinuslly with his light troops, beat up their quarters, intercepted
their convoys, and covered or relieved every place which they
attempted to attack. By this prudent condut, he not only re.
tarded their :progress, but would have soon wearied out the
Poqp, who had hithertodefrayed almost the whole expence of the
wa4, .a the Emperor, whos e;revenues in Spain' were difi-
pated during the commotions in that country, and who .was
obliged to support a numerous army in the Netherlands, could
not male any considerable .remittances into Italy. But
an .unforeseen aqcident disconcerted all his measures, ad
oceafiond a fatal revetfe in',the French affairs. A body of
twelVe thousand Swiss served in their army under the banners
,bs therepublick, with which France was i alliance, By a law,
*do les ppdlitial than, huwmne, eftablithed among the canton, .their
!troops,Wrer; not hiredr ut by publick authority .to both the con-
-tending parties. in any war. This law, the love of, gain.ad
sometimes eluded, and private persons had been allowed to enlist
in what service they pleased, though not under the publick
brner, btt under those of their officers. The Cardinal of
.Sion,. who till preserved his interest among his countrymen, and
his etrnity to France, hiaing prevailed on them to .ptrmtit a

levy

t43

levy of this kind, twelve thousand Swiss joined the army of the BOOK II.
confederates. The cantons, when they afw so many of their
countrymen marching under hostile flandards, and ready to de-
froy each other, became sensible of the infamy to which they.
would be exposed, as well as the loss they might susser, and dif-
pathed couriers, commanding them to leave both rmies, and to
return into their own country. The Cardinal of Sion, however,'had
:the addret, by corrupting the nmefengers appointed to carry this
order, to prevent its being delivered to the Swiss in the service bs
the conrfederates 'but being itimated in due form to those in the
trettch army, they, fatigued with the length of the campaign, and
Trtirruring for want of pay, 'irftantly yielded obedience in spite of
Itautrec's rernonirances and intreaties..

AFTER the desertion of a body which formeitd the strength Become

aftrers of,

of his army, Lautrec dprRt no longer face the confederates; MiUan
and returning towards Milan, encamped on the banks of the
Adda, and placed .his chief hopes of tfiety in preventing ,thd
enemy from passing the river an expdient.for deferdiN a
country so precarious, that there are few examples of its
being employed with: success against any general of expe-
rience or abilitics. Acordiqgly .Clona, ntwithftpaning Lau-
trec's vigilance and aCivity, ,pased .the Adsa with.,little ofs,,
and obliged him to (hut himself up within the wals of Milan,.
which the confederates. were preparing to Jbfiege when an un-
known person, who never afterwards appeared iths.r to ,Jboat
of this fervic, or to clait a ,re.wvrld fipr it, ap frfi rRthe iy.
and acquainted .Moronl :that if .the ary my w.ould advwanc .that
night, the Ghibelline or Imperial faction would put them in pof-
eflion of one f the gates. 'Colonna, though mnofriend to ralh.
enterprizes, allowed the' marquis de Pescara to advance with the
Spanish infantry, and he himself followed with the reft of his

troops.

BOOK II. troops. About the beginning of night, Pescara arriving at the

Roman gate in the suburbs, furprized the soldiers whom he
found there; those posted in the fortifications adjoining to it,
immediately fled; the marqiis, seizing the works which they
abandoned, and puffing forward .incefantly, though with no
left caution than vigour, became master of the city with little
bloodshed, and almost without resistance; the vi&tors being as
much astonished as the vanquished at the facility and success of
the attempt. Lautrec retired precipitately towards the Venetian
territories with the remains of his hattered army; the cities of
the Milanese following the fate of the capital, surrendered to the
confederates; Parma and Placentia were united to the ecclefi-
aftical state, and of all their conquests in Lombardy, only the
town of Cremona, the cattle of Milan, and a few inconsiderable
forts: remainedin the hands of the Frenchb.

Death of LEO received the accounts of this rapid fuccefflon of prosper.
Leo X. ous events with such transports ofjoy, as brought on if we may

believe' tie Fr&ech historians) a flight fever, which being
negleced, occasioned his death on the second of December, while
he was still of a vigorous age, and at the height of his glory. By
this unexpected accident, the spirit of the confederacy was
broken, 'and' its operations futpended. The Cardinals of Sion
and Medict left the army that they might be present in the
conclave'; the Swiss were recalled '.by their superiors; some
other mercenaries disbanded for want of pay; and only the Spa-
niards, and a feW Germans in the Emperor's service, remained
to defend' the Milanese. BtLautrec, destitute both of men and
of money, was 'unable to improve this favourable opportunity in

b Guic. . xiv. 90o, &c. Mem. de Bellay, 43, &c. Galeacii Capella de reb. gel.
prp reftituit. Fran. Sfortic Commert. ap. Scardium, vol. ii. 180, &c.

*

-.. : * ';) :' { he
r44

the manner he would have wished. The vigilance of Morons,
and the good conduct of Colonna, disappointed his feeble
attempts on the Milanese; and.Guicciardini, by his address and
valour, repulsed a bolder and more dangerous attack which he
made on Parma '.

MEANWHILE great discord prevailed in the conclave, which

followed upon Leo's death, and all the arts natural to men
grown old in intrigue, when contending for prize so valuable,
were pratifed. Wolsey's name, notwithtanding all the Empe-
ror's magnificent promises to favour his pretensions, of which
that prelate did not fail to remind him, was scarce mentioned in
the conclave. Julio Cardinal de Medici, Leo's nephew, who was
more eminent than any other member of the sacred college for
his abilities, his wealth, and his experience in tranfating great
affairs, had already secured fifteen voices, a number ufficent,
according to the forms of the conclave, to exclude any other
candidate, though not to carry his own election. All the
old cardinals combined against him, without being united
in favour of any other person. While there facions were
endeavouring to gain, to corrupt, or to weary out each other,
Medici and his adherents voted one morning at the fcru-
tiny, which according to form was made every day, for Cardi-
nal Adrian of Utrecht, who at that time governed Spain in the
Emperor's name. This they did merely to protra& time ; but
the adverse party instantly closing with them, to their own
amazement and that of all Europe, a stranger to Italy, unknown
to the persons who gave their suffrages in his favour, and unac-
quainted with the' manners of the people, or the interest of the
state, the government of which they conferred upon him, was

c Guic. I. xiv. 214.

U

unani-
' TOL. II.

BooK II.

Adrian cleft
ed Pope.

145

BOOK I.

January 9.

War renewed
in the
Milanese.

unanimously raised to the papal throne, at a junEture o delicate
and critical, as would have demanded all the sagacity and expe-
rience of one of the most able prelates in the sacred college. The
Cardinals themselves, unable to give a reason for this strange
choice, on account of which, as they marched in proceflion from
the conclave, they were loaded with insults and curses by the
Roman people, ascribed it to an immediate impulse of the Holy
Ghost. It may be imputed with greater certainty to the influ-
ence of Don John Manuel, the Imperial ambassador, who by his
address and intrigues facilitated the election of a person devoted
to his master's service, from gratitude, from interest, and from
inclination d

BESIDES the influence which Charles acquired by Adrian's pro-

motion, it threw great lustre on his administration. To bestow on
his preceptor such a noble recompence, and to place on the papal
throne a creature whom he had raised, were as of uncommon
magnificence and power. Francis observed, with the sensibility
of a rival, the pre-eminence which he was gaining, and resolved
to exert himself with fresh vigor, in order to wrest from him his
late conquests in Italy. The Swiss, in order to make some repara-
tion to the French King, for having so unseasonably withdrawn
their troops from his army, which had occasioned the loss of
the Milanese, permitted him to levy ten thousand men in the
republick. Together with this reinforcement, Lautrec received
from the King a small fum in money, which enabled him once
more to take the field, and after seizing by furprize, or force,
several places in the Milanese, to advance within a few miles of
the capital. The confederate army was in no condition to

d Ger. MorngtVita Hadriani ap. Cafp. Burman. in Analeft. de Hadr. p. 52.
Conclave Hadr. Ibid. 144, &c.

obftrt&t
146

EMPEROR CHARLES V.

147

obftru& his progress; and though the inhabitants of Milan, BooK II.
inflamed by the artifices of Moron>, and by the poptlar decla-
mations of a monk whom he employed, with the most enthusiastic
zeal against the French government, consented to ra fe extraordinary
contributions, Colonna must soon have abandoned the advantageous
camp he had choren at Bicocca, and have dismissed his troops for
want of pay, if the Swiss in the French service had not once more
extricated him out of his difficulties.

The insolence and caprice of that people were often no les The French

defeated In

fatal to their friends, than their valour and discipline were for- the battle of
midable to their enemies. Having now served some months CO
without pay, of which they complained loudly, a urn destined
for their use was lent from France under a convoy of horse; but
Morone, whose vigilant eye nothing escaped, posted a body of
troops in their way, o that those who escorted the money durst
not advance. On receiving intelligence of this, the Swiss loft all
patience, and officers as well as soldiers crowding around Lautrec,
threatened with one voice instantly to retire, if he did not either
advance thepay which was due, or promise to lead them next
morning to battle. In vain did Lautrec remonstrate against
there demands, representing to them the impoflibility of the for-
mer, and the rashness of the latter, which must be attended with
certain deftruion, as the enemy occupied a camp naturally of
great strength, and which by art they had rendered almost inac-
ceflible. The Swiss, deaf to reason, and persuaded that their
valour was capable of surmounting every obstacle, renewed their
demand with greater fierceness, offering themselves to form the
van-guard, and to begin the attack. Lautrec, unable to over-
come their obstinacy, complied with their request, hoping, per-
haps, that some of those unforeseen accidents which o often

U 2

determine

BOOK II. determine the fate of battles, might crown this rath enterprize

with undeserved success; and convinced that the effe&ts of a defeat
could not be more fatal than those which would certainly follow
upon the retreat of a body which composed one half of his army.
May. Next morning the Swiss were early in the field, and marched

with the greatest intrepidity against an enemy deeply intrenched
on every fide, surrounded with artillery, and prepared to receive
them. As they advanced, they sustained a furious cannonade
'522. with great firmness, and without waiting for their own artillery,

rushed impetuously upon the intrenchments. But after incredible
efforts of 'valour, seconded With great spirit by the French,
having loft their bravest officers and best troops, and finding that
they could make no imprelfion on the enemy's works, they founded
a retreat; leaving the field of battle, however, like men repulsed,
but not vanquished, in close array, and without receiving any
molestation from' the enemy.

Drtien out of NtxT day, such as survived set out for their own country1
the Milanese. and Lautrec, despairing of' being able to make any farther resist-

ance, retired into France, after throwing garrisons into Cremona,
and a few other places all which, except the citadel of 'Cremona,
Colbnna oon obliged to surrender.

GENOA, however,, and its territories, remaining fubje to

France, still gave Francis considerable footing in Italy, and made
it easy for him to execute any scheme for the recovery of the
Milanese. But Colonna, rendered enterprizil)g by continual
success, and excited by the follicitations of the faction of the
Adorni, the hereditary enemies of the Fregofi, who under the
proteation of France poffefled the chief authority in Genoa,
determined'to attempt the redution of that state; and accom-

plifhed

L.ose Genoa.
148

plifhed it with amazing facility. He became matter of Genoa BOOK II.
by an accident as unexpected as that which had given him pof-
fefiion of Milan ; and almost without opposition or bloodshed,
the power of the Adorni and the authority of the Emperor were
eftablifled i Genoa .

SUCH a cruel fucceflion of misfortunes asseted Francis with Henry VII.

declares war

deep concern, which was not a little augmented by the unex- against
peeted arrival of an Englih herald, who, in the name of his FanceO
sovereign, declared war in form against France. This tfep was May 29,
taken in consequence of the treaty Wolfey had concluded with
the Emperor at Bruges, and which had hitherto been kept
secret. Francis, though he had reason to be furprized with this
denunciation, after having been at filch pains to sooth Henry
and to gain his minister, received the herald with great compo-
lure and dignity '; and without abandoning any of the fchemcs
he was forming against the Emperor, began vigorous prepara.
tions for resisting this new enemy. His treasury, however,
being exhaustcd by the efforts which he had already made, as
well as by the fums he expended on his pleasures, he had re-
course to extraordinary expedients for supplying it. Several nev
offices were created, and exposed to sale ; the royal demefies
were alienated ; unusual taxes were imposed; and the tomb
of St. Martin was firipped of a rail of maflive silver, with
which Lewis XI. in one of his fits of devotion, had encircled it.
,By means of these expedients he was enabled to levy a confide-
rable army, and to put the frontier towns in a good posture of,
defence.

c Jovii Vita Feedin. Davali. p. 344. Guic. 1. xiv. 233.
i Journal do Louise de Savoic, p. 99.

149

BOOK It

Charles visits
England.

The Englilh
invadeFrance,
/

THE Emperor, mean while, was no less solicitous to draw as

much advantage as poflible from the acceflion of fucl a powerful
ally; and the prosperous situation of his affairs, at this time,
permitting him to set out for Spain, where his presence was
extremely necelfary, he visited the court of England in his way
to that country. He proposed by this interview not only to
strengthen the bonds of friendflip which united him and Henry,
and to excite hini to push the war against France with vigour,
but hoped to remove any disgust or resentment Wolfey might have
conceived on account of the cruel disappointment which he had

met with in the late conclave. His success exceeded his most
sanguine expectations ; and by'his artful address, during a refi-
dence of fix weeks in England, he gained not only the King and
the minister, but the nation itself. Henry, whose vanity was
sensibly flattered by such a visit, as well as by the studied refpea
with which the Emperor treated him on every occasion, entered
warmly into all his schemes. The Cardinal, foreseeing from
Adrian's age and infirmities,. a sudden vacancy in the papal fee,
:diflembled or forgot his resentment; and as Charles augmented
the pensions which he had already fettled on him, and renewed his
promise of favouring his pretensions to the papacy, with all his
interest, he endeavoured to merit the former, and to secure the
accomplishment of the latter, by fresh services. The nation,
sharing in the glory of its monarch, and pleased with the con-
fidence which the Emperor placed in the Engli(h by creating the
earl of Surrey, his high-admiral, discovered no less inclination to
commence hostilities than Henry himself.

IN order to give Charles, before he left England, a proof of

this general ardour, Surrey failed with such forces as were ready,
and ravaged the coasts of Normandy. He then, made a descent

on
150

oh Bretagne, where lie plundered and burnt Morlaix, and ome Bo OKII.
other places of less consequence. After there flight excursions,
attended with greater dishonour than damage to France, he re-
paired to Calais and took the command of the principal army, con-
filing of sixteen thousand men; with which having joined the
Flemifl troops under the count de Buren, he advanced into Pi-
cardy. The army which Francis had afembled, was far inferior in
number to these united bodies. But during the long wars between with little
the two nations, the French had discovered the proper method of
defending their country against the English. They had been
taught by their misfortunes to avoid a pitched battle with the ut-
most care, and to endeavour, by throwing garrisons into every
place capable of refitance, by watching all the enemy's motions,
by intercepting their convoys, attacking their advanced poRts, and
harafling them continually with their numerous cavalry, to ruin
them with the length of the war, or to beat them by piece meal;
This plan the duke of Vendome, the French general in Picardyi
pursued with no less prudence than success and not only prevented
Surrey from taking any town of importance, but obliged him to
retire with his army greatly reduced by fatigue, by want of pro.
visions, and by the loss it had sustained in several unsuccessful
skirmishes.

Ttlus ended the second campaign in a war the mot'general

that hitherto had been kindled in Europe; and though Francis,
by his mother's ill-timed resentment, by the difgufling insolence
of his general, and the caprice of the mercenary troops lie em-
ployed, had loft his conquets in Italy, yet all'tlie powers combined
against him had not been able to make any imprcilion on his here-
ditary dominions; and wherever they cither.intended or attempted
an attack, he wrs well prepared to receive them.

W1Ill,t

gg5

WHILE the Christian princes were thus wafting each other's

strength, Solyman the Magnificent entered Hungary with a
numerous army, and investing Belgrade, which was deemed the
chief barrier of that kingdom against the Turkish arms, soon
forced it to surrender. Encouraged by this success, he turned
his vi&torious arms against the island of Rhodes, the feat, at that
time, of the knights of St. John of Jerusalem. This small state
he attacked with such a numerous army, as the lords of Asia
have been accustomed in every age to bring into the field. Two
hundred thousand men, and a fleet of four hundred fail appeared
againit a town defended by a garrison consisting of five thousand
soldiers, and fix hundred knights, under the command of Villiers
de L'isle Adam, the grand master, whose wisdom and valour ren-
dered him worthy of that flation at such a dangerous juncture.
No sooner did he begin to fufpe& the destination of Solyman's vait
armaments, than he dispatched messengers to all the Christian
courts, imploring their aid against the common enemy. But though
every prince in that age, acknowledged Rhodes to be the great
bulwark of Christendom in the east, and trusted to the gallantry
of its knights as the best security againit the progress of the
Ottoman arms; and though Adrian, with a zeal which became
the head and father of the church, exhorted the contending
powers, to forget their private quarrels, and by uniting
their arms, to prevent the Infidels from destroying a society
which did honour to the Christian name; yet so violent and im-
placable was the animosity of both parties, that, regardless of
the danger to which they expoted all Europe, and unmoved
by the intreaties of. the grand master, or the admonitions of
the Pope, they suffered Solyman, without disturbance, to carry
on his operations againit Rhodes. The grand matter, after incre-
dible efforts of courage, of patience, and of military condut

during

BOOK II.

Solyman's
conquest of
Rhodes.

during a siege of fix months after sustaining many aflaults, and
disputing every post with amazing obstinacy, was obliged at lat
to yield to numbers, and having obtained an honourable capitula-
tion from the Sultan, who admired and refpeded his virtue, he
surrendered the town, which vas tedsiced to a heap of rubbiflh,
and destitute of every resource . Charles and Francis, ashamed
of having occasioned such a loss to Christendom by their ambitious
contests, endeavoured to throw the blame of it on each other, while
all Europe, with greater justice, imputed it equally to both. The
Emperor, by way of reparliioil geantd the knights of St. John
the small island of Malta, in which they fixed their residence, re-
taining, though with less power and fplendaur, their ancient spirit,
and enmity to the Infidels.

g Fontanus de Bllo Rhodib ap. Scatd. Script Rer. German.
P. Barre, HiR. d'Allem. tom. viii. 7.

Vol. ii. p. 88,
VOL. II.

153

BOOK II.
X

THE

# BOOK III.

THE
I s

T
OF THE

I

OF THE
EMPEROR CHARLES

BOOK III.

V.
C HARLES, having had the satisfaction of feeing hostilities

begun between France and England, took leave of Henry,

and arrived in Spain on the seventeenth of June. He found that
country just beginning to recover order and strength after the mi-
series of a civil war to which it had been exposed during his ab-
fence; an account of the rife and progress of which, as it was but
little connected with the other events that happened in Europe,
hath been reserved to this place.

No sooner was it known that the Cortes afferbled in Galicia
had voted the Emperor a Jfregift, without obtaining the redress

of
H

0

R

Y
R

E

G

N

BOOK III.

Civil war in
Castile.

Infurreftion
of Toledo.

of any one grievance, than it excited universal indignation.
The citizens of Toledo, who confidered themselves, on account
of the great privileges which they enjoyed, as guardians of the
liberties of the Castilian commons, finding that no regard was paid
to the remonflrances of their deputies against that unconstitutional
grant, took arms with tumultuary violence, and seizing the gates
of the city which were fortified, attacked the al-cazai, or caftlc,
which they Toon obliged the governour to surrender. Emboldened
by this success, they deprived of all authority every person
whom they fiufpe&ed of any attachment to the court, eftablifled
a popular form of government, compoed of deputies fiom the
several parishes in the city, and levied troops in their own
defence. The chief leader of the people in there infurredions
was Don John de Padilla, the eldest son of the commendador of
Castile, a young nobleman of a generous temper, of undaunted
courage, and possessed of, the talents as well as of the ambition
which in times of civil di(cord raise men to power and emi-
nence'.

THE resentment of the citizens of Segovia produced effets

still more fatal. Tordefillas, one of their representatives in the
late Cortes, had voted for the donative; and being a bold and
haughty man, ventured, upon his return, to call together his
fellow citizens in the great church, that he might give tlem,
according to custom, an account of his conduct in that aembly.
But the multitude, unable to bear his insolence, in attempting
to justify what they thought inexcusable, burit open the gates
of the church with the utmost fury, and seizing the unhappy
Tordefillas, dragged him through the streets, with a thousand

a Sandov. p.77.

X 2. curses

BOOK Ill.
Of Segovia

i55

BOOK III.

Measures of
Adrian, in
order to
punish them.
June 5, 1520.

curses and insults, towards the place of publick execution. In
vain did the dean and canons come forth in proceflion with the
holy sacrament, in order to appease their rage. In vain did the
monks of those monasteries by which they passed, conjure them
on their knees to spare his life, or at least to allow him time to
confers, and to receive absolution of his fins. Without listening
to the dictates either of humanity or of religion, they cried out,
" That the hangman alone could absolve such a traitor to his
country," hurried him along with greater violence, and finding
that he had expired under their hands, they hung him up with
his lead downwards on the common gibbet. The farme spirit
seized the inhabitants of Burgos, Zamora, and several other cities j
and though their representatives, taking warning from the fate
of Tordefillas, had been so wife as to save themselves by a timely
flight, they were burnt in effigy, their houses razed to thd
ground, and their effets consumed with fire; and such was the
horror the people had conceived against them as betrayers of
the publick liberty, that not one in those licentious multitudes
..would touch any thing, however valuable, which had belonged to
them '.

ADRIA1, at that time regent of Spain, had scarce fixed the

feat of his government at Valladolid, when he was alarmed
with an account of there infurredions. He immediately alTem-
bled the council to deliberate concerning the proper method of
suppressing them. The counsellors differed in opinion; ome
infiting that it was neceary to check this audacious spirit in
its infancy by a severe execution of justice; others advising to
treat with lenity a people who had some reason to be incensed,

P. Martyr. Ep. 671.

c Sandov. 103. P. Mart. Ep. 674.

and
156

and not to drive them beyond all the bounds of duty by an ill-
timed rigour. The sentiments of the former being warmly flp-
ported by the archbishop of Granada, president of the council, a
person of great authority, but cholerick and impetuous, were
approved of by Adrian, whose zeal to support his master's autho-
rity hurried him into a measure, to which, from his natural
caution and timidity, he would otherwise have been averse. He
commanded Ronquillo, one of the King's judges, to repair in-
flantly to Segovia, which had set the first example of mutiny, and
to proceed against the delinquents according to law and left the
people should be so outrageous as to resist his authority, a con-
fiderable body of troops was appointed to attend him. The Sego.
Vians, foreseeing what they might expe& from a judge so well
known for his austere and unforgiving temper, took arms with one
content, and having mustered twelve thousand men, shut their
gates against him. Ronquillo, enraged at this insult, denounced
them rebels and outlaws; and his troops seizing all the avenues to
the town, hoped that it would oon be obliged to urrender for
want of provisions. The inhabitants, however, defended the-
selves with vigour, and having received a considerable reinforce-
ment from Toledo, under the command of Padilla, attacked Ron-
quillo, and forced him to retire, with the loss of his baggage and
military chest d.

UPON this Adrian ordered Antonio de Fonseca, whom the

Emperor had appointed commander in chief of the forces in
Spain, to assemble an army, and to besiege the city in form.
But the inhabitants of Medina del Campo, where Cardinal
Ximenes had etfablifhed a vast magazine of military. otes,
would not fiffer him to draw from it a train of battering cannon,

d Sandov. la. P. Mait. Ep. 679 Miniana, Contin. p. i5.

or

BOOK III.

His troops
repulsed at
Segovia,

. x

and at Medina
del Campo.

157

iSg
BOOK III. or to destroy their countrymen with those arms which had been

^'CY prepared againfR the enemies of the kingdom. Fonseca, who could

not execute his orders without artillery, determined to seize the
magazine by force, and the citizens standing on their defence, he
Aug. ' assaulted the town with great brilknefs: But his troops were so

warmly received, that despairing of carrying the place, he set fire.
to some of the houses, in hopes that the citizens would abandon
the walls in order to save their families and effe&s. nftead of
that, the expedient to which he had recourse served only to in-
crease their fury, and he was repulsed with great infamy, while
the flames spreading from street to street, reduced to ashes almost
the whole town, one of the most considerable at that time in Spain,
and the great mart for the Manufatures of Segovia, and several
other cities. As the warehouses were then filled with goods for
the approaching fair, the loss was immenfr., and was felt univer-
sally; and this, added to the imprenion which such a cruel ac-
tion made on a people long unaccustomed to the horrors of civil
war, enraged the Castilians almost to madness. Fonseca became
the objec of general indignation, and was branded with the name
of incendiary and enemy to his country; and even the citizens of
Valladolid, whom the pretence of the Cardinal had hitherto re-
strained, declared that they could no longer remain inactive spec-
tators of the sufferings of their countrymen, and taking arms with
no less fury than the other cities, they burnt Fonseca's house to the
ground, elected new magifRrates, raised oldiers, appointed officers
to command them, and guarded their walls with as much dili-
gence, as if an enemy had been ready to attack them.

Adrian dif- THE Cardinal, who though virtuous and disinterested, and
*trloop. capable of governing the kingdom with honour in times of tran-

quillity,

quillity, poffefled neither the courage nor sagacity neceflary at such:
a dangerous juncture, finding himself unable to check thee out-
rages committed under his own eye, attempted to appease the
people, by protesting that Fonseca had exceeded his orders, and
had by his rafi condut offended him, as much as he had injured
them. This condescension, the effet ofirrefolution and timidity,
rendered the malecontents bolder and more ifolent and the Car-
dinal having loon after recalled Fonseca, and difmifled his troops,,
which he could no longer afford to pay, as the treasury had been
drained by the rapaciousness of the Flemish ministers, and received
no supply from the great cities which were all in arms, the people
were left at full liberty to ad without conroul, and scarce any fiadow.
of power remained in his hands.

NOR were the proceedings of the commons the effects merely of

popular and tumultuary rage; they aimed at obtaining redress of
their political grievances, and an eftablilhment of public liberty
on a secure basis, obje&s worthy of all the zeal they discovered
in contending for them. The feudal government in Spain, was
at that time in a state more favourable to liberty than in any other
of the great European kingdoms. This was owing chiefly to the
number of great cities in that country, a circumfance of which I
have already taken notice, and which contributes more than any
other to mitigate tle rigour of tile feudal institutions, and to in-
troduce a more liberal and'equal form of government. The inha-
bitants of every city formed a great corporation with valuable im-
munities and privileges; they were delivered from a state of
fubjedion and vafnalage; they were admitted to a considerable
share in the kgiflnature; they acquir:d the arts of induflry,
without which cities cannot fubfifl ; they accumulated wealtli,
by engaging in commerce ; and'being free a:nd i:dcpcndent them-

felvce

',

159,

BOOK III.

The views
and preten-
fionsofthe
co0111mmon of.
Castile.

BOOK III. selves, were the guardians of the publick freedom and indepent
^r -' dence. The genius of the internal government elfablifhed in

cities, which, even in countries where despotic power prevails
most, is democratical and republican, rendered the idea of liberty
familiar and dear to them. Their representatives in the Cortes
were accustomed to check'with equal spirit the encroachments
of the King, and the opprefion of the nobles. They endeavour-
ed to extend the privileges of their own order; they laboured to
shake off the remaining encumbrances with which the feudal tyranny
had burdened them; and conscious of being one of the most
considerable orders in the slate, were ambitious of becoming the
most powerful.

Their confe-
deracy by the
name of the
Holy Junto.

T H E present junture appeared favourable for pushing

any new claim. Their overeign was absent from his domi-
nions; by the ill-condud of his ministers he had loft the
esteem and affection of his fubjets the people exasperated by
many injuries had taken arms, though without concert, alrpoft
bygeneral consent; they were animated with fury capable of
carrying them to the most violent extremes ; the royal treasury
was exhausted; the kingdom destitute of troops; and the go-
vernment committed to a stranger, of great virtue indeed, but of
abilities unequal to such a trust. The first care of Padilla, and
the other popular leaders who observed and determined to
improve there circumstances, was to establish some form of union
or association among the malecontents, that they might at with
greater regularity and pursue one common end ; and as the
different cities had been prompted to take arms by the fame
motives, and were accustomed to confider themselves as a diftint
body from the reft of the fubjeds, they did not find this difficult.
A general convention was appointed to be held at Avila. Depu-

ties
i6o

EMPEROR CHARLES V.

ties appeared there in name of almost all the cities enttled to
have representatives in the Cortes. They all' bound themselves
by folemnoath, to live and die in the service of the King, and in
defence of the privileges of their order; and assuming the name
of the holy Junta or association, proceeded to deliberate concern-
ing the slate of the nation, and the proper method of redrefing its
grievances. The first that naturally presented itself, was tle nomi-
nation of a foreigner to be regent; this, they declared with one
voice to be a violation of the fundamental laws of the kingdom,
and resolved to fend a deputation of their members to Adrian, re.
quiring him in their name to lay aside all the cnfigns of his office,
and to abstain for the future from the exercise of a jurifdiation
which they had pronounced illegal .

WHILE they were preparing to execute this bold resolution,

Padilla accompliflied an enterprize of the greatest advantage to
the cause. After relieving Segovia, 'he marched suddenly to Torde-
fillas, the place where the unhappy Qeen Joanna had resided since
the death of her husband, and being favoured by the inhabitants,
was admitted into the town, and became master of her person, for
the security of which Adrian had negleted to take proper precau-
tions '. Padilla waited immediately upon the Q.ecn, and accofling
her with that profound refpet, which file exactd from the few
persons, whom she deigned to admit into her prcfence, acquainted
her at large with the miserable condition of her Canilian fijes
under the government of her son, who being defitute of experi-
ence himself, permitted his foreign niinifcers to treat them with
such rigour, as had obliged them to take arms in defence of the
liberties of their country. The Qeen, as if flie had been

BOOK III.

They dil-
claini Adri-
in's auliori-
ty.

Get pofltfi-
on o Q ecn
Joanna.
Aug. 29.

k P. Mart. Ep. 691. I Vita dell' Ilnpr. Catl. V. dall Als. Ulloa.
Ven. 1509, p. 67. Miniana, Contin. p. 17.

VOL. II. Y awakened

BOOK III. awakened out of a lethargy, expressed great atonifhnient at what

he said, and told him, that as he had never heard till that moment,
of the death of her father, or known the sufferings of her people,
no blame could be imputed to her, but that now ile would take
care to provide a sufficient remedy ; and in the mean time, added
file, let it be your concern to do what is necenry for the pub.
lick welfare. Padilla, too eager in forming a conclusion agree-
able to his withes, mistook this lucid interval of reason for a
perfet return of that faculty; and acquainting the Junta with
what had happened, adviscd them to remove to Tordefillas, and
to hold their meetings in that place. This was instantly done; but
tliough Joanna received very graciously an address of the Junta,
beseeching her to take upon lier the government of' the king-
dom, and in token of her compliance, admitted all the deputies
to kifs her hand; though the was prcfent at a tournament held
on that occasion, and seemed highly satisfied with both these ce-
remonies, which were conduced with great magnificence in order
to please her, tie oon relapsed into her former melancholy and
sullenness, and could never be brought by any arguments or in-
treaties, to sign any one paper necefary towards the dispatch of
business .

Crry on go- THE Junta concealing as much as pofllble this last circum-
herna"eln stance, carried on all their deliberations in her name; and

as the Castilians, who idolized the memory of Isabella, retained
a wonderful attachment to her daughter, no ooncr was it known
that file had consented to assume the reins of government than
the people expressed the most universal and immoderate joy ; and
believing her recovery to be compleat, ascribed it to a miraculous

i Sandov. 164. P. Mait. Ep 685, 686.

interpo.
162"

interposition of heaven, in order to rcfcuc their country from the
oppreflion of foreigners. The Junta, onfcious of the reputation
apd power they had cquired by seeming to ad under the royal au-
thority, were no longer satisfied with requiring Adrian to resign the
qffice of regent, they detached Padilla to Valladolid with a confi-
4erable body of troops, ordering him to seize fucl mnembers of the
council as were till in that city, to conduc them to Tordefillas,
and to bring away te feals of the kingdom, the publick archives
snd treasury books. Padilla, who was received by the citizens,
as the deliverer of his country, executed his comminifion with great
exaftnefs; permitting Adrian however, fRill to reside in Valladolid,
though only as a private person, and without any fladow of
power ".

THE emperor, to whom frequent accounts of these tranf-

a&ions were transmitted while he was still in Slanders, was
fenfiblc of his own imprudence and that of his ministers in
having despised too long the murmurs and remonltlanccs of the
Castilians. He beheld, with deep concern, a kingdom the most
valuable of any he possesed, and in which lay the strength and
filews of Ihis power, just ready to disown his authority, and on
the point of being plunged in all the mieries of civil war.
But though his pretence might have averted this calamity, he
could not, at that time, visit Spain without endangering the
Imperial crown, and allowing the French King full leisure to
execute his ambitious schemes. The only points now to be
deliberated upon, were whether he Ihould attempt to gain the
malecontents by indulgence and conceflions, or prepare diredly
to suppress them by force; and le resolvcd to make trial of tile
former, while at the fame time, if that should fail.of success, he

n Sandov. 174. P. Mart, Ep. 791.

Y a prepared

BOOK 111.

and deprive
Adrian of all
power.

'rhc niipcroa
alartned.

1-Es ncnsures
with eft)ett
to te
m1a-Io tcOItlts.

i63

BOOK III.

The large re-
monstrance of
theJunta con-
cerning their
grievances.

prepared for the latter. For this purpose, he issued circular letters
to all the cities of Castile, exhorting them in most gentle terms,
and with assurances of full pardon, to lay down their arms; he
promised such cities as had continued faithful not to exa&t from
them tle subsidy granted in the late Cortes, and offered the
fame favour to those who returned to their duty; he engaged
that no office should be conferred for the future upon any
but native Castilians. On the other hand, he wrote to the
nobles exciting them to appear with vigour in defence of their
own rights, and those of the crown, against the exorbitant claims
of the commons; he appointed the )iigh admiral, Don Fadrique
Enriquez, and the high conflable of Castile, Don Inigo de Ve-
lafco, two noblemen of great abilities and influence, regents of
the kingdom in conjunction with Adrian; and he gave them
full power and inftru&ions, if the obltmacy of the malecontents
should render it necessary, to vindicate the royal authority by force
of arms'.

THE concessions he was willing to make, which, at the

time of his leaving Spain, would have fully satisfied the people,
came now too late to produce any effect. The Junta, relying on
the unanimity with whih the nation submitted to their authority,
elated with the success which hitherto had accompanied all their
undertakings, and feei:lg no military force collected to defeat or
obltrut their designs, aimed at a more thorough reformation of
political abuses. They had been employed for some time in
preparing a remonstrance containing a large enumeration not
only of the grievances, of which they craved redress, but of such
new regulations as they thought neceflary for the security of
their liberties. This remonstrance, which is divided into many

P. Heuter. Rer. Aufir. lib. viii. c. 6. p. 188.

articles
164

articles relating to all the different members of which the con-
ftitution was composed, as well as to the various departments in
the administration of government, furnishes us with more authen-
tic evidence concerning the intentions of the Junta, than can be
drawn from the testimony of the later Spanilh historians, who
lived in times when it became fashionable and even necessary to
represent the conduc of the malecontents in the worst light, and
a's flowing from the worst motives. After a long preamble con-
cerning the various calamities under which the nation groaned,
and the errors and' corruption in government to which these were
to be imputed, they take notice of the exemplary patience where-
with the people had endured them, till felf-prefervation, and the
duty which they owed to their country, had obliged them to as-
femble in order to provide in a legal manner for their own safety,.
and that of the conititution : For this purpose, they demanded that
the King would'be pleased to return to his Spanifli dominions, and
reside there, as all their former monarcls had done; that he would.
not 'larry but with content of the Cortes; that if he should be
obliged at any time to leave the kingdom, it fiall not be lawful
to appoint any foreigner to be regent; that the present nomina-
tion of Cardinal Adrian to that office Ihall instantly be declared
void; that he would not, at his return, bring along with hinm
any Flemings or other tfrangers ; that no foreign troops hall,.
on any pretence whatever, be introduced into the kingdom; that.
none but natives hall be capable of holding any office or benefice
either in church or slate ; that no foreigners hall be naturalized i;
that free quarters shall not be granted to soldiers, nor to thofie
of the King's household for any longer time than fix days, and
that only when the court is in a progress that all the taxes liall.
be reduced to the fame fiate they were in at the death of Q!ueen.
Isabella that all alienations of the royal demefiles or revenues

since

BOOK Ill.
1._

16g

i66

since the Queen's death hall be resumed; that all nw officea
created since that period be abolished; that the fubf4iy graptt
by the late Cortes in Galicia lhall pot he eacted; that in all
future Cortes each city shall fend one representative of the clergy,
one of the gentry, and one of the commons, each to be elected,
by his own order ; that the crown (hall not infuieAce or direc
any city with regard to the choice of its r epreetaijvs, that
no member of the Cortes (hall receive an office or pension from
the King, either for himself or for any of iis famrily, iuder pain
of death, and confiscation of his goos ; tllat each city or com-
munity shall pay a .competent salary to its representatives for
lhis maintenance during his attendance on the Cortes; tl¥at the
Cortes hall assemble once in three years at least, whether fum-
moned by the King or not, and (hall then enquire into the 9?ser-
vation of the articles now agreed upon, and deliberate concerrin
.ublick affairs; that the rewards which l4ave been given or pro-
mired to any of the members of the Cortes in Galicia, (hall be re-
vo.ed; that no gold silver, orjewels, shall, upon pain of dpath,
pe sent out of tlhe kin1dom; that judges fha l have fixed salaries
afigned tliem, and shall not receive any (hare of the fines and
forfeitures of perfns condemned by them; that no grant of the
goods of persons accused spall le valid, if given before senten.c.e
was pronounced against t!em ; that all previleges which the
lno4!s have at any time obtained, to.the prejvdice of the corm-
mons, iall be revoked, that the governmepit of cities or towns
flall not be put into the hands of the nobles; that the lands of
te nobles (fall be subjea to all public taxes in the fame rmanner
as thbfe o the commons.; that an inquiry be made into. the con-
diuLt of tlhoe who have been entrusted with the management
oF the royal patrimony since the accefion of Ferdinand; and if
the Kiig do not within thirty days appoint persons properly

qualified

BOOK !I.
b_<S4

qualified for that service, it hall be lawful for the Cortes to nomi-
nate them; that Indulgenes flall not belpreached or dispersed in
the kingdom until' tlie caiife of publiffit{ig thim' be exalmiined and
approved of by the Cortes; that all the money aring from the
sale of Indulgences, shall be faithfully eimployed in carrying on war
againit the Infidels; that such prelates as do' not rerfde in their
dioceses fix months in the year, lhall forfeit their revenues during
the time they'are absent; that the ecclesiastical judges and their
officers (hall not exact greater fees than those which are paid in the
secular courts that the present archbishop of Toledo being a so-
reigner, be compelled to resign that dignity, which (hall be con-
ferred upon a Castilian; that the King' hall ratify and hold as,
good service done to him and to the kingdom all the proceedings:
of the Junta, and pardon any irregularities which the cities may
h'ave committed from an excess of zeal in a good cause: That he
(hall promise and swear in the most solemn manner to observe all:
there articles, and on no occasion attempt either to elude, or to.
repeal them ; and that he hall never solicit the Pope or any other
prelate to grant him a dispensation or absolution from this oath and.
ptoriife P.

SUCH were the chief articles presented by the Junta to their

sovereign. As the feudal inflitutions in the several kingdoms of
Europe were originally the fame, the genius of those govern-
ments which arose from them bore a itrong resemblance to each
other, and the regulations which the Castilians attempted to efta-
blifli'on this occasion, differ little from those which other nations
labotired'to procure in their struggles with their monarchs for li-
berty. The grievances complained of, and the remedies proposed

P Sandov, zo6. P. Mart. Ep. 686.

BpOK Ill.

I%

The pirit of.
liberty which.
it brcathed.
by

BooK III.

Irritates the
nobles.

The deputies
of the Junta
dare not pre-
sent their
remonfrance.

by the English commons in their contests with the princes of the
house of Stuart, particularly resemble those upon which the Junta
now insisted. But the Spaniards 'had already acquired ideas of
their own liberty and independence, had formed bold and gener-
ous sentiments concerning government, and discovered an extent
of political knowledge to which the English did not attain till more
than a century afterwards.

IT is not improbable, however, that the spirit of reformation

among the Castilians, hitherto unrestrained by authority, and em-
boldened by success, became too impetuous, and prompted the
Junta to propose innovations which by alarming the other members
of the confiitution, proved fatal to their cause. The nobles, who
instead of obstructing, had favoured or connived at their proceed-
ings, while they confined their demands of redress to such griev-
ances as had been occasioned by the King's want of experience, and
by the imprudence and rapacioufniefs of his foreign miniflers, were
filled with indignation when they began to touch the privileges of
their order, and plainly saw that the measures of the commons
tended no less to break the power of the aritocracy, than to limit
the prerogatives of the crown. The resentment which they had
conceived on account of Adrian's promotion to the regency, abated
considerably upon the Emperor's raising the constable and admiral
tojoint power with him in that office; and as their pride and dig-
nity were less hurt by suffering the prince to possess an extensive
prerogative, than by admitting the high pretensions of the people,
they determined to give their sovereign the afliftance which he had
demanded of them, and began to aflemble their valals for that
purpose.

THE Junta, meanwhile, expeted with impatience the Em-
peror's answer to their remontrance, wlich they had appointed

some
x68

some of tlieir number toprefent. iThe members entrusted iwith
this commillion set out immediately :for Gernnnny, blt havitng
received at different places certain intelligence from court, that
they, could not'venture to appear tliere withodit endangering
theirlives, they ftopt short in their journey,'and cqtuinted
tho Junta of the information lwhich had been given themn I This
excited 'filih ..violent pallions as tralifpotted the whole party
beyond atll bounds of prudence, or of 'moderation. That a
Castilian King 'should deny 'his"fubje6ts access into his presence,,
or refilfe to.liften to their lhumble petitions, was reprofented as
an at of tyranny to unprecedented and ,iltolerable, that nothing
naw rmained but witiharms'in their hands to drive 'away that
ravenous band of foreigners which encompifed the throne, Who
after havifig devoured the wealih of the kingdom, 'found 'it"ne-
ceflary to.prevent the cries of .an injured people from reaching
the ears of their overeign. Many infifled warmly on approving
a motion which had formerly"been made, for driving'Chales,
during the' 'life f his mother, of the regal titles and authority
which had been too rashly conferred upon him from a false sup-
position of her total inability for government. Some propoed to
provide a proper peifon to aflift her in the administration of pub-
lick affairs, by ma'rrying the Queen to the Prince of Calabria,
the heir of the Aragonefe Kings of Naples, who had been
detained in prison since the time that Ferdinand had difpofi'efed
his ancestors of their crown. All agreed that, as the hopes of
obtaining redress and ecurity merely by presenting their requests
to their sovereign, had kept them too long in a ate of inaction,
and prevented them from taking advantage of the unanimity
with which the nation declared in their favour, it was now
necessary to collet their whole force, and to exert themfelvcs

Sandov. 143.

BOOK 'f.

Violent po-
position of
the Junta.

'tE
z

with
VOL. II.

with vigour, in opposing this fatal combination of the King and
nobles against their libertiesm

THEY oon took thefield with twenty thousand men. Violent

disputes arose concerning the command of this army. Padilla, the
darling of the people and soldiers, was the only person whom
they thought worthy of this honour. But Don Pedro de Giron,
the eldest son of the Conde de Uruena, a young nobleman of
the first order, having lately joined the commons out of pri-
vate resentment against the Emperor, the respeCt due to his
birth, together with a secret desire of disappointing Padilla, of
whose popularity many of the Junta had become jealous, pro-
cured him the office of general; though he soon gave them a
fatal proof that he possesed neither the experience, the abilities,
nor the steadiness which that important ftatien required,

T HE regents, meanwhile, appointed Riofeco as the place of

rendezvous for their troops, which though far inferior to those
of the commons in number, excelled them greatly in discipline
and in valour. They had drawn a considerable body of regular
and veteran infantry out of Navarre. Their cavalry, which formed
the chief strength of their army, confifed mostly of gentlemen
accustomed to the military life, and animated with the martial
spirit peculiar to their order in that age. The infantry of the
Junta was formed entirely of citizens and mechanics, little
acquainted with the use of arms. The small body of, cavalry
they had been able to raise, was composed of persons of ignoble
birth, and perfedc strangers to the service into which they entered.
The character of the generals differed no less than that of their

m P. Matt. Ep. 688.

troops

BOOK III.

Take the
Geld.

The regents
and nobles
arm. 170

troops. The royalifis were commanded by the Cond' de Haro,
the constable's eldest son, an officer of great experience, and of
distinguished abilities.

GIRON marched with his army dire&ly to Riofeco, and seizing

the villages and passes around it, hoped that the royalists would
be obliged either to surrender for want of provisions, or to fight
with disadvantage before all their troops were assembled. But
he had not the abilities, nor his troops the patience and difci-
pline necefary for the execution of such a scheme. The Conde
de Haro found little difficulty in conducting a considerable rein-
forcement through all his posts into the town; and Giron
defparing of being able to reduce it, advanced suddenly to
Villa-panda, a place belonging to the Constable, in which the
enemy had their chief magazine of provisions. By this ill-
judged motion, he left Tordefillas open to the royalists, whom
the Conde de Haro led thither in the night, with the utmost
secrecy and dispatch; and attacking the town, in which Giron
had left no other garrison than a regiment of priests raised by
the bishop of Zamora, he, by break of day forced his way into
it after a desperate resistance, became master of the Qceen's per.
son, took prisoners many members of he Junta, and recovered
the great eal, with the other ensigns of government.

BooK 111.

In] rudence
als ill uccers
Oscli geral
of cte junta,

Deceinber S.

B Y this fatal blow, the Junta loft all the reputation and autho-

rity which they derived from teeming to act by the Queen's com-
mands; such of the nobles as had hitherto been wavering or un-
determined in their choice, nowjoined the regents with all their
forces; and an universal consternation seized the partizans of
the commons. This was much increased by the suspicions they
began to entertain of Giron, whom they loudly accused of hav-

Z 2, ing

17

BOOK III.

The Junta
adhere to their
system.

Their expe-
dients for
saifing money.

ing betrayed Tordefillas to the enemy; and though that charge
seems to have deen destitute of foundation, the success of the
royalists being owing to Giron's ill-condud rather than to his
treachery, he so intirely loft credit with his party, that he
resigned his-commiflion, and retired to one of. his castles n.

SUCH. members of the Junta as had escaped the enemy's

hands at Tordefillas, fled to Valladolid; and as it would have
required long time to supply the places of those who were pri-
foners,. by anew election, they.made choice among themselves
of a small number of persons to whom they committed the
supreme direction of affairs. Their army, which grew stronger.
every day by the arrival of 'troops from different parts of the
kingdom, marched' likewise to' Valladolid ; and Padilla being
appointed commander in chief' the -spirits of the soldiers revived,'
and the whole party forgetting the late misfortune, continued
toiexprefs'the fame. ardent zeal for the liberties of their country,
and -the fame implacable animosity againfit their roppreffors.

Wk Ar they stood rnoftR in, need of, was money to py ' their

troops.. A:great part, of the current coin had beencaried" out
of the kingdom by theFleming; the stated taxes levied in times!
of peace were inco;ifiderable; commerce of every kind.being:inter,
rupted by the war, the furm.which they yielded decreased :daily
and the Junta were afraid of disgusting the people by burden-
ing them with new impositions,, to which, in that. ago, they were
little acuftomed. But: from, this difficulty they were extricated.
by Donna Maria Pacheco, Padill's wifeia woman of noble birth,:
of great abilities, of boundless ambition, and animated with the'
most ardent zeal in support of .the cufe of the. Jtnta... She, . with.

a Miscellaneous TraCts by Dr. Mich, GeddIes vol. i. 278.

a. bold-
172

11r

a boldness superior to those fupdrtRitious fears which ofte :iliflu Bobk. IIr.
ence her sex, proposed to seize all 'the;ribh and' mignificeht 'ornia°
ments in the cathedral of Toledo, but l' that adtion,' by'; itd!
appearance of impiety, might offend the'ipdople;, she arid'her
retinue'marched to the chiurch in folemirnptoenfldont-i ih'mirlrhin'hg
habits,, with: tears in their eyes, add beatigg tlifir' breadft, and'
falling on; their knees, irrplored -tlie"'padon of' th'e'faihtts'Wlife:
shrines (he was about to violate.' By this artifite, which'fcrteen'ed
her from the iputation;of faBrileg, 'and petiade'd' the pe'opl1"
that.; necefllty and zeal', for a g66d' cause 'liad '"toiiftaiirdj tleer,'
though with rehlt&atice,' tO ventute'-up6h this ntidn, she. pcured'
a6confiderable filpply.of money fdr the'Jdnta. .' Th6'regents, n6o'
less at a loss how to malhtaith their tr6opi, tlie'revenues'of 'tie
ciown having, either been diflpated''byt" he'FFlenihs; ort'be g '
seized by the commons, :wer'bbbligd! to' iake'*the ' iQeen's jerwei';
ad the plite'belongihg: to thl';n6oility, ad 'apply therm tdo'that'
ptrp6fe; and: when these faild, they"'obitihed a fill fum by
way of loan fr6m the King 6f Pott'ugal '.

. T B nobility discovered great unwiliiignefs toiprocted to.etti'- Lose tinimfin
mities with. theJunta. They were animated'with n:6 lietf haird' n'egociatio"'
tata the commtnns against the Flemings', thiey aproved. irucl of ' nobility
feveralarticles in the rerlonitrance; they thought the 'juliit'ure
f.vourable; not only for redelliing: pfi't grieva'ces, but for' reri.
dbring'the confti'titiit mnbr -perfiE and ecure'by'hew regulations;
thy were avraid that vhile the twi orders of which the eginature
was'compofed; wafted each other's ftrengtll by mutual hoftiities,
the crd6n odtild 'rife to pwer on'the ruin or. weakners of bot ,
and 'eincroachl ho less oil the indepcndence of the noble, than on.

* Sandov. 308. Die. de Bayle, Art. Padilla.

pP. Mart. Ep. 718.

the

the privileges of the commons. To this disposition were owing
the frequent overtures of peace which the regents made to the
Junta, and the continual negociations they carried on during the
progress of their military operations. Nor were the terms which
they offered unreasonable; for on condition that the Junta would
pass from a few articles most subversive of the royal authority, or
inconfiltent with the rights of the nobility, they engaged to pro-
cure the Emperor's content to their other demands, which, if he,
through the influence of evil counsellors, should refuse, several of
the nobles promised to join with them in order to extort it q.
Such divisions, however, prevailed among the members of the
Junta, as prevented their deliberating calmly, or judging with
prudence. Several of the cities which had entered into the con-
federacy, were filled with that mean jealousy and distrust of
each other, which rivalfhip in commerce or in grandeur is apt
to inspire; the constable, by his influence and promises, had
prevailed on the inhabitants of Burgos to abandon the Junta,
and other noblemen had shaken the fidelity of rome of the lesser
cities; no person had arisen among the commons of such superior
abilities or elevation of mind, as to acquire the direetion of their
affairs; Padilla, their general, was a man of popular qualities,
but distrusted for that reason by those of highest rank who
adhered to the Junta; the conduct of Giron led the people to
view with suspicion every person of noble birth who joined
their party; so that the strongest marks of irresolution, mutual,
distrust, and mediocrity of genius, appeared in all their proceed-
ings at this time. After many consultations held concerning
the terms proposed by the regents, they suffered themselves to
be so carried away by resentment against the nobility, that reject-
ing all thoughts of accommodation, they threatened to strip

q P. Mart. Ep. 695, 713. GedJes's Tratls, i. 61.

them

BOOK III.
1-t
'I74

them of the crown-lands, which they or their anceftbrs .had BOOK III.
usurped, and to re-annex them'td the royal domain: And on
this preposterous scheme, which would 'at 'once 'bave annihilated
all the liberties for which they had been fitrggling, by rendering
the Kings of Castile absolute and independent on their people,
they were so intent that they exclaimed with. less vehlmence
against the exactions of tlhe foreign ministers, ,than againf, the
immense power and wealth of the nobles, and eemed to hope:
that they might make peace with Charles, by offering to enrich
him with their spoils.

THE fuccefs,which Padilla had met with in several small en- Elated with

their uccefs

counters, and in reducing' ome inconsiderable towns, helped to in ome fmall.i
precipitate them into this measure, filling them with such con- rencount"'C
fidence in the valour of their troops, that they hoped. for an easy
victory over the royalists. Padilla,. that. his armyj.might, not
remain inacive, while flushed. with good fortune, laid siege '
to Torrelobaton, a place of greater strength and importance than
any he had hitherto attacked, and which was defended :by a
fifficient. garrison;. and,,though the befiegedi made.a .desperate
resistance,. and the admiral, attempted to, relieve:thein, lie- took' March 3.
the town by (torm 'and gave itlup to. be plundere d'bylii foidi/rs.:.
If he had marched instantly with his vicorious army to Torde-
fillas the head quarters of, the royalists, h could scarce have
failed of making an cffeCttal iifiireflion on their troops, fir- .
prized at the briflnefs 'ds his-opetations, and, far from being. of
fifficient: ftiengthl to give hin b'attle. . Bit the ficlenef and Imprudence

of their con-i

imprudence of. the Jtnta prevented his taking thisfRep. Incap- dut..
able alike of carrying on war, or of making peace, they listened
again to overtures of accommodation, and even agreed to a hort
suspension of arms. This negociation terminated .in nothing;

but..

IlL but whlejit was saryingon rpany, of; Padila's ,:soldiers, unac-

quajntSd with the reftlaits, of.difinline,. ,eot 9ffvjtlt.tlh~i.j.ty
they had got at ,Torrelobkaton; ,,nd :pThes, .y.earied qut ,by .li
uniufual length of the campaign, deserted r I..l!le cpnrftble ;iso ,hRd
leisure to fernble his forces at Burgts,, and. to prepare evey
thing for marching, and as.fqon as tli truce expired,. he e.effeed
a juntion' with the Conldde Hare in spite of allPadilla's ,ffTrts
to' prevent; it;-They advadied im'nediatey--towards Torrelobaton,
anid Padilla'findng the number of his troops so diminished that he
durst not rilk a battle, attempted to retreat to Toro, which if he
could have accomplithed, the invasion of Navarre at that juncture
by the French, and the necefity which the ,egents must ave bpen
under of detachihg 'men tthat kingdom, might.hive saved im
from danger. But Haro, sensible how tatal the confeqlences .would

be be of suffering him to escape, marched with such rapidity at the
the head of his cavalry, .that he came up with him near Villalar, a

wthe thout. waitingforhis ihfantry, advanced to the attack. .Padilla's
3 atrmy, fatigued and difheaitened by their precipitate retreat, which

they could not diftinguilh from a flight, happened at that time
to he .pafling over a- ploughed field, on which such a violent rain
had fallen, that the soldiers funk almost to the knees at everyftep,
apd.remaine ,ixpfed:,to thefire of fome.ifield pieces which the
roya!fs. hli ,brough ai;ng with.lthem. All these circumtancca
so j(ifcpncertgd ,apd intixniated raw soldiers, that without facing
the nemy, 9r making any rej(ftince, they ,fled in the utmost
confusion. Padilla exert e,d himflf with ,extraordinary courage
eat it.

eat apd ativty in, order ,;o rly, .th, thloulgh in v.ain; fear ren-

e'ring therp deaf, both to lris treats and intreaties : IVpon
which, finding matters irretrievable, and resolving not to fur-
vive the disgrace of that. day, and the ruin of his party, p,

r $andov. 336.

rad

Bp9K

.", K
lk-~T

The no
attack
army of
Junta,
April z.
and deft

rulhed into the thickest of :lhe enemy but being wounded an'd
dismounted, he was taken prisoner. His prilicipal officers shared
the fame fate ; the common soldiers were allowed to depart unhurt,
the nobles being too generous to kill men who threw down thcir
armrs '.

Tr. resentment of his enemies did not filffer Padilla to linger

long in expetation of what would befal him. Next day lie
was condemned to lose his head, though without any regular
trial, the notoriety of the crime beilng supposed sufficient to
supercede the formality of a legal process. He was led inftaltly
to execution, together with Don John Bravo, and Don Francis
Maldonada, the former commander of the Segovians, and tile
latter of the troops of Salamanca. ' Padilla viewed the approach
of death with calm but undaunted fortitude; and when Bravo,
his fellow-fufferer, expressed some indignation at hearing him-
self proclaimed a traitor, he checked him, by observing, " That
yesterday was the time to have displayed the spirit of gentlemen,
this day to die with the meekness of Christians." Being per-
mitted to write to his wife and to the community of Toledo,
the place of his nativity, lie addressed the former with a manly
and virtuous tenderness, and the latter with tle exultation natil-
ral to one who confidered himself as a martyr for the liberties of

t Sandov. 345, &c. P. Mart. Ep. 720, Miniana, Contin. p. 26, Epitome

de la vida y Hechos del Emper, Carlos V. per D. Juan. Anton. de Vera y Zuniga,
'4to. Madr. 1627. p. 19.

BooK: IIl.

Padilla, their
general, put
to death.
VOL. I.

'!77

his
A a

BOOK III. his country". After this, he submitted quietly to his fate. Most
.~,"v~, of the Spanifl Historians, accustomed to ideas of government,

and

u The drain of thefc letters is so eloquent and high spiritcd that I have
translated them for the entertainment of my readers.

bTh Letter of Don Padilla to bit 'wife.

SENN ORA,

"I F your grief did not afflic me more than my own death, I hould deem

myself perfectly happy. For the end of life being certain to all men, the Al-
mighty cnfers a mark of difiinguihing favour upon that person, for whom he
appoints a death such as mine, which though lamented by many, is neverthc-
less acceptable unto him. It would require more time than I now have to
write any thing that could afford you consolation. That my enemies will not
grant me, nor do I with to delay the reception of that crown which I hope to
enjoy, You may bewail your own loss, but not my death, which, bing so
honourable, ought not to be lamented by any. My foul, for nothing else is
left to me, I bequeath to you. You will receive it, as the thing in this world
which you valued mod.' I do not write to my father Pero Lopez, because I
dare not, for though I have thewn myself to be his son in daring to lce my
life, I have not been the heir of his good fortune. I will not attempt to ay any
thing more, that 1 may not tire the executioner who waits for me, and that
I may not excite a suspicion, that in order to prolong my life, I lengtllen out
my letter. My servant Sofla, an eye witness, and to whom I have communicated
my mofi secret thoughts, will inform you of what I cannot now write; and
thus I reft, expecing the instrument of your grief, and of my deliverance."

lii Letter to the City of Toledo.

( o thee, the crown of Spain, and light of the whole world, free from

the time of the mighty Goths; to thee, who by hedding the blood of
firangers, as well as thy own blood, haft recovered liberty for thylelf, and
thy neighbouring cities, Thy legitimate son Juan de Padilla gives informa-
tion, how by the blood of his body, thy ancient victories are to be refres ed.
If fate hathl not permitted my acions to be placed among your fuccefsftil and
celebratcd exploits, the fault hath been in my ill fortune not in my good will.
Tills I request of tiee as of a molier, to accept, since Gcd hath given me

nothing
178

and of regal power very different from those upon which he aed, BOOK III.
have been lb eager to teflify their disapprobation of the cause in
which he was engaged, tliat they have negleded, or have been
afraid to do justice to his virtues and by blackening his memory,
have endeavoured to deprive him of that pity, which is seldom de-
nied to illustrious sufferers.

THE victory at Villalar proved as decisive as it was compleat. Ruin of tile

Valladolid, the most zealous of all the afrociated cities, opened lpa ty
its gates immediately to the conquerors, and being treated with
great clemency by the Regents, Medina del Campo, Segovia,
and many other cities followed its example. This sudden dilfo-
lution of a confederacy, formed not upon flight dilgults, or
upon trifling motives, into which the whole body of the
people had entered, and which had been allowed time to acquire
some degree of order and consistence by eftablifling a regular
plan of government, is the Itrongeft proof of the inability of
its leaders,. or of ome secret discord reigning among the
members. Though part of the army by which they had been
subdued, was obliged, a few days after the battle, to march
towards Navarre, in order to check the progress of the French
in that kingdom, nothing could prevail on the dejeted com-

nothing more to lose for thy fake, than that whicl I am now to relinquilh.
I am more follicitous about thy good opinion than about my own life. The
shiftings of fortune which never flands still, arc many. But this I fee with
infinite consolation, that I, the leaf of thy children, fuffcr death for theet
and that thou haft nursed at thy breadss such as may take vengeance for my
wrongs. Many tongues will relate the manner of my death, of which I am
till ignorant, though I know it to be near. My end will testify what was
my desire. My foul I recommend to thee as to the patroness of Chrillianity,
Of my body I fay nothing, for it is not mine. I can write nothing more, for
at this very moment, I feel the knife at my throat with greater dread of thy
displeasure, than apprehension of my own pain." Sandov. Hill. vol. i . 47 8.

A a mons

179

BOOK III.

Padilla's wife
defends To-
ledo with
great spirit.

mnons of Castile to take arms again, and to embrace such a favour-
able opportunity of acquiring those rights and privileges for which
they had appeared so zealous. The city of Toledo alone, ani-
mated by Donna Maria Pacheco, Padilla's widow, who, instead of
bewailing her husband with a womanihi sorrow, prepared to
revenge his death, and to prosecute that cause in defence of
which he had suffered, must be excepted. Refpe& for her sex,
or admiration of her courage and abilities, as well as sympathy
with her misfortunes, and veneration for the memory of her
husband, secured her the fame ascendant over the people which
he had poffefled. The prudence and vigour with which he
a¢ted justified the confidence they placed in her. She wrote to
the French general in Navarre, encouraging him to invade
Castile by the offer of powerful afliftance. She endeavoured
by her letters and emissaries to revive the spirit and hopes of
other cities. She raised soldiers, and exadted a great fum from
the clergy belonging to the cathedral to defray the expence of
keeping them on foot x. She employed every artifice that could
interest or inflame the populace. For this purpose fie ordered
crucifixes tobe ued by her troops instead of colours, as if they
had been at war with infidels, and enemies of religion; (he
marched through the streets of Toledo with her son, a young
child, clad in deep mourning, feated on a mule, having a standard
carried before him representing the manner of his father's execu-
tion Y. By all there means he kept the minds of the people il
such perpetual agitation as prevented their pafions from subsiding,
and rendered them insensible of the dangers to which they
were exposed by standing alone in opposition to the royal
authority. While the army was employed in Navarre, ,the
Regents were unable to attempt the reduction of Toledo by

x P. Mart. ep. 727.

y Sandov. 375.

force;

I
8o

force; and all their endeavours either to diminish Donna
Maria's credit with the people, or to gain her by large. promises
and the solicitations of her brother the Marquis' de Mondleir,
proved ineffetual. Upon the expulsion of the French out of
Navarre, part of the army returned into Castile, and invested
Toledo. Even this made no imprenfio0 on the intrepid and
obstinate courage of Donna Maria. Slle defqnded the town
with vigour,' her troops beat the roya!ifts in several sallies, and
no progress was made towards reducing the place, till the
clergy whom file had highly offended by invading their pro-
perty, having received information of the death of William do
Croy arclhbiliop qs Toledo, whlofe, poflfefion of that fee wa§
their chief grievance, and that the Eperor had named a
Castilian to succeed him, began to turn against her. They per-
fuaded the people that she had acquired such influence over them
by the force of enchantments, that file wds allifted by a familiar
demon which attended her in the form of a Negro-maid, and
that by its suggestions ile regulated every part of her condua ".
The credulous multitude, whom their impatience of a long
blockade, and despair of obtaining ficcours either from the cities
formerly in confedeiacy with them, or from the French, render-
ed desirous of peace, took arms againfl her, and driving her out
of the city surrendered it to the Royalifls. She retired to the
citadel, which fle defended with amazing fortitude four months
longer; and' when reduced to the last extremities, lhe made her
escape in disguise, and fled to Portugal, where the had many
relations .

. P. Mart. Ep. 727.
' Sandov. 375. P. Matt. Ep, 754. Ferrer. viii. 563.

"' , . ,
' ' iU PON'

BOOK III.

Oaober 26.
Feb. o.i522.

BOOK III.

Fatal effets
of this civil
war.

UPON her flight the citadel surrendered. Tranquillity was re.

established in Castile; and this bold attempt of the commons, like
all unsuccessful infurretions, contributed to confirm and extend
the power of the crown, which it was intended to moderate and
abridge. The Cortes still continued to make a part of the Cafti-
ian conflitution, and were summoned to meet whenever the King
flood in need of rriorey; but ifead of adhering to their ancient
and cautious form of examining and redrefling publick grievances,
before they proceeded to grant any supply, the more courtly
custom of voting a donative in the first place was introduced,
and'the Sovereign having obtained all he wanted, never allowed
them to enter into any scrutiny, or to attempt any reformation
injurious to his authority. The privileges which the cities had en-
joyed were gradually circumicribed or abolilhed.; their commerce
began from this period to decline ; and becoming less wealthy and
les populous, they loft that power and influence which they had
acquired in the Cortes.

The progress \WHtILE Castile was exposed to the calamities of civil war,
of the inlur-
^reioni in the kingdom of Valencia was torn by intestine commotions till
Valencia. more violent. Tile association which had been formed in the

city of Valencia in the year one-thoufand five hundred and
twenty, and which was diftinguifled by the name of the Ger-
manada, continued to subsist after the Emperor's departure from
Spain-; and the members of it, upon pretext of defending the
coasts againfi the decents of the Corsairs of Barbary, and
under fantion of that permiflion, which Charles had rashly
granted them, rcfefcd to lay down their arms. But as the
grievances, which the Valencians aimed at rdrefliig, pro-
ceeded from the arrogance and exactions of the nobility, rather

than
182

than from any unwarrantable exercise of the royal prerogative,
their resentment turned chiefly against the former. As oon
as they were allowed the use of arms, and became conscious
of their own strength, they grew impatient to take vengeance
of their oppreflors. They drove the nobles out of most of the
cities, plundered their houses, wafted their lands, and aflaulted
their. caftlea. They then proceeded to cled thirteen persons,
one from each company of tradesmen eftablilhed in Valencia, and
committed the administration. of government to them,: under pre-
text that. they, would reform the laws, establish one uniform mode
of dispensing justice without partiality, or regard to the diftintion
of ranks, and. thus restore men to ome degree of their original
equality.

THE nobles were obliged to take arms in felf-defence. Ho-

tilities began, and were carried on with all the rancour, with which
resentment at oppreflion inspired the one party, and the idea of
insulted dignity animated the other., As no person of' honourable
birthi or of liberal education joined the Germanada, the councils
as well as troops of the confederacy were conduted by low
mechanics, who acquired the confidence of an enraged multitude
chiefly by the fiercenes of their zeal, and the extravagance of
their proceedings,. Among fucll men, the laws introduced in ci-
vilized nations, in order to restrain or moderate the violence of
war, were unknown or,defpifed i and they. committed the wildest
ats.of cruelty and outrage..

THE Emperor occupied with fupprefling the infurrecion ii

Castile, which more immediately threatened the subversion of
Hls power and prerogative, was unable to give much attention to

the

BDOOK I.

183

BOOK III.

Appearances
ofdifaffeaion
in Aragon.

the tumults in Valencia, and left the nobility of that kingdom
to fight their own battles. -His viceroy, the Conde de Melitb,
had the supreme command of the forces which the nobles raised
among their valfals. The Germanada carried on the war during
the years'6rne thofahd five hundred 'nd twenty. and twenty^one,
with a n160r persevering courage, than c6uld hl'arv beeh expeted
from a body so tumultuary, under the conduct of fi1uh leaders.
They defeated the nobility in several ations, which, though not
considerable, were 'etremely harp. They repulsed them in
'their attempts to reduce different: towns. 'flitt the noble's, by
their superior kill in bwa, and at the head of troops more:accuf-
tomed to service, gained the advantage in most of the rencoun.
ters. At length, they were joined by a body of Castilian cavalry,
which the regents. dispatched towards Valencia, soon after
their victory over Padilla at Villa!ar, and by their afliftarce they
acquired such superiority, that they entirely broke and ruined the
Germanada. The leaders of the party were put to death, almdft
without any formality of legal'trial, and suffered such cruel punish-
ments, as the sense of recent injuries prompted the hobKs to inflit.
The government 'of Valencia was re-established i its nciefit
form b

IN Aragon, violent symptoms of the fame spirit of difaffectidn
nahd mutiny, which reigned in the other kingdoms of Spain,
began to appear; but by the prudent conduc of the viceroy,
Don John de Lanuza, they were so far compoed, as to prevent
their breaking out into any open infurrefion. But in the island

b'Argenfola Anales de Aragon, cap. 75. 90. 99. 18. Sayas Anales de Atigoh,

cap. 12. &c. P. Mart. Ep. lib. 33. & 34. paiim. Ferrer. Hist. d'Efpagne, viii.
542. 564. &c.

of
184

of Majocal which wa' nntxed to tIe crown of Aragoh, the ihome
caults;thatl hlad fxcted t the commotions .i Valencia, produced effcas.'
n&oe£s violsent. The: people, iirpatient of, thelhardthips wliich they';
efidureddundet the ildjurfifditiii of te nobility;, took arms i a'
tufuffiltuary matie \; deposed: their viceroy drove him out 'of the
illand.; and maftacrid every gentlema who Was so' utiortunate as
to' fll into :th'eii'hlnds: Tle obftinaty with which thepeodleJl
of Majorci perrffed, ili: tleir rebelliodn. Wa' eulit teirbe .*it}l':
vhiell'they began it. : It equired inlihCqiifid"table eftfrt toredice'
them to obedience- and tranqtuillity was, re-established i every
paet'of Spain before they'cotild be briddghit to'fiibiit totlieir so-:
Vereign .
. . ,

. i ' I ..' i . .' ,,: {1 I' ;'. ',.! ,,1 .'., a .';,,/ / .,.;
WHI LE' the! spirit' of difaffe&ion 'wai 'so gehera;likmoig tlh

Spaniards, and so many causes concurred in: precipitating them
into such violent neafures,, in. ordertolpbtaiiith.e edref of tlleiri
grievances, it may appear strange, thatthe, WmalQcottntsi iin the,
different kingdoms should have carried on their operations with-
out any mutual concert, or even any 'iitercblrfe vittliieach otier
By. uhiting their councils and arms, they"'tight have' aed both
*ith greater f6rce, an dith)mdrb'efJ'; . 'Tl appearanc'of '
national chfederacy wotild h'a ie rerideire' i fibi" !esi eitetable
among the people,' than formidhble tth crdwd ; and tlie Enipe-
ror, unbile to resist such a combinatibri, mulE have complied with'
inyt' terns which' the member o it' thought fit to' prefcrib. '
Miny things, lhoever, I evevented the Spaniads 'fidr' forijing
thesrelves'lit'ohoe bbdy' and' pUrflingri ommo 'i meatires. The'

,d Argenfola Anales de Aragon, c. 3. Perrer. Hist. viii. 4. 'Siyaa Anales
de Aragon, ca. 7,. , 14 ?, 76, 81. Ferrera: Hist. d'ifpagne, iii.,7,,8c. 609.

VOL. I B 3 ; people

BobOK 1II.

Forwitlahbe
intrredAion in
Majorca.
Malch 19,

Caures whIlCI
prevented the
union of the
rnalecontcnte.

l8g

BOOK IrI. people of the different kingdoms in Spain, though they were

^^y ^ ~become the subje&s of the fame sovereign, retained, in full force,,

their national antipathy to each other. The remembrance of
their ancient rival(hip and hostilities was fiill recent, and the
sense of reciprocal injuries so intire, as to be incompatible with
their ating with confidence and concert. Each nation chore
rather to depend on its own efforts, and to maintain the struggle
alone, than t implore the aid of neighbours, whom they if-
trusted and hated. At the fame time, the forms of government
in the several kingdoms of Spain were so different, and the
grievances, of which they complained, as well as the alterations
and amendments which they attempted to introduce, so various,
that it was not easy to bring them to unite in any common
plan. To this disunion Charles was indebted for the preservation
of his Spanish crowns; and while each of the kingdoms followed
separate measures, all of them were obliged at last to conform to
the will of their sovereign -
.

' ° . . . . .

'The Empe- THE arrival of the Emperor in Spain filled his fubjets who
ror's prudent

had been in arms agqinftl him with deep apprehensions ;, fiom

and generous . ,.. .,
behaviour to- which he fQn, delivered themr. by,n a t of'clemency, no
ward thee b'o em

' . . .....
malecontents. less prudent than gererous. After a rebelion so general,

scarce twenty persons, among so many criminals obnoxious to
the law, had been punifled capitally in Castile. Though strongly
solicited by his council, Charlte refused to shed any more blood
by the hands of the executioner; and published a general par-
O. 28 don, extending tQ all crimes corpmitted since the comencement

of the infurrretions, from which only fourscore were excepted.
Even there he seems to have named, rather with an intention to
intimidate others, than from any inclination to eize them , for
when an officious courtier offered to inform him where'one 'of

the

the most considerable among them was concealed; he avoided it
.by a good-natured pleafaitry; "Go," fays he, " I have now no
reason to be afraid of that man, but he has some cause to keep at
a difance from me, and you would be better employed in telling
him that I am here, than in acquainting me with the place of his
retreat '" By this appearance of magnanimity, as well as by his
care to avoid every thing which had disgusted the CaRilians dur-
ing his former residence among them ; by his address in assuming
their manners, in speaking their language, and in complying with
all their humours and customs, he acquired an ascendant over
them which scarce any of their native monarchs had ever at-
tained, and brought them to support him in all his enterprizes
with a zeal and valour to which he owed much of his fuccels and
grandeur .

ABOUT the time that Charles landed in Spain, Adrian et out

for Italy to take poieflion of his new dignity. But though the
Roman people longed extremely for his arrival, they could not,
on his first appearance, conceal their furprize and disappointment.
After being accustomed to the princely magnificence of Julius,
and theelegant splendour of Leo, they beheld with contempt an
old man of an humble deportment, of austere manners, an
enemy to pomp, destitute of taste in the arts, and unadorned
with any of the external accomplishments which the vulgar
expect in those raised to eminent stationss. Nor did his politi-
cal views and maxims seem less strange and astonishing to the
pontifical ministers. He acknowledged and bewailed the cor-

B OK III.

Adrian fete
out for Rome,
and his ill
reception
there.

e Sandov. 377, &c. Vida del. Emper. Carlos pot Don Juan Anton. de Vera y
;uniga. p. 3o. f Ulloa Vita de Carlo V. p. 8s. .

g Guic. 1. s1. 238. Jovii Vita Adriani, 11 7. Bellfor. 'Epitr. des Princ. 84.

B b ruptions

BOOK III. ruptions .which abounded in.,the church, as well as in the cout

of Rome, and prepared to reform both; he discovered no inten-
tion of aggrandizing his family; he even scrupled at retaining
·such territories as some of his predecessors had acquired by.vio-
lence or fraud, rather than by any legal title, and for that reason
he inveRed Francesco Maria de Rovere anew in the dutchy of Ur-
bino, of which Leo had stripped him, and surrendered to the duke
of Ferrara several places wrested from him by the church b. To
men little habituated to fee princes regulate their condua by the
rmaxims of morality and the principles of jutice, these aftions of
the new Pope appeared inconteftible proofs of his weakness and
inexperience; and Adrian who was a perfect tranger to the com-
plex and intricate system of Italian politics, and who could place
no confidence in persons whose subtilty and refinements in bufi-
ness suited so ill with his natural simplicity and candour, being
qften embarrassed and irresolute in his deliberations, the opinion
of his incapacity daily increased, until both his person and govern-
ment became objects of ridicule among his fubjets'.

He endea-
vours to re-
store peace in
Europe.

AbRIAN, though devoted to the Emperor, endeavoured to

aflume the impartiality which became the common father of
Christendom, and laboured to reconcile the contending princes,
that they might unite in a league against S6ly'ian, whose con-
quest of Rhodes rendered him more fornidable than ever to
Europe . But this was an undertaking far beyond'his abilities.
To examine such a variety of pretensions, to adjust such a num-
ber of interfering interests, to extinguish .the pailions which
ambition, emulation, and mutual injuries had kindled, to bring

h Guic. lib. 15. 40. i Jov. Vita Adr. I 8. P. Mart. Ep. 774.
Rufcclli Lettere de Princ. vol. i. 87, 96, ot. k Bellefor. Epitr. p. 86

*'·:~ s( l)fo
*

·so many hostile powers to pursue te faine scheme with unanimity
and vigour, required not only uprightsefl of intentions, but a
great filperiority both of understanding and address.

THE Italian states were no less desirous of peace than the

Pope. The Imperial army under Colonna was still kept on foot,
:but as the Emperor's revenues in Spain,. in Naples, and in the Low-
Countries, were either exhausted,. or applied to ome other pur-
pose, it depended entirely for pay and subsistence on the Italians,.
A great part of it was quartered :in the ecclefiaftial state, and
monthly contributions were levied upon the Florentines, the Mil;-
-nefe, the Genoese, and. Lucchefe, by the viceroy of Naples anl:
.though all exclaimed against such oppreflion, and were ipqtient
'to be delivered from it, the dread.of worse consequences from the
rage of the, army, or the resentment of the Emperor, bliged tiem,
to submit'.

So much regard, however, was paid to the Pope's exhortations,,

and to a bull which he issued requiring all ChriRfian, princes to
consent to a truce for three years, that the Imperial, the French,
and Englifli ambassadors at Rome were empowered to treat of
that matter; but while they wafted their time in fruitless nego-
ciations, their masters continued their preparations for war.. . The
Venetians, who had hitherto adhered with great firmness to
the'r alliance with Francis,' being now convinced that his affairs in
Italy were in a desperate situation, entered into a league againf him:
with the Emperor; to which Adrian, at the instigation of his coun-
tryman and friend Charles deLannoy, viceroy of Naples, who
persuaded him that the only obstacles to peace arose from the

Sle;

A new league
against the
French King

June 28.
I Guic. I. i . 238.

ambition

A89

~ooc ll.
~yvmd

BOOK In.

Francis's vi-
go rous ma-

rules in oppo-

fition to it.

Suspended
upon the dif-
covery of the
constable
Bourbon's
conspiracy.

ambition of the French Kings oon after acceded, The other
Italian states followed their examples and Francis was left, with-
out a single ally, to resist the efforts of so many enemies whose
armies threatened, and whose territories encompafled, his domi-
nions on every fide .

THE dread of this powerful confederacy, it was thought,

would have obliged Francis to keep wholly on the defensive, or
at least have prevented his entertaining any thoughts of march-
ing into Italy. But it was the charater of that prince, too apt
to become remiss, and even negligent on ordinary occasions, to
rouze at the approach of danger, and not only to encounter it
-with spirit and intrepidity, qualities Which never forsook him,
but to provide against it with diligence and industry. Before his
enemies were ready to execute any of their schemes, Francis had
assembled a numerous army. His authority over his own sub-
je&s was far greater than that. which Charles or Henry pofefled
over theirs. They depended on their parliaments for money,
wxhich was usually granted them in mall fums, very slowly, and
with much reluctance. The taxes he could impose were more
*considerable, and levied with greater dispatch Cfo that on this,
as well as on other occasions, his army was in the field while
they. were devising ways and means for .raiing theirs. Sensible
of this advantage, .Francis hoped to disconcert all the Emperor's
Schemes by marching in person into the Milanese, and this bold
ineafure, the more formidable because unexpeced, could scarce
-have failed of producing that effect. The vanguard of his
,army had already reached Lyons, and he himself was hastening
after it with the second division of his troops, when the dif-

Guic. 1. 15. 241, 248.

covery
190o

covery of a domestic conspiracy which threatened the ruinof the
kingdom, obliged him. to top hort, and to. alter his meaftures.

i ,;, . .

T H . author of this dangerous plot was Charles duke. of.

Bourbon, lord high constable, whose noble birth,. vast fortunes,,
and highl office,, railed him to be the most powerful subjed in
France, as his great. talents, equally suited to the field or the
council, and his signal services to the crown rendered him the
mot illustrious and deserving. The near resemblance between
the King and him in. many of their qualities, both being fond.
of war, and ambitious to excel in active and manly exercises,
as well as their equallity in age, and their proximity of blood,.
ought naturally to laveo secured him a considerable share in that,
Monarch's favour. But unhappily Louise, the King's mother, had.
contracted a violent. aversion to the house of Bourbon, for no better
reason than because Anne of Bretagne, the Queen of Lewis the
Twelfth, with whom she lived' in perpetual enmity, discovered a.
peculiar attachment to that branch of the royal family ; and Ihe had,
taught her son, who was too susceptible of any impression Ihe gave:
him, to view all the constable's actions with a mean and unbecoming
jeaouy. His distinguished merit at the battle of Marignano had
not been fufilciently rewarded- he had been recalled from the go:
vernment of Milan upon very frivolous pretences, and had met witli.
a cold' reception, which liis prudent conduct in that difficult
station did, not deserve; the payment of his pensions had been
fuEpnded without any good cause and during the campaign of
one thousand. five hundred and twenty-one, the King,. as has.
already been related, had affronted .him in pretence of the whole
army,, by giving the. command. of the van to the duke.'of 'Alen-

con..

BOOK I.

HI characer;

The culss ofts
his difaffcc.'.
tion.

BooK III. con. The constable, at first; bore thece indignities with greater

"'v~ moderation than could have been expecte from a highfpirited

Prince, conscious of what was due to his rank, and to his services.
Such a multiplicity of injtrife, 'however, exhausted his. patience;
and inspiring himn with thouglits of revenge,, lie retired from court,
and began to hold a secet corefporiderice with ome of the Em-
peror's minilters ' .

AoU.... that time dut s f Boubo happen to die
AiOU¥r that time ihe dutchess Of: Bourbo happene.,'to dic

without leaving any children ; and Louise,, of a dfpofiti0 no
less' amorous than vindi&ive: and: still ffceptible of: the ,tender
pins at the -age'. of 'fbrty-fix, bgan: itc. view th Conable, a
Pfihne'aa' aMiable ds he was aceibpli(ed, with other,eyes i;.nd
riotwithfanding the great disparity of their years, he formed the
: fthemeof marrying him,. Bourbon, who might lhavp expeaed,
every' thiing to which an ambitious' mind can, fpjire,;,frm the
doting fondiefs of a woman wlh governed her son apc th~ kingd0on,
being incapable either of irtmitating the Qeen in her sudden tran-
fition from hatred to love, or of difembling,fo meanly as. to pre-
tend affection: for one who had perfcuted. hinm,fo long with, unpro.
voked, malice; not only rejected the mratch, ,,but eCbittered his re-
fufal by fomfe evere raillery on Louise's person and .character. he
finding herself not only contemned, but insulted, her disappointed
love turnedlinto:hatred, and since Ihe could not marry, she resolved
to ruin Boubon. ; , '
,,

-Foa tis purpote lie' consulted with the chancellor du Pra', l'
man, wli6by a base prostitution of' great talents and of superior
ikill' in his profeflion, had risen to that high office. By his
advice a law-suit was commenced against the Coftable for"the

whole
192

whole estate belonging to the house of Bourbon. P art of it was
claimed in the King's narme, as having'fallen to the crown ; part
in that of Louise, as the nearest heir in blood of tlie deceased
Dutchess. Both these claims were equally diftitute of any
foundation injustice; but Louise, by her follicitations and autho-
rity, and Du Prat by 'employing all the artifices and chicanery
of law, prevailed on the judges to order the estate to be fequeftred.
This unjust decision drove the Constable to despair, and to mea-
fures which despair alone could have dictated. He renewed his
intrigues in the Imperial court, and flattering himself that the
injuries ihe had suffered would justify his having recourse to any
means in order to obtain revenge, he offered to transfer his alle-
giance from his natural sovereign to the Emperor, and to aflit
him in the conquest of France. Charles, as well as the King of
1England, to whom the secret was communicated", epecting
'prodigious advantages from his revolt, were ready to receive him
with open arms, and spared neither promises nor allurements
that might help to confirm him in his resolution. The Emperor
offered him in marriage his sifter Eleanor, the widow of the
King of Portugal, with a vast portion. He Was included as a
principal in the treaty between Charles and Henry. The coun-
ties of Provence and Dauphina were to be fettled on him, with
the title of King. The Emperor engaged to enter France by the
Pyrenees, and Henry, supported by the Flemings, to invade
Picardy; while twelve thousand Germans, levied at theii com-
mon charge, were to penetrate into Burgundy, and to act in
concert with Bourbon, who undertook to raise fix thousand men
among his friends and vassals in the heart of the kingdom. The
execution of this deep-laid and dangerous plot was suspended,

n Rymer' Feder. iii. 794.
VOL. II. C c .until

BOOK II.

1513.

His fccret ne-
gociation
with the
Emperor.

X93

BOOK III. until the King should cross the Alps with the only army capable
1"-C3 of defending his dominions; and as he was far advanced in his

march for that purpose, France flood on the brink ofdeftrution .
Discovcred HAPPILY for that kingdom, a negotiation which had now

.been carrying on for several months, though conducted with
the most profound secrecy and communicated only to a few
chosen confidents, could not altogether escape the observation of
the reft of the conflable's numerous retainers, rendered more
inquisitive by finding that they were distrusted. Two of there
gave the King some intimation of a mysterious correspondence
between their master and the Comte de Roeux a Flemish noble-
man of great confidence with the Emperor. Francis, who could not
bring himself to fufpe&t that the first prince of the blood would
be so base as to betray the kingdom to its enemies, immediately
repaired to Moulins, where the Confable was in bed, feigning
indisposition that he might not be obliged to accompany the King
into Italy, and acquainted him of the intelligence which he had
received. Bourbon, with great solemnity and the most imposing
affectation of ingenuity and candour, aflerted his own innocence;
and as his health, he said, was now more confirmed, he promied
to join the army within a few days. Francis, open and candid
himself, and too apt to be deceived by the appearance of those
virtues in others, gave such credit to what he said, that he
refused to arrest him, although advised to take that precaution by
his wisest counsellors, and as if the danger had been over, he
September. continued his march towards Lyons. The Constable set out soon

after, seemingly with an intention to follow him; but turning
Flies to Italy. suddenly to the left he crossed the Rhone, and after infinite

oThuani Hilt. lib. i c. to. Heuter. Rcr. AuRr. lib. viii. c. 18. p. 207.

fatigues
194

fatigues and perils escaped all the parties which the King, fen-
fible too late of his credulity, ent out to intercept him, and
reached Italy in safety P.

FRANCIS took every possible precaution to prevent the bad

effe&s of the irreparable error he had committed. He put gar-
rifons in all the places of strength in the Constable's territories.
He seized all the gentlemen whom he could fufpet of being
his associates, and as he had not hitherto discovered the whole
extent of the conspirator's schemes, nor knew how far the insec-
tion had spread among his fubjecs, he was afraid that his absence
might encourage them to make ome desperate attempt, and for
that reason relinquithed his intention of leading his army in per-
son into Italy.

Hr did not, however, abandon his design on the Milanese;

but appointed admiral Bonnivet to take the fipreme command
in his stead, and to march into that country with an army thirty
thousand strong. Bonnivet did not owe this preferment to his
abilities as a general for of all the talents requisite to form a great
commander, he poifeffed only personal courage, the lowest and the
most common. But he was the most accomplished gentleman
in the French ourt, of agreeable manners, an insinuating address,
and a sprightly conversation; and Francis who lived in great
familiarity with his courtiers, was so charmed with there quali-
ties that he honourcd him, on all occasions, with the moll partial
and diftinguilhing marks of his favour. He was, besides, the
implacable enemy of Bourbon; and as the King scarce knew

P Mem. de ellay, p. 64, &c. Pafquier Recherches de la Prance, p, 481.

C c 2, whom

French invade
the Milanese.
BOOK Ill.

15t3.

195

BOOK III.

1523.

Their ill con.
duet.

whom to trust at that juncure, he thought the chief command could
be lodged no where so safely as in his hands.

COLONNA, who was entrusted with the defence of the Mi-

lanefe, his own conquest, was in no condition to resist such a for-
midable army. He had scarce money sufficient to pay his troops,
reduced to a small number by sickness or desertion, and had, for
that reason, been obliged to neglet every precaution necefary
for the security of the country. The only plan he formed was
to defend the passage of the river Teflino against the French; and
as if he had forgotten how easily he himself had disconcerted a
similar scheme formed by Lautrec, he promised with great
confidence on its being effecual. But in spite of all his caution,
it succeeded no better with him than with Lautrec. Bonnivet
patled the river without loss, at a ford which had been neglected,
and the Imperialists retired to Milan, preparing to abandon the
town as oon as the French should appear before it. By an unac-
countable negligence which Guiccardini imputes to infatuation q,
Bonnivet did not advance for three or four days, and loft the op-
portunity with which his good fortune presented him. The
citizens recovered from their consternation: Colonna still
acfive, at the age of fourscore, and Morone, whose enmity to France
was indefatigable, were employed night and day in repairing the
fortifications, in amafing provisions, in collecting troops from
every quarter; and by the time the French approached, had put
the city in a condition to stand a siege. Bonnivet, after ome fruit-
less attempts on the town, which harralfed his own troops more
than the enemy, was obliged, by the inclemency of the season, to
retire into winter-quarters.

i Guic. lib. 1 5 254.

DURING
x96

DURING there tranfations, Pope Adrian died an event so

much to the fatisfaaion of the Rbman people, whose hatred; or
contempt of him augmented every day, thatr the night' after his
deeafe, they adorned the door of his chief physician's house with
garlands, adding this inscription, TO THE DELIVEERE OP
HIS COUNTRY r. The Cardinal de Medici instantly renewed
his pretensions to the Papal dignity, and entered the conclave
with high expectations on his own part, and a. general opinion
of the people that they would be successful. But though sup-
ported by the imperial faction, poteled of great personal inte-
reft, and capable of all the artifices, refinements, and corruption,
which reign in those aflemblies, the obflinacy and intrigues of
his rivals protracted the conclave to the unusual length of fifty
days. The address and perseverance of the Cardinal, fur-
mounted at last every obstacle. He was raised to the head of
the church, and afnumed the government of it by the name of
Clement VII. The choice was universally approved of. High
expectations were conceived of a Pope, whose great talents, and
long experience in business, seemed to qualify him no less for
defending the Spiritual interests of the church, exposed to immi-
nent danger by the progres of Luther's opinions, than for conduct-
ing its political operations with the prudence requisite at filch a dif-
ficult juncture .and who, besides there advantages, rendered the
ecclesiastical state more refpeCable, by having in his hands the go-
vernment of Florence, and the wealth of the family of Medici s.

CARDINAL WOLsEY, not disheartened. by the disappoint-

ment of his ambitious views at the former election, had
entertained more sanguine hopes of fucccfs on this occasion.

rJovii Vit. Adr. 127.

Bool III.

5a3;

Death of
Adrian VI.

Eletion of
Clement VII.
Nov. a8.

Wolfey di-'
appointed,
and filled
with reefnt -
lenat.
Guic. 1. . 263.

Henry
.

I97

BooK III. Henry wrote to. the Emperor, reminding him of his engage-

ments to second the pretensions of his minister. Wolfey
'beftirred himself with activity suitable to the importance of the
prize for which he contended, and inftrudced his agents at Rome
to spare neither promises nor bribes in order to gain his end.
But Charles had either amused him with vain hopes which he
never intended to gratify, or he judged it impolitic tooppofe
a candidate who had such a profpet of succeeding as Medici;
or perhaps the cardinals durR not venture to provoke the people
of Rome, while; their indignation against Adrian's memory
was still frefh,by placing another Ultra-montane in the papal
throne. Wolfey, after all his expectations and endea-
vours, had the mortification to fee a Pope eleted, of such
an age, and of o vigorous a constitution, that he could not
comfort himself much with the chance of surviving him.
Wolfey, by this second proof, was fully convinced of the
Emperor's insincerity, and it excited in him all the resent-
ment which an haughty mind feels on being at once difap-
pointed, and deceived; and though Clement endeavoured to
sooth his vindictive nature by granting him a commiflion to
be legate in England during life, with such ample powers as
veited in him almost the whole papal jurifdiaion in that king-
dom, the injury he had received entirely difrolved the tie which
had united him to Charles, and from that moment he medi-
tated revenge. It was neceflary, however, to conceal his
intention from his master, and to suspend the execution of it,
until by adextrous improvement of the incidents which might
occur, he should be able gradually to alienate the King's assec-
tions from the Emperor. For this reason, he was o far from
exprefling any uneasiness on account of the repulse he had

nict
98

199

met with, that he abounded on every occasion, private as well as
publick, in declarations of his high fatisfation with Clement's
promotion m.

HENRY had, during the campaign, fulfilled with great since-

rity whatever he was bound to perform by the league against
France, though more slowly than he could have wished. His
thoughtless profusion, and total neglet of Ceconomy reduced
him often to great straits for money. The operations of war
were now carried on in Europe in a manner very different
from that which had long prevailed. Instead of armies suddenly
aftembled, which under diltina chieftains followed their prince
into the field for a hort space, and served at their own cost;
troops were now levied at great charge, and received regularly
considerable pay. Instead of impatience on both fides to bring
every quarrel to the iffiue of a battle, which commonly decided.
the fate of open and defenceless countries, and allowed the barons
together with their vassals to return to their ordinary occupations
towns were fortified with great art, and defended with much
obstinacy; war, from a very simple, became a very intricate
science and campaigns grew of course to be more tedious, and
less decisive. The expence which these alterations in the mili-
tary system neceflarily created, appeared intolerable to nations
hitherto unaccustomed to the burden of heavy taxes. Hence
proceeded the frugal, and even parsimonious. spirit of: the
English parliaments in that age, which Henry,, with all
his authority, was seldom able to overcome. The commons,,
having refused at this time to grant him the supplies he
demanded, he had recourse to the ample and almost unlimited

iu Fiddes's Life of Wolfey, 94, &c. Herbert,

prerogative,

BooK III.

'5z3.

Henry's ope-
rations in
France.

BOOK III. prerogative, which the Kings of England, then, pofreired, and
<''*J :by a violent and unusual exertion of it, raised the money he
Septemb. 20. wanted. This, however, wafted so much time, that it was

late in the season before his army, under the duke of Suffolk,
could take the field. 'Being joined by a considerable body of
Flemings, Suffolk marched into Picardy, and Francis from his
extravagant eagerness to recover the Milanese, having-.left that
frontier almost unguarded, he penetrated as far as the banks of
the river Oyfe, within eleven leagues of Paris, filling that
capital with conftrnation. But the arrival of ome troops de.
tached by the King, who was still at Lyons; the aftive gal-
lantry of the French officers, who allowed the allies no re-
spite night or day; the rigour of a most unnatural season,
together with scarcity of provisions, compelled Suffolk to retire;
November. and La Tremouille, who commanded in those parts, had the

glory of having, with an handful of men, checked the progress
of a formidable army, and of having driven them with ignominy
out of the French territories ".

And those of TnEi Emperor's attempts upon Burgundy.and Guienne were not
the Germans
and Spani- more fortunate, though in both these provinces Francis was equally
ards. ill prepared to resist them. The condu& and valour of his ge-

nerals supplied his want of foresight i the Germans who made an
irruption into one of there provinces, and the Spaniards who attacked
the other, were repulsed with great disgrace.

End of the THUS ended the year 1523, during which Francis's good
campaign. fortune and success had been such as gave all Europe an high

idea of his power and resources. He had discovered and difcon-

u Herbert. Mem. de Bellay, 73, &c.

ccrtcd
960o

teried. a danigerous. cQnfpiracy, the autbiQ:otof wlich he:h 4 !dive
into eiile, alnm6ft 'itiout an attendant ;. lie had, reindeed ;abortive
all the ,fchdmea' of: te. powerfil confedrdqcy formed againg hlim
he .had proteted. his domiiniols ,wlen atacked,,9 ,three, differot
fides:; anid.though hia- army in:: the, MilFapefe had not de such
progrerfs,ap:,might h!aye been .expe aedL from i fuperirity to. tle
enemy in number, 'le had recovered and still kept pgWefion of
one half of that dutchy. ;

,,*; ' V.

! .

* ' . .'*^ 1¼ ! ':.*J f

s.;l ii ...'"**:}*.'

': .'1;"ii

. THE tfnfuing. yar oppe with events. more difr ous to France.
Fontarabia wa ,loit by; the cowardice gr. treachery of its governor.
In Italy,, the allies resolved on an early and vigorous effort in order
to dispossess .Bonnive..of that part ,of the Milanese wiwich lies be.
yond the Tefino; Clement, who, under the pontificates both of
Leo and Adrian, had discovered an implacable enmity to' France,
bgan now to'vieW the power which the Emperor was daily ac-
quiring in Italy, with so much jealousy, that he refused to accede,
as his prededeflbrs had done, to the league againftFrancis,,and for-
getting private paflions and animofities, laboured ryilith te zeal
which became his characEer, to bring about a reconci!iatijoln aong
the contending parties. But all his endeavours were ineffectual;
a numerous army, to which each of the allies furnifiled their
contingent of troops, was 'affeble at Milan by the begilping
of, March. Lannoy,.viceroy of Naples, took the command .of
it: upon Colonna's death, though the chief direction of military
operations was committed to Bourbon, and the marquis de
Pescara; the latter, the ablest and most enterprising of the
Imperial generals; tile former ifpired' by his refentmnt with
new activity and invention, and acquainted so thoroughly with

VOL. II. D d the

Boo .J1..

IS"'
153a,

1 24.

Sentilents of
the new Pope.
Februaty 27.

Imperial ar-
my ready to
take the field
early.

Bok :III. the charater of the French commanders, the genius of' their

4' troops, and the strength' as well as weakness of their. armies, ad

to be of infinite service to the party which he joined. But all these
advantages were nearly loft through the Emperor's inability to raise
mney sufficient for executing the various and extensive plans

Retarded by which he had formed. When his troops were commanded to
a mutiny of ''
the troops. march, they mutinied against their leaders, demanding the pay

which was due to them for ome months and disregarding both
the menaces and intreaties of their officers, threatened to pillage
the city of Milan if 'they did n6t instantly receive fatisfa&ion.
Out of this difficulty the generals'of the allies were extricated by
Morone, who, prevailing on his countrymen, over whom his in.
fluence was prodigious, to advance the fum that was requisite.
tie army took the field. - . , ,

The French BONN IVET z w. destitute' f troops to oppof, this army,
obliged to
abandon the and still more of the talents that could render him an equal

Mlanc' match for its leaders. After various movements and encqunters,

l described with great accuracy:by the contemporary historian$s
a detail of which, at this distance of time, would be equally
uninteresting and uninftrufive, he was forced to abandon the

rong camp in which he had entrenched himself at Biagraffa.
Sooh after, partly by his own mifcondu, partly by the activity
of the enemy, who harafled and ruined his army by continual
fkirmi(hes, while they carefilly declined a battle which e
often offered them; and partly by the caprice of 6000 Swif,
-who refused to join his army though within a day's march of
it; he was reduced to the neeffity of attempting a retreat into
France through the valley of Aoft. Just as he arrived on the

X Guic, . x. 267. Capella, 19o.

banks

Pescara appeared with' the vanguard of the allies, and attacked
iis i eat with !gre ftr . At the beginning :,pf;.the charge/
lonnivet, 'while exetting-;'himflf.' with 'muchl. alour..: w
woundea e so dangertufly as obliged hini to tuit::the field., and
the conduct of the rear was committed to the chevalie'r Byard,
who', though so 'much a stranger to the arts of a cotrt thlt he
never rose to the cief command, 'wzt always called, i tims
of real danger, to the posts of greatest difficulty and impottarlce;
He put himself at the head of the men at arms, and animating
them by his,prefence and example to sustain the hole shock
of ,te !enemny',,troops. ,hpe gainedl time, for the reA of hii c6lun-
trymen to make good their retreat. 'But in this fIervice he
received a wound which he immediately perceived to be'ihortal,
and being unable to continue anry longer on horseback, lhe
ordered 'dne of; hi ttendant. to place him ..uner, a tree,i with
his faoelhtowardd thei enemy; tlhq!, sing his eyes, on tle
guard, loft.'his', sword,, whicl h held up. inlftad of.. cross,
he addreshed his prayers to God, and in this posture, which
became his chara&ter both as a soldier and as a Christian, he
calmly waited th: approaich of death. Bourbon, who ld the
forembft 'f the entemies'troops, found' him in this fjtuatjon,
and expreed regret and pity at thie' ight " Pity ;not me,"
cried the igh-fplrited chevalier, " I die as a man of honour
cr 'ught in the dichare bs my duty; hey indeed are obje&s
" f pity,; who, fight i against, l)eir King, theiri country, and
" thieit oath." Themarquis de!,Pefcara, , pl9qg oon: after,
manifested his admiration of Bayard's virtues, and his forrrow
for his fall, with the generosity of a gallant enemy ; and find-
irg :.hat he could not be removed with safety frm tliat spot,

Dd 2 ordered

I3QK· 11.'

Death of e
clicalki Bay.
ard, and uin
of the French
army.
E.'MMP s R a - k t - IWA P., L .2 9

BooK Ir. ordered a tent to. be pitched there, and appointed proper persons

1534 taattend him. He.died, notwithstanding heir care, as, his ancef-

tors for several geperations lad done, in the field of. battle. Pescara
odered his body to be 'embalrIed, and sent t his relations;, airt
such was the rfpe&. paid to military merit in that age, that the
duke of Savoy commanded it to be received with royal honours
inr all tl t cities. of, his dromiipns in Dauphine, Bayard's native
; coiunry the peple. of all rans came out in a solemn 'roceio to

meet itt nli I; . ' * . , , ,
AP '_it .1 '

BONNIVET led bacl the (hattered remains of his' aimy into

France, .and in one Iot campaiigi, Francis' was fritrled-of all
he, had posse fsd in Italy, and left 'withiit-'6ne ally'ihn that

country. , . . ....
: .

WHILE the war kindled .by the emulation of Charles andd

Francis spread 'bver':( lima'i ,ouit:fies ;of Europe,. ,Germany,
enjoyed a' rofound' i"rahqsiill'ty,; 'txtremely favourable toi the:
r'ef6rmation,' hicii' 'co6niied fto mkalikepripgrefs daily.' ,;During
Luther's confinement in his retreat at Wartburg, CarlofRadius,
one of'his disciples, animated with the fame zeal, but possesed
of iefs rudence andhimoderation'; than his:mafter,: begn..to pro-
pagute: ild aid daigeroui opiniprs, chiefly:,among the: lower
people. Encoiraged b his' dxhortatidns, they. rof in several
villages' of Saxony, brbke into the chuirches' with. tumultuary
violence, ,nd tllrev dowh aid destroyed the.,images :witlh; .w}ich.
thley Wvere adorHed. '':Ttefl:'tregithlr and outrageous ,prce'd-
ifrgs were so reiignafit':to all the .Eletor's ''autiUa' ,mgsi»lss,

y Bellefor. Epitr. p. 73. Mem. de Bellay, 7. Oeuv. de Brant. tor. vi. o8, &c.
Pafquier Recherclles p. 56.

:i . , , . ;
,ihat

! , ' 8 [t ' ~~~~~~~~~~~~, ;

Progress of
the reforma-
tion in Ger-
many.

RO5

that if they had not received a timely check, they could scarce
have faiied 6f alienating from the reformers; that: prince, jealoud
to '; great degree' of his own. authority, and afraid of giving
offence'to the Emperor, and other patrons of the ancient opi-
nions. ' Luther, 'en'fible of the danger, immediately quitted his
retreat, ithoiut waiting-for Frederick's pefmiflion, and returned
to Wittemiberg. iHappiy for the :reforhation, the veneration
for his person dni'autiori'ty were still so great, that his appearance
alone fuppreied that spirit of extravagance which began to seize
his party. CarlofRadius and his fanatical followers struck dumb
by' his rebukes, declared that they heard the voice of an angel,
not f a man ' "'

BEFORE Luther left his retreat, he had begun to tranfate

the Bible ito the German tongue, an undertaking of no lefi
difficulty than: importance, of whicli he was' extremely fond,
and for which he was well qualified : He lad. a competent
knowledge in the original languages a thorough acquaintance
with the itile and sentiments of the inspired writers and tho'
his compqtitions in Latin were: rude and barbarous,, he was
reckoned a great master of the purity of his mother tongue, and
could express lhimfelf with all theelegance of which' it is capable.
By his own afiduous application, together with the afliftance
of llelancthon and, several, other of ,his disciples, he iiled
ps, r; q:s I Netw Tefament'this year, ; .and tilhe ptbicatioq of it
pftVed rore:fatal to tlhe church of Rome, thlan tllat f all his
Qyon, worksi It was read with wonderft!l ayidity and tttetion by.
p,,fon6s of every rank. They were aflopifljed at di^coveripg how.
contlary ti p o t A or f, relion
aret tof the

; ·X tit1 HiUL 5. SeFken.d. i. i inv
'.4~~~~~~~~~ *.Inventions

Boo. II.

1534.

March 6,

1522.
1Sz.

1

Luther tranf,
lates the
Bible.

. t11

BOOK IIL

Seveal cities
abolish the
rites of the
Popilchurch.

Measures em-
ployed by
Adrian in
order to check
the progress
of the Refor-
mation.

inventions of those who pretended to be. his vicegerents; and
having now in their hand the rule of faith, they thought. theif
filves qualified by applying it to judge of the established opinions,
and to pronounce when they were conformable to the standard, and
,when they departed from it. The great advantages arising from
Luther's translation of the Bible, ecouraged the advocates for re-
formation, in the other countries of Eurqpe, to imtatw his
example, and to publilh verfiQns of the Scriptures in their refpec.
tive languages.

ABOUT this time, Nurembergh, Francfort, Hamburgb, and

several other cities in Germany of the firR rank openly embraced
the reformed religion, and by the authority of their magistrates
abolihed the mass, and the other fuperRitious rites of Popery *.
The Eletor of Brandenburgb, the Dukes of Brunswick and
lunenburgh,. and Prince'of Anhalt, became avowed patrons of Lu.
ther's opinions; and' ountenanced the preaching of them among
their fubjets.

THE court of Rome' beheld this growing defection with great

concern ; and Adrian's first care after his arrival in Italy, had
been to deliberate with the Cardinals, chcerniihg the proper
means of putting a flop to it. This Pope was profoundly skilled
in fcholaRic theology, and having been early taken' notice f
on hat'account, he fill retained fclih an exceflive admiration of
ile science to which .he' owed his reputation and success in lifti
that he confidered Luther's inveives against the fchoolmen, par.
icularly Thomas Aquinas, as little less than blasphemy. All the
tenets of tlat dotor'd'itpeared it
iim so Cear 'nd itrefraal

a Seckend. 41. ChytriContin. kraniz, 203.

that
200

that he supposed every person who called in question or con-
tradicted them, to be either blinded by ignorance, or to be asing
in opposition to the conviction of his own mind: Of course, no
Pope was ever more bigotted or inflexible with regard to points
of doctrine than Adrian; he not only maintained them as
Leo had done, because they were ancient, or because it was 4dn-
gerous for the church to allow of innovations, but he adhered to
them with the zeal of a theologian, and with the tenaciousness
of a disputant. At the fame time his own manners being
extremely simple, and uninfected with any of the vices which
reigned in the court of Rome, he was as sensible of its corrup-
tions as the reformers themselves, and viewed them with no less
indignation. The brief he addressed to the Diet of the Empire
alembled at Nuremberg, and the inftru&ions he gave Cheregato
the nuncio whom he sent hither, were framed agreeably to. there
views. On the one hand, he condemned Luther's opinions
with more asperity and rancour of expreflion than Leo had ever
used hbe severely censured the Princes of Germany for suffering
him to spread his pernicious tenets, by their neglecting to execute
the edit of the Diet at Worms, and required them, if Luther did
not instantly retrac his errors, to destroy him with fire as a
gangrened and incurable member, in like manner as Dathan and
Abiram had been cut off by Moses, Annanias and Sapphira by
the apostles, and John Huss and Jerom of Prague by their
ancestors b. On the other hand, he, with great candour, and in
the most explicit terms, acknowledged the corruptions of the
Roman court to be the source from which had flowed all the
evils that the church now felt or dreaded he promied to exert
all his authority towards reforming these abuses, with as much

b Fafic. Rer, Expet & Ftgiend. 342.

B0K IL

1514*

Novembe&.
dispatch

BOOK II.

,'S4.

Diet of Nu-
remberg pro-
pose a gene-
ral council as
the proper re-
nedy,.

Artifices of
the nuncio to
elude it.

dispatch as the nature and inveteracy of the disorders would ad-
mit; and he requeed of them to give him their advice with re-
gard to the most effectual means of fupprelling that new heresy
which had sprung up among them .

THE members of the Diet,. after praising the Pope's pious and

laudable intentions, excused themselves for not executing the
edia of Worms, by alleging that the prodigious inoreafe of
Luther's followers, as well as the aversion to the court of Rome a-
rong their other fubjeas on account of its innumerable exactions,
rendered such an attempt not only. dangerous, but, impoflible.
They affirmed that the grievances of Germany, which did not arise
from imaginary injuries, but from impositions no less real than
intolerable, as his Holiness would learn from a catalogue of them
which they intended to lay before him;, called now for some
new ar.d efficacious remed2y; and in their opinion, the only reme-
dy adequate to thie disease, or which afforded them any hopes of
feeing the church restored to soundness and vigour, was a gene-
ral council. Such a council, therefore, they advised him, after
obtainingthe Emperor's conent, to alemble without delay, in one
of the great cities of Germany, that all who had right to be present
might deliberate with freedom, and propose their opinions with
such boldness, as the dangerous situation of religion at this june.
ture required A.

THr nuncio, more artful than his master, and better acquaints

ed with the political views and intereits of the Roman court,
was flartled at the proposition of a council; and easily foresaw
how dangerous such an aflembly might prove at a time when

c Fafcic. Rer. Expet, & Fugiend. p. 345.

d Ibid. p. 346.

many
208

many openly denied the papal authority, and the reverence and
fubmiflion yielded to it visibly declined among all. For that reason
he employed his utmost address, in order to prevail on the members
of the Diet to proceed themselves with greater severity against the
Lutheran heresy, and to relinquifl their proposal concerning a ge-
neral council to be held in Germany. They, perceiving the nun-
cio to be more follicitous about the interefis of the Roman court,
than the"tranqtiillity of the Empire, or purity of the church, re
mained inflexible, and continued to prepare the catalogue of their
grievances to be presented to the Pope '. The nuncio, lhat lie
might not be the bearer of a remonstrance. o, difageeable to his
court, left Nurembergh abruptly, without takipg leave of the
Diet'. ,

THE secular Princes accordingly, for the ecclefiafics, although

they gave no opposition,; did not think it decent to join with
them, drew up the lift (o famous in the German annals) of an
hundred 'grievances which the Empire imputed to the iniquitous
dominion of the papal fee. This lift contained grievances much
of the fame nature with that prepared under the reign' of
Maximilian. It would be tedious to enumerate each of
them; they complained of the fums exated for dispensations,
absolutions, and indulgences; of the expence arising from 'the
law-suits carried to Rome; of the innumerable abuses occasioned
by, reservations, . commendams, and annates of the exemption
from civil jurifdi&ion which the clergy had obtained; ,of the
arts by which they brought all secular eaufes under he cog-
nifante of the ecclesiastical judges; of the indecent and profli-
gate lives which not a few of the clergy led; and of various
other particulars, many of which have already been mentioned
among the circumftanFes which contributed to the favourable

e Facic. Rer. Expet. & Fugiend. 349.
VOL. II.

The Diet pre-
sent a lid of
an hundred
grievances to
the Pope.
f Ibid. 376.

reception,

BOOK ll.

1524.

20o9
E e

BOOK IlI.

3524.

The recess
of the Diet.
March 6,

1523.

The biet of
great benefit
to the Refor-
mation.

reception, or to the quick progress of Luther's doctrines. In the
end they concluded, that if the holy fee did not speedily deliver
them from those intolerable burdens, they had determined to
endure them no longer, and would employ the power atd autho-'
rity with which God had entrusted them, in order to procure
relief .

INs'rEAb of such severities againIt Luther and his followers

as the nuncio had rcommended, the recess or edict of tle Diet
contained only a general injunction to all ranks of men to wait
with patience for the determinations of the council which was
to be afetnbled, tid in the mehn time not to publirh any new
opinions contrary to the established doftrines of the church;
together with an admonition to all preachers to abtain from mat-
ters of controversy in their discourses to the people, and to confine
thetnfelves t the plain and iifiruCtive truths of religion '.

THE reformers derived great' advantage from the tralfadtions

of this Diet, 'as they afforded therh the.fulleft and most authentic
evidence that gross. corruptions, prevailed in the court of Rome,
and that the Empire, was loaded by the dlirgy with iniupportable
burdens. .- Withi rgard .to the former, Ithey',had.,now the tefti-
mony of'the Pope himtelf that their invectveis and accufatibrs

ere not malicions or ill;founded. As to the latter, the repre-
fentatives of the Germaniok body, in an aembly where the pa-
trons of tlle new opinions were far fom beifig:the idti1ilhtm1htits
or powetfiil,' had pointed bott- as the chief grievanceso o'the Ein
pire, those very practices of the Romish church aainft which
Luther and his disciples were accustomed to declaim. According.
ly in all their controversial writings after this period,. they often

g Farcic. Rer. Expet. & Plgiied 354. ' h bi 34.

appealed
210

It.

appealed to Adrian's declaration, and to the hundred grievances, Boo K IIL
in confirmation of whatever they advanced concerning the difrolute o
manners, or insatiable ambition and rpacioufncfs of the papal
court.

AT Rome, Adrian's condut was confidered as a proof of tle Adrinn's con-

duO. cnlsc~t d

mol childih simplicity and imprudence. Men trained up amidst a loec.
the artifices and corruptions of the papal court, and accustomcd
to.judge of aions not by whatwaa juss, but what was ueful,
were aflonithed at a Pontff, ,who, departing: from tle wile
maxima of his predecefobrs, acknowledged disorders which lie
ought to.have concealed; and forgetting his own dignity, alked
advice of those, to whom lie was entitled to prescribe. By such
an excess of impolitic sincerity, they were afraid that instead of
reclaiming, lie would render the enemies of the church more
presumptuous, and instead of extinguishing heresy, would weaken
the foundations of the papal power, or flop the chief
sources from which wealth flowed into the church '. For this
reason they indutrioufly opposed all hiS,fchlemes of refQrmation,
and by throwing objeations and difficulties in his way, endeavour-
ed to retard or to defeat the execution of them. Adrian, amazed
on the one hland, at the obRtinacy of the Lutherans, difguRetl,
on the other, with the manners and maxims of tle Italians, and
finding himself unable to corret either tlhe one or hie other, often
lamented his own situation, and often looked back with pleaflire
on that period of his life when lie was only dean of Louvain,
a more humble but happier station, in whllich little was expetecd
from him, and there wap nothing to fruflrlt I his good intin-
tions k, , ,

i F. Paul, Hi. ofCounc. p. 28. Pallavic. Hilft 58.
k Jovii Vit. Adr. p. 18. '

, .'. :r : Ee 2

CLEMI INT

211

BOOK III. reception, or to the quick progress of Luther's doftrines. In the

54. end they concluded, that if the holy fee did not speedily deliver

them from those intolerable burdens, they had determined to
endure them no longer, and would employ the power ad autho-
rity with which God had entrusted them, in order to procure
relief g.

The recess INSYEAt of such fevyrities against Luther and his followers
of the Diet.
March 6, as the nuncio had recommended, the recess or edi&t of the Diet

1523. contaired only a general injuntion to all ranks of men to wait

with patience for the determinations of the council .which was
to be aembled, atd in the mrt^in time not 'to publish iny new
opinions contrary to the eftablilhed doftrines of the church;
together with an admonition to all preachers to abstain from mat-
ters of controversy in their discourses to the people, and to confine
thefifelves td the plain ind iitrudive truths of religion '.

The biet of THE refotmers derived great advantage from the: trailfati.on
great benefit
to theRefor- of this Diet, as they afforded ther the.fulleft and most authentic
imation. evidence that.grofs. corruptions prevailed in the court of Ronle,

and that the Empire, was loaded by the dlergy with insupportable
burdens..- Withi rgird to iithe fdrmer, I:they:,tad.,now the; tefti
mb'ny of the Pope himtelf that their inveotve 'and accufatiods
were not malidioiis or illfounded. As to the latter, the repre-
fentatives of the Germaniuk body, in an assembly where the pa-
trons of tlhe new opiinions were fr fomn beilg!the lti'tlhtUidmrti
or powetful, had pointed btlt hs ;the chief gridevaces o'.the- Ei-i
pire, those very practices of the Romish church aainft which
Luther and his disciples were accustomcd to declaim. Accotdlng.
ly in all their controversial -writings after thia peri6d,, they oftn

r Facic. Rer. xpet. k& ligsend 354. 'i Id'. 34.

appeled

. .

. .
210

appealed to Adrian's declaration, and to the hundred grievances,
in confirmation of whatever they advanced concerning the difrolute
manners, or insatiable ambition and rpacioufnofs of thle papal
court.

AT Rome, Adrian's condu& was confidered as a proof of tile

molf childish simplicity and imprudence. Men trained up anidft
the artifices and corruptions of the papal court, and accustomed
to judge of actions not by what,wa just, but whlat was useful,
were aftonihed at a, Pontiff, ,who, departing, from the wile
maxims of his predecessors, acknowledged disorders which he
ought tohave concealed; and forgetting his own dignity, alked
advice of those, to whom he 'was entitled to prescribe. By such
an excess of impolitic sincerity, they were afraid that instead of
reclaiming, lie would render the enemies of the church more
presumptuous, and instead of extinguifling hereCy, would weaken
the foundations of the papal power, or flop the chief
sources from which wealth flowed into the church '. For this
refion they industriously opposed all hi, fclhemes of reformation,
and by throwing objeatipns and difticulties in his way, endeavour-
ed to retard or to defeat the execution of them. Adrian, amazed
on the one hand, at the obfRinacy of the Lutherans, disgusted,
on the other, with the manners and maxims of the Italians, and
finding himself unable to correct either the oe or the other, often
lamented his own situation, and often looked back with pleafilre
on that period of his life when lie was only dean of Louvain,
a more humble but happier fation, in which little was epetcd
from him, and there wag nothing to frurt¢ Ihis good inten-
tions k

i F. Paul, Hil. of Counc. . 28. Pallavic. lift. 58.
k JoviiVit. Adr. p. 118. '::

: E e

BOOK IIr.

SZ 4.

Adrin's con.
du' c1t'u1qc
at Rome1.
CLE M1 NT

211
0

Book III.

1524,

Clement's
measure a-
gainft Luther,
and his dread
of a general
council.

Feb. 1524.
The negoci-
ations of his
nuncio in a
second diet at
Nuremberg,

CLEMENT VII. his successor, excelled Adrian as much in the

arts of government, as he was inferior to him in purity of life, or
uprightness of intention. He was animated not only with the aver-
sion which all Popes naturally bear to a council, but having gained
his own elecion by means very uncanonical, he was afraid of an
aflembly that might subjee it to a scrutiny which it could not
stand. He determined, therefore, to elude by every poflible means
the demands of the Germans, both with refpe& to the calling of a
council, and reforming abuses in the papal court, which the rash-
ness and incapacity of his predecelor had brought upon him. For
this purpose, he made choice of cardinal Campeggio, an artful
man, often entrusted by the Popes with negotiations of import-
ance, as his nuncio to the diet of the Empire affenbled again at
Nuremberg.

CAMPEGGIO, without taking any notice of what had pafled

in the last meeting, exhorted the diet in a long discourse, to
execute the edie of Worms with vigour, as the only effectual
means of fupprefling Luther's doctrines. The diet, in return,
desired to know the Pope's intentions concerning the council,
and the redress of the hundred grievances. The former, the
nuncio endeavoured to elude by general and unmeaning decla-
rations of the Pope's resolution to pursue fitch measures as
would be for the greatest good of the church. With regard
to the latter, as the catalogue of grievances did not reach
Rome till after Adrian's death, and of consequence had not
been regularly laid before the present Pope, Campeggio took
advantage of this circumstance to decline making any'definitive
answer to them in Clement's name; though, at the fame time,
he observed that their catalogue of grievances contained many
particulars extremely indecent and undutiful, and that the

publishing
J

212

213

publishing it by their own authority was highly difrefpe6tful BOOK III.
to the Roman fee. In the end, he renewed his demand of the le
proceeding with rigour against Luther and his adherents but wtended wi'b
though an ambassador from the Emperor, who was at that
time very solicitous to gain the Pope, warmly seconded' the
Nuncio, with many profeflions of his master's zeal for the
honour and dignity of the papal fee, the recess of the diet was April 8.
conceived in terms of almost the fame import with the former,
without enjoining any additional severity against Luther and his
party'.

BEFORE he left Germany, Campeggio, in order to amuse

and ooth the people, publihed certain articles for the amend-
ment of ome disorders and abuses which prevailed among the
inferior clergy; but this partial reformation, which fell o far hort
of the expe&tations of the Lutherans, and of the demands of the
Diet, gave no fatisfation, and produced little effct. The nun-
cio, with a tender hand, lopped a few branches; the Germans
aimed a deeper blow, and by firiking at the root wished to exter-
minate the evils.

I Seckend. ;86. S5cid. Hi*. 66.

m Scckond. 291a

# BOOK IV.

THE
I S

E

T (
o F THE

I

OF THE
EMPEROR CH

B O OK
BOOK IV.

1524.

Views of the
Italian Rates
with refpest
to Charles
and Francis.

ARLES

V.

IV.

HE xpulfion ds the French, both out of the Milanese,
and the republick of Genoa, was confidered by the Ita-

lians, as the conclusion of the war between Charles and Francls;
and as they began immediately to be apprehensive of the Empe-
ror, when they saw no power remaining in Italy capable either
to controul or oppose him, they longed ardently for the re-efta-
blifhment of peace. Having procured the restoration of Sforza
to his paternal dominions, which had been their chief motive for
entering into confederacy with Charles, they plainly discovered

their
H

R

Y

D

G
R

N

the;r intention to contribute no longer towards increasing the Em-
peror's superiority over his rival, which was already the objet of
their jealousy. The Pope especially, whose natural timidity in-
creased his suspicions of Charles's designs, endeavoured by his am-
bafladors and remonfrances to inspire him with moderation, and
incline him to peace.

BuT the Emperor, intoxicated with success, and urged on by

his own ambition, no less than by Bourbon's desire of revenge,
contemned Clements admonitions, and declared his resolution of
ordering his army to pass the Alps, and to invade Provence, a
part of his rival's dominions where he leat: dreaded: n attack,
and was leaf prepared. to resist it. His most experienced mini-
fiers distuaded him from undertaking such an enterprize with a
feeble army, and an exhausted treasury: But he relied so much
on having obtained the concurrence of the King of Englalld,
and on tlhe hopes which Bourbon, with the confidence anld cre-
dulity natural to exiles, entertained of being joined by a nume-
rous body of his partisans as oon as the Imperial troops Ihould
enter France, that he persisted obstinately in the measure. Henry
undertook to furnish an hundred thousand ducats towards defray-
ing the expence .of the expedition during the firfi month, and
had it in his choice either to continue the payment of that film,
monthly, or to invade Picardy before the end of July with a pow-
.efful army. The Emperor engaged to attack Gienne at the
irflrie time ith a considerable body of men, and if there enter-
prizeA!Spoved filicefsfl, they agreed, that Bourbon, besides the
teriitories ihe 'had loft, hbould be put in pofeflion of Provence,
'with the title of ing, and hould 'do homage to Henry as the
lawful King of France, .for hisnew dominions, Of all the parts

of

Charles re-
solves to in-
vade France.

t5$
I300K IV.

15*4.
..

BOOK IV.

1524.

The Impe-
rialifs enter
Provence,
August 19.

Prudent met-
cures of
Francis.

THE REIGN OF THE

of this extensive but extravagant projeEt, the invasion of ro-
vence was the only one which was executed. For although Bout.
bon, with a scrupulous delicacy, altogether unexpected after the
part he had acted, positively refuted to acknowledge Henry's title
to the crown of France, and thereby absolved him from any obli-
gation to promote the enterprize, Charles's eagerness to carry his
own plan into execution did not in any degree abate. The army
he employed for that purpose amounted only to eighteen thousand
men; the supreme command of which was given to the Marquis
de Pescara, with instruCtions to pay the greatest deference to Bour-
bon's advice in all his operations. Pescara passed the Alps without
opposition, and entering Provence, laid siege to Marseilles. Bour-
bon had advised him rather to march towards Lyons, in the neigh-
bourhood of which city his territories were situated, and where of
course his influence was most extensive: But the Emperor was so
desirous to get possession of a port, which would, at all times, fe-
cure him easy access into France, that by his authority he over-
ruled the Constable's opinion, and directed Pescara to make the
reduction of Marseilles his chief object .

FRANC.IS, who forelaw, but was unable. to prevent this

attempt, took the most proper precautions to defeat it. He laid
waste the adjacent country, in order to render it more difficult for
*the enemy to subsist their army; he razed the suburbs of the
city, strengthened its fortifications, and threw into.it a nume-
rous garrison nder the command of brave and experienced
Officers. To there, nine thousand of the citizens, whom their
dread of the Spanish yoke inspired with contempt of dan-
ger, joined themselves; by their united courage and industry,

a Guic. 1. 15. 273, &c. Mcm. de Bellay, p. 80.

all

all the efforts of Pescara's military skill, and of Bourbon's aEti- BOOK V.
vityand revenge, were rendered abortive. Francis, meanwhile, ,5,4.
had leisure to aflemble a powerful army under the walls of
Avignon, and no sooner began to advance towards Marseilles, Illperialii
than the imperial troops, exhaufled by the fatigue of a siege forced to
which hadla(ted forty days, weakened bydifeafes, and almo treat.
destitute of provisions, retired with precipitation towards Italy b. pt1'9

IF during these operations of the army in Provence, either

Charles or Henry had attacked France in the manner which
they had proje&ed, that kingdom must have beenexpofed to the
most imminent danger. But on this, as well as on many other
occasions, the Emperor found that the extent of his revenues was
not adequate to the greatness of his power, or the ardour of his
ambition, and the want of money obliged him, though with much
relucance, to circumscribe his plan, and to leave part of it unexe-
cuted. Henry disgusted at Bourbon's refilfing to recognize his
right to the crown of France; alarmed at the motions of the
Scots, whom the follicitations of the French King had persuaded
to march towards the borders of England; and no longer incited
by his minister, who was become extremely cool with regard to
all the Emperor's interests; took no measures to fipport an enter-
prize, of which, as of all new undertakings, he had been at first
excefively fond .

IP the King of France had been satisfied with having delivered Fiancs elaecd
his subjects from this formidable invasion, and having flewn all with his

fuccefa

Europe the facility with which the internal strength of his domi-
nions enabled him to refil: the impreflion of a foreign enemy,

b Giuc. I. IS. 277. Ulloa Vita dell. Carlo V. p. 93.
( Fiddes's Life of Wolfey. Append. No. 70, 71, 72.

27
VOL. II.

even

even when seconded by the abilities and powerful efforts of
a rebellious subjet, the campaign, notwithstanding the loss
of the Milanese, would have been far from ending ingloriously.
But Francis, animated with courage more becoming a soldier
than a general; pushed on by ambition, enterprizing rather
than considerate; and too apt to be elated with success; was
fond of every undertaking that seemed bold and adventurous.
Such an undertaking, the situation of his affairs at that juncure,
naturally presented to his view. He had under his command one
of the most powerful and belt appointed armies France had ever
brought into the field, which he could not think of dilbanding
without having employed it in any service. The imperial troops
had been obliged to retire almost ruined by hard duty, and dif-
heartened with ill success; the Milanese had been left altogether
without defence; it was not impofibie to reach the country
before Pescara, with his Chattered forces, could arrive there; or
if fear llould add speed to their retreat, they were in no condi-
tion to make head against ,his fresh and numerous troops; and
Milan would now as in former instances, submit without refit-
ance to a bold invader. These considerations, which were not
destitute of plausibility, appeared to his sanguine temper to be of
the utmost weight. In vain did his wisest ministers and gene-
rals represent to him the danger of taking the field at a season
so far advanced, with an army composed chiefly of Swiss and
Germans, to whose caprices he would be subjeCt in all his opera-
tions, and on whose fidelity his safety muff absolutely depend. In
vain did Loulfe of Savoy advance by hasty journeys towards Pro-
vence, that he might exert all her authority in difluading. her
son from such a rafl enterprize. Francis disregarded the remon
ftrances of his fubjets and that he might save himself the pain

of
BOOK IV.

1524.

Resolves to
invade the
Milanese
aI8

EMPEROR CHARLES V.

oF an interview with his mother, whose councils he had deter- BOK V.
mined to reject, he began his march before her arrival; appoint- 1524.
ing her, however by way of attonement for that negle, to be
regent of the kingdom during his absence. Bonnivet, by his Appoints his
persuasion, contributed not a little to confirm Francis in this during his
resolution. That favourite who strongly resembled his maftcr bec
in all the defective parts of his character, was led by his natural
impetuosity, warmly to approve of such an enterprize ; and being
prompted besides by his impatience to revisit a Milanese lady, of
whom he had been deeply enamoured during his late expedition,
he is said, by his flattering descriptions of her beauty and accom-
plifhments, to have inspired Francis, who was extremely ilfcep-
tible of such paflions, with an equal desire of feeing herd.

.THE French passed the Alps at Mount Cenis; and as their Opeat
success depended ondifpatch, they advanced with the greatest the Milanese.
diligence. Pescara, who had been obliged to make a longer and
more difficult rout by Monaco and Final, was oon informed of
their intention ; and being sensible that nothing but the presence
of his troops could save the Milanese, marched with such rapi-
dity, that he reached Alvaon the fame day that the French army
arrived at Vercelli. Francis, inftruaed by Bonnivet's error in
the former campaign, advanced directly towards Milan, where
the unexpeted approach of an enemy so powerful, occasioned
such consternation and disorder, that although Pescara entered
the city with some of his best troops, he found that the defence
of it could not be undertaken with any probability of success
and having thrown a garrison into the citadel, retired through
one gate, while the French were admitted at another

d Oeuv. de Brant. tom. vi. 253.
Mem. de Bellay, p. 81. Guic. 1. iS. 278.

F f z THESE

BOOK IV. THESE brisk motions of the French Monarch disconcerted all

524 the schemes of defence which the Imperialifis had formed.

Embarrafling Never, indeed, did generals attempt to oppose a formidable inva-
Rate of the
Imperialists. sion under such circumstances of disadvantage. Though Charles

pofflelfd dominions more extensive than any other Prince in
Europe, and had, at this time, no other army but that which
was employed in Lombardy, which did not amount to sixteen
thousand men, his prerogative in all the different ates was so
limited, and his fiubjeds, without whose content he could raise
no taxes, discovered such unwillingness to burden themselves
with new or extraordinary impositions, that even this small
body of troops was in want of pay, of ammunition, of.provi-
sions and of cloathing. In such a situation, it equired all the
wisdom of Lannoy, the intrepidity of Pescara, and the implacable
resentment of Bourbon, to preserve them from finking under de-
fpair, and to inspire them with resolution to attempt, or sagacity
to discover what was eential to their safety. To the efforts of
'their genius, and the activity of their zeal, the Emperor was
more indebted 'for the preservation of'his 'Italian dominions than
to his own power. Lannoy, by mortgaging the revenues of
Naples, procured some money, hich was immediately applied
towards providing the army with whatever was most necelfary f.
Pescara, beloved and almost adored by the Spanish troops,
'exhorted them to flew the world, by lheir engaging to serve the
'Eiperor, in that dangerous exigency, Without making any
immediate demand of pay, that they were animated with
'fentiiments of'honour very different 'from those of mercenary
'foldlers, to w'hich popofition, 'he gallant body of men with an

f Guic 1. 15. 280.

unexampled

-
1

unexampled generosity gave their cOnsent . Bourbon having raised
aconfiderable fum, by pawning his jewels, set out for Germany,
where his influence was great, that by his presence he might haften
the levying of troops for the Imperial service h.

o9K IV.

3 524.
FRANCIS, by a fatal error, allowed tlhe Elperor' gnergals .time Francis be-

sieges Pavia.

to derive advantage from :all these operations. Inftcad of pullfuing
the enemy, who retired to Lodi on the Adda, an untenable pQlt,
which Pescara had resolved to abandon on his approach, he in com-
pliance with the opinion of Bonnivet, though ctrary,to that of
his other generals, laid siege to Pavia onlthe'Tlfinp;i a towAl, in- Ootbora8.
deed, of great importance, the poffefion of which wouldhlave qpened
to him all the fertile country lying on the banks of that river. But
the fortifications of the place wee Itrong j it 'was dangerous :toun-
dertake a difficult siege, at so;late arfeafon; and the Imperial gene-
rals, 'sensible of its consequence, had thrown into.the :town a igar,
rifon cornpofed of fix thousand veterans, .unler thle comnmand f
Atntonio de 'Leyva, an .officer of high irank.; ,of great experience,
of a patient but enterprizingcourage; fertile in re'sources; anibi;
tious ofdiftinguiing i himflf; and .capable, for that -eafn, "as
well as from'his having been long accultomed lboth to obey and to
command, of fiffering or performing any ,thing in order to pro-
cure success.

FRANCIS pr6fecuted the siege with 6bftinacy equal to the Hisvigorous

rashness with hich he had undertaken it. During three o
months, every thing known to the engineers of that age, or

g Jovii Vit. Davali, lib v. p. 386. Sandov. vol. i. 621. Ulloa Vita dell Carlo V.
v. p. 94, &c. Vide dell Eper. Carlos V. per Vera y Zuniga. p. 36.

h Merm. de Ballay, ,p..83.

that

221

that could be effected by the valour of his troops, was attempted
in order to reduce' the place; while Lannoy ahd Pescara, unable
to obftru& his operations, were obliged to remain in such an
ignominious fate of inaction, that a Pasquinade was published at
Rome, offering a reward to any person who could find the Im-
perial army, loft in the month of Otober in the mountains be-
tween France and Lombardy, and which had not been heard of since
that time'.

LEY A, well acquainted with the difficulties under which his

countrymei laboured, and the impofibility of .their facing, in
the field, such a powerful army as formed the siege of Pavia,
placed his only hopes of safety in his own vigilance and valour.
The efforts of both were extraordinary, and: in proportion to the
importance. of the place, with the defence of which he. was. en-
trusted. He interrupted the approaches of the French by frequent
and furious allies. Behind the breaches which their artillery made,
he ere6ted new works, that appeared to be scarce inferior in strength
to'the original, fortifications. He repulsed the besiegers in all their
aftaults; and by his own example, brought not only the garrison,
but the inhabitants to bear the most intolerable fatigues, and to
encounter the greatest dangers without murmuring. The rigour
of the season conspired with his endeavours in retarding the pro-
grefs of the French. Francis attempting to become master of the
town,. by diverting thle course of the Tefino, which is its defence
on one fide, a sudden inundation of the river destroyed, in one
day, the labour of many weeks, and swept away all the mounds
which his army had raited with infinite toil, as well as at great

expence k.
i Sandov. i. 608.

k Guic. 1. 21o. Ulloa Vita di Carlo V. p. 95.

NOTwITH-

222
BOOK IV.

1524.

The town
gallantly de-
fended.
;A.

NOTWI'THSTANDING the flow progress of the besiegers, and

the glory which Leyva acquired by his gallant defence, it was
not doubted but that the town would at last be obliged to fur-
render. The Pope, who already confidered the French'arms
as superior in Italy, became impatient to dilengage himself from
his connetions' with the Emperor, of whose designs. he was
extremely jealous; and to enter into terms of friendship with
Francis. As Clement's timid and cautious temper rendered him
incapable of following the bold plan which I eo had 'formed of
delivering Italy from the yoke of both the rivals, he returned to
the more obvious and practicable scheme of emiploying'the
power of the one to balance and to refiraiil that of the other.
For this reason, he did not difemble his fatisfation at feeing
the Frencll King recover Milan, as he hoped that the dread of
such a neighbour would be ome check upon the Emperor's am-
bition, which no power in Italy was now able to controul. He
laboured hatd' to bring about a peace that would fecurc Francis
in pofefion of his new conquefls; and as Charles, who was al-
ways inflexible in the p rfecution of his schemes, rejeced the pro-
position with disdain, and with bitter exclamations against the
Pope, by whofc perfuafilons, while Cardinal de Medici, he had
been induced to invade the Milanese, Clement immediately con-
cluded a treaty of neutrality with the King of France, in which.
the republick f Florence was included'.

' '; . . . *

' '

'

FRA:CI: S iaving bylthis tranfa&ion, deprived the Emperor of
iis two moit powerfil allies, and at the famte time having secured
a pasrage for his own troops through their territories, formed a
scheme of attacking tl'e kingdom of Naples, hoping either to

1 Guic. . s. 282 285,.

over run,

BOoK IV.

154.

The Pope
concludes a
treaty of
neutrality.

Francis in-
vades Naple.

23

.BOOK IV.

l$g4.

Efforts of
1'efcara and
Bourbon.

over-run that country, which was left altogether without defence,
or that at least such an unexpected invasion would oblige the
viceroy to recal part of the Imperial army out of the Milanese.
For this purpose he ordered fix thousand men to march under
the command of John Stuart duke of Albany. But Pescara fore-
feeing that the effect of this diversion would depend entirely
upon the operations of the armies in the Milanese, petfuaded
Lannoy to disregard Albany's motions , and to bend his whole
force against the King himfelfI so that Francis not only weak-
ened his army very unseasonably by this great detachment; but
incurred the.reproach of engaging too rashly in chimerical and
extravagant projecs.

MI!ANW1ItLte the garrison of Pavia was reduced to extre,

mity.; their ammunition and provisions began to fail the Gert
thans, of whom it was chiefly composed, having received no pay
for' seven months", threatened to deliver tih town into the
enemy's hands, and could scarce be restrained from mutiny by
all Leyva's address and authority. The Imperial generals, who
were no strangers to his situation, aw the neceflity of march-
ing without loss of time to his relief. This they had now in
their power: Twelve thousand Germans, whom the zeal and
activity of Bourbon taught to move with unusual rapidity, had
entered Lombardy under his command, and rendered the Impe-
rial army nearly equal to that of the French, greatly diminilied
'by the abfcnce of the body under Albany, as well as by the
fatigues of the siege, and the rigour of the season. But the
more their troops increaed in number, the more sensibly did
they feel, the distress arising from want of money. Far from

a Guic, . 5. 28sg n Gold. Polit. Imperial. 875..

having
224

having funds for paying a powerful army, they had scarce what
was sufficient for defraying the charges of condusing their
artillery, and of carrying their ammunition and provisions. The
abilities of the generals, however, supplied every defet. By their
own example, as well as by magnificent promires in name of the
Emperor, they prevailed on the troops of all the different nations
which composed their army, to take the field without pay;
they engaged to lead them directly towards the enemy; and
flattered them with the certain profpet of victory, which would
at once enrich them with such royal spoils as would be an ample
reward for all their services. The soldiers, sensible that by
quitting the army, they would forfeit the vast arrears due to
them, and eager to get poffeflion of the promired treafiures, de-
manded a battle with all the impatience of adventurers who fight
only for plunder m.

THE Imperial generals, without suffering the ardour of their

troops to cool, advanced immediately towards tle French camp.
On the firit intelligence of their approach, Francis called a coun-
cil of war, to deliberate what course he ought to take. All his
officers of greatest experience were unanimous in advising him to
retire, and to decline a battle with an enemy who courted it from
despair. The leaders of the Imperialists, they observed, would
either be obliged in a few weeks to disband an army, which they
were unable to pay, and which they kept together only by the
hope of pillage, or the soldiers enraged at the non-performance
of the promises to which they had trusted, would rife in ome
furious mutiny which would allow them to think of nothing but
their own safety:' That, meanwhile, he might encamp in some

BOOK IV.

They march
to attack the
French,
February 3.

m Eryci Peuteani Hilt. Cifalpina ap. Grzvii Thef. Antiquit. Ital. iii. p. 170,
1t79.

VOL. II. Gg strong

225

strong post, and waiting in safety the arrival of fresh troops from
France and Switzerland, might, before the end of spring, take
poffeflion of all the Milanese, without danger, or bloods(ed.
But in opposition to them, Bonnivet, whose destiny it was to
give councils fatal to France during the whole campaign, repre-
sented the ignominy it would reflect on their sovereign if he
should abandon a siege which he had prosecuted so long, or turn
his back before an enemy to whom he was still superior in num-
ber; and infited on the neceflity of fighting the Imperialists rather
then relinquilh an undertaking, on the fucceefs of which the King's
future fame depended. Unfortunately, Francis's notions of honour
were delicate to an excess that bordered on what was romantick.
Having often said that he would take Pavia, or perish in the
attempt, he thought himself bound not to depart from that refo-
lution; and rather than expose himfelg to the slightest imputation,
he chore to forego all the advantages which were the certain
consequences of a retreat, and determined to wait for the Imperia-
lits before the walls of Pavia ".

THE Imperial generals found the French o strongly entrenched,

that notwithltanding the powerful motives which urged them on,
they hesitated long before they ventured to attack them; but at
last the necessities of the besieged, and the murmurs of their owh
soldiers obliged them to put every thing to hazard... Never did
armies engage with greater ardour, or with an higher opinion
of the importance of the battle they were going to fight;
never were troops more strongly animated with emulation,
national antipathy, mutual iefentment, and all the pafions which
inspire obstinate bravery. On the one hand, a gallant young

·Guic. 1. 291.

Monarch
BOOK 1V.

1525.

Battle of
Pavia.

February 24.
226

Monarch, secondcd by a generous nobility, and followed by fb-
jests to whose natural impetuosity, indignation at the opposition
they had encountred, added new force, contended for vidory
and honour. On the other fide, troops more completely difci-
plined, and conducted by generals of greater abilities, fought
from neceflity, with courage heightened by despair. The
Imperialifis, however, were unable to rcfift the firfl eflbrts of
the French valour, and their firmefl battalions began to give
way. But the fortune of the day was quickly changed. The
Swiss in the service of France, unmindful of the reputation of
their country for fidelity and martial glory, abondoned their post
in a cowardly manner. Leyva, with his garrison, sallied out and
attacked the rear of the French during the heat of the action
with such fury as threw it into confilfion; and Pescara falling on
their cavalry, with the Imperial horse, among whom lie had pru-
dently intermingled a considerable number of Spanish foot,
armed with the heavy muskets then in use, broke this formi-
dable body by an unuflal method of attack against which they
were wholly unprovided. The rout became universal; and
refifance ceased in almost every part, but where the King was
in person, who fought now, not for fame or vitory, but for
safety. Though wounded in several places, and thrown from
his horse which was killed under him, Francis defended himself
on foot with an heroic courage. Many of his bravest officers
gathering round him, and endeavouring to save his life at the
expence of their own, fell at his feet. Among these was Bon-
nivet, the author of this great calamity, who alone died unla-
mented. The King exhausted with fatigue,' and scarce capable
of farther refitance, was left almost alone, exposed to the firy
of ome Spanifli soldiers, firangers to his rank, and enraged at

G g a his

BooK IV.

1525.

The French
army routed.

227

BOOK IV.

1525.

Francis taken
prisoner.

his obstinacy. At that moment came up Pomperant, a French gentle-
man, who had entered together with Bourbon into the Emperor's
service, and placing himself by the fide of the Monarch against
whom he had rebelled, alfifted in proteting him from the vio-
lence of the soldiers; at the fame time bcfeeching him to Surrender
to Bourbon, who was not far distant. Imminent as the danger was
which now surrounded Francis, he rejected with indignation
the thoughts of an action which would have afforded such matter of
triumph to his traiterous subjet; and calling for Lannoy, who
happened likewise to be near at hand, gave up his sword to him;
which he, kneeling to kifs theKing's hand, received with profound
refpet; and taking his own sword from his fide, presented it to
him, faying, That it did not become so great a Monarch to remain
disarmed in the pretence of one of the Emperor's subjects .

TEN thousand men fell on this day, one of the most fatal France

had ever seen. Among these were many noblemen of the highest
diftintion, who chore rather to perish than to turn their backs
with dihonour. Not a few were taken pxifoners, of whom the
the mot illustrious was Henry D'Albret the unfortunate king of
Navarre. A fnall body of the rear guard made its escape under
command of the duke Alenfon; the feeble garrison of Milan
on the firt news of the defeat, retired without being pursued, by
another road,; and in two weeks after the battle, not a French-
man remained in Italy.

o Guic. 1. S1. 292. Oeuv. de Brant. vi 3S5 Mem. de Belay p, 9o. S0ndov.

Hist. i. 638, &c. P. Maut. .p. 805. 8l.Q, o.ufdUi Letweo de Plincipi ii, p.
70. Ulloa Vita.deU Carlo V. .. 9S.

LAwqOY,

LANNOY, though he treated Francis with all the outward

marks of honour due to his rank and character, guarded him
with the utmost attention. He was follicitous, not only to pre-
vent any pofibility of his escaping, but afraid that his own
troops might seize his peribn, and detain it as the best security
for the payment of their arrears. In order to provide against both
there dangers, he conduced Francis, the day after the battle, to
the strong castle of Pizzichitone' near Cremona, committing him to
the custody of Don Ferdinand Alarcon, general of the Spanifl in-
fantry, an officer of great bravery, and of ftrit honour, but re-
markable for that severe and scrupulous vigilance which such a trust
required.

MEANWHILE Francis, who formed a judgment of the Emperor's

dispositions by his own, was extremely desirous that Charles should.
be informed of his situation, fondly hoping that from his generosity
or sympathy, he would obtain speedy relief. The Imperial gene-
rals were no less impatient to give their sovereign an early account
of the decisive victory which they had gained, and to receive his
inftruaions with regard to their future condut. As'the most cer-
tain and expeditious method of conveying intelligence to Spain,
at that season of the year, was by land, Francis gave the Com-
mendador Pennalofa, who was charged with Lannoy's dispatcheo, a
paflport to travel through France.

CHARLES received the account of this signal and unexpected

success that had crowned his arms, with a moderation, which
if it had been real, would have done him more honour than the
greatest victory. Without uttering one word expressive of exul,.

tation,.

Effea of this

CarICa.
March wR.!

BOOK 1V.

a$as.

229

BOOK IV.

ISZi.

The schemes
he began to
form.

The general
conternation
in France.

tation, or of intemperate joy, he retired immediately into his
chapel, and having spent an hour in offring up his thainkfgivings
to heaven, returned to the preence chamber, which by that time
was filled with grandees and foreign ambassadors, aff'mbled in
order to congratulate him: He accepted of their compliments with
a modest deportment; he lamented the misfortune of the captive
King, as a striking example of the fad reverse of fortune, to which
the most powerful monarchs are fubje ; he sorbad any publick
rejoicings, as indecent in a war carried on among Christians, re-
serving them until he hould obtain a victory equally illustrious
over the Infidels; and seemed to take pleasure in the advantage
he had gained, only as it would prove the occasion of restoring
peace to Christendom P.

CHARLES, however, had already begun to form schemes in his

own mind, which little suited such external appearances. Ambi-
tion, not generosity, was the ruling palion in his mind and
the vitory at Pavia opened such new and unbounded profpets
of gratifying it, as allured him with irresistible force: But it be-
ing no easy matter to execute the vast designs which he meditated,
he thought it necefary, while proper measures were taking for
that purpose, to asset the greatest moderation, hoping under, that
veil to conceal his real intentions from the other Princes of Eu-
rope.

M ANWH LE France was filled with consternation. The

King himself had early transmitted an account of the rout at
Pavia in a letter to his mother delivered by Pennalofa, which
contained only thee words, " Madam, all is loft, except our

p Sandov. Hist. i. 651. Ulloa Vita dell Carlo V. p. ilo.

" honour."
230

" honour." Those who survived, when they arrived from Italy,
brought such a melancholy detail of particulars as made all ranks
of men, sensibly feel the greatness and extent of the calamity.
France, without its sovereign, without money in her treafiry,
without an army, without officers to command it, and encom-
pafffcl on all fides by a victorious and active enemy, seemed to
be on the very brink of deftrudion. But on that occasion the
great abilities of Louise the regent saved the kingdom, which the
violence of her paflions had more than once expold to the greatest
danger. Instead of giving herself up to such lamentations as were
natural to a woman so remarkable f6r her maternal tenderness, (he
discovered all the foresight, and exerted all the activity of a con-
fummate politician. She aflembled the nobles at Lions, and anima-
ted them by example no less than by her words with such zeal in
defence of their country as its present situation required. She col-
leeted the remains of the army which had served in Italy, ransomed
the prisoners, paid their arrears, ad put them in a condition to
take the field. She levied new troops, provided for the fecutity of
the frontiers, and raised fums Cufficient for defraying there extraor-
dinary expences. Her chief care, however, was to appease the
resentment, or to gain the friendlhip of the King of England ; and
from that quarter, the first ray of comfort broke in upon the
French affairs.

THOUGH Henry, in entering into alliances with Charles or

Francis, seldom followed any regular or concerted plan of policy,
but was influenced chiefly by the caprice of temporary palions,
such occurrences often happened as recalled his attention towards
that equal balance of power which it was neceflhry to keep be-
tween the two contending potentates, the preservation of which he

always

BOOK IV.

1525.

The prudent
corlndut of
the Regent.

EffeEts of the
viatory at
Pavia on
Henry VIII.

<3I

BooK IV. always boasted to be his peculiar office. He had expeced that

5;. his union with the Emperor might afford him an opportunity of

recovering some part of hose territories in France which had
belonged to his ancestors, and for the fake of such an acquisition
he did not scruple to give his afliftance towards raising Charles to
a considerable pre-eminence above Francis. He had never dreamt,
however, of any event so decisive and so fatal as the victory at
Pavia, which seemed not only to have broken, but to have
annihilated the power of one of the rivals; so that the profpeEt of
the sudden and entire revolution which this would occasion in
the political system, filled him with the most disquieting appre-
henfios. He saw all Europe in danger of being over-run by
an ambitious prince, to whose power there now remained no
counterpoise; and though he himself might at first be admitted,
in quality of an ally, to some share in the spoils of the captive
monarch, it was easy to discem that with regard to the manner
of making the partition, as well as his security for keeping pof-
feflion of what should be allotted him, he must absolutely de-
pend upon the will of a confederate, to whose forces his own
bore no proportion. He was sensible that if Charles were per-
mitted to add any considerable part of France to the vast
dominions of which he was already master, his neighbourhood
would be much more formidable to England than that of the
ancient French Kings; while, at the fame time, the proper
balance on the continent, to which England owed both its safety
and importance, would be entirely loft Concern for the fitua-
tion of the unhappy monarch co-operated with these political
considerations; his gallant behaviour in the battle of Pavia had
excited an high degree of admiration, which never fails of aug-
menting sympathy; and Henry, naturally susceptible of generous

sentiments,
232

sentiments, was fond of appearing as the deliverer of a van- BoK IV.
quifshLd enemy from a state of captivity. The paflions of the ' 52
Engllfh minift(r seconded the inclinations of the Monarch.
VWoLey, who had not forgot the diiappointment of his hopes in
two fucceilive conclaves, which he imputed chiefly to the Em-
peror, thought this a proper opportunity of taking revenge; and
Louise, courting the friendship of England with ifch flattering
fubmiflions as were no less agreeable to the King than to:.the
Cardinal, Henry gave her secret aifurances that he would not
lend his aid towards opprcfing France in its present helpless
state, and obliged her to promise that he would not conent to
difinember the kingdom even in order to procure cer so.' '
liberty q

BUT as Henry's connections with the Emperor made it necef-

fary to at in such a manner, as to save appearances,' he ordered
publick rejoicings to be made in his 'dominions for' the success
of the Imperial arms; and as if he had been'eager to seize the
present opportunity of ruining the French monarchy, he ent
ambafladors to Madrid, to congratulate with Charles .ipon
his victory; to put him in mind, that he, as his ally, engaged
in one common cause, was entitled to partake in the fruits
of it; and to require that in compliance with the terms of
their confederacy, he would invade Guienne with a power-
ful army in order to give him possession of that province.
At the fame time, he offered to fend the princefs'Mary into
Spain or the Low Countries, that he might be educated under
the Emperor's direction until the conclusion of the marriage
agreed on between them; and in return for that mark of his
confidence he insisted that Francis hould be delivered to him,

q AMm. de Bllay, 94. Guic. 1. 6. 318. Herbert.
VoL. II. H h 1-::

?_33

BooK IV. in consequence of that article in tile treaty of Bruges, whereby

each of the contrascing parties was bound to surrender all ufur-
pers to him -hose rights they had invaded. It was impoflible
that Henry could expect that the Emperor would liften to these
extravagant demands, which it was neither his interest, nor in
his power to grant. They appear evidently to have been made
with no other intention than to furnish him with a decent pre-
text.for entering into fach engagements with France as the
jun'ture requiredr.

Onteltalaa IT was among the Italian states, that the victory at Pavia occa-
po"wei sioned the greatest alarm and terror. That balance of power on

which they relied for their security, ar.d which it had been the
constant objeA of all their negociations and refinements to main-
tain; was destroyed in a moment. They were exposed by their
firuationto feel the firt effeAs of the uncontrouled authority Charles
.had acquired. They obierved.many symptoms of a boundless am.
birion in that young prince, and. were sensible that as Emperor, or
King of Naples, he could .either form dangerous pretensions upon
.eachof their territories, or invade them with great advantage.
They deliberated, therefore, with much follicitude concerning
the means of raising such a force as might obftruc his progress '.
But their confulkatiors, coi.duded with little union, and executed
with less vigour, had no effect. Cltment, ifcad of pursuing the
.measures which he had cccerted with the Vel. ans for securing
the liberty of I1aly, was to intimidated by Lanroy's threats, or
4p:3 i. overcome by his promifLs, that he entered into a separate treaty,

bindirg himself to advance a considerable fum in return for

-Herbert, p6. 6. i Guic. 1. 6. 300. Rufclli Lettcre
ie Prric. ii. -4, 6, &c. Thuani H:ft. lib. i. c. ii.

certain
S34

certain emoluments which ihe was to receive. The money was BooKz IV.
instantly paid; Charles afterwards refused to ratify the treaty; )
and the Pope r mained exposed at once to infamy and to ridicule;
to the forme,, bcaufe he had deferred the publicl cause for his
private interest; to the latter, becaul he had been a loser by that
unworthy aion .

How dishonourable foevei the artifice might be which was Mutiny i h

employed in order to defraud the Pope of this fum, it came very 'mperial
seasonably into the viceroy's hands, and put it in his power to
extricate himself out of an imminent danger. Soon after the
defeat of the French army, the German troops which had
defended Pavia with such meritorious courage and perseverance;
growing insolent upon the fame they had acquired, and impa-
tient of relying any longer on fruitless promises. with which
they had been so often amused, rendered themselves matters of
the town, with a resolution to keep polfellion of it as a security
for the payment of their arrears; and the reft of the army disco-
vered a much iltronger inclination to allift, than to piinih the muti-
neers By dividing among them the money exacted from the Pope,
Lannoy quieted the tumultuous Germans; but though this satis-
sicd their present demands, he had o little prospect of being able to
pay them or his other forces regularly soT the future, and was under
fich continual apprehensions of their seizing the person of the cap-
tive King, that not long. after, he was obliged to.difmifs all the
Germans and Italians in the Imperial fcrvice . Thus, from a cir-
cumflaance that now appears very singu.lar, but arising naturally
fiom the confitution of moif Europ.an governments in the
fixtcenth century, while Charles was ihlpeed by all his eig:-

t Guc. 1. 16. 305. Mauroceni IliRor. Vnet ap. Iforichi dli crie
Venez. V. 13r, f36. u Guti. 1. . p. 3 2.

I-I h 3 brs

2.5

B6bK ,'

The Empe-
Jor'a delibera-
tions con-
cerning the

niproving his
li'lory.

bturs of aiming at univerral monarchy, and while he was really
foritig vast projects of this kind, his revenues were so limited;
that he could not keep on foot his victorious army, though it
did not exceed twenty-four thousand men.

DURING these tranfaions, Charles, whose pretensions to

moderation and disinterestedness were soon forgotten, deliberated
with the utnioft solicitude, how' he might derive the greatest
advantages from the: misfortunes of his adversary. Some of his
counsellors advised him to treat Francis with the magnanimity
that became. a vitorious Princes, nd iftead of taking advani-
tage of 'His fituaiion to impose rigorous conditions, to difmif him
on such equal terms, as would bind him .for ever to his interest
by- the ties ofigratitdde and affecion,.' more forcible as well as
more.peimanent than; any ;which could be formed 'by extorted
oaths and-involtuntary, Ripulationi. ,Such .an exertion of .geiero-
fit3y.is.not, perhaps, to be expe4ed'in :the condud of political affairs,
and it was far too refined for that Prince to whom it was proposed.
the more obvious, but, less splendid scheme of endeavouring to
piqkQ the utmoft'df Francis's calamity, had a greater: number in
th:o!couhcil to recomtmend its and suited better with the Empe-
rer's genius:!' :.Bnt though Chailes adopted this plan, he did not
execute: it in: a- proper manner ' Instead bs making one great
effort tb penetrate irito' France ith all :the Iforces of Spain and
the Low-Countries; instead of cfu(hig the !Italian tates before
they.recovered 'from the 'Cnfterna'iori which the success of his
arms had occasioned, he had recourse to the artifices of intrigue
and negociation. This proceeded partly from' neceffit;, partly
from the htural disposition of hils' mind. The situation of his
finances at that time rendered it extremely difficult to carry on
an extraordinaty' armament :and he himself having never

~; i appeared

appeared at the head of his armies, the command of
which he had hitherto committed to his generals, was averre
from bold and martial counsels, and trusted more to the arts
with which he was acquainted. He laid, betides, too much
itrefs upon the victory of Pavia, as if by that event the firength
of France had been annihilated, its resources exhausted, apd. the
kingdom itself, no less than the person of its Monarch, had been
fubjeded to his power.

FULL of this opinion, he determined to set the highest price

upon Francis's freedom, and having appointed the Count de
Roeux to visit the captive King in his name, he inftrusted him to
propose the following articles, as the conditions on which he
would, grant him his liberty that hle hould restore Burgundy to
the Emperor, from whose ancestors it had been unjustly. wrested;
that lie ihould surrender Provence and Dauphinb that they
might be ereced into an independent kingdom for the Conitable
Bourbon; that he fllould make full fatisfadion to the King. of
England for all his.claims; and finally, renounce, the .prctcn-
sions of France to Naples, Milan, or any other territory in Italy.
When Frances, who had hitherto flattered himself that lie should
be treated by the Emperor with the generosity becoming one.
great Prince towards another, heard there rigorous conditions,
he was so transported with indignation, that drawing his dagger
hastily, he cried out, " 'Twere better that a King should die thus."
Alarcon, alarmed at his vehemence, laid hold on his hand but
though he soon recovered greater compofilre he till declared in
the most folemnmanner, that he would rather remain a piioner
during life, than purchase liberty by filch ignominious concef-
sions .

BOOK IV.

1525.

The rigorous
terms he pro-
poses to
Prancis.
Mem. de Bellay, 94. Feireras Hill. ix. 43.

'I

BOQg 1V. 'TH iS' mortifying discovery of the Emperors intensions

greatly augmented Francis's chagrin and impatience under his
confinement, and must have driven him to absolute despair, if he

Francis car-
ried prisoner ha'd not laid hol6d of the only thing which could ifill adminifler
to Spain. to him any comfort. 'He perruaded himself 'that the conditions

whichRoeux had proposed, did not flow originally from Charles
.imfrelf, but were di&tated by the rigorous policy of his Spanish
council, and that therefore he might hope in one personal inter.
view with him, to do more towards hastening his own deli-
verance, than could' be asseted by long negociations palling
through the ubordinate hands of his ministers. Relying on
this supposition, which proceeded from too favourable an opi-
nion of the Emperor's' character, he offered to visit him in Spain,
and was willing to be carried thither as a fpetacle to that
haughty nation. Lannoy employed all his address to confirm
him in there sentiments; and concerted with him in secret the
manner of executing this resolution. Francis was o eager
on a scheme which eemed to open ome profpet of liberty,
that he 'furnifed the gallies neceflary for the voyage, Charles
beingat that time unable to set any fleet to sea. The viceroy,
without communicating his intentions either to Bourbon or
Pescara, conduted his prisoner towards Genoa, under pretence
of transporting him by ea to "Naples ; though soon after they
set fail, he ordered the pilots to fleer diretly for Spain; but the
wind happening to carry them near the French coast, the
unfortunate Monarch had a full profpc&t of his own dominions,
towards which lie cast many a sorrowful and desiring look.
they landed, however, i a 'few days at Barcelona; and oon
after, Francis was lodged, by the Emperor's command, in the
August 4. Alcazar of Madrid, under the care of the vigilant Alarcon, who

guarded him with as much cjrcumfp-:tion as every.

y Mem, de Bellay, 95. P, Mart. Ep. ult. Guic. 1. 16. 323

A FEW

A PEW days after Francis's arrival at Madrid, and when he

began to be sensible of his having relied without foundation on
tlhe Emperor's generosity, Henry VII. concluded a treaty with
the Regent of France, which afforded him some hope of
liberty from another quarter. Henry's extravagant demands
had been received at Madrid with that neglec which they
deserved, and which lie probably expeed. Clarles intoxicated
with prosperity, no longer courted him in that refpectfill and
fiubmifive manner which pleased his haughty temper. Wolfey,
no less haughty than his master, was highlly irritated at the
Emperor's discontinuing his wonted caresses and profeflions of
friendship to him. These flight offences, added. to the weighty
considerations formerly mentioned, induced Henry to enter into
a defensive alliance with Louise, in which all the differences
between him and her Con were adjusted; at the fame time he
engaged that lie would employ his best offices in order to pro-
sure the deliverance of his new ally from a state of captivity x..

WHILE the open defecion of such a powerful confederate

affe&ed Charles with deep. concern, a seeret conspiracy was car-
rying on in Italy, which threatened him. with coifequences ftijl
more fatal. The restless. and. intliguing, genus of Moron6,
chancellor of. Milan, gave rife to this. His revenge, had been
amply gratified by the expulsion of the French out of Italy, and
his vanity no less footled by the re-establishment of Sforza, to
whose interest: he had attached hinielf, in the dutchy of Milan.
The delays however, and . evasions of the Imperial cou.rt in
granting Sforza the invcfliture of Ilis new-acquired territories
had. long alarmed Moroni; these were repeated so often, and
with filch apparent artifice, as became a full proof to his ffpj-

x Herbert. Fiddes's Life of Wolfey, 33V.

BOOK IV.

1525.

Henry VlII.
concludes a
treaty with
France, in
order to pro-
cure his
tcleafe.

Moron's in--
tigues, in or-
der to over-
turn the Ein-
peror's power
in Italy.
ciots.

239
1'

BooK IV. cious mind that the Emperor intended to strip his master of that

rith country which he had conquered in his name. Though
Charles, in order to quiet tie Pope and Venetians, no less jea-
lous of his designs than Moron , gave Sforza, at last, the invefti-
ture which had been so long desired, the charter was clogged with
so many reservations, and fubjeftcd him to such grievous bur-
,dens, as rendered file duke of Milan a dependant on the Emperor,
rather than a 'vasal' of the Empire, and afforded him scarce any
other security for his poffeflions, than the good pleasure of an
ambitious superior. Such an acceflion of power as would have
accrued from the addition of the Milanese to the kingdom of
Naples, was corfidered by Morone as fatal to the liberties of Italy
'no less than' to his own power and importance. Full of this idea, lhe
'began to revolve in his mind the poflibility of rescuing Italy
from the yoke of foreigners, the darling scheme, as has been
already observed, of the Italian politicians in that age, and
which it was the great object of their ambition to accomplish
If to the glory of having been the chief instrument in driving
the French out of Milan, he could add that of delivering Naples
from the dominion of the Spaniards, he thought that nothing
Would be wanting to compleat his fame. His fertile genius
tfoon suggested to him a project for that purpose a difficult,
indeed, and daring one, but for that very rcafon, more agreeable
to his bold and enterprizing temper.

His negocia- BOURBON and Pescara were equally enraged at Lannoy's
trons with :carrying the French King into Spain without their knowledge.
Pescara.

The former, being afraid that the two Monarch's might, in his
absence, conclude ome treaty in which his intereits would be
entirely sacrificed, hastened to Madrid, in order to guard against
that danger. The latter, on whom 'the command of the army

now
. 4

now devolved, was obliged to remain in Italy; but in every
company, he gave vent to his indignation against the viceroy in
exprefions full of rancour and contempt; he accused him in a
letter to the Emperor of cowardice in the time of danger, and
of insolence after a vicory, towards the obtaining of which he
had contributed nothing either by his valour or his condut nor
did he abstain from bitter complaints againf the Emperor him-
self, who had not discovered, as he imagined, a sufficient sense
of his merit, nor bestowed any adequate reward on his services.
It was on tis disgust of Pescara, that Moron& founded his
whole system. He knew the boundless ambition of his nature,
the vast extent of his abilities in peace as well as war, and the
intrepidity of his mind capable alike of undertaking' and of
executing the moil desperate designs. The cantonment of the
Spanilh troops on the frontier of the Milanese, gave occasion to
many interviews between him and Morone, in which the latter
took care frequently to turn the conversation to the tranfations
subsequent to the battle of Pavia, a subjet upon which the mar-
quis always entered willingly and with pafion; and Morone ob-
serving his resentment to be uniform and violent, artfully point-
ed out and aggravated every circumstance that could increase its
fury. He painted in the firongeft colours the Emperor's want of
discernment, as well as of gratitude, in preferring Lannoy to him,
and in allowing that presumptuous Fleming to dispose of the
captive King without consulting the man to whose bravery and
wisdom Charles was indebted for the glory of having him in
his power. Having warmed him by fitch discourses, he then
began to insinuate that now was the time to be avenged for
there insults, and to acquire immortal renown as the deliverer
of his country from tlhe oppreflion of firangers; that the Rates

VOL II. Ii of

BOOK IV.

i ss.

24t

242
BO6K IV.

1525.

of Italy, weary of tile ignominious and intolerable dominion of
barbarians, were at last ready to combine in order to vindicate
their own independence; that their eyes were fixed on him.
as the only leader whose genius and good fortune could ensure
the happy success of that noble enterprize; that the attempt was
no lers practicable than glorious, it being in his power so to dif-
perre the Spanith infantry, the only body of the Emperor's
troops in Italy, through the villages, of the Milanese, that, in.
one night they might be destroyed by the people, who, having
fuf'ered much from their exactions and infolrice, would gladly.
Undertake this ervice; that he might then, without opposition,.
take poffeflion of the throne of Naples, the elevation destined for
him, and a reward not unworthy the teftorer of liberty to Italy ;.
that the Pope, of whom that kingdom held, and.whofe pre-
deceffors had difpoed of it on many frmer occasions, would.
willingly grant him the right of invetiture; that the Venetians,
the Florentines, the duke of Milan, to whom he had communi-
cated the fchene, together with the French would be the guaran-
tees of his right; that the Neapolitans would naturally prefer
the government of one of their countrymen, whom they loved'and
admired, to that odious dominion of strangers, to which they'had
been so long fubjested; 'and that the Emperor, astonished at a blow
so unexpeced, would find that he had neither troops nor money to
cfift such a powerful confederacyb.

PESCARA, amazed at the boldness and extent of the scheme,
listened attentively to Morone, but with the countenance of a

b Guic. 1. xvi. 325. Jovii Vita Davali, p. 417. Oeuv. de Brantomc, iv.

171. RufcelliLettere de Princ. ii. 91. JThuanii Hifi. lib. i. c. 1t. P. 'Heu-
ler. Rer. Aultr. lib. ix. c. 3. p. o27.;

t

man

mnan 16f1 in profound and anxious thought; On die one hand,
the infamy of betraying his sovereign uider whom he bore fich
higli command, deterred him from die attempt; on the other,
the protpee of obtaining a crown allured him to venture upon it.
After continuing a hort fpace.in futpenfe, the leat commend-
able motives, as is usual after such deliberations, prevailed, and
ambition triumphed over honour. In order, however, to throw
a colour of decency.on his condu&, lie inifted tat' some learned
cafuilts hould give their oponion, " Whether it was lawful
for a subje&t to take arms againt hip immediate sovereign,
in obedience' to the Lord Paramednt of whom the kingdom
itself was held.' Such a resolution of the cafe, as he expected,
was oon obtained from the divites and civilians both ds Rome
and Milan the negociation went forward; and measures seemed
to be taking with great' spirit for. the speedy eecution of the
design., i

MEANWHILE. Pescara, either hpcked at tlle treachery of the

a'tion which he was going to ,commit, or.deepairjng of its fc,.
ceis, began.to ntertain thoughts of abandoning thie engigemen
he had come iunder. The indifpofitiot of Sfora, w.h9 appsne
at that time to be! taken ill of ,distemper, wljbi; was lougl,
mortal, confirmed this resolution; and determined him to .make
known the whole con(piracy, to the Emperor, d igng it nopro
pAdent to expet the dutchy ,of Milan frgnp Ji as, tlie ,re vad
of :hiis difcpvery, than to aim at a,' kingdpm',to be prqhac4, ;!y,
a series of crimes. This resolution, however, proved the Corcq
of ations scarce less criminal and ignominious. The Emperor,
who had already. received full information concerning the con-
fpiracy from other hands, seemed to be highly pleated with

I i 2 Petcara's

BOOK IV;

Betrayed and
taken pri-
soner by
Pescara.

t43

BOOK IV.

1525.
t,,..---,

JS~5.

Pescara's fidelity, and commanded him to continue his intrigues
for fomr time with the Pope and Sforza, both that he n.ight
discover their intentions more fully, and be able to convict them
of the crime with greater certainty. Pescara, conscious of guilt,,
as well as sensible how suspicious his long silence must have. ap-
pearedat Madrid, durst not decline that dishonourable office;, and.
to his eternal disgrace, was obliged. to a& the meanest of all parts,
that of seducing with a purpose to betray. Confidering the
abilities of the persons with. whom, he had to deal,. the part
was scarce less difficult,' than. base; but he ated, it with such
address, as to deceive even the penetrating eye of Moroni who
relying with full. confidence on his sincerity, visited him at
Novara in order to put the last hand to their machinations.
Pescara received him. in an apartment where Antonio de Leyva
was placed, behind .the tapestry, that he might overhear and
bear witness to their conversation; as MoronS was returning
homewards, that officer suddenly appeared, and to his astonish-
ment arrested him prisoner in the Emperor's name. He was con-
duetedto thecaftle of Pavia; and Pescara, who had so lately been
his accomplices had now the ahrance to interrogate him as his
judge. At the fame time, the Emperor declared Sforza to have
forfeited all right to the duchy of;:Milan, by his engaging in
a conspiracy against the sovereign of whom he held ; Pescara,
byhis command, seized on every place in the Milanese, except
the castles of Cremona-arid Milin, which the unfortunate duke
attempted to: defend, were closely blockaded by the Imperial
troops "

t Guic. . xvi. 329. Jovii His, 319.. Capella, lib.v. p. oo200. ,
244

BuT though this uifuccefsfitl conspiracy, intead of ftrippiig

ihe Emperorof what he already pobleffed in Italy, contributed to
extend his dominions in that country, it hewed him the nece6-
fity of coming to some- agreement with, the. French King, unless
he would draw on himself a confederacy of .all Europe, which
the progress of his arms,: and his, boundless and.. undisguised
a'ambition, filled with general !ialarn. ' Hei had .not; hithdrto
'trated Francis' with the geher6fity 'hich 'that. monarch ex-
pedted, 'arid scarce with the decency 'due to his flation. ' Instead of
difplaiig' the: sentiments- beconming a great Prince,, he seems to
'have'aced withl the mercenary art bs a:derfai,, wh by: the rigor
rouis lagie of hi' prisoners, endeavours; to drdaw from them an
high price for their ransom. The .aptive King was confined in
an old caste, under a keeper whose formal austerity of manners
rendered llis vigilance mtill" more, difguftfull . He :was allowed
fi6"exercife but that.of ridilg on a mule,i surrounded with!nrrned
gulards on horseback; '(iarles, on pietence of itis being :necefT
fary to attend the Cortes assembled in Toledo, had gone' to reside
in that city, and fui:red several weeks to elapse without visiting
Francis, tiough hiefollicited an; interview. with the mrof prdfling
and' fubmiflive impbrtunity. ' So: 'many ndigrnities: nia'de a
!ieep iiprehioh 'tinaht'!J ig-fpirit'd' Prince'; he began' to: lose
all relilh for his usual amusements; his natural gaiety of .'teper
forsook him ; and after languishing for ome time, he was seized
with a dangeroiis fever, diring the violence of whlich ge don-
plainedconflantly bf'the unlexpeced atid unpiincely rig6ur (tiuh
which' he had been tieated,' often exlaiining, thlat noWi.thd
Einpieror would have the atisfietion; of his dyiig in his hands
without having once deigned to fee his face. The physicians,
at, lft,. delpaired of his life, and informed' the Emperof that they

$~~~~t · aw

.BbOK IV.

The riorous
treatment of
Francis in
Spain.

Endangers lib
life.

1I ' . ,
11 , ---

*4W

Boax I. saw no hope f his recovery, unless he were gratified with

1-525 regard to that point oii which he seemed to be so strongly bent.

Charles, follicitous to preserve a life, with which all his profpz&s
of farther advantage from the viaory at Pavia must have termi-
nated, immediately consulted his mirifers concerning the course
to be taken. In vain did de chancellor Gat inara, the most
able among them, represent to him the indecency of his visiting
Francis, if he did not intend to et him at liberty immediately
upon equal termsi in vain did he point out the infamy to which
he would be exposed, if motives of avarice or ambition flquld
prevail on him to give the captive Monarch this mark of.atten-
tion and sympathy, for which humanity and generosity had
pleaded so long without effe& The Emperor, less delicate, or
less follicitous about reputation than his minister, set out for

Sept 28. Madrid tovifit his prisoner.- The interview was hort ; Francis
TihtEmprr being too weik to bear a long conversation. Charles accosted him

in terms full of affection and refpct, and;gave him such promires
of speedy deliverance and princely treatment, as would have
refleed the greatest honour upon him, if they had flowed from
another fouree. Francis grasped at them. with the eagerness
natural in his situation; and cheared with this gleam of hope
bean to-revive from that moment, and soon recovered, his wonted
healthd.

The co.a. -. HE had. oon the mortification to find, that his confidence
bIe Boybca in the Emperor was not better founded than formerly.
Madrid. Charles returned inftandy to Toledo; all negociaions were

carried on by his minifers; and Fiancis was kept in as stria

Guic. . xvi. 339. Sandov. Hist. i. 665.

custody

cu'oedy :;s ever. A new indignity, and that very galling, was BOOK IV.
add.d to. all theie he had already fiffered. Bourbon arriving in 52

1525,

Spau abuut ;hli- time, Charles, who had so long refued to visit
ihe Kinlg, I',cived his rebellious fubjeat with the most studied
.,p!c't. i-Ik met him without the gates of Toledo, embraced

Nov. 15.

mi.n s-ih tlhe greatest affetion, and placing him on his left hand,
c',nlt.tced h;m to his apartment. These marks of honour to
h!m, were so many insults to the unfortunate Monarch; which
he fdIt in a very sensible manner. It afforded him ome confo-
lation, however, to observe that the sentiments of the Spaniards
differed idely from those of their sovereign. That generous
people detested Bourbon's crime; and notwithitanding his great
ta!ents and important ervices, they shunned all intercourse with him
to itch a degree, that Charles having desired the marquis de
Villena to permit Bourbon to reside in his palace while the
court remained in Toledo, he politely replied, " That he could
not ifufe gratifying the Emperor in that request;" but added
with a Caftillian dignity of mind, " that he muf not be furpiized
if the moment the Constable departed, he flould burn to the
ground a house, which having been polluted by the preerice of a
traitor, becamiie an unfit habitation for a man of honour e*"

THE Emperor himself, ne-crthelefs, seemed to have it much at
heart to reward Bourbon's services in a fig:!al mannir. But as Appointed

generll of the
Bourbon insisted, in the first place, on the accompliihment of his npelialanlny

n Italy.

promise of giving, him in marriage his filter Eleanora, Queen
do ilger of Portugal, the honour of which alliance had been one
of his chief inducements-to rebel agai.ift his lawful- sovereign; as
Francis, in order to prevent fitch a dangerous uaio, ,lad offered,

e Guic. 1. vi. 335. b

before

BioK' IV. before he 'left Italy, to marry that Princess; and as Eleanora

' ^"e herself discovered in inclinatibn rather to match with a powerful

Monarch, than with his exiled subjet; all these interfering cir-
cumftances created great embaraffment to Charles, and left him
f carce any ,lope of extricafing himself with decency. But the
December. death of Pescara, who at the age of thirty-fix; left behind him

tie 'reputation of being one of the greatest generals and ablest
politicians of that century, happened opportunely at this junture
for his relief. By that event, the command of the army in Italy
became vacant, and Charles, always fertile in resources, per-
fuided Bourbon, who was in no condition ;to dispute his will,
to adept the 6ffice of a general in chief there, together with a grant
of thie dutchy of Milan forfeited by Sforza, and in return for.
thetf to' relinquish al hopes of marrying the Queen of Portugal.r.

' ': :.

' ,' ' '

";.' ,

'

'i: , /

Negoc;at;ons THE .chief obflacle tbat flood in the way of.rancis's liberty
forprocuring' wasthe Emperar's infifling o peremptorily on te retftit.ution of
lirberty. Burgunldy, es a preliminary to that event. Francis often declared

that he would never oent to difmemberbi .h kingdom and
that even if'he fould io far forget ,the dutiesof iMopnarch. a
to come to such a refoution, the fundamental laws of the' king-
dom would prevent its. taking. effec. On his part, he was will-
ing to make an absolute ceflion to the Emperor of all-his pre-
tensions in Italy and the LowCountties; hiie'roiifed"t6'i'ebre
' , Bourbon allhiis land which had been 'confiatc d l'he renew; d ,,i

proposal of marrying; the 'Rmperdr's' fifi ";he' Qteei dwa

'

of 'Portugal' and' engaged to pay a great lnm by 'tay 's'"i nfbti'
foi'his owi perion. But all mutual 'esteem and confidinci ' b6
tween the iwo'monarchs were now entifely'oft; tilere':ppiead,

f Bandov. Hit. i. 676. Oeuv, d:Btlant.'i. t49.

on
248

on the one hand, a rapaciouis ambition labouring to avail itself
of every favourable circmnftaiice on the ther, ffpicion and
refentmeht, standing perpetually on their gard'1' To that the
profpet of bringiig tlieir negociations to an iflhe, 'eemed to be
far distant. The dutchiefs of Alencon, the French King's fitei,
whoih Charles permitted t visit her brother in' his coifiheiient,
employedall her address, in order to procure his liberty on m6iie
reasonable terms, Henty of England iriitepofed his good offices
to the fame ptrpofe ; bt both with b little success, that Francis
in delpair took fiuddenly the rfolutibn of resigning his cr6Wn
with all his tights and prerogatives to his son the Dauphllili,
determined rather to end his days in prison, than to purchafl
his freedom by conceflons unworthy of a King. The decd
for his purpose he signed with legal formality at Madrid,
empowering his filter to carry it into France that it might be
registered in all the parliaments of the kingdom; and at the
fame time intimating his intention to the Emperor, he deiired
him to name the place of his confinement, and to aflign. him a
proper number of attendants during the remainder of his days8.

THts refoltition of the French King had great effe&:; 'Charles

began to be sensible, that by pushing rigour to exces, he might
defeat hisown measures, and instead of the vast advantages he
hoped to draw from ransoming a powerful Monarch, he might
at last find in his hands a Prince without dominions or revenues.
About the fame time one of the King of Navarre's domestics
happened by an extraordinary exertion of fidelity, courage and
address, to procure his master an opportunity of escaping from
the prison in which: he had been confined ever fiiice the battle of

g This paper is publi(hed in Memoires Hifloriques, &c; par M. 1' Abbe
Raynal, tom, ii. p. 5 r.

V L . K k Pavia,

sboit' 'v.

1s.

Francs i
despair re-
solves to re-
sign hiacrown.

Charles
alarme.A

,t
249

BuOK IV.

'Sz5.

1526.

Treaty of
Madrid.

Pavia, This convinced the Emperor, that the molt vigilant atten-
tion of his officers might be eluded by the ingenuity .or boldness
of Francis, or his attendants, and one unlucky hour might
deprive him of all the advantages which he had been To follicitous to
obtain. By these considerations, he was induced to abate some-
what of his former demands. On the other hand, Francis's im-
patience under confinement daily increased ; and having received
certain intelligence of a powerful league forming against his rival
in Italy, he grew more compliant with regard to conceflions,
trusting, that if he could once obtain his liberty, he would soon
be in a condition to resume whatever he had yielded.

A s there were the views and sentiments of the two. Monarclis,.

the treaty which procured Francis his liberty was signed' at Madrid.
on the fourteenth of January, one thousand five hundred and
twenty fix. The article with regard to Burgundy,. which had
hitherto created the greatest difficulty, was compromised, Francis
engaging to restore that dutchy with all its dependencies in full
sovereignty to the emperor; and Charles conenting that tiis
restitution should not be made till the King was. set at liberty ;
in order to secure the performance of this, as well as the o,ther
conditions in the treaty, Francis agreed that at the fame instant
he himself was released, he would deliver as hoflages to the Em-
peror, his. eldest son the Dauphin, his second on the duke of
Orleans, or in lieu of the latter, twelve of his principal nobi,
lity, to be. named by Charles. The other articles, swelled, to a
great number, and tho' not of such importance, were extremely
rigorous. Among there the most remarkable were, that Francis
hould renounce all his pretensions in Italy; that he hould
disclaim any title which lie had to the sovereignty of Slanders
and Artois; that within fix weeks after his release, he fhoukl

restore

restore to Bourbon and his adherents, all their goods, moveable
and immoveable, and make them full reparation for the damages
they had sustained by the confiscation of them; that lie Ihould
uCe his interest with Henry D'Albret to relinquish his preten-
sions to the crown of Navarre, and hould not for the future
assist him in any attempt to recover it; that there should be efta-
blilled between the Emperor and Francis a league of perpetual
friendlfip and confederacy, with a promise of mutual assistance
in every cafe of neceflity. That in corroboration of this union,
Francis should marry the Emperor's sifter, the QLieen Dowager of
Portugal; that Francis should cause all the articles of this treaty
to be ratified by the States, and registered in the Parliaments of
his kingdom; that upon the Emperor's receiving this ratifica-
tion, the hoflages should be set at liberty; but in their place, the
duke of Angouleme, the King's third on, hould be delivered to
Charles, that in order to manifest, as well as to trengthen the
amity between the two Monarchs, he might be educated at the
Imperial court; and that if Francis did not, within the time
limited, fulfil the stipulations in the treaty, he should promise,
upon his honour and bath, to return into Spain, and 'to surrender
himself again a prisoner to the Emperor b.

BooK IV.

' 5 X

BY this treaty, Charles flattered himself that he had not only ScntillInts of

affedually humbled his rival, but that he had taken such pre- that age with
cautions as would for ever prevent his re-attaining any to it
formidable degree of power. The' opinion, whicl the wisest
polititions formed concerning it, was very different; they could
not persuade themselves that Francis, after obtaining his liberty,
would execute there articles against which lie had firuggled 'b

h Recueildes Trait. tom. ii. ii2. Ullon Vita dell Callo V.p. i0o, &c.

K k long,

BOOK IV.

5Sa6.
;>

Francis fe-
cretlyprotefts
against the
validity of it.

long, and to which even amidst the horrors of captivity he had
consented with such relutance. Ambition and resentment, they
knew, would conspire in prompting him to violate the hard con-
ditions to which he had been constrained to submit; nor would.
arguments and casuistry be wanting to represent that which was
so manifestly advantageous, to be neceflary and just.. If one
part of Francis's conduct had been known, at that time, this.
opinion might have been founded, not in conjecture, but in cer-
tainty. A few hours before he signed the treaty, he assembled
such of his councellors as were then in Madrid, and having
exacted from them a folernn. oath of secrecy, he made a long
enumeration in their presence of all the dishonourable arts, as
well as unprincely rigour; which the Emperor had employed in
order to ensnare or intimidate him, For that reason, he took
a forimal protest in the hands of notaries, that his content to the
treaty hould be oonfidteed as an involuntary deed, and be deemed
null and void . By this disingenuous artifice, for which even
the treatment he had met with was no apology, Francis endea-
voured to satisfy his honour andconScience in signing the treaty,
and to provide at the fame time a pretext on which to break it..

MEANWHILE, great were the outward demonstrations of

love and confidence between the two Monarchs , they appeared
often together in publck.; they frequently had long conferences
in private; they travelled in, the fame litter, and joined in the
fame amusements. But amidf there signs of peace and friend:
ihip, the Emperor ill harboured fufpiciol in his mind. Though
the ceremonies of the marriage between Francis and the Qeen
of: Portugal were performed soon after the conclusion of the
treaty, Charles would not permit him to confumate it until

i Recucil des Trait. torn. ii. p. 107.

the
252

the return of the ratification. from France. Even then Francis
was not .alowed to beat full liberty; his guards were still con-
tinued ; and while he was caressed as a brother-in-law, he was
fill watched like a prisoner; and it was obvious to attentive
observers, that an union, in the very beginning of which there
might be discerned flch symptoms of jealousy and iltrluftl, could
not be cordial, or of long continuance . ,

A B o U T a month after the signing of the treaty, the Regellt's

ratification of it was brought from France; and that wife Prin.
cess, preferring, n this occasion, ,the publick god to domeftick
*affeion, infored her To ,ithat inlead of the twelve noblemen!
named in the treaty, he had lent the duke of Orleans along
with his brother the Dailphin to the frontier, asthe kingdom
oould susser nothing,by the absence of a child, but muftbe left
alimot, incapable of defence, if deprived of its ablest Ifatefmen, and
mot experienced generals, whom Charles lhadartfilly, included
in his nomination. At laR Francis took leave of the Emperor,
whose suspicion of the King's sincerity increasing, as the time
of putting it to the proof approached, lhe endeavoured to bind
him Al faster by exactinginew promises, which after those he
had already made,. the French Moqar0. was not flo to grant.
He set out from Madrid, a place which the remembrance of
many affliing .circumstances rendered peculiarly odious to
him, with the joy natyral pn fucla an occasion, and began tle
long-wi(hed-for journey towards his own doninions. He was
escorted by a body of horse under ile ommand of Alarcon, who,
as the King drew near the frontiers of France, guarded him
with more fcrluptlous xaanefs than ,ever. When he arrived
at the river Andaye, which, separates the two kinlgdoms, Lautrcc

*K uic.. . i

.35 . !
k G.uic. l. 16. 3.

.*- . ,' '

. '
! 1 " *~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

BOOK IV.

1 26.

Ratified i.
France.

Francis (et at
liberty.
T

apparcl-

B0ooK IV.

^(_)

' S6,.

THE. REIGN OF THE

appeared on the opposite 'bank with a guard of horse equal in
:number to Alarcon's. An empty bark was moored in the middle
of the fiream; the attendants drew up in order on the opposite
'banks; at the fame instant, Lannoy with eight gentlemen put
off from the Spanish, and Lautrec with the fame number from
the French 'fide of the river; the former had the King in his
,boat-; the latter, the Dauphin and duke of Orleans they met
in the empty vessel; the exchange was made in a moment;
Francis, after a hort embrace to his children, leaped 'into Lau-
trec's boat, and reached the French ihore. He mounted that
instant a Turkish horse, waved his hand over his head, and with
ajoyful voice crying aloud several times, " I am yet a King,"
galloped full speed to St. John de Luz, and from thence to
Bayonne. This event, no less impatiently desired by the
French nation than by their Monarch, happened on the eigh-
teenth of March, a year and twenty-two days after the fatal
battle of Pavia.

The Empe- SOON after the Emperor had taken leave of Francis, and permitted
ror's marriage
with Isabella him to begin his journey towards his own dominions, he set out
of Portugal. for Seville, in order to solemnize his marriage with 'Isabella, the

daughter of Emanuel, the late King 'of Portugal," and the flfter
of John III. who had succeeded him in the throne of that king-
dom. Isabella was a princess of uncommon beauty and accom-
plifhments; and as the Cortes both in Castile 'and Aragon had
warmly solicited their fovereignto marry, the choice of a wife
so nearly allied to the royal blood of both kingdoms, was
extremely acceptable to his fubjeds. The Portuguese, fond of
this new connecion with the first Monarch in Christendom,
granted him an extraordinary dowry with Isabella, amounting

to
1 Sandov. Isidl. i. '135. Gic. . 6. 355.

to nine hundred thousand crowns, a fum, which, in

. the

situation of his affairs at that junCture,' was of no small confe-
quence to the Emperor. The marriage was celebrated with that
splendour and gaiety, which became. a great and youthful Prince.
Charles lived with Isabella in perfee harmony, and treated her
on all occasions with much diftintion and regard m.

DuRINO these tranfations, Charles could scarce give any

attention to the affairs of Germany, tllhull it was torn in piece'
by commotions, ,which threatened the' mnoft dangerouls confe'
quences. The feudal institutions still subsisted almnft iinimpaired
in the Empire. The property of lands was' vefied in the Princes,
and free-barons. Their vassals held of them by tlie strictest and
most limited'tenures; while the great body of tliepeople ws kept
in a ftatebut little removed'from abflute fiervitude. In tome plces
of Germany, people of the lowest class welr f6 entirely in tlih power
of their masters; as to be fulbje& to personal and domestic slavery,
the most rigorous form of that wretched state. In other provinces;
particularly in Bohemia and Lusatia, the peafaiits' ;0re bdund
to remain on the lands t6 which' theybelonged,. tiid'makingpart
of the estate,. were transferred like any "other propetty from one
hand to another. Even in Suabia, and, the countries on the
banks of the Rhine, where their condition was most tolerable,
the peasants not only paid the: filll rent of .;their farnms to the
landlord; but if they chose either to change the place of:their
abode, or to follow a new profellion,. they were obliged to pur-
chafe this privilege at a certain price. Befides:,this, all grants of
lands to peasants expired at their death, without defcepding to
their posterity. Upon that event, the;landlord lid a 'right to the

m UlloaVita di Carlo V. p. Io6. Belcarius Corn. Rer. Gallic. p. 565.
Spalatinus ap. Struv. Corp. Hillt Germ. ii, o108..

bell.

BOOK IV.

1526.

March ra2

Aflairs of
Germany.

Grievances of
the pcalflnts.

Boon .

1526.

Their inrur-
zetion in
Suabia.

bell of .heir cattle, and of their furniture; and. their heirs, in
order to obtain a renewal of the grant, 'were obliged to pay
large fums by way of fine. These exactions,' though grievous,
*were boir with patience, becaue' they *wee ctiftonimary and
ancient- But when thelprogref. of elegance arid luxury, as well
:as the changes introduced into lie ait of war ame to increase
,the expenceof government, and made it necessary for Princes to
levy occasional or stated taxes on their fubjeas, such impositions
being new, appeared intolerable; and in Germany, these duties
being laid chiefly upon beer, wine, and other heceffarics of
life, affected the common people i tle most 'enfible manner.
"The addition of such a load to their former burdens, drove them
to depair.. It,was oq the valour inspired by resentment against
imposition f hi kind, that tle Swiss owed the acquisition of
their'liberty i ,thle fourteenth century. The famre caiufe had
excited the peasants in several other province§ of Germany to
rebel gains their superiors towards the end of the fifteenth and
beginning of. the sixteenth. centuries; and though there infur-
re4ions were not attended wirhl like success, they could not
however be quelled without much difficulty and bloodffed a.

B Y there checks, the spirit of he peasants was overawed

rather than subdued.; and their grievances multiplying conti-
nually. they ran:to arms this year, with the most frantic rage.
Their first appearance was near Ulm in Suabia. The peasants
in theadjacent country flocked to their standard with the ardour
.and impatience natural, to men, who having groaned long under
oppression, beheld at last tome profpea of deliverance; and the
contagion fpreadirg from province to province, reached almost

Stcknd. lib. ii. p. 2. 6.

every

every part of Germany. Wherever they came, they plundered
the monasteries; wafted the lands of their fperiors; razed their
castles; and mnaiacred without mercy all persons of noble birth
who were so unhappy as to fall into their handsn. Having inti-
midated their oppreflors, as they imagined, by the violence of
thlee proceedings, they began to confider what would be the
molf proper and effectual method of securing themselves for the
future from heir tyrannical exacions. With this view, they
drew up and published a memorial, containing all their demands,
and declared that while arms were in their hands, they would
either persuade or oblige the nobles to give them full fatisfation
with regard to these. The chief articles were, that they might
have liberty to chufe their own patlors; that they might be
freed from the payment of all tythes but those of corn that they
might no longer be confidered as the slaves or bo,:dcnen of their
superiors; that the liberty of hunting and fillhing might be
common; that the great forests might not be regarded as private
property, but be open for the use of all tlat they might be deli-
vered from the unusual burden of taxes under which they
laboured; that the administration of justice might be rendered
less rigorous and more impartial ; that the encroahmnents of the
nobles upon meadows and commons might be restrained°.

BOOK IV.

1526.

MANY of there demands were extremely reasonable; and Qelled

being urged by ffich formidable numbers, might have met with
some redress. But those vast unwieldy bodies, aflebled in dif-
ferent places, had neither union, nor conduct, nor vigour.
They were led by persons of the lowest rank without Ikill in war,

n, Petr. Crinitus de Bello. Ruflicanoap. Freher. Script. Rer. Germ. Argent.
1717 o.
vol. iii. p. 43. o Sleid. Hit. p. 9o.

VOL. II. L I or

257

BOOK IV. or knowledge of what was neceffary.for accompliihing their

1"""6. designs; and all their exploits were diftinguilhed only by a

brutal and unmeaning fury. To oppose this, the princes and:
nobles of Suabia and the Lower Rhine raised their vasals, and
attacking rome of the mutineers with open force, and others by.-
furprize, cut to pieces, or dispersed all who infested those pro-
vinces; so that the peasants, after ruining the open country, and
losing upwards of twenty thousand of their afrociates in the
field, were obliged to return to their habitations with less hope
tlian ever of relief from their grievances P.

Their inur- THESE commotions. happened' at first in provinces of Ger-
ITetfon in many where Luther's opinions had made little progress; and.
T. huringi.

being excited wholly by political.caufes, had no connection with
the disputed points in religion. But the frenzy reaching at last
those countries in which the Reformation was established
derived new strength frem. circumstances peculiar to them, and
rose to a still greater pitch of extravagance. The Reformation,.
wherever it was received, increased that bold and innovating
spirit to which it owed its birth. Men who had the courage to
overturn a system supported. by every thing which can command.
refpe& or reverence, were not to be overawed by any authority,
however great or venerable. After having been accustomed to
confider themselves as judges of the most important docrines
in religion, to examine tlefe freely, and to-reje&, without scruple,
what appeared to them erroneous, it was natural for them.to turn.
the fame daring. and. inquisitive eye towards government, and to.
think of rectifying whatever disorders or imperfections were dif-.

p Seckend. lib. ii. p. o. Petr. Gnodalius de Ruflicanorum Tumultu in.
Germania ap. Scard. Script. vol. ii. p. 131, &c.

covered
a5t

covered there. And as religious abuses had been reformed in
several places without the permiflion of the magistrate, it was an
easy transition to attempt the redrels of political grievances in the
fame manner.

No sooner, then, did the spirit of revolt break Oat in Thu-

ringia, a province subjed to the Eleetor of Saxony, the inhabi-
tants of which were mostly converts to Lutheranifm, than it
afflmed a new and more dangerous form. Thomas Munccr,
one of Luther's disciples, having eftablifsd himfnelf in that
country, had acquired a wonderful ascendant over the
minds of the people. He propagated among them the wvildeft
and most enthusiastic notions, but such as tended manifestly to
inspire them with boldness, and lead them to sedition. " Luther,
lie told them, had done more hurt than service to religion. He
had indeed rescued the church from the yoke of Popery, but his
doctrines encouraged, and his life set an example of the utmost
licentioufilefs of manners. In order to 'avoid vice, fays he, men
must pratifc perpetual mortification. Tey must put on a grave
countenance, speak little, wear a plain garb, and be serious in
their whole deportment. Such as prepare their' hearts in this
manner, may expeCt that the filpreme Being w'ill direc all
their steps, and by ome visible sign discover his will to them
if that illumination be at any time with-held, we may expotlu-
late with the Almighty, who deals with us o harlhly, and, remind
him of his promises. This expostulation and anger will be highly
acceptable to God, and will at last prevail on him 'to guide us
with the fame unerring hand that conduAed the patriarchs of
old. Let us beware, however, of offending him by our arro-
gance; but as.all men are equal in his eye, let them return to
that condition of equality in which he forr ed them,, and having

L all

BootK 1V.

1526.

More formi-
dable.

Their fana-
tical spirit.

259

BOOK IV all things in common, let them live together like brethren,

-~"'"6 without any marks of subordination or pre-eminences."

EXTRAVAGANT asthefe tenets were, they flattered o many

paflions in the human heart, as to make a deep impression. To
aim at nothing more than abridging the power of the nobles
was now confidered as a trifling and partial reformation,
not worth the contending for it was proposed, to level every
diftintion among mankind, and by abolilfling property, to
reduce them to their natural slate of equality; in wlich all
lhould receive their fubfiftance from one common stock. Muncer
assured them, that the design was approved of by heaven,
and that the Almighty had in a dream ascertained him of its
success. The peasants et about the execution of it, not only
with the rage which animated those of their 'order in other
parts of Germany, but with the ardour that ehthufiafm inspires.
They deposed the magistrates in all the cities of which they
were masters; seized the lEnd3 of the nobles and obliged such
of them as they got into their hands, to put on the dress
commonly worn by peasants, and instead of their, formec
titles, to be satisfied with the appellation given to people in
the lowest class of life. Vast numbers engaged in this wild
undertaking but Muncer, their leader and their prophet, was
destitute of the abilities necessary for conducting it. He had
all the extravagance, but not the courage, which enthufiafta
ufially pofsefT. It was with difficulty he could be persuaded to
take the field;, and though he oion drew together eight thou-
sand men, he suffered himself to be surrounded by a body of
cavalry under the command of the Elector of Saxony, the Land-
grave of Hesse, and Duke of Brunswick. These Prince~, unwil-

Seckend. lib. ii. p. 13. Sled. Hilt. p. 83.

ling
6o

ling to shed the blood of their deluded fibjeds, ent a young BOOK IV.
nobleman to their camp, with the offer of a general pardon, if 5g6
they would immediately lay down their arms, and deliver up
the authors of the fcdition. Muncer, alarmed at this, began to
harangue them with his ufiual vehemence, exhorting them not
to trust these deceitful promires of their oppreflors, nor to desert
the cause of God and of CQriftian liberty.

But the sense of present danger made a deeper impreflion on Pecaants dek

the peasants than his eloquence, and confusion and terror were feated.
visible in every fice, when a rainbow, which was the emblem
the mutineers had painted on their colours, happening to appear
in the clouds, Muncer, with admirable pretence of mind, laid
hold of that incident, and suddenly raised his eyes and hands
towards heaven, " Behold," cries he, with an elevated voice,.
"the sign which God has given. There is the pledge of your
" safety, and a token that the wicked hall be destroyed." The
fanatical multitude et up infantly a great hout, as if victory
had been certain; and pafling in a moment from one extreme
to another, murdered the unfortunate nobleman who had come
with the offer of pardon, and demanded to be led towards the
enemy. The Princes enraged at this hocking violation of the
laws of war, prevented them by beginning the attack but the May IS.
behaviour of the peasants in the combat was not fucll as might
have been epected either from' their ferocity ot confidence of
success; an undisciplined rabble was no equal match for well,
trained troops; above five thousand were slain in the field,
almost without making retfiance; the reft fled, and among the
foremost Muncer their general. He was talen next day, and
being condemned to fuchl punilhments as his crimes had

deserved,

261

BOOK IV.

,15»6.

:Luther's mo-
derate and
.prudent con-
.dua.

.deserved, he suffered thcm with a poor and dastardly pirit. His
-death put an end to the infurreions of the peasants which had
.filled Germany with fiuch terror r; but the enthusiastic notions
which he had scattered were not extirpated, and produced, not
.long after, effecs.more memorable, as well as more extravagant.

DuRING there commotions, Luther aed with exemplary pru-

dence and moderation like a common parent, solicitous about
the welfare of both parties, without sparing the faults or errors
of either. On the one hand, he addreffd a monitory discourse
to the nobles, exhorting them to treat their -dependants with
greater humanity and indulgence. On the other, he severely
censured the editious spirit of the peasants, advising them not to
murmur at -hardships inseparable from their condition, nor to
seek for redress by any but legal means,.

LUTHER'S famousmarriage with Catharine a Boria, a nun of

a noble family, who having thrown off the veil, had fled from the
cloister, happened this year, and was far from meeting with the
fame approbation. Even his most devoted followers thought this
indecent at a time when his country was involved in so many
calamities; while his enemies never mentioned it with any softer
appellation than that of incestuous or profane. Luther himself
was sensible of the impreflion it had made to his disadvantage;
but being satisfied with his own conduct, he bore the censure of
his friends, and -the reproaches of his adversaries, with his usual
fortitude .

Sleid. Hil. p. 84. Seckend. lib. ii. p. 1 2. Gnodalius Tumult. Rulican.
1·55. Sleid. Hifl. p. 87. t Seckend. lib. ii. p. 15.

!- THIS

THIS year the Reformation loft its first protetor, Frederick,

Elecor of Saxony; but the blow was the les sensibly felt, as he
was succeeded by his brotherJohn, a more avowed and zealous,.
though less able patron of Luther and his.doctrines.

ANOTHER' event happened about the fame time, which, as it

occafibned'a considerable change in the state of Germany,' muf
be traced back to its source. While the frenzy of the Crusades
pofeifed all Europe during the twelfth and thirteenth centu-
ries, several' orders of religious knighthood were founded in-
defence of the Cliriftian faith against Heathens and Infidels.
Ainong' there the Teutonic order in Germany was one of the
moit illufsrious, the knights of which diitinguifhed themselves
greatly in all the wild enterprizes carried on in the Holy Land.
BSing driven at last from their settlements in the east, they were
obliged to return to thl ir native country. Their zeal, and valour
were toa impetuous to rem.in lcng inactive. They invaded,'
on very flight pretences, the province of Prufia, the inhabitants
of which were still idolaters; and having completed the conquest
of it about the middle of the thirteenth century, held. it many
years as a fief depending -on the crown of Poland, Fierce contests
arose during this period, between the grand masters of the order,
and the Kings of Poland; the former struggling for indepen-
dence, while the latter afterted- their right of sovereignty with
great firmness. Albert, a Prince of the house of Brandenburgh,
who was electd grand master in the year one thousand five hun-
dred and eleven, engaging keenly in this quarrel, maintained a
long war with Sigifinund, King of Poland; but having be-
come an early. convert to Luther's doctrines, this gradually
lessened his zeal for the interefis of his fraternity, so that !e

took.

BOOK IV.

1526.

May 5.

Prussia wrest-
ed from the.
Teutonic
order.

z63-

BOOK IV.

1526.

irft mea-

fures of the
French King
upon his re-
turn to
France.

took the oportunity of the confusion in the Empire, and the
absence of the Emperor, to conclude a treaty with Sigismund,
greatly to his private emolument. By it, that part of Pruflia
which belonged to the Teutonic order, was ereced into a secular
and hereditary dutchy, and the investiture of it granted to Albert,
who, in return bound himself to do homage for it to the Kings
of Poland as their vaflal. Immediately after this, he made pub-
lick profeflion of the reformed religion, and married a Princess
of Denmark. The Teutonic knights exclaimed so loudly againlt
the treachery of their grand mailer, that he was put under the
ban of the Empire; but he still kept poffeflion of the province
he had usurped, and tranfinitted it to his posterity. In process
of time this rich inheritance fell to the electoral branch of the
family, all dependance on the crown of Poland was shaken off,
and the Margraves of Brandenburg, having assumed the title of
Kings of Prussia, have not only risen to an equality with the first
Princes in Germany, but take their rank among the great
Monarchs,.of Europeu.

UPON the return of the French King to his dominions, the

eyes of all the powers in Europe were fixed upon him, that by
observing his first motions, they might form a judgment concern-
ing his subsequent condut. They were not held long in fufpence.
Francis, as oon as he arrived at Bayonne, wrote to the King of
England, thanking him for his zealous and affetionate interpo-
fition in his favour, to which he acknowledged that he owed the
recovery of his liberty. Next day the Emperor's ambassadors
demanded audience, and in their malter's name, required him

· Sleid His. p. 98. Pfcffel Abregt de l'hift. de Droit Publ. p. 6o0, &c.

to

E
264

to iue such orders as were neceflary for carrying the treaty of
Madrid into immediate and full execution ; he coldly an(wcrcd,
that though for his own prt he determined religiously to
perform all he had promised, the treaty contained so many
articles relative not to himself alone, but affecting the intereits
of the French monarchy, that he could not take any farther
ftep without consulting the States of his kingdom, and that
some time would be necefTary in order to reconcile their minds
to the hard conditions which he had consented to ratify x.
This reply was confidered as no obscure discovery of his being
resolved to elude the treaty ; and the compliment paid to Henry,
appeared a very proper ftep towards securing the afliftanoe of
that Monarch in the war with the Emperor, to which fitch a refo-
lution would certainly give rife. These circumstances, added
to the explicit declarations which Francis made in secret to the
ambassadors from several of the Italian powers, fully fltified
them that their conjecures with regard to his conduct had been
just, and that instead of intending to execute an unreasonable
treaty, he was eager t seize the first opportunity of revenging
those injuries which had compelled him to feign an approbation
of it. Even the doubts, and fears and scruples which used, on
other occasions, to hold Clement in a state of uncertainty were
difnipated by Francis's teeming impatience to break through all
his Engagements with the Emperor. The situation, indeed, of
affairs in Italy at that time, did not allow the Pope to hesitate
long. Sforza was fill besieged by the Imperialilts in the castle
of Milan. That feeble Prince, deprived now of Moron6's
advice, and unprovided with every thing necessary for defence,

x Mem. de Bellay, p. 97,
V\OL II.

BOOK IV.

1526.

*

a6d
M m

found

BOOK IV.

A league formedagainft
the Emperor.

found means to inform Clement and the Venetians, that lie
mutl soon surrender, if they did not come to his relief. The
Imperial troops, as they had received.no pay since the battle
of Pavia, lived at discretion in the Milanese, levying such
exorbitant contributions in that dutchy, as amounted, if we may
rely on Guiccardini's calculation, to no less a fum than five thou-
sand ducats a day Y;, nor was it to be doubted, but that the foL-
diers, as soon as the castle should submit, would chue to leave a
ruined country which scarce afforded them fubiftence, that they
might take pofeflion of more comfortable quarters in the fertile
and wutouched territories of the Pope and. Venetins. The
assistance of the French King was the only thing which could
either ave Sforza, or enable them to protect their own domi-
nions from the infultaof the Imperial troops..

FOR there reasons, the Popo, the Venetians, and duke of

Milan, were equally impatient to come to an agreement with
Francis, who, on his part, was no les desirous of acquiring.
so considerable an accefflon both. of strength and reputation
as ftch a confederacy would bring along with it. The chief
objects of this alliance, which was concluded at Cognac on
the twenty-fecond of May, though kept secret for ome time,
weretooblige the Emperor to set at liberty the French King's
sons, upon payment of a reasonable ransom; and to re-establish
Sforza in the quiet poffelion of the Milanese. If' Charles
should refute either of these, the contracting parties bound
themselves to bring into the field an army of thirty-five
thousand men, with which, after driving the Spaniards out

X Guic. 1. xvii. 360.

of
a66

of tle Milanese, they would attack the kingdom of Naples.
The King of England was declared Protedor of this league,
which they dignified with the name of Uoly, because the Pope
was at the head of it; and in order to allure Henry more eficc-
tually, a principality in the kingdom of Naples, of thirty thou-
sand ducats yearly revenue, was to be fettled on him ; and lands
to the value of ten thousand ducats on Wolfey his favourite z.

No ooner was this league concluded, than Clement, by the

plenitude of his papal power, absolved Francis from the oath he
had taken to observe the treaty of Madrid . This right, how
pernicious soever to morals, and destructive of that integrity
which is the basis of all tranfadions among men, was the natu-
ral consequence of the powers which the Popes arrogated as
the infallible vicegerents of Christ upon earth and they having,
in virtue of there, often dispensed with obligations which
were held sacred, the interest of Come men, and the credulity of
others led them to imagine that the decisions of a sovereign
pontiff authorized or justified aions which would, otherwise,
have been criminal and unbecoming.

MEANWHILE, the discovery of Francis's intention to elude,

the treaty of Madrid, filled the Emperor with a variety of dif-
quieting thoughts. He had treated an unfortunate Prince with
the mos ungenerous rigour he had displayed an insatiable
ambition in all his negociations with his prisoner: He knew
what censures the former had drawn upon him, and what appre-

BooK IV.

1526.

The Pope al-
solves Francis
from his oath
to observe the
treaty of
Madrid.

The nEmpcrt
alarlmcd,

z P. Heuter. Rer. Auflr. lib. ix. c. 3. p. 217. Recueil des Trait. ii. 124.
a Goldaft. Polit. Imperial. p. 1002. Pallav. Hlilt p. 70.

M m 2 hecnfions

261

BooK IV.

526.

Requires IFrarcistopcr-
formi what he
hadslipulatcd,

henfions the latter had excited in every court of Europe; nor
had he reaped from the meafulres he pursued, any of those advan-
tages which politicians are apt to confider as an excuse for the
most criminal condut, and a compensation for the severest
reproaches. Francis was now out of his hands, and. not one of
all the mighty consequences which he epe&ed from the treaty
that set him at liberty, was likely .to take place. His rashness
in relying o far on his own judgment as to trust to the sincerity
of the French King, in opposition to the sentiments of his wisest
rniniters, was now apparent;, and he easily coijedtired that 'the
'fame confederacy, the dread of which had induced him to flit
P'rancis at liberty, would now be formed against him with that
'gallant and incensed Monarch at its lhead. Self-condemnation and.
shame on account of What was paft,with anxious apprehensions
concerning what might'happen,. were the 'necessary result of these
reflections on his own condudt and situation. Charles, however,
was naturally firm and inflexible in all his measures. 'To have
receded suddenly from any article in the treaty of 'Madrid,
woild have been a plain cbnfefllon of imprudence, and' a-palpa-
ble symptom of fear; he determined therefore, that it was mdft
suitable to his dignity, to insist, whatever might be the confe-
quences, on the striCt execution of the treaty, and particularly
liot'toaccept of any thing which might 'be dffered ;as .aneqttva-
lent for the restitution of Burgundy b.

I N consequence of this resolution, he appointed Lannoy and

Alarcon, to repair, as his' ambafladors, to the court. of France,
and formally to summon the King either to execute the treaty

b Guic. 1. xvii. 366.

a
I'

with.
268

with the sincerity that became him, or to return, according to
his oath, a prisoner to Madrid. InRead of.giving them an imme-
diate answer? Francis admitted the deputies of the flates of Bur-
gundy to an audience in their pretence. They humbly repre-
sented to him, that he had .exceeded the powers vested in a King
of France when he consented to alienate their country from the
crown, the domains of which he was bound by his coronation oath
to preserve entire and unimpaired. Francis, in return, thanked
them for their attachmeht to his crown, and intreated them,
though very faintly, to remember the obligations which he lay
under to fulfil his engagements with the Emperor. The depu-
ties assuming an higher tone, declared that they would not obey
commands which .they confidered as illegal and if 'he should
abandon them to the enemies of France, they had resolved to de-
fend themselves to the best of their power, with a firm purpof
rather to perish than submit to a foreign dominion. - Upon which
Francis turning towards the Imperial ambafiadors, represented to
them the impoflibility of performingwliat .he Ihad uhdertken, and
offered in lieu of Burgundy, to pay the Emperor two ,million qs
crowns. The Viceroy and Alarcon who .easily perceivicd.that
the 'fcene-to which they had been witnefles, was:concetted;between
the King and .his subje5s' in order to impose o tlhem,.ifignified
to him 'their mafter'sjfixed efolution not to..depart. in.the filalleft
point from tllc terms of the treaty, nd ;withdre. . Beforethey
,left the kingdom, they.had the mortification ,to ,hear the .Holy
league.againfl the.Empror.publifhed ,with. great ifolemliity.

c Belcar. Comment. d, Rb. .Gal. 573. ,Mem. dc.Bellay, 97.

4 , , ' . . . .

BOOK IV,

' a6.

His Rnfw r;;

June i.
,CH 4zuR

269

BOOK IV.

1526.

The Empe-
ror's prepara-
tions for war.

Feeble opera-
tions of the
confederates.

CHIARLES no ooner received an account of this confederacy

than he exclaimed in the most publick manner, and in heharfleft
terms, againfl Francis, as a Pince void of faith, or of honour.
He complained no less of Clemnt, whom he follicited in vain to
abandon his new allies; he accused him of ingratitude ; he taxed
him with an ambition unbecoming his character; he threatened
him not only with all the ven eance which the power of an
Emperor can inflict, but by appealing to a general council, called
up before him all the terrors arising from the authority of those
aflemblies Co formidable to the Papal fee. It was necessary,
however, to qppofe omething else than reproaches and threats
to the powerful combination formed against him and the Empe-
ror, prompted by so many pallions, did not fail to exert himself
with unusual vigour, in order to fend supplies not only of men,
but of money, which was still more needed, into Italy.

ON the other hand, the efforts of the confederates bore no

proportion to that animosity against the Emperor with which
they seemed to enter into the holy league. Francis it
was thought,. would have infused spirit and vigour into the
whole body. He had his loft honour to repair, many injuries
to revenge, and the station among the Princes of Europe from
which he had fallen to recover. From all these, added to the
natural impetuosity of his temper, a war more fierce and bloody
than any he had hitherto made upon his rival, was expected.
But Francis had gone through such a scene of ditrefs, and the
imprefion it had made was still so frefl in his memory, that lie
was become diffident of himself, distrustful of fortune, and defi-
rous of tranquillity. To procure the release of his sons, and to
Ivoid the restitution of Burgundy by paying ome reasonable

t equivalent,
m7o

. -.

equivalent, were his chief objects, and for the fake of there, he
would willingly have sacrificed Sforza and the liberties of Italy
to the Emperor. He flattered himself that the dread alone of
filch a confederacy would induce Charles to liften to what was
equitable; and was afraid of employing any considerable force
for the relief of the Milanese, left his allies, whom he had often
found to be more attentive to their own interest, than puntlual
in fulfilling their engagements, hould abandon him as oon as
the Imperialists were driven out of that country, and deprive his
negociations with the Emperor of that weight which they derived
from his being at the head of a powerful league. Meanwhile the
caffle of Milan was prefled more closely than ever, and Sforza
was now reduced to the last extremity. The Pope and Venetians,
trusting to Francis's concurrence, commanded their troops to
take the field, in order to relieve him'; and an army more. than
sufficient for that service was soon formed. The Milanese, pas-
fionately attached to their unfortunate duike, and no less exafpe-
rated against the Imperialists, who had oppressed them so cruelly,
were ready to aid the confederates in all their enterprizes. But
the duke dUrbino, their general, naturally flow. and indecisive,
and restrained, besides, by his ancient enmity to the family of
Medici, from taking any ftep that might aggrandize or. add
reputation to the Pope d, loft some opportunities, and refused to
improve others, of attacking the Imperialists, and raising the
siege. These delays gave Bourbon time to bring up a reinforce-
ment of fresh troops, and a supply of money. He immediately
took the command of the army, and puihed on the siege with
such vigour, as quickly obliged Sforza to furrcnder, who retiring
to Lodi, which the confederates had furprized, left Bourbon in

d Guic. 1. 17. 382.

full

BOOK IV.

1526.

July 24.
r

271

BOOK IV.

1525.

Disquietude
of the Italian
powers.

Measures of
the Impe-
tialtifs.

full poffelion of the reft of the dutchy, the invesliture of which
the Emperor had promised to grant him e.

THE Italians began now to perceive the game which Francis

had played, and to be .sensible that, notwithstanding all their
address, and refinements in negociation, which they boatled of
as taletits pecuiliarly their own, they had for once been over-
reached in those very arts by a tramontane Prince. He had
hitherto thrown almost the whole burden of the war upon them,
taking advantage of their efforts, in order to enforce fthe propo-
fals.which hieoften' renewed at the court of Madrid for obtain-
:ing.-the .liberty of his sons. 'The Pope and Venetians expoftu-
lated and complained f, but as they were not able to rouze
:Frartcis from his inactivity, their on zeal and vigour, gra-
,dlually abated, and Clement having already gone farther than
liis timidity usually permitted him, began to accuse himself of
rafnefs, and to relapse into his natural slate of doubt and uncer-
tainty.

A L L ite Emperor's motions depending on hirmfelr alone,

were more briik ' and better concerted. The narrowness
6f his revenues, indeed, did not allow him to make any
sudden or great effoft in the field, but he abundantly supplied
that defet by his intrigues and negociations. The family of
Colonna, the ihodt powerful of all the Roman batons, had
adhered uniformly to the Ghibelile or Irrperial fation, during
those fierce contentions between the Popes and Emperors, which,
for everal ages, filled Italy and Germany with discord and

* Guic. . 17. 376, &c.
159, 16o-66.

f Rucelli Lettere de Princip ii. 157, &c.

bloodshed
27Z

bloodshed. Though the causes which at first gave birth to there
deftrudive factions existed no longer, and the rage with which
they had been animated was in a great measure spent, the Co-
lonnas still retained their attachment to the Imperial interest, and
by placing themselves under the protetion of the Emperors, fe-
cured the quiet polftfeion of their own territories and privileges.
The Cardinal Pompeo Colonna, a man of a turbulent and ambi-
tious temper, at that tide the head of the family, had long been
Clement's rival, to whose influence in the last conclave ie imputed
the disappointment of all his schemes for attaining the Papal dig-
nity, of which, from his known connection with the Emperor,
he thought himself secure. This was too great an injury to an
aspiring mind ever to be forgiven; and though he had diflembled
his resentment so far as to vote for Clement at his election, and to
accept of great offices in his court, he waited with the utmost im-
patience for an opportunity of being revenged. Don Hugo di
Moncada, the Imperial ambaFador at Rome, who was no ifranger
to these entiments, easily persuaded him that now was the time,
while all the Papal troops were employed in Lombardy, to attempt
something which would, at once, avenge his own wrongs, and be
of essential service to the Emperor his patron. The Pope, how-
ever, whose timidity rendered him quick-fighted, was' so attentive
to their operations, and began to be alarmed so early, that he
might have drawn together troops sufficient to. have disconcerted
all Colonna's measures. But Moncada amused him so artfully witil
negociations, promires, and sale intelligence, that he lulled asleep
all his fuipicions, and prevented his taking any of the precautions
necefry for his safety; and to the eternal difgraceof a prince pof-
sessed of great power, as well as renowned for political wisdom,
Colonna, at the head of three thousand men, seized one of tlhe

\Vol. II. N gates

Boo1K IV.

Spt6.
sept. 20.

273

BOOK IV.

,s26.

The Cplon-
nas become
mailers of
Rome.

Accommoda-
tion between
the Pope and
Emperor.

gates of his capital, while he imagined himself to be in perfecQ
security, and was altogether unprepared for resisting. such a
feeble engmy. Tlh inhabitrnts of Pnrom peimitted Cnlonis's
troops, from whom they appehellded no ijury, t a.dvanc
witlhQot opposition ; the Pope' gards were difpexed in a cm-
me; ,aC gtlement himflf, t.riied at the; dagr, ala.ad¢
of is own credulity,. p4. dMfertqd by ,alJoff every pirfol, fled
with precipitation into thli qafte of St. Auglok which was im-
nediately invested. The palace of the Vatican, the church of
St. Peter, and the holses of the Pope's niifters and fevants,
were plundered in the mnofi, icentiotp manner ; the reft; of the
city was left unmolefte,, Cklemnt, dRitut o evry ,thing
necefary either for fubf.lten.ce ox defence,, was loon oblid to
demand a capitulation; and Moncada, being admitted into th
castle, prescribed to him, with all the hauglltleCf, qs a conqueror,
conditions which. it was not in, is power to rejeA. The chief
of these were, That Clemept fihould not only grant a full pardp
to the Colonnas, but receive them into favour, and. immdiately
withdraw all the troops i his, pay from the army f thg confe-
derates in Lombardy g.

THE Colonnas who tlked of nothing less than of deposing

Clement, and of placing Ponpeo, their kinfmnan, in the vacant
chair of St. Peter, exclaimed loudly against a treaty which. left
them at the mercy of a Pontiff justly incensed against them.
But Moncada, attentive only to his master's interest, paid little
regard to their complaints, and by this fortunate meafiure, broke
entirely the power of the confederates.

4 Jovi Vita, Pompp.. Colg, p,
de PriniRi. i. p. 0o4.

Guic.i , 17 407. Rufcelli Lottere

WHILE
Z74

W1\ILB the army f th&e cohfederates fuffecd such a confi

derable diminution, the iitperialifts received to rea't reitn-
forcements; one from Spain, under the cormmand of Lannoy
and Alarcon, which amounted to fix thoufatd men. The other
was railed in the Empire b Gedrge Frondfperg, a' Gerfian
nobleman, who' having sered ih' Italy with geat reputairon,
had acquired fiulh influenfe and popularity, that mtltitude of
his countrymen, fond 6n every oCafion of engaging iti military
eiterprize,. and impatient at that juneture to elbape fronb the
opprelibnm 'f their' fpbrtior both in religious ad civil matters,
crouded to hi ftiandard; so' that witliout aiy otler gratuity tlid;
the payment of a crown to each man, fourteen thousand enlilled
in his fetvice. TIo these the Archduke Ferdinand added two
thdufand Hti6re,i levied in the Auftian doniniohs: tIt al-
thougithe Etmpertot Had raited' rodp6, - ie could :iot remi't tile
tfuomb eeefdry for tlirit fuip6rt, H1is ordiniary riBvtileh" Wetre
exhausted; the tredit of Princes during the infanty. of coti-
merc, was not extensive; ad the Cortes of CatBlle, though
evVya tt had eert tried'. to gain 'ihem, tid torne innovations
riad beei mddde in the cnftitutioini .drder to secure tlfdi c6z-i
omence, peemnptorily rfiied to gran Carlts any eftraordi-
naty supply h so- that the ohtre hMd armiy incteaTed in tinumber,
the more wert lis generali' eimbarrafed and diftrffed. ' Bdurbon,
i'n, trticl!, w as involved fiduh':diffictlties, that he fto6d in
ieed'dif all his addrefh al^d ticbltge in' order to e*triciat' im-
flf. 'Vait ltMit ' were dule t tlid Spanifi troops already in the
Milanese, whet, Frondfperg airived with sixteen tlioufa'd hun-
gy Getflans destitute of every tliilg. Both inadd their de-
mands with equal fierceness; the former clairtiihg'thi atircars,

Ih Sandov. i. 814.

N n and

B66K IV.

The Imperial
army reln-
forced.

'rTe Empc-
ror's finances
deficient.

7S

and he latter, the pay which had been promired them on their
entering Lombardy: Bourbon was altogether incapable of giving
fatisfation to either. In this situation, lie was constrained to
commit ats of violence extremely hocking to his own nature,
which was gentle and humane. He seized the principal citizens
of Milan, and by threats, and even by torture, forced from them
a considerable um; he rifled. the churches of all their plate and
ornaments; the inadequate supply which there afforded, he dif-
tributed among the soldiers, with so many soothing exprefions of
of his sympathy and affection, tlat, though it fell far hort of the
fums due to them, it appeased their present murmurs h

AMONG other expedients for raising money, Bourbon granted

his life, and liberty to Morons, who having been kept in prison
since his intrigue with Pefcagr, had been condemned to die by the
Spanish Judges empowered to try him.. For this remiflion he paid
twenty thousand ducats; and such were his singular talents, and
the wonderful ascendant he acquired over the minds of those to
whom he had accef, that in a few days, from being Bourbon's
prisoner, he became his prime confident, with whom he consulted
in all affairs of importance: To his insinuations must be im-
puted the suspicions which Bourbon began to entertain, that the
Emperor had never intended to grant him the investiture of Milan,
but had appointed Leyva, and the other Spanish generals, rather
to be spies on his conduct, than to co-operate heartily towards the
execution of his schemes. To him likewise, as he still retained at
the age of fourscore all the enterprizing spirit of youth, may be
attributed the bold and unexpected measure on which Bourbon
soon after ventured i.

h Ripamont. Hilt. Mcdiol. ib. ix. p. 717. i Guic. 1. 17. 419.

SUCH

BOOK. IV.

-~ 1i 6.

Bout hon ets
Moron at
liberty. 276

Sucsi, Indeed, were the exigencies of tl)e Imperial troops in

the Milanese, that it became indifpenfablyi necefary to take ome
immediate ftep for their relief. The arrears of the soldiers
inc e'tfed daily; the Emperor made no remittances to his gene-
rals; and the utmost rigour of military extortion could draw
nothing more from a country entirely drained and ruined. In
this situation there was no choice left, but either to disband the
army, or to march for subsistence into the enemies country. The
territories of the Venetians lay nearest at hand but they, with
their 'usual foresight and prudence, had taken fch precautions
as secured them from any insult. Nothing therefore remained
but to invade the dominions of the church, or of the Florentines;
and Clement had of late aed fiuch a part, as merited the severest
vengeance from the Emperor. No sooner did his troops return
to Rome after the insurrection of the Colonmas, than;, without
paying any regard to the treaty with Moncada, he degraded the
Cardinal Colonna, excommunicated the reft of the family, seized
their places of strength, and wafted their lands with all the cru-
elty which the smart of a recent injury naturally excites. After
this, he turned his arms againfl Naples, and as his operations were
seconded by the French fleet, he made some progress towards the
conquest of that kingdom; the Viceroy being no les destitute than
the other Imperial generals, of the money requisite for a vigorous
defencek.

THESE

measures
set about

proceedings of the Pope, justified, in appearance, the
which Bourbon's situation rendered necefiary; and he
executing them under such disadvantages, as furnish

BooK V.

3526.

FlIisd elihe-
rations with
rcipelt to his
1notIonr.

I a 7.

Marchles to
invade the
I'ope's lera
tories:
k Jovii Vita Pomp. Colon. Guic. . 8. 424.

the

277

BOOK IV. the strongest proof, both of tile despair to which he was reduced,

and of the greatefs of his abilities which were able to surmount so
127.

many obstacles. Having committed the government of Milan to
Leyva, whom he was not unwilling to leave behind; he began his
march in the depth of winter, at the head of twenty-five thousand
men, composed of nations differing from each other in language
and manners; without money, without magazines, without artille-
ry, without carriages; in hort, without any of those things which
are neceflfay to the smallest party, and which seem elfential to the
existence and motions ofa great army. His rout lay through a coun-
try cut by rivers and mountains, in which the roads were almost
impracticable; as an addition to his difficulties, the enemy's army,
superior to his own in number, was at hand to watch all his motions,
and to improve every advantage, But his troops impatient of their
present hardships, and allured by the hopes of obtaining an
immense booty, did not confider how ill provided they were for
a march, and followed him with great chearfulnefs. His first,
Rfheme was to have made himself master of Placentia, and to.
have gratified his soldiers \yitb the.plunder of.that city; but
the vigilance of the cnfederate. generals rendered theldefiga
abortive; nor had he better success in his project for the xeduc-
tion of Bologna, which was seasonably supplied with as'many
troops as secured it from the intlfylts of an army whicll hlad. nei-
ther artillery nor ammunition. Having failed in both these
attempts to become master of ome great city, he was under a
necessity of advancing But he had now been two montlh in the
field; his troops had suffered every calamity which a long march,
together witl.,the uncommon rigpur of, the *feali:;.couldf( bing

Mutiofhisupon men destitute of all necessary accommodations, in an ene-

Mutiay orhis *
troops. mies country; the magnificent promifcs to which they trusted,

had
278

had proved altogether vain ; they flw no profpet of relief their
patience, tried to the utmofl, failed at last, and they broke out
into open mutiny. Some officers, who rafllly attempted to re-
strain them, fell vidimns to their fury ; Bourbon himself, not dar-
ing to appear during the first transports of their rage, was obliged
to fly secretly from his quaiters . But this sudden ebullition of
wrath began at last to fulbfide; when Bourbon, who polfefed in
a wonderful degree, the art of governing the minds of soldiers,
renewed his promises with more confidence than formerly, and
assured them that they would be oon accomplished. He endea-
voured to render their hardlhips more tolerable by partaking
of them himself; he fared no better than the meanest centinel ;
he marched along with them on foot hle joined them in inging
their camp-ballads, in which, with high praises of his valour, they
mingled many strokes of military raillery on his poverty; and
wherever they came, he allowed them, as a foretaste of what lie
had promised, to plunder the adjacent villages at discretion. En-
couraged by all these soothing ats, they entirely forgot their fils-
ferings and complaints, and followed him with the fame implicit
confidence as formerly m,

BOURBON, meanwhile, carefully concealed his intentions.

Rome and Florence, not knowing on which the blow would
fall, were held in the most disquieting state of fufipence. Cle-
ment, equally follicitous for, tle safety of both, fluctuated
in more than his ufial uncertainty and while the rapid ap-
proach of danger called for prompt and decisive measures, he
spent the time in deliberations which came to no iie, or in

I Guic. 1. 18. 434. Jovii Vit. Colon. 163.
m Ocuvres de Brant. vol. 4. 246, &c.

taking

BOOK IV.

1527.

Tie Pope's
irrefol I tion
and iimplu-
dcnce.

279

taking resolutions, which next day, his reftlels mind, more fa-
gacious in discerning than in obviated difficulties, overturned,
without being able to fix on what hould be substituted in their
place. At one time he determined to unite himself more closely
than ever with his allies, and to push the war with vigour; at
another, he inclined to bring all differences to a final accommo-
dation by a treaty with Lannoy, who knowing his passion for
negociation, solicited him inceflantly with proposals for that
purpose. His timidity at length prevailed ; and led him to con-
clude an agreement with Lannoy, of which the following were
the chief articles: That a suspension of arms hould take place
between the Pontifical and Imperial troops for eight months;
That Clement should advance sixty thousand crowns towards
fatisfying-the demands of the Imperial army ; That the Colonnas
should be absolved from censure, and their former dignities and
possessions be reltored to them ; That the viceroy should come to
Rome, and prevent Bourbon from approaching nearer to that
city, or to Florence n. On this sudden treaty, which deprived
him of all hopes of assistance from his.allies, without affording
him any solid foundation of security, Clement relied so firmly,
that like a man extricated at once out of all difficulties, he was
at perfect ease, and in 'the fulness of his confidence disbanded all
his troops, except as many as were sufficient to guard his own
person. This amazing confidence of Clemeit's, who on every
other occasion was fearful and suspicious to excess, appeared so
unaccountable to Guicciardini, who being at that time the pon-
tifical commiflary-general and resident in the confederate army,
had great opportunity as well as great abilities for observing
how chimerical all his hopes were, that he imputes the Pope's

n Guic. 1. 8. 436.

condu&t,
BOOK IV.

1527.

March 15.
Concludes a
treaty with
the Viceroy
of Naples.
a80

conduct, at this juncture, wholly to infatuation, which those who
are doomed to ruin cannot avoid o

LANNOY, it would seem, intended to have executed 'the treaty

with great sincerity, and having detached Clement from tile co1p
federacy, wished to turn Bourbon's arms against the Venetians, who,
of all the powers at war with the Emperor, had'exerted the great-
eft vigour. With this view he dispatched a courier to Bourbon,
informing him of the suspension of arms, which, ill the name of their
common master, he lhad concluded with'the Pope. Bourbon had
other fch'mes', and ie hiad prosecuted them' now too sar'to think
of retreating. To have mentioned a retreat to his soldiers, would
have been dangerous; his' cmmand was independant on Lannoy;
he was fond of mortifying a man whom lie had many reafols to
hate for these readfoliswithout paying the least regard to the meflage,
he contiitued to ravage the ecclesiastical territories, and to advance
towards Florence. Upon this, all Clement's terror and anxiety re-
turning with new force, he had recourse to Lannoy, and intreated
and conjured him to put a stop to Bourbon's progress. Lannoy ac-
c'rdingly set out for his camp, but durst not approach it; Bour-
bbn's soldiers having got notice of the truce, raged and threatened,
demanding the accomplishment of the promises to which they hlad
trusted; their general himself could scarce rellrain them; every
person in Rome perceived that nothing remained but to prepare
for efiftinig a tform which it was now impofible to dispel. Cle-
iient alone, relyiig on some ambiguous and deceitful profeflions
ivhich Bourbon made of his inclination towards peace, funk back
into his former security P.

0 Guic. 1. 18 446. P Guic. 1. 18. 437, &c. MIem. de Bellay, p. 1oo

Boo ,Iy.

IS27.

which Bour-
bon difie-
gards.

o BoURBON,
Vol.. 1I.

BooK IV.

1527.

Advances to-
warda Ronie.

The Pope's
preparations
for defence.

BOuRSoN, on his part, was far from being free from follici-
tude. All his attempts on any places of importance had hitherto
miscarried; and Florence, towards which he had been approaching
for ome time, was, by the arrival of the duke d' Urbino's army,
put in a condition to set his power at defiance. As it now became
necessary to change his rout, and to take initantly ome new
iefolution he fixed without hesitation on one no less daring
in itself, thani it was impious according to the 'opinion of that
age. This was to assault and plunder Rome. Many reasons,
however, prompted him to it. He was fond of thwartingLannoy,
who had undertaken for the safety of that city; he 'imagined
that the Emperor would be highly pleased to fee Clement, the chief
author of the league against him, humbleds he flattered himself,
that by gratifying the rapacity of his soldiers with such immense
booty, he would attach them for ever to his interest, or (which is
fill more probable than any of these) he hoped that by means of
the power and splendor he would acquire from the conquest of the
frft city in Christendom, he might lay the foundation of an inde
pendent power; and that after hakiug off all connection with the
Emperor, he might take pofleflion of Naples, or of some of the
Italian Rates in his own name .

WH AT EVE. R his motives were, he executed his resolution

with a rapidity equal to the boldnes with which he had formed
it. His soldiers, now that they had their prey in 'full view,
complained neither of fatigue, nor famine, nor want of pay.
No sooner did they begin to move from Tuscany towards Rome,
than the Pope, sensible at last how fallacious the hopes had been
on which he reposed, started from his security. But no time

q Bran. . 27 . 6. 189. Belcarii Comment. 594.

now
282

now remained, even for a bold and decisive Pontiff, to have taken
proper measures, or to have formed any effectual plan of defence.
Under Clement's feeble conduct, all was consternation, disorder,
and irresolution. He collected, however, fucll of his disbanded
soldiers as still remained in the city ; he armed the artificers of
Rome, and the footmen and train-bearers of the Cardinals; he
repaired the breaches in the walls; he begun to eret new works;
he excommunicated Bourbon and all his troops, branding the
Germans with the name of Lutherans, and the Spaniards with that
of Moors r. Trusting to these ineffectual military preparations,
or to his fpirltual arms, which were still more despised by rapa-
cious soldiers, he seems to have laid aside his natural timidity,
and contrary to the advice of all his counsellors, determined to
wait the approach of an enemy whom, by a timely retreat, he
might easily have avoided.

B o u R B ON, who saw the neceflity of dispatch, now that his

intentions were known, advanced with such speed, that he gained
several marches on the duke d'Urbino's army, and encamped in
the plains of Rome on the evening of the fifth of May. From
thence he shewed his soldiers the palaces and churches of that ci-
ty, into which, as the capital of the Christian commonwealth,
the wealth of all Europe had flowed during many centuries,
without having been once violated by any hostile hand; and
commanding them to refrefl themselves that night, as a pre-
paration for the afhult next day, promised them in reward of
their toils and valour, the pofleflion of all the treasures accumulated
there.

r Seckend. Lib. ii. 68.

EARLY

BOOK IV.

57.

Aflault of
Romle.

283
002

EARLY in the morning, Bourbon, who had determined to diftin-

guilh that day either by his death or the success of his enterprize,
appeared at the head of his troops, clad in compleat armour, above
which he wore a vest of white tilue, that he might-be more
conspicuous. both to his friends and to his enemies ; and as all de-
pended on one bold impreflion, he led them instantly to feale the
walls. Three diftint bodies, one of Germans, another of Span-
iards, and the last of Italians, the three different nations of whom
the army was composed, were appointed to this service; a fepa-
rate attack was afligned to each and the whole army advanced
to support them as occasion should require. A thick mist conceal-
ed their approach until they reached almost the brink of the ditch
which surrounded the suburbs; having planted their ladders in
a moment, each brigade rushed on to the assault with an impe-
tuofity heightened by national emulation. They were received
at first with fortitude equal to their own; the Swiss in the Pope's
guards, and the veteran soldiers who had been assembled, fought
with a courage becoming men to whom the defence of the
noblest city in the world was entrusted. Bourbon's troops, not-
withstanding all their valour, gained no ground, and even began
to give way; when their leader, perceiving that on this critical
moment the fate of the day depended, threw himself from his
horse, pressed to the front, flatched a scaling ladder from a fol-
dier, planted it against the wall, and began to mount it, encourag-
ing his men with his voice and hand, to follow him. But at
that very instant, a mufsket bullet from the ramparts pierced his
groin with a wound, which he immediately felt to be mortal;
but he retained o much presence of mind as to desire those who
were near him to cover his body with a cloak, that his death
might not difhlcartl his troops and soon after he expired with a

courage

lV.

1527.

Bourbon
Ilit.

courage: worthy of a better cause and which would have entitled B3o9l:IV.
him to the highest praise, if he had thus fallen in defence of his S 7?
country, not at the head of its enemies,.

IT was impoflible, to conceal this fatal event from tlhe army; The city

the foldiers'foon mifed their .general, whom they were acciftomed' taken
to fee in every time'of danger; buttinftead of being difheartelfd
by their loss, it animated them with new valour; the namfe of
Bourbon resounded along the line, accompanied with the cry of
blood. and revenge. The veterans who defended the walls,' were
soon overpowered by numbers; the untraine'd bdy of ci'ty recruits
fled at the fight of danger, and the enemy with irresistible violence
rulhed into the town. '

DURINO the combat, Clement was .employed.at the altar of

St. Peter's in offering up to heaven unavailing pray)ers flit
victory.' No sooner was he informed that- his troops began
to give way than he fled with precipitatibn and with an
infatuation still more amazing than any thing already men-
tioned, inflead of !'making his escape by the :dppofite gate
where . there was no enemy ito oppose it, lhe fliut himself tip,
together with thirteen cardinals, the foreign ambafladors, and
many persons of diftindtion, in the cattle of St. Angelo, which
from his late misfortune, he might have known to' be nr icure
retreat. In his way from the Vatican to that fertrefs, hI'fhwfliis
troops flying before an enemy who pursued without giving
quarter; he heard the cries and lamentations of the Roman
citizens, and beheld the beginning of those calamities which

Mr cm. de Bcllny,' ot. Guic. 1. 18. p. 445, c. Ocuv. tie. Brant iv.
257, &c.

his

285

BooK Il. his own credulity and ill-condud had brought upon his sub-

a7' jeast.
Plundered. IT is impollible to describe, or even to imagine the miCery and

horror of that cene which followed. Whatever a city taken
by, storm can dread from military rage unrestrained by discipline;
whatever eXcefles the ferocity of the Germans, the avarice of
the Spaniards, or the licentiousness of the Italians could com-
mit, these the wretched inhabitants were obliged to susser.
Churches, palaces, and the houses of private persons were plun-
dered without diftiinioh. No age, or character, or ex was
exempt fromh injlry. Cardinals, nobles, priests tnatrons,
virgins, were all the prey of soldiers, and at the mercy of men
deaf to the voice of humanity. Nor did there outrages cease,
as is ufial in towns which are carried by assault, when the first
fury of the ifotth was over; the Imperialists kept: pofeffion of
Rome several months:; and during all that time the insolence
and brutality of the soldiers scarce abated. Their booty in
ready money alone amounted to a million of ducats; what they
raised by ransoms and ixations far exceeded that fum.. Rome,
though taken several different times by the northern nations,
who over-ran the Empire in the fifth and fix centuries, was never
treated with fb much cruelty by the barbarous and heathen Huns,
Vandals o.l Goths, as now by the biggotted fubjeds of a catholic
Monatch",

The Pope AAFiER Bourbon's death, the command of the Imperial army
bhfiegedin devolved on Philibert de Chalons prince of Orange, who with
the castle of
St. Angelo.

'Jov. Vit. Colon. 65. u Jov. Vit. Colon. 166. Guic . . 8. 440, &c.

Comment. de capta urbe Roma ap. cardium 2. 230. Ulloa Vita dell.
Carlo. V. p. 'x o, &c. Gianonne Hlit. of Nap. B. xxxi. c. 3. p. 507.

difficulty
286

difficulty prevailed on as many of his soldiers to desist from the
pillage, as were neceffary.to invest the cafile of .St. Angelo. .Cle-
ment was immediately sensible of. his error in having retired into
that ill provided and untenable fort. But as the Imperialilas, scorn-
ing discipline, and intent only on plunder, pufled the siege
with little vigour, he did. ot despair of holding oQut,. until the
duke d' Urbino should conmeto his relief. That general advanced
at the head of an army composed of Venetians, Florentines, and
Swiss in the pay of France, of ufficient strength to have deli-
vered Clement from the preset danger. But d' Urbino, preferring
the indulgence of his batried -against the family ps Medici to the
glory of delivering the capital of Christendom, and the head. of
the church, pronounced the enterprize to be too hazardous and
having, from an exquisite refinement in revenge, marched forward
so far, that his army being seen from the ramparts of St. Angelo,
flattered the Pope with the profpet of certain relief, he imme-
diately retired ,. Clement, deprived of every resource, and re-
duced to such extremity of famine as :to feed on affis lefh y,
was obliged to capitulate on such conditions as the conqueorsr
were pleased to prescribe. He agreed to, pay four hundred thou-
sand ducats to the army; to furrnder to the Emperor all the
places of strength belonging to the church; and, bfid&s giving
hostages, to remain a prisoner himself until the chief atticles
were performed. He was committed to the.care of Alarcon,
who, by his severe vigilance in guarding Francis, had given'full
proof of his being qualified for that office; and thus, by a fin-
gular accident, the fame man had the cu'stody of the two most
illustrious personages who had been made prisoners i Europe dur-
ing several ages.

y Jov, Vit. Colon. 167.

BoK :IV.

IS27.

Surrenders
hinircf a
Plilbner.
June 6.

287
x uic. 1. 18. 40.

Bo6k IV.

1.527.

'Ihe Empe-
Or'3 beha-
viour at this
julaOure.

Solynian in-
vades Hun-
gary.
Aug. 29,

5z6.

THE ccount of this extraordinary and unexpected event was,

noelefs flurprizing than agreeable to the Emperor. But in order to
conceal his joy from his subjects,' wh6 Were filled with horror at the
fulccefs and crimes of their countrymen, and to leflen the indigna-
tiofi of thel reft qs Europe', hle declared that Rome had, been as-
faulted without any ordel' fron0 him; ie wrote ,to all the Princes
With whom. he' ws in' alliance, disclaiming' hisilhaviig.lad any
knowledged of Bourbon's intention he. put himself and coirt into.
mourning commanddd the rejoicings which had been.ordered for
the birth of, his ':on Philip to be flopped, *idemploying"ad arr.
tifice no. lefs/i hypocritical. lihani 'gtfs/ he;App6ihted prayers iand
procefliOns 'throtghoiut all Spiin ]so'. tht recovqe y :of i the Popes.
liberty, which by an order to lis'generals he couldt have imime-
diately granted him . :: . . .;

, ' '

. '

i : -; :.

, '
i ' ,, . ' ; !' : . ',"1 !'',

T-iz good fortune of the houfce of Austria was no less con-.

fpicuous in another partlofi Eurqpe. oSolyhan having invaded,
Hungary with an army three hundted thousand strong, Lewis II.
King of that country, and, of ;ilohemia a weak and unexpe-
rienced, Prince, advaftled.rafhly to rheet him with body of men
which- did nt! imont;to titty thoufaild.. ;With a imprudence
still more unpardonable,.. he gave the comma'nd of these troops
to Paul Toinorri, a Franciscan monk, archbilhop of Golocza.
This :iiukiard'general,' in.:the dress of his order, girt!with its
cord, rmanched at. the 'head of. the troops; and hurried on by.
his own prefirnption, as well as, by. te;,irnpe,tuofity of nobles.
who despised. danger, but.were impatient of long service, fought
the fatal battle of Mohacz, in which the King, the.flower of. the
Hungarian nobility, and upwards of twenty tlloufatnd! men fell

t Rufcelli Lettere'di Principl, ii. 234.
a Sleid. 109. Sandov. i. 822. Mauroc. I-lif. Vc:eta. lib. iii. 220.

the
288

the victims of his folly and ill-condu. Solyman, after his' vic BOOK IV.
tory, seized and kept pofhffion of several towns of greatest strength 7
in the southern provinces of Hungary, and over-running the reft Dofat of the
of the country, carried near two hundred thousand person into and death of
captivity. As Lewis was the last male of the royal family of Ja- their King.
gellon, thn Archduke Ferdinand claimed both his crowns. This
claim was founded on a double title ; the one derived from the
ancient pretensions of the houCe of Austria to both kingdoms
the other from the right of his wife, the only sifter of the deceased
Monarch. The feudal inflitutions lowever filbfifted both in Hun-
gary and Bohemia in fiuch vigour, and the nobles possessed such
extensive power, that the crowns were still eletive, and Ferdinand's
rights, if they had not been powerfully supported, wonld have met
with little regard. But his own personal merit; the refpe& due
to the brother of the greatest Monarch in Chriftelldom; the
necessity of chufing a prince able to afford his fltbjeds ome Ferdinand
additional protetion against the Turkish arms, which, as they ele d King.
had felt their weight o lately, they greatly dreaded; together
with the intrigues of his sifter, who had been married to the late
King, overcame the prejudices which the Hungarians had con-
.ceived against the Archduke as a 'foreigner; and though a confi-
derable party voted for the Vaywode of Tranfilvania, at length
secured Ferdinand the throne of that kingdom. The flates of Bo-
hemia imitated the example of their neighbour kingdom'; but in
order to ascertain and secure their own privileges, they obliged Ser-
dinand before his coronation, to subscribe a deed which they term
a Reverse, declaring that he held that crown not by any previous
right, but by their gratuitous and voluntary ele6tion. By such a
vast acceflion of territories, the hereditary pofeflion of which they
secured in process of time to their family, the princes of the

VOL. II. P p house

a89

BOOK IV. house of Austria attained that pre-eminence in power which hath

5X7^- rendered them .to.foymidable to the reft of Germay b.
1527.

Progre of T HE dissensions between the Pope and Emperor proved
theRefotna- extremely favourable .t the prpgrefs of Lutheranifm. Charles,
tioOn exasperated by Clement's conduct, and 'fully employed in oppo-

sing the league' which he had formped against them, had little
inclination and less leifire to take any measures for fupprening

June 25, the new opinions in Germany. In a diet of the Empire held at
1526. Spires, the state of religion came to be confidered, and all that

the Emperor required of the princes was, that they would wait
patiently, and without encouraging innovations, for the meeting
of a general council which he had demanded of the Pope. They,'
in return, acknowledged the convocation of a council to be the
proper and regular ftep towards reforming abuses in the church;
but contended, that a national council held in Germany would be
more effectual for that purpose than what he had proposed. To
his advice, concerning the discouragement of innovations, they
paid so little regard, that even during the meeting of the diet at
Spires, the divines who attended the Elector of Saxony and
Landgrave of HeFie-Caffel thither, preached publickly, and
administered the sacraments according to the rites of the reformed
church . The Emperor's own example imboldened the Ger-
rans to treat the Papal authority with little reverence. During
the heat of his resentment against Clement, he had published a
long reply to an angry brieve which the Pope had intended as an
apology for' his own condut. In this manifesto, the Emperor,

b Steph. Bioderick Procancelarii Hungar. Clades in campo Mohacz ap.
Scadium 2. 218. P.Barre Hist. d'Allemagne,tom. viii. part i. p. 198.

* Seidl. 103.

after

*
290

·

after having enumerated many inflances of that Pontiffs ingra-
titude, deceit and ambition, all which he painted in the itronget
and most aggravated colours, appealed from him to a general
council. At the fame time, he wrote to the college of Cardinals,
complaining of Clement's partiality and injiftice ; and requiring
them, if he refused or delayed to call a council, to manifest their
concern for the peace of the Chriitian Church, so hamefully ne-
gle&ted by its chief pastor, by summoning that assembly in their
own named. This manifesto, scarce inferior in virulence to the
invectives of Luther himself, was dispersed over Germany with
great industry, and being eagerly read by persons of every rank,
did much more than counterbalance the effect of all Charles's de-
clarations againt the new opinions.

d Goldaft. Polit. Imper. p. 984.

TH E

BOOK IV.

1527.

291
Ppz

# BOOK V.

THE
T

0
OF THE

I G N

OF THE
EMPEROR CHARLES

BOOK

V.

V.
Book V.

1527.

General in-
dignation ex-
cited against
the Emperor.

T HE account of the cruel manner in which the Pope had

been treated, filled all Europe with astonishment or
horror. To fee a Christian Emperor, who, by pofleffing

that dignity, ought to have been the protector and advocate of the
holy fee, lay violent hands on him who represented Christ on
earth, and detain his sacred person in a rigorous captivity, was
confidered as an impiety that merited the severest vengeance, and
which called for the immediate interposition of every dutiful
son of the church. Francis and Henry, alarmed at the progress
of'the Imperial arms in Italy, had, even before the taking of
Rome, entered into a closer alliance; and, in order to give some

check
H

I S

R

Y
R E

check to the Emperor's ambition, had agreed to make a vigorous
diversion in the Low-Countries. Tile force of every motive
which had influenced them at that time, was now increased
and to these were added, the desire of rescuing the Pope out of
the Emperor's hands, a measure no less political, than it appeared
to be pious. This, however, rendered it neceflary to abandon
their designs on the Low-Countries, and to make Italy the feat
of war, as it was by vigorous operations in that country, they
might promise most certainly upon delivering Rome, and setting
Clement at liberty. Francis being now sensible, that in his
system with regard to the affairs of Italy, the spirit of refinement
had carried him too far; and that, by an excess of remififefs,
he had allowed Charles to attain advantages 'which lie might
easily have prevented, was eager to make reparation for an error
of which he was not often guilty, by an activity more suitable
to his temper. Henry thought his interposition necelary, in
order to hinder the Emperor from becoming master of all Italy,
and acquiring by that means such superiority of power, as would
enable him, for the future, to diCate without controul to the
other princes of Europe. Wolfey, whom Francis had taken
care to secure by flattery and presents, the certain methods of
gaining his favour, neglected nothing that could inccnfe his
mailer against the Emperor. Besides all these publick con-
fiderations, Henry was influenced by one of a more private
nature ; having begun about this time to form his great ifciemc
of divorcing Catharine of Aragon, towards the execution of
which he knew that the fandion of Papal authority would be
neceflary, he was desirous to acquire as much merit as poflible
with Clement, by appearing to be the chief instrument of his de-
liverance.

''t .

BOOK V.

1527.

293

BOOK V. THE negociation, between princes thus disposed, was not
^5T7^ tedious. Wolfey hlimfelf conduced it, on the part of his fove-

1527.

Confdcracy reign, with unbounded powers. Francis treated with him in
agailtt hiim.
July ,1. person at Amiens, where the Cardinal appeared, and was received

with royal magnificence. A marriage between the duke of
Orleans aud the princess Mary was agreed to as the basis of the
confederacy ; it was resolved that Italy should be the theatre of
war; the strength of the army which should take the field, and
the contingent of troops or of money which each prince should
furnlih, were fettled; and if the Emperor did not accept of the
proposals they were jointly to make him, they bound them-
Ang. i'3. selves immediately to declare war, and to begin hostilities.

Henry, who took every resolution with impetuosity, entered o
eagerly into this new alliance, that in order to give Francis the
strongest proof of his friendship and respeCt, he formally renoun-
ced the ancient claim of the English Monarchs to the crown of
France, which had long been the pride and ruin of the nation;
as a full compensation for which, he accepted a pension of fifty
thousand crowns, to be paid annually to himself and his fuc-
ceffors ';

The Floren- MEANWHILE the Pope, being unable to fulfil the conditions
tines recover
their free. of hls capitulation, remained a prisoner under the revere custody
don. of Alarcon. The Florentines no sooner heard of what had hap-

pened at Rome, than they ran to arms in a tumultuous manner
expelled the Cardinal di Cortona, who governed their city in the
Pope's name ; defaced the arms of the Medici ; broke in pieces
the tatues of Leo and Clement; and declaring themselves a free
slate, re-eflablifhed their ancient popular government. The

* Herbert, 83, &c. Rym. Feeder. 14. 203.

Venetians,
294

Venetians, taking advantage of the calamity of their ally the Pope,
seized Ravenna, and other places belonging to the church, under
pretext of keeping them in dpofite. The dukes of Urbino and
Ferrara, laid hold likewise on part of the spoils of the unfortunate
Pontiff, whom they confidered as irretrievably ruined b.

LANNOY, on the other hand, laboured to derive ome solid

benefit from that unforeseen event, which gave such splendour
ana uperiority to his master's arms. For this purpose he marched
to Rome, together with Moncada, and the marquis del Guafto,
at the head of all the troops they could assemble in the kingdom
of Naples. The arrival of this reinforcement brought new cala-
mities on the unhappy citizens of Rome ; for the soldiers, envy-
ing the wealth of their companions, imitated their licence, and
with the utmost rapacity gathered the gleanings, which had
ercaped the avarice of the Spaniards and Germans. There was
not now any army in Italy capable of making head against the
ImperialiRts; and nothing more was requisite to reduce Bologna,
and the other towns in the ecclesiastical state, than to have ap-
peared before them; But the soldiers having been o long accut-
tomed, under Bourbon, to an entire relaxation of discipline, and
having talted the sweets of living at discretion in a great city,
a!moft without the controul of a superior, were become so impa-
tient of military ubordination, and o averse to service, that
they refuted to leave Rome, unless all their arrears were paid; a
condition which they knew to be impoflible; and declared, that
they would not obey any other person than the Prince of Orange,
whom the army had chosen general. Lannoy, finding that it
was no longer safe for him to remain among licentious troops,

, Guic. 18. 453.

BOOK V.

1527.

'I'he Inpeial
troops in-
tive.
who,

295

BOOK V. who despised his dignity, and hated his person, returned to Naples;
.- --' soon after the marquis del Guafto and Moncada thought it pru-

dent to quit Rome for the fame reason. The Prince of Orange,
a general only in name, and by the most precarious of all tenures,
the good will of soldiers whom fiuccefs and licence had rendered
capricious, was obliged to pay more attention to their humors,
than they did to his commands. Thus the Emperor, instead of
reaping any of the advantages he might have expeted from
the reduction of Rome, had the mortification to fee the most
formidable body of troops he had ever brought into the field,
continue in a Rate of inactivity from which it was impossible to
rouze them c.

The French
army marches
into Italy.

Its orera-
tions.

THIS gave the King of France and the Venetians leisure to

form new schemes, and to enter into new engagements for
delivering the Pope, and preserving the liberties of Italy. The
newly restored republick of Florence very imprudently joined
with them, and Lautrec, of whose abilities the.Italians entertained
a much more favourable opinion than his own master, was, in
order to gratify them, appointed generaliflimo of the league.
It was with the utmost reluctance he undertook that office,
being unwilling to expose himself a second time to the difficul-
ties and disgraces which the negligence of the King, or the
malice of his favourites might bring upon him. The belt
troops in France marched under his command, and the King
of England, though he had not yet declared war against the
Emperor, advanced a considerable fum towards carrying on the
expedition. Lautrec's first operations were prudent, vigorous,
and successful. By the aflifance of Andrew Doria, the ablest

c Guic. 1. 8. 454.

sea
296

sea officer of that age, he. rendered liimfelf malter of Genoa,
and re-eftablifled in tliat republick the stion of the Fregofi,
together with the dominion of France. He obliged Alexandria to
surrender after a hort siege, and reduced all the country on that
fide of the Tefino. He took Pavia, which had so long iefifted
the arnis of his sovereign, by assault, nd plundered it with that
cnielty which the memory of the atal difilfer that had befal-
len the French nation before its walls naturally ifpi-ed. All
the Milanese, which Antonio de Leyva detended with a finall
body of toops kept tgether and fpported y liis own' address
and indtltry, muff have soon submitted to his power, if he had
continued to bend the force of his arms against that country.
But Laitrec dutft not compleat a' con'quest which would have
been so holiurable to himself, aid f such advantage to the
league. Francis kew his confederates to be nmore desirous of
circumfctibing the Iptnerial power in Italy, thani of acquiring lne
territories for him, and was afraid tat if Sforza wqire once e-ef-
tablilhed in Milan, they would fedond but coldly the attack
which he itended to make on the kingdom of Naples. For
shis reason h' inftriEted Lautrec iot to' pufhhis operations with
oo much viour in Lmbardy, and happily the implortunities of
the Pope, ind the follicitations of the Florentihes, tlie one' for
relief, and the other for protetion, were so urgent as afforded
him a decent petext to marclh forward'without' yielding to the
intreaies of the Venetians.and Sforza, who' insisted on his layihg
fige tb'Milan'd.

d Guid. . xviii. 461. Bellay, 1o7, &c. Mauroc. lift. V. nct. lib. iii. 238.
I . , ' : i

BOOK V.

,s27.

297

WHILE

Q.q
VOL. II.

BOOK. V.

1527,

The emperor
sets the pope
at libeity.
Frb. .

WHILE Lautrec advanced slowly towards Rome, the Empe-

ror had time to deliberate concerning the disposal of the Pope's
person, who still remained a prisoner in the castle of St. Angelo.
Notwithstanding the specious veil of religion with which he
usually endeavoured to cover his actions, Charles in many in-
flances appears to have been but little under the influence of
religious considerations, and had frequently on this occasion
expressed an inclination to transport the Pope into Spain, that
he might indulge his ambition with the fpe&acle of the two
most illustrious personages in Europe fucceflively rifoners in
hiscourt. But the fear of giving new offence to all Chtiften-
dom, and of filling his own fubjeds with horror, obliged him to
forego that fatisfactione. The progress of the confederates
made it now neceflary either to set the Pope at liberty, or to
remove him to tome place of confinement more secure than the
castle of St. Angelo. Many confiderftions induced him to pre-
ser the former, particularly his want of the money requisite as
well for the recruiting his army, as for paying off the vast arrears
due to it. In order to obtain this he had assembled the Cortes
of Castile at Valladolid. bout the beginning of: the year,, and
having laid before them ithe state of his affairs, and eprefented
the neceflity of making great preparations to resist the enemies,
whom envy at the success which had crowned his arms would
unite against him, he deranded! a large supply in the most
prefing terms. But the Co9tes, as the nation was already .x-
haufted by extraordinary donatives, refused to load it with any
new burden, and in spite of all his endeavours to gain orto
intimidate the members, persisted in this refolutionr. No re-
source, therefore, remained but the extorting from Clement,

Guic. 1. 18. 457.

f Sandov. i, p. 814.

by
298

by way of ransom, a fum sufficient for discharging what was due BOOK V.
to his troops, without which it was vain to mention to them their
leaving Rome.

NOR was tie Pope inactive on hlis part, or his intrignes un-

successful towards hastening fuchl a treaty. By: flattery, ad
the appearance of unbounded confidence, lie difairned the re-
fentment of the cardinal Colonna, and wrought upon his vanity,
which made him desirous of .hewing the world thit as his
power had at first depressed the Pope, it could now raise him
to his frrrier dignity. By favours and promises lhe gained
Morone, who, by one of those whimsical revolutions which
occur so often in his life, and which so strongly difp!ay his
character, had now recovered his credit and authority with the
Imperialists. The address and influence of two fchll en,cafily
removed all the difficulties of the Emperor's ambafadors,. and
brought to a'conclufion the treaty for Clement's liberty, upon
conditions hard indeed, but not more intolerable than a prince in
his situation had reason to expe&. He was obliged to advance
in ready money an hundred thoufapd crowns for the: use of the
army to pay the fame fum at the distance of a fortnight; and
at the end of three months, an hundred and fifty thousand
more. He engaged not to take part in the war against Charles,
either in Lombardy or in Naples ; lie granted him a cruzado,
and the tenth of ecclesiastical revenues in Spain ; and lhe not
only gave hostages, but put the Emperor in pofenlion of several
towns, as a security for the performance of there articles g.
Having raised the first moiety by a sale of ecclesiastical dignities

g Guic. 1. 18. 467, &c.

QOqz

299

[
BOOK V.

1527.

December 6.

Overtures of
the Empeior
to Francis
and Henry.

and benefices, and other expedients equally uncanonical, a day
was fixed' for deliveriiig him from imprisonment. But Clement,
impatient to be free,' after a' tedious confinement of fix months,
as well as full of the suspicion and distrust natural 'to the unfor-
tunate, was so much afraid that the Imperialifs might still throw
in obstacles to put offllis deliverance, that 1he difguifed.himflff the.
precedilt night in the habit of a mercliant, and Alarcon having
remitted fomenwhat of'his vigilaice tpon t conclusion of the
treaty, he made his escape uiditcoyered. -e arrived before next
morning, witlhout any attendanits' buit a fingte oqier, at O trvieto
and'from thenice wrote a letter of thanks to'Lautrec, as t!e cief
instrument of tocuring hiiin liberty h,

' ;, * . ,. ,, . ' -- ** , , . . · . , , , · . ,

; DURING these tranfadions, the ainbafladrs of France, ad
England repaired to Spain, in conequence.of the treatw.hicl
W6fey hiad' oncluded' wit'it'i lrench; in . ;he ;EPoICr
unwillingIto'draw on hitmelt the united forces of the tw.pMe

· . .i--,.

" | ' , '"'

.

) "'" "

'

' "

'

"*" ... * ()

; . ,

0 L -[''.!,

niarchs, dfcov'ered an inclination to relax fomewlhat the rigour.
of the treaty of Madrid, to 'which, hitherto, he had adhered
inflexibly. e offered to accept of the twp millions of ciowns
which Francis'had proposed to pay as an equivalent for thdut:y
of Brgundy, and to'fet his sons at libertyon conitilon thI'heJ
would recall his army out. of Italyr and rtre Geno .tpget!er,
with the other conquests h had made in that coqtntry. With
regard to Sforza, he insisted that his.fate noioud be deterijned
by the judges appoinited to 'enquire into his crimes. These pro-
positions being made to Henry, he transmitted them to :his aly'
the French King, whom it more nearly concerned to examine,,
and to answer thei ; and if Francis had been sincerely solicitous

h Guic. 1. 18. 467, &c. Jov. Vit. Colon. 169. Mauirc. His. Venet. lib. iii.
252.

either
300

either to conclude peace or preserve confiffency in his own
conduct, he ought instantly to have closed with overtures which
differed but little from the propositions he himself had formerly
made;. But his views were now much changed; his alliance.
with Henry; Lautrec's progress in Italy, and the superiority of
his army there above that of the Emperor, ecarce left him room
to doubt of the success of his enterprize against Naples. Full
of there fanguiile hopes, he was at no lofis to find pretexts for
rejecting or evading what the Emperor had proposed Under
the appearance of sympathy with Sforza, for whose interefis he
had not hitherto discovered much solicitude, he again demanded
the full and unconffitional re-eflabliflment of that unfortunate
prince in his dominions; Under colour of its being imprudent
to rely on the Emperor's sincerity, he infifled that his ons
should be set at liberty before the French troops left Italy, or
surrendered Genoa. The unreasonableness of there demands, as
well as the reproachful insinuation with which they were ac-
companied, irritated Charles to such a degree that he could scarce
liften to them with patience; and repenting of his moderation
which had made so little impreflon on his enemies, declared that
lie would not depart in the smallest article from the conditions he
had now offered. Upon this the French and Engltfh ambaffdors,
for Henry had been drawn unaccountably to concur with Francis in
there strange propositions, demanded and obtained their audience
of leave k

NP.XT day, two heralds who had accompanied the abafta-
dors of purpose, though they had hitherto concealed their cha-

I Recueil des Traitez, 2. 249.
k Rym. 14. 2oo. Herbert 85. Guic. 1. 18.471.

ra.Ser,

BOOK V.

1527.

1528.
January 22.

30o

BOOK V.

1528.

They declare
wvr gainll
the Emperor.

Francis chal-
lenges the
Emiperor to
finglecombat.

rader, having aflumed the ensigns of their office, appeared in the
Emperor's court, and being admitted into his presence, they in
the name of their refpetive masters, and with all the the folem-
nities customary on fiich occasions, denounced war against him.
Charles received both with a dignity suitable to his own rank,
but spoke to each in a tone adapted to the sentiments which he
entertained of their sovereigns. He accepted the defiance of the
English Monarch with a firmness tempered by some degree of
decency and refped. His reply to the French King abounded
with that acrimony of expreflion, which personal rivalfhip, ex-
afperated by the memory of many injuries infliced as well as
suffered, naturally suggests. He desired the French herald to
acquaint his overeign, that he would henceforth confider him
as a base violater of publick faith, and a firanger to the honour
and integrity becoming a gentleman. Francis, too high spirited
to bear such an imputation, had recourse to an uncommon ex-
pedient in order to vindicate his character. He inflantly rent
back the herald with a cartel of defiance, in which he gave the
Emperor the lie in form, challenged him to ingle combat, requir-
ing him to name the time and place of the encounter, and the
weapons with which he chore to fight. Charles, as he was not
inferior to his rival in spirit or bravery, eadily accepted the
challenge; but after several meflages concerning the arrange-
ment of all the circumstances relative to the combat, accompa-
nied with mutual reproaches, bordering on the most indecent
scurrility, all thoughts of this duel, more becoming the heroes of
romance than the two greatest Monarchs of their age, were entire-
ly laid aside .
I Recucil des Traitcz 2. Mem. de Ballay, 03, &c. Sardov. Ht.. . 837.

TrH
302

THE example, of two personages so illufiious drew such ge-

neral attention, and carried along with it so much authority, as
gave rile to an important change in manner sail over Europe.
Duels, as has already been observed, had long been permitted by
the laws of all the European nations, and frmin;g a part of their
jurisprudence, were authorised by the magistrate on many occa-
ons as the most proper method of terminating questions with re-
gard to property, or of deciding in those which refpecled crimes.
But single combats being confidered as solemn appeals to the
omniscience and justice of the supreme Being, they were al-
lowed only in publick causes, according to the prescription of
law, and carried on in a judicial form. Men accustomed to
this manner of decision in courts ofjuftice, were naturally led
to apply it to personal and private quarrels. Duels, which
at first could be appointed by the civil judge alone, were fought
without the interposition of his authority, and in cafes to
which the laws did not extend. The tranfaftion between
Charles and Francis strongly countenanced this praice. Upon
every affront, or injury which seemed to touch his honour, a
gentleman thought himself entitled to draw his sword, and to
call on his adversary to make reparation. Such an opinion in-
troduced among men of fierce courage, of high spirit, and of
rude manners, when offence was often given, and revenge was
always prompt, produced most fatal cbnfequences. Much of
the befl blood in Chriflendom was fled; many ueful lives were
sacrificed; and at some periods, war itself hath scarce been more
deftrudtive than these contests of honour. So powerful, how-
ever is the dominion of fashion, that neither the terror of peal
laws, nor reverence for religion have been able entirely to abo-
lifl a practice unknown among the ancients, and not justifiable

by

BOOK V.

1528.

'Ie ell l of
this in pro-
1lloting the
cu llon of du-
efling.

3o3

by any principle of reason; though at the fame time it mu be
admitted, that to this absurd custom, we must ascribe in ome
degree the extraordinary gentleness and complaisance of modern
manners, and that refpedful attention of one man to another,
which, at present, render the social intercourses of life far more
agreeable and decent than among the most civilized nations of an-
tiquity.

WHILE the two Monarchs seemed so eager to terminate their

quarrel by a personal combat, Lautrec continued his operations
which promised to be more decisive. His army, which was
now increased to thirty-five thousand men, advanced by great
marches towards Naples. The terror of their approach, as well
as the remonstrances and the entreaties of the Prince of Orange,
prevailed at last on the Imperial troops, though with difficulty,
to quit Rome, of which they had kept poefflion during ten
months. But of that flourishing army which had entered the
city, scarce one half remained; the reft, cut off by the plague,
or wafted by diseases, the effes of their inactivity, intempe,
rance, and debauchery, fell victims to their own crimes m. Lau-
trec made the greatest efforts to attack them in their retreat to-
wards the Neapolitan territories, which would have finished the
war at one blow. But the prudence of their leaders difapointed
all his measures, and conducted them with little loss to Naples.
`The people of that kingdom, always the prey of every invader,
extremely impatient to hake off the Spanish yoke, received the
French with open arms, wherever they appeared to take pofl'ef-
sion; and Gaeta and Naples excepted, scarce any place of impor-
tance remained in the hands of the Imperialists. The preservation

m Guic. . 18. 478.

of

304
BOOK V.

15z6.

Retreat of.
the Iiliperia-
lilts front
Roru.e.
February.

305

of the iformer was; owing (,to the strength of itsifortifiuati(vns, BOOK VI
that of. the latter ito the presence ofthe. Ihiptinl army, ;.Lauitiec, Cv8
however,; fat downibefore Naples; but filiding itl'.'in to tiil j of Fiencll be-
reducing by force a 'city defended by o mtitiy troops, he was ce NPIe
obliged t employ ..the flower, but less. dangerous method of
bloclkade.; .and.: aving ;Jaken meafires whihl..appeared to:hirri
effeuilal,tle h';cpn6detntly afiliret!'his ziafter,;that fanilieiii tuld
fooil compel,tlhe.,b¢fiegd: to capitulate. Thelie Ioes' ere'ftrong-
lyiconfirmed by the defeat of.a vigorous attempt made 'by tho
enemy in rder,to recpvger l;he command of the ea., "The gallies
of Andrew Pori, under,t ie c.ommaqodr of his :nephew)Phlippinod
guir,ded the.o .th of tile harbQor., . ^lona'da )w,hi, lind fubeeed
ed Lannoy in the vice-royaltyJ rigged out a nmber of gallieAtflt
perior to'Doria's,,and going on board himself, together with the
marquis d4el/,Gtafto,. and. the flower' .ofi the Spinflh 'dfflees id
fol!iers,; aaked, Doria./before..the arrival of.; th' j:Veneia
and retclfleetsl :,ur Doria,; bychls superior fkill;ihn fitiaval ope
rations, easily triumphed over the valour.'and nuinero'f the
Spaniards. The viceroy was killed,, most of his fleet destroyed,
apd Guato,. with l any, officers ofdiftinCion being taken ipljfon
ers, lwere put on ba/, the qap.ive,gallies,. and' sent by Plillippino,
a. trpphi.eo of his viaory, tohlis uncle .i I

.,: .: ,
' .

BuT notwitlftanding this flattering profpe& of fiuccers, may.,

circuanlics, concurredi to::.friftrate, Lautreo's, expea4iooiif wCiculreganr
Clenlet llt;.houglh he always, acknowledged, his bei(tg indbtdl ti.e piogrcls
to rancis for the recovery. of hi$ liberty, and often complained)
of the cruel treatment lie had met with froln tlhe Emperor, was

. n CuiC..l. 12. 487. P. IXeutcr. Ilb. x. c. 2. p. 231 . j
VOL. If. R r : . f .. )bt

BOOK V. not influenced at this junture by principles of gratitude, nor,

5a8 which is more extraordinary, was he swayed by the:defire of

revenge. His past misfortunes rendered him.more cautipus than
ever, and his recollection of the errors which hehad committed,
increased the natural irresolution of his mind. While he amused
Francis with promifLs, he secretly negociated.with Charles; and
being follicitous, above all things, to re-eftablilh his family in
Florence with their ancient authority, which he could not expect
from Francis, who had entered into ftrid alliance with the
new republick, he leaned rather towards the fide 6f his enemy
than: that of his benefator,. and gave' Lautrec o aflftan ce
towards. carrying on his operations.: The Venetians, viewing
with jealousy the progress of the French arms, were intent only
on recovering fnch maritime towns in the Neapolitan dominions
as were tbe' pofeffed by.,their republick, while they were alto-
gether careless about thea rediftion of Naples, on which the fuc-
cess of the ciommon caqfd depended o.' Th King: of Englahid,
instead of being able, as had. been projeced, to embarrass the
Emperor by attacking his tertitories in the Low-Countries, found
his fibjet! so averse to..an :inneceffary war, which would have
ruincil;,th trade of the nation, that in order to silence their
clamours, and put a flop to the infutreaions ready to break
out among them, he was compelled to conclude a truce for
eight months with the governess of the Netherlands P. Francis
himself, with the fame- unpardonable, inattention of which he
' had formerly been guilty,- and for which he had suffered' so
severely, neglected to make proper remittances to Lautrec for the
support of his army q,

.Guic. 1. xix. 491. P Herbert, go. Rymer, 14. 258.
s.Guic. . xviii. 478.

THESE
306

i THesp. unexpeted events retarded the progr'ess of the French,
and discouraged both the general and his troops but' thcrievolt
of' Andrew Ddria proved :a fatal blow todall their meafulres.
That gallant officer, the citizen of a republick, and trained up
from his infancy in the ea-fervice, retained the spirit of inde-
pendence. natutal to the former,' ahidi:the plain'liberal manners
pecdliar to the latter. ' Aperfect fttanger t: the: arts.of sub-
miilion or 'attery necetiary in courts, and cornfcious'at the
fame time of his own merit 'aid importance, he always offered
his advice with fieedotn, aid' often! ptreerted his complaints:'and
iinoflna'es .' ith boldneit. ; The: 'rencli riinifters, I.urac-
customed to fch liberties, deterhtined to:ruii a ntan Who treated
them' with so little deference; anid though Frahcis himself had a
just sense of Doria's.'fervices, as well as an high esteem for his
¢harader, thecdiurtirrs, by continually :reprefehting.him as, a
man haughtyr; intraldble, and more r'bllcitous to aggraddize him-
felfi than to ptorrote the 'interest ofFrahce, gradually uder-
mined the'foundations of his ctedit, and filled the King's mind
with ufipicion ndd ditruft. 'From thence proceeded several
affronts ;'rd idlggnities 'put' upon t6ria His appointments
weeei not"lirgulatiy 'paid ; his advic, even in naval affairs,, was
often flighted i atisttemipt wa's made'to seize tlhe prisoners taken
by his nephew in the fea-fight off Naples; all which he bore
with abundance of ill humour. But an injury. offered to his
country, transported him beyond all bounds of patience. The
French began to fortify Savona, to clear its harbour, and,
rbniovihg thither' some branches of trade carried on at Genoa,
plainly. hewed that they intended to render that town, long the
obje of jealousy and-hatred to thei Genoese, their rival in wealth.
and commerce. Doria,' animated with a patriotic zeal for the

R r 2 honour

Book V.

t528.

Revolt of An
drew Doria
froni France.

307

BooK V. honour and interest of his country, remonstrated againif this i:!
Ij-~28. the highest tone, not without threats, if the measure were not

instantly abandoned. This bold ation, aggravated by the
malice of the courtiers, and placed in the most odious light, irri-
tated Francis to such a degree, that he commanded Barbefieux,
whom he appointed admiral of the Levant,.to fail directly to
Genoa with the French fleet, to arrest .Doria, and to seize
his gallies. This rash order, of which the most profound
secrecy alone could have secured the execution, was concealed
with so little care, that Doria, got timely intelligence of it, and
retired with all his gallies to a place of safety. Guafto, -his
prisoner, who had long observed and fomented-his: growing dif-
content, and had often allured him by magnificent promises to
enter into the Emperor's service, laid hold on this favourable
opportunity.. While his indignation: and resentment were-at
their height,. he prevailed on him' to.difpatch one of his officers
to the Imperial couw: with-his overtures and demands..'. The
negociation was not long; Charles, fully sensible of the impor-
tance of such an acquisition, granted 'him whatever terms he
required. ;Toria ent :ack-hisponition,. together with thejcollar
of St. Michael to Francis, and htoigingthe'Imperial colours, failed.
with all his galleys towards Naples, not to block up the harbour,of
that unhappy city as he had formerly engaged, but to bring them
protection and deliverance. '

vx.reicd His arrival, opened the, communication: with the, sea' .and
'e Freech restored plenty in Naples, which was now reduced to the last
army before extremit-; and the French, having loft their superiority at

sea, were soon reduced to great traits for want of provisions.
The prince of Orange, who succeeded the viceroy in the con-
ma.d of the !rr. rial army, shewed himself by his prudent

conduct
30S

conduct worthy of th:t ho-our which his good fortune and the BooK V.
death of his generals had twice acquired him. Beloved by the 7 ~-
troops, ho remembeiig the prosperity they had e:-joyed u:'der
his command, servcd him with the utmost alacrity, he let flip no
opportu:itt of harralfil:g the enemy, and by continual alarms or
Gallies, fatigued and weakentd them r. As an addition to all these
misfortunes, the dileafes common in that country during the sultry
months, began to break out among the French troops. The pri-
fouers communicated to them the pestilence which the Imperial
army had brought to Naples from Rome, and it raged with such
violence, that few, either officers or soldiers, escaped the infection.
Of the whole army, not four thousand men, a number scarce
sufficient to defend the camp, were capable of doing duty ; and
being now besieged in their turn, they suffered all the miseries from
which the Imperialists were delivered. Lautrec, after struggling
long with so many dihappointments and calamities, which preyed
on his mind at the fame time that the pestilence wafted his body,
died, lamenting the negligence of his sovereign, and the infidelity A.',u
of his allies, to which tb many brave men had fallen viicims'
By his death, and the indisposition of the other generals, the com-
mand devolved on the marquis de Saluces, an officer altogether R ,ic lh,
unequal to uch a truit. He, with troops no less dispirited than i'
reduced, retreated in diflrder to Averfa; which town being in-
vested by the Prince of Orange, Saluccs was under the neceiiy
of contenting, that he himself hould remain a prilbner of ar,
that his troops should lay down their arms and colours, give up
their baggage, and march under a guard to the frontiers of

Jov;i H-. ib.36. p. i, &c. ;ger.ii Vi a Ioric, p. 1 BEell.y, 1 ,

&c. r Bcllay, i, k1 , .

> t I P. licuitc;'. R r-iu AuIr. l:h. . a.
. ;

F:, ;u:.c

,

BooK V.

.528.

Genoa reco-
vers its li-
bcrly.

Sept. 12.

Difintereted
conduct of
Doria.

France. By this ignominious capitulation, the wretched remains
of the French army were saved; and the Emperor, by his own
perseverance and the good conduct of his generals, acquired once
more the fluperiority in Italy .

THE loss of Genoa followed immediately upon the ruin of the

army in Naples. To deliver his country from the dominion of
foreigners was Doria's highest ambition, and had been his prin-
cipal inducement to quit the service of France, and enter into
that of the Emperor. A most favourable opportunity for exe-
cuting'this honourable enterprize now presented itself. The city
of Genoa, afflicted by the pestilence, was almost deserted by its
inhabitants, the' French garrison being neither regularly paid nor
recruited, was reduced to an inconsiderable number; Doria's emif-
saries found that such of the citizens as remained, being weary
alike of the French and Imperial yoke,; the rigour of which they
had alternately felt, were ready to welcome him, as 'their deli-
verer, and to second all his measures. Things wearing this pro-
mifing aspet, he failed towards the coast of Genoa; on his approach
the French gallies retired;, a, small body of men wvhich he!landed,
furprized one of the gates of Genoa in the night time.;: Trivulci,
the French.governor, with his feeble garrilfn, hut'himfelf up in
the citadel, and Doria took possession of the town without blood-
shed or resistance. Want of provisions quickly obliged Trivulci
to capitulate; the people, eager to abolish such an qdiou monu-
ment of their servitude, ran together with a tumultuous:violence,
and levelled the citadel with the ground.

IT was now in Doria's power to have rendered himself the
sovereign of his country, which he had so happily freed from

oppreflion.
u1 Bellay, 1 1 7, &c.. ovii Hil. lib. , !z6.

opprellion. The fame of his former acions, the success of his pre-
sent attempt, the attachment of his fiiends, the gratitude of his
countrymenr together with the fpport of the Emperor, all con-
spired to facilitate the attaining the supreme authority, and invited
him to lay hold of it. But with a magnanimity of which there are
few examples, he sacrificed all thoughts of ggrandizing himself
to tile virtuous fatisfation of etablifhing liberty in his country,
the highest obje&t at which ambition can aim. Having aflembled
the whold body of the people in the court before his palace, he
assured them, that the happiness of feeing them once more in
pofleflion of freedom, was to him a full reward for all his ser-
vices that more delighted with the name of citizen than of fove-
reign, he claimed no pre-eminence or power above his equals;
but remitted entirely to them the right, of fettling what form of
government they. would now chufe to be established among them.
The people listened to him with tears of admiration, 'and of
joy. Twelve persons were eleted to new-model the conftitu-
tion of the republick. The influence of Doria's virtue and
example, communicated itself to his countrymen; the fations
which had long torn and ruined the state, seemed to be forgotten
prudent precautions were taken to prevent their reviving and
the fame form of government which hath ftubtifted with little
variation since that time in Genoa, was established with univerial
applause. Doria lived to a great age, beloved, refpeted, and ho-
noured by his countrymen; and adhering uniformly to his pro-
feflions of moderation, withoutCarrogating any thing unbecoming a
private citizen, he preserved a great ascendant over the councils
of the republick, which owed its being to his generosity. The
authority he poieflfed was more flattering, as well as more fatisfac-
tory, than that derived from fovezeignty a dominion fotuided in

love

BOOK V.

158.

,3tx

love and in gratitude ; and' pheld by veneration for his virtues,
not by the dread of his power. His memory is Rill reverenced by;
the Genoese, and he is diftinguifled in their publick montuments,.
and celebrated in the works of their hiftotians by the 'most ho-
nourable of all appellations, THE FATHER OF HIS COUN-
TRY, AND THE RESTORER OF ITS LIBERTYx. .. .

FRANCIS, in order to recover the reputation of :his arms,

discredited by'fo many losses, made new efforts in the Milanese.
But. the: Copn of St. Pol, a ralh and unexperienced officer, to
whom. h¢!gqve fthe command, was no match. for Antonio de
Leyya ,the, ablest of the Imperial generals: He, by ihis fperior
skill in war, checked with a handful of men, the brif but
ill concerted motions of the French; and though o infirm him-
self that he.was carried constantly in a litter, he furpafled them.
wlien, occafiQn required,. no less in ativity than in, prudence.'
By an unexpeted march he furprized, defeated, and took the
Count of St. Pol, and ruined the French army in the Milanese as
entirely as the prince of Orange had ruined that which besieged
Naples .,

AMIDST these vigorous operations in the field, each party

discovered an impatient desire of peace, and continual negocia-
tions were carried on for that purpose. The French King,
discouraged, and almost exhausted by o many unfuccefsfil entr-
prizes, was reduced now to think of obtaining the release of
his sons by concessions, not by the terror of his arrms. The

x Guic, . 19. p. 498. Sigonii Vita Doriae, p. 1146. Jovii Hil. lib. :6.

p. 36, &c. y Guic. 1. 19, 520. P. 'Heuter. Rcr. Axifl.'
lib. x. c. 3. . 33. Mem. de Bellay, 12i.

Pope
BOOK V.

1528.

1529.

Operations
in the Mi-
la nel.

Negociations
between,
Charles and
Francis.

312

1

Pope hoped to !recover by a treaty wllatever he,lhad loft in tle
'war. The Emperor, notwithstanding the advantages which he had
gained, had many reasons to make him wil for an accommoda-
tion Solymari, having over-run Hungary, wps ready to break
in upon the Austria) territories with tlhe whe, frce p~s t! e
East ; the Reformation gaining groundd;,ily in Germany, the
.princes: who favoured it had entered into a confederacy, which
lie though dingerous to the tranquillity of the Empire;. the
-Spanirds mirmured at a war the

d weight .of which refted

chiefly on .theni, the,.varietyind extent ofl his operations,,,far
exceeded what :his revenues could..fuppprt; his fiuccefs hitlerto
had been owing chiefly to his: own good fortune, and to the
abilities of his generals, nor could he flatter himself that they
with troops destitute of every thing neceflary, would always tri-
umph'over enemies f1lll in' a doiditioi :to;renew ,their attqcks, All
parties, 'however' wire! at equal pains to:conceal, or to dissemble
their real fentiients. The 'Emperor, that: his inability to carry
on'the war might not be fufpeaed, ;insisted onhigh terms in the
tohe of aicoqueror. The P6p', folibitous not, to lose. his.prefent
allies, before: he came' tolany agieement with Charlesi continued
to make a'thoufand protiftations of fidelity to the former, while
he privately negociatedlwith tile latter. Francis, afraid that his
!confederates 'might prevent him by treating for tliemfelves with
the.Emperoi, :ha'd recourse o manyidifhpnqurable artifices in or-
'der to thrin their attention: from the' measures whiclh he was taking
to adjust all differences.with'his rival. ,

: ;I/'thls, fitqation) of. dffairs, hen; ll telleonten4ipg powers

i-wjfbed :fdr peace,* but;d.,,rft:tnQt venture to, I(ati!y on the
steps necefTary for attaining it, two ladies undertook to procure

VoL. II. S f this

313
BOOK V.

'S29.

BOOK V.

z59.

May.

Separate trea-
ty between
the Pope and
Charles.
June 20.

this blessing so much defred by all Europe. These were Mar-
garet of Austria, dowager of Savoy, the Emperor's aunt, and
Louise Francis's mother: They agreed on an interview at Cam-
bray, and being lodged in two adjoining houses between which
a communication was opened, met together without ceremony or
observation, and held daily conferences to which no person what-
ever was admitted. As both were profoundly killed in business,
thoroughly acquainted with the secrets of their refpetive courts,
and possessed with perfect confidence in each other, they soon
made great progress towards a finall accommodation; and the
ambafadors of all the confederates waited in anxious fufpenfe:to
know their fate, the determination of which was entirely in their
hands. .

BUT whatever diligence:they used to hten forward a,general

peace, the Pope had the address and industry to get the start of
his allies, by concluding at. Barcelona a particular treaty for
himself. The Emperor, impatient to, visit Italy in: his, way..to
Germany and desirous. .of re-eftablilhing tranquiilityin the one
country, before he attempted to compose the difor4ers which
abounded in the other, found it necessary to secure at leaft,one
alliance on which he might depend,: among the Italian states.
That ith the Pope,:i who courted it wittl unweari4;, impprtu-
nity, seemed more. propel thanany other, X Charle. being x-
tremely solicitous to make 'some reparation for the: insults which
he had offered to his sacred charater, and to redeem' pai of-
fences by new merit, granted Clement, after all his misfortunes,
terms mo-efavourable :'than he couild; have expedted.!laf;¢r a
'continued settes' of fiicefs. 'Amdng: other articles, lhe ngaged

* P. IHeuter. Rer. Auflr. lib. x. c. 3. p. 133. Mem. de Bellay, p. I22.

to
314

to restore all the territories belonging to the ecclesiastical itate;
to re-establish the dominion of the Medici in Florence; to give
his natural daughter in marriage to Alexander the head of that
family; and to put it in the Pope's power to decide concerning
the fate of Sforza, and the poffellion of the Milanese. In
return for these ample conceflions, Clement gave the Emperor
the investiture of Naples without the reserve of any tribute, but
the present of a white fleed in acknowledgment of his fovcreign-
ty; absolved all who had been concerned in assaulting and plun-
dering Rome; and permitted Charles and his brother Ferdinand
to levy.the fourth of. the ecclesiastical revenues throughout their
dominions a.

THE account of this tranfation, quickened the negociations

at Cambray, and brought Margaret and ouife to an immediate
agreement. The treaty of Madrid served as the basis of that which
they concluded the latter being intended to mitigate the rigour
of the former. The chief articles were, That the Emperor should
not, for the present, demand the restitution of Burgundy, reserving
however, in full force, his rights and pretensions to that dutchy;
That Francis should pay two millions of crowns as the ransom of
his sons, and, before they were set at liberty, flould restore fiuch
towns as he still held in the Milanese; That he should resign the so-
vereignty of Slanders and Artois; That lie hould renounce all his
pretensions to Naples, Milan, Genoa, 'and every other place bc-
yond the Alps; That he flould immediately consummate the
marriage concluded between him and the Emperor's sifter E-
leanora b.

BOOK V.

1529.

Augul 5.
Peace of
Canbany be-
tween Charles
and Francis.

, Guic.l. 19. 522. b P. Heuter. Rer. Auflr. lib. x. c. 3. p. 234.
Sandov. lilt. dell Emiper. Carl. V. ii. 28.

Ss 2 THus

315

THUS Francis, chiefly from his impatience to procure liberty

to his sons, sacrificed every thing which had at first prb'rhpted
him to take arms, or which .had induced him, by continuing
hoftilit;:s, during nine fuccefive campaigns, t6 protrat ihe war
to a length scarce known in Europe before the establishment of
standing armies, and the imposition of exorbitant taxes became
universal. The Emperor, by this treaty, was rendered sole arbi-
ter of the fate of Italy; lie delivered his territories in the
Netherlands from an ignominious badge of fubjefion; and after
having baffled his rival in the field, he prescribed to him the
conditions of peace. The different conduct and spirit with
which the two Monarchs carried on the operations of war, led
naturally to such an issue of it. Charles, inclined by temper,
as well as obliged by his situation, concerted all his schemes
with caution, pursued hiem with perseverance; arid observing
circumstances and events with attention, .let none. efape that
could be improved to advantage., Francis, more enterprizing
than steady, undertook great designs with warmth, but executed
them with remiflhefs; and, diverted by his pleasures, 'or de-
ceived by his favourites, he often loft the inoft promising oppor-.
tunities of success. Nor h.d the charater of the two rivals.
themselves greater influence on the operations of .the war, than
the opposite qualities of the generals whom they employed.
Among the Imperialists, valour tempered with prudence ; ferti-
lity of invention aided by experience; sagacity to penetrate the
designs of their enemies, as well as to conduct their own, with
all the talents that form great commanders and ensure vi&tory,
were conspicuous. Among the French, there qualities were
either wanting, or the very reverse of them abounded nor could
they boast of one man (unless we except Lautrec, who was

always
BOOK V.

5s29.

Advantage-
ous for the
Emperor.
3i6

always unfortunate) that equalled the merit of Pescara, Leyva, BOOK V.
Guafto, tle prince of Orange, and other leaders whom Charles 529.
had to set in opposition to them. Bourbon, Morone, and Doria,
who might have been. capable of balancing by their abilities and
conduct the superiority which the Imperialists had acquired,
were loft through the careleflhefs of the King, and the malice or
injustice of his counsellors; and the most fatal blows given to
France during the progre the he war, proceeded from the despair
and resentment of these three persons, who were forced to abandon
her service.

THE hard conditions to which Francis was obliged to fhbmit, Dinlonour.

were not the most affliting circumiiftance to him in the treaty of hble to
Cambray. He loft his reputation and the confidence of all
Europe, by abandoning his allies to his rival. Unwilling to
enter into the details necessary for adjusting their interests, or
afraid that whatever he claimed for them muff have been pur-
chased by farther conceflions on his own part, he gave them up
in a body ; and without the least provision in their behalf, left the
Venetians, the Florentines, the duke of Ferrara, together with
filch of the Neapolitan barons as had joined his army, to the mercy
of hie Emperor. They exclaimed loudly against this base and
perfidious ation, of which Francis himself was o much ashamed,
that, in order to avoid the pain of healing from their ambafa-
dors the reproaches which he justly merited, it was ome time
before he would consent to allow them an audience. Charles,
on the other hand, was attentive to the interest of every person
who had adhered to him; the rights of ome of his Flemish sub-
jects who had estates or pretensions in France, were secured;
one article was inserted, obliging Francis to restore the blood
and memory of the Constable Bourbon; and to grant his heirs

the

3'7

BOOK V.

1529.

Henrv ac-
quivlces in it.

His scheme
of being di-
vorced from
his Queen.

the poffeflion of his lands which had been forfeited; another,
by which indemnification was]ipulated For those French gentlemen
who had accompanied Bourbon in his exilec. This condut, lau-
dable in itself, and placed in the mot itriking light by a comparison
with that of Francis, gained Charles as much esteem as the success
of his arms had acquired him glory.

FRANCIS, did not treat the King of England with the

fame neglec as his other allies. He communicated to him
all the steps of his negociation at Cambray, and luckily found
that Monarch in a situation which left him no choice, but to
approve implicitly of his measures, and to concur with them.
Henry had been folliciting the Pope for rome time, in order to
obtain a divorce from Catharine of Aragon his Qeen. Several
motives combined in prompting the King to urge this suit; as
he was powerfully influenced at ome seasons by religious con-
fiderations, he entertained many scruples concerning the legi-
timacy of his marriage with his brother's widow; his affections
had long been etranged from the Qeen, who was older than
himself, ad had loft all the charms he possessed in the earlier
part of her life; he was pafionately desirous of having male ifiue;
Wolfey artfully fortified his scruples, and encouraged his hopes,
that he might widen ihe breach between him and the Emperor,
Catharine's nephew; and, what was more forcible perhaps in its
operation than all these united, the King had conceived a vio-
lent love for the celebrated' Anne Boleyn, a young lady of great
beauty, and of greater accomplifliments, whom, as he found it
impofible to gain her on other terms, he determined to raise to
the throne. The Papal authority had often been interposed to
< Guic.i. 1. p. 525 P. Hcuter. Rer. Aultr. lib. x. c. 4. p. 235.

grant
318

grant divorces for reasons less specious than those which Henry
produced. When the matter was first proposed to Clement,
during his inprifonment in the catle of St. Angelo, as his hopes
of recovering liberty depended entirely on the King of England,
and his ally of France, lie exprefed the warmest inclination to
gratify him. But no sooner was he set free, than he discovered
other sentiments. Charles, who espoused the protection of his
aunt with zeal inflamed by refentmen, alarmed the Pope on the
one, hand with threats which made a deep impreflion on his
timid mind; and allured hiim on the other with those promies
in favour of his family, which he afterwards accomplithed.
Upon the profpe&t of these, Clement not only forgot all his
obligations to Henry, but ventured to endanger the interest of
the Romish religion in Eigland, and to run the risk of alienat-
ing that kingdom for ever from the obedience of the Papal fee.
After amusing Henry during two years, with all tlie fiubtleties
and chicane which the court of Rome can so dexterously employ
to protra& or defeat any cause ; after displaying the whole
extent of his ambiguous and deceitful policy, the intricacies of
which the English historians, to whom it properly belongs, have
found it no easy matter to trace and unravel; he, at lads, recalled
the powers of the delegates whom he had appointed to judge in
the point, avocated the cause to Rome, leaving the King no other
hope of obtaining a divorce but from the perfionrl decision of tlie
Pope himself. As Clement was now in firit alliance with the
Emperor, who had purchased his frielndflip by filch exorbitant
concelilons, Henry dcfpaired of procuring any sentence from the
former, but what was dictated by the latter. His ghonour,
however, and' palions concurred in preventing him from re-
linquilhing his scheme of a divorce, which lie determined to
accomplish by other means, and at any rate; and: the contilunce

oc

BOOK V.

12a9.

319

Book V.

1529.

Aug. 12.
The Emperor
visits Italy.

of Francis's fiiendfhip being neceffaty tocounterbalance the Em'
peror's.power, he, in order to secure that, not only offered no-c-
monstrances against the total negle& of their allies, in the treaty
of Cambray, but made Francis the present of a large fum, as,a
brotherly contribution towards the payment of the ranforn for his
sons d.

MEANWHILE the Emperor landed in Italy with a numerous

train of the panifh nobility, and a 'confiderale body, of ,troops.
He left the government of Spain during his absence to the Em-
press Isabella. By his long residence in that country, he had
acquired such thorough knowledge of the,charater of the people,
that he could perfectly accommodate, the maxims of his government
to their genius. He could even assume, upon fiome.ocafignjs,
fuch.popular manners, as gained wonderfully upon.the Spaniards.
A striking instance of his disposition to gratify them had oc-
curred a few days before he embarked for Italy: He was to
make his publick entry into the city;of Barce!lona; an. some
doubtsi having arisen among the,ihbabiants, whether they hpuld
receive him; as Emperor, or .as Count of Barcelona, Charles in-
ftantly decided in favour of the latter, declaring that he was more
proud of that ancient title, than of his Imperial crown. Soothed
with this flattering expression of his regard, the citizeas welconied
him with acclamations ofjoy, and the Rtates of the:prOvince swore
allegiance to his son Philip, as heir of the connty. of Barcelona.
A similar oath had been taken in all the kingdoms of Spain, with
equal fatisfafion C.

THE Emperor appeared in Italy with the pomp and powver of
a conqueror; and ambalfadors from all the princes and flatesof

d Herbert. Mem. de Bellay, p. 122.

e Sandov. ii. p. 5o. Ferrer. ix. 6.

that
3 o

that cou:ntry attended his court waiting to receive his decision
with regard to their fate. At Genoa, where lhefirfi lalded, he
was received with the acclamations due to the protector of
their liberties. Having honoured Doia with many marks of
diftintion, and bellowed on the rcpublick several new pivi-
leges, he proceeded to Bologna, the place fixed upon for his
interview with the Pope. He afieeted to uiite in his publick
entry into that city the state and majcify that fited an Emperor,
with the humility becoming an obedient son of the church ; and
while at the head of twenty thousand veteran soldiers, able to
give law to all Italy, lie kneeled down to kils the feet of that
very Pope whom he had so lately detained a prifo:rer. The
Italians, after suffering so much from the ferocity and licen-
tioufnefs of his armies, and after having been long accustomed
to form in their imagination a picture of Charles which bore ome
rclemblance to that of the barbarous Monarchs of the Goths
or Huns, who had formerly affli6ted their country with like cala-
mities were furprized to fee a prince of a graceful appear-
ance, affable and courteous in his deportment, of regular man-
ners, and of exemplary attention to all the ofices of religion .
They were iill more aftoniflied when lie fttled all tile con-
cerns of the princes and states which now depended on him, with
a degree of moderation and equity much beyond what they had
expeaed.

CHARLES himself, when lie set out fiom Spain, far fiom

intending to give any fiuch extraordinary proof of his self-
denial, seems to have been rcfolvcd to avail hlinfelf to the utmofi
of the fuiperiority wlhicl lie liad acquired in Italy. But various

f S Hn'ov. 1 il. d& ii I iil Ca i. V. i. 50, 5 , &c.
Void- 11. T t

BOOK V.

N . .()

Nov. 5.

Ilis iiolcrn-
tion Anll I th
miotives ol' it.
cilcumftances

32

circumstances concurred in pointing out the neceflity of purfuirg
a very different course. The progress of the Turkifl Sultan,
who, after over-running Hungary, had penetrated into Austria,
and laid siege to Vienna with an army of an hundred and fifty
thousand men, loudly called on him to collect his whole force
to oppose that torrent; and though the valour of the Germans,
the prudent co.dud of Ferdinand, together with the treachery
of the Vizier oon obliged Solyman to abandon that enterprize
with infamy and loss, the religious disorders still growing in
Germany made the Emperor's presence highly neceffajy there g:
The Florentines, instead of givirg their consent to the re-efta-
blifhment of the Medici, which by the treaty of Barcelona the
Emperor had bound himself to procure, were preparing to defend
their liberty by force of arms; the vast preparations for hisjourney
had involved him in unusual expences; and on this, as well as
many other occasions, the multiplicity of his affairs, and the
narrowness of his revenues obliged him to contrac his vast
fchemies of ambition, and to forego.prefent and certain advan-
tages, that he might guard against more remote but unavoidable
dangers. Charles, from all there considerations, finding it necefl
fary to assume an air of moderation, aed his part with a
good grace. He admitted Sforza into his pretence, and not
only gave him a full pardon of all past offences, but granted
him the investiture of the dutchy together with his niece the
King of Denmark's daughter in marriage. He allowed the
duke of Ferrara to keep poffefion of all his dominions, adjusting
the points in dispute between him and the Pope with an imparti-
ality not very agreeable to the latter. He came to a final accom-
mcdation with the Venetians upon the reasonable condition of

g Slcidan, 121. Guic. I. xx. 55o.

their

322
BOOK V.

1529.

Sept. 18.
Ct. 16.

their restoring whatever they had ufuirped durii;g the late war,
either in the Neapolitan or papal territories In return for so
many conceflions be exated considerable furns from each of
the powers with whom he treated, which they paid without re-
lutance, and which afforded him the means of proceeding on his
journey towards Germany with a magnificence suitable to his
dignity h.

THESE treaties, which restored tranquillity to Italy after a

tedious war, the calamities of which had chiefly asseted that
country, were publifled at Bologna with great solemnity on the
first day of the year one thousand five hundred and thirty, amidst
the universal acclamations of the people, applauding the Emperor
to whose moderation and generosity they ascribed the blessings of
peace which they had so long desired. The Florentines alone
did not partake of this general joy. Animated with a zeal for
liberty more laudable than prudent, they determined to oppose
the restoration of the Medici. The imperial army had already
entered their territories, and formed the siege of their capital.
But though deserted by all their allies, and left without any hope
of ficcour, they defended themselves many mouths with an ob-
tfinate valour worthy of better success, and even when they fur-
rendered, they obtained a capitulation which gave them hopes
of securing ome remains of their liberty. But the Emperor,
from his desire to gratify the Pope, frustrated all their expeda-
tions, and abolifling their ancient form of government, raised
Alexander Medici to the fame absolute dominion over that slate
which his family have retained to the present times. Philibert de
Chalons Prince of Orange, the Imperial general, was killed

h Sardov. ii. 55, &c.

T t 2 during

BOOK V.

1529.

Re elhiblifllea
the uthority
of the Medici
in F~lorence.

323

BOOK V.

1530.

State of ;f-
fairs, civil
and religious,
in Germany.
Feb. 22 and
24.

during this siege. His cftate and titles descended to his sifter
Claude de Chalons, who was married to Rene count of Nassau,
and fie transmitted to her posterity of the house of Naflau
the title of Princes of Orange which they have rendered so illus-
trious i

AFTER the publication of the peace at Bologna, and tile

ceremony of his coronation as King of Lombardy and Emperor
of the Romans, which the Pope performed with the accustomed
formalities, nothing detained Charles in Italy k; and 'he began
to prepare for his journey to Germany. His presence becariic
every day more necefary in that country, and was solicited with
equal importunity by the catholicks 'and by the favourers of tle
new doctrines. During that long interval of tranquillity which
the absence of the Emperor, the contests between him and the
Pope, and his attention to the war with France atorded them,
the latter had gained much ground. Most of the Princes who
had embraced Luther's opinions, h1ad not only eftabliihed in
their territories that form of worship which he approved, but
had entirely suppressed the rites of the Romifl church. Many
of the free cities had irnitated their condut. Almost one :hllf
of the Germanic body had revolted Tf!.om the Papal fee, and
its dominion, even in that part which had not hitherto shaken
off the yoke, was cor.fiderally weakened by the example of the
neighbouring tates, or by the fcret ptogrefs bs those doctrines
,which had undermined it among them. Whatever fatisfation
the Emperor, while he was at open enmity with the fee of
Rome, might have felt in those events that tend6d to mortify

i Guic. 1. xx. p. 541, &c. P. Ieuter. Rcr. Aufit. 1;1. x. c. 4. p. 236.
k H. Corn!. At iipra de duplici Coronhtione Car. V. np. Scard. ii. 266.

and

aid embarrass the Pope, lie could not help prceiviig now, that
the religions divifio:!s i.l Germany would, in tie ed, prove
extremely hurtful to tie Imptrial authority. .Thi iweak.ncfs of
former Emperors had lfiltered the great viaflis of the Empire to
make lilch successful cncroachmel:ts upon their power and pre-
rogative, that during the whole course of a war, which had
often required the exertion of his utmoit rh'ergth, Charles scarce
drew any effeciual aid fiom Germany, and found tht magnifi-
cent titles or obsolete pretensions were almost the only advantages
which he had gained by swaying the Imperial fccptre. He
,now became fully sensible that if he did not recover in oime
degree the prerogatives. which .his predecessors had lotl, and
acquire thetauthority, s,well as pofefs-tie name of licad of tle
Empire, his high dignity would contribute more to obftrut than
to promote his ambitious schemes. Nothing, lie saw, was, more cel
fential toward$ attainiilg this than to filppres opinions which might
fom new bonds of confederacy among the princes of; the Empire,
and unite them by ties ftrongcr and more sacrcd than any politi-
cal connection. Nothing feeelcd to lead more certainly to the ac-
complilhment of his designs, than to mploy zeal for the eftablifll
ed religion, of which lie was tile natural protector, as the inflru-
ment of extending his:civil authority.

ACCORDNCGLY, a profpet no fooncr opened of coming to an

accommodation with the Pope than by the Empcror's appoint
pnent, a diet of tie Empire wasl eld at Spires, in order to takC
into consideration the slate of religion. The decree of the dikt
assemblcd there in the year one thousand five hundred ad
twenty-fix, which was almost equivalent to a toleration of
Luthlle's opinions, had given great offence to the reft of Cilif.

tcldomll.

1530.

Proceed ngts
of' h'. DieLc

'1 5,

tendom. The greatest delicacy of address, however, was requi-
fiteTi proceeding to any decision more rigorous. 'lle minds of
men kept in perpetual agitation by a controversy carried on
during twelve years without Iltermillion of debate, or abatement
of zeal, were now inflamed to an high degree. They were
accustomed to innovations, and saw the boldeftof them iilccefs-
ful. Having not only abolished old rites, but substituted new
forms in their place, they were influenced as much by attach-
ment to the system which they had embraced, as by aversion to
that which they had abandoned. Luther himself, of a spirit not
to be worn out by the length and obstinacy of the combat, or to
become remils upon success, continued the attack with as much
vigour as he had begun it. His disciples, of whom many
equalled him in zeal, and ome surpassed him in learning, were
no less capable than their matter to condua the controversy in
the properft manner. Many of the laity, and even of the
princes, trained upamidft there incessant disputations, and in the
habit of listening to the arguments of the contending parties
who alternately appealed to them as judges, came to be pro-
soundly skilled in all the questions which were agitated, and,
upon occasion, could hew themfelvcs not inexpert in ay of
the arts with which these theological encounters were managed.
It was obvious from all these circumstances, that any violent
decision of the diet mutt have immediately precipitated matters
into confusion, and have kindled in Germany the flames of a
religious war., All, therefore, that the Archduke, and the other
conmiflro:-ers appoi.;ted by the Emperor demanded of the diet,
was, to enjoin those fates of the Empire who liad hitherto
obeyed the decree iued against Luther at Worms in the year
one thousand five hundred and tlenty-four, to p'erfcvere in the

obfervatioi:
BooK V.

1530.

obfeivation of it, and to prohibit the other flates fromn atteinpli:.g
any farther innovation in religion, particulaily from aboliflling
tile Mass, before tile meeting of a geneial council. After much
dispute, a decree to that cfltd was approved of by a majority of
voices '.

'r H E Eleor of Saxony, the marquis of Brandenburgh, the

Landgrave of I-len, the Dukes of Lulncburgh, the prince of
Anhalt, together with the deputies of fourteen Imperial or free
cities n', entered a solemn protest against this decree, as unjust and
impious. On that account they were diflinguifed by the name
of PROTESTANTS", an appellation which hath since become
better known, and more honourable, by its being applied indif-
criminately to all the fees of whatever denominnation which have
revolted from the Roman fee. Not satisfied with this declara-
tion of their difient from tile decree of the. diet, the Protestants
lent ambafadors into Italy to lay. their grievances before the
Emperor, from whom they met with the most discouraging
reception. Charles was at that time in close union with the
Pope, and follicitous to attach him inviolably to his interc1l.
During their long residence at Bologna, they held many confil-
tations concerning the mol cffctual means of extirpating the
herefies which had sprung up in Germany. Clemeut, whorfe
cautious and timid mind.the proposal of a general council filled
with liorror, even beyond that which Popes, the corflant,ci e-

BOCK V.

i 53°.

The follow-
crs of I .lher
prot.(ctgainift
I Ii I11,
April 19.

I)elil)erati(.i a
of the Pope
and Epipvr r.

1 Skid. IHif. 11 7.
m The fourteen cities were Straflurgh, Nuremburgh, Ulin, Conflance,

Rcillingen, Windflleim, Meinengen, Lindaw, Kemien, -laiHlion, fnia,
Weilfemnburgh, Nordlingcn, and St. Gal.

n icid. I-lifi. 119. F. Paul, Hist. p. 45. ecckcnd. ii. 127.

mica

3?.7

Book V.

1530.

Fnilcror pic-
l.!lt at the:
D)i.t ,. '' gs-
i'U! v.
AL:ic! 22,

1530.

mies of such aflemblies, usually feel, employed every agument
to dissuade the Emperor from conlenting to that mcafuire. He
represented general councils as factious, ungovernable, prefump-
tuous, formidable to civil authority, and too low in their ope-
rations to remedy disorders ihich required an immediate cure.
Experience, he said, had now taught both the Emperor and
himself, that forbearance and lenity exasperated' the spirit of
innovation which they ought to have mollified ; it was neceflary,
therefore, to have recourse to the rigorous methods which such
a desperate cafe required; Leo's sentence of excommunication
and the decrce of the diet at Worms flould be carried into exe-

cution, and it was incumbent on the Emperor to employ his
whole pwer, in order to overawe those on whom the reverence
diuc either to ccclefiaftical or civil authority hlad no longer any
influence. Charles, whose views ere very different from the
Pope's, and who became daily more sensible how obfltinate and
deep rooted the evil was, thought of reconciling the Protestants
by means less violent, .lnd confidercd the convocation of a coun-
cil as n6 improper expedient for that purpose; but promied, if
these gentler arts failed of success, that then he would exert him-
felt with vigour to reduce those stubborn enemies of the Catholic
faith o.

Such were the sentiments with which the'Emperor set out

for Germany, having already appointed a diet of the Empire
to be held at Augsburg. In his journey towards that city lie
had many opportunities of observing the disposition of the Ger-
mans with crgard to the points in contiovcrfy, and found their
minds every where to much irritated and inflamed, as convinced

1'. Plaul, 47. cck. I. ii. 142. Hlifi. de ConlcPl: d'Auxbourg, par 1).
CliytIrus, 4to. Antw. 1572, p. 6.

Iiim
328

him that nothing tending to severity or rigour onglht to be
attempted, till all other measures proved inefetldual. He made
his public entry into Aglburgh with extraordinary pomp ; and
found there such a full assembly of the members of the diet as
was suitable both to the importance of the aflairs which were to
come under their consideration, and to the honour of an Epe-
ror, who, after a long absence, returned to them crowned with
reputation and success. His presence seems to have communi-
cated to all parties an unusual spirit of moderation and desire of
peace. The Elecor of Saxony would not permit Luther to
accompany him to the diet, left he should offel;d the Emperor by
bringing into his pretence a person excommunicated by the
Pope, and the author of all those dissensions which it now ap-
peared o difficult to compose. At the Emperor's desire, all the
Protestant princes sorbad the divines who accompanied them to
preach in publick during their residence at Augsburg. For the
fame reason they employed Melancton, thu man of the greatest
learning, as well as of the most pacific and gentle pirit among
the Reformers, to draw up a confeflion of their faith exprefled
in terms as little offensive to the Roman Catholics, as a regard
for truth would permit. MelanCthon, who seldom suffered the
rancour of controversy to envenom his style, even in writings
purely polemical, executed a talk so agreeable to his natural dif-
position with great moderation and success. The Creed which
he composed, known by the name of the Confeflion of Aug-
fburg, from the place where it was presented, was read pub-
lickly in the diet; ome Popish divines were appointed to exa-
mine it; they brought in their animadversions; a dispute ensued
between them and Melancthon, seconded by Come of his brethren;
but though Melanhlon softened ome articles, made concefli-

Voi,. II. U u ons

BOOK V.

1530.

June 15.

The confelli-
on of Aug-
burg.

3J9

ons with regard to others, and put the leaf exceptionable sense.
upon all; though the Emperor himself laboured with great earnest-
nels to reconcile the contending parties; so many marks of diftinc-
tion were now established, and fich insuperable barriers placed be-
tween the two churcheS, that all hopes of bringing about a coalition
seemed utterly desperate .

FROM the divines, among whom his endeavours had been so

unsuccessful, Charles turned to the Princes their patrons. Nor
did he find them, how desirous soever of accommodation, or
willing to oblige the Emperor, more disposed than the former to
renounce their opinions. At that time, zeal for religion took pof-
fefion of the minds of men to a degree which can scarce be conceiv-
ed by those who live in an age when the paflions excited by the first
manifestation of truth, and the first recovery of liberty, have in great
meafuire ceased to operate. This zeal was then of fucl strength
as to overcome attachment to their political interest, which is com-
monly the predominant motive among Princes. The Elector of
Saxony, the Landgrave of Hefe, and other chiefs of the Protef-
tants, though solicited separately by the Emperor, and allured ,by
the promise or profped of those advantages which it was known
they were most solicitous to attain, refitfed, with a fortitude high-
ly worthy of imitation, to abandon what they deemed the cause of
God for the fake of any earthly acquisition q.

Severe decree
riainfl the
Protefants.

EV EY scheme in order to gain or disunite the Protestant
party proving abortive, nothing now remained for the Emperor

pSeckend. lib. ii. 159. &c. Abr. Sculteti Annales Evangelici ap. Herm.
Von der Hard. Hilt. Liter. Reform. Lips. 1717. fol. p. 159.

q Sleid 132. Scultel. Annal. 158.

but
BOOK. V.

1530,
33°

but to take ome vigorous measures towards aflerting the dotrines
and authority of the establishe.l church. These, Campeggio,
the Papal nuncio, had always recommended as the only proper
and effectual course of dealing with such obstinate heretics. In
compliance with his opinions and remonstrances, the diet if-
filed a degree, condemning most of the peculiar tenets held by
the Protestants; forbidding any person to protect or tolerate
those who taught them; enjoining a stria observance of the
eftablifled rites; and prohibiting any further innovation under
severe penalties. All orders of men were required to alift with
their persons and fortunes in carrying this decree into execution
and such as refused to obey it were declared incapable of acting
as judges, or of appearing as parties in the Imperial chamber,
the supreme court of judicature in the Empire. To all which
was subjoined a promise that an application should be made to
the Pope, requiring him to call a general council within fix
months, in order to terminate all controversies by its sovereign
decifionsr.

THE severity of this decree, which they confidered as a pre-

lude to the most violent persecutions, alarmed the Protestants,
and convinced them that the Emperor was resolved on their dc-
ftruction. The dread of those calamities which were ready to fall
on the church, oppressed the feeble spirit of Melandhon ; and as
if the cause had already been desperate, he gave up himself, to
melancholy and lamentation. But Luther, who during the meeting
of the diet had endeavoured to confirm and animate his party by
several treatises which he addrefled to them, was not disconcerted
or dismayed at the profpet of this new danger. He comforted

T
r Sleid. 39.

Uul z

They enter
into a league
at SmalkaTdc.

Malanhtlion
.."

BOOK V.

1530.
Nov. 19.

3,13

BOOK V.

1530.

December 22.

The Emperor
proposes to
have his bro-
ther eleted
King of the
Romans.

Melanthon and his other desponding disciples, and exhorted tile
Princes not to abandon those truths which they had lately asserted
with such laudable boldness. His exhortations made the deeper
impreflion upon them as they were greatly alarmed at that time
by the account of a combination among the Popish Princes of the
Empire for the maintenance of the established religion, to which
Charles himself had acceded t. This convinced them that it was
neceflary to tand on their guard; and that their own safety as
well as the success of their cause depended on union. Filled with
this dread of the adverse party, and with these sentiments con-
cerning the conduct proper for themselves, they aembled at
Smalkalde. There, they concluded a league of mutual defence
againfl all aggressors A, by which they formed the Protestant states
of the Empire into one regular body, and beginning already to
confider themselves as such, they resolved to 'apply to the Kings of
France and England, and to implore them to assist and patronize
their new confederacy. '

AN affair not connected with religion' furnished them with a

pretence for courting the aid of foreign Princes. Charles,
whose ambitious vieivs enlarged in proportion to the increase f
his power and grandeur, had formed a scheme of continuinlg the
Imperial crown in his 'family, by procuring his brother Fetdi-
nand to be eleted Kihg of the Romans. The present junture
was favourable 'for the execution of that design. The, Eipe-
:ror's arms had been every w'here victorious; he had given'lii
to all Europe at the late peace; no rival now remained in a
condition to balance 'or to controul him; and the Eie&ors,
s Seck. i, i8o. Scid. 14o.

t Seek. ii. 200. iii. 1 1.

n Sleid. Hist. 142.

dazzled
332

dazzled by the fpleudor of hlls fuecefs, or oeraed by tle great-
ness of his power, durst scarce difpute:the will of apritice,whlofc
follicitations carried with 'them the: autlhority of commlands.
Nor did he want plauftblq reasons to enforce the mealire. The
affairs of his other kingdoms, lie laid, obliged him to be often
fbfent from Germany; the growing disorders occasioned by the
controversies atout ireligion, as well' as:the formidable njeigllh
bourhood of thle Turks. who continually thteatened to break in
with their desolating armies into the heart of the Empire, requi-
red tle,.coniant prefenee of. a prince endowed with prudence
capable of' eompofing he :former,-, d with power and valour
sufficient to .repel'ithe lt.tot. His. brqtler .

Ferdi.na!id poflseed

there qualitqes i an enmilpqlit tlcgroe: ; by ref;iiing long in
Gcrmany, he had acquired a thorough knowledge of their con-
fIitution and manners, ,haying been prefeit almost from tie sift
rife of their religious dissensions, he knew what remcdijg were
moif proper, what they could bear, and how to apply them;
as his own dominions lay on the Turkish frontier, he as the
natural defender of Germaly against the invasions of. the nfidels,
being prompted by interest no less tlhal hle woiuld$ be bound n duty
tooppofe them. .

THEse arguments made little imprefllon on the Proteflants.
Experience taught them, that nothing had contributed more to
the undisturbed progress of their opinions, than the interregnum
after. Maximilian's death, the long absence of Charles, and the
slackness in the reins of government, which these ocdafloned;
after deriving such advantages from a state of anarchy, they
were extremely unwilling to give themselves a new and a fixed
master. They perceived clearly the extent of Charles's ambi-

tion,

BooK V.

1530

The Pro-
tcftants uvcrf
to it.

333

BOOK V. tion, that he aimed at rendering the Imperial crown hereditary

C^:r^ in his family, and would of course eftablifll in the Empire an
1530.

absolute dominion, to which elecive princes could not have
aspired with equal facility. They determined therefore to oppose
Ferdinand's election with the utmost vigour, and to route their
countrymen by their example and exhortations, to withitand this
encroachment on their liberties. The Eletor of Saxony

'53'. accordingly, hot only' refuted to be present in the electoral col-
ury 5 lege, which the Emperor summoned to meet at Cologne, but

inftrutled his eldest son to appear there, and to protest against
the election as informal, illegal, contrary to the articles of the
golden bull, and subversive of the liberties of the Empire. But
He is chosen. the other Electors, whom Charles had been at great pains to gain;

without regarding either his absence or protest, chose Frdinand
King of the Romans; who a few days after was crowned at ix-la-
Chapellex.

Negociations
of the Pro-
teRants with
France.
Feb 29.

THE account of this tranfaftion, as well as of the commence-

ment of ome prosecutions against them on account of their reli-
gious principles, in the Imperial chamber, being brought to the
Protestants, who were assembled a second time at Smalkalde,
they thought it necessary both to renew their former confederacy,
and immediately to dispatch their ambafladors into France and
England. Francis had observed, with all the jealousy of a rival,
the reputation which the Emperor had acquired by his eeming
disinterestedness aid moderation in fettling the affairs of Italy ; and
beheld with great concern, the successful ftep which lhe had taken
towards perpetuating and extending his authority in Germany
by the election of a King of the Romans. Nothing, however4
x Sleid. 42. Seck. iii. . P. Heuter. Rer. Auflr. lib. x. c. 6. p. 240.

would

would have been more impolitic than to precipitate into a'new BOOK V.
war his kingdom exhaufh d by extraordinary efforts, and difcou-:
raged by ill uccefs, before it had got time to recruit its flrcngth,
or to forget past misfortunes. Nor could he, when no provoca-
tion had been given, ad scarce a pretext. h,.d beenn afforded
him, violate a treaty of peace which he himself had so lately
solicited, without forfeiting the esteem of all Europe, and being
detcfled as a prince void of probity and honour. He observed,
with great joy, powerful factions beginning to form in the Em-
pire; he listened with the utmost eagcrnefs to the.complaints
of the Protestant princes; and without seeming to countenance
their religious opinions, determined' secretly to cherifl those
sparks of political discord which might be afterwards kindled
into a flame. For this purpose, he ent William de Bellay,
one of the ablest negociators in France, into Germany, who visit-
ing the courts of the malecontent princes, and heightening their
ill-humour by various arts, concluded an alliance between them
and his master Y, which though concealed at that time, and
productive of no immediate effects, laid the foundation of an
union fatal on many occasions to Charles's ambitious projects
and fiewed the discontented princes of Germany, where they
might, for the future, find a protector no less powerful than
willing to undertake their defence against the encroachments of
the Emperor.

THE King of England, highly incensed against Charles, i'n Wihll ng-

land.

complaisance to whom, the Pope had long retarded, and now
openly opposed his divorce, was no less disposed than Francis:
to firlengthen a league which might be rendered Co. formidable

Y Bellay, 129, a. 130, b. Sck. iii. 14.

to.

335

BOOK V. to the Emperor. But his favourite project of the divorce led him
''v' into such a labyrinth of schemes and negociations, and lie was,
1531.

at the fame time, so intent on abolilhing the papaljurifdiation
in England, that he had no leifiure for foreign affairs; and was
obliged to satisfy iimfelf with giving general promises, together
with a small supply in money to the confederates of Smalkalde '.

Charie? MBANWHILE, many circumstances convinced Charles that
c°outsths this was not a junCture when the extirpation of erefy was to

be attempted by violence and rigour; that, in in compliance with.
the Pope's inclinations, he had already proceeded with impru.
dent precipitation, and that it was more his interest to confo-
lidate Germany into one united and vigorous body, than to
divide and enfeeble it by a civil war. The Protestants, already
considerable by their numbers, and their zeal, had now acquired
additional weight and importance by their joining in that. con-
federacy into which the rash steps taken at Augsburg had forced
them. Having now discovered their own strength, they de-
spifed the decisions of the Imperial chamber; and being secure
of foreign protection, were ready to et the head of the Empire
at defiance. At the fame time his pace with France was pre-
carious, the friendship of an irresolute and interested pontiff was
not to be relied on; and Solyman, in order to repair the infamy
and loss which his arms had sustained in the former campaign,. was
preparing to enter Austria with more numerous forces. On all
there accounts, especially the last, a speedy accommodation with
the malecontent princes, was necessary not only for the accom-
plifhment of his future schemes, but for afcertairing his present
safety. Negociations were, accordingly, carried on by his

2 Hcrbert, 152, 15..

direcion
336

337

direcion with the Eledtor of Saxony and his associates; after
many delays occasioned by their jealousy of the Emperor, and
of each other, after innumerable difficulties arising from the in-
flexible nature of religious tenets, which cannot admit of being
altered, modified, or relinquished in the fame manner as points
of political interest, terms of pacification were agreed upon at
Nuremberg, and ratified solemnly in the Diet at Ratisbon. In
this treaty, it was stipulated, That universal peace be establish-
ed in Germany, until the meeting of a general council, the con-
vocation of which within fix months the Emperor hall endeavour
to procure; That no person be molested on account of religion;
That a flop be put to all procefles begun by the Imperial cham-
ber against Protestants, and the sentences already passed to their
detriment be declared void. On their part, the Protestants en-
gaged to aflift the Emperor with all their forces in refilling the
invasion of the Turksa. Thus by their firmness in adhering to
their principles, by the uanimity with which they urged all their
claims, and by their dexterity in availing themselves of the Em-
peror's situation, the Protestants obtained terms which amounted
almost to a toleration of their religion ; all the conceflions were
made by Charles, none by them; even the favourite point of their
approving his brother's eletion was not mentioned ; and the Pro-
teftants of Germany, who had hitherto been viewed only as a re-
ligious fed, came henceforth to be confidered as a political body
of no small consequence b.

THE intelligence which Charles received of Solyman's having
entered Hungary at the head of three hundred thousand men

BOOK V.

153a.

Grants themn
favourable
terms.
July 2.
Augull j.

Campaign in
Hu ngsry.

a Du Mont Corps Diplomatique, ton. iv. part ii. 87, 89.
b Sleid. 149, &c. Seck. ii. 9.
VOL I.

Xx

cut

cut flort the deliberations of the Diet at Ratitbon; the contin-
gent both of troops and money which each prince was to furnifl
towards the defence of the Empire having been already fettled.
The Protestants, as a teflimony of their gratitude to the
Emperor, exerted themselves with extraordinary zeal, and
brought into the field forces that exceeded in number the quota
imposed on them; and the Catholics imitating their example,
one of the greatest and best appointed armies that had ever been
levied in Germany, assembled near Vienna. Being joined by
a body of Spanih and Italian veterans under the marquis del
Guafto; by some heavy armed cavalry from the Low-Countries;
and by the troops which Ferdinand had raised in Bohemia,
Austria, and his other territories, it amounted in all to ninety
thousand disciplined foot, and thirty thousand horse, besides a
prodigious swarm of irregulars. Of this vast army, worthy
the first prince in Christendom, the Emperor took the command
in person; and mankind waited in suspense the issue of a deci-
five battle between the two greatest monarchs in the world.
But each of them dreading the other's power and good fortune,
they both conducted their operations with filch exceflive caution,
that a campaign, for which such immense preparations had
been made, ended without any memorable event. Solyman
finding it impoflible to gain ground upon an enemy always
attentive, and on his guard, marched back to Conltantinople
towards the end of autumnc. It is remarkable that in such a
martial age, when every gentleman was a soldier, and every
prince a general, this was the first time that Charles, who had
already carried on such extensive wars, and gained o many
victories, appeared at the head of his troops. In this first essay

c Jovii Hift.lib. 30. p. oo, &c. Barrc I liit. (Ie I'Empirc, i. 8. 347.

of
BOOK V

'532.

Sept?nll:,r
and Ofctber.
338

of his arms, to have opposed such a leader as Solyman, was no
small honour; to have obliged him to retreat merited very confi-
derable praise.

ABOUT the beginning of this campaign, the Eleor of Saxony

died, and was succeeded by his son John Frederick. The Refor-
mation rather gained than loft by that event; the new Elector,
no less attached than his predeccflors to the opinions of Luther,
occupied the station which thay had held at the head of the Protef-
tant party, and defended, with the boldness and zeal of youth,
that cause which they had foitered and reared with the cautidp of
old age.

IMMEDIATELY after the retreat of the Turks, Charles, im-

patient to revisit Spain, set out, on his way thither, for Italy.
As he was extremely desirous of an interview with the Pope, they
met a second time at Bologna, with the fame external demin)frati-
ons of refped and friendfip, but with little of that confidence
which had subsisted between them during their late negociations
there. Clement was much diflatisfied with the Emperor's proceed-
ings at Augiburg; his conceflions with regard to the fpccdy convo-
cation of ai council; having more than cancelled all the merit of the
revere decree against the doctrines of the Reformers. The tole-
ration granted to the Protestants at Ratisbon, and the more expli-
cit promise concerning a council with which it was accompanied,
had irritated, him still farther. Charles, however, partly from
conviction that the meeting of a council would be attended with
'alutary effects, and partly from his desire to please the Germans,
having olicited him by his ambafiaddrs to call that assembly with-
out delay, and now urging the fame thing in person, Clement was

X x z greatly

BCOK V.

1532.

Aug. 6.

'rie Empe-
ror's inter-
view withl the
Pope in Ili
way to Spain.

Negociationi.
concerniing a
general coun-
cil.
/

339

BOOK V. greatly embarrafled what reply he should make to a rcqueft, which

^^^^ it was indecent to refuse, and dangerous to grant. He endeavoured
1532.

at firif to divert Clarles from the meafire, but finding him inflexi-
ble, he had recourse to artifices which lie knew would delay, if not
entirely defeat the calling of that assembly. Under the plausible
pretext of its being previously necessary to fettle, with all parties
concerned, the place of the council's meeting; the manner of
its proceedings; the right of the persons who hould be admit-
ted to vote; and the authority of their decisions; he dispatched a
nuncio, accompanied by an ambassador from the Emperor, to
the Elector of Saxony as head of: tie Protestants. With regard
to each of these articles, inextricable difficulties and contests
arose. The Ptoteftants demanded a council to be held in Ger-
many; the Pope insisted that it should meet in Italy; they
contended that all points in dispute flould be determined by the
words of holy scripture alone i he confidered the decrees of the
church, and the opinions of' fathes and doctors as of equal
authority; they required a free council in which the divines
commissioned by different churches lhould be allowed a voice';
he aimed at modelling the council in fch a manner as would
render it entirely dependant on his pleafuie: Above' all, the
Protestants thought it unreasonable that they hould bind them-
selves to submit to the decrees of a council, before they knew
on what principles these decrees were to be founded, by what
persons they were to be pronounced, and what forms of pro-
ceeding they would observe. The Pope maintained' it to be alto-
gether unnecessary to call a council, if those who demanded it
did not previously declare their resolution to acquiesce in its
decrees. In order to adjust such a variety of points, many ex-
pedients were proposed, and the negotiations. spun out to such

a length,
34°

n length, as effectually anuwered Clement's purpose of putting off
the meeting of a council, without drawing on himself the whole
infamy of obftruding a measure which all Europe deemed lo es-
fential to the good of the church d.

TOOGTHER with this negociation about calling a council, the

Emperor carried on another which he had still more at heart, for
fecuri:g the peace eflabliflhed in Italy. As Francis had renounced
his pretenfiors in that country with great reluctance, Charles
made no doubt but that he would lay hold on the first pretext
afforded him, or embrace the first opportunity which presented
itself of recovering what he had loft. It became necessary, on
this account, to take measures for assembling an army able to op-
pose him. As his treafiry, drained by a long war, could not
supply the fums requisite for keeping fich a body constantly on
foot, lie attempted to throw that burden on his allies, and to
provide for the safety of his own dominions at their expence, by
proposing that the Italian ates should enter into a league of de-
fence against against all invaders; that, on the first appearance of
danger, an army should be raised and maintained at the common
charge; and that Antonio de Leyva Ihould be appointed the ge-
neraliimo. Nor was the proposal unacceptable to Clemen;, thlo'
for a reason very different from that which induced the Emperor
to make it. He hoped, by this expedient, to deliver Italy from
the German and Spanish veterans which had so long filled all the
powers in that country with terror, and still kept them in fubjedion
to the Imperial yoke. A league was accordingly concluded ; all the
Italian states, the Venetians excepted, acceded to it the film
which each of the contracting parties should furnilh towards main-

1 F. PI'.ul, His', 6 . sc(l;(nd. iii. 73.

tainig

BOOK V.

1532.

and for prc-
serving the
tranquillity of
Italy.

'533.
Feb. 24.

34'

BOOK V.

1533.

April zz.

)efigns and
neocialions
o( tle French
King against
the Emperor.

taining the army was fixed; the Emperor agreed to withdraw the
troops which gave o much umbrage .to his allies, ad which lihe
was unable any longer to fipport. Having disbanded part of
them, and removed the reft to Sicily ad Spain, he embarked on
board Doria's gallies, and arrived at Barcelona e.

NOTWITHSTANDING all his precautions for securing the

peace of Germany, and maintaining that system which he had
established in Italy, the Emperor became every day more and
more apprehensive that both would be oon disturbed by the
intrigues or arms of the French King. His apprehensions were
well founded, as nothing but the desperate situation of his as-
fairs could have brought Francis to give his content to a treaty
so dishonourable and disadvantageous as that of Cambray: He
at the very time of ratifying it, had formeda resolution to observe
it no longer than necefity compelled him, and took a solemn
protest, though with the most profound secrecy, against several
articles in the treaty, particularly that whereby he renounced all
pretensions to the dutchy of Milan, as unjust, injurious to his
heirs, and invalid. One of the crown lawyers, by his command,
entered a protest to the fame purpose, and with the like secrecy,
when the ratification of the treaty was registered in the parlia-
ment of Paris f; and Francis seems to have thought that, by
employing an artifice unworthy of a King, deftrudive of pub-
lic faith, and of the mutual confidence on which all transactions
between nations are founded, he was released from any obliga-
tion to perform the most solemn promises, or to adhere to the
most sacred engagements. From the moment he concluded the

e Guic. 1. xx. 551. Fcrreras, ix. 149.
f Du Mont' Corps Diplom. tom. iv. part 2. p. 52.

peace
342

piace of Cambray, he wilfhcd and watched for an opportunity
of violating it with safety. He endeavoured for that reason to
flrengthen his alliance with the King of England, whose fricndfliip
he cultivated with the greatcit afliduity. He put the military force
of his own kingdom on a better and more refpedable footing than
ever. IHe artfully fomented the jealousy and discontent of the
German princes.

BuT above all, Francis laboured to break the itrict confe-

deracy which subsisted between Chailes and Clement ; and
he had soon the fatisfacion to observe appearances of ditguft
and alienation arising in the mind of that fifpicions and inte-
refted Pontiff, wlhich gave him hopes that their union would not
be lasing. As the Emperor's decision in favour of the duke of
Ferrara lad greatly irritated the Pope, Francis aggravated the
injustice of that proceeding, and flattered him that the Papal fee
would find in him a more impartial and no less powerful pro-
teator. As the importunity with which Charles demanded a
council was extremely offensive to the Pope, Francis artfully
created obstacles to prevent it, and attempted to divert tli Ger-
man princes, his allies, from insisting so obflinately on that
point . As the Emperor had gained such an acendant over
Clement by contributing to aggrandize his family, Francis
endeavoured to allure him by the fame irresistible bait, propo-
sing a marriage between his second son Henry duke of Orleans,
and Catharine, the daughter of the Pope's cousin Laurence di
Medici. On the firfl overtures of this match, the Emperor
could not persuade himfclf that Francis really intended to debase
the royal blood of France by an alliance with Catharine, wliofe

Book V.

1533.

parlicul.lly
wiitl te Pope.

d
e lMlay 1, 141, &c. Seek. ii. 48. F. Paul, 63,

anccitors.

3.4-3

344
BOOK V.

'533.

Interview be-
tween the
Pope and
Francis.
OAober.

ancestors had been Co lately pivate citizens and merchants ia
Florence, and believed that he meant only to flatter or amuse
the ambitious Pontiff He thought it ncceflary, however, to
efface the impreflion which such a dazzling offer might have
made, by promising to break off the marriage which had been
agreed on between his own niece the King of Denmark's daugh-
ter, and the Duke of Milan, and to substitute Catherine in her
place. But the French ambaifadors producing unexpecedly full
powers to conclude the marrriage treaty with the duke of Orleans,
this expedient had no effect. Clement was so highly pleated
with an honour which added such lustre and dignity to the
house of Medici, that he offered to grant' Catharine the investiture
of considerable territories in Italy by way of portion ; he seemed
ready to support Francis in prosecuting his ancient claims in
that country, and consented to a personal interview with that
Monarch h.

CHARLES was at the utmoff pains to prevent a meeting, in

which nothing was likely to pass but what would be of detri-
ment to him ; nor could he bear, after he had twice condescended
to visit the Pope in his own territories, that Clement hould beflow
such a mark of diflintion on his rival, as to venture on a voy-
age by sea, at an unfavourable season, in order to pay court to
Francis in the French dominions. But the Pope's eagerness to
accomplish the match overcame all scruples of pride, or fear, or
jealousy, which muff have influenced him on any other occasion.
The interview, notwithstanding several artifices of the Emperor
to prevent it, took place at Marseilles with extraordinary pomp,
and dcmonftrations of confidence on both fides; and the mar-

h Guic. 1. xxi 551, 553. Bllay, 138.

riage,
' 1.

345

riage, which the ambition and abilities of Catharine icndered
in the sequel as fatal to France, as it was then thought dilho-
nourable, was consummated. But whatever fclemes may have
been secretly concerted by the Pope and Francis ill favour of the
duke of Orleans, to whom his father proposed to make over all
his rights in Italy, so careful were they to avoid giving any cause
of offence to the Emperor, that no treaty was concluded between
them h; and even in the marriage-articles, Catharine renounced
all claims ad pretensions in Italy, except to the dutchy of
Urbino .

BuT at the very time when he was carrying on there negocia-

tions, and forming this connection with Francis, which gave so
great umbrage to the Emperor, such was the artifice and duplicity
of Clement's character, that he fiffered the latter to direct all his
proceedings with regard to the King of England,. and was no
less attentive to gratify him in that particular, than if the
most cordial union had still subsisted between them. Henry's
suit for a divorce had now continued near fix years during all
which period the Pope negociated, promised, retraced, and con-
cluded nothing. After bearing repeated delays and disappoint-
ments, longer than could have been expected from a prince of
such a cholerick and impetuous temper, his patience was at last
so much exhausted, that he applied to another tribunal for that de-
cree which he had folicited'in vain at Rome. Cranmer, archbilhop
of Canterbury, by a sentence founded on the authority of Univer-
fities, Dotors, and Rabbiesi who had been consulted with refpec
to the point, annulled the King's marriage with Catharine her
daughter was declared illegitimate: and Anne IBoleyn acknow-

h Guic. 1. 20. 55 5. Du Mont Corps Diplom: iv. p; lo'.

BooK V.

'534.

Pope's con-
dutt with re-
gar to the
King of Eng-
land'sdivorce.
VOL. II.

Yy

ledged

BOOK V. ledged as Queen of England. At the fame time Henry began to

neglec and to threaten the Pope whom e had hitherto courted,
1534.

and to make innovations in the church, of which he had formerly
been such a zealous defender. Clement, who had already seen so
many provinces and kingdoms revolt from the Holy See, became
apprehensive at last that England would imitate their example,
and partly from his solicitude to prevent that fatal blow, partly
in compliance with the French King's solicitations, determined to
give Henry such fatisfaaion as might still retain him within
the bosom of the church. But the violence of the Cardinals,
devoted to the Emperor, did not allow the Pope leisure for exe-
cuting this prudent resolution, and hurried him, with a precipita-
1aca34. tion fatal to the Roman See, to issue a bull rescinding Cranmer's

sentence, confirming Henry's marriage with Catharine, and de-
claring him excommunicated, if, within a time specified, he did
not abandon the wife he had taken, and return to her whom he
had deserted. Enraged at this unexpected decree, Henry kept no

Papal autho- longer any measures with the court of Rome; his fubjets second-
in England. ed his resentment and indignation; an a of Parliament was

passed, abolishing the Papal power and jurifdition in England;
by another, the King was declared supreme head of tne church,
and all the authority of which the Popes were deprived was vested
in him. That vast fabrick of ecclesiastical dominion which
had been raised with such art, and whose foundations seemed
so deep, being no longer upported by the veneration of the
people, was overturned in a moment. Henry himself, with the
caprice peculiar to his characer, continued to defend the doCtrines
of the Romilh church as fiercely as he attacked its jurifdition.
He alternately persecuted the Protestants for rejecting the for-
mer, and the Catholicks for acknowledging the latter. But his

fubjets
346

fubjeds being once permitted to enter into new paths, did not chufe
to flop flhort at the precise point prescribed by him. Having been
encouraged by his example to break some of their fetters, they
were o impatient to shake off all that remained k, that in the fol-
lowing reign, with the general applause of the nation, a total e-
paration was made from the church of Rome in articles of doctrine,
as well as in matters ofdifcipline and jurifdiAion.

A SHORr delay might have saved the See of Rome from all the

unhappy consequences of Clement's rafhnels. Soon after his fen-
tence against Henry, he fell into a languifling distemper, which gra-
dually wafting his constitution, put an end to his Pontificate, the
most unfortunate, both during its continuance, and by its effects,
that the church had known for many ages. The very day on which
the Cardinals entered the conclave, they raised to the Papal throne
Alexander Farnese, dean of the sacred college, and the eldest
member of that body, who assumed the name of Paul III. The
account of his promotion was received with extraordinary accla-
mations of joy by the people of Rome, highly pleated, after an
interval of more than an hundred years, to fee the crown of St.
Peter placed on the head of a Roman citizen. Persons more capable
ofjudging, formed a favourable presage of his administration, from
the experiencewhich he had acquired under four Pontificates, as well
as the charater of prudence and moderation which he had uni.-
formly maintained in a station of great eminence, and during an ac-
tive and difficult juncture that required both talents and address 1.

BOOK V.

'534.

Death ofCle-
ment VII.

Sept. 25.

Eleilon of
Paul III.
o0. n3.

EUROPE, it is probable, owed the continuance of its peace to
the death of Clement for althougll no traces remain in history

k Herbert. Burn. Hist. of Reform.

1 Guic. I. 2o. 556. F. Paul. 64.

347
Yya

. of

of any league concluded between him and Francis, it is scarce to be
doubted but that he would have seconded the operations of the
French arms in Italy, that he might have gratified his ambition by
feeing one of his family possessed of the supreme power in Florence,
and another in Milan. But upon the election of Paul III. who had
hitherto adhered uniformly to the Imperial interest, Francis found
it neceflary to suspend his operations for rome time, and to put off
the commencement of hofilities against the Emperor, on which he
was fully determined.

WHILE Francis waited for an oppportunity to renew a war

which had hitherto proved so fatal to himself and his subje&s,
a tranfadion of a very singular natire was carried on in Ger-
many. Among many beneficial and salutary effets of which
the Reformation was the immediate cause, it was attended, at
must be the cafe, in all ations and events wherein men are con-
cerned, with rome consequences of an opposite nature. When
the human mind is rouzed by grand objects, and agitated by
strong paflions, its operations acquire such force, that they are
apt to become irregular and extravagant. Upon any great
revolution in religion, such irregularities abound mosts 'at that
particular period, when men laving trown off the authority of
their ancient principles, do not yet fully comprehend the nature,
or feel the obligation of those new ones which theyhave em-
braced. The: mind, in that situation,' pushing forward with the
bdldnefs which prompted it to rejec established opinions, and
not guided by a clear knowledge of the system substituted in their
place, disdains all restraint, and runs into wild notions, that
often lead to scandalous or immoral condu&t. Thus, in the first
ages of the Christian church, many of the new converts, having

renounced
BOOK V.

1534.

Jnfurrection
of the Ana-
baptists in
Germany.
348

renounced their ancient Creeds, and being but imperpedly'ac-
quainted with the doctrines and precepts of Christianity broached
the moil extravagant opinions equally fulbverfive of; piety and vir-
tue; all which errors dilappeared or were exploded when the
knowledge of religion increased, and came to be more generally
diffused. In like manner, soon after. Luther's appearance, the
rashness or ignorance of some (if his disciples led themn to publish
abfulrd and pernicious tenets, which being propored to mie't ex-
tremely illiterate, but fond of: nbvelty, and at a time when their
minds were turned wliolly towards religious speculations, gained
too e'y credit and authority among them. i'To these causes must
be imputed the extravaganeies 'of Mluncer, in the year one tihot-
sand 'five hundred and twenty-five, as well as the rapid progres'
which they made among the peasants; .but though the infurrefion
excited by that Fanatic was soon' suppressed,' several of his followers
lurked in different places, and Cndeavoured:ptivately to ropagate
his opinions. · i

IN those provinces of Upper Germany, which had already

been fo'.cruelly wafted by theit enthusiastic rage, tle magift'ratcs
wvatched:their motions with fuci severe attentioni'tllhat rany of
them found it neceflarv to retire into other countries, rome werc
puniflied, others driven into exile, and their errors were entirely
rooted out. But in the Netherlands and Weftphalian, where the
per;liciohs tendency. of their opinions'was nore tnknown, and
guaded: ag'ainst with lers care, they got adrnittantce iinto revra
towns, and spread the infeEtion of their principles. Thle nmofl
remarkable of their religious tenet related to the Sacrament of
3aptifil, w]icl, as they chntddd? dilgl to be adliniftercd only
!6 pefons growvn 'p to yearsof underhtanding, aiand fliould be per-

formed

BOOK V.

1534.

Origin and
tenets ofthat

i'
,c·C1.

. ! .
34.9

BOOK V, formed not by sprinkling them with water, but by dipping them
w'"_ in it: For this reason they condemned the baptism of infants, and

rebaptizing all whom they admitted into their society, the fed
came to be diftinguilhed by the name of Anabaptists. To this
peculiar notion concerning baptism, which has the appearance
of being founded on the pracice of the church in the apostolic
age, and contains nothing inconsistent with the peace and order
of human society, they added other principles of a most enthu-
fiaftic, as well as dangerous nature. They maintained that,
among Christians who had the precepts of the gospel to diret,
and the spirit of God to guide them, the office of magistracy
was not only unnecefTary, but an unlawful encroachment on
their spiritual liberty; that the diftindions occasioned by birth,
or rank, or wealth, being contrary to the spirit of the gospel,
which confiders all men as equal, should be entirely abolished;
that all Christians, throwing their pofFeflions into one common
stock, Ihould live together in that ltate of equality which becomes
members of the fame family; that as neither the laws of nature,
nor the precepts of the New Testament had placed any restraints
upon men with regard to the number of wives which they might
marry, they should use that liberty which God himself had granted
to the patriarchs.
Settle in SUCH opinions, propagated and maintained with enthusiastic

Muner. zeal and boldness, were not long in producing the violent effects

natural to them. Two Anabaptist prophets, John Matthias, a
baker of Haerlem, and John Bocold, or Beilkels, a journeyman
taylor of Leyden, possessed with the rage of making proselytes,
fixed their residence at Munster, an Imperial city in Westphalia,
of the first rank under the sovereignty of its bishop, but

governed
33o

35x

governed by its own senate and consuls. As neither of there
Fanaticks wanted the talents necessary for such an undertaking,
great resolution, the appearance of fantity, bold pretensions to
inspiration, and a confident and plausible manner of discoursing,
they oon gained many converts. Among these were Rothman,
who had firt preached the Protestant docrine in Munster,
and Cnipperdoling, a citizen of good birth,. and considerable
emipence. Emboldened by the countenance of such disciples,
they openly taught their opinions; and not satisfied with that
liberty, they made several attempts, though without success, to
seize the town, in order to get their tenets eftablifled by publick
authority. At lait, having secretly called in their associates from
the neighbouring country, they suddenly took poffelion of the
arsenal and fenate-houfe in the night-time, and running through
the streets with drawn swords, and horrible 'howlings, cried out
alternately, "Repent, and be baptized," and " Depart ye ungodly."
'The senators, the canons, the nobility, together with the more
fober citizens, whether Papists or Protestants, terrified at their
threats and outcries, fled in confusion, and left the city under the
dominion of a frantic multitude, consisting chiefly of rangers.
Nothing now remaining to overawe or controul them, they set
about modelling the government according to tlhir own wild
ideas; and though at first they flowed so much reverence for the
ancient constitution, as to elect feiators of their own fee, and to
appoint Cnipperdoling nd. another pofelyte cnfuls, this. was
nothing more than form ; for all their proceedings were dreted
by Matthias, who in, the stile, and with the authority of a pro-
phet, uttered his commands, which it was instant death to dif-
obey. Having begun with encouraging the multitude to pillage
the churches, and deface their ornaments; lie enjoined them

to

BOOK V.

1534.

Become
mailers of
that city.

February.

Elablii a
new form of
govcrnment.

BOOK V. to 'defroy all boks except the Bible, as ufclefs or impious; he

appointed the estates of such as fled to be confiscated, and fold
'534.

to the inhabitants of the adjacent country; he ordered every
man to bring forth his gold, silver, and precious effects, and
to lay them at his feet; the wealth amassed. by these means, he
deibofitd in'a publick treasury,' and named deacons to dispense
it for the common' use of all. The members of his common-
wealth being thus brought to a petfeCt equality, he commanded
all of them to eat at tables prepared in public, and even prescribed
the, dishes which were to be served up each day. Having
finifled his plan 'of Reformation, his next care was to provide
for the defence of the city; and he took measures for that pur-
pose with a prudence which favoured nothing of fanaticism. He
collected vast magazines of every kind; he repaired and extended
the fortifications, obliging every person without diftindion to work
in hi's turn; he formed such as were capable of bearing arms into
regular bodies, and endeavoured to'add .the vigour of discipline
to the impetuosity of enthusiasm. He ent emissaries to the
Ahabaptifts in the LoW-Countries, inviting them to assemble at
Munster which ihe dignified with 'the name of Mount-Sion,
that fror,.thence, they might set out to reduce .all the nations
of the earth tlnder their dominion. He himself was unwearied
in attending to every thing necealary for the security or increase
of the, fe , animating'his difeiples by his own example to' refute
no labor, asv.well as to repine at no hardship; and their enthufi-
aftic pailions being kept frOnm lhbfiding by a perpetual fucceflion
of exhortations, revelations and pophecies, they seemed ready
to undertake or to susser any thing in maintenance of their
opinions. '
i

MEANWHILE
352

MEANWHILE, the bishop of Munftcr having aflembled a

considerable army, advanced to besiege the town. On his ap-
proach, Matthias rallied out at the head of some chosen troops,
attacked one quarter of his camp, forced it, and after great
slaughter, returned to the city loaded with glory and ipoil. In-
toxicated with this success, he appeared next day brandifliing a
spear and declared, that in imitation of Gideon, lie would go
fortlh ith a handful of men and smite the host of the un:godly.
Thirty persons, whom he named, followed him without hcfi-
tation in this wild enterprize, and rushing on the enemy with a
frantic courage were cut off to a man. The death of their prophet
occasioned at first great consternation among his disciples, but Boc-
cold, by the fame gifts and pretensions which had gained Matthias
credit, oon revived their spirits and hopes to such a degree, that he
succeeded him in the fame absolute direction of all their affairs.
As he did not possess that enterprizing courage which diftinguihed
his predeceflor, he satisfied himself with carrying on a defensive
war, nd without attempting to annoy the enemy by allies,
he waited for the succours he expected from the Low-Countries,
the arrival of which was often foretold and promised by their
prophets. But though less daring in ation than Matthias, he
was a wilder enthusiast, and of more unbounded ambition.
Soon after the death of his predecessor, having by obscure vifiols
and prophecies, prepared the multitude for some extraordinary
event, he stripped himself naked, and marching through the
streets, proclaimed with a loud voice, "That the kingdom of
Sion was at hand; that whatever was highest on earth should be
brought low, and whatever was lowest should be exalted." In
order to fulfil this, he commanded the churches, as the most
lofty buildings in the city, to be levelled with the ground; he

VoL. II. Z z degraded

BOOK V.

l534.

The iop o
Munflel takes
arms gain(t
them.

May.

John of Ley-
den acquires
great autho-
rity nasong
the Anabap-
tits.

353

1o 6k V.

'534.

Eleted King.
June 24.

TH E R'E IGN OF TI-IE

degraded the enators chosen by Matthias, and depriving Cnip-
perdoling of the confulfhiip, the lighleft office in the common-
wealth, he appointed him to execute the lowest and most in-
famous, that of common llangman, to which strange tranfi-
tion the other agreed, not only without murmurings but with the
utmoift joy and such was the despotism and rigour of Boccold's
administration, that he was called almost every day to perform
'some duty or other of his wretched function. In place of the
deposed 'senators, he named twelve judges, according to ihe num-
ber 'oF tribes in Tfrael, to iefilAe in al aTffairs; retaining to him-
'seif the 'fame authority which Moses anciently pofeffed as legifla-
tor of that people.

NOT fatigfied, however, with power or titles which were not

fupr'emne, a prophet, whom he had gained and tutored, having
'called the multitude togetlier, declared it to be the will of God,
that John Boccold should be King of Sion, and fit on the throne
'of IDavid. John kneeling down, 'accepted of the heavenly call,
'which e foiemny protested had been revealed likewise to hirh-
seIf, and was immediately acknowledged as monarch by the de-
'iud'ed multitude. From that moment he assumed !all the state
and pomp of royalty. He wore a crown of gold, and thecrichdff
and most sumptuous garments. A Bible was carried on his
one hand, a naked sword on the other. A Igteat body ds guards
accompanied him when he appeared i pdblick. He coindd
money stamped with his own image, and appointed the gredt
officers of his household and kingdom, amodg Whom Cnipperdollrn
was nominated governor of the city, as a reWard for his sorner
fubmifflon.

HAVING

HAVING now attailned the heighth of power, Boccold began BooK. V.

to discover papions, which ihe had hitherto restrained or jn- .
dulged only in secret. As the exceres of citllufiafm have been His licnttousx
observed in every age to lead to sensual gratifications, the fame condut.
conftitgtion that is susceptible of the former, being remarkably
prone to the latter le inftru&ed the prophets and tech!ers to
harranfe .the people for fevgral days concerning tse lawf.ullnes,
and even neceflity of taking more .wives than one, which they
alerted to be one of the privileges grapted by Gqd to the faints.
When their ear were once accustomed o this licentious 4oCrine,
and their paflions inflamed with thie profpet of fuchl unbounded
indulgence, he himself set them an example of using wlat he
called their Chrifian liberty, by marrying at once three wiv es,
amo6n which the widow of Matthias, a woman of singular
beauty, was one. As lie was allured by beauty, or the love
of variety, he gradually added to the number of his wives until
they anmounted to fourteen, though the widow of Matthias was
tle only one dignified with the title of Queen, or who flared
with him the splendor and ornaments of royalty. After thg
example of their prophet, the multitude gave themselves up
to the most licentious and uncontrouled gratification of their
desires. No man remained satisfied with a single wife. Not
to use their Christian liberty was deemed a crime. Persons were
appointed to search the houses for young women grown up to
maturity, whom they instantly compelled to marry. Together
with polygamy, freedom of divorce, its inseparable attendant,
was introduced, and became a new furce .of corruption. Every
excess was .committed of which the pa(lions of men are capable,
when eftrailed ,neitler by the authority of laws nr the sense of

Z z decency;

355

Book V. decency m; and by a monstrous and almost incredible conjunction

voluptuoufnefs was engrafted on religion, and dilfblute riot accom-
panied the aufterities of fanatical devotion.

Aconfederacy MEANWHILE, the German Princes were highly offended at the
against the insult offered to their dignity by Boccold's presumptuous usurp-
Anabaptifls.

nabapt ation of royal honours; and the profligate manners of his followers,

which were a reproach to the Christian name, filled men of all
professions with horror. Luther, who had testified against this
fanatical spirit on its first appearance, now deeply lamented its
progress, and exposing the delusion with great strength of argu-
ment, as well as acrimony of stile, called loudly on all the states
of Germany to put a flop to a phrenzy no less pernicious to society,
than fatal to religion. The Emperor, occupied with other cares
and projects, had no leisure to attend to such a distant objet. But
the Princes of the Empire, assembled by the King of the Romans,
voted a supply of men and money to the bishop of Munster, who
being unable to keep a sufficient army on foot, had converted the

Beiege the siege of the town into a blockade. The forces raised in confe-
town. quence of this resolution, were put under the command of an

m Prophete & concionatorum autoritate juxta et exemplo, tota urbe ad

rapiendas pulcherrimas quafque faemina'i difcurfum eft. Nec intra paucos dies,
in tanta hominum turba, fere ulla reperta ell fpra annum decimum quar-
tum, quae ftuprum paffa non fuerit. Lamb. Hortcnf. p. 303. Vulg6 viris
quinas esTe uxores, pluribut senas, nonnullis feptcnas & oonas. Puellas
supra duodecimurn :ttntis annumnflatimn amare. Id. 305. Nemo- una con-
LCi tiis uit. nrtlti' c tiill il cxti ('n'aln: s .- . 'ii. h ilsl1 :lllltillS .,Olllll l l i · I'

. - T;,-,,i, 1,1 -'~'~__"l';Ic~hs..i.'- tat fit '

.
--

356

officer of experience, who approaching the town towards the end
of fping in the year one thousand five hundred and thirty-five,
pressed it more closely than formerly, but found the fortifications
so strong, and o diligently guarded, that he durst not attempt
an aflault. It was now above fifteen months since the Anabap-
tifts had established their dominion in Munfer ; they had during
that time undergone prodigious fatigue in working on the forti-
fications, and performing military duty. Notwithstanding the
prudent attention of their King to provide for their subsistence,
and his frugal and regular oeconomy in their publick meals, they
began to feel the approach of famine. Several small bodies of
their brethren, who were advancing to their assistance from the
Low-Countries, had been intercepted, and cut to pieces; and
while all Germany was ready to combine against them, they had
no profped of succour. But such was the ascendant which Boc.
cold had acquired over the multitude, and so powerful the fafcina-
tion of cnthufiafm, that their hopes were as sanguine as ever, and
they hearkened with implicit credulity to the visions and predic-
tions of their prophets, which aflured them, that the Almighty
would speedily interpose, in order to deliver the city. The faith,
however, of some few, shaken by the violence and length of
their sufferings, began to fail ; but being fufpeded of an inclina-
lion to firrender to the enemy, they were punilhed with imme-
diate death, as guilty of impiety in distrusting the power of God:
One of the King's wives, having uttered certain words that
inmplied some :doubt concerning his divine milion. he instantly
e.illl.dl the wvholle ntuinltcr tjtichle, rn llc )lo
< minal4 clillg the lhin-

BooK V.

1535.

May. Diftrss nd
tanaticisin of
the biegcd.

357

1 v.
o6k V.

'534.

Eleted King.
June 24.

degraded the enators chosen by Matthias, and depriving Cnip-
perdoling of the consulship, the highieft offici in the common-
wealth, he appointed him to execute the lowest and most in-
famous, that of common angman, to whici strange tranfi-
tion the other agreed, not only without murmurings but witli the
utmost joy; and such was the despotism and rigour of Boccold's
administration, that he was called almost every day to perform
'tome duty or other of his wretched function. In place of the
deposed 'senators, he named twelve judges, according to the num-
ber of tribes in frael, to pirefiee in all affairs; retaining to him-
'fef the fame authority which Moses anciently polffled as legifa-
tor of that people.

sOT satisfied, however, with power or titles which were not

Tupireme, a prophet, whom he had gained and tutored, having
called the multitude together, declared it to be the will of God,
'that John Boccold iould be King of Sion, and fit on the throne
'of David. Jolm kneelihg down, accepted of the heavenly call,
w'hich he 'olemnly proteited had been revealed likewise to hirh-
eflf, and was immediately acknowledged as monarch by the de-
iuded multitude. From that moment he aflumed all the state
and pomp of royalty. He wore a crown of gold, and the-richdft
and most sumptuous garments. A Bible was carried on his
one hand, a naked sword on the other. A gfeat :body ds guards
accompanied him when he appeared i: pdblick. He coined
money amped with his own image, and appointed the great
officers of his household and kingdom, among Whom nipperdoliH
was nominated 'governor of the city, as a reWard for his sorner
fubmiflion.

HAVING
354'

355

SHAVIN now attailed the heighth of power, Boccold began BOOK. Vr,

to discover paflions, which lie had hitherto restrained or in- .
dulged only in secret. As the excesses of entliufiafm have been His licentious
observed in every age to lead to sensual gratifications, the fame condu.
conftitytion that is ufceptible of the former, being remarkably
prone to the latter, !e inftruaed the prophets and teachers to
harrangue .the people for fev.ral days concerning the lawfulnets,
and even necesity of taking more .wives than one, which they
aerted,to be one of the pri.vileges grapted by God to the faints.
When their earp were once accuflomed so .this licentious orine,
and their passions inflamed with the profpet of fruch unbounded
indulgence? he himrfelf set them an example of using what he
called their Chriflian liberty, by marrying at once three wives,
among which the widow of Matthias, a woman of singular
beauty, was one. As he was allured by beauty, or the love
of variety, he gradually added to the number of his wives until
they an1ounted to fourteen, though the widow of Matthias was
the only one dignified with the title of Qeen, or who shared
with him the splendor and ornaments of royalty. After the
example of their prophet, the multitude gave themselves up
to the most licentious and uncontrouled gratification of their
desires. No man remained satisfied with a ingle wife. Not
to ufe-their Christian liberty was deemed a crime. Persons were
appointed to search the houses for young women grown up to
maturity, whom they inflantly compelled to marry. Together
with polygamy, freedom of divorce, its inseparable attendant,
was introduced, and became a new fqurce.of corruption. Every
excef.ws ,.comsmitted of which the paflons of men are capable,

Iwhen xetgraild ,neitlher by the authority of laws nr the fen e f

Z z a decency;

Book V. decency m; and by a monstrous and almoff incredible conjunction

534' voluptuoufnefs was engrafted on religion, and dissolute riot accom-
1534.

panied the aufterities of fanatical devotion.

Anederac MEANWHILE, the German Princes were highly offended at the

againf the insult offered to their dignity by Boccold's presumptuous usurp-
Anabaptilis.

naapis. ation of royal honours; and the profligate manners of his followers,

which were a reproach to the Christian name, filled men of all
professions with horror. Luther, who had testified against this
fanatical spirit on its first appearance, now deeply lamented its
progress, and exposing the delusion with great firength of argu-
ment, as well as acrimony of stile, called loudly on all the states
of Germany to put a stop to a phrenzy no less pernicious to society,
than fatal to religion. The Emperor, occupied with other cares
and projets, had no leisure to attend to such a distant object. But
the Princes of the Empire, afembled by the King of the Romans,
voted a supply of men and money to the bishop of Munfer, who
being unable to keep a sufficient army on foot, had converted the

Besiege the siege of the town into a blockade. The forces raised in confe-
town. quence of this resolution, were put under the command of an

m Prophete & concionatorum autoritate juxta et exemplo, tota urbe ad

rapiendas pulcherrimas quafque faeminas difcurfum eft. Nec intra paucos dies,
in tanta hominum turba, fere ulla reperta eft supra annum decimum quar-
turn, que fuprum paffa non fuerit. Lamb. Hortenf. p. 303. Vulg3 viris
quinas effe uxores, pluribus senas, nonnullis feptenas & oonas. Puellas
supra duodecimum tatis annum fiatim amare. Id. 305. Nemo una con-
tentus suit, neque cuiquam extra effietas & viris immaturas continenti effe
licuit. Id. 307. Tacebo hic, ut fit fuus honor auribus, quanta barbarie et
malitia ufi funt in puellis vitiandis nondum aptis matrimoniae, id'quod mihi
nequc ex'vano, neque ex vulgi fermonibus hauflum eft, fed ex ca vetula, cui
cura sic vitiatarum demandata suit, auditum. Joh. Corvinus, 316.

officer
356

officer of experience, who approaching the town towards the end
of spring in the year one thousand five hundred and thirty-five,
pressed it more closely than formerly, but found the fortifications
so strong, and so diligently guarded, that he durst not attempt
an aflault. It was now above fifteen months since the Anabap-
tifts had established their dominion in Munfler; they had during
that time undergone prodigious fatigue in working on the forti-
fications, and performing military duty. Notwithstanding the
prudent attention of their King to provide for their subsistence,
and his frugal and regular oeconomy in their publick meals, they
began to feel the approach of famine. Several small bodies of
their brethren, who were advancing to their assistance from the
Low-Countries, had been intercepted, and cut to pieces; and
while all Germany was ready to combine against them, they had
no profpet of succour. But such was the ascendant which Boc-
cold had acquired over the multitude, and so powerful the fafcina-
tion of enthusiasm, that their hopes were as sanguine as ever, and
they hearkened with implicit credulity to the visions and predic-
tions of their prophets, which aflfired them, that the Almighty
would speedily interpose, in order to deliver the city. The faith,
however, of ome few, ihaken by the violence and length of
their sufferings, began to fail ; but being fufpeted of an inclina-
tion to surrender to the enemy, they were punished with imme-
diate death, as guilty of impiety in distrusting the power of God.
One of the King's wives, having uttered certain words that
implied some doubt concerning his divine miflion, he instantly
called the whole number together, and commanding the blaf-
phemer, as he called her, to kneel down, cut off her head with
his own hands; and o far were the reft from exprefing any

horror

BooK V.

1535.

May. Diftrcfs and
fanaticifin of
the besieged.

357

BOOK V.

The city
naken.
June .

June 24.

Puniflment
of the King
and his affo-
ciates.

horror at this crwpl deed, tllrt tley joineql him in dancing
with a frantick joy farPund the bledipg bpdy of their compa-
!ion.

By this time, th# besieged endured the uttm0p rigor of f!mine

but they chose rather o susser Iar4flipo, the recit, of whihc is
shocking to humanity, than to jfte t the terms of .capitlation
offered them by the bishop, t l.ft, a d4fprtgr, whorn they had
taken intp their £fvile, BAing thh }§ i.nto, iiate witll sle
fumes of ethufifw, p unabje rny Qngr to e4r such direfs
made his escape to the enemy. He ornpd tleir generaJ of a
weak part in the fortigAiogs jic.4 he hgd brybf ded pnd auiling
him that the ,efiege, exlgy:ed with .u)nger nd fatigue?, k.ept
wgtch there with litgi .car, h ,effe! t ,l;ed ,a party thbige8r in ,tlle
oight. Te pr.pofal -wvas aepted, a a coSCe1 body of trqops
apponted for thI ferviie w, fcalipg he ,avpls npqrceiv.d,
seized ,ne of the gatee, an .ddmtd the eft of the army. The
AnabaptiRs, though ~irpried, 4efe1d,4d temfeJvgs in the mar-
ket plage with vlour, he1ig^e4 ,by ,despair; .,but being oyer-
pow.red by num.bers, and fwVrouv.dei on ey.eXy ind mo.s of
them w.ee slain, .an.d the remainder -taken pri.fpoerp. Among
the last were the King and CnipperdoJing,. he Kipn, !aJed
with. laips, ,was car,ied from city .to city .,s a ~pefacle to gratify
the curiosity of the people, and ws exppfed t all their insults.
His spirit, however, was ot hbroken or hurnble by ths fad
reverse of :his condition and .he ,gl.ered with ,upiha.en firmness
to the diftinguilhing teuets of his f6t. After this, :e ,was brought
back to Munster, thefcene of bis royalty and .r imes, and put to
death with the noft exqliifite and lingering tortures, all which he
bore with aftonifling fortitude. This extraordinary man, who

had
358

EMPEROR CHARLES V.

had been able to acquire fiuch mazing doffinion over the millds
of his fllowers, and to excite :combintidi lb dangerous toTciety,
was only twenty-fix years bo age "

ToOiETHi e w' Mt'sh MohiAch, the kiegddorfi bs the Anabaptists

came to an end. Theirprinciples lhaving'taken deep tbot in the Low-
Countries, the parfy itill ilubfiRft there, under tile nane of Meino
nites; but by a very liingilir 'revtil'tlbii, this iec, 'To niutHfits'and
fanguinaty at its firt borigin, hatd becone altogether inceqt and
padific. olding it Jnlawffil 't wage'wtar, or to accept 6 dvil :6f-
Aces, they devote themfiLvs ntierey t t the dSties oF'private diti-
zens, and by their indu'try and cha'rfiy ihdeavouir to fna'e e'ktaa
tion to human ociety for the violence comfntfted by their ouhdirndb.
A ifmall number of this red which 'is sett'ed in Englaind, retail its
peculiar tenets concerning blptifin, but 'witlhorit an dagiterous'mix-
ture of enthufiaifn.

'R' e 'iiti'ny ds 'te Ahdbaptifts, tli6gh it dtrew getteral

at'tdtltdh, did 'tot 'o etirely engrdfs th'e prirines '. Germany,
as 'ndt 'to 'allW lelfUit 'tf-r 'tlier tiiraeidns .- he 'alHlance
b'etwien the Fteilch king 'tld the otlfedeats at 'Sialkalde,
e&gan 'al out i'fiis timr'e t6 'pddibe 'teat effets. 0H, 6 1ket br
Wurtemberg, having been expelled his dominions .lh The' ut
one thousand five hundred and nineteen, on account of his vio-
le'it a'aii '6 opitelie adi iifttrio'n, 'e Itbtifb "of Atf(tria hadt 'got

n Sleid.:9ga, &c. TIumultuutn .Anabaptifarium Liber unus. Ant.-larn-

berto Hortenflo auc6ore ap. Scardium vol. 2.rp. 298, &c. De Miferabili Mo-
na(terienfium obfidione, &c. libellus Antonii Corvini ap. Scard. 313. Annales
Anabaptifiici a Joh. Henrico Ottio, 4to. Bafileve, 1472. Cor. I-eerlbachius
Hist. Anab. Edil. 65 7.'. 140. o -Baylb;Diion. Art. AnabaptiJlet,

poflefliol

BOOK V.

1535.

Chara&er of
the fedt lince
that period.

Proceedings
and authority
ofthe league
of Smalkalde.

359

BOOK V.

1535.

The King of
the Romans
<owuts them.

poffeflion of his dutchy. That prince having nw by a long
exile atoned for the errors in his conduct, which were the effiet
rather of inexperience than of a tyrannical disposition, was
become the object of general compallion. The Landgrave of
Hefie, in particular, his near relation, warmly espoused his
interest, and used many efforts to recover for him his ancient
inheritance. But the King of the Romans obltinately refused
to relinquish a valuable acquisition which his family had made
with o much cafe. The Landgrave, unable to compel him,
applied to the King of France his new ally. Francis, eager
to embrace any opportunity of diltreffing the house of Austria,
and desirous of wresting from it a territory, which gave it foot-
ing and influence. in a part of Germany at a distance from its
other dominions, encouraged the Landgrave to take arms, and
secretly supplied him with a large fum of money. This he
employed to raise troops, and marching with great expedition
towards Wurtemberg, attacked, defeated, and dispersed a con-
fiderable body of Austrians, entrutfed with the defence of the
country. All the Duke's fubjeas hastened, with emulation,
to receive their native Prince, and re-invested him with that au-
thority which is still enjoyed by his descendants. At the fame
time the exercise of the Protestant religion was established in his
dominions P.

FERDINAND, how sensible soever of this uexpe&ed blow,

not daring to attack a Prince whom all the Protestant powers
in Germany were ready to support, judged it expedient to con-
clude a treaty with him, by which he recognized in the most

p Sleid. 172. Bellay, 159, &c.

ample

ample form his title to the dutchy. Tie success of the Land- BOOK V.
grave's operations in behalf of the Duke of Wurtemberg hav- 53
ing convinced Ferdinand that a rupture with a league so for-
midable as that of Smalkalde, was to be avoided with the utmost
care, he entered likewise into a negociation with the EleAor of
Saxony, the head of that union, and by some conceflions in
favour of the Protestant religion, and others of advantage to the
Eledor himself, he prevailed on him together with his confe-
derates to acknowledge his title as King of the Romans. At the
fame time, in order to prevent any such precipitate or irregular
election in times to come, it was agreed that no person should
hereafter be promoted to that dignity without the unanimous con-
sent of the Ele&ors; and the Emperor soon after confirmed this
stipulation .

THESE ats of indulgence towards the ProteRfants, and the Paul Ill. calls
close union into which the King of the Romans seemed to be a general

council to
entering with the Princes of that party, gave great offence at meet at

Mantua.

Rome. Paul Il. though he had departed from a resolution of his
predecessor, never to conent to the calling of a general council,
and had promied, in the firt confitory held after his elefion,
that he would convoke that afrembly so much desired by all
.Christendom, Was no les enraged than Clement at the innova-
tions in Germany, and no less averre to any scheme for reform-
ing either the dotrines of the church, or the abuses in the court:
of Rome: But having been a witness of tle universal censure'
which Clement had incurred by his obstinacy with regard to
these points, he hoped to avoid the fame reproach by the seem-
ing alacrity with which he proposed a council; flattering him-

q Sleid. 173. Corps Diplom. tornm i. p. 2. 119.
VOL. 11. A aa self,

oOK V. seif, however, that such difficulties would arise concerning the

-- time and. place of meeting, the persons who had a right to be

present, and the order of their proceedings, as would effecually
defeat the intention of those who demanded that assembly, with-
out exposing himself to any imputation for refuting to call it.
With this view he dispatched nuncios to the several courts in order
to make known his intention, and that he had fixed on Mantua
as a proper place in which to hold the council. Such difficulties
as the Pope had foreseen, immediately presented themselves in
great number. The French King did not approve of the place
which Paul had chosen, as the Papal and Imperial influence would
necessarily be two great in a town situated in that part of Italyi
The King of England not only concurred with Francis in urging
that objection, but refused, besides, to acknowledge any council
z. , called in the name and by the authority of the Pope. The Ger-

man Protestants having met together, at Smalkalde, insisted on
their original demand of a council to, be held in Germany, and
pleading the Emperor's promifp, as well as the/agreement at Ratif.
bon to that effet, declared that they would not confider an aflem
bly held at Mantua as a.legal or free representative of the church.
By this: diversity of fentments and views, such a field fqr intrigue
and negqciation Open<d, as tiade it easy fr thePbope to aume
the merit of being eager to assemble a council, while at the fame
time he could put off its meeting at pleasure. The Protetants on
the other: hand fufpeting his defigos, and sensible of the impor-
tance which they derived from their union, renewed for; ten years
the league of Smalkalde, which. ow became stronger: and ore
formidable by the accellion of several new members,.

DURINO

This league was concluded December, one thousand five hundred and
thirty-five, but not extended or signed In form till September in the following

year.

Be
k_

Dec 362
*

36,3

DURING these; tranfations in Germany, the Emperor under-

took his famous enterprize against the 'piratical: tates in Africa.
That part of the African continent lying along the coast of the
Mediterranean sea, which anciently formed the kingdoms of
Mauritania and Maffylia, together with ,he republick of Car-
thage, and which is now known by the general name of Barbary,
had undergone many revolutions. Subdued by the Romans, it
became a province of their empire. Conquered afterwards by
the Vandals, they ere&ed a kingdom there. That being over-
turned by Belisarius, the country continued subjet to the Greek
Emperors, until it was' over-run towards the end of the seventh
century, by the rapid and irresistible arms of the Arabs. It
remained for ome time a part of that vast empire of which the
Caliphs were the head. Its immense distance, however, from
the feat of government, encouraged the descendants of those
leaders, wlho had subdued the country, or the chiefs of the
Moors, its ancient inhabitants, to throw off the yoke, and to set
up for independence. The Caliphs, who. derived their autho-
rity from a spirit of enthusiasm, more fitted for making conquests
than for preserving. them, were obliged to connive at as of
rebellion which they could not prevent; and Barbary was
divided into several kingdoms, of which Morocco, Algiers and
Tunis were the most considerable, ;The inhabitants of these

· . .. .

'

. o.

..

year. The .pri'nces.ih acceded to it were Jqhn Eleor of Saxony, Ernell
Duke of Bruniwick, Phiip Landgrave of Hefie, Utric Duke of Wurtem-
berg, Barnim and Philip Dukes of Pomerania, John George, and Joachim
Princes of Anhalt, G:bhard ard Albert Cdunts of Mansfield; William Count
of affiau The cities, Strafburg;: Nurttnibtig,'Coiodtance, 'lm, Magde-
burg,' remen, Rutlingen, Hailbrorin, emerien, Lindaw,; Campen,
Ifna, IBibrac. Windlheim, Aulburg, Francfart, Esing, Brunswick, Goflar,
Hanover, Gottingen, Eimbtck, Hamburg, Minden.

A a a 2 kingdoms

Bodk V.

153

The Empe-
ror's cxpedi-
tion to Africa,
and slate of
that country.
\

BOOK V., kingdoms were a mixed race, Arabs, Negroes from the. southern
u-.-.. provinces, and Moors, either natives of Africa, or who had been

expelled out of Spain all zealous professors of the Mahometan
religion, and inflamed againfl ChriRianity with a bigotted hatred
proportional to their ignorance and barbarous manners.

Rife of the AMONG there people, no less daring, inconstant and treache-
piratical rous, than the ancient inhabitants of the fame country, described

by the Roman historians, frequent seditions broke out, and
many changes in government took place. These, as they
affected only the internal state of a country o barbarous, are
but little known, and deserve to be so: But about the beginning
of the sixteenth century a sudden revolution happened, which by
rendering the Ifates of Barbary formidable to the Europeans,
hath made their history worthy of more attention. This revolur

and of the tion was brought about by persons born in a rank of life which
Barbaroas. entitled them to a no filch illustrious part. Horuc and Hay-

radin, the sons of a .potter in the Ine of Lebos, prorpted by a
restless and enterpriziog spirit,, forsook their father's trade, ran
to .iea, and joined a crew of ,pirates., They fpon: di4inguifhed
themselves by their valour and acivity,, and becoming masters
of a small brigantine, carried on their infamous trade with such
conduct. and success, that.they assembled a fleet of twelve galleys,
besides many vefels of smaller force. Of this fleet Horuc,-the
elder brother, called Barbaroila from the red colour of his. beard,
was admiral, and Hayradin second in command, but with alroft
equal authority. They called themselves the friends of the ,sea,
and the enemies of all who fail upon it ; and their names soon
became terrible from the Straits of the Dardanelg, to those of
Gibraltar. Together with their fame and power, their ambi-

tious

I. J ,.'
364.

tious views opened and enlarged, and while aing as Corsair' 'BooK V.
they adopted the ideas, and acquiied the talents of conquerors.' --

,535.

They often carried the prizes which they took on the coasts of
Spain and Italy into the ports of Barbary, and enriching the inha-
bitants by the sale of their booty, and the thoughtless prodiga-
lity 'f their- crews, were welcome guests in every place at which
they touched. The convenient situation of these harbours lying
so near the greatest commercial flates at that time in Christen-
dom, made the brotheis withi for an eftabliibment in that coun-.
try. An opportunity of ccomplifhing this uickly presented:
itself, which they'did not susser to pdas unimproved.' utemi,
King of Algiers, haviing attempted feverai times, without success,
to take a fort which the Spanish. governors of Oran had built
not far from his capital, was so ill advised as to apply for aid to
Barba'rofl, whore valour the' Africans confidered as irefiftibe.
The 'ative Corsair gladly acceptedof the invitation, ahd leaving; 15i6.
his brother Hayradin with the fleet, marched at the head of five
thousand men to Algiers, where he was received as their deliverer.
Such aforde.gave him the command of the town ; and observing
that the. Moors; neither fufpted him of any bad intention, nor
were capable with their light-armed troops of. opposing his
disciplined veterans, he' secretly murdered the Monarch whom Houc, tih
li" 'had come 'td aflift' and caiifed hiifelf to' be proclaimed Iing elder brotI,,:

s, P becomes
of Algiers' il his ese'/d.: The authority whicli -hL iadt thus boldly inalter of

ilrea,'he endeavoure'd to efabli'h by afts fiiitedtl t the genius Algier,

of the people whom lie had to govern;- by liberality, without
bounds to' those who favoured his promotion, and by cruelty no
lbss unbounded toward all whomh helhad 'aly' reason to diftruff.
Noti Latitfied with 'the throne which lie had acquired, he attacked
the ieighBoliting' King of Tremecn'i hand .having vanquished him'

i!

365.

BOCK V.

'15: 1

The progress
of Hayradin
the second
brother.

Puts his do-
ninions under
the rrot,.'ion
of the Sultan.

in battle, added his dominions to those of Algiers. At the fame
time, he continued to infest the oasts of Spain and Italy with
fleets which resembled the armaments of a great Monarch, rather
than the light squadrons of a Corsair. The devaltations which
these committed obliged Charles, about the beginning of his
reign, to furnilh the marquis de Comares, governor of Oran,
with troops sufficient to attack him. That officer, aflifted by
the dethroned King of Tremecen, executed the commiflion with
such spirit, that Barbarossa's troops being beat in several encoun-
ters, he himself was Ihut up in Tremecen; after defending it
to the last extremity, he was overtaken in attempting to make his.
escape, and slain while he fought with an obstinate valour, worthy
of his former fame and exploits,

His brother Hayradin, known likewise by the name of Bar.

baroffa, assumed the sceptre of Algiers with the fame ambition
and abilities, but with better fortune. His reign being undi-
flurbed by the arms of the Spaniards, which had ull occupation
in the wars among the European powers, he.regulated with
admirable prudence the interior police of his kingdom, carried
on his naval operations with great vigour, and extended his
conquests on the continent of Africa. But, perceiving that the
Moors and Arabs fibmitted to his goyernment with the utmost
impatience, and being, afraid that his' continual. depredations
would, one day, draw upon him the arms qs the.Chriflians, he put
his dominions under the protection of the Grand Seignior, and
received from him a body of Turkish soldiers sufficient for his
security against. his domeRic, s: well as his foreign enemies.,, At
last, the fame of his exploits daily. increasing, Solyman offered him
the command of the Turkish fleet, as the only person whose

valour
;66

valour and skill in nav.l aairs entitled him to command agaiiift
Andrew Doria, the greatest 1a-officer of that age. Proud of this
d:ftindtion, BarbarofTh repaied to Constantinople, and with a won-
derful versatility of mind, mingling the arts of a courtier with tile
boldness of a Corsair, gained the entire confidence both of the Sul-
tan and his Vizier. To them he communicated a scheme that he
had formed of making himself master of Tunis, the rmoft flourilh-
ing kingdom, at that time, on the coast of Afiica; which being ap-
proved of by them, he obtained whatever he demanded for carrying
it into execution.

His hopes of ?success in this undertaking- were founded on

the:inte(line divisions in'the kingdom of Tunis. Mahmed, the
last King of. that country, having thirty four sone by different
wives, named Mulcy-Hafccn, one of the youngest amongst them,
his fuccefor. TJiat weak Prince, who owed this preference not
to his own merit, but to the afcendalt: wlhch.lhis mother had ac-
quired over an old doating Monarch, first p6ifroed his father in
order to prevent him from altering his destination; and then, with
the barbarous policy which prevails. wherever polygaity is per-
mitted, and the right of fucceflioni is not precisely fixed,,. he put
to death all his brothers whom 'l6. could g't) into hisipower.
Alrafchid, one of the eldelt, was so fortunate,- a to efcapp his
rage; and finding a retreat among the wandering Arabs, made
several attempts, by the ..aliftance' of e:o f

: tflir chief,: sto

recover the throne, *lich of right. belonged to him; ,-But ithefe
proving unfuccefsfil, and the Arnbs, froin their nathral levity,
being ready to deliver him up to his merciless brother, he fled to
Algiers, the only place of refuge remining, and implored the
proteetion of,Barbarffa; who, difeieniiing aioiice. alU'the advan-

tages

BooK V.

J535

His kcheie
for conquering
Tuniis.

362

BOOK. V.

15J5.

tages that might be gained by fupporling his title, received him
with every poflible demonstration of friendship and refped.
Being ready, at that time, to set fail for Constantinople, he easily
persuaded Alrafchid, whose eagerness to obtain a crown disposed
him to believe or undertake any thing, to accompany him thi-
ther, promising him effecual afliftance from Solyman, whom he
represented to be the most generous, as well as most powerful,
Monarch in the world. But no sooner were they arrived at
Constantinople, than the false Corsair, regardless of all his promises
to him, opened to the Sultan a plan for conquering Tunis, and
annexing it to the Turkish empire, by making using of the name
of this exiled Prince, and by means of the party ready to declare
in his favour. Solyman approved, with too much facility, of this
perfidious proposal, extremely suitable to the character of its au-
thor,. but altogether unworthy of a great Prince. A powerful
fleet and numerous army were soon aflembled; at the fight of
which the credulous Alrafchid flattered himself, that he would
soon enter his capital in triumph.
Its success. UT just as this unhappy Prince was going to embark, he

was arrested by.order of the Sultan, hut up in the seraglio, and
was never heard of; more. Barbarossa failed with a fleet of two
hundred and fifty vessels towards Africa. After ravaging the
coasts of Italy, and spreading terror through every part of that
country, he appeared before Tunis; and!landing-his men, gave
out that he came to afiert the right of Alrafehid, whom he pre-
tended to have left sick aboard the Admiral galley.. The fort
of Goletta which commands the bay, oon fell into his hands,
partly by. his own address, partly by the treachery of its
commander; and the inhabitants of Tunis, ..weary of Muley-

Hafcen's
3b8

Hafcen's government, took arms, and declared for Alrafchid
with such zeal and unanimity, as obliged the former to fly o
precipitately, that he left all his treasures behind him. The
gates were immediately set open to Barbarofla, as the restorer
'of their lawful sovereign. But when Alrafchid himself did not
appear, and when instead of his name, that of Solyman alone
was heard among the acclamations of the Turkish soldiers march-
ing into the town, the people of Tunis began to fufped the
Corsair's treachery; and their suspicions being oon converted
into certainty, they ran to arms with the utmo'f fury, and
surrounded the citadel, into which Barbarofla had led his troops.
But having foreseen such a revolution, he 'was not unprepared
for it; he immediately turned against them the artillery on the
ramparts, and by one brilk discharge of ft, and of his fmall-arms,
he dispersed the numerous but undirected aailants, and forced
them to acknowledge Solyman as their sovereign, and to submit to
himself as his viceroy.

His first care was to put the kingdom, of which he had thus

got poffeflion, in a proper posture of defence. He ftretgthened
the citadel which commands the town; and fortifying the
Goletta in a regular manner, at vast expence, made it the
principal tation for his fleet, and his great arsenal both for mili-
tary and naval stores. Being now pofeffed of such extensive
territories, he carried on his depredations against the Cluiftian
fiates to a greater extent, and with more deflrutive violence
than ever. Daily complaints of the outrages committed by his
cruizers were brought to the Emperor by his subjects, both in
Spain and Italy. All Christendom seemed to expeft from
him, as its greatest and most fortunate Prince, that he would

VOL. II. B b b put

.BooK V.

1535.

Iarbarofra's
formiidable
polv'er.

S69

370
BOOK V. put an end to this new and odious species of oppreflion. At

' the fame time Muley-Hafcen, the exiled King of Tunis, find-
'535.

The exiled ing none of the Mahometan Princes in Africa willing or able
King c Funis
imp!'.resthe to afift him in recovering his throne, applied to Charles as the
E,;perr's only person who could assert his rights in opposition to such a
afliftance.
April2i,1553. formidable uftirper. The Emperor, equally desirous of deliver-

ing his dominions from the dangerous neighbourhood of Bar-
baroffa; of appearing as the protector of an unfortunate Prince;
and of acquiring the glory annexed in that age, to every expedi-
tion against the Mahometans, readily concluded a treaty with
Muley-Hafcen, and began to prepare for invading Tunis.
Having made trial of his own abilities for war in the late cam-
paign in Hungary, he was now become so fond of the military
character, that he determined to command on this occasion in

His prepara- person. The united strength of his dominions was called out
tion for the
expedition. upon an enterprize in which the Emperor was about to hazard

his glory, and which drew the attention of all Europe. A
Flemish fleet carried from the ports of the Low-Country a body
of German infantry ; the gallies of Naples and Sicily took on
board the veteran bands of Italians and Spaniards, which had
distinguished themselves by so many vicories over the French;
the Emperor himself embarked at Barcelona with the flower of
the Spanish nobility, and was joined by a considerable squadron
from Portugal, under the command of the Infant Don Lewis, the
Empress's brother; Andrew Doria conducted his own gallies,
the best appointed at that time in Europe, and commanded by
the most kilful officers: The Pope furnilhed all the assistance in
his power towards such a pious enterprize; and the order of

a Hardi Annales Brabant, i. 509.

Malta,

Malta, the perpetual enemies of the Infidels, equipped a fall Book V.
squadron, but formidable by the valour of the knights who served

1535.

on board it. The port of Cagliari in Sardinia was the general place
of rendezvous. Doria was appointed.High Admiral of the fleet;
the command in chief of the land forces was given to the marquis
di Guafto.

ON the sixteenth of July, the fleet,. confifing of near five Lands in

hundred vessels, having on board above thirty thousand regular Africa.
troops, et fail from Cagliari, and after a prosperous navigation,
landed within fight of Tunis. Barbarossa having early intelli-
gence of the Emperor's immense armament, and fufpeding its
destination, prepared with equal prudence and vigour for.the
defence of his new onquet. He called in all his corsairs from
their different flations; he drew from Algiers what forces could
be spared; he dispatched messengers to all the African' Princes,
Moors as well as Arabs, and by representing Muley-Hafcen as
an infamous apostate, prompted by ambition and revenge, 'not
only to become the vaflal of a Christian Prince, but to conspire
with him to extirpate the Mahommedan faith, he inflamed those
ignorant and biggdtted chiefs to fuch-a degree, that they took
arms as in a common cause. Twenty thousand horse, together
with a vast body of foot, soon assembled kt Tunis; and Barba-
roffa, by a proper distribution of presents among them from time
to time, kept the ardour which had 'brought them together from
subsiding. But as he was too well' acquainted with the, enemy
whom he had to oppose, to think that these light troops could reift
the heavy armed cavalry and veteran infantry which composed
the Imperial army, his chief confidence was in the strength of
the Goletta, and in his body of Turkish soldiers who were armed Lays siege to

_~B b b and2~~ Goletta,
B b b z and

37[

BOOK V. and disciplined after the European fashion. Six thousand of
k- j5 these, under the command of Sinan, a renegado Jew, the bravest

m535.

and most experienced of all his corsairs, he threw into that fort,
which the Emperor immediately invefied. As Charles had the
command of the sea, his camp was so plentifully supplied not
only with the neceflaries, but with all the luxuries of. life, that
Muley-Hafcen, who had not been accustomed to fee war carried
on with fich order and magnificence,! was filled with admiration
of the Emperor's power. His troops, animated by his presence,
and confidering it as meritorious to shed their blood in such a
pious:caife, contended with each ther for the posts of hoour
and danger. .-Three separate attacks were concerted,' and. the
Germans, Spaniards and Italians, havilg p,one of llhefe committed
to each of thcrf, pushed them forward with the eager courage
which national emulation inspires. Sinan displayed resolution
and fiill becdming the confidence which his master had put in
him; the gairrlfbn performed thethrd service on which they were
ordered with great fortitude, !But thouglh ! e interrupted the
besiegers by frequeit. sallies'; though the Moors and Arabs
alarnied the camp with their. continual incursions; the breaches
soon became so, considerable towards the .land, whije the fleet
battered the fortifications whielc it could approach,: with no, less

rTakes ify fuiy and success, thatatt assault beingggien on all: fideo at once,
tfioiiu. the place was taken by storm Sinan, wvith the remains of his

garrison,' retiring,: after n;.obftiiate refi(tance,.over a flallow
part of the .bay: towvards the city.. By the reduction of the
Goletta, the Empeor bedame'mifter of. Barbarossa's fleet, .con-
'fiting of eighty-feven ;gallies and galliots, together with his
arsenal, and three hundred canno:n mostly brass, which were
planted on the ramparts a prodigiods ntlriber in that age, and

! '~" a remark-

373

a remarkable proof of the strength of the fort, as well as of the BOOK V.
greatness of the corsair's power. The Emperor marched into the
Goletta through the breach, and turning to Muley-Hafcen who
attended him, " Here," fays he, is a gate open to you, by
which you ihall return to take poffeflion of your dominions."

BARBAROSSA, tho' he felt the full weight of the blow which

he had received, did not, however, lose courage, or abandon the
defence of Tunis. But as the walls were of great extent, and
extremely weak; as he could not depend on the fidelity of the
inlabitants, nor hope that the. Moors and Arabs would sustain
the hardships of a siege, he boldly determined to advance with
his army, which amounted to fifty toufand men towards the
Imperial camp, and to decide the fate of his kingdom by the issue
of a battle. This resolution he communicated to his principal
officers, and representing to them the fatal consequences which
might follow, if ten thousand Christian slaves,. whom he had
shut up in the citadel, should attempt to mutiny during the absence
of tile army, he proposed as a necessary precaution for the publick
security, to massacre them without mercy before he began his
march. They all approved warmly of his intention to fight but
inured as they were, in their piratical depredations, to scenes of
bloodshed and cruelty, the barbarity of his proposal concerning
the slaves filled them with horror; and Barbarofa, rather from
the dread of irritating them, than swayed by motives of humanity,
consented to spare the lives of the slaves.

BY this time the Emperor had begun to advance towards Defeats Bar-
Tu:iFi; and though his troops suffered inconceivable hardflips baro1llt'y

t r.pillCrs i's lilctcs, par Rufcc lli, p. ii 9, &c.

in

in their march over burning sands, destitute of water, and exposed
to the intolerable heat of the fun, they oon came up with the
enemy. The Moors and Arabs, emboldened by their vast fupe-
riority in number, immediately rushed on to the attack with loud
shouts, but their undisciplined courage did not stand one moment
the shock of regular battalions; and though Barbarofla, with ad-
mirable pretence of mind, and by exposing his own person to the
greatest dangers, endeavoured to rally them, the rout became o
general, that he himself was hurried along with them in their
flight back to the city. There he found every thing in the utmost
confusion; ome of the inhabitants flying with their families and
effecs; others ready to et open their gates to the conqueror;
the Turkish soldiers preparing to retreat; and the citadel, which
in such circumstances might have afforded him rome refuge, al-
ready in the poffefion of the Christian captives. These unhappy
men, rendered desperate by their situation, had laid hold on the
opportunity which Barbarossa dreaded. As oon as his army
was at ome distance from the town, they gained two of their
keepers, by whose assistance, knocking off their fetters, and
buining open their prisons, they overpowered the Turkish garrison,
and turned the artillery of the fort against their former masters.
Barbarofla, disappointed and enraged, exclaiming ometimes against
the faife companion of his officers, and sometimes condemning his
own imprudent compliance with their opinion, fled precipitately to
Bona.

Tunis ur- MEANWHILE Charles, satisfied with the easy and almost blood-
renders. less vitory which he had gained, and advancing slowly with the

precaution necessary in an enemy's country, did not yet know the
whole extent of his own good fortune. But at last, a mefTenger

dispatched
BOOK V.

1535.
374

dispatched by the slaves acquainted him with the success of their
noble effort, for the recovery of their liberty; and at the fame
time deputies arrived from the town, in order to present him the
keys of their gates, and to implore his prote&ion from military
violence. While he was deliberating concerning the proper
measures for this purpose, the soldiers fearing that they would
be deprived of the booty which they had expected, broke fud-
denly, and without orders, into the town, and began to kill and
plunder without distinction. It was then too late to restrain
their cruelty, their avarice, or licentioufiefs. All the outrages
of which soldiers are capable in the fury of a storm, all the
excesses of which men can be guilty when their paflions are
heightened by the contempt and hatred which difference in
manners and religion inspire, were committed. Above thirty
thousand of the innocent inhabitants perished on that unhappy
day, and ten thousand were carried away as slaves. Muley-
Hafcen took pofeflion of a throne surrounded with carnage,
abhorred by his fubjets on whom he had brought such cala-
mities, and pitied even by those whose rashness had been the
occasion of them. The Emperor lamented the fatal accident
which had stained the lustre of his vicory; and amidst fich a
scene of horror there was but one fpedacle that afforded him any
fatisfadion. Ten thousand Christian laves, among whom were
several persons of diftinaion, met him as he entered the town ;
and falling on their knees, thanked and blefied hinm as their de.
livercr.

AT the fame time that Charles accomplished his promise to

the Moorihf King of re-eltablifhing him in his dominions, he
did not neglec what was neccflary for bridling the power of

the

BOOK V.

1535.

Restores the
exiled King to
iis throne.

375

1

c
!

which itbe *Etiproper . imitdiatcly' inveted.. As cihares hiid the
c-,flinindl (of tlie en, his cnnp 'wns fIo pletifilVl filppl;ctl not
only with the. ncceflarics, but with all te luxuies ot lile, tlhat
Muley-Hafcen, who had not beu accustomed to Ife war carried
on with fich order and magnificence, was filled with admiration
of the Emperor's power. His troops, animated by his pretence,
and confidering it as meritorious to ihed their blood in fitch a
pious cause, contended with each ther for the potsa of honour
and danger. .Three separate attacks were oncerted,'and. the
Germans, Spaniards and Italian, having .one of hbefe committed
to each of them, pushed them forward with the eager courage
w'nich national emulation inspires. Sinan displayed resolution
and skill becdming the confidence which his master had put in
him ; the garrlibn performed the!hrd service on which they were
ordered with great fortitude, But thouglh !e interrupted the
besiegers by frequeit. sallies'; though the Moors and Arabs
alarmed the: camp with their continual incursions; the breaches
soon became so, conliderable towards the, land, while the fleet
battered .the foftifications whiich it could: approachl, with no, less

Tkes i; v fury and success, that.at assault being given on all: fideb at once,
fiOll. 2 the place was taken by storm; Sinan, ith the remains of his

garrifo, retiring,: after an obstinate refifance,.over a lhallow
part of the .bay towarda the city. By the reducion of the
Goletta, the Emperor became mAster of Barbarossa's flet,cpn-
silting of eighty-feven 'gallies and galliots, together with his
arsenal, and three hundred canr.o: mostly brass, which were
planted o the ramparts ; a prodigious number in that age, and

a remark-

a*ttentle i ini " qel;' (Tys h, '; is a gat o^p e tu y'iai!^^l

hicli ro'1 I111all retiurnll to t ke poi'lon oi s your domilioisl."

BA, RAROSSA, tlIo1 lie felt the lill weight of the blow which

he lhad received, did not, however, lore courage, or abandon the
defence of Tunis. But as the walls were of great extent, and
extremely weak as lie could not d .pend on the fidelity of the
inhabitants, nor hope that the. Moors and Arabs would futain
the hard(hips of a siege, he boldly determined to advance with
his army, which amounted to fifty thousand men ', towards the
Imperial camp, and to decide the fate of his kingom by the iflue
of a battle. This resolution he communicated to his principal
officers, and representing to them the fatal consequences which
might follow, if ten thousand Christian slaves, whom he had
hut up in the citadel, should attempt to mutiny during the absence
of tile army, he proposed as a necessary precaution for the publick
security, to massacre them without mercy before he began his
march. They all approved warmly of his intention to fight but
inured as they were, in their piratical depredations, to scenes of
bloodshed and cruelty, the barbarity of his popotal concerning
the slaves filled them with horror; and Barbaoilla, rather tiom
the dread of irritating them, than swayed by motives of humaity,
consented to Ipare the lives of the slaves.

BY this time the Emperor had begun to advance towards Ditcxts c r.u-
Tu::i ; and though his troops fuflrcd iconceivable hardlhips :luOl;

t r'fit-' i s 'iicits, pr Rtnctlli, p tin, &-c.

1:'.

BOOK V. in their march over burning sands, destitute of water, and exposed

to the intolerable heat of the fun, they oon came up with the
enemy. The Moors and Arabs, emboldened by their vast fupe-
riority in number, immediately rushed on to the attack with loud
shouts, but their undisciplined courage did not fland one moment
the shock of regular battalions; and though Barbarofla, with ad-
mirable pretence of mind, and by exposing his own person to the
greatest dangers, endeavoured to rally them, the rout became o
general, that he himself was hurried along with them in their
flight back to the city. There he found every thing in the utmost
confusion; ome of the inhabitants flying with their families and
effects; others ready to set open their gates to the conqueror;
the Turkish soldiers preparing to retreat; and the citadel, which
in such circumfiances might have afforded him ome refuge, al-
ready in the pofeffion of the Christian captives. These unhappy
men, rendered desperate by their situation, had laid hold on the
opportunity which Barbarossa dreaded. As oon as his army
was at ome distance from the town, they gained two of their
keepers, by whose assistance, knocking off their fetters, and
buifting open their prisons, they overpowered the Turkish garrison,
and turned the artillery of the fort againfi their former matters.
Barbarofla, disappointed and enraged, exclaiming ometimes againfi
the false compassion of his officers, and ometimes condemning his
own imprudent compliance with their opinion, fled precipitately to
Bona.

Tunis lur- MEANWHILE Charles, satisfied with the easy and almost blood-
renders lets vitory which he had gained, and advancing slowly with the

precaution necef'ary in an enemy's country, did not yet know the
whole extent of his own good fortune. But at last, a meflenger

dispatched
374

dispatched by the slaves acquainted him with the success of their BOOK V.
noble effort, for the recovery of their liberty; and at the fame S3
time deputies arrived fiom the town, in order to present him the
keys of their gates, and to implore his protetion from military
violence. While lie was deliberating concerning the proper
measures for this purpose, ihe soldiers fearing that they would
be deprived of the booty which they had expected, broke fud-
denly, and without orders, into the town, and began to kill and
plunder without distinCtion. It was then too late to restrain
their cruelty, their avarice, or licentioufiefs. All the outrages
of which soldiers are capable in the fury of a storm, all the
excesses of which men can be guilty when their paions are
heightened by the contempt and hatred which difference in
manners and religion inspire, were committed. Above thirty
thousand of the innocent inhabitants perished on that unhappy
day, and ten thousand were carried away as slaves. Muley-
Hafcen took poffenion of a throne surrounded with carnage,
abhorred by his subjes on whom he had brought fucl cala-
mities, and pitied even by those whose rafinefs had been the
occasion of them. The Emperor lamented the fatal accident
which had stained the lustre of his viatory and amidst filch a
scene of horror there was but one fpetacle that afforded him any
satisfaction. Ten thousand Christian laves, among whom were
several persons of diitintion, met him as he entered the town
and falling on their knees, thanked and blessed him as their de-
liverer.

AT the fame time that Chailes accomplilhed his promise to Retores tlle

the Moorish King of re-eftablifling him in his domniions, lie lexileKg to
did not neglect what was necellary for bridling the power of

the

375

BOOK V. the African corsairs, for tie security of his own fubjeds, and for

"T"5 the interest of the Spaninl crown: In order to gain these ends,
1535.

he concluded a treaty ith Muley-Hafcen on the following
conditions; that he should hold the kingdom of Tunis in fee of
the crown of Spain, and do homage to the Emperor as his liege
lord; that all the Chritlian slaves now within his dominions, of
whatever nation, hould be set at liberty without ransom; that
no subjec of the Emperor's flould for the future be detained
in servitude; that no Turkish corsair should be admitted into the
ports of his dominions; that trade, together with the publick
exercise of the Chrifian religion, Ihould be allowed to all the
Emperor's fubjeds ; that the Emperor hould not only retain the
Goletta, but all the other sea-ports in the kingdom which were
fortified, hould be put into his hands ; that Muley-Hafcen
should pay annually twelve thousand crowns for the subsistence
of the Spanilh garrison in the Goletta; that he hould enter into
no alliance with any of the Emperor's enemies, and should present
to him every year, as an acknowledgment of his vassalage, fix
Moorish horses, and as many hawks". Having thus fettled the
affairs of Africa; chatifed the insolence of the corsairs; secured
a safe retreat for the ships of his fubjeds, and a proper tfation
for his own fleets, on that coast from which he was most infested
August 7 by piratical depredations; Charles embarked again for Europe,

the tempestuous weather, and sickness among his troops, not
permitting him to pursue Barbarofa x.

u Du Monts Corps Diplomat. ii. r28. Summontc I-lif. di Napoli, iv. 89.
x Joh. Etropii Diarium Expedition. Tunctanx ap. Scard. v. ii. p. 320, &c,

Jovii Hiflor. lib. xxxiv. 53, &c. Sandov. ii. 154, &c. Vertot Hill. de Cheval.
dc MIalthe. Epiflresdes Princes, par Rufcelli, traduites par Bellefor,p. 119,
120, &c.
376

By this expedition, the merit of which seems to have been

eflimnated in that age, rather by the apparent generosity of the
undertaking, the magnificence wherewith it was conducted, and
the success which crowned it, than by the importance of the confe-
quences that attended it, the Emperor attained a greater height of
glory than at any other period of his reign. Twenty thousand
slaves whom he freed from bondage, either by his arms, or by his
treaty with Muley-Hafcen y, each of whom he cloathed and fur-
nilhed with the means of returning to their refpe&tive countries,
spread all over Europe the fame of their benefa&or's munificence,
extolling his power and abilities with the exaggeration flowing from
gratitude and admiration. In comparison with him, the other
Monarchs of Europe made an inconsiderable figure; he, as the
chief Prince in Chiiftendom, appeared to be concerned for the
honour of the Christian name, for the public security and welfare,
while they were attentive only to their private and particular
interests.

Y Summonte Hill. de Nap. vol. iv. p. 103.
VOL. It.

Ccc

THE
K

BOOK V.

1535.

The gloty
which the
Emperor ac-
quired.

377

# BOOK VI.

THE
H I

S T O

OF THE

I G

N

OF THE
EMPEROR CHARLES V.

I '
. .

VI.

BOOK VI.

The causes of
a new war be-
tween the
Emperor and
Francis.

U NFORTUNATELY for the reputation of Francis I.

among his cotemporaries, his conduct, at this juncure,
appeared a perfect contrast to that of his rival, as he laid

hold on the opportunity afforded him, by the Emperor's having
turned his whole force against the common enemy, to revive his
pretensions in Italy, and to plunge Europe into a new war. The
treaty of Cambray, as has been observed, did not remove the
causes of enmity between the two contending Princes; it covered up,
but did not extinguish the flames of discord. Francis, in particu-
lar, who waited with impatience for a proper occasion of recover-
ing the reputation as well as territories which he had loft, con-

tinued
R

Y
R

BOOK

tinued to carry on his negociations in different courts againif the BOOK VI.
Emperor, taking the utmost pains to heighten the jealousy 535.
which many Princes entertained of his powei or designs, and
to inspire the reft with the fame suspicion and fear: Among
others, he applied to Francis Sforza, who, though indebted to
Charles for the poffeflion of the dutchy of Milan, had received
it on such hard conditions, as rendered him not only a vaflal of
the Empire, but a tributary dependant upon the Emperor. The
honour of having married the Emperor's niece, did not recon-
cile him to this ignominious state of fiubjedion, which became
so intolerable even to Sforza, a weak and poor pirited Prince,
that he listened with eagerness to the first proposals Francis made
of rescuing him from the yoke. These proposals were conveyed
to him by Maraviglia, or Merveille, as he is called by the French
historians, a Milanese gentleman residing at Paris; and oon
after, in order to carry on the negociation with greater advan-
tage, Merveille was sent to Milan on pretence of visiting his
relations, but with secret credentials from Francis as his envoy.
In this characer he was received by Sforza. But notwithftand-
ing his care to keep that circumstance concealed, Charles fifpet-
ing, or having received information of it, remonfrated and
threatened in such an high tone, that the Duke and Iis mini-
fters, equally intimidated, gave the world immediately a most
infamous proof of their servile fear of offending the Emperor.
Having decoyed Merveille, who had neither the prudence nor
temper which the station wherein he was placed required, into
a quarrel, in which he happened to kill his antagonist, one of the
Duke's domestics, they instantly commanded him to be seized, to
be tried for that crime, and to be beheaded. Francis, astonished at Dec. 533.
this violation of a character held sacred among the most uncivi-

C c lized

379

BOOK VI.

'535.

Francis defti-
tute of allies.

His negocia-
tion with the
German Pro-
telnants.

lized nations, and enraged at the insult offered to the dignity of
his crown, threatened Sforza with the effete of his indignation,
and complained to the Emperor, whom he confidered as the real
author of that unexampled outrage. But meeting with no satis-
faaion from either, he appealed to all the Princes of Europe, and
thought himself now entitled to take vengeance for an injury,
which it would have been indecent and pusillanimous to let pass
with impunity.

B E I N o thus furnished with a pretext for beginning a war,

on which he had already resolved, he multiplied his efforts in
order to draw in other Princes to take part in the quarrel. But
all his measures for this purpose were disconcerted by unforeseen
events. After having sacrificed the honour of his houfc by the
marriage of his son with Catharine of Medici, in order to gain
Clement, the death of that Pontiff had deprived him of all the
advantages which he expected to derive from his friendship. Paul,
his successor, tho' attached by inclination to the Imperial interest,
seemed determined to maintain the neutrality suitable to his
character as the common father of the contending Princes. The
King of England, occupied with domestic cares and projects,
declined, for once, engaging in the affairs of the continent,
and refused to aflift Francis, unless he would imitate his exam-
ple, in throwing off the Papal fupretnacy. These disappoint-
ments led him to follicit, with greater earnestness, the aid of the
Protestant Princes afrociated by the league of Smalkalde. That
he might the more easily acquire their confidence, he endeavour-
ed to accommodate himself to their predominant passion, zeal
for their religious tenets. He asseted a wonderful moderation
with regard to the points in dispute; he permitted Bellay, his

envoy
380

envoy in Germany, to explain his sentiments concerning some of
the most important articles, in terms not far different from tlhofe
uscd by tle Protestants ; he even condescended to invite Me-
landthon, whose gentle manners and pacific spirit diftinguiflled
him among the Reformers, to visit Paris, that by his afiftance
he might concert the nloft proper measures for reconciling the
contending sets, which so unhappily divided the church b. Tlefe
concellions mufft be confidered rather as arts of policy, than the
result of conviction for whatever impression the new opinions in
religion made on his filters, the Q3een of Navarre and Dutchess
of Ferrara, the gaiety of Francis's own temper, and his love of
pleasure, allowed him little leisure to examine theological cpntro.
verfies.

BuT oon after he loft all the fruits of this difingenuous.arti-

fice, by a ftep very inconfifent with his declarati9s to theGer-
man Princes. This itep, however, the prejudices of theage, and
the religious sentiments of his own fubjeets, rendered it neceflary
for him to take. His close union with the King of England,
an excommunicated heretick; his frequent negqciations with
the 'German Proteftantsi but above all, his ,giving publick
audience to an envoy from Sultan Solyman, had excited violent
suspicions concerning the sincerity of his attachment to religion.
To have attacked the Emperor, who, on all occasions, made
high pretensions to zeal in defence of the Catholick faith, and
at the very juncture, when he was preparing for his expedition
against Barbarofa, which was then confidered as a pious enter-

Freheri Script. Rer. German. iii. 354, &c. Sleid. Ilif. 178, 183.
Seckend. lil. iii. 103.

b Camerarii Vita Ph. Melanchthonis, 12°. Hag. 1655 . 12.

prize,

BOOK VI.

1535.
Irritatestheni.

BOOK VI. prize, could not have failed to confirm such unfavourable senti-

ments with regard to Francis, and called on him to vindicate him-
,535.

self by some extraordinary demonstration of' his reverence for
the established doctrines of the church. The indiscreet zeal of
some of his fibjeds, who had imbibed the Protestant opinions,
furnished him with such an occasion as he desired. They had
affixed to the gates of the Louvre, and other public places,
papers containing indecent refletions on the doetrines and rites
of the Popilh church. Six of the persons concerned in this rash
a&tion were discovered and seized. The King, in order to avert
the judgments which it was supposed their blasphemies might draw
down upon the nation, appointed a solemn proceflion. The holy
sacrament was carried through the city in great pomp; Francis
walked uncovered before it, bearing a torch in his hand. the
Princes of the blood supported the canopy over it ;the nobles
marched in order belind. In the presence of this numerous as-
fembly, 'the'King, accustomed to exprefi himself on every subjea
in itrong and animated language, declared that if one of his hands
were insete'd with heresy, he would cut it off with the other, and
would not spare even his own children, if found guilty of that
crime. As a dreadfadl proof of his being in earnest, the fix
unhappy persons were publickly burnt before the proceflion was
finished, with circumstances of the most flocking barbarity at-
tendifig their execution c

They refure . THE Princes of the league of Smalkalde, filled with resent-
to join himn.

ment and indignation at the cruelty with which their brethren
were treated,' could not conceive Francis to be sincere, when he
offered to protect in Germany those very tenets, which he perse-

c 3Blcarii Comment. Rer. Gallic. 646. Sleid. Hil. 75, &c.

cuted

cuted with fiuch rigour in his own dominions so that all Bellay's
art and eloquence in vindicating his matter, and apologizing for
his condut, made but little impreflion upon them. Besides, the
Emperor, who hitherto had never employed violence against the
doctrines of the Reformers, nor even given them much molestation
in their progress, was now bound by the agreement at Ratisbon,
not to disturb those who had embraced the new opinions; and the
Protestants wifely confidered this as a more certain, and imme-
diate security, than the precarious and distant hopes with wlich
Francis endeavoured to allure them. The manner too in which
he had behaved to his allies at the peace of Cambray, was too
recent to be forgotten, and did not encourage others to rely much
on his friendflip or generosity. Upon all these accounts, the
Protestant Princes refused to aflift the French King in any hostile
attempt againit the Emperor. The Elector of Saxony, the
most zealous among then, in order to avoid giving any umbiage'
to Charles, would not permit Melanthon to visit the court of
France, although that Reformer, flattered perhaps by the invi-
tation of so great a Monarch, or hoping that his pretence there
might be of signal advantage to the Protestant cause, discovered
a strong inclination to undertake the journey d.

BUT though none of the many Princes who envied or dreaded

the power of Charles, would second Francis's efforts in order to
reduce and circumscribe it, he, nevertheless, commanded Ihis
army to advance towards the frontiers of Italy. As his sole?
pretext for taking arms was, that he might chastise the Duke of
Milan for his insolent and cruel breach of the law of nations, it

BOOK VI.

1535.

T1he Frenchi
iniiy advan-
ce; towmuds
Italy.
C:imerarii Vita Mlan. 142, &kc. 415. Sckcnl.'lib. iii. lo7.

might

BOOK VI.

'S3S '535.

'Takes posses-
sion of the
Duke of Sa-
voy's donli-
nions.

might have been expe&ed that the whole weight of his ven-
geance was to have fallen on his territories. But on a sudden,
and at their very commencement, the operations of war took
another direction. Charles Duke of Savoy, one of the least
active and able Pinces of the line from which he descended,
had married Beatrix of Portugal, the Empress's fitter. By her
great talents, he oon acquired an absolute ascendant over her
husband; and proud of her affinity to the Emperor, or allured
by the magnificent promies with which he flattered her ambi-
tion, he formed an union between the Duke and the Imperial
court, extremely inconsistent with that neutrality, which wife po-
licy as well as the situation of his dominions had hitherto induced
him to observe in all the quarrels between the contending Mon-
archs. Francis was abundantly sensible of the distress to which
he might be exposed, if when he entered Italy, he should leave
behind him the territories of a Prince, devoted o obsequiously
to the Emperor, that he had sent his eldest on to be educated in
the court of Spain, as a kind of hostage for his fidelity. Clement
the Seventh, who had represented this danger in a strong light
during his interview with Francis at Marseilles, suggested to
him, at the fame time, the proper method of guarding against
it, having advised him to begin his operations against the Mila-
nefe, by taking poffeflion of Savoy and Piedmont, as the only
certain way of securing a communication with his own domi-
nions. Francis, highly irritated at the Duke on many accounts,
particularly for having supplied the Constable Bourbon with the
money, which enabled him to levy that body of troops which
ruined the French army in the fatal battle of Pavia, was not
unwilling to let him now feel both how deeply he resented, and
how severely he could punish there injuries. Nor did he want

several
384

several pretexts that would give some colour of equity to the
violence which lie intended. The territories of France and Savoy
lying contiguous to each other, and intermingled in many places,
various disputes, unavoidable in such a situation, subsisted con-
cerning the limits of their respeCtive property; and beides,
Francis had, in right of his mother Louise of Savoy, large claims
upon the Duke her brother, for her share in her father's fuc-
cellion. Being unwilling, however, to begin hostilities without
some cause of quarrel more specious than there pretensions, many
of which were obsolete and others dubious, he demanded per-
miflion to march through Piedmont in his way to the Milanese,
hoping that the Duke, from an excess of attachment to the Impe-
rial interest, might refute this request, and thus give a greater
appearance of justice to all his operations againit him. But, if
we may believe the historians of Savoy, better informed with re-
gard to this particular than those of France, the Duke readily,
and with a good grace, granted what it was not in his power to
deny, promising free pafage to the French troops as was desired;
To that Francis as the only method now left of justifying the mea-
fures which lie determined to take, was obliged to insist for full
fatisfation with regard to every thing that either the crown of
France or his mother Louise could demand of the house of Savoy c.
Such an evasive answer, as might have been expected, being made
to this requisition, the French army under the admiral Brion pour-
cd at once into the Duke's territories at different places. The
countries of Brefle and Bugey, united at that time to Savoy,
were over-run in a moment. Moil of the towns in the dutchy
of Savoy opened their gates at the approach of the enemy ; a few

c Hifloirc Genealogilque de Savoyc, par Guichcnon. 2 torn. fol. Lyon. 1660,
i. 639, &c.

VOL. 1I. D d d which

BOOK VI.

1535.

385

BOOK. VI. which attempted to make resistance were easily forced; and before
1.S ^ the end of the campaign, the Duke saw himself stripped of all his

dominions, but the province of Piedmont, in which there were not
many places in a condition to be defended.

The city of To compleat the Duke's misfortunes, the city of Geneva, the
Geneva reco-
vers its liber- sovereignty of which he claimed, and in ome degree possesed,
ty. threw off his yoke, and its revolt drew along with it the lots of

the adjacent territories. Geneva was, at that time, an Imperial
city; and though under the diret dominion'of its own biihops,
and the remote sovereignty of the Dukes of Savoy, the form of
its internal conflitution was purely republican, being governed
by syndics and a council chosen by the citizens. From these
distinct and often clafning jurifdiCions, two opposite parties took
their rife, and had long subsisted in the slate; the one composed
of the advocates for the privileges of the community, assumed
the name of Eignotz, or confederates in defence of liberty; and
1532. branded the other, which flipported the episcopal or ducal pre-

rogatives, with the name of Mammelutkes or slaves. At length,
the protestant opinions beginning to spread among the-citizens,
inspired such as embraced them with that bold enterprizing spirit
which always accompanied or was naturally produced by them
in their first operations. As both the Duke and Bilhop were
from interest, from prejudice, and from political considerations,
violent enemies of the Reformation, all the new converts joined
with warmth the party of the Eignotz; and zeal for religion,
mingling with the love of liberty, added strength to that gene-
rouspaflion. The rage ad animosity of two factions, slut up
within the fame walls, occasioned frequent infurredtions, which

terminating
386

terminating mostly to the advantage of the fiiends of liberty, BOOK VI.
they daily gained ground.

'535.

TH. Duke and Biflop, forgetting their ancient contests about

jurifdition, had united against their common enemies, and each
attacked them with his proper weapons. The Bilhop excom-
municated the people of Geneva as guilty of a double crime ; of
impiety, in apostatising fiom the eftablilhed religion; and of
sacrilege, in invading the right of his fee. The Duke attacked
them as rebels againit their lawful Prince, and attempted to render
himself mailer of the city, first by furprize, and then by open 153i.
force. The-citizens, despising the thunder of the Bishop's cen-
fures, boldly aerted their independance againtt the Duke; a:d
partly by their own valour, partly by tie powerful aflilance which
they received from their allies, tile canton of Berne, together with
some small supplies both of men and money, secretly furnifled by
the King of France, they defeated all his attempts. Not satisfied
with having repulsed him, or with remaining always upon tile
defensive themselves, they now took advantage of the Duke's ia-
bility to refiit them, while overwhelmed by the armies of France,
and seized several caitles and places of strength which lie possessed
in tile neighbourhood of Geneva thus delivering tile city from
these odious monuments of its former fubjetion, and rendering
the public liberty more secure for tle future. At the fame time
tile canton of Berne invaded and conquered the Pais de Vaud, to
which it had ome pretensions.. The canton of Fliburgh, though
zealously attached to the Catholic religion, and having no subjed
of contest with the Duke, laid hold on part of the spoils of that
unfortunate Prince. A great portion of these conquets or ufuir-
pations being still retained by the two cantons, add conlfiderably

Dddz to

387

to their power, and have become the most valuable part of their
territories. Geneva, notwithitanding many schemes and enter-
p izes of the Dukes of Savoy to re-eftablilh their dominion there,
still keeps pofTcflion of its idependance; and in consequence of
that blefling, has attained a degree of consideration, wealth and
elegance, which it could not otherwise have reached g.

AMIDST such a fuiccellion of difafrous events, the Duke of

Savoy had no other resource but the Emperor's protection, which,
upon his return from Tunis, he demanded with the most earnest
importunity; and as his misfortunes were occasioned chiefly by
his attachment ro the Imperial interest, he had a just title to im-
mediate afliitance. Charles, however, was not in a condition to.
support him with that vigour and dispatch which the exigency
of his affairs called for. Most of the troops employed in the
African expedition, having been raised for that service alone, were
disbanded as soon as it was finished; the veteran forces under
Antonio de Leyva were scarce fifficient for the defence of the
Milanese; and the Emperor's treafiry was entirely drained by his
vast efforts againift the Infidels.

BUT the death o(' Francis Sforza, occasioned, according to some

historians, by the terror of a French invasion, which had twice
been fatal to his family, afforded the tEmperor fill kifure to
prepare for action. By this unexpected event, the nature of the
war, and the causes of discord, were totally changed. Francis's
first pretext for taking arms, in order to chastise Sforza for the

g Hifi. de la Ville de Geneve, par Spon. 12°. Utr. 1685. p. 99. Hi-s. de

la Reformation dc Suifle, par Rouchat, Gen. 1728. tom. iv. p. 294, & c. tom. v.
p. 26, &c. Mlem. de Bdllay, 181

insult
BOOK VI.

'534.

The Epe-
ror unable tc
plliit the
Duke of
Savoy.

OA. 24.
Death of
Sfor7a Duk(
of M.lin.
388

infilt offered to the dignity of his crown, was at once cut oft;
but, as that Prince died without iflue, all Francis's rights to the
dutchy of Milan, which he had yielded only to Sforza and his
posterity, returned back to him in full force. As the recovery
of the Milanese was the favourite obje(t of that Monarch, he
instantly renewed his claim to it; and if he had supported his
pretensions by ordering the powerful army quartered in Savoy to
advance without losing a moment towards Milan, he could scarce
have failed to secure the important point of pof'elion. But
Francis, who became daily less enterprizing as lie advanced in
years, and who was overawed at ome times into an exces of
caution by the remembrance of his paif misfortunes, endea-
voured to eflablifli his rights by negociation, not by arms; and
from a timid moderation, fatal in all great affairs, negleced to
improve the favourable opportunity which preented itself.
Charles, mean while, in quality of overeign, took poflfllion of
the dutchy, as a vacant fief of the Empire; and while Francis
endeavoured to explain and aert his title to it, by arguments
aid memorials, ufing'every art in order to reconcile the Italian
powers to the thoughts of his regaining footing in Italy, his rival
was ileltly taking efflecual steps to prevent it. The Emperor,
however, was very careful not to discover too early any intention
of this ki(d ; but eeming to admit the equity of Francis's clainm
he appeared follicitous only about giving him poffflion in filch a
manner as might not disturb the peace of Europe, or overturn the
balance of power in Italy, which the politicians of that country
were o fond of preserving. By this artifice he deceived Francis,
and gained o much confidence with the reft of Europe, that
almost without incurring any suspicion, he involved the aflair in
.e\x difficulties, and protracled the :egociations at ,pleafilre.

Sometimts

BootK VI.

Francis's pre
tenlions to
that dlutclly.

389

Sometimes he proposed to grant tle investiture of Milan to tilc
Duke of Orleans, Francis's second son, sometimes to the Duke
of Angouleme, his third on; as the views and inclinations of the
French court varied, he transferred his choice alternately from the
one to the other, with such profound and well conducted difimu-
lation, that neither Francis nor his ministers seem to have pene-
trated his real intention; and all military operations were entirely
suspended, as if nothing had remained but to enter quietly into
poffcllion of what they demanded.

DURING the interval gained in this manner, Charles pre..

vailed on the states both of Sicily and Naples, who thought
themselves greatly honoured by the pretence of their Sovereign
on his return from Tunis, and who were no. less pleated with
the apparent disinterestedness of his expedition into Africa,
than dazzled by the success which had attended his arms, to vote
him such liberal fibfidies as were seldom granted in that age.
This enabled him to recruit his veteran troops, to levy a body of
Germans, and to take every other proper precaution for execu-
ting or supporting the measures on which he had determined.
Bellay, the French envoy in Germany, having discovered the
intention of raiing troops in that country, notwitlhflanding all
the pretexts employed in order to conceal it, firfl alarmed his
master with this evident proof of the Emperor's insincerity .
But Francis was to p)fll'ed at that time with the rage of nego-
ciatior, in all the artifices and refinements of which his rival far
surpassed him, that ii.ftead of beginning his military operatiors,
and pushing them with vigour, or izing the Milanese before
the Imperial army was aflcmbled, he satisfied himself with
making new ofllrs to the Emperor, in order to procure the

g \ c s. d C l3 .. ', 2i

investiture
f

BOOK VI.

1535.

1536.

Clnarls's
preparations
for war.
390

invefiture by his voluntary deed. His offers were, indced, so BOOK VI.
liberal and advantageous, that if ever Charks had intended to
grant his demand, lie could not have reIcjced them with decelcy. 53
IIe dextroufly eluded them by declaring that, until he consulted
the Pope in person, he could not take this final lefolution with
regard to a point which so nearly concerned the peace of Italy. By
this evasion he gained ome farther time for ripening the fchemcs
he had in view.

THE 'Empcror at last advanced towards Rome, and made his .1.ie Etpeor

public entry into that city with extraordinary pomp; but it entcels RomIe.
being found necefiary to remove the ruins of an ancient temple pr
of peace, in order to widen one of the streets, through which the
cavalcade had to pass, all the hliftorians take notice of this tri-
vial circumstance, which they are fond to interpret as an omen
of the bloody war that followed. Charles, it is certain, had by
this time banifled all thoughts of peace; and at last threw off the
nafl, with which lie had so long covered his designs fiom the
court of France, by a declaration of his sentiments no less fingu-
lar than explicit. The French ambassadors having in their
matler's name demanded a definitive reply to his propositions
concerning the investiture of Milan, Charlcs promised to give
it next day in presence of the Pope and Cardinals assembled.
in full co:fiftory. These being accordingly met, and all the
fortign mbanlhadors invited to attend, the Emperor flood up, llis p11,lic

inve tive

and addrefing himflf to the Pope, expatiated for lome time on againif
the finccrity of his own wishes for the peace of Chrifltendom, and l1llcis.
Iis abhorrence of war, the miseries of which lie enumerated
at great length,' with studicd and elaborate oratory; lie
complained that all his endeavours to prc.'rvc the tranquillity

of

391

BOOK VI. of Europe had hitherto been defeated by the restless and unjust
k76- ambition of the French King ; that even during his minority

1536.

he had proofs of the unfriendly and hostile intentions of that
Monarch that afterwards, he had openly attempted to wrest
from him the Imperial crown which belonged to him by a title
no lefsjufl than natural; that he had next invaded his kingdom
of Navarre ; that not satisfied with this, he had attacked his
territories as well as those of his allies both in Italy and the Low-
Countries; that when the valour of the Imperial troops, ren-
dered irresistible by the protection of the Almighty, had checked
his progress, ruined his armies, and seized his person, he con-
tinued to pursue by deceit what he had undertaken with injuf.
tice; that he had violated every article in the treaty of Madrid
to which he owed his liberty, and as oon as lie returned to his
dominions took measures for rekindling the war which that
pacification had happily extinguifled; that when new misfor-
tunes compelled him to sue again for peace at Cambray, he
concluded and observed it with great insincerity; that oon
thereafter he had formed dangerous connetions with the here-
tical Princes in Germany, and incited them to disturb the tran-
quillity of the Empire; that now he had driven the Duke of
Savoy, his brother-in-law and ally, out of the greater part of
his territories; that after injuries ol often repeated, and amidst
so many fourccs of discord, all hope o amity or concord became
desperate; aid though he was fill willing to grant the invefti-
ture of Milan to one of the Piilces of Franc, there was little
probability of that event's taking place, as Francis, on the one
hand, would not consent to what he ju-lged neceflary for fecurig
the tranquillity of Europe, nor, on tl:e other, couild he think it rea-
fonable or safe to give him the unconditional pofrlElion of all that
he demanded. Let us not, however, added he, continue wantonly to

ihcd
39-.

shed the blood of our innnocent fubje6ts; let us decide the quarrel
man to man, with what arms he pleases to chufe, in our shirts,
on an island, a bridge, or aboard a galley moored in a river; let
the dutchy of Burgundy be put in deposit on his part, and that
of Milan on mine; there hall be the prize of the conqueror; and
after that, let the united forces of Germany, Spain and France,
be employed to humble the power of .the Turk, and to extirpate
heresy out of Christendom. But if he, by declining thirsmethod of
terminating our differences, renders war inevitable, nothing hall
divert me from prosecuting it to such extremity, as shall reduce
one of us to be the poorest gentleman in his own dominions.
Nor do I fear that it will be on me ithi misfortune (hall fall I
enter upon ation with the faireftprofpeft of success; the justice
of my cause, the union of my fubje6ts, the number and valour
of my troops, the experience and fidelity of my generals, all com-
bine to ensure it. Of all these advantages, the Kiug.of France
is destitute; and were my efources no more certain, and my
hopes of vitory no better founded than his, I would instantly
throw myself at his feet, and with folded hands, .and a rope about
my neck, implore his mercy h.

THIS long harangue the Emperor delivered with an elevated

voice, a haughty tone, and the .greatest vehemence of expreion
and gesture. The French ambafadors, who did not fully com-
prehend his .meaning, as he spake in the Spanifl tongue, were
totally diconcerted, and at a loss how :they hould answer such.
an unexpected invective; when one of them beganlto vin-
dicate his master's condut,. Charles interposed abruptly, and
would not permit him to proceed. The Pope, without enter-

h Bellay, 199. Sandov. Hiflor. del Emper. II. 226.
VOL. II. E ee ing

Book VI.

1536.

Challenges
hiim to hngle
combat.

k
393

ing into any particular detail, satisfied himself with a nlort but
pathetic recommendation of peace, together with an offer of em-
ploying his sincere endeavours in order to procure that blessing to
Chritendom; and the assembly broke up in the greatest aftonilh-
ment at the extraordinary scene which had been exhibited. In no
part of his conduct, indeed, did Charles ever deviate so widely
from his general character. Instead of that prudent recollection,
that composed and regular deportment so ftritly attentive to
decorum, and so admirably adapted to conceal his own paflions,
for which he was at all other times conspicuous, he appears on
this occasion before the most august assembly in Europe, boasting
of his own power and exploits with insolence; inveighing against
his enemy with indecency; and 'challenging him to combat with
an ostentatious valour, more becoming a'champion in romance,
than the first Monarch in Chriftenddm. But the well known and
powerful operation of continued prosperity, and of exaggerated
praise, even upon the firmest minds, sufficiently account for this
seeming inconsistency. After having compelled Solyman to retreat,
and having stripped Barbarossa of a kingdom, Charles began to
confider his arms as invincible. He had been entertained, ever
since his return from Africa, with repeated scenes of triumphs and
· public rejoicings; the orators and poets of Italy, the rtoft elegant

at that time in Europe, had exhausted their genius in panegyric,
to which the astrologers added magnificent promises of a more
splendid fortune still in store. Intoxicated with all these, he forgot
his usual reserve and moderation, and was unable to restrain this
extravagant (ally of vanity, which became the more remarkable,
by being both so uncommon and so public.

HE

394
BOOK VI.

'536.

The motives
of this raili
measure.

I

HE himself seems to have been immediately sensible of the

impropriety of his behaviour, and when the French ambafadors
demanded next day a more clear explanation of what he had said
concerning the combat, he told them, that they were not to con-
fider his proposal as a formal challenge to their matter, but as an
expedient for preventing bloodihed he endeavoured to soften
other expressions in his discourse and spoke in terms full of re-
fpe&t towards Francis. But thought this flight apology was far
from being sufficient to remove the offence which had been given,
Francis, by.an unaccountable infatuation, continued to negociate,
as if it had ill been possible to bring their differences to a period
by an amicable composition. Charles, finding him so eager to
run into the snare, favoured the deception, and by seeming toliften
to his proposals gained time to prepare for the execution of his own
designs .

AT last, the Imperial army aembled on the frontiers of the

Milanese, to the amount of forty thousand foot, and ten, thou-
sand horse, while that of France encamped near Vercelli in Pied-
mont, being greatly inferior in number, and weakened by the
departure of a body of Swit, whom Charles artfully persuaded
the Popili cantons to recal, that they might not serve agailift
the Duke of Savoy, their ancient ally. The French general,
not daring to rifque a battle, retired as soon as tile Imperialists,
advanced. The Emperor put himfalf at the head of his forces,
which the marquis del Guafto, the Duke of Alva, and Ferdinand
de Gonzaga commanded under him, though the supreme direc-
tion of the whole was committed to Antonio de Leyva, whose
abilities and experience justly entitled him to that diftinition.

i Mem. de Bellay, 205, &c.

E e e 2 Charles

BOOK VI.

1536.

Charles In-
vades France.
May 6.

395

Charles soon discovered his intention not to confine his opera-
tions to the recovery of Piedmont and Savoy, but to push for-
ward and invade the southern provinces of France. This scheme
he had long meditated, and had long been taking measures for
executing it with such vigour as might ensure success. He had
remitted large fums to his sifter, the governess of the Low-Coun-
tries, and to his brother, the King of the Romans, inftruting them
to levy all the forces in their power, in order to form two separate
bodies, the one to enter France on the fide of Picardy, the
other on the fide of Champagne; while he, with the main army,
fell upon the opposite frontier of the kingdom. Trusting to
there vast preparations, he thought it impossible that Francis could
resist so many unexpeted attacks, on such different quarters; and
begun his enterprize with such confidence of its happy issue, that
he desired Paul Jovius the historian, to make a large provision
of paper sufficient to record the victories which he was going to
acquire.

H is ministers and generals, instead of entertaining the fame

sanguine hopes, represented to him in the strongest terms the
danger of leading his troops so far from his own territories, to
such a distance from his magazines, and into provinces which
did not yield sufficient subsistence for their own inhabitants.
They intreated him to confider the inexhaustible resources of
France in maintaining a defensive war, and the ative zeal with
which a gallant nobility would serve a Prince whom they loved,
in repelling the enemies of their country; they recalled to his
remembrance the fatal miscarriage of Bourbon and Pescara, when
they ventured upon the fame enterprize under circumstances
which seemed as certainly to promise success; the marquis

del
Book VI.

1536.
396

397

del Guafto in particular, fell on his knees, and conjured him to
abandon the undertaking as desperate. But many circumstances
combined in leading Charles to disregard all their remonstrances.
He could seldom be brought, on any occasion, to depart from a
resolution which he had once taken; he was too apt to under-rate
and despise the talents of his rival the King of France, which dif-
sered so widely from his own; lie was blinded by the presumption
which accompanies prosperity; and relied, perhaps, in ome de-
gree on the prophecies which predicted the increase of his own
grandeur. He not only adhered obstinately to his own plan, but
determined to advance towards France without waiting for
the redu&tion of any part of Piedmont, except such towns as were
absolutely neceflary for preserving his communication with the
Milanese.

TH E marquis de Saluces, to whom Francis had entrusted the

command of a small body of troops left for the defence of Pied-
mont, rendered this more easy than he had any reason to expet.
That nobleman, educated in the court of France, distinguished
by continual marks of the King's favour, and honoured To lately
with a charge of such importance, suddenly, and without any
provocation or pretext of difgut, revolted from his benefactor.
His motives to this treacherous ation, were as childish as the
deed itself was base. Being strongly poffefled with a fuperfti-
tious faith in divination and astrology, he believed with full'
assurance, that the fatal period of the French nation was at hand;
that on its ruins the Emperor would eftablifi an universal
monarchy; that therefore he ought to follow the dictates
of prudence, in attaching himself to his rising fortune, and
would incur no blame for deserting a Prince whom heaven had

devoted

BOOK VI.

1536.

Recovers
part of the

uke of
Savoy's
dominions.

BOOK VI. devoted to deftrueion k. His treason became still more odious, by
' s36 his employing that very authority with which Francis had in-

vested him, in order to open the kingdom to his enemies. What-
ever was proposed or undertaken by the officers under his command
for the defence of their conquests, he rejeted or defeated.
Whatever properly belonged to himself as a commander in chief,
to provide or perform for that purpose, he totally neglected. In
this manner, he rendered towns even of the greatest consequence
untenable, by leaving them destitute either of provisions, or
ammunition, or artillery, or a sufficient garrison; and the Im-
perialifts mutt have reduced Piedmont in as hort time as was
necessary to march through it, if Montpezat, the governor of
Foffano, had not, by an extraordinary effort of courage and
military conduc, detained them, almost a month, before that
inconsiderable place.

Francis's
plan for the
defence ofhis
kingdom.

B Y this meritorious and seasonable service, he gained his

master sufficient time for assembling his forces, and for concert-
ing a system of defence against a danger which he now saw to be
inevitable. Francis fixed upon the only proper and effectual plan
for defeating the invasion of a powerful enemy; and his prudence
in chufing this plan, as well as his perseverance in executing it,
deserve the greater praise, as it was equally contrary to his own
natural temper, and to the genius of the French nation. He
determined to remain altogether upon the defensive; never to
hazard a battle, or even a great skirmish, without certainty of
success. to fortify his camps in a regular manner; to throw
garrisons only into towns of great strength; to deprive the
enemy of subsistence, by laying waste the country before them;
and to save the whole kingdom, by sacrificing one of its pro-

k Bellay, 222, a. 246, b.

vinces.
398

vinces. The execution of this plan lie committed entirely to
the marechal Montmorency, who was the author of it a man
wonderfully fitted by nature for such a trufl. Haughty, severe,
confident in his own abilities, and despising those of other men;
incapable of being diverted from any resolution by remonstrances
or intreaties and in profccuting any Lfiernle, regardless alike of
love and of pity.

MONTMORENCY, made choice of a strong camp under the

walls of Avignon, at the confluence of tile Rhofnc and Durance,
one of which plentifully supplied his troops with all neceflaries
from the inland provinces, and the other covered his camp on
that fide, where it was most probable the enemy would approach.
He laboured with unwearied industry to render the fortifications
of this camp impregnable, and assembled there a considerable
army, thimgh greatly inferior to that of the enemy; while the
King with another body of troops encamped at Valence, higher
up the Rhofile. Marseilles and Aries were the only towns, he
thought it necessary to defend; the former, in order to retain
the command of the ea; the latter, as the barrier of the pro-
vince of Languedoc; and each of there le furnifled with nume-
rous garrisons of his best troops, commanded by officers, on
whose fidelity and valour he could rely. The inhabitants of tile
other towns as well as of the open country, were compelled to
abandon their houses, and were conducted to the mountains, to the
camp at Avignon, or to the inland provinces. The fortifications
of such places as might have afforded flielter or defence to the
enemy, were thrown down. Corn, forage and provisions of every
kind, were carried away or destroyed; all the mills and ovens were
ruined, and the wells filled up or rendered useless. The deva-

tfation

399
BOOK VI.

1536.

Entiults
Mon I inorell-
cy with the
execution of
it.

He enlcnallps
at Avignon.

BOOK VI.

1536.

Cliiles cn-
ters Provence.

station extended from the Alps to Marseilles, and from the ea to
the confines of Dauphine; nor does history afford any instance
among civilized nations, in which this cruel expedient for the
public safety was employed with the fame rigour.

MEANWHILE, the Emperor arrived with the van of his

army on the frontiers of Provence, and was Rill so possesed with
confidence of success, that during a few days, when lie was
obliged to halt until the reft of his troops came up, he began to
divide his future conquests among his officers; and as a new
incitement to serve him with zeal, gave them liberal promises of
offices, lands and honours in Francel. The face of desolation,
however, which presented itself to him, when he entered the
country, could scarce fail to damp his hopes; and to convince
him that a Monarch, who, in order to distress an enemy, had
voluntarily ruined one of his richest provinces, would defend the
reft with obstinate despair. Nor was it long before he became
sensible, that Francis's plan of defence was as prudent as it ap-
peared to be extraordinary. His fleet, on which Charles chiefly
depended for subsistence, was prevented for some time by contrary
winds, and other accidents to which naval operations are filbje&,
from approaching the French coast; and even after its arrival, it
afforded at best a precarious and scanty supply to such a nume-
rous body of troops m; nothing was to be found in the country
itself for their support; nor could they draw any considerable
aid from the dominions of the Duke of Savoy, exhausted
already by maintaining two great armies. The Emperor
was no less embarrassed how to employ, than how to subsist his
forces, for, though he was now in poffellion of almost an entire

1 Bclly, 266, a.

in Sandov. ii. 231.

province,
400

province, he could not however be said to have the command of BOOK VI.
it, while he held only defenceless towns; and while the French, 6
betides their camp at Avignon, continued mailers of Marfcilles
and Aries. At firt hle thought of attacking the camp, and of
terminating the war by one decisive blow; but skilful officers,
who were appointed to view it, declared the attempt to be utterly
impracticable. He then commanded Marfcilles and Aries to be
invested, hoping that the French would quit their advantageous s
post in order to relieve them; but Montmorency adliering firmly
to his plan, remained immoveable at Avignon, and the Impe-
rialifts met with filch a warm reception from the garrisons of
both towns, that they relinquiflied their enterpiizes with loss and
disgrace. As a last effort, the Emperor advanced once more to-
wards Avignon, tho' with an army harraffed by the perpetual i-
curfions of small parties of the French light troops, weakened by
diseases, and dispirited by difaflters, which seemed more intolerable,
because they were unexpeted.

Du R I N these operations Montmorency found hlimfelf ex- Montloren-
posed to greater danger from his own troops than fioml tile lrya Irtiltl"l

in iidhciiitig

enemy; and their inconsiderate valour went near to have pre- to lis plan ot
cipitated the kingdom into those calamities, which lie with such
indufiry and caution had endeavoured to avoid. Unaccutomned
to behold an enemy ravaging their country almof: without
controul; impatient of such long inaction; unacquainteld with
the flow and remote, but certain effects of Montlmorcncy's
system of defence; the French wifled for a battle with no less
ardour than the Imperialiffts. They confidered the conduct of
their general as a dilgrace to their country. His caution tchey
imputed to timidity; his circumflpetion to want of spirit ; and

VolJ. II. F f 1' the

4ol

BOOK VI.

1536.

The retreat
and wretched
condition of
the Imperial
ariiy.

the conRfancy with which he pursued his plan to obstinacy or
pride. These reflections, whispered, at filft, among the soldiers
and subalterns, were adopted, by degrees, by officers of higher
rank; and as many of there envied Montmorency's favour with
the King, and more were dissatisfied with his harfli disgusting
manner, the discontent oon became great in his camp, which
was filled with general murmurings and almost open complaints
against his measures. Montmorency, on whom the sentiments
of his own troops made as little impreflion as the insults of
the enemy, adhered steadily to his fyltem; though in order to
reconcile the army to his maxims, no less contrary to the genius
of the nation, than to the ideas of war among undisciplined
troops, he assumed an unusual affability in his deportment, and
often explained with great condescension the motives of his
conduc, the advantages which had already resulted from it,
and the certain success with which it would be attended. At
last Francis joined his army at Avignon, which having received
several reinforcements, he now confidered as of strength sufficient
to face the enemy. As he had put upon himself no small con-
ftraint, in having consented that his troops fiould remain o long
upon the defensive, it can be scarce doubted but that his fond-
ness for what was daring and splendid, added to the impatience
both of officers and soldiers, would have over-ruled Montmorency's
salutary caution .

HAPPILY the retreat of the enemy delivered the kingdom

from the danger which any ralh resolution might have occasioned.
The Emperor, after spending two inglorious months in Provence,

n Mem. dc Bellay, 269, &c. 312, &c.

having
402

having performed nothing filitable to his vait prcparatio:'s, or
that could justify the co:fidence with which lie had boafled of
his own power, sou:;d that, belides Antonio de eyva, and otiler
officers of diftilndion, lie had loft one lialf of his troops by il'-
eases, or by famine; and that the reft were in no condition to
firuggle any longer with calamities, by which so many of their
companions had perified. Necellity, therefore, extorted fiom him
orders to retire; and though he was some time in motion before
the French fufpcaed his intention, a body of light too'ps, allifted
by crowds of peasants, eager to be revenged on those wlho hlad
brought lich desolation on their country, hung upon the rear of'
the Imperialists, and by seizing every favouroble opportunity of
attacking them, threw them often into confuifion. The road by
which they fled, for they pursued their march with fitch difor-
der and precipitation, that it scarce deserves the name of a re-
treat, was firewed with arms or baggage, which in their hurry
and trepidation they had abandoned, and covered with the lick,
the wounded, and the dead; insomuch, that Martin Bellay, an
eye-witness of their calamities, endeavours to give his readers
ibme idea of it, by comparing their miserics to those which the
Jews fiffered from the victorious and deftluctive arms of the
Romans o. If Montmorency at this critical moment had advanced
with all his forces, nothing could have saved the whole Imperial
army from utter ruin. But that general, by flanding so long
and lo obstinately on the defenlive, had become cautious to ex-
cels; his mind, tenacious of any bent it had.once taken, could
not alliume a contrary one as suddenly as the charge of circum-
flances required ; and lie flill continued to repeat his favourite
maxims, that it was more prudent to allow the lion to escape, than

Mem. dc 13ell.i), 31 6. Sandov, 1-lifl. dcl l.mpcr. ii. 232.

F f f to

B~on V .

i .
4t' 3-

BOOK VI. to drive him to depair, and that a bridge of gold fliould be made
G;-SC for a retreating enemy.

3536.

THE Emperor having condutlsed the f(attered remains of his

troops to the frontiers of Milan, and appointed the marquis del
Guafto to succeed Leyva in the government of the dutchy, set out
for Genoa. As he could not bear to expose himself to the scorn
of the Italians, after such a fad reverse of fortune ; and did not
chute, under his present circumstances, to revisit those cities through
which he had so lately pafied in triumph for one conquest, and in

Novenmb. certain expeation of another; he embarked directly for Spain p.

Operations No R was the progress of his arms on the opposite frontier of
in Picardy. France such as to alleviate in any degree the losses which he had

sustained in Provence. Bellay by his address and intrigues had
prevailed on so many of the German Princes to withdraw the con-
tingent of troops which they had furniflied to the King of the Ro-
mans, that he was obliged to lay aside all thoughts of his intended
irruption into Champagne. Though a powerful army levied in
the Low-Countries entered Picardy, which they found but feebly
guarded, while the strength of the kingdom was drawn towards
the south; yet the nobility taking arms with their uual alacrity,
supplied by their spirit the defects of the King's preparations, and
defended with such vigour Peronne, and other towns which were
attacked, as obliged the enemy to retire without making any
conquest of importance q.

THUS Francis, by the prudence of his own measures, and by
the union and valour of his subjeCts, rendered abortive those vast

P Jovii lliflor. lib. 35. p. 174, &c. q Mem. de Ecllay, 318, &c.

efforts
404

efforts by which his rival had almofl: exhautted his whole force.
As this humbled tile Emperoi's arrogance no less than it checked
his power, lie was mortified more lenfibly on this occasion than on
any other, during the courie of the long contests between him
and the Frcnch Monarch.

ON E circumflance alone cmbittcred the joy with which the

fticces of the campaign inspired Francis. That was the death
of the Dauphin, his eldest son, a Prince of great hopes, and
extremely beloved by the people on account of his resemblance
to his father. This happening fudderly, was imputed to poison,
not only by the vulgar, fond of ascribing the death of illustrious
personages to extraordinary causes, but by the King and his mi-
nifters. The count de Montecuculi, an Italian nobleman, cup-
bearer to the Dauphin, being seized on ffpicion and put to the
torture, openly charged the Imperial generals, Gonzaga and
Leyva, with having inltigated him to tle commillion of that
crime, and threw out onme indircet and oblfcure accusations
againfl the Emperor himself, At a time when all France was
animated with implacable hatred againt Charles, this was confi-
dered as an inconteftible proof of guilt; while tle confidence with
which both lie and his officers afnerted their own innocence, toge-
ther ith the indignation and horror which they exprefcd on
their being fippofed capable of such a detcftable ation, were little
attended to, and less regarded . It is cvident, however, that the
Emperor could have no inducement to perpetrate fitch a crime,
as Francis as s ttill in the vigour of life himself, and had two Tons,
besides the Dauphin, grown up to a good age. That tingle confi-
deration, without mentioning the Emperor's general character,

r MIn. dc Ilclli, 289.

ltIblcmlnilltc

405
BOOK VI.

L5.16.

Death ofthe
Dauphin.

Imputed to
poilbo .

BooK VI.

1536.

1557.

Decree of the
parlialciit of
P.aris againll
the Emperor.

unblemiflied by the imputation of any deed refemlbling this in
atrocity, is more than filfficient to counterbalance the weight of
a dubious teffirnoily uttered during the anguifll of torture 6:
According to tile most unprejudiced historians, the Dauphin's
death was occasioned by his having drunk too freely of cold water
after overheating himfclf at tennis; and this account, as it is the
molt limple, is likewise the most credible. But if his days were
cut short by poison, it is not improbable that the Emperor con-
jetured rightly, when le affirmed that it had been administered
by the direcion of Catherine of Medici, in order to secure the
crown to the Duke of Orleans, her hufbandt. The advantages
resulting to lier by the Dauphin's death, were obvious as well as
great; nor did her boundless and daring ambition ever scruple at
any acion nccefary towards attaining the objets which he had
in view.

NEXT year opened with a trainfation very uncommon, but

so incapable of producing any effet, that it would not deserve
to 'be mentioned, if it were not a striking proof of that personal
animosity which mingled tfelf in all the hostilities between
Clarles and Francis, and which often betrayed thim into such
indecencies towards each other, as lessened the dignity of both.
Francis, accompanied by the peers and princes of the blood,
having taken his feat in the Parliament of Paris with the usual
folemnities, the advocate-general appeared ; and after accusing
Charles of Auftiia, (for so he affctted to call the Emperor) of
having violated the treaty of Cambray, by which lie was
absolvcd from the homage due to the crown of Frarce for the
counties of Artois and Slanders; ifiited that this treaty being

Sandov. Iifi. de l Impcr. ii. 231.
t\ra y Z niga ' ida di Callo V, p. 75.

nOW
406

now void, he was fill to e confidered as a vaflill of the crown,
and, by consequence, had been guilty of rebellion il taking arms
againif his fovercign ; and therefore he demanded that Charles
should be summoned to appear in person, or by his counsel,
before the parliament of Paris, his legal judges, to answer for
his crime. The request was granted; a herald repaired to the
frontiers of Picardy, and fullmoned him, with the accustomed
formalities, to appear againfl a day prefixed. That term being
expired, and no person appearing in his name, the parliament
gave judgment, " That Charles of Auitria had forfeited by rebel-
lion and contumacy these fiefs; declared Slanders and Artois to be
re-united to the crown of France; and ordered their decree for
this purpose to be published by found of trumpet on the frontiers
of there provinces ."

SOON after this vain display of his resentment, rather than of

his power, Francis marched towards the Low-Countries, as if
hle had intended to execute the sentence which his parliament
had pronounced, and to seize those territories which it had
awarded to him. As the Qeen of Hungary, to whom her
brother the Emperor had committed the government of that
part of his dominions, was not prepared for so early a campaign,
he at sirs made some progress, and took several towns of impor-
tance. But being obliged soon to leave his army, in order to
fiperintend the other operations of war, the Flemings having
aflimbled a numerous army, not only recovered most of the places
which they had loft, but began to make conquests in their turn.
At last they invefled Terouenne, and tle Duke of Orleans, now
u I.ctres et lMecnoircs d'EIat, par Ribicr, 2 tom. IlBois. 1666. tom. i. p. .

Dauphin.

BooK VI.

1537.

Camuipign
OeCII i (e
Low-
Counluics.

a rII.

407

BOOK VI.

1537.

A fufpel sion
ofairns there..

July o.

And in Pied-
mont.

Dauphin, by the death of his brother, and Montmorency, whom
Francis had honoured with the constable's sword, as the reward
of his great services during the former campaign, determined to
hazard a battle in order to relieve it. While they were advancing
for this purpose, and within a few miles of the enemy, they
were ifopt hort' by the arrival of an herald from the Queen of
Hungary, acquainting him that a suspension of arms was now
agreed upon.

THIS unexpected event was owing to the zealous endeavours

of the two sifters, the Queens of France and of Hungary, who
had long laboured to reconcile the contending Monarchs. ! The
war in the Netherlands had laid waste the',frontier provinces of
both countries, without any real advantage to either; the French
and Flemings equally regretted the interruption of their com-
merce, which was beneficial to both; arid Charles and Francis,
who had each itrained to the utmost, in'order to fuppott the' vafl
operations of the former campaign,' found that they could not now
keep armies on foot in this quarter, without weakening their
operations in Piedmont, where both wished to push the war with
the' greatest vigour':' All there circumitances facilitated the inego-
ciatidn'sof the two Qeens , a truce; was concluded, to continue
in force for ten months, but it extended no farther than the Low-
Couitries . '

. * . . . .

.IF Piedmont the' war was till iprofeiuted with ereat alniriib-

fity; and though neither Cliarles' nor Francis' could 'iake
the powerful efforts, to which their hanrmofity- prompted
them, they continued to exert themselves like combatants,

x Memoires dc Ribier, 56.

whose
-N

whose rancour remaino after their strength is exhausted. Towns
were alternately loft and retaken; kirmifhes were fought every
day; and much blood was sIed, without any decisive aion,
that gave the uperiority to either fide. At last the two QLeens
determining not to leave unfinished the good work which they
had begun, prevailed, by their importunate solicitations, the one
on her brother, the other on her husband, to consent also to a
truce in Piedmont for three months, upon condition that eacl
should keep poffeflion of what was in his hands, and leaving
garrisons in the towns, withdraw his army out of the province
and that plenipotentaries ihould be appointed to adjust all matters
in dispute by a final treaty y.

THE powerful motives which inclined both Princes to this

accommodation, have been often mentioned. The expences of
the war had far exceeded the fums which their revenues were
capable of supplying, nor durst they venture upon any great
addition to the impositions then established, as fubjets were not
yet taught to bear with patience the immense burdens to which
they have become accustomed in modern times. The emperor,
in particular, though he had contracted debts which in that age
appeared prodigious ", had it not in his power to pay the large
arrears which had been long due to his army. At the fame time
he had no profpe&t of deriving any aid in money or men either
from the Pope or Venetians, though he had employed promises
and threats, alternately, in order to procure it. But lie found the
former fixed in his resolution of adhering feadily to the neutrality
which he had always declared to be suitable to his character,
and paflionately desirous of bringing about a peace. He perceived

BOOK VI.

1537.

Motives of it.

Y Mem. de Ribicr, 62.
VOL. II.

R libicr, i. 294.
Ggg

409
that

that the latter were fRill intent on their ancient
the balance between the rivals, and follicitous
great a weight into either scale.

object of holding
not to throw too

W H AT made a deeper impreflon on Charles than all tlefe,

was the dread of the Turkish arms, which Francis had drawn
upon him by his league with Solyman. Though Francis,
without the afiftance of a single ally, had a war to maintain
against an enemy greatly superior in power to himself, yet so
great was the horror of Christians, in that age, at any union
with infidels, which they confidered not only as dishonourable
but profane, that it was long before he could be brought to
avail himself of the obvious advantages resulting from such a
confederacy. Neceflity at last flrmounted his delicacy and
scruples; and towards the close of the preceding year, La Forest,
a secret agent at the Ottoman porte. had concluded a treaty with
the Sultan, whereby Solyman engaged to invade, next campaign,
the kingdom of Naples, and to attack the King of the Romans
in Hungary with a powerful army, while Francis undertook to
enter the Milanese at the fame time with a proper force. Soly-
man had puntually petformed what was incumbent on him.
Barbarossa with a great fleet appeared on the coast of Naples,
filled that kingdom, from which all the troops had been drawn
towards Piedmont, with consternation, landed without resistance
near Taranto, obliged Castro, a place of ome strength, to fur-
render, plundered the adjacent country, and was taking mea-
fures for securing and extending his conquests, when the unex-
peted arrival of Doria together with the Pope's gallies, and a
squadron of the Venetian fleet, made it prudent for him to
retire. In Hungary the progress of the Turks was more for-

midable.
BOOK VI.

1537.

Of which,
Francis's al-
liance will)
the I'urkish
Eimiperor
the nioft
considerable.
410

midable. Malmet, their general, after gaining several finall
advantages, defeated the Germans in a great battle at Effek on
the Drave . Happily for Christendom, it was not in Francis's
power to execute with equal exactness what lie had stipulatcd;
nor could he assemble at this junture an army strong enough to
penetrate into the Milanese. By this he failed in recovering
pofeflion of that dutchy and Italy was not only saved from the
calamities of a new war, but from feeling as an addition to all that
it had suffered the desolating rage of the Turkish armsb. As the
Emperor knew that he could not long resist the efforts of two
such powerful confederates, nor could expect that the fame fortu-
nate accidents would concur a second time to deliver Naples, and
to preserve the Milanese: As he foresaw that the Italian tlates
would not only tax him loudly with insatiable ambition, but
might even turn their arms against him, if he should be o
regardless of their danger as obstinately to protrac the war,
lie thought it necessary, both for his safety and reputation, to
give his content to a truce. Nor was Francis willing to fuflain
all the blame of obftru&ing the re-efbabliflment of peace, or to
expose himself on that account to the danger of being deserted
by the Swiss and other foreigners in his service. He even began
to apprehend that his own fubjets would serve him coldly, if,
by contributing to aggrandize the power of the Infidels, wlhich
it was his duty, and had been the ambition of his ancellors to
depress, he continued to a in direc opposition to all the prin-
ciples which ought to influence a Monarch diftinguifled by the
title of Most Christian King. He chore, for all tlcfe reasons,
rather to run the rifque of difobliging his new ally the Sultan,

, Iftnanhalli lifi. ilung. li). xiii. p. 139.
, Jovii Iliflor. lib. xxxv. p. 183.

G g g 2 than,

BOOK VI.

'137.

411

BOOK VI.

1537.

Negociations
of a peace be-
tween Charles
and Francis.

538.

''he Pope
conduas
these in per-
ton.

THE REIGN OF THE

than, by an unseasonable adherence to the treaty with him, to for-
feit what was of greater consequence.

BUT though both parties consented to a truce, the plenipo-

tentiaries found insuperable difficulties in fettling the articles of
a definitive treaty. Each of the Monarchs, with the arrogance
of a conqueror, aimed at giving law to the other; and neither
would so far acknowledge his inferiority, as to sacrifice any
point of. honour, or to relinquish any matter of right; so that
the plenipotentiaries spent the time in long and fruitless negocia-
tions, and separated after agreeing to prolong the truce for a few
months.

T HE Pope, however, did not depair of accomplishing a

point in which the plenipotentiaries had failed, and took upon
himself the sole burden of negociating a peace. To form a
confederacy capable of defending Christendom from the formi-
dable inroads of the Turkish arms, and to concert effetual mea-
fures for the extirpation of# the Lutheran heresy, were two great
objects which Paul had much at heart, and he confidered the
union of the Emperor with the King of France as an essential pre-
liminary to both. To be the instrument of reconciling these con-
tending Monarchs, whom his predecessors by their interested and
indecent intrigues had so often embroiled, was a circumstance
which could not fail of throwing diftinguifled luffre on his cha-
ra&er and administration. Nor was he without hopes that while
he pursued this laudable end, he might secure advantages to his
own family, the aggrandizing of which he did not neglect, though
he aimed at it with a less audacious ambition than was common
among the Popes of that century. Influenced by there confidera-
tions, he proposed an interview between the two Monarchs at

Nice,

Nice, and offered to repair thither in person, that he might a&
,IS mediator in composin;g all their differences. When a Pontiff of
a venerable characer, and of very advanced age, was willing,
fromn his zeal for peace, to undergo the fatigues of such a distant
journey, neither Charles nor Francis could with decency decline
the interview. But though both came to the place of rendezvous,
so great was the difficulty of adjufling the ceremonial, or such
the remains of diflruft and rancour on each fide, that they re-
fured to fee one another, and every thing was tranfafted by the
intervention of the Pope, who visited them alternately. Nor could
lie with all his zeal and ingenuity find out any method of remov-
ing the obftgcles, particularly those arising from the poffeflion
of the Milanese, which prevented a final accommodation nor
was all the weight of his authority sufficient to overcome the ob-
ltinate perseverance of either Monarch in aflerting his own claims.
At last, that he might not seem to have laboured altogether with-
out cffed, he prevailed on them to sign a truce for ten years, up-
on the fame condition with the former, that each flould retain
what was now in his poffenion, and in the mean time Imould fend
ambafiadors to Rome, to discuss their pretensions at leisure .

BOOK VI.

1538.

A truce for
ten years con-
cluded ai
Nice.
Juine S.

T ii s ended a war of no long continuance, but very exten-

five in its operations, and in which both parties exerted their
utmof ftrcngth. Tho' Francis failed in the objet that he had
principally in view, the recovery of the Milanese, he acquired,
nevertheless, great reputation by the wisdom of his measures as
well as the success of his arms in repulsing a formidable invasion;
and by securing pofl'elion of one half of the Duke of Savoy's

c lRcucil des Traitez, ii. 210. Itelaionc del Nicolo 'Tielolo dcl'aboca-
nmnto di Nizza clie.. Du Mont Cotps Diplomat. par. ii. p. 172.

doininion,

413

BOOK VI.

1538.

Interview be-
tween
Charles and
Francis at
Aigue.-mor-
tes.

dominions, he added no iconfiderable acceflion to his kingdom.
Whereas Charles, repulsed and baffled, after having boasted so
arrogantly of victory, purchased an inglorious truce, by facri-
sicing an ally who had rashly confided too much in his friendship
and power. The unfortunate Duke murmured, complained,
and remonstrated against a treaty so much to his disadvantage ;
but in vain ; he had no means of redress, and was obliged to
submit. Of all his dominions, Nice, with its dependencies,
was the only corner of which he himself kept poffellion. He
saw the reft divided between a powerful invader and the ally to
whose protection he had trusted, while he remained a fad
monument of the imprudence of weak Princes, who by taking
part in the quarrel of mighty neighbours, between whom they
happen to be situated, are cruhed and overwhelmed in the
shock.

A F E w days after signing the treaty of truce, the Emperor

set fail for Barcelona, but was driven by contrary winds to the
island St. Margaret on the coast of Provence. When 'Francis,
who happened to be not far distant, heard of this, he confidered
it as an office of civility to invite him to take helter in his do-
minions, ard proposed a personal interview with him at Aigues-
mortes. The Emperor, who would not be outdone by his ri-
val in complaisance, instantly repaired thither. As oon as e
cast anchor in the road, Francis, without waiting to fettle any
point of ceremony, but relying implicitely on the Emperor's
honour for his security, visited him on board his galley, and
was received aid entertained with the warmest demonitrations
of esteem and affection. Next day the Emperor repaid the con-
fidence which the King had placed in him. He landed at

Aigues-
414

Agiues-nortes with as little precaution, and met with a recep-
tion equally cordial. He remained on lore during the night,
and in both visits they vied with each other in tie expreflions of
lefpedt and friendfhipd. After twenty years of open hoftili-
ties, or of secret enmity; after so many ijuries reciprocally
inflicted or endured; after having formally given the lie and
challelnged one another to ingle combat after the Emperor had
inveighed so publickly against Francis as a Prince void of honour
or integrity; and Francis had accused him as accessary to the
murder of his eldest son, fich an interview appears altogether
singular ad even unnatulal. Bdt the hiflory of there Monarchs
abounds with fich furprizing transitions. From implacable
enmity they appeared to pass, in a moment, to the most cordial
reconcilement ; from suspicion and difiruft to perfect confidence
and from pradifing all the dark arts of a deceitful policy, they
could afliumc, of a fildden, the liberal and open manners of two
gallant gentlemen.

THE Pope, besides the glory of having restored peace to

Europe, gained, according to his expeEtation, a point of great
confequcnce to his family, by prevailing on tle Emperor to be-
troth Margaret of Austria his natural daughter, formerly the
wife of Alexander de Medici, to his grandon Oavio Farnese,
and in consideration of this marriage, to belfow fevcral honours
and territories upon his future fon-in-law. A very tragical
event, which happened about the beginning of the year one
thousand five hundred and thirty seven, had deprived Margaret
of her first husband. That young prince, whom the Emperor's

d Sandov. Hi-t. vol. ii. 238. Relatia: de l'cntrcvie d Charl. V. & Franl. I.

par M. de a Rivoire. Hlill. de Langucd. par. D. D. De Vic .& Vaifette. torn. v.
Pleuves, p. 93.

partiality

BooK VI.

1538.

The'laftili.
nation of
Alexander
de Melici.

4'5

4

partiality had railed to the supreme power in Florence, upon the
ruins of the public liberty, neglected entirely the cares of govern-
ment, and abandoned himself to the most dissolute debauchery.
Lorenzo de Medici his nearest kinsman was not only the companion
but direcor of his pleasures, and employing all the powers of a
cultivated and inventive geiius in this dishonourable ministry,
added fuich elegance and variety to vice as gained him an absolute
ascendant over the mind of Alexander. But while Lorenzo
seemed to be funk in luxury, and affected such an appearance
of indolence and effeminacy, that he would not wear a sword,
and trembled at the fight of blood, he concealed under that
disguise, a dark, designing, audacious spirit. Prompted either by
the love of liberty, or allured by the hope of attaining the supreme
power, he determined to affafninate Alexander his benefactor and
friend. Though he long revolved this design in his mind, his re-
served and suspicious temper prevented him from communicating it
to any person whatever; and continuing to live with Alexander in
their usual familiarity, he, one night, under pretence of hav-
ing secured him an assignation with a lady of high rank whom he
had often follicited, drew that unwary Prince into a secret
apartment of his house, and there ltabbed him, while he lay

carelessly on a couch expecing the rrival of the lady whose
company he had been promised. But no sooner was the deed
done, than tfanding astonished, and struck with horror at its
atrocity, he forgot, in a moment, all the motives which had
induced him to commit it, and instead of rouzing the people
to recover their liberty by publishing the death of the tyrant,
instead of taking any ftep towards opening his own way to the
dignity now vacant, he locked the door of the apartment, and

like

416
EOOK VI.

1538.

like a man beraved of reason and pretence of mind, fled with
the utmost precipitation out of the Florentine territories. It was
late next morning before the fate of the unfortunate Prince was.
known, as his attendants, accuflomed to his irregularities, never
entered his appartment early. Immediately the chief persons,
in the slate assembled. Being induced partly by the zeal of car-
dinal Cibo for the house of Medici, to which lie was nearly re
lated, partly by the authority of Francis Guicciardini, who
recalled to their memory and represented in striking colours the
caprice as well as turbulence of their ancient popular govern-
ment, they agreed to place Cosmo di Medici, a youth of eighteen,
the only male heir of that illustrious house, at the head of the
government; though at the fame time such was their love of
liberty, that they eftablilhed several regulations in order to cir-
cumfcribe and moderate his power.

MEANWHILE Lorenzo having reached a place of safety, made

known what he had done, to Philip Strozzi and the other
Florentines who had been driven into exile, or who had volun-
tarily retired, when the republican form of government was abo-
lifled in order to make may for the dominion of the Medici. By
them, the deed was extolled with extravagant praises, and the
virtue of Lorenzo was compared with that of the elder Brut'ls,
who disregarded the ties of blood, or with that of the younger,
who forgot the friendship and favours of the tyrant, that they
might preserve or recover the liberty of their country . Nor did
they reft satisfied with empty panegyricks; they immediately
quitted their different places of retreat, afembled forces, animated
their vassals and partizans to take arms, and to seize this oppor-

e Lettere di Principi, tom. iii. p. 52.
VOL. II. H h h tunity

Cofino de
Medici placed
at the head of
the Florentine
slate.

His govern-
mient opposed
by thle Flo-
rentine
exiles.

417

BOOK V. tunity of re-eftablifling the publick liberty on its ancient foun-
< 5 98 dation. Being openly assisted by the French ambassador at Rome,

and secretly encouraged by the Pope, who bore no good will to
the house of Medici, they entered the Florentine dominions with
a considerable body of men. But the persons who had elected
Cosmo pofTeffed both the means of supporting his government,
and abitities to employ them in the most proper manner. They
levied, witli the greatest expedition, a good number of troops;
they endeavoured by every art, to gain the citizens of greatest
authority, and to render the administration of the youg prince
agreeable to the people. Above all, they courted the Emperor's
protection, as the only firm foundation of Cosmo's dignity and
power. Charles, knowing the propensity of the Florentines
to the friendlhip of France, and how much all the partizans of
a republican government detested him as the oppreifor of their
liberties, saw it to be greatly for his interest to prevent the re-
establishment of the ancient conltitution in Florence. For this
reason, he not only acknowledged Cosmo as head of the Floren-
tine state, and conferred on hhn all the titles of honour with
which Alexander had been dignified; but engaged to defend
him to the utmost; and as a pledge of this, odered the com-
manders of such of his troops as were stationed on the frontiers
of Tuscany, to support him against all aggressors. By their aid,
Cosmo obtained an easy victory over the exiles, whose troops he
furpiized in the night-time, and took most of the chiefs pri-
foners; an event which broke all their measures, and fully ea-
blifhed his own authority. But though he was extremely
desirous of the additional honour of marrying the Emperor's
daughter, the widow of his prcdeceflbr, Charles secure already

of
418

of his attachment, chore rather to gratify the Pope by beltowing
her on his nephew .

DURING the war between the Emperor and Francis, an event

had happened which abated in ome degree.the warmth and
cordiality of friendflip which had long subsisted between the
latter and the King of England. James the fifth of Scotland,
an enterprizing young Prince, having heard of the Emperor's
intention to invade Provence, and being fond of hewing that
he did not yield to any of his aiceftors in the sincerity of his
attachment to the French crown, as well as eager to diftinguifli
himself by ome military exploit, levied a body of troops with
an intention of leading them in person to the afliftance of the
King of France. Though ome unfortunate accidents prevented
his carrying ay troops into France, nothing could divert him
from going thither in person. Immediately upon his landing he
hastened to Provence, but had been detained so long in his voyage
that he could not have any hare in the military operations, and
he met the King on his return after the retreat of the Imperialists.
Francis, greatly pleased with his zeal, and no less with his man-
ners and conversation, could not refue him his daughter Mag-
dalen, whom he demanded in marriage. It mortified Henry ex-
tremely to ee a Prince of whom he was lately become jealous,
after having long treated him and his fubjedts with contempt, form
an alliance, from which he derived such an acceflion both of re-
putation and security . He could not, however, with decency

BOOK VI.

1538.

'The friend-
flip between
Francis and
Henry V111.
begins to
abate.

Jan. , 1537

f Jovii Hilf. c. xcviii. p. 218, &c. Belcarii Comment. 1. 22. p. 696.
Iftoria de fui tcmpi di Giov. Bat. Adriani. Ven. 1587. p. 10.

g Hid. of Scotland, vol. i. p. 77.

419
H h h 2

oppose

BOOK. VI.

1538.

The EmFeror
courts Henry.

oppose Francis's bestowing his daughter upon a Monarch descended
from a race of Princes, the most antient and faithful allies of the
French crown. But when James, upon the sudden death of Mag-
dalen, demanded as his second wife Mary of Guise, he warmly
follicited Francis to deny his suit, and il order to disappoint him
asked that lady in marriage for himself. When Francis pre-
ferred the Scottish King's sincere courtship to his artful and
malevolent proposal, he discovered much difitisfaaion. The
pacification agreed upon at Nice, and the familiar interview of
the two rivals at Aigues-mortes, filled Henry's mind with new
suspicions, as if Francis had altogether renounced his friendship
for the fake of new connections with the Emperor. Charles,
thoroughly acquainted with the temper of the English King,
and watchful to observe all the shiftings and caprices of his
paflions, thought this a favourable opportunity of renewing his
negociations with him, which had long been broken off. By
the death of Queen Catherine, whose interest the Emperor
could not with decency have abandoned, the chief cause of their
discord was removed; so that without touching upon the delicate
question of her divorce, he might now take what measures he
thought most effectual for regaining Henry's good will. For
this purpose, he began with proposing several marriage-treaties
to the King. He offered his niece, a daughter of the King of
Denmark, to Henry himself; he demanded the Princess Mary
for one of the Princes of Portugal, and was even willing to
receive her as the King's illegitimate daughterh. Though
none of these projected alliances ever took place, or perhaps
were ever seriously intended, they occasioned such frequent in-

h Mem, de Ribier, t. i. 496.

tercourfe
420

tercourfe between the courts, and so many reciprocal professions
of civility and esteem, as considerably abated the edge of Henry's
rancour against the Emperor, and paved the way for that union
between them which afterwards proved o disadvantageous to
the French King.

T E ambitious fchcmcs in which the Emperor had been en-
gaged, and the wars he had been carrying on for ome years
proved, as ufunl, extremely favourable to the progress of the
reformation in Germany. While Charles was absent upon
his African expedition, or intent on his vast projects against
France, his chief object in Germany was to prevent the diffen-
sions about religion from disturbing the publick tranquillity,
by granting such indulgence to the Protestant Princes as might
induce them to concur with his meafires, or at least hinder them
from taking part with his rival. For this reason, he was care.
ful to secure to the Protestants the poffeflion of all the advantages
which they had gained by the articles of pacification at Nurem-
berg, in the year one thousand five hundred and thirty-two i;
and except ome flight trouble from the proceedings of the Im-
perial clamber, they met with nothing to disturb them in the
exercise of their religion, or to interrupt the successful zeal with
which they propagated their operations. Meanwhile the Pope
continued his negociations for convoking a general council; and
though the Protestants had expressed great diflatisfa6Cton with
his inetntion to fix upon Mantua as the place of meeting, he
adhered obstinately to his choice, issued a bull on the second
of June, one thousand five hundred and thirty-fix, appointing

BOOK VI.

1538.

Progress of
tlle Rclorna-
tion.

Negociatiolrs
and intrigues
witil refpedt
to a general
council.
i Du Mont Corps Diplurn. torn. iv. part. 2. p. 138.

it

Book VI. it to aflemble in that city on the twenty-third of May the year

58' following; he nominated three cardinals to preside in his name;

enjoined all Christian Princes to countenance it by their autho-
rity, and invited the prelates of every nation to attend in per-
son. This citation of a council, an aftmbly which from its
nature and intention demanded quiet times, as well as pacific
dispositions, at the very juncture, when the Emperor was on his
march towards France, and ready to involve a great part of
Europe in the confusions of war, appeared to every person ex-
tremely unseasonable. It was intimated, however, to all the
different courts by nuncios dispatched of purpofek. The Em-
peror, with an intention to gratify the Germans, had, during
his residence at Rome, warmly solicited the Pope to call a
council; but being at the fame time willing to try every art in
order to persuade Paul to depart from the neutrality which he
preserved between him and Francis, he ent Heldo his vice chan-
cellor along with the nuncio whom the Pope employed in Ger-
many, inftruing him to second all the nuricio's reprefenta-
tions, and to enforce them with the whole eight of the Imperial
authority. The Protestants gave them audience at Smalkalde,
where they had assembled in a body, in order to receive them.
But after weighing all their arguments, they unanimously refused
to acknowledge a council summoned in the name and by the
February 25, authority of the Pope alone; in which he afilmed the ole right

of presiding; which was to be held in a city not only far distant
from Germany, but fubje& to a Prince, a stranger to. them,
and closely connected with the court of Rome; and to which
their divines could not repair with safety, especially after
their doctrines had been figmatized in the very bull of convo-

k Pallavic. Hlid. Cone. Trid. 1 3.

cation
422

493

cation with the name of hercfy. These and many other objec-
tions against the council, which appeared to them unanfwcrable,
they enumerated in a large manifcfto, which they publillcd in
vindication of their conduc i.

AGAINS'i this the court of Rome exclaimed as a flagrant

proof of their obstinacy and presumption, and the Pope still per-
sifted in his resolution to hold the council at the time and in the
place appointed. But some unexpeted dificulties being started
by the duke of Mantua, both about the right of jurifdition
over thole who retorted to the council, and the security of his
capital amidst such a concourse of trangers, the Pope, after
fruitless endeavours to adjust there, first prorogued the council
for ome months, and afterwards transferring the place of
meeting to Vicenza in the Venetian territories, appointed it to
assemble on the first of May in the following year. As
neither the Emperor nor French King, who had not then come
to any accommodation, would permit their fubjets to repair
thither, not a single prelate appeared on the day prefixed, and
the Pope, that his authority might not become altogether con-
temptible by o many ineffectual intimations, put off the meeting
by an indefinite prorogation.".

MEANWHILE, that he might not seem to have turned his

whole attention towards a reformation which lie was not able
.to accomplish, while he neglected that which was in his power,
he deputed a certain number of cardinals and bishops with fill
authority to inquire into the abuses and corruptions of the

BOOK VI.

1538.

0t. 8, 153J&

A paitial rc-
tbi Alation of
nlulesf by thlr
Pope.

I Skidan, 1. xii. 123, &c. eckend. Coni. lib. iii. p. 143, &c.
m F. Paul, 117. Pallavic. 117.

RoIn;u

Roman court; and to propose the most effeculal method of re-
moving them. This scrutiny, undertaken with relutance, was
carried on slowly and with remiflhefs. All defers were touched
with a gentle hand, afraid of probing too deep, or of discovering
too much. But even by this partial examination, many irregula-
rities were detected, and many enormities exposed to light, while
the remedies which they suggested as most proper were either
inadequate, or were never applied. The report and resolutions
of there deputies, though intended to be kept secret, were tranf-
mitted by ome accident into Germany, and being immediately
made publick, afforded ample matter of reflection and triumph
to the Protestants n. On the one hand they demonstrated the ne-
ceflity of a reformation in the head as well as the members of the
church, and even pointed out many of the corruptions against
which Luther and his followers had remonitrated with the greatest
vehemence. They howed, on the other hand, that it was vain to
expect this reformation from ecclefiafticks themselves, who, as Lu-
ther strongly expressed it, piddled at curing warts, while they over-
looked or confirmed ulcerso.

A league
formedl in
opposition to
ihat at Smal-
kalde.

THE earnestness with which the Emperor seemed, at first,

to press their acquiescing in the Pope's scheme of holding a
council in Italy, having alarmed the Protestant Princes o much,
that they thought it prudent to strengthen their confederacy,
by admitting several new members who solicited that privilege,
particularly the King of Denmark; Heldo, who during his
residence in Germany, had observed all the advantages which
they derived from that union, endeavoured to counterbalance its

n Sleidan, 233.

e Seek. 1. iii. 164.

effects
424

effec&s by an alliance among the catholick powers of the Em. BooK VI.
pire. This league distinguished by the name of Holy, was 539,
merely defensive, and though concluded by Heldo in the Em-
peror's name, was afterwards disowned by him, and ubfcribed
by very few Princes P.

T H Protestants Coon got intelligence of this aflociation, not- Alarms the

PoteRants.

witbftanding all the endeavours of the contrating parties to con-
ceal it; and their zeal, always apt to suspect and to dread, even
to excess, every thing that seemed to threaten religion, inflantly
took the alarm as if the Emperor had been just ready to enter
upon the execution of rome formidable plan for the extirpation
of their opinions. In order to disappoint this, they held frequent
consultations, they courted the Kings of France and England
with great assiduity, and even began to think of raising the
refpectivecontingents both in men and money which they were
obliged to furnish by the treaty of Smalkalde. But it was not
long before they were convinced that there apprehensions were
without foundation, and that the Emperor to whom repose was
absolutely necefary after being exhausted by efforts beyond his
strength in tle war with France, had no thoughts of disturbing
the tranquillity of Germany. As a proof of this, his abala-
dors, at an interview with the Protestant Princes in Francfort, April 19
agreed that all concelions in their favour, particularly those
contained in the pacification of Nuremberg, hould continue in
force for fifteen months; that during this period all proceedings
of the Imperial chamber againfl them should be ufpended;
that a conference flould be held by a few divines of each party,

P Seck. 1. iii. 171. Recueil de Traitez.
VOL.. I. I in

05

BooK VI.

.1539.

April 24.

Reformation
eftablihed in
every part of
Saxony.

in order to discuss the poits in controversy, and to propoe arti-
cles of accommodation which flould be laid before the next diet.
.Though the Emperor, that he might not irritate the Pope,
who remonflrated against the first part o this agreement as im-
politick, and against the latter as an impious encroachment
upon his prerogative, never formally ratified this convention, it
was observed with considerable exaftnefs, and greatly strength-
ened the basis of that ecclefialaical liberty, for which the Pro-
teftants contended.1.

A w days after the convention at Francfort, happened' the
death of George Duke of Saxony, an event of great advantage
to the reformation. That Prince, the head of the Albertine, or
younger branch of the Saxon family, possesed, as marquis of
Mifnia and Thuringia, extensive territories, comprehending
Dresden, Leipfick, and other cities now the most considerable
in the electorate. From the first dawn of the reformation, he
had been its enemy as avowedly as the electoral Princes were
its protectors, and had carried on his opposition not only with
all the zeal flowing from religious prejudices, but with a viru-
lenc .inspired by personal antipathy to Luther, and imbittered
by the domeftick animosity fubfiting between him and the
other branch of his family. By his death without iue, his
fucceflion fell to his brother Henry, whose attachment to the
Protestant religion surpassed, if possible, that of his predeceflbo
to popery. Henry no sooner took poffeflion of his new domi-
nions, than, disregarding a clause in George's will, dictated
by his bigotry, whereby he bequeathed all his territories to the

q F. Paul, 8. Sleid. 247. Seek. 1. iii. zoo.

Emperor]
436

Emperor and King of the Romans, if his brother should attempt'
to make any innovation in religion, he invited rome Protestant
divines, and among them Luther himself, to Leipfick. By
their advice and aflitance, lie overturned in a few weeks the
whole system of ancient rites, etablifhing the full exercise of
the reformed religion, with the universal applause of his sub-
jeds, who had long wished for this change, which the authority
of their Duke alone had hitherto prevented r. This revolution
delivered the Protestants from the danger to which they were
exposed by having an inveterate enemy situated in the middle of
their territories; and their dominions now extended in one
great and almost unbroken line from the shore of the Baltick to
the banks of the Rhine.

SOON after the conclusion of the Truce at Nice, an event

happened, which satisfied all Eurbpe that Charles had prose-
cuted the war to the utmost extremity that the state of his affairs
would permit. Vast arrears were due to his troops, whom he
had long amused with vain hopes and promises. As they now
foresaw that little attention would be paid to their demands, when
by the re eftablilhment of peace their services became of less
importance, they loft all patience, broke out into an open mutiny,
and declared that they thought themselves entitled to seize by
violence what was detained from them contrary to all juflice.
Nor was this spirit of sedition confined to one part of the Empe-
ror's dominions ; the mutiny was almost as general as the grie-
vance which gave rife to it. The soldiers in the Milanese plundered
the open country without controul, and filled the capital itself

r Sleidan, 249.
I i i z with

BOOK VI.

1539.

A mutiny of
the Imperial
troops.

4t7

with conIternation. Those in garrison at Goletta threatened to
give up that important fortress to Barbarofa. In Sicily the
troops proceeded to Rill greater excesses; having chaced away
their officers, they eleced others in their flead, defeated a
body of men whom the viceroy ent against them, took and
pillaged several cities, conduced themselves all the while, in
such a manner, that their operations resembled rather the regu-
lar proceedings of a conceried rebellion, than the rashness and,
violence of a military mutiny. But by the address and pru-
dence of the generals, who partly by borrowing money in their
own name, or in that of their master, partly by extorting large
fums from the cities in their respective provinces, railed what
was sufficient to discharge the arrears of the soldiers, there in-
furrections were quelled. The greater part of the troops
being dibarnded, such a number only as was necessary for gar-
rifoning the principal towns,. and protecing the sea coasts from
the infilts of the Turks, was kept in pay '.

IT was happy for the Emperor that the abilities of his gene-

ralsextricated him out of there difficulties, which it exceeded his
own power to have removed. He had depended, as his chief
resource for discharging the arrears due to his soldiers, upon the
subsidies which he expected from his Castilian subjects. For
this purpose he aembled the Cortes of Castile at Toledo, and
having represented to them the great expence of his military
operations, together with the vast debts in which there had ne-
ceffarily involved him, be proposed to levy such supplies as the
present exigency of his affairs demanded, by a general excite on

' Jovii Hifnor. 1 xxxvii. 203. c. Sandov. Ferreras, ix. 209.

commodities.
BooK VI.

1539,

Cortes of
Castile held
at Toledo.

commodities. But the Spaniards ho already felt thermelves BOOK VI.
oppressed with a load of taxes unknown to their ancestors, and ~,'53
who had often complained that their country, in order to prosecute The conl-

plaints nd

quarrels.in which it was not iuterefted, and to fight battles from Sifatisfalion
whichl it could rape no benefit, was drained not only of its of thatafllm-
wealth but of its inhabitants, determined not to add voluntarily to
their own burdens, or to furnifi the Emperor with the means of
engaging in new enterprises no less ruinus to the, kingdom tlhqq
moRs of those which he had hitherto carried on. The nobleo, in
particular, inveighed. with great vehemence againfl the im-
position proposed, as an encroachment upon the valuable and
diftinguithing privileges of their order, that of being exempted
from the payment of any tax. They demanded a conference
with the representatives of the cities concerning the fRate of the
nation. They contended that if. Charles would imitate the
example of his predeceflbrs, who had resided conflantly in
Spain, and would avoid entangling himself in a multiplicity of
transactions foreign to the concerns of his Spanish dominions,
the ated revenues of the crown would be fully sufficient to
defray the necelfary expences of government. They repre-
sented to him that it would be unjufi to lay new burdens upon
the people, while this prudent and effecdual method of re-efia-
blifhing public credit, and, securing national opulence, was totally.
neglected . Charles, after employing arguments, entreaties
and promises, but without success, in order to overcome their
obstinacy, difniffed the assembly with great indignation,. From The ancient
that period neither the nobles nor .the prelates have been calkld co'Rfitutiio

of the Cortcs
to these assemblies, on pretence that such as pay no part of fubvcrtd,

t Sandov. His. vol. ii. 269.

429

BOOK VI, the public taxes,' should claim no vote in laying them on.
'-^-3 ' None have been admitted to the Cortes but the procurators or

representatives of eighteen cities. These, to the number of
thirty-fix, being two from each community, from an assembly
which bears no resemblance either in power or dignity or inde-
pendance to the ancient Cortes, and are absolutely at the devo-
tion of the court in all their determinations". Thus the im-
prudent zeal with which the Castilian nobles had upported the
regal prerogative, in opposition to the claims of the commons
during the commotions in the year one thousand five hundred
and twenty-one, proved at laR fatal to their own body. By
enabling Charles to depress one of the orders in the ltate, they
destroyed that balance to which the constitution owec its fecu-
ity, and put it in his power and in that of his fuceflrs to
humble the other, and to strip it of its moi fvaluable privileges.

The Spanifli AT that time, however, the Spaninl grandees fiill poflefled
grandees still extraordinary power as well as privileges, whidch'hey exertifed
possesed high
privileges. and defended with an haughtiness peculiar to themselves. Of this

the Emperor himself had a mortifying proof during the meet-
ing- of the Cortes at Toledo. As he was returning one day
from a tournament accompanied by most of the nobility,, one
of the serjeants of the court, out of officious zeal to clear the
way for the Emperor, struck the TDike of Infantado's horse with
his-batton, -which that haughty grandee resenting, drew his
sword, beat and wounded the officer. Charles, provoked at fich
an insolent deed in his pretence, immediately ordered Ronquillo
the judge of the court to arrest the Duke; Roiiquillo. advanced

u Sandov. ibid. La Science du Gouvernement, par M. de Real, tom. ii.
p. 02.

to
43o

to. execute his charge, when the conflable of Castile interposing,
checked him, claimed the right of jurifdiion over a grandee as
a privilege of his office, and conducted Infantado. to his own
apartment. All the nobles present were so pleased with the
boldness of the constable in aflerting the rights of their order,
that deserting the Emperor, they attended him to his house
with infinite applauses, and Charles returned to the palace
without any person along with him but the cardinal Tavera. The
Emperor, how sensible soever of the affront, saw the danger of
irritating a jealous and high-fpirited order of men whom the
slightest appearance of offence might drive to the most unwar,
rantable extremes. For that reason, instead of training at any
ill-timed exertion of his prerogative, hle prudently connived at
the arrogance of a body. too potent for him to controul, and
sent next morning to the Duke of Infantado offering to inflict
what punishment he pleated on the person who had affronted
him. The Duke confidering this as a full reparation to his
honour, instantly forgave the officer; bestowing, on him, be-
fides, a considerable present as a compenifation for his wound.
Thus the affair was entirely forgottenx; nor would it have
deserved to be mentioned, if it were not a striking example of
the haughty and independent spirit of the Spanish nobles in
that age, as well as an instance of the Emperor's dexterity in
accommodating his conduct to the circumstances in which he
was placed.

CHARLES was far from discovering any such condescension
or. lenity towards the citizens of Ghent, who not long after

x Sandov. 1i. 274. Ferreras, ix. 22. Miniana, 113..

broke

BO:K VJ.

1539.

Iniirretliono
at Ghent.

431

<*

BooK VI.

1539.

Pretension of
the citizens.

Proceedings
against them.

broke out into open rebellion against his government. An
event which happened in the year one thousand five hundred
and thirty-fix, gave occasion to this ra(h infurretion so fatal
to that flourishing city. At that time the Queen dowager of
Hungary, governess of the Netherlands, having received orders
from her brother to invade France with all the forces which he
could raise, lhe afiembled the States of the united Provinces,
and obtained from them a subsidy of twelve hundred thousand
florins, to defray the expence of that undertaking. Of this fum,
the county of Slanders was obliged to pay a third part as its
proportion. But the citizens of Ghent, the most considerable
city in that country, averse to a war with France with which
they carried on an extensive and gainful commerce, rfuted to
pay their quota, and contended that in consequence of flipula-
tions between them and the ancestors of their present sovereign
the Emperor, no tax could be levied upon them, unless they had
given their express content to the imposition of it. The gover-
ness, on the other hand, maintained that as the subsidy of twelve
hundred thousand florins had been granted by the States of
Slanders, of which their representatives were members, they
were bound, of course, to conform to what was enated by
them, as it is the first principle in society, on which the tran-
quility and order of government depend, that the inclinations
of the minority must be over-ruled by the judgment and decision
of the superior number.

TH citizens of Ghent, however, were not willing to relin..

quilh a privilege of such high importance as that which they
claimed. Having been accustomed, under the government
of the house of Burgundy, to enjoy extensive immunities, and

to
43

to be treated with much indulgence, they disdained to sacrifice
to the delegated power of a regent thoe rights and liberties
which they had often and fuccefsfuilly aferted againf their
greatest Princes. The Queen, though file endeavoured at first
to ooth them, and to reconcile them to their duty by various
conceflions, was at last o much irritated by the obstinacy with
which they adhered to their claim, that he ordered all the citi-
zens of Ghent, on whom ihe could lay hold in any part of the
Netherlands, to be arrested. But this rafl aion made an im-
prefflion very different from what fie expeted on men, whose
minds were agitated with all the violent pailions with indig-
nation at oppreflion and zeal for liberty inspire. Less affected
with the danger of their friends and companions, than irritated
at the governess, they openly despised her authority, and ent
deputies to the other towns of Slanders, conjuring them not to
abandon their country at such a juncture, but to concur with
them in vindicating its rights against the encroachments of a
woman, who either did not know or did not regard their im-
munities. All but a few inconsiderable towns declined entering
into any confederacy against the governess; however, they
joined in petitioning her to put off the trm for payment of the
tax o long, that they might have it in their power to fend ome
of their number into Spain, in order to lay their title to exemption
before their sovereign. This she granted with some difficulty.
But Charles received their commiflioners with an haughtiness to
which they were not accuflomed from their antient Princes,
and enjoining them to yield the fame refpeAfill obedience to his
filter, whicl) they owed to him in person, remitted the examina-
tion of their claim to the council of Malines. This court,
which is properly a Rlanding committee of the parliament or

VOL. II. K kk fatcs

BooK VI.

1539.

433

BOOK VI.

1539.

They take
arms, and
offer to sub-
mit to France.

fates of the country, and which possesses the supreme jurisdiction
in all matters civil as well as criminal Y, pronounced the claim of
the citizens of Ghent to be ill founded, and appointed them forth-
with to pay their proportion of the tax.

ENRAGED at this decision, which they confidered as noto-

rioufly unjufR, and rendered desperate on feeing their rights be-
trayed by that very court which was bound to protec them, the
people of Ghent ran to arms in a tumultuary manner, drove
such of the nobility as resided among them out of the city;
secured several of the Emperor's officers; put one of them to
the torture, whom they accused of having stolen or destroyed the
record, that contained the privileges of exemption from taxes
which they pleaded; chose a council to whom they committed
the direction of their affairs; gave orders for repairing and
adding to their fortifications; and openly erected the standard
of rebellion against their sovereign . Sensible, however, of
their inability to fipport what their zeal had prompted them to
undertake, and desirous of securing a protector againit the
formidable forces by which they might expet oon to be at-
tacked, they ent some of their number to Francis, offering not
only to acknowledge him as their sovereign, and to put him in
immediate pofleflion of Ghent, but to aflift him with all their
forces in recovering those provinces in the Netherlands, which
had antiently belonged to the crown of France, and had been so

V Defcrittione di ttti paefi balli di Lud. Guicciardini. Ant. 1571. fol, p. 53.
' Memoires fur la revolte de Gantois en 1539, par Jean d'Hollander, ecrit

en 1547. A la Haye 1747. P. Heuter. Rer. Auitr. lib. xi. p. 262. Sandov.
Hiftor. tom ii. p. 282.

lately
434

lately re-united to it by the decree of the parliament of Paris.
This unexpected proposition coming from persons who had it
in their power to have performed inltantly one part of what
they undertook, and who could contribute so effectually to-
wards the execution of the whole, opened vast as well as alluring
profpeds to Francis's ambition. The counties of Slanders and
Artois were of greater value than the dutchy of Milan, which
he had so long laboured to acquire with paflionate but fruitless
desire; their situation with refpet to France rendered it more
easy to conquer or to defend them; and they might be
formed into a separate principality for the Duke of Orleans no
less filitable to his dignity than that which his father aimed at
obtaining. From this, the Flemings, who were acquainted with
the French manners and government, would not have been
averse; and his own fbjecs, weary of their deflruaive expedi-
tions into Italy, would have turned their arms towards this
quarter with more good will, and with greater vigour. Several
considerations, nevertheless, prevented Francis from laying hold
of this opportunity, the most favourable in appearance which had
ever presented itself of extending his dominions or diftrefling
the Emperor. From the time of their interview at Aigues-
mortes, Charles had continued to court the King of France
with wonderful attention, and often flattered him with hopes
of gratifying at last his wilhes concerning the Milanese, by
granting the invefliture of it either to him or to one of his
soris. But though there hopes and promises were thrown out
with no other intention than to detach him from his confede-
racy with the grand Seignior, or to raise suspicions in Soly-
man's mind by the appearance of a cordial and .familiar inl
tercourfe subsisting between the courts of Paris and Madrid,

K k k 2 Francis

BOOK Vt.

1539.

Francis de-
clines their
offer.

435

BOOK VI.

539.

Communi-
cates their in-
tentions to
the Emperor.

Francis was weak enough to catch at the hadow by which he
had been so often deceived, and from eagerness to seize it, re-
linquifhed what mufft have proved a more fubtantial acquisition.
Besides this, the Dauphin jealous to excess of his brother, and
unwilling that a Prince who seemed to be of a restless and enter-
prizing nature should obtain an establishment, which from its
situation might be confidered almoff as a domeftick one, made use
of Montmorency, who by a singular piece of good fortune, was
at the fame time the favourite of the father and of the son, to
defeat the application of the Flemings, and to divert the King
from espousing their cause. Montmorency represented accord-
ingly the reputation and power which Francis would acquire by
recovering that footing which he had formerly in Italy, and that
nothing could be o efficacious to overcome the Emperor's aver-
sion to this, as his adhering sacredly to the truce, and refuting on
this occasion to countenance his rebellious filbjets. Francis, apt
of himself to over-rate the value of the Milanese, because he
eflimated it from the length of time as well as from the great
efforts which he had employed in order to re-conquer it, and
fond of every action which had the appearance of generosity,
alfented without difficulty to entiments so agreeable to his own,
rejected the propositions of the citizens of Ghent, and dismissed
their deputies with an harsh answer'.

NoT satisfied with this, by a farther refinement in genero-

fity, he communicated to the Emperor his whole negociation
with the malecontents, and all that he knew of their schemes

a Mem. de Bellay, p. 263. P. Heuter. Rer. Aultr. lib. xi. 263.

and
436

and intentions b. This convincing proof of Francis's disinterest-
ednefs relieved Charles from the most disquieting apprehensions,
and opened a way to extricate himself out of all his difficulties.
He had already received full information f all the tranfaaions
in the Netherlands, and of the rage with which the people
of Ghent had taken arms againit his government. He was
thoroughly acquainted with the genius and qualities of his sub-
jeds in that country; with their love of liberty their attach-
ment to their antient privileges and cufloms as well as the
invincible obstinacy with which their minds, flow but firm and
persevering, adhered to any measure on which they had leisure
to fix. He easily saw what encouragement and flpport they
would have derived from the aflifance of France; though now
free from any danger on that quarter, he was ill sensible that
rome immediate and vigorous interposition was neceflary in order
to prevent the spirit of difaffetion and rebellion from spreading
in a country where the number of cities, the multitude of peo-
ple, together with the great wealth diffused among them by com-
merce, rendered it peculiarly formidable, and would flipply it
with inexhauftable resources. No expedient, after long delibera-
tion, appeared to him so effeteual as his going in person to the
Netherlands; and the governess his siRser being of the fame opi-
nion, warmly follicited him to undertake the journey. Tlere
were only two different routs which he could take; one by land,
through Italy and Germany, the other, entirely by fca, from
tome port in Spain to one in the Low-Countries. But the
former was more tedious than fiuited the prelent exigency of his
affairs; nor could he in consistency with his dignity or even

b Sandov. Ililtor. torn. ii. 284.

his

BOOK VI '

1539.

Charles's dC-
liberations
concerning Ilis
journey to the
Netherlands.

'437

BOOK VI. his afety pals through Germany without such a train both of

attendants and of troops, as would have added greatly to the
time that he must have confirmed in his journey; the latter was
dangerous at this season, and not to be ventured upon, while he
was on bad terms with the King of England, unless under the
convoy of a powerful fleet. This perplexing situation, in which
he was under a necellity of chufing, and did not know what to
chufe, inspired him at last with the singular and seemingly

Proposes to extravagant thought of pafling through France, as the most ex-
gass through peditious way of reaching the Netherlands. He propored in

-his council to demand Francis's permiflion for that purpose. All

his counsellors joined with one voice in condemning the mea-
sure as no less rash than unprecedented, and which must infal-
libly expose him to disgrace or to danger; to disgrace, if the
demand were rejected in the manner that he had reason to ex-
pet; to danger, if lie put his person in the power of an enemy
whom lie had often offended, who had antient injuries to re-
venge, as well as fubjets of present contest still remaining unde-
cided. But Charles, who had studied the characer of his
rival with greater care, and more profound discernment than
any of his ministers, persisted in his plan, and flattered liimfelf
that it might 'be accomplished not only without danger to his
own person, but even without the expence of any concefliop
detrimental to his crown.

To which WITH this view he communicated the matter to the
Francis con- French ambassador at his court, and ent Granvelle his chief

minister to Paris, in order to obtain from Francis permif-
sion to pass through his dominions, and to promise that he
would loon fettle the affair of the Milanese to his fatisfaaion;

but
.438

439

but at the fame time to intreat that he would not exact any new
promie, or even insist on former engagements, at this junc-
ture, left whatever he hould grant, under his present circum-
stances, might seem rather to be extorted by neceflity, than to
flow from friendlhip or the love of justice. Francis, instead
of attending to the snare which such a flight artifice scarce con-
cealed, was so dazzled with the splendour of overcoming an
enemy by as of generosity, and fo.pleafed with the air of filpe-
riority which the rectitude and disinterestedness of his proceed-
ings gave him on this occasion, that he at once aflented to all
that was demanded. Judging of the Emperor's heart by
his own, he imagined that the sentiments of gratitude, arising
from the remembrance of good offices. and liberal treatment,
would determine him more forcibly to fulfil what he had so
often promired, than the most precise flipulations, that could be
inserted in any treaty.

U PON this, Charles, to whom every moment was precious,

set out, notwithstanding the fears and suspicions of his Spanish
fubjeds, with a small but splendid train of about an hundred
persons. At Bayonne, on the frontiers of France, he was. re-
ceived by the Dauphin and the Duke of Orleans attended by the
conitable Montmorency. The two Princes offered to go into
Spain, and to remain there as hostages for the Emperor's
.flfety; but this he rejeaed, declaring that he relied with im-
plicit confidence on the King's honour, and had never de-
manded nor would accept of any other pledge for his fccurity.
In all the towns through which he pafled the greatest ponible
magnificence was displayed; the magiRrates presented him the
keys of the gates; the prison doors were et open; and by the

royal

BOOK VI.

1539.

His reception
in that kingo
dom.
C)

BOOK VI. royal honours paid to him, he appeared more like the overeign

539 of the country than a stranger. The King advanced as far

as Chatelherault to meet him; their interview was diftin-
guifhed by the warmest expreflions of friendhfip and regard.
150. They proceeded together towards Paris, and presented to the

inhabitants of that city, the extraordinary spectacle of two rival
Monarchs whose enmity had disturbed and laid waste Europe,
during twenty years, making their solemn entry together with
all the symptoms of confidence and harmony, as if they had
forgotten for ever past injuries, and would never revive hoftili-
ties for the future c.

CHARLES remained fix days at Paris; but amidst the per-

petual caeefles of the French court, and the various entertain-
ments contrived to amuse or to do him honour, he discovered an
extreme impatience to continue his journey, arising as much from
an apprehension of danger which constantly oppressed him, as
from the neceflity of his presence in the Low-Countries. Con-
fcious of the difingenuity of his own intentions, he trembled
when hJe refle&ed that ome fatal accident might betray them to
his rival, or lead him to supet them; and though his arti-
sices to conceal there hould be successful, he could not help
fearing that motives of interest might at last triumph over the
scruples of honour, and tempt Francis to avail himself of the
advantage now in his hands. Nor were there wanting persons
among the French ministers, who advised the King to turn his
own arts against the Emperor, and as the retribution due for
so many inilances of fraud or falsehood, to seize and detain his

' Thuan. Hilt. lib. i. c. 14. Mem. de Bellay. 264.

4

person
I

The Empe.
rot's folici-
tude.

person till he granted him fill fatisfaaion with regard to all the
just claims of the French crown. But no consideration could
induce Francis to violate the faith which he had pledged, nor
could any argument convince him that Charles, after all the pro-
mises that he had given, and all the favours which he had received,
might fill be capable of deceiving him. Full of this faife confi-
dence le accompanied him to St. Quintin, and the two Princes,
who had met him on the borders of Spain, did not take leave of
him until he entered his dominions in tile Low-Countries..

As oon as the Emperor reached his own territories, the

French ambaf'adors demanded the accompliflment of what lie
had promised concerning tile investiture of Milan, but Charles,
under the plausible pretext that his whole attention was then
engrossed by the confilltations neceflary towards fupprefling the
rebellion in Ghent, put off the matter for ome time. But in
order to prevent Francis from fifpeding his sincerity, he fRill
continued to talk of his resolutions with refpec to that matter
in the fame itrain as when he entered France, and even wrote to
the King much to the fame purpose, though in general terms, and
with equivocal expressions which he might afterwards explain away
or interpret at pleafuire '.

MEANWHILE, the unfortunate citizens of Ghent, defRitute of

leaders capable either of directing their councils, or conduding
their troops; abandoned by the French King and unsupported
by their countrymen ;. were unable to resist their offended ove.
reign who was ready to advance against them with one body of
troops which he had raised in the Netherlands, with another

a Memoire de Ribier, i. 504,

L 1 .

BOOK VI.

1540.

nnd difinge-
nt ity.
Jnnulry 244

Reduation of.
Ghent.

441
VOL, II.

drawn

drav.:n out of Germany, and a third which had arrived from
Spain by ea. The near approach of danger made them, at last,
so sensible of their own folly, that they ent ambassadors to the
Emperor imploring his mercy, and offering to et open their
gates at his approach. Charles, without vouchsafing them any
other answer, than that he would appear among them as their
sovereign, with the fceptro and the sword in his hand, began his
march at the head of his troops. Though he chore to enter the
city on the twenty-fourth of February, his birth-day, he was
touched with nothing of that tenderness or indulgence which
was natural towards the place of his nativity. Twenty-fix of
the principal citizens were put to deathl; a greater number was
sent into banishment; the city was declared to have forfeited
all its privileges and immunities; the revenues belonging to it
were confiscated; its ancient form of government was abolilhed;
the nomination of its magistrates was vested for the future in
the Emperor and his fcceffors- a new fyftein of laws and political
adminifiration was prefcribedb, and in order to bridle the fedi-
tious spirit of the citizens a trong citadel was appointed to be'
erected, for defraying the expence of which a fine of an hundred
and fifty thousand florins was imposed on the inhabitants, to-
gether with an annual tax of fix thousand florins for the support
of a garrifonc. By there rigorous proceedings, Charles not only
punished the citizens of Ghent, but set an awful example of
severity before his other subje&s in the Netherlands, whose
immunities and privileges, partly the effect, partly the cause of
their extensive commerce, circumforibed the royal prerogative

b Les coutumes & loix du Compte de Flandre, par Alex. e Grande, 3
tom. fol. Cambray, 1 719, tom. i. p. 169.

' Haraei Annales Brabantiam, vol. i. 616.

within
Blor V.

1540.

and punish-
ient of the
citizens.'
April 20.
442

within very narrow bounds, and often stood in the way of measures
which he wished to undertake, or fettered and retarded.him in his
operations.

CHARLES having. thus vindicated and re-eftablifled his autho-

rity in the Low-Countries, and being now under no neceflity
of continuing, the fame scene of falflood and diflimulation with
wlhicl hle had long amused Francis, began gradually to throw
aside the veil under which lie had concealed his intentions witli
refpe to the Milanese. At first, hle eluded the demands of the
French ambassadors when they again reminded him of his pro-
mises; then he proposed, by way of equivalent for the dutchy of
Milan, to grant the Duke of Orleans the investiture of Slanders,
clogging the offer, however, with impracticable conditions, or
filch as he knew would be rejected d At last, being driven from
all his evasions andc fbterfuges by their infifing on a categorical
answer, lie peremptorily refiufed to give up a territory of filch va-
lue, or voluntarily to make filch a liberal addition to the itrength
of an enemy by diminilhing hisown power e. He denied at tq
fame time, that lle had ever made any promie 'whichl could bind
lhim to, an aion so foolilh, and.fo contrary to.his own itereft .

OP all the aions in the Emperor's life, this, without doubt,,

refefts tie greatest. difhonolr on his reputation . Tlho' Charles
was not. extremely scrupulous at other times about the means
which he employed for accomplifliing h!is ends, or always,obfer-
vant.of. the ftrit precepts of veacity and honour, lie had hitherto.
maintained some regard for the maxims of that les precise and,

dMem. de Ribier, i. 509. 514. e: Ribiele;! 519.
'IBcllay, 365.6. . -Jovii Hifr.:lib. xxxcix p. 238. a.

L I I 3 rigid.

BOO K VI.

1540.

Charles re-.
Jiles to filfil
his engage-
ments to
Francis.

443

rigid morality by which monarchs think themselves entitled to
regulate their condult. But, on this occasion, the scheme that he
formed of deceiving a generous and open-hearted Prince the
'illiberal and mean artifices by which he carried it on; the infenfi-
'bility with which he received all the marks of his friendship, and
the ingratitude with which he requited them; are all equally un-
becoming the dignity of his character, and inconsistent with the
grandeur of his views.

THIS tranfaftion exposed Francis to as much fcom as it did

the Emperor to censure. After the experience of a long reign,
after so many opportunities of discovering the duplicity and
artifices of his rival, the credulous simplicity with which he
trusted him at this juncture eemed to merit no other return
than it atually met with. Francis, however, remonfirated and
exclaimed, as if this had been the first instance in which the Em-
peror had deceived him, Feeling, as is ufial, the insult which was
offered to his understanding still more sensibly than the injury done
to his intereRf, he discovered such resentment as made it obvious
that he would lay hold on the first opportunity of being revenged,
and that a war, no less rancorous than that which had so lately
caged,. would foor break out anew in Europe.

The Pope
auholizes
the institution
of the Order
of Jesuits.

THIS year is rendered memorable by the establishment of the

Order of Jesuits; a body whose influence on ecclesiastical as well
as civil affairs hath been so considerable, than an account of the
genius of its laws and government juily merits a place in history.
When men take a view of the rapid progress of this society to-
wards wealth and power; when they, contemplate the. a4mirable
prudence with which it has been governed; when tly attend

to
BOOK VI.

540o.
444

to the petfevering and fyftematick spirit with whih its fchetne BOOK V.
have been carried on ,they are apt to ascribe such a fingulat ,s
inflitution to tlhe superior wisdom of its founder, and to suppose
that he had formed and digered his plan with profound policy.
But the Jesuits, as well as the other monastic orders, are in,
debted for the existence of their order not to the wisdom of tlhei
founder, but to his enthusiasm. Ignatio Loyola, whom I have
already mentioned on occasion of the wound which he received
in defending Pampeluna h, was a fanatick diftinguilhed by
extravagancies in sentiment and conduc, no less incompatible
with the maxims of fober renfon, than repugnant to the spirit
of true religion. The wild adventures, and visionary schemes,
in which his enthufiafin engaged him, equal any thing recorded
in the legends of the Romish faints; but are unworthy of
notice in history.

PROMPTED by this fanatical spirit, or incited by the love of Fanatlcifin of

Loyola its

power and diftintion, from which such pretenders to superior founder,
fandity are not exempt, Loyola was ambitious of becoming the
founder of a religious order. The plan, which he formed of
its constitution and laws, was suggested, as he gave oit,l and as
his followers ill: teach, by the immediate iifpiration 'of hea-
ven1. But notwithstanding this high pretension, his design
met at firit with violent opposition. The Pope, to whom
Loyola. lad appliedifor the fanion of. his authority. t. confirm
the inftitu.Vtn,. rfeired his petition to a committee of Cardinals.
They represented the eftablilhment to be unneceflfary as well as
dagerous, and Paul refufted to grant his approbation of it. At

h o ,k i p. 13 . . .' Compq re3dqd Constitutions
des' Jesuites, au lIarlement de Provence, par M. de Monclar. p. 85.

last,

445

BooK

The
niotivi
confirl
the or

Sept.

Its cl
tion
nius
parti tentil

VI. last, Loyola removed all his scruples by an offer which it was
'l-r impofflble for any Pope to resist. He proposed that besides the
40. 'ope's three vows of poverty, of chastity, and of monastic obedience,
ming which are common to all the monastic orders, the members of
der. his society Ihould: take a fourth vow of obedience to the Pope,.

binding themselves, to go whithersoever he should command for
the Tfevice of religion, and: without requiring any thing, from
the'Holy. Se :for their support. At a time when the papal
authority: had received such a Ihock by the revolt of so many
nations from the Romill church; at a time when every part of
the popih, system was. attacked with. so much violence and fuc-
ces, the acquisition of a body of men, thus peculiarly devoted to
the fee of Rome, and whom it might fet.in opposition to all its
27. enemies, was an object of the, highest consequence. Paul, in-

ftantly perceiving this, confirmed the inltitution of the Jefiits
by his bull; granted the most ample privileges to the members
of the society; and appointed Loyola to be the flrt' General'of
the order. The event hath fllly juftifitd.Paul's discernment, in
expecting such beneficial consequences to the fee of Rome from
this. institution. In less .than half a century, the society, obtained
etablifments. in, -every country .that, adhered. to -;the Roan
catholicchurch its power and: wealth .;increased amazingly') the
number of its members became great,. their chliarater and ac-
complifhments were still greater; and the Jefiits were celebrated
by the friends,. and dreaded by. the. enemies of the Romifih'.
faith, as the moft,able and earterprizing.,order in the.church.'

minitu- THI. constitution and. laws of the society. were perfected by.
and ge- Laynez and Aquaviva, the two generals who succeeded Loyla,
merit .
cular at- men far fulperior to' their mater in abilities, and in the science
OD. . '
)'' .1 .' of'
446

of government. They framed that system of profound and
artful policy which distinguishes the order. The large infusion
of fanaticism, mingled with its regulations, hould be imputed to
Loyola its founder. Many circumstances concurred in giving a
peculiarity of character to the order of Jefitits, and in forming
the members of it not only to take greater part in the affairs of
the world than any other body of monks, but to acquire fiupe-
rior influence in the conduc of them.

THE primary object of almost all the monastic orders,is to

separate men from the world; and from any concern in its affairs.'
In the solitude and silence of the cloister, the monk is called to
work out his own alvation by extraordinary ads of mortifica-
tion and piety. He is dead to the world, and ought not to
mingle in its tranfations. He can be of no benefit to mankind,
but by his example and by his prayers. On the contrary,. the
Jesuits are taught to confider themselves as formed for ation.
They are chosen soldiers, bound to exert themselves continually
in the service of God, and of the Pope, his vicar on earth;
Whatever tends to inftrua the ignorant; whatever can be of
use to reclaim or to oppose the enemies of the Holy See, is their
proper objet. That they may have full leisure for this aive
service, they are totally exempted from those findions, the per-
formance of which is the chief business of other monks. They
appear in no processions they pradife no rigorous aufterities
they do not conflime one half of their time in the repetition of
tedious offices k. But they are required to attend to all the tran-
faetions of the world, on account of the influence which there

BOOK VI.

1540.

The objeQ of
the order fin-
gular.

k Compte Rendu, par M. de Monclar. p. 13. 290. Sur la deftru&. des
Jesuites, par M. D'Alembert, p. 42.

may

447

B3ook VI,

1540.

may have on religion; they are directed to study tle difpofi-
tions of persons in high rank, and to cultivate their friendship ;
and by the very constitution as well as genius of the order, a
spirit of a&ion and intrigue is infused into all its members.

Peculiarities As the obje6 of the society of Jefuiits differed. from that of
in the form of
its policy par- tlhe ,tller monastic orders,. the diversity was no less in the form
ticularly with of its government. The other orders are to be confidered as
refpeat to the
power of the voluntary associations, in which whatever affects the whole
general . bdy, is regulated by the common fiffrage of all its members.

. The executive power is vested in the persons placed at the head

of each convent, or of the whole society; the legislative autho-
rity resides in the community. Affairs of moment, relating to
particular convents, are determined in conventual chapters; such
as respect the whole order are confidered in general congrega-
tions., But Loyola, full of the ideas of implicit obedience, which.
be had derived from his military profeflion, appointed that the
government of his rder should be purely monarchical. A Ge-
neral, chosen for life by the deputies. from the several provinces,.
pIssesed power. that was supreme and independent,. extending to.
every person, nd to every cafe. He, by his ole authority. nomi-
nated provircials,: reors, and every other officer employed in the
government of the society, and could rmove them at pleafire.
In him was vested the overeign administration of the revenues
and. funds of the .order. Every member belonging to it was
at hi difpfal; nd by::his uncontroulable mandate, lhe could.
impose on .therh. any task, oremploy them in what service soever
he pleated, To his commands they were required to yield not.

Compte par .M. de Moncli. p, i a.

only
448

only outward obedience, but to resign up to him the inclinations .BOOK VI.
of their own wills, and the sentiments of their own undelftand- .'-,"Vo
ings. They were to liften to his injun&ions, as if they hlad been
uttered by Christ himself. Under his direcion, they were to
be mere pafive initruments, like clay in the hands of the
potter, or like (lead carcases incapable of refiftancem. Such a
singular form of policy could not fail to impress its character on.
all the members of the order, and to give a peculiar force to.
all its operations. There is not in the annals of mankind any
cxample of ficlh a perfea defpotifin, exercised not over monks
flt up in the cells of a convent, but over men dispersed among.
all tile nations of the earth..

As the constitutions of tle order vest, in the General, fitch Circ""um'n-

ces which cii--

nbfolute dominion over all its members, they carefilly provide nbl him to
for his being perfecly informed, with refpecd. tile charactr x.,lcire it

with t',C

:and abilitics of his filbjels. Every novice who offcrs himself grenc't nd-
as a candidate for entering into tle order, is obliged to mnifi vatage.
his conference to the superior, or to a person appointed by him;
and is required to confels not. only his fins and defe&ts, but to
discover tlleinclinations, the.'pafions, and the bent of his loul.
This manifestation must be renewed every fix months". lhe
society not satisfied with penetrating in this manner into the in-
nermoft recefles of the'lheart 'direts each member to observe the
words and ations of' tlle novices; they ae conflituted spics
upon their condruct and.areboutnd to disclose every thing of im
portance concerning them to the fiperior. In order that this
scrutiny. into their charader may be as compleat as possible, a

m Compte rendu a Parlem. de Brctagne,.par M. de Chalotais, p. 41, &c.
Compte par M. de Monclar. 83. 185. 343.

" Compte par M. de Monclar. p. 2 1, &c.
VOL. II. M m m. long

449

long noviciate rust expire, dring which they pars through
the several gradationb of ranks in the society, hnd they must
have attained the full age of thirty three years, before they can
be admitted to take the final vows, by which they become
profefed members . By there various methods, the superiors,
under whose immediate inspection the novices are placed, ac-
quire a thorough knowledge of their dispositions and talents. In
order that the General, who is the foul that animates and moves
the whole society, may have under his eye every thing necefary
to inform or direA him, the provincials and heads of the several
houses are obliged to tranfinit to him regular and frequent
reports concerning the members under their infpeclion. In
there they descend into minute details with refpe& to the cha-
rhcter of each person, his abilities natural or acquired, his tem-
per, his experience in affairs, and the particular department
for which he is best fitted P. These reports, when digested and

arranged,

Compte par M. de Moncl. 215. 241. Sur la deftr. des Jef. par M. D'Alemb.
P. 39.

P M. de Chalotais has made a calculation of the number of thefc reports,

which the geheral f the Jefitits must atinually receive according to the regula-
tions of the society. There atnotint in all to 6584. If this um be divided by
37, the number of provinces in the order, it appears that 177 reports concerning
the late of each province are tranfiilitted to Rome annually. Compte, p. 52.
Befides'this, there may be extraordinary letters, or such as are sent by the mo-
nitors or spies which the general and provincials entertain in each house.
Compte par M. de Moncl. p. 431. iift. des Jesuites, Anit. 1'761. torn. i.
p. 56. The provincials dnid hehd o6f houles 'bt only teport cohcerhing thb
members of the ociety, bt are bound to give the general ;an account of the
civil affairs of the country wherein they are fettled, in so far as the knowledge
of there may be of'benefit to religibh. This condition" 'ly e'xrend 'tb' every

particular,
BooK VI.

1540.
45o

arranged, are entered into registers, kept of purpose that the
General may, at one comprehensive view, survey the state of
the ociety in every corner of the earth observe the qualifica-
tions and talents of its members; and thus choose, with perse&
information, the instruments, which his absolute power can
employ in any service for which he thinks meet to define
them '.

As it was the professed intention of the order of Jefiits to

labour with unwearied zeal in promoting the salvation of men,
this engaged them, of course, in many ative fundions. From
their first infittition, they confidered the education of youth as
their peculiar province; they aimed at' being spiritual guides and
confefbrs; they preached frequently in order to inftrudtthe peo-
ple; they set out as miflionaries to convert unbelieving nations.
The novelty of the intfitution, as well as the singularity of
its objecs procurcd the Order many admirers and patrons.
The governors of the society had the address to avail themfelvcs
of every circumstance in its favour, and in a hort time, the
number as well as influence of its members increased wonder-
fully. Before the expiration of the sixteenth century, the
Jesuits had obtained the chief direction of the education of youth
in every catholic country in Europe. They had become the

particular, so that the general is furnifled with full information concerning the
tranfa6lions of every Prince and Rate in the world. Compte par M. de Moncl.
443. Hilt. des Jesuit. ibid. p. 58. When the affairs.with refpet to which the
provincials or retors write are o( importance, they are direCed to use cyphers
and each of them has a particular cypher from the General. Compte par M.
Chalotals, p. 54.

9' Compte par M. de Moncl . 215. 439.-Compte pa M. de Chalotais, p.
52, 222.

BOOK VI.

1540.

Progress of
the power &
influence of
the older.

451

contellors
M m m 2

confeflcrs of almost all its monarchs, a fundion of no fmalr
importance in any reign, but under a weak Prince, flperior
-even to that of minister. They were the spiritual guides of
almost every person eminent for rank r power. They possessed
the highest degree of confidence and interest with the papal
court, as the most zealous and able champions for its authority.
The advantages which an ative and enterprizing body of men
might derive from all there circumflances are obvious. They
formed the minds of men in their youth. They retained an
ascendant over them in their advanced years. They possesed, at
different periods, the direcion of the most considerable courts
in Europe. They iningled in all affairs. They took part in
every intrigue and revolution. The General, by means of the
extensive intelligence which he received, could regulate the opera-
tions of the order with the most perfect discernment, and by means
of his absolute power could carry them on with the utmost vigour
and effect r

Progress of TOGETHER with tle power of the order, its wealth continued
its wealth. to increase. Various expedients were devised for eluding the

obligation of the vow of poverty. Tile order acquired ample
pofleflions in every catholic country; and by the number as

r When Loyola in the year 4o petitioned the Pope to authorize the inflitu-

tion of the order, he had only ten disciples. But in the year 1608, sixty eight
years after their first institution, the number of Jesuits had increased to ten thou-
fandfive hundred and eighty one. In the year 1710, the order possesed twenty-
four prfeid houses; jfifiy-nine ouses of probation three hundred and forty
refidencies fix hundred and twelve colleges; two hundred millions; one hun-
dred and fifty seminaries and boarding schools and confided of 19,998 Jesuits.
Hist. des Jesuites, tom. i. p. o20

well
BOOK VI.

154o.
452

well as magnificence of its publick buildings, together with tile
value of its property, moveable or real, it vied witl the most
opulent of the monaftick fraternities. Betides the sources of
wealth common to all the regular clergy, the Jefilits possesld
one which was peculiar to themselves. Under pretext of pro-
moting the success of their miflions, and of facilitating the
fitpport of their miflionaries, they obtained a special licence
from the court of Rome, to trade with the nations which they
laboured to convert. In consequence of this, they engaged in
an extensive and lucrative commerce, both in the East and Weft
Indies. They opened ware-houses in different parts of Europe,
in which they vended tleir commodities. Not satisfied witl
trade alone, they imitated the example of other commercial
societies, and aimed at obtaining settlements. They acquired
pofellion accordingly of a large and fertile province in the
southern continent of America, and reigned as sovereigns over
Tome hundred thousand subjeCts.

UNHAPPILY for mankind, the valt influence which the order

of Jesuits acquired by all there different means, has been often
exerted with the moit pernicious effect. Such was the tendency
of that discipline observed by the society in forming its mem-
bers, and ficli tle fundamental maxims in its constitution,
that every Jesuit was taught to regard the interest of the order
as the capital object, to which every consideration was to be
sacrificed. This spirit of attachment to their order, the most
ardent, 'perhaps, that ever influenced any body of men t, is
the charaderitic principle of the Jesuits, and serves as a key to

* Hifl. des Jer. iv. 68-- 96, &c.
t Conmpte par NM. de Moncl. p. 285.

the

BOOK VI.

1540.

Pernicious es-
fcss of thcre
on civil focice
ty.

453

454

BOOK VI. the genius of their policy, and to the peculiarities in their fen-
4.,'', ' timents and condut.

As it was for the honour and advantage of the society, that

its members hould possess an ascendant over persons in high
rank or of great power, the desire of acquiring and preserving
such a diretion of their condut, with greater facility, has led
the Jefilits to propagate a system of relaxed and pliant
morality; which accommodates itself to the paflions of men,
which justifies their vices, which tolerates their imperfections,
which authorizes almost every aion that the most audacious
or crafty polician would wish to perpetrate.

As the prosperity of the order was intimately conneCted with

the preservation of the papal authority, the Jefiuits, influenced
by the fame principle of attachment to the interefis of their
society, have been the most zealous patrons of those doEtrines,
which tend to exalt ecclesiastical power on the ruins of civil
government. They have attributed to the court of Rome a
jurifdicion as extensive and absolute as was claimed by the
most presumptuous pontiffs in the dark ages. They have con-
tended for the entire independance of ecclefiafticks on the civil
magistrate. They have publilhed such tenets concerning the
duty of opposing Princes who were enemies of the catholic faith,
as countenanced the most atrocious crimes, and tended to dif-
solve all the ties which conneA fubjeas with their rulers.

As the order derived both reputation and authority from
the zeal with which it stood. forth in defence of the Romish

church

church against the attacks of the reformers, its members proud
of this diftin&ion, have confidered it as their peculiar funcion
to combat the opinions, and to check the progress of the Pro-
teflants. They have made use of every art, and have em-
ployed every weapon against them. They have set themselves
in opposition to every gentle or tolerating measure in their fa-
vour. They have inceflantly stirred up against them all the
rage of ecclefialtical and civil persecution.

MONKS of other denominations have, indeed, ventured to

teach the fame pernicious doctrines, and have held opinions
equally inconsistent with the order and happiness of civil so-
ciety. But they, from reasons which are obvious, have either
delivered such opinions with greater reserve, or have propa-
gated them with less success. Whoever recollects the events
which have happened in Europe during two centuries, will
find that the Jefiuits may justly be confidered as responsible for
most of the pernicious effects arising from that corrupt and
dangerous cafuilfry, from those extravagant tenets concerning
ecclesiastical power, and from that intolerant pirit, which have
been the disgrace of the church of Rome throughout that pe-
riod, and which have brought so many calamities upon civil
society ".

But amidst many bad consequences flowing from the in-

flitution of this order, mankind, it must be acknowledged, have
derived from it rome considerable advantages. As the iJefuits
made the education of youth one of their capital objects, and
as their first attempts to establish colleges for the reception of

Some ndvnl-
tages rcfulting
from the infti-
tution of this
order.
A Encyclopedic, Art. Jrtuitr, tom. viii. 513.

students

BOOK VI.

1540.

455

THE REIGN OF TIIE
BOOK VI. flidents were violnrtly rppofed 1,v the urivcrfti:s in different

countIies, it became neceflary for them, as thle most efsiecual
methcd of acquirirg the publick fasour, to surpass their rivals
iP . in icience and indulrt. ' his prompted them to cultivate with
,i:erUn;e. great ardour the ftudv of ancient literature. This put them

u.cn various methods for facilitatig the instruction of youth;
ard by the improvements hich thev made in it, they hal
ccntributed rot a little towards the progress of polite learri-r,
and have on this account merited well of f.ciet. Nor has the
order of Jesuits been successful nly in teaching the elements
of literature, it has prcduced likewie emir.nent masters in many
branches of science, -ad can alone bcaft of a greater number
of irgenious authors, than all the other religious fraternities
taken together .

t M. d'Alember bhas observed that though the Jesuits have mnde extraordi:

nay progress in erudi:ion of every species; though they can reckon up many of
their brethren who have been eminent mathematicians, antiquarians, and ci-
ticks; though they have even formed some orators of reputation ; yet the ordir
has never produced one man, whose mind was so much enlightened with found
knowledge, as to merit the name ofa philosopher. But it seems to be the un-
avoidable effec ofmonaflick education to contrat and fetter the human mlind.
The partial attachment of a monk to the interest of his older, which is often
incompatible with that of other citizens, the habit of implicit obedience to the
will of a superior, together with the frequent return of the wearisome and fri-
volous duties of the cloister, dhbafe his faculties, and extinguiih that generosity
of sentiment and spirit, which qualifies men for thinking or feeling jufly with
refpeQ to what is proper in life and conduct. Father Paul of Venice is, per-
haps, the only person educated in a cloister, that ever was altogether superior to
its prejudices, or who viewed the anfactions of men, and reasoned concerning
the interets of fociery, with the enlarged sentiments of a philosopher, with the
difcerranea of a man conversant in affairs, and with the liberality of a gentle-
man.

BUT

BUT it is in the new world that the Jesuits have exhibited the BOOK VI.

most wonderful display of their abilities, and have contributed ,540.
most effecually to the benefit of the human species. The con- Mor efpeci-

ally froll) the

querors of that unfortunate quarter of the globe had nothing fetlenlent of
in view, but to plunder, to enfave, and to exterminate its in- thJetiis*'
habitants. The Jesuits alone have made humanity the object of
their fettling there. About the beginning of the last century they
obtained admiflion into tie fertile province of Paraguay, which
stretches across the southem continent of America, from the
bottom of the mountains of Potofi, to the confines of the
Spanish and Portuguese settlements on the banks of the river
de la Plata. They found the inhabitants in a slate, little dif-
ferent from that which takes place among men when they firfl
begin to unite together; firangers to the arts; fibfiffing pre-
carioufly by hunting or fishing; and carce acquainted with the
firit principles of subordination and government, The Jesuits
set themselves to inftrut and to civilize these savages. They.
taught them to cultivate the ground, to rare tame animals, and
to' build houses. They brought them to live together in vil-
lages. They trained them to arts and manufacures. They
made'them taste the sweets of foeiety ;- and accustomed them to
the blessings of fecuriry aid order; iTliefe people became the
filbjecfs of their benefactors; who have governed them with a
tender attention, resembling that, with which a father directs
his children. Respected and beloved lmoft to adoration, a few
Jefits presided over some hundred tlotifand Indians. They
maintained a perfec equality among all the members of the
community. Each of them was obliged to labour not for himself
alone, but for the publick. The produce of their fields, together
u irh the fruits of their induflry of every fpqcis,. were ddpuletd
in common florehoufcs, from which each individual received

VOL . II. N n ,..e..,

457

BOOK VI. every thing neceifary for the supply of his wants. By this ln-

ilitution, almost all the paflions which diflurb the peace' of
society, and render the :members of i unhappy, were extin-
guifhed. A few magistrates, chosen by the Indiana themselves,
watched over the publick tranquility, and secured obedience
to the laws. The sanguinary punilhments; fequlent. under
other governments were. tnknown. An' admonition from a
Jesuit a flight mark of infamy , o'r, on f6ine singular occafir6n,
a few lathes with a whip, were fufficieht to maintain good order
among there innocent and happy people 7.

Even here the BUT even in this meritorious effort of 'the Jefdius 'for
ambyition and the good of mankind, the genius and spirit of their order
policy of the
order dif. have mingled and are discernible. They plainly aimed at efta-
cernible. blifhing in Paraguay an independant empire, subje&t to the

society alone, and which. by the:.filperior excellence 0f its, con1
.ftitution and police could; scarce have failed to extend its domii-
nion over all the southern continent of America.. With -this
view, in order to prevent the Spaniards or Portuguese: in,'the
adjacent fettlment-.i from acquiring. any influence over; the
people whom they gqverned that .might be dangerdus, the ijefuits
endeavoured to, inspire, the Indians :,with: hatred. aind contandipt .of
these nations. They cut off all intercouirfe betweeh their fib-
jets and the Spanish or Portuguese settlements. They ro-
hibited any privat¢ trader of. eithetr, nation from entering itheir.
territories. When they were obliged to admit: ahy person iird
a publick ch4racer from the neighbpuring governments;.ntsthey
did not.permit him to have any conversation with their fubjeds,,

Y Hist. du Paraguay par Pe' ede Chalevoix, tomn. i. 4, &c. Voyage au Pe-
tou par Don G' 'Juai& D; Ant. de Ulloa, torn. i. 540, &c. Par.' 4to. 1752.'

,',, !
. ' T and:

and no Indian was allowed even to enter the house' where these
strangers resided, unless in the preence of a Jefilit. In order
to render any communication between them as difficult as pof-
fible, they industriously avoided giving the Indians any know-
ledge of the Spanish, or of any other European language but
encouraged the different tribes, which they had civilized, to
acquire a certain dialea of the Indian tongue, and laboured to
make that the universal language throughout their dominions
As all there precautions, without military force, would have been
insufficient to have rendered their empire secure and permanent,
they inftru6ted their fubjedts in the European arts of war. They
formed them into bodies of cavalry and infantry, completely'
armed and regularly disciplined. They provided a great train
of artillery, as well as magazines stored with all the implements
of war. Thus 'they eftablilhed an army so numerous and well-
appointed, as to be formidable 'in a country, where a few sickly
and ill-difciplined battallions compored all :the military force
kept on foot by the Spaniards or Portuguese .

T a Jefiuits gained no considerable degree of power during

the reign of Charles V. who, with his usual sagacity, discerned
the dangerous tendency of, the infticution; and checked its pro-
grefs . But as the order was founded in the period of which I
write the history, and as the age to which I acldrcfs this work
hath seen its fall, the view which I have exhibited of the laws
and genius of this formidable body will not, I hope, be unaccep-
table to my readers; epecially as one circumstance has enabled
me to enter into this detail with particular advantage. Europe

X Voyage de Juan & de Ulloa, tom. i. 549. Recueil des toutes les Pieces qui
ont paru fur lee Affaires des Jesuites en Portugal, tom. i. p. 7, &c.'

* Compte par M, de Moncl. p. 312.

N n had

BOOK VI.

1540.

Rcafon for
giving To full
a view of the
government
and progress
of the order.

459

had observed for two centuries, the ambition and power of the
order. But while it felt many fatal effets of these, it could
not fully discern the causes to which they were to be imputed.
It was unacquainted with many of the singular regulations in the
political constitution or government of the Jefiuits, which forrr-
ed that spirit of intrigue ahd enterprize which distinguished its
,members, and elevated the body itself to fich a height of power.
It was a favourite maxim with the Jesuits, from their first infii-
tution, not to publish the rules of their order. These they kept
concealed as an impenetrable ryfttr.y. They never.commdni-
cated them to strangers; not even to the greater part of their
own members. They refuted to produce them when required by
courts of justice b; and by a strange solecism in policy, the civil
power in different countries authorized or connived at the eta-
blithment of an order of men, whose constitution and laws were
concealed with a follicitude, which alone was a good reason for
having excluded them. During the prosecutions lately carried
on against them in Portugal and France, the Jesuits have been
so inconsiderate as to produce the mysterious volumes of their
infitute. By the aid of these authentick records, .the prin-
ciples of their government may be delineated, and the sources
of their power investigated with a degree of certainty and pre-
cifion, which, previous to that event, it was impoflible to attain .

b Hill. des Jef. tom. iii. 236, &c. Compte par M. de Chalot, p. 38.
c The greater part of my information concerning the government and laws of

the order of Jesuits, I have derived from the reports of M. de Chalotais and M.
de Monclar. I reft not, however, upon the authority even of these refpetable
magistrates, and elegant writers, but upon innumerable passages which they have
extraaced from the constitutions of the order, deposited in their hands. Hofpinian,
a Protestant divine of Zurich, in his Hifqria rfflitica, printed A. D. 1619,pub-
lifhed a small part of the constitutions of the Jesuits, of which by: rome accident
hehad got a copy; p. 13-54.

But
B66K VI.

1540.
460

But as I have pointed ouC the dangerous tendency of the conftitu-
tion and spirit of thie: order with the freedom becoming an hifto-
rian, the candour and impartiality no less requiiite in that cha-
rader call on me to add one observation, That no class of regular
clergy in the Romish church has been more eminent for decency
'and evn ,purity of manners, than the major part of the order of
Jefilits'd., The maxims of an intriguing, abitious, i!iterefted
policy, might influence those who governed the iobiety, and
might even corrupt the heart, and pervert the conduct of ome
individuhls; while the greater number, engaged in: literary purr
flits, or;employed in the functions of religion, was left to the
guidance of those common principles which restrain mea from
vice' and excite them to what is becoming and laudable. The
causes which occasioned the ruin of this mighty body, as well as
the circilnumlances and effets with which it has bedn attended. in
the different countries of Europe, though objects extremely worthy
the attention of every intelligent observer of human affairs, donot
fall within the period of this history.

,No. fooher had Charles reoeftablifiled order in the Low-
Countries, than he was obliged to turn .his attention to. the
'affairs of Germany. The protestants pressed him earnestly to
appoint that conference between a felea number of the divines
of each party, which had been itiptlated in the convention at
Frankfort. The Pope, confidering such an attempt to examine
or decide the points in dispute as derogatory to his right of
being the supreme judge in controversy, and persuaded that it
would either be ineffectual by determining nothing, or prove
dangerous by determining too much, employed every art to

Sur la defr6t. des Jes. par M. D'Alemb, p. 5.,1

prevent

BOO K VI.

540.

1

Alfairs of
GetrmuIny.

461

BooK VL prevent the meeting. The Emperor, however, finding it more

0 '-."' for his interest to sooth the Germans, than to gratify Paul, paid

A coDnerence little regard to his remonstrances. In a diet held at Haguenaw,
berween the
Popiih and matters were ripened for the conference. In another diet assem-
Proerianuts bled at Worms, the conference was begun, Melan&hon on the
June 25. one fide and Eckius on the other, sustaining the principal part in
Dec. 6. the dispute; but after they had made some progress, tho' without

concluding any thing, it was suspended by the Emperor's com-
mand, that it might be renewed with greater solemnity in his own
IJi1. presence in a diet summoned to meet at Ratisbon. This assem-

bly was opened with great pomp, and with a general expeation
that its proceedings would be vigorous and decisive. By the
consent of both parties, the Emperor was entrusted with the
power of nominating the persons who should manage the con-
ference, which it was agreed hould be conducted not in the
form of a publick disputation, but as a friendly fcrutiay or ex-
amination into the articles which had given rife to the present
controversies. He appointed Eckius, Gropper and Pflug, on
the part of the Catholicks, and MNelancihon, Bucer and Piftorius,
on that of the Protestants, all men of distinguished reputation
among their own adherents, and, except Eckius, all eminent for
their moderation, as well as desirous of peace. As they were about
to begin their consultations, the Emperor put into their hands a
book, composed, as he said, by a learned divine in the Low-Coun-
tries, w ;d such extraordinary perspicuity and temper, as might go
far, in his opinion, to tnite and comprehend the two contending
parties. Gropper, a canon of Cologne, whom he had named
among the managers of the conference, a man of address as well
as of erudition, was afterwards fufpeted to be the author of this
short treatile. It contained positions with regard to twenty-two
of the chief articles in theology, which included most of the

questions

questions then agitated in the controversy between the Luthe- BooK VI.
rans and the church of Rome. By ranging his sentiments in a
natural order, and exprefling them with great simplicity; by
employing often the very words of scripture, or of the primitive
fathers; by softening the rigour of rome opinions, and explain-
ing away what was absurd in others; by concellions, now on
one fide, and now on the other; and epecially by banishing as
much as poflible scholastic phrases, thole words and terms of art
in controversy, which serve as badges of diflincCtion to the diffe-
rent feds, and for which theologians often contend more
fiercely than for opinions themselves; he framed his work in
such a manner, as promised fairer than any thing that had
hitherto been attempted, to compose and to terminate religious
dissensions '.

BUT the attention of the age was turned, with such acute Fruitlcli.

observation, towards theological controversies, that it was not
easy to impose on it by any gloss how artful or specious soever.
The length and eagemefs of the dispute had eparated the con-
tending parties o compleatly, and had et their minds at such
variance, that they were not to be reconciled by partial concefli-
ons. All the zealous Catholics, particularly the eclefiaftics who
had a feat in the diet, joined in condemning Gropper's treatise as
too favourable to the Lutheran opinions, the poison of which hc-
refy it conveyed, as they pretended, with greater danger, because
it was in rome degree disguised. The rigid Protestants, especially
Luther himself, and his patron the Elector of Saxony, were for
rejeding it as an impious compound of error and truth, craftily
prepared that it might impose on the weak, the timid and the

'Goldaf. Conflit. Imper. ii. p. 82.

unthinking.

BooK VL unthinking. But the divines, to whom the examination of it

was committed, entered upon that business with greater delibera-
tion and temper. As it was more easy in itsel, as well as more
consistent with the dignity of the church to make concefions,
and even alterations with regard to speculative opinions, the
difculfion whereof is confined chiefly to schools, and which .pre-
sent nothing to the people that either strikes their imagination
or affects their senses, they came to an accommodation about
these without much labour, and even defined the great-article
concerning justification to their mutual satisfaction. But, when
they proceeded to points of jurisdiction, where the interest and
authority of the Roman See were concerned, or to the- rites and
foms- of exteral worftip, where every change that could be
made must be public, and draw the observation of the people,
there the Catholics were altogether untractable; nor could the
church either with safety or with honour abolish its arncient in-
ffitutions All the articles relative o the power of the Pope, the
authbonty of councils; the admihiftration of the sacraments the
worship of faints, and many other particulars did not, in their
nature, admit of any temperament; so that after. labouring
long to bring about an accommodation with respect to these, the

Recess of the Emperor found all his endeavours ineffectual. B eing impatient,
diet of aif- however, to close the diet, he at last prevailed on' a majority
bon in favour
of a eneral of the members to approve of the following recess; " That

gcouncil the articles concerning which the diines had agreedin the con-
July zS.

ferer.ce, should be held as points decided, 'ang be obnrved insio-
lably by all; that the other articles about which they had differed,
should be referred to the determination of a general council, or
if that could not be obtained; to a national fynod of Germany;
and if it hould prove impracicable ,likewise, to assemble a fynod,
hat a general diet of the Empire should be called within eigh-

teen
464

teen months, in order to give ome finl judgment upon the BooK VI.
whole controversy ; that the Emperor should use all his interest 54,
and authority with the Pope, to procure the meeting ither of a
general council or fynod; that, in tile mean t;iie, no innovations
ihould be attempted, no endeavours ffould be employed to gain
proselytes; and neither the revenues of the church, nor tie rights
of the monasteries, should be invaded f.

ALL tlhe proceedings of this diet, as well as the recess in GiS olece

bos h to fal'l

i hich they ttrminatd, gave great offence to the Pope. The power and ,'lorc-

whidih the Germans had allilmtd of appointing their own dixincs llant
to examine and determine matters of controversy, he co;fidered
as a v-ey dargerous inivafion on his rights ; tle renewing of their
ancient propofll concerning a national lynod, which had been Io
often rcjectcd by him and his predecellors, appeared extremely
undutiful ; but the bare mention of allowing a diet, composed
chiefly of laymen, to pals judgment with relipei to articles of
faith, w'as deemed no lets ciminal and profane than the wort of
tlhof herefies which theylc fmed zealous to suppress. On the
other hand, the Protestants were no lels dilTatisfied with a recels,
slhich confiderabl) abridged the liberty which they ejoytd at
that time. As they murmurrd loudly against it, Charls, uinwil- Chiales
!i:g to leave any feeds of ditcontent in the Empire, granted l'rts th

&1roteilants.

them a plivate declaration, in tle most ample terms, exempting
them from lwhatever they thought opprellive or injurious in the
rcces, and acfertaining to them the full poflelion of all the
pi ivilegts \which the) had ever cnjoyed .

Sleidan, 267, &c. Pallav. I. iv. c. . p. 136. F. Paul, p. 86. Sec-

kend. . iil. 256.

g Sleid. 283. Seckend. 366. Dumont Corps Diplorn. iv. p. ii. p. 210.
Vo L. 11. 0 o EXTRA\-

465

EXTRAORDINARY as these conceflions may appear, the fitua-

tion of his affairs at this juncture made it neceflary for the Em-
peror to grant them. He foresaw a rupture with France to be
unavoidable, as well as near at hand, and durst not give any fucl
cause of disgust or fear to the Protestants, as might force them,
in felf-defence, to court the protection of the French King, from
whom, at present, they were much alienated. The rapid pro-
grefs of the Turks in Hungary, was a more powerful and pre-
sent cause of the moderation which Charles discovered. A great
revolution had happened in that kingdom; John Zapol Scaepus
having chosen, as has been related, rather to possess a tributary
kingdom, than to renounce the royal dignity to which he had been
accustomed, had, by the alliftance of his mighty protetor Soly-
man, wrested from Ferdinand a great part of the country, and
left him only the precarious pofleflion of the ret. But being
a Prince of pacific qualities, the frequent attempts of Ferdinand,
or of his partizans among the Hungarians, to recover what they
had loft, gave him great pain; and the necessity, on there occa-
sions, of calling ini the Turks, whom he confidered and felt to
be his masters rather than auxiliaries, was scarce less mortifying.
In order, therefore, to avoid there diftrefles, and to secure quiet
and leisure to enjoy the arts and amusements in which he de-
lighted, lie secretly came to an agreement with his competitor,
on this condition; That Ferdinand should acknowlege him as
King of Hungary, and leave him, during life, the unmolested
poffeflion of that part of the kingdom now In his power; but
that, upon his demise, the sole right to the whole hould devolve
upon Ferdinand h. As John had never been married, and was
then far advanced in life, the terms of the contract seemed very

h Ifluanhaffi Hill. Hung. lib. xii. p. 135.

favourable
BOOK VI.

*S4'-

Affairs of
Hungary.

A. D. 53.
466

favourable to Fedinand. But, soon after, fme of the Hunga-
rian nqblcs, follicitous to prevent a foreigner from acending
their throne, prevailed on John to put an end to a long celi-
bacy, by marrying Isabella, the daughter of Sigifmond, King of
Poland. John had the fatisfaaion;. before his death, which hap.
pened within less than a year thereafteri to fee a on born to in-
herit his kingdom. To him, without regarding his treaty with
Ferdinand, which he confidered, no doubt, as void, upon an event
not foreseen when it was concluded, he bequeathed Iis crown
appointing the Queen and George Martinuzzi, bilhop of Wara-
din, guardians of his on, and regents of the kingdom. The greater
part of the Hungarians immmediately acknowledged the young
King, to whom, in memory of the founder of their monarchy,
they gave the name of Stephen .

FERDINAND, though extremely disconcerted by this un.

expected event, resolved not to abandon the kingdom which he
had acquired by his compact with John. He ent ambassadors
to the Queen to claim polfefion, and to offer the province of
Transylvania as a settlement for her on, preparing at the fame
time to afiert his right by force of arms. But John had com-
mitted the care of his on to prfons, who had too much spirit to
give up the crown tamely, and who possessed abilities sufficient
to defend it. The Queen, to all the address, peculiar to her own
sex, added a masculine courage, ambition, and magnanimity.
Martinuzzi, who had raited himself from the lowcft rank in life
to his present dignity, was one of those extraordinary men, who
by the extent as well as variety of their talents, are fitted to ac
a fupQrior part in bustling and faaious times. In discharging the

Jovii Hilt.' ib. 39, p. 239, a. &c.

0 o o 2. functions

BOOK yI.

154t.

Death of the
King of
Hungary.

Ferdinand's
efforts to ob,-
tain the
crowns

Chntafer and
power of

artinuzzi.

46?

BOOK VI. funtions of his ecclesiastical ffice, he put on the semblance of

'i;i4' an humble and austere sanctity. He discovered, in civil tran-

fafions, industry, dexterity and boldness. During the war he laid
aside the cassock, and appeared on horse-back with his fcymeter
and buckler, s acive, as ostentatious, and as gallant as any'of
his countrymen. Amridft all these different and contraditor
forms which he. could a- furhe, an insatiable desire of dominion
and authority was conspicuous. From such persons it was ob-
vious what answer Ferdinand had to expect. He oon perceived
that 'he must depend on arms alone for recovering Hungary.
Having levied for this purpose a considerable body of Germans,
whom his 'partizans among the Hungarians joined with their
vassals, he ordered them to march into that part of the kingdom
which adhered to Stephen. Martinuzzi, unable to make head
against tfich a powerful army in the field, satisfied himself with
holding out the towns, all of which, especially Buda, the place
of greatest consequence, he provided with every thing necessary
Callks the for defence; and in the mean time he ent ambafladors to Soly-

man, beseeching him to extend towards the son, the fame Impe-
rial protection which had o long riaintained the father on his
throne. The Sultan, though Ferdinand used his utmost endea.
vours to thwart this negotiation, and even offered to accept of
the Hungarian crowf'on the fame ignominious condition of pay-
ing tribute to the Ottoman Porte, by which John had held it,
saw fich profpe&s of advantage from espousing the interest of
the young King, that he instantly promised him'his protetion;
and commanding one army to advance towards Hungary; he
himself followed, with another. Meanwhile the Germans,
hopir.g t terminate the war by the reduction of a city in which
the King and his mother were ihut up, had formed the siege of

i - m Buda.
468

Buda. Martinuzzi, having drawn thither tile firength of tle Hun- BooK VI.
garian nobility, defended the town with fuich courage and ntill, as 54-
allowed the Turkish forces time to come up to its relief. They
instantly attacked the Germans, weakened by fatigue, diseases and
desertion, and defeated them with great slaughter k.

SOLYMAN oon after joined hi. victorious troops, and being Solyman's

weary of so many expensive expeditions undertaken in defence of conTdu.
dominions which were not his own, or being unable to refill this
alluring opportunity of seizing a kingdom, while pollefled by
an infant, under the guardianship of a woman and a priest, he
allowed interested considerations to triumph with too much
ficility over tile principles of honour and the sentiments of hu-
manity. What he planned ungenerously, lie executed by fraud.
Having prevailed on the Qeen to fend her son, whom lie
pretended to be desirous of feeing, into his camp, and having
at the fame time invited the chief of the nobility to an enter-
tertainment there, while they, fiifpeting no treachery, gave them-
selves up to the mirth and jollity of the feafft, a feled band of
troops by the Sultan's orders seized one of the gates of Buda.
Being thus malter of the capital, of the King's person and of
the eading men among the nobles, he ordered the Queen together
with her onl to be conducted to Tranfilvania, which province lie
allotted to them, and appointing a Balha to reside in Buda with
sa large body of soldiers, annexed Hungary to the Ottoman Empire.
rTle tears and complaints of tle unhappy Queen had no influence
to change his purpose, nor could Martinuzzi either resist his absolute
and uncontroulable command, or prevail on him to recal it'.

k Iluanhiffi. hilt. Hung. lib. 14. 1. 150.
t Ifluanhaffi. lib. 14. p. 56. Jovii hiftor. lib. 39. p 2476, &c.

BE FOIt R

469

BREORE the account of this violent usurpation reached Ser-

dinand, he was so unlucky as to have dispatched new ambafla-
dors to Solyman with a fresh representation of his right to the
crown of Hungary, as well as a renewal of his former overture to
hold the kingdom, of the Ottoman Porte, and to pay for it an
annual tribute. This ill-timed proposal was rejeced with scorn.
The Sultan elated with success, and thinking that he might
prescribe what terms he pleated to a Prince who voluntarily
prosered conditions so unbecoming his own dignity, declared that
he would not suspend the operations of war, unless Ferdinand
instantly evacuated all the towns which he still held in Hungary,
and consented to the imposition of a tribute upon Austria, in order
to reimburse the fums, which his preftimptuous invasion of Hun-
gary had obliged the Ottoman Porte to expend in defence of that
kingdom m.

SUCH was the state of affairs in Hungary. As the unfor-

tunate events there had either happened before the difrolu-
tion of the diet at Ratisbon, or were dreaded at that time,
Charles aw the danger of irritating and inflaming the minds of the
Germans, while such a formidable enemy was ready to break into
the Empire; and perceived that he could not expet any vigo-
rous afliitance either towards the recovery of Hungary or the
defence of the Aultrian frontier unless he courted and satisfied
the Proteitants. By the conceflions which have been mentioned,
he gained this point, and uch liberal upplies both of men and
money were voted for carrying on the war against the Turks,

m Iluanhaffi hilf. Hung. . 14. p. 158.

as
BOOK VI.

1541.

Ferdinand's
overtures to
Solyman.
47°

47

as left him under little anxiety about the security of Germany du-
ring the next campaign ".

IMMEDIATELY upon the conclusion of the diet, the Empe-

ror et out for Italy. As he pafied through Lucca he ad a hort
interview with the Pope, but nothing could be concluded con-
cerning the proper method of compoing the religious disputes
in Germany between two Princes whose views and interests with
regard to that matter were at this juncture so opposite. The
Pope's endeavours to remove the causes of discord between Charles
and Francis, and to extinguiih those mutual animofities which
threatened to break out suddenly into open hostility, were not
more fuccefsfil.

THE Emperor's thoughts were bent so entirely, at that time,

on the great enterprize which he had concerted against Algiers,
that he listened with little attention to the Pope's schemes or
overtures, and haflened to join his army and fleet°.

BOOK VI.

541.

Emperor
visits Italy.

His expedil'
tion against
Algicis, and
motives of it.

ALGIERS Rill continued in that fate of dependance on the

Turkish empire to which Barbarofa had filbjected it. Ever since
lie, as captain Bafha, commanded the Ottoman fleet, Algiers
had been governed by Hafcen-Aga, a renegado eunuch, who by
pafling through every ation in the Corsairs service, had ac-
quired great experience in war, and was well fitted for a station
which required a man of tried and daring courage. Hafcen,
in order to Ihew how well he deserved that dignity, carried on

. Sleid. 283.

o Sandov. hiltor. tom. ii. 298.

his

BooK VI. his piratical depredations against the Christian States with
-4^,^ amazing activity, and out-did, if possible, Barbarossa himself

in boldness and cruelty. The commerce of the Mediterranean
was greatly interrupted by his cruisers, and fucl frequent
alarms given to the coasts of Spain, that there was a neceflity
of erecting watch-towers at proper distances, and of keeping
guards conflantly on foot, in order to decry the approach of his
squadrons, and to protet the inhabitants from their defcentsP.
Of this the Emperor's filbjeds had long complained, represent-
ing it as an enterprize corresponding to his power, and becom-
ing his humanity, to reduce Algiers, which since the conquest
of Tunis, was the common receptacle of all the free booters;
and to exterminate that lawless race, the implacable enemies of
the Chriflian name. Moved partly by their intreaties, and
partly allured by the hope of adding to the glory which he had ac-
quired by his last expedition into Africa, Charles before he left
Madrid in his way to the Low-Countries had ifited orders both
in Spain and Italy to prepare a fleet and army for this pupofe.
No change in circumfianccs, since that time, could divert
him from this resolution, or prevail on him to turn his arms
towards Hungary; though the success of the Turks in that
country seemed more immediately to require his pretence there;
though many of his most faithful adherents in Germany urged
that the defence of the Empire ought to be his first and peculiar.
care; though such as bore him no good will ridiculed his pre-
pofterous conduc in flying from an enemy almost at hand, that
he might go in quest of a remote and more ignoble foe. But to
attack the Sultan in Hungary, how splendid soever that mea-
fire might appear, was an undertaking which exceeded his

Jovii his 1 40. p. 266.

power,
47z

power, and was not consistent with his interest. To draw BOOK VI.
troops out of Spain or Italy, to march them into a country so
distant as Hungary, to provide the vast apparatus necefflary for
transporting thither the artillery, ammunition and baggage of
a regular army, and to push the war in that quarter, where it
could scarce be brought to any iffie during several campaigns,
were undertakings o expensive and unwieldy as did not cor-
respond with. the low condition of the Emperor's treasury.
While his principal force was thus employed, his dominions in
Italy and the Low-Countries must have lain open to the French.
King, who would not have allowed such a favourable opportu-
nity of attacking them to go unimproved. Whereas the
African expedition, the preparations for which were already
finished and almost the whole expence of it defrayed, would de-
pend upon a tingle effort, and besides the security and satis-
faftion which the fiuccefs of it must give his subjes, would.
detain him during so hort a space, that Francis could scarce
take advantage of his absence, to invade his dominions in.
Europe.

ON all there accounts, Charles adhered to his first plan, and His prepara,-

with such determined obstinacy, that he paid no regard to the tions.
Pope who advised, or to Andrew Doria who conjured him not
to expose his whole armament to almost unavoidable deftruc-
tion, by venturing at such an advanced season of tle year, and
while the autumnal winds were so violent, to approach the
dangerous coast of Algiers. Having embarked on board Doria's
galies at Porto-Venere in the Genoese territories, he soon.
found that this experienced. sailor had not judged wrong con-
cerning the element with which he was so well acquainted; for.

VO L. II. P p p such.

473

filch a form arose that it was with the tmoft difficulty and
danger he reached Sardinia, the place of general rendezvous.
But as his courage was undaunted, and his temper often inflexi-
ble, neither the remonstrances of the Pope and Doria, nor the
danger to which he had already been exposed by disregarding
them, had any other effect than to confirm him in his fatal re-
solution. The force, indeed, which he had colleted was such
as might have inspired a Prince les adventrous, and less con-
sident in his own schemes, with the most sanguine hopes of
success. It confidted of twenty thousand foot, and two thou-
sand horse, Spaniards, Italians and Germans, moffly veterans,
together with three thousand volunteers, the flower of the
Spanih and Italian nobility, fond of paying court to the Empe-
ror by attending him in this favourite expedition, and eager
to share in the glory which they believed he was going to reap;
to these were added a thousand soldiers ent from Malta by. the
order of St. John, led by an hundred of its nmoft gallant
Knights.

THE voyage, from Majorca to the African coast, was not

less tedious, or full of hazard, than that which he had just
finished. When he approached the land, the roll of the
ea, and vehemence of the winds, would not permit the troops
to disembark. But at last, the Emperor eizing a favourable
opportunity, landed them without opposition, not far from
Algiers, and immediately advanced towards the town. To
oppose this mighty army, Hafcen had only eight hundred
'urks, and five thousand Moors, partly natives of Africa, and
partly refigees from Granada. He returned, however, a fierce
and haughty answer when summoned to\firrender. But with

fich

BOOK VI.

Lands in
Africa.

E
474

such a handful of soldiers, neither his desperate courage, nor
consummate skill in war could have long resifted forces fluperior
to those which had defeated Barbarofla at the head of sixty thou-
sand men, and had reduced Tunis, in spite of all his endeavours
to save it.

BUT how far soever the Emperor might think himself be-

yond the reach of any danger from the enemy, he was suddenly
exposed to a more dreadful calamity, and one againfl which
human prudence, and human efforts availed nothing. On the
second day. after his landing, and before he had time for any
.thing but to disperse rome light armed Arabs wlo. molested his
troops on. their marchi the, clouds began to. gather, and the
heavens to appear with a fierce and threatening asped. To-
wards evening rain began to fall accompanied with violent wind,
and the rage of the tempest increasing. during the night, the
soldiers who had brought nothing ahore but their arms, re-
mainec exposed to all its fury without tents, or shelter, or cover
of any kind. The ground was soon so wet. that they could not lie
down on it; their camp being. in a low situation was overflowed
with water, and they funk at every Rtep to the ankles in mud;
while the. wind blew with lifch impetuosity, that to prevent
their falling they were obliged to thrust their spears into the
ground, and to support themselves by taking hold of them.
Halcen was too vigilant an officer to. allow an enemy in filch
distress. to remain unmolested. About the dwn of morning,
he allied out with soldiers, who having been fdrcened from the
florm under their own roofs, were fresh and vigorous.. A body
of Italians who were stationed nearest the city\ dispirited and.
benumbed. with cold, fled at the approach of the Turks. The

P p p troops;

BOOK VI.

3541.

The dfalters
which besel
his army.

475

troops at the post behind them, discovered greater courage,
but as the rain had extinguished their matches and wet their
powder, their muskets were useless, and having scarce strength
to handle their other arms, they were oon thrown into con-
fusion. Almost the whole army, with the Emperor him-
self in person, was obliged to advance before the enemy could
be repulsed, who, after spreading such general confernation,
and killing a considerable number of men, retired at last in good
order.

BuT all feeling or remembrance of this loss and danger were

quickly obliterated by a more dreadful as well as affecting spec-
tacle. It was now broad day the hurricane had abated no-
thing of its violence, and the ea appeared agitated with all the
rage of which that deftrudive element is capable; all the hips,
on which alone the whole army knew that their fafcty and sub-
fiftence depended, were seen driven from their anchors, some
dashing against each other, some beat to pieces on the rocks,
many forced ahore, and not a few finking in the waves. In
less than an hour, fifteen ships of war, and an hundred and
forty transports with eight thousand men perished; and such of
the unhappy crews, as escaped the fury of the ea, were mur-
dered without mercy, by the Arabs, as oon as they reached
land. The Emperor flood in silent anguilh and astonishment
beholding this fatal event, which at once blasted all his hopes
of success, and buried in the depths the vast stores which he had
provided as well for annoying the enemy, as for subsisting his
own troops. He had it not in his power to afford them any other
assistance or relief than by fending rome troops to drive away the
Arabs, and thus delivering a few wlhowere so fortunate as to get

ashore
BOOK VI.

1541.

And :fleet.
, f

476

ashore from tlh cruel fate which their companions had met with.
At last the wind began to fall, and to give ome hopes that as
many fhipe might escape, as to save the army from perilhing by
famine, and transport them back to Europe. But there were
only hopes; the approach of evening covered the sea with dark-
ness and it being impoflible for the officers aboard the ships
that had out-lived the storm to fend any intelligence to their
companions who were ashore, they remained during the night
in all the anguilh of fiflpenfe and uncertainty. Next day, a
boat difpatclied by Doria made flift to reach land, with infor-
mation, that having weathered out the storm, to which, during
fifty years knowledge of the ea, he had never seen any equal in
fierceness and horror, lie had found it neceflary to bear away
with his flattered ships to Cape Metafuz. He advised the Em-
peror, as the face of the sky was flill lowering and tempefluous,
to march with all speed to that place, where the troops could re-
imbark with greater ease.

WHATEVER comfort this intelligence afforded Charles, from

being affilred that part of his fleet had escaped, was balanced by
the new cares and perplexity in which it involved him with re-
gard to his army. Metafuz was at least three days march from
his present camp; all the provisions which he had brought ashore
at his first landing were ow consumed his soldiers, worn out
with fatigue, were scarce able for fiuch a journey, even in a friendly
country ; and being dispirited by a fuccelion of hardflips, which
vidtory itself would scarce have rendered tolerable, they were
in no condition to undergo new toils. But the situation of the
army was flch, as allowed not one moment for deliberation, nor
left it in the least doubtful what to chule. They were ordered
inlfanlly to march, the wounded, the ick and the feeble being

placed

BooK VI.

1549.

Obliged to
retreat.

477

placed in the centre; such as seemed most vigorous were fta-
tioned in the front and rear. Then the fad effecs of what they
had suffered began to appear more manifetly than ever, and new
calamities were added to all these which they had already endured.
Some could scarce bear the weight .of their arms; others, spent
with the toil of forcing their way through deep and almost im-
passible roads, funk down and died; many perished by famine,
as the whole army subsisted chiefly on roots and berries, or the
flesh of horses, killed by the Emperor's order, and distributed
among the several battalions; many were drowned in brooks which
were fwoln so much by the exceflive rains, that in pafling them
they waded up to the chin ; not a few were killed by the enemy,
who during the greatest part of their retreat, alarmed, harraffed
and annoyed them night and day. At last they arrived at Meta-
fuz; and the weather being now so calm as to restore their com-
munication with the fleet, they were supplied with plenty of
provifiors, and cheered with the profpec of safety.

DURING this dreadful series of calamities, the Emperor dif-

covered great qualities, many of which an almost uninterrupted
flow of prosperity had hitherto afforded him no opportunity of
displaying. He was conspicuous for firmness and constancy of
spirit, for magnanimity, fortitude, humanity and compafion.
He endured as great hardihips as the meanest soldier; he exposed
his own person wherever danger appeared; he encouraged the
desponding; visited the sick and wounded; and animated all by
his words and example. When the army embarked, he was
among the last who left the shore, although a body of Arabs
hovered at no great distance, ready to fall on the rear. By these
virtues, Charles attoned, in rome degree, for his obstinacy and
presumption in undertaking an expedition so fatal to his fubjets.

TH
BOOK VI.

5S41.

His fortitude
of iind.

478

THE calamities which attended this unfortunate enterprize did

not end here; for no sooner were the forces got on board, than
a new storm arising, though less furious than the former, scat-
tered the fleet, and obliged them, separately, to make towards
filch ports in Spain or Italy as they could first reach; thus spread-
ing the account of their disasters, with all the circumitances of
aggravation and horror, which their fear or fancy suggested.
The Emperor hirnfelf, after escaping great dangers, and being
forced into the port of Bugia in Afiica, where he was obliged
by contrary winds to remain several weeks, arrived at last in
Spain, in a condition very different from that in wliicli he had
returned from his former expedition against the Infidels'.

z Carol. v. Expeditio ad Argyriam per Nicolaum Villagnonem

Rhodium ap Scardium, v. ii. 365. Jovii Flil. . xl. p. 269-b.
Zuniga vida de Carlos v. p. 83. Sandov. Hiftor. ii. 299, &c.

BOOK VI.

'541.

Returns to
Eulope.

December a.

Equitem
Vera y
END OF THE SECOND VOLUME.

479

# INDEX TO THE SECOND VOLUME.

D

TO THE
SEC

OND

V O L U M

A
A BSOLUTION, the form of that

used by father Tetzel in Germany,
A1j 80.

Adorni, the facion of, aflifis the
Imperial general Colonna in the re-

duation of Genoa, 149.
Adrian of Utrecht, made preceptor to Charles V.

under William de Croy, lord of Chievres,
21. His character, 22. Sent by Charles
with power to assume the regency of Caflile
on the death of his grandfather, 27. His
claim admitted by Cardinal Ximenes, and
executed in conjunaion, ib. Authorized
by Charles to old the cortes of Valencia,
which refuses to aflcmble before him, 63.
Miade viceroy of Castile on the departure of
Charles for Germany, 66. His election re-
monftrated againfl by the Caltliians, ib. Is
chosen l'ope, 145. Rctrofpe&t of his con-
duEt in Spain during the abfncc of Charles,
157. Sends Ronquillo to reduce the Sego-
vians, who repulse him, ib. Sends Fonseca
to besiege the city, whlo is repulled by the
inhabitants of Medina del Campo, 158.

VOL. III.

Apologizes for Fonfcca's condut to the
people, ix9. Recals Fonseca and difiniffes
his troops, ib. His authority disclaimed by
the Holy Junta, 61. Deprived of power
by them, 163. His ill reception on his ar-
rival at Rome on being chofcn to the Pa-
pacy, 187. Reflores the territories acquired
y his predeccffor, 188. Labours to unite
the contending powers of Europe, ib. Pub-
lisles a bull for a three years truce among
them, 189. Accedes to the league against
the French King, 190. His death, r97.
The fentimcnts and behaviour of the people
on that occasion, ib. A rctrofpect of his
condu towards the Reformers, 206. His
brief to the diet at Nuremburgh, 207. Re-
ceives a lift of grievances from the diet, 209.
His conduc to the Reformers, how etcem-
ed at Rome, 211.
Africa, the Spanish troops sent by Cardinal

Ximenes against Barbarofll, defeated there,
36.
Aigue-Mortcs, interview between the Empc-

ror Charles, and Franlcis, there, 414.
Aix la Cbapillc, the Emperor Charles crowned

N n n there,
I

N

E

X
E.

there, 77. Fcrdinand his brother crown-
ed King of the Romans there, 334.
Alarcon, Don Ferdinand, Francis 1. of France,

taken prisoner at the battle of Pavia, com-.
mitted to his cuflody, 229. Conducts
Francis to Spain, 238. Delivers up Francis
in pursuance of the treaty of Madrid, 254.
Is sent ainbaflador to Francis to require the
fulfilment of his treaty, 268. Pope Cle-
ment VII. taken pifoncr by the Imperia-
lifRs, is committed to his cuflody, 287.
Albany, John Stuart duke of, commands the

French army font by Francis I. to invade
Naples, 224.
Albert, of Brarndenburgh, grand mafler of the

Teutonic Order, becomes a convert to the
doctrines of Luther, 263. Obtains of
Sigismund King of Poland the invefliture
of Pruflia, crcEtcd into a dutchy, 264. Is
put under the ban of the empire, ib. His
family fixed in thle inheritance of Prussia, ib.
Albert, clecor of Metz., the publication of in-

dulgences in Germany, committed to him,
80.
Alexandr VI. Pope, remarks on the pontificate

of, 102.

Alexander di Medici. See MEDICI.
Algiers, how it was seized by Barbarofia,

365. Is seized by the brother of the fame
name, on the death of the former, 336. Is
taken under the protecion of the Porte, ib.
Is governed by Hafcen Aga in the abfcnce of
Barbarossa, 471. Is belieged by the Em-
peror Charles V. 474. Charlcs forced to
re-imbark by bad weather, 478.
Alrafcbid, brother of Muley Hafcen King of

Tunis, olicits the protecion of Barbarossa
against him, 367. His treacherous treat-
ment by Barbarossa, 368.
Alva, Duke of, adheres to Ferdinand of Ara-

gon, in his dispute with the Archduke Phi-
lip concerning the egency of Ca/iile, 9.
Amn:erjlrf, a nobleman of Holland, allbciated

by Charles V. with Cardinal Ximenes, in
the regency of Caflile, 34.
/lnabap!ifls, the origin of that set deduced,

348. Their principal tenets, 349. Their
lettlement at Munfler, 350. Chara er of
their principal leaders, ib. They seize the
city of Mnnler, 351. T'hey cilablifl a
new form of government there, ib. Chufe
Bocold King, 355. Their licentious prac-

tices, ib. A confederacy of the German
Princes formed against them, 356. Are
blockaded in Munfler by tle bifnop, 357.
The city taken and great flnaghter made of
tliem, 358. 'Their. King put to death, 359.
Character of the fte since that period, ib.
See AIlatthias, and Borold.
A4ngleria, his authority cited in proof of the

extortions of the Flemifli Miniflers of Charles
V. 45.
Anbalt, Prince of, avows the opinions of Mar-

tin luther, 206.

Annats to the couit of Rome, what, 113.
Aragon, how Ferdinand became poflefed of

that Kingdom, 2. The cortes of, ac-
knowledges the Archduke Philip's title to
the crown, 3. Antient enmity between this
kingdom and Callile, 7. Navarre added to
this crown by the arts of Ferdinand, 19.
Arrival of Charles V. 46. The cortes not
allowed to aflemble in his name, ib. The
refracory behaviour of the 'Aragonians, ib.
They refute rcflitution of the kingdom of
Navarre, 47. Don John Lanuz.a appoint-
ed regent, on the departure of Charles for
Germany, 66. XVho composes the diflur-
bances there, 184. The moderation of
Charles towards the insurgents on his arrival
in Spain, 186. See Spain.
Ardres, an interview there between Francis I.

and Henry VIII. of England, 75.
A/lurias, Charles son of Philip and Joanna, ac-

knowledged Prince of, by the Cortes of
Caflile, 14.
AufJiurg, a diet called there by Charles V.

328. Hi-s public entry into that city,
329. The confcflion of faith named from
this city, drawn up by Melanihon, 329.
Resolute behavior of the protcftant Princes
at, 330. Its form of government violently
altered, and rendercd fubmiflive to the Em-
peror, 181. The diet reassembled there,
193. The diet takes part with the Empe-
ror againfi the city of Magdeburg, 2oo. Is
seized by Maurice of Saxony, 238. Another
diet at, opened by Ferdinand, 326. Car-
dinal Morone attends the diet as the Pope's
nuncio, 327. IVlorone departs on the lope's
death, 329. Rccefs of the diet on the sub-
je of religion, 332. Remarks on this rc-
cess, 337.
Avila, a convention of the malecontents in

Spain

Spain held there, 160. A confederacy
termed the Holy Junta, formed there, 161.
which disclaims the authority of Adrian, ib.
The -loly Junta removed to Tordefillas, 6a.
Sec 7unta.
Aufria, by what means the honife of, became

so formidable in Germany, 289.

B
Barbarossa, Horue, his rife to the kingdoms of

Algiers and Tunis, 36. Defeats the
Spanifl troops sent against him by Cardinal
Ximencs, ib. His parentage, 364. Com-
mences pyrate with his brother Hayradin, ib.
How he acquired pofTeflion of Algiers, 365.
Infefis the coarts of Spain, 366. Is reduced
and killed by Comares the Spanifli governor
of Oran, ib.
Barbarofa, Hayradin, brother to the former

of the fame name, takes poffeflion of Algiers
on his brother's death, 366. Put his
dominions under the protecion of the Grand
Signior, ib. Obtains the command of the
Turkish fleet, ib. His treacherous treat-
ment of Alrafchid, brother to the King of
Tunis, 368. Seizes Tunis, 369. Extends
his depredations by sea, ib. Prepares to rc-
sift the Emperor's armament against him,
371. Goletta and his fleet taken, 372. Is
defeated by Charles, 374.' Tunis taken,
375.
Barbary, a summary view of the revolutions

of, 363. Its division into indepcndant
kingdoms, ib. Rife of the piratical States,
364. See Barbarofi.
Barcelona, the publick entry of the Emperor

Charles V. into lhat city as its count,
320. The treaties of Charles with the Ita-
lian States, publiflied there, 3214.
Bayard, chevalier, his characer, 135. Ilis

gallant defence of Mezicres, besieged by the
Imperialifis, ib. Obliges them to raise the
siege, ib. His noble behaviour at his death,
203. His refpeafill funeral, 204.
Bellay, M. his erroneous account of the educa-

tion of Charles V. correted, 21. Note.
His account of the difafirous retreat of the
Emperor Charles V. from the invasion of
Provence, II. 403.
Bible, a translation of, undertaken by Martin

L.uther, and its effets in opening tihe eyes
of the people, 205.
Bicocca, battle of, between Colonna, and

Marcchal Lautr6c, 147.
Bocold or Bcukcl;, John, a journeyman taylor,

becomes a leader of the anabaptifis, at Mun-
iter, 350. Succeeds Matthias in the
direction of their ifflairs, 353. His enthu-
fiaftick extravng;ncs, ib. Is chosen King,
354. Marries fourteen wives, 355. Be-
heads one of them, 357. Is put to a cruel
death at the taking of Munflcr, 358. See
Alnabaptijfl.
Bobemia, tile Archduke Ferdinand chosen

King of, 289.
Bonnivel, admilal of France, appointed to

commni d the invasion of Milan, 195.
His character, ib. Enables Colonna to de-
fend tie city of Milan by Iis imprudent de-
lay, I96. Forced to abandcn the Milaneec,
202. Is wounded and his army defeated by
the Impcrialifis, 203. Stimulates Francis
to an invasion of tile Milancre, 219. Ad-
vises Francis to besiege Pavia, 221. Advises
him to give battle to Bourbon who advanced
to the relief of Pavia, 226. Is killed at tie
battle of Pavia, 227.
BolQgna, an interview between the Emperor

Charles V. and Pope Clement VII. there,
321. Another meeting between them
there, 39.

Bofifer. Sec GouFrFIER.
Bouillon, Robert de la Marck, lord of, declares

war againfi the emperor Clarles, at the in-
ifigation of Francis, 134. Is odered by
Francis to dilband his troops, ib. Iis tcrri.
tories reduced by tlie IEmperor, 135.
Bourbon, Charles Duke of, his character,

191. The caufcs of hljs difcontct with
Francis 1. is

b. is uchefs dies, 192. Re-

jects the advances of Loui!s the King's mo-
ther, 3i'. His cllate fcqucflcrdl by her in-
tiigtcs, 193. Ncgociates fccrctly with the
Fmperor, ib. Is included in a treaty between
tihe Emperor and Henry VIII. of England,
ib. Is taxed by the King with betraying
him, which he denies, 194. Efcapcs to
Italy, 195. Dircts the nmcafurcs of the
Imperial army under Lannoy, 201. )cfeats
the French on the banks of the Seffia, 203.
Inligates Charles to an invasion of France,

Nnn 215.

215. Advances to the relief of Pavia, 224.
Defeats Francis, and takes him prisoner,
227. Hastens to Madrid to fccure his own
interells on the interview between Charles
and Francis, 240 His kind reception by
Charles, 247. Obtains a grant of the dutchy
of Milan, and is made general of the Impe-
rial army, 248. Obliges Sforza to furren-
der Milan, 271. Is forced to oppress the
Milanese to satisfy his troops mutinying for
pay, 276. Sets Morone at liberty, and makes
him his confidant, ib. Appoints Leyva go-
vernor of Milan, and advances to invade the
Pope's territories, 278. His disappointed
troops mutiny, ib. He determines to plunder
Rome, 282. Arrives at Rome, and afaiults
it, 284. Is killed, ib.
Brandenburgb, Eletor of, avows the opinions

of Luther, 206.

Albert of. Sec Albert.
Bruges, a league concluded there between the

Emperor and Henry VIII. of England, a-
gainft France, 157.
Brunswick, Duke of, avows the opinions of

Luther, 20'6.
Buda, siege of, by Ferdinand King of the Ro-

mans, 468. Is treacheroufiy seized by
Sultan Solyman, 469.

C
Cajetan, Cardinal, the Pope's legate in Ger-

many, appointed to examine the doctrines
of Martin Luther, 88. Requires Lu-
ther peremptorily to retract his errors, ib.
Requires the Elecor of Saxony to surrender
or banish Luther, 96. His conduc jufli-
fled; 91.
Calais, an ineffectual congress there, between

the Emperor and Francis, under the m-
diation of Henry VIlI. 136.
Cambray, articles of the peace concluded there,

between the Emperor Charles, and Francis
of France, 315. Remarks on this: treaty,
316.
Campeggio, Cardinal, made legate from Pope.

Clement' VII. to the second diet,at Nurem-
berg, 212. Publishes articles for re-
forming the inferior clergy, 213. Advises
Charles: to rigorous measures againfl the Pro-
teflants, 331.
Capitulation of the Germanick body, fignedby

Charles V. and prefcibe4 to all his fuccef-
fors, 60.

r o THE
Carlefladius, imbibes the opinions of Martin

Luther, at Wittemburg, 97. His in-
temperate zeal, 204. Awed by the reproofs
of Luther, 205.

Caflaldo, Mlarquis of Piadeno. Sec Piadeno.
Ciflile, how Ilabella became pofleffed of that

kingdom, 2. The Archduke Philip's
title acknowledged by the Cortes of that
kingdom, 3. Isabella dies and leaves her
hulband Ferdinand of Aragon, regent, 6.
Ferdinand resigns the crown of, ib. Ferdi-
nand acknowledged regent by the Cortes, 7.
Enmity between this kingdom and Aragon,
ib. The particular dislike of the Castilians
to Ferdinand, ib. The regency of, jointly
vefed in Ferdinand, Philip and Joanna, by
the treaty of Salamanca, . Declares
against Ferdinand, 12. The regency of,
resigned by Philip, t Ferdinand, 13. Philip
and Joanna acknowledged King and. Qeeri
by the Cortes, 14. Death of Philip,' ib.
The Perplexity of the Castilians on Joanna's
incapacity for government, ib. Ferdinand
gains the regency and the good will of the
Caj1ilians by his prudent administration, 8.
Oran and other places in Barbary annexed'
to this kingdom by Ximenes, ib. Ximenes
appoipted regent by Ferdinand's will, until
the arrival of Charles V. 25. Charles afr
fumes the regal title, 28, Ximenes procures
its acknowledgement, 29. The nobility
deprefled by Ximenes, 30. The. gran4ees
mutiny against Ximenes, 31. Thle ur
tiny fupprefled, ib. Ximenes Tefimes the
grants made by Fcrdinand to the nobles, 32.
The bold reply of Ximenes.to the discontent-
ed nobles, 33. Otheraffociates in the regency
appointed with Ximencs at the infligationof
the Flemifl courtiers, 34. Ximrenes dies,
42. Charles acknowledged King by the
Cortes, on his arrival, with a reservation; in
favour of his mother Joanna, 43. The
Caflilians receive, unfavourable; impreflions
of him, 44. Difgufled by his partiality.to
his Flemih. ministers, ib. Sauvage made
chancellor, ib. William de.Croy, appoint-
ed archbiolop of Toledo, 45. The prin-
cipal cities confederate and,complain oftheir.
grievances, 47. The clergy of,'refufe to'
levy the tenth of benefices. granted by the
Pope to Charles V. 62. Interdiced, -but
the interdict taken off, by Charles's appli-

cation

cation, ib. An infiirrecion there, 64. In-
crease of difafftQion, 65. Cardinal Adrian
appointed regenton tlhe departure of Charles
for Germany, 66. The views and prelcn-
fionsof the commons, in their infurirctions,
159. The confederacy called the Holy Junta
formed, 166. The proceedings of which are
carried on in the name of Queen Joanna, 162.
Receives circulatory letters from Charles for
the insurgents to lay down their arms, with
promilis of pardon, 64. The r:oblcs un-
dertake to fipprcfs the inflirgents, 168.
Raise an army against them under the Conde
de Haro, 70. Haro gets poflcflion of Jo-
anna, 171. Expedients by which they raire
money for their troops, 173. Unwilling to
prbceed to extremities with'the Junta, ib.
The army of the Junta routed and Padilla
excted, 177. Dfolution of the Junta,
179. The moderation of Charles toward
the insurgents on his arrival in Spain, 186.
He acquires the love of the Castilians, 187.
See Spain.
Catberine of Aragon, is divorced' from Henry

VIlli of England, 347. Dies, 420.
Catberine a Boria, a nun, flies from her cloifecr,

and marries Martin Luther, 262.

Cnatherine di Medici. See MEDI rci.
C(arleslV. Emperor of Germany, his obfer-

vations on the manners of the clergy, in his
letter to the archbishop of Mentz, 104.
Nete.
Charles V. Emperor, his descent and. birth,

. I-low he came to inherit such cxtenfive
dominions, ib. Acknowledged Prince of
Aflirias, hy the Cortes of Castile, 14. Hlis
father Philip dies, ilb. Jealbufy and hatred' of
his grandfather Ferdinand toward him, 9.
left heir to his dlominions, 20. Death of
' Ferdinand, 21. His education' committed
to Williani de Croy' lord of Chievres, ib.
" Adrinn of Utrecht appointed to, be his pre-
ceptor, ib. The first opening of his charac-
ter, 22. Aflumes the government of Flan-
ders, and attends to business, 23. Sends
cardinal Adrian to, be regent of Caltile,

iwo 'executes it jointly with' Xirnencs, 27.
Aflies the regal title, 28. His title ad-
mitted with difliculty by the Caflilian no-
bility, 29. Persuaded to add aflbciate re-
gents to Xinencs, 34. His Flemish court
corrupted by the avalice of Chicvres, 36.

V 0 I1 U M E.

PiTrfiaded by Ximencs to villt Spain, but
hlow tle journC) is retarded, 37. The pic-
fnt slate of his aflTirs, ib. Concludes a peace
at Noycn with Fralicis I. of F'Iance, and
tie conditions of'tie treaty, 38. Artives in
Spain, 40. Is ungrateful treatment of
Ximenes, 42. His lpnblick celiry into Val-
ladolid, 43. Is acknowledged King by the
Corics, who vote him a free gift, ib. The
Caffilians receive unfavourable impressions
of him, 45. 1)ifgufis the by hiis parti-
ality to his Flemilhi miniflers, ib. Sets out
for Aragon, 45. Sends' his brother Ser-
dinand to visit their gratdfather Maximi-
lian, b. Cannot assemble the Cortes of
Aragon in his own name, 46. Tlle op-
position made by that nflemby to his dfiies,
ib. Refules the application of Francis 1. ftr
reclttution of the kingdom of Navaire, il,.
Neglets the renionflrances of lhe Calfilians,
47. Death of the Emperor Maximilian, 48.
View of the present slate of Europe, l'.
How Maximilian was obltrletcd in eccuring
the Empire to him, 49. Flancis I. afpircs
to thle Imperial crown, ib. Circumflanccs
faivourable tq the pretensions of Charles, 5o.
lThe Swits cantons cfpoui his caufc, 5..
Apprchenfiois and conduct of Pope Leo X.
on the occasion, 54. AfIinbhling of the
dietat Frankfort, 56. Frederick Duke of
Shxony refuses tile offer of tlie E'mpire and
votes for himi, 57. And refulics the pefents
offecred'by his anbafihdors, 58. Concurring
circ/iftlances which favoured his cleion,
ib' ''-His' elction, 59. Signs and confirms
the Capitulation of the Germanick body, 60.
The cletion notified to im, lb. Afiinmcs
the title of Majcfty, ib. Accepts the In-
perial dignity ofil'rcd by the count Palatine
nmbaffador from the Elctors, 62. The
clergy of Caflile reftie the tenth of hene-
sices granttd him by the Pope, ib. Procurcs
the interdict the kingdom is laild r:det' Ior
refuilal, to be taken off, lb. Finpowc s car-
dinal Adrian to hold the Corles of Valenci:,
63. The robles eftie to allnible wililoit
his presence, ib. Aliorizes the nliirgent'i
there to continue in arms, lb. Summonls the
Cortes of Caflile to neet in Gallicia, 6..
Narrowly cfcapcs with his FlIeifi mi'iflcr
from an infurrccion on that account, (..
Obtains a donative ficrn the Cortec, (,.

PItcpal,.'

PrepAres to leave Spain, and alpointl re-
gents, ib. Emba ks, ib. Motives of this
journey, 67. Rife of the rivalfllip between
him and Fra-lcis I. ib. Courts the favour
of Henry VTII. of England and his miniler
Cardinal Wolley, 73. Visits Henry at D)o-
vcr, 74. Proifes Wolfey his interest for
the papacy, 75. HIas a second interview
with Henry at Gravelines, 76. Offers to
fubniit his ditTerences with Francis to
Ilenry's abitration, ib. His magnificent
coronation at Aix-la-Chap.elle, 76. Calls a
diet at Worms, to check the reformers, 77.
Causes which hindered his cfpoufing the
party of Martin Luther, 12I. Grants Lu-
ther a safe condua to the diet of Worms,
122. An edi& published against him, ib.
His cnibarranfment at this time, 126. Con-
cludes an alliance with the Pope, 130. The
conditions of the treaty, ib. Death of his
minifler Chievrcs, and its advantages to him,
131. Invasion of Navarre by Francis, 132.
The French driven out, and their general

'Efparre taken prisoner, 133. War de-
clared againfi him by Robert de la Marck,
lord of Bouillon, who ravages Luxembourg.
134. Reduces Bouillon, and invades France,
135. His demands at the congress at Calais,
136. Has an interview with cardinal Wol-
fey at Bruges, and concludes a league with
Henry VIII. against France, 137. Pope
Leo declares for him against France, 140.
The French driven out of Milan, 143, 147.
Visits England in his passage to: pain, 150.
Cultivates the good will of cardinal Wolfey,
and creates the Earl of Surrey his high ad-
miral, ib. Grants the iland of Malta, to
the Knights of St. John, expelled from
Rhodes by Solyman the magnificent, 153.
Arrives in Spain, 154. A rctrofpe& of his
proceedings in relation to the infurredions in
Spain, 163. Issues circulatory letters for the
insurgents to lay down their arms, with pro-
mises of pardon, 164. His prudent mode-
ration toward the inlurgents, on his arrival
in Spain, 186. Acquires the love of the
Castilians, 187. Enters into a league with
Charles Duke of Bourbon, 193. Why he
did not endeavour to get Wolfcy clceed
Pope, 198. Invades Guienne and Burgundy
but without success, 200. His troops in
Milan mutiny for want of pay, but are pa-

cified by Morond, 202. Undertakes an in-
vafion of Provence, 215. Orders Pescara to
befiegc Marseilles, 216. Pescara obliged to
retire, 217. Difconccrted by the French
over-running the hii.iiJc again, 220. The
revenues of Naplc iiieigaged to raise mo-
ney, ib. I-ls troops defeat Francis and take
him prisoner at the battle of Pavia, 228
His affeacd moderatiii at receiving the
news, 229. Avails himself of a treaty con-
cluded between Lannoy and Pope Clement,
but refutes to ratify it, 235. His army in
Pavia mutiny, and arc obliged to be dilband-
ed, 236. Iis deliberations on the proper
improvement of his disadvantages, i. His
propositions to Fancis, 237. After many
delays grants Sforza, the invefliture of Mi-
lan, 240. Morone's intrigues betrayed to
him by Pescara, 243. Orders Pescara, to
continue his negociations with Morond, 244.
His rigorous treatment of Francis, 245.
Visits Francis, 46. His kind reception of
the Duke of Bourbon, 247. Grants Bour-
bon the dutchy of Milan, and appoints
him general in chief of the imperial army
there, 248. Fruitless negociations for
the delivery of Francis, ib. Treaty of, Ma-
drid, with Francis, 250. Delivers up Fran-
cis, 254. Marries Ilabella of Portugal, ib.
An alliance formed against him at Cognac,
266. Sends ambassadors to Francis to re-
quire the fulfilment of the treaty of Madrid,
268. Prepares for war against l;rancis, 270.
The Pope reduced to an accommodation
with him, 274. The exhaufled slate of his
finances, 275. His troops under Bourbon
ditrceffed and mutinous for want of pay, ib.
Bourbon assaults Rome, and is slain but the
city taken, 284. The Prince of Orange.ge-
neral on Bourbon's death, takes the cafle of
St. Angelo,. and the Pope prisoner, 87.
The Emperor's conduc on that occasion,
288. His dissentions with the Pope, how
far favourable to the reformation, 290. lis
inflrulions to the diet at Spires, ib, His
manifelto againfi the Pope, and letter to the
cardinals, 291. France and England league
againti him, 294. Is refuted supplies by the
Cortes of Castile, 298. Delivers the,Pope
for a ransom, 299. lis overtures to Ienry
and Francis, 300. Their declaration of war
againit him, 302. Is challenged by Francis

to

tofingle combat, ib. Andrew Doria revolts
from Francis to him, 308. Iis forces de-
feat the French in Italy, 310. 32. His
motives fortldfiring an accommodatton, 313.
Coucludes a separate treaty with the Plope,
314. Tlerms of the peace of Carimbray con-
cluded with Francis by the mediation of
Margaret of Aufiria and Louise of France,
315. Remarks on the advantages gained
by him in this treaty, and on his conduc of
the war, 316, Visits Italy, 320. I-lis po-
licy on his publick entry into Barcelona, ib.
Has an interview with the Pope at Bologna,
321. Motives for his toderation in Italy,
ib. His treaties with the States of, 322. IS
crowned King of Lombardy and Emperor of
theRomans, 324. Summons a diet at Spires
to confider the slate of religion, 325. His
deliberations with the Pope, refpecliing the
expediency of calling a general council, 327.
Appoints a diet at Augsburg, 328. Makes
a publick entry into that city, 329. His en-
deavours to check the reformation, ib. Re-
solute behaviour of the protestant Princes
toward lim, 330. His severe decree againfi
the Protellants, 331. Proposes his brother
Ferdinand to be elected King of the Romans,
332. Is opposed by the 'roteflants, 333.
Obtains his elecaion, 334. Is desirous of an
accommodation with the Proteflants, 336.
Concludes a treaty with them at Nurem-
burg, 337. Raises an army to oppose tile
'urks under Solyman, and obliges him to
rctire, 338. Has another interview with the
Pope, and prelles him to call a general
council, 339. Procures a league of the Ita-
lian States to secure the peace of Italy, 341.
Arrives at Barcelona, 342. lis Iendeavours
to prevent the ncgociations and meeting be-
tween the Pope anti Francis, 344. Under-
'takes to expel Barbarofi' ilom' Tunis, and
restore Mulcy 1-lafccn, 370. Lands in
Africa, and bclieges Goletta, 371. Takes
Goletta, and seizes Barbarolil's flect, 373.
Defeates Barbaroflh, and takes Tunis, 374.
Reflores Muley H-lafcen; and the treaty be-
tween them, 376. The glory acquired by
this cnterprlze and thl delivery of the Chri-
flian captives, 377. Scizes the dutchy of
Milan on the death of Francis Sfotza, 389.
Hlis policy with regard to it, ib. Prepares lor
war with Francis, 390. His inv'/cive againfi

Francis at Rome before the Pope in council,
391. IRemarks on this tralnl;iclon, 394.
Invades France, 395. Enters Provence and
finds it defolaied, 400. Bliciges Marfllilles
and Aries, 401. His miserable retreat fom
Provence, 403. His inv.fion of Picardy
defeated, 44. Is accifed of poilbning the
datiphin, 405. Improbability of its truth',
ib. His conjecltre concerning hle dauphin's
death, 406. Slanders invaded by Francis,
407. A fufpenlion of arms in Slanders,
)low negociated, 408. A truce in Pied-
mont, 409. Motives to these truces, ib.
Negociation for peace with Francis, 412.
Concludes a truce for ten years at Nice,
413. Remarks on the wvar, ib. His in-
terview with Francis, 414. Courts the
lric(ndllip of lHenry VIII. ot England, 420.
Indulges the Protellant Princes, 421. QLiets
their :apprelhnfions of the Cltholick leagtie,
425. His troops mtiny, 427. ATfembles
tile Cortes of Caflile, 428. Dctroys tihe
ancient confitution of the Cortes, 429. In-
fiance of the haughty spirit of the Spanifl
grandees, 430. Desires permiflion of Fran-
cis to pass tlrough France to the Nether-
lands, 438. Hlis reception itl Francc, 439.
His rigorous treatmentt of Ghent, 442. Re-
futfes to fulfill his engalgemcnts to Flrancis,
4.t3. Appoints a friendly conference be-
tween a deputation of Catholick and pro-
teftant divines betore the diet at Ratiflon,
462. Reful tof this coference, ,164. Grants
a private exemption from opprlflions to the
Proteflants, 465. Undertakes to reduce Al-
giers, 472. Is near being call aay by a
violent llorm, 474. Iands near Algiers, ib.
Mis soldiers cxpofcd to a violent tcmpcll and
rain, 475. His fleet lt,:ttcrcl, 476. Iis
fortitude under these lifallers, 478, LCeavcs
his nterin/e a;id embailks waitn, i. Is
diflreflld with another flornm at ;ia, 479.
C'reatlo, nuncio Irom the Plope to lhe ict ;at

Nurenlmurgh, his ilruilions, 7. ()p'
poles tlhe allenibling a grencrnl coniicl, zo8.
C;eh.r'/f, William de Croy, lord of, :appl)ilt-

ed y Maximilian to fuprl)r'nlendltl ci duc':
lion of hlis grandson Chliales, 21. Ad;an
of Utrcc)t made preceptor unl r 'imn, ib.
lis dircalion of the fludics of Carlecs, 23.
I-ls avaric corrupts tle l,'lcniflh coirt of
Chailes, 36. NcgociiCts a !i:ace v\ithl

V'ia!.c

France, 38. Endeavours to prevent an in-
terview between Charles and Ximenes, 39.
Attends Charles to Spain, 40. His afcen-
dancy over Charles, 44. His extortions, ib.
His death and the luppofed causes of it, 139.
Clement VII. pope, his election, 197. His

character, ib. Grants Cardinal Wolfey a
legatine commission in England for life, 198.
Refues to accede to the league against
Francis, 201. Labours to accommodate
the differences between the contending par-
ties, ib. I Ii proceedings with regard to the
Reformers, 21 2. Concludes a treaty. of
neutrality with Francis, 323. Entert into
a fcparate treaty with Charles after the battle
of Pavia, and the consequences of it, 234.
Joins in an alliance with Francis o Sforza,
aud the Venetians, against the Emperor,
266. Abfolvcs Francis from his oath to ob-
serve the treaty of Madrid, 267. Cardinal
Colonna seizes Rome, and invefis him in
the caltle of. St. Angelo, 274. Is forced to
an accommodation with the Imperialtfts, ib.
His revenge againil the Colonna family,
277. Invades Naples, ib., His territories
invaded by Bourbon, and his perplexity on
theoccafiou, 279. Concludes a treaty with
Lannoy viceroy of Naples, 280. His con-
flernation on Bourbon's motions towards
Rome, 283. Rome taken, and himself be-
fieged in the castle of St. Angelo, 285. Sur-
renders himself prisoner, 287. The Flo-
rentines revolt against him, 294. Pays
Charles a ransom for his liberty, with other
lipulations, 209. Makes his' escape from
confinement, 309. Writes a letter of thanks
to Lautrec, ib. Is jealous of his intentions
of Francis, and negociates with Charles,
306. His motives and fleps towards an ac-
commodation, 313. Concludes a separate
treaty with Charles, 314. His interview
with the Emperor at Bologna, 331. Crowns
Charles, King of Lombardy and Emperor
of the Romans, 324. His representations
to the Emperor against calling a general
council, 328. Has another interview with
Charles at Bologna, and the difficulties raised
by him to the calling a general council, 339.
Agrees to a league of the Italian States tor
the peace of Italy, 31. His interview and
treaty with Francis, 344. Marries Catha-
rir:e di Mcdici to the Duke of Orleans, 345.

His protraaion of the affair of the divorce
solicited by Henry VIII. ib. Reverses
Cranmer's sentence of divorce, under penalty.
of excommunication, 346. Henry re-
nounces his fipremacy, ib. His death, 347.
Reflections on his Pontificate, ib.
Clergy, Romish, remarks on the immoral lives

of, and how the contributed to the progress
of the Reformation, 103. The 'facility
with which they obtained pardons, 104.
Their usurpations in Germany, during the
disputes concerning investitures, xo6. Their
other opportunities of aggrandizing them-
selves there, 107. Their personal immuni-
ties, ib. Their encroachments on the laity,
108. The dreadful effects of spiritual cen-
fures, 109. Their devices to secure their
usurpations, 1lo. The united effect of all
thef circumstances, 114. Oppose the ad-
vancement of learning in Germany, I 17.
Cnipperdoling, a leader of the Anabaptists at

Munster, an account of, 351. 334. See
Anabiptiflr.
Cognac, an alliance formed there againfi Charles

V. by the Pope, the Venetians, the Duke of
Milan, and Francis I. 266.
Cologne, Ferdinand King of Hungary and Bo-

hemia, brother to the Emperor Charles V.
elected King of the Romans by the college
of Electors there, 334.
Colonna, Cardinal Pompeo, his characer, and

rivalfhip with Pope Clement VII. 273.
Seizes Rome, and invells the Pope in the
castle of St. Angelo, 274. Is degraded and
the reft of the family excommunicated by
the Pope, 277. Is prevailed on by the Pope
when prisoner with the Imperialifis, to soli-
cit his delivery, 299.
--- Prosper the Italian general, his cha-

racer, 141, Appointed to command the
troops in the invasion of Milan; ib. Drives
the French out of Milan, 143. His army
how weakened at the death of Pope Leo X.
144. Defeats Marechal de Lautrec, at
Blcocca, 147. Reduces Genoa, ,49. The
bad slate of his troops when the French in-
vade Milan, 196. Is enabled to defend the.
city by the ill conduct of Bonnivet the French
commander, ib. Dies, and is ficcceeded by
1.annoy, 2o0.
Cochills, an Aragonian gentleman, employed

by Ferdinand of Aragon, to obtain Joanna's

consent

consent to his regency of Caflile, 9. Thrown
into a dungeon by the Archduke Philip. ib.
Cofeffion, of Augsburg, drawn up by Melanc-

thon, 329.
Corsairs of Barbary, an account of the rife of,

364. See Algiers, Barbarffa.
Cortes of Aragon, acknowledges the Archduke

Philip's title to the crown, 3. Not allowed
to assemble in the name of Charles V. Their
opposition to his desires, ib.
Cortes of Castile, acknowledges the Archduke

Philip's title to the crown, 3. Is prevailed
upon to acknowledge Ferdinand regent, ac-
cording to Isabella's will, 7. Acknowledges
Philip and Joanna King and Qneen of Caf-
tile, and their on Charles, Prince of Asturias,
14. Declares Challes King and votes him
a free gift, 43. Summoned by Charles to
meet at Compoftella in Galicia, 64. Tu-
multuary proceedings thereupon, 65. A do-
native voted, 66. Loses all its influence
by the dissolution of the Holy Junta, 182.
Its backwardness to grant supplies for the
Emperor's wars in Italy, 275. Refutes his
prefling solicitations for a supply, 298. As-
fembled at Toledo to grant supplies to the
Emperor, 428. The remonstrances of, 429.
The ancient conflitution of, subverted by
Charles, ib. See Spain.
Cortona, Cardinal di, governor of Florence for

the Pope, expelled by the Florentines, on
the Pope's captivity, 294.

Cosmo di Medici. See Medici.
Cranmer, archbishop of Canterbury, annuls the

marriage of Henry VIII. with Catherine of
Aragon, which was refiured to Henry by the
Pope, 345. His sentence reverted by the
Pope, 346.
Croy, William de, nephew to Chievres, made

archbishop of Toledo, by Charles V. 45.
Dies, 181.

D
D'Albert, John, expelled from his kingdom of

Navarre by Ferdinand of Aragon, 19. In-
vades Navarre, but is defeated by Cardinal
Ximenes, 35.
D'Alembert, M. his observation on the order of

Jesuits, 456. Note.
Dauphin of France, eldefl : on of Francis I. is

delivered up with the Duke of Orleans, to
the Emperor Charles V. in exchange for his
VOL. II.

father, as hostage for the performance of the
treaty of Madrid, 254. His death imputed
to poifin, 405. The mofi probable cause of
it, 406.
Denmark, King of, joins the Protestant league at

Smalknlde, 424.
Doria, Andrew, assists autrec in subduing

Genoa, 296. Conquers and kills Mncada
in a sea engagement before the harbour of
Naples, 305. His charascr, 307. Is dif-
gulted with the behaviour of the French,
ib. Revolts to the Emperor, 308. Opens
to Naples a communication by sea, ib. Rc-
fcucs Genoa from the French, 3o0. Re-
flores the government of, to the citizens,
311 . The refpe& paid to his memory, 312.
Attends the Emperor Charles in his difallrous
expedition againll Algiers, 473.
Dever, an interview there between Henry VIII.

and the Emperor Charles V. 74.
Du Prat, chancellor of France, his characer,

192. Commences a lawsuit againfl Charles
Duke of Bourbon, for his estate, at the in-
fligation of Louise the King's mother, ib.
Duelling, the culom of, how rendered general,

303. Its influence on manners, 304.

E
Ecrius, an adversary of Luther's holds a pub-

lick disputation withl him at Leipfic, on the
validity of the Papal authority, 94.
Ecelef/iafical cenfircs of the Romifli church,

the dreadful effets of, lo9.
---- Reservation, in the recess of the

diet of Augsburg, remarks on, 337.
Egypt, how and by whom added to the Otto-

man Empire, 50.
Eignotz, a fa6tion in Geneva so termed, an ac-

count of, 386.
Emmanuel Phillibert, Duke of Savoy. See

Savoy.
England, by what means that kingdom was

freed from the papal supremacy, and received
the docrines of the Reformation, 346.
Erard, de la Mark,, ambassador of Charles V.

to the diet of Frankfort, his private motives
for thwarting the pretensions of Francis I.
of France, to the Imperial crown, 58. Signs
the capitulation of the Germanick body, on
behalf of Charles, 60.
Erajinus, some account of, 118. Preceded

Luther in his censures againfl the Romiffi

0 oo church,

church, ib. Concurs with him in his inten-
tions of reformation, i19. Motives which
checked him in this, ib.
Europe, a hort view of the fate of, at the

death of the Emperor Maximilian, 48. The
contemporary monarchs of, all illutfrious, at
the time of Charles V. 77. The method of
carrying on war in, how improved beyond
thepractice of earlier ages, 199. The fen-
timents of, on Charles's treatment of the
Pope, 292.
Eutemi, King of Algiers, engages Barbarossa in

his service, and is murdered by him, 365.
Excommunication, in the Romish church, the

original institution of, and the use made of it,
109.

F
Farnese, Alexander, his unanimous elction to

the Papacy, 347. See Paul, vol. III.
Ferdinand King of Aragon, how he acquired

his kingdoms, 2. Invites his daughter
Joanna, and her husband, Philip Archduke
of Aufiria, to Spain, 3. Becomes jealous
of Philip, ib. Carries on his war with France
vigorously, notwithstanding Philip's treaty
with Lewis, 5. His Queen Isabella dies,
and leaves him regent of Castile, under re-
flrictions, 6. Resigns the kingdom of Caf-
tile, and is acknowledged regent by the
Cortes, ib. Hischaracter, 7. His. maxims
of government, odious to the Castilians, ib.
Required by Philip to resign his regency, 8.
Joanna's letter of consent procured by him,
intercepted by Philip, and herself confined,
9. Is deserted by the Castilian nobility, ib.
Determines to exclude his daughter from the
fuccellion by marrying, ib. Marries Ger-
maine de Foix niece to Lewis XII. of France,
I . A treaty between him and Philip at
Salamanca, by which the regency of Caflile
is jointly veiled in them, and Joanna, ib.
Prevails on Henry VII. of England to de-
tain Philip for three months, when driven
cn that coast, 12. The Caflilians declare
against him, ib. Resigns the regency of
Castile by treaty, 13. Interview between
limn and Philip, ib. Is absent, at Naples,
when Philip died, 17. Returns and gains
with the regency of Castile, the good will
of the natives by his prudent administration,
18. Acquires by difhtnourable means the

kingdom of Navarre, 19. How he destroy-
ed his conflitution, ib. Endeavours to ex-
clude his grandson Charles from his Spanifl
fucceflion, 20. Alters his will in favour of
Charles, ib. Dies, 21. Review of his ad-
ministration, 24. Ximenes appointed by his
w.ll, regent of Castile, until the arrival of
Charles V. 25.
Ferdinand, second son of Philip Archduke of

Austria born, 5. Left regent of Aragon, by
his grandfather Ferdinand, 20. This, re-
voked by a subsequent will, by which he ob-
tains only a pension, 21. Discontentcd with
his disappointment, he is taken to Madrid un-
der the eye of Cardinal Ximenes, 27. Sent
by Charles V. to visit their grandfather Max-
imilian, 45. Is clected Kingof Hungary and
Bohemia, 289. Signs a deed called the Re-
verse, ib. The Emperor endeavours to get
him elected King of the Romans, 332. He
is opposed by the Proteflants, 333. Is crowned
King of the Romans, 334. Forms a confe-
deracy againfit the Anabaptists at Munster,
356. Opposes the restoration of Ulrick Duke
of urtemberg, 360. Recognizes his title
and concludes a treaty with him, ib. His
kingdom of Hungary wrefled from him by
John Zapol Scaepius, 466. Besieges the
young King Stephen and his mother in Buda,
but is defeated by the Turks, 468. His mean
offers of fubmiflion to the Porte, ib. which
are rejected, 470.
Feudal government, a view of, as it existed

in Spain, 159.

Fiefco, Count of Lavagna. See Lavagna.
Floren e, the inhabitants of, revolt against Pope

Clement VII. on the news of his captivity,
and recover their liberty, 294. Are reduced
to fubje&ion to Alexander di Medici, by the
Emperor, 323. Alexander di Medici, Duke
of, affalfinated by his kinsman Lorenzo, 416.
Cosmo di Medici, advanced to the fovcreignty,
417. Cosmo fupporled by the Emperor, de
feats the partizans of Lorenzo, 418.
Fonseca, Antonio de, commander in chief of the

forces in Spain, ordered by Cardinal Adrian
to besiege the insurgents in Segovia, 157. Is
denied liberty of taking military stores, by the
inhabitants of Medina del Campo, ib. At-
tacks and aliioft burns the whole town, 158.
Is repulsed, ib. His house at Valladolid
burnt, ib.

Francis,

FrancisI. King of France, concludes a peace

with Charles V. and the conditions of the
treaty, 38. Sends a fruitless cmbaffy to
Charles for the reflitution of Navarre to the
young King, 46. Aspires to the Imperial
crown at the death of Maximilian, 49. Rea-
sons by which he supported his pretensions,
50. Remarks on the equipages of his am-
baffadors to the German States, 52. His
pretensions adopted by the Venetians, 53.
Loses the elecaion, 59. Rife of the rival-
ship between him and Charles, 67. Courts
the favour of Cardinal Wolfey, 73. Pro-
mises Wolfey his interest for the Papacy, 75.
Has an interview with Henry VIII. of Eng-
land, ib. Wrefiles with Henry and throws
him, ib. Note. His advantages over Charles,
at the commencement of hostilities between
them, 127. Concludes an alliance with the
Pope, 129. Invades and reduces Navarre,
in the name of Henry D'Albert, son of John,
the former King, 132. T'he French driven
out by the imprudence of L'Efparre their
general, who is taken prisoner by the Spa-
niards, 133. Retakes Moufon from the
Imperialists, 135. Invades the low Coun-
tries, but loses the opportunities of success
by imprudence, ib. Rejeats the demands
of Charles at the congress at Calais, 137.
A league concluded between Charles and
Henry VIII. againit him, ib. His impru-
dent appointment of the Marechaal de Foix
to the government of Milan, 139. De Foix
attacks Reggio, but is repulsed by the go-
vernorGuicciardini the hiflorian, 140. The
Pope declares against hiln, ib. His embar-
raffments on the invasion of Milan, 141.
His mother seizes the money appointed for
payment of the Nlilinefe troops- ib. Milan
taken, and the French driven out, 143.
Levies a body of Swiss, 146. Who infill
on giving a precipitate battle to the Imperia-
liss, which is loft, 147. War declared
againfl him by Henry VIl. 149. Iis ex-
pedients to lupply his treafilry, ib. The
plan pui ued by him to refilt the incursions
of the Englili, 151. Picardy invaded by
Henry, ib. The Venetians league with the
Emperor againfl him, 189. To which Pope
Adrian accedes, 19o. His expeditious
movement against the Milanese, ib. Dif-
conccrtcd by the Duke of Bourbon's con-

fpiracy, ib. Taxes him with betraying his
cause, which Bourbon denies, 194. Bour-
bon e'capes to Italy and Francis returns,
195. Appoints the admiral Bonnivet to
command against the Milanese, ib. Picardy
invaded by the Duke of Suffolk, who is
driven back, 200. Repulses the invafioo
of Gu enne and Burgundy by Charles, ib.
His fucceefful close of the campaign, ib.
His prudent care to disappoint the Imperia-
lifts in their invasion of Provence, 2:6.
Affemhles an army, which causes the Im-
perialifis to retire from Marseilles, 217.
Determines to invade the Milanese, 218.
Appoints his mother Louise regent during
his absence, 219. Enters Milan, and takes
polfeflion of the city, ib. Advised by Bon-
nivet to bcfiege Pavia, 221. His vigorous
attacks on Pavia, 222. Concludes a treaty
of neutrality with Pope Clement, 223.
His imprudent invasion of Naples, 224.
Resolves by Bonnivet's advice to attack
Bourbon's army, and advance to the relief of
Pavia, 226. Is routed at the bttle of Pa;-
via, 227. Is taken prisoner, 228. Is lint
to the caltle of Pizzitchitone under the cul-
tody of Don Ferdinand Alarcon, 229. Re-
fuses the propositions made to him by Chai les,
237.. Is carried to Spain on his desire of a
personal interview with Charles, 238. Is
rigor.ously treated in Spain, 245. Fallsdan-
gerofly ill, ib. Is visited by Charles, 246.
Resolves to resign his kingdom, 249. Is
delivered from his captivity by the treaty of
Madrid, 250. His secret proteflations againIt
the validity of this treaty, 252. Marrics
the Qeen of Portugal, ib. Recovers his
liberty, and the Dauphin and the Duke of
Orleans delivered up hoflages to Charles l r
the performance of the treaty of Madrid,
254. Writes a letter of acknowledgement
to Henry VIII. of England, 264. lis ic-
ply to the Imperial ambafl.idors, 265. En-
ters into a league with the Pope, the Vene-
tians and Sforza, againfi Charles, 266. Is
absolved from his oath to observe the treaty
of Madrid, 267. His behaviour to the
Emperor's second embafly, 269. Is dilpi-
rited by his former ill f'tccefs, 270. EIntels
into a treaty with Henry VIII. of Englalnd
against the Emperor, 294. Succefli's of his
general Lautrec in Italy, 297. His relly

0 2 to
M E.

to the Emperor's overtures, 301. Declares
war against him, and challenges him to single
combat, 302. Treats Andrew Doria ill,
who revolts from him to the Emperor, 308.
His army under Saluces, driven out of Italy,
310. His troops in Milan routed, 32.
His endeavours toward an accommodation,
313. Terms of the peace of Cambray,
concluded by the meditation of his mother
Louise and Margaret of Auflria, 315. Re-
marks on the faclifices made by him in this
treaty, and on his conduc of the war, 316.
Leagues secretly with the Proteflant Princes,
334. His measures to elude the treaty
of Cambray, 342. His negociations with
the Pope, 343. His interview and treaty
with the Pope, 344. Gives the Duke of
Orleans in marriage to Catherine di Midici,
345. Negociates a treaty with Francis
Sforza, Duke of Milan, 379. His envoy
Merveille executed at Milan for murder, ib.
Is disappointed in his endeavours to nego-
ciate alliances against the Emperor, 380.
Invites MelanQhon to Paris, 381. vi-
dences his zeal for the Romish religion,
382. Causes of his quarrel with the Duke
of Savoy, 384. Seizes the Duke's territo-
ries, 385. His pretensions to the dutchy of
Milan, on the death of Francis Sforza, 389.
The Emperor's inveaive agailft him before
the Pope in council, 391. Is invaded by
Charles, 395. His prudent plan of defence,
398. Joins the army under Montmorency,
402. Death of the Dauphin, 405. Ob-
tains a decree.of the parliament of Paris
.againf the Emperor, 406. Invades the Low
Countries, 407. A suspension of arms in
Flandtrs, and how negociated, 408. A
truce in Piedmont, 409. Motives to there
truces, ib. Concludes an alliance with So-
lyman the Magnificent, 410. Negociations
tor a peace with the Emperor, 412. Con-
cludes a truce for ten years at Nice, 413.
Reflecions on the war, ib. His interview
with Charles, 414. Marries Mary of Guise
to James V. of Scotland, 420. Refuses the
offers of the deputies of Ghent, 436. In-
forms Charles of the offer made by them,
437. Grants the Emperor leave to pass
through France to the Netherlands, 439.
His reception of the E;mperor, 440. Is deceived
by the Emperor in refpea to Milan, 443.

Frankfort, the diet of, assembled for the choice

of an Emperor at the death of Maximilian,
56. Names and views of the Elecors,
ib. The Empire offered to Frederick of
Saxony, ib. Who rejecs it, with his reasons,
57. Chufeo Charles V. Emperor, 59. His
confirmation of the Germanick pivilegcs
required and agreed to, 60. City of, em-
braces the reformed religion, 206.
Frederick Dnke of Saxony, aflembles with the

other Elecors at the diet of Frankfort, to
chute an Emperor, 56. The Empire
offered to him, ib. Rejecs it, and votes
for Charles V. 57. Refuses the presents of
the Spanifl ambassadors, 58. Thi. difintcr-
efled behaviour confirmed by the t.fltimony
of historians, ib. Note. Chufes Martin
Luther, philosophical professor at his univer-
fity of Wittemberg, 83. Encourages Luther
in his opposition to indulgences, 85. Pro-
teas him againfl Cajetan, 90. Causes
Luther to be seized at his return from the
diet of Worms, and conceals him at Wart-
burg, 124. Dies, 263.
FrondJperg, George, a German nobleman, some

account of, he joins the army of Charles V.
275.

G
General of the Jcfuits, an inquiry into his office

and defpotick authority, 448.
Geneva, an account of its revolt against the

Duke of Savoy, 386.
Genoa, reduced by Lautrec, the French gene-

ral, 296. The French endeavour to pre-
judice its trade in favour of Savona, 307.
Is rescued from the French by Andrew Do-
ria, 310. The government of, fettled by
the difinterefctdnefs of Doria, 311. 'he
honour paid to Doria's Ir.emory, 312. Is
visited by the Emperor, 321.
Germanada, an aflbciation in Valencia, so term-

ed, on what occasion formed, 182. Re-
fuse to lay down their arms, ib. Their re-
fentment levelled at the nobility, who raise
an army against them, 183. Defeat the
nobles in fevcral ations, 184. But are
routed and dispersed by them, ib.
Gtrmany, (ate of, at the death of the Empe-

ror Maximilian, 48. Charles V. of Spain,
and Francis I. of France, form pretensions
to the Imperial crown, 49. Their refpeaive

reasons

reasons offered in favour of their claims, 50,
51. Views and interests of the other Euro-
pean ftlates in relation to the competitors, 52.
Henry VIII. of lFngland,advances a claim, 53.
Bunt is discouraged from profeccting it, 54.
How the PIapacy was likely to be ffcted in
the choice of an Emperor, ib. Advice of
Pope Leo X. to the German Princes, 55.
Opening of the diet at Frankfort,i/. In whom
the election ofan Emperor is veled, 56. Views
of tlhe Elecors, ib. IThe Empire offered to
Frederick of Saxony, ib. Who rejedts it,
and his rcalbns, 57. Charles V. chosen, 59.
The capitulation of the Gcrmanick privi-
leges confirmed by him, 60. Charles sets
out lor, 66. Charles crowned at Aix la Cha-
pelle, 76. Commencement of the Refor-
mation there, by Martin Luther, 78. Treat-
ment of the bull of excommunication pub-
lifiled againfl Luther, 96. The usurpations
of the clergy there, during the disputes con-
cerning inveflitures, 106. The clergy of,
inofily foreigners, ino. The benefices of,
nominated by the Pope, i l. The expedi-
ent of the Emperors for refiraining this power
of tle Pope, ineflecual, 12. 7'he great
progrcfs of Luther's doctrines in, 206. Griev-
ances of the peasants, 255. InfurreEtion in
Suabia, 256. 'The memorial of their griev-
ances, 257. The infurrecion qulcled, 258.
Another infurrecion in Thuringia, ib. How
the house of Auflria became so formidable in,
289. Proceedings relating to the Reforma-
tion there, 290. Great progress of the Re-
formation there, 324. Ferdinand King of
H1ungary and lBohemia, brother to Charles V.
eleted King of the Romans, 334. The Pro-
teclant religion eflabliflled in Saxony, 427.
Gbent, an infiirrction there, 431. The preten-

sions of the citizens, 432. Form a confe-
deracy againfl the Queen-dowager of Hunga-
ry, their governess, 433. 'Their deputies to
the Emperor, how treated by him, ib. Offer
to submit to France, 434. Is reduced by
Charles, 442.

Gbibeline facion, in Italy, a view of, 272.
Giron, Don Pedro de, appointed to the coml-

mand of the army of the Iloly Junta, 170.
Resigns his commission and Padilla replaced,
172.
Goletla, in Africa, taken by the Emperor

Charles V. 371.

GoiufirC, sent by Francis I. King of France, to

nrgocihte a peace witl Charles V. 38.
Gravclies, an interview there betwvcn the Erm-

peror Charles V. and lHenr)y V11I. of Eng-
laud, 76.
Groppier, canon of Cologne, is appointed a ma-

nager of the Proteliant and Catholick confe-
rences before the diet at Ratillon, 462.
Writes a treatifc to compose the diffirences
between them, ib. The fentincnts of both
parties on this work, 463.
Gr;ianald, arclibifop of, president of tle coutn-

cil of Caflile, his imprudent advice to Car-
dinal Adrian, relating to the insurrection in
Segovia, 157.
Gtuao, the M\arquis del, appointed governor

of Milan, by the Emperor, 404.
Gurirciardini, his account of the publication of

Indulgencescontradicted, 86. Defends Reg-
gio ag;infl: the French, 140. Repulses an
attack upon Parma, by the French, 145.
His sentiments of the Pope's treaty with lan-
noy viceroy of Naples, 280.
GuiP, Mary of, married to James V. of Scot-

land, 420.
Guirk, Cardinal de, why lie favoured the clec-

tion of Charles V. to the Imperial crown, 58.
Signs the capitulation of the Germanick body
on behalf of Charles, 60.
!Iamburgb, city of, embraces the reformed re-

ligion, 206.
Ilaro, the conde de, appointed to command

the army of the Caflilian nobles againlf the
Holy Julna, 171. Attacks Tordefillas, and
gets poffellion of Queen Joanna, ib. Routs
the army of the Junta, ad takes Padilla pri-
foncr, who is executed, 177.
Iafiin A4ga, deputy governor of Algiers, his

piracies againfl the Chritlian fltes, 472. Is
besieged in Algiers by the Enrmp ror Charles V.
474. Makes a successful sally, 475. ''lhe
Emperor forced by bad weather to return
back again, 478.
Iayradin, a potter's son of Lcfbos, commences

pirate, 364. Sec Barbarofti.
Ie/dlo, vice chancellor to Charles V. attends the

Pope's nuncio to Smalkaldc, 422. Forms
a Catholick league in oppofitiun to the Pro-
teflant one, 424.

lleni-v

Henry VII. of England, detains the archduke

Philip and his duchess when driven on h's
coast, three mnths at the infligation of
Ferdinand. 12.
Henry VIII. of England, fends an ambassador

to Germany to propose his claimns to the Im-
perial crown. 53. Is discouraged from his
pretensions, and takes no part with the
other competitors, 54. His personal cha-
raaer and political influence in Europe, 70.
Entirely guided by Cardinal Wolfey, 72.
Receives a visit from the Emperor Charles V.
74. Goes over to France to visit Francis,
75. Wrefiles with Francis and is thrown
by him, ib. Note. Has another interview
with Charles at Gravelines, 76. Charles
offers to submit his differences with Francis
to his arbitration, ib. Publishes a treatise
on the Seven Sacraments, against Martin
Luther, 125. Obtains of the Pope the title
of Defender of be Faitb, 126. Takes part
with Charles againfi Francis, 127. Sends
Wolfey to negociate an accommodation be-
tween the Emperor and Francis, 136. Con-
cludes a league with Charles againfi Francis,
137. His avowed reasons for this treaty, ib.
His private motives, 138. Declares war
against Francis, 49. Is visited by Charles,
15o. Makes descents upon the coast of
France, ib. Advances with an army into
Picardy, 1 . Obliged to retire by the
Duke de Vendome, ib. Enters into a treaty
with the Emperor and Charles Duke of
Bourbon, 193. How he raised supplies for
his wars beyord the grants of his parliament,
199. Sends the Duke of Suffolk to invade
Picardy, who penetrates almost to Paris, but
is driven back, 200. Engages to afilft Charles
in an invasion of Provence, 215. Causes
of his not supporting the Imperialifls, 217.
Effeas of the battle of Pavia, and captivity
of Francis on him, 231. Particulars of his
embassy to Charles, 233. Concludes a
defensive alliance with France, 239. Is de-
clared proteQor of the league of Cognac
againfl the Emperor, 267. His motives for
aflilling tile Pope against the Emperor, 293.
Enters into a league with Francis, and re-
nounces the English claim to the crown of
France, 294. Declares war against the
Fmperor, 302. Concludes a truce with the
governess of the Low Countries, 306. Pro-

jes his divorce from Catharine of Aragon,
318. Motives which withheld the Pope
from granting it, 319. Acquiesces in the
peace of Cambray, 320. Sends a supply of
money to the Proteltant league in Germany,
336. Procures his marriage to be annulled
by Cranmer archbishop of Canterbury, 345.
The divorce reversed by the Pope under pe-
nalty of excommunication, 346. Renounces
the Papal supremacy, ib. Refuses to ac-
knowledge any council called by the Pope,
362. Opposes James V. of Scotland mar-
rying Mary of Guise, 420. His disgusts
with Francis and intercourse with the Em-
peror, ib.
Hesse, the Landgrave of, procures the reflora-

tion of his kinsman, Ulric Duke of Wur-
temberg, 360.
Heuterus, his account of Lewis XII. (hewn to

contradict the relations given by Bellay and
other French historians of the education of
Charles V. 21. Note.

Holy yunta. See unta.
Holy League, againfl the Emperor Charles V.

formed at Cognac, under the prote&ion of
Henry VIII. of England, 266.
Horuc, a potter's son of Lesbos, commences

pirate, with his brother Hayradin, 364.
See Barbarossa.
Hungary, is invaded by Solyman the Magnifi-

cent, and its King Lewis II. killed, 288.
His successes, and the number of prisoners
carried away, 289. The archduke Ferdi-
nand elected King of, together with Bohe-
mia, ib. John Zapol Scaepius wrests it
from Ferdinand, 466. Stephen succeeds on
the death of his father John, 467. Is trea-
cheroufly seized by Solyman, 469. See
I/abella, and Martinuzzi.
James V. of Scotland, levies troops to aflilt

Francis in Provence, but his intention fruf-
trated. 419. His negociations for mar-
riage with Francis's daughter, ib. Marries
Mary of Guise, 420.
Jesuits, the order of, by whom founded,

132. Carater of that order, ib. Charac-
ter of Ignatio Loyola their founder, 445.
The order confirmed by the Pope, 446. An
examination into the coi.llitution of the

order,

451. Engage in trade, and eflablifl an em-
pire in South America, 453. Bad tendency
of the order, 454. Are rclionfible for mofl
of the pernicious eftfics of Popery, since their
inlitution, 455. Advantages resulting from
their infitu;ion, ib. Civilize the natives of
Paraguay, 457. Their precautions for the in-
dependency of their empire there, 458. How
the particulars of their government and in-
flitution came to be disclosed, 459. Sum-
mary of their charater, 461.
Indiulgence, in the Romifl church, the doc.rinc

of, explained. 79. By whom firfl in-
vented, ib. Martin Luther preaches against
them, 83. Writes againfl them to Albert
Elcaor of Mentz, 84. A bull issued in fa-
vour of, 92. The sale of, opposed in Swit-
zerland by Zuinglius, 94.
Infantado, Duke of, his haughty resentment

of a cafiual blow on his horse, 430. Is pro-
teAed by the Confable of Caflile, 431.
Inveflitures, usurpations of tle Romifl Clergy

in Germany, during the disputes between the
Emperors and l'opes, concerning, o16.
Joanna, daughtcr of Ferdinand, and mother

of Charles V. visits Spain with her huband
Philip Archduke of Aultria, 3. Is flight-
ed by her hulband, 4. Her charater, ib.
Is abrubtly left in Spain by her husband, ib.
Sinks into melancholy on the occasion, and
is delivered of her second son Ferdinand, 5.
Her letter of consent to her father's regency
of Caflile intercepted, and herself confined,
9. Made joint regent of Castile with Ser-
dinand and Philip by the treaty of Salaman-
ca, . Sets out for Spain with Philip, are
driven on the coast of England and detained
three months by Henry VII. 12. Acknow-
ledged Qgeen of the Cortes, 14. Her ten-
dernefs to her hulband in his sickness, and
extraordinary attachment to his body when
dead, ib. Is incapable of government, 15.
Her son Charles assumes the Crown, 28.
The Cortes acknowledge her son King, with
a reservation in her favour, 44. Her recep-
tion of Padilla the chief of the Spanish
malcontents, 161. T'he Holy Junta re-
moved to Tordefillas the place of her refi-
dence, 162. Relapses into her former me-
lanclicly, ib. Th'Ie proceedings of the Holy
Junta carried on in her name, ib. Is seized
by the conde de H-aro, 171.

7obn Zapol Scaepius, y the aflifance of Sul-

tan Solyman, cfiablifhcs himfdlf in the
kingdom of Hungary, 466. .eaves the
kingdom to his son tclphen, 467. Sec
Iungary, Isabella, and AMartimizzi.
Ifaldell, daughter of John II. of Caflile, and

wite of Ferdinand King of Aragon, her
hiflory, 2. Her concein at the archduke
l'hilip's treatment of her daughter Joanna,
4. Her death and characler, 6. Appoints
Ferdinand regent of Calile tinder irefcic-
tions, ib.
-- daughltcr to Sigismund King of Poland,

married to John King of Hungary, 467.
Her charaOer, ib. Is treacherouliy carried
with her infant son into Transylvania by
Sultan Solyman, 469.
--- of Portugal, married to the Emperor

Charles V. 254.
Italy, consequences of the league between Pope

Leo X. and the Emperor Charles V. to,
139. The characers of the Italians, Spa-
niards and French, contrafled, i/. State of,
at the acceflion of Clement VII. to the l'a-
pacy, 201. Views of the Italian States
with refpea to the Emperor and Francis on
the expulsion of the French from Genoa
and tle Milanese, 214. Their apprehen-
sions on the battle of Pavia and captivity of
Francis, 234. The principal States, join
in the Holy league againfl the Emperor,
266. Are difguflcd at the tardincfs of
Francis, 272.. A view of the Ghibeline
faction, ib. Sentiments of tile States of,
on the peace of Cambray, 317. Is visitcd
by the Emperor Charlcs, 320. The imo-
tives of his moderation toward the States
of, 321. A league among the States o,
formed by Charles, 341.
Junta, Holy, a view of the confederacy in

Spain, so termed, 160. The authority of
Adrian disclaimed by, 161. Remov d to
Tordcfillas whee 2ueen Joanna residcd,
162. Their procedings cairied on in tie
name of Joanna, 162. Recciv(s letters from
Charles to lay down their arms, with pro-
miles of pardon, 164. IRcnonlrancc of
grievances drawn up by, ib. 'The particu-
lars of this renonflrancc, i65. Remarks on
the spirit of it, 161. Are intimidated from
presenting it to Charlcs, 169. Propose to
deprive Charles of his royalty during the lilf

of

of Joanna, ib. Take the field, 170. Cha-
ra&er of their army, ib. The Queen seized
by the conde de Haro, 171. How they'
obtained money to support their army, 1 72.
Lose time in negociating with the nobles,
175. Their irresolute conduct, ib. Their
armiy defeated by Haro, and Padilla taken
prisoner, 176. Padilla'executed, 177. His
letters to his wife, and the city of Toledo,
178. The ruin of the confederacy, 179.
fuli;us f. Pope, obfcrvations on the pontificate

of, 102.

L
La Chau, a Flemish gentleman, associated by

Charles V. with Cardinal Ximenes in the
regency of Caflile, 35.
Lanny, mortgages the revenues of Naples, to

supply the exigencies of the Eemperor,
220. Francis surrenders himself prisoner
to him at the battle of Pavia, 228. His
cautious disposal of him, 229. Delivers
him up in pursuance of the treaty of Ma-
drid, and receives the Duke of Orleans and
the Dauphin, as hontages in exchange, 254.
Is sent ambaflador to Francis to require his
fulfilment of the treaty of, 268. Concludes
a treaty with the Pope, 280. Marches to
join the Imperialists at Rome, where the
troops refuse to obey him,
Lanuza, don John de, made viceroy of Aragon,

on the departure of Charles V. for Germany,
66. Composes the disturbances there, 184.
Laotrec, Odet de Foix, marechal de, the French

goverl or of Milan, his charaaer, 139.
Alienates the affetions of the Milanese from
the French, ib. Inverts Reggio, but is re-
pulled by Guicciardini the historian, then
governor, 140. Is excommunicated by the
Pope, ib. The money for paying his troops,
feitfd by Louifeof Savoy, 141. Is left by
his Swiss troops, 142. Is driven out of the
Milanese territories, 143. A new body of
Swiss under him infit on giving battle to
the Imperialists, who defeat him, 147. The
Swiss leave him, 148. Retires into France
with the rcfidue of his troops, ib. Delivers
up the Dauphin and Duke of Orleans, in
exchange for Francis I. as holtages for the
performance of the treaty of Madrid, 254.
Is appointed generaliflimo of the league

against the Emperor, 296. His fuccefles in
Italy, 297. Motives which withheld him
from subduing the Milanese, ib. Obliges
the Prince of Orange to retire to Naples, 304.
Blockades Naples, 305. His army wafted,
and himself killed by the pestilence, 309.
Learning, the revival of, favourable to the re-

formation of religion, 116.
Leipfic, a public disputation held there by Mar-

tin Luther, and Eccius, on the validity of the
Papal authority, 94.
LoX. Pope of Rome, his characser, 54.

His apprehensions on the election of an Em-
peror of Germany, at the death of Maxi-
milian, ib. His council to the German
Princes, 55. Grants Charles V.a tenth of
all ecclefilaRical benefices in Caltile, 62.
Lays Cafdile under an interdict, but takes it
off, at the instance of Charles, ib. His
conduc on the profpeA of war between
Charles and Francis, 69. Situation of the
Papacy at his acceflion, and his views of
policy, 79. His inattention to Martin Lu-
ther's controversy with the Dominicans,
concerning indulgences, 87. Is infligated
against him, and summons him to Rome, ib.
Desires the elector of Saxony not to protect
him, ib. Is prevailed on to permit Luther's
doctrines to be examined in Germany, 88.
Cardinal Cajetan appointed to try him, ib.
Issues a bull in favour of Indulgences, 92. A
suspension of proceedings againlf Luther, and
why, 93. Publishes a bull of excommunica-
tion against him, 95. The political views of
his conduct between Charles and Francis,
128. Concludes a treaty with Francis, 129.
Concludes a' treaty also with Charles, ib. The
conditions of the treaty with Charles, 130.
Its consequences to Italy, 139. Is difap-
p6inted in a scheme formed by Merome, chan-
cellor of Milan, for attacking that dutchy,
140. Excommunicates Marechal de Foix
for his attack of Reggio, and declares against
France, ib. Takes a body of Swiss into
pay, 141. The French driven out of the
Milanefc, 143. Hedies, 144. The pirit
of the confederacy broken by his death, ib.
L'Efparre, Foix de, commands the French

trfrops in Navarre for Henry D'Albert, 132.
Reduces that kingdom, ib. His imprudent
progrels into Caltile, 133. Is taken prisoner

by

by the Spaniards, and the French driven out
of Navarre, ib.
LewiIl. King of Hungary and Bohemia, his

charaQfer, 288. Is invaded and'killed by
Solyman the Magnificent, ib.
- XII. King of France, receives homilage
of the Archduke Philip, for the earldom of
Slanders, 3. Concludes a treaty with him,
while at war with Ferdinand of Aragon, 5.
Beflows his niece Germaine de Foix, on
Ferdinand, and concludes a peace with him,
io. Loses the confidence of Philip on that
occasion, 21. Note. Belows his eldest daugh-
ter, already betrothed to Charles V. on the
count of AngoulEme, ib.
Leyva, Antonio de, defends Pavia for the Em-

peror against Francis, 221. His vigorous
defence, 222. Sallies out at the battle of
Pavia, and contributes to the defeat of Francis,
227. Is left governor'of Milan by the Duke
of Bourbon, 278. Defeats the forces there,
312. Is appointed generalifimo of the Ita-
lian league, 341. Direts the operations of
the invasion of France, under the Emperor,
395. Dies, 403.
Literature, its obligations to the order ofJe-

suits, 456.

Lerenzo di Medici. See Medici.
Louise of Savoy, mother of Francis I. of France,

her charaaer, 141. Her motives for seizing
the mony appointed for payment of marechal
Lautrec's troops, ib. Cause of her aversion
to the house of Bourbon, 191. Her advances
toward a marriage with Charles Duke of
Bourbon, rejeced by him, 192. Deter-
mines to ruin him, ib. Instigates a law-fiuit
against him, for his efates, ib. Goes to dif-
fuade Francis from his intended invasion of
the Milaiefe, who will not wait for her, 2 18.
Is appointed regent during his absence, 219.
Her prudent conduc on the defeat of Pavia,
and captivity of her son Francis, 23 . Con-
cludes a delenfive alliance with Henry VtII.
239. Ratifies the treaty of Madrid for the
recovery of her on's liberty, 253. Under-
takes with Margaret of Savoy, to accommo-
date the differences betwecn the Emperor
and Francis, 314. Articles of the peace of
Cambray, 315.
Loyo/l, Ignatio, commands the cafle of Pam.

pehlna in Navarre, and is wounded in its
defence, 132. His enthufiaftick turn of
mind, ib. I'he founder of the society of Jc-
VOL. II.

suits, ib. Prevails on the Pope to nfablinl
the order, 446; An examination into the
conflitution of the order, ib. Office and
power of the general, 448. The rapid pro-
grefs of the order, 45 i. See efuiits.
Luinentlrgi, Duke of, avows the opinions of

Luther, 206.
Lutber, Martin, tle happy consequences of

the opinions propagated by him, 78. Attacks
Indulgences, 82. His birth and education,
ib. Chosen pliilofophical professor at the
university of Wittemberg, 83. Inveighs
againfl the publiflcrs of Indulgences, ib.
Writes to Albert Elecfodrof Mentz, againli
them,84. Composes theses against Indulgences,
ib. Is supported by the Augultinians, and
encouraged by Frederick Elctor of Saxony, ib.
Is summoned to Rome by Pope Leo, 87. Ob-
'tains of the Pope leave to have his dolrines
examined in Germany, 88. Appears before
Cardinal Cjetan at Augibulgh, ib. Ilis
resolute reply to the peremptory order of
Cajetan, toretraE his principles, 89. With-
draws from Augfburgh, and appeals from
the Pope ill-informed, to the Pope when bet-
ter informed concerning him, ib, Appeals
to a general council, 92. The death of Max-
imilian, how of service to him, 93. Qufitions
' the Papal authority in a publick disputation,
94. His opinions condemned by the univer-
fities of Cologne and Louvain, ib. A bull
of excommunication publiflled again(t him,
95. Pronounces the Pope to be Antichrist,
and burns 'the bull, 96. RcRlcclionson the
condu& of the court of Rome toward him,
97. RefleCtions on his condu&t, 99. Caufcs
which contiibuted to favour his opposition
to the church of Rome, iol. Particularly
the art of printing, IH5. And the revival
of learning, 116. He is '(ummoned to ap-
pear at the diet of Worms, 122. A fate
conduce graiited him thiiher, ib.. Ilis recep-
tion there, ib Refuses to rctracl his opi-
nions,' 123. Departs, ib. An ctlid pub-
lilhed againl him, ib. le is fcizcd and con-
cealed at Wartburg, 124. Progrcs of his
dociirines, ib. The, univeifity of Pl'ris
pullifhts a decree againfl him, 125. Wrote
againlt by' Henry VIII. of I'ngland, i/..
Anwers both, 126. Withdraws 'romn his
retreat lo check the icotfidcrate z.al .ft
Carlofadius, 205. Urdertakes a tranlla-
tion of the bible, b. hii.s dotlines a\owed

P1 pp by
S E

ly several of the German Princes, 206. His
moderate and prudent condu&, 262. Mar-
ries Catherine a Boria, a nun, ib. The
great progress of his dotrines among the
Ocrmanick States, 324. Encourages the
Proteflants dispirited b the Emperor's de-
cree against him, 331. 'lis concern at the
iraaicesof the Anabaptifis at Muniler, 356.
Is invited to Leipfick, by Henry Duke of Sax-
ony, 427. His opinion of Gropper's trea-
tife to unite the Ptbtefiants and Catholicks,
463. Luxemburg) invaded by Robert de a Marck,

lord of Bouillon,'134.

M
Madrid, treaty of, between the Emperor

Charles V. and his prifsner Francis I. ing
of Prance, 25o. 'Sentiments of 'the pblic
with regard to this treaty, 251.
Mubmd, King of Tunis, 'history of his. ons,

367.
Majorca, an infurreclion there, 185. Which

is quelled with difficulty, ib. The modera-
tion of Charles, toward the insurgents, on his
arrival in Spain, 86.
Mjjlty, the appellation of, aflumed by Charles

V. on his ee&ion 'to. the Imperial crown,
and'taken' by all the other monarchs.of' u-
rope, 61.

-Malines, council of, an account of, 434.
Malta, the iand of, granted by the Emperor,

Charles V. to the Knights of St. John, expel-
led from Rhodes by th Turks, 53.

Mdamalslks, extirpated by Sultan Selim II. 50.
MAammiluker, a facion in Geneva, so termed,

some account of, 386.
Manuel, Don John, Ferdinand's ambafiador at

the Imperial court, pays his court to the
Archduke Philip on Queen Isabella's death,
8. Intercepts Joanna's letter of consent to
Ferdinand's regency, of Caflile, 9. Ncgo-
ciates a treaty between Ferdinand and Philip,
xi. Declares for Maximilian's regency on
Philip's death, 6. Is made Imperial am-
baffador at Rome, and concludes an alliance
between Charles V. and.Leo X. 130. The
conditions of the treaty, ib. Procures Adrian
of Utrecht to be eleced Pope, 46,
Margaret of Aufiria, and Dowager of Savoy,

aunt to Charles V. undertakes with Louise,
mother of Francis I. of France, to accom-

modate the differences between those two
monarchs, 314. Articles of the peace of
Cambray, 315.
Marck, Robert de , lord of Bouillon, de-

dlares war against the Emperor Charles V.
1.34. Ravages Luemburg witl French
troops, ib, Is commanded to dilband his
troops by Francis, ib. His teriitories! re-
duced by the Emperor, 135.'
Marfeillef,.befieged by the Imperialils, 26.

Rescued by Francis, 17. Interview and
treaty there between the Pope and Francis,
344 Martinuzzi, billop of Waradin, is appointed

guardian to Stephen, King of Hungary, 467.
His charaqer ib. Solicits the ql(ifiance of
Sultan Solyman against Ferdinand,468. So-
lyman si izes thc kingdom, 469.
Martyr, Peter, his authority cited in proof of

the extortions of the Flemish rpinifters of
Chafles V. 45.
Mry ofBurgundy, contra6ced to Lewis XI[.

of France, but mairied to the Emperor Max-
imilian, 2.
Matthias, John, a baker, becomes a leader of

the Apabaptifts, at Munfer, 350. Seizes
-the city and eflablifhes a new form of go-
vernment there, 351.! Repulrs the bilhop
of Munater, 353, Is. killed, ib. See B-
cold and' Anabtapt,.
Maximilian, Emperor of'Germany, claims.the

regency of Caflile on his son Philip's depth,
16. Is fupprtd in lis claim by Don Jphn
Manuel, ,b. Ioles t, 8. Obtains,,the
government of the 'LowCountries by the
death of Philip, 21. Appoints William de
Croy, lord of Chievres to filperintend the edu-
cation of his grandson Charles, ib. Con-
cludes a peace with France and-Venice, 39.
Dies, 48. State of Europe at this, period,
ib. His endeavours to secure the Ieprial
crown to his grandson, Charles,. 49i, low
oblruacd, ib. !
Medici, Alexander, restored to the dominions

of Florence, by the Emperor Charles, 323.
Is assassinated, 415.
Medici, Cardinal de, eleed Pope, and afTumes

the title of Clement VII. 197. See ClIrwnt
VII.
Medici, Catherinedi, is married to the Duke of

Orleans, 345. Is conjecured, by the Emperor
Charles V. to have poisoned the Dauphin, 4p6.

Mediri,

Meddi, Cofmode, made duke of Florerce, 417.

Is supported by the Emperor, and defeats the
partizans of Lorenzo, 418.
Mediri, Lorenzo de, assassinates his kinfrman

Alexander 416. Flies, 417. Attempts
to oppose Cosmo, but is defeated, 418.
Medina del Campo, the inhabitants of, refuse

to let Fonseca take the military flores there,
for the siege of the insurgents in Segovia, 15 7.
The town almost burnt by Fonseca, 158.
The inhabitants repulse him, ib. Surren-
ders after the battle of Villalar, and diflolu-
tion of the Holy Junta, 179.
MelanIRbon, imbibes the opinion of Martin

Luther, 97. Is employed to draw up a
confefllon of faith by the Proteflant princes
at the diet at Aug(burgh, 329. Is deje&ted
by the Emperor's decree against the Pro-
teflants, but comforted by Luther, 331. Is
invited to Paris by Francis, 381. His confe-
rence with Eckius, 462.
Melio, Conde de, made viceroy of Valencia,

on the departure of Charles V. for Germany,
66. Appointed to command the troops of
the notables againht the Germanada, 184.
Defeated by them in several ations, i. De-
firoys the aflociation, ib.
Merveille, a Milanese gentleman employed as

envoy from Francis I. to Francis Sforza, duke
of Milan, his fate, 379.
Mezier., in France, befleged by the Imperial-

ilts, 135. Gallant defence of, by the che-
valier Bayard, ib. The siege ralfed, b.
Milan, marechal de Foix appointed to be the

French governor of, 139. His chara&er,
ib. The Milanefealienated from the French
by his oppreflione, ib. Invaded by the cc-
clefiafical troops under Prosper Colonna,
141. The French driven out, 143. Op-
pressed by the Imperial troops, 188. In-
vaded by the French, 195. Who are dri-
ven out by Colonna, 96. The Imperial
troops there mutiny for pay, but are appeased
by Morond, 202. Abandoned by the French,
ib. Over-run again by Francis, who si'cs
the city, 219. The French retire on news
of the battle of Pavia, 228. The invcftiturc
of, granted to Sforza, 240. Taken from
him and granted to the duke of Bourbon,
248. Disorders committed by the Iinperial
troops hete, 66. Oppreflve measures of
Bourbon to supply his n'utinous troops, 276.
The French troops there defeated by Ato-

niode Leyva, 312. Is again granted by the
Emperor to Sforta, 322. Death of Sfdrza,
388. The pretensions qs Francis to that
dutchy, 389. Is fizedl by the Emiperr, i/.
The marquis del Guafto appointed gover-
nor, 404.
Mobacz, battle of, between Solyman the Mag-

nificent and the Iungarians, 288.
Monaflic orders, enquiry into the fundamental

principles of, 447. Peculiar confitutlon of
theorder of Jesuits, ib.
Moncada, Ion llugo di, the Imperial ambaf-

fador at Rome, his intrigues with cardinal
Colonna, against Pope Clement 273.
Reduces the Pope to an accommodation,
2714. Is defeated and killed by Andrew Do-
ria in a naval engagement bfore the harbour
of Naples, 305.
Monteruculi, count of, accused and tortured for

poisoning the dauphin, charges the Emperor
with iniigating it, 405.
Moatnorency, marcfchal, his charafler,, 399.

Francis adopts his plan for rcfiting the i.m-
peror, and commits the execution to him,
ib. His precautions, ib. His troops despise
his condu&, 401. Observations on his ope-
rations, 403.
Montpelier, a friitlefs conference held there for

the relitutidn of tile kingdom of Navarre,
47.
Moron , Jerom, chancellor of Milan, his cha-

rater, 139. Retires from the Frcnch ex-
a&ions in Milan to Francis Sforza, ib. His
intrigues how rendered abortive, 140. Qiets
the mutiny of the Imperal troops in Milan,
202. Is difgufled with the behaviour of
Charles, 239. Intrigues againit the Empc-
ror with Pclcara, 241. Is betrayed to the
Emperor by Pescara, 243. Is arrefed'al his
visit to Pescara, 244. Is set at liberty by
the duke of Bourbon, and becomes his con-
sident, 276.
Moufo/ in France, taken by the mnpcrialifls,

13 5. Retaken by Francis, lb.
Mlrey, Harccn, king of Tun's, his inhuman

tieatnient of his father and brothers, 367.
Is expelled by Barbaronfl, 369. Ergages
the Emperor Charles V. to rcflorc him, 370.
Is ofablihned again by the furrendcr of Tu-
nis, 375. -is treaty with Charlec, 376.

Munc, Trme
l as, a dilciple of luthl'r, opposes

him with I'nnatical nblions, "5 d, leads

1' p p tle

the infurrecion of the pcafants in Thuringia,
26o. His extravagant schemes, ib. Is de-
feated ard put to death, 261.
Mufller, the firfi settlement of the Anabaptists

in that city, 350 The city seized by them,
351. They eflablifh a new form of govern-
mient there, ib. Is called Mount Sion, 352.
'he bishop of, repulsed by them, 33. Is
blockaded by the bishop, 356. The city
taken, 358. See Alabapt.lt.
Murder, the prices of composition for, by the

Ron;ih clergy, lo5.

N
ANaples, the revenues of, mortgaged by Lannoy

to supply the Emperor in his exigencies, 220.
Invadcd by the French under he duke of
Albany, 224. Invaded by Pope Clemert
VII. 277. Treaty between the Pope and
Lannoy viceroy of, 280. The Prince of
Orange retreats thither before Lautrec, 304.
Is blockaded by Lautrec, 305. Sea engage-
ment in the harbour of, between Andrew
Doria and Moncada, ib. Causes which dif-
appointed the French operations against,.
306. Doria revolts, and opens the commu-
nication by sea again, 308.
NafTau, count of, invades Bouil'on at the head

of the Imperialists, 135. Invades France,
takes Moufon, and besieges Mezieres, but
is repulsed, ib.
Navarre, the kingdom of, unjufily acquired by

Ferdinand of Aragon, 19. D'Albert's in-
vafion of, defeated by cardinal Ximenes,
35. Its cafiles dismantled, except Pampe-
luna, which Ximenes firengthens, ib. In-
vaded by Francis I. in the name of Henry
D'Albret, 132. Reduced by I,'Efparre, the
French general, 133. The French driven
out by the Spaniards, and L'Efparre taken
prisoner ib.
\etberlandt,. the government of, first assumed

by Charles V. 23. The Flemings averse to
Charles's going to Spain, 39. Invaded by
Francis I. king of France, 135. A truce
concluded with, by Henry VIIL of England,
306. Invaded by Francis again, 407. A
suspension of arms there, 408. An infur-
reion at Ghent, 431. See Ghent.
Nice, a truce for ten years concluded there be-

tween the Emperor and Francis, 413.
Noymn, treaty of, between Charles V. and

Francis I. of France, 38. The terms of,
negleed by Charles, 68.

Nurenburg, the city of, embraces the re-

formed religion, 206. Diet of, particulars
of Pope Adrian's brief to, refpeding the re-
formerst 207. The reply to, 208. 'Po-
poses a general council, ib. Presents a lilt of
grievances to the Pope, 209. The recels,
or di&t, of, 210. Ihis diet of great ad-
vantage to the reformers, ib. Proceedings
of a second diet there, 212. Rccefs of the
diet, 213. An accommodation agreed. to
there, between the Emberor Charles V. and
the Protestants, 337.

0
Oran, and other places in Barbary annexed to

the crown of Castile, by Ximenes, 18.
Orange, Phillibert de Chalons, prince of, gene-

ral of the Imperial army on the death of the
duke of Bourbon, takes the cattle of St.
Angelo, and Pope Clement VII. prisoner,
287. Retires to Naples on the approach
of Lautrec, 304. Takes his ftcce for the
marquis de Saluces, prisoner at Averfa, 309.,
Orleant, duke of, delivered to the Emperor

Charles V. with the Dauphin, as ho tages
for the performance of the treaty of Madrid,
254. Is married to Catherine di Medici,
345. Becomes Dauphin by the death of his
brother, 405.

P
Pacbeco, Donna Maria, wife to Don John de

Padillo, her artful scheme to raise money to
supply the army of the Holy Junta, 172.
Her huiband taken prisoner, and executed,
177. His letter to her, 178. Raises forces
to revenge his death, 80. Is reduced and
retires to Portugal, 81.
Padilla, Don John de, his family and character,

155. Heads the insurrection at Toledo,
ib. Routs the troops under Ronquillo, 157.
Calls a convention of the malecontents at
Avilla, 16o. Forms the confederacy called
the Holy Junta, 161. Disclaims Adrian's
authority, ib. Gets poffeflion of Queen
Joanna, ib. Removes the Holy Junta to
Tordefillas, the place of her residence, 162.
Sent with troops to Valladolid, and deprives
Adrian of all power of government, 163. Is
superseded in the command of the army of
the Junta, by Don Pedro de Giron, 170.
Is appointed commander at the resignation
of Giron, 172. His army supplied with

money

money by an expedient of his wife, 173.
Besieges Torrelobalon, 175. Takes and
plunders it, ib. Concludes a truce with the
nobles, ib. Is wounded and taken prisoner
in an aion with the conde de Haro, 177.
Is put to death, ib. His letter to his wile,
178. His letter to the city of Toledo, ib.
Palatine, count, ambaflador from the diet at

Frankfort, brings CharlesV. the offer of the
Imperial crown, which he accepts, 62.
Pampeluna, Caflle of, in Navarre, its fortifica-

tions firenghened by Cardinal Ximenes,
35. Taken by L'Efparre, the French ge-
neral for Henry D'Albret, 133. Retaken
by the French, ib.
Papacy, how liable to be afltced by the dif-

pofal of the Imperial crown, 54.
Paraguay, a sovereignly eflablifled there, by

the order of Jefuils, 453. The inha-
bitants of, civilized by them, 457. Pre-
cautions used by tile Jesuits to prefeive the
independency of their empire there, 458.
Paris, a decree publilhed by the university of,

ngainfR Martin Luther the Reformrer,
125. A decree of the parliament of, pu-
blifhed againf the Emperor Charles V.
406.
Pavia, besieged hy Francis I. of France,

221. Vigorously defended by Antonio de
leyva, 222. Battle of between Francis
and the Duke of Bourlon, 226. The Im-
perial troopsin that city mutiny, 235.
Paul Ill. Pope, elced, 347. His charac-

ter, ib. Propofcs a general council to be
held at Mantua, 362. Negociates person-
ally between the Emperor and Francis, 412.
lif1Tes a bull for a council at Mantua, 421.
Prorogues and transfers it to Vicenza, 423.
A partial reformation of abuses by, ib.
Pefara, marquis de, takes Milan by affaul,

143. Drives Bonnivet back to France,
o03. His generous care of the chevalier
Bayard, ib. Commands in the invasion of
P'rovence, 216. Besieges Marseilles, ib.
His army retires toward Italy, on the ap-
pearance of the French troops, 217. Re-
signs Milan to the French, 219. Prevails
on his fpanifli troops not to murmur at pre-
sent for their pay, 220. Co,)tributes to the
defeat of Francis at the battle of Pavia, 227.
Is difgufled at Francis being taken to Spain,

without his concurrence, 40. Ilis refentmcnt
inflamed by Morond, 241. Betrays Motone's
designs to the Emperor, 243. Arrtfls Mo-
rond, 244. Dies, 248.
Pbilip, Archduke of Austria, and father of

Charles V. visits Spain, with his wife
Joanna, 3. Does homage by the way
to lewis XII. of France for the carldom of
Slanders, ib. His title to the crown ac-
knowledged by the Cortes, ib. Is difgulicd
with the formality of the Spanifli court, ib.
Ferdinand becomes jealous of his power, il,'
Slights his wife, 4. His abrupt departure
from Spain, ib. alffes through France, and
euters into a treaty with Lewis, 5. Ills
fentimcnts on Ferdinand's obtaining the
regency of Callile, 8. Requires Ferdinand
to retire to Aragon, and resign his regency
of Caflilc, ib. 'The regency of Cafile veitcl
jointly in him, Ferdinand and Joanna, by
the treaty of Salamanca, 1i. Sets out for
Spain, and is driven on the coall of England,
where he is detained three months by Henry
VII. 12. Arrives at Corunna, ib. The
Caflilian nobility declare openly for him, ib.
Ferdinand resigns the regency of Caflilc to
him, 13. Interview between them, ib. Ac-
knowledged King of Castile by the Cortes,
14. Dies, ib. Joanna's extraordinary con-
dua in regard to his body, 5. See Joanna.
Pbillipino, nephew to Andrew Doria, defeats

Moncada in a sea engagement before the
harbour of Naples, 305.
Picardy, Invaded by Henry VIII. 15 .

Henry forced by by the Duke de Vcndome to
retire, ib. Invaded again under the Duke of
Sililblk, 200. Who penetrates silmo to
Paris but is driven back, ib. Inefl'ctual in-
valion by the Imperialifis, 404.
Printing, its cffcts on the progress of the Re-

formation, 115.
Proteflants, the derivation of the name,

327. Of whom they originally confilled,
ib. A severe decree publihed against them
by the Emperor, 331. They enter into
a league, 332. See Smalcalde. Renew their
league, and apply to Francis King of France,
and Henry VIII. of England, for protec-
tion, 334. Are secretly encouraged by
Francis, ib. Receive a supply of money
from Henry, 336. Terms of the pacifica-

tion

tion agreed to between them and the Em-
peror at Nuremburg, 337. Afftll the
Emperor against the Turks, 338. Their
negociations with the Pope, rteative to a
general council, 340. Renew the league
of Smalkalde for ten years, 362. The mo-
tives for refuting to aflift the King of France
against the Emperor, 382. Refuse to ac-
knowledge the council summoned by the
Pope at Mantua, 422. A conference be-
tween their principal divines and a deputa-
tion of Catholick,, at Ratilbon, 462. This
conference how rendered fruitless, 464.
Obtain a private grant from Charles in their
favour, 465.
Provence, is laid wate by the marefchal Mont-

morency on the approach of the Emperor
Charles V. 399. Is entered by the Em-
peror, 400. The disastrous retreat of the
Emperor from, 403.
PrulFia, when conquered by the Teutonick

order, 263. Is ereaed into a dutchy, and
finally into a kingdom, and enjoyed by
the house of Brandenburg, 264.

R
RatiJbon, a conference between a deputation of

Proteflant and Catholick divines, before
the Emperor and diet there, 462. This
conference how rendered fruitless, 464
Reformation in religion, the rife of, explained,

78. The diet at Worms called by
Charles V. to check the progress of, ib. Ac-
count of Martin Luther, the Reformer, 82.
Beginning of in Switzerland by Zuinglius,
94. State of, in Germany, at the arrival
of Charles V. 97. Reflc&ion on the con-
du& of the court of Rome toward Luther,
ib. Andon Luther's condu&, 99. Inquiry
into the caues which contributed to the
progress of, o11. Observations on the pon-
tificate of Alexander VI. and Julius II. o0z.
The immoral lives of the Romish clergy,
103. The progress of, favoured by the in-
vention of printing, i5. And the revival
of learning, 116. The great prog.efs of, in
Germany, 206. Advantages derived to, from
the diet at Nuremburg, 210. Its-tendency
in favour of civil liberty, 258. The dif-
fenfions between the Emperor and the Pope,
favourable to, 290. The great spread of,

among the German Princes, 324. The
confeflion of Augsburg drawn up by Melanc-
thon, 329. Caufrs which led to that of
England, 345. The excesses it gave rife to,
348. See Proteflants. Maurice, and Smal-
kalde, Is eftablithed in Saxony, 427.
Reggio, invested by the French, who are re-

pulsed by the governor Guicciardini the his-
torian, 140.
Remonstrance of grievances drawn up by the

Holy Junta, the particulars of, 165. Re-
marks on, 67.
Reverse, a deed so called, signed hy the Arch-

duke Ferdinand on being eleced King of Bo-
hemia, 289.
Rbodes, the island of, besieged by Solyman

the Magnificent, 52. Taken by him, 153.
The Island of Malta granted to the knights
of, by the Emperor Charles V. ib.
Rome, refleions on the conduct of the court,

of, refpeaing the proceedings againll Martin
Luther, 98. The exorbitant wealth of the
church of, prev'ous to the Reformation, 1o6.
Venality of, 13. How it drained other
countries of their wealth, ib. The city
seized by Cardinal Colonna, and Pope Cle-
ment VII. besieged in the castle of St. An.
gelo, 274. The city taken by the Impe-
rialifts, and Bourbon killed, 285. Is plun-
dered, 286.
Ronquillo, ent by Cardinal Adrian with troops

to suppress the infurrecion in Segovia, 157.
Is routed by them, ib.
Roveri. Francesco Maria de, reflored to his

dutchy of Urbino, by Pope Adrian, 188.

S
Salamanca, treaty of, between Ferdinand of

Aragon, and his fon-in-law Philip, .
Salucte, marquis de, succeeds Lautrec in the

command of the French army before Naples,
309. Retires to Averfa, where he is taken
prisoner by the Prince of Orange, ib. Be-
trays his charge in Piedmont, 397.
Sauvage, a Fleming, made Chancellor of Caf-

tile by Charles, on the death of Ximenes,
44. His extortions, ib,
Savona, is fortified, and its harbour cleared by

the French to favour its rivrlflhip with Ge-
noa, 307.
Savoy, Charles Duke of,. marries!Beatri of

Portugal,

Portugal, filter to the Emperor Charles V.
384. The cause of Francis's difpleafuire
against him, ib. His territories over-run by
the French troops, 385. Geneva recoVers
its liberty, 386. His situation by the:truce
at Nice,; between the Emperor and Francis,
414,
Saxony, George Duke of, an enemy to the

Refbrmation, 426. His death an advantage
to the Reformation, ib. The Proteflant re-
ligion eflablifhed by Henry Duke of, 427.
Scotland, James V. of, married to Mary of

Guile, duchefs-dowager of longuevillc,
420.
Sefis in religion, reflesions on the origin of,

348.
Segovia, an infurreEion tlcre, on account of

their representative Tordefillas voting for the
donative to Chatles V. 155. He is killed
by the populace, 146. The inftirgents there
defeat Ronquillo, sent to fiupprefs'them by
Cardinal Adrian, 157. Surrenders after the
battle of Vililalr, 179.
Slin:m I. Sultan, extilpates the Mamalukes,and

adds Egypt and Syria to his empire, 50.
Confidered as lhrmid.able to the European
powers, ih
Sforza obtains of Charles V. the iveftiture of

Milan, 240. Forfeits the dutchy, by his
intrigues with Moron, 244. Joins in a
league againll Charles for the recovery of
Milan, 266. Is forced to futrendcr Milan
to the Inpcrialifls, 271. Obtains again of
the Emperor the invefituire of Milan, 322.
Enters into a private treaty with Francis,
379, Merveille' Francis's envoy executed
for murderb ib. Dies, 388.
Sio,, Cardinal of, his scheme for weakening

the French army, in tho Milanefc, 143. Leaves
the Imperial army to attend the conclave on
the death of: Leo X. 144.
SmalkaldF, the Protellatits enter into a league

there,:for their mutdal support, 332. The
league renewed at a second meeting there,
334. The league of, renewed for ten years,
362. A manifetlo, refuting to acknowledge
a council called by the Pope, 422'. The
King of Denmark joins the league, 424.
Solyrian the Magnificent, ascends the Ottoman

throne, 17. Invades Hungary and takes
Belgrade, 152. Takes the ifand of Rhodes,
ib. Defeats the Hungarians at Mohac.,

288. His fuccefes, and the number of pri-
fonershe carried away, a89. :Beicegcs Vienna,
322. Enitrs Hungary aain with a vail arm)y,
but is forced to retire by the' F.lsicror Charles,
338. Takes lBarbardTa the pirate under his
protection, 366. Concludes' an alliance
with Francis King of France, 410. Pre-
pares to invade Naples, ll. Protees Ste-
phen King of -Hungary, and defeats Ferdi-
nand, 468. Seizes Iuhgary for himself;
469.
Spain, the (late of, at the dca;h of Ferdinand

of Aragon, 23. Charles King ol,
aspires to the Imperial crown' on the death
of Maximilian, 49. Is elected mperor 59.
Reflections of the Spaniards on that event,
6z. Charles appoints viceroys, and departs
for Germany, 66. Infurreqions there, t 55.
A view of the feudal fyltem in, 59. An
account of the confederacy, termed the
Holy Junta, 160. Causes which prevented
an union of the malcontents in the relpec-
tive provinces, 85. The moderation of
Charces toward them on his arrival, 186.
Inflance of the haughty spirit of the gran-
dees, 430.
Spires, diet of, its proceediigs relative to the

Rcformnation, 2o. Another diet called
there by the Emp'ero, 32.
Spiritual censures of the Romish church, the

dreadful effects of, og9.
Sula'ia, an infirrecEioll of the peacfats against

the nobles there, 256. They pul)ifli
a memorial of their grievances, 257. 'The
infuil'gnts (difcrfc(, 258.
Ssjslk, Duke of, invades Picardy, penetrates

almnof to Paris, blt is driven back, 200.
Surrej, earl of, created high admiral to the

Emperor Charles V. i5o. Obliged to
r'elire'out of Picardy by the duke de Veh-
dome, 1 5 .
Switzerland, the cantonsof, efpouc thc preten-

sions of Chatles V. to the Imperial crown,
53. Commencement of the Reformation
there by Zuinglius, 94. The regulation
under which they hire out their troop.s, 142.
The' precipitate battle, ifified on by their
troops uldcr Lautrec, loft, 147.
Syria, how and hy whom added to the Ottoman

Empire; o5.

Telzel,
U M

T
Tetzel, a Dominican friar, his hameful con-

du& in the sale of Indulgences in Germany,
80. His form of absolution, and recom-
mendation of the virtues of Indulgences, ib.
Note. His debauched course of life, 81.
Publishes there against Luther, 85.
Tettontit order, a character of, 263. Conquer

the province of Pruflia, ib. Their grand
malter Albert made duke of Pruflia, 264.
Tbutringia, an infurre&ion of the pealants

there, againfl the nobility, 258. The fa-
natical notions inspired into them by Thomas
Muncer, 260. Theif disorderly army de-
feated, 261.
Toledo, infurreaion. in, at the departure of

Charles V. for Germany, 66, I55. The
cathedral of, stripped of its riches to support
the army of the Holy Junta, 173. Padillo's
letter to, at his execution, 178. Is instigated
to continue in his arms by Padillo's wife, 180.
Is reduced, 181.
Tomorri, Paul, a Franciscan monk, archbishop

of Golocza, is made general of the Hunga-
rian army againtf Solyman the Magnificent,
and is defeated by him, 288.
Tordeillat, the residence of Queen Joanna, the

confederacy of malcontents called the Holy
Junta, removed thither, 162. The Qgeen
taken there by the conde de Haro, 171.
Tordeillas, one of the representatives of Sego-

via, killed by the populace for voting the do-
native to Charles V. at the Cortes assembled
in Galicia, 155.
Tremouil e, La, drives the Fngl fh under the

duke of Suffllk out of Picardy, 200.
'ir/ni,, the means of its coming under the power

of Barbarossa, traced, 367. The Emperor
and other Chrillian powers unite to expel
Barbarossa, and reltore Muley Hafcen, 370.
Is taken by the Emperorr 375. Muly Has-
cen ielfored, and his treaty with Charles,
176.

V
Valfncia, an infurrelion in, 62. The people

there greatly oppressed by the nobles, 63.
The robles refuse to aflnmble the Coltes ex-
cept the King is present, ib. Charles autho-
rifts the people to continue in arms, ib.
Tlheyexpel the nobles, 64. Aflbciate un-
der the Germanada, and appoint their own
magiflrates, ib. Don Diego de Mendora,
Conde d Melito, appointed regent, on the

departure of Charles for Germany, 66. The
Germanada refuse to lay down their arms,
182. Defeat the nobles in several acions,
184. Are at length routed by the conde de
Melito, ib. The moderatonof Charles to-
wards the insurgents on his arrival, 186.

[alentinois, dutchess of; fee Diana of Poitiers.
Valladolid, the first public entry of Charles V.

to that city, 43. The inhabitants rife, burn
Fonleca's hcufe, and fortify the town, 158.
Surrenders after the battle Villlalr, and dif-
solution of the Holy Junta, 179.
Vendome, duke of, his plan of operations in op-

posing the progress of the invasion of Picardy
by Henry VIII. 15i. Obliges him to
retire, ib.
Venice, the republic of, incline in favour of the

pretensions of Francis I. of France, to the
Imperial crown, 53. Their views and
apprehensions on the approaching rupture
between the Emperor Charles V. and Fran-
cis, 69. Leagues with the Emperor against
Francis, 889. A final accommodation be-
tween, and the Emperor, 322. Refuses to
enter into the league of the Italian lates,
formed by the Emperor, 34r.
Vienna, is besieged by Sultan Solyman the

Magnificent, 322.
Villalar, battle of, between Padilla,and the conde

de Hlaro, 176.
Villena, marquis de, his spirited reply to the re-

quell of the Emperor to lodge Bourbon in
his palace, 247.
Urbino, restored by Pope Adrian to Francesco

Maria dc Rover,, 188.
War, the method of carrying on in Europe,

how improved at this period from the prac-
tice of earlier ages, 199.
Wartburg, Martin Luther concealed there by

the Elector of Saxony, 124
Wolfey, cardinal, his rife, character, and influ-t

ence over Henry VII. of England, 72.
Receives a pcnfion from Francis I.'of France,
73. And from the Emperor Charles V.
ib. Detached from the French intercit by
the latter, 74. Inclines! Henry to join the
Emperor againfl Fratcis, 127. Sent by
Henry to Calais, to negociate an accommc-
dation between the Emperor and, Fancis,
136. Has an interview with Charles at
Bruges, and concludes a league with him on
the part of Henry, againtl France, 137.
Meditates revenge against Charles on his ec-
cond dilfppointncnt of the Papacy by the

election

elecion of Clement VIt. 198. Obtains of
Clement a legatine commifllon in England
for life, 198. Negociates a league with
Francis against the Emperor, 294.
Worms, a diet called there by Charles V. to

check the progress of the Reformers, 77.
Proceedings of, 121. Martin Luther cited
before it, 178. Refuses to retraa his opi-
nions, 123. An edit publifled against
him, ib.
1Wurtemberg, Ulric duke of, why expelled his

dominions, 359. Recovers his dominions
by the assistance of Francis King of France,
and receives the Proteflant religion, 360.

X
Ximenes, archbiflop of Toledo, adheres to

Ferdinand of Aragon, in his dispute with
the archduke Philip concerning the regency
of Caflile, 9. Espouses Ferdinand's claim
to the regency of Castile on Philip's death,
17. Conquers Oran, and other places in
Barbarv, for the crown of Cafile, 8. Ap-
pointed regent of Caflile, by Ferdinand's
will, untill the arrival of Charles V. in Spain,
-5. His rife and charaaer, ib. Admits
the claim to the regency of cardinal Adrian,
tent with that commiflion by Charles, and
executes it jointly with him, 27. Takes
the infant Don Ferdinand to Madrid under
his own eye, ib. Procures Charles, who
assumed the regal title, to be acknow-
ledged by the Castilian nobility, 29.
Schemes to extend the regal prerogative, ib.

DeprefeTs. the nobility, 30. Frees the King
from the feudal limitations, and eflablifhcs a
regal army to check the barons, 31. Sup-
presses a mutiny headed by the grandees, ib.
Resumes the grants of Ferdinand to his no-
bles, 32. His prudent application of the
revenue, ib. His bold alertion of his autho-
rity to the discontented nobles, 33. Other
associates it the regency appointed at the
intligation of the Flemifli courtiers, 34. Re-
tains the superior management, ib. De-
feates John D'Albert's invasion f Navarrec
35. Dismantles all the cafiles there, ex-
cept Pampeluna, which he ftrcngthens, ib.
The troops sent by him against Barbaroflh
defeated, and his equanimity on that occa-
lion, 36. Alarmed at the corruption of the
Flemillh court, he persuades Charles to visit
Spain, 37. Falls ick on his journey to
meet Charles at his arrival, 41. His letter
of council to Charles, ib. Requeis an in-
terview, ib. 'The ingratitude of Charles to
him, 42. His death, ib. His character,
ib. Reverence paid to his memory by the
Spaniards, 43.

7,
Zanora, bishop of, raises a regiment of priests

to defend 'ordcfillas, for the H-oly Junta,
which is forced by the conde de lHaro,
171.
Zuingliut, attacks the sale of Indulgences at

Zurich in Switierland, 94.
End of the Second Volume.
