,i,:,

THE
HISTORY

OF
A M E R IC A.

By WILLIAM ROBERTSON, D.D.
PRINCIPAL OF THE UNIVERSITY OF EDINBURGIH, IIISTORIOGRAPIILE

TO IlIS MAJESTY FOR SCOTLAND, AND I.EMBER OF TIIE

ROYAL ACADEMY OF lI1STORY AT MADRID.

THE NINTH EDITION,
In which is included the Pofithwnous Volume,

CONTAINING
THE HISTORY OF VIRGINIA, TO THE YEAR 1688;

AND OF NEW ENGLAND, TO THE YEAR 1652.

IN FOUR VOIUMES.

VOL. II.

LONDON:

Printed by A. S/illhn i, l'riljlr. s SIre,'
Fur A. STRAIIAN; 'I. CAIDEI.. jIn. a. ;l V. DA.vlr;, 't:.udl;

and E. BxI.IUov R, Edliilburl l.

18oo.

# THE HISTORY OF AMERICA. BOOK IV.

T HE
H ISTORY

OF
AMERICA.

BOOK IV.
TW-ENTY-sIX years had elapsed since Colum- B o o K

bus conduced the people of Europe to the ..-..-

New World. During that period the Spaniards fhatIPa't
had made great progress in exploring its various we'r'then

- 1 ~0 . known.

regions. They had visited all the islands scat-
tered in different cluflers through that part of
the ocean which flows in between North and
South America. They had failed along the
eastern coafl of the continent from the river De
la Plata to the bottom of the Mexican gulf, and
had found that it fIretched without interruption
through this vast portion of the globe. They
had discovered the great Southern Ocean, which
opened new profpeas in that quarter. They
had acquired orme knowledge of the coast of
Florida, which led them to observe the conti-
nent as it extended in an opposite direction;

VOL. I1. B and

B OO K and though they pushed their discoveries no

IV.

farther towards the north, other nations had
visited those parts which they neglected. The
English, in a voyage, the motives and success of
which Shall be related in another part of this
History, had failed along'the coast of America
from Labrador to the confines of Florida; and
the Portuguese, in quelf of a florter passage to
the East Indies, had ventured into the northern
seas, and viewed the fame regions a. Thus, at
the ;period where I have chosen to take a view
of the ltate of the New World, its extent was
known almofi from its northern extremity to
thirty-five degrees south of the equator. The
countries which ftrctch from thence to the
southern boundary of America, the great em-
pire of Peru, and the interior state of the ex-
tensive dominions fubjc¢e to the sovereigns of
Mexico, were flill undiscovered.

Thil vant WVITEN we contemplate the New World, the
extcrt of
,1 'N,.° first circunmfance tlhat [rikes us is its iimcnfe
World.

extent. It was not a small portion of the earth,
I) inconsiderable that it miight have escaped the
oblci-vation or rel(arch of former ages, which
Columbus dilcovcred. Ile nlade known a new
hcnillhlcre, largr tha either i Europe, or Arfia,

aHen -cii, tc e. t. lib. vi. . t 6.

~~~~~; ~or

or Africa, the three noted divisions of the an- B o 0
cient continent, and not much inferior in di- --
mentions to a third part of the habitable globe.

AMERICA is remarkable not only for its

magnitude, but for its position. It firetches
from the northern polar circle to a high south-
ern latitude, above fifteen hundred miles beyond
the farthest extremity of the old continent on
that fide of the line. A country of such extent
passes through all the climates capable of be-
coming the habitation of man, and fit for yield.
ing the various productions peculiar either to
the temperate or to the torrid regions of the
earth.

NEXT to the extent of the New World, the Grad Ob.

j' c%' it

grandeur of the objet:s which it presents to view piefents to
is molt apt to strike the eye of an observer. vie.
Nature seems here to have carried on her ope-
rations upon a larger scale, and with a bolder
hand, and to have distinguished the features of
this country by a peculiar magnificence. The Its motn-
mountains of America are much superior in
height to those in the other divisions of the
globe. Even the plain of Quito, which may be
confidered as the base of the Andcs, is elevated
farther above the iea than the top of the Pyre-
nees. This stupendous ridge of the Andes, no lcfs
remarkable for extent than elevation, riles in

13 2 different

B 0 0 K different places more than one third above the

--- _ Pike of Teneriffe, the highest land in the ancient

hemisphere. The Andes may literally be said
to hide their heads in the clouds; the storms
often roll, and the thunder burfis below their
summits, which, though exposed to the rays of
the fun in the center of the torrid zone, are
covered with everlaffing snows b
rivers, FROM these lofty mountains descend rivers,

proportionably large, with which the streams in
the ancient continent are not to be compared,
either for length of course, or the vaif body of
water which they roll towards the ocean. The
Maragnon, the Orinoco, the Plata in South
America, the Miflifippi and St. Laurence in
North America, flow in such spacious channels,
that, long before they feel the influence of the
tide, they resemble arms of the sea rather than
rivers of fresh water .
Lalie . THE lakes of the New World are no less

conspicuous for grandeur than its mountains
and rivers. There is nothing in other parts of
the globe which resembles the prodigious chain
of lakes in North America. They may properly
be termed inland seas of frefl water; and even
those of the second or third class in magnitude,

b Sec NOTE 1. c See NOTE II.

arc

are of larger circuit (the Caspian sea excepted) B 0O K
than the greatest lake of the ancient continent.

THE New World is of a form extremely fa- Its form fa

yvourabl: to

vourable to commercial intercourse. When a commerce.
continent is formed, like Africa, of one vait
solid mass, unbroken by arms of the sea pene-
trating into its interior parts, with few large
rivers, and those at a considerable diflance from
each other, the greater part of it seems destined
to remain for ever uncivilized, and to be de-
barred from any ative or enlarged communi-
cation with the reft of mankind. When, like
Europe, a continent is opened by inlets of the
ocean of great extent, such as the Mediterranean
and Baltic; or when, like Asia, its coast is
broken by deep bays advancing far into the
country, such as the Black Sea, the gulfs of
Arabia, of Persia, of Bengal, of Siam, and of
Leotang; when the surrounding seas are filled
with large and fertile islands, and the continent
itself watered with a variety of navigable rivers,
those regions may be said to posess whatever
can facilitate the progress of their inhabitants in
commerce and improvement. In all these re-
fpeEts America may bear a comparison with
the other quarters of the globe. The gulf of
Mexico, which flows in between North and
South America, may be confidered as a Medi-

13 3 tcrrancan

B o0 K terranean sea, which opens a maritime com-

IV. _pyr3 merce with all the fertile countries by which it

is encircled. The islands scattered in it are infe-
rior only to those in the Indian Archipelago, in
number, in magnitude, and in value. As we
stretch along the northern division of the Ame-
rican hemisphere, the Bay of Chefapeak pre-
sents a spacious inlet, which conducts the navi-
gator far into the interior parts of provinces no
less fertile than extensive; and if ever the pro-
grefs of culture and population flall mitigate the
extreme rigour of the climate in the more
northern diftrits of America, Hudson's Bay
may become as subservient to commercial inter-
course in that quarter of the globe, as the Baltic
is in Europe. The other great portion of the
New World is encompassed on every fide by the
sea, except one narrow neck, which separates
the Atlantic from the Pacific Ocean ; and though
it be not opened by spacious bays or arms of the
sea, its interior parts are rendered acceflible by
a number of large rivers, fed by so many aux-
iliary Itreams, flowing in such vaiious direaions,
that, alinoft without any aid froml the hand of
induilry and art, an inland navigation may be
carried on through all the provinces from the
river Dle la Plata to the gulf of Paria. Nor is
this bounty of Nature confined to the southern
divilion of Anmerica; its northern continent

abounds

abounds no less in rivers which are navigable B 0 0 K
almost to their sources, and by its imnmenfe chain -
of lakes provision is made for an inland commu-
nication, more extensive and commodious than
in any quarter of the globe. The countries
stretching from the gulf of Darien on one fide,
to that of California on the other, which form
the chain that binds the two parts of the Ame-
rican continent together, are not deititute of
peculiar advantages. Their coalt on one lide
is warsed by the Atlantic Ocean, on the other
by the Pacific. Some of their rivers flow into
the former, some into the latter, and secure to
them all the commercial benefits that may result
from a communication with both.

BUT what most diftinguifles America from Trnmper"-

turt ol Its

other parts of the earlh, is the peculiar temper- elimatt.
ature of its climate, and the diffirent laws to
which it is fubjeac with lefpcl: to the distribution
of heat and cold. We cannot determine with
precision the portion of heat fclt in any part of
the globe, merely by Ineafuring its dillance firom
the equator. lThe climrate of a country is afliteed,
in fobne degree, by its elevation- above the 'la,
by the extent of conlinent, by the nature of the
foil, the height of adjacent mountaiiis, and
many other circumiiftlaces. The influence of
these, however, is, from various caults, lets

3 4 confider-

B VO K considerable in the greater part of the ancient

»-- continent; and from knowing the position of

any country there, we can pronounce with
greater certainty, what will be the warmth of
its climate, and the nature of its productions.

Predomi- THE maxims which are founded upon ob~
'cold servation of our hemisphere will not apply to

the other. In the New World, cold predomi-
pates. The rigour of the frigid zone extends
over half of those regions, which ihould be tem.
perate by their position, Countries where the
grape and the fig should ripen, are buried under
snow one half of the year; and lands situated
in the fame parallel with the most fertile and
belt cultivated provinces in Europe, are chilled
with perpetual frosts, which alnoft destroy the
power of vegetation d. As we advance to those
parts of America which lie in the fame parallel
with provinces of Asia and Africa, blefled with
an uniform enjoyment of such genial warmth
as is Inolt friendly to life and to vegetation, the
dominion of cold continues to be felt, and
winter reigns, though during a flort period,
with extreme severity. If we proceed along the
American continent into the torrid zone, we
ihall find the cold prevalent in the New World

d Sec NOTE III.

extending

extending itself also to this region of the globe, B o0 K
and mitigating the excess of its fervour. While L-
the negro on the coast of Africa is scorched with
unremitting heat, the inhabitant of Peru breathes
an air equally mild and temperate, and is per-
petually shaded under a canopy of grey clouds,
which intercepts the fierce beams of the fun,
without obftrucing his friendly influence .
Along the eastern coast of America, the climate,
though more similar to that of the torrid zone
in other parts of the earth, is nevertheless con-
fiderably milder than in those countries of Aria
and Africa which lie in the fame latitude. If
from the southern tropic we continue our pro-
grefs to the extremity of the American conti-
nent, we meet with frozen seas, and countries
horrid, barren, and scarcely habitable for cold,
much sooner than in the north .

VARIOUS causes combine in rendering the cauresof

tlhis.

climate of America so extremely diffIrent from.
that of the ancient continent. Though the
utmost extent of America towards the north
be not yet discovered, we know that it advances

c Voyage de Ulloa, tom. i. p. 453. Anson's Voyage,
p. 184.

r Anson's Voyage, p. 74; and Voyagc de Quiros, chez

I-IiR. dc Gen. tles Voyages, tom. xiv. p. 83. Richard
I-Iill. Natur. de l'Air, ii. 305, &c.

much

B 00 K much nearer to the pole than either Europe or

Asia. Both these have large leas to the north;
which are open during part of the year; and
even when covered with ice, the wind that
blows over them is less intensely cold than that
which blows over land in the fame high lati.
tudes. But in America the land stretches from
the river St. Laurence towards the pole, and
spreads out immensely to the Weft. A chain
of enormous mountains, covered with fiow and
ice, runs through all this dreary region. The
wind, in parsing over filch an extent of hig-h and
frozen land, becomes so impregnated with cold,
that it acquires a piercing keenness, which it
retains in its progress through warmer climates,
and-is not entirely mitigated until it reach the
Gulf of Mexico. Over all the continent of
North America, a north-westerly wind and ex-
ceffive cold are synonymous terms. Even in
the most sultry weather, the moment that the
wind veers to that quarter, its penetrating in-
fluence is felt in a transition from heat to cold,
no less violent than ludden. To this powerful
cause we may ascribe the extraordinary domi-
nion of cold, and its violent inroads into the
fouthcrn provinces in that part of the globe .

g Charlevoix I-lit. de Nov. Fr. iii. 165. H-ll. genctalc
Voyages, turn xv. z 5, &c.

OTHE R

OTHrER causes, no less remarkable, diminish B o o0

IV.

the adtive power of heat in those parts of the
American continent which lie between the tro-
pics. In all that portion of the globe, the wind
blows in an invariable direction fi-om eaf to
weft. As this wind holds its course across the
ancient continent, it arrives at the countries
which firetch along the western shores of Africa,
inflamed with all the fiery particles which it
hath colleced from the sultry plains of Asia,
and the burning sands in the African deserts.
The coast of Africa is, accordingly, the region
of the earth which feels the most fervent heat,
and is exposed to the unmitigated ardour of the
torrid zone. But this fame wind which brings
such an acceflion of warmth to the countries
lying between the river of Senegal and Cafraria,
traverfcs the Atlantic Ocean, before it reaches
the American shore. It is cooled in its passage
over this vast body of water, and is felt as a
refrefling gale along the coast of Brafilh, and
Guiana, rendering these countries, though
among the war-mest in America, temperate,
when conlpared with those which lie opposite
to them in Africa'. As this wind advances in
its courts across America, it meets with immense
plains, covered with impenetrable forests, or oc-

I' Sec NOTE IV. i Sec NOTE V,

cupied

B O O K cupied by large rivers, marshes, and fiagnating

IV.
-- waters, where it can recover no considerable

degree of heat. At length it arrives at the
Andes, which run from north to south through
the whole continent. In pafling over their
elevated and frozen summits, it is so thoroughly
cooled, that the greater part of the countries
beyond them hardly feel the ardour to which
they seem exposed by their situation k. In the
other provinces of America, from Tierra Ferme
weRtward to the Mexican empire, the heat of
the climate is tempered, in some places, by the
elevation of the land above the sea, in others,
by their extraordinary humidity, and in all, by
the enormous mountains scattered over this
trat. The islands of America in the Torrid
Zone are either finall or mountainous, and
are fanned alternately by refreihing sea and
land breezes.

TIE causes of the extraordinary cold towards

the southern limits of America, and in the seas
beyond it, cannot be ascertained in a manner
equally satisfying. It was long supposed that a
vast continent, diflinguified by the name of
Terra AuJiralis Incognita, lay between the south-

k Acofta Hilt. Novi Olris, lib. ii. c. x. Buffon Hilt.

Naturellc, &c. tom. ii. 512, &c. ix. 107, &c. Osborn's
Collea. of Voyages, ii, p. 868.

2 ern

ern extremity of America and the Antareic B o O K
pole. The fame principles which account for
the extraordinary degree of cold in the northern
regions of America, were employed in order to
explain that which is felt at Cape Horn and the
adjacent countries. The immense extent of the
southern continent, and the large rivers which
it poured into the ocean, were mentioned and
admitted by philosophers as causes sufficient to
occasion the unusual sensation of cold, and the
still more uncommon appearances of frozen seas
in that region of the globe. But the imaginary
continent to which such influence was ascribed,
having been searched for in vain, and the space
which it was supposed to occupy having been
found to be an open sea, new conjectures must
be formed with refpet to the causes of a tem-
perature of climate, so extremely different
from that which we experience in countries
removed at the fame distance from the opposite
pole '.

AFrER contemplating those permanent and Condition

when tirft

characerific qualities of the American conti- difcovcrcd.
nent, which arise from the peculiarity of its
situation, and the disposition of its parts, the
next object that merits attention is its condition

Sce NOTE VI.

when

B 0 0 K when first discovered, a~ far as that depended

iV.

upon the industry and operations of man. The
effecs of human ingenuity and labour are more
extensive and considerable, than even our own
vanity is apt at firr to imagine. When we
survey the face of the habitable globe, no finall
part of that fertility and beauty which \ e ascribe
to the hand of nature, is the work of man.
His efforts, when continued through a fucceflion
of ages, change the appearance and improve
the qualities of the earth. As a great part of
the ancient continent has long been occupied by
nations far advanced in arts and industry, our
eye is accustomed to view the earth in that form
which it assumes when rendered fit to be the
residence of a numerous race of men, and to
supply them with nourishment.

Rude and BUT in the New World, the rfate of mankind
lunculli-
vatecd. was ruder, and the aflpet of nature-extremely

different. Throughout 'all its vail regions,
there were only two monarchies remarkable for
extent of territory, or dillinguilhed by any
progress in improvement. The reft of this
continent was possesed by finall independent
tribes, dcftitutc of arts and industry, and neither
capable to correEt the defects, nor desirous to
meliorate the condition of that part of the earth
allotted to them for their habitation. Countries,

occupied

occupied by such people, were almost in the B o K
fame slate as if they had been without inhabit- --.
ants. Immense forelts covered a great part of
the uncultivated earth; and as the hand of in-
duffry had not taught the rivers to run in a
proper channel, or drained off the flagnating
water, many of the nmolt fertile plains were
overflowed with inundations, or converted into
marshes. In the southern provinces, where the
warmth of the fun, the moisture of the climate,
and the fertility of the foil, combine in calling
forth the most vigorous powers of vegetation,
the woods are so choked with its rank luxu-
riance, as to be almost impervious, and the
surface of the ground is hid from the eye under
a thick covering of shrubs and herbs and weeds.
In this slate of wild unaflilled nature, a great
part of the large provinces in South America,
which extend from the bottom of the Andes
to the sea, fiill remain. The European colonies
have cleared and cultivated a few 1pots along
the coast, but the original race of inhabitants,
as rude and indolent as ever, have done nothing
to open or improve a country, pollfeling almnoft
every advantage of situation and climate. As
we advance towards the northern provinces of
America, Nature continues to wear [he faime ur-
cultivated alpct-, and in proportion as the rigoLur
of the climate increases, appears more dcfolare

anld

B 0 0 K and horrid. There the forests, though not en,

IV.
A~ V« _cumbered with the fame exuberance of vegeta-

tion, are of immense extent; prodigious marshes
overspread the plains, and few marks appear of
human activity in any attempt to cultivate or
embellifl the earth. No wonder that the colo-
nies sent from Europe were astonished at their
first entrance into the New World. It appeared
to them waste, solitary, and uninviting. When
the English began to fettle in America, they
termed the countries of which they *took pof-
feflion, The Wildernef. Nothing but their
eager expectation of finding mines of gold,
could have induced the Spaniards to penetrate
through the woods and marshes of America,
where, at every itep, they observed the extreme
difference between the uncultivated face of Na-
ture, and that which it acquires under the form-
ing hand of industry and art '.
tInIIolc- 'THE labour and operations of man not only

" ' improve and embellifl the earth, but render it

more wholesome and friendly to life. When
any region lies neglected and destitute of cul-
tivation, the air stagnates in the woods, putrid
exhalations arise from the waters; the surface
of the earth, loaded with rank vegetation, feels

" See NOTE VII.

not

bot the purifying influence of the fun or of the E o o K
wind; the malignity of the diltempers natural
to the climate increases, and new maladies no
less noxious are engendered. Accordingly, all
the provinces of America, when first discovered,
were found to be remarkably unhealthy. This
the Spaniards experienced in every expedition
into the New World, whether destined for con-
quest or settlement. Though by the natural
confiitution of their bodies, their habitual tem-
perance, and the persevering vigour of their
minds, they were as much formed as any people
in Europe for aftive service in a sultry climate,
they felt severely the fatal and pernicious quali-
ties of those uncultivated regions through which
they marched, or where they endeavoured to
plant colonies. Great numbers were cut off by
the unknown and violent diseases with which
they were infected. Such as survived the de-
ftrucive rage of those maladies, were not ex-
empted from the noxious influence of the cli-
mate. They returned to Europe, according to
the description of the early Spanifi historians,
feeble, emaciated, with languid looks, and com-
plexions of such a sickly yellow colour, as in-
dicated the unwholelfine temperature of the
countries where they had resided".

" Comaia I-lift. c. 20. 22. Ovicdo Ilil. lib. ii. c. 13.
lib. v. C. . P. . art. Epill. 5.5. 1)ctaJ. p. 176.

VOL. 1. C THI.

B O K THE uncultivated state of the New World

IV.

affected not only the temperature of the air, but
Its animals. the qualities of its produEtions. The principle

of life seems to have been less active and vi-
gorous there, than in the ancient continent.
Notwithstanding the vait extent of America,
and the variety of its climates, the different
species of animals peculiar to it are much fewer
in proportion, than those of the other hemi-
sphere. In the iilands, there were only four
kind of quadrupeds known, the largest of which
did not exceed the size of a rabbit. On the
continent, the variety was greater; and though
the individuals of each kind could not fail of
multiplying exceedingly, when almost unmo-
lefted by men, who were neither so numerous,
nor so united in society, as to be formidable
enemies to the animal creation, the number of
distinct species mufi still be confidcrcd as ex-
tremely finall. Of two hundred different kinds
of animals spread over the face of the earth,
only about one third existed in America, at the
time of its difcovcry". Nature was not only
less prolific in the New World, but fle appears
likewifl to have been less vigorous in her pro-
duEtions. The animals originally belonging to
this quarter of the globe appear to be of an

o Buffon I-Ill. Natinrcllc, tomi. ix. p. 86.

inferior

inferior race, neither so robust, nor so fierce, o o K

IV.

as those of the other continent. America gives I
birth to no creature of such bulk as to be com-
pared with the elephant or rhinoceros, or that
equals the lion and tyger in strength and fe-
rocity P. The Tapyr of Brasil, the largefl qua-
druped of the ravenous tribe in the New World,
is not larger than a calf of fix months old.
The Puma and Jaguar, its fiercest beasts of
prey, which Europeans have inaccurately deno-
minated lions and tygers, possess neither the
undaunted courage of the former, nor the ra-
venous cruelty of the latter'q. They are inac-
tive and timid, hardly formidable to man, and
often turn their backs upon the least appearance
of resistance '. The fame qualities in the climate
of America which flinted the growth, and en-
feebled the spirit, of its native animals, have
proved pernicious to such as have migrated into
it voluntarily from the other continent, or have
been transported thither by the Europeans'.

P Sec NOTE VIII.
'1 Buffon l1ilt. Natu-r. tom. ix. p. 87. Margravii Hist.
N;t. B1rasil, p. 229.

r Buffon 1- ift. Natur. ix. 13. 203. Acofla Hit.. lib. iv.

c. 34. Pilbnis Hilt. p. 6. Herrera, dec. 4. lib. iv. c. ,.
lib. x. c. 13.

Churchill, v. p. 69i. Ovalle Relat. ofChili, Church.

iii. p. io. Somnmario de Ovicdo, c. 14-22. Voyage du
DIs Marchais, iii. 299.

c 2 The

B 0 0 K The bears, the wolves, the deer of America,
_-...J are not equal in size to those of the Old

World'. Most of the domestic animals, with
which the Europeans have ifored the provinces
wherein they fettled, have degenerated with
refpeA either to bulk. or quality, in a country
whose temperature and foil seem to be less fa-
vourable to the strength and perfection of the
animal creation .

Insets and THE fame causes, which checked the growth
reptilcs. ,

and the vigour of the more noble animals, were
friendly to the propagation and increase of rep-
tiles and insets. Though this is not peculiar
'to the New World, and those odious tribes,
nourished by heat, moisture, and corruption,
infest every part of the torrid zone; they mul-
tiply falter, perhaps,. in America, and grow to
a more monstrous bulk. As this country is,
on the whole, lets cultivated, and less. peopled,
than the other quarters of the earth, the active
principle of life waftes its force in productions
of this inferior form. The air is often darkened
with clouds of infecs, and the ground covered
with flmocking and noxious reptiles. The coun-
try around Porto-Bello swarms with toads in

] Buffon Hilt. Natur. ix. 103. Kalm's Travels, i. 102.
Bict. Voy. de France Equinox. p. 339.

u Sec NOTE IX.

fich

such multitudes, as hide the surface of the B o o K

IV.

earth. At Guyaquil, snakes and vipers are _ _
hardly less numerous. Carthagena is infested
with numerous flocks of bats, which annoy not
only the cattle but the inhabitants . In the
islands, legions of ants have, at different times,
consumed every vegetable production Y, and left
the earth entirely bare, as if it had been burnt
with fire. The damp forefis, and rank foil of
the countries on the banks of the Orinoco and
Maragnon, teem with almofl every offensive and
poisonous creature, which the power of a sultry
fun can quicken into life '.

THE birds of the New World are not diftin B;id..

guifled by qualities so conSpicuous and charac-
teriftical, as those which we have observed in
its quadrupeds. Birds are more independent
of man, and less affected by the changes which
his industry and labour make upon the fate of
the earth. They have a greater propensity to
migrate from one country to another, and can

x Voyage de Ulloa, turn. i. . I. p. 147. IIer-
roia, dec. I . lib. iii. c. 3. 19.

Y Sec NOTE X.

z Voyage de Codarnmine, p. 167. Gunilla, iii. 120,

&c. Hilt. goner. des Voyages, xiv. 317. Durmout Me.
moires fur la Louiliane, i. io8. Soilrmario de Oviedo,
c. 52-62.

c 3 gratify

B O O K gratify this inflinl: of their nature without diffi-

IV.
L_.... culty or danger. Hence the number of birds

common to both continents is much greater
than that of quadrupeds; and even such as are
peculiar to America nearly refembic those with
which mankind were acquainted in similar re-
gions qs the ancient hemisphere. The American
birds of the torrid zone, like those of the fame
climate in Asia and Africa, are decked in
plumage, which dazzles the eye with the beauty
of its colours; but nature, satisfied with cloth-
ing them in this gay dress, has denied moit of
them that melody of found, and variety of notes,
which catch and delight the ear. The birds of
the temperate climates there, in the fame man-
ner as in our continent, are less splendid in their
appearance, but, in conipenfation for that de-
sect, they have voices of greater compass, and
more melodious. In rome diftriEs of America,
the unwholclome temperature of the air seems
to be unfavourable even to this part of the
creation. The number of birds is less than in
other countries, and the traveller is struck with
the amazing' solitude and silence of its forelts ".
It is remarkable, however, that America, where

a Boilrgticr Voy. an Pciro, 17. Chanvalon Voy)agc ii

la Martiniquic, p. 96. Warren 1)cfcript. Sil'nlani. Oflborn's
Collct. ;i. 92.1.. Lcttrcs Edit. xxiv. p,. 339. Clia-lcv.
Iifl. de lit Nouv. Frnance, iii. 155.

the

the quadrupeds are so dwarfifll and dastardly, B 0O K
should produce the Condor, which is entitled to I-
pre-eminence over all the flying tribe, in bulk,
in strength, and in courage b.

THE foil, in a continent so extensive as Arne- Soil.

rica, mufft, of course, be extremely various.
In each of its provinces, we find some diftin-
guifhing peculiarities, the description of which
belongs to those who write their particular
history. In general, we may observe, that the
moisture and cold, which predominates si re-
markably in all parts of America, must have
great influence upon the nature of its foil;
countries lying in the lame parallel with those
regions which never feel the extreme rigour
of winter in the ancient continent, are frozen
over in America during a great part of the
year. Chilled by this intense cold, the ground
never acquires warmth sufficient to ripen the
fruits, which are found in the corresponding
parts of the other continent. If we winl to rear
in America the productions which abound in
any particular dilfrict of the ancient world, we
muff advance several degrees nearer to the line
than in the other hemisphere, as it requires such

b Voyage de Illloa, i. 363. Voyage de Con(ldaiinc,

175. Buflon I-Iilt. Nat. xvi. 18.4. Voyage du Des lar-
clais, iii. 320.

c 4 llan

B O O K an increase of heat to counterbalance the naw

Iv.
si__.. tural frigidity of the foil and climate c. At the

Cape of Good Hope, several of the plants, and
fruits peculiar to the countries within the tro-
pics, are cultivated with success; whereas, at
St. Augustine, in Florida, and Charles-Town,
in South Carolina, though considerably nearer
the line, they cannot be brought to thrive with
equal certainty d. But, if allowance be made
for this diversity in the degree of heat, the foil
of America is naturally as rich and fertile as in
any part of the earth. As the country was
thinly inhabited, and by a people of little in-
duftry, who had none of the domestic animals,
which civilized nations rear in such vast num-
bers, the earth was not exhausted by their con-
fumption. The vegetable produEtions, to which
the fertility of the foil gave birth, often remained
untouched, and being suffered to corrupt on its
surface, returned with increase into its bosom c.
As trees and plants derive a great part of their
nourishment from air and water, if they were
not deflroyed by man and other animals, they
would render to the earth more, perhal;s, than
they take from it, and feed rather than impo-
verifh it. Thus the unoccupied foil of America
may have gone on enriching for many ages.

C Sce NOTE XI. Se NOTE XII.
e Buffon -lilt. Natur. i. 242. Kalm, i, 151.

The

The vast number as well as enormous size of the i o o K

iv.

trees in America, indicate the extraordinary vi- _
gour of the foil in its native Rate. When the
Europeans first began to cultivate the New
World, they were astonished at the luxuriant
power of vegetation in its virgin mould; and in
several places the ingenuity of the planter is
still employed in diminishing and wafting its
superfluous fertility, in order to bring it down
to a Rfate fit for profitable culture '.

HAVING thus surveyed the state of the New Iowwa.

Amcrira

World at the time of its discovery, and confi- pcopilei
dered the peculiar features and qualities which
distinguish and characerife it, the next inquiry
that merits attention is, How was America
peopled ? By what course did mankind migrate
from the one continent to the other and in
what quarter is it most probable that a communi-
cation was opened between them?

WE know, with infallible certainty, that all Notradition

concCt rning

the human race spring from the fame oburce, it among
and that the dcfcendants of one man, under the tllen£vs.
proteEtion as well as in obedience to the com-
mand of Heavcn, multiplied and repleniflbed

' Charlevoix, Iill. de Nouv. Iran. iii. 405. Voyage

du Des Marcllais, iii. 29. Lcry ap dc Bry, part iii. p. 17.t
Sec NOTE XIII.

the

B O O K the earth. But neither the annals nor the tra.

IV. 'y_-s1 ditions of nations reach back to those remote

ages, in which they took pofleffion of the differ.
ent countries, where they are now fettled. We
cannot trace the branches of this firif family,
or point out with certainty the time and manner
in which they divided and spread over the face
of the globe. Even among the most enlight-
ened people, the period of authentic history is
extremely short, and every thing prior to that is
fabulous or obscure. It is not surprising, then,
that the unlettered inhabitants of America, who
have no solicitude about futuritf, and little cu.
riofity concerning what is pal, should be alto-
gether unacquainted with their own original.
The people on the two opposite coasts of Ame-
rica, who occupy those countries in America
which approach nearest to the ancient continent,
are so remarkably rude, that it is altogether vain
to search among them for such information as
might discover the place from whence they came,
or the anceflors of whom they are descended .
Whatever light has been thrown on this subjet,
is derived, not. from the natives of America,
but from the inquisitive genius of their con-
querors.

Venega's I-lift. of California, i. 60.

WHEN

WHEN the people of Europe unexpecedly B o O K

discovered a New World, removed at a valfc -_
diltance from every part of the ancient continent aroi
which was then known, and filled with inhabit-
ants whose appearance and manners differed
remarkably from the reft of the human species,
the question concerning their original became
nat4rally an objeEt of curiosity and attention.
The theories and speculations of ingenious men
with refped to this subject, would fill many
volumes; but are often so wild and chimerical,
that I flould offer an insult to the underltanding
of my readers, if I attempted either minutely to
enumerate or to refute them. Some have pre-
sumptuously imagined, that the people of Ame-
rica were not the offspring of the fame common
parent with the reft of mankind, but that they
formed a separate race of men, diftinguifable
by peculiar features in the constitution of their
bodies, as well as in the characteristic qualities
of their minds. Others contend, that they are
descended fiom Come remnant of the antediluvian
inhabitants of the earth, who survived the deluge,
which swept away the greatest part of the human
species in the days of Noah ; and prepoferoufly
suppose rude, uncivilized tribes, scattercd over
an uncultivated continent, to be the moil ancient
race of people on the earth. There is hardly
any nation from thc north to the south pole, to

which

B 0 0 K which some antiquary, in the extravagance of

IV. *aLj conjecture, has not ascribed the honour of

peopling America. The Jews, the Canaanites,
the Phoenicians, the Carthaginians, the Greeks,
the Scythians in ancient times, are supposed to
have fettled in this western world. The Chinese,
the Swedes, the Norwegians, the Welsh, the
Spaniards, are said to have sent colonies thither
in later ages, at different periods, and on various
occasions. Zealous advocates stand forth to
support the refpeEtive claims of those people;
and though they reft upon no better foundation
than the casual resemblance of some customs,
or the fuppoled affinity between a few words in
their different languages, much erudition and
more zeal have been employed, to little purpose,
in defence of the opposite fyflems. Those
regions of conjeEture and controversy belong
not to the hiflorian. His is a more limited pro-
vince, confined to what is established by certain
or highly probable evidence. Beyond this I
shall not venture, in offering a few obferv-
ations, which may contribute to throw some
light upon this curious and much agitated
queflion.

,ght not .n THEREL are authors who have endeavoured

o¢ I1 llc'r by mere conjectures to account for the peopling
,i>ljidtulc, of America. Some have supposed that it was

originally

originally united to the ancient continent, and B 0 o
disjoined from it by the shock of an earthquake, -
or the irruption of a deluge. Others have ima-
gined, that some vessel being forced from its
course by the violence of a westerly wind, might
be driven by accident towards the American
coast, and have given a beginning to population
in that desolate continent g. But with refpe& to
all those systems, it is vain either to reason or
inquire, because it is impoflible to come to any
decision. Such events as they suppose are barely
possible, and may have happened. That they
ever did happen, we have no evidence, either
from the clear testimony of history, or from the
obscure intimations of tradition.

2. NOTHING can be more frivolous or uncer- oronrefem-

tain than the attempts to discover the original of na'.eof
the Americans, merely by tracing the refem-
blance between their manners and those of any
particular people in the ancient continent. If
we suppose two tribes, though placed in the
molt remote regions of the globe, to live in a
climate nearly of the fame temperature, to be
in the fame state of society, and to re'emble each

g Parson's Remains of Japhle, p. 240. Ancient Uni-

verf. Hill. vol. xx. p. 164. 1'. Fcyjoo Tcatro Critico,
torn. v. p. 304, &c. Acofla HifL. Moral. Novi Oibis,
* lib. i. c. 16. i9.

other
/

B oo .K other in the degree of their improvement, they
aJ mufft feel the fame wants, and exert the fame

endeavours to supply them. The fame objets
will allure, the fame passions will animate them,
and the fame ideas and sentiments will arise in
their minds. The charater and occupations of
the hunter in America mufft be little different
from those of an Asiatic, who depends for sub-
fiftence on the chace. A tribe of savages on the
banks of the Danube muff nearly resemble one
upon the plains washed by the Miffifippi. In-
stead then of presuming from this similarity,
that there is any affinity between them, we
should only conclude, that the disposition and
manners of men are formed by their situation,
and arise from the state of society in which they
live. The moment that begins to vary, the
charaEter of a people must change. In propor-
tion as it advances in improvement, their man-
ners refine, their powers and talents are called
forth. In every part of the earth the progress of
man hath been nearly the fame, and we can
trace him in his career from the rude simplicity
of savage life, until he attains the industry, the
arts, and the elegance of polished society.
There is nothing wonderful then in the fimili-
tude between the Americans and the barbarous
nations of our continent. Had Iafitau, Garcia,
and many other authors, attended to this, they

would

would not have perplexed a subjea which they B O O K
pretend to illustrate, by their fruitless endea- .
vours to establish an affinity between various
races of people in the old and new continents,
upon no other evidence than Iuch a resemblance
in their manners as necessarily arises from the
similarity of their condition. There are, it is
true, among every people, some customs which,
as they do not flow from any natural want or
desire peculiar to their situation, may be deno-
minated usages of arbitrary institution. If be-
tween two nations fettled in remote parts of the
earth, a perfec agreement with refpeft to any
of these should be discovered, one might be led
to fufpet that they were conneEted by forne
affinity. If, for example, a nation were found
in America that consecrated the seventh day to
religious worship and reft, we might justly sup-
pose that it had derived its knowledge of this
usage, which is of arbitrary institution, from the
Jews. But, if it were discovered that another
nation celebrated the first appearance of every
new moon with extraordinary demonstrations of
joy, we flould not be entitled to conclude that
the observation of this monthly festival was
borrowed from the Jews, but ought to confider
it merely as the expreflion of that joy which is
natural to man on the return of the planet which
guides and cheers him in the night. The in-

ftance:i

B o0 K frances of customs, merely arbitrary, commot)

.^ to the inhabitants of both hemispheres, are,

indeed, so few and so equivocal, that no theory
concerning the population of the New World
ought to be founded upon them.
orofei. 3. THE theories which have been formed

with refpeEt to the original of the Americans,
from observation of their religious rites and
practices, are no less fanciful, and deflitute of
solid foundation. When the religious opinions
of any people are neither the result of rational
inquiry, nor derived from the inftrudions of
revelation, they muff needs be wild and extra-
vagant. Barbarous nations are incapable of the
former, and have not been blessed with the
advantages arising frorp the latter. Still, how-
ever, the human mind, even where its operations
appear most wild and capricious, holds a course
lb regular, that in every age and country the
dominion of particular paflions will be attended
with similar effects, The savage of Eurbpe or
America, when filled with superstitious dread of
invisible beings, or with inquisitive solicitude to
penetrate into the events of futurity, trembles
alike with fear, or glows with impatience. I-Ie
has recourse to rites and practices of the fame
kind, in order to avert the vengeance which he
supposes to be impending over him, or to divine

2 the

the secret which is the objeEt of his curiosity. B o K
Accordingly, the ritual of superstition, in one H
continent, seems, in many particulars, to be a
transcript of that eflablifhed in the other, and
both authorise similar institutions, sometimes so
frivolous as to excite pity, sometimes so bloody
and barbarous as to create horror. But without
supposing any consanguinity between such distant
nations, or imagining that their religious eere-
monies were conveyed by tradition from the one
to the other, we may ascribe this uniformity,
which in many instances seems very amazing, to
the natural operation of fuperilition and enthu,
fiafm upon the weakness of the human mind.

4. WEi may lay it down as a certain principle Notpcopled

by any na-

in this inquiry, that America was not peopled tion highly
by any nation of the ancient continent, which civilized
had made considerable progress in civilization.
The inhabitants of the New World were in a
ifate of society so extremely rude, as to be un-
acquainted with those arts which are the first
essays of human ingenuity in its advance towards
improvement. Even the most cultivated na-
tions of America were itrangers to many of
those simple inventions, which were alinof
coeval with society in other parts of the world,
and were known in the earliest periods of civil
life with which we have any acquaintance. From

VO,. 11. D this

B O 0 K this it is manifest, that the tribes which originally

,
__. migrated to America, came off from nations

which muff have been no less barbarous than
their posterity, at the time when they were first
discovered by the Europeans. For, although
the elegant and refined arts may decline or
perish, amidst the violent shocks of those revo-
lutions and disasters to which nations are ex-
posed, the necessary arts of life, when once they
have been introduced among any 'people, are
never loft. None of the vicissitudes in human
affairs affect these, and they continue to be prac-
tifed as long as the race of men exists. If ever
the use of iron had been known to the savages
of America, or to their progenitors, if ever they
had employed a plough, a loom, or a forge, the
utility of those inventions would have preserved
them, and it is impossible that they fiould have
been abandoned or forgotten. We may con-
clude then, that the Americans sprung from
tome people, who were themselves in fitch an
early and unimproved stage of society, as to be
unacquainted with all those necessary arts, which
continued to be unknown among their pofte-
rit!, xlhen firit visited by the Spaniards.

orlrolnlth 5. I'r appears no less evident that America
gions 0 o ur was not peopled by any colony from the more

tit lt. southern nations of the ancient continent. None

of

of the rude tribes fettled in that part of our B o o K
hemisphere can be supposed to have visited a ._
country so remote. They possessed neither en-
terprife, nor ingenuity, nor power, that could
prompt them to undertake, or enable them to
perform, such a diltant voyage. That the more
civilized nations in Asia or Africa are not the
progenitors of the Americans is manifefr, not
only from the observations which I have already
made concerning their ignorance of the most
simple and necessary arts, but from an additional
circumstance. Whenever any people have ex.
perienced the advantages which men enjoy, by
their dominion over the inferior animals, they
can neither subsist without the nourishment
which these afford, nor carry on any confider-
able operation independent of their ministry and
labour. Accordingly, the first care of the Spa-
niards, when they fettled in America, was to
flock it with all the domestic animals of Europe;
and if, prior to them, the Tyrians, the Cartha-
ginians, the Chinese, or any other polished
people, had taken possession of that continent,
we should have found there the animals pecu-
liar to those regions of the globe where they
were originally leated. In all America, how-
ever, there is not one animal, tame or wild,
which properly belongs to the warm, or even
the more temperate countries of the ancient

1) 2 continent.

BOO K continent. The camel, the dromedary, the
,-^-« horse, the cow, were as much unknown in

America, as the elephant or the lion. From
which it is obvious, that the people who' firit
fettled in the western world did not issue from
the countries where those animals abound, and
where men, from having been long accufRomed
to their aid, would naturally confider it, not
only as beneficial, but as indispensably necessary
to the improvement, and even the preservation,
of civil society.

The two 6. FROM confidering the animals with which
continents
seem toap- America is flored, we may conclude that the
proach eaeil to nearest point of contact between the old and
towac d the new continents is towards the northern ex-
nrt'h. trernity of both, and that there the communi-

cation was opened, and the intercourse carried
on between them. All the extensive countries
in America which lie within the tropics, or ap--
proach near to them, are filled with indigenous
animals of various kinds, entirely different from
thole in the corresponding regions of the ancient
continent. But the northern provinces of the
New World abound with many of the wild
animals which are common in such parts of our
hemisphere as lie in a similar situation. The
bear, the wolf, the fox, the hare, the deer, the
roebuck, the elk, and several other species fre-

quent

quent the forests of North America, no less than 1n o o K
those in the north of Europe and Afiah. It ,
seems to be evident then, that the two conti-
nents approach each other in this quarter, and
are either united, or so nearly adjacent, that
these animals might pals from the one to the
other.

7. THE actual vicinity of the two continents Thisafer.

tained by

is so clearly established by modern discoveries, discovery.
that the chief difficulty with refpe& to the
peopling of America is removed. While those
immense regions, which firetch eastward from
the river Oby to the sea of Kamchatka were
unknown, or imperfectly explored, the north:
east extremities of our hemisphere were sup-
posed to be so far diflant from any part of the
New World, that it was not easy to conceive
how any communication should have been car-
ried on between them. But the Ruffians, have
ing fubjeted the weflern part of Siberia to
their empire, gradually extended their know.
ledge of that valt country, by advancing to-
wards the east into unknown provinces. These
were discovered by hunters in their excursions
after game, or by soldiers employed in levying
the taxes, and the court of Moscow estimated

' Buffun Hilt. Nat. ix. p. 97, &c.

u D~3 ~ the

B 0 0 K the importance of those countries only by the

finall addition which they made to its revenue.
At length Peter the Great ascended the Ruffian
throne. His enlightened, comprehensive mind,
intent upon every circumlfance that could ag-
grandize his empire, or render his reign illus-
trious, discerned consequences of those disco-
veries, which had escaped the observation of his
ignorant predecessors. He perceived, that in
proportion as the regions of Asia extended
towards the east, they must approach nearer to
America; that the communication between the
two continents, which had long been searched
for in vain, would probably be found in this
quarter, and that by opening it, some part of
the wealth and commerce of the weflern world
might be made to flow into his dominions by a
new channel. Such an objet suited a genius
that delighted in grand schemes. Peter drew
up inftruEions with his own hand for prose-
cuting this design, and gave orders for carrying
it into execution'.

Hls successors adopted his ideas, and pursued

his plan. The officers whom the Rufian court
employed in this service, had to ftrugglc with
ol many difficulties, that their progress was ex-

I Muller Voyages et I)ecouvertcs par les RuffTs, tom. i.
p. 4, 5. 141.

tremely

tremely flow. Encouraged by some faint tra. BOO K

IV.

ditions among the people of Siberia, concerning _
a successful voyage in the year one thousand fix
hundred and forty-eight, round the north-east
promontory of Asia, they attempted to follow
the fame course. Vessels were fitted out, with
this view, at different times, from the rivers
Lena and Kolyma; but in a frozen ocean,
which nature seems not to have defined for
navigation, they were exposed to many disasters,
without being able to accomplish their purpose.
No vessel fitted out by the Ruffian court ever
doubled this formidable Cape k; we are indebted
for what is known of those extreme regions of
Asia, to the discoveries made in excursions by
land. In all those provinces an opinion prevails,
that there are countries of great extent and ser-
tility, which lie at no considerable distance from
their own coasts. These the Ruffians imagined
to be part of America; and several circum-
stances concurred not only in confirming them
in this belief, but in persuading them that fomc
portion of that continent could not be very
remote. Trees of various kinds, unknown in
those naked regions of Asia, are driven upon
the coast by an easterly wind. By the fame
wind, floating ice is brought thither in a few

: Sec NOTE XIV.

D 4 days;

B 0 OK days; flights of birds arrive annually from the

A -V. fame quarter; and a tradition obtains among

the inhabitants, of an intercourse formerly car-
ried on with fomne countries situated to the east.

AFTER weighing all there particulars, and

comparing the position of the countries in Asia
which had been discovered, with such parts in
the north-west of America as were already
known, the Ruffian court formed a plan, which
would haye hardly occurred to a nation less
accustomed to engage in arduous undertakings,
and to contend with great difficulties. Orders
were issued to build two vessels at the small
village of Ochotz, situated on the sea of Kam-
chatka, to fail on a voyage of discovery.
Though that dreary uncultivated region fur-
nifhed nothing that could be of use in conitruEt-
ing them, but tome larch trees; thopgh not
only the iron, the pordage, the fails, and all the
numerous articles requisite for their equipment,
but the provisions for victualling them were to
be carried through the immense deserts of Sibe-
ria, down rivers of difficult navigation, and along
roads almoff impassable, the mandate of the so-
yereign, and the perfcvcrance of the people, at

V174. lafi furniounted every obflacle. Two vefels
june '
"

were finished, and, undcr the command of the
captains Behring and Tfchirikow, failed fiom

Kamchatka,

Kamchatka, in quest of the New World, in a B o o O
quarter where it had never been approached. _
They shaped their course towards the east; and
though a storm soon separated the vessels, which
never rejoined, and many difatters besel them,
the expectations from the voyage were hot alto-
gether frustrated. Each of the commanders
discovered land, which to them appeared to be
part of the American continent and, accord-
ing to their observations, it seems to be situated
within a few degrees of the north-well coast of
California. Each ser omen of his people ashore;
but in one place the inhabitants fled as the
Ruffians approached; in another, they carried
off those who landed, and destroyed their boats.
The violence of the weather, and the dillrefs
of their crews, obliged both captains to quit
this inhospitable coast. In their return they
touched at several islands, which stretch in a
chain from eall to weft between the country
which they had discovered and the coast of Asia.
They had forne intercourse with the natives,
who seemed to them to resemble the North
Americans. They presented to the Ruffians
the calunmt, or pipe of peace, which is a symbol
of friendship universal among the people of
North America, and an usage of arbitrary in.
Atitution, peculiar to them.

TIIOUGH

B 0 0 K THOUGH the islands of this New Archipelago

have been frequented since that time by the
Ruffian hunters, the court of St. Peterfburgh,
during a period of more than forty years, seems
to have relinquifled every thought of prosecuting
discoveries in that quarter. But in the year one
thousand seven hundred and fixty-eight, it was
unexpectedly resumed. The Sovereign, who
had been lately feated on the throne of Peter
the Great, possessed the genius and talents of
her illustrious predecessor. During the ope-
rations of the most arduous and extensive war
in which the Ruffian empire was ever engaged,
f{e formed schemes and executed undertakings,
to which more limited abilities would have been
incapable of attending but amidcft the leisure of
pacific times. A new voyage of discovery from
the eastern extremity of Asia was planned, and
captain Krenitzin and lieutenant Levalheff were
appointed to command the two vessels fitted out
for that purpose. In their voyage outward they
held nearly the fame course with the former na-
vigators, they touched at the fame islands, ob-
served their situation and productions more
carefully, and discovered fevcral new islands,
with which Behring and Tfchirikow had not
fallen in. 'hough they did not proceed so far
to the east as to revisit the country which

i3 Behring

Behring and Tfchirikow supposed to be part of B o o K
the American continent, yet, by returning in a
course considerably to the north of theirs, they
correEed some capital mistakes into which their
predecessors had fallen, and have contributed to
facilitate the progress of future navigators in
those seas'

THUS the possibility of a communication be-

tween the continents in this quarter refts no
longer upon mere conjecture, but is established
by undoubted evidence'". Some tribe, or some
families of wandering Tartars, from the restless
spirit peculiar to their race, might migrate to
the nearest islands, and, rude as their knowledge
of navigation was, might, by passing from one
to the other, reach at length the coast of Ame-
rica, and give a beginning to population in that
continent. The distance between the Marian
or Ladrone islands and the nearest land in Asia,
is greater than that between the part of America
which the Ruffians discovered, and the coast of
Kamchatka; and yet the inhabitants of those
islands are nanifeftly of Asiatic extrac. If,
notwithstanding their remote situation, we ad-
mit that the Marian islands were peopled from
our continent, distance alone is no reason why

See N')TL XXV.
m Mtiller' Voyagcs, tom. i. 248, &c. 267. 276.

we

B 0 O K we should hesitate about admitting that the

IV. ..-v-. Americans may derive their original from the

fame source. It is probable that future navi-
gators in those seas, by fleering farther to the
north, may find that the continent of America
approaches still nearer to Asia. According to
the information of the barbarous people who
inhabit the country about the north-east pro-
montory of Asia, there lies, off the coast, a
small island, to which they fail in less than a
day. From that, they can descry a large conti-
nent, which, according to their description, is
covered with forests, and possessed by people
,whose language they do' not underftandn. By
them they are supplied with the fidns of mar-
tens, an animal unknown in the northern parts
of Siberia, and whicl is never found but in
countries abounding with trees. If we could
rely on this account, we might conclude, that
the American continent is separated from ours
only by a narrow tirait, and all the difficulties
with refpe& to the communication between
them would vanish. What could be offered
only as a conjecture when this History was first
published is now known to be certain. The
near approach of the two continents to each
other has been discovered and traced in a voyage

"Mullcr's Voylgcs ct Dccouv. i. 166.

undertaken

undertaken upon principles so pure and so li- B o K

IV.

beral, and conducted with so much professional .--J
skill, as reflec luitre upon the reign of the
Sovereign by whom it was planned, and do
honour to the officers entrusted with the exe-
cution of it °.

IT is likewise evident from recent discoveries, Another

coiTinmuni-
that an intercourse between our continent and cation by

the nlortl-

America might be carried on with no less fa- ,vwt.
cility from the north-west extremities of Europe.
As early as the ninth century, the Norwegians A. D. 30o.
discovered Greenland, and planted colonies
there. The communication with that country,
after a long interruption, was renewed in the
last century. Some Lutheran and Moravian
missionaries, prompted by zeal for propagating
the Christian faith, have ventured to fettle in
this frozen and uncultivated region P. To them
we are indebted for much curious information
with refpet to its nature and inhabitants. aWe
learn, that the north-welt coast of Greenland
is separated from America by a very narrow
strait; that, at the bottom of the bay into
which this itrait conduEts, it is highly probable

° Sec NOTE XVf.
P Cr-antz' I-iil. of GCrc,,l. i. 242. 2.44. Prevot Hilt.
Gen. (Its Voyages, toin. ;\. 15Z, not (96'.)

that

B o 0 K that they are unitedq; that the inhabitants of
Jr,-_ the two countries have foine intercourse with

one another; that the Efquimaux of America
perfectly resemble the Greenlanders in their
aspet, dress, and mode of living; that some
sailors, who had acquired the knowledge of a
few words in the Greenlandifh language, re-
ported that these were understood by the Efqui-
A.D. 764. maux; that, at length, a Moravian missionary,

well acquainted with the language of Green-
land, having visited the country of the Efqui-
maux, found, to his aftoniihment, that they
spoke the fame language with the Greenlanders,
that they were in every refpe& the fame people,
and he was accordingly received and enter-
taiIned by them as a friend and a brother .

BY there decisive fatds, not only the confan-

guinity of the Efquimaux and Greenlanders is
eftablilhed, but the poflibility of peopling Ame-
rica from the north of Europe is demonstrated.
If the Norwegians, in a barbarous age, when
science had not begun to dawn in the north of
Europe, poisessd such naval skill as to open a
communication with Greenland, their ancestors,
as much addited to roving by sea, as the Tartars

*q Eggcde, p. 2, 3.
r Crant.' Hill. of C iclc. p. 261, 262.

arc

are to wandering by land, might, at some more B o o K
remote period, accomplish the fame voyage, and
fettle a colony there, whose descendants might,
in progress of time, migrate into America. But
if, instead of venturing to fail directly from
their own coast to Greenland, we suppose that
the Norwegians held a more cautious course,
and advanced from Shetland to the Feroe
Islands, and from them to Iceland, in all which
they had planted colonies, their progress may
have been so gradual, that this navigation can-
not be confidered as either longer or more
hazardous, than those voyages which that hardy
and enterprising race of men is known to have
performed in every age.

8. THOUGH it be possible that America may Probably

peopled
have received its firit inhabitants from our con- f:oin the

north.cast.

tinent, either by the north-west of Europe or
the north-east of Aria, there seems to be good
reason for supposing that the progenitors of all
the American nations, from Cape HIorn to the
southern confines of Labrador, migrated from
the latter rather than the former. The Efqui-
maux are the only people in America, who,
in their aspee or charactcr, bear any refem-
blance to the northern Europeans. They arc
manifestly a race of men, distinCt from all the
nations of the American continent, in language,

in

B °v° K in disposition, and in habits of life. Their ori-

- ginal, then, may warrantably be traced up to

that source which I have pointed out. But,
among all the other inhabitants of America,
there is such a firiking similitude in the form of
their bodies, and the qualities of their minds,
that, notwithstanding the diversities occasioned
by the influence of climate, or unequal progress
in improvement, we muff pronounce them to be
descended from one source. There may be a
variety in the shades, but we can everywhere
trace the fame original colour. Each tribe has
something peculiar which distinguishes it, but
in all of them we discern certain features coma
mon to the whole race. It is remarkable, that
in every peculiarity, whether in their persons or
dispositions, which charaferife the Americans,
they have some resemblance to the rude tribes
Scattered over the north-east of Asia, but almost
none to the nations fettled in the northern ex-
tremities of Europe. We may, therefore, refer
them to the former origin, and conclude that
their Asiatic progenitors, having fettled in those
parts of America, where the Ruffians have dif.
covered the proximity of the two continents
spread gradually over its various regions. This
account of the progress of population in Ame-
rica, coincides with the traditions of the Mex,
icans concerning their own origin, which, im,

perfect

perseEt as they are, were preserved with more B o o K
accuracy, and merit greater credit, than those --v
of any people in the New World. According
to them, their ancestors came from a remote
country, situated to the north-west of Mexico.
The Mexicans point out their various stations
as they advanced from this, into the interior
provinces, and it is precisely the fame route
which they muff have held, if they had been
emigrants from Asia. The Mexicans, in de-
scribing the appearance of their progenitors,
their manners and habits of life at that period,
exacly delineate those of the rude Tartars, from
whom I suppose them to have fprungr.

THUS have I finished a disquisition which has

been deemed of so much importance, that it
would have been improper to omit it in writing
the history of America. I have ventured to
inquire, but without presuming to decide. Sa-
tisfied with offering conjectures, I pretend not
to eftablilh any fyltem. When an invetfigation
is, from its nature, lb intricate and obscure,
that it is impossible to arrive at conclusions

Acofla HIfI. Nat. & Mor. lib. vii. c. 2, &c. Garcia

Origen de los Indios, lib. v. c. 3. Torqucmada Monar.
lid. lib. i. c. 2, &c. Botlurii Bcnaduci Idea de una
Hilt. de la Amr. Septentr. § xvii. p. 127.

VOL. I. E. which

B O o c which are certain, there may be some merit in

iv.

LcV_ pointing out such as are probable'.

Condition THE condition and character of the American
and cl.lrac-
ter tui ti nations, at the time when they became known

to the Europeans, deserve more attentive con-
fideration than the inquiry concerning their
original. The latter is merely an object of
curiosity; the former is one of the molt im-
portant as well as inftrudive refcarches which
can occupy the philosopher or historian. In
order to complete the history of the human
mind, and attain to a perfect knowledge of its
nature and operations, we must contemplate
man in all those various situations wherein he
has been placed. We must follow him in his
progress through the different fRages of society,
as he gradually advances from the infant state
of civil life towards its maturity and decline.
We must obfervc, at each period, how the fa-
culties of his understanding unfold, we mull
attend to the efforts of his active powers, watch
the various movements 'of dcfire and allection,
as they rife in his breast, and mark whither
they tend, and with what ardour they are ex-
erted. The philoolphers and hiflorians of an-

MeTmoircs fur la Louilanc, par Dunuiit, tom. i.
p. 119.

cient

cient Greece and Rome, our guides in this as C o o K
well as every other disquisition, had only a x__
limited view of this subject, as they had hardly
any opportunity of surveying man in his rudest
and most early state. In all those regions of
the earth with which they were well acquainted,
civil society had made considerable advances,
and nations had finished a good part of their
career before they began to observe them. The
Scythians and Germans, the rudest people of
whom any ancient author has tranfmnitted to us
an authentic account, pofieffed flocks and herds,
had acquired property of various kinds, and,
when compared with mankind in their primitive
state, may be reckoned to have attained to a
great degree of civilization.

BUT the discovery of the New World en- iLef lm-

provt d than
larged the sphere of contemplation, and pre- i any part

r0 ~~ .r~

. .n ~ * ~

. * ~

, 01of the carth.

tented nations to our view, in Rages of their
progress, much less advanced than those wherein
they have been observed in our continent. In
America, man appears under the rudest form
in which we can conceive him to subsist. We
behold communities jult beginning to unite, and
may examine the fcntimcnts and a&ions of hu-
man beings in the infancy of social life, while
they feel but impcrfeLly the force of its ties,
and have scarcely rclinquiflicd their native li-

E 2 berty.

B 0 0 K berty. That state of primaval simplicity, which

was known in our continent only by the fan-
ciful description of poets, really existed in the
other. The greater part of its inhabitants were
strangers to industry and labour, ignorant of
arts, imperfecly acquainted with the nature of
property, and enjoying almost without restriction
or control the blessings which flowed fponta-
neoufly from the bounty of nature. There
were only two nations in this vast continent
which had emerged from this rude state, and
had made any considerable progress in acquiring
the ideas, and adopting the institutions, which
belong to polished societies. Their government
and manners will fall naturally under our re-
view in relating the discovery and conquest of
the Mexican and Peruvian empires; and we
!hall have there an opportunity of contemplating
the Americans in the slate of highelf improve-
ment to which they ever attained.

This in. AT present, our attention and researches flhall
qmIi:y con-
tinti o, be turned to the IhMall independent tribes which
The riidcit
rbs. occupied every other part of America. Among

there, though with forne diversity in their cha-
rader, their manners, and inflitutions, the slate
of society was nearly similar, and so extremely
rude, that the denomination of San'vge may be
appllied to them all. In a general history of

America,

America, it would be highly improper to de- B 0o K
scribe the condition of each petty community,
or to invefiigate every minute circumstance
which contributes to form the character of its
members. Such an inquiry would lead to
details of immeasurable and tiresome extent.
The qualities belonging to the people of all the
different tribes have such a near resemblance,
that they may be painted with the fame features.
Where any circumstances seem to constitute a
diversity in their character and manners worthy
of attention, it will be sufficient to point there
out as they occur, and to inquire into the cause
of such peculiarities.

IT is extremely diffiGult to procure satisfying Dtfficulty

of obtaining

and authentic information concerning nations intorma-
while they remain uncivilized. To discover
their true character under this rude form, and
to felet the features by which they are difltin-
guified, requires an observer pofinefld of no
lets impartiality than difccrnlnmnt. For, in
every flage of society, the faculties, the lenti-
ments and desires of men are so accommodated
to their own state, that they become fiandards
of excellence to themselves, they aflix the idea
of perfection and happiness to those attainments
which resemble their own, and wherever the
objects and enjoyments to which they have

E 3 been

B o0 K been accustomed are wanting, confidently pro-

IVV.
L.yd- nounce a people to be barbarous and miserable.

Hence the mutual contempt with which the
members of communities, unequal in their de-
grees of improvement, regard each other. Po-
lifhed nations, conscious of the advantages which
they derive from their knowledge and arts, are
apt to view rude nations with peculiar scorn,
and, in the pride of superiority, will hardly
allow either their occupations, their feelings, or
their pleasures, to be worthy of men. It has
seldom been the lot of communities, in their
early and unpolifhed slate, to fall under the ob.
servation of persons endowed with force of mind
superior to vulgar prejudices, and capable of
contemplating man, under whatever afpe& he
appears, with a candid and discerning eye.

from then- TIHE Spaniards, who first visited America,
capacity of
tie firt ob- and who had opportunity of beholding its va-
fvelrs, rious tribes while entire and unfubdued, and

before any change had been made in their ideas
or manners by intercourse with a race of men
much advanced beyond them in improvement,
were far froin poflefling the qualities requifiet
for observing the firiking spectacle prefcnted to
their view. Neither the age in which they lived,
nor the nation to which they belonged, had
made such progress in true science, as infpircs

enlarged

enlarged and liberal sentiments. The conquer- B 0 0 K

IV.

ors of the New World were mostly illiterate
adventurers, destitute of all the ideas which
should have directed them in contemplating ob-
jects so extremely different from those with
which they were acquainted. Surrounded con-
tinually with danger, or struggling with hard-
ships, they had little leisure, and lcfs capacity,
for any Ipeculative inquiry. Eager to take pof-
feflion of a country of such extent and opulence,
and happy in finding it occupied by inhabitants
so incapable to defend it, they haitily pro-
nounced them to be a wretched order of men,
formed merely for servitude; and were more
employed in computing the profits of their la-
bour, than in inquiring into the operations of
their minds, or the reasons of their customs and
institutions. The persons who penetrated at
subsequent periods into the interior provinces,
to which the knowledge and devastations of the
firfl conquerors did not reach, were generally
of a iimilar character; brave and enterpriling
in an high degree, but so uninformed as to be
little qualified either for obfcrving or describing
what they beheld.

NOT only the incapacity, but the prejudices :inlli

of the Spanilards, render their accounts of tlhei l
people of America extremely defective. Soon

: . I after

B 0 K after they planted colonies in their new con-

1.._. quefls, a difference in opinion arose with refpeat

to the treatment of the natives. One party,
solicitous to render their servitude perpetual,
represented them as a brutish, obtiinate race,
incapable either of acquiring religious know-
ledge, or of being trained to the funcions of
social life. The other, full of pious concern
for their conversion, contended that, though
rude aad ignorant, they were gentle, assec-
tionate, docile, and by proper inftrutions and
regulations might be formed gradually into good
Chriflians and useful citizens. This contro-
verfy, as I have already related, was carried on
with all the warmth which is natural, when
attention to intereit on the one hand, and reli-
gious zeal on the other, animate the disputants.
Most of the laity espoused the former opinion;
all the ecclesiastics were advocates for the latter;
and we fliall uniformly find that, accordingly
as an author belonged to either of these parties,
he is apt to magnify the virtues or aggravate
the defets of the Americans far beyond truth.
Those repugnant accounts increase the difficulty
of attaining a perfect knowledge of their cha-
rater, and render it neceflary to peruse all the
descriptions of them by Spanifl writers with
diflruff, and to receive their information with
some grains of allowance.

ALMOST

ALMOST two centuries elapsed after the dif- B o0 K

IV.

covery of America, before the manners of its L-J
inhabitants attracted, in any considerable degree, tnd fy
the attention of philosophers. At length, they tpP"ilofo-
discovered that the contemplation of the con-
dition and characer of the Americans in their
original state, tended to complete our knowledge
of the human species, might enable us to fill up
a considerable chafin in the history of its pro-
grefs, and lead to speculations no less curious
than important. They entered upon this new
field of study with great ardour; but, instead
of throwing light upon the subjed, they have
contributed, in some degree, to involve it in
additional obscurity. Too impatient to inquire,
they hastened to decide; and began to eret
systems, when they should have been searching
for fads on which to eftablifli their foundations.
Struck with the appearance of degeneracy in
the human species throughout the New World,
and astonished at beholding a vafl continent
occupied by a naked, feeble, and ignorant race
of men, some authors of great name have main-
tained, that this part of the globe had but lately
emerged from the sea, and become fit for the
refidencc of man; that every thing in it bore
marks of a recent original; and that its inha-
bitants, lately called into existence, and still at

the

B O K the beginning of their career, were unworthy

IV.

, to be compared with the people of a more an-

cient and improved continent '. Others have
imagined, that, under the influence of an un-
kindly climate, which checks and enervates the
principle of life, man never attained in America
the perfection which belongs to his nature, but
remained an animal of an inferior order, de-
fective in the vigour of his bodily fiame, and
destitute of sensibility, as well as of force, in the
operations of his mindu. In opposition to both
these, other philosophers have supposed that man
arrives at his highest dignity and excellence long
before he reaches a state of refinement; and, in
the rude simplicity of savage life, displays an
elevation of sentiment, an independence of mind,
and a warmth of attachment, for which it is
vain to search among the members of polished
obcieties x. They seem to confider that as the
noRt perfect Rtate of man which is the least ci-
vilized. They lcfcribe the manners of the rude
Americans with such rapture, as if they proposed
them for models to the reft of the species.
Thcle contraditory theories have been pro-
poscd with equal confidence, and uncommon

M. de lBufol Hllt. Nat. iii. 48S, &c, ix. 103. 114.

" M. de P. Rcchcrchcs Plilof. lur Ics Alncric. palfim.
x M. Roufni;au.

powers

powers of genius and eloquence have been B O O K
exerted, in order to clothe them with an ap- '_
pearance of truth.

As all those circumstances concur in render-

ing an inquiry into the state of the rude nations
in America intricate and obscure, it is necessary
to carry it on with caution. When guided in
our researches by the intelligcnt observations
of the few philosophers who have visited this
part of the globe, we may venture to decide.
When obliged to have recourse to the super-
ficial remarks of vulgar travellers, of sailors,
traders, buccaneers, and missionaries, we mufft
often pause, and comparing detached fads, en-
deavour to discover what they wanted sagacity
to observe. Without indulging conjcEure, or
betraying a propensity to either system, we muff
fiudy with equal care to avoid the extremes of
extravagant admiration, or of supercilious con-
tempt for thofc manners which we describe.

IN order to conduc this inquiry with greater Mctho0iocl o

fvcr v~.,in the

accuracy, it flould be rendered as simile as inquiry.
poflible. JIMan exifled as an individual before
he became the member of a community; and
the qualities which bclolng to him under his
former capacity fllould be known, before we
proceed to examine those which arise fioin the

latter

B o o K latter relation. This is peculiarly necessary in
i _- .investigating the manners of rude nations.

Their political union is so incomplete, their
civil institutions and regulations so few, so
simple, and of such slender authority, that men
in this state ought to be viewed rather as inde-
pendent agents, than as members of a regular
society. The character of a savage results almioft
entirely from his sentiments or feelings as an
individual, and is but little influenced by his
imperfect fubjetion to government and order.
I ihall conduct my researches concerning the
manners of the Americans in this natural order,
proceeding gradually from what is simple to
what is more complicated.

I SHALL confider, I. The bodily constitution

of the Americans in those regions now under
review. II. The qualities of their minds.
III. Their domeffic itate. IV. Their political
state and inflitutions. V. Their system of war,
and public fccurity. VI. The arts with which
they were acquainted. VII. Their religious
ideas and inflitutions. V11I. Such singular de-
tached cufloms as are not reducible to any of
the former heads. IX. I shall conclude with a
general review and estimate of their virtues and
lIcfe1 :s.

I. T'rE

I. THE bodily constitution of the Americans. B O O K

-The human body is less affeEted by climate I
than that of any other animal. Some animals Tke conai.

tution of

are confined to a particular region of the globe, their bodies.
and cannot exist beyond it; others, though they
may be brought to bear the injuries of a climate
foreign to them, cease to multiply when carried
out of that diftric which Nature destined to be
their mansion. Even such as seem capable of
being naturalized in various climates, feel the
effect of every remove from their proper station,
and gradually dwindle and degenerate from the
vigour and perfection peculiar to their species.
Man is the only living creature whose frame is
at once so hardy and so flexible, that he can
spread over the whole earth, become the inha-
bitant of every region, and thrive and multiply
under every climate. Subject, however, to the
general law of Nature, the human body is not
entirely exempt from the operation of climate;
and when exposed to the extremes either of
heat or cold, its size or vigour diminishes.

TIE first appearance of the inhabitants of Complex.

the New World, filled the discoverers with such i"', &c
afloniflhment, that they were apt to imagine
them a race of men different fiom those of the
other hemisphere. Their complexion is of a
reddish brown, nearly refcmbling the colour of

copper.

B 0 0 K copper . The hair of their heads is always

IV.
L^__y black, long, coarse, and uncurled. They have

no beard, and every part of their body is per-
fecly smooth. Their persons are of a full size,
extremely straight, and well proportionedz.
Their features are regular, though often dif-
torted by absurd endeavours to improve the
beauty of their natural form, or to render their
More afpedt more dreadful to their enemies. In the

ebe islands, where four-footed animals were both few

and small, and the earth yielded her produtions
almost spontaneously, the conltitution of the na-
tives, neither braced by the active exercises of
the chace, nor invigorated by the labour of cul-
tivation, was extremely feeble and languid. On
the continent, where the forests abound with
game of various kinds, and the chief occupation
of many tribes was to pursue it, the human
frame acquired greater firnnefs. Still, how-
ever, the Americans were more remarkable for
agility than strength. They rcfembled beasts of
prey, rather than animals formed for labour".
They were not only averse to toil, but incapable
of it; and when rouzed by force from their
native indolence, and compelled to work, they
funk under tafls which the people of the other

Y Ovicdo Soin:al, p. 1, D. Life of Culumbus, c. 24.
2 Sec NOTE SN\l.
a Sec NOTE XVlir.

continent

continent would have performed with eafeb. B 0 0 K

Iv.

This feebleness of conilitution was universal
among the inhabitants of those regions in Ame-
rica which we are surveying, and may be con-
fidered as characLeriftic of the species there'.

TIHE beardless countenance and smooth fiin

of the American seems to indicate a defct of
vigour, occasioned by some vice in his frame.
IHe is destitute of one sign of manhood and of
firength. This peculiarity, by which the inha-
bitants of the New World are diftinguiilied from
the people of all other nations, cannot be attri-
buted, as some travellers have supposed, to their
mode of fubfiience '. For though the food of
many Americans be extremely insipid, as they
are altogether unacquainted with the use of salt,
rude tribes in other parts of the earth have sub-
sifted on aliments equally simple, without this
mark of degradation, or any apparent symptom
of a diminution in their vigour.

As the external form of the Amcricans leads Lefsapp-.
us to fufpc& that there is oicm natural debility

1i Ovicdo Sorn. p. 51, C. Voy. de Correal, ii. 138.
Wlafcl's l)tl cripti(i, p). I 1.

c B. Las Casas l're. Relac. p. 14. Torqicum. Monar.

i. 58). Ovilcdo Solnimario, p . .

4 lilor. lib. iii. c. 6.
JIcrrcra, dec. i. lib. ix. c. 5. Simon, p. 41.

" Clhinlcv. Ilill. dc Notuv. Fr. iii. 310o.

in

0 0 K in their frame, the smallness of their appetite for
_V. food has been mentioned by many authors as a

confirmation of this suspicion. The quantity of
food which men consume varies according to
the temperature of the climate in which they
live, the degree of activity which they exert,
and the natural vigour of their constitutions.
Under the enervating heat of the torrid zone,
and when men pass their days in indolence and
ease, they require less nourishment than the
active inhabitants of temperate or cold countries.
But neither the warmth of their climate, nor
their extreme laziness, will account for the un.
common defec of appetite among the Ame-
ricans. The Spaniards were astonished with
observing this, not only in the islands, but in
several parts of the continent. The conftitu-
tional temperance of the natives far exceeded,
in their opinion, the abstinence of the most
mortified hermits ; while, on the other hand,
the appetite of the Spaniards appeared to the
Americans insatiably voracious; and they as-
firmed, that one Spaniard devoured more
food in a day than was sufficient for ten Ame.
ricanss.

e Ramufio, iii. 304, F. 306, A. Simon Conquitla,

&c. p. 39. IIakliyt, iii. 468. 508.
f Herrera, dec. i. lib, ii. c. 16.

A PROOF

A PROOF of some feebleness in their frame, B o o K

1V.

flill more striking, is the insensibility of the
Americans to the charms of beauty, and the Lc Vele
power of love. That passion which was deafined dclfire
to perpetuate life, to be the bond of social
union, and the source of tenderness and joy, is
the most ardent in the human breast. Though the
perils and hardships of the savage state, though
excessive fatigue, on some occasions, and the
difficulty at all times of procuring subsistence,
may seem to be adverse to this passion, and to
have a tendency to abate its vigour, yet the
rudest nations in every other part of the globe
seem to feel its influence more powerfully than
the inhabitants of the New World. The negro
glows with all the warmth of desire natural to
his climate; and the most uncultivated Asiatics
discover that sensibility, which, from their fitua,
tion on the globe, we flould expect them to
have felt. But the Americans are, in an amaz-
ing degree, strangers to the force of this first
intfin&t of nature. In every part of the New
World the natives treat their womcn with cold-
ness and indifference. They are neither the
objets of that tender attachment which takes
place in civilized society, nor of that ardent
desire conspicuous among rude nations. Even
in climates where this panion usually acquires
its greatest vigour, the s:avage of America views

VOL.. n1. his

E 0 0 K his female with disdain, as an animal of a lefi

Iv.
u_ » noble species. He is at no pains to win her

favour by the afaiduity of courtship, and itill
less solicitous to preserve it by indulgence and
gentlenefsg. Mifiioniaries themselves, notwith-
flanding the austerity of monastic ideas, cannot
refrain from exprefling their aftonithinent at the
difpaflionate coldness of the American young
men in their intercourse with the other fexh.
Nor is this reserve to be ascribed to any opinion
which they entertain with refpecf to the merit
of female chastity. That is an idea too refined
for a savage, and suggested by a delicacy of
sentiment and affeEion to which he is a
stranger.

Reflecions BUT in inquiries concerning either the bodily
with Irefpea
to tltfe. or mental qualities of particular races of men,

there is not a more common or more seducing
error, than that of ascribing to a single cause,
those charateriftic peculiarities, which are the

t I-Icennepin Mocurs des Sauvagcs, 32, &c. Rochefort
llil. cdes Iles Antilles, p. 461. Voyage de Coreal, ii.
141. Ramniilo, iii. 309 l. I. ,ozano Defcr. dlcl Gra
Chaco, 71. lalkner's Defecr. of Patagon. p. 125. Lct-
tcrc di P. Catanco ap. Muratori I1 Chrilti;il. Felice, i,
305.

1 Clanvalon. p. 51. I,ettr. Edif. torn. xxiv. 318.

Tcrtrc, ii. 377. tVneg;i, i. 81. Ribas Hilt. de lo.
T''rhimilf. p. i.

cffca

effeA of the combined operation of many causes. B o o K
The climate and foil of America differ, in so _..
many refpeEts, from those of the other hemi-
sphere, and this difference is fb obvious and
striking, that philosophers of great eminence
have laid hold on this as sufficient to account
for what is peculiar in the constitution of its in.
habitants. They reft on physical causes alone,
and confider the feeble frame and languid desire
of the Americans, as consequences of the tem-
perament of that portion of the globe which
they occupy. But the influences of political
and moral causes ought not to have been over-
looked. These operate with no less effeEt than
that on which many philosophers reft as a full
explanation of the singular appearances which
have been mentioned. Wherever the state of
society is such as to create many wants and
desires, which cannot be satisfied without regular
exertions of industry, the body accustomed to
labour becomes robufl and patient of fatigue.
In a more simple fate, where the demands of
men are so few and so moderate, that they may
be gratified, almost without any effort, by the
spontaneous productions of nature, the powers
of the body are not called fUrth, nor can they
attain their proper ltrcngth. The natives of
Chili and of North-America, the two temperate
regions in the New World, who live by hunlt-

F 2 ing,

B O0 K ing, may be deemed an active and vigorous

I¥.

-..- race,. when compared with the inhabitants of the

isles, or of those parts of the continent where
hardly any labour is requisite to procure sub-
fifence. The exertions of a hunter are not,
however, so regular, or so continued, as those
of persons employed in the culture of the
earth, or in the various arts of civilized life,
and though his agility may be greater than
theirs, his strength is on the whole inferior.
If another diretion were given to the afive
powers of man in the New World, and his
force augmented by exercise, he might acquire
a degree of vigour which he does not in his
present state polfefs. The truth of this is con-
firmed by experience. Wherever the Americans
have been gradually accustomed to hard labour,
their confitkutions become rolbufi, and they have
been found capable of performing such tasks,
a.; feemeld not only to exceed the powers of such
a feeble ;IIne as has been deemed peculiar to
their country, but to equal any eflbrt of the
natives, either of Africa or of Europe .

T''E fa:me reasoning will apply to what has

been observed concerning their slender demand
for food. As a proof that this should be

' Scc NOTE XIX.

ascribed

ascribed as much to their extreme indolence, and B o K
often total want of occup:ation, as to any thing Iv
peculiar in the physical ftru!ture of their bodies,
it has been observed, that in those diftrids,
where the people of America are obliged to
exert any unusual eflort of activity, in order to
procure fubfifience, or wherever they are em-
ployed in revere labour, their appetite is not
inferior to that of other men, and, in forne
places, it has struck observers as remarkably vo-
racious .

THE operation of political and moral causes

is frill more.confpicuous, in modifying the de-
gree of attachment between the sexes. In a
state of high civilization, this passion, inflamed
by restraint, refined by delicacy, and cherished
by fashion, occupies and engrosses the heart.
It is no longer a simple inftinE of nature; fen-
timcnt heightens the ardour of desire, and the
noft tender emotions of which our frame is
fi:iceptible, soothe and agitate the foul. This
description, however, applies only to those, who,
by their situation, are exempted from the cares
and labours of life. Among perlbns of inferior
order, who are doomed by their condition to

k Giumilla, ii. 12. 7P. 24.7. Ii;nrtall, i. 5. Ovaillc
Churchl. ii. 81. Muratori, i. 295.

- 3 incc(ltnt

B3 0 K incessant toil, the dominion of this passion is less

IV.

- violent; their solicitude to procure subsistence,

and to provide for the first demand of nature,
leaves little leisure for attending to its second
call. But if the nature of the intercourse be-
tween the sexes varies so much in persons of
different rank in polified societies, the condition
of man, while he remains uncivilized, must oc-
cafion a variation still more apparent. We may
well suppose, that amidst the hardships, the
dangers, and the simplicity of savage life, where
subsistence is always precarious, and often icanty,
wvhere men are almost continually engaged in the
pursuit of their enemies, or in guarding against
their attacks, and where neither dress nor reserve
are employed as arts of female allurement, that
the attention of the Americans to their women
would be extremely feeble, without imputing
this solely to any physical defect or degradation
in their frame.

Ir is accordingly observed, that in those

countries of America, where, fiom the fertility
of the foil, the mildness of the climate, or some
farther advances which the natives have made
in improvement, the means of lubfiftence are
more abundant, and the hardships of savage life
are less severely felt, the animal passion of the
sexes becomes more ardent. Striking examples

ofI

of this occur among some tribes feated on the B 0 0 K.

IV.

banks of great rivers well stored with food, -,
among others who are masters of hunting-
grounds abounding so much with game, that
they have a regular and plentiful supply of nou-
riihment with little labour. The superior degree
of security and affluence which there tribes enjoy,
is followed by their natural effecs. The passions
implanted in the human frame by the hand of
nature acquire additional force; new taftes and
desires are formed; the women, as they are
more valued and admired, become more atten-
tive to dress and ornament; the men, beginning
to feel how much of their own happiness de-
pends upon them, no longer disdain the arts of
winning their favour and affecion. The inter-
course of the sexes becomes very different from
that which takes place among their ruder coun-
trymen; and as hardly any reitraint is imposed
on the gratification of desire, either by religion,
or laws, or decency, the dissolution of their
manners is excessive .

NOTWITHSTANDING the feeble make of the Nunci

Americans, hardly any of them are deformed, fcrnidl.
or mutilated, or defeetive in any of their felues.
All travellers have been struck with this cir.

i Biet. 389. Cliarlv. iii. 423. Dumont Mem. fur
Louifiane, i. 155.

r 4 cuniftance,

B O O K cumftance, and have celebrated the uniform

IV.

symmetry and perfecRion of their external figure.
Some authors search for the cause of this ap-
pearance in their physical condition. As the
parents are not exhausted or over-fatigued with
hard labour, they suppose that their children are
born vigorous and found. They imagine, that
in the liberty of savage life, the human body,
naked and unconfined from its earliest age, pre-
serves its natural form; and that all its limbs
and members acquire a juster proportion, than
when fettered with artificial restraints, which
flint its growth and diflort its shape"'. Some-
thing, without doubt, may be ascribed to the
operation of these causes; but the true reasons
of this apparent advantage, which is common to
all savage nations, lie deeper, and are closely
interwoven with the nature and genius of that
slate. The infancy of man is to long and so
helplet{, that it is extremely difficult to rear
children among rude nations. Their means of
subsistence are not only scanty, but precarious.
Such as live by hunting must range over exten-
five countries, and (hist often from place to
place. The care of children, as well as every
other laborious talk, is devolved upon the
women. The difireffes and hardships of the

iso, p. 6.

savage

savage life, which are often such as can hardly B O O K
be supported by persons in full vigour, mufl be
fatal to those of more tender age. Afraid of
undertaking a talk so laborious, and of such
long duration, as that of rearing their offspring,
the women, in some parts of America, procure
frequent abortions by the use of certain herbs,
and extinguish the first sparks of that life which
they are unable to cherish". Sensible that only
flout and well formed children have force of
constitution to struggle through such an hard
infancy, other nations abandon or destroy such
of their progeny as appear feeble or defedtive,
as unworthy of attention,. Even when they
endeavour to rear all their children without
diftindion, so great a proportion of the whole
number perishes under the rigorous treatment
which must be their lot in the savage tfate, that
few of those who laboured under any original
frailty attain the age of manhoodP. Thus, in
polished societies, where the means of subsistence
are secured with certainty, and acquired with
cafe; where the talents of the mind are often of
more importance than the powers of the body;

Ellis's Voyage to Hudson's Bay, 198. Herrera,

t'c. 7. lib. ix. c. 4.

' Gumnilla IIift. ii. 234. Techo's Hill. of Paraguay,
&c. Churchill's Colled. vi. xo8.

P Creuxii Hiflt Canad. p. 57.

children

B O O K children are preserved notwithstanding their de-

IV.
as -. feEts or deformity, and grow up to be useful

citizens. In rude nations, such persons are
either cut off as soon as they are born, or be-
coming a burden to themselves and to the
community, cannot long protrac their lives.
But in those provinces of the New World
where, by the establishment of the Europeans,
more regular provision has been made for the
subsistence of its inhabitants, and they are re.
itrained from laying violent hands on their
children, the Americans are so far from being
eminent for any superior perfeEtion in their
form, that one should rather fufpeEt some pecu-
liar imbecility in the race, from the extraordi-
nary number of individuals who are deformed,
dwarfifh, mutilated, blind, or deafq.

1'n;fornity How feeble soever the constitution of the
pf,.eiac'.' Americans may be, it is remarkable, that there

is less variety in the human form throughout
the New World, than in the ancient continent.
When Columbus and the other discoverers first
visited the different countries of America which
lie within the torrid zone, they naturally ex-
pcEted to find people of the fame complexion
with those in the corresponding regions of the

' Voyage de 11dloa, i. 232.

other

other hemisphere. To their amazement, how- B 0 0 K
ever, they discovered that America contained i
no negroes'; and the cause of this singular
appearance became as much the object of cu-
riofity, as the fad itself was of wonder. Ia
what part or membrane of the body that hu-
mour resides which tinges the complexion of
the negro with a deep black, it is the business
of anatomiefs to inquire and describe. The
powerful operation of heat appears manifestly to
be the cause which produces this striking variety
in the human species. All Europe, a great
part of Asia, and the temperate countries of
Africa, are inhabited by men of a white com-
plexion. All the torrid zone in Africa, some
of the warmer regions adjacent to it, and fe-
veral countries in Asia, are filled with people
of a deep black colour. If we survey the na-
tions of our continent, making our progress
from cold and temperate countries towards
those parts which are exposed to the influence
of vehement and unremitting heat, we flhall
find, that the extreme whitenels of their ikin
soon begins to dinliniflh; that it; colour deepens
gradually as we advance; and after pasing
through all the fucceflive gradations of mfade,
terminates in an uniform unvarying black. But

r P. Martyr, dec. p. 71.

in

B 0 0 K in America, where the agency of heat is checked
A _--..- and abated by various causes, which I have al-

ready explained, the climate seems to be destitute
of that force which produces such wonderful
effeEts on the human frame. The colour of the
natives of the torrid zone in America, is hardly
of a deeper hue than that of the people in the
more temperate parts of their continent. Ac-
curate observers, who had an opportunity of
viewing the Americans in very different climates,
and in provinces far removed from each other,
have been itruck with the amazing similarity of
their figure and aspeQ s.

BUT though the hand of Nature has deviated

so little from one standard in fashioning the
human form in America, the creation of fancy
hath been various and extravagant. The fame
fables that were current in the ancient conti-
nent, have been reviveciwith relpe&t to the New
World, and America too has been peopled with
human beings of monstrous and fantastic ap-
pearance. The inhabitants of certain provinces
were described to be pigmies of three feet high;
those of others to be giants of an enormous size.
Some travellers published accounts of people
with only one eye, others pretended to have

S NOT'I' XX.

difcovcred

discovered men without heads, whose eyes and B O 0 Kc
mouths were planted in their breasts. The va-
riety of Nature in her productions is, indeed,
so great, that it is presumptuous to set bounds
to her fertility, and to rejec indiscriminately
every relation that does not perfectly accord
with our own limited observation and expe-
rience. But the other extreme, of yielding a
hasty aflent, on the slightest evidence, to what-
ever has the appearance of being strange and
marvellous, is still more unbecoming a philo-
fophical inquirer, as, in every period, men are
more apt to be betrayed into error, by their
weakness in believing too much, than by their
arrogance in believing too little. In proportion
as science extends, and nature is examined with
a discerning eye, the wonders which amused
ages of ignorance disappear. The tales of cre-
dulous travellers concerning America are for-
gotten; the monflers which they describe have
been Searched for in vain; and those provinces
where they pretend to have found inhabitants
of singular forms, are now known to be pol-
fefled by people no wife different firol the oilier
Americans.

T'lOUGHc those relations may, without dif-

cuflion, be rejected as fabulous, there arc other
accounts of varieties in the humlan eiecies in

mnlle

B OO K some parts of the New World, which reft upon

, better evidence, and merit more attentive exa.,

mination. This variety has been particularly
observed in three different diftricls. The first
of these is situated in the isthmus of Darien,
near the centre of America. Lionel Wafer,
a traveller possessed of more curiosity and in-
telligence than we ihould have expeted to find
in an associate of Buccaneers, discovered there a
race of men few in number, but of a singular
make. They are of low stature, according to
his description, of a feeble frame, incapable of
enduring fatigue. Their colour is a dead milk
white ; not resembling that of fair people among
Europeans, but without any tincture of a blush
or sanguine complexion. Their skin is covered
with a fine hairy down of a chalky white, the
hair of their heads, their eye-brows, and eye-
lathes, are of the fame hue. Their eyes are of
a singular form, and so weak, that they can
hardly bear the light of the fun; but they fee
clearly by moon-light, and are molt ative and
gay in the night . No race similar to this has
been discovered in any other part of America.
Cortes, indeed, found nime pcrfons exactly re.
fembling the white people of Darien, among
the rare and monflrous animals which Monte-

t Wafer Dcfcript. of Ifth. ap. Dampier, iii. p. 346.

zuma

Zuma had collected . But as the power of the B o o K

iV.

Mexican empire extended to the provinces bor-
dering on the isthmus of Darien, they were pro-
bably brought thence. Singular as the appear-
ance of those people may be, they cannot be
confidered as conflituting a diftinEt species.
Among the negroes of Africa, as well as the
natives of the Indian islands, nature sometimes
produces a frnall number of individuals, with all
the chara&eriftic features and qualities of the
white people of Darien. The former are called
Albinos by the Portuguese, the latter Kackerlakcs
by the Dutch. In Darien the parents of those
Whites are of the fame colour with the other
natives of the country; and this observation
applies equally to the anomalous progeny of the
negroes and Indians. The fame mother who
produces some children of a colour that does
not belong to the race, brings forth the rcft
with the complexion peculiar to her country'.
One conclusion may then be formed with lrcpeCf
to the people described by Wafer, the Albincs
and the Kackcrlakcs; they are a degcncratcl
breed, not a separate class of men; and fiom
some disease or defect of their parents, the pe-
culiar colour and debility which mark their

" Cortes ap. Ramus. i;i. p. 241, E.
"Margiav. H-ist. Rer. Nat. Bras. lib. vii/. c. 4.

degradation

B o K0 degradation are transmitted to them. As a de¢

CIK cifive proof of this, it has been observed, that

neither the white people of Darien, nor the
Albinos of Africa, propagate their race: their
children are of the colour and temperament
peculiar to the natives of their refpedtive coun-
tries x.

THE second diftria that is occupied by inha-

bitants differing in appearance from the other
people of America, is situated in a high northern
latitude, extending from the coast of Labrador
towards the pole, as far as the country is ha-
bitable. The people scattered over those dreary
regions, are known to the Europeans by the
name of Efquimaux. They themselves, with
that idea of their own superiority, which con-
soles the rudest and most wretched nations,
aflume the name of tKralit or Mcn. They are
of a middle size, and robust, with heads of a
disproportioncd bulk, and feet as remarkably
small. Their complcxion, though swarthy, by
being continually exposed to the rigour of a
cold climate, inclines to the European white,
rather than to the copper colour of America,
and the men have beards which are sometimes

x Wafer, p. 348. Dcnanct lift. de I'Afrique, ii. 234.
Rccherci. lhilof. fuirles Amer. ii. 1, &c. NOTE XXI.

bufly

bushy and long . From there marks of dif- B o00 K
tin&ion, as well as from one still less equivocal, -,-.
the affinity of their language to that of the
Greenlanders, which I have already mentioned,
we may conclude, with some degree of con-
fidence, that the Efquimaux are a race different
from the reft of the Americans.

WE cannot decide with equal certainty con-

cerning the inhabitants of the third diftric,
situated at the southern extremity of America.
These are the famous Patagonians, who, during
two centuries and a half, have afforded a fubje&
of controversy to the learned, and an objec of
wonder to the vulgar. They are supposed to
be one of the wandering tribes, which occupy
that vast, but least known region of America,
which extends from the river Ie la Plata to the
Straits of Magellan. Their proper flation is in
that part of the interior country which lies on
the banks of the river Negro.; but in the hunt-
ing season they often roam as far as the firaits
which separate Tierra del Fuego from the main
land. The first accounts of this people were
brought to Europe by the companions of Ma-

Y Ellis Voy. to IIudf. Bay, p. 131. 139. De la Po-

tlieric, tom. i. p. 79. Wales Journ. of a Voy. to Cliurcillill
River. Phil. Tralf. vol. lx. 109.

VOL. I. c; gellan,

B o o r gellan , who described them as a gigantic race,

_-. .-j above eight feet high, and of strength in pro.

portion to their enormous size. Among several
tribes of animals, a disparity in bulk, as confi.
derable, nay be observed. Some large breeds
of horses and dogs, exceed the more diminutive
races in flature and strength as far as the Pa.
tagonian is supposed to rife above the usual
flandard of the human body. But animals at.
tain the highest perfetion of their species, only
in mild climates, or where they find the molt
nutritive food in greatest abundance. It is not
then in the uncultivated waste of the Magellanic
regions, and among a tribe of improvident fa-
vages, that we lhould expet to find man,
poflefling the highest honours of his race, and
distinguished by a superiority of size and vigour,
far beyond what he has reached in any other
part of the earth. The moit explicit and un-
exceptionable evidence is requisite, in order to
establish a fadt repugnant to those general prin-
ciples and laws, which seem to affe& the human
fiame in every other instance, and to decide
with refpc't to its nature and qualities. Such
evidence has not hitherto been produced.
Though several persons, to whose testimony

z F.lkiler's Decri;ption of Patagonia, p. 102.

great

great refpe&t is due, have visited this part of B O 0 K
America since the time of Magellan, and have s
had interviews with the natives; though some
have affirmed, that such as they saw were of
gigantic tfature, and others have formed the
fame conclusion from measuring their footsteps,
or from viewing the skeletons of their dead;
yet their accounts vary from each other in so
many essential points, and are mingled with so
many circumfiances manifestly false or fabulous,
as detract much from their credit. On the
other hand, some navigators, and those among
the molt eminent of their order for discernment
and accuracy, have asserted that the natives of
Patagonia, with whom they had intercourse,
though stout and well-made, are not of such
extraordinary size as to be distinguished from
the reft of the human species a. The existence
of this gigantic race of men seems, then, to be
one of those points in natural history, with re-
fpeft to which a cautious inquirer will hesitate,
and will chufe to suspend his assent until more
complete evidence shall decide, whether he
ought to admit a sac, seemingly inconfiltent
with what reason and experience have disco-
vered concerning the itrudure and condition of

. Sec NOTE XXII.

c 2 man,

B O K man, in all the various situations in which he

1V.

'.
s has been observed.

Their slate IN order to form a complete idea with respect
of health.

to the constitution of the inhabitants of this and
the other hemisphere, we should attend not only
to the make and vigour of their bodies, but
confider what degree of health they enjoy, and
to what period of longevity they usually arrive.
In the simplicity of the savage slate, when man
is not oppressed with labour, or enervated by
luxury, or disquieted with care, we are apt to
imagine that his life will flow on almost un.
troubled by disease or suffering, until his days
be terminated, in extreme old age, by the gra-
dual decays of nature. We find, accordingly,
among the Americans, as well as among other
rude people, persons, whose decrepit and hlri-
velled form seems to indicate an extraordinary
length of life. But as most of them are unac.
quainted with the art of numbering, and all of
them as forgetful of what is past, as they are
improvident for what is to come, it is impoflible
to ascertain their age, with any degree of pre.
cifion". It is evident, that the period of their
longevity muff vary considerably, according to

b Ulloa Notic. Amneric. 323. Baicroft Nat. 11ill. (l
CGiaia, 334.

the

the diversity of climates, and their different Bn O K
modes of subsistence. They seem, however, to
be everywhere exempt from many of the dif-
tempers which afflict polished nations. None
of the maladies, which are the immediate off-
spring of luxury, ever visited them; and they
have no names in their languages by which to
diftinguifli this numerous train of adventitious
evils.

BUT, whatever be the situation in which man Diseases.

is placed, he is born to susser; and his diseases,
in the savage slate, though fewer in number,
are, like those of the animals whom he nearly
resembles in his mode of life, more violent, and
more fatal. If luxury engenders and nourishes
distempers of one species, the rigour and dif-
tresses of savage life bring on those of another.
As men, in this state, are wonderfully impro-
vident, and their means of subsistence preca-
rious, they often pass from extreme want to
exuberant plenty, according to the vicissitudes
of fortune in the chace, or in consequence of
the various degree of abundance with which the
earth affords to them its produEtions, in dif-
ferent seasons. Their inconsiderate gluttony in
the one situation, and their severe abstinence in
the other, are equally pernicious. For, though
the human constitution may be accustomed by

0 3 habit,

B OO IK habit, like that of animals of prey, to tolerate

1^V long famine, and then to gorge voraciously, it

is not a little affeEted by such sudden and vio-
lent transitions. The strength and vigour of
savages are, at tome seasons, impaired by what
they fufler from scarcity of food; at others they
are aflicted with disorders ariing from indi-
geftion and a superfluity of gross aliment. These
are so common, that they may be confidered as
the unavoidable consequence of their mode of
subsisting, and cut off considerable numbers in
the prime of life. They are likewise extremely
subjet to consumptions, to pleuritic, asthmatic,
and paralytic difordersc, brought on by the im.
moderate hardflips and fatigue which they en-
dure in hunting and in war; or owing to the
inclemency of the seasons to which they are con-
tinually exposed. In the savage slate, hardflips
and fatigue violently assault the constitution. In
polished societies, intemperance undermines it.
It is not easy to determine which of them ope.
rates with most fatal effect, or tends molt to
abridge human life. The influence of tih
former is certainly mot cextenfive. The perni-
cious confequenccs of luxury reach only a fcw
members in any community ; the diltreffes of
savage life are ielt by all. As far as I can

C Chalc\v. N. Fr. iii. 36-4. Lititat! , ii. 360. 1)Oc Ii
Prollthic, ii. 37.

judge,

judge, after very minute inquiry, the general 1B o o ;
period of human life is shorter among savages,
than in well-regulated and industrious societies.

ONE 'dreadful malady, the severest scourge

with which, in this life, offended Heaven chaf-
tens the indulgence of criminal desire, seems to
have been peculiar to the Americans. By com-
municating it to their conquerors, they have
not only amply avenged their own wrongs, but
by adding this calamity to those which formerly
imbittered human life, they have, perhaps, more
than counterbalanced all the benefits which Eu-
rope has derived from the discovery of the New
World. This distemper, from the country in
which it first raged, or from the people by
whom it was supposed to have been spread over
Europe, has been sometimes called the Neapo-
litan, and sometimes the French disease. At
its first appearance, the infection was so malig-
nant, its symptoms so violent, its operation so
rapid and fatal, as to baffle all the efbfrts of
medical skill. Aflonifhiment and terror accom-
panied this unknown affliction in its progress,
and men began to dread the extinetion of the
human race by such a cruel visitation. Expe-
rience, and the ingenuity of physicians, gra-
dually discovercd remedies of such virtue as to
cure or to mitigate the evil. During the course

4 of

B 0 0 K of two centuries and a half, its virulence seems

Iv.
a_-^' to have abated considerably. At length, in the

fame manner with the leprosy, which raged in
Europe for some centuries, it may waste its
force and disappear; and in some happier age,
this western infection, like that from the East,
may be known only by description d.

J'owerand II. AFTER confidering what appears to be
q ualitits of
their miins. peculiar in the bodily contfitution of the Ame-

ricans, our attention is naturally turned towards
the powers and qualities of their minds. As the
individual advances from the ignorance and im-
becility of the infant tfate, to vigour and matu-
rity of underflanding, something similar to this
may be observed in the progress of the species.
With respect to it, too, there is a period of in-
fancy, during which several powers of the mind
are not unfolded, and all are feeble and defective
in their operation. In the early ages of society,
while the condition of man is simple and rude,
his reason is but little exercised, and his desires
move within a very narrow sphere. Hence
arise two remarkable charaaerifics of the hu-
man mind in this slate. Its intellectual powers
are extremely limited; its emotions and efforts
are few and languid. Both thcle diftindions

" Sec NOTE XXIII.

;.ll'C

are conspicuous among the rudest and molf un- B o o K

iV.

improved of the American tribes, and contitute ,
a striking part of their description.

WHAT, among polished nations, is called int.ell.u-i

speculative reasoning or research, is altogether ,- liitxd.
unknown in the rude state of society, and never
becomes the occupation or amusement of the
human faculties, until man be so far improved
as to have secured, with certainty, the means of
fubfifcnce, as well as the poffeflion of leisure
and tranquillity. The thoughts and attention
of a savage are confined within the small circle
of objccts, immediately conducive to his pre-
servation or enjoyment. Every thing beyond
that, efcapcs his observation, or is perfectly in-
different to him. Like a mere animal, what is
before his eyes interests and affiets himl; what
is out of fght, or at a diftancc, makes little
impreflion . There are several people in Ame-
rica whose limited underflandings fecil nlot to
be capable of forming an arrangement for fu-
turity; neithcr their solicitude nor their fore-
fight extend to far. They follow blindly the
impulse of the appetite which they feel, but are
entirely regardless of dillant conlequcnccs, and
even of thole removed in the lead degree from

Ullua Noticias Amcric. 222.

imlmediate

BOO K immediate apprehension. While they highly

iV.
Amy prize such things as serve for present use, or

minister to present enjoyment, they set no value
upon those which are not the objet of some im-
mediate want . When, on the approach of the
evening, a Caribbee feels himself disposed to go
to reft, no consideration will tempt him to fell
his hammoc. But, in the morning, when he is
sallying out to the business or pastime of the
day, he will part with it for the slightest toy
that catches his fancy 5. At the close of winter,
while the impreflion of what he has suffered from
the rigour of the climate is fresh in the mind of
the North American, he sets himself with vigour
to prepare materials for erecting a comfortable
hut to proteEt him against the inclemency of the
succeeding season; but as soon as the weather
becomes mild, he forgets what is past, abandons
his work, and never thinks of it more, until the
return of cold compels him, when too late, to
resume it ".

IF in concerns the most interefling, and seem-
ingly the most timple, the realbn of man, while

f Venc:-as Hill. of C;lif. i. i6. Siipp. Church. Coll.

v. 693. Bordc Dl)lcr. dics Caraibcs, p. 16. Elli; Voy.
19+.

S Labat Voyngcs, ii. 114, 1 1. l'crcc, ii. 385.
h Adair's Ililt. of Alncr. ld(ians, 11 7.

IUtlc

rude and deflitute of culture, differs so little B O O K
from the thoughtless levity of children, or the -
improvident inftin& of animals, its exertions in
other directions cannot be very considerable.
The objeets towards which reason turns, and
the disquisitions in which it engages, must de-
pend upon the slate in which man is placed,
and are fuggefled by his necessities and desires.
Disquisitions, which appear the moit necessary
and important to men in one slate of society,
never occur to those in another. Among ci-
vilized nations, arithmetic, or the art of num-
bering, is deemed an essential and elementary
science, and in our continent, the invention and
use of it reaches back to a period so remote as is
beyond the knowledge of hiflory. But among-
savages, who have no property to eflimate, no
hoarded treasures to count, no variety of ob-
jeEts or multiplicity of ideas to enumerate, arith-
metic is a superfluous and useless art. Accord-
ingly, among tome tribes in America it fcems
to be quite unknown. There are many who
cannot reckon farthcr than three; and have no
denomination to distinguish any number above
it'. Several can proceed as far as ten, others
to twenty. When they would convey an idca

Coind:in. p. 67. Stadncls ap. dc B'Iy, ix. 128. Lcry.
ibid. 251. Biet. 362. Lcttr. Edif. 23. 314.

2 of

B o K of any number beyond there, they point to the

IV.
_ hair of their head, intimating that it is equal to

them, or with wonder declare it to be so great
that it cannot be reckonedk. Not only the
Americans, but all nations, while extremely
rude, seem to be unacquainted with the art of
computation'. As soon, however, as they ac-
quire such acquaintance or conne&tion with a
variety of objees, that there is frequent occa-
sion to combine or divide them, their know-
ledge of numbers increases, so that the state of
this art among any people may be confidered
as one standard, by which to estimate the de-
gree of their improvement. The Iroquois, in
North America, as they are much more civilized
than the rude inhabitants of Brasil, Paraguay,
or Guiana, have likewise made greater advances
in this refpeEt; though even their arithmetic
does not extend beyond a thousand, as in their
petty tranfadions they have no occasion for any
higher number . The Cherokee, a less confi-
derable nation on the fame continent, can reckon
only as far as a hundred, and to that extent have

k tl imont Louis. i. 187. IIer eera, dec. I. lib. iii.
c 3. Bict. 396. Bordlc, 6.

I Thlis is the care wifi t heC GrienlallC.rs, Crantz. i. 225.
aiind with Kamclatlikaldalcs, MI. I'AbbL CIl,)pc, iii. 17.

m Charlcv. NonLv. Franc. iii. 402.

names

names for the several numbers; the smaller B °o K
tribes in their neighbourhood can rife no higher -v_-,
than tenn.

IN other refpeEts, the exercise of the under- Noabftrat

ideas.

htanding among rude nations is still more li-
mited. The first ideas of every human being
must be such as he receives by the senses. But,
in the mind of man, while in the savage state,
there seem to be hardly any ideas but what
enter by this avenue. The objects around him
are presented to his eye. Such as may be sub-
servient to his use, or can gratify any of his ap-
petites, attract his notice; he views the reft with-
out curiosity or attention. Satisfied with con-
fidering them under that simple mode, in which
they appear to him, as separate and detached,
he neither combines them so as to form general
classes, nor contemplates their qualities apart
from the subjeC in which they inhere, nor be-
stows a thought upon the operations of his own
mind concerning them. Thus, he is unac-
quainted with all the ideas which have been
denominated universal, or abfirafl, or of re-
fieftion. The range of his understanding muff,
of course, be very confined, and his reasoning
powers be employed merely on what is fcnfible.

" Adair's IIill. of Amer. Indians, 77. See NOTE
XXIV.

IThis

B13 0 0 This is so remarkably the cafe with the ruder

1V.

nations of America, that their languages (as we
shall afterwards find) have not a word to ex-
press any thing but what is material or corpo-
real. Time, space, fibJfance, and a thousand
other terms which represent abftra& and uni-
versal ideas, are altogether unknown to them°.
A naked savage, cowering over the fire in his
miserable cabin, or stretched under a few
branches which afford him a temporary shelter,
has as little inclination as capacity for useless
speculation. His thoughts extend not beyond
what relates to animal life; and when they are
not directed towards some of its concerns, his
mind is totally inacive. In situations where no
extraordinary effort either of ingenuity or la-
bour is requisite, in order to satisfy the simple
demands of nature, the powers of the mind are
so seldom routed to any exertion, that the ra-
tional faculties continue almost dormant and
unexercifed. The numerous tribes scattered
over the rich plains of South-America, the in-
habitants of some of the islands, and of several
fertile regions on the continent, come under
this description. Their vacant countenance,
their flaring unexpressive eye, their liftlels in-
attention, and total ignorance of fubjets, which

" Condamn. p. 54.

fecll

seem to be the first which should occupy the B O O K
thoughts of rational beings, made such im- A-
prefion upon the Spaniards, when they first
beheld those rude people, that they confidered
them as animals of an inferior order, and could
not believe that they belonged to the human
species P. It required the authority of a papal
bull to counterat this opinion, and to convince
them that the Americans were capable of the
funEions, and entitled to the privileges of hu-
manity 1. Since that time, persons more en-
lightened and impartial than the discoverers or
conquerors of America, have had an opportu-
nity of contemplating the most savage of its
inhabitants, and they have been aflonifhed and
humbled, with observing how nearly man, in
this condition, approaches to the brute creation.
But in fevrere climates, where subsistence can-
not be procured with the fame ease, where men
muff unite more closely, and a& with greater
concert, neceflity calls forth their talents, and
sharpens their invention, to that the intellectual
powers are more exercised and improved. The
North-American tribes and the natives of Chili,
who inhabit the temperate regions in the two
great diflrilts of America, are people of culti-
vated and enlarged undcrtiandings, when viewed

P I-lclrcra, lcc. 2. lib. ii. c. 15.
'i Tu'lrquutl. Mun. Ild. iii. IY8.

in

B o K in comparison with some of those feated in the

Iv.

_ flands, or on the banks of the Maragnon and

Orinoco. Their occupations are more various,
their system of policy, as well as of war, more
complex, their arts more numerous. But, even
among them, the intelletual powers are ex-
tremely limited in their operations, and unless
when turned directly to those objets which in-
terest a savage, are held in no estimation. Both
the North-Americans and Chilefe, when not en-
gaged in some of the functions belonging to a
warrior or hunter, loiter away their time in
thoughtless indolence, unacquainted with any
other subjet worthy of their attention, or ca-
pable of occupying their mindsr. If even
among them, reason is so much circumscribed
in its exertions, and never arrives, in its highest
attainments, at the knowledge of those general
principles and maxims, which serve as the found-
ation of science, we may conclude, that the
intellectual powers of man in the savage state
are deliltute of their proper object, and cannot
acquire any considerable degree of vigour and
enlargement.

\Afive cf- FiROrM the fame causes, the active efforts of
f;Ults 0l tlie
ilni I,,w the mind are few, and, on most occasions,
:nd(l 1.i,-

Laitau, ii. 2.

languid.

languid. If we examine into the motives which B 0 0 K
rouze men to ativity in civilized life, and
prompt them to persevere in fatiguing exertions
of their ingenuity or strength, we shall find that
they arise chiefly from acquired wants and ap-
petites. These are numerous and importunate;
they keep the mind in perpetual agitation, and,
in order to gratify them, invention must be
always on the stretch, and industry muff be
incessantly employed. But the desires of simple
nature are few, and where a favourable climate
yields almost spontaneously what suffices to gra-
tify them, they scarcely fir the foul, or excite
any violent emotion. Hence the people of fe-
veral tribes in America waste their life in a
liltlefs indolence. To be free from occupation,
seems to be all the enjoyment towards which
they aspire. They will continue whole days
itretched out in their hammocs, or feated on the
earth, in perfelt idleness, without changing their
posture, or raising their eyes from the ground,
or uttering a single word '.

SUCH is their aversion to labour, that neither Improvi-

the hope of future good, nor the apprehension
of future evil, can surmount it. They appear
equally indifferent to both, discovering little

' Bogucr Voy. au Pcrou, 102. Borde, 15.
VQL. II. H1 solicitude,

B 0 K solicitude, and taking no precautions to avoid

IV.
A _e-» the one, or to secure the other. The cravings

of hunger may rouse them; but as they devour,
with little diftinEtion, whatever will appease its
inflinctive demands, the exertions which these
occasion are of short duration. Destitute of
ardour, as well as variety of desire, they feel not
the force of those powerful springs which give
vigour to the movements of the mind, and urge
the patient hand of induflry to persevere in its
efforts. Man, in some parts of America, ap-
pears in a form so rude, that we can discover no
effe&s of his activity, and the principle of un-
derftanding which should direc it, seems hardly
to be unfolded. Like the other animals, he has
no fixed residence; he has ereted no habitation
to shelter him from the inclemency of the wea-
ther; he has taken no measures for securing
certain subsistence; he neither sows nor reaps;
but roams about as led in search of the plants
and suits which the earth brings forth in fuc-
cefion; and in quest of the game which he kills
in the forests, or of the fifhl which he catches in
the rivers.

Sonle,.- T'1IS description, however, applies only to
liety with
refpre to some tribes. Man cannot continue long in this
:'"lt'' filate of feeble and uninformed infancy. -Hc

was made for indullry and ation, and the

·.~ .~ ~~. P ~powers

powers of his nature, as well as the necessity of B O O Kv
his condition, urge him to fulfil his destiny.
Accordingly, among most of the American na-
tions, especially those feated in rigorous climates,
fonme efforts are employed, and some previous
precautions are taken, for securing fubfiifence.
The career of regular industry is begun, and
the laborious arm has made the first essays of
its power. Still, however, the improvident and
slothful genius of the savage slate predominates.
Even among those more improved tribes, labour
is deemed ignominious and degrading. It is
only to work of a certain kind that a man will
deign to put his hand. The greater part is de-
volved entirely upon the women. One half of
the community remains inactive, while the other
is oppressed with the multitude and variety of
its occupations. Thus their industry is partial,
and the foresight which regulates it, is no left
limited. A remarkable instance of this occurs
in the chief arrangement with respect to their
manner of living. They depend for their sub-
filtence, during one part of the year, on fifliing;
during another, on hunting; during a third, on
the produce of their agriculture. Though ex-
perience has taught them to foresee the return
of those various seasons, and to make some pro-
vision for the respective exigencies of each, they

ii 2 either

B o0 K either want sagacity to proportion this provision
a-_- to their consumption, or are so incapable of any

command over their appetites, that, from their
inconsiderate wafle, they often feel the calamities
of famnne as severely as the rudest of the savage
tribes. What they susser one year does not
augment their industry, or tender them more
provident to prevent similar distresses'. This
inconsiderate thoughtlessness about futurity, the
effec of ignorance and the cause of sloth, ac-
companies and characterizes man in every stage
of savage life ; and, by a capricious singularity
in his operations, he is then least solicitous about
supplying his wants, when the means of satisfy-
ing them are most precarious, and procured with
the greatest difficulty w

Their social III. AFTER viewing the bodily confitution of
flartc.

. the Americans, and contemplating the powers

of their minds, we are led, in the natural order
of inquiry, to confider them as united together
in society. Hitherto our researches have been
confined to the operations of understanding

t Charlev. N. Fr. iii. 338. Lettr. Edif. 23. 298. De-

frlipt. of N. France, Olborn's Collcd. ii. 88o. )c la Pu-
terlie, ii. 63.

"Bancroft's Nat. I-Tif. of Guiana, 326. 333.
' See NOTE XXV.

refpcting

refpedting themselves, as individuals, now they B O 0o
will extend to the degree of their sensibility and
affecion towards their species.

THE domestic Rfate is the first and most: omen;.:

imiple form of human association. The union
of the sexes, among different animals, is of
longer or /horter duration in proportion to the
ease or difficulty of rearing their offspring.
Among those tribes where the season of infancy
is ihort, and the young soon acquire vigour or
agility, no permanent union is' formed. Nature
commits the care of training up the offspring
to the mother alone, and her tenderness, without
any other assistance, is equal to the talk. But
where the state of infancy is long and helpless,
and the joint assiduity of both parents is requi-
site in tending their feeble progeny, there a
more intimate connexion takes place, and con-
tinues until the purpose of nature be accom-
plithed, and the new race grow up to full ma-
turity. As the infancy of man is more feeble
and helpless than that of any other animal, and
he is dependent, during a much longer period,
on the care and forefighr of his parents, the
union between husband and wife came early to
be confidered, not only as a solemn, but as a
permanent contract. A general Hlate of pro-
mifcuous intcrcourfe between rihe lxecs never

11 , existed

B O O K exilted but in the imagination of poets. In the

IV.
,_y- infancy of society, when men, destitute of arts

and industry, lead a hard precarious life, the
rearing of their progeny demands the attention
and efforts of both parents; and if their union
had not been formed and continued with this
view, the race could not have been preserved.
Accordingly, in America, even among the rudest
tribes, a regular union between husband and
wife was universal, and the rights of marriage
were understood and recognized. In those dif-
tricts where subsistence was scanty, and the
difficulty of maintaining a family was great, the
man confined himself to one wife. In warmer
and more fertile provinces, the facility of pro-
curing food concurred with the influence of
climate, in inducing the inhabitants to increase
the number of their wives x, In some countries,
the marriage union subsisted during life; in
others, the impatience of the Americans under
reitraint of any species, together with their na-
tural levity and caprice, prompted them to dif-
solve it on very flight pretexts, and often without
;ffigning any cause Y.

" Lettr. Edif. 23. 318. Lafitau Mcclrs, i. 554. Icry
ap. de Dry, iii. 234. Journal de Grillect ct Bechamrl, p. 88.

Y Lafitau, i. 580. Joutcl Journ. Hiftor. 345. Lozano

Dcfc. dcl Gran Chaco, 70. HIlnnepin Mceurs des Sau,
vagcs, )p. 30 33.

BUi

BUT in whatever light the Americans confi- B 0 0 K

IV.
dered the obligation of this contrat, either as

Condition

perpetual, or only as temporary, the condition of ,cme,
of women was equally humiliating and mifera-
ble. Whether man has been improved by the
progress of arts and civilization in society, is a
question, which, in the wantonness of difputa-
tion, has been agitated among philosophers.
That women are indebted to the refinements of
polished manners for a happy change in their
Rate, is a point which can admit of no doubt.
To despise and to degrade the female sex, is
the charaderiftic of the savage state in every
part of the globe. Man, proud of excelling in
strength and in courage, the chief marks of
pre-eminence among rude people, treats woman,
as an inferior, with disdain. The Americans,
perhaps from that coldness and insensibility
which has been confidered as peculiar to their
constitution, add neglef and harshness to con-
tempt. The most intelligent travellers hav'e
been flruck with this inattention of the Ame-
ricans to their women.. It is not, as I have
already observed, by a studied dilplay of ten-
dernefs and attachment, that the American en-
deavours to gain the heart of the woman whoin
he wifles to marry. Marriage itfilt, initead of
being an union of affection and interests between

1 4 equals,

BOO K equals, becomes, among them, the unnatural

V-_, conjunction of a master with his slave. It is

the observation of an author, whose opinions
are deservedly of great weight, that wherever
wives are purchased, their condition is extremely
depressed z. They become the property and the
slaves of those who buy them. In whatever
part of the globe this cuflom prevails, the ob-
servation holds. In countries where refinement
has made some progress, women, when pur-
chased, are excluded from society, shut up in
sequestered apartments, and kept under the vi-
gilant guard of their matters. In ruder nations,
they are degraded to the meanest funcions.
Among many people of America, the marriage-
contrac is properly a purchase. The man buys
his wife of her parents. Though unacquainted
with the use of money, or with such commercial
tranfaftions as take place in more improved
society, he knows how to give an equivalent
for any object which he desires to possess. In
some places, the suitor devotes his service for a
certain time to the parents of the maid whom
he courts; in others, he hunts for them occa-
fionally, or assisis in cultivating their fields, and
forming their canoes; in others, he offers pre.

Sketches of Hiit. of Man, i. 184.

sents

sents of such things as are deemed molt valua- B o o K
ble on account of their usefulness or rarity. a
In return for these, he receives his wife; and
this circumstance, added to the low estimation
of women among savages, leads him to confider
her as a female servant whom he has purchased,
and whom he has a title to treat as an inferior.
In all unpolilhed nations, it is true, the funcions
in domestic ceconomy, which fall naturally to
the ihare of women, are so many, that they are
fubjeded to hard labour, and muff bear more
than their full portion of the common burden.
But in America their condition is so peculiarly
grievous, and their depression so complete, that
Servitude is a name too mild to describe their
wretched state. A wife, among most tribes, is
no better than a beast of burden, destined to
every office of labour and fatigue. While the
men loiter out the day in sloth, or spend it in
amusement, the women are condemned to in-
ceffant toil. Taflks are imposed upon them
without pity, and services are received without
complacence or gratitude h. Every circurnfance
reminds women of this mortifying inferiority.

a Lafitan Mceurs, &c. i. 56o, &c. Charlev. iii. 285,
&c. Herrera, dec. 4. lib. iv. c. 7. Dumoit, ii. I56.

1 Tertre, ii. 382. Bordc Relat. des Mceuts (ds Ca-

raibcs, p. 21. Biet. 357. Condaminne, p. j o. Fermin.
A' 79.

They

B O O r They muff approach their lords with reverence;

Iv.
_ .they muff regard them as more exalted beings,

and are not permitted to eat in their presence'.
There are ditricts in America where this domi-
nion is so grievous, and so sensibly felt, that
some women, in a wild emotion of maternal
tenderness, have destroyed their female children
in their infancy, in order to deliver them from
that intolerable bondage to which they knew
they were doomed d. Thus the first inRfitution
of social life is perverted. That slate ofdomeftic
union towards which nature leads the human
species, in order to soften the heart to gentle-
ness and humanity, is rendered so unequal,
as to establish a cruel distinction between the
sexes, which forms the one to be harsh and
unfeeling, and humbles the other to servility
and fubjedion.

Tlieir wo- IT is owing, perhaps, in tome measure, to
'n,'ieT. this state of depreflion, that women in rude

nations are far from being prolific . The vi-
gour of their conflitution is exhausted by ex-
ccfive fatigue, and the wants and diltreffes of
savage life are lo numerous, as to force thne

G Cmilln, i. 153. Ba;icrc, i64. Labat Voy. ii. 8.
Chalnvalon, 51. '1'crtrc, ii. 300.

.1 G imilla, ii. 233. 238. I-Icrrcra, dec. 7. lib. i. c. 4.
J~irt(;lll, i. 0590. Cliyrlrois, iii. 3n4.

to take various precautions in order to prevent e o o K

IV,

too rapid an increase of their progeny. Among ^
wandering tribes, or such as depend chiefly
upon hunting for subsistence, the mother can.
not attempt to rear a second child, until the
first has attained such a degree of vigour as to
be in some mea'ure independent of her care.
From this motive it is the universal pracice of
the American women to suckle their children
during several years f; and as they seldom marry
early, the period of their fertility is over, befre
they can finish the long but.neceffary attendance
upon two or three children g. Among some of
the least polished tribes, whose industry and
foresight do not extend so far as to make any
regular provision for their own subsistence, it
is a maxim not to burden themselves with rear-
ing more than two childrenh; and no such
numerous families, as are frequent in civilized
societies, are to be found among men in the
savage state'. When twins are born, one of
them commonly is abandoned, because the mo.

f Herrera, dec. 6. lib. . c. 4.
g Charlev. iii. 303. Dumont Mem. far Louifianc, ii,

270. Denys Hilt. Natur. de l'Amerique, &c. ii. 365,
Charlcv. Hist. dc Parag ii 422.

h Techo's Account of Paraguay, &c. Church. Colldt,
yi. 10. Lett. Edif. 24 200. Lozano Dcfcr. 9z.

1 Maccleur's Journal, 63.

thelr

B o o K ther is not equal to the talk of rearing both .
I._ 'When a mother dies while {he is nursing a child,

all hope of preserving its life fails, and it is bu.
ried together with her in the fame grave'. As
the parents are frequently exposed to want by
their own improvident indolence, the difficulty
of fulaining their children becomes so great,
that it is not uncommon to abandon or destroy
them "'. Thus their experience of the difficulty
of training up an infant to maturity, amidst the
hardships of savage life, often stifles the voice of
nature among the Americans, and suppresses the
itrong emotions of parental tenderness.

Parental as- BUT, though necessity compels the inhabitants
section and
filhal duty. of America thus to set bounds to the increase of

their families, they are not deficient in affetion
and attachment to their offspring. They feel
the power of this inftin& in its full force, and
as long as their progeny continue feeble and
helpless, no people exceed them in tenderness
and care . But in rude nations, the dependence
of children upon their parents is of shorter con-

k Lctt. Edif. x. 2co. See NOTE XXVI.
2 Charlev. iii. 368. Lctt. Edif. x. 200. P. Mclch.
lHernarndcz Meinor. dc Chtriqui. Colbert. Collct. Orig.
Pap. L.

m Vcncga's Hill. of Californ. i 82.
" Gumilla, i. 211. Bict. 39 .

tinuancc

tinuance than in polished societies. When men B o O K
muff be trained to the various funtions of civil
life by previous discipline and education, when
'the knowledge of abstruse sciences mufft be
taught, and dexterity in intricate arts muff be
acquired, before a young man is prepared to
begin his career of ation, the attentive feelings
of a parent are not confined to the years of in-
fancy, but extend to what is more remote, the
establishment of his child in the world. Even
then, his solicitude does not terminate. His
protetion may still be requisite, and his wisdom
and experience still prove useful guides. Thus
a permanent connexion is formed; parental
tenderness is exercised, and filial refped re-
turned, throughout the whole course of life.
But in the finplicity of the savage fate, the
affetion of parents, like the inffintive fondness
of animals, ceases almost entirely as soon as their
offspring attain maturity. Little inftrution fits
them for that mode of life to which they are
destined. The parents, as if their duty were
accomplished, when they have conducted their
children through the helpless years of infancy,
leave them afterwards at entire liberty. Evcln
in their tender age, they feldoin advise or admo-
nifh, they never chide or chaffife them. They
susser them to be absolute masters of their own

adcionls.

B o K actions°. In an American hut, a father, a
...._ mother, and their posterity, live together like

persons assembled by accident, without seeming
to feel the obligation of the duties mutually
arising from this connexion P. As filial love is
not cherished by the continuance of attention
or good offices, the recollection of benefits re-
ceived in early infancy is too faint to excite it.
Conscious of their own liberty, and impatient of
restraint, the youth of America are accustomed
to aEt as if they were totally independent. Their
parents are not objets of greater regard than
other persons. They treat them always with
neglect, and often with such harshness and in.
folence, as to fill those who have been witnesses
of their conduct with horror 9. Thus the ideas
which seem to be natural to man in his savage
state, as they result neceflarily from his circum.
flances and condition in that period of his pro-
grefs, affect the two capital relations in domestic
life. They render the union between husband

Charleviiiz72. Biet.39.

B Giiila,i. 12. La-

fitau, i. 602. C(rcuxii Hill. Canad. p. 71. Fcrlinndcz,
Relac. Hist. de los Chequit. 33.

P lharlev. Hilt. N. Fr. iii. 273.
I Gumilla, i. 212. Tertre, ii, 376. Charlev. llift. de

N. France, iii. 309. Charlev. Hill. de Parag. i. S15.
Lozano, Dtfcript. del Gran Cl;Co, p. 68. loo, Io1.
Fcrnand. Relac. Hi-tor. de los Chcquit. 426.

and

and wife unequal. They hllorten the duration, B o0 K
and weaken the force, of the connexion between --
parents and children.

IV. FROM the domestic tfate of the Ameri- Politicalin.

fiitutionr.

cans, the transition to the consideration of their
civil government and political institutions is na-
tural. In every enquiry concerning the ope-
rations of men when united together in society,
the first object of attention should be their mode
of subsistence. Accordingly as that varies, their
laws and policy mufft be different. The infti-
tution suited to the ideas and exigencies of
tribes, which subsist chiefly by fishing or hunting,
and which have as yet acquired but an imperfect
conception of any species of property, will be
much more simple than those which must take
place when the earth is cultivated with regular
industry, and a right of property not only in its
producions, but in the foil itself, is completely
ascertained.

ALI the people of America, now under re- Ml,,'l,.t

view, belong to the former class. But though
they may all be comprehended under the ge-
neral denomination of savage, the advances
which they had made in the art of procuring
to themselves a certain and plcntiful fubfiftcnce,
were very unequal. On the cxtenfive plains oi

Soith-

B O K South-America, man appears in one of the

Iv.
a_ . rudest flates in which he has been ever ob-

served, or, perhaps, can exist. Several tribes
depend entirely upon the bounty of nature for
subsistence. They discover no solicitude, they
employ little foresight, they scarcely exert any
industry, to secure what is necessary for their
support. The Topayers of Brasil, the Guaxeros
of Tierra Firme, the Caiguas, the Moxos, and
several other people of. Paraguay, are unac-
quainted with every species of cultivation. They
neither sow nor plant. Even the culture of the
manioc, of which caffada bread is made, is an
art too intricate for their ingenuity, or too fa-
tiguing to their indolence. The roots which
the earth produces spontaneously, the fruits, the
berries, and the feeds, which they gather in the
woods, together with lizards and other reptiles,
which multiply amazingly with the heat of the
climate in a fat foil, moistened by frequent rains,
supply them with food during some part of the
Eyfiliing. year'. At other times they subsist by fishing

and nature seems to have indulged the laziness
of the South-American tribes by the liberality

r Nicuhoff. Iift. of Brasil. Church. Coll. ii. 134. Si-

mon, Conquilla de Tierra Firmti, p. r66. Tccho, Account
of Paraguay, &c. Church. vi. 78. Lettr. Edif. 23. 384.
0o. I90. Lozano, Iefcrip. dcl Gran Chaco, p. 8. Ri-
bas, Hiltor. dc los 'riumfos, &c. p. 7.

with

with which she ministers, in this way, to their B o o. K
wants. The valt rivers of that region in AIme- ._--
rica abound with an infinite variety of the most
delicate fish. The lakes and marfles formed
by the annual overflowing of the waters, are
filled with all the different species, where they
remain shut up, as in natural reservoirs, for the
use of the inhabitants. They swarm in such
floals, that in some places they are catched
without art or industry s. In others, the natives
have discovered a method of infeaing the water
with the juice of certain plants, by which the
fish are so intoxicated, that they float on the
surface, and are taken with the hand'. Some
tribes have ingenuity enough to preserve them
without salt, by drying or smoking them upon
hurdles over a flow fire ". The prolific quality
of the rivers in South-America induces many of
the natives to resort to their banks, and to de-
pend almofft entirely for nourishment on what
their waters supply with such profusion . In
this part of the globe, hunting teems not to have
been the firfl employment of men, or the first
eflort of their invention and labour to obtain
food. They were fishers before they became

5 See NOTE XXVII. t Sec NOTE XXVIII.
U Condam. 159. Gumilla, ii. 37. Ittr. Edli. 1.i.
199. 23. 328. Acugna, lRlat. de la Riv. dcs Ainaz. 138.

w Barrere, Relat. dc Fr. Eqrin. p. 15 .
VOL. 1. 1 hunters;

B O 0 K hunters; and as the occupations of the former

IV. I ,_ do not call for equal exertions of acivity, or

talents, with those of the latter, people in that
state appear to possess neither the fame degree
of enterprise nor of ingenuity. The petty na-
tions, adjacent to the Maragnon and Orinoco,
are manifestly the most inadive and least intelli.
gent of all the Americans.
lByhunting. NONE but tribes contiguous to great rivers

can sustain themselves in this manner. The
greater part of the American nations, dispersed
over the forests with which their country is cc.
vered, do not procure fubfiflence with the fame
facility. For although these forests, efpeciallv
in the southern continent of America, are tfored
plentifully with game , considerable efforts of
activity and ingenuity are requisite in pursuit of
it. Neceflity incited the natives to the one, and
taught them the other. Hunting became their
principal occupation; and as it called forth
ftrcnuous exertions of courage, of force, anda
of invention, it was deemed no lcfs honouralle
than necessary. This occupation was peculiar
to the men. They were trained to it from tlhir
earliest youth. A bold and dextrous huntr
ranked next in fame to the difinguilfed wvarrior,

x P. MT; ,', )ccadi. p. 32.1.. Gumillt, i. 4, &c.
.,\,'Il;3 ln i, J. I ) 'i.

and

and an alliance with the former is often courted u o 0 K
in preference to one with the latter Y. Hardly V
any device, which the ingenuity of man has
discovered for ensnaring or destroying wild ani-
mals, was unknown to the Americans. While
engaged in this favourite exercise, they {hake off
the indolence peculiar to their nature, the latent
powers and vigour of their minds are roused,
and they become acive, persevering, and inde-
fatigable. Their sagacity in finding their prey,
and their address in killing it, are equal. Their
reason and their senses being conflantly directed
towards this one object, the former displays
such fertility of invention, and the latter acquire
such a degree of acuteness, as appear almost in-
credible. They discern the footsteps of a wild
beast, which escape every other eye, and can
follow them with certainty through the pathless
forest. If they attack their game openly, their
arrow seldom errs from the mark "; if they en-
deavour to circumvent it by art, it is almost
impoflible to avoid their toils. Among several
tribes, their young men were not pcrmitted to
marry, until they had given such proofs of their
lkill in hunting as put it beyond doubt that they
were capable of providing for a fiamily. Their

y Clharll v. Hltlloir' dc la N. rr;l'cc, iii. r .
Z Bict. Voy. dc F'ra'llc Equin. 357. 1)avics' DiLcuv.
,r the River of Ama,.. Purcllaf. iv. p. 1287.

J ingenut),,

B °V K ingenuity, always on the stretch, and sharpened

by emulation, as well as necessity, has struck
out many inventions, which greatly facilitate
success in the chafe. The most singular of these
is the discovery of a poison in which they dip
the arrows employed in hunting. The slightest
wound with those envenomed shafts is mortal.
If they only pierce the skin, the blood fixes and
congeals in a moment, and the strongest animal
falls motionless to the ground. Nor does this
poison, notwithflanding its violence and subtlety,
infect the flefih of the animal which it kills.
That may be eaten with perfect safety, and
retains its native relish and qualities. All the
nations situated upon the banks of the Maragnon
and Orinoco are acquainted with this compofi-
tion, the chief ingredient in which is the juice
extracted from the root of the curare, a species
of withea. In other parts of America, they
employ the juice of the mnanchenille for the fame
purpose, and it operates with no less fatal ac-
tivity. To people poffifed of those secrets, the
bow is a more deftrucQive weapon than the
musket, and, in their skilful hands, docs great
execution among the birds and beafs which
"%bound in the forests of America.

a G it, ill;b, Ci

. iC
&r .

C II . 20 RCicrcli. ll Pi-
los. ii. 2(3. U3ancrvfl.'s Nat. 1-lill. of CGuinan, 281, &S.

Bur

BUT the life of a hunter gradually leads man B o o K

to a state more advanced. The chafe, even _
where prey is abundant, and the dexterity of .5,gic''l-
the hunter much improved, affbrds but an un-
certain maintenance, and at some seasons it
must be suspended altogether. If a savage
trusts to his bow alone for food, he and his
family will be often reduced to extreme dif-
trefs b Hardly any region of the earth fur-
nifhes man spontaneously with what his wants
require. In the mildest climates, and molt ser-
tile foils, his own industry and foresight mulf
be exerted, in some degree, to secure a regular
supply of food. Their experience of this fur-
mounts the abhorrence of labour natural to
savage nations, and compels them to have rc-
course to culture, as subsidiary to hunting. In
particular situations, onme finall tribes may, sub-
sift by fishing, independent of any production
of the earth, raised by their own industry. But
throughout all America, we scarcely meet with
any nation of hunters, which does not pratife
tome species of cultivation.

TIrE agriculture of the Americans, however, Thc vaioinl

is neither extensive nor laborious. As game i,',,:'.l-
and fish are their principal food, all they aim ""'

b See NOTE XXIX.

3 at

BOOK at by cultivation, is to supply any occasional

V.' . defect of there. In the southern continent of

America, the natives confined their indultry to
rearing a few plants, which, in a rich foil and
warm climate, were easily trained to maturity.
The chief of these is Maize, well known in
Europe by the name of Turkey or Indian wheat,
a grain extremely prolific, of simple culture,
agreeable to the taste, and affording a strong
hearty nourishment. The second is the Manioc,
which grows to the size of a large shrub, or
small tree, and produces roots somewhat refei-.
bling parsnips. After carefully squeezing out
the juice, these roots are grated down to a fine
powder, and formed into thin cakes, called
Cacida bread, which, though insipid to the
taste, proves no contemptible food c. As the
juice of the manioc is a deadly poison, tome
authors have celebrated the ingenuity of the
Americans, in converting a noxious plant into
wholefli ,: nourilhment. But it flould rather
be confidered as one of the desperate expedients
for procuring fublitllnce, to which neceflity re-
du'.cs ru;e ntions; or, perhaps, men were led
to the tile of it by a progress, in which there

Sloani T!iil. of am. ITn;i,d. p. iS. Labat, i. 394.

.,A(olta H iTll .

ll(1 d. i. l. i(ccvi.

r. l.

iv. c. 17. I'll ',

i. 62. AuiicLt leIl. litr l ic MIIanioc. Hilt. dcs Phlatcq,
toni. ii. p. O6, &c.

is nothing marvellous. One species of manioc B o K
is altogether free of any poisonous quality, and --.
may be eaten without any preparation but that
of roasting it in the embers. This, it is pro-
bable, was first used by the Americans as food;
and neceflity having gradually taught them the
art of separating its pernicious juice from the
other species, they have by experience found it
to be more prolific as well as more nourifhling .
The third is the plantain, which though it rifes
to the height of a tree, is of such quick growth,
that in less than a year it rewards the industry
of the cultivator with its fruit. This, when
roasted, supplies the place of bread, and is both
palatable and nourihfing'. The fourth is the
pofatoe, whose culture and qualities are too well
known to need any description. The fifth is
pimento, a finall tree, yielding a strong aromatic
spice. The Americans, who, like other inha-
bitants of warm climates, delight in whatever is
hot and of poignant flavour, deem this seasoning
a necessary of life, and mingle it copiously with
every kind of food they take'.

Q' Martyr, Decad. 30r. Labat. i. 411. Gumillk, ii;.
192. Machucha Milic. Indiana, 164. See NOTE XXX.

See NOTE XXXI.
Gurnilla, iii. 171. Acoffa, lib. iv. c. 20.

I 4 StUhr

B 0o K Suci- are the various produEtions, which

IV.
.._ --s were the chief obje&t of culture among the

hunting tribes on the continent of America;
and with a moderate exertion of active and
provident industry, there might have yielded a
full supply to the wants of a numerous people.
But men, accustomed to the tree and vagrant
life of hunters, are incapable of regular appli-
cation to labour, and confider agriculture as a
secondary and inferior occupation. Accord-
ingly, the provision for fubliftence, arising from
cultivation, was so limited and scanty among
the Americans, that, upon any accidental failure
of their usual fucccfs in hunting, they were
often reduced to extreme distress.

IN the islands, the mode of fubfifiing uas

considerably different. None of the large ani-
mals which abound on the continent were
known there. Onlyfour Ipecies of quadrupeds,
besides a kind of small dumb dog, exifled in
the islands, the biggest of which did not exceed
the size of a rabbit e. To hunt such diminutive
prey, was an occupation which required no
effort either of activity or courage. The chief
employment of a hunter in the isles was to kill

v Ovicdo, lib. xii. in proem.

birds,

birds, which on the continent are deemed ig- B o o

IV,

noble game, and left chiefly to the pursuit of
boys h. This want of animals, as well as their
peculiar situation, led the islanders to depend
principally upon fishing for their fubfiflence'.
Their rivers, and the sea with which they are
surrounded, fup,.,lied them with this species of
food. At some particular seasons, turtle, crabs,
and other fhlell fish, abounded in such numbers,
that the natives could support themselves with
a facility in which their indolence delightedkL
At other times, they ate lizards, and various
reptiles of odious forms'. To fishing, the in-
habitants of the islands added tome degree of
agriculture. Maize m, manioc, and other plants,
were cultivated in the fame manner as on the
continent. But all the fruits of their indurry, Theragnr.
together with what their foil and climate pro- it.
duced spontaneously, afforded them but a scanty
maintenance. Though their demands for food
were very sparing, they hardly raiscd what was
sufficient for their own consumption. If a few
Spaniards fettled in any distric&t, such a finall
addition of supernumerary mouths soon ex-

h Ribas I-li. de los Triumph. p. 13. De la Potlherc,
ii. 33. iii. 20.

Oviedo, lil). xiii. c. I. Gomara, I-Ifl. Gencr. c. 28.

k (onmara, Hlil. Gcner. c. 9. Labat. ii. 221, &c.
1 Ovicdo, lib. xiii. c. 3. ', Scc NOTE XXXII.

haultcd

B o O K haufted their scanty stores, and brought on a
Jv. famine.

Two causes Two circurnfanccs, common to all the savage
pcrtlion. nations of America, concurred;with those which

I have already mentioned, not only in rendering
their agriculture imperfet, but in circumfcrib-
ing their power in all their operations. They
had no tame animals; and they were unac-
quainted with the useful metals.

The want IN other parts of the globe, man, in hi'
ct tane
ni,~Ln3. rudest slate, appears as lord of the creation,

giving law to various tribes of animals, which
he has tamed and reduced to fubjedion. The
Tartar follows his prey on the horse which he
has reared; or tends his numerous herds, which
furnish him both with food and clothing: the
Arab has rendered the camel docile, and avails
himself of its persevering strength: the Lap-
lander has formed the rein.deer to be fubfcrvient
to his will; and even the people of Kamchatka
have trained their dogs to labour. This com-
mand over the inferior creatures is one of the
noblest prerogatives of man, and among the
greatcft effirts of his wisdom and power. With-
out this, his dominion is incomplete. He is
a monarch, who has no fubjc&s; a maiter,
without fcrvants, and mutf perform every ope-

ratiio

ration by the strength of his own arm. Such B o o K

1V.

was the condition of all the rude nations in I
America. Their reason was so little improved,
or their union so incomplete, that they seem
not to have been conscious of the superiority
of their nature, and suffered all the animal
creation to retain its liberty, without establishing
their own authority over any one species. nMoif
of the animals, indeed, which have been ren-
dered domeflic in our continent, do not exist
in the New World; but those peculiar to it are
neither so fierce, nor so formidable, as to have
exempted them from servitude. There arc some
animals of the fame species in both continents.
But the rein-deer, which has been tamed and
broken to the yoke in the one hemisphere, runs
wild in the other. The bfon of America is
manifestly of the fame species with the horned
cattle of the other hemisphere". The latter,
even among the rudetl nations in our continent,
have been rendered domeflic; and, in confe-
quence of his dominion over them, man can
accomplish works of labour with greater facility,
and has madc a great addition to his means of
fubfiftcnce. The inhabitants of many regions
of the New World, wlere the bison abounds,
might have derived the fame advantages from

n ]uiifrun, Arlic. f'otn.

it.

B o0 K it. It is not of a nature so indocile, but that

IV.

it might have been trained to be as subservient
to man as our cattle°. But a savage, in that
uncultivated itate wherein the Americans were
discovered, is the enemy of the other animals,
not their superior. He waftes and destroys,
but knows not how to multiply or to govern
them P.

THIS, perhaps, is the mofl notable diftin&ion

between the inhabitants of the Ancient and
New Worlds, and a high pre-eminence of ci.
vilized men above such as continue rude. The
greatest operations of man in changing and im-
proving the face of nature, as well as his most
considerable efforts in cultivating the earth,
are accomplifled by means of the aid which
he receives from the animals whom he has
tamed and employs in labour. It is by their
firength that he subdues the Rfubborn foil, and
converts the desert or marsh into a fruitful
field. But man, in his civilized state, is so ac-
cuflomed to the service of the domefic animals,
that he seldom reflc&s upon the vast benefits
which he derives from it. If we were to suppose

o Nouv. Decouvertc par Hcnncpin, p. 192. Kaln.
i. 207.

P Buffon Hidf. Nat. ix. 85. I-Iilt. Philof. et Polk. dcs
Etabliffcm. des Europ. dans lea dcux Ildes, vi. 364.

to

to him, even when most improved, to be de- B 0o K
prived of their useful ministry, his empire over 'v-
nature must in some measure cease, and he
would remain a feeble animal, at a loss how to
subsist, and incapable of attempting such ar-
duous undertakings as their affitance enables
him to execute with ease.

IT is a doubtful point, whether the dominion Want of th

useful mc-

of man over the animal creation, or his ac- tals.
quiring the use of metals, has contributed most
to extend his power. The era of this im-
portant discovery is unknown, and in our he-
mifphere very remote. It is only by tradition,
or by digging up some rude inflruments of our
forefathers, that we learn that mankind were
originally unacquainted with the use of metals,
and endeavoured to supply the want of them
by employing flints, llells, bones, and other
hard substances, for the fame purposes which
metals serve among polified nations. Nature
completes the formation of some metals. Gold,
filvcr, and copper, are found in their perfct
state in the clefts of rocks, in the fides of Imoun-
tains, or the channels of rivers. These were
accordingly the metals first known, and sir:s
applied to use. But iron, the: mos

o! i.rvice;ii)le

of all, and to vh;.:h n]:i is ioflt indebled, is
never difcovcrcd in its perle-t lorm; its pgr';s

alld

B o O K and flubborn ore must feel twice the force of

Iv.
i -_ fire, and go through two laborious processes,

before it become fit for use. Man was long
acquainted with the other metals, before he
acquired the art of fabricating iron, or attained
such ingenuity as to perseEt an invention, to
which he is indebted for those instruments
wherewith he subdues the earth, and commands
all its inhabitants. But in this, as well as in
many other respects, the inferiority of the Ame-
ricans was conspicuous. All the savage tribes,
scattered over the continent and islands, were
totally unacquainted with the metals which their
foil produces in great abundance, if we except
Ibme trifling quantity of gold, which they picked
up in the torrents that descended from their
mountains, and formed into ornaments. Their
devices to supply this want of the serviceable
metals, were extremely rude and awkward.
The nmoft simple operation was to them an un-
dertaking of immense difficulty and labour. To
fell a tree with no other instruments than
hatchets of stone, was employment for a month q.
To form a canoe into ihape, and to hollow it,
consumed years'; and it frequently began to rot
before they were able to finish itr. Their opc-

q Gunmilla, iii. 196.

Burdc Rclat. des Caraibcs, p. 22.

rations

rations in agriculture were equally flow and B o O K
defective. In a country covered with woods of _-
the hardest timber, the clearing of a small field
destined for culture required the united efforts
of a tribe, and was a work of much time and
great toil. This was the business of the men,
and their indolence was satisfied with perform-
ing it in a very slovenly manner. The labour
of cultivation was left to the women, who,
after digging, or rather stirring the field, with
wooden mattocks, and flakes hardened in the
fire, sowed or planted it; but they were more
indebted for the increase to the fertility of the
foil, than to their own rude industry'.

AGRICULTURE, even when the strength of

man is seconded by that of the animals which
he has fubjeted to the yoke, and his power
augmented by the use of the various inftru-
ments with which the discovery of metals has
furrnified him, is frill a work of great labour;
and it is with the lk'cat of his brow that he
renders the earth fertile. It is not wonderful,
then, that people deliitute of both thelc advan-
tages floulld have made so little progrcls in
cultivation, that they mult be confidered as
depending for lubfifctece on li(hing and hunt-

S Giinilla, iii. 166, &c. Lcltt, Edif. xi. 1o.

2 ing,

B o o K ing, rather than on the fruits of their own

iV.

'.-. . labour.

Political in- FROM this description of the mode of sub-
ftitutions arilingfrom fifling among the rude American tribes, the
this /tate.

form and genius of their political institutions
may be deduced, and we are enabled to trace
various circumfiances of diftination between
them and more civilized nations.

i. Divided i. T-iEY were divided into small independ-
into finall
communi- ent communities. While hunting is the chief

. source of subsistence, a vast extent of territory

is requisite for supporting a small number of
people. In proportion as men multiply and
unite, the wild animals, on which they depend
for food, diminimh, or fly at a greater distance
from the haunts of their enemy. The increase
of a society in this slate is limited by its own
nature, and the members of it must either
dili)erfe, like the game which they pursue, or
filLupon some better method of procuring food,
than by hunting. Beafis of prey are by nature
solitary and unsocial, they go not forth to the
chafe in herds, but delight in those recesses of
the forest where they can roam and destroy
undisturbed. A nation of hunters resembles
them both in occupation and in genius. They
cannot form into large communities, because it

. ~ would

would be impossible to find subsistence; and B o OK
they must drive to a distance every rival who _
may incroach on those domains, which they
confider as their own. This was the slate of
all the American tribes, the numbers in each
were inconsiderable, though scattered over coun-
tries of great extent; they were far removed
from one another, and engaged in perpetual
hoflilities or rivalthip'. In America, the word
nation is not of the fame import as in other
parts of the globe. It is applied to small so-
cieties, not exceeding, perhaps, two or three
hundred persons, but occupying provinces
greater than some kingdoms in Europe. The
country of Guiana, though of larger extent
than the kingdom of -France, and divided
among a great number of nations, did not
contain above twenty-five thousand inhabitants".
In the provinces which border on the Orinoco,
one may travel several hundred miles in different
directions, without finding a single hut, or ob-
serving the footsteps of a human creature w
In North America, where the climate is more
rigorous, and the foil less fertile, the desolation
is still greater. There, journeys of some hun-

I Lozano, Defcrip. del Gran Chaco, 59. 62. Fernan-
dez, Rclac. Hist. de los Chiquit. 162.

u Voyages de Marchais, iv. 353.
w Gumilla, ii. Io1.

VOL. II. K dred

B OOK dred leagues have been made through unin-
---.. habited plains and forests ". As long as hunting

continues to be the chief employment of man
to which he trusts for subsistence, he can hardly
be said to have occupied the earth Y.

Unac- . NATIONS which depend upon hunting
quaintred
wvtlr tle are, in a great measure, itrangers to the idea
idea of
property of property. As the animals on which. the

hunter feeds are not bred under his infpe&ion,
nor nourished by his care, he can claim no
right to them, while they run wild in the forest.
Where game is so plentiful that it may be
catched with little trouble, men never dream
of appropriating what is of small value, or of
easy acquisition. Where it is so rare, that the
labour or danger of the chafe requires the united
efforts of a tribe, or village, what is killed is a
common flock, belonging equally to all, who,
by their lkill or their courage, have contributed
to the success of the excursion. The forest, or
hunting-grounds, are deemed the property of
the tribe, from which it has a title to exclude
every rival nation. But no individual arrogates
a right to any diftrid of theli, in preference to

x M. Fabry, quoted by Buffon, iii. 488. Lalitlu, ii.

1,79. Bofsu, Trvelis through Louiiiianla, i. i i. Sc.
NOTE XXXIII.

Y See NOTI: XXXIV.

lI 5.

his fellow-citizens. They belong alike to all; B O O K
and thither, as to a general and undivided store,
all repair in quest of sustenance. The fame
principles by which they regulate their chief
occupation, extend to that which is subordinate.
Even agriculture has not introduced among
them a complete idea of property. As the men
hunt, the women labour together, and after
they have shared the toils of the seed-time, they
enjoy the harvest in commonz. Among some
tribes, the increase of their cultivated lands is
deposited in a public granary, and divided among
them at flated times, according to their wants".
Among others, though they lay up separate
stores, they do not acquire such an exclusive
right of property, that they can enjoy super-
fluity, while those around them susser want'.
Thus the diftinftions arising from the inequality
of poifeffions are unknown. The terms rich or
poor enter not into their language, and being
firangers to property, they are unacquainted
with what is the great objec of laws and policy,
as well as the chief motive which induced

z Dr. Fcrgufon's Essay, 125.
a Gimilla, i. 265. Brickell, Hilt. of N. Carol. 327.
See NOTE XXXV.

b Dcnys, Hilt. Natur. ii. 392, 393.

K 2 mankind.

B O 0 K mankind to eflabli(h the various arrangements

Iv.

a__W A of regular government .

High sense 3. PEOPLE in this slate retain a high sense of
of rqmality
and Inde- equality and independence. Wherever the idea
pendence. of property is not established, there can be no

diftinEtion among men, but what arises from
personal qualities. These can be conspicuous
only on such occasions as call them forth into
exertion. In times of danger, or in affairs of
intricacy, the wisdom and experience of age are
consulted, and prescribe the measures which
ought to be pursued. When a tribe of savages
takes the field againit the enemies of their
country, the warrior of most approved courage
leads the youth to the combat'. If they go
forth in a body to the chafe, the most expert
and adventurous hunter is foremost, and direts
their motions. But during seasons of tranquillity
and inaction, when there is no occasion to dif-
play those talents, all pre-eminence ceases. Every
circumflance indicates that all the members of
the community are on a level. They are clothed
in the fame simple garb. They feed on the

P. Martyr, Decad. p. 45. Veneg. Hist. of Califo)i.
i. 66. Lery, Navig. in Braiil, c. 17.

d Acofia, Hill. lib. vi. c. 19. Stadius, H;fl. Dia3l;.
lib. u c. 13. l)r Bry. iii. p. I to. Biet. 361.

faimc

fame plain fare. Their houses and furniture B OO K
are exactly finlilar. No distinction can arise -
from the inequality of possessions. Whatever
forms dependence on one part, or constitutes
superiority on the other, is unknown. All are
freemen, all feel themselves to be such, and
assert with firmness the rights which belong to
that condition ". This sentiment of indepen-
dence is imprinted so deeply in their nature,
that no change of condition can eradicate it,
and bend their minds to servitude. Accustomed
to be absolute masters of their own conduct,
they disdain to execute the orders of another;
and having never known controul, they will
not submit to corrections. Many of the Ame-
ricans, when they found that they were treated
as slaves by the Spaniards, died of grief; many
destroyed themselves in despair g.

4. AMONG people in this itate, government sene of

fubordina-

can assume little authority, and the sense of toi, impcr.
civil subordination muff remain very imperfect. f
While the idea of property is unknown, or in-
completely conceived; while the spontaneous

C Labat. vi. 124. Brickell, Iilt. of Carol. 310.

See NOTE XXXVI.

g Oviedo, lib. iii. c. 6. p. 97. Vega, Conquils. dc la

Florida, i. 30. ii. 416. Labat. ii. 38. Bciizo, Hill. Nov.
Orb. lib. iv. c. 25.

K 3 productions

B O K productions of the earth, as well as the fruits of
I-_- industry, are confidered as belonging to the

public flock, there can hardly be any such
subjet of difference or discussion among the
members of the fame community, as will re.
quire the hand of authority to interpose in
order to adjust it. Where the right of separate
and exclusive poffefiion is not introduced, the
great object of law and jurifdition does not
exist. When the members of a tribe are called
into the field, either to invade the territories of
their enemies, or to repel their attacks, when
they are engaged together in the toil and
dangers of the chafe, they then perceive that
they are part of a political body. They are
conscious of their own connetion with the
companions in conjunction with whom they
a&; and they follow and reverence such as
excel in condut and valour. But, during the
intervals between such common efforts, they
seem scarcely to feel the ties of political union h
No visible form of government is established.
The names of tnagjgrate and fbbjeed are not in
use. Every one seems to enjoy his natural in.
dependence almost entire. If a scheme of public
utility be proposed, the members of the com-

h Lozano, Defcr. del Gran Chaco, 93. Melendez Tc-
foros Verdaderos, ii. 23. See NOTE XXXVII.

munity

inunity are left at liberty to chufe whether they B o o K
will or will not assist in carrying it into exe- _
cution. No flatute imposes any service as a
duty, no compulsory laws oblige them to per-
form it. All their resolutions are voluntary,
and flow from the impulse of their own mindsi.
The first ftep towards eftabliflling a public ju-
rifdihion has not been taken in those rude
societies. The right of revenge is left in pri-
vate hands k. If violence is committed, or blood
is shed, the community does not assume the
power either of inflicting or of moderating the
punishment. It belongs to the family and friends
of the person injured or slain to avenge the
wrong, or to accept of the reparation offered by
the aggressor. If the elders interpose, it is to
advise, not to decide, and it is seldom their
counsels are liflened to; for as it is deemed
pusillanimous to susser an offender to escape
with impunity, resentment is implacable and
everlasting'. The object of government among
savages is rather foreign than domestic. They
do not aim at maintaining interior order and
police by public regulations, or the exertions

i Charlev. Hill. N. France, iii. z66. 268.
k Herrcra, dec. 8. lib. iv. c. 8.
I Charley. Hilt. N. France, iii. 271, 272. L;fit. i,
486. Caffani, H-is. de Nuevo Rcyno de Granada, 226.

K 4 0of

B 0 K of any permanent authority, but labour to
a_ , preserve such union among the members of

their tribe, that they may watch the motions
of their enemies, and aa againfl them with
concert and vigour.

To what SUCH was the form of political order efta.
people thore
descriptions blifhed among the greater part of the American
appiy. nations. In this ifate were almost all the tribes

spread over the provinces extending eastward of
the Mississippi, from the mouth of the St. Lau-
rence to the confines of Florida. In a similar
condition were the people of Brasil, the in-
habitants of Chili, several tribes in Paraguay and
Guiana, and in the countries which firetch from
the mouth of the Orinoco to the peninsula of
Yucatan. Among such an infinite number of
petty associations, there may be .peculiarities
which constitute a diftintion, and mark the
various degrees of their civilization and improve-
ment. But an attempt to trace and enumerate
there would be vain, as they have not been ob-
served by persons capable of discerning the mi.
nute and delicate circumflances which serve to
discriminate nations resembling one another in
their general characer and features. The de.
scription which I have given of the political
institutions that took place among those rude

tribes

tribes in America, concerning which we have oo K
received most complete information, will apply, ^
with little variation, to every people, both in
its northern and southern division, who have
advanced no farther in civilization, than to add
some slender degree of agriculture to fishing and
hunting.

IMPERFECT as those inflitutions may appear,

several tribes were not so far advanced in their
political progress. Among all those petty na-
tions which trusted for fubfilfence entirely to
fishing and hunting without any species of cul-
tivation, the union was so incomplete, and their
sense of mutual dependence so feeble, that
hardly any appearance of government or order
can be discerned in their proceedings. Their
wants are few, their objects of pursuit simple,
they form into separate tribes, and ac together,
from inflin&, habit, or conveniency, rather than
from any formal concert and association. To
this class belong the Californians, several of the
small nations in the extensive country of Para-
guay, some of the people on the banks of the
Orinoco, and on the river St. Magdalene, in the
new kingdom of Granada .

' Venegas, i. 68. Lettr. Edif. ii. 176. Techo, Hil.

of Parag. Churchill, vi. 78. Hill. Gen. des Voyages,
xiv. 74.

BUT

B K BTr though among these lafl-mentioned

i'.
W.- tribes there was hardly any shadow of regular
Sgillrap-r government, and even among those which I

arancs. first described its authority is slender and con.

fined within narrow bounds, there were, how.
ever, some places in America where government
was carried far beyond the degree of perfeEtion
which seems natural to rude nations. In fur.
veying the political operations of man, either in
his savage or civilized state, we difcovsr singular
and eccentric institutions, which start as it were
from their flation, and fly off so wide, that we
labour in vain to bring them within the general
laws of any system, or to account for them by
those principles which influence other commu-
nities in a similar situation. Some instances of
this occur among those people of America, whom
I have included under the common denomination
of savage. These are so curious and important
that I ihall describe them, and attempt to explain
their origin.

Particularly IN the New World, as well as in other parts
inl role of
the w;r.ncr of the globe, cold or temperate countries appear

to be the favourite feat of freedonl and inde-
pendence. There the mind, like the body, is
firm and vigorous. There men, conscious of
their own dignity, and capable of the greatefL
efforts in allerting it, aspire to independence,

D aland

and their flubborn spirits stoop with reluaance B o K
to the yoke of servitude. In warmer climates, .
by whose influence the whole frame is so much
enervated, that prelent pleasure is the supreme
felicity, and mere repose is enjoyment, men
acquiesce, almost without a firuggle, in the do-
minion of a superior. Accordingly, if we pro-
ceed from north to south along the continent of
America, we shall find the power of those vested
with authority gradually increasing, and the
spirit of the people becoming more tame and
passive. In Florida, the authority of the fa-
chems, caziques, or chiefs, was not only per-
manent, but hereditary. They were diftinguifled
by peculiar ornaments, they enjoyed prerogatives
of various kinds, and were treated by their sub-
jests with that reverence which people accuf-
tomed to fubjedion pay to a master ". Among Among the
the Natchez, a powerful tribe now extincc, for-
merly situated on the banks of the Mifiifippi, a
difference of rank took place, with which the
northern tribes were altogether unacquainted.
Some families were reputed noble, and enjoyed
hereditary dignity. The body of the people
was confidered as vile, and formed only for

n Cardenas y Cano Enfayo Chronol. a la His. de Florida,

p.46. Le Moyne de Morgues Icones Floridz. Ap. de
Bry. p. i. 4, &c. Charlev. Hid. N. Franlce, iii. 467,
468.

fubjelion.

:: o 0 K fubjetion. This diftindion was marked by

AV.

-_^, -rappellations which intimated the high elevation

of the one state, and the ignominious deprefion
of the other. The former were called Refpci7-
able; the latter, the Stinkards. The great
Chief, in whom the supreme authority was
vested, is reputed to be a being of superior nature,
the brother of the Sun, the sole object of their
worship. They approach this great Chief with
religious veneration, and honour him as the
representative of their deity. His will is a law
to which all submit with implicit obedience.
The lives of his subjects are so absolutely at his
disposal, that if any one has incurred his dif-
pleasure, the offender comes with profound humi-
lity and offers him his head. Nor does the
dominion of the Chiefs end with their lives;
their principal officers, their favourite wives,
together with many domestics of inferior rank,
are sacrificed at their tombs, that they may be
attended in the next world by the same persons
who served them in this; and such is the reve-
rence in which they are held, that those victims
welcome death with exultation, deeming it a
recompence of their fidelity, and a mark of
diflindtion, to be feleded to accompany their
deceased mafler '. Thus a perfed defpotifi,

0 Dumolt, Mcmoii. Hit. fur. I.ouiiiane, i. 175. Chlrlev.
lilt. N. l.'r iuce, iii. 41T, &c-. J,;ttr. Edif. zo. io6. 1 1.

w\ith

with its full train of superstition, arrogance, and Bn O K
cruelty, is established among the Natchez, and _
by a singular fatality, that people has tafted of
ihe worst calamities incident to polished nations,
though they themselves are not far advanced
beyond the tribes around them in civility and
improvement. In Hispaniola, Cuba, and the Inthe.
larger islands, their caziques or chiefs poffefled
extensive power. The dignity was transmittcd
by hereditary right from father to son. Its
honours and prerogatives were considerable.
Their fubjeEts paid great refpecl to the caziques,
and executed their orders without hesitation or
reserve P. They were distinguished by peculiar
ornaments, and in order to preserve or augment
the veneration of the people, they had the
address to call in the aid of fuperRfition to uphold
their authority. They delivered their mandates
as the oracles of heaven, and pretended to possess
the power of regulating the seasons, and of dif-
pensing rain or funflline, according as their sub-
jecs flood in need of them.

IN some parts of the southern continent, the 1in n,,no.

power of the caziques seems to have been as
extensive as in the isles. In Bogota, which is
now a province of the new kingdom of Granada,

P Ierrera, dec. i. lib. i. c. iG. lib. iii. c. 44 p. .88. I,;f
of Coliunb. cli. 32.

there

B o O K there was fettled a nation, more considerable in

IV.
__ -_j number and more improved in the various arts

of life, than any in America except the Mexicans
and Peruvians. The people of Bogota subsisted
chiefly by agriculture. The idea of property
was introduced among them, and its rights,
secured by laws, handed down by tradition, and
observed with great care 9. They lived in towns
which may be termed large, when compared
with those in other parts of America. They were
clothed in a decent manner, and their houses
may be termed commodious, when compared
with those of the fiall tribes around them.
The effeEts of this uncommon civilization were
conspicuous. Government had assumed a regu-
lar form. A jurifdicEion was established, which
took cognizance of different crimes, and punilhed
them with rigour. A diftin&ion of ranks was
known; their chief, to whom the Spaniards gave
the title of monarch, and who merited that name
on account of his splendor as well as power,
reigned with absolute authority. He was at-
tended by officers of various conditions; he never
appeared in public without a numerous retinue i
he was carried in a fort of palanquin with much
pomp, and harbingers went before him to sweep
the road and strew it with flowers. This un.

q Piedrahita, Hist. de las Conquilt del N. Rayno de Gral;.
p. 46.

common

common pomp was supported by presents or B 0 0 K

IV.

taxes received from his fubjeEs, to whom their ,
prince was such an obje& of veneration, that
none of them presumed to look him directly in
the face, or ever approached him but with an
averted countenance . There were other tribes
on the fame continent, among which, though
far less advanced than the people of Bogota in
their progress towards refinement, the freedom
and independence, natural to man in his savage
fate, was much abridged, and their caziques had
assumed extensive authority.

IT is not easy to point out the circumstances, Ceaufrc o

thole irrc-

or to discover the causes which contributed to gulaap-
introduce and establish among each of those p.'aial.cs
people a form of government so different from
that of the tribes around them, and so repugnant
to the genius of rude nations. If the persons
who had an opportunity of observing them in
their original state had been more attentive and
more discerning, we might have received inform-
ation from their conquerors sufficient to guide
us in this inquiry. If the tranfadions of people,
unacquainted with the use of letters, were not
involved in impenetrable obscurity, we might
have derived some information from this domeflic

r Herrera, dec. 6. lib. ;. c. 2. lih. v. c. 56. Piedraiiti,
c. 5. p- 25, '&c. Goimnra, 1-ii. c '2.

source.

B 0 0 K source. But as nothing fatisfacory can be
A ^> gathered, either from the accounts of the Spa-

niards, or from their own traditions, we mufft
have recourse to conjectures, in order to explain
the irregular appearances in the political state of
the people whom I have mentioned. As all
those tribes which had loft their native liberty
and independence were feated in the Torrid
Zone, or in countries approaching to it, the
climate may be supposed to have had some influ-
ence in forming their minds to that servitude,
which seems to be the destiny of man in those
regions of the globe. But though the influence
of climate, more powerful than that of any
other natural cause, is not to be overlooked;
that alone cannot be admitted as a solution of the
point in question. The operations of men are
so complex, that we muff not attribute the form
which they assume to the force of a tingle prin-
ciple or cause. Although despotism be confined
in America to the Torrid Zone, and to the warm
regions Ibordering upon it, I have already ob-
served that these countries contain various tribes,
some of which possess a high degree of freedom,
and others are altogether unacquainted with the
restraints of government. The indolence and
timidity peculiar to the inhabitants of the islands,
render them so incapable of the sentiments or
efforts necessary for maintaining independence,

that

that there is no occasion to search for any other B o K
cause of their tame submission to the will of a - K
superior. The fubjetion of the Natchez, and
of the people of Bogota, seems to have been the
consequence of a difference in their itate from
that of the other Americans. They were fettled
nations, residing constantly in one place. Hunt-
ing was not the chief occupation of the former,
and the latter seem hardly to have trusted to it
for any part of their subsistence. Both had made
such progress in agriculture and arts, that the
idea of property was introduced in tome degree
in the one community, and fully established in
the other. Among people in this state, avarice
and ambition have acquired obje&s, and have
begun to exert their power, views of interest
allure the selfish; the desire of pre-eminence
excites the enterprising; dominion is courted by
both; and passions unknown to man in his
savage state prompt the interested and ambitious
to encroach on the 'rights of their fellow-citizens,
Motives, with which rude nations are equally
unacquainted, induce the people to submit
tamely to the usurped authority of their superiors.
But even among nations in this state, the spirit
of fubjets could not have been rendered so obfe-
quious, or the power of rulers so unbounded,
without the intervention of superstition. By its
fatal influence, the human mind, in every stage

VOL. 11. L of

B OO K of its progress, is depressed, and its native

IV.
-v- vigour and independence subdued. Whoever

can acquire the direEion of this formidable en-
gine, is secure of-dominion over his species.
Unfortunately for the people whose institutions
are the subjed of inquiry, this power was: in the
hands of their chiefs. The caziques of the isles
could put what responses they pleased into the
- mouths of their Ccmis or gods; and it was by
their interposition, and in their name, that they
imposed any tribute or burden on their people'.
The fame power and prerogative was exercised
by the great chief of the Natchez as the principal
minifPer as well as the representative of the Sun,
their deity. The refpe& which the people of
Bogota paid to their monarchs was likewise
inspired by religion, and the heir apparent of
the kingdom was educated in the innermost recess
of their principal temple, under such austere dif-
cipline, and with such peculiar rites, as tended
to fill his fubjets with high sentiments concern-
ing the fanclity of his charaater, and the dignity
of his station'. Thus fuperflition, which, in
the rudest period of society, is either altogether
unknown, or waftes its force in childish unmean-
ing pralites, had acquired such an ascendant
over thole people of America, who had made

' r tlrcia, dec. k
. lib, iii. c. 3. ( Piedrallita, p. 27.

fuOme

some little progress towards refinement, that it B O O K
became the chief instrument of bending their
minds to an untimely servitude, and fubjedted
them, in the beginning of their political career,
to a despotism hardly less rigorous than that
which awaits nations in the last Itage of their
corruption and decline.

V. AFTER examining the political institutions Their art o

of the rude nations in America, the next object
of attention is their art of war, or their provision
for public security and defence. The frnall
tribes dispersed over America are not only inde.
pendent and unconneted, but engaged in per.
petual hostilities with one another . Though
mostly strangers to the idea of separate property
vested in any individual, the rudest of the Ame.
rican nations are well acquainted with the rights
of each community to its own domains. This
tight they hold to be perfed and exclusive,
entitling the possessor to oppose the encroach-
ment of neighbouring tribes. As it is of the
utmost consequence to prevent them from de-
firoying or disturbing the game in their hunting
grounds, they guard this national property with
a jealous attention. But as their territories are
extensive, and the boundaries of them not exaetly

u Ribas Hill. de los Triumph. p. 9.

L 2 afcer.

B o0 0 ascertained, innumerable fubjecs of dispute arise,

_- which seldom terminate without bloodshed. Even

in this simple and primitive fiate of society,
interest is a source of discord, and often prompts
savage tribes to take arms, in order to repel or
punish such as encroach on the forests or plains,
to which they trust for subsistence.

Their mo- BUT ntereft is not either the most frequent
tivcs for en-
:gtI'gin or the molt powerful motive of the incessant
W"'' hostilities among rude nations. These must be

imputed to the passion of revenge, which rages
with such violence in the breast of savages, that
eagerness to gratify it may be confidered as the
distinguishing charafteriftic of men in their unci-
vilized fiate. Circumstances of powerful influ-
ence, both in the interior government of rude
tribes, and in their external operations against
foreign enemies, concur in cherishing and add-
ing strength to a paflion fatal to the general
tranquillity. When the right of redressing his
own wrongs is left in the hands of every indi.
vidual,'injuries are felt with exquisite sensibility,
and vengeance exercised with unrelenting ran,
cour. No time can obliterate the memory of
an offence, and it is seldom that it can be
expiated but by the blood of the offender. In
carrying on their public wars, savage nations arc
influenced by the fame ideas, and animated with

the

the fame spirit, as in prosecuting private ven- B °° K
geance. In small communities, every man is o--

FroIn the

touched with the injury or afliont offered to the f,,:,,t of
body of which he is a member, as if it were a '"I'""-
personal attack upon his own honour or safety.
The desire of revenge is communicated from
breast to breast, and soon kindles into rage.
As feeble societies can take the field only in
finall parties, each warrior is conscious of the
importance of his own arm, and feels that to it
is committed a considerable portion of the public
vengeance. War, which between extensive
kingdoms is carried on with little animosity, is
prosecuted by finall tribes with all the rancour
of a private quarrel. The resentment of nations
is as implacable as that of individuals. It may be HIence the

ferocity of

dissembled or suppressed, but is never extin- hjeirars,
guifhed; and often, when least expEted or
dreaded, it bursts out with redoubled furyv.
When polished nations have obtained the glory
of victory, or have acquired an addition of ter-
ritory, they may terminate a war witli honour.
But savages are not satisfied until they extirpate
the community which is the objed of their
hatred. They fight not to conquer, but to

v Boucher Hit. Nat. de N. France, p. 93. Cliariv.

Hilt. de N. France, iii. 2i5. 251. ILe.y al). dic lryr, ii.
z04. Creux. Hill. Canad. p. 72. .ozaiio D)elcr. dcl
Gran Chaco, 25. IHcinnp. Mxcurs des Sauv. 40.

L 3 (dcfroy,

B 0 K defiroy. If they engage in hostilities, it is with a

_^_V resolution never to fee the face of the enemy in

peace, but to prosecute the quarrel with immor.
tal enmity". The desire of vengeance is the
first, and almost the only principle, which a
savage inffils into the minds of his children x.
This grows up with him as he advances in life;
and as his attention is direted to few objects,
it acquires a degree of force unknown among
men, whose paflions are dissipated and weakened
by the variety of their occupations and pursuits.
The desire of vengeance, which takes possession
of the heart of savages, resembles the instinctive
rage of an animal, rather than the pafflon of a
man. It turns, with undifcerning fury, even
against inanimate objeEts. If hurt accidentally
by a flone, they often seize it in a transport of
anger, and endeavour to wreak their vengeance
upon it Y. If struck with an arrow in a battle,
they will tear it from the wound, break and bite
it with their teeth, and dash it on the ground'.
With refpe& to their enemies, the rage of ven-
geance knows no bounds. When under the

w Charlev. Hilt. N. Fr. iii. z25. Colden, i. io8. ii. 126.
Barrere, p. 170. 173.

x Charlev. Hilt. N. Fr. iii. 326. Lery ap. de Bry, iii.
z36. Lozano Hilt. de Parag. i. 144.

Y Lery ap. de Bry, iii. 190.
X Lery ap. de Bry, iii. 208. Herrera, dec. I. lib. vi.
c.8.

dominion

dominion of this paflion, man becomes the mopi B n o K
cruel of all anlmals. He neither pities, nor for. ,,
gives, nor spares.

THE force of this paflion is so well under-

flood by the Americans therfclves, that they
always apply to it, in order to excite their people
to take arms. If the elders of any tribe attempt
to rouze their youth from sloth, if a chief wifhles
to allure a band of warriors to follow him in
invading an enemy's country, the most perfua-
five topics of their martial eloquence are drawn
from revenge. " The bones of our country-
men," fay they, " lie uncovered; their bloody
bed has not been washed clean. Their spirits
cry against us; they must be appeared. Let us
go and devour the people by whom they were
slain. Sit no longer inacive upon your mats;
lift the hatchet, console the spirits of the dead,
and tell them that they shall be avenged "."

ANIMATED with such exhortations, the youth and trc;,

fiatch their arms in a transport of fury, raile the IP,','Ui.
song of war, and burn with impatience to embrue
their hands in the blood of their enemies. Pri-
vate chiefs often affemrble finall parties, and
invade a hostile tribe, without consulting the

= Charlev. Hill. N. Fr. iii. 216, 217. Lcly ap. de
Bry, iii. 204.

L 4 rulers

B o0 K rulers of the community. A single warrior,

IV.
ev'-_ prompted by caprice or revenge, will take the

field alone, and march several hundred miles
to surprise and cut off a traggling enemyb.
The exploits of a noted warrior, in such solitary
excursions, often form the chief part in the
hiffory of an American campaign '; and their
elders connive at such irregular sallies, as they
tend to cherish a martial spirit, and accuflom
their people to enterprise and danger '. But
when a war is national, and undertaken by
public authority, the deliberations are formal
and flow. The elders assemble, they deliver
their opinions in solemn speeches, they weigh
with maturity the nature of the enterprise, and
balance its beneficial or disadvantageous confe-
quences with no inconsiderable portion of poli-
tical discernment or sagacity. Their priefis and
soothsayers are confuhed, and sometimes they
ask the advice even of their women . If
the determination be for war, they prepare for
it with much ceremony. A leader offers to
conduac the expedition, and is accepted. But
no man is constrained to follow him; the refo-
lution of the community to commence hoflilities

b See NOTE XXXVIII. C See NOTE XXXIX.
d Boffu, i. i4o. Lery ap. de Bry, 215. Henncpin
1Iceurs des Sauv. 41. Lafitau, ii. 169.

Clarlev. Hilt. N. Fr. z 5. 268. Biet. 367. 3So.

imposes

imposes no obligation upon any member to take B O O I
part in the war. Each individual is frill master
of his own conduct, and his engagement in the
service is perfectly voluntary '.

THE maxims by which they regulate their Mode of

carryingon

military operations, though extremely different war.
from those which take place among more civi-
lized and populous nations, are well suited to
their own political ftatc, and the nature of the
country in which they at. They never take
the field in numerous bodies, as it would require
a greater effort of foresight and induflry, than is
usual among savages, to provide for their sub-
fiftence, during a march of some hundred miles
through dreary forefis, or during a long voyage
upon their lakes and rivers. Their armies are
not encumbered with baggage or miliary flores.
Each warrior, besides his arms, carries a mat
and a small bag of pounded maize, and with
these is completely equipped for any service.
While at a distance from the enemies frontier,
they disperse through the woods, and support
themselves with the game which they kill, or the
fish which they catch. As they approach nearer
to the territories of the nation which they intend
to attack, they collect their troops, and advance

t Charlcv. Hist. N. Fr. 217, 218.

with

B o0 K with greater caution. Even in their hottest and

*.
- nmoft aaive wars, they proceed wholly by ftra.

tagem and ambuscade. They place not their
glory in attacking their enemies with open force.
To surprise and defiroy is the greatest merit of a
commander, and the highest pride of his fol-
lowers. War and hunting are their only occu.
pations, and they conduct both with the fame
spirit and the fame arts. They follow the track
of their enemies through the forest. They en-
deavour to discover their haunts, they lurk in
some thicket near to there, and, with the patience
of a sportsman lying in wait for game, will con-
tinue in their station day after day, until they
can rufl upon their prey when nmoft secure, and
least able to refifl them. If they meet no frag-
gling party of the enemy, they advance towards
their villages, but with such solicitude to conceal
their own approach, that they often creep on
their hands and feet through the woods, and
paint their flins of the fame colour with the
withered leaves; in order to avoid detention '
If so fortunate as to remain unobserved, they set
on fire the enemies' huts in the dead of night,
and massacre the inhabitants, as they fly n{ked
and defencclefs from the flames. If they hope
to efl'ecS a retreat without being pursucd, they

g Clharlv. Ilill. N. Fr. iii. z37, 238. IInncp. Matrirl
dlc' ti,,v. p. 59.

carl ;

carry off some prisoners, whom they reserve for B o K
a more dreadful fate. But if, notwithstanding a-
all their address and precautions, they find that
their motions are discovered, that the enemy
has taken the alarm, and is prepared to oppose
them, they usually deem it most prudent to
retire. They regard it as extreme folly to meet
an enemy who is on his guard, upon equal terms,
or to give battle in an open field. The most
diflinguifhed luccels is a disgrace to a leader, if
it has been purchased with any considerable loss
of his followersh; and they never boalt of a
vidory, if fained with the blood of their own
countrymen ', To fall in battle, instead of
being reckoned an honourable death, is a mif-
fortune which fubjets the memory of a war-
rior to the imputation of rashness or impru-
dence L.

THIS system of war was universal in America, Not owing

to any defe&

and the small uncivilized tribes, dispersed through ot courage.
all its different regions and climates, display more
craft than boldness in carrying on their hostilities.
Struck with this condu&, so opposite to the ideas
and maxims of Europeans, several authors con-

h See NOTE XL.
i Charlev. Hill. N. Fr. iii;. 238. 307. Biet. 38 . La-

litau Mcaurs des Sauv. ii. 248.
I Charlcv. iii. 376. Sce NOTE XLI.

tend

B 0 0 K tend that it flows from a feeble and dastardly

IV. i_-_.i spirit peculiar to the Americans, which is inca-

pable of any generous or manly exertion '. But
when we reflec that many of these tribes, on
occasions which call for extraordinary efforts,
not only defend themselves with obstinate refo-
lution, but attack their enemies with the most
daring courage, and that they possess fortitude
of mind superior to the sense of danger or the
fear of death, we must ascribe their habitual
caution to foine other cause than constitutional
timidity ". The number of men in each tribe
isTfo small, the difficulty of rearing new members,
amidst the hardships and dangers of savage life,
so great, that the life of a citizen is extremely
precious, and the preservation of it becomes a
capital objeEt in their policy. Had the point of
honour been the fame among the feeble Ame-
rican tribes as among the powerful nations of
Europe, had they been taught to court fame or
victory in contempt of danger and death, they
muff have been ruined by maxims so ill adapted
to their condition. But wherever their commu-
nities are more populous, so that they can a&
with considerable force, and can sustain the

I Rccherches Philof. fur lcs Amclic. i. 11i. Voyage
de March. iv. 410.

,n Lalitan Mecurs dcs Sauv. ii. 248, 249. Clhal'c''.
N. Fr. iii. 307.

loss of several of their members, without being B o o K
sensibly weakened, the military operations of _- ..j
the Americans more nearly resemble those of
other nations. The Brafilians, as well as the
tribes situated upon the banks of the river De la
Plata, often take the field in such numerous
bodies, as deserve the name of armies n. They
defy their enemies to the combat, engage in re-
gular battles, and maintain the confli& with that
desperate ferocity, which is natural to men who,
having no idea of war but that of exterminating
their enemies, never give or take quarter 0. In
the powerful empires of Mexico and Peru,
great armies were assembled, frequent battles
were fought, and the theory as well as practice
of war were different from what took place in
those petty societies which assume the name of
nations.

BUT though vigilance and attention are the rncapabl. oi

order or dis1

qualities chiefly requisite, where the objed of l Jij.
war is to deceive and to furprize and though
the Americans, when acing singly, display an
amazing degree of address in concealing their
own motions, and discovering those of an enemy,
yet it is remarkable that, when they take the
field in parties, they can feldorn be brought to

" Fabr; Vcrifr. Dcfcrip. Illdic ap. dc Bry, vi. . p42.
' See NOTE XLII.

obs)erve

B O K observe the precautions most essential to their

IV. ,__-J own security. Such is the difficulty of accustom.

ing savages to subordination, or to a& in con.
cert; such is their impatience under restraint,
and such their caprice and presumption, that it is
rarely they can be brought to conform them,
selves to the counsels and direcions of their
leaders. They never flation centinels around
the place where they reft at night, and after
marching some hundred miles to furprize an
enemy, are often surprised themselves, and cut
off, while funk in as profound sleep as if they
were not within reach of danger P.

IF, notwithstanding this negligence and fecu.

rity, which often frustrate their most artful
schemes, they catch the enemy unprepared, they
rush upon them with the utmost ferocity, and
tearing off the scalps of all those who fall viQims
to their rageq, they carry home those strange
trophies in triumph. Thcfe they preserve as
monuments, not only of their own prowess, but
of the vengeance which their arm has inflicted
upon the people who were objets of public
resentment r. They are still more solicitous to
seize prisoners. During their retreat, if they

P Charlev. N. Fr. iii. 23ó, 237. Lettr. Edif. 17. 308.
20. 130. Lafit, Mcatits, ii. 47. Lahontan, ii. 176.

A1 Sec NOTE XL 11. Lalitau Mccurn, ii. 256.

hope

hope to effect it unmolested, the prisoners are B 0 0 K
commonly exempt from any insult, and treated
with some degree of humanity, though guarded
with the most strict attention.

BUT after this temporary suspension, the rage Treatmcnt

olpi ifoncr:,

of the conquerors rekindles with new fury. As
soon as they approach their own frontier, some
of their number are dispatched to inform their
countrymen with refpec to the success of the
expedition. Then the prisoners begin to feel
the wretchedness of their condition. The wo-
men of the village, together with the youth who
have not attained to the age of bearing arms,
assemble, and forming themselves into two lines,
through which the prisoners muff pass, beat and
bruise them with flicks or flones in a cruel
manner'. After this first gratification of their
rage against their enemies, follow lamentations
for the lots of fich of their own countrymen as
have fallen in the service, accompanied with
words and actions which fuem to cxprefs the
utmont anguifl and gridel But, in a moment,
upon a signal given, their tears cealc they pal:,
with a sudden and unaccountable transition,
from the depths of sorrow to transports of joy;
and begin to celebrate their victory with all the

' lallr.)lt;l , i1. i f8!..

'u ill

B o o K wild exultation of a barbarous triumph '. The

_. fate of the prisoners remains fiill undecided,

The old men deliberate concerning it. Some
are destined to be tortured to death, in order to
satiate the revenge of the conquerors; some to
replace the members which the community has
loir in that or former wars. They who are
reserved for this milder fate, are led to the huts
of those whose friends have been killed. The
women meet them at the door, and if they
receive them, their sufferings are at an end.
They are adopted into the family, and, accord.
ing to their phrase, are feated upon the mat of
the deceased. They assume his name, they
hold the fame rank,, and are treated thence.
forward with all the tenderness due to a father,
a brother, a husband, or a friend. But if, either
from caprice or an unrelenting desire of revenge,
the women of any family refuse to accept of the
prisoner who is offered to them, his doom is
fixed. No power can then save him from
torture and death.

Trn- IL

their

n- tir lot is in suspense, the prisoners

difl'crnce c,)lcrnillg themselves appear altogether unconcerned about
htifat, what may befal them. They talk, they eat,

they sleep, as if they were perfectly at ease, and
t Clhrlcv. . Ni. N. Si. i. 241. Lafitau Mccurs, ii. 264.

no

no danger impending. When the fatal sentence B O o K
is intimated to them, they receive it with an un-
altered countenance, raise their death-long, and
prepare to susser like men. Their conquerors and forri

rude under

affemble.as to a solemn feltival, resolved to put torture.
the fortitude of the captive to the utmost proof.
A scene ensues, the bare description of which is
,enough to chill the heart with horror, wherever
men have been accuflomed, by milder inflitu-
tions, to refpedt their species, and to melt into
tenderness at the fight of human sufferings.
The prisoners are tied naked to a stake, but so
as to be at liberty to move round it. All who
are present, men, women, and children, rush
upon them like furies. Every species of torture
is applied that the rancour of revenge can invent.
Some burn their limbs with red-hot irons, some
mangle their bodies with knives, others tear
their flesh from their bones, pluck out their nails
by the roots, and rend and twist their sinews,
They vie with one another in refinements of tor-
ture. Nothing sets bounds to their rage but the
dread of abridging the duration of their ven-
geance by hastening the death of the sufferers;
and such is their cruel ingenuity in tormenting,
that by avoiding indultrioufly to hurt any vital
part, they often prolong this scene of anguish
for several days. In fpitc of all that they susser,
the vitims continue to chant their death..fong

VOL. li. M 'with

B o0 K with a firm voice, they boast of their own
-v.--> exploits, they insult their tormentors for their

want of skill in avenging their friends and re-
lations, they warn them of the vengeance which
awaits them on account of what they are now
doing, and excite their ferocity by the most
provoking reproaches and threats. To display
undaunted fortitude in such dreadful situations,
is the noblest triumph of a warrior. To avoid
the trial by a voluntary death, or to shrink under
it, is deemed infamous and cowardly. If any
one betray symptoms of timidity, his tormentors
often dispatch him at once with contempt, as un-
worthy of being treated like a man ". Animated
with those ideas, they endure, without a groan,
what it seems almost impossible that human na-
ture fliould sustain. They appear to be not only
insensible of pain, but to court it. " Forbear,"
1aid an aged chief of the Iroquois, when his
infsults had provoked one of his tormentors
to wound him with a knife, " forbear these
flabs of your knife, and rather let me die by
fire, that those dogs, your allies, from beyond
the sea, may learn by my example to susser like
men "." 'This magnanimity, of which there
are frequent instances among the American

D I) le Pothecie, ii. 237. iii. 48.
-" Colden, TIift. of Iive Nationst i. 200.

warriors,

Watriors, inflead of exciting admiration, or call- B O

IV.

ing forth sympathy, exasperates the fierce spirits a
of their torturers to fresh adts of cruelty".
'Weary at length of contending with men, whose
conrtancy of mind they cannot vanquish, some
chief in a rage puts a period to their sufferings,
by dispatching them with his dagger or club Y.

THIS barbarous scene is often succeeded by Sometimes

eat their

one no less shocking. As it is impoflible to priioners.
appease the fell spirit of revenge which rages in
the heart of a savage, this frequently prompts
the Americans to devour those unhappy persons,
who have been the vidims of their cruelty. In
the ancient world, tradition has preserved the
memory of barbarous nations of cannibals, who
fed on human flesh. But in every part of the
New World there were people to whom this
custom was familiar. It prevailed in the south-
ern continent Z, in several of the islands a, and in

x Voyages de Lahont. i. 236.
Y Charlev. Hilt. N. Fr. iii. 243, &c. 385. Lafitau

Mcurs, ii. 265. Creuxij Hilt. Canad. p. 73. Hcnnep.
Mcurs des Sauv. p. 64, &c. Lahont. i. 233, &c. Tertrc,
ii. 405. De la Potherie, ii. 22, &c.

X Stadius ap. de Bry, iii. 123. Lcry, ib:d. 210. Biet.

384. Lettr. Edif. 23. 341. Pifo, 8. Condam. 84. 97?
Ribas, Hilt. de los Triumph. 473.

" Life of Colunb. 529. Mart. Dec, p. 18. Tertre,
ii. 405.

M 2 various

B o o iK various diftri&s of North Americab. Even in

those parts, where circumstances, with which we
are unacquainted, had in a great measure abo.
lifhed this practice, it seems formerly to have
been fe well known, that it is incorporated into
the idiom of their language. Among the
troquois, the phrase by which they express their
resolution of making war againit an enemy is,
" Let us go and eat that nation." If they
solicit the aid of a neighbouring tribe, they
invite it to " eat broth made of the flesh of their
enemiesC." Nor was the practice peculiar to
rude unpolifhed tribes; the principle from which
it took rife is so deeply rooted in the minds
of the Americans, that it subsisted in Mexico,
one of the civilized empires in the New World,
and relics of it may be discovered among the
more mild inhabitants of Peru. It was not
scar city of food, as some authors imagine, and
the importunate cravings of hunger, which
forced the Americans to those horrid repasts on
their fellow-creatures. Human flesh was never
used as common food in any country, and the
various relations concerning people who reckoned
it among the stated means of fubfiflence, floxw

. b Dumont, Mcr. i. 254. Clailev. I-lift. N. Fr. i. 259.
ii. 14. iii. 21. D)e la Potheric, iii. 50.

' Charlv. Hilt. N. Fr. iii. 208, 209. Lcttr. Edif. :3'
p. 277. Dr a l ottlrie, ii. 298. See NOTE XLIV.

froln

from the credulity and mistakes of travellers. B o o K
The rancour of revenge first prompted men -v. .
to this barbarous aftion'. The fiercest tribes
devoured none but prisoners taken in war, or
such as they regarded as enemies '. Women and
children who were not the objeAs of enmity, if
not cut off in the fury of their first inroad into
an hostile country, seldom suffered by the delibe-
rate effets of their revenge f.

THE people of South America gratify their

revenge in a manner somewhat different, but
with no less unrelenting rancour. There pri-
foners, after meeting at their first entrance with
the fame rough reception as among the North
Americans g, are not only exempt from injury,
but treated with the greatest kindness. They
are feasted and caressed, and some beautiful
young women are appointed to attend and solace
them. It is not easy to account for this part of
their conduc, unless we impute it to a refiner
ment in cruelty. For, while they seem studious
to attach the captives to life, by supplying them

'1 Biet. 383. Blanco, Conversion de Piritu, p. 28. Ban.
croft, Nat. Hist. of Guiana, p. 259, &c.

O See NOTE XLV.
e Biet. 382. Bandini, Vita di Americo, 84. Tertrc,
.)o5. Fcrmin. Defcrip. dc Surin. i. 54.

6 Stadius ap. de Bry, iii. p. 40. 123.

bl 3 with

B o o K with every enjoyment that can render it agree.
Vi3_,_ able, their doom is irrevocably fixed. On a day

appointed, the victorious tribe assembles, the
prisoner is brought forth with great solemnity,
he views the preparations for the sacrifice with
as much indifference as if he himself were not
the viEtim, and meeting his fate with undaunted
firmness, is dispatched with a single blow. The
moment he falls, the women seize the body, and
dress it for the feast. They besmear their
children with the blood, in order to kindle
in their bosoms a hatred of their enemies, which
is never extinguifled, and all join in feeding
upon the flesh with amazing greediness and
exultation . To devour the body of a flaugh-
tered enemy, they deem the most complete and
exquisite gratification of revenge. Wherever
this praEice prevails, captives never escape death,
but they are not tortured with the fame cruelty
as among tribes which are less accustomed to
such horrid feasts'.

As the conflancy of every American warrior

may be put to such severe proof, the great ob.
jet of military education and discipline in the
INew World is to form the mind to fuflain it.

h Stadius ap. de Bry, iii. 128, &c. Lery, ibid. 210.
t Sec NOTE XLVI.

3 *When

When nations carry on war with open force, B 0o o
defy their enemies to the combat,. and vanquish I
them by'the superiority of their skill or courage,
soldiers are trained to be active, vigorous, and
enterprising. But in America, where the genius
and maxims of war are extremely different,
paflive fortitude is the quality in highest eftiima
tion. Accordingly, it is early the study of the
Americans to acquire sentiments and habits,
which will enable them to behave like men,
when their resolution shall be put to the proof.
As the youth of other nations exercise them-
selves in feats of activity and force, those of
America vie with one another in exhibitions
of their patience under sufferings. They harden
their nerves by those voluntary trials, and gra-
dually accustom themselves to endure the sharpest
pain, without complaining. A boy and girl
will bind their naked arms together, and place a
burning coal between them, in order to try who
first discovers such impatience as to shake it offk.
All the trials, customary in America, when a
youth is admitted into the class of warriors, or
when a warrior is promoted to the dignity
of captain or chief, are accommodated to this
idea of manliness. They are not displays of
valour, but of patience; they are not exhibitions

k Clarlcv. HiIl. N. Fr. iii. 307.

M 4 of

B 0°v K of their ability to offend, but of their capacity to
a__... susser. Among the tribes on the banks of the

Orinoco, if a warrior aspires to the-rank of cap.
tain, his probation begins with a long fafl, more
rigid than any ever observed by the most ab.
flemious hermit. At the close of this the chiefs
afemble, each gives him three lathes with a large
whip, applied so vigorously, that his body is
almost flayed, and if he betrays the least symptom
of impatience or even sensibility, he is disgraced
for ever, and rejeEed as unworthy of the honour
to which he aspires. After some interval, the
constancy of the candidate is proved by a more
excruciating trial. He is laid in a hammoc with
his hands bound fast, and an innumerable mul.
titude of venomous ants, whose bite occasions
exquisite pain, and produces a violent inflamma.
tion, are thrown upon him. The judges of his
merit sand around the hammoc, and, while
these cruel insets fatten upon the moif sensible
parts of his body, a sigh, a groan, an involuntary
motion expressive of what he suffers, would
exclude him for ever from.the rank of captain.
Even after this evidence of his fortitude, it is
not deemed to be completely ascertained, but
muff itand another test more dreadful than any
he has hitherto undergone. He is again sus-
pended in his hammoc, and covered with leaves
of the palmetto. A fire of stinking herbs is

kindled

kindled underneath, so as he may feel its heat, B o K
and be involved in its imoke. Though scorched 1V-
and almost suffocated, he must continue to en-
dure with the fame patient inlenfibility. Many
perish in this rude essay of their firmness and
courage, but such as go through it with applause,
receive the ensigns of their new dignity with
much solemnity, and are ever after regarded
as leaders of approved resolution, whose beha.
viour, in the molt trying situations, will do
honour to their country '. In North America,
the previous trial of a warrior is neither fb
formal, nor so revere. Though even there, be-
fore a youth is permitted to bear arms, his
patience and fortitude are proved by blows, by
fire, and by insults, more intolerable to a haughty
spirit than both ".

THE amazing steadiness with which the Ame-

ricans endure the most exquisite torments, has
induced some authors to suppose that, from the
peculiar feebleness of their frame, their sensibility
is not so acute as that of other people; as
women, and persons of a relaxed habit, are ob-
served to be less affected with pain than robust
psen, whose nerves are more firmly braced.

Gumilla, ii. 286, &c. Biet. 376, &c.
m Charlev. Hist. N. Fr. iii. zg9.

But

B 0°0 K But the conifitution of the Americans is not
s.---- so different, in its texture, from that of the reft

of the human species, as to account for this
diversity in their behaviour. It flows from a
principle of honour, instilled early and cultivated
with such. care, as to inspire man in his rudeRt
state with an heroic magnanimity, to which phi,
lofophy hath endeavoured, in vain, to form him,
when more highly improved and polished. This
invincible constancy he has been taught to con,
fider as the chief difintion of a man, and
the highest attainment of a warrior. The ideas
which influence his condud, and the passions
which take possession of his heart, are few.
They operate of course with more decisive
effet, than when the mind is crowded with
a multiplicity of objets, or diftraded by the
variety of its pursuits; and when every motive
that ads with any force in forming the sentiments
of a savage, prompts him to susser with dignity,
he will bear what might seem to be impossible
for human patience to sustain. But wherever
the fortitude of the Americans is not roused to
exertion by their ideas of honour, their feelings
of pain are the fame with those of the reft of
mankind . Nor is that patience under susser-
ings for which the Americans have been so juifly

" See NOTE XLVII.

cclebrated,

celebrated, an universal attainment. The con- B o o s,
ftancy of many of the victims is overcome by _
the agonies of torture. Their weakness and
lamentations complete the triumph of their
enemies, and reflec disgrace upon their own
country °.

THE perpetual hoflilities carried on among Waled by

their perpe,

the American tribes are producive of very fatal tual wars.
effects. Even in seasons of public tranquillity,
their imperfet industry does not supply them
with any superfluous flore of provisions; but
when the irruption of an enemy desolates their
cultivated lands, or disturbs them in their hunt-
ing excursions, such a calamity reduces a com-
munity, naturally unprovident and destitute of
resources, to extreme want. All the people
of the diftrit: that is invaded, are frequently
forced to take refuge in woods or mountains,
which can afford them little subsistence, and
where many of them perish. Notwithflanding
their excefive caution in conducting their mili-
tary operations, and the solicitude of every
leader to preserve the lives of his followers,
as the rude tribes in America seldom enjoy any
interval of peace, the loss of men among them

o Charlcv. Hilt. N. Fr. iii. 2.48. 385. De la Potheric,
i;i. 48.

in

t 0o 0 is considerable in proportion to the degree

V
-_ of population. Thus famine and the sword

combine in thinning their numbers. All. their
communities are feeble, and nothing now remains
of several nations, which were once considerable,
but the name P.

Recruit SENSIBLE of this continual decay, there are
bers by tribes which endeavour to recruit their national
prifoerl. force when exhausted, by adopting prisoners

taken in war, and by this expedient prevent
their total extintion. The pracice, however,
is not universally received. Resentment operates
more powerfully among savages, than confider.
ations of policy. Far the greater part of their
captives was anciently sacrificed to their ven-
geance, and it is only since their numbers began
to decline fast, that they have generally adopted
milder maxims. But such as they do naturalize,
renounce for ever their native tribe, and assume
the manners as well as paflions of the people
by whom they are adopted ', so entirely, that
they often join them in expeditions against their
own countrymen. Such a sudden transition,
and so repugnant to one of the nmolt powerful
inflinds implanted by nature, would be deenime

r Charlcv. lill. N. 1r. iii. 202, 203. ,|29. CuLmilii,
ii, 227, &c.

I Cliarlcv. Ilill. N. 1r. iii. 2 [y,.& c. LafiR, ii. 308.

Itrlan Igc(

strange among many people; but, among the B 0 0

o

members of small communities, where national ..
enmity 'is violent and deep-rooted, it has the ap-
pearance of being frill more unaccountable. It
seems, however, to result naturally from the
principles upon which war is carried on in
America. When nations aim at exterminating
their enemies, ho exchange of prisoners can ever
take place. From the moment one is made
a prisoner, his country and his friends confider
him as dead . He has incurred indelible dif.
grace by suffering himself to be surprised or to
be taken by an enemy; and were he to return
home, after such a slain upon his honour, his
nearest relations would not receive or even
acknowledge that they knew him '. Some tribes
were still more rigid, and if a prisoner returned,
the infamy which he had brought on his country
was expiated, by putting him infantly to death .
As the unfortunate captive is thus an outcast
from his own country, and the ties which bound
him to it are irreparably broken, he feels leis
relucance in forming a new connection with
people, who, as an evidence of their friendly
sentiments, not only deliver him from a cruel
death, but offer to admit him to all the rights ot

r Sec NOTE XLVIII. ' .ahont. ii. 185, ir,.
t I-Icrrera, dec. 3. llb. ivc. c . p. 173.

a fellow-

B o o K a fellow-citizen. The perfec similarity of man,

IV.

ners among savage nations facilitates and corn
pletes the union, and induces a captive to transfer
not only his allegiance, but his affection, to
the community into the bosom of which he is re.
ceived.

their infe- BUT though war be the chief occupation of
warto po- men in their rude state, and to excel in it
]ifhtd ha.
tions. " their highest diftinEtion and pride, their infe.

riority is always manifest when they engage in
competition with polished nations. Destitute of
that foresight which discerns and provides for
remote events, strangers to the union and mutual
confidence requisite in forming any extensive
plan of operations, and incapable of the fubordi-
nation no less requisite in carrying such plans
into execution, savage nations may astonish a
disciplined enemy by their valour, but seldom
prove formidable to him by their conduct; and
whenever the contefs is of long continuance,
mulf yield to superior art". The empires of
Peru and Mexico, though their progress in civi-
lization, when measured by the European or
Asiatic fiandards, was inconsiderable, acquired
such an ascendancy over the rude tribes around
them, that they lubjeted molt of them with

Sec NOTE XLIX.

great

great facility to their power. When the people B o o K
of Europe overran the various provinces of a.
America, this superiority was still more con-
fpicuous. Neither the courage nor number of
the natives could repel a handful of invaders.
The alienation and enmity, prevalent among
barbarians, prevented them from uniting in any
common scheme of defence, and while each
tribe fought separately, all were subdued.

VI. TTHE arts of rude nations unacquainted Theirarts.

with the use of metals, hardly merit any atten-
tion on their own account, but are worthy
of some notice, as far as they serve to display the
genius and manners of man in this stage of his
progress. The first distress a savage must feel,
will arise from the manner in which his body is
affeEed, by the heat, or cold, or moisture, of
the climate under which he lives; and his firfl Dress and
care will be to provide some covering for his ornmnts.
own defence. In the warmer and more mild
climates of America, none of the rude tribes
were clothed. To most of them Nature had not
even suggested any idea of impropriety in being
altogether uncoveredw. As under a mild cli-
mate there was little need of any defence fron

' Lery Navigat, ap. de Bry, iii. p. 164. Lifei of Co-
lumbus, c. 24. Vcncgai Hiilt. of C'alilurn. p. 70.

the

B 0 o K the injuries of the air, and their extreme Inm

_ dolence shunned every species of labour to which

it was not urged by absolute necessity, all the in-
habitants of the isles, and a considerable part of
the people on the continent, remained in this
state of naked simplicity. Others were satisfied
with some flight covering, such as decency
required. But though naked, they were not
unadorned. They dressed their hair in many
different forms. They fastened bits of gold, or
shells, or shining flones, in their ears, their
notes, and cheeks . They lained their skins
with a great variety of figures; and they spent
much time, and submitted to great pain, in
ornamenting their persons in this fantaitic man-
ner. Vanity, however, which finds endless oc-
cupation for ingenuity and invention, in nations
where dress has become a complex and intricate
art, is circumscribed within so narrow bounds,
and confined to so few articles among naked
savages, that they are not satisfied with those
imple decorations, and have a wonderful pro.
penfity to alter the natural form of their bodies,
in order to render it (as they imagine) more
perfet and beautiful. This pra&Eice was uni.
versal among the rudest of the American tribes.
Their operations for that purpose begin as soon

* Lery ap. de Bry, iii. i65. Lcttr. Edifiantef, 20. 223.

as

as an infant is born. By compressing the bones B 0 o K
of the skull, while still soft and flexible, some _'
flatten the crown of their heads; some squeeze
them into the shape of a cone; others mould
thert as much as possible into a square figure ;
and they often endanger the lives of their
posterity by their violent and absurd efforts to
derange the plan of Nature, or to improve upon
her designs, But in all their attempts either to
adorn or to new-model their persons, it seems to
have been less the objeEt of the Americans to
please, or to appear beautiful, than to give an air
of dignity and terror to their aspet. Their at-
tention to dress had more reference to war than
to gallantry. The difference in rank and efti-
mation between the two sexes was so great,
as seems to have extinguished, in some measure,
their solicitude to appear mutually amiable. The
man deemed it beneath him to adorn his person,
for the fake of one on whom he was accustomed
to look down as a slave. It was when the
warrior had in view to enter the council of his
nation, or to take the field againfl its enemies,
that he assumed his choicefc ornaments, and

Y Ovicdo I-ll. lib. iii c. 5. Ulloa, i. 329. Voyage de

Labat. ii. 72. Cllarlcvoix, iii 323. Gurnilla, i. 197, &c.
Acugiia lRlat. dc la Riv. dcs Alnaz. ii. 8?. Lawson's
Voyage to Carolina, p. 33.

VOL. 11. N deckedl

B 0 O., decked his person with the nicest careL. Th,

,i_ - decorations of the women were few and simple

whatever was precious or splendid was reserved
for the men. In several tribes the women were
obliged to spend a considerable part of their
time every day in adorning and painting their
husbands, and could bellow little attention upon
ornamenting themselves. Among a race of men
ib haughty as to despise, or so cold as to neglect
them, the women naturally became careless and
slovenly, and the love of finery and shew, which
had been deemed their favourite passion, was
confined chiefly to the other sex a. To deck his
person was the diftin&ion of a warrior, as well as
one of his molt serious occupations b. In one
part of their dress, which, at first fight, appears
the most singular and capricious, the Americans
have discovered considerable sagacity in provid.
ing against the chief inconveniencies of their
climate, which is often sultry and moist to excels.
All the different tribes, which remain unclothed,
are accustomed to anoint and rub their bodies

7 Wafer's Voyage, p. i42. Lery ap. de Bry, iii. 167.
Charley. Hilt. N. Fran. iii. 216. 222.

a Charlev. Hill. de la Nouv. France, iii. 278. 327

Lafilau, ii. 53. Kalin's Voyage, iii.. 73. Lery al. i'c
Bry, iii. 169, 170. P rch. Pilgr. iv. 1287. Ribas [li"
de los 'iriumph. &c. 472.

" Sec NOTE I.

with

wvith the grease of animals, with vifcpus gums, B O O K
and with oils of different kinds. By this they
check that profuse perspiration, which, in the
torrid zone, waftes the vigour of the frame, and
abridges the period of human life, By this too,
they provide a defence against the extreme
moisture during the rainy season . They like-
wife, at certain seasons, temper paint of different
colours with those undtuous fibftances, and be-
daub themselves plentifully with that compofi-
tion. Sheathed with this impenetrable varnish,
their skins are not only prote&ed from the
penetrating heat of the fun, but, as all the innu-
merable tribes of infects have an antipathy to the
smell or taste of that mixture, they are delivered
from their teazing persecution, which amidfl
foreffs and marshes, especially in the warmer
regions, would have been altogether intolerable
in a state of perfect nakedness ".

THE next objec to dress that will engage the Habit-

attention of a savage, is to prepare some habita-
tion which may afford him (helter by day, and a
retreat at night. Whatever is conne&ed with
his ideas ofperfonal dignity, whatever bears any
reference to his military characer, the savage

' See N'OTE LI.
d Labat, ii. 73. Gumilla, i. 190. 202. Bancroft Nat.
Hist, of Guiana, 81. 280.

N 2 warrior

B o o K warrior deems an objet of importance. What.

Iv. »,-----' ever relates only to peaceable and inative life,

he views with indifference. Hence, though
finically attentive to dress, he is little solicitous
about the elegance or disposition of his habita.
tion. Savage nations, far from that state of im.
provement, in which the mode of living is
confidered as a mark of diftintnion, and un-
acquainted with those wants, which require a
variety of accommodation, regulate the conftruc-
tion of their houses according to their limited
ideas of necefity. Some of the American tribes
were lb extremely rude, and had advanced so
little beyond the primeval simplicity of nature,
that they had no houses at all. During the day,
they take shelter from the scorching rays of the
fun under thick trees ; at night they form a
shed with their branches and leaves . In the
rainy season they retire into coves, formed by the
hand of Nature, or hollowed out by their own
induitry '. Others, who have no fixed abode,
and roam through the forest in quest of game,
sojourn in temporary huts, which they ercct
with little labour, and abandon without any

Ste Ni(OTE L L .
Lc'ltltcs Elis. v. 273. V\ciegas Hifl. of Califor. i. -'

L.Oza1n() l)ctciip) . tdC1 Cr;lll. Cliaco, p. 55. Lcttires I'di.
ii. ,76. (Guniill]i, i. j38 . Biancroft Nat. -ilft. of G11uiaii
Z77.

conccrll.

concern. The inhabitants of those vast plains, B O O K
which are deluged by the overflowing of rivers a
during the heavy rains that fall periodically be-
tween the tropics, raise houses upon piles fattened
in the ground, or place them among the boughs
of trees, and are thus safe amidst that wide ex-
tended inundation which surrounds themg.
Such were the first essays of the rudest Ame-
ricans towards providing themselves with habita-
tions. But even among tribes which are more
improved, and whose residence is become alto-
gether fixed, the struCture of their houses is
extremely mean and simple. They are wretched
huts, Sometimes of an oblong and fometimnes of
a circular form, intended merely for Shelter,
with no view to elegance, and little attention to
conveniency. The doors are so low, that it is
necessary to bend or to creep on the hands and
feet in order to enter them. They are without
windows, and have a large hole in the middle of
the roof, to convey out the smoke. To follow
travellers in other minute circumnifances of their
description, is not only beneath the dignity of
hlifory, but would be foreign to the objeEt of
my researches. One circumnlance merits atten-
tion, as it is singular, and illulfrates the charaCter

1 GCumilla, i. 225. IIc l re'r, dce. i. lib. ix. c. 6. Ovi-
edo SommLar, p. 53, C.

N3 of

B o o K of the people. Some of their houses are so
i_,,-. large as to contain accommodation for fourscore

or a hundred persons. These are built for the
reception of different families, which dwell toge.
ther under the fame roof h, and often around a
common fire, without separate apartments, or
any kind of screen or partition between the
spaces which they refpetively occupy. As soon
as men have acquired diltint ideas of property;
or when they are so much attached to their
females, as to watch them with care and
jealousy i families of course divide and fettle in
separate houses, where they can secure and
guard whatever they wish to preserve, This
singular mode of habitation among several people
of America, may therefore be confidered not
only as the effect of their imperfecE notions con.
cerning property, but as a proof of inattention
and indifference towards their women. If they
had not been accustomed to perse& equality,
such an arrangement could not have taken place.
If their sensibility had been apt to have taken
alarm, they would not have trulted the virtue of
their women amidst the temptations and oppor-
tunities of such a promiscuous intercourse. At
the fame time, the perpetual concord which
reigns in habitations where so many families are

h See NOTE LIII,

croudcd

crouded together, is surprising, and affords a B o o K
firiking evidence that they must be people of . _
either a very gentle, or of a very phlegmatic
temper, who, in such a situation, are un-
acquainted with animosity, brawling, and dif-
cord .

AFTER making some provision for his dress Their arms,

and habitation, a savage will perceive the ne-
ceffity of preparing proper arms with which to
assault or repel an enemy. This, accordingly,
has early exercised the ingenuity and invention
of all rude nations. The first offensive weapons
were doubtless such as chance presented, and the
first efforts of art to improve upon these, were
extremely awkward and simple. Clubs made of
Tome heavy wood, flakes hardened in the fire,
lances whose heads were armed with flint or the
bones of tome animal, are weapons known to the
rudest nations. All there, however, were of use
only in close encounter. But men wified to
annoy their enemies while at a diflance, and the
bow and arrow is the nmot early invention for
this purpose. This weapon is in the hands
of people, whose advances in improvelnent are

' Journ. de Grill.t & Beclhamcl dans la Goyalle, p. 65.

Lafitau Mceurs, ii. 4. Torlqqum. Monarq. i. 247. JourLial
Hist, de Joutal, 217. Lery I-iflt. Brasil, ap. de Bry, iii.
238. Lozano Defer. del Gian Cliao, 67.

N 4 extremely

B 0 K extremely inconsiderable, and is familiar to the

IV.
i- _>l inhabitants of every quarter of the globe. It is

remarkable, however, that some tribes in Ame-
rica were so destitute of art and ingenuity, that
they had not attained to the discovery of this
simple invention k, and seem to have been unac-
quainted with the use of any miflive weapon.
The fling, though in its conflrucion not more
complex than the bow, and among many nations
of equal antiquity, was little known to the
people of North A:ieri:;t', or the islands, but
appears to have been used by a few tribes in the
southern continent m. The people, in some pro-
vinces of Chili, and those of Patagonia, towards
the southern extremity of America, use a weapon
peculiar to themselves. They fatlen flones,
about the size of a fill, to each end of a leather
thong of eight feet in length, and swinging
these round their heads, throw them with such
dexterity, that they seldom miss the object at
which they aim".
Ii *,r {l- AMONG people who had hardly any occupa-

tl. tion but war or hunting, the chief exertions of

k Piedrahita Conq. del Nuevo Reyno, ix. 12.

Nauf. de Alv. Nun Cabcca de vaca, c. x. p. 12.
m Piedral. p. I6. See NOTE LIV.
" Ovallc's Relation of Chili. Chiurch. Collet. iii. 8.8
:a;lklnr's Dcfcript. of Patagon. p. 130.

tlliir

their invention , as well as industry, were n OK
naturally diredted towards these objects. With .,.
refpec to every thing else, their wants and
desires were so limited, that their invention was
not upon the stretch. As their food and habita-
tions are perfectly simple, their domeflic utensils
are few and rude. Some of the southern tribes
had discovered the art of forming vefiels of
earthen ware, and baking them in the fun, so as
they could endure the fire. In North America,
they hollowed a piece of hard wood into the
form of a kettle, and filling it with water, brought
it to boil, by putting red-hot stones into it P.
These vessels they used in preparing part of their Drcffig
provisions; and this may be confidered as a ftep
towards refinement and luxury, for men in their
rudest state were not acquainted with any method
of drefling their victuals, but by roasting them
on the fire; and among several tribes in Ame-
rica, this is the only species of cookery yet
known q. But the master-piece of art, among Connruc-

tion of their

the savages of America, is the construction of canoes.
their canoes. An Efkinmaux, fliit up in his
boat of whalebone, covered with the ikins of
feals, can brave that tformy ocean, on which
the barrenness of his country compels him to

o See NOTE LV. 1' Charlcv. Hilt. N. Fr. iii. 332.
*' See NOTE LVI.

depend

B 0 K depend for the chief part of his subsistence'.

- The people of Canada venture upon their rivers

and lakes, in boats made of the bark of trees,
and so light that two men can carry them,
wherever fllallows or catara&s obftrud the navi-
gation'. In these frail vessels they undertake
and accomplish long voyages'. The inhabitants
of the isles and of the southern continent form
their canoes by hollowing the trunk of a large
tree, with infinite labour, and though in appear-
ance they are extremely aukward and unwieldy,
they paddle and fleer them with such dexterity,
that Europeans, well acquainted with all the im-
provements in the science of navigation, have
been astonished at the rapidity of their motion,
and the quickness of their evolutions. Their
pirogues, or war-boats, are so large as to carry
forty or fifty men; their canoes employed in
fishing and in short voyages are less capacious".
The form, as well as materials of all there
various kinds of vessels, is well adapted to the
service for which they are destined; and the
more minutely they are examined, the mechanifin
of their ftruaure, as well as neatness of their
fabric, will appear the more furpiifiig.

r Ellis Voy. 133. See NOTE LVII.
t Lafitau MIiurs, &c. ii. 213.

Labat Vo(; y.iics, ii. 91, '&c, 13t.

Bu'r,

BUT, in every attempt towards indultry among B o° K
the Americans, one striking quality in their cha- _

Lifll ffnef$

rater is conspicuous. They apply to work with- wi,, ,lici
out ardour, carry it on with little acivity, and, tlIy PuPiy
like children, are easily diverted from it. Even
in operations which seem the most interesting,
and where the mofl powerful motives urge them
to vigorous exertions, they labour with a languid
listlessness. Their work advances under their
hand with such slowness, that an eye-witness
compares it to the imperceptible progress of ve-
getation'. They will spend so many years in
forming a canoe, that it often begins to rot with
age before they finish it. They will susser one
part of a roof to decay and perish, before they
complete the other . The slightest manual
operation consumes an amazing length of time,
and what in polished nations would hardly be an
effort of industry, is among savages an arduous
undertaking. This slowness of the Americans
in executing works of every kind may be imputed
to various causes. Among savages, who do not
depend for subsistence upon the efforts of regular
industry, time is of so little importance, that they
set no value upon it; and provided they can
finifhi a design, they never regard how long they
are employed about it. The tools which they

Gumilla, ii. 297, w Borde Rclat, (lec Cr.aibes, p. 2X,

employ
' t~.*"

BOO K employ are so aukward and defecive, that every

_..y. work in which they engage must necessarily be

tedious. The hand of the most industrious and
skilful artist, were it furnished with no better in-
ftrument than a stone hatchet, a ihell, or the
bone of some animal, would find it difficult to
perseEt the most simple work. It is by length of
labour, that he must endeavour to supply his de-
fest of power. But above all, the cold phleg-
matic temper peculiar to the Americans renders
their operations languid. It is almofl impossible
to rouze them from that habitual indolence
in which they are funk; and unless when
engaged in war or hunting, they seem incapable
of exerting any vigorous effort. Their ardour
of application is not so great as to call forth that
inventive spirit which suggests expedients for
facilitating and abridging labour. They will re-
turn to a taflk day after day, but all their methods
of executing it are tedious and operose . Even
since the Europeans have communicated to them
the knowledge of their instruments, and taught
them to imitate their arts, the peculiar genius of
the Americans is conspicuous in every attempt
they make. They may be patient and afliduous
in labour, they can copy with a servile and
minute accuracy, but discover little invention,

X See NOTE LVIII.

and

and no talents for dispatch. In spite of in- B o o K
ftruEion and example, the spirit of the race pre-
dominates; their motions are naturally tardy,
and it is in vain to urge them to quicken their
pace. Among the Spaniards in America, the
work of an Indian is a phrase by which they
describe any thing, in the execution of which ai
immense time has been employed, and mucl
labour wafted '.

VII. No circumstance refpeEting rude nations Their reli-

has been the object of greater curiosity than gion.
their religious tenets and rites; and none, per-
haps, has been so imperfectly understood, or re-
presented with so little fidelity. Priests and mif- Peculiar

difficulties

fionaries are the persons who have had the belt il this i'n
opportunities of carrying on this inquiry, among quiry.
the inoft uncivilized of the American tribes.
Their minds, engrossed by the doctrines of their
own religion, and habituated to its inflitutions,
are apt to discover something which resembles
those objets of their veneration, in the opinions
and rites of every people. Whatever they con-
template, they view through one medium, and
draw and accommodate it to their own system,
They study to reconcile the institutions, which
fall under their observation, to their own creed,

Y Voyagc dc IJlloa, i. 335. l.ettr. E.lis. & 1. x . 34o .

not

B OOK not to explain them according to the rude

IV.

_-y notions of the people themselves. They ascribe

to them ideas which they are incapable of form-
ing, and suppose them to be acquainted with
principles and fads, which it is impossible that
{.hey should know. Hence, some miflionaries
Iave been induced to believe, that even among
the most barbarous nations in America, they
had discovered traces, no less ditlint than
amazing, of their acquaintance with the sublime
mysteries and peculiar institutions of Christianity.
From their own interpretation of certain expref.
sions and ceremonies, they have concluded that
these people had some knowledge of the dotrine
of the Trinity, of the incarnation of the Son of
God, of his expiatory sacrifice, of the virtue of
the cross, and of the efficacy of the sacraments Z.
In such unintelligent and credulous guides, we
can place little confidence.

BUT, even when wve make our choice of con-

dudors, with the greatest care, we muff not fol-
low them with implicit faith. An inquiry into
the religious notions of rude nations is involved
in peculiar intricacies, and we must often pause
in order to separate the fads which our in-

Vencgas, i. 88. 92. Torqucmada, ii. 445. Gatci;

Crigen. 122. ICler'cra, dec. 4. lib. ix. c. 7. dec. 5. lib. iv.
c. 7.

formers

formers relate, from the reasonings with which B o o K

IV.

they are accompanied, or the theories which V-
they build upon them. Several pious writers,
more attentive to the importance of the subjef
than to the condition of the people whose senti-
ments they were endeavouring to discover, have
bestowed much unprofitable labour in researches
of this nature a.

THERE are two fundamental doctrines, upon onfined to

two arti.

which the whole yfernem of religion, as far as it cics.
can be discovered by the light of nature, is
established. The one refpeEts the being of a
God, the other the immortality of the foul. To
discover the ideas of the uncultivated nations
under our review with regard to those important
points, is not only an objec of euriofity, but
may afford inftru&ion. To these two articles I
Thall confine my researches, leaving subordinate
opinions, and the detail of local fuperflitions, to
more minute inquirers. Whoever has had any 'hic being
opportunity of examining into the religious opi- Go-.
nions of persons in the inferior ranks of life,
even in the nmoft enlightened and civilized na-
tions, will find that their system of belief is
derived from inltrucion, not discovered by in-
quiry. That numerous part of the human

' See NOTE' L1X.

species,

B o0 K species, whose lot is labour, whose principal and
*-v-- alnmof sole occupation is to secure subsistence,

views the arrangement and operations of nature
wvith little reflecion, and has neither leisure nor
capacity for entering into that path of refined
and intricate speculation which conduas to the
knowledge of the principles of natural religion.
In the early and most rude periods of savage
life, such disquisitions are altogether unknown.
When the intellectual powers are just beginning
to unfold, and their first feeble exertions are
direEted towards a few objets of primary ne-
ceffity and use; when the faculties of the mind
are so limited, as not to' have formed abftrat or
general ideas; when language is so barren, as to
be destitute of names to diftinguiih any thing
that is not perceived by some of the senses ; it is
preposterous to expec that man should be ca-
pable of tracing with accuracy the relation be-
tween cause and efre&t; or to suppose that he
should rife from the contemplation of the one to
the knowledge of the other, and form just con-
ceptions of a 1)eity, as the Creator and Governor
of the uniivcrfe. The idea of creation is lb
familiar wherever the mind is enlarged by fci-
ence, and illuminated with revelation, that we
seldom reflect how profound and abstruse this
idea is, or confidcr what progress man inuft have
made in observation and rcfearch, before he

could

could arrive at any knowledge of this elementary B o o K
principle in religion. Accordingly, several tribes _
have been discovered in America, which have no
idea whatever of a Supreme Being, and no rites
of religious worfliip. Inattentive to that magni-
ficent fpetacle of beauty and order presented to
their view, unaccuftorned to reflect either upon
what they themselves are, or to inquire who
is the author of their existence, men, in their
savage tfate, pass their days like the animals
round them, without knowledge or veneration
of any superior power. Some rude tribes have
not in their language any name for the Deity,
nor have the most accurate observers been able
to discover any practice or institution which
seemed to imply that they recognised his autho-
rity, or were oflicitous to obtain his favour b. It
is however only among men in the most un-
cultivated state of nature, and while their intel-
lectual faculties are so feeble and limited as

I' Bict, 539. Lery ap. de Bry, iii. 221. Nieuhoff.

Churcli. Coil. ii. 132. Ltttr. Edif. 2. 177 I. I. ', 13.
Verlcgas, I. 87. Lozano I)cfcr-ilt. dcl Glald( Chaco, 59.
Fcnlland. Miflion. de Ch;qiiit. 39. Gumilla, ii. 156.
]oclhcfolt Ililt. ides Antilles, p. 468. Margrave I-lilt. in
Append. de Cliiliclfibut, 286. Ulloa Notic. Almcic. 335,
&-:. BaIrree, 218, 219. I-IaLrcotirt Voy. to C(uiiai;a.
l'urcl. Pilrl . iv. p. 1273. Account of 13r:ifil, ly a; Po ttl.
glefe. Ibid. p. 1289. Joillcz'i Journal, p. 59. See
NOTE LX.

VOL. ii. C hardly

B OO K hardly to elevate them above the irrational

Iv.
i._-.. creation, that we discover this total insensibility

to the inpreffions of any invisible power.

BUT the human mind, formed for religion,

soon opens to the reception of ideas, which are
destined, when correeed and refined, to be the
great source of consolation amidst the calamities
of life. Among some of the American tribes,
still in the infancy of improvement, we discern
apprehensions of some invisible and powerful
beings. These apprehensions are originally in.
diftine and perplexed, and seem to be suggested
rather by the dread of impending evils, than to
flow from gratitude for blessings received. While
Nature holds on her course with uniform and
undisturbed regularity, men enjoy the benefits
resulting from it, without inquiring concerning
its cause. But every deviation from this regular
course rouses and aftonifies them. When they
behold events to which they are not accustomed,
they search for the reasons of them with eager
curiosity. Their understanding is unable to
penetrate into these; but imagination, a more
forward and ardent faculty of the mind, decides
without hesitation. It ascribes the extraordinary
occurrences in nature to the influence of in.
visible beings, and supposes that the thunder, tie
hurricane, and the earthquake, are eiFects of

their

their interposition. Some such confused notion B O o K
of spiritual or invisible power, superintending ,
over those natural calamities which frequently
desolate the earth, and terrify its inhabitants,
may be traced among many rude nations c.
But besides this, the difaflers and dangers
of savage life are so many, and men often find
themselves in situations so formidable, that the
mind, sensible of its own weakness, has no
resource but in the guidance and protection of
wisdom and power superior to what is human.
Dejected with calamities which oppress him, and
exposed to dangers which he cannot repel, the
savage no longer relies upon himself; he feels
his own impotence, and fees no profped of being
extricated, but by the interposition of some
unseen arm. Hence, in all unenlightened na-
tions, the first rites or practices which bear any
resemblance to acts of religion, have it for their
object to avert evils which men susser or dread.
The Manitous or Okkis of the North Americans
were amulets or charms, which they imagined
to be of such virtue, as to preserve the persons
who reposed confidence in them from every
disastrous event, or they were confidered as
tutelary spirits, whose aid they might implore in

See NOTE LXI.

0 2 circum-

B 0 0 K circumstances of diftrefsd. The Cem'is of the

IV. vj i siflanders were reputed by them to be the authors

of every calamity that afflits the human race;
they were represented under the most frightful
forms, and religious homage was paid to them
with no other view than to appease there furious
deitiesc. Even among those tribes whose re.
ligious system was more enlarged, and who had
formed some conception of benevolent beings,
which delighted in conferring benefits, as well as
of malicious powers prone to infliEt evil; super.
flition still appears as the offspring of fear, and
all its efforts were employed to avert calamities.
They were persuaded that their good deities,
prompted by the beneficence of their nature,
would bestow every blessing in their power,
without solicitation or acknowledgment; and
their only anxiety was to soothe and deprecate
the wrath of the powers whom they regarded as
the enemies of mankind f.

d Cliarlev. N. Fr. iii. 343, &c. Creuxii Hilt. Canad.
p. 82, &c.

c Oviedo, lib. ii. c. i. p. 11. P. Martyr, dccad.
p. 102, &C.

r Tcrtrc, ii. 365. Borde, p. i-.. State of Virginia, by

a Native, book iii. p. 32, 33. Duinont, i. 165. Bancrofl
N'at. Iill of Guiana, 309.

Sucii

SUCH were the imperfect conceptions of the R o o K
greater part of the Americans with refpet to the a -_
interpositions of invisible agents, and such, almost
universally, was the mean and illiberal objeEt of
their superstitions. Were we to trace back the
ideas of other nations to that rude slate in which
history firfi presents them to our view, we
should discover a surprising resemblance in their
tenets and practices; and should be convinced,
that, in similar circumstances, the faculties of
the human mind hold nearly the fame course in
their progress, and arrive at almoit the fame con-
clufions. The impreflions of fear are conspicuous
in all the systems of superstition formed in this
situation. The most exalted notions of men rife
no higher than to a perplexed apprehension of
certain beings, whose power, though super-
natural, is limited as well as partial.

BUT, among other tribes, which have been Remnrnklhi

longer united, or have made greater progress in th'ti, ,cgi.
improvement,' we discern tome feeble pointing o"isn"tiots.
towards more just and adequate conceptions
of the power that presides in nature. They
seem to perceive that there must be some univer-
fal cause to whom all things are indebted for
their being. If we may judge by tome of their
expressions, they appear to acknowledge a divine
power to be the maker of the world, and the

o 3 disposer

B o O K disposer of all events. They denominate him
ReIv_, the Great Spirit . But there ideas are faint

and confused, and when they attempt to explain
them, it is manifest, that among them the word
spirit has a meaning very different from that in
which we employ it, and that they have no con.
ception of any deity but what is corporeal. They
believe their gods to be of the human form,
though of a nature more excellent than man,
and retail such wild incoherent fables concern.
ing their funcions and operations, as are alto.
gether unworthy of a place in history. Even
among there tribes, there is no established form
of public worship; there are no temples ere&ed
in honour of their deities; and no ministers pe-
culiarly consecrated to their service. They have
the knowledge, however, of several superstitious
ceremonies and practices handed down to them
by tradition, and to there they have recourse
with a childish credulity, when routed by any
emergence from their usual insensibility, and ex-
cited to acknowledge the power, and to implore
the protection of superior beings h.

Sylteln of THE tribe of the Natchez, and the people of
tli Nat-
che/.. Bogota had advanced beyond the other unculti-

g Charlev. N. Fr. iii. 343. Sagard, Voy. du Pays dcs
I-Iurons, 226.

h Charlcv. N. Fr. iii. 345. Coldcn, i. 17.

vated

vated nations of America in their ideas of reli- 13 O O K

IV.

gion, as well as in their political institutions;
and it is no less difficult to explain the cause
of this diftintion than of that which we have
already confidered. The Sun was the chief
object of religious worship among the Natchez.
In their temples, which were conftruEted with
some magnificence, and decorated with various
ornaments, according to their mode of architec-
ture, they preserved a perpetual fire, as the
pureit emblem of their divinity. Ministers were
appointed to watch and feed this sacred flame.
The first function of the great chief of the nation,
every morning, was an ad of obeisance to the
Sun; and festivals returned at stated seasons,
which were celebrated by the whole community
with solemn but unbloody rites . This is the
most refined species of superstition known in
America, and, perhaps, one of the most natural
as well as most seducing. The Sun is the
apparent source of the joy, fertility, and life,
diffused through nature; and while the human
mind, in its earlier essays towards inquiry, con-
templates and admires his universal and animat-
ing energy, its admiration is apt to flop flort at
what is vifiblc, without reaching to the unieen
cause; and pays that adoration to the most

1 Dumont, i. 15, &c. Charlcv. N. Fr. iii. 417, &c.
429. Lafitau, i. 1G7.

o 4 glorious

B 0 0 K glorious and beneficial work of God, which is

V.. o due only to him who formed it. As fire is the

purest and most active of the elements, and in
some of its qualities and effeAs resembles the
Sun, it was, not improperly, chosen to be the
emblem of his powerful operation. The ancient
Persians, a people far superior, in every refpe&,
to that rude tribe whose rites I am describing,
founded their religious system on similar prin-
ciples, and eflablifhed a form of public worship,
less gross and exceptionable than that of any
people destitute of guidance from revelation.
This surprising co-incidence in sentiment between
two nations, in such different states of improve-
ment, is one of the many singular and un.
accountable circunftances which occur in the
history of human affairs.

AMONG the people of Bogota, the Sun and

Moon were, likewile, the chief objeEts of venera-
tion. Their fytemi of religion was more regular
and complete, though less pure, than that of the
N.:icl(ez. They had temples, altars, priefrs, fa-
crificcs, and that long train of ceremonies, which
fup..lflition introduces wherever fle has fully
eflablifllcd her doninion over the minds of men.
But the rites of their worship were cruel and
bloody. They offered human victims to their
deities, and many of their practices nearly rc-

fembldl

fembled the barbarous institutions of the Mexi- B oO K
cans, the genius of which we shall have an
opportunity of confidering more attentively in its
proper place k,

WITH refpe& to the other great dotrine of re. TLheir den
ligion, concerning the immortality of the foul, t"'eimmoor

tality of the

the sentiments of the Americans were more foul,
united: the human mind, even when leaf im,
proved and invigorated by culture, shrinks from
the thoughts of annihilation, and looks forward
with hope and expectation to a slate of future
existence. 'This sentiment, resulting from a
secret consciousness of its own dignity, from an
inftintive longing after immortality, is universal,
and may be deemed natural. Upon this, are
founded the most exalted hopes of man in his
highest state of improvement; nor has nature
withheld from him this soothing consolation, in
the most early and rude period of his progress.
We can trace this opinion from one extremity of
America to the other: in some regions more
faint and obscure, in others more perfedly de-
veloped, but nowhere unknown. The most
uncivilized of its savage tribes do not apprehend
death as the extinction of being. All entertain
hopes of a future and more happy state, where

k Picdl-alita, Conq. del N. Rcyno, p. 17. 'I-Icrcra, dec. 6.
lib. v. c. 6.

they

B 0 o K they shall be for ever exempt from the calamities

-- which imbitter human life in its present condition.

This future fiate they conceive to be a delightful
country, blessed with perpetual spring, whose so.
refts abound with game, whose rivers swarm with
fifhl, where famine is never felt, and uninterrupted
plenty (hall be enjoyed without labour or toil.
But as men, in forming their first imperfec ideas
concerning the invisible world, suppose that there
they shall continue to feel the fame desires, and
to be engaged in the fame occupations, as in the
present world; they naturally ascribe eminence
and diftintion, in that state, to the fame qualities
and talents which are here the objea of their
efleem. The Americans, accordingly, allotted
the highest place, in their country of spirits, to
the skilful hunter, to the adventurous and success.
ful warrior, and to such as had tortured the
greatest number of captives, and devoured their

induce flesh'. These notions were so prevalent, that
them to
bury arms, they gave rife to an universal custom, which is,
tI d'cad. at once, the strongest evidence that the Ameri-

cans believe in a future slate, and the best
illustration of what they expet there. As they
imagine, that departed spirits begin their career
anew in the world whither they are gone, that

i Lcry ap. de Bry, iii. 222. Charlev. N. Fr. iii. 351,
&c. DCe k Pothcric, ii. 45, &c. iii. 5.

their

their friends may not enter upon it defenceless B o o K

IV.

and unprovided, they bury together with the bo-
dies of the dead their bow, their arrows, and
other weapons used in hunting or war; they de-
posit in their tombs the skins or fluffs of which
they make garments, Indian corn, manioc, veni-
son, domestic utensils, and whatever is reckoned
among the necessaries in their simple mode of
life m. In some provinces, upon the decease of a
cazique or chief, a certain number of his wives,
of his favourites, and of his slaves, were put to
death, and interred together with him, that he
might appear with the fame dignity in his future
flation, and be waited upon by the fame at-
tendants ". This persuasion is so deep-rooted,
that many of the deceased person's retainers
offer themselves as voluntary victims, and court
the privilege of accompanying their departed
matter, as an high diftintion. It has been found
difficult, on some occasions, to set bounds to

n Chronica de Cieca de Leon, c. 28. Sagard, 2PX8.

Creux. I-ill. Canad. p. 91. Roclhfort. Hist. des Antilles,
568. Bict, 391. De la Potlleric, ii. 44. iii. 8. Blanco,
Converf. de Piritu, p. 35.

Durnont, Louifiane, i. 208, &c. Oviedo, lib. v. c. 3.

Gomara, Hill. Gcn. c. 28. P. Mart. dccad. 304. Char-
lev. N. Ftr. iii. 42 r. Herrera, (Iec. I. lib. iii. c. 3. P.
Mclchior Hernandecz, Mcmor. dt Cliriqui. Coll. Orig.
Pi;tlrs, i. Clron. de Cicca de Leon, c. 33.

this

B 0 K this enthusiasm of affectionate duty, and to re.

IV.
_--_-«« duce the train of a favourite leader to such a

number as the tribe could afford to spare".

Supcrefi- AMONG the Americans, as well as other unci.
tion con-
nceLd with vilized nations, many of the rites and observances

which bear tome resemblance to ats of religion,
have no connection with devotion, but proceed
from a fond desire of prying into futurity. The
human mind is molt apt to feel, and to discover
this vain curiosity, when its own powers are most
feeble and uninformed. Aftonified with occur-
rences, of which it is unable to comprehend the
cause, it naturally fancies that there is something
mysterious and wonderful in their origin. Alarmed
at events of which it cannot discern the issue or
the consequences, it has recourse to other means
of discovering them, than the exercise of its
own sagacity. Wherever superstition is so efta-
blifled as to form a regular system, this desire of
penetrating into the secrets of futurity is con-
neted with it. Divination becomes a religious
at. Priests, as the ministers of Heaven, pretend
to deliver its oracles to men. They are the
only soothsayers, augurs, and magicians, who
profess the sacred and important art of disclosing

bwhat is hid from other eyes.

, Sec NOTE LXII.

BUT,

BuT, among rude nations, who pay no venera- B 0 K

tion to any superintending power, and who have An
no eflablifhed rites or ministers of religion, their This d^e
'curiosity to discover what is future and un- ,)collgsto

their phyti-

known is cherifled by a different principle, and cians.
derives strength from another alliance. As the
diseases of men, in the savage slate, are (as has
been already observed) like those of the animal
creation, few but extremely violent, their im-
patience under what they susser, and solicitude
for the recovery of health, soon inspired them
with extraordinary reverence for such as pre-
tended to understand the nature of their mala-
dies, and to be possessed of knowledge sufficient
to preserve or deliver them from their sudden and
fatal effeas. These ignorant pretenders, how-
ever, were such utter firangers to the ftruture of
the human frame, as to be equally unacquainted
with the causes of its disorders, and the manner
in which they will terminate. Superstition,
mingled frequently with some portion of craft,
supplied what they wanted in science. They im-
puted the origin of diseases to supernatural in-
fluence, and prescribed or performed a variety of
mysterious rites, which they gave out to be
of such efficacy as to remove the most dan-
gerous and inveterate maladies. The credulity
and love of the marvellous, natural to unin-
formed men, favoured the deception, and pre-

pared

B 0 0 K pared them to be the dupes of those impostors.

IV.
-h---. Among savages, their first physicians are a kind

of conjurers or wizards, who boast that they
know what is past, and can foretell what is
to come. Incantations, sorcery, and mummeries
of diverse kinds, no less firange than frivolous,
are the means which they employ to expel
the imaginary causes of malignity p; and relying
upon the efficacy of these, they predict with
confidence what will be the fate of their de-
luded patients. Thus fuperitition, in its earliest
form, flowed from the solicitude of man to
be delivered from present distress, not from his
dread of evils awaiting him in a future life, and
was originally ingrafted on medicine, not on
religion. One of the firrf, and most intelligent
historians of America, was firuck with this
alliance between the art of divination and that of
physic, among the people of Hispaniola 1. But
this was not peculiar to them. The Alexis, the
Piayas, the Auttmoins, or whatever was the diftin-
guifhing name of their diviners and charmers in
other parts of America, were all the physicians
of their refpe&ive tribes, in the fame manner as
the Buthitos of Hispaniola. As their funEtion led
them to apply to the human mind when cn-

P P. Mclch. Hernandcz, Memori;lt de Cllricqui. Collcdl.
Orig. Palp. i.

' Ovicdo, lib. v. c. i.

fceblcd

feebled by sickness, and as they found it, in that B 0 0 K
season of dejetion, prone to be alarmed with
imaginary fears, or amused with vain hopes, they
easily induced it to rely with implicit confidence
on the virtue of their spells, and the certainty of
their preditions '.

WHENEVER men acknowledge the reality of Gtaednuly

extends.

supernatural power and discernment in one in-
fance, they have a propensity to admit it in others.
The Americans did not long suppose the efficacy
of conjuration to be confined to one fubjeEt.
They had recourse to it in every situation of
danger or diffrefs. When the events of war
were peculiarly disastrous, when they met with
unforeseen disappointments in hunting, when
inundations or drought threatened their crops
with deftruation, they called upon their conjurers
to begin their incantations, in order to discover
the causes of those calamities, or to foretell what
would be their issue'. Their confidence in this
delusive art gradually increased, and manifested
itself in all the occurrences of life. When in-

' Herrera, dlec. i. lib. iii. c. 4. Osborne, Coll. ii. 86o.

Durmont, i. I69, &c. Charlcv. N. IF. iii. 361. 364, &c.
Lavfoii, N. Carol. 214. Rilas, Triumph. . 17. 7 ict,
386. Dc la Potllcric, ii. 35, &C.

Charlev. N. Fr. iii. 3. Dl)umoit, i. 173. Fcrnal(d.
Rclac. de los Chlilpit. p. 40. Lozaino, 84. Margrave, 279.

volvcd

B OO K volved in any difficulty, or about to enter upon
__>. any tranfation of moment, every individual

regularly consulted the forcerer, and depended
upon his inftruftions to extricate him from the
former, as well as to diret his conduc in
the latter. Even among the rudest tribes in
America, superstition appears in this form, and
divination is an art in high esteem. Long before
man had acquired such knowledge of a deity
as inspires reverence, and leads to adoration, we
observe him stretching out a presumptuous hand
to draw aside that veil with which providence
kindly conceals its purposes from human know.
ledge; and we find him labouring, with fruitless
anxiety, to penetrate into the mysteries of the
divine administration. To discern, and to wor-
ship a superintending power, is an evidence
of the enlargement and maturity of the human
underfcanding ; a vain desire of prying into futu-
rity, is the error of its infancy, and a proof of its
weakness.

FROM this weakness proceeded likewise the

faith of the Americans in dreams, their ob-
servation of omens, their attention to the chirp-
ing of birds, and the cries of animals, all which
they suppose to be indications of future evcnts,
and if any one of these prognoflics is decinel
unfavourable, they instantly abandon the purflli

er

of those measures on which they are most eagerly B o o K
bent'. 1i, .

VIII. BUT if we would form a complete idea Detached

of the uncultivated nations of America, we must cufoms
not pass unobserved some singular customs,
which, though universal and charateriftic, could
not be reduced, with propriety, to any of the
articles into which I have divided my inquiry
concerning their manners.

AMONG savages, in every part of the globe, Love of

dancing.

the love of dancing is a favourite passion. As,
during a great part of their time, they languish
in a state of inactivity and indolence, without any
occupation to rouse or interest them, they delight
universally in a pastime which calls forth the
adive powers of their nature into exercise. The
Spaniards, when they first visited America, were
aflonifhed at the fondness of the natives for
dancing, and beheld with wonder a people, cold
and unanimated in most of their other pursuits,
kindle into life, and exert themselves with ar-
dour, as often as this favourite amusement re-
curred. Among them, indeed, dancing ought
not to be denominated an amusement. It is a

t Charlev. N. Fr. ;ii. 262. 353. Stadius ap. de Bry, iii.

120. Crcuxj. Hilt. Canad. 84. Techo Hill. of Parag.
Church. Coll. vi. 37. De la Potheric, iii. 6.

VOL. I. P serious

B 0 K serious and important occupation, which mingie

IV.
i _-» in every occurrence of public or private life. If

any intercourse be necessary between two Ameri.
can tribes, the ambassadors of the one approach
in a solemn dance, and present the calumet or
emblem of peace; the sachems of the other re.
ceive it with the fame ceremony ". If war is de.
nounced against an enemy, it is by a dance, ex.
preffive of the resentment which they feel, and of
the vengeance which they meditatew. If the
wrath of their gods is to be appeased, or their
beneficence to be celebrated; if they rejoice at
the birth of a child, or mourn the death of a
friend x, they have dances appropriated to each of
there situations, and suited to the different senti-
ments with which they are then animated. If a
person is indisposed, a dance is prescribed as the
most effectual means of restoring him to health;
and if he himself cannot endure the fagtiue
of inch an exercise, the physician or conjurer
performs it in his name, as if the virtue of hig
acivity could be transferred to his patient .

D De la PothIc;C Hist. . 17, &c. Charley. N. t. ;;I.

3i1. 297. La lIoitan, i. Ioo. 137. lcIncp, m I)

cc;i,,
1Ijr(, &c.

" Charlcv. N. Fr. ii;. 298. Laflita,, ;. 523.

joutel, 31.3. Gomara Hill. G(nc. c. 196.

Y .D)cnv Iifil. Nit. 89. Brickell, 372. Dc lal oilcl',
ii. Es.

t.!

ALL their dances are imitations of rome acion; B o 0 K

and though the music by which they are re- A
gulated is extremely simple and tiresome to the
ear by its dull monotony, some of their dances
appear wonderfully expreflive and animated.
The war dance is, perhaps, the most firiking.
It is the representation of a complete American
campaign. The departure of the warriors from
their village, their march into the enemy's
country, the caution with which they encamp,
the address with which they station some of their
party in ambush, the manner of surprising the
enemy, the noise and ferocity of the combat, the
scalping of those who are slain, the seizing of
prisoners, the triumphant return of the con-
querors, and the torture of the vidtims, are
successively exhibited. The performers enter
with such enthusiastic ardour into their several
parts; their gefturesj their countenance, their
voice, are so wild and so well adapted to their
various situations, that Europeans can hardly be.
lieve it to be a mimic scene, or view it without
emotions of fear and horror 'z

Bur however expreflive some of the American
dances may be, there is one circumstance in them

z Dc la Potheric, ii. x16. Challv. N. Fr. il. 297.
Iafitau, i. z53.

P 2 remnalk-

u o o r remarkable, and conneted with the charaftet of

, the race. The songs, the dances, the amuse.

ments of other nations, expressive of the senti.
nents which animate their hearts, are often
adapted to display or excite that sensibility which
mutually attaches the sexes. Among some people,
such is the ardour of this passion, that love is
almost the sole objec of festivity and joy; and as
rude nations are strangers to delicacy, and unac-
cuflomed to disguise any emotion of their minds,
their dances are often extremely wanton and in.
decent. Such is the Calenda, of which the
natives of Africa are so pafionately fonda; and
such the feats of the dancing girls, which the
Asiatics contemplate with so much avidity of de.
fire. But, among the Americans, more cold
and indifferent to their females, from causes
which I have already explained, the passion of
love mingles but little with their festivals and
pastimes. Their songs and dances are mostly so.
lemn and martial, they are conneted with some
of the serious and important affairs of life b, and
having no relation to love or gallantry, are
ieldom colnm on to the two sexes, but executed

a Adanfon Voyage to Senegal, iii. 287. Laba

Voyages, iv. 463. Sloaic Ililt. Nat. of Jam. Introd. p. 48.
IFcrniin. I)cfcript. de Siril. i. p. 139.

h Dierript. of N. Irance. Osborne Coll. ii. 883. Char-
Its. N. Fr. iii. $1.'

by

by the men and women apart . If, on some nB 0 K

IV.

occasions, the women are permitted to join in I
the festival, the character of the entertainment is
still the fame, and no movement or gesture
is expressive of attachment, or encourages fami.
liarity d.

AN immoderate love of play, especially at Passion for

games of hazard, which seems to be natural gaming,
to all people unaccustomed to the occupations of
regular industry, is likewise universal among
the Americans. The fame causes, which so
often prompt persons in civilized life, who are at
their ease, to have recourse to this pastime, ren-
der it the delight of the savage. The former are
independent of labour, the latter do not feel the
necessity of it; and as both are unemployed,
they run with transport to whatever is interesting
enough to stir and to agitate their minds. Hence
the Americans, who at other times are so in-
different, so phlegmatic, so silent, and animated
with so few desires, as soon as they engage
in play become rapacious, impatient, noisy, and
almost frantic with eagerness. Their furs, their

c Wafer's Account of Ifihmus, &c. 169. Lery np. le

Bry, iii. 177. LozanoHill. de Parag. i. 149. Herrera,
dec. 2. lib. vii. c. 8. dec. 4. lib. x. c. 4. See NOTE
LXIII.

d Barrcrc Fr. Equin. p. 191.

P 3 domestic

D o o K domestic utensils, their clothes, their arms, are

Iv.
i-_r Rflaked at the gaming-table, and when all is loft,

high as their sense of independence is, in a wild
emotion of despair or of hope, they will often
ritk their perolnal liberty upon a tingle cast'.
Arncng several tribes, such gaming parties fre.
quently recur, and become their ioft acceptable
entertainment at every great festival. Superfli.
tion, which is apt to take hold of those paflions
which are most vigorous, frequently lends its aid
to confirm and strengthen this favourite .inclina.
tion. Their conjurers are accustomed to pre.
scribe a solemn match at play, as one of the moR
efficacious methods of appearing their gods, or of
restoring the sick to health f,

and for FROM causes similar to those which render
drinking, them fond of play, the Americans are extremely

addicted to drunkenness. It seems to have been
one of the firfl exertions of human ingenuity to
discover some composition of an intoxicating
quality; and there is hardly any nation so rude,
or so destitute of invention, as not to have
succeeded in this fatal research. The most bar-
barous of the American tribes have been lb
unfortunate as to attain this art; and even those

Chalcv. N. Fr. iii. 26t. 318. Larltau, i. 338, &'
Ribas Trilumf. 13. Brickcll, 335

f Charlcv. N. FIr. iii. 26z.

wlhich

which are so deficient in knowledge, as to be B o o K
unacquainted with the method of giving an 1.-.
inebriating flrength to liquors by fermentation,
can accompliflf the fame end by other means. The
people of the islands of North America, and of
California, used, for this purpose, the finoke of
tobacco, drawn up with a certain infitument into
the noltrils, the fumes of which ascending to the
brain, they felt all the transports and fi-renzy of in-
toxication . In almost every other part of the
New World, the natives poiTffed the art of ex-
tracing an intoxicating liquor from maize or the
manioc root, the fame substances which they con-
vert into bread. The operation by which they
effet this, nearly resembles the common one of
brewing, but with this difference, that in place of
yeft, they use a nauseous infusion of a certain
quantity of maize or manioc chewed by their
women. The saliva excites a vigorous ferment-
ation, and in a few days the liquor becomes fit
for drinking. It is not disagreeable to the taste,
and when swallowed in large quantities, is of an
intoxicating quality h. This is the general beve-
rage ps the Americans, which they ditinguiflh by
various names, and for which they feel such a

g Ovicdo I-ift. ip. Ramiuf. ii. 113. Vcciiga, i 68.
Nalufiag. de Cabcca de( V\ica, cap. 26. Sec NOTE LXIV.

)' Stadius ap. de Bry, iii. 1 1 . Lcry, ibid. 175.

1 4 violent

B o K violent and insatiable desire, as it is not easy
^ _. either to conceive or describe. Among polished

nations, where a fucceflion of various funtions
and amusements keeps the mind in continual
occupation, the desire for itrong drink is re.
gulated, in a great measure, by the climate, and
increases or diminishes according to the variations
of its temperature. In warm regions, the deli-
cate and sensible frame of the inhabitants does
not require the flimulation of fermented liquors.
In colder countries, the contfitution of the na.
tives, more robust and more sluggish, flands in
need of generous liquors to quicken and animate
it. But among savages, the desire of something
that is of power to intoxicate, is in every fitua,
tion the fame. All the people of America, if we
except some fiall tribes near the Straits of
Magellan, whether natives of the torrid zone, or
inhabitants of its more temperate regions, or
placed by a harder fate in the severe climates
towards its notthern or southern extremity, ap-
pear to be equally under the dominion of this
appetite'. Such a firnilarity of taste, among
people in such different situations, must be as-
cribed to the influence of tome moral cause, and

i Gumilla, i, 257. Lozano Dcfcrip, del Gran Cliaco, 5i.

103. Ribal, 8. Ulloa, i. 219. 337. Marchais, iv. 436.
F:crnnlldcz. Million. de lais Clliquct. 35. B3arrcr, p. 2C3.
131anco Convci . de Piritl, 3 1.

canno!

cannot be confidered as the effet of any physical B o oK
or constitutional want. While engaged in war --v
or in the chafe, the savage is often in the most
interesting situations, and all the powers of
his nature are roused to the most vigorous exer-
tions. But those animating scenes are succeeded
by long intervals of repose, during which the
warrior meets with nothing that he deems of
sufficient dignity or importance to merit his
attention. He languishes and mopes in this
season of indolence. The posture of his body is
an emblem of the state of his mind. In one
climate, cowering over the fire in his cabin; in
another, stretched under the hade of some tree,
he dozes away his time in sleep, or in an unthink-
ing joyless inacivity, not far removed from it.
As itrong liquors awake him from this torpid
tfate, give a brisker motion to his spirits, and en.
liven him more thoroughly than either dancing
or gaming, his love of them is excessive. A
savage, when not engaged in adion, is a pensive
melancholy animal ; but as soon as he taftes, or
has a profped of tatting, the intoxicating draught,
he becomes gay and frolicsome k. Whatever be
the occasion or pretext on which the Americans
assemble, the meeting always terminates in a de-
bauch. Many of their festivals have no other

k Melclnez Tcforez Verdad. iii. 369.

object,

B o O K object, and they welcome the return of them with
1V. transports of joy. As they are not accufomned

to restrain any appetite, they set no bounds
to this. The riot often continues without inter.
mission several days; and whatever may be the
fatal effects of their excess, they never cease from
drinking as long as one drop of liquor remains.
The persons of greatest eminence, the most dif.
tinguifhed warriors, and the chiefs most renowned
for their wisdom, have no greater command of
themselves than the moif obscure member of the
community. Their eagerness for present enjoy.
ment renders them blind to its fatal confe-
quences; and those very men, who, in other
situations, seem to possess a force of mind more
than human, are in this instance inferior to
children in foresight, as well as consideration,
and mere slaves of brutal appetite '. Whien
their paflions, naturally strong, are heightened
and inflamed by drink, they are guilty of the
most enormous outrages, and the festivity feldoni
concludes without deeds of violence or blood.
flied .

Bu'r, amidst this wild debauch, there is one
circumstance remarkable; the women, in nmolt

1 Rila '

s ,

c). 1 .

1a i. 33's.
m lcttr. Edif,. ii. 17t. T, 'ur miidalXond. Ind. i. 3?"

'til

of the American tribes, are not permitted to par. B o K
take of it . Their province is to prepare the
liquor, to serve it about to the guests, and to take
care of their husbands and friends, when their
reason is overpowered. This exclusion of the
women from an enjoyment so highly valued by
savages, may be justly confidered as a mark
of their inferiority, and as an additional evidence
of that contempt with which they were treated in
the New World. The people of North Ame-
rica, when first discovered, were not acquainted
with any intoxicating drink; but as the Eu.
ropeans early found it their interest to supply
them with spirituous liquors, drunkenness soon
became as universal among them as among their
countrymen to the south; and their women hav-
ing acquired this new taste, indulge it with
as little decency and moderation as the men o

IT were endless to enumerate all the detached Puttodcath

woner n d and

customs which have excited the wonder of travel- incurble.
lers in America; but I cannot omit one teem.
ingly as singular as any that has been mentioned.
When their parents and other relations become
old, or labour under any distemper which their
Slender knowledge of the healing art cannot

n See NOTE LXV.

" tlutchinfoi Hlilt. of Miftachuf. 469, Lilt...: .
125. Sigard, 146.

v m ','

B o K remove, the Americans cut ihort their days with

IV.
i _,' · a violent hand, in order to be relieved from the

burden of supporting and tending them. This
practice prevailed among the ruder tribes in
every part of the continent, from Hudson's Bay
to the river De la Plata; and however shocking
it may be to those sentiments of tenderness and
attachment, which, in civilized life, we are apt
to confider as congenial with our frame, the con.
dition of man in the savage ifate leads and recon.
ciles him to it. The fame hardships and difficulty
of procuring subsistence, which deter savages, in
some cafes, from rearing their children, prompt
them to destroy the aged and infirm. The de.
dining slate of the one is as helpless as the
infancy of the other. The former are no less
unable than the latter to perform the funEtions
that belong to a warrior or hunter, or to endure
those various distresses in which savages are so
often involved, by their own want of foresight
and industry. Their relations feel this, and,
incapable of attending to the wants or weak.
neffes of others, their impatience under an addi.
tional burden prompts them to extinguifl that
life which they find it difficult to sustain. This
is not regarded as a deed of cruelty, but as an
aft of mercy. An American, broken with years
and infirmities, conscious that he can no longer
depend on the aid of those around him, places,

hinifclt

lhimfelf contentedly in his grave; and it is by the B O O K
hands of his children or nearest relations that the *_'
thong is pulled, or the blow infli&ed, which
releases him for ever from the sorrows of life P.

IX. AFTER contemplating the rude American General

estimate of

tribes in such various lights; after taking a view their cha-
of their customs and manners from so many dif- raacr.
ferent stations, nothing remains but to form
a general estimate of their character, compared
with that of more polished nations. A human
being, as he comes originally from the hand
of nature, is everywhere the fame. At his first
appearance in the slate of infancy, whether it be
among the rudest savages, or in the most civilized
nation, we can discern no quality which marks
any diftination or superiority. The capacity of
improvement seems to be the fame; and the
talents he may afterwards acquire, as well as the
virtues he may be rendered capable of exercising,
depend, in a great measure, upon the state
of society in which he is placed. To this state
his mind naturally accommodates itself, and fiom
it receives discipline and culture. In proportion
to the wants which it accustoms a human being
to feel, and the funtions in which there engage

P Caffani Hi-tor. de N. Rcyno de Gran. p. 300. I'io,
p. 6. Ellis Voy. 19. Gumilla, i. 333.

him,

B 0 0 K him, his intellectual powers are called forth.

iv.
.-j--' According to the connections which it establishes

between him and the reft of his species, the
affeAions of his heart are exerted. It is only by
attending to this great principle, that we can dir.
cover what is the character of man in every dif-
ferent period of his progress.

Intelletual IF we apply it to savage life, and measure the
powers. attainments of the human mind in that slate by

this standard, we shall find, according to an ob-
servation which I have already made, that the in-
telledual powers of man must be extremely
limited in their operations. They are confined
within the narrow sphere of what he deems
necessary for supplying his own wants. What-
ever has not some relation to these, neither
attracs his attention, nor is the objeEt of his in-
quiries. But however narrow the bounds may
be within which the knowledge of a savage is
circumscribed, he poffefles thoroughly that small
portion which he has attained. It was not com-
municated to him by formal inftru&ion; he
does not attend to it as a matter of mere fpecu-
lation and curiosity; it is the result of his own
observation, the fruit of his own experience, and
accommodated to his condition and exigencies.
While employed in the adive occupations of war
or of hunting, he often finds himself in difficult

and

and perilous situations, fiom which the efforts B 0O K
of his own sagacity nluft extricate him. He _
is frequently engaged in measures, where every
sIep depends upon his own ability to decide,
where he must rely solely upon his own penetra-
tion to discern the dangers to which he is
exposed, and upon his own wvifdom in providing
against them. In consequence of this, he feels
the knowledge which he pofliet'es, and the efforts
which he makes, and either in deliberation or
acion relfs on himself alone.

As the talents of individuals are exercised and Political .

improved by such exertions, much political wis-
dom is said to be displayed in conducting the
affairs of their small communities. The council
of old men in an American tribe, deliberating
upon' its interests, and determining with refpe&t
to peace or war, has been cormp-red to the senate
in more polished republics. The proceedings of
the former, we are told, are often no less formal
and sagacious than those of the latter. Great
political wisdom is exhibited in pondering the
various measures proposed, and in balancing
their probable advantages, agyainft the evils of
which they may be productive. Much addrcfs
and eloquence are employed by the leaders, who
aliirc at acquiring such confidence with their
countrymen, as to have an ascendant in those

assemblics.

B O K assemblies " But, among savage tribes, the field

· V. *,.-V--.' for displaying political talents cannot be exten.

five. Where the idea of private property is in-
complete, and no criminal jurifdition is eftab.
lifhed, there is hardly any funEtion of internal
government to exercise. Where there is no
commerce, and scarcely any intercourse among
separate tribes; where enmity is implacable, and
hostilities are carried on almost without inter-
miniion; there will be few points of public
concern to adjust with their neighbours ; and
that department of their affairs which may be de-
nominated foreign, cannot be so intricate as to
require much refined policy in conducting it.
Where individuals are ib thoughtless and impro.
Vident as seldom to take effetual precautions
for felf-prefervation, it is vain to expeEt that
public measures and deliberations will be regu-
lated by the contemplation of remote events,
It is the genius of savages to act from the impulse
of present paflion. They have neither foresight
nor temper to form complicated arrangements
with refpcet to thcir future conduc. The con-
fultations of the Americans, indeed, are so fre-
quent, and their negociations are so many',
and so long protracted, as to give their proceed-

'1 Clarlev. N. Fr. iii. 269, &c.
' See NOTE LXVI.

ingS

ings an extraordinary asped of wisdom. But B o K.
this is not owing so much to the depth of their
schemes, as to the coldness and phlegm of their
temper, which render them flow in determining'.
If we except the celebrated league, that united
the Five Nations in Canada into a federal re.
public, which shall be confidered in its proper
place, we can discern few such traces of political
wisdom, among the rude American tribes, as dif-
cover any great degree of foresight or extent of
intellectual abilities. Even among them, we
ihall find public measures more frequently di-
reted by the impetuous ferocity of their youth,
than regulated by the experience and wisdom of
their old men.

As the condition of man in the savage state is Degree of

'asset ion.

unfavourable to the progress of the understanding,
it has a tendency likewise, in some. refpe&s, to
check the exercise of affecion, and to render the
heart contrated. The strongest feeling in the
mind of a savage is a sense of his own independ-
ence. He has sacrificed so small a portion of his
natural liberty by becoming a member of society,
that he remains, in a great degree, the sole mafler
of his own ations '. He often takes his refolu-

Charlev. N. Fr. iii. 271.

' Fernandez Mirfion. de los Chiquit. 33.
VOL. uI. Q tions

BoV 0 K sions alone, without consulting, or feeling any

IV. LAP.-J connection with the perflns around him. In

many of his operations, he fiands as much de.
tached from the reft of his species, as if he had
formed no union with them. Conscious how
little he depends upon other men, he is apt
to view them with a careless indifference. Even
the force of his mind contributes to increase this
unconcern, and as he looks not beyond himself
in deliberating with respect to the part which he
should a&t, his solicitude about the consequences
of it seldom extends farther. He pursues his
own career, and indulges his own fancy, without
inquiring or regarding whether what he does be
agreeable or offensive to others, whether they
may derive benefit or receive hurt from it.
Hence the ungovernable caprice of savages, their
impatience under any species of restraint, their in.
ability to suppress or moderate any inclination, the
feorn or neglet with which they receive advice,
their high estimation of themselves, and their con
tempt of other men. Among them, the pride of
independence produces almost the fame effects
with interettednefs in a more advanced slate of
society; it refers every thing to a man himself, it
leads him to be indifferent about the manner in
which his adions may asseE other men, and
renders the gratification of his own wiflhes tl;e
measure and end of condud.

To

To the fame cause may be imputed the hardness Bo o K

IV.

of heart, and insensibility, remarkable in all
savage nations. Their minds, rouzed only by tHardntQs
strong emotions, are little susceptible of gentle,
delicate, or tender affe&ions . Their union is
so incomplete, that each individual a&s as if he
retained all his natural rights entire and un-
diininifed. If a favour is conferred upon him,
or any beneficial service is performed on his ac-
count, he receives it with much satisfaction,
because it contributes to his enjoyment; but
this sentiment extends not beyond himself, it ex-
cites no sense of obligation, he neither feels grati-
tude, nor thinks of making any return w. Even
among persons the most closely conneced, the
exchange of those good offices which firengthen
attachment, mollify the heart, and sweeten the
intercourse of life, is not frequent. The high
ideas of independence among the Americans
nourish a fullen refcrve, which keeps them at a
distance from each other. The nearest relations
are mutually afraid to make any demand, or to
solicit any service x, left it flould be confidered
by the other as imposing a burden, or laying
a reitraint upon his will.

Charlev. N. Fr. iii. 309.

v Ovicdo Hii. lib. xvi. c. 2. See NOTE LXVII.
' De la Pothcrie, iii. 28.

Q_ 2 I HkAV

B 0 0 K I HAVE already remarked the influence of this

, hard unfeeling temper upon domestic life, with re.
fenfrb- fpe t to the connet.ion between husband and

wife, as well as that between parents and children,
Its effets are no less conspicuous, in the per-
formance: of those mutual offices of tenderness
which the infirmities of our nature frequently
exact. Among some tribes, when any of their
number are seized with any violent disease, they
are generally abandoned by all around them,
who, careless of their recovery, fly in the utmot
consternation from the supposed danger of in.
fecion Y. But even where they are not thus de.
ferted, the cold indifference with which they are
attended can afford them little consolation. No
look of sympathy, no soothing expressions, no
officious services, contribute to alleviate the dif.
trefs of the sufferers, or to make them forget
what they endure '. Their nearest relations vill
often refuse to submit to the smallest incon.
veniency, or to part with the least trife, however
much it may tend to their accommodation or re.
lief . So little is the breast of a savage fufcepti.

r Lcttre de P. Cataneo ap. Muratori Chrillian, i. 3c.C

Tcrtrc, ii. 41o. Lo/ano, xoo. Herrera, dcc. 4. lib. viii. c. 5.
dec. 5 lil iv. c. 2. Falkncr's l)cfcrilt. of Patagoiti;l, S.

X Gumilla, i. 329. Lozano, loo.
3 Garcia OI igen, &c. 90. Hcrrcra, dec. 4. lib. iii. c. 5

ble

ble of those Sentiments which prompt men to that B oo K

IV.

feeling attention which mitigates the calamities of
human life, that, in some provinces of America,
the Spaniards have found it necerfary to inforce
the common duties of humanity by positive laws,
and to oblige husbands and wives, parents and
children, under severe penalties, to take care of
each other during their fickners b. The lame
harshness of temper is lill more conspicuous
in their treatment of the animal creation. Prior
to their intercourse with the people of Europe,
the North Americans had some tame dogs, which
accompanied them in their hunting excursions,
and served them with all the ardour and fidelity
peculiar to the species. But, inflead of that fond
attachment which the hunter naturally feels to-
wards those useful companions of his toils, they
requite their services with neglect, seldom feed,
and never caress them c. In other provinces, the
Americans have become acquainted with the
domestic animals of Europe, and avail themselves
of their service; but it is univerallly observed
that they always treat them harflly ', and never
employ any method, either for breaking or
managing them, but fboce and cruelty. In
every part of the deportment of man in his

b Cogulludo Hilt. de \carthan,, p. 300.
c Charlcv. N. Fr. iii. ii 19. 337.

J1 Uloa Notic. American. 3 1 .

Q. 3 savage

B o o K savage state, whether towards his equals of the
(h ---j human species, or towards the animals below

him, we recognize the fame character, and trace
the operations of a mind intent on its own grati.
fications, and regulated by its own caprice, with
little attention or sensibility to the sentiments and
feelings of the beings around him.
Tatiturnity. AFTER explaining how unfavourable the fa.

vage slate is to the cultivation of the understand.
ing, and to the improvement of the heart, I
should not have thought it necessary to mention
what may be deemed its lesser defects, if the
charaEter of nations, as well as of individuals,
were not often more diftinEtly marked by cir-
cumftances apparently trivial than by those of
greater moment. A savage, frequently placed
in situations of danger and distress, depending on
himself alone, and wrapt up in his own thoughts
and schemes, is a serious melancholy animal.
His attention to others is small. The range
of his own ideas is narrow. Hence that tacitur.
nity which is so dilgufting to men accustomcd to
the open intercourse offocial conversation. Wlen
they are not engaged in action, the Americans
often fit whole days in one posture, without
opening their lips'. When they go forth to

c Voyage dc Bouguer, lo2.

war,

war, or to the chafe, they usually march in a line B 0 0 K
at some distance from one another,! and without L
exchanging a word. The fame profound silence
is observed when they row together in a canoe.
It is only when they are animated by intoxicating
liquors, or rouzed by the jollity of the festival
and dance, that they become gay and con-
verfible.

To the fame causes may be imputed the re. Cunning.

fined cunning with which they form and execute
their schemes. Men, who are not habituated to
a liberal communication of their own sentiments
and wishes, are apt to be so distrustful, as to
place little confidence in others, and to have re-
course to an insidious craft in accomplishing
their own purposes. In civilized life, those per-
sons, who, by their situations, have but a few
objets of pursuit on which their minds in.
ceffantly dwell, are molt remarkable for low
artifice in carrying on their little projeEts
Among savages, whose views are equally con-
fined, and their attention no less persevering,
those circumstances must operate still more
powerfully, and gradually accustom them to a
disingenuous subtlety in all their tranfaltions.
The force of this is increased by habits which

Charlev. iii. 340.

. 4 they

B °° K they acquire in carrying on the two most in.
v__J teresting operations wherein they are engaged.

With them war is a system of craft, in which
they trust for success to firatagem more than
to open force, and have their invention con.
tinually on the itretch to circumvent and surprise
their enemies. As hunters, it is their constant
objec to ensnare, in order that they may de.
firoy. Accordingly, art and cunning have been
universally observed as diftinguiilling charater.
iflics of all savages. The people of the rude
tribes of America are remarkable for their artifice
and duplicity. Impenetrably secret in farming
their measures, they pursue them with a patient
undeviating attention, and there is no refine.
ment of diflimulation which they cannot employ,
in order to insure success. The natives of Peru
were engaged above thirty years, in concerting
the plan of that infurretion which took place
under the viceroyalty of the marquis de Villa.
Garcia; and though it was communicated to a
great number of persons, in all different ranks,
no indication of it ever transpired during that
long period; no man betrayed his trust, or by
an unguarded look, or raflh word, gave rife
to any suspicion of what was intended g. The
dissimulation and craft of individuals is no less

g Voyage de Ulloa, ii. 309.

remarkable

remarkable than that of nations. When set upon B 0 0 K
deceiving, they wrap themselves up so artificially, _
that it is impossible to penetrate into their inten-
tions, or to deteEt their designs h

BUT if there be defects or vices peculiar to the Virtues.

savage state, there are likewise virtues which
it inspires, and good qualities, to the exercise of
which it is friendly. The bonds of society fit so Independ-

ent fypirit.

loo'e upon the members of the more rude
American tribes, that they hardly feel any re-
ftraint. Hence the spirit of independence, which
is the pride of a savage, and which he confiders
as the unalienable prerogative of man. Incapable
of controul, and disdaining to acknowledge any
superior, his mind, though limited in its powers,
and erring in many of its pursuits, acquires such
elevation by the conlcioufnefs of its own freedom,
that he acts on some occasions with astonishing
force, and perseverance, and dignity.

As independence nouri'shes this high spirit Fortitude.

among savages, the prprpeual wars in which they
are engaged call it forth into action. Such long
intervals of tranquillity as are fr-cquent in polished
societies are unknown in the savage ltate. Their
enmities, as I have observed, are implacable and

h Gumilla, i. 162. Charllv. iii. 109.

immortal.

BO OK immortal. The valour of the young men is

Iv.
y..- _ never allowed to rust in ination. The hatchet is

always in their hand, either for attack or de.
fence. Even in their hunting excursions, they
mufft be on their guard against surprise from the
hostile tribes, by which they are surrounded.
Accustomed to continual alarms, they grow
familiar with danger; courage becomes an habi.
tual virtue, resulting naturally from their situ-
ation, and strengthened by conitant exertions.
The mode of displaying fortitude may not be the
fame in small and rude communities, as in more
powerful and civilized tfates. Their system of
war, and fiandard of valour, may be formed
upon different principles, but in no situation
does the human mind rife more superior to the
sense of danger, or the dread of death, than in
its most simple and uncultivated fate.

Attachment ANOTHER virtue remarkable among savages,
to their community. is attachment to the community of which they

are members. From the nature of their political
union, one might expect this tie to be extremely
feeble. But there are circumstances which ren-
der the influence, even of their loose mode
of association, very powerful. The American
tribes are finall; combined against their neigh-
bours, in prosecution of ancient enmities, or in
avenging recent injuries, their interests and ope-

rations

rations are neither numerous nor complex. These B o o K
are objecs, which the uncultivated underfland- I
.ing of a savage can comprehend. His heart
is capable of forming connections, which are so
little diffused. He assents with warmth to public
measures, dictated by passions similar to those
which direc his own conduEt. Hence the ar-
dour with which individuals undertake the rnot
perilous service, when the community deems it
necefary. Hence their fierce and deep-rooted
antipathy to the public enemies. Hence their
zeal for the honour of their tribe, and that love
of their country, which prompts them to brave
danger that it may triumph, and to endure the
most exquilite torments, without a groan, that it
may not be disgraced.

THUS, in every situation where a human Satisfna;on

being can be placed, even in the most un- owl ondi.r
favourable, there are virtues which peculiarly be- tlon-
long to it; there are affections which it calls
forth; there is a ipecies of happiness which
it yields. Nature, with most beneficent inten-
tion, conciliates and forms the mind to its condi-
tion; the ideas and wilhes of man extend not
beyond that slate of society to which he is ha-
bituated. What it presents as objets of con-
templation or enjoyment, fills and satisfies his
mind, and he can hardly conceive any other

mode

B o o K mode of life to be pleasant, or even tolerable,

Iv.
^_s The Tartar, accustomed to roam over extensive

plains, and to subsist on the product of his herds,
imprecates upon his enemy, as the greatest of all
curses, that he may be condemned to reside
in one place, and to be nourified with the top
of a weed. The rude Americans, fond of their
own pursuits, and satisfied with their own lot, are
equally unable to comprehend the intention or
utility of the various accommodations, which, in
more polished society, are deemed essential to the
comfort of life. Far from complaining of their
own situation, or viewing that of men in a more
improved state with admiration or envy, they re.
gard themselves as the standard of excellence, as
beings the best entitled, as well as the most per.
fectly qualified, to enjoy real happiness. Unac.
cuRtomed to any restraint upon their will or their
adtions, they behold with amazement the in.
equality of rank, and the subordination which
take place in civilized life, and confider the vo.
luntary submission of one man to another, as a
renunciation, no less base than unaccountable, of
the first diftinEtion of humanity. Void of fore-
fight, as well as free from care themselves, and
delighted with that state of indolent security,
they wonder at the anxious precautions, the un-
ceasing industry, and complicated arrangements
of Europeans, in guarding against diltant evils,

or

or providing for future wants; and they often B 0 0 K
exclaim against their preposterous folly, in thus
multiplying the troubles, and increasing the
labour of life'. This preference of their own
manners is conspicuous on every occasion. Even
the names, by which the various nations wifll to
be distinguished, are assumed from this idea
of their own pre-eminence. The appellation
which the Iroquois give to themselves is, the chief
of meln k. Caraibe, the original name of the
fierce inhabitants of the Windward Islands,
signifies, the warlike people'. The Cherokees,
from an idea of their own superiority, call the
Europeans Nothings, or the accursed race, and
assume to themselves the name of the beloved
people m. The fame principle regulated the no-
tions of the other Americans concerning the
Europeans; for although, at first, they were
filled with astonishment at their arts, and with
dread of their power, they soon came to abate
their estimation of men, whose maxims of life
were so different from their own. Hence they
called them the froth of the Tea, men without
father or mother. They supposed, that either
they had no country of their own, and therefore

C Charlev. N. Fr. iii. 308. Lahortan, ii. 97.
k Colden, i. 3. 1 Rochefort. Hill. des Antilles,455.
'" Adair, -ill. of Amcr. Indians, p. 32.

invaded

B o K invaded that which belonged to othersn; or
'v'rJ , that, being deititute of the necessaries of life at

home, they were obliged to roam over the
ocean, in order to rob such as were more amply
provided.

MEN, thus satisfied with their condition, are

far from any inclination to relinquish their own
habits, or to adopt those of civilized life. The
transition is too violent to be suddenly made,
Even where endeavours have been used to wean
a savage from his own customs, and to render
the accommodations of polished society familiar
to him; even where he has been allowed to taste
of those pleasures, and has been honoured with
those diftintions, which are the chief objects of
our desire, he droops and languishes under the
reitraint of laws and forms, he seizes the firfl
opportunity of breaking loose from them, and
returns with transport to the forest or the wild,
where he can enjoy a careless and uncontrolled
freedom °.

TiIus I have finished a laborious delineation of

the characer and manners of the uncivilized
tribes scattered over the vast continent of America.

Benzon. Hist. Novi Orbis, lib. iii. c. 21.
C Charlvy. N. Fr. iii. 322.

In

In this, I aspire not at rivalling the great masters B o K.
who have painted and adorned savage life, either _,
in boldness of design, or in the glow and beauty
bs their colouring. I am satisfied with the more
humble merit of having perfifled with patient
indufrry, in viewing my subjed in many various
lights, and colleEing from the most accurate
observers such detached, and often minute
features, as might enable me to exhibit a portrait
that resembles the original.

BEFORE I close this part of my work, one ob- General

servation more is necessary, in order to jutuify the Ci,'trfpc
conclusions which I have formed, or to prevent qto t"'l
the miflakes into which such as examine them
may fall. In contemplating the inhabitants of a
country so widely extended as America, great
attention should be paid to the diversity of
climates under which they are placed. The in-
fluence of this I have pointed out with refped to
several important particulars, which have been
the objet of research; but even where it has
not been mentioned, it ought not to be over-
looked. The provinces of America are of such
different temperament, that this alone is sufficient
to constitute a diftin&tion betwecn their inha-
bitants. In every part of the earth where man
exists, the power of climate operates, with dcci.
five influence, upon his condition and character.

In

B o K In those countries which approach near to the

.'., extremes of heat or cold, this influence is so

conspicuous as to strike every eye. Whether
we confider man merely as an animal, or as
being endowed with rational powers which fit
him for ativity and speculation, we ihall find
that he has uniformly attained the greatest per.
fetion of which his nature is capable, in the
temperate regions of the globe. There his con-
flitution is modt vigorous, his organs molt
acute, and his form most beautiful. There,
too, he possesses a superior extent of capacity,
greater fertility of imagination, more enterprising
courage, and a sensibility of heart which gives
birth to desires, not only ardent, but perse.
vering. In this favourite situation he has dif-
played the utmost efforts of his genius, in
literature, in policy, in commerce, in war, and
in all the arts which improve or embellish life P.

TiIS powerful operation of climate is felt moll

sensibly by rude nations, and produces greater
effects than in Societies more improved. The
talents of civilized men are continually exerted
in rendering their own condition more com-
sortable; and by their ingenuity and inventions,

P Dr. Ferguson's Efnly on the Hilt. of Civil Society,
part iii. c. t.

they

they can, in a great measure, supply the defers, B 0 K

IV.

and guard against the inconveniencies of any Iv
climate. But the improvident savage is affected
by every circumstance peculiar to his situation.
He takes no precaution either to mitigate or
to implove it. Like a plant, or an animal, he is
formed by the climate under which he is placed,
and feels the full force of its influence.

IN surveying the rude nations of America, this

natural diftindtion between the inhabitants of the
temperate and torrid zones is very remarkable.
They may, accordingly, be divided into two great
classes. The one comprehends all the North
Americans, from the river St. Laurence to the
Gulf of Mexico% together with the people of
Chili, and a few frnall tribes towards the extremity
of the southern continent. To the other belong
all the inhabitants of the islands, and those fettled
in the various provinces which extend from the
ilthmus of Darien almost to the southern confines
of Brasil, along the east fide of the Andes. In
the former, which comprehends all the regions
of the temperate zone that in America are inha-
bited, the human species appears manifestly to be
more perseEt. The natives are more robusts
more active, more intelligent, and more coura-
geous. They poffels, in the most eminent de-
gree, that force of mind, and love of independ-

VOL. 11. R ence,

B o 0 K ence, which I haue pointed out as the chief

IV.
s-Y_ « virtues of man in his savage state. They have

defended their liberty with persevering fortitude
against the Europeans, who subdued the other
rude nations of America with the greatest ease.
The natives of the temperate zone are the only
people in the New VWorld who are indebted for
their freedom to their own valour. The North
Americans, though long encompafled by three
formidable European powers, still retain part of
their original possessions, and continue to exist as
independent nations. The people of Chili, though
early invaded, still maintain a gallant contest with
the Spaniards, and have set bounds to their en.
croachments ; whereas, in the warmer regions,
men are mere feeble in their frame, less vigorous
in the efiorts of their mind, of a gentle but
dastardly spirit, more enslaved by pleasure, and
more funkl in indolence. Accordirgly, it is in the
torrid zone that the Europeans have most comn
pletely established their don-inion over America;
the most fertile and desirable provinces in it arc
filujeted to their yoke ; and if several tribes there
flill enjoy independence, it is either because they
have never been attacked by an enemy already
ftiated with conquest, and poffefled of larger
territories than he was able to occupy, or because
they have been saved from oppreflion by their
reinloic and inacceflible situation.

CON.

CONSPICUOUS as this diftin&ion may appear Bl 0 0 K

between the inhabitants of those different regionsj
it is not, however, universal. Moral and political
causes, as I have formerly observed, asset the
disposition and character of individuals, as well
as nations, still more powerfully than the in-
fluence of climate. There are, accordingly, some
tribes, in various parts of the torrid zone, pof-
sessed of courage, high spirit, and the love of in-
dependence, in a degree hardly inferior to the
natives of more temperate climates. We are too
little acquainted with the history of those people,
to be able to trace the several circumstances in
their progress and condition, to which they are
indebted for this remarkable pre-eminence. The
fat, nevertheless, is certain. As early as the
first voyage of Columbus, he received inform-
ation that several of the islands were inhabited by
the Caribbees, a fierce race of men, nowise re^
ferrbling their feeble and timid neighbours. In
his second expedition to the New World, he
found this information to be juftt and was him-
self a witness of their intrepid valour q. The
fame character they have maintained invariably
in all subsequent contests with the people of
Europer; and, even in our own times, we have

1 Life of Columbus, c. 47, 48. Sec NOTE LXVIII.
' ochefort Hilt. des Antilles, 531.

R 2 fccn

B. o o K seen them make a gallant itand in defence of the

-- last territory which the rapacity of their invaders

had left in their poffeflion'. Some nations in
Brasil were no less eminent for vigour of mind,
and bravery in war t. The people of the isthmus
of Darien boldly met the Spaniards in the field,
and frequently repelled those formidable in.
vaders . Other instances might be produced,
It is not attending to any single cause or prin.
ciple, how powerful and extensive soever its in.
fluence may appear, that we can explain the
adions, or account for the character of men.
Even the law of climate, more universal, per.
haps, in its operation than any that affeas thQ
human species, cannot be applied, in judging of
their conduct, without many exceptions.

' See NOTE LXIX.
t Lery ap. de Bry, iii. 207, &c.
" Herrera, dec. I. lib. x. c. 15, &c.; dec. 2. pallim.

# THE HISTORY OF AMERICA. BOOK V.

THE
H I S T ORY

OF
AMERICA.

BOOK V.
W7HEN Grijalva returned to Cuba, he found B o o K

the armament destined to attempt the . ._,
conquest of that rich country which he had dif- P1s.

Prepara-
covered, almost complete. Not only ambition, tions of Ve.

hfquez for

but avarice, had urged Velasquez to haften his invading
preparations; and having such a profpeEt of New pai
gratifying both, he had advanced considerable
fums out of his private fortune towards defraying
the expence of the expedition. At the fame
time, he exerted his influence as governor, in
engaging the most distinguished persons in the
colony to undertake the service". At a time
when the spirit of the Spanish nation was adven-
turous to excess, a number of soldiers, eager to

a Sec NOTE LXX.

R 3 cmbark

B 0 K embark in any daring enterprise, soon appeared.

But it was not so easy to find a person qualified
J5ts to take the command in an expedition of so

much importance; and the character of Velaf.
quez, who had the right of nomination, greatly
increased the difficulty of the choice. Though of
most aspiring ambition, and not destitute of
talents for government, he possessed neither such
courage, nor such vigour and ativity of mind,
as to undertake in person the conduct of the
armament which he was preparing. In this em.
barrafing situation, he formed the chimerical
scheme, not only of atchieving great exploits by
a deputy, but of securing to himself the glory of
conquefis which were to be made by another.
In the execution of this plan, he fondly aimed at
reconciling contradictions. He was solicitous to
choose a commander of intrepid resolution, and
of superior abilities, because he knew these to be
requisite in order to insure success; but, at the
fame time, from the jealousy natural to little
minds, he wished this person to be of a spirit so
tame and obsequious, as to be entirely dependent
on his will. But when he came to apply those
ideas in forming an opinion concerning the
several officers who occurred to his thoughts as
worthy of being entrusted with the command, he
soon perceived that it was impossible to find
such incompatible qualities united in one cha.

raster,

rafter. Such as were distinguished for courage B o K
and talents were too high-fpirited to be passive in-
itruments in his hands. Those who appeared 's's
more gentle and traftable, were destitute of ca-
pacity, and unequal to the charge. This aug-
mented his perplexity and his fears. He delibe-
rated long, and with much bolicitude, and was
fiill wavering in his choice, when Amador
de Lares, the royal treasurer in Cuba, and
Andres Duero,"his own efcretary, the two persons
in whom he chiefly confided, were encouraged
by this irresolution to propose a new candidate,
and they supported their recommendation with
such afiduity and address, that, no less fatally
for Velasquez than happily for their country, it
proved successful b

THE man whom they pointed out to him was Hecappoints

Fernando Cortes. He was born at Medellin, a man'dcr."
small town in Ellremadura, in the year one thou-
sand four hundred and eighty-five, and descended
from a family of noble blood, but of very mode-
rate fortune. Being originally deflined by his
parents to the study of law, as the nmoft likely
method of bettering his condition, he was sent
early to the university of Salamanca, where he

'' B. Diaz. c. 19. Gomara Cron. c. 7. I-errera, dec. a.
Jib iii. F. . I.

B 4. imbibed

B 0 O K imbibed some tinEture of learning. But he was

soon disgusted with an academic life, which did
A5s8 not suit his ardent and restless genius, and retired

to Medellin, where he gave himself up entirely
to active sports and martial exercises. At this
period of life, he was so impetuous, so overbear.
ing, and so dissipated, that his father was glad to
comply with his inclination, and fend him abroad
as an adventurer in arms. There were in that
age two conspicuous theatres, on which such of
the Spanish youth as courted military glory
might display their valour; one in Italy, under
the command of the Great Captain; the other
in the New World. Cortes preferred the former,
but was prevented by indisposition from embark.
ing with a reinforcement of troops sent to
Naples. Upon this disappointment he turned
his views towards America, whither he was
allured by the prospeCt of the advantages which
he might derive from the patronage of Ovandoc,
the governor of Hispaniola, who was his kinf-
man, When he landed at St. Domingo in one
thousand five hundred and four, his reception
was such as equalled his most sanguine hopes,
and he was employed by the governor in several
honourable and lucrative flations. These, how-
cver, did not satisfy his ambition; and in the

Sec NOTE LXXI.

year

year one thousand five hundred and eleven, he i o o K

V.

obtained permiflion to accompany Diego Velaf- _
quez in his expedition to Cuba. In this service ,sS3.
he distinguished himself so much, that, notwith.
flanding some violent contells with Velasquez,
occasioned by trivial events, unworthy of remem.
brance, he was at length taken into favour, and
received an ample conceflion of lands and of
Indians, the recorpence usually bellowed upon
adventurers in the New World d.

THOUGH Cortes had not hitherto aded in

high command, he had displayed such qualities in
several scenes of difficulty and danger, as raised
universal expetation, and turned the eyes of his
countrymen towards him, as one capable of per,
forming great things. The turbulence of youth,
as soon as he found objeds and occupations
suited to the ardour of his mind, gradually sub-
fided, and fettled into a habit of regular in-
defatigable ativity. The impetuosity of his
temper, when he came to ad with his equals, in-
sensibly abated, by being kept under reltraint,
and mellowed into a cordial oIldierly frankness.
These qualities were accompanied with calm
prudence in concerting his schemes, with per-
fevering vigour in executing them, and with

4 Gomara Cron. c. I, z, 3.

what

BO 0 K what is peculiar to superior genius, the art of

V__ gaining the confidence and governing the minds
'51S- of men. To all which were added the inferior

accomplishments that strike the vulgar, and com-
mand their refpee; a graceful person, a winning
aspec, extraordinary address in martial exercises,
and a conflitution of such vigour as to be capable
of enduring any fatigue.

As soon as Cortes was mentioned to Velasquez

by his two confidents, he flattered hinmfelf that he
had at length found what he had hitherto fought
in vain, a man with talents for command, but
not an objec: for jealousy. Neither the rank nor
the fortune of Cortes, as he imagined, were such
that he could aspire at independence. He had
reason to believe that by his own readiness to
bury ancient animofities in oblivion, as well as
his liberality in conferring several recent favours,
he had already gained the good-will of Cortes,
and hoped, by this new and unexpected mark of
confidence, that he might attach him for ever to
his interest,

Soon bc- CORTES, receiving his commiflion with the
'oi.s of ir. warmest expreflions of refpec and gratitude to
Oaobr 23 the governor, immediately ereEted his standard

before his own house, appeared in a military
dress, and assumed all the ensigns of his ncw

dignity.

dignity. His utmost influence and activity were B o oK
exerted in persuading many of his friends to -
engage in the service, and in urging forward the '5s8
preparations for the voyage. All his own funds,
together with what money he could raise by
mortgaging his lands and Indians, were expended
in purchasing military flores and provisions, or
in supplying the wants of such of his officers as
were unable to equip themselves in a manner
suited to their rank'. Inoffensive, and even
laudable as this conduct was, his disappointed
competitors were malicious enough to give it a
turn to his disadvantage. They represented him
as aiming already, with little disguise, at eftab.
lifhing an independent authority over his troops,
and endeavouring to secure their refpedt or love
by his ostentatious and intererted liberality. They
reminded Velasquez of his former dissensions
with the man in whom he now reposed so much
confidence, and foretold that Cortes would be
more apt to avail himself of the power, which the
governor was inconsiderately putting in his hands,
to avenge past injuries, than to requite recent
obligations, These insinuations made such irm
prefion upon the suspicious mind of Velasquez,
that Cortes soon observed some symptoms of a
growing alienation and dittruft in his behaviour,

' See NOTE LXXH,

and

B o O K and was advised by Lares and Duero, to hallen

V_. his departure, before there should become so
5'18. confirmed, as to break out with open violence.

Fully sensible of this danger, he urged forward
his preparations wich such rapidity, that he set
fail from St. Jago de Cuba on the eighteenth of
November, Velasquez accompanying him to the
shore, and taking leave of him with an appear-
ance of perfect friendship and confidence, though
he had secretly given it in charge to some of
Cortes's officers, to keep a watchful eye upon
every part of their commander's condu f'.

Endeavours CORTES proceeded to Trinidad, a small set.
to deprive
lim of his tlement on the fame fide of the island, where he
QOmiffion, was joined by several adventurers, and received a

supply of provisions and military stores, of which
his flock was flill very incomplete. He had
hardly left St. Jago, when the jealousy which had
been working in the breast of Velasquez, grew
so violent, that it was impoflible to suppress it.
The armament was no longer under his own eye
and direcion; and he felt, that as his power
over it ceased, that of Cortes would become
more absolute. Imagination now aggravated
every circumflance, which had formerly excited
suspicion: the rivals of Cortes induRfrioufly

f Gomara Cron. c. 7. B. Diaz. c. 20.

threw

threw in reflecions which increased his fears; B 0 K
and with no less art than malice they called Lv.-
fuperltition to their aid, employing the pre- 's5x8
diaions of an astrologer in order to complete the
alarm. All there, by their united operation,
produced the desired effet. Velasquez repented
bitterly of his own imprudence, in having com-
mitted a trust of so much importance to a person
whose fidelity appeared so doubtful, and hastily
dispatched inftrudions to Trinidad, empowering
Verdugo, the chief magistrate there, to deprive
Cortes of his commission. But Cortes had
already made such progress in gaining the efleem
and confidence of his troops, that, finding officers
as well as soldiers equally zealous to support his
authority, he soothed or intimidated Verdugo,
and was permitted to depart from Trinidad with-
out moleflation.

FROM Trinidad Cortes failed for the Havana, and to tay

him under

in order to raise more soldiers, and to complete arreit.
the viAualling of his fleet. There several persons
ofdiftincion entered into the service, and engaged
to supply what provisions were (till wanting; but
as it was necessary to allow them some time for
performing what they had promised, Velasquez,
sensible that he ought no longer to rely on a man
of whom he had so openly discovered his distrust,
availed himself of the interval, which this un-

avoidable

B[O o K avoidable delay afforded, in order to.make one

, __ attempt more to wrest the command out of the
s15s. hands of Cortes. He loudly complained of Ver-

dugo's conducE, accusing him either of childish
facility, or of manifest treachery, in suffering
Cortes to escape from Trinidad. Anxious to
guard against a second disappointment, he sent a
person of confidence to the Havana, with pe.
remptory injunctions to Pedro Barba, his lieu.
tenant-governor in that colony, inifantly to arrest
Cortes, to fend him prisoner to St. Jago under a
firong guard, and to countermand the failing of
the armament until he should receive farther
orders. He wrote likewise to the principal
officers, requiring them to assist Barba in execut.
ing what he had given him in charge. But
before the arrival of his messenger, a Franciscan
friar of St. Jago had secretly conveyed an account
of this interesting tranfadion to Bartholomew de
Olmedo, a monk of the fame order, who adced
as chaplain to the expedition.

Cortes de. CORTES, forewarned of the danger, had time
feats his
tchnies, to take precautions for his own safety. His first

snus his ftep was to find some pretext for removing from
tio,,1. the Havana Diego de Ordaz, an officer of great

merit, but in whom, on account of his known
attachment to Velasquez, he could not confide in
this trying and delicate juncure. He gave him

the
I

the command of a vessel, defined to take on B o o K

V.

board some provisions iil a small harbour beyond ,.-.-
Cape Antonio, and thus made sure of his ab- *5'8s
fence, without seeming to fufpeA his fidelity.
When he was gone, Cortes no longer concealed
the intentions of Velasquez from his troops;
and as officers and soldiers were equally impatient
to set out on an expedition, in preparing for
which moif of thenl had expended all their
fortunes, they expressed their astonishment and
indignation at that illiberal jealousy, to which the
governor was about to sacrifice, not only the
honour of their general, but all their sanguine
hopes of glory and wealth. With one voice
they intreated that he would not abandon the
important tfation to which he had such a good
title. They conjured him not to deprive them of
a leader whom they followed with such well-
founded confidence, and offered to ihed thelat
drop of their blood in maintaining his authority.
Cortes was easily induced to comply with what
hehimfelffo ardently dcfired. He swore that he
would never desert soldiers who had given him
such a signal proof of their attachment, and
promised instantly to conduct them to that rich
country, which had been so long the objet
of their thoughts and wiflhes. This declaration
was received with transports of military applause,

aIccOin--

B o K accompanied with threats and imprecations

:- . against all who should prefure to call in question
IlsL. the jurifdidion of their general, or to obftruat

the execution of his designs.

Th a. EVERY thing was now ready for their de.

mount of
is torccs. parture; but though this expedition was fitted

out by the united effort of the Spanish power in
Cuba; though every settlement had contributed
its quota of men and provisions; though the
governor had laid out considerable fums, and
each adventurer had exhausted his flock, or
strained his credit, the poverty of the prepara-
tions was such as muff astonish the present age,
and bore, indeed, no resemblance to an arma-
ment destined for the conquest of a great empire,
The fleet consisted of eleven veflels; the largest
of a hundred tons, which was dignified by the
name of Admiral; three of seventy or eighty
tons, and the reft small open barks. On board
of these were fix hundred and seventeen men; of
which five hundred and eight belonged to the
land service, and a hundred and nine were
fearnen or artificers. The soldiers were divided
into eleven companies, according to the number
of the ships; to cach of which Cortes appointed
a captain, and committed to him the command of
the veffl while at sea, and of the men when on

florc.

fhoire As the use of fire.arms among the B o0O K
nations of Europe was hitherto confined to a few ·_- _
battalions of regularly disciplined infantry, only Isl'
thirteen soldiers were armed with muskets, thirty.
two were cross-bow men, and the reft had swords
and spears. Instead of the usual defensive armour,
which mufft have been cumbersome in a hot
climate, the soldiers wore jackets quilted with
cotton, which experience had taught the Spaniards
to be a sufficient protection against the weapons
of the Americans. They had only sixteen horses,
ten small field-pieces, and four falconets h,

WITH this slender and ill-provided train did Feb. io,

Iq~9-

Cortes set fail, to make war upon a monarch Hisdepar-
whose dominions were more extensive than all cuba.
the kingdoms fubjeEt to the Spanifl crown. As
religious enthusiasm always mingled with the
spirit of adventure in the New World, and, by a
combination still more strange, united with ava-
rice, in prompting the Spaniards to all their
enterprises, a large cross was displayed in their
standards, with this inscription, Let us follow the
cross, for under this ign we falall conquer.

So powerfully were Cortes and his followers
animated with both these passions, that no less.

g Sec NOTE LXXIII. h B. Diaz. c. 19.
VOL I. I. eager

B o o K eager to plunder the opulent country whither
-·._, they were bound, than zealous to propagate the
1519. Christian faith among its inhabitants, they set

out, not with the solicitude natural to men going
upon dangerous services, but with that confidence
which arises from security of success, and cer-
tainty of the divine protection.
Touches at As Cortes had determined to touch at every

place which Grijalva had visited, he steered di-
redtly towards the island of Cozumel; there he
had the good fortune to redeem Jerome de Agui-
lar, a Spaniard, who had been eight years a pri.
soner among the Indians. This man was per-
feely acquainted with a dialed of their language,
underfwood through a large extent of country,
and poffeging besides a considerable share of
prudence and sagacity, proved extremely useful
as an interpreter. From Cozumel, Cortes pro-

rMarch 4. ceeded to the tiver of Tabasco, in hopes of a re-
and at Ta-
bfco. ception as friendly as Grijalva had met with

there, and of finding gold in the fame abundance;
but the disposition of the natives, from some un-
known cause, was totally changed. After re-
peated endeavours to conciliate their good-will,
he was constrained to have recourse to violence.
Though the forces of the enemy were numerous,
and advanced with extraordinary courage, tlicy
were routed, with great slaughter, in 1everal

fucceflive'

successive aftions. The loss which they sus- B 0o K
tained, and fill Inore the astonishment and terror
excited by the deftrudive effedt of the fire-arms, '5sS'
and the dreadful appearance of the horses, hum-
bled their fierce spirits, and induced them to sue
for peace. They acknowledged the king of
Castile as their sovereign, and granted Cortes a
supply of provisions, with a present of cotton
garments, some gold, and twenty female slaves .

CORTES continued his course to the westward, Arrives at

St. Juan de

keeping as near the filore as possible, in order to uilu.
observe the country; but could discover no pro-
per place for landing, until he arrived at St. Juan
de Ulua k. As he entered this harbour a large Aprilz.
canoe, full of people, among whom were two who
seemed to be persons of diflinction, approached
his lhip with signs of peace and amity. They
came on board without fear or difIrult, and ad-
drefled him in a mnoft refpecful manner, but in a
language altogether unknown to Aguilar. Cortes
was in the utmost perplexity and diftrers, at an
event of which he infsantly forcfaw all the confe-
quences, and already felt the hesitation and uncer-
tainty with which he flould carry on the great

i See NOTE LXXIV.

k B. Diaz. c. 31-36. GomaraCron. c. 18-23. HeIr-
cera, dec. 2. lib. iv. c. 1 , &c.

s 2 schemes

B 0 0 K schemes which he meditated, if, in his tranf-
,_^-J- aEtions with the natives, he muff depend entirely

51'9. upon such an imperfect, ambiguous, and con-

jeclural mode of communication, as the use of
signs. But he did not remain long in his em-
barrafling situation: a fortu-nate accident ex-
tricated him, when his own sagacity could have
contributed little towards his relief. One of the
female slaves, whom he had received from the
cazique of Tabasco, happened to be present
at the first interview between Cortes and his new
guests. She perceived his distress, as well as the
confusion of Aguilar; and as she perfecEly under.
stood the Mexican language, she explained what
they had said in the Yucatan tongue, with
which Aguilar was acquainted. This woman,
known afterwards by the name of Donna Marina,
and who makes a conspicuous figure in the
history of the New World, where great revolu-
tions were brought about by small causes and
inconsiderable inflruments, was born in one of
the provinces of the Mexican empire. Having
been fold a& a slave in the early part of her life,
after a variety of adventures fie fell into the
hands of the Tabafcans, and had resided long
enough among them to acquire their language,
without losing the ufc of her own. Though it
was both tedious and troublesome to convcricl by
the intervention of two differcnt interprcters,

Cortes

Cortes was so highly pleased with having di f- o o K
covered this method of carrying on some inter- v-
course with the people of a country into which s'I9.
he was determined to penetrate, that in the
transports of his joy he confidered it as a visible
interposition of Providence in his favour'.

HE now learned, that the two persons whom he Lands h;i

had received on board of his flip were deputies troop'
from Teutile and Pilpatoe, two officers entrusted
with the government of that province, by a great
monarch, whom they called Montezuma; and
that they were sent to inquire what his intentions
were in visiting their coafi, and to offer him
what assistance he might need, in order to con-
tinue his voyage. Cortes, struck with the
appearance of those people, as well as the tenor
of the meflage, assured them, in refpedful terms,
that he approached their country with inoft
friendly sentiments, and came to propose matters
of great importance to the welfare of their prince
and his kingdom, which he would unfold more
fully, in perfbn, to the governor and the general.
Next morning, without waiting for any answer,
he landed his troops, his horses, and artillery;
and having chosen proper ground, began to

i B. Diaz. c. 37, 38, 39. Gomara Cron. c. 25, 26.
IHerrera, dec. 2. lib. v. c. 4.

s 3 ere;

B 0 0 K ere& huts for his men, and to fortify his camp.

V.
_-,-- The natives, instead of opposing the entrance
35'9' of those fatal guefis into their country, assisted

them in all their operations, with an alacrity
of which they had ere long good reason to
repent.

Hisfirftin- NEXT day Teutile and Pilpatoe entered the
tcrview * n
with the Spanilf camp with a numerous retinue, and
Mexicans. Cortes confidering them as the ministers of a

great monarch, entitled to a degree of attention
very different from that which the Spaniards
were accufftomed to pay to the petty caziques,
with whom they had intercourse in the isles,
received them with much formal cererfmony. He
informed them, that he came as ambassador from
Don Carlos of Austria, king of Castile, the
greatest monarch of the East, and was intrufed
with propositions of such moment, that he could
impart them to none but the emperor Montc-
zuma himself, and therefore required them to
conduct him, without loss of time, into the
presence of their mailer. The Mexican officers
could not conceal their uneasiness at a requelt,
which they knew would be difigrceable, ant
which they foresaw might prove extremely em-
barrafling to their ibvereign, whose mind had
been filled with many disquieting apprclienfionrs,
ever since the former appearance of the Spaniards

1l

on his coasts. But before they attempted to B O O K
dissuade Cortes from insisting on this demand, '--.
they endeavoured to conciliate his good-will, by 5'9'
entreating him to accept of certain presents,
which, as humble slaves of Montezuma, they laid
at his feet. They were introduced with great
parade, and consisted of fine cotton cloth, of
plumes of various colours, and of ornaments
of gold and silver, to a considerable value; the
workmnanfhip of which appeared to be as curious
as the materials were rich. The display of these
produced an effec very different from what the
Mexicans intended. Inttead of satisfying, it in-
creased the avidity of the Spaniards, and ren-
dered them so eager and impatient to become
masters of a country which abounded with such
precious productions, that Cortes could hardly
liften with patience to the arguments which
Pilpatoe and Teutile employed to dissuade him
from visiting the capital, and in a haughty
determined tone he insisted on his demand, of
being admitted to a personal audience of their
sovereign. During this interview, some painters,
in the train of the Mexican chiefs, had been di-
ligently employed in delineating, upon white
cotton cloths, figures of the flips, the horses, the
artillery, the soldiers, and whatever else at-
traded their eyes, as singular. When Cortes
observed this, and was informed that there

s 4 pictures

B O K pitures were to be sent to Montezuma, in order

V.

i _-y- to convey to him a more lively idea of the firange
'159' and wonderful obje&s now presented to their

view, than any words could communicate, he re.
solved to render the representation still more
animated and interesting, by exhibiting such a
fpeEtacle as might give both them and their
monarch an awful impression of the extraordinary
prowess of his followers, and the irresistible
force of their arms. The trumpets, by his
order, founded an alarm; the troops, in a mo-
ment, formed in order of battle, the infantry
performed such martial exercises as were best
suited to display the effe& of their different
weapons; the horse, in various evolutions, gave
a specimen of their agility and strength; the
artillery, pointed towards the thick woods which
surrounded the camp, were fired, and made
dreadful havoc among the trees. The Mexicans
looked on with that silent amazement which
is natural when the mind is itruck with objeEs,
which are both awful and above its comprehen-
sion. But, at the explosion of the cannon,
many of them fled, some fell to the ground, and
all were so much confounded at the fight of men
whose power so nearly resembled that of the gods,
that Cortes found it difficult to compose and re-
afiure them. The painters had now many new
objects on which to exercile their art, and they

put

put their fancy on the ltretch in order to invent B O o K
figures and symbols to represent the extraordinary 1_---
things which they had seen. 's59-

MESSENGERS were immediately dispatched to Negocia-

Montezuma with those pictures, and a full ac- Montev, '
count of every thing that had passed since the ma-
arrival of the Spaniards, and by them Cortes sent
a present of some European curiosities to Mon-
tezuma, which, though of no great value, he
believed would be acceptable on account of their
novelty. The Mexican monarchs, in order to
obtain early information of every occurrence in
all the corners of their extensive empire, had in-
troduced a refinement in police, unknown, at
that time, in Europe. They had couriers polled
at proper stations along the principal roads; and
as these were trained to agility by a regular edu.
cation, and relieved one another at moderate
diffances, they conveyed intelligence with fur-
prifing rapidity. Though the capital in which
Montezuma resided was above a hundred and
eighty miles from St. Juan de Ulna, Cortes's
presents were carried thither, and an answer to
his demands was received in few days. The
fame officers who had hitherto treated with the
Spaniards, were employed to deliver this answer;
but as they knew how repugnant the deter.

rination
I.

B 0 0 K mination of their master was to all the schemes

V.
L .-- and wishes of the Spanifi commander, they

'1519 would not venture to make it known until they
His pre- had previously endeavoured to sooth and mollify

him. For this purpose, they renewed their ne.
gociation, by introducing a train of a hundred
Indians, loaded with presents sent to him by
Montezuma. The magnificence of these was
such as became a great monarch, and far ex-
ceeded any idea which the Spaniards had hither-
to formed of his wealth. They were placed on
mats spread on the ground, in such order, as
shewed them to the greatest advantage. Cortes
and his officers viewed, with admiration, the va-
rious manufactures of the country, cotton fluffs
so fine, and of such delicate texture, as to re.
femble silk; pitures of animals, trees, and other
natural objecs, formed with feathers of different
colours, disposed and mingled with such (kill and
elegance, as to rival the works of the pencil in
truth and beauty of imitation. But what chiefly
attracted their eyes, were two large plates of a
circular form, one of massive gold representing
the fun, the other of silver, an emblem of the
moon"'. These were accompanied with bracelets,
collars, rings, and other trinkets of gold; and

,, Scc NOTE LXXV.

that

that nothing might be wanting which could give B O oK
the Spaniards a complete idea of what the _
country afforded, with some boxes filled with s'9
pearls, precious stones, and grains of gold un-
wrought, as they had been found in the mines or
rivers. Cortes received all there with an appear-
ance of profound veneration for the monarch by
whom they were bestowed. But when the Mexi rForb:ds
cans, presuming upon this, informed him, that apprci,
their mailer, though he desired him to accept of his cap'it"'
what he had sent as a token of regard for that
monarch whom Cortes represented, would not
give his content that foreign troops should ap.
proach nearer to his capital, 'or even allow them
to continue longer in his dominions, the Spanish
general declared, in a manher more resolute and
peremptory than formerly, that he mull infilt on
his first demand, as he could not, without dif-
honour, return to his own country, until he was
admitted into the presence of the prince whom he
was appointed to visit in the name of his fove-
reign. The Mexicans, atonilhed at feeing any
man dare to oppose that will, which they were
accuflomed to confider as fupremc and irre-
fiftible, yet afraid of precipitating their country
into an open rupture with such formidable ene-
mies, prevailed with Cortes to promiie, that he
would not move from his prcfent camp, until the

return

B o0 K return of a messenger, whom they lent to Monte.

V.

zuma for farther inftruclionsn.

1519.

State of the THE firmness with which Cortes adhered to his
Mexican
empire a original proposal, should naturally have brought
that pod. the negociation between him and Montezuma to

a speedy issue, as it seemed to leave the Mexican
monarch no choice, but either to receive him with
confidence as a friend, or to oppose him openly as
an enemy. The latter was what might have been
expected from a haughty prince in poffeflion of
extensive power. The Mexican empire, at this
period, was at a pitch of grandeur to which no so.
ciety ever attained in so short a period; Though
it had subsisted, according to their own traditions,
only a hundred and thirty years, its dominion ex.
tended from the North to the South Sea, over
territories stretching, with some finall interrup.
tion, above five hundred leagues from east to
weft, and more than two hundred from north to
south, comprehending provinces not inferior in
fertility, population, and opulence, to any in the
torrid zone. The people were warlike and en.
terprifing; the authority of the monarch un.
bounded, and his revenues confidcrable. If,

" B. Diaz. c. 39. Gomara Cron. c. . 27. Hcrera, dec. 2.
lib. v. c. 5, 6.

. .l

with the forces which might have been suddenly B 0 0 K
affernbled in such an empire, Montezuma had I-_
fallen upon the Spaniards while encamped on a 5'9.
barren unhealthy coast, unsupported by any ally,
without a place of retreat, and deflitute of provi-
sions, it seems to be impossible, even with all the
advantages of their superior discipline and arms,
that they could have flood the fllock, and they
must either have perished in such an unequal
contest, or have abandoned the enterprise.

As the power of Montezuma enabled him to Charaeer

of the ino-

take this spirited part, his own dispositions were narch.
such as seemed naturally to prompt him to it.
Of all the princes who had swayed the Mexican
sceptre, he was the most haughty, the most vio-
lent, and the most impatient of controul. His
fubjests looked up to him with awe, and his ene-
mies with terror. The former he governed with
unexampled rigour, but they were imprefied with
such an opinion of his capacity, as commanded
their refped ; and, by many viEtories over the
latter, he had spread far the dread of his arms,
and had added several considerable provinces to
his dominions. But though his talents might be
suited to the tranfations of a fiate so imperfetly
polifled as the Mexican empire, and fifficient to
condut them while in their accustomed course,
they were altogether inadequate to a conjuncture

so

B o0 K so extraordinary, and did not qualify him either

V.

-.-- to judge with the discernment, or to aa with the
'Ii9' decision, requisite in such trying emergence.

His per- FROM the moment that the Spaniards appeared
plexity and
terror upon on his coast, he discovered symptoms of timidity
the arrival
oftie spa and embarrafrment. Inflead of taking such refo.
niadidb. lutions as the consciousness of his own power, or

the memory of his former exploits, might have
inspired, he deliberated with an anxiety and heft.
tation which did not escape the notice of his
meanest courtiers. The perplexity and difconn.
pofure of Montezuma's mind upon this occasion,
as well as the general dismay of his fubjets,
were not owing wholly to the impreflion which
the Spaniards had made by the novelty of their
appearance and the terror of their arms. Its
origin may be traced up to a more remote source,
There was an opinion, if we may believe the
earliest and molt authentic Spanish historians,
almost universal among the Americans, that tome
dreadful calamity was impending over their
heads, from a race of formidable invaders who
ihould come from regions towards the rising fun,
to overrun and delblate their country. Whether
this disquieting apprehension flowed from the
memory of foume natural calamity which had
afflided that part of the globe, and impressed the
minds of the inhabitants with superstitious fears

and

and forebodings, or whether it was an imagina- 1 0o K
tion accidentally fuggefled by the aflonifhment ..-
which the first fight of a new race of men 1
occasioned, it is impoflible to determine. But as
the Mexicans were more prone to fuperflition
than anTy people in the New World, they were
more deeply affected by the appearance of the
Spaniards, whom their credulity inltantly repre-
sented as the infhtument destined to bring about
this fatal revolution which they dreaded. Under
those circumstances, it ceases to be incredible
that a handful of adventurers should alarm the
monarch of a great empire, and all his fubjets °.

NOTWITHSTANDING the influence of this im- Continues

pression, when the rneffenger arrived from the ciate.
Spanilh camp with an account that the leader of
the firangers, adhering to his original demand, re-
fused to obey the order enjoining him to leave
the country, Montezuma assumed some degree
of resolution, and, in a transport of rage natural
to a fierce prince unaccufiomed to neet with any
opposition to his will, he threatened to sacrifice
those presumptuous men to his gods. But his
doubts and fears quickly returned, and instead
of issuing orders to carry his threats into execu-

° Cortes Rclatione Sicclnda, ap. RaZmuI. iii. 234, 235.

Herrera, dec. 2. lib. iii. c. i. lib. v. c. l . lib. 'ii. c. 6.
Gomiara Cron. c. 66. 92. i s4.

lion,

B OO K tion, he again called his ministers to confer

V. 0
_' - and offer their advice. Feeble and temporising
35'9. measures will always be the result when men

assemble to deliberate in a situation where they
ought to act. The Mexican counsellors took no
effe&ual measure for expelling such troublesome
intruders, and were satisfied with issuing a more
positive injundion, requiring them to leave the
country; but this they preposterously accom.
panied with a present of such value, as proved
fresh inducement to remain there.

Anxietyand MEANWHILE, the Spaniards were not without
apprehen- onsofthe solicitude or a variety of sentiments, in deliberat-
Spanirds. ing concerning their own future conduEt. From

what they had already fecn, many of theni
formed such extravagant ideas concerning the
opulence of the country, that despising danger of
hardflips, when they had in view treasures which
appeared to be inexhaustible, they were eager to
attempt the conquest. Others, estimating the
power of the Mexican empire by its wealth, and
enumerating the various proofs which had oc-
curred of its being under a well-regulated al-
miniltration, contended, that it would be an ad
of the wildest frenzy to attack such a fate with
a finall body of men, in want of provisions, un-
connected with any ally, and already enfeebled
by the diseases peculiar to the climate, and the

loss

loss of several of their number P. Cortes secretly B 0 0 K

V.

applauded the advocates for bold measures, and
cherished their romantic hopes, as such ideas '1519
corresponded with his own, and favoured the exe-
cution of the schemes which he had formed.
From the time that the suspicions of Velasquez
broke out with open violence in the attempts to
deprive him of the command, Cortes saw the ne- Schemesof
ceflity of dissolving a connetion which would
obftrut and embarrass all his operations, and
watched for a proper opportunity of coming to
a final rupture with him. Having this in view,
he had laboured by every art to secure the
efleem and affedion of his soldiers. With his
abilities for command, it was easy to gain their
efteemr; and his followers were quickly satisfied
that they might rely, with perfet confidence, on
the conduct and courage of their leader. Nor
was it more difficult to acquire their affedion.
Among adventurers, nearly of the fame rank,
and serving at their own expence, the dignity of
command did not elevate a general above ming-
ling with those who ated under him. Cortes
availed himself of this freedom of intercourse, to
insinuate himself into their favour, and by his
aftfble manners, by well-timed ads of liberality
to some, by inspiring all with valt hopes, and by

P B. Diaz. c. 40.
VOL. ii. T allowing

B o o X allowing them to trade privately with the na.
_Le..2. tives q, he attached the greater part of his soldiers
1519. so firmly to himself, that they almost forgot

that the armament had been fitted out by the
authority,'and at the expence of another.

His addrcfs DURING those intrigues, Teutile arrived with
in carrying
ther on. the present from Montezuma, and, together with

it, delivered the ultimate order of that monarch
to depart instantly out of his dominions; and
when Cortes, instead of complying, renewed his
request of an audience, the Mexican turned
from him abruptly, and quitted the camp with
looks and geflures which strongly expressed his
surprise and resentment. Next morning, none
of the natives, who used to frequent the camp in
great numbers, in order to barter with the fol-
diers, and to bring in provisions, appeared. All
friendly correspondence seemed now to be at an
end, and it was expeEted every moment that
hostilities would commence. This, though an
event that might have been foreseen, occasioned
a sudden conlternation among the Spaniards,
which emboldened the adherents of Velasquez
not only to mumur and cabal against their
general, but to appoint one of their number to
rimonitfate openly againfl his imprudence in at-

See NOTE LXXVI.

tempting

tempting the conquest of a mighty empire with B o o K
such inadequate force, and to urge the necessity of -
returning to Cuba, in order to refit the fleet and 's5'
augment the army. Diego de Ordaz, one of his
principal officers, whom the malcontents charged
with this commiflion, delivered it with a soldierly
freedom and bluntness, assuring Cortes that he
spoke the sentiments of tile whole army. lie
listened to this renonftrance without any appear-
ance of emotion, and as he well knew the temper
and withes of his soldiers, and foresaw how they
would receive a proposition fatal at once to all the
splendid hopes and schemes which they had been
forming with fuich complacency, he carried his
dif/imulation so far as to seem to relinquish his
own measures in compliance with the requcft of
Ordaz, and issued orders that the army fliould be
in readiness next day to reimbark for Cuba. As
soon as this was known, the disappointed adven-
turers exclaimed and threatence ; the emiliarios
of Cortes, mingling with them, inflamed tleir
rage ; the ferment became general; the whole
camp was alnoft in open mutiny ; all demand-
ing with cagernLts to fee their commander.
Cortes was not flow in appearing; when, with
one voice, oficers and foldliel's exprclfed their
ftlollifllmlent and indlignalion at the orders which
they had receivedl It was unworthy, they cried,
ol the Caflilian courage, to be daunted at the

T 2 firIt

B 0 0 K first aspef of danger, and infamous to fly before

C,_-^» any enemy appeared. For their parts, they were
15'9' determined not to relinquish an enterprise, that

had hitherto been successful, and which tended
so visibly to spread the knowledge of true reli-
gion, and to advance the glory and interest
of their country. Happy under his command,
they would follow him with alacrity through
every danger, in quest of those settlements and
treasures which he had so long held out to their
view; but if he chose rather to return to Cuba,
and tamely give up all his hopes of diftinclion
and opulence to an envious rival, they would in-
flantly choose another general to conduEt them
in that path of glory, which he had not spirit to
cntern

CORTES, delighted with their ardour, took no

offence at the boldness with which it was uttered.
The sentiments were what he himself had in-
spired, and the warmth of expreflion satisfied
him that his followers had imbibed them tho-
roughly. lIe afledted, however, to be surprisecd
at what he heard, declaring that his orders to
prepare for embarking were issued from a pcr-
suasion that this was agreeable to his troops;
that, from deference to what he had been in-
formed was their inclination, he had sacrificcd
his own private opinion, which was firmly bent

on11

on establishing immediately a settlement on the B 0O K
sea-coast, and then on endeavouring to pene- ._
trate into the interior part of the country; that '59'
now he was convinced of his error; and as
he perceived that they were animated with
the generous spirit which breathed in every true
Spaniard, he would resume, with fresh ardour,
his original plan of operation, and doubted not
to condud them, in the career of vicory, to such
independent fortunes as their valour merited.
Upon this declaration, shouts of applause testified
the excess of their joy. The measure seemed to
be taken with unanimous content; such as
secretly condemned it being obliged to join in
the acclamations, partly to conceal their dif-
affeEtion from their general, and partly to avoid
the imputation of cowardice from their fellow-
soldiers r.

WIT-OUT allowing his men time to cool or Elablilnesa

to reflect, Cortes set about carrying his design "ovr

ot

into execution. In order to give a beginning to ment.
a colony, he assembled the principal persons in
his army, and by their suffrage elected a council
and magistrates in whom the government was to
be velted. As men naturally transplant the in-

, B. Diaz. c. 40, 41, 42. I-Irrera, dec. 2. lib. v.
c, 6, 7.

T 3 flitutions

B O O K ftitutions and forms of the mother-country into
;i__ their new settlements, this was framed upon the

519. model of a Spanish corporation. The magiitrates

were distinguished by the fame names and el.
signs of office, and were to exercise a finiilar
jurifdicion. All the persons chosen were inoft
firmly devoted to Cortes, and the instrument of
their election was framed in the king's name,
without any mention of their dependance on
Velasquez. The two principles of avarice and
enthusiasm, which prompted the Spaniards to all
their enterprises in the New World, seem to
have concurred in suggesting the name which
Cortes bestowed on his infant settlement. He
called it, The rich town of the true Cros '.

Rergns his THE fir-t meeting of the new council was diftin.
commiiffon, guifhed by a tranlfation of great moment. As

soon as it assembled, Cortes applied for lea',; )
enter; and approaching with many marks ol pro.
found refpet, which added dignity to the tri-
bunal, and let an example of reverence for
its authority, he began a long harangue, in
which, with much art, and in terms extremrely
fattcring to persons just entering upon their new
functiion, he observcd, that as the lfpieme jurif-
dicion over the colony which they had planted

° Villa rica de la vcra Cruz.

wvas

was now velfed in this court, he confidered them B o o K
as clothed with the authority, and representing a__j
the person of their sovereign; that accordingly i5'9.
he would communicate to them what he deemed
essential to the public safety, with the fame
dutiful fidelity as if he were addressing his royal
malter; that the security of a colony fettled in a
great empire, whose sovereign had already dif-
covered his hostile intentions, depended upon
arms, and the efficacy of there upon the fubordi-
nation and discipline preserved among the troops;
that his right to command was derived from
a commission granted by the governor of Cuba;
and as that had been long since revoked, the
lawfulness of his jurifdiEtion might well be
questioned; that he might be thought to at
upon a defective, or even a dubious title; nor
could they trust an army which might dispute
the powers of its general, at a juncture when it
ought implicitly to obey his orders ; that, moved
by these considerations, he now resigned all his
authority to them, that they, having both right
to choose, and power to confer full jurifdision,
might appoint one, in the king's name, to com-
mand the army in its future operations; and as
for his own part, such was his zeal for the ser-
vice in which they were engaged, that he would
molt cheerfilly take up a pike with the fame hand
that laid down the general's truncheon, and con-

T 4 vince

B 0 0 K vince his fellow-foldiers, that though accustomed

V.
--e-- i to command, he had not forgotten how to obey.

5'19' Having finished his discourse, he laid the corn-

mission from Velasquez upon the table, and after
killing his truncheon, delivered it to the chief
magistrate, and withdrew.

andischcfen THE deliberations of the council were not long,
chiefjuftice
and cap- as Cortes had concerted this important measure
tain-general. with his confidents, and had prepared the other

members with great address, for the part which
he wished them to take. His resignation was
accepted; and as the uninterrupted tenor of
their prosperity under his conduct afforded the
most satisfying evidence of his abilities for com-
mand, they, by their unanimous suffrage, elected
him chief justice of the colony, and captain-
general of its army, and appointed his commiflion
to be made out in the king's name, with most
ample powers, which were to continue in force
until the royal pleasure should be farther known.
That this deed might not be deemed the machi-
nation of a junto, the council called together
the troops, and acquainted them with what had
been refblved. The soldiers, with eager ap-
plause, ratiied the choice which the council had
made; the air resounded with the name of
Cortes, and all vowed to flied their blood in sup.
port of his authority.

Co r ES

CORTES having now brought his intrigues to B o o K

the desired issue, and shaken off his mortifying _
dependance on the governor of Cuba, accepted A5s9.;is
of the commiifion, which velted in him supreme authority

with vigour.

jurisdiction, civil as well as military, over the
colony, with many profeflions of refpe&t to the
council, and gratitude to the army. Together
with his new command, he assumed greater
dignity, and began to exercise more extensive
powers. Formerly he had felt himself to be
only the deputy of a subject; now he acted as the
reptefentative of his sovereign. The adherents
of Vclafquez, fully aware of what would be the
effc1t of this change in the situation of Cortes,
could no longer continue silent and paflive fpecta-
tors of his aStions. They exclaimed openly
againlt the proceedings of the council as illegal,
and against those of the army as mutinous.
Cortes, inflantly perceiving the necellity of giving
a timely check to fucl seditious dilcourfe by some
vigorous measure, arreltcd (rdaz, Efcudero, and
Velasquez de Leon, the ringleaders of this
fation, and fcnt them prifloners aboard the fleet,
loaded with chains. Their dependants, as[o-
nifhed and over-awed, remained quiet; and
Cortes, more desirous to reclaim than to punish
his 1iitobners, who were officers of great merit,
courted their friendship with such afliduity and
address, that the reconciliation was )prfectly cor-

dial ;

B o K dial; and, on the most trying occasions, neither

V.
a__J their connetion with the governor of Cuba, nor

J59'' the memory of the indignity with which they had

been treated, tempted them to swerve from an
inviolable attachment to his interelt'. In this,
as well as his other negotiations at this critical
conjun&ure, which decided with refpeId to his
future fame and fortune, Cortes owed much of
his success to the Mexican gold, which he dif-
tributed with a liberal hand both among his
friends and his opponents".

I-isfriend- CORTES, having thus rendered the union be.
ihip courted
by thecz.m- tween himself and his army indissoluble, by en-
oa""an. gaging it to join him in disclaiming any depend-

ence on the governor of Cuba, and in repeated
ants of disobedience to his authority, thought he
might now venture to quit the camp in which he
had hitherto remained, and advance into the
country, To this he was encouraged by an
event no less fortunate than seasonable. Some
Indians having approached his camp in a myfte-
rious manner, were introduced into his presence.
He found that they were sent with a profler
of friendship from the cazique of Zempoalla, a

t B. Diaz. c. 42,43. GomaraCron. c. 30, 31. Hcrrcra,
dec. 2. lib. v. c. 7.

u 13. Diaz. e. 44.

confidcr-

considerable town at no great diflance; and m o o 1C
from their answers to a variety of questions v
which he put to them, according to his usual 1519-
pratice in every interview with the people of the
country, he gathered, that their master, though
fubje& to the Mexican empire, was impatient of
the yoke, and filled with such dread and hatred
of Montezumia, that nothing could be more
acceptable to him than any profped of deliver-
ance from the oppreflion under which he
groaned. On hearing this, a ray of light and
hope broke in upon the mind of Cortes. He
saw that the great empire which he intended
to attack was neither perfectly united, nor its
sovereign universally beloved. HIe concluded,
that the causes of dilaffe&tion could not be
confined to one province, but that in other cor-
ners there must be malcontents, so weary of
fubjeetion, or so desirous of change, as to be
ready to follow the fRandard of any protedor.
Full of those ideas, on which he began to form a
scheme, that time, and more perfec information
concerning the ltate of the country, enabled him
to mature, he gave a most gracious reception to
the Zempoallans, and promised soon to visit their
cazique .

x B. Diaz. c. 41. Gomara Cron. c. 28.

IN

B 0 K IN order to perform this promise, it was not

V.

Iy,_ necessary to vary the route which he had already
Ma9rhesto fixed for his march. Some officers, whom he
Zempoal.a. had employed to survey the coast, having dif-

covered a village named Quiabiilan, about forty
miles to the northward, which, both on account
of the fertility of the foil, and commodiousness
of the harbour, seemed to be a more proper
-fation for a settlement than that where he was
encamped, Cortes determined to remove thither.
Zempoalla lay in his way, where the cazique re-
ceived him in the manner which he had reason
to expect; with gifts and caresses, like a man
solicitous to gain his good-will; with refped
approaching almost to adoration, like one who
looked up to him as a deliverer. From him he
learned many particulars with refpea to the cha-
radter of Montezuma, and the circumfiances
which rendered his dominion odious. He was a
tyrant, as the cazique told him with tears,
haughty, cruel, and suspicious; who treated his
own subjects with arrogance, ruined the con-
quered provinces by exceflive exacions, and often
tore their sons and daughters from them by vio-
lence; the former to be offered as viEtims to his
gods; the latter, to be reserved as concubines for
himself or favourites. Cortes, in reply to him,
artfully insinuated, that one great objea of the

Spaniardts

Spaniards in visiting a country so remote from B O K
their own, was to redress grievances, and to re- _-.
lieve the oppressed; and having encouraged him 159
to hope for this interposition in due time, he con-
tinued his march to Quiabiflan.

THE spot which his officers had recommended Builds a

as a proper situation, appeared to him to be for
well chosen, that he immediately marked out
ground for a town. The houses to be erected
were only huts; but these were to be surrounded
with fortifications, of sufficient Rtrength to resist
the assaults of an Indian army. As the finishing
of those fortifications was essential to the exilft
ence of a colony, and of no less importance
in prosecuting the designs which the leader and
his followers meditated, both in order to secure
a place of retreat, and to preserve their commu-
nication with the sea, every man in the army,
officers as well as soldiers, put his hand to the
work, Cortes himself setting them an example of
activity and perseverance in labour. The Indians
of Zempoalla and Qiiabillan lent their aid ; and
this petty station, the parent of so many mighty
settlements, was soon in a slate of defence Y.

Y B. Dinz. c. 45,6 46. 4. Gomara Cron. c. 32, 33. 37.
Herrcra, dec. 2. lib. v. c. 8, 9.

Wim-i7

B 0 0 K WHILE engaged in this necessary work, Cortes
. _ .had several interviews with the caziques of Zem.
concIls9a poalla and Quiabiflan ; and availing himself of
formal alli- their wonder and astonishment at the new objeCts
ance with
feveralca- which they daily beheld, he gradually inspired

them with such an high opinion of the Spaniards,
.as beings of a superior order, and irresistible in
arms, that, relying on their proteEtion, they
ventured to insult the Mexican power, at the
very name of which they were accustomed to
.tremble. Some of Montezuma's officers having
appeared to levy the usual tribute, and to demand
.a certain number of human viacims, as an ex-
piation for their guilt in prefiuming to hold
intercourse with those st-rangers whom the empe-
ror had commanded to leave his dominions,
initead of obeying the order, the caziques made
them prisoners, treated them with great indignity,
and, as their superstition was no less barbarous
'than that of the Mexicans, they prepared to
sacrifice them to their gods. From this last dan-
ger they were delivered by the interposition of
Cortes, who manifested the utioft horror at tli
mention of such a deed. The two caziques hav-
ing now been puflled to an act of such open re-
bellion, as left them no hope of safety but in
attaching themselves inviolably to the Spaniards,
'hey soon completed their union with them, by
fornmally acknowledging themfclvcs to be val'ltls

of

of the fame monarch. Their example was fol- B 0 0 K
lowed by the Totonaques, a fierce people who
inhabited the mountainous part of the country. 'S59.
They willingly fubjeced themselves to the crown
of Caflile, and offered to accompany Cortes,
with all their forces, in his march towards
Mexico z.

CORTES had now been above three months in His mea-

fures to pro.
New Spain; and though this period had not been cure a con-

firnnation of

diftinguilhed by martial exploits, every moment ,is autio-
had been employed in operations, which, though kiby th
less splendid, were more important. By his ad-
dress in conduAing his intrigues with his own
army, as well as his sagacity in carrying on his
negociations with the natives, he had already laid
the foundations of his future success. But what-
ever confidence he might place in the plan which
he had formed, he could not but perceive, that as
his title to command was derived from a doubtful
authority, he held it by a precarious tenure. The
injuries which Velasquez had received, were such
as would naturally prompt him to apply for
redress to their common sovereign; and such
a reprefentarion, he foresaw, might be given of
his condut, that he had reason to apprehend,

B. Diaz. c. 47. Gomara Cron. 35, 36. Herrcra,
dcc. 2. lib. v, c. 9, 1o, 11.

not

B o K not only that he might be degraded from his

V._ present rank, but fubjeEed to punishment. Be.
1S19. fore he began his march, it was necessary to take

the noft effeaual precautions against this im-
pending, danger. With this view he persuaded
the matlifirates of the colony at Vera Cruz
to address a letter to the king, the chief object
of which was to justify their own condut in
establishing a colony independant on the jurifdic.
tion of Velasquez. In order to accomplish this,
they endeavoured to detract from his merit, in
fitting out the two former armaments under
Cordova and Grijalva, affirming that these had
been equipped by the adventurers who engaged
in the expeditions, and not by the governor.
They contended that the sole objec: of Velasquez
was to trade or barter with the natives, not to
attempt the conquest of New Spain, or to fettle
a colony there. They asserted that Cortes and
the officers who served under him had defrayed
the greater part of the expence in fitting out the
armament. On this account, they humbly re-
quested their sovereign to ratify what they had
done in his name, and to confirm Cortes in the
supreme command by his royal coinmifion.
That Charles might be induced to grant more
readily what they demanded, they give him
a pompous description of the country which
they had discovercd ; of its riches, the number of

its

its inhabitants, their civilization and arts; they B O K
relate the progress which they had already made L-
in annexing some parts of the country situated on 519.
the sea-coast to the crown of CafRile; and mention
the schemes which they had formed, as well as
the hopes which they entertained, of reducing
the whole to fubjecion a. Cortes himself wrote
in a similar Rtrain; and as he knew that the
Spanifl court, accustomed to the exaggerated re-
presentations of every new country by its dif-
coverers, would give little credit to their splendid
accounts of New Spain, if these were not accom-
panied with such a specimen of what it contained,
as would excite an high idea of its opulence, he
solicited his soldiers to rclinquifh what they might
claim as their part of the treasures which had

a In this letter it is assertcd, that though a considerable

number of Spaniards have been wounded in their various en-
counters with the people of Tabasco, not one of them died,
and all had recovered in a very flort time. This seems to
confirm what I obfLrve in p. 299, concerning the imperfeaion
of the offensive weapons uled by the Americans. In this
letter, the human sacrificees offered by the Mexicans to their
deitice are described minutely, and with great horror;
ierm of the Spaniards, it is said, had been eye-witneflcs of
tliroe barbarous rites. To the letter is subjoincd a catalogue
and description of the presents sent to hlie emperor. That
pbl.billcd by Gonlara, Cron. c. 29, seems to have been
copied from it. Pet. Martyr delecribcs many of the articles
i11 hi trc:itilfe De infulis jupcr iliventis, p. 354, &c.

VOL. ir. U hitherto

n o 0 K hitherto been collected, in order that the whole

might be sent to the king. Such was the
'5!9 aafcendant which he had acquired over their

minds, and such their own romantic expecta.
tions of future wealth, that an army of indigent
aad rapacious adventurers was capable of this
generous effort, and offered to their sovereign
the richcft present that had hitherto been tranf.
mitted from the New WVorld l. Portocarrcro
and Montejo, the chief magistrates of the colony,
were appointed to carry this present to Castile,
with express orders not to touch at Cuba in their
passage thitherc.

A confpi- WTHILE a vessel was preparing for their dc.
racy against
Cornes. parture, an unexpected event occasioned a gene-

ral alarm. Some soldiers and sailors, secretly
attached to Velasquez, or intimidated at the
profped of the dangers unavoidable in attempt-
ing to penetrate into the heart of a great empire
with such unequal force, formed the design of
seizing one of the brigantines, and making their
escape to Cuba, in order to give the governor
such intelligence as might enable him to intercept
the flip which was to carry the treasure and dif-
patches to Spain. This conspiracy, though

" See NO'E LXXVII.
' B. Diaz. c. 5'. Comara Cron. c. 4o.

so rmed

formed by persons of low rank, was conduced B O K
with profound secrecy; but at the moment _

-

when every thing was ready for execution, they '5'9.
were betrayed by one of their associates.

THOUGH the good fortune of Cortes interposed He defloys

his fleet,

so seasonably on this occasion, the deteEtion of
this conspiracy filled his mind with most disquiet-
ing apprehensions, and prompted him to execute
a scheme which he had long revolved. He per-
ceived that the spirit of difaffetion still lurked
among his troops; that though hitherto checked
by the uniform success of his schemes, or sup-
pressed by the hand of authority, various events
might occur which would encourage and call it
forth. He observed, that many of his men, weary
of the fatigue of service, longed to revisit their
settlements in Cuba; and that upon any appear-
ance of extraordinary danger, or any reverse of
fortune, it would be impoflible to restrain them
from returning thither. He was sensible that his
forces, already too feeble, could bear no diminu-
tion, and that a very small defection of his fol-
lowers would oblige him to abandon the entcr-
prise. After ruminating often, and with much
solicitude, upon those particulars, he saw no
hope of success, but in cutting off all poflibility
of retreat, and in reducing his men to the

v 2 ncccflity

o 0 K necessity of adopting the fame resolution with
V. Am, which he himself was animated, either to conquer
'5'9. or to perish. With this view, he determined to

destroy his fleet; but as he durst not venture to
execute such a bold resolution by his single au.
thority, he laboured to bring his soldiers to adopt
his ideas with refpea to the propriety of this
measure. His address in accomplithing this was
not inferior to the arduous occasion in which it
was employed. He persuaded some, that the
flips had suffered so much by having been long
at sea, as to be altogether unfit for service; to
others he pointed out what a seasonable rein.
forcement of strength they would derive from the
junction of an hundred men, now unprofitably
employed as sailors ; and to all, he represented
the necessity of fixing their eyes and wishes upon
what was before them, without allowing the idea
of a retreat once to enter their thoughts. With
universal consent the fiips were drawn ashore,
and after firipping them of their fails, rigging,
iron works, and whatever else might be of use,
they were broke in pieces. Thus, from anl
effort of magnanimity, to which there is nothing
parallel in history, five hundred men voluntarily
consented to be shut up in a hostile country,
filled with powerful and unknown nations; and
having precluded every means of cfcape, l't

them-

tlhemfelves without any resource but their own B o o K
valour and perseverance . i__

1519.

NOTHING now retarded Cortes; the alacrity

of his troops and the disposition of his allies were
equally favourable. All the advantages, however,
derived from the latter, though procured by much
afliduity and address, were well nigh loft in a mo-
ment, by an indiscreet sally of religious zeal,
which, on many occasions, precipitated Cortes
into actions inconsistent with the prudence that
diflinguifles his character. Though hitherto he
had neither time nor opportunity to explain to
the natives the errors of their own superstition, or
to inftruEt them in the principles of the Christian
faith, he commanded his soldiers to overturn the
altars and to destroy the idols in the chief temple
of Zempoalla, and in their place to erect a
crucifix and an image of the Virgin Mary, The
people beheld this with aftonifhmcnt and horror;
the priests excited them to arms; but such was
the authority of Cortes, and so great the ascend-
ant which the Spaniards had acquired, that the
commotion was appeased without bloodflcd, and
concord perfectly re-eftablified .

' Rclat. di Cortes. Ramus. iii. 225. B. Diaz. c. 57,58.
Herrera, dec. 2. Iib. v. c. 14.

B. Diaz. c. 41, 42. I- irrela, dec. 2. lib. v. c. 3, 4.

IJ 3 CORTEs

B O O K CORTES began his march from Zempoalla oi

V.- the sixteenth of Augufr, with five hundred men,

Advances fifteen horse, and fix field-pieces. The reft of
into tiit: his troops, consisting chiefly of such as from age
cCuntry.

or infirmity were less fit for active service, he left
as a garrison in Villa Rica, under the commaind
of Efcalante, an officer of merit, and warnmly at-
tached to his interest. The cazique of Zempoall,t
supplied him with provisions, and with twvo
hundred of those Indians called Tamcnzcs, whole
office, in a country where tame animals were un-
known, was to carry burdens, and to perform all
servile labour. They were a great relief to the
Spanish soldiers, who hitherto had been obliged,
not only to carry their own baggage, but to
drag along the artillery by main force. I-Ie
offered likewise a considerable body of his troops,
but Cortes was satisfied with four hundred;
taking care, however, to chufe persons of fuich
note as might prove hostages for the fidelity of
their master. Nothing memorable happened il
his progress, until he arrived on the confines of
Tlafcala. The inhabitants of that province, a
warlike people, were implacable enemies of the
Mexicans, and had been united in an ancient al-
liance with the caziques of Zempoalla. Thoutgh
less civilized than the fubjels of Montezunla,
they were advanced in improvement far beyond
the rude nations of America, whose manners we

have

have described. They had made considerable B 0O Ko
progress in agriculture; they dwelt in large i-
towns; they were not firangers to some species 5s'9.
of commerce; and in the imperfed accounts of
their institutions and laws, transmitted to us by
the early Spanish writers, we discern traces both
of distributive justice and of criminal jurifdidion,
in their interior police. But fRill, as the degree
of their civilization was incomplete, and as they
depended for subsistence not on agriculture alone,
but trufled for it, in a great measure, to hunting,
they retained many of the qualities natural to
men in this slate. Like them, they were fierce
and revengeful; like them, too, they were high-
spirited and independent. In consequence of
the former, they were involved in perpetual hofti-
lities, and had but a slender and occasional inter-
course with neighbouring fates. The latter in-
spircd them with such dcteftation of servitude,
that they not only refused to stoop to a foreign
yoke, and maintained an obstinate and successful
contest in defence of their liberty against the fu-
pcrior power of the Mexican empire, but they
guarded with equal solicitude againit doncftic
tyranny; and disdaining to acknowledge any
niafter, they lived under the mild and limited
iurifdiaion of a council eletedl by their several
tribes.

I. 4 ( )RT(;

B 0 0 K CORTES, though he had received information

V.
Cv-, concerning the martial characer of' this people,

Hi519 flattered himself that his profefilons of delivering
with the the oppressed from the tyranny of Montezuma,
'1 iafcalans.

their inveterate enmity to the Mexicans, and the
example of their ancient allies the Zempoallans,
might induce the Tlafcalans to grant him a
friendly reception. In order to dilpofe them to
this, four Zempoallans of great eminence were
sent ambassadors, to request, in his name, and in
that of their cazique, that they would permit the
Spaniards to pass through the territories of the
republic in their way to Mexico. But infclad
of the favourable answer which was expecIcd,
the Tlafcalans seized the ambassadors, and, with-
out any regard to their public characer, made
preparations for sacrificing them to their gods.
At the fame time, they assembled their troops, in
order to oppose those unknown invaders, if they
should attempt to make their passage good by
force of arms. Various motives concurred in
precipitating the Tlafcalans into this resolution.
A fierce people, lhut up within its own narrow
precinCts, andlittle accustomed to any intcrcourfe
with foreigners, is apt to confider every firanger
as an enemy, and is easily excited to arms.
They concluded, from Cortes's proposal of visit-
ing Montezuma in his capital, that, notwith-
standing all his profellions, he courted the friend-

ship

ship of a monarch whom they both hated and B oo K
feared. The imprudent zeal of Cortes in violat- v
ing the temples in Zempoalla, filled the Tlafcalans '15'9
with horror ; and as they were no less attached to
their superstition than the other nations of New
Spain, they were impatient to avenge their in-
jured gods, and to acquire the merit of offering
up to them, as viEtims, those impious men who
had dared to profane their altars; they con-
temned the finall number of the Spaniards, as
they had not yet measured their own firength
with that of there new enemies, and had no idea
of the superiority which they derived from their
arms and discipline.

CORTES, after waiting some days, in vain, for Aug.0.

Su .ccss of

the return of his ambassadors, advanced into the it.
Tlafcalan territories. As the resolutions of people
who delight in war are executed vith no less
promptitude than they are formed, he found
troops in the field ready to oppole him. They
attacked him with great intrepidity, and, in the
firfl encounter, wounded some of the Spaniards,
and killed two horses ; a loss, in their fituatioa,
of great moment, because it was irreparable.
From this specimen of their courage, Cortes faiv
the neccflity of proceeding with caution. IIis
army marched in close order; he chofi' the
(tations, where he Iialcdl, with attention, and

bi! t'fic:,J

BO 0 K fortified every camp with extraordinary care.
aL During fourteen days he was exposed to almost
's15- uninterrupted assaults, the Tlafcalans advancing

with numerous armies, and renewing the attack
in various forms, with a degree of valour and
perseverance to which the Spaniards had seen no-
thing parallel in the New World. The Spanish
historians describe those successive battles with
great pomp, and enter into a minute detail
of particulars, mingling many exaggerated and
incredible circumstances , with such as are real
and marvellous. But no power of words can
render the recital of a combat interesting, where
there is no equality of danger ; and when the
narrative closes with an account of thousands
slain on the one fide, while not a single person
falls on the other, the mosd laboured descriptions
of the previous disposition of the troops, or of the
various viciflitudcs in the engagement, command
no attention.

Sonmn.?- T. TIIKRE are some circumfiances, however, in
iti',Ut'l. this war, which arc memorable, and merit no-

tice, as they throw light upon the characterboth
of the people of New Spain, and of their con-
querors. 'Though the 'l'lalf'lans brought inlto
the lield fuich numerous armics as appear filfi-

f Sce NOTE LXXVIII.

cicnt

cient to have overwhelmed the Spaniards, they B 0 0 K
were never able to make any impression upon
their small battalion. Singular as this may seem, 1519
it is not inexplicable. The Tlafcalans, though
addited to war, were, like all unpolifhed nations,
firangers to military order and discipline, and loft
in a great measure the advantage which they
might have derived from their numbers, and the
impetuosity of their attack, by their conflant
oIlicitude to carry off the dead and wounded.
This point of honour, founded on a'fentiment of
tenderness natural to the human mind, and
strengthened by anxiety to preserve the bodies of
their countrymen from being devoured by their
enemies, was universal among the people of New
Spain. Attention to this pious office occupied
them even during the heat of combat g, broke
their union, and diminished the force of the im-
preflion which they might have made by a joint
effort.

NoTr only was their superiority in number of

little avail, but the iinperfdcion of their military
weapons rendered their valour in a great Incafure
inofilcnfive. After three battles, and mnlaly flir-
inifles and assaults, not one Spaniard Vwa killed
in the field. Arrows and l pcars, headled with lliit

1: ]:,, .. d;,

0)1

B o0 O or the bones of fishes, flakes hardened in the fire,
_L-N- and wooden swords, though deftruftive weapons

s159. among naked Indians, were easily turned aside by

the Spanish bucklers, and could hardly penetrate
the efcaupiles, or quilted jackets, which the soldiers
wore. The Tlafcalans advanced boldly to the
charge, and often fought hand to hand. Many
of the Spaniards were wounded, though all
slightly, which cannot be imputed to any want
of courage or strength in their enemies, but to
the defet of the arms with which they assailed
them.

NOrwITHSTANDING the fury with which thL

Tlafcalans attacked the Spaniards, they seem to
have condu&ed their hofRilities with some degree
of barbarous generosity. They gave the Spaniards
warning of their hostile intentions, and as they
knew that their invaders wanted provisions, and
imagined, perhaps, like the other Americans,
that they had left their own country because it
did not afford them fubfitelnce, they sent to their
camp a large supply of potrltry and maize,
desiring them to eat plentifully, because they
scorned to attack an enemy enfeebled by hunger,
and it would be an affront to their gods to ollcr
them fainifhcdt vicaims, as well as difagreeablc to
theimflvcs to feed on ilch emaciated prey '.

h IIcncia, dec. . lib. vi. c. 6. Comnmra Cron.. c. I

WHEN they were taught by the first encounter B 0 0 K

V.

with their new enemies, that it was not easy to -
execute this threat; when they perceived, in the '519.
subsequent engagements, that notwithstanding all
the efforts of their own valour, of which they had
a very high opinion, not one of the Spaniards was
slain or taken, they began to conceive them to be
a superior order of beings, againit whom human
power could not avail. In this extremity, they
had recourse to their priests, requiring them to
reveal the mysterious causes of such extraordinary
events, and to declare what new means they
should employ in order to repulse those for-
midable invaders. The priests, after many fa-
crifices and incantations, delivered this response.
That these firangers were the offspring of the fun,
procreated by his animating energy in the regions
of the east; that, by day, while cherished with
the influence of his parental beams, they were
invincible; but by night, when his reviving heat
was withdrawn, their vigour declined and faded
like the herbs in the field, and they dwindled
down into mortal men i. Theories less plausible
have gained credit with more enlightened na-
tions, and have influenced their condu&. In
consequence of this, the Tlafcalans, with the im-
plicit confidence of men who fancy thcmfclves to

1 B. Djaz. c. 6,,

be

Bo o K be under the guidance of Heaven, aced in con.

V.
v - tradicion to one of their most eftablilhed maxims
15'9. in war, and ventured to attack the enemy, with

a strong body, in the night-time, in hopes of de.
stroying them when enfeebled and surpriscd.
But Cortes had greater vigilance and discern.
ment than to be deceived by the rude firatagems
of an Indian army. The centinels at his out.
pofis, observing some extraordinary movement
among the Tlafcalans, gave the alarm. In
a moment the troops were under arms, and
sallying out, dispersed the party with great
slaughter, without allowing it to approach the
camp. The Tlafcalans, convinced, by fad expe-
rience, that their priests had deluded them, and
satisfied that they attempted in vain, either to de-
ceive or to vanquiff their enemies, their fierce-
ness abated, and they began to incline seriously

to peace.

The T;laca- THEY were at a loss, however, in what manner
lalls dit.
Iofed to to address the itrangers, what idea to form of their
peace. charater, and whether to confider them as beings

of a gentle or of a malevolent nature. There were
circuniftancesin their condut which seemed to fa-
vour each opinion. On the one hand, as the
Spaniards constantly difminifed the prifoncrs
whom they took, not only without injury, but
often with prcfcnts of European toys, and re-

newed

newed their offers of peace after every victory; B o o K
this lenity amazed people, who, according to V..
the exterminating fyftern of war known in Ame- '15s9
rica, were accustomed to sacrifice and devour
without mercy all the captives taken in battle,
and disposed them to entertain favourable fentin
ments of the humanity of their new enemies.
But, on the other hand, as Cortes had seized
fifty of their countrymen who brought provi-
sions to his camp, and, supposing them to be
spies, had cut off their hands ; this bloody
fpeEtacle, added to the terror occasioned by the
fire-arms and horses, filled them with dreadful
impreflions of the ferocity of their invaders'.
This uncertainty was apparent in the mode of
;addressing the Spaniards. " If, said they, you
are divinities of a cruel and savage nature, we
present to you five slaves, that you may drink
their blood and eat their fiefh. If you are mild
deities, accept an offiring of incense and varie-
gated plumes. If you are men, here is meat,
and bread, and fruit to nourith you m." The
peace which both parties now desired with equal

k Cortes Relat. Ramus. il. 228. C. (Gona:ra Cron.
c. 48.

Sc NOTE IXXIX.

"' . I)L.. I c. 7o. oComara Cron. c. -. Iirlrt:i,
.,';C . 1. Il,. V;. . , .

ardour,

B 0 K ardour, was soon concluded. The Tlafcalans

V. At_, yielded themselves as vassals to the crown of
C5'9' Castile, and engaged to assist Cortes in all his fu-
cude. ture operations. He took the republic under

his protection, and promised to defend their
persons and possessions from injury or violence.

A(lvantacs THIS treaty was concluded at a seasonable
Spaildr juncture for the Spaniards. The fatigue of ser-

vice among a finall body of men, surrounded
by such a multitude of enemies, was incredible.
Ealf. the army was on duty every night, and
even they whose turn it was to reft, slept always
upon their arms, that they might be ready to
run to their posts on a moment's warning.
MIany of them were wounded, a good number,
and among these Cortes himself, laboured un-
der the distempers prevalent in hot climates,
and several had died since they set out from
Vera Cruz. Notwithitanding the supplies which
they received from the Tlafcalans, they were
often in want of provisions, and so destitute of the
necessities most requisite in dangerous service,
that they had no salve to dress their wounds,
but what was composed with the fat of the
Indians whom they had slain . Worn out with
such intolerable toil and hardfilips, many of the
.llclicrs bcgan to murmur, and, when they rc-

n B. Diaz.i . 6cfz. 65.

nrl c,

flected on the multitude and boldness of their B 0 0 K

V.

enemies, more were ready to despair. It required _-_i
the utmost exertion of Cortes's authority and ad- I59.
dress to check, this spirit of despondency in
its progress, and to re-animate his followers with
their wonted sense of their own superiority over
the enemies with whom they had to contend°.
The fubmiflion of the Tlafcalans, and their own
triumphant entry into the capital city, where
they were received with the reverence paid to
beings of a superior order, banished, at once,
from the minds of the Spaniards, all memory of
palt sufferings, dispelled every anxious thought
with'refpec to their future operations, and fully
satisfied them that there was not now any power
in America able to withstand their arms P.

CORTES remained twenty days in Tiafcala, in Cortes soli-
order to allow his troops a short interval of ga.n their

confidence.

repose after such hard service. During that
time, he was employed in tranfahions and in-
quiries of great moment with refped to his
fiture schemes. In his daily conferences with
the Tlafcalan chiefs, he received information
concerning every particular relative to the slate

° Cortes Relat. Riuf. iii. 229. B. Diaz. c. 69.

Coimara Cron. c. 5r.

P Cortes Rclat. RaLuC iii. 230. 3. Diaz. c. 72.
VOL. . . x of

B o O K of the Mexican empire, or to the qualities of its
Am'_, fSovereign, which could be of use in regulating
15I9 his conduct, whether he should be obliged to act

as a friend or as an enemy. As he found that
the antipathy of his new allies to the Mexican
nation was no less implacable than had been re.
presented, and perceived what benefit he might
derive from the aid of such powerful confe.
derates, he employed all his powers of insinuation
in order to gain their confidence. Nor was any
extraordinary exertion of these necefiary. The
Tlafcalans, with the levity of mind natural to un.
polished men, were, of their own accord, dii.
posed to run from the extreme of hatred to that
of fondness. Every thing in the appearance and
conducq of their guests, was to them matter
of wonder . They gazed with admiration at
whatever the Spaniards did, and fancying them
to be of heavenly origin, were eager not only to
comply with their demands, but to anticipate
their wishes. They offered, accordingly, to ac-
company Cortes in his march to Mexico, with
all the forces of the republic, under the command
of their most experienced captains.

wi;ci BUT, after bestowing so much pains on cement.

h ild alnollt
lui hy liji ing this union, all the beneficial fruits of it \wre
.lnli Zt' l.

'i Sce NOTE LXXX.

6 tOil

on the point of being loft, by a new effusion B OO K

V.

of that intemperate religious zeal with which -~
Cortes was animated, no less than the other ad- ''-
venturers of the age. They all confidered them-
selves as instruments employed by Heaven to
propagate the Christian faith, and the less they
were qualified, either by their knowledge or
morals, for such a function, they were more
eager to discharge it. The profound veneration
of the Tlafcalans for the Spaniards, having en-
couraged Cortes to explain to some of their
chiefs the doctrines of the Christian religion,
and to infiR that they flould abandon their own
fuperlitions, and embrace the faith of their new
friends, they, according to an idea universal
among barbarous nations, readily acknowledged
the truth and excellence of what he taught;
but contended, that the Tculcs of Tlafcala were
divinities no less than the God in whom the
Spaniards believed; and as that Being was en-
titled to the homage of Europeans, so they were
bound to revere the fame powers which their
anceflors had worshipped. Cortes continued,
nevertheless, to urge his demand in a tone of
authority, mingling threats with his'arguments,
until the Tlafcalans could bear it no longer, and
conjured him never to mention this again, left
the gods flould avenge on their heads the guilt
of having listened to fulch a proposition. Cortes,

x 2 astonishcd

B 0 0 K aftonifled and enraged at their obRinacy, pre-

V.
L---- pared to execute by force, what he could not ac-

'5'9- complifh by persuasion, and was going to over-

turn their altars, and cars down their idols X\ith
the falme violent hand as at Zempoalla, if father
Bartholomew de Olmedo, chaplain to the expe-
dition, had not checked his inconsiderate im-
petuofity. IIe represented the imprudence of
such an attempt in a large city newly reconciled,
and filled with people no lets superstitious than
warlike; he declared, that the proceeding at
Zempoalla had always appeared to him precipi-
tate and unjuflt; that religion was not to be
propagated by the sword, or infidels to be con-
verted by violence; that other weapons were to
be employed in this minitry; patient inftruclion
muff enlighten the underfianding, and pious
example captivate the heart, before men could
be induced to abandon error, and embrace the
truth r. Amidfi ficenes, where a narrow-minded
bigotry appears in i.ch close union with opprcl-
lion and cruelty, sentiments so liberal and humane
sooth the mind with unexpected pleasure; and
at a time when the rights of conscience were
little undcrtfood in the Christian world, and the
idea of toleration unknown, one is afloniflcd
to find a Spanifi monk of the sixteenth century

r B. ;D:. c. 77. P. 54,+ C. 83. p. 6,.

aii01on,

among the firfl advocates againIt persecution, B 0 0 K
and in behalf of religious liberty. Th. remon-
firances of an ecclesiastic, no less refpetable for 151'9
ivifdom than virtue, had their proper weight
with Cortes. He left the lTlacalans in the un-
disturbed exercise of their own rites, requiring
only that they should desist fiom their horrid
practice of offering human victims in tacrifice.

CORTES, as soon as his troops were fit for A^,,nce,

service, resolved to continue his march towards
Mexico, notwithstanding the earnest dissuasives
of the Tlafcalans, who repretfnted his deftrucdion
as unavoidable, if he put himself in the power of
a prince so faithless and cruel as Montezuma.
As he was accompanied by fix thousand Tlafca-
lans, he had now the command of forces which
resembled a regular army. They directed their oa. .
course towards Cholula; Montezuma, who had
at length conented to admit the Spaniards into
his presence, having informed Cortes, that he
had given orders for his friendly reception there.
Cholula was a considerable town, and though
only five leagues distant from Tlafcala, was
formerly an independent fate, but had been
lately fubjeded to the MIexican empire. This
was confidered by all the people of New Spain as
a holy place, the haniduary and chief flea of tllir
gods, to which pilgriims rfborted fiom n very pro-

:< 3 vinc..

B 0 0 K vince, and a greater number of human vidlinm

V.

_.--^ were offered in its principal temple than even in
35J9' that of Mexico . Montezuma seems to have

invited the Spaniards thither, either from some
fuperflitious hope that the gods would not fufler
this sacred mansion to be defiled, without pour.
ing down their wrath upon those impious itran.
gers, who ventured to insult their power in the
place of its peculiar refde.ce; or from a belief
that he himself might there attempt to cut them
off with more certain success, under the immediate
protection of his divinities.

Thefevciry CORTES had been warned by the Tlafcalan.,
iule tl;tre. before he set out on his march, to keep a watch-

ful eye over the'Cholulans. He himself, though
received into the town with much seeming
refpeft and cordiality, observed several circum-
fiances in their conduct which excited suspicion.
Two of the Tlafcalans, who were encamped
at some distance from the town, as the Cholulais
refused to admit their ancient enemies within its
precincs, having found"means to enter in dif-
guise, acquainted Cortes, that they obfcrved the
women and children of the principal citizens
retiring in great hurry every night; and that

6 Torqucmda;Munar. I nd. i. 281r, 282. ii. 291. Comnli
Cron. c. 61. Hrrcra, dec. 2. lib. vii. c. 2.

fix

fix children had been sacrificed in the chief B 0 K
temple, a rite which indicated the execution of v
some warlike enterprise to be approaching. At 's,'
the fame time, Marina the interpreter received in-
formation from an Indian woman of diftindion,
whose confidence she had gained, that the de-
firution of her friends was concerted; that
a body of Mexican troops lay concealed near the
town; that some of the itreets were barricaded,
and in others, pits or deep trenches were dug,
and slightly covered over, as traps into which the
horses might fall; that stones or missive weapons
were collected on the tops of the temples, with
which to overwhelm the infantry; that the fatal
hour was now at hand, and their ruin un-
avoidable. Cortes, alarmed at this concurring
evidence, secretly arrested three of the chief
priests, and extorted from them a confession,
that confirmed the intelligence which ie had
received. As not a moment was to be loft, he
inflantly resolved to prevent his enemies, and to
infliiE on them such dreadful vengeance as might
itrike Montezuma and his fibjedls with terror.
For this purpose, the Spaniards and Zcmpoallans
were drawn up in a large court, which had been
allotted for their quarters, ncar the centre of the
town; the Tlalcalans had orders to advance; the
magiltrates, and several of the chief citizens were
lullt for, under various pretexts, and seized. Qn

x 4 a fi.rna[,

B 0 0 K a signal given, the troops rushed out, and fell

;. upon the multitude, destitute of leaders, and so
I15'9 much astonished, that the weapons dropping

from their hands, they flood motionless, and in-
capable of defence. While the Spaniards prcfled
them in front, the Tlafcalans attacked them
in the rear. The fireets were filled with blood-
shed and death. The temples, which afforded a
retreat to the priests and some of the leadin%
men, were set on fire, and they perished in thc
flames. This scene of horror continued two
days; during which, the wretched inhabitants
suffered all that the defirudive rage of the Spa.
niards, or the implacable revenge of their Indian
allies, could infli&. At length the carnage
ceased, after the slaughter of fix thousand Cho-
lulans, without the loss of a single Spaniard.
Cortes then released the magifirates,and reproach.
ing them bitterly for their intended treachery,
declared, that as justice was now appeased, he
forgave the offence, but required them to recal
the citizens who had fled, and re-etfablifl order
in the town. Such was the ascendant which the
Spaniards had acquired over this fuperflitious
race of men, and so deeply were they impreflld
with an opinion of their superior discernment, as
well as power, that, in obedience to this con-
mand, the city was in a few days filled again
with people, who, amidst the ruins of their

sacrcd

sacred buildings, yielded refpeEtful service to B o o.
men, whose hands were Rained with the blood of _ _
their relations and fellow-citizens . ss519

FROM Cholula, Cortes advanced directly to- o0.z9.

wards Mexico, which was only twenty leagues ^Adce
distant. In every place through which he passed, MiC','".
he was received as a person possessed of sufficient
power to deliver the empire from the oppression
under which it groaned; and the caziques or
governors communicated to him all the griev-
ances which they felt under the tyrannical go-
vernment of Montezuma, with that unreserved
confidence which men naturally repose in superior
beings. When Cortes firfi observed the feeds of
discontent in the remote provinces of the empire,
hope dawned upon his mind; but when he now
discovered such symptoms of alienation from their
monarch near the feat of government, he con-
cluded that the vital parts of the constitution
were affeced, and conceived the most sanguine
expectations of overturning a slate, whose na-
tural tRrength was thus divided and impaired.
While those reflections encouraged the general to
persist in his arduous undertaking, the soldiers

t Cortes Rclat. Ramus. ii. 23t. B. Diaz. c. 83.

Gonara Cron. c. 64. Herrcra, dec. 2. lib. vii. c. 1, 2.
See NOTE LXXXI.

were

BOOK were no less animated by observations more
k-^-^ obvious to their capacity. In descending from
I5's7 the mountains of Chalco, across which the road

lay, the vast plain of Mexico opened gradually to

Sirs view their view. When they firlt beheld this profped,
of it.

one of the most ifriking and beautiful on the
face of the earth; when they observed fertile and
cultivated fields, stretching farther than the eye
could reach; when they saw a lake resembling
the sea in extent, encompassed with large towns,
and discovered the capital city rising upon an
island in the middle, adorned with its temples and
turrets; the scene so far exceeded their imagina-
tion, that some believed the fanciful descriptions
of romance were realized, and that its enchanted
palaces and gilded domes were presented to their
fight; others could hardly persuade themselves
that this wonderful fpedacle was any thing more
than a dream". As they advanced, their doubts
were removed, but their amazement increared,
They were now fully satisfied that the country
was rich beyond any conception which they
had formed of it, and flattered themselves that
at length they flould obtain an ample recori.
pence for all their services and sufferings.

u See NOTE LXXXII,

HIiTIIERTO

HIITHERTO they had met with no enemy to B 0 0 K

oppose their progress, though several circum-
frances occurred which led them to fufpeet that Thf irrCo.
some design was formed to surprise and cut them lution of

some ~ p and cut them Monte-

off. M'any messengers arrived successively from zum:.
Montezuma, permitting them one day to ad-
vance, requiring them on the next to retire, as
his hopes or fears alternately prevailed; and so
wonderful was this infatuation, which seems to
be unaccountable on any supposition but that of
a superstitious dread of the Spaniards, as beings
of a superior nature, that CorLes was almost at
the gates of the capital, before the monarch had
determined whether to receive him as a friend,
or to oppose him as an enemy. But as no sign
of open hostility appeared, the Spaniards, with-
out regarding the flu&uations of Montezuma's
sentiments, continued their march along the
causeway which led to Mexico through the lake,
with great circumfpiEtion and the tlricleft difci-
pline, though without seeming to fufpedt the
prince whom they were about to visit.

WHEN they drew near the city, about a ; fil R in-

thousand pcrfons, who appeared to be of dif- X;iiltl:.
tinction, came forth to meet tlciii, adorned with Sl,'lnild-.
plumes, and clad in Imanltls of line cotton.
Each of tlicfe, in his order, pafled by Coiles,
and salutcd him according to the nlode ctlcinicd

nmoll

B o o nmoft refpetful and submissive in their country.

v-_ TThey announced the approach of Montezuma
sl19. himself, and soon after his harbingers came

in fight. There appeared first two hundred per-
sons in an uniform dress, with large plumes of
feathers, alike in fashion, marching two and two,
in deep silence, bare-footed, with their eyes fixed
on. the ground. These were followed by a
company of higher rank, in their most showy
apparel, in the midst of whom was Montezuma,
in a chair or litter richly ornamented with gold,
and feathers of various colours. Four of his
principal favourites carried him on their flloul-
tiers, others supported. a canopy of curious work.
mranfhip over his head. Before him marched
three officers with rods of gold in their hands,
which they lifted up on high at certain intervals,
and at that signal all the people bowed their
heads, and hid their faces, as unworthy to look
on so great a monarch. When he drew near,
Cortes dismounted, advancing towards him with
officious harte, and in a refpedful pofiurl. At
tile fame time Montezuma alighted fiom his
chair, and leaning on the arms of two of his
near relations, approached with a flow and stately
pace, his attendants covering the ftrect with
cotton cloths, that he might not touch the
ground. Cortes accofled him with profound
reverence, after the European fashion. He re.

turnet

turned the salutation, accarding to the mode of B o o K
his country, by touching the earth with his Lj.
hand, and then kissing it. This ceremony, the s15t9
customary expression of veneration from in-
feriors towards those who were above them
in rank, appeared such amazing condescension in
a proud monarch, who scarcely deigned to con-
fider the reft of mankind as of the fame species
with himself, that all his fubjecds firmly believed
those persons, before whom he humbled himself
in this manner, to be something inore than hu-
man. Accordingly, as they marchcd through
the crowd, the Spaniards frequently, and with
much fatisfation, heard themselves dcnominated
Tcnulcs, or divinities. Nothing material pafctd in
this first interview. Montezuma conduaed
Cortes to the quarters which he had preparct
for his reception, and immediately took leavc of
him, with a politeness not unworrhy of a court
more refined. " You are now," fays he,
" with your brothers in your own house; re-
frefl yourlelves after your fatigue, and be happy
until I returnw." The place allotted to the
Spaniards for their lodging was a hioufe built by
the father of Montezuma. It was surroundcd
by a fIone-wall, wilh towers at proper dillanccs,

"' Cortes Rclat. RI;lm. iii. 232-2,5. B. D;,ia. c. 83--

S ;. Co(io ;irai C lon. . 6.1, 65. lhrrk cra), dc:. ii. Jib. vi.
"3. , 4. ,.

'ahich

Bn o0 K which served for defence as well as for ornament,

,_s and its apartments and courts were so large, as
'519- to accommodate both the Spaniards and their

Indian allies. The first care of Cortes was to
take precautions for his security, by planting the
artillery so as to command the different avenues
which led to it, by appointing a large division
of his troops to be always on guard, and by
polling centinels at proper flations, with in.
junctions to observe the fame vigilant discipline as
if they were within fight of an enemy's camp.

Hi;s ;id or IN the evening, Montezuma returned to visit
ntiald. ' his guests with the fame pomp as in their first

interview, and brought presents of such value,
not only to Cortes and to his officers, but even
to the private men, as proved the liberality of
the monarch to be suitable to the opulence of his
kingdom. A long conference ensued, in which
Cortes learned what was the opinion of Monte-
zuma with refpet to the Spaniards. It was an
eftablifled tradition, he told him, among the
Mexicans, that their anceflors came originally
from a remote region, and conquered the pro-
vinces now subjet to his dominion; that after
they were fettled there, the great captain who
conduded this colony returned to his own
country, promising, that at sobe future period
his delcendants should visit them, aflume the

govcln-

government, and reform their constitution and o 0 K
laws; that, from what he had heard and seen of ----
Cortes and his followers, he was convinced that 15,).
they were the very persons whose appearance the
Mexican traditions and prophecies taught them
to expeft; that accordingly he had received
them, not as firangers, but as relations of the
fame blood and parentage, and desired that they
might confider themselves as masters in his
dominions, for both himself and his fubjeAs
fiould be ready to comply with their will, and
even to prevent their wilhes. Cortes made a
reply in his usual fiyle, with refped to the
dignity and power of his sovereign, and his in-
tention in fending him into that country; artfully
endeavouring so to frame his discourse, that it
might coincide as much as poflible with the idea
which Montezuma had formed concerning the
origin of the Spaniards. Next morning, Cortes
and some of his principal attendants were ad-
mitted to a public audience of the emperor.
The three subsequent days were employed in
viewing the city; the appearance of which,
so far superior in the order of its buildings
and the number of its inhabitants to any place
the Spaniards had beheld in America, and yet so
little refenbling the flru&ture of an European
city, filled them with lfurpritic and admiration.

lMi xxco,

B o O K MEXICO, or Tenuchtitlan, as it was anciently

^.-.iw called by the natives, is situated in a large plain,
5.-9 environed by mountains of such height, that,

though within the torrid zone, the temperature
of its climate is mild and healthful. All the
moisture which descends from the high grounds
is colleced in several lakes, the two largest of
which, of about ninety miles in circuit, commu-
nicate with each other. The waters of the one
are fresh, those of the other brackish. On
the banks of the latter, and on tome finall
islands adjoining to them, the capital of Monte.
guma's empire was built. The access to the city
was by artificial causeways or streets formed of
itones and earth, about thirty feet in breadth.
As the waters of the lake during the rainy
season overflowed the flat country, these cause-
ways were of considerable length. That of
Tacuba, on the wefl, extended a mile and a
half; that of Tepeaca ", on the north-west, three
miles; that of Cuoyacan, towards the south, fix

X I am idndbcted to M. Clavigero for correfting an error

of importanlce in my deecription of Mexico. From tlheeaft,
where lTczuco was lituatcd, there was no caufcway, as L
havc.obfcrvc(d, and yet by fomnc inattention on my part, ul
on thiat of the printer, in all the foiner editions one of tihe
causeways was litid to lead to Tezcuco. M. Clavigcenl,'
mcafuireinciilt of the length of these causeways difrers fonu'-
what from that whlich Il have adopted from F. Torlili{i',
Clvig. ii. 1. z2.

miles.

tiles. On the east there was no causeway, and B 0 0 K
the city could be approached«only by canoes Y. .
In each of these causeways were openings at tS''
proper intervals, through which the waters
flowed, and over these beams of timber were
laid, which being covered with earth, the cause-
way or street had everywhere an uniform appear.
ance. As the approaches to the city were fingu,
lar, its conftruEtion was remarkable. Not only
the temples of their gods, but the houses belong.
ing to the monarch, and to persons of diftindion,
were of such dimensions, that, in comparison
with any other buildings which had been hitherto
discovered in America, they might be termed
magnificent. The habitations of the common
people were mean, resembling the huts of other
Indians. But they were all placed in a regular
manner, on the banks of the canals which passed
through the city, in some of its diftrids, or on
the fides of the streets which interfered it in
other quarters. In several places were large
openings or squares, one of which, allotted for
the great market, is said to have been so
spacious, that forty or fifty thousand persons
carried on traffic there. In this city, the pride
of the New World, and the noblest monument
of the induflry and art of man, while un-

Y F. Torribio MS.
VOI. I. . acquainted

1 /0 K acquainted with the use of iron, and detfitute of
(--^_ aid from any domestic animal, the Spaniards,
1'5'9 who are most moderate in their computations,

reckon that there were at least sixty thousand
inhabitants '.

Their ci B3ur how much soever the novelty of those
Xerous situ-
ijn·. oobjects might amuse or astonish the Spaniards,

they felt the utmost solicitude with refpea to their
own situation. Fronm a concurrence of circum-
flances, no less unexpefted than favourable to
their progress, they had been allowed to pene-
trate into the heart of a powerful kingdom, and
were now lodged in its capital, without having
once met with open opposition from its mo.
narch. The Tlafcalans, however, had earnestly
ditiladed them from placing such confidence
in Mlontezuma, as to enter a city of such a pe-
culiar situation as' Mexico, where that prince
would have them at mercy, shut up as it were
in a snare, from which it was impoflible to
escape. Tlhey aflured him that the Mexican
priests had, in the name of the gods, counsellcd
their sovereign to admit the Spaniards into the
capital, that he might cut them off there at one

' Cortes Rch:t. Ram. iii. 239 D. Relat. dclla gr:a

Citt' de Mexico, par ll, Gcntclhuomo del Corltcf. Rl.Ia
ibKJ. 304 . Il. llericra, tcc. 2. lib. vii. c. t4, &c.

blow

blow with perfect fecuriy . They now per- B 0 o k
ceived, too plainly, that the apprehensions of _
their allies were not deflitute of foundation; 1519.
that, by breaking the bridges placed at certain
intervals on the causeways, or by destroying part
of the causeways themselves, their retreat would
be rendered impraticable, and they muff remain
cooped up in the centre of a hofrile city, fur.
rounded by multitudes sufficient to overwhelm
them, and without a possibility of receiving aid
from their allies. Montezuma had, indeed, re.
ceived them with diftinguilhed refpec. But
ought they to reckon upon this as real, or to
confider it as feigned? Even if it were sincere,
could they promise on its continuance ? Their
safety depended upon the will of a monarch in
whose attachment they had no reason to confide;
and an order flowing from his caprice, or a
word uttered by him in passion, might decide
irrevocably concerning their fate .

THESE reflections, so obvious as to occur to Solicitude

.and per.

the meanest soldier, did not escape the vigilant plexiy of
sagacity of their general. Before he set out or
from Cholula, Cortes had received advice from
Villa Rica , that Qualpopoca, one of the

' ,B. Diaz. c. 85, 86. 11 B. Diaz. c. 94.
Curtes Relat. Ram. iii. 235. C.

v 2 Alexican

B 0 K Mexican generals on the frontiers, having a'-

V.
,-^ - fenmbled an army in order to attack rome of the

5X people whom the Spaniards had encouraged to

throw off the Mexican yoke, Efcalante had
marched out with part of the garrison to sup.
port his allies; that an engagement had en-
sued, in which, though the Spaniards were
victorious, Efcalante, with seven of his men, had
been mortally wounded, his horse killed, and
one Spaniard had been surrounded by the
enemy and taken alive; that the head of this un.
fortunate captive, after being carried in triumph
to difierent cities, in order to convince the
people that their invaders were not immortal,
had been sent to Mexico '. Cortes, though
alarmed with this intelligence, as an indication
of Montezuma's hostile intentions, had con.
tinued his march. But as loon as he entered
Mexico, lie became sensible, that, from an ex-
cess of confidence in the superior value and dif.
cipline of his troops, as well as from the difad.
vantage of having nothing to guide him in an
unknown country, but the defecive intelligence
which he had received from people with whom
his mode of communication was very imperlsed
he had pufied forward into a situation, w hcre il
was difficult to continue, and from which it w.i:

a B. Diaz. c. 93, 94. Herrera, dec. z. lib. viii, c. 1.

dangerou;

dangerous to retire. Disgrace, and perhaps B 0O K
ruin, was the certain consequence of at- ,-,
tempting the latter. The success of his enter- 'r 9
prise depended upon lupporting the h'gh opinion
which the people of New Spain had formed
with respect to the irresistible power of his arms.
Upon the firll symptom of timilily on his part,
their veneration would cease, and Montezuma,
whom fear alone reirained at present, would
let loose upon him the whole force of his empire.
At the fame time, he knew that the countenance
of his own sovereign was to be obtained only
by a series of victories, and that nothing but the
merit of extraordinary success could screen his
conduct from the censure of irregularity. From
all these considerations, it was necesSary to main-
tain his ltation, and to extricate himself out of
the difficulties in which one bold ftep had in-
volved him, by venturing upon another £till
bolder. The situation was trying, but his mind
was equal to it; and after revolving the matter
with deep attention, he fixed upon a plan no less
extraordinary than daring. I-e deterTriiiLed to RKoIv, s tq
seize Montezuma in his palace, aiinl to carry tcZL1uIX.
him as a prisoner to the Spaniflh quiri rs. From
the fuperititious veneration of the lMexicans for
the person of their monarch, as well a, their im-
plicit fubmifion to his will, he hoped, by hav-
ing Montezuma in his power, to acquire ihe fu-

v 3 preile

B o O K preme direction of their affairs; or, at least, with

such' a sacred pledge in his hands, he made no
J5 19 doubt of being secure from any effort of their

violence,

His manner THIS he immediately proposed to his officers,
of excu-
tilgtlis. The timid startled at a mealure so audacious,

and raised objedtions. The more intelligent and
resolute, conscious that it was the only resource
in which there appeared any profpet of safety,
warmly approved of it, and brought over their
companions so cordially to the fame opinion, that
it was agreed instantly to make the attempt.
.At his usual hour of visiting Montezuma, Cortes
went to the palace accompanied by Alvarado,
Sandoval, Lugo, Velasquez de Leon, and Davila,
five of his principal officers, and as many trusty
soldiers. Thirty chosen men followed, not in
regular order, but sauntering at tome liftance,
as if they had no uojet but curiosity; ftlall
parties were potscd at proper intervals, in all the
streets leading from the Spaniflu quarters to the
court; and the remainder of his troops, with the
Tlafcalan allies, were under arms ready to sally
out on the first alarm. Cortes and his attend-
ants were admitted without suspicion; the
Mexicans retiring, as usual, out of refpeEt. ie
addreflcd the monarch in a tone very different
from that which he had employed in former

conference.:,

conferences, reproaching him bitterly as the B OO K
author of the violent assault made upon the -- -
Spaniards by one of his officers, and demanded I5t.'
public reparation for the loss which they had
sustained by the death of tome of their com-
panions, as well as for the insult ofscred to the
great prince whose servants they were. Mon-
tezuma, confounded at this unexpcted accufa-
tion, and changing colour, either fi-om con-
fcioufnefs of guilt, or from feeling the indignity
with which he was treated, asserted his own in-
nocence with great earneltnefs, and, as a proof
of it, gave orders instantly to bring Qualpopoca
and his accomplices pri-oners to Mexico. Cortes
replied, with seeming complaisance, that a de-
claration so refpe&able left no doubt remaining
in his own mind, but that something more was
requisite to satisfy his followers, who would
never be convinced that Montezuma did not
harbour holiile intentions againfl them, unless,
as an evidence of his confidence and attachment,
he removed from his own palace, and took up
his residence in the Spanifli quarters, where he
fmould be served and honoured as became a
great monarch. The first mention of so itrange
a proposal bereaved Montezuma of fpcech, and
almost of motion. At length, indignation gave
him utterance, and he haughtily answered,
"'1 hat persons of his rank were not accuftnn)ed

u~ ~~ volurirv~~~~~~i~~,

B o K voluntarily to give up themselves as prisoners;

v__ - and were he mean enough to do so, his fubjets
Js519 would not permit such an affront to be offered

to their sovereign." Cortes, unwilling to em.
ploy force, endeavoured alternately to sooth and
to intimidate him. The altercation became
warm; and having continued above three hours,
Velasquez de Leon, an impetuous and gallant
young man, exclaimed with impatience, " Why
waste more time in vain? Let us either seize
him instantly, or stab him to the heart." The
threatening voice and fierce gestures with which
these words were uttered, itruck Montezuma.
The Spaniards, he was sensible, had now pro.
ceeded so far, as left him no hope that they
would recede. His own danger was imminent,
the necessity unavoidable. He saw both, and
abandoning himself to his fate, complied with
their request,

.Tontezuma HIS officers were called. He communicated
carrned to
the Spanish to them his resolution. Though astonished and
quarters. afflied, they presumed not to question the will

of their mailer, but carried him in silent pomp,
all bathed in tears, to the Spanifil quarters.
When it was known that the itrangers were con.
veying away the emperor, the people broke out
into the wildest transports of grief and rage,
threatening the Spaniards with immediate de.

ftrution,

ftrution, as the punishment justly due to their B o o K
impious audacity. But as soon as Montezuma _
appeared with a seeming gaiety of countenance, s519.
and waived his hand, the tumult was hushed,
and upon his declaring it to be of his own choice
that he went to reside for some time among his
new friends, the multitude, taught to revere
every intimation of their sovereign's pleasure,
quietly dispersed '.

THUS was a powerful prince seized by a few

trangers in the midst of his capital, at noonday,
and carried off as a prisoner without opposition
or bloodshed. History contains nothing parallel
to this event, either with respect to the temerity
of the attempt, or the success of the execution;
and were not all the circumfiances of this extra-
ordinary tranfa.ion authenticated by the most
unquestionable evidence, they would appear so
wild and extravagant, as to go far beyond the
bounds of that probability which mult be pre-
served even in fictitious narrations.

MONTEZUMA was received in the Spanish Received

quarters with all the ceremonious relpect which r.ntrlltIcit.
Cortes had promised. He was attended by his

e 13. Diaz. c.. 9 Gomara Cron. c. 83. Cortes Rcl;t.
Ram, iii. p. 235, 236. lerrera, dec. 2. lib. viii. c. 2, 3.

own

B O O K own dolmefics, and served with his usual ifate.

V_ His principal officers had free access to him, and
'l59. he carried on every function of government as

if he had been at per-fed liberty The Spaniards,
however, watched him with the scrupulous
vigilance which was natural in guarding such an
important prize', endeavouring at the fame time
to sooth and reconcile him to his situation, by
every external denoniftration of regard and at-
tachmnent. But from captive princes the hour of
humiliation and suffering is never far ditlant.

suhjtedi Qualpopoca, his son, and five of the principal
:o clruel in-
dSglntis. officers who served under him, were brought

prisoners to the capital, in consequence of the
Dec. 4. orders which Montezuma had issued. The en-

peror gave them up to Cortes, that he might
inquire into the nature of their crime, and deter.
mine their punifshment. They were formally
tried by a Spanish court-martial; and though
they had afted no other part than what became
loyal fubjeAs and brave men, in obeying the
orders of their lawful fobereign, and in opposing
the invaders of their country, they were con-
demned to be burnt alive. The execution of
such atrocious deeds is seldom long suSpended.
The unhappy victims were instantly led fioth.
The pile on which they were laid was composed

See NOTE LXJ1J.
l: . <''

of the weapons colleAed in the royal magazine B O K
for the public defence. An innumerable multi-
tude of Mexicans beheld, in silent astonishment, '59'.
the double inlult offered to the nlajefty of their
empire, an officer of diltintion committed to
the flames by the authority of firangers, for
having done what he owed in duty to his natural
sovereign; and the arms provided by the fore-
fight of their ancestors for avenging public
wrongs, consumed before their eyes.

BUT these were not the most shocking indig.

nities which the Mexicans had to bear. The
Spaniards, convinced that Qualpopoca would
not have ventured to attack Efcalante without
orders from his master, were not satisfied with
inflicting vengeance on the instrument employed
in committing that crime, while the author of it
escaped with impunity. Just before Qualpopoca
was led out to susser, Cortes entered the apart-
ment of Montezuma, followed by tome of his
officers, and a soldier carrying a pair of fetters;
and approaching the monarch with a ftcrn coun-
tenance, told him, that as the persons who were
now to undergo the punishment which they me-
rited, had charged him as the cause of the out-
rage committed, it was neceflary that he likewilf
should make atonement for that guilt; then

turning

o oV I turning away abruptly, without waiting for a
V.
i,-_^ reply, commanded the soldier to clap the fetters

1s9. on his legs. The orders were inltantly exe-

cuted. The disconsolate monarch, trained up
with an idea that his person was sacred and in-
violable, and confidering this profanation of it
as the prelude of immediate death, broke out
into loud lamentations and complaints. His at-
tendants, speechless with horror, fell at his feet,
bathing them with their tears; and bearing up
the fetters in their hands, endeavoured with of-
ficious tenderness to lighten their pressure. Nor
did their grief and despondency abate, until
Cortes returned from the execution, and with a
cheerful countenance ordered the fetters to be
taken off. As Montezuma's spirits had funk
with unmanly dejeaion, they now rose into in-
decent joy; and with an unbecoming tranfitioi,
he pafled at once from the anguifl of despair to
transports of gratitude and expressions of fond-
ness towards his deliverer.
Rcioons of IN those tranfaEtions, as represented by the

Spanish hiflorians, we search in vain for the
qualities which distinguish other parts of Cortes's
conduct. To usurp a jurifdidion which could
not belong to a firanger, who assumed no higher
charalder than that of an anbafliador fromn a

lorci an
,%,/

foreign prince, and, under colour of it, to inflit n OO K
a capital punishment on men whose conduEt en-
titled them to esteem, appears an acd of bar- 5'9'
barous cruelty. To put the monarch of a great
kingdom in irons, and, after such ignominious
treatment, suddenly to release him, seems to be
a display of power no less inconsiderate than
wanton. According to the common relation,
no account can be given either of the one acion
or the other, but that Cortes, intoxicated with
success, and presuming on the ascendant which
he had acquired over the minds of the Mexicans,
thought nothing too bold for him to undertake,
or too dangerous to execute. But, in one
view, there proceedings, however repugnant to
justice and humanity, may have flowed from
that artful policy which regulated every part of
Cortes's behaviour towards the Mexicans. They
had conceived the Spaniards to be an order of
beings superior to men. It was of the utmofl
consequence to cherish this illusion, and to keep
up the veneration which it inspired. Cortes
wifled that ihcdding the blood of a Spaniard
should be deemed the molt heinous of all crimes;
and nothing appeared better calculated to efta-
blifl this opinion, than to condemn the firfi
Mexicans, who had ventured to commit it to a
cruel death, and to oblige their monarch him-
i;lf to Iubniit to a mortifying idiiigity, as an ex-

pIiation

B 0 0 K piation for being accessary to a deed so atro.

V.
Li.-__'- clous .

1520. THE rigour with which Cortes punished the

Whic, - unhappy persons who first presumed to lay violent
tes ac.
quired. hands upon his followers, seems accordingly to

have made all the impression that he desired.
The spirit of Montezuma was not only overawed,
but subdued. During fix months that Cortes
remained in Mexico, the monarch continued in
the Spanilh quarters, with an appearance of as
entire satisfaction and tranquillity, as if he had
resided there, not from constraint, but through
choice. Ilis ministers and officers attended him
as usual. He took cognizance of all affairs;
every order was issued in his name. The ex-
ternal afpeEt of government appearing the fame,
and all its ancient forms being scrupulously ob.
served, the people were so little sensible of any
change, that they obeyed the mandates of their
monarch with the fame fubmiflive reverence as
ever. Such was the dread which both Monte-
zuma and his fubjeds had of the Spaniards, or
such the veneration in which they held them, that
no attempt was made to deliver their sovereign
from confinement; and though Cortes, relying
on this ascendant which he had acquired over

f Sce NOTE LXXXIV.

their

their minds, permitted him not only to visit his B o o K
temples, but to make hunting excursions beyond
the lake, a guard of a few Spaniards carried with s50'
it such a terror as to intimidate the multitude,
and secure the captive monarch h.

THUS, by the fortunate temerity of Cortes in

seizing Montezuma, the Spaniards at once fe-
cured to themselves more extensive authority in
the Mexican empire than it was poflible to have
acquired in a long course of time by open force;
and they exercised more absolute sway in the
name of another than they could have done
in their own. The arts of polished nations, in
fubjeEting such as are less improved, have been
nearly the fame in every period. The fyltem of
screening a foreign usurpation, under the fandtion
of authority derived from the natural rulers of a
country, the device of emplloying the nagiftrates
and forms already eflablifhed as inflrumnents to
introduce a new dominion, of which we are apt
to boast as sublime refinements in policy peculiar
to the prefeit age, were inventions of a more
early period; and had been tried xlitll fucce's
in the Weft, long before they) were pratifed
in the East.

h Cortes Rclat. p. 236 . iE. I1. . c c7 97, 9, 99

C() R TS

Bo K CORTES availed himself to the utmost of the

V., power which he possessed by being able to at in
50Lo. the name of Montezuma. He sent some Spa.
he makes niards, whom he judged best qualified for such

commifflons, into different parts of the empire,
accompanied by persons of distinction, whom
Montezuma appointed to attend them both as,
guides and protectors. They visited most of the
provinces, viewed their foil and produ&ions, fur.
veyed with particular care the diftrids which
yielded gold or silver, pitched upon several
places as proper stations for future colonies,
and endeavoured to prepare the minds of the
people for fubinitting to the Spanish yoke.
While they were thus employed, Cortes, in the
name and by the authority of Montezuma, de.
graded some of the principal officers in the
empire, whose abilities or independent spirit
excited his jealousy, and substituted in their
place persons less capable or more obsequious.

ONE thing still was wanting to complete his

security. iHe wiiled to have such command of
the lake as might ensure a retreat, if, either from
levity or disgust, the Mexicans lfiould take arms
against him, and break down the bridges or
causeways. This, too, his own address, and the
facility of Montezuma, enabled him to accom-
plifh. Having fi-cquently entertained his prisoner

wilth

with pompous accounts of the European marine B O0O K
and art of navigation, he awakened his curiosity
to fee those moving palaces which made their 52o '
way through the water without oars. Under
pretext of gratifying this desire, Cortes per-
fuaded Montezuma to appoint some of his sub-
'jets to fetch part of the naval stores which
the Spaniards had deposited at Vera Cruz to
Mexico, and to employ others in cutting down
and preparing timber. With their afliftance, the
Spanish carpenters soon completed two brigan-
tines, which afforded a frivolous amusement
to the monarch, and were confidered by Cortes
as a certain resource, if he flould be obliged to
retire.

ENCOURAGED by so many instances of the Montezuma

ack(low-

monarch's tame submission to his will, Cortes ldcrs him-
ventured to put it to a proof frill more trying. 't Spai1
lie urged Montezuma to acknowledge himself a
vassal of the king of Caflile, to hold his crown
of him as superior, and to subjet his dominions
to the payment of an annual tribute. With this
requifirion, the last and most humbling that can
be made to one poflueed of sovereign authority,
Montezuima was so obsequious as to comply.
lie called together the chief men of his empire,
and in a folcln harangue, reminding them of

VOL. II. Z ihe

B o o 0 the traditions and prophecies which led themn to

_->-' expet the arrival of a people sprung from the
°52' fame frock with themselves, in order to take

poffeflion of the supreme power, he declared his
belief that the Spaniards were this promised
race; that therefore he recognized the right of
their monarch to govern the Mexican empire;
that he would lay his crown at his feet, and
obey him as a tributary. While uttering thele
words, Montezuma discovered how deeply he
was afflEted in making such a sacrifice. Tears
and groans frequently interrupted his discourse.
Over-awed and broken as his spirit was, it still
retained such a sense of dignity, as to feel that
pang which pierces the heart of princes when
conifrained to resign independent power. The
firfl mention of such a resolution firuck the
assembly dumb with afloniflment. This wa
followed by a fullen murmur of sorrow, min-
gled with indignation, which indicated some
violent eruption of rage to be near at hand.
This Cortes foresaw, and seasonably interposed to
prevent it, by declaring that his masler ha(l
no intention to deprive Montezuma of the royal
dignity, or to make any innovation upon the
conflitution and laws of the Mexican cnpir:.
Thllis assurance, added to their dread of tlih
81panifn power, and to the authority of tliir

monarclh'

monarch's example, extorted a relucant consent B 0 0 K
from the assembly'. The a&t of fubmiflion and
homage was executed with all the formalities J520S
which the Spaniards were pleased to prescribe k

MONTEZUMA, at the desire of Cortes, accom- Theamount

panied this profeflion of fealty and homage with rs , ctllta.
a magnificent present to his new sovereign; spa',.dl.
and, after his example, his fubjets brought
in very liberal contributions. The Spaniards
now collected all the treasure which had been
either voluntarily beflowed upon them at different
times by Montezuma, or had been extorted
from his people under various pretexts; and
having melted the gold and silver, the value of
these, without including jewels and ornaments of
various kinds, which were preserved on account
of their curious workmanihip, amounted to fix
hundred thousand pesos. The soldiers were im- Diviion of

it, and the

patient to have it divided, and Cortes complied dif:ontcntit
with their desire. A fifth of the whole was firfl OCC1:fi.)nt
set apart as the tax due to the king. Another
fifth was allotted to Cortes, as comnmander in.
chief. The fiins advanced by Vclafquez, by
Cortes, and by some of the officers, towards de-

Sec NOTE ,XXXV.

k Cortes Rclat. 238. 1). B. Dlaz. c. ti. CGuinara

!rcI. c . IcrrCa, I . 2. ii!). Yc. .
. c . .

7 2 1 l;yilng

B 0 0 K fraying the expence of fitting out the armaa

V.
_. _ n ment, were then deduted. The remainder was

!^5z0 divided among the army, including the garrison

of Vera Cruz, in proportion to their different
ranks. ifter so many defalcations, the share of
a private man did not exceed a hundred pesos.
This fum fell so far below their sanguine ex-
pectations, that some soldiers rejected it with
scorn, and others murmured so loudly at thi,
cruel difappointicnt of their hopes, that it re-
quired all the addrcfs of Cortes, and no finall
exertion of his liberality, to appease them. The
complaints of the army were not altogether
destitute of foundation. As the crown had con-
tributed nothing towards the equipment or fuc-
cess of the armamlent, it was not without regrcr
that the foldicrs beheld it sweep away so great a
proportion of the treasure purchased by their
blood and toil. What fell to the {hare of the
general appeared, according to the ideas of wcalth
in the sixteenth century, an enormous funi.
Some of Cortes's favourites had secretly appro-
priated to their own use several ornaments ol
gold, which neither paid the royal fifth, nor
were brought into account as part of the com-
mon flock. It was, however, lo niaiiifctlly tli
interelt of Cortes at this period to make a largu
remittance to the king, that it is highly probable
thole concealincnts were not of great confeq(uclcc.

6 'l'l

THE total fum amassed by the Spaniards bears B o O K

no proportion to the ideas which might be
formed, either by refleting on the descriptions Rcs."
given by historians of the ancient splendour of v1iy gold

was found
Mexico, or by confidering the productions of its in ,uc

finall quan-

mines in modern times. But, among the ancient titil.
Mexicans, gold and silver were not the standards
by which the worth of other commodities was
eflimated; and destitute of the artificial value
derived from this circumstance, were no farther
in request than as they furnished materials for
ornaments and trinkets. These were either con-
fecrated to the gods in their temples, or were
worn as marks of distinction by their princes and
some of their most eminent chiefs. As the con-
fumption of the precious metals was incon-
fiderable, the demand for them was not such as
to put either the ingenuity or industry of the
Mexicans on the stretch, in order to augment
their store. They were altogether unacquainted
with the art of working the rich mines with
which their country abounded. What gokl
they had was gathered in the beds of rivers,
native, and ripened into a pure metallic fate'.
The utmost effort of their labour in search of it
was to wafli the earth carried down by torrents

I Cortes Rclat. p. 236. F. 1. Di; a. c. 10, 10o;
Culinara Croni. c. 9o.

z 31 fr'om

B O O K from the mountains, and to pick out the grains
, _,-i of gold which subsided; and even this simple
1520. operation, according to the report of the persons

whom Cortes appointed to survey the provinces
where there was a profped of finding mines, they
performed very unfkilfully m. From all those
causes, the whole mass of gold in possession of the
Mexicans was not great. As silver is rarely
found pure, and the Mexican art was too rude
to condua the process for refining it in a proper
manner, the quantity of this metal was still lcfs
considerable ". Thus, though the Spaniards had
exerted all the power which they possessed in
Mexico, and often with indecent rapacity, in
order to gratify their predominant pailion, and
though Montezuma had fondly exhausted his
treasures, in hopes of satiating their thirst for
gold, the product of both, which probably in-
cluded a great part of the bullion in the empire,
did not rife in value above what has been
mentioned °.

MoIntezumn BUT however pliant Montezuma might be in
inflexible withlrefpca other matters, with refpe& to one point he was
toleligion inflexible. Though Cortes often urged him,

with the importunate zeal of a miflionary, to rc-

1 13. Diaz .

c o3. ln. cl ra, (Idc. 2. lib. ix. c. 4.
O See NOTE LXXXVI.

InounLlC

nounce his false gods, and to embrace the Chrifi- 2 o o Ki
ian faith, he always rejected the proposition with --._,
horror. Superstition, among the Mexicans, was 15:7D
formed into such a regular and complete system,
that its inflitutions naturally took salt hold of the
mind; and while the rude tribes in other parts
of America were cafily induced to relinquish a
few notions and rites, so loose and arbitrary as
hardly to merit the name of a public religion,
the Mexicans adhered tenaciously to their mode
of worflip, which, however barbarous, was ac-
companied with such order and solemnity as to
render it an objeca of the highest veneration.
Cortes, finding all his attempts ineffediual to
shake the conflancy of Montezuma, was so much
enraged at his obstinacy, that in a transport of
zeal he led out his soldiers to throw down the
idols in the great temple by force. But the
priefis taking arms in defnce of their altars, and
the people crowding with great ardour to fiupport
tlhem, Cortes's prudence overruled his zeCal, and
induced him to dclfil from hiis rafi attempt,
after dislodging the idols from one of the fiirincs,
and placing in their flcad an image of the
Virgin Mary ''

]i'iOM that moment the Mexicans, who had sci.,LI, (,
pcnlitted the illprifolnmcnt of their lovcrcign . . ',"-

bl), ¢. l dcs.
r Sec NO''E LXYXVII.

z 4- and

BOO K and suffered the exactions of strangers without a

V.

, - s itruggle, began to meditate how they might
J520) expel or deflroy the Spaniards, and thought

themselves called upon to avenge their inlulted
deities. The priests and leading men held fre-
quent consultations with Montezuma for this
purpose. But as it might prove fatal to the
captive monarch to attempt either the one or the
other by violence, he was willing to try more
gentle means. Having called Cortes into his
presence, he observcd, that now, as all the pur-
poses of his embassy were fully accomplished, the
gods had declared their will, and the people
signified their desire, that he and his followers
should inflantly depart out of the empire. With
this he required them to comply, or unavoidable
deflruEtion would fall suddenly on their heads.
The tenor of this unexpected requisition, as
well as the determined tone in which it was
uttered, left Cortes no room to doubt that it
was the result of some deep scheme concerted
between Montezuma and his subjects. Iie
quickly perceived that he might derive more ad.
vantage from a seeming compliance with the
monarch's inclination, than from an ill-timed
attempt to change or to oppose it; and replied,
with great composure, that he had already begun
to prepare for returning to his own country;
but as he had destroyed the vcflels il which
he arrived, fomen time was requisite lor buikling

otler

other ships. This appeared reasonable. A num- B 0 0 K
ber of Mexicans were Tent to Vera Cruz to cut --.
down timber, and some Spanish carpenters were '520'
appointed to superintend the work. Cortes
flattered himself, that during this interval he
might either find means to avert the threatened
danger5 or receive such reinforcements as would
enable him to despise it.

ALMOST nine months were elapsed since Por- Anxiety

and d lge!.

tocarrero and Montejo had failed with his dif- ofCortes.
patches to Spain; and he daily expeEted their
return with a confirmation of his authority from
the king. Without this, his condition was
insecure and precarious, and after all the great
things which he had done, it might be his doom
to bear the name and susser the punishment of a
traitor. Rapid and extensive as his progrels had
been, he could not hope to complete the re-
duaion of a great empire with so finall a body
of men, which by this time difeafcs of various
kinds considerably thinned; nor could he apply
for recruits to the Spanilh tittlenlents in the
islands until he received the royal approbation of
his proceedings.

Wir i.: he remained in this cruel situation, Thie rrivl

( 1 Ia L' lw

anxious about what was pall, uncertain with re- .,,a,,,in.it,
lijee to the future, and, by the late declaration

of

Bo o K of Montezuma, opprefled with a new addition

V. of cares, a Mexican courier arrived with an ac-
iso-. count of some hlips having appeared on the

coalt. Cortes, with fond credulity, imagining
that his messengers were returned from Spain,
and that the completion of all his withes and
hopes was at hand, imparted the glad tidings to
his companions, who received them with tranf-
ports of mutual gratulation. Their joy was not
of long continuance. A courier from Sandoval,
whom Cortes had appointed to succeed Efca-
lante in command at Vera Cruz, brought cer-
tain information that the armament was fitted
out by Velasquez, governor of Cuba, and in.
stead of bringing the aid which they expecced,
threatened them with immediate deftrudion.
fted out ly TIIE motives which prompted Velasquez to

this violent measure are obvious. From the
circumtnances of Cortes's departure, it was iam-
pofible not to fufpeEt his intention of throwin,
off all dependence upon him. His negleilg
to tranimit any account of his operations to
Cuba, flrengthened this suspicion, which was at
la;il confirmed beyond doubt, by the indilcreticn
of the officers whom Cortes sent to Spain.l
Tlhey, from some motive which is not clearly cx-
plained by the contemporary hifltorians, toucllcd
at the illand of Cuba, contrary to the perclemptory

c.ri,. ' .

orders of their generalq. By this means Velaf- B o°o K
quez not only learned that Cortes and his --
followers, after formally renouncing all con- 15t0
neftion with him, had established an independent
colony in New Spain, and were soliciting the
king to confirm their proceedings by his au-
thority; but he obtained particular information
concerning the opulence of the country, the
valuable presents which Cortes had received,
and the inviting profpedts of success that opened
to his view. Every pahion which can agitate an
ambitious mind; ihame, at having been so
grossly overreached; indignation, at being be-
trayed by the man whom lie had felec'ed as the
object of his favour and confidence; grief, for
having wafted his fortune to aggrandize an
enemy; and despair of recovering so fair ani
opportunity of eftablifling his fame and extending
his power, now raged in the bosom of Velaf-
quez. All these, with united force, excited him
to make an extraordinary effort in order to
be avenged on the author of his wrongs, and to
wrest from him his usurped authority and con-
quelts. Nor did he want the appeal :nce of
a good title to juflify such an attcmpr . The
agent whom he icnt to Spain with an account

. 1. 5.

)i.2.. (-.s, 55,. l{'-cl'r, dec. . lil,. v. c. 1k.
Goniara Cron, c. 96.

of

B oo OK of Grijalva's voyage, had met with a most favou,..

,_-^^ able reception; and from the specimens which
li2°" he produced, such high expe&ations were formed

concerning the opulence of New Spain, thar
Velasquez was authorised to prosecute the dili
covery of the country, and appointed governor
of it during life, with more extensive power ani
privileges than had been granted to any ad-
venturer from the time of Columbus r. Elated
by this distinguishing mark of favour, and war.
ranted to confider Cortes not only as intruding
upon his jurifdiAion, but as disobedient to the
royal mandate, he determined to vindicate liis
own rights, and the honour of his sovereign !h

under tle force of arms'. His ardour in carrying cn
ct :

I: nl

l ,nCl
ofcailva z. his preparations, was such as might have beei

expeced fiom the violence of the paflions with
which he was animated ; and in a flort time an
armament was completed, consisting of eighteen
Ihips, which had on board fourscore horlcnin,
cight hundred foot foldicrs, of which eighty were
imulkcteers, and an hundred and twenty cril'-
bow men, together with a train of twelve pieces
of cannon. As Velasquez's experience of the
fatal consequence of committing to another wllit
he ought to have executed himfclf, had not reit-

r T'rrcra, dc(-. 2. lIb. iii. c. Il.
' cc 1NOTI' LXXXVIII.

dered him more enterprising, he vested the cor- B o O'K
imand of this formidable body, which, in the -_
infancy of the Spanish power in America, merits '5Z'
the appellation of an army, in Pamphilo de
Narvaez, with inftrulions to seize Cortes and
his principal oficers, to fend them prisoners
to him, and then to complete the discovery and
conquest of the country in his name.

'(

dial~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~' W1.d

/~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~v '

~''

c.
' - Cer&-____I~

5a, '~"'' o^ - '"^^p^'^ 1

....,~..... .~' :,

.,'w. ^ j __ ai e~~~~~~~~~gl~~~al»&.&'^^ ^^IT /^^-'^ ^ u^^^^^^T^^ ^C..... ''i"" ^y-T -^ ^ '^7' 'y7 7~ /nr

:~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~.......

//~Cn, n^---!&si^~Z-S"- ^l^ ^ 't^ _L-y. mS \l~~~ Lrd ;ek-.^^"^^srT^S Tii,<ins /i y / 1/ __,C;
-s^ ^%3^^*" :'^""-' ~ /^'~'V<^ * '7, , ,,*' : "t ' l^l''t'

. ~ ~ ~ ~ i "l~~lc

^^^

^^ (y 'N<'' :
* Tnr laT s7 ^.^Mrr^ c (

·· JA xi
t

hiC.' .-1VA

Y-II

~."q:

i ~''

^^ ' /^./"'~?"::
... *^y-'v_......^^^^

h~P "v·i EJ ii.sc^

^'^ ------^'^^^^^^^ Y\ \^ ^V^^.-'Js'T'1"15^^~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~--.-

r :lirr~l~~ P... ..···l.. A,
i~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~i

Ct~F h,~~ ......~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
~~)J'E-~~~~~ --jr3L L·Wqili'i3 il

*.z^~""~ '

'

'~ _

z,.~

^ ^ 4. .......''

\j~51~>1~~~t~ -//^'^ . ' "1" /

"

r ,
'

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

'~~~~~7
* -, \, |..------,,-"",:

J1/~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~/~

1,3~~~~~~~~~~~~~~.

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~4W~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ ~ ,, b i1

~

\~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ AI1:

,_A- _'_----,. ,/'X'4~>--

- £ >^ \: ,,,

^y^ ^ ^

s(~d ~.i

V~,~" ' 7. ',

'~ ~"'

!I^ \ ' I'v#^ '*"^ ,'

'r
~:\'° /^ '*..

*!^ \ ^T~~~sr^^^ \ ^L^-K· ^1u^^^^b

I ^ \ \ \  ^M "7^ ^^ -S A@ - .-^t^- -"\- s-\"----^--^-y^^ '^r'""<'n'^^^^^ c 0 s/ c'

i'%"',

.-;,,1 - ': 2 : i !.

^^--\ -----

\~ ~~~~~~~~~~~~\' eqc^^ ^ -2^?^^ ?/

2 _-, I1 N !'7o*r,.,&,

n^-1 ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~~~~~~ ~

\ " I
'. - ' ^ »^ -J\V-^^^ ^ ^ ^

/'a ---

--

-- --\---- --T i « s,. 'M r^Af »*» i^-1 > '- \ ' i^ «. \i^'"iuvit, A ^,----:--' / 1,.-*j , J :'.:,._" l 'i,'J - ' , __ %/x,,.,,t

^ /3/.r "^sc^-r- ^:W^^w /;Z~,~/dn '~ /?

) ;° '

/ "
''

Ii \ ///AS/i'/i///./»;<(alll ''Bw I

'ItIl l'"'"' "

·. S

i~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~,,''- z,,

,''t ..:
............."

a, /i z P~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
~'~..'};J

'~~~ ~~~~~~~

,IP : -:~r~

s ,r~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

s~~~~~~~c~~~~~~La: : "'"· 'ri~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~io~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~~~ s! 1~~~~~~~.!,'.-
Z/

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~'··

r~~ ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~"-

~:
.,,,w .....*.~ ..Z

--~I 'i :.'.
1 r ·1,:r ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

'·~~~~~~~~~ I ....

Mtt~t~}Zt~ Zr i '
·r~~~~~~~~~~~~~ ,,1~,' , C'

'.<::¢ ~ :

,'~rsJJ //

gl..[

' ,,~,e

_
_

- ~ ;z

... . ,, ,

,,~,

/,/?·,>;v~,/,///,/,; i
I

P% ~~~~ ~~a8 Ro
I Oi s

xi. cl c h G
e. -

,1 ~ ~ ~ ~

~~~~ V~~~~~~~~T/~~~~~~~~4) ~

~ ~ ~ ~~~~~~o jslj e 'D o )( Ps?
ro 17'

w /au,
3n -~~~~~~~~~~Pu~JY -A-11 4 45

.4~~~~~~~~~~4-

t~~~~
i%14 -

4~~~~~~~JUYYT

4)/ ("
~

4ó~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~3
'4~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~F

/4,arr~c i//(/aU(~4 /t
k / ~ m ~ ' A~'s< /1/a~~uT''d/m/~sv~d

Jp'` 3~i·Lz~ ~ l~. S of C apiio,~.u

5 .1~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~1
1~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~4

bo(k__ K

a:. Q sa" ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ce~U,"2

~~Z~a/ddC - Itp A .

A c h. e d

35 (;uv·7L Ii

(IC-~it·~;r*
· Iak·/'iIa a

Z.'h/~~~~~MER CA
Z4 45~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~?..

-7 7?
Ce Al 7,

u~~~pr~ Sour1~v y ~ s

IC~/()II~~Li L)~ZAME RICA.,

(V) / -1-' a 21 "
-

k ~~U.(V !.9,s~,j7 96 1I'Y'im;,uZlo in/r/au

# NOTES AND ILLUSTRATIONS.

NOTES

AND
ILL UST RATIONS.

NOT' I,. P. 4.

Tr-E hdight of the moss lee'a;tecd '-oilnt in tte

Pyrenees is, according to M. Cassini, fix tloufand

fix hundred and forty-fix feet. The height of the
'mountain Gemini, in the canton of Berne, is ten tlou-
faind one hundred and ten feet. The height of the
Peak of Teneriffe, according to the measurement of
P. Feuille, is thirteen thousand one huindred and
feventy-eight feet. The height of Chiinborazzo, the
piolt. elevated point of the Andes, is twenty thousand
two hundred and eighty feet; no lefc than seven thou-
sand one hundred and two feet above the liiglheit
mountain in the ancient continent. X\oy:ge de I).
Juian ITllon, Obfcrvations Astron. ct Phyfiq. tom. ii.
p. 1 4. The line of congetltion on Chimborazzo, or
that part of the mountain twich is covered perpetually
with snow, is no lcfs than two tliouifndl four hundred
feet from its funimit. Prc'vut.. Iit, Gencr. decs Voyages,
V;l. xiii. p. 636.

NOTE II. p. 4.

As a particular description makes a stronger im-

prcffion than general afiertionb, I fllall give one of Rio
de la Plata by an eye-witness, P. Cattaneo, a Modenefe
Jesuit, who landed at Buenos Ayres in I749, and thus
represents what he felt when such new objecs were
first presented to his view. " While I resided in
Europe, and read in books of history or geography that
the mouth of the river De la Plata was an hundred and
fifty miles ill breadth, I confidered it as an exaggera-
tion, because in this hemisphere we have no example of
such vast rivers. When I approached its mouth, I had
the most vehement dcfire to ascertain the truth with my
own eyes; and I have found the matter to be exatly
as it was represented. This I deduce particularly from
one circumstance: When we tock our departure from
Monte-Video, a fort situated more than a hundred
miles from the mouth of the river, and where its
breadth is considerably diminiflied, we failed a complete
day before we discovered the land on the opposite bank
of the river; and when we were in the middle of the
channel, we could not discern land on either fide, and
l'w nothing but the sky and water, as if we had been
in tfome great ocean. Indeed, we should have taken it
to be sea, if the frcfli water of the river, which w..s
turbid like tlie Po, had not iftisficd us tlat it wa:;
a river. Moreover, at Blucnos Ayres, another hundred
miles up the river, and where it is Ilill much narrower,
it is not only impnollibl to dlil'cirn the oppofitc co.ll,
uwhich is inldeed very losw and illat; but one cannot

pcrccivt\

perceive the houses or the tops of the steeples in the
Portuguese settlement at Colonia on the other fide of
the river." Lettera prima, published by Muratori,
II Chritianefimo Felice, &c. i. p. 257.

NOTE III. p. 8.

NEWFOUNDLAND part or Nova Scotia nnd Canada,

are the countries which lie in the fame yrarallel of
latitude with the kingdom of France; and in every
part of these the water of the rivers is frozen during
winter to the thickness of several feet ; the earth is
covered with fiow as deep;. almost all the birds fly
during that season, from a climate where they could not
live. The country of the Efkirnaux, part of Labrador,
and the countries on the south of Hudson's Bay, are in
the fame parallel with Great Britain ; and yet in all
thetf the cold is so intense, that even the industry of
Europeans has not attempted cultivation.

NOTE IV. p. Il.

AcosrA is the firlt philosopher, as f;r as I k:iav,

who endeavoured to account for the difi:rcit degrees
of heat in the old and new continents, by the agency
of the winds which blow in each. -lill. Moral. &c.
lib. ii. and iii. M. de Buffon adopts tlis theory, and
has not only improved it by new observations, but has
employed his amazing powers of dcfreipti\v eloqluc(iic
in embellifiling and placing it in tllc imof llrikiig
light. Some rcinarlks may e added, whichl tend to
illulfrate more fully a doliriln of mllch import.ilc:

VOL. ir. A A jil

in every inquiry concerning the temperature of various
climates.

W'HEN a cold wind blows over land, it muff in its

passage rob the surface of some of its heat. By
means of this, the coldness of the wind is abated.
But if it continue to blow in the fame direaion,
it will come, by degrees, to pals over a surface already
cooled, and will susser no longer any abatement of
its own keenness. Thus as it advances over a large
trait of land, it brings on all the fevcrity of intense
frost.

LET the fame wind blow over an extensive and

deep sea; the superficial water must be immediately
cooled to a certain degree, and the wind proportionally
warmed. But the superficial and colder water be-
coming specifically heavier than the warmer water
below it, descends; what is warmer supplies its place,
which, as it comes to be cooled in its turn, continues
to warm the air which passes over it, or to diminifli
its cold. This change of the superficial water, and
successive ascent of that which is warmer, and the
consequent successive abatement of coldness in the air,
is aided by the agitation caused in the sea by the
mechanical afion of the wind, and also by the motion
of the tides. This will go on, and the rigour of the
wind will continue to diminifl until the whole water
i, so far cooled, that the water on the surface is no
longer removed from the action of the wind, fall
enough to hinder it from being arrested by frofl. Whcn-
ever the furf.icc freezes, the wind is no longer warmed

1,

by tle water from below, and it goes on *ith undi-
minifhed cold.

FROMX those principles may be explained the severity

of winter frosts in extensive continents; their mildness
in small islands; and the superior rigour of winter in
those parts of North America with which we are best
acquainted. In the north-west parts of Europe, the
severity of winter is mitigated by the weft winds,
which usually blow in the months of November,
December, and part of January.

ON the other hand, when a warm wind blows

over land, it heats the surface, which must therefore
cease to abate the fervour of the wind. But the fame
wind blowing over water, agitates it, brings up the
colder water from below, and thus is continually losing
somewhat of its own heat.

BUT the great power of the sea to' mitigate the heat

of the wind or air palling over it, proceeds from the
following circumifance, that on account o' the tranf-
parency of the sea, its surface cannot be heated to a
great degree by the fun's rays; whereas the ground,
fubjetedl to their influence, very soon acquires great
heat. When, thereforc, the wintd blows over a torrid
continent, it is soon raised to a heat almost intolerable;
but during its passage over an extensive ocean, it is
gradually cooled ; so that on its arrival atr the farlhlct
lhorc, it is again fit for rcfpiration.

'lihosi. principles will :Iccoull for thL fulirrv alts
of 1arge continents in tibe torrid zone l for tie 1miiltd

A 4 2 clilinl:

climate of islands in the fame latitude; and for the
superior warmth in summer which large continents,
situated in the temperate or colder zones of the carth,
enjoy, when compared with that of islands. The
heat of a climate depends not only upon the im-
mediate effect of the fun's rays, but on their continued
operation, on the effect which they have formerly
produced, and which remains for tome time in the
ground. This is the reason why the day is warmefi:
about two in the afternoon, the summer warmest
about the middle of July, and the winter coldest about
the middle of January.

THE forests which cover America, and. hinder the

sun-beams from heating the ground, are a great caufc
of the temperate climate in the equatorial parts. The
ground, not being heated, cannot heat the air; and
the leaves, which receive the rays intercepted from the
ground, have not a mass of matter sufficient to absorb
heat enough for this purpose. Besides, it is a known
faa, that the vegetative power of a plant occasions a
perspiration from the leaves in proportion to the heat
to which they are exposed; and, from the nature of
evaporation, this perspiration produces a cold in the
leaf proportional to the perspiration. Thus the effea
of the leaf in heating the air in conta& with it, is
prodigiously diminiflhed. For those observations, which
throw much additional light on this curious fubjeac, I
am indebted to my ingenious friend, Mr. Robifon,
professor of natural philosophy in the university of
Edinburgh.
I

NOTE V. p. ii.

THE climate of Brasil has been defcrihed by two

eminent naturalists, Pifo and Margrave, who observe'd
it with a philosophical accuracy for which we search
in vain in the accounts of many other provinces in
America. Both represent it as temperate and mild,
when compared with the climate of Africa. They
ascribe this chiefly to the refreshing wind which blows
continually from the sea. The air is not only cool,
but chilly through the night, in so much, that the
natives kindle fires every evening in their huts. Pifo
de Medicina Brafilienfi, lib. i. p. i, &c. Margravius
Hiftor. Rerum Natural. Brafilie, lib. viii. c. 3. p. 264.
Nieuhoff, who resided long in Brasil, confirms their
description. Churchill's Collection, vol. ii. p. 26.
Gumilla, who was a missionary many years among
ihe Indians upon the river Oronoco, gives a similar
description of the temperature of the climate there.
Hiut. de l'Orenoque, tom. i. p. 26. P. Acugna felt
a very considerable degree of cold in the countries on
the banks of the river Amazons. Relat. vol. ii. p. 56.
M. Biet, who lived a considerable time in Cayenne,
gives a similar account of the temperature of that
climate, and ascribes it to the fame cause. Voyage
de Ia Prance, Equinox, p. 330. Nothing can be
more different from these descriptions than that of.
the burning heat of the African coast given by
M. Adanfon. Voyage to Senegal, paflim.

AA 3

NOTE VI. p. 13.

Two French frigates were sent upon a voyage oi

diflovery in the year 1739. In latitude 44° south,
they began to feel a considerable degree of cold. In
latitude 48°, they met with ifands of floating ice.
Hifcoire des Navigations aux Terres Auflrales, tom. ii.
p. 256, &c. Dr. Halley fell in with ice in latitude 59".
Id. tom. i. p. 47. Commodore Byron, when on the
coast of Patagonia, latitude 50° 33' south, on the
liftenlth of I)ecembcr, which is midfumnmer in that
part of the globe, the twenty-firft of December being
the longest day there, compares the climate to that ot'
England in the middle of winter. Voyages by
Hawkefworth, i. 25. Mr. Banks having landed on
Terra dcl Fuego, in the Bay of Good Success, lati-
tude 55°, on the sixteenth of January, which corrc-
fponds to the month of July in our hemilfphre, two
of his attendants died in one night of extreme cold(
and all the party were in the most imminent danger ot
perifiling. Id. ii. 51, 52. By the fourteenth of Marcl,
corrcfponding to September in our hemifpherc, winter
was set in with rigour, and the mountains were covered
with filow. Ibid. 72. Captain Cook, in his voyage
towards the South Pole, furnifles new and ltriking
instances of the extraordinary predominanc of cold iA
this region of the globe. " Who would have thoughl:
(fays he) that an island, of no greater extent than
ftvcnty leagues in circuit, situated bctceenc the latitude
of 5 ° aund 55', fliould in the very icighlt of fulnmer
be, ini a n;iinlcr, wholly covered, many fatlhoms deep,
willi ftrzcn filw ; but mlore especially the S. UW.

coult ?

coafit? The very summits of the lofty mountains
were cased with snow and ice; but the quantity that
lay in the valleys is incredible; and at the bottom of
the bays, the coast was terminated by a wall of ice of
considerable height." Vol. ii. p. 217.

IN some places of the ancient continent, an extraordi-

nary degree of cold prevails in very low latitudes.
Mr. Bogle, in his embalfy to the court of tile Delai
Lama, pafled the winter of the year I774 at Cham-
nanning, in latitude 3 1 39' N. He often found the
thermometer in his room twenty-nine degrees under
the freezing point by Fahrenheit's scale; and in the
middle of April the itanding waters were all frozen,
and heavy flowers of snow frequently fell. The
extraordinary elevation of the country seems to be the
cause of this exceflive cold. In travelling from
Indoftan to Thibet, the ascent to the summit of the
Boutan Mountains is very great, but the descent on
the other fide is not in equal proportion. The king-
dom of Thibet is an elevated region, extremely bare
and dcfolate. Account of Thibet, by Mr. Stewart,
read in the Royal Society, p. 7. The extraordinary
cold in low latitudes ill America cannot be accounted
for by the fame cause. Those regions are not re-
markable for elevation. Some of them are countries
deprefled and level.

T'itE most obvious and probable cause of the superior

degree of cold, towards the southern extremity of-
America, seems to be the form of the continent there.
Its breadth gradually decreases as it stretches from
St. Antonio southwards, and from the bay of St. Julian

a A 4 to

to the Straits of Magellan its dimensions are mucl'
contra&ed. On the east and weft fides, it is washed
by the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans. From its southern
point it is probable that a great extent of sea, without
any considerable trac of land, reaches to the Antarteic
pole. In whichever of these directions the wind blows,
it is cooled before it approaches the Magellanic regions,
by passing over a vast body of water, nor is the land
there of luch extent that it can recover anv considerable
degree of htat in its progress over it. These circum-
flanccs concur in rendering the temperature of the air
in this dittrit of America, more similar to that of an
insular, than to that of a continental climate, and
hinder it from acquiring the fanme degree of fummcr
heat with places in Europe and Aafi, in a correspond-
ing northern latitude. The north wind is the only
one that reaches this part of America, after blowing
over a great continent. But from an attentive survey
of its position, this will be found to have a tendency,
rather to liminifh than augment the degree of heatr.
The southern extremity of America is properly the
termination of the immense ridge of the Andes, which
stretches nearly in a dire& line from north to south,
through the whole extent of the continent. The most
sultry regions in South America, Guiana, Brasil,
Paraguay, and Tucum;nl, lie many degrees to the ealt
of the Magellanic regions. The level country of Peru,
which enjoys the tropical heats, is situated confider-
ably to the welt of them. The north wind then,
though it blows over land, docs not bring to the
southern extremity of America, an incrcafe of heat
collcLt'ed in its pafiTge over torrid regions; but before
it arrives there, it mult !hve fwcpt along the fununits

of

of the Andes, and comes impregnated with the cold of
that frozen region.

THOUlG it be now demonfirated that there is no

southern continent in that region of the globe which
it was supposed to occupy, it appears to be certain
from Captain Cook's discoveries, that there is a large
trat of land near the south pole, which is the source
of molt of the ice spread over the vast southern ocean.
Vol. ii. p. 230, 239, &c. Whether the influence of
this remote frozen continent may reach the southern
extremity of America, and affca its climate, is an
inquiry not unworthy of attention.

NOTE VII. p. 16.

M. CON)DAMIXE is one of tlhe latert andl most accu-

rate observers of the interior state of South-lAmerica.

. After (lefcending from the Andes, (fays lih,) one
beholds a vast and uniform profpecl of watcr annd
verdure, and nothing more. One treads upon the
earth, but does not fee it; as it is so entirely covered
with luxuriant plants, weeids, and liirub:, that it
would require a coinfideraible degree of labour to clear ir,
for the flpace of a foot." Relation aLbreg d'In Voyage,
&c. p.48. One of the fiiigularitic; in tile forefis is
a fort of oficrs, or withs, c;:ledlci /,i::r by tile Spanliardul,
iails by the French, ;d(l . yi!i,,s It tilIe 11Ili:m11s whihl
are ufiillly employed as roupcs in Aim rica. This i.
one of tlle paralliticall pliint, v :licli twitls aboul tice
trees it meet.s wvilt, :nidl rifiig above their hliiil1'{t
li'aichlies, its tendrils deceiml ptrlpci!il,,l?', llriLe

tree, and thus mount and descend alternately. Other
tendrils are carried obliquely by the wind, or some
accident, and form a confusion of interwoven cordage,
which resembles the rigging of a ship. Bancroft,
Nat. Hist. of Guiana, 99. These withs are often as
thick as the arm of a man. Ib. p. 75. M. Bouguer's
account of the forests in Peru perfectly resembles this
description. Voyage au Peru, p. I6. Oviedo gives a
similar description of the forests in other parts of
America. Hist. lib. ix. p. 144. D. The country of
the Moxos is so much overflowed, that they are
obliged to reside on the summit of some rising ground
during some p.;rt of the year, and have no commu-
nication with their countrymen at any distance.
Lcttres Edifinltes, tom. . x . p187. Garcia gives a
full and ju(t description of the rivers, lakes, woods,
;lnd marfles in those countries of America which lie
between the tropics. Origen de los Indios, lib. ii.
c. . 4, 5. 'The incredible hardflips to which
(;onclalez Pliz:arro was cxpofed in attempting to

au;lrch into the country to the east of the Andes,

convey a very flrilking idea of that part of America
in its origilnal u;cultiv.teld {late. Garcil. de la Vega,
Royal. Comment. of Peru, pairt ii. book iii. c. 2-5.

NOIE VIII. . 1. 9.

'frll. :aimls of Amenrica seem not to have been

.lways of a li/ inferior to tliofi in othe- qu;irters ol
the globe. I'lomn ;amllers ol thle moolf-dccr which
have been foundr, in Aimcrica, it .appears to tic been
;nl alnimal of gre:t 1ize. Ncar the banLks of the Ohio,
.1 co(lilid(rAlc numb, il,.1! bone:, of ;n imnielisie nil;lagli-

t\id-

tude have becn found. The place where this difcovcry
has been made lies about one hlundred and ninety miles
helow thle junlcion of the river Scioto with the Ohio.
It is about four miles dillant from the bankls of the lat-
ter, on the fide of the marfi called the Salt Lick. The
bones lie ill valt quantities about five or fix feet under
ground, and the tlratum is visible in the bank on the
edge of the Lick. jsourl of C'olonlt Gec'rge; Crogla/n,
IllS. penr's ie. 'lThis spot fellms to be accurately laid
down by Evans in his map. 'Ilti bones mult have
belonged to animals of enormous bulk ; but naturaiilts
being acquainted with 10o living craturc of such size,
were at firlt inclined to think that they wcre mineral
substances. Upon receiving a greater number of
fpccimcns, and after itcilnCing tlit.- more narrowly,
tlhey are now allowed to be the bones of an animal.
As the elephant is the largest known quadruped, and
ilh tulls which were found nearly rcfamlbled, both in
folir andl quality, the tusks of anl ellphant, it wvas
concludlcd that the carcases deposited on tlhe Olio
were of that species. But Dr. lHuntcr, one of the
persons of our age best qua;lified to decide with rc-
fpct to this poiilt, having accurately examined fevcral
parcels of tulks, and grill!Lrls, and jaw-bones, tent
fromn tlhe Ohio to Londlio, gives it ;s his opinion,
tli.t tlhey (lid nut belong to an: elephant, but to some
huge c:rivi\orous animal of an uinknown fpccics.
Phil. 'lralinflct. ol. Iviii. p. 34. Bones of the fatme
kind, and as re mark;able tfi their lize, have bcen
foundl Ier the nloutlh of the great rivers Oby,
Jenlieia, andl Lena, ill Siberia. SII/'L.r' iri, Dfirinpt.
/' ,.//., nl fJ p'lts ,:f l.:ipc ,,.tn! ;a, p. 402, &e.
'T'le clepl)li.t fecl'im to be c(onlfledli ill his ranllg to
rli. tornid z-le, al:d liev'r llultiplics bo':nd it. In

filch1

fucbi cold regions as those bordering on the frozen
sea, he could not live. The existence of such large
animals in America might open a wide field for
conjecure. The more we contemplate the face of
nature, and confider the variety of her productions,
the more we muff be satisfied that astonishing changes
have been made in the terraqueous globe by convulsions
and revolutions, of which no account is preserved in
history.

NOTE IX. p. 20.

TITs degeneracy of the domestic European animals

in America may be imputed to some of these causes.
In the Spanish settlements, which are situated either
within the torrid zone, or in countries bordering
upon it, the increase of heat, and diversity of food,
prevent sleep and horned cattle from attaining the
fame size as in Europe. They seldom become so fat,
and their flefll is not so juicy, or of such delicate
flavour. In North America, where the climate is
more favourable, and similar to that of Europe, the
quality of the graffes which spring up naturally in
their pafture-grounds is not good. Mitchell, p. 15i.
Agriculture is still so much in its infancy, th:l;
artificial food for cattle is not raised in aly quantity,
During a winter, long in many provinces, and rigorous
in all, no proper care is taken of their cattle. The
general treatment of their horses and horned cattle is
injudicious and harsh in all the Engliflh colonies.
These cilvulnllanccs contribute more, perhaps, than
any thing peculi;ir in the quality of the climate, to the
drgcncracy of breed in the horses, cows, and sheep,
of imnnya of tin' North American provinces.

NOTE X. p. 21.

IN the year 1518, the island of Hispaniola was

afflicted with a dreadful visitation of those deftruEtive
infecs, the particulars of which Herrera describes, and
mentions a singular instance of the fuperflition of the
Spaniflh planters. After trying various methods of
exterminating the ants, they resolved to implore
protection of the faints; but as the calamity was new,
they were at a loss to find out the faint who could
give them the molt effeEtual aid. They cast lots in
order to discover the patron whom they should invoke.
The lots decided in favour of St. Saturninus. They
celebrated his festival with great solemnity, and im-
mediately, adds the historian, the calamity began to
abate. Herrera, dec. 2. lib. iii, c. If. p. 107.

NOTE XI. p. 24.

THEI author of Recherches Philofophiques fur les

Americains fuppofcs this difference in heat to be equal
to twelve degrees, and that a place thirty degrees from
the equator in the old continent, is as warm as one
situated eighteen degrees from it in America, tom. i.
p. in. Dr. Mitchell, after observations carried on
during thirty years, contends that the difference is
equal to fourteen or fifteen degrees of latitude. Prcfcnt
State, &c. p. 257.

NOTE XII. p. 24.

JANUARY 3d, 1765, Mr. Bcrtram, near the head of

St. John's river iln East Florida, observed a frost so
intense, that ill one night the ground was frozen an
inch thick upon the banks of the river. The limes,
citrons, and banana trees, at St. Auguftin, were dc-
stroyed. Bertram's Journal, p. 20. Other inflances
of the extraordinary operations of cold ill the southern
provinces of North America are collected by Dr.
Mitchell. Present State, p. 206, &c. February 7th,
1747, the froll at Cllarleftown was io intense, that a
person having carried two quart bottles of hot water
to bed, in the morning they were split to pieces, aiul
the water converted into solid lumps of ice. In a
kitchen, where there was a fire, the water in a jar in
which there was a large live eel, was frozen to the
bottom. Alimof all tlhe orange and olive trees were
dcflroycd. Dcfcription of South-Carolina, 8 vo
Lond. 176r.

NOTE XIII. P. 25.

A REMARKAnB.lE inifanee of tills occurs in Dutch

Guiana, a country everywhere level, and so low,
that during the rainy seasons it is usually covered with.
water near two feet in height. 'llis renders the foil
so rich, that on the furr.fue, for t'welve inchC in deptll,
it is a flratum of perfetl nmanur, and as fucli has
beerl tralnfported to Ba;rhladccs. (n the banks of the
l'lclquebo, thirty crops of ratan: c;a;cs have beeni rail fe

6 fitcccllivel

successively, whereas in the Weft Indian islands not
more than two is ever expeEted from the richest land.
The expedients by which the planters endeavour to
diminifl this excessive fertility of foil are various.
Bancroft, Nat. Hilt. of Guiana, p. Io, &c.

NOTE XIV. p. 39..

MULLER seems to have believed, without sufficient

evidence, that the Cape had been doubled, torn. i.
p. I J, &c.; and the Imperial Academy of St. Peters-
burgh give orne countenance to it, by the manner in
which TJfch/1koIfoi-iofs is laid down in their charts.
But I am aflured, from undoubted authority, that no
Ruffian vessel has ever failed round that cape, and as
the country of TJfhi.tki is not subject to the Ruffian
empire, it is very imperfeCtly known.

NOTE XV. p. 43.

WLRE this the place for entering into a long and

intricate geographical difqifition, many curious obferv-
ations might arise from comparing the accounts of the
two Ruflian voyages, and the charts of their rcfpelivt
navigations. One remark is applicable to both. rWe
cannot rely with absolute certaiintv on the position
which they atflgii to several of the places which tihe
visitcd. The weather vwas si rc-trenmcly foggy, tlli;
they feldoim saw the funi, or {lars, and th le pofitioi of
tle islands and supposcd contiillelns was commonly
determined by reckoning, not by ohfi:rvation. Behring
and Tfcliirikow procccdcil mLu firtli'r towardt; tli
cast thiln Krnitzin. Tli l:d dlfc\ v
rc by Jcli.

ii. i

which he imagined to be part of the American conti.
nent, is in the 236th degree of longitude from the
first meridian in the isle of Ferro, and in 58° 28' of
latitude. I'fchirikow came upon the fame coast iln
1ongit. 241°, lat. 56°. Muller, i. 248, 249. The
former must have advanced 60 degrees from the Port
of Petropawlowfki, from which he took his departure,
and the latter 65 degrees. But from the chart of
Irenitzin's voyage, it appears that he did not fail
farther towards the east than the 20oth degree, and
only 32 degrees from Petropawlowfld. In 1741,
Behring and Tfchirikow, both in going and returning,
held a course which was mostly to the south of that
chain of illands, which they discovercd; and observing
the mountainous and rugged aspect of the head-lands
which they descried towards the north, they supposed
them to be promontories belonging to some part of the
American continent, which, as they fancied, stretched
as far south as the latitude 56. In this manner they are
laid down in the chart published by Muller) and like-
wife in a manuscript chart drawn by a mate of
Behling's fliip,, communicated to me by Mr. Profcflor
Robifon. But in 1769, Krcnitzin, after wintering
in the island Alaxa, fttood so far towards the north in hii;
return, that his course lay through the mliddle of
what Bcliring and Tfchirikow had supposed to be a
continent, which he found to be an open sea, and
that they had mistaken rocky isles for the head-lands of
a continent. It is probable, that the countries dif-
covered in 1741, towards the eafl, do not belong to
the American continentl, but arc only a continuation of
the chain of ilandls. The number of volcanoes in tii;
rcgion of the globe is renarkable. lherc arc fivcr:ll

in

in Kamchatka, and not one of the islands, great or
small, as far as the Ruffian navigation extends, is
without them. Many are actually burning, and the
mountains in all bear marks of having been once in a
slate of eruption. Were I disposed to admit such
conjectures as have found place in other inquiries
concerning the peopling of America, I might suppose
that this part of the earth, having manifcftly suffered
violent convulions from earth-quakes and volcanos,
an isthmus, which may have formerly united Asia to
America, has been broken, and formed into a cluster
of islands by the flock.

IT is singular, that at the very time the R.ulian

navigators were attempting to maki discoveries in the
north-west of America, the Spaniards were prosecuting
the fame design from another quarter. In 1769, two
small veflels failed from Loretto in California t6 explore
the coasts of the country to the north of that peninsula.
They advanced no farther than the port of Monte-
Rcy in latitude 36. But, in several fucccffive cxpe-
ditions fitted out from the port of St. Blas in New
Galicia, the Spaniards have advanced as far as the
latitude 58. Gazeta de Mad/lrid, March 19, and May
14, 1776. But as the journals of those voyages have
not yet been publilhed, I cannot compare their pT-
grefs with that of the Ruffians, or fliew how near the
navigators of the two nations have approached to each
other. It is to be hoped, that the enlightened minister,
who lhas now1 the dirceion of Amcrican affairs in Spain,
will not withhold this information from the public.

VOL. UI. B

NOTE XVI. p. 45.

OrI knowledge of the vicinity of the two continents

of Asia and America, which was very impcrfed when
I published the hittory of America il the year 1777,
is now complete. Mr. Coxc's Account of the Ruffian
Difcovcrics between Alfa and America, printed in the
year i 780, contains many curious and important fads
with refplca to the various attempts of the Ruffians to
open a communication with the New World. The
history of the great Voyage of Difcovcry, begun by
Captain Cook in 1776, and completed by Captains
Clerk and Gore, published in the year 1780, commu-
nicates all the information that the curiosity of mankind
could desire with regard to this subject.

AT my rcqueft, my friend Mr. Playfair, ProferFor of

Mathematicks in the University of Edinburgh, has
compared the narrative and charts of those illultrious
navigators, wvith the Iore iiperfc:ct rc!ations and maps
of the Ruffians. 'The result of this comparison I com-
municate in his own words, with much greater confi-
dence in his fcicntific acctnracy, than I could have
ventured to place in any observations which I myself
mi-ght have ma(le upon the fubjecl.

'' TI-i. difcovcries of Captain Cook in his lars voyage

have confirmed the conclulions which Dr. Robertson
Ilad drawn, and have colliccled together the fads front
which they were deduedl . 'Ihey have now rendered
it certain that Bchring alid '1;.hilil.rikw touched on the
coalt of Almrica in 1741. The fuorer dlircovercd

land

land in lat. 58" 28', and about 2360 east from Ferro.
He has given such a description of the Bay in which he
anchored, and the high mountain to the westward of
it, which he calls St. Elias, that though the account of
his voyage is much abridged in the English translation,
Captain Cook recognized the place as he failed along
the Western coast of America in the year 1778. The
isle of St. Hermogenes, near the mouth of Cook's
river, Schumagins Illes on the coast of Alaflika, and
Foggy Isle, retain in Captain Cook's chart the names
which they had received from the Ruffian navigator.
Cook's Voy. vol. ii. p. 347.

" TSCHIRIKOW came upon the fame coast about

2° 30' farther south than Bchring, near the Mount
Edgccumbe of Captain Cook.

" WITH regard to Krenitzin, we learn from Coxc's

Account of the Ruffian Discoverics, that he failed
from the mouth of the Kamtchatka river with two lhips
in the year 1768. With his own fliip he reached the
island Oonolailka, in which there had been a Ruffian
Ifttlement since the year 1762, where he wintered
probably in the fame harbour or bay where Captain
Cook afterwards anchored. The other ship wintered
at Alalhka, which was supposed to be an island, though
it be in fadt a part of the American continent. Kre-
nitzin, accordingly, returned without knowing that
either of his flips had been on the coast of America;
and this is the more surprising, because Captain Cook
has informed us that Alafhlka is understood to be a great
continent, both by the Ruffians and the natives at
Oonollllika.

B B 2 (" ACCORD-

" ACCORDING to Krenitzin, the flhip which had

wintered at Alafika had hardly failed 32 to the east-
ward of the harbour of St. Peter and St. Paul in Kamt-
chatka but, according to the more accurate charts of
Captain Cook, it had failed nolefs than 37" 17' to the
ealsward of that harbour. There is nearly the fame
mistake of 5 in the longitude which Krenitzin afligns
to Oonolaflika. It is remarkable enough, that in the
chart of those seas, put into the hands of Captain
Cook by the Ruffians on that island, there was an
error of the fame kind, and very nearly of the fame
extent.

cc B3T what is of most confcquence to be remarked

on this subjed is, that the discoveries of Captain Cook
have fully verified Dr. Robertson's conjecture, " that
it is probable that future navigators in those seas, by
iteering farther to the north than Behring and Tfchi-
rikow or Krenitzin had done, may find that the conti-
nent of America approaches still nearer to that of Asia."
Vol. ii. p. 44. It has accordingly been found that
these two continents, which in the parallel of 55°, or
that of the southern extremity of Ala{hka, arc about
four hundred leagues asunder, approach continually to
one another as they lfretch together toward the north,
until, within less than a dtgree from the polar circle,
they are terminated by two capes, only thirteen leagues
distant. The call cape of Alia is in latitude 66" 6',
and in longitude 19o° 22' eaf; from Greenwich; the
weltern extremity of America, or Prince of Wales
Cape, is in latitude 65" 46', and in longitude 19I° 45'.
Nearly in the middle of the narrow strait (Behring's
Strait) which feplarates thee capes, are the two ifludls

of

of St. Diomede, from which both continents may be
seen. Captain Iing informs us, that as he was failing
through this {trait July 5, 779, the fog having cleared
away, he enjoyed the pleasure of feeing from the filip
the continents of Asia and America at the fame moment,
together with the islands of St. Diomede lying between
them. Cook's Voy. vol. iii. p. 244.

" BEYOND this point the strait opens towards the

ArEic Sea, and the coafl of Asia and America diverge
so fat from one another, that in the parallel of 69°
they are more than one hundred leagues aful,'lcr. Ib.
p. 277. To the south of the firait there are a number
of islands, Clerke's, King's, Anderson's, &e. which,
as well as those of St. Diolnede, may have facilitated
the migrations of the natives from the one continent to
the other. Captain Cook, however, on the authority
of the Ruffians at Oonolafhka, and for other good
reasons, has diminished the number of islands which
had been inserted in former charts of the northern
Archipelago. I-[e has also placed Alafhka, or the
promontory which firetchcs from the continent of
America S. W. towards Kam-itchatka, at the diflance
of five degrees of longitude farther from the coait
of Asia than it was reckoned by the Ruffian navi-
gators.

T( Tn. geogrphy of the Old and New World is

thercore eqin;ily indebted to the lifcovcrics nmade ilM
this ncmor:;llc voyage ; anil ;is Illmly errors have been
corrcl.c.l, and lany dtlfiicinci.s lfupplicld by nmcall of
thclc d(ifcovcrics, so the accuracy of fnme foinllr
ob)crv.tiubis li as been cit;iblililcd. The ba)fi, f the

u 1. 3 imi;p1

map of the Ruffian Empire, as far as regarded
Kamtchatka, and the country of the Tfchutzki, was
the position of four places, Yakutsh, Ochotz, Bolche-
refk, and Petropawlowfki, which had been determined
by the astronomer Kraffilnicow in the year 1744.
Nov. Comment. Petrop. vol. iii. p. 465, &c. But
the accuracy of his observations was contcfted by
M. Engcl, and M. Robert de Vaugondy; Coxe
Append. i. No. 2. p. 267, 272; and the former of
there geographers ventured to take away no less than
28 degrees from the'longitude, which, on the faith of
Kraffilnicow's observations, was affligned to the eastern
boundary of the Ruffian empire. With how little
reason this was done, will appear firom confidering
that our Britifl navigators, having determined the
position of Petropawlowiki by a great number of
very accurate observations, found the longitude of that
port 158° 43' E. from Greenwich, and its latitude
53" i'; agreeing, the firfl to less than seven minutes,
and the second to less than half a minute, with the
calculations of the Ruffian astronomer: a coincidence
which, in the situation of so remote a place, does not
leave an uncertainty of more than four Englifli miles,
and which, for the credit of science, defcrves to be
particularly remarked. The chief error in the Ruffian
maps has been in not extending the boundaries of
that clmpire fufficicntly towards the call. For as
there was nothing to connedt the land of the
'lfchutzki and the north-caft point of Asia with those
p'accs whereof the position had been carefully afccr-
tailed, except the impcrfct accounts of Bcllring's
and Synd's voyages, conlilerable errors could not fail
to be in;troduccd, and that point was laid down :as

not

not more than 23° 2' east of the meridian of Petro-
pawlowfki. Coxe App. i. No. 2. By the obfervatiols
of Captain King, the difference of longitude between
Petropawlowfki and the East Cape is 31° 9' that is
80 7' greater than it was supposed to be by the
Ruffian geographers."-It appears from Cook's and
King's Voy. iii. p. 272. that the continents of Asia and
America are usually joined together by ice during
winter. Mr. Samwell confirms this account of his
superior officer. " At this place, viz. near tlh latitude
of 66° N. the two coalss are only thirteen leagues
asunder, and about midway between them lie two
islands, the distance from which to either lhore, is
flort of twenty miles. At this place, the natives of
Asia could find no difficulty in palling over to the
opposite coast, which is in fight of their own. That
in a course of years such an event would hap-
pen, either through design or accident, cannot admit
of a doubt. The canoes which we law among the
Tfchutzfki were capable of performing a nluch longer
voyage; and, however rude they may have been at
some difantt period, we can fcarccly suppose thein
unequal to a paflage of fix or seven leagues. People
might have been carried over by accident on floating
pieces of ice. They might aifo have travelled across
on fledges or on foot; for we have reason to believe
that the {trait is cntirely frozen over in the winter;
so that (during that fcafuon, the contiil(nlts, with rcfped
to the colimunicatioln betweent them, may be confidered
ns one land." Letter froln Mr. Saniwell, Scots I\;lga-
zinc for 1780, p. 6c4. It is probab;le that thii
iiterciftting portion ul' g;cgrl:pliicl1 l nowledge .'ill, in
tlhe course of a few yr.;Tr;, rlccivct tatll(r iniliovrt'nt.

1 11 ii '"-. 14

Soon after the publication of Captain Cook's last
voyage, the great and enlightened Sovereign of Russia,
attentive to every thing that may contribute to extend
the bounds of science, or to render it more accurate,
formed the plan of a new voyage of difcovcry, in
order to explore those parts of the ocean lying between
Asia and America, which Captain Cook did not visit,
to examine more accurately the islands which stretch
from one continent almost to the other, to survey
the north-east coast of the Ruffian empire, frorp the
mouth of the Kovyma, or Kolyma, to the North
Cape, and to fettle, by astronomical observations, the
position of each place worth notice. The conduc of
this important enterprize is committed to Captain
Billings, an English officer in the Ruffian service, of
whose abilities for that station it will be deemed the
best evidence, that he accompanied Captain Cook in
his last voyage. To render the expedition more ex-
tenfively useful, an eminent naturalilt is appointed to
attend Captain Billings. Six years will be requisite
for accomplishing the purposes of the voyage. Coxe
Supplement to Ruffian Discoveries, p. 27, &c."

NOTE XVII. p. 62.

FEW travellers have had such opportunity of ob-

serving the natives of America, in its various dillritcs,
as Don Antonio Ulloa. In a work lately publifled
by him, he thus describes the chairaCicriflical features
of the race: " a very fiall forelcad, covered with
hair towards its extremities, as far as the middle of
the eye-brows; little eyes; a thin nose, small and

bendingi

bending towards the upper lip; the countenance
broad; the ears large; the hair very black, lank, and
coarse; the limbs well turned, the feet finall, the body
of jult proportion; and altogether smooth and free
from hair, until old age, when they acquire some beard,
but never on the cheeks." Noticias Americanas, &c.
p. 307. M. le Chevalier de Pinto, who resided several
years in a part of America which Ulloa never visited,
gives a fkctch of the general afpe& of the Indians
there. " They are all of copper colour with some
diversity of fhiade, not in proportion to their diltance
from the equator, but according to the degree of
elevation of the territory which they inhabit. Those
who live in a high country are fairer than those in
the marfhv low lands on the coast. Their face is
round, farther removed, perhaps, than that of any
people from an oval shape. Their forehead is finall,
the extremity of their ears far from the face, their lips
thick, their nose flat, their eyes black, or of a chefnut
colour, frnall, but capable of discerning objeis at a
great diftInce. Their hair is always thick and fleck,
and without any tendency to curl. They have no
hair on any part of their body but the head. At
the first afpcc a southern American appears to be
mild and innocent, but on a more attentive view, one
discovers in his countenance fomcthing wild, distrust-
ful, and fullen." MS. pe'nrs me. The two portraits
drawn by hands very ditffrent from those of common
travellers, have a near relcnlblancc.

NOTE XVIII. p. 62.

AMAZING accounts are given of the persevering fpced

of the Americans. Adair relates the adventures of a
Chikkafah warrior, who run through woods and over
mountains, three hundred computed miles, in a day
and a half and two nights. Hist. of Amer. Ind. 396.

NOTE XIX. p. 68.

M. GODIN LE JEUNE, who resided fifteen years

among the Indians of Peru and Qtito, and twenty
years in the French colony of Cayenne, in which
there is a constant intercourse with the Galibis and
other tribes on the Orinoco, observes, that the vigour
of conflitution among the Americans is exactly in pro-
portion to their habits of labour. The Indians, in
warm climates such as those on the coasts of the South
Sea, on the river of Amazons, and the river Orinoco,
are not to be compared for strength with those in
cold countries; and yet, fays he, boats daily set out
from Para, a Portuguese fettlcment on the river of
Amazons, to ascend that river against the rapidity of
the ftrean, and with the fame crew they proceed to
San Pablo, which is cight hundred leagues diflant.
No crew of white people, or even of negroes, would
)he found cqual to a tllli of such persevering fatigue,
as tile Porltugucl IhIItvc xpurilnccd, ani yet tihe
Indians, bcing accul!cnlmc to this labour froi their
ilfillcy, preltiorl it. IMS. pcniir mie.

NOTE XX. p. 76.

DON ANTONIO ULLOA, who visited a great part of

Peru and Chili, the kingdom of New Granada, and
several of the provinces bordering on the Mexican
gulf, while employed in the fame service with the
French mathematicians during the space of ten years,
and who afterwards had an opportuuity of viewing the
North-Americans, aflerts, " that if we have fcen one
American, we may be said to have fcen them all, their
colour and make are so nearly the fame." Notic.
Americanas, p. 308. A more early obhfirerr, Pedro
de Cieca de Leon, one of the conquerors of Peru,
who had likewise traversed many provinces of America,
alfirms, that the people, men and women, although
there is such a multitude of tribes or nations as to be
allnoft innumerable, and such divcrfity of climates,
appear nevertheless like the children of one father and
mother. Chronica dcl' Peru, partc i. c. 19. There is,
no doubt, a certain combination of features, and
peculiarity of aspec, which forms what may be called
a European or Asiatic countenance. There must
likewise be one that may be denominated American,
common to the whole race. This may be supposed to
strike the traveller at firif fight, while not only the
various lhadcs, which liftinguifhl people of (liiffrent
regions, but the peculiar featurets whichi dilicriminate
individuals, efc;lpe the notice of a triafient observer.
But when persons who had rclidcd so long among the
Amcrican, concur in bearing teflimony to the firnilarity
of their appearance in cvery climate, we may conclude
that it is more reialrk;ible tlihan tlhat of anly oher race.
See likewise (;arc1i.a Origc'll dic ls nlldic, p. 51. 2.12.
T'orqtucmild.i Monarch. llti,ndin, ii. 571.

NOTE XXI. p. 80.,

MI. LE CHEVALIER DE PINTO observes, that in the

interior parts of Brasil, he had been informed that
some persons resembling the white people of Darien
have been found; but that the breed did not continue,
and their children became like other Americans.
This race, however, is very imperfeCtly known.
RIS. penes me.

NOTE XXII. p. 83.

THE teffimonies of different travellers, concerning

the Patagonians, have been colleted and itated with
a considerable degree of accuracy by the author of
Recherches Philofophiques, &c. tom. i. 281, &c. iii.
1 81, &c. Since the publication of his work, several na-
vigators have visited the Magellanic regions, and, like
their predecessors, differ very widely in their accounts of
its inhabitants. By Commodore Byron and his crew,
who failed through the Straits in i764, the common
size of the Patagonians was estimated to be eight feet,
;md many of them much taller. Phil, Tranfa&. vol.
Ivii. p. 78. By Captains Wallis and Carteret, who
actually mcafured them in 1766, they were found to
bc from fix feet to fix feet five and fevcn inches in
height. Phil. Tranf. vol. Ix. p. 22. T'lcfe, however,
eecm to have been the very people whose size hIad
been rated so high ill the year 1764; for fevcral of
them had beads and red baize of the lame kind with
what had been put on board Captain \rallis's fiip,
and lie nturally concluded that they had got thelti

fr nill

from Mr. Byron. Hawkefw. i. In I767 they were
again measured by M. Bougainville, whose account
differs little from that of Captain Wallis. Voy. i29.
To these I ilhall add a testimony of great weight. In
the year I762, Don Bernardo Ibagnez de Echavarri
accompanied the Marquis de Valdelirios to Buenos
Ayrcs, and resided there several years. He is a very
intelligent author, and his reputation for veracity un-
impeached among his countrymen. In speaking of
the country towaids the southern extremity of America,
" By what Indians," fays he, " is it pofll'cfd? Not
certainly by the fabulous Patagonians, who are sup-
posed to occupy this diftrid. I have from many eyc-
witneffis, who have lived among those Indians, and
traded much with them, a true and accurate description
of their persons. They are of the fame stature with
Spaniards. I never saw one who rose in height two
vairas and two or three inches," i. e. about 80 or 81.332
inches English, if Echavarri makes his computation
according to the vara of Madrid. This agrees nearly
with the measurement of Captain Wallis. Rcyno
Jcfuitico, 238. Mr. Falkner, who resided as a mi-
fionary forty years in the southern parts of America,
fays, that " the Patagonians, or Puelchcs, are a large-
bodied people; but I never heard of that gigantic
race which others have mentioned, though I have
seen persons of all the different tribes of southern
Indians." Introd. p. 26. M. Dobrizhoffcr, a Jesuit,
who resided eighteen years in Paraguay, and who had
fecn great numbers of the various tribes which inhalbit
the countries situated upon the Straits of Magellan,
confirms, in every point, the testimony of his brother
niiflionary Falkner. Dobrizhoffcr enters into some

detail

detail with refpeEt to the opinions of several authors
concerning the stature of the Patagonians. Having
mentioned the reports of some early travellers with
regard to the extraordinary size of some bones found
on that coast, which were supposed to be human; and
having endeavoured to flew that these bones belonged
to some large marine or land animal, he concludes,
' de hifce oflibus crete quicquid libuerit, dummodo.
me fuafore, Patagones pro gigantibus definas haberc."
Hiftoria de Abiflbnibus, vol. ii. p. 19, &c.

NOTE XXi1!. p. S.

ANTONIO SANCUIF.Z RIP IPO, a learned .1CIl ingeni

ous physician, publillled a dilcrtation in the year
1765, in which he endeavours to prove, that this
difcafe was not introduced from America, but took it..
rife in Europe, and was brought on by an cpidemical
and malignant disorder. Did I chufe to enter into a
disquisition on this subject, which I fiould not have
mentioned, if it had not been intimately connected with
this part of my inquiries, it would not be difficult to
point out some miftlkes with rcfpect to the facts upon
which he founds, as well as some errors in the con-
sequences which he draws from them. T'he rapid
communication of this difeafc from Spain over Europe,
fccms however to refmble the progrclf of an epidemic,
rather than tlhat of a disease tranfimitted by infcftion.
The first mention of it is in the year 1493, and before
the year 1497 it hal made its appearance in mnof
countries of Europe, with such alarming symptoms as
rcndered it neccfilry for the civil magiflrate to interpofc,
in order to check its carer.-Since the publication of

this

this work a second edition of Dr. Sanchez's Dissertation
has been communicated to me. It contains several
additional faEts in confirmation of his opinion, which
is supported with such plausible arguments, as render it
a fubje' of inquiry well defcrving the attention of
learned physicians.

NOTE XXIV. p. 93.

TrE people of Otaheite have no denomination for

any number above two hundred, which is fuflicient
for their transactions. Voyages, by HIawkefworth1
ii. 228.

NOTE XXV. p. Ioo.

As the view which 1 hav.e given of rude nations is

extremely different from that exhibited by very re-
fpeLtablc authors, it may be proper to produce fonle
of the many authorities on which I found my defcrip-
tion. The manners of the savage tribes in America
have never been viewcd by persons more capable of
observing them with difcernmcnt, than the philosophers
employed by France and Spain, in the year 1735, to
determine the figure of the earth. M. Bougucr,
1). Antonio d'[Tlloa, and I). Jorge Juan, resided long
amolng the natives of the least civilized provinces in
Peru. M. de la Condamilne had not only the fame
advantages with them for obfcrvation, but, in his
voyage down the Maragnon, lie had al opportunity of
intfpei'iiilg the state of the various nations flated on its
banks, in its vast course across the continent of South

America.

America. There is a wonderful resemblance in their
representation of the character of the Americans,
"They are all extremely indolent,; fays M. Bouguer,
"they are stupid, they pass whole days fitting in the
fame place, without moving, or speaking a single word.
It is not easy to describe the degree of their indifference
for wealth, and all its advantages. One does not well
know what motive to propose to them, when one
would pcrfuade them to perform any service. It is
vain to offer them money; they answer, that they are
not hungry." Voyage au Perou, p. 102. If one
confiders them as men, the narrowneis of their under-
standing seems to be incompatible with the excellence
of the foul. Their imbecility is so visible, that one
can hardly form an idea of them different from what
one has of the brutes. Nothing disturbs the tran-
quillity of their fouls, equally infcnfible to difaltcrs
and to prosperity. Though half-naked, they are as
contented as a monarch in his most splendid array.
Riches do not attrac them in the finalleft degree,
and the authority or dignities to which they may aspire
are so little the objects of their ambition, that an
Indian will receive with the fame indifference the office
of a judge (Alcade) or that of a hangman, if deprived of
the former a:nd appointed to the latter. Nothing can
move or cilange them. Interest has no power over
them, 'and they often refuse to perform a fmnall service,
though certain of a great recompcnce. Fear makes no
hnprellion upon them, and rcfpc;l as little. Their dif
position is so fingul:-a that there is no method of in-
fluencing them, no means of routing them from tlhit
indiffercnce, which is proof ag:infl all the ecdeavours
of the wil:fI pcrlbons no expedicnt vhich can illllli,:

tli et

them to abandon that gross ignorance, or lay aside
that careless negligence, which disconcert the prudence
and disappoint the care of such as are attentive to
their welfare." Voyage d'Ulloa, tom. i. 335. 356.
Of those singular qualities he produces many extraordi-
nary instances, p. 336-347. " Infelfibility," fays
M. de la Condamine, " is the basis of the American
chara&er. I leave others to determine, whether this
flould be dignified with the name of apathy, or dif-
graced with that of tfupidity. It arises, without
doubt, from the small number of their ideas, which
do not extend beyond their wants. Gluttons even to
voracity, when they have wherewithal to satisfy their
appetite. Temperate, when neccfity obliges them to
such a degree, that they can endure want without
tfeming to desire ally thing. Pusillanimous and cow-
ardly to excess, unless when they are rendered desperate
by drunkenness. Averse to labour, indifferent to every
mnotive of glory, honour or gratitude ; occupied entirely
by the object that is present, and always determined
by it alone, without any solicitude about futurity; in-
capable of foresight or of reflection ; abandoning them-
selves, when under no restraint, to a puerile joy, which
they cxprefs by frilking about, and immoderate fits of
laughter; without objct or design, they pass their
life without thinking, and grow old without advancing
beyond childhood, of which they retain all the dcfects.
If this description were applicable only to the Indians
in some provinces of Peru, wlo are slaves in every
refpedt but the name, one might believe, that thlis
dlegree of degeneracy was occasioncd by the servile
dependence to which they arc red(uced(; the exanplel
of the modern Greeks being proof how far fcrvitude

VOL. II. C C 1111

may degrade the human species. But the Indians in
the missions of the Jcfuits, and the savages who still
enjoy unimpaired liberty, being as limited in their
faculties, not to fay as stupid as the other, one cannot
observe, without humiliation, that man, when aban-
doned to simple nature, and deprived of the advantages
resulting from education and society, differs but little
from the brute creation." Voyage de la Riv. de
Amaz. 52, 53 M. de Chanvalon, an intelligent and
philosophical obfervcr, who visited Martinico in 175 1,
and rcfided there fix years, gives the following de-
Icription of the Caraibs: " It is not the red colour of
their complexion, it is not the singularity of their
features, which confittutcs the chief difference between
them and us. It is their exceflive simplicity; it is the
limited degree of their faculties- Their reason is not
more enlightened or more provident than the instinct
of brutes. The reason of the molt gross peasants,
that of the negroes brought up in the parts of Africa
luoit remote from intercourse with Europeans, is such,
that we discover appearances of intelligence, which,
though impcrfect, is capable of increase. But of this
the unidcrflanding of Caraibs seems to be hardly fur-
ccptible. If found philosophy and religion did not
afiord us their light, if we were to decide according
to the firfL impreflion which the view of that people
makes upon the mind, we fmould be lifpolfdl to believe
that thiiev o not leclong to the fame fpccics witl us.
'lheir liulpid eyes are the true mirror of their fouls
it appe;rs to be without fum11iions. Their indolence
is extreme ; they have nevr the lealt: solicitude about
tile mloiiIlint which is to uicceel tIhat whichl is prcfent."
Voy;lage 't ia Mtrtiniqut, p. 44, 45. 5 I. M. de la Borde,

Tcrtre,

Tertre, and Rochefort, confirm this description. c" The
charaaeriftics of the Californians," fays P. Venegas,
"( as well as of all other Indians, are stupidity and in-
sensibility; want of knowledge and reflection; incon-
ftancy, impetuosity, and blindness of appetite; an
exceflive sloth, and abhorrence of all labour and
fatigue; an excessive love of pleasure and amusement
of every kind, however trifling or brutal; pusillanimity;
and, in fine, a most wretched want of every thing
which constitutes the real man, and renders him
rational, inventive, tratable, and useful to hilm-
self and society. It is not easy for Europeans, who
never were out of their own country, to conceive an
adequate idea of those people: for, even in the least
frequented corners of the globe, there is not a nation
so stupid, of such contracted ideas, and so weak both
in body and mind, as the unhappy Californians.
Their understanding comprehends little Inore than
what they fee; abitrad- ideas, and much less a chain
ps reasoning, being far beyond their power; so that
they scarce ever improve their first ideas, and these arc
in general falfc, or at least inadequate. It is in vaill
to reprefcnt to them any future advantages which will
result to them from doing or albltining from this or
that particular inmmcdiatciy present; the relation of
means and ends being beyond the firctch of their
faculties. Nor have they the least notion of purluing
such intentions as will procure thcmfelves fomne future
gookl, or guard them again ft future evils. '.heir will
is proportional to tliir ficullics, and all their panions
move in a very narrow fplllrc. Ambition they have
nonel, and arc more d(lfirous ot b,.ing :accounted flrong
than vali:unt. Thec objces of ambition with us,

c c 2 honour.

honour, fame, reputation, titles, pofis, and difliiiCtions
of superiority, are unknown among them; so that this
powerful spring of acion, the caule of so much seem-
ing good and real evil in the world, has no power here.
This disposition of mind, as it gives them up to an
amazing languor and lafitude, their lives fleeting away
in a perpetual inadtivity and deteflation of labour, so it
likewise induces them to be attraccdl by the first objec
which their own fancy, or the perfualion of another,
places before themn; and at the fame time renders
them as prone to alter their resolutions with the fame
facility. They look with indifference upon any kindness
done them; nor is even the bare remembrance of it
to be expe&ed from them. In a word, the unhappy
mortals may be compared to children, in whom the
developemcit of reason is not completed. They may
indeed be called a 'nation who never arrive at man-
hood." Hist. of Californ. Engl. Tranfl. i. 64. 67.
Mr. Ellis gives a similar account of the want of fore-
fight and inconsiderate disposition of the people adjacent
to Hudson's Bay. Voyage, p. 194, T95.

Ti.: incapacity of the Americans is so remarkable,

that negroes from all the different provinces of Africa
are obfcrved to be more capable of improving by in-
fIruCtion. They acquire the knowledge of several
particulars which the Americans cannot comprehend.
Hence the negroes, though slaves, value themselves as
a superior order of beings, and look down upon the
Americans with contempt, as void of capacity and of
rational difccrnment. Ulloa Notic. Americ. 322, 323.

NOTE XXVI. p. Io8.

DoBRIZHOFFER, the last traveller, I know, who has

resided among any tribe of the ruder Americans, has
explained so fully the various reasons which have in-
duced their women to suckle their children long, and
never to undertake rearing such as were feeble or dif-
torted, and even to destroy a considerable number of
their offspring, as to throw great light on tle obferva-
tions I have made, p. 72, 73. Hist. (te Abifbnibus,
vol. ii. p. 107. 221. So deeply were thcfe ideas im-
printed in the minds of the Americans, that the
Peruvians, a civilized pcople, when compared with
the barbarous tribes, whose manners I am dfccribing,
retained them; and even their intercourse with the
Spaniards has not bcen able to root them out. When
twins are born in any family, it is still con!idcred as
an ominous event, and the parents have recourse to
rigorous atrs of mortification, in order to navcrt the
calamities witl which they are threatcncJ. \iWhen a
child is born with any deformity, tllcy ill not, if they
can possibly avoid it, bring it to be baptiz/cd, and it is
with difficulty they c.n be brolught to rclr it.
Arriaga Extirpac. de la Idolat. d(1! Peru, p. 32, 33.

NOTE XXVII. p. 113.

Tl-IE number of the lTfif in the rivers of Soulli

America is so cxtraordill:ry, as to merit particulI tr
notice. " Inl the Ma:ragnon (lys P. Acug!ia) (ilI .,.l(
so plentiful, that without any art, they n.iy ta;.:

c C 3 tlt'i

them with the hands." p. 138. " In the Orinoco
(fays P. Gumilla), besides an infinite viriety of other
fish, tortoise or turtle abound in such numbers, that I
cannot find words to express it. I doubt not but that
such as read my account will accuse me of exaggera-
tion: but I can affirm that it is as difficult to count
them, as to count the lands on the banks of that river.
One may judge of their number by the amazing con-
fumption of them; for all the nations contiguous to
the river, and even many who are at a distance, flock
thither at the fcafon of breeding, and not only find
sustenance during that time, but carry off great num-
bers both of the turtles and of their eggs, &c." Hist.
de l'Orenoque, ii. c. 22. p. 59. M. de la Condamine
confirms their accounts, p. !59.

NOTE XXVIII. p. 113.

Piso describes two of there plants, the Curruuape,

and the Guajana-Timbo. It is remarkable, that though
they have this fatal cffect upon fishes, they are so far
from being noxious to the human species, that they
are used in medicine with success. Pifo, lib. iv. c. 88.
Bancroft mentions another, the Hiarree, a small quantity
of which is sufficient to inebriate all the fifli to a con-
fiderable distance, so that in a few minutes they float
motionless on the surface of the water, and are taken
with eafc. Nat. Hilt. of Guiana, p. o16.

NOTE XXIX. p. 117.

REMARKABLE instances occur of the calamities

which rude nations susser by famine. Alvar Nugnez
Cabeca de Vaca, one of the most gallant and virtuous
of the Spaniih adventurers, resided almost nine years
among the savages of Florida. They were unacquainted
with every species of agriculture. Their fubfiftencc
was poor and precarious. " They live chiefly (fays
he) upon roots of different plants, which they procure
with great difficulty, wandering from place to place in
search of them. Sometimes they kill game, sometimes
they catch fish, but in fucl finall quantities, that their
hunger is so extreme as compels them to eat filders,
the eggs of ants, worms, lizards, serpents, a kind of
untuous earth, and I am persuaded, that if in this
country there were any stoncs, they would swallow
these. They prefcrve the bones of fiflies and fcrpents,
which they grind into powder, and cat. 'he only
season when they do not susSer much from famile, is
when a certain fruit, which he calls 7ilti.rn, is ripe.
Tlhis is the fame with the Opuillia, or prickly pear, oF
a reddiih and yellow colour, with a fv,.cct in!lipid taflc.
They are follctimcs obliged to travel flir from tle ir
usual place of refidencc, in order to lind them."
Naufragias, c. xviii. p. 20, 21, 22. In another place,
1c ohfcrves that they are frequently reduced to pa';;
two or three days without food, c. xxiv. p. 27.

cc 4

NOTE XXX. p. 119.

M. FERMIN has given an accurate description of the

two fpccies of manioc, with an account of its culture,
to which he has added some experiments, in order
to ascertain the poisonous qualities of the juice ex-
traded from that species which he calls the bitter
cassava. Among the Spaniards, it is known by the
name of Yuca brava. Defer. de Surin. tom. i. p. 66.

NOTE XXXI. p. 119.

THE plantain is found in Asia and Africa, as well

as in America. Oviedo contends, that it is not an
indigenous plant of the New World, but was intro-
duced into the island of Hispaniola, in the year i516,
by father Thomas dc Berlanga, and that he transplanted
it from the Canary Islands, whither the original flips
had been brought from the East Indies. Oviedo,
lib. viii. c. I. But the opinion of Acofta and other
naturalists, who reckon it an American plant, seems to
be better founded. Acofia Hilt. Nat. lib. iv. 2I. It
was cultivated by rude tribes in America, who had
little intercourse with the Spaniards, and who were
destitute of that ingenuity, which disposes men to
borrow what is useful from foreign nations. Gumil. iii.
x86. Wafer's Voyage, p. 87.

NOTE XXXII. p. 121.

IT is remarkable, that Acofta, one of the mofl accu.

rate and beft-informed writers concerning the Wetl
Indies, affirms, that maize, though cultivated in the
continent, was not known in the islands, the inhabitants
of which had none but cafladai bread. Hist. Nat.
lib. iv. c. I6. But P. Martyr, in the first book of
his first Decad, which was written in the year I493,
upon the return of Columbus from his first voyage,
expressly mentidns maize as a plant which the islanders
cultivated, and of which they made bread, p. 7. Gomara
likewise asserts, that they were acquainted with the
culture of maize. I-iflor. Gener. cap. 28. Oviedo
describes maize without any intimation of its being a
plant that was not natural to Hispaniola. Lib. vii. c. I.

NOTE XXXIII. p. 130.

NEW HOLLAND, a country which formerly was only

known, has lately been visited by intelligent observers.
It lies in a region of the globe where it must enjoy a
very favourable climate, as it stretches from the ioth
to the 38th degree of northern latitude. It is of great
extent, and from its square form must be much
more than equal to all Europe. The people who
inhabit the various parts of it appear to be of one
race. They are evidently ruder than molt of the
Americans, and have made still less progrcfs in im-,
provcment and the arts of life. There is not the
leall appearance of cultivation in any part of this valt

region.

region. The inhabitants are extremely few, so that
the country appears almost desolate. Their tribes are
still more inconsiderable than those of America. They
depend for subsistence, almost entirely, on fishing.
They do not fettle in one place, but roam about in
quell of food. Both sexes go ftark-naked. Their
habitations, utensils, &c. are more simple and rude
than those of the Americans. Voyages, by Hawkef-
worth, iii. 622, &c. This, perhaps, is the country
where man has been difcovcred in the earliest itage of
his progress, and it exhibits a miserable fpecirnen of
his condition and powers in that uncultivated state.
If this country shall be more fully explored by future
navigators, the comparison of the manners of its in-
habitants with those of the Americans will prove an
instructive article in the history of the human species.

NOTE XXXIV. p. 130.

P. GABRnIr. I MAREST, who travelled from his station

among the Illinois to Machillimakinac, thus describes
the face of the country. " We have marched twelve
days without meeting a tingle human creature. Some-
times we found ourfclvcs in vast meadows, of which
we could not fee the boundaries, through which there
flowed many brooks and rivers, but without any path
to condut us. Sometimes we were obliged to open a
pafflge across thick forests, through bushes, and
underwoo(l filled witl briars and thorns. Somctimes
we hlad to p;iss through deep marfnles, in which we
funk up to the middle. After being fatiglcd through
the l;ay, u hulad the e:th for our bed, or a few leavqs,
cxpofed to the wind, tllh r.;il, and ill1 the injuries of

t!h.

the air." Lettr. Edifiantes, ii. 360. Dr. Brickell, in
an excursion from North Carolina towards the moun-
tains, A. D. I730, travelled fifteen days without meet-
ing with a human creature. Nat. Hist. of North
Carolina 389. Diego de Ordas, in attempting to make
a settlement in South America, A. D. 1532, marched
fifty days through a country without one inhabitant.
Herrera, dec. 5. lib. i. c. I.

NOTE XXXV. p. 131.

I STRONGLY fufpe&t that a community of goods, and

an undivided store, are known only among the rudest
tribes of hunters; and that as soon as any species of
agriculture or regular industry is known, the idea of
an exclusive right of property to the fruits of them is
introduced. I am confirmed in this opinion by
accounts which I have received concerning the fate of
property among the Indians in very different regions of
America. " The idea of the natives of Brasil con-
cerning property is, that if any person cultivate a field,
he alone ought to enjoy the produce of it, and no
other has a title to pretend to it. If an individual or
family go a-hunting or fifling, what is caught bclong,;
to the individual or to the family, and they communi-
cate no part of it to any but to their ca;iquc, or to
such of their kindred as lhappen to be inlifpofed. If
any pcrfon in the village come to their hut, he may
fit down freely, and cat without alking liberty. But
this is the confcqucnce of their general principle of
hospitality; for I never ob,)crvcd any partition of the
incrcafe of their fields, or the produce of the cliace,
which I could confider as the rcfult of any idea con-

(c.·'*ning

cerning a community of goods. On the contrary, they
are so much attached to what they deem to be their
property, that it would be extremely dangerous to en-
croach upon it. As far as I have seen, or can learn,
there is not one tribe of Indians in South America,
among whom that community of goods which has
been so highly extolled is known. The circumstance
in the government of the Jesuits, most irksome to the
Indians of Paraguay, was the community of goods
which those fathers introduced. This was repugnant
to the original ideas of the Indians. They were ac-
quainted with the rights of private exclusive property,
and they submitted with impatience to regulations
which destroyed them." M. le Cheval. de Pinto, MS.
penes me. " A&tual possession (fays a miiffonary who
resided several years among the Indians of the Five
Nations) gives a right to the foil, but whenever a pof-
feffor fees fit to quit it, another has as good right to
take it as he who left it. This law, or custom, refpeóls
not only the particular spot on which he ereds his
house, but also his planting-ground. If a man has
prepared a particular spot of ground, on which he dc-
signs in future to build or plant, no man has a right
to incommode him, much less to the fruit of his
labours, until it appears that he voluntarily gives up
his views. But I never heard of any formal convey-
ance from one Indian to another in their natural state.
The limits of every canton is circumscribed ; that is,
they are allowed to hunt as far as such a river on
this hand, and such a mountain on the other. This
area is occupied and improved by individuals and their
families. Individuals, not the community, have the
use and profit of their own labours, or success in hunt-
ing." MS. of Mr. Gideoln awley, pem's 1'.

NOTE XXXVI. p. 133.

THIS difference of temper between the Americans

and negroes is so remarkable, that it is a proverbial
faying in the French islands, " Regarder un fauvage
de travers, c'eft le battre ; le battre, c'eft le tuer;
battre un negre, c'eft le nourrir." Tertre, ii. 490.

NOTE XXXVII. p. I34.

THE description of the political slate of the people

of Cinaloa perfetly resembles that of the inhabitants
of North America. " They have neither laws nor
kings (fays a missionary who resided long among them)
to punish any crime. Nor is there among them any
fpccies of authority, or political government, to restrain
them in any part of their condut. It is true, that
they acknowledge certain Caziqucs, who are heads of
their families or villages, but their authority appears
chiefly in war, and the expeditions against their ene-
mies. This authority the Caziques obtain not by
hereditary right, but by their valour in war, or by the
power and number of their families and relations.
Sometimes they owe their pre-eminence to their
eloquence in difplaiying their own exploits." Ribas
Hiftor. de las Triumph. &c. p. I i. The state of the
Chiquitos in South America is nearly the fame.
c"They have no regular form of government, or civil
life, but in matters of public concern they lifien to
the advice of their old men, and usually follow it.
The dignity of Cazique is not hereditary, but conferred
according to merit, as the reward of valour in war.

fTlh

The union among them is imperfet. Their society
refemblcs a republic without any head, in which every
man is master of himself, and upon the least disgust,
separates from those with whom he seemed to be
conneced." Relacion Historical de las Mifliones de
los Chiquitos, por P. Juan Patr. Fernandez, p. 32,
33. Thus, under very different climates, when
nations are in a similar Itate of society, their
inifitutions and civil government assume the fame
form.

NOTE XXXVIII. p. 152.

" I lAAVE known the Indians (fays a person wefl

acquainted with their mode of life) to go a thousand
milcs for the purpose of revenge, in pathless woods,
over hills and mountains, through huge cane-fwamnps,
cxpofcd to the extremities of heat and cold, the vicif-
fitude of seasons, to hunger and thirst. Such is their
over-boiling revengeful temper, that they utterly
contemn 'all those things as imaginary trifles, if they
are so happy as to get the scalp of the murderer, or
enemy, to satisfy the craving ghofls of their deceased
relations." Adair's Hill. of Amer. Indians, p. rSo.

NOTE 'XXIX. p. I52.

IN the acctu.nt of the grie.il war belween the Algon-

quills and( Iroquois, the atelicvements of Pilkarct, a
famous chief of the Algonquins, performed mostly by
liimllf alonl, or witl one or two companions, make a
capital fi.urc. D)c la IPot1iric, i. 297, &c. Coldeii's
-Hill., of ]ive NIations, 125, &C.

NOTE XL. p. I55.

Ti-E life of an unfortunate leader is often in danger,

and he is always degraded from the rank which he
had acquired by his former exploits. Adair, p. 388..

NOTE XLLI. p. i55.

As the ideas of the North Americans, with respect

to the mode of carrying on war, are gencrally known ;
I have founded my obfcrvations chiefly upon tile tcli-
mony of the authors who dcfcribe them. But the
-fame maxims took place amiong other nations in tle
New World. A judicious In iflionary has given a view
of the military operations of the people in Gran Chaco,
in South America, pcrfeatly similar to those of the
Iroquois. "( They are much addi&ed to war (fays he),
which they carry on frequently amon, themselves,
but perpetually against the Spaniards. But they may
rather be called thieves than soldiers, for they never
make head against tle Spaniards, unless when they
can aflault them by flenlth, or have guarded again ft
any mifcliance by flpics, who may be called inde-
fatigable; they will watch thle fcttlements of the
Spaniards for one, two, or three years, obl'rving by
night every thing thalt pafics with the utmost solicitude,
whether they may cxpcc% refifrance or not, and until
they are perfeclly secure of tlhe event, they will not
venture i.pon an attack ; so that when they do give the
;fi'lult, they arc certain of fucccfs, and free from all
daLnger. 'Thee spies, in order that they may not be
obl'rvcdt, will creep on all-four like cats in tle night;

6 bu:

but if they are discovered, make their escape with
much dexterity. But, although they never choose to
face the Spaniards, if they be surrounded in any place
whence they cannot escape, they will fight with def-
perate valour, and fell their lives very dear." Lozano
Defcrip. del Gran Chaco, p. 78.

NOTE XLII. p. 157.

LERY, who was an eye-witness of the proceedings of

the Topinnambos, a Brafilian tribe, in a war against a
powerful nation of their enemies, dcfcribes their
courage and ferocity in very striking terms. Ego cum
Gallo altero, paulo curiofius, magno noltro periculo
(si enim ab holtibus capti aut lefi fuiffemus, devorationi
fuiffemus devoti), barbaros noflros in militiam euntes
comitari volui. Hli, numero 4000 capita, cum
hoftibus ad littus decertarunt, tanta ferocitate, ut vel
rabidos et furiosos quofque fuperarent. Cum primum
hostes confpexere, in magnos atque editos ululatus
perruperunt. Haec gens adeo sera eft & truculenta,
ut tantifper dum virium vel tantillum reftat, continuo
dimicent, fugamque nunquam capeffant. Quod a
natura illis inditum cfc reor. Teftor interea me, qui
non femel, turn pcditum turn equitum copias ingentcs,
in acicm inltruEtas hic confpexi, tanta nunquam vo-
luptate videndis peditum legionibus armis fulgentibus,
quanta turn pugnantibus iftis pcrcuflum fuiflie. Lery
Hist. Navigat. in Brasil. ap. de Bry, iii. 207, 208, 209.

NOTE XLIII. p. I58.

IT was originally the praftice of the Americans, as

well as of other savage nations, to cut off the heads of
the enemies whom they flew, and to carry them away
as trophies. But, as they found these cumbersome in
their retreat, which they always make very rapidly,
and often through a vast extent of country, they
became satisfied with tearing off their scalps. This
custom, though most prevalent in North America,
was not unknown among the Southern tribes.
Lozano, p. 79.

NOTE XLIV. p. 164.

THE terms of the war-fong seem to be diEtated

by the fame fierce spirit of revenge. " I go to war
to revenge the death of my brothers; I fihall kill; I
shall exterminate; I flall burn my enemies; I flhall
bring away slaves; I shall devour their heart, dry their
flesh, drink their blood; I shall tear off their scalps,
and make cups of their skulls." Boffu's Travels
through Louisiana, vol. i. p. 1o2. I am informed,
by persons on whose testimony I can rely, that as the
number of people in the Indian tribes has decreased
so much, almost none of their prisoners are now put
to death. It is confidered as better policy to spare and
to adopt them. Those dreadful scenes which I have
described occur now'fo rarely, that missionaries and
traders who have resided long among the Indians,
never were witncffes to them.

VOL. II. D D

NOTE XLV. p. x65.

ALL the travellers who have visited the most unci-

vilized of the American tribes, agree in this. It is
confirmed by two remarkable circumflanccs, which
occurred in the conquefl of different provinces. In
the expedition of Narvaez into Florida in the year
1528, the Spaniards were reduced to such extreme
distress by famine, that, in order to preserve their own
lives, they eat such of their companions as happened
to die. This appeared so (hocking to the natives, who
were accustomed to devour none but prisoners, that
it filled them with horror and indignation against the
Spaniards. Torquemada Monarch. Ind. ii. p. 584.
Naufragios de Alv. Nugnez Cabeca de Vaca, c. xiv.
p. 15. During the siege of Mexico, though the
Mexicans devoured with greediness the Spaniards and
Tlafcalans, whom them took prisoners, the utmost
rigour of the famine which they suffered could not
induce them to touch the dead bodies of their own
countrymen. Bern. Diaz. del Castillo Conquift. de la
N. El'agna, p. x56.

NOTE XVI. p. 166.

MANY ringular circumstances concerning the treat-

ment of prifoncrs among the people of 3rafil, are
contained in the narrative of Stadius, a German officer
in the service of the Portugucfl, publifled in the ye;lr
1556. I-1e was taken prifoncr by the Totpiiiamnbo.r,
and remained in captivity nine years. IHe was often
present at those horrid Icfliv:lls whicli he (lefcribcs,

andl

was destincd himself to the fame cruel fate with other
prisoners. But he saved his life by extraordinary
efforts of courage and address. De Bry, iii. p. 34, &c.
M. De Lery, who accompanied M. De Villagagnon in
his expedition to Brasil, in the year I556, and who
resided some time in that country, agrees with Stadius
in every circumitance of importance. He was fre-
quently an eye-witness of the manner in which the
Brafilians treated their prisoners. De Bry, iii. 2Io.
Several firiking particulars omitted by them, are
mentioned by a Portuguese author. Purch. Pilgr.
iv. 1294, &c.

NOTE XLVII. p. i70.

THOUGH I have followed that opinion concerning

the apathy of the Americans, which appeared to me
most rational, and supported by the authority of the
moist respectable authors, other theories have been
formed with regard to it, by writers of great eminence.
D. Ant. Ulloa, in a late work, contends, that the
texture of the flin and bodily habit of the Americans
is such, that they are less fcnfible of pain than the reft
of mankind. He produces fcvcral proofs of this, from
the manner in which they endure the most cruel
chirurgical operations, &c. Noticias Amcricanas,
p. 313, 314. The fame obfcrvation has been made
by surgeons in Brasil. An Indian, they fay, never
complains under pain, and will bear the amputation
of a leg or arm without uttering a single groan.
MS. peeV' ,Ie.

) PD 2

NOTE XLVIII. p. 173.

THIS is an idea natural to all rude nations. Among

the Romans, in the early periods of their common-
wealth, it was a maxim that a prisoner, " turn deceffiffe
videtur cum captus eft." Digefi. lib. xlix. tit. 15.
c. 18. And afterwards, when the progress of refine-
ment rendered them more indulgent with respeCt to
this article, they were obliged to employ twxo fiotions
of law to secure the property, and permit the return
of a captive, the one by the Lex Cornelia, and the
other by the Jus Poftliminii, Heinec. Elem. Jur. Civ.
fee. ord. Pand. ii. p. 294. Among the negroes the
fame ideas prevail. No ranfoi was ever accepted for
a prisoner. As soon as one is taken in war, he is
reputed to be dead; and he is so in effet to his
country and his family. Voy. du Cheval. des Marchais,
i. . 369.

NOTE XLIX. p. 174.

Tlri people of Chili, the molt gallant and high-

spirited of all the Americans, are the only exception
to this observation. They attack their enemies in the
open field; their troops are ranged in regular order;
their battalions advance to the charge not only with
courage, but with discipline. ''he Nortlh Americans,
though many of them have fitbfituted the European
tire-arms in place of their own bows and arrows,
(Fill adhere to their ancient nmxims of war, and
(-rry it on ;:cctrtinr to their own peculiar f)ilcnm.

But

But the Chilefe nearly resemble the warlike nations of
Europe and Asia in their military operations. Ovalle's
Relation of Chili. Church. Coll. iii. p. 71. Lozano's
Hist. Parag. i. I44, 145.

NOTE L. p. 178.

HERRERA gives a remarkable proof of this. In

Yucatan, the men are so solicitous about their dress,
that they carry about with them mirrors, probably
made of frone, like those of the Mexicans, Dec. iv.
lib. iii. c. 8. in which they delight to view themselves;
but the women never use them. Dec. iv. lib. x. c. 3.
He takes notice that among the fierce tribe of the
Panche.r, in the new kingdom of Granada, none but
dilinguiflhcd warriors were permitted either to
pierce their lips and to wear green stones in them,
or to adorn their heads with plumes of feathers.
Dec. vii. lib. ix. c. 4. In some provinces of Peru,
though that empire had made considerable progress
in civilization, the state of women was little improved.
All the toil of cultivation and dometic work was
devolved upon tlhem, and they were not permitted to
wear bracelets, or other ornaments, with which the
men were fond of decking thcmfelves. Zarate Hist
de Peru, i. p. 15, i6.

NOTE LI. p. 179.

I HAvn ventured to call this mode of anointing and

painting their bodies, the dr',f of the Americans.
This is agrc(lblle to their own idiom. As tlihy never
llir abroad if they are not completely anointted; they

LI i1t r':yclrifc

excuse themselves when in this situation, by faying,
that they cannot appear because they are naked.
Gumilla Hist. de l'Orenoque, i. x91.

NOTE LII. p. 180.

SOME tribes in the province of Cinaloa, on the gulf

of California, seem to be among the rudest people of
America united in the social state. They neither
cultivate nor sow; they have no houses in which
they reside. Those in the inland country subsist by
hunting; those on the sea-coast chiefly by fishing.
Both depend upon the spontaneous producions
of the earth, fruits, plants, and roots of various
kinds. In the rainy season, as they have no habitations
to afford them ihelter, they gather bundles of reeds,
or strong grass, and binding them together at one end,
they open them at the other, and fitting them to
their heads, they are covered as with a large cap,
which like a pent-house throws off the rain, and
will 'keep them dry for several hours. During the
warm season, they form a fled with the branches of
trees, which proteas them from the sultry rays of
the fun. When exposed to cold they make large
fires, round which they sleep in the open air. Hiftoria
de los Triumphos de Nueftra Santa Fe cntre Gentes
las mas barbaras, &c. por P. And. Perez de Ribas,
P. 7, &c.

NOTE LIII. p. 182.

THESE houses refemblebarns. "We have measured

some which were a hundred and fifty paces long, and
twenty paces broad. Above a hundred persons resided
in some of them." Wilson's account of Guiana.
Pilrch. Pilgr. vol. iv. p. 1263. Ibid. 1291. "1 The
Indian houses," fays Mr. Barrere, " have a rnoft
wretched appearance, and are a striking image of the
rudeness of early times. Their huts are commonly
built on some rising ground, or on the banks of a
river, huddled sometimes together, sometimes ftrag-
gling, and always without any order. Their aspet is
melancholy and disagreeable. One fees nothing but
what is hideous and savage. The uncultivated fields
have no gaiety. The silence which reigns there, unless
when interrupted by the disagreeable notes of birds, or
cries of wild beasts, is extremely dismal." Relat, dc
la France Equin. p. 146.

NOTE LIV. p. 184.

SOaME tribes in South America can fend their arrows

to a great distance, and with considerable force,
without the aid of the bow. They make use of a
hollow reed, about nine feet long, and an inch thick,
which is called a Sarbacane'. In it they lodge a small
arrow, with tome unfpun cotton wound about its great
end ; this confines the air, so that they cal blow it
with altonlifling rapidity, and a firc aim, to the
distance of above a hundred paces. These finall
arrows arc always poisoned. Fermin. Defcr. de

D D 4 Surin.

Surin. i. 55. Bancroft's Hist. of Guiana, p. 281, &c.
The Sarbacane is much used in some parts of the East
Indies.

NOTE LV. p. 185.

I MIGHT produce many instances of this, but shall

satisfy myself with one, taken from the Efkimaux.
"c Their greatest ingenuity (fays Mr. Ellis) is fllewn
in the ftruaure of their bows, made commonly of
three pieces of wood, each making part of the fame
arch, very nicely and exacly joined together. They
are commonly of fir or larch; and as this wants
itrength and elasticity, they supply both by bracing the
back of the bow, with a kind of thread, or line, made
of the sinews of their deer, and the bow-string of the
fame materials. To make them draw more stiffly,
they dip them into water, which causes both the
back of the bow and the string to contra&, and
consequently gives it the greater force; and as they
pra&ise from their youth, they shoot with very great
dexterity." Voyage to Hudson's Bay, p. 138.

NOTE LVI. p. I85.

NECESSITY is the great prompter and guide of man-

kind in their inventions. There is, however, such
inequality in some parts of their progress, and some
nations get so far the start of others in circumstances
nearly (linilar, that we mutf ascribe this to some
events in their story, or to fomc peculiarity in their
situation with which we are unacquainted. The people
in the island of Otaheite, lately discovered in the South

Sea,

Sea, far excel most of the Americans in the knowledge
and practice of the arts of ingenuity, and yet they had
not invented any method of boiling water; and having
no veflel that would bear the fire, they had no more
idea that water could be made hot, than that it could
be made solid. Voyages by H-awkefworth, i. 466. 484.

NOTE LVII. p. i86.

ONE of these boats, which could carry nine men,

weighed only sixty pounds. Gofiol. Relat. des Voy.
a la Virgin. Rec. de Voy. au Nord, torn. v. p. 403. ,

NOTE LVIII. p. iS8.

A REMARKABLE proof of this is produced by Ulloa.

In weaving hammocks, coverlets, and the other coarse
cloaths, which they are accustomed to manufacture,
their industry has discovered no more expeditious
method, than to take up thread after thread, and
after counting and forting them each time, to pass the
woof between them, so that in finilhing a finall piece
of those fluffs, they frequently fpcnd more than two
years. Voyage, i. 336. Bancroft gives the fame
description of the Indians of Guiana, p. 255. Accord-
ing to Adair, the ingenuity and dispatch of the North
American Indians are not greater, p. 422. From one
of the engravings of the Mexican paintings in Purchas,
vol. iii. p. 10o6. I think it probable that the people
of Mexico were unacquainted with any better or
more expeditious mode of weaving. A loom was an
invention beyond the ingenuity of the muof improved
Americans. In all their works they advance so

slowly,

slowly, that one of their artists is two months at a
tobacco-pipe with his knife before he finiihes it.
Adair, p. 423.

NOTE LIX. p. i91.

THE article of religion in P. Lafitau's Mcxurs des
Sauvages, extends to 347 tedious pages in quarto.

NOTE LX. p. 193.

I HAVE referred the reader to several of the authors

who describe the most uncivilized nations in America.
Their testimony is uniform. That of P. Ribas con-
cerning the people of Cinaloa, coincides with the reft.
" I was extremely attentive (fays he), during the years
I resided among them, to ascertain whether they were
to be confidered as idolaters; and it may be affirmed
with the most perfea exa&niefs, that though among
some of them there may be traces of idolatry, yet
others have not the least knowledge of God, or even
of any false deity, nor pay any formal adoration to
the Supreme Being, who excrcifes dominion over the
world; nor have they any conception of the providence
of a creator or governor, from whom they exped in
the next life the reward of their good, or the punili-
ment of their evil deeds. Neither do they publicly
join in any aCt of divine worfliip." Ribas'l'riunplio3,
&c. p. 16.

NOTE LX. p. 195.

THE people of Brasil were so much affrighted by

thunder, which is frequent and awful in their country,
as well as in other parts of the torrid zone, that it
was not only the objet of religious reverence; but
the inoft expressive name in their language for the
Deity, was Toupan, the fame by which they diftinguifled
thunder. Pifo de Medec. Brasil, p. 8. Nieuhoff
Church. Coll. ii. p. 132.

NOTE LXII. p. 204.

BY the account which M. Dumont, an eye-witness,

gives of the funeral of the great chief of the Natchez,
it appears, that the feelings of the persons who suffered
on that occasion were very different. Some solicited
the honour with eagerness; others laboured to avoid
their doom, and several saved their lives by flying to
the woods. As the Indian Bramins give an intoxicating
draught to the women, who are to be burnt together
with the bodies of their husbands, which renders them
insensible of their approaching fate, the Natchez
obliged their vidtims to swallow several large pills of
tobacco, which produce a similar effet. Meni. de
Louis. i. 227.

NOTE LXII. p. 213.

ON some occasions, particularly in dances initituted

for the recovery of persons who are indisposed, they
are extremely licentious and indecent.: De la Potherie
Hist. &c. ii. p. 42. Charlev. N. Fr. iii. p. 319. But
the nature of their dances is commonly such as I
have described.

NOTE LXIV. p. 2I5.

THE Othomacoas, a tribe feated on the banks of the

Orinoco, employ for the fame purpose a composition,
which they call rupa. It is formed of the feeds of
an unknown plant, reduced to powder, and certain
shells burnt and pulverized. The effects of this when
drawn up into the nostrils are so violent, that they
resemble madness rather than intoxication. Gumilla,
i. 286.

NOTE LXV. p. 219.

THOUci this observation holds true among the

greater part of the fouthcrn tribes, there arc some in
which the intemperance of the women is as excessive
as that of the men. Bancroft's Nat. Iilt. of Guiana,
P. 275.

NOTE LXVI. p. 224.

EVEN in the moRs intelligent writers concerning the

manners of the Americans, one meets with incon-
fiftent and inexplicable circumstances. The Jesuit
Chalevoix, who, in consequence of the controversy
between his order and that of the Franciscans, with
refped to the talents and abilities of the North
Americans, is disposed to represent their intellectual
as well as moral qualities in the most favourable light,
aflerts, that they are engaged in continual nego-
ciations with their neighbours, and conduc these
with the most refined address. At the fame time he
adds, c" that it behoves their envoys or plenipotentiaries
to exert their abilities and eloquence, for if the terms
which they offer are not accepted of, they had need
to {land on their guard. It frequently happens, that
a blow with a hatchet is the only return given to
their propositions. The envoy is not out of danger
even if he is so fortunate as to avoid the stroke, he
may expe& to be pursued, and if taken, to be burnt."
Hist. N. Fr. iii. 251. What occurs, vol. ii. p. 277.
concerning the manner in which the Tlafcalans treated
the ambassadors from Zcmpoalla, corresponds with the
fat related by Charlevoix. Men capable of such
a&s of violence, fem to be unacquainted with the
firfl principles upon which the intercourse between
nations is founded; and instead of the perpetual nego-
ciations which Charlcvoix mentions, it seems almost
impossible that there fliould be a;y correspondence
whatcver among them.

NOTE LXVII. p. 227.

IT is a remark of Tacitus concerning the Germans,

" Gaudent muneribus, fed nec data imputant, nec
acceptis obligantur." C. 21. An author who had a
good opportunity of observing the principle which
leads savages neither to express gratitude for favours
which they had received, nor to expe& any return
for such as they beflowed, thus explains their ideas:
" If, fay they, you give me this, it is because you
have no need of it yourself; and as for me, I never
part with that which I think necessary to me." Memoir
fur le Galibis; Hist. des Plantes'de la Guiane Francoise
par M. Aublet, tom. ii. p. I io.

NOTE LXVIII. p. 243.

AND. BERNALDLS, the contemporary and friend of

Columbus, has preserved fomc circumffances concerning
the bravery of the Caribbecs, which are not mentioned
by Don Ferdinand Columbus, or the other historians
of that period, whose works have been published. A
Caribbean canoe, with four men, two women, and a
boy, fell in unexpecedly with the fleet of Columbus
in his second voyage, as it was fleering through their
islands. At first they were struck almost stupid with
aftoniflment at such a strange fpecacle, and hardly
moved from the spot for above an hour. A Spanili
bark, with twenty-five men, advanced towards them,
and the fleet gradually surrounded them, so as to cut
off their communication with the fhorc. " When

they

they saw that it was impossible to escape (fays the
historian), they seized their arms with undaunted refo-
lution, and began the attack. I use the expreflion,
·oith undaunted refoltion, for they were few, and beheld
a vast number ready to assault them. They wounded
several of the Spaniards, although they had targets, as
well as other defensive armour; and even after their
canoe was overset, it was with no little difficulty and
danger that part of them were taken, as they continued
to defend themselves, and to use their bows with great
dexterity while swimming in the Tea." Hilt. de D.
Fern. y Yfab. MSS. c. x9.

NOTE LXIX. p. 244.

A PROBABLE conjeaure may be formed with refpec

to the cause of the diftinEtion in charaCter between
the Caribbees and the inhabitants of the larger inands.
The former appear manifetly to be a separate race,
Their language is totally different from that of their
neighbours in the large islands. They themselves
have a tradition, that their ancestors came originally
fir omome part of the continent, and having conquered
and exterminated the ancient inhabitants, took pof-
session of their lands, and of their women. Rcchefort,
384. Tertre, 360. Hence they call themselves
Banaree, which signifies a man come from beyond
sea. Labat. vi. I31. Accordingly, the Caribbees till
ulte two diltinc languages, one peculiar to the men,
and the other to the women. Tertrc, 361. The
language of the men has nothing common with that
fpokcn in the large islands. 'file dialce of the

womenlCI

women considerably resembles it. Labat. I29. This
strongly confirms the tradition which I have men-
tioned. The Caribbees themselves imagine, that they
were a colony from the Galibis, a powerful nation of
Guiana, in South America. Tertre, 361. Rochefort,
348. But as their fierce manners approach nearer to
those of the people in the northern continent, than to
those of the natives of South America; and as their
language has likewise some affinity to that spoken in
Florida, their origin should be deduced rather from
the former than from the latter. Labat. 128, &c.
Herrera, dec. i. lib. ix. c. 4. In their wars, they still
observe their ancient pra&tice of destroying all the
males and prcferving the wvomcn either for servitude
or for breeding.

NOTE LXX. p. 245.

OUR knowledge of the events which happened in

the conquest of N\ew Spain, is derived from sources of
information more original and authentic than that of
any tranfaation in the history of America. The letters
of Cortes to the Emperor Charles V. are an historical
monument, not only firfl in order of time, but of the
greatef authenticity and value. As Cortes early as-
fumed a command indcpendant of Velasquez, it became
necefary to convey such an account of his operations to
Madrid, as might procure him the approbation of his
sovereign.

THEi- first of his dispatches has never been made

public. It was sent from Vera-Cruz, July i6th, 151 9.
As I imagined that it might not reach the Emperor,

until

until he arrived in Germany, for which he set out
early in the year 1520, in order to receive the Imperial
crown ; I made diligent search for a copy of this dif-
patch, both in Spain and in Germany, but without
success. This, however, is of less consequence, as it
could not contain any thing very material, being writ-
ten so soon after Cortes arrived in New Spain. But,
in searching for the letter from Cortes, a copy of
one from the colony of Vera-Cruz to the emperor
has been discovered in the Imperial library at Vienna.
Of this I have given some account in its proper place,
p. 288 of this volume. The second dispatch, dated
O&ober 3oth, 1520, was published at Seville, A. D.
1522, and the third and fourth soon after they were
received. A Latin translation of them appeared in
Germany, A.D. 1532. Ramufio soon after made
them more generally known, by inserting them in his
valuable collection. They contain a regular and mi-
nute history of the expedition, with many curious
particulars concerning the policy and manners of the
Mexicans. The work does honour to Cortes; the
style is simple and ptrfpicuous; but as it was mani-
feflly his interest to rcprefent his own aCtions in the
fairest light, his victories are probably exaggerated,
his lofles diminished, and his ats of rigour and violence
softened.

TiE next in order is the Cronica de la Nueva

lfpagn;a, by Francisco Lopjz de Gomara, published
A. D. 1554. Gomar:'s historical merit is considerable.
Ilis mode of narration is clear, flowing, always agree-
able, and foectirmes elegant. But he is frequently in.-
accurate and credulous and as lie was the domeflic
chapllin of Cortcs after iris return from New Spain,

VOL. 11. E E and

and probably composcd his work at his desire, it is
manifest that he labours to magnify the merit of his
hero, and to conceal or extenuate such transaCtions
as were unfavourable to his charader. Of this Herrera
accuses him inone instance, Dec. ii. lib. iii. c. 2. and
it is not once only that this is conspicuous. Ile writes,
howevcr, with so much freedom concerning several
mcafures of the Spanifl court, that the copies both
of his Hiftoria de las Indias, and of his Cronica, were
called in by a decree of the council of the Indies,
and they were long confidered as prohibited books in
Spain ; it is only of late that licence to print them has
been granted. Pinelo Biblioth. 589.

' htE Chronicle of Gomara induced Bernal Diaz del

Caltillo to compose his Hiftoria Verdadcra de la
Conquifta de la Nueva Efpagna. He had been an
adventurer in each of the expeditions to New Spain,
aild was the companion of Cortes in all his battles and
perils. When lie found that neither he himself, nor
many of his fellow-foldiers, were once mentioned by
Gonlara, but that the fame of all their exploits was
.fcribed ro Cortes; the gallant veteran laid hold of lis
pea witl indignat;on, and composed his true history.
It contains a prolix, minute, confused narrative of all
Cortes's operations, in such a rude vulgar flyle as
iaight be expeCted from an illiterate soldier. But as lie
relates tranifations of lwhich he was witness, and in
which he performed a considerable part, his account
hbers all the marks of authenticity, and is accompanied
with fich a pleasant nimt'lr, with such intereffing
details, witl fitch anuling vanity, and yet so pardon-
able in an old soldier who had been (as lie boasts)
ill a huindred and nineteen battles, as renders !lis

book

book one of the most singular that is to be found in
any language.

PET. Martyr abAngleria, in a treatise de Infulis nuper

inventis, added to his Decades de Rebus Oceanicis &
Novo Orbe, gives some account of Cortes's expedition.
But he proceeds no farther than to relate what
happened after his first landing. This work, which
is brief and flight, seems to contain the information
transmitted by Cortes in his first difpatclles, embelliflled
with several particulars communicated to the author
by the officers who brought the letters from Cortes.

BUT the book to which the greater part of modern

historians have had recourse for information concerning
the conquest of New Spain, is Hiftoria de la Conquifta
de Mexico, por D. Antonio de Solis, first published
A. D. 1684. I know no author in any language whose
literary fame has risen so far beyond his real merit.
De Solis is reckoned by his countrymen one of the
purest writers in the Castilian tongue; and if a
foreigner may venture to give his opinion concerning
a matter of which Spaniards alone are qualified to
judge, he is entitled to that praise. But, though his
language be correat, his taste in composition is far
from being just. His periods are so much laboured
as to be often stiff, and formctincs tumid; the figures
which he employs by way of ornament, arc frequently
trite or improper, and his obfcrvation, fiuperficial.
These blcmifhes, however, might easily be overlooked,
if he were not defe&ivc with refpc& to all the great
qualities of an hiltorian. Dcltitute of that patient
industry in research, which coldu(is to the knowlCedge
of truth; a stranger to that imparti;lity which weighs

1 I- ' c
2 evidence

evidence with cool attention; and ever eager to
establish his favourite system of exalting the charaEter
of Cortes into that of a perfet hero, exempt from
error, and adorned with every virtue; he is less solicitous
to discover what was true, than to relate what might
appcar splendid. When he attempts any critical dif-
cuffion, his reasonings are fallacious, and founded upon
an imperfect view of salts. Though he sometimes
quotes the dispa7tches of Cortes, he seems not to have
consulted them; and though he sets out with some
censure on Gomara, he frequently prefers his autho-
rity, the most doubtful of any to that of the other con-
temporary historians.

BUTr of all the Spanifi xn titers, I-errera furnishes the

fullelf and most accurate information concerning the
conquest of Mexico, as well as every other tranfadion
of America. The industry and attention with which
he consulted not only the books, but the original papers
and public records, which tended to throw any light
upon the fubjeat of his inquiries, were so great, and
he usually judges of the evidence before him with so
much impartiality and candour, that his decads may
be ranked among the nmoft judicious and useful hifto-
rical collections. If, by attempting to relate the various
occurrences in the New World in a ltri& chronological
order, the arrangement of events in his work had not
been rendered so perplkxcd, difconnoe&ed, and obscure,
that it is an unplcaflllt talk to collce from different
parts of his bool:, and piece together the detached
llhreds of a 1torv, he might juflly ha\ve been ran;iked
among tlhe molt. ulinnllt hiftli i.iiis of his country.
-le gives an naccount ol lthi man.itrials from which hlo
comrnpofed his sork, I)ec. vi. lib. iii. c. 19.

NOTE LXXI. p. 248.

CORTES purposcd to have gone in the train of

Ovando when he set out for his government in the
year 1502, but was detained by an accident. As he
was attempting in a dark night to scramble up to tle
window of a lady's bed-chamber, with whom he car-
ried on an intrigue, an old wall, on the top of which
he had mounted, gave way, and he was so much
bruised by the fall as to be unfit for the voyage.
Gomara, Cronica de la Nueva Efpagna, cap. 1.

NOTE LXXII. p. 251.

CORTES had two thousand pesos in the hands of

Andrew Ducro, and lie borrowed four thousand.
These fums are about equal in value to fifteen hundred
pounds sterling; but as the price of every thing va;
extremely high in America, they made but a fcanity
flock when applied towards the equipment of a mi-
litary expedition. H-crrra, dec. ii. lib. iii. c. 2.
B. Diaz, c. 20.

NOTE LXXIII. p. .57

Tnl.i names of those gallant officers which will oftenr

occur in the futbfequent irory, were Juan Vcl;if(jilcz dc
l,con, Alonfo Hernandez Portocarrcio, Fraiicifo de
I\!ontcjo, Chrifloval dc Olid, Juan de Elifc;l te, Fran-
cisco dec Morla, Pedro de Alvarado, Fr:;cifco dc
Salceda, Juan de Efcobar, Gines de Norrts. Corte;.
himifelf commanded the Caipitlna, or Admiral. Fran-
cisco (ie Orozco, an officer formed in tle war'; of Italy,

i r * li:dl

had the comln'nd of the artillery. The experienced
Alaminos actcd as chief pilot.

NOTE LXXIV. p. 259.

IN those difierent conflicts, the Spaniards loft only

two men, but had a considerable number wounded,
Though there be no occasion for recourse to any super-
natural cause to account either for the greatness of
their victories, or the finallnefs of their loss; the
Spanish historians fail not to ascribe both to the
patronage of St. Jago, the tutelar Saint of their
country, who, as they relate, fought at the head of
their countrymen, and by his prowess gave a turn to
the fate of the battle. Gomara is the firit who men-
tions this apparition of St. J3mes. It is amusing to
observe the elnbarrafiment of B. Diaz del Castillo,
occasioned by the flruggie between his superstition and
his veracity. The former disposed him to believe
this miracle, the latter reitrained him from attesting
it. " I acknowledge," fays he, "( that all our exploits
and vicories are owing to our Lord Jesus Christ, and
that in this battle there was such a number of Indians
to every one of us, that if each had thrown a handful
of earth they might have buried us, if by the great
mercy of God we had not been protected. It may
be that the person whom Gomara mentions as having
appeared on a mottled grey horse, was the glorious
apollle Signor San Jago or Signor San Pedro, and tlat
I, as being a finncr, was not worthy to fee him. Thlis
I know, that I saw Francifca de Morla on such a
horse, but as an unworthy tranfgrcfilr, did not
defcrvc to fee any of the holy apofllcs. It may have
been the will of God, that it was so ;as Comara

rclates,

relates, but until I read his Chronicle I never heard
among any of the conquerors that such a thin . Ilhud
happened." Cap. 34.

NOTE LXXV. p. 266.

SEVERAL Spanish historians relate this occurrenc iu

such terms, as if they wishld it should be believed,
that the Indians, loaded with tl-e prcfcnts, had carried
them from the capital in the fame short fpacc of time
that the couriers performed that journey. This is
incredible, and Gomara mentions a circumstance which
shews, that nothing extraordinary happencd on this
occasion. This rich present had been prepared for
Grijalva, when he touched at the fame place femc
months before, and was now ready to be delivered,
as soon as Montezuma sent orders for that purpose.
Gomara Cron. c. xxvii. p. 28.

AccORDING to B. Diaz del Castillo, the value of the

silver plate representing the moon, was alone above
twenty thousand pcfos, about five thousand pounds
sterling.

NOTE LXXVI. p. 274.

TIis private traflic was dircclly contrary to the

infiruelions of Velafqucz, who cnjoined, that what-
ever was acquired by trade hlloull be thrown into the
common flock. But it appears, that the foldicrs had
each a private aflortment of toys, and other goods
proper for the Indian trade, and Cortes gained their
favour by encouraging this under-hand barter. B.
Diaz, c. 41.

EE4

NOTE LXXVII. p. 290.

GOMARA has published a catalogue of the various

articles of which this prefcnt confilted. Cron. c. 49'
P. Martyr ab Angleria, who saw them after they were
brought to Spain, and who seems to have examined
them with great attention, gives a description of each,
which is curious, as it conveys some idea of the
progress which the Mexicans had made in several
arts of elegance. De Infulis nuper inventis Liber,
p. 354, &c.

NOTE LXXVIII. p. 298.

THERE is no circumstance in the history of the

conquest of America, which is more questionable than
the account of the numerous armies brought into the
field against the Spaniards. As the war with the re-
public of Tlafcala, though of short duration, was one
of the most considerable which the Spaniards waged in
America, the account given of the Tlafcalan armies
merits some attention. The only authentic informa-
tion concerning this is derived from three authors.
Cortcs, in his second dispatch to the emperor, dated
at Sc^ura de la Frontera, October 30, 1520, thus
estimates the number of their troops; in -the first
battle 6000; in the second battle ioo,ooo; in the
third battle 15o,ooo. Relat. ap. Rarnuf. iii. 228.
Bcrnal Diaz del Castillo, who was a' eye-witness,
and engaged in all the aRtions of this war, thus
reckons their numbers; in the first battle 3000, p. 43;
in the second battle 6000, ibid. in the third battle
50,000, p. 45. Gomara, who was Cortes's chaplain
after his return to Spain, and published his Cronica

in

in I552, follows the computation of Cortes, except
in the second battle, where he reckons the Tlafcalans
at 80,ooo, p. 49. It was manifeitly the interest of
Cortes to magnify his own dangers and exnloits.
For it was only by the merit of extraordinary services,
that he could hope to atone for his irregular conduc,
in assuming an independent command. Bern. Diaz,
though abundantly disposed to place his own prowess,
and tlat of his fellow-conquerors, in the most advan-
tageous point of light, had not the fame temptation
to exaggerate; and it is probable, that his account of
the numbers approaches nearer to the truth. The
afrembling of an army of 1 50,oo mlen requires many
previous arrangements, and fucll provision for their
subsistence as seems to be beyond the foresight of
Americans. The degree of cultivation inTlafcala does
not fecm to have been so great, as to have furnishcd
such a vast army with provisions. Though this pro-
vince was so much better cultivated than other regions
of New Spain, that it was called the country of 1i,'il,;
yet the Spaniards in their march suffered such want,
that they were obliged to subsist upon T7nas, a fpecics
of fruit which grows wild in the fields. Ic-rrera,
D)ec, ii. lib. vi. c. 5. P. 182.

NOTE LXXIX. p. 303.

TErsE unhappy visims are said to be persons of dif-

tinclion. It fecins improbable that so great a number
as fifty flhould be employed as spies. So many prison-
ers had been taken andl lifmiflcd, and the Tlafcalans
lad feent bs many mefihges to the Spanish quarters,
that there appears to be no rcafon for hazarding the
lives of so many considerable people, in order to pro-

cure

cure information about the position and slate of their
camp. The barbarous manner in which Cortes treated
a people unacquainted with the laws of war eftablified
among polished nations, appears so shocking to the
later Spanith writers, that they diminish the number
of those whom he punifled so cruelly. Herrera fays,
that he cut off the hands of seven, and thumbs of some
more. Dec. ii. lib. ii. c. 8. De Solis relates, that
the hands of fourteen or fifteen were cut off, and the
thumbs of all the reft. Lib. ii. c. 20. But Cortes
hinmfelf, Relat. p. 228, b. and after him Gomara,
c. 48, affirm, that the hands of all the fifty were
cut off.

NOTE LXXX. p. 306.

THE horses were objects of the greatest astonish-

ment to all the people of New Spain. At first they
imagined the horse and his rider, like the Centaurs of
the ancients, to be some monstrous animal of a terrible
form; and supposing that their food was the fame as
that of men, brought flesh and bread to nourish them.
Even after they discovered their mistake, they believed
the horses devoured men in battle, and when they
neighed, thought that they were demanding their
prey. It was not the intere{l of the Spaniards to
undeceive them. Herrera, dec. ii. lib. vi. c. I i.

NOTE LXXXI. . 313.

ACCORDING to Bart. de las Casas, there was no rea-

son for this maflacre, and it was an act of wanton
cruelty, perpetrated merely to strike terror into the
people of New Spain. Rclac. de la Dcftruyc. p. 17,
&c. But the zeal of Las Casas often leads him to

exaggerate.

exaggerate. In opposition to him, Bern. Diaz, c. 83,
atTcrts, that the firit milfionaries sent into New Spain
by the emperor, made a judicial inquiry into this
tranfaation; and having cxami:ed the prierts and
.elders of Chlolula, found that there was a real confpi-
racy to cut of0 the Spaniards, and that the accounr
given by Cortes was cxactly true. As it was the objec
of Cortes at that time, andl manlifefly his intcrcft, to
gain the good-will of Montezuma, it is improbable
that lie fnould have taken a ftcp which tendcld bi
visibly to alienate him from the Spaniards, if l h;ad
not believed it to be necefliry for his own prclervation.
At the fame time, the Spaniards who served in Ame-
rica lhad such contempt for the natives, and thought
them so little entitled to the common rights of
-iien, that Cortes might hold the Cholulans to be
,guilty upon flight andl imperfet evidence. The
i;everity of the punishment was certainly cxccllive and
itrocious.

NOTE LXXXII. p. 314.

Ti-lis description is taken allmoft literally from Bernal

Diaz del Callillo, who was f() unacquainted with the
art of composition, as to be incapable of embellifliing
his narrative. IIe relates in a simple aId rude Ifyle
what pallld il his own mindll, and tihat of his fellow-
foldicr ;, on tlhat oc(Cafioil; "' alnd let it not be thought
ftra nge," lfys ie, " lihat I lhould write in tl is manner of
what then haippenl) ed, for it ouglht to be colnidered,
that it is one thling to relate, another to have beheld
things that were never before seen, or lhard, or spoken
of among men." C;p. 86. p. 6,1, b.

NOTE LXXXIII . . 330.

B. DIAS del Castillo gives us some idea of the fatigue

and hardships they underwent in performing this, and
other parts of duty. During the nine months that
they remained in Mexico, every man, without any
difiintion between officers and soldiers, slept on his
arms in his quilted jacket and gorget. They lay on
mats, or straw spread on the floor, and each was
obliged to hold himself as alert as if he had been on
guard. " This," adds he, " became so habitual to me,
that even now in my advanced age, I always sleep in
my clothes, and never in any bed. When I visit
my Encomienld, I reckon it suitable to my rank, to
have a bed carried along with my other baggage, but
I never go into it; but, according to custom, I lie in
my clothes, and walk frequently during the night into
the open air, to view the stars as I was wont when
in service." Cap. o18.

NOTE LXXXIV. P. 334.

CORTES himself, in his second dispatch to the em-

peror, does not explain the motives which induced
him either to condemn Qualpopoca to the flames, or
to put Montezuma in irons. Ramus. iii. 236. B. Diaz
is silent with refpe& to his reasons for the former;
and the only cause he alfigns for the latter was, that
he might meet with no interruption in cxecuting the
sentence pronounced again{t Q Palpopoca, c. xcv. p. 75.
But as Montezuma was his prisoner, and absolutely
in his power, he had no rcafon to dread him, and the
insult olf'rcdl to that monarch could have no cffecl: ut
to irritate him unnececlrily. Gomara fuppofcs, that

Cortes

Cortes had no other obje&t than to occupy Montezuma
with his own distress and sufferings, that lie might
give less attention to what besel Qualpopoca. Cron.
c. 89. Herrera adopts the fame opinion. Dec. ii.
lib. viii. c. 9. But it seems an odd expedient, in
order to make a person bear one injury, to load him
with another that is greater. De Solis imagines, that
Cortes had nothing eife in view than to intimidate
Montezuma, so that lle might make no attempt to
refeue the vi&tims from their fate ; but the spirit of
that monarch wa s f submissive, and he had so tamely
given up the prifollers to the disposal of Cortes, that
he had no cause to 'pprcheid any opposition from him.
If the explanation which I have attempted to give of
Cortes's proceedings on this occalion be not admitted,
it appears to me, that they must be reckoned among
the wanton and barbarous atc of oppreftion which
occur too often in the history of the conquest of
America.

NOTE LXXXV. p. 339.

Dr Solis afierts, lib. iv. c. 3. that the proposition of

doing homage to the ling of Spain, came from
Montezuma himself, and was made in order to induce
the Spaniards to depart out of his dominions. He
dcfcribes his condu&t on this occasion, as if it had
been foundcd upon a scheme of profound policy, and
executed with such refined address, as to deceive
Cortes lhimfclf. But there is no hint or circumstance
in the contemporary historians, Cortes, Diaz, or
Gomiira, to jultify this theory. Montezuma, on
other occasions, dilcovcrcd no such extent of art and
abilities. The anguiih which lie felt in performing

this

this humbling ceremony is natural, if we suppose it to
have been involuntary. But, according to the theory
of De Solis, which supposes that Montezuma was
executing what he himself had proposed, to have as-
fumed an appearance of sorrow, would have been pre-
pofterous and inconsistent with his own design of
deceiving the Spaniards.

NOTE LXXXVI. p. 342.

IN fevera! of the provinces, the Spaniards with all

their industry and influence, could collect no gold.
In others, they procured only a few trinkets of small
value. Montezuma aftured Cortes, that the present
which he offered to the king of Caitile, after doing
homage, consisted of all the treasure amassed by his
father; and told him, that he had already distributed
the reft of his gold and jewels among the Spaniards.
B. Diaz, c. 104. Gomara relates, that all the filvcr
colleted amounted to 5oo marks. Cron. c. 93.' This
agrees with the account given by Cortes, that the
royal fifth of silver was loo marks. Relat. 239, B.
So that the fum total of silver was only 4000 ounces,
at the rate of eight ounces a mark, which demonstrates
the proportion of filvcr to gold to have been exceed-
ingly fnmall.

NOTE LXXXVII . 343.

Dr. Solis, lib. iv. c. i. calls in qucftion the truth

of this tranfa6tion, from no better rcafon than that it
was inconfiltent with that prudence which diftinguifles
the character of Cortes. But he ought to have recol-
leltecd the impetuosity of his zeal at 'lafcala, which
was no less imprudlcit. He aflerts, that the cvildcnce

for

for it refts upon the testimony of B. Diaz del Castillo,
of Gomara, and of Herrera. They all concur indeed,
in mentioning this inconsiderate ftep which Cortes
took ; and they had good realon to do so, for Cortes
himself relates this exploit in his second dispatch to
the Emperor, and seems to glory in it. Cort. Relat.
Ramus. iii. 140, D. This is one instance, among
many, of De Solis's having consulted with little atten-
tion the letters of Cortes to Charles V. from which
the most authentic information with refped to his
operations mult be derived.

TOTE LXXXVIII. p. 348.

HERRERA and De Solis suppose, that Velasquez

was encouraged to equip this armament againPf Cortes,
by the accounts which lie received from Spain con-
cerning the reception of the agents lent by the colony
of Vera Cruz, and the warmth with whlich Fonseca
bishop of Burgos had espoused his interest, and con-
demned the proceedings of Cortes. Herrera, dec. ii.
lib. ix. c. I8. DC Soiis, lib. iv. c. g. But the chro-
nological order of events refutes this supposition.
Portocarrero and Montejo failed from Vera Cruz,
July 26, 1519. eIrrcra, dec. ii. Iib. v. . c.. They
landed at St. Lucar in Ocober, according to H-errera,
ibid. But P. Martyr, who attended the court at that
time, and commin icated every occurrence of moment
to his corrcfpoiidents day by day, mentions the arrival
of tliefe agents for the firit time in December, and
fipeaks oI it as a recent event. Epiit. 65o. All the
hiftorianls agree, that the agents of Cortcs had their
firit audience of the Emperor at Torlefillas, when he
went to that town to vilit his mother in his way to

St. Jago

St. Jago de Compoftella. Hertera, dcc. ii. lib. v. c. 4.
De Solis, lib. iv. c.5. But the emperor fct out from
Valladolid for Tordefillas, on the I th of March i5 20;
and P. Martyr mentions his having seen at that time
the presents made to Charles, Epift. 1665. The arma-
ment under Narvaez failed from Cuba in April I520.
It is manifest then, that Veiafquez could not receive
any account of what pasi:d in this interview at Torde-
fillas, previous to his hostile preparationsagainfl Cortes.
His real motives seem to be those which I have men-
tioned. The patent appointing him /d,'laitado of
New Spain, with such cxtcnfive powers, bears date
November 13, 1519. Hcrrcra, ecc. ii. lib. iii. c. ii.
He might receive it about the beginning of January,
Gomara takes notice, that as soon as this patent was
delivered to him, he began to equip a fleet and levy
forces. Cron. c. 96.

THLE FNI 0n TIIEF. SECOND yOlU}tL .

Priitrd bLy .f. r/ihra,,:, )'rinleJ-Si tret, London.
