- I

________ ~ 1 ~)

THE-
H I ST R Y

0 F
SCOTLAND

DURING THE REIGNS OF
Queen MARY and of King JAMES VI.

Hs TILL
His ACCESSION to the CROWN of ENGLAND.

WITH A

REVIEw of the SCOTTISH HISTORY pfevious to that Period;

And an APPE N D X containing OR I INAL PA PE RS.
BY WILLIAM ROBERTSON, D.D.

MINISTER of LADY YESTFR'S, Edinburgh.

VOLUME II.
A NE W EDITION.

D U B L I N:
Printed by JAMES WILLIAMS.

M DCC LXXVIII.

:~I

# THE HISTORY OF SCOTLAND. BOOK VI.

THE

H r S T O R Y
HISTORY

OF
S CO T L A N D.

BO O K- VI.

H E unexpected blow, by which the-Regent B o o K
was- cut off, ftnick-th¢- King's party with VI.

the utmost 'confternatior. 'Elizabeth bewailed '- -'
his death as the most fatal disaster, which I570"
could have befallen her kingdom; and was' incon- occaoned
folable to ad degree that little, suited her dignity. bygent's
Mary's adherenits exulted, as if, now, her reftora- dath-
tion wre not only certaini, but' near at hand:. The
infamy of' the crifme naturally fell on those, who
expressed ·such 'indecent joy 'at the commission of it.
And as the affaflin made his escape on a horse, which
belonged to Lord Claud'Hairilton, and fled dire&tly
to' Hamilton, where he was received in triumph, it:
was concluded that the Regent had fallen a sacrifice
to the resentment of the'Queen's party, 'rather than

VOL. II. .B .. . to

- ---- ---- ---·I-C---IP -c --L a"

B o o K to the revenge of a private man. On -the.day after

VI. the murder, Scott of Buccleugh, and Ker of Ser-

' e'" niherft, both zealous abettors of the Qeen's cause,
1570. entered England in an hostile manner, and plun-

dered and burnt the country, the inhabitants of
which rxpected no such outrage. Ithe Regent
had bien alive, they .would fcarce'have ventured on
such an irregular incursion, nor could it well have
happened so soon after his death, unless they had
been privy to the crime.

Twis was not the only irregularity,. to whieh the

anarchy that followed the Regent's death gave oc-
cafion. During such general confusion, men hoped
for universal impunity, and broke out into excesses
of every kind. As it was impossible to restrain
there, without a fettled form of government, a

stEEstam Convention of the nobles was -held, in..order. to de-.
toewatdi libeate.concerning'the eleEtion of a Regnent.. The
anothe- ( Qguen'.sdherents refufedo be prefer t ar.tih meet-.

.; .- . i'gsi- and.-:po6teeed:, gai s
!. its proceedirgs.. ,The

Ki-_g:s; Qwn !party-was. irresolute, and diyided in
-- q piiof .Maitlan-1, v omKirkaldy had set at li-

h ert.sand!who obtained from .the nobles ten as-,
fembleed; a declaration ,ac'quitting him of the crime,
which ,hid been laid to i-is charge, endeavoured to
bririg ga.ut-a coalition of ,the two parties,, ,by pro-
pofmig o-admtit the:.Qoee:to the. joint adminiftra-
tion :of: government.vi.th. her son, , Elizabeth ad-
hering tQ.her: ancient fyitem with. egard to. Scottish
affairs,- aboured, n.twithftanding [the foliicitations
Qs Mary!.sfriends *,- to multiply? and mta perpetuate

*SeeAppend. No.I.

the

the facions, which tore in pieces the kingdom. B o o K
Randolph, whom She dispatched into Scotland on VI.
the first news of the Regent's death, and who was her
usual agent for such services, found all parties so 570
exasperated by mutual injuries, and so full of irre-
concilable rancour, that it ccft him little trouble to
inflame their animosity. The Convention broke up
without coming to any agreement; and a new meet,
ing, to which the nobles of all parties were invited,
was appointed on the first of May*.

MEANTIME, Maitland and Kirkaldy, who still A coalition
continued to acknowledge the King's authority, of partmie

attempted

were at the utmost pains to restore rome degree of in vain
harmony among their countrymen. They procured
for this purpose, an amicable conference among the
leaders of the two factions. But while the one de-
manded the restoration of the Queen, as the only
thing which could re-eftablif: the public tranquillity;
while the other esteemed the King's authority to be
so sacred, that it was, on no account, to be called
in question or impaired; and neither of them would
recede in the least point from their opinions, they
separated without any profpet of concord. Both
were rendered more averse from reconcilement, by
the hope of foreign aid. An envoy arrived from
France with promises of powerful succour to the
Queen's adherents ; and as the civil wars in that
kingdom seemed to be on the point of terminating
.in peace, it was expe&ed that Charles would soon
be at liberty to fulfil what he promised. On the
other hand, the Earl of Suffex was assembling a

* Crawf. Mem. z13. Calderw. ii. 157,

B 2 power-

3,

B o o K powerful army on the borders, and its operations

VI. could not fail of adding spirit and strength to the

"-C 'Y- King's party*.
1570.
Quen's THOUGH the attempt towards a coalition of the
party in
prffion of facions proved ineffe&ual, it contributed somewhat
Edinbugh. to moderate, or suspend their rage X but they soon

began to ac with their usual violence. Morton,
the most vigilant and able leader on the King's fide,
solicited Elizabeth to interpose, without delay, for
the fafetv of a party, so devoted to her interest,
and-which stood so much in need of her assistance.
pFri 1o. The Chiefs of the Queen's facion, assembling at

- Linlithgow, marched thence to Edinburgh; and

Kirkaldy, who was both Governor of the castle,
and Provost of the town, prevailed on the citizens,
though with some difficulty, to admit them within
the gates. Together with Kirkaldy, the Earl of
Athole, and Maitland, acceded almost openly to
their party; and the Duke, and Lord Herreis, hav-
ing recovered their liberty by Kirkaldy's favour,
resumed the places, which they had formerly held
in their councils. Encouraged by the acquisition
of persons, so illustrious by their birth, or so emi-
nent for their abilities, they published a proclama-
tion, declaring their intention to support tne Queen's
authority, and. seemed resolved not to leave the
city before the meeting of the approaching Con-
vention, in which, by 'their numbers and influ-
ence, they did not doubt of securing a majority of
voices or their fide t.
T Crawf. Mem. 134. t Ibid. 137. Calderw. ii. 176.

AT
4

AT the fame time, they had formed a design of B o o K

kindling war between the two kingdoms. And if VI.
they could engage them in hostilities, and revive '-
their ancient emulation and antipathy, they hoped, End'avour
not only to dissolve a confederacy of great advan- to involve

the nation

tage to the King's cause, but to reconcile their coun- in a war
trymen to the Queen, Elizabeth's natural and most wh. Erg"
dangerous rival. With this view, they had, imme-
diately after the murder of the Regent, prompted
Scott and Ker to commence hostilities, and had
since initigated them to continue and extend their
depredations. As Elizabeth foresaw, on the one
hand, the dangerous consequences of rendering this
a national quarrel and resolved, on the other, not
to susser such an insult on her government to pass
with impunity; Ihe issued a proclamation, declaring
that Ihe imputed the outrages which had been com-
mitted, not to the Scottish nation, but to a few def-
perate and ill-defigning persons; that, with the for-
mer, she was resolved to maintain an inviolable
friendship, whereas the duty which she owed to
her own fubjeC&s, obliged her to chastise the licen-
tioufnefs of the latter *. Suffex and Scroop, accord-
ingly, entered Scotland, the one on the east, the
other on the weft borders, and laid waste the adja-
cent countries with fire and sword t. Fame mag-
nified the number and progress of their armies, and
Mary's adherents, not thinking themselves safe in
Edinburgh, the inhabitants whereof were ill affeced
to their cause, retired to Linlithgow. There by a
public proclamation they asserted the Queen's au- Apri ,2.
thority, and sorbad giving obedience to any, but

Cald. ii. I81. + Cabala, 174.

the

B o oK the Duke, or the Earls of Argyll and Huntly,

VI. whom she had constituted her Lieutenants in the
"'T - kingdom.
I 57C.
RKis's P- THE nobles who continued faithful to the King,
Ednbmh. though considerably weakened by the defe&ion of
May I. so many of their friends, assembled at Edinburgh

on the day appointed. They issued a counter-pro-
clamation, declaring those who appeared for the
Queen, enemies of their country; and charging
them with the murder both of the late King, and
of the Regent. They could not, howevet, pre-
fume so much on their own strength as to venture
either to ele& a Regent, or to take the field against
the Queen's party; but the afliftance, which they
received from Elizabeth, enabled them to do both.
By her order, Sir William Drury marched into
-Scotland, with a thousand foot, and three hundred
horse; the King's adherents joined him with a con-
fiderable b, dy of troops, and advancing towards
Glasgow, where the adverse party had already be-
gun hostilities by attacking the cabtle, they forced
them to retire, plundered the neighbouring coun-
try, which belonged to the Hamiltons, and, after
seizing some of their castles, and rafing others, re-
turned to Edinburgh.

Moties of UNDER Drury's protection, the Earl of Lennox
conIdua returned into Scotland. It was natural to commit
wih ead the government of the kingdom to him, during

the minority of his grandson. His illustrious birth,
and alliance with the royal family of England, as
well as of Scotland, rendered him worthy of that

honour;

honour; and his resentment against Mary being B o o
implacable,: and'his estate lying in England, and VI.
his family residing there, Elizabeth confidered, him '
as a man, who, both from- inclination,, and-from I7P0
interest, would a& in concert with her, arid ardently
wished that he might succeed Murray in the, office
of Regent. But, on many accounts,.flie did-not
think it prudent to discover her 'own sentiments,'; or
to favour his pretensions too openly. l.The civil
wars in France, which had .been excitedi, by!.a 'pire-
tended zeal for religion, and carried on witdyafierme-
ness that did it real dishonour, appeared now to be
on the point of coming to an issue; and after jhed-
ding the best blood, and waiting the' richeftfpro-
vinces in the kingdom, both parties desired peace
with an ardour, that facilitated the negociations
which were carrying on for that purpose. Charles
IX. was known to be a passionate admirer of
Mary's beauty. Nor could he, in honour, susser
a Queen of France, and the most ancient ally of r ..
his crown, to languish in her present cruel situation,
without attempting to procure her relief. He had,
hitherto, been obliged to satisfy himself with re-
monitrating, by his ambassadors, against the indig-
nity, with which the had been treated. But if he
were once at full liberty to pursue his inclinations,
Elizabeth would have every thing to dread from
the impetuosity of his temper, and the power of
his arms. It therefore became necessary for her to
ac with some reserve, and not to appear, avowed-
ly, to countenance the choice of a Regent, in con-
tempt of Mary's authority. The jealousy and pre-
judices of the Scots required no less management.

Had

7

B o o iK Had fle openly supported Lennox's claim; had the

VL recommended him to the Convention, as' the can-
' _' sdidate,--whom she approved; this might hayeroufed

57 the independent spirit of the nobles, and by too

plain a ifcovery of her intention, hie might have
defeated.its success. . For these reasons, she hesitated
long,, and returned ambiguous answers to all the
meffages:.-which she received from the King's party.
A more explicit declaration, of her sentiments was
at last obtained, and an event of an extraordinary
nature'feems' to have been the occasion of it. Pope
Pius'V. having issued a bull, whereby he excom-
municated Elizabeth, deprived her of her kingdom,
and abfblved her subje&s from their oath of allegi-
ance, Felton, an Englishman, had the boldness to
fix it on the gates of the Bishop of London's pa-
lace. In former ages, a Pope, moved by his own
ambition, or pride, or bigotry, denounced this fa-
tal sentence against the most powerful monarchs;
but as the authority of the court of Rome was now
less regarded, its proceedings were more.cautious;
and it was only when they were routed by some
powerful Prince, that the thunders of the church
were ever heard. Elizabeth, therefore, imputed
this ftep, which the Pope had taken, to a combi-
nation of the Roman Catholic Princes agaipft her,
and fufpe&ed that some plot was on foot in favour
of the Scottiflh Queen. In that event, she knew
that the safety of her own kingdom depended on
preserving her influence in Scotland; and in order
to strengthen this, ihe renewed her promises of pro-
tecfing the King's adherents, encouraged them to

pro-

proceed to the Ele&ion of a Regent, and even ven- B o o K
tured to point out the Earl of Lennox, as the person VI.
who had the best title. That honour was accord- ~
ingly conferred upon him, in a Convention of the I570.
whole party, held on the I 2th of July *.

THE Regent's first care was to prevent the meet- LennXe

ing of the Parliament, which the Queen's party gent.
had summoned to convene at Linlithgow. Having
effected that, he marched against the Earl of Hunt-
ly, Mary's lieutenant in the North, and forced the
garrison, which he had placed in Brechin, to fur-
render at discretion. Soon after, he made himself
master of some other castles. /Emboldened by this
successful beginning of his administration, as well
as by the appearance of a considerable army, with
which the Earl of Suffex hovered on the borders,
he deprived Maitland of his office of Secretary, and
proclaimed him, the Duke, Huntly, and other
leaders of the Queen's party, traitors and enemies
of their country t.

IN this desperate situation of their affairs, the Mary's ad-

herents ne-

Queen's adherents had recourse to the King of gociate
Spain $, with whom Mary had held a close corre- with Spaio.
fpondence ever since her confinement in- England.
They prevailed on the Duke of Alva, to fend two
of his officers to take a view of the country, and
to examine its coafis and harbours; and obtained
from him a small supply of money and arms, which

* Spotfw. 240. Cald. ii. 186. See Append. No. II.
t Crawf. Mem. 159. Cald. ii. 198.
I See Append. No:.II.

were

9

B o o K were sent to the Earl of Huntly *. But this aid,

VI. so disproportionate to their exigencies, would have
--T availed them little. They were indebted for their
1570. safety to a treaty, which Elizabeth was carrying on,
ropcrs a under colour of restoring the captive Queen to her
aeaty of

l>C;o - throne. The first steps in this negociation had been
aion b- taken in the month of May; but hitherto little pro-
twee~ Ma-
ry and hr grefs was made in it. The peace concluded between
fbjes. the Roman Catholics and Hugonots in France, and

her apprehensions that Charles would interpose with
vigour in behalf of his fifter-in-law, quickened Eli-
zabeth's motions. She affee&ed to treat her prisoner
with more indulgence, she listened more graciously
to the solicitations of foreign ambassadors in her fa-
vour, and seemed fully determined to replace her on
the throne of her ancestors. As a proof of her fin-
cerity, lhe laboured to procure a cessation of arms
between the two contending facions in Scotland.
Lennox, elated with the good fortune, which had
hitherto attended his administration, and flattering
himself with an easy triumph over enemies, whole
estates were wafted, and their forces dispiritei, re-
fused, for some time, to come into this measure.
It was not safe for him, however, to dispute the
will of his proteArefs. A cessation of hostilities
during two months, to commence on the third of
September, was agreed upon; and being renewed
from time to time, it continued till the first of
April next year t.

SooN after, Elizabeth dispatched Cecil and Sir

Walter Mildmay to the Queen of Scots. The dig-
* Anders. iii. 2zz. Crawf. Mem. 153. t Spots. 243.

nity,

nity of these ambassadors, the former her prime Mi- B o o K
nifter, the latter Chancellor of the Exchequer, and VI.
one of her ablest counsellors, convinced all parties '- '
that the negociation was serious, and that the hour 570.
of Mary's liberty was now approaching. The pro-
positions, which they made to her, were advan-
tageous to Elizabeth, but such as a Prince, in
Mary's situation, had reason to expect. The rati-
fication of the treaty of Edinburgh; the renouncing
any pretensions to the English Crown, during Eli-
zabeth's own life, or that of her posterity; the ad-
hering to the alliance between the two kingdoms;
the pardoning her subjects, who had taken arms
against her; and her promising to hold no corre-
fpondence, and to countenance no enterprise, that
might diffurb Elizabeth's government; were among
the chief articles. By way of security for the ac-
complifhment of these, they demanded that some
persons of rank should be given as hostages, that
the Prince her son should reside in England, and
that a few castles on the border should be put into
Elizabeth's hands. To some of these propositions
Mary consented; some ihe endeavoured to miti-
gate; and others she attempted to evade. In the
mean time, she tranfinitted copies of them to the
Pope, to the Kings of France and Spain, and to
the Duke of Alva. She insinuated, that without
some timely and vigorous interposition in her be-
half, ihe would be obliged to accept of these hard
conditions, and to purchase liberty at any price.
But the Pope was a distant and feeble ally, and by
his efforts against the Turks, his treasury was en-
tirely exhausted. Charles had already begun to me-

ditate

II

ditate that conspiracy againif the Hugonots, which
marks his reign with such infamy; and it required
much leisure, and perfect tranquillity, to bring that
execrable plan to maturity. Philip was employed
in fitting out that fleet, which acquired so great re-
nown to the Christian arms, by the victory over the
infidels at Lepanto; the Moors in Spain threatened
an insurrection; and his subje&s in the Netherlands,
provoked by much oppression, and many indigni-
ties, were breaking out into open rebellion. All
of them, for these different reasons, advised Mary,
without depending on their aid, to conclude the
treaty on the best terms she could procure *

MARY, accordingly, contented to many of Eli-

zabeth's demands, and discovered a facility of dif-
position, which promised still further concessions.
But no concession she could have made, would have
satisfied Elizabeth, who, in spite of her repeated
professions of sincerity to foreign ambassadors, and
notwithstanding the solemnity with which she car-
ried on the treaty, had no other objeCt in it, than
to amuse Mary's allies, and to gain time t. After
having so long treated a Queen, who fled to her for
refuge, in so ungenerous a manner, she could not
now dismiss her with safety. Under all the difad-
vantages of a rigorous confinement, Mary had found
means to excite commotions in England, which
were extremely formidable. What desperate effets
of her just resentment might be expeced, if she were
let at liberty, and recovered her former power ?

A nderf. vol. iii. iog. 12o. t Diggcs, Compl. Amb. 78.

What.

What engagements could bind her, not to revenge B o o x
the wrongs she had suffered, nor to take advantage VI.
of the favourable conjunEtures, that might present '---
themselves ? Was it possible for her to give such 1570
security for her behaviour in times to come, as
might remove all suspicions and fears? And was
there not good cause to conclude, that no future be-
nefits could ever obliterate the memory of past inju-
ries? It was thus Elizabeth reasoned; though she
continued to a& as if her views had been entirely
different. She appointed seven of her privy coun-
fellors to be cornmiffioners for fettling the articles
of the treaty; and as Mary had already named the
Bithops of Ross and Galloway, and Lord Leving-
fton, for her ambassadors, Ihe required the Regent
to impower proper persons to appear in behalf of the
King. The Earl of Morton, Pitcairn, abbot ofDun-
fermling, and Sir James Macgill were the persons 1571.
chosen by the Regent. They prepared for their
journey, as slowly as Elizabeth herself could have
wished. At length theyCarrived at London, and
met the commiflioners of the two Queens. Mary's b.
ambassadors discovered the strongest inclination to
comply with every thing that would remove the
obstacles which flood in the way of their Mistress's
liberty. But when Morton and his associates were
called upon to vindicate their conduct, and to ex-
plain the sentiments of their party, they began, in
justification of the treatment of their Queen, to ad-
vance huch maxims concerning the limited powers
of Princes, and the natural right of fubjecs to resist
and to controul them, as were extremely ihocking
to EliZabeth, whose notions of regal prerogative

were

B o o K were very exalted. With regard to the authority

VI. which the King now possessed, they declared that
'-- v-- they neither had, nor could possibly receive inftruc-

57I1 tions, to content to any treaty, that tended to sub-

vert, or even to impair it, in the least degree *.
Nothing could be more trifling and ridiculous, than
such a reply from the commissioners of the King of
Scots to the Queen of England. His party de-
pended absolutely on her protection, her hand had
feated him on the throne, and to her power he owed
the continuance of his reign. With the utmost ease
she could have brought them to talk in a very dif-
ferent manner; and whatever conditions the might
have thought fit to prescribe, they would have had
no other choice but to submit. This declaration,
however, lhe affected to confider as an insuperable
difficulty. And finding that there was no reason to
Itoes dread any danger from the French King, who had

not discovered that eagerness in support of Mary,
which was expeted; the reply made by Morton
furnished her with a pretence for putting a stop to
the negociation, till the Regent should fend ambaf-
Ma.h 4. fadors with more ample powers. Thus, after being

amused for ten months with the hopes of liberty,
the unhappy Queen of Scots remained under ftricer
custody than ever, and without any protpe& of
escaping from it; while those subje&s, who still ad-
hered to her, were exposed, without ally or protec-
tor, to the rage of enemies, whom their success in
this negociation rendered still more insolent t.

* Cald. ii. z3. Digges, 51. Haynes, 523, 524,
t Anders. iii. 91. &c.

ON

ON the day after the expiration of the truce, which B o o K

had been observed with little exa&nefs on either fide, VI.
Captain Crawford of Jordan-hill, a gallant and en- 'r---
terprifing officer, performed a service of great inm- 1 57 1

Dunbarton

portance to the Regent, by surprising the cafile of caite fur-
Dunbarton. This was the only fortified place in Phe'.gby
the kingdom, of which the Queen had kept posses-
lion, ever since the commencement of the civil wars.
Its situation on the top of an high and almost inac-
ceffible rock, which rites in the middle of a plain,
rendered it extremely itrong, and in the opinion of
that age impregnable as it commanded the river
Clyde, it was of great consequence, and esteemed
the moit proper place in the kingdom for landing
any foreign troops, that might come to Mary's aid.
The strength of the place rendered Lord Fleming,
the governor, more secure than he ought to have
been, confidering its importance. A soldier, who
had served in the garrison, and had been disgusted
by some fill usage, proposed the scheme to the Re-
gent, endeavoured to demonitrate that it was prac-
ticable, and offered himself to go the foremast man
on the enterprise. It was thought prudent to risk
any danger for so great a prize. Scaling-ladders,
and whatever else was neceflary, were prepared with
the utmost secrecy and dilpatch. All the avenues
to the castle were seized, that no intelligence of the
design might reach the governor. Towards evening
Crawford marched from Glasgow, with a small but
determined band. By midnight, they arrived at the
bottom of the rock. The moon was set, and the
sky, which hitherto had been extremely clear, was
covered with a thick fog. It was where the rock

was

B o o K was highest, that the aflailants made their attempt,

VI. because in that place there were few centinels, and

'-- . they hoped to find them least alert. The firlt lad-
I57I* der was scarcely fixed, when the weight and eager-

ness of those who mounted, brought itto the ground.
None of the assailants were hurt by the iall, and
none of the garrison alarmed at the noise. Their
guide and Crawford scrambled up the rock, and
fastened the ladder to the roots of a tree, which grew
in a cleft. This place they all reached with the ut-
most difficulty, but were still at a great distance
from the foot of the wall. Their ladder was made
fast a second time; but, in the middle of the ascent,
they met with an unforeseen difficulty. One of their'
companions was seized with some sudden fit, and,
ciing, seemingly without life, to the ladder. All
were at a stand. It was impofilble to pass him.
To tumble him headlong was cruel; and might oc-
cafiona discovery. But Ci-awford's presence of mind
did not forsake him. He ordered the' soldier to be
bound fast to the ladder, that he might not fall when
the fit was over: And turning the other fide of the
ladder, they mounted, with ease, over his belly.
Day now began to break, and there Rill remained
a high wall to scale; but after surmounting so many
greater difficulties, this was soon accomplished. A
sentry observed the first man, who appeared on the
parapet, and had just time to give the alarm, before
he was knocked on the head. The officers and fol-
diers of the garrison ran out naked, unarmed,. and
more solicitous about their own safety, than capable.
of making resistance. The assailants ruflied for-
wards, with repeated Ihouts, and with the utmost

fury;

fury; took pofleffion of the magazine; seizcd the B o o K
cannon; and turned them against their enemies. VI.
Lord Fleming got into a small boat, and fled all '"I
alone into Argylfhire. Crawford, in reward of 57.
his valour and good condut, remained maaer of
the castle; and as he did not lose a single man in
the enterprise, he enjoyed his success with unmixed
pleasure. Lady Fleming, Verac the French En-
voy, and Hamilton Archbishop of St. Andrew's,
were the prisoners of greatest diftintion *.

VERAC'S characer proteced him from the usage, Archbimop

which he merited by his acivity in flirring up ene- dfreSs put
mies against the King. The Regent'treated the to deathby
lady with great politeness, and humanity. But a him
very different fate awaited the Archbishop; he was
carried under a strong guard to Stirling; and as he
had formerly been attainted by at of Parliament,
he was, without any formal trial, condemned to be
hanged; and on the fourth day after he was taken,
the sentence was executed. An attempt was made
to convict him of being accessary to the murder
both of the King and Regent, but there accusations
were supported by no proof. Our historians ob-
serve that he was the first Bishop in Scotland who
died by the hands of the executioner. The high
offices he had enjoyed,, both in church and fate,
ought to have exempted him from a punishment,
inflited only on the lowest criminals. But his zeal
for the Queen, his abilities, and his profefflon, ren-
dered him odious and formidable to the King's ad-
herents. Lennox hated him as the person, by whose

* Buch. 394.

C
VOL. II.

couniels

B o o K counsels the reputation and power of the house of

VI. Hamilton were supported. And party rage, and
1"5"7 personal enmity, ditated that indecent sentence, for
1571. which some colour was fought, by imputing to him

such odious crimes .

dfndthe THE loss of Dunbarton, and the severe treatment
caffl of of the Archbilhop, perplexed and enraged the
Edinburgh
in the Quee's party; and hostilities were renewed with
~Q'^6 all the fierceness, which disappointment and indig-

nation can inspire. Kirkaldy, who, during the truce,
had taken care to increase the number of his garri-
son, and to provide every thing necessary for his de-
fence, issued a proclamation declaring Lennox's au-
thority to be unlawful, and usurped; commanded
all who favoured his cause to leave the town within
fix hours, seized the arms, belonging to the citi-
zens; planted a battery on the steeple of St. Giles,
repaired the walls, and fortified the gates of the city;
and, though the affections of the inhabitants leaned
a different way, held out the metropolis against the
Regent. The Duke, Huntly, Home, Herreis, and
other chiefs of that fa&ion, repaired to Edinburgh
with their followers; and having received a small
fum of money, and some ammunition from France,
formed no contemptible army within the walls. On
the other fide, Morton seized Leith, and fortified
it; and the Regent joined him with a considerable
body of men. While the armies lay so near each
other, daily skirmishes happened, and with various
success. The Queen's party was not flrong enough
to take the field against the Regent, nor was his

$ Spotfw. 2 z.

fupe-
z8

£uperiority so great as to undertake the siege of the B o o K
caffle, or the town . VI.

SOME time before Edinburgh fell into the hands I571.

Both par-

of his enemies, the Regent had summoned a par- ties hold
liament to meet in that place. In order to prevent entS.
any objection against the lawfulness of the meeting, May 14.
the members obeyed the proclamation as exacly as
poflible; and assembled in a house at the head of
the Canongate, which, though without the walls,
lies within the liberties of the city. Kirkaldy ex-
erted himself to the utmost to interrupt their meet-
ing; but they were so strongly guarded, that all his
efforts were vain. They passed an a& attainting
Maitand, and a few others, and then adjourned to
the 28th of Auguf t.

THE other party, in order that their proceedings

might be countenanced by the fame ihew of legal
authority, held a meeting of parliament loon after.
There was produced in this assembly, a declaration
by the Queen, of the invalidity of that deed, where-
by she had resigned the Crown, and consented to the
coronation of her son. Conformable to this decla-
ration, an a& was passed, pronouncing the resignation
to have been extorted by fear; to be null in itself,
and in all its consequences; and enjoining all good
fubjeds to acknowledge the Queen alone to be their
lawful Sovereign, and to support those who acted in
her name. The present establishment of the pro-
teftant religion was confirmed by another statute;

* Cald. ii. 233, &c. t Crawf. Mem. 177.

C a and,

B o o E and, in imitation of the adverse party, a new meet-

VI. ing was appointed on the 26th of August*.

1571. MEANWHILE, all the miseries of civil war defo-
Miserable
condition lated the kingdom. Fellow-citizens, friends, bro-
oatekig- thers, took different fides, and ranged themselves

under the standards of the contending factions. In
every county, and almost in every town and village,
King's-men and Queen's-men were names of diftinc-
tion. Political hatred dissolved all natural ties, and
extinguished the reciprocal good-will and confidence
which hold mankind together in society. Religious
zeal mingled itself with these civil diftin&tions, and
contributed not a little to heighten, and to inflame
them.

State oi THE factions which divided the kingdom were,
factions ..

in appearance, only two. But in both there, there
were persons, with views and principles, so diffe-
rent from each other, that they ought to be diftin-
guifhid. With some, considerations of religion
were predominant, and they either adhered to the
Queen, because they hoped, by her means, to re-
eitablifh Popery, or they defended the King's au-
thority, as the best support of the Protestant faith.
Among these the opposition was violent and irre-
concilable. Others were influenced by political
motives only, or allured by views of interest; the
Regent aimed at uniting there, and did not despair
of gaining, by gentle arts, many of Mary's adhe-
rents to acknowledge the King's authority. Mait-

* Crawf. Mem. 177.

land

land and Kirkaldy had formed the fame design of a 'B o o K
coalition, but on such terms, that the Queen might VI.
be restored to some lhare in the government, and '-'
the kingdom shake off its dependence on England. '571
Morton, the ablest, the most ambitious, and the
most powerful man of the King's party, held a par-
ticular course; and moving only as he was prompt-
ed by the court of England, thwarted every mea-
sure, that tended towards a reconcilement of the
factions; and as he served Elizabeth with much si-
delity, he derived both power and credit from her
avowed protection.

THE time appointed by both parties, for the

meeting of their parliaments, now approached.
Only three peers and two bishops appeared in
that, which was held in the Queen's name at Edin-
burgh. But contemptible as their numbers were,
they passed an a& for attainting upwards of 200 of
the adverse faction. The meeting at Stirling was
numerous and splendid. The Regent had prevail-
ed on the Earls of Argyll, Eglinton, Caffils, and
Lord Boyd, to acknowledge the King's authority.
The three Earls were among the most powerful
noblemen in the kingdom, and had hitherto been
zealous in the Queen's cause. Lord Boyd had been
one of Mary's commissioners at York and Weftmin-
fter, and, since that time, had been admitted into
all her most secret councils. But, during that tur-
bulent period, the condu& ofindividuals, as well as
the principles of fa&ions, varied so often, that the
sense of honour, the chief preservative of consistence
in character, was entirely loft; and without any re-

gard

B o o K gard to decorum, men suddenly abandoned one par-

VI. ty, and adopted all the violent passions of the other.
'-"'v' The defetion, however, of so many persons of dif-
157'1 tin&ion, not only weakened the Queen's party, but

added reputation to her adverfarles.

The King's AFTER the example of the parliament at Edin-
pird in- burgh, that at Stirling began with framing ats
Stling. against the opposite fa&ion. But in the midst of all

the security, which confidence in their own num-
bers, or distance from danger could inapire, they
were awakened, early one morning, by the Shouts
Sept 3 of the enemy in the heart of the town. In a mo-

ment,i the houses of every person of difintion were
surrounded, and before they knew what to think of
So strange an event, the Regent, the Earls of Ar-
gyll, Morton, Glencairn, Caffils, Eglinton, Mon-
trofe, Buchan, the Lords Sempil, Cathcart, Ogil-
vie, were all made prisoners, and mounted behind
troopers, who were ready to carry them to Edin-
burgh. Kirkaldy was the author of this daring en-
terprife; and if he had not been induced, by the
ill-timed solicitude of his friends about his safety,
nottohazard his own person in conducting it, that
day might have terminated the contest between the
two fations, and have restored peace to his coun-
try. By his dire&cion, four hundred men, .under
the command of 1untley, Lord Claud Hamilton,
and Scott of Buccleugh, set .out from Edinburgh,
and the better to conceal their design, imarched to-
wards the south. But they soon wheeled to the
right, and horses having been provided for the in-
rcnt.i, rode fnraight to Stirling. By four in the

morning,

morning, thE-j arrived there; not one sentry. was B o o
potled on the walls, not a single man was awake VI.
about the place. They met with no refiflance from
any person they had seized, except Morton. He I7I'
defending his house with obstinate valour, they were
obliged to set it on fire, and he did not surrender
till forced out of it by the flames. In performing
this, some time was consumed; and the private
men, unaccuflomed to regular difcipiine, left their
colours, and began to rifle the houses and ihops of
the citizens. The noise and uproar of the town
reached the castle. The Earl of Mar sallied out
with thirty soldiers; fired briskly upon the enemy,
of whom almost none but the officers kept together
in a body. The townsmen took arms to assist their
governor; a sudden panic struck the assailants; some
fled, some surrendered themselves to their own pri-
foners; and had not the borderers, who followed
Scott, prevented a pursuit, by carrying off all the
horses within the place, not a man would have
escaped. If the Regent had not unfortunately been
killed, the loss on the King's fide would have been
as inconsiderable as the alarm was great. Think on
the Archbihop of St. Andrew's, was the word among
the Queen's soldiers; and Lennox fell a sacrifice to The Regn
his memory. The officer, to whom he surrendered, killed.
endeavouring to protec him, loft his own life ini
his defence. He was slain, according to the gene-
ral opinion, by command of Lord Claud Hamil-
ton. Kirkaldy had the glory of concerting this plan
with great ftcrecy and prudence; but Morton's
fortunate obstinacy, and the want of discipline
among his own troops, deprived him of success, the

C 4 only

B o o K only thing wanting to render this equal to the mo:

VI. applaudedcmilitary enterprises of the kind*.

MI57I. As so many of the nobles were assembled, they
Mar thofen
Regent. proceeded, without delay, to the eletion of a Re-
Se. 6. gent. Argyll, Morton, and Mar, were candidates

for the office. Mar was chosen by a majority of
voices. Amidst all the fierce dissensions, which had
prevailed so long in Scotland, he had distinguished
himself by his moderation, his humanity, and his
disinterestedness. And as his power was far inferior
to Argyll's, and his abilities not so great as Mor-
ton's, he was, for these reasons, less formidable to
the other fiobles. His merit, too, in having so
lately rcfcued the leaders of their party from im-
minent deftrucion, contributed not a little to his
preferment.

Proceed- WHILE these things were carrying on in Scot-
ings in land, the tranfacions in England were no less inte-
ag-inft refing to Mary, and still more fatal to her cause.
Mi-'. The parliament of that kingdom, which met in

April, pafied an a&t, by which it was declared to
be high treason, to claim any right to the Crown
during the life of the Queen; to affirm that'the title
of any other person was better than hers, or to main-
tain that the parliament had not power to fettle, and
to limit the order of succession. This remarkab'!
ftatutewas intiended not only for the security of their
own Sovereig.., but to curb the restless and in-
triguing fpirii of the Scottilh Qeen, and her adhe-
rents ' ' ' a

* Melv. 226. Crawf. Men. zo.0.
24

' Camid. 436.

AT this time, a treaty of marriage between B o o K

Elizabeth and the Duke of Anjou, the French VI.
King's brother, was far advanced. Both courts ,'J
seemed to desire it with equal ardour, and gave Maiage'
out, with the utmost confidence, that it could not negociated
fail of taking place. Neither of them, however, Eizabetb
wished it success; and they encouraged it for no Dad eos
other end, but because it served to cover or to Anjou.
promote their particular designs. The whole policy
of Catherine of Medicis was bent towards the ac-
complifhment of her detestable project for the de-
ftruclion of the Hugonot chiefs; and by carrying
on a negociation for the marriage of her son with a
Princess, who was justly esteemed the protetrefs or
that party, by yielding some things in point of re-
ligion, and by discovering an indifference with re-
gard to others, Ihe hoped to amuse all theProteftants
in Europe, and to lull asleep thejealoufy even of the
Hugonots themselves. Elizabeth flattered herself
with reaping advantages of another kind. During
the dependance of the negociation, the French could
not with decency give any open assistance to the
Scottish Queen; if they conceived any hopes of fuc-
cess in the treaty of marriage, they would, of course,
interest themselves but coldly in her concerns; Mary
herself muff be deje6ted at losing an ally whom she
had hitherto reckoned her most powerful protecor;
and by interrupting her correspondence with France,
one source, at lealt, of the cabals and intrigues
which disturbed the kingdom, would be ftopt. Both
Queens fucceded in their schemes. Catherine's ar-
tifices imposed on Elizabeth, and blinded the Hu-
gonots. The French discovered the utmost indiffe-
rence about the interest of the Scottish Queen; and

Mary,

B o o E Mary, confidering that court as already united with

VI. her rival, turned herself, for protection, towards the

l-v.--- King of Spain *. Philip, whose dark and thought-
NS57s' ful mind delighted in the mystery of intrigue, had
conSpiracy. held a secret correspondence with Mary, for some

famrcurof
ay. time, by means of the bishop of Ross, and had

supplied both herself, and her adherents in Scotland,
with small fums of money. Ridolphi, a Florentine
gentleman, who resided at London under the cha-
ra&er of a banker, and who a&ed privately as an
agent for the Pope, was the person whom the Bi-
ihop intrusted with this negociation. Mary thought
it necessary, likewise, to communicate the secret to
the Duke of Norfolk, whom Elizabeth had lately
restored to liberty, upon his solemn prorife to have
no further intercourse with the Queen of Scots;
which, however, he regarded so little, that she took
no ftep in any matter of moment, without his ad-
vice. She complained in a long letter, which lhe
wrote to him in cyphers, of the baseness, with which
the French court had abandoned her interest; ihe
declared her intention of imploring the assistance of
the Spanish Monarch, which was now her only re-
source; and recommended Ridolphi to his confi-
dence, as a persson, capable both of explaining and
advancing the scheme. The Duke commanded
Hickford, his secretary, to decypher, and then to
burn this letter; but whether he had been already
gained by the court, or resolv,ed at that time to be-
tray his master, he disobeyed the latter part of the
order, and hid the letter, together with other trea-
fenable papers, under the Duke's own bed.

Digges. 144, 148. Camd. 434.

RIDOLPHI,
26

RIDOLPHI, in a conference with Norfolk, omitted B o o t

none ofthofe arguments, and spared none of those VI.
promises, which are the usual incentives to rebel- '-v
lion. The Pope, he told him, had a great fum in 1571.
readiness to bestow in so good a cause. The Duke of
Alva had undertaken to land ten thousand men, not
far from London. The Catholics to a man would
rife in arms. Many of the nobles were ripe for a
revolt, and wanted only a leader. Half the nation
had turned their eyes towards him, and called on
him to revenge the unmerited injuries, which he
himself had suffered; and to rescue an anfortunate
Queen, who offered him her person, and her Crown,
as the reward of his success. Norfolk approved of
the deflgn, and though 'he refused to give Ridolphi
any letter of credit, allowed him to use his name, in
negaciating with the Pope, and Alva* The Bishop
of Ross, who, from the violence of his temper, and
impatience to procure relief for his mistress, was apt
to run into rafl and desperate designs, advised the
Duke to assemble fecretlyafew of his followers, and
at once to seize Elizabeth's person. But this the
Duke rejected as a scheme equally wild and hazard-
ous. Meanwhile, the English Court had received Dcif.ocrtd
some imperfet information of the plot, by inter- byEliza-
cepting one of Ridolphi's agents; and an accident Augua.
happened, which brought to light all the circum-
stances of it: The Duke had employed Hickford
to transmit to Lord Herreis some money, which
was to be distributed among Mary's friends in Scot-
land. A person not in the secret was intrusted with

A ndcrf. iii. 161.

corvey-

Bo o K conveying it to the borders, and he, fufpe&ing it

VI. from the weight to be gold, whereas he had been
·* '"--' told that it was silver, carried it dire&ly to the Pri-

157I' vy Council. TheDuke, his domestics, and all who

were privy, or could be fufpeted of being privy to
sept 7. the design, were taken into custody. Never did the

accomplices in a conspiracy discover less firmness,
or servants betray an indulgent master with greater
baseness. Every one confessed the whole of what
he knew. Hickford gave direcions how to find
the papers, which he had hidden. The Duke him-
self, relying at first on the fidelity of his associates,
and believing alldangerous papers to have been de-
stroyed, confidently asserted his own innocence; but
when their depositions and the papers themselves
were produced, astonished at their treachery, he
acknowledged his guilt, and implored the Queen's
mercy. His offence was too heinous, and too often
repeated, to obtain pardon; and Elizabeth thought
it necessary to deter her subje&s, by his punilhment,
from holding correspondence with the Queen of
Scots, or her emissaries. Being tried by his Peers,
he was found guilty of high treason, and, after fe-
veral delays, suffercd death for the crime .

THE discovery of this conspiracy produced many

effe&s, extremely detrimental to Mary's interest.
The Biflop of Ross, who appeared by the consef-
sion of all concerned, to be the prime mover in
every cabal against Elizabeth, was taken into cuf-
tody, his papers searched, himself committed to the

Anerf. iii. 149. State Trials, 185.

Tower,

Tower, treated with the utmost rigour, threatened B o o K
with capital punilhment, and after a long confine- VI.
ment, set at liberty, on condition that he lhould '---'
leave the kingdom. Mary was not only deprived 1571.
of a servant, equally eminent for his zeal, and his
abilities, but was denied from that time, the privi-
lege of having an ambassador at the English court.
The Spanilh ambassador, whom the power and
dignity of the prince he represented, exempted from
such insults as Ross had suffered, was commanded
to leave England *. Mary herself was kept under
a ftri&er guard than formerly, the number of her
domestics abridged, and no person permitted to fee
her, but in presence of her keepers t.

AT the fame time, Elizabeth, foreseeing the storm Elizabeth

declares

which was gathering, on the continent, against her openly a-
kingdom, began to wilh that tranquillity were re- g'inth"
stored in Scotland; and irritated by Mary's late at- party.
tempt against her government, The determined to
aEt, without disguise or ambiguity, in favour of the
King's party. This resolution she intimated to the
leaders of both fa&ions. Mary, she told them, oa23..
had held such a criminal correspondence with her
avowed enemies, and had excited such dangerous
conspiracies both against her crown and her life, that
Ihe would henceforth confider her as unworthy of
protection, and would never consent to restore her
to liberty, far less to replace her on her throne. She
exhorted them therefore, to unite in acknowledging
the King's authority. She promised to procure by

* Digges, 163. t Strype, Ann. i. 5o.

her

29

B o o K her mediation equitable terms for those, who had

VI. hitherto opposed it. But if they still continued re-

t -' fra&ory, Ihe threatened to employ her utmost power
I571. to compel them to submit . Though this decla-

ration did not produce an immediate effea&; though
hoffilities continued in the neighbourhood of Edin-
burgh; though Huntly's brother; Sir Adam Gor-
don, by his bravery, and good condu&, had routed
the King's adherents in the North, in many en-
counters; yet such an explicit discovery of Eliza-
beth's sentiments contributed not a little to animate
one party, and to depress the spirit and hopes of
the other t-

1572. As Morton, who commanded the Regent's for-
Hoftiliies ces, lay at Leith, and Kirkaldy still held out the
b-.dn town and castle of Edinburgh, scarce a day passed

t without a flirmilh. And while both avoided any

decisive ation, they harassed each other by attack-
ing small parties, beating up quarters, and inter-
cepting convoys. These operations, though little
memorable in themselves, kept the paflions of both
factions in perpetual exercise and agitation, and
wrought them up, at last, to a degree of fury,
which rendered them regardless not only of the laws
of war, but of the principles of humanity. Nor
was it in the field alone, and during the heat of
combat, that this implacable rage appeared; both
parties hanged the prisoners they took, of whatever
rank or quality, without mercy, and without trial.
Great numbers suffered in this shocking manner;

*See Append. No. IV.
f Cald. ii. 289. 294. Strype, ii. 76.

the
S

the unhappy vicims were led, by fifties at a time, B o o i
to execution; and it was not till both fides had VI.
smarted severely, that they discontinued this barba- -'
rous praaice, so reproachful to the chara&er of the 1572.
nation * Mean while, those in the town and castle,
though they had received a supply of money from
the Duke of Alva t, began to susser for want of
provisions. As Morton had destroyed all the mills
in the neighbourhood of the city, and had planted
small garrisons in all the houses of strength around
it, scarcity daily increased. At last all the miseries
of famine were felt, and they must have been soon
reduced to such extremities, as would have forced
them to capitulate, if the Englilh and French am-
baffadors had not procured a suspension of hoftili-
ties, between the two parties :.

THOUGH the negociation for a marriage, between League be-

Elizabeth and the Duke of Anjou, had been fruit- landanda
less, both Charles and the were desirous of conclud- Francc.
ing a defensive alliance between the two Crowns.
He confidered such a treaty, not only as the best
levice for blinding the Protestants, againrf whom
the conspiracy was now almost ripe for execution;
but as a good precaution, likewise, against the dan-
gerous consequences, to which that atrocious mea-
sure mightexpofe him. Elizabeth, who had hither-
to reigned without a single ally, now saw her king-
dom to threatened with intestine commotions, or
exposed to invasions from abroad, that Ihe was ex-

b Crawf. Mem. zz8. 220, Cald. ii. 345.
t Id. 346.

tremely

B o o K tremely folicitousto secure the assistance of so pow-

VI. erful a neighbour. The difficulties arising from
*'---' the situation of the Scottish Queen, were the chief
1572. occasions of any delay. Charles demanded some

terms of advantage for Mary, and her party. Eli-
zabeth refused to liften to any proposition of that
kind. Her obstinacy overcame the faint efforts of
the French Monarch. Mary's name was not so
much as mentioned in the treaty, and with regard
to Scotdlh affairs, a short article was inserted, in ge-
April . neral and ambiguous terms, to this purpose, " That

the parties contracting shall make no innovations in
Scotland; nor susser any stranger to enter, and to
foment the fations there; but it lhall be lawful for
the Queen of England to chastise, by force of arms,
those Scots who shall continue to harbour the Eng-
lih rebels now in Scotland*." In consequence of
this treaty, France and England affeced to a& in
concert with regard to Scotland, and Du Croc, and
Sir William Drury, appeared there, in name of their
refpetive Sovereigns. By their mediation, a truce,
for two months, was agreed upon, and during that
time, conferences were to be held between the lead-
ers of the opposite factions, in order to accommo-
date their differences, and restore peace to the king-
dom. This truce afforded a seasonable interval of
tranquillity to the Queen's adherents in the South;
but in the North, it proved fatal to her interest.
Sir Adam Gordon had still maintained his reputa-
tion and superiority there. Several parties, under
different officers, were sent against him. Some of
them he attacked in the field; against others he

* Digges, 170. 191. Camd. 444.

employed

employed fftraagemn; and as his courage and con- B o o K
du&t were equal, none of his enterprises failed of VI.
success. He made war, too, with the humanity, '.
which became so gallant a man, and gained ground 5
by that, no less than by the terror of his arms. If
he had not been obliged, by the truce, to suspend
his operations, he would, in all probability, have
brotught that part of the kingdom to submit entire-
ly to the Queen's authority*.

NOTWITHSTANDING Gordon's bravery and fuc- Proceed-
cess, Mary's interest was on the decline, not only ingsinEng-

land against

in her own kingdom, but among the Englilh. No- Mary.
thing could be more offensive to that nation, jea-
lous of foreigners, and terrified at the profpeC of
the Spanish yoke, than her negociations with the
Duke of Alva. The parliament, which met in
May, proceeded against her as the most dangerous
enemy of the kingdom; and after a solemn confer-
ence betweenthe Lords and Commons, both houses
agreed in bringing in a bill to declare her guilty of
high treason, and to deprive her of all right of fuc-
cession to the Crown. This great cause, as it was
then called, occupied them during the whole feion,
and was carried on with much unanimity. Eliza-
beth, though The applauded their zeal, and approv-
ed greatly of the course they were taking, was fa-
tisfied with shewing Mary what ihe might expect
from the resentment of the nation; but as she did
not yet think it time to proceed to the most violent
extremity against her, she prorogued the parlia-
rrent t-

* Crawf. Mem. f D'Ewes Journ. 206, &c.
VOL. II. D THESE

B o o K THESE severe proceedings of the Englilh parlia-

VI. ment were not more mortifying to Mary, than the
'-'~ coldness and negle& of her allies the French. The
The F7ch Duke of Montmorency, indeed, who came over to
ncg he ratify the league with Elizabeth, made a shew of in-

tereffing himself in favour of the Scottish Queen,
but instead of soliciting for her liberty, or her re-
itoration to her throne, all that he demanded was
a flight mitigation of the rigour of her imprison-
ment. And even this small request, he urged with
so little warmth or importunity, that no regard was
paid to it*.

The mara- THE alliance with France afforded Elizabeth
re ofParis. much fatisfacion, and the expe&ed from it a great

increase of security. She now turned her whole at-
tention towards Scotland, where the animofities of
the two fa&ions- were still so high, and so many in-
tersering interests to be adjusted, that a general pa-
cification seemed to be at a great distance. But
while ihe laboured to bring them to some agree-
ment, an event happened which filled a great part
of Europe with aftonihiment, and with horror.
This was the massacre of Paris; an attempt, to
which there is no parallel in the history of mankind,
either for the dissimulation which led to it, or for
the cruelty. By the most solemn promises of safety
and favour, the leaders of the Protestants were
drawn to court; and though doomed to deftrution,
they were received with caresses, loaded with ho-

t Jebb, ii. 512,

nours,
34

nours, and treated, for seven months, with every B o o K
possible mark of familiarity, and of confidence. In VI.
the midst of their security, the warrant fortheir de- ..

1572.

ftrution was issued by their Sovereign, on whose August 24.
word they had relied; and, in obedience to it, their
countrymen, their fellow-citizens, and companions,
imbrued their hands in the r blood. Ten thousand
Protestants, without diftin&ion of age, or sex, or
condition, were murdered in Paris alone. The
fame barbarous orders were sent to other'parts of
the kingdom, and a like carnage ensued. This
deed, which no Popish writer, in the present age,
mentions without deteltation, was, at that time, ap-
plauded in Spain; and at Rome, solemn thanks-
givings were offered to God, for its success. But
among the Protestants, it excited incredible horror;
a striking picture of which is drawn by the French
Ambassador at the court of England, in his account
of his first audience after the massacre. " A gloomy
sorrow, fays he, fat on every face; silence, as in
the dead of night, reigned through all the chambers
of the royal apartment; the ladies and courtiers
were ranged on each fide, all clad in deep mourn-
ing, and as I passed through them, not one bestow-
ed on me a'civil look, or made the least return to
my salutes*."

BUT horror was not the only passion, with which Detrme-.
this event inspired the Protestants; it filled them t, toMa-

ry's inte.

with fear. They confidered it as the prelude to ret.
some greater blow, and oelieved, not without much

' Carte, iii. 522.

D 2 pro-

B o o K probability, that all the Popihi Princes had confpir-

VI. ed tIe deftd&ti-n of6 their fe&. This opinion did

no ffiall disservice t Mary's affairs in S$cotiad.
x572. Many 0 f her adhereints were arotefants; and;

though they wiflied her 'reftoation, were 'uiot wil-
ling, on that account, to. facrtfice the faith which
they po6eTeid. Ther 'draded hier- ttiachment to
a religion, which alloiied its votaries to violate the
mioft solemn eingagements, and prormpite'd them to
perpetr'ate the moRt barbiarous criimes. A general
co6nfederacy 'of th'e Protefahts feemned to tthem the
only thing that could uphold 'the eformaition against
the league, 'which was formed 'to 'ove-rt'urni it. Nor
could :the present 'efitaibiihmeniit ofreligion be long
ma'intained in Britaini, b-it by a ftriE 'union with
Elizaieth, arid by the conc'urrence of bolh 'nations,
in efpo-uftlng the defence of it, as a comiinon cause*.

The Regent THE Regent took hlol of this fasdoutrable con-
'tounie1" juni-&re for negociating a general peace. And as
bo Pr- he laboured for this p'arpofe, with the utmost zeal,

iana the adverse fa&ion placed entire confidence in
his integrity, his endiavours could scarce have failed
of being successful. Maitland and Kirkaldy came
so near to an agreemenit 4ith hiim, that scarce any
thing remained, except the formality of signing the
treaty. But Morton had not forgotten the difap-
pointment he'met with in his pretenforis to the Re-
gency; his abiliies, his wealth, and the patronage
of the court of England, gave him greater sway
with the party, than even the Regent himself i and
he took pleasure in thwarting every measure pur-

* Digges, z44, 267.

sued

sued by him. He was afraid that if Maitland and B o o K
his associates recovered any. hare in the adlpiniftra- VI.
tion, his own i nflunce would be considerably dimi- '"'
nifhed; the Regent, by their means, would re- 57
gain that ascendant, which belonged to his station.
With him, concurred all those who were in posses-
sion of the lands, which belonged to any of the
Queen's party. And his ambition, and their.,va-
rice, frustrated 'the Regent's pious intentions, -and
retarded a blessing so necessary to the kingdon, as
the eftabli.hment of peaceL.

SUCH a discovery of the felfiihnefs and ambition, His death.

which reigned among his party, made a deep im-
preflion on the Regent, who loved his country, and
willed for peace with much ardour. This inward
grief brdke his spirit, and by degrees, brought on
a fettled melancholy, that .ended in a distemper, of
which he died on the 29th of Otober. He was,
perhaps the' only perofn in the kingdom, who could
have enjoyed the office of Regent, without envy,
and have'left it, without'lofs of reputation., Not-
withstanding .their mutual animofities, both facions
acknowledged his views to be honourable, and his
integrity to be uncorrupted t-

No competitor now appeared against Morton. Morton

The Queen of England powerfully supported his hotfenre
claim, and notwithstanding the fears of the people, Novem.
and the jealousy of the nobles, he was elteed Re-
gent; the fourth, who, in the space of five years,
had held that dangerous office.

*Melv. 233. Crawf. Mem. 237. t Id. 241.

D3 As

VI. January, this gave him an opportunity of continu-

rc'/' ing the negociations with the opposite party, which
I57' -had been set on foot by his predecessor. They pro-

duced no effects, however, till the beginning of the
next year.

iBEFORE we proceed to these, some events, hi-
thErto untouched, deserve our notice;

THE Earl of Northumberland, who had been

kept prisoner in Lochlevin, ever since his flight in-
to Scotland in the year I1569, was given up to Lord
Hunfdon govenor of Berwick; and being carried to
York, suffered there the puniihment due to his re-
bellion. The King's party were so sensible of their
dependence on Elizabeth's prote&ion, that it was
scarce pofitble for them to-refufe putting into her
hands a person who had taken up arms against her.
But as afum of money was paid, on that account;
and ihared between Morton and Douglas of Loch-
levin, the former of whom, during his exile in
England, had been much indebted to Northumber-
land's friendship, the abandoning this unhappy
nobleman, in such manner, to certain deftrucion,
was deemed an ungrateful and mercenary acion*.

Affiars of THIS year was remarkable for a considerable in-
the churh. novation in the government of the Church. Soon

after the Reformation, the Popilh bishops had been
confirmed by law in poffeflion of part of their be-
nefices; but the spiritual juridi&ion, which belong-

* Crawf. Mem. 55. 222. Camd. 445,

ed

THE H:1STORY
38

ed to their order, was exercised by fuperintendants, B o o K
though with- more moderate authority. On the VI.
death of the Archbilhop of St. Andrews, Morton -"
obtained from the Crown a grant of the tempora- 572
lities of that fee. But as it was thought indecent
for, a layman to hold a benefice, to which the cure
of fouls was annexed, he procured Douglas, re&or
of the university of St. Andrews, to be chosen Arch-
bijhop; and allotting him a small pension out of the
revenues of the fee, retained the remainder in his
own hands. The nobles, who saw the advantages
they might reap from such a pracice, supported
him in the execution of his plan. It gave great
offence, however, to the Clergy, who, instead of
perpetuating an order, whose name and power was
odious to them, wilhed that the revenues which had
belonged to it, might be employed in supplying such
parilhes, as were {till unprovided with fettled pastors.
But on the one hand, it would have been rash in
the Clergy to have irritated, too much, noblemen,
on whom the veryexiftence of the Protestant Church
in Scotland dependeds and Morton, on the other,
conduced his scheme with such dexterity, and ma-
naged them with so mudch art, that it was, at lat,
agreed, in a convention composed of the leading
men among the Clergy, together with a committee
of privy council, " that the name and office of
Archbishop, and Bilhop, ihould be continued during
the King's minority, and these dignities be confer-
red upon the best qualified among the Protestant
Ministers; but that with regard to their spiritual ju-
rifdi&ions, they ihould be subjet to the general as-
fembly of the Church." The rules to be observed

in

B o o K in their eletion; and the persons who were to supply

VI. the place, and enjoy the privileges, which belonged
- --2- to the Dean and Chapter in times of Popery, were
1572. likewise particularly specified*. And the whole be-

ing laid before the General Assembly, after some
exceptions to the name ofArchbiJhop, Dean, Cbap-
ter, &c. and a protestation that it fiiould be con-
fidered only as a temporary conititution till one
more perfec could be introduced, it obtained the
approbation of that court t. Even Knox, who
was prevented from attending the assembly by the
ill state of his health, though he declaimed loudly
against the Simoniacal paction, to which Douglas
owed his preferment, and blamed the nomination of
a person, worn out with age and infirmities, to an
office, which required unimpaired vigour both of
body and mind, seems not to have condemned the
proceedings of the Convention; and in a letter to the
Aflembly, approved of some of their regulations
with refpe&t to the Election of Bilhops, as worthy
of being carefully observed :, In consequence of
the assembly's consent to the plan agreed upon in
the Convention, Douglas was initalled in his office,
and at the fame time, an Archbishop of Glasgow
and a Bilhop of Dunkeld, were chosen from among
the Proteflant Clergy. They were all admitted to
the place in Parliament, which belonged to the ec-
defiaftical order. But, in imitation of the example
set by Morton, such bargains were made with them
by different noblemen, as gave them poffeltion only

* Cald. ii. 305.
t See Appendix, No. V.

t Id. 354+

of a very small part of the revenues, belonging to B o o K
their fees*. VI.

I572.

SOON after the dissolution of this assembly, Knox, Nov. 27

the prime instrument of spreading and. establishing Death"and
the Reformed religion in Scotland, ended his life, of Knox.
in the 67th year of his age. Zeal, intrepidity, dif-
intereftednefs, were virtues which he pofleffed, in an
eminent degree. He was acquainted too, with the
learning, cultivated in that age; and excelled in
that species of eloquence, which is calculated to
route, and to inflame. His maxims, however,
were often too revere, and the impetuosity of his
temper exceflive. Rigid and uncomplying himself,
he shewed no indulgence to the infirmities of others.
Regardless of the diftinEtions of rank and character,
he uttered his admonitions with an acrimony and ve-
hemence, more apt to irritate, than to reclaim.
This often betrayed him into indecent and undutiful
expressions, with refpe&t to the Queen's person and
condut. Those very qualities, however, which
nowrender his chara&er less amiable, fitted him to
be the instrument of Providence for advancing the
Reformation among a fierce people, and enabled him
to face dangers, and to surmount opposition, from
which, a person of a more gentle spirt would have
been apt to Ihrink back. By an unwearied appli-
cation to study, and to business, as well as by the
frequency and fervour of his public discourses, he
had worn out a constitution, naturally strong. Dur-
ing a lingering illness, he discovered the utmost for-
titude; and met the approaches of death, wlh a

. Spots. 261.

magna-

B oo magnanimity inseparable from his chara&er. He

VI. was constantly employed in a&s of devotion, and

'- ' comforted himself with those profpets of immorta-
1572- lity, which not only preserve good men from de-

fponding, but fill them with exultation in their last
moments. The Earl of Morton, who was present
at his funeral, pronounced his elogium in a few
words, the more honourable for Knox, as they
canme from one whom he had often censured with
peculiar severity, " There lies He, who never fear-
ed the face of man*."

53 , THOUGH Morton did not desire peace from such
Th.- RWJ t generous motives as the former Regent, he laboured,

uwith however, in good earnest to establish it. The pub-
paty. lic confusions and calamities, to which he owed his

power and importance when he was only the second
person in the nation, were extremely detrimental to
him, now that he was raised to be the first. While
so many of the nobles continued in arms against
him, his authority, as Regent, was partial, feeble,
and precarious. Elizabeth was no less desirous of
extinguilhing the flame, which lhe had kindled, and
kept so long alive in Scotland t. She bad disco-
vered the alliance with France, from which she had
expected such advantages, to be no foundation of
security. And though, appearances of friendlhip
still subsisted between her and that court, and Charles
daily renewed his protestations of inviolable adhe-
rence to the treaty, fle was convinced, by a fatal
example, how little tfle ought to rely on the pro-
mises or oaths' of that perfidious Monarch. Her

* Spo:f. zz6. Cald. ii. z37.

t Digges z99.

am-

ambassador warned her that the French held secret B o o K
correspondence with Mary's adherents in Scotland, VI.
and encouraged them in their obstinacy*. The -v
Duke of Alva carried on his intrigues in that king- 573'
dom, with less disguise. She was persuaded that
they would embrace the first serene interval, which
the commotions in France and in the Netherlands
would allow them, and openly attempt to land in
Scotland. She resolved, therefore, to prevent their
getting any footing in the island, and to cut off all
their hopes of finding any aliftance there, by unit-
ing the two parties,

THE situation of Mary's adherents enabled the Hisover-

Regent to carry on his negociations with them to jt'd
great advantage. They were now divided into two Maitland
facions. At the head ofthe one, were Chatelhe- aidy.
rault and Huntly, Maitland and Kirkaldy were
the leaders of the other. Their high rank, their
extensive property, and the numbers of their fol-
lowers, rendered the former considerable. The lat-
ter were indebted for their importance, to their per-
fonal abilitie,, and to the strength of the castle of
Edinburgh, which was in their possession. The
Regent had no intention to comprehend both in the
fame treaty; but as he dreaded that the Queen's
party, if it remained entire, would be able to thwart
and embarrass his administration, he resolved to di-
vide and weaken it, by a separate negotiation. He
made the first overture to Kirkaldy, and his affo-
ciates, and endeavoured to renew the negociation

Digges, 296. 312.

with

B o o K with them, which, during the life of his predecef-

VI. for, had been broken off by his own artifices. But

Kirkaldy knew Morton's views, and system of go-
I573- vernment, to be very different from those of the

former Regent. Maitland confidered him, as a
personal and implacable enemy. They received re-
peated assurances of protecion from France. And
though the siege of Rochelle employed the French
arms at that time, the fame hopes, which had so
often deceived the party, still amused them, and
they expected that the obstinacy of the Hugonots
would soon be subdued, and that Charles would
then be at liberty to as with vigour in Scotland.
Mean while, a supply of money was sent, and if
the castle could be held out till Whitfunday, effec-
tual aid was promised*. Maitland's genius delight-
ed in forming schemes, that were dangerous; and
Kirkaldy possessed the intrepidity, necessary for put-
ting them in execution. The castle,- they knew,
was so situated that it might defy all the Regent's
power. Elizabeth, they hoped, would not violate
the treaty with France, by fending forces to his as-
fiftance; and if the French should be ablk to land
any considerable body of men, it might be pGffible
to deliver the Queen from captivity, or at least to
balance the influence of France and England in
such a manner, as to rescue Scotland from the dif-
honourable dependance on the latter, under which it
had fallen. This splendid, but chimerical project,
they preferred to the friendship of Morton; They
encouraged the negociation, however, because it
served to gain time; they proposed, for the fame

* Digges, 314.

pur-
44

purpose, that the whole of the QOeen's party should B o o K
he comprehended in it, and that Kirkaldy Ihould VI.
retain the command ofthe castle, fix monthls after '--
the treaty was signed. His initerekt prodmpted the 1573-
Regent to reje& 'the former; his penetration disco-
vered the danger f cotiplyihg with the latter; and
all hopes of accom'modation (ranihied *.

As soon as the truce expired, Kirkaldy began to

fire on the city of Edinburgh, which, by the re-
turn of the inhabitants whom he had expelled, was
devoted as zealously as ever, 'to the King's cause.
But as thi, Regent had 'now set on foot a treaty with
Chatelhe~rault rid IHuntly, the cessation of arms
still c6nti'nued with them.

THEY we're less fcrupuulous 'than the other party, Acceped
and listened eagerly to his overtures. The tiuke by Chlatel

herault and

was naturally uniteacdy, and the approach of old Huntly.
age iicreafedhis irrefolu'tioii, and aversion t6 a&ion.
The miseries of civil discord had affliEted Scotland,
almost five years, a length of time far beyond the
duration of any forme'r contest. The war, instead
of doing servic'e, had been detrimental to the Queen;
and more ruiinous than iany foreign invasion, to the
kingdom. In prosecuting it, neither party had
gained much honour; both had suffered great losses;
and had exhausted their own estates, in wafting
those of their adversaries. The commons were in
the utmost misery, and longed ardently for a peace,
which might terminate this fruitless, but deftruclive
quarrel.

* Melv. 23s, &c.

A GREAT

45

B o o . A GREAT Itep was taken towards this desirable

VI. event, by the treaty concluded at Perth, between
L' * 8 the Regent on one hand, and Chatelherault and

.Atii3of Huntly on the other, under the mediation of Kil-
the taty. legrew, Elizabeth's ambassador'. The chief arti-

cles in it were these; that all the parties compre-
hended in the treaty Ihould declare their approbation
of the Reformed religion, now established in the
kingdom; that they should submit to the King's
government, and own Morton's authority as Re-
gent; that they ihould acknowledge every thing
done in opposition to the King, since his coronation,
to be ill:gal; that on both fides the prisoners who
had been taken should be set at liberty, and the
lands restored to their proper owners ; that the a&
of attainder passld against the Queen's adherents
ihould be repealed, and indemnity granted for all
the crimes, of which they had been guilty since the
i5th of June 1567; and that the treaty should be
ratified, by the common content of both parties, in
parliament t.

SKRKALDY, though abandoned by his afrociates,

cale o who neither discovered solicitude nor made provision
Edbur' for his safety, did not lose courage, nor entertain

any thoughts of accommodation :. And though

all

See Append. No. VI. t Crawf. Mem. 251.

t Melvil, whose brother Sir Robert was one of those who

joined with Kirkaldy in the defence of the catfle, and who was
himself strongly attached to their party, asserts that Kirkaldy
offered to accept of any reasonable terms of composition, but
that all his offers were rejected by the Regent, Melv. 240. But
as Elizabeth was, at that time, extremely desirous of reforing

peace

all Scotland had now submitted to the King, he frill B o o K
resolved to defend the castle, in the Queen's name VI.
and to wait the arrival of the promised succours. Y
The Regent was in want of every thing necessary 1573-
for carrying on a siege. But Elizabeth, who de-
termined, at any rate, to bring the dissensions in
Scotland to a period, before the French could find
leisure to take part in the quarrel, soon afforded him
sufficient supplies. Sir William Drury marched into
Scotland, with 50oo foot, and a considerable train
of artillery. The Regent joined him, with all his April aS.
forces; and trenches were opened and approaches
regularly carried on, against the castle. Kirkaldy,
though discouraged by the loss of a great tum of
money, remitted to him from France, and which
fell into the Regent's hands, through the treachery
of Sir James Balfour, the molt corrupt man of that
age, defended himself with bravery, augmented by
delpair. Three and thirty days he resifted all the
efforts of the Scotch and Englilh, who pushed on
their attacks, with courage, and with emulation.
Nor did he demand a parly, till the fortifications
were 'battered down, and one of the wells in the
castle dried up, and the other choaked with rubbish.
Even then, his spirit was unfubdued, and he deter-

peace in Scotland, and her ambassador Killegrew, as well as
the Earl of Rothes, used their utmolt endeavours to persuade
Kirkaldy to accede to the treaty of Perth, it seems more cre-
dible to impute the continuance ofhoftilities to Kirkaldy's ob-
ftinacy, his distrust of Morton, or his hope of foreign aid, than
to any other cause.

That this was really the cafe, is evident from the positive

testimony of Spotfw. 269, 270. Camd. 448. Johnft. Hill.
3, 4. Digges, 334, Crawford's account agrees, in the main,
with theirs, Mem. 263.

mined

47

B o o K mined rather to fall gloriouny behind the last in-

VI. trenchmen't, than to yield to his inveterate enemies.
`'-a But his garrifonwas not animated with the fame he-
1573- roic or desperate resolution, and rifingin a mutiny,

forced him to capitulate. He surrendered himielf
to Drury, who promised, in the name of his mif-
trefs, that he should be favourably treated. Toge-
ther with him, James Kirkaldy his brother, Lord
Home, Maitland, Sir Robert Melvil, a few citi-
zens of Edingburgh, and about 160 soldiers, were
made prisoners .

SEVERAL of the officers, who had been kept in

pay during the war, prevailed on their men to ac-
company them into the Low-countries, and enter-
ing into the service of the States, added, by their
gallant. behaviour, to the reputation for military
virtue, which has always been the charaterifitic of
the Scotiih Nation.

THus by the treaty with Chatelheratilt and Hunt-

tcher- ly, and the surrender .of the caffle, the civil Wars in
r of both Scotland were brought to a peribod. When we re-

*pars view the state of the natioh, ahd compare the

strength of the two factions, Mary's partitans
among the nobles appear, manifestly, to have been
superior both in numbers, and in power. But these
advantages were more than counteibalanced by
others, which their antagonists enjoyed. Political
abilities, military frill, and all the talents, which
times of a&ion form, or call forth, appeared chiefly
on the King's fide. Nor could their enemies boast

Cald. ii. 4o8. Melv. 240. Crawf. Mem. 265.

of any man, who equalled the intrepidity of Mur- B o o K
ray, tempered with wisdom; the profound sagacity VI.
of Morton; the subtle genius, and insinuating ad- -'
dress of Maitland; or the successful valour of-Kirk- I573'
aldy; all which were at firif, employed in laying
the foundations of the King's authority. On the
one fide, measures were concerted with prudence,
and executed with vigour; on the other, theirre'
solutions were rash, and their'conduEt feeble. The
people, animated with zeal for religion, and prompt-
ed by indignation against the Queen, warmly sup-
ported the King's cause. The Clergy threw the
whole weight of their popularity into the fame scale.
By means of these, as well as by the powerful inter-
position of England, the King's government was
finally efiablilhed. Mary loft even that fhaddw of
fovereighty, which, amidst allyher sufferings, 'the had
hitherto retained among part of her own fubjecs.
And as fie was no longer permitted to have an
Ambassador at the court of England, the only mark
of dignity which ihe had, for some time, enjoyed
there, she must henceforth be confidered as an exile
stripped of all the ensigns of royalty; guarded
with anxiety in the one kingdom, and totally de-
ferted or forgotten in the other.

KIRKA.DY and his associates remained in:Drury's Kirkaldy

custody, and were treated by him with great huma- Pt t
nity, till the Queen of England, whose prisoners
they were, (hould determine their fate. Morton
insisted that they ihould susser the punilhment due
to their rebellion and obstinacy; and declared that,
so long as they were allowed to live, he did not

VOL. II. E reckon

B o oKE reckon his own person or authority secure; and

VI. Elizabeth, without regarding Drury's honour, or

his promises in her name, gave them up to the Re-
5'73- gent's disposal. He first confined them to separate

prisons; and, fcon after, with Elizabeth's consent,
AgUn 3. condemned Kirkaldy, and his brother, to be hanged

at the cross of Edinburgh. Maitland, who did not
expect to be treated more favourably, prevented
the ignominy of a public execution, by a volun-
tary death, and " ended his days, fays Melvil, after
the old Roman fashion ."

WHILE the Regent was wreaking his vengeance

on the remains of her party in Scotland, Mary,
incapable of affording them any reliefs bewailed
their misfortunes in the solitude of her prison. At
the fame time, her health began to be much im-
paired by confinement, and want of exercise. At
the entreaty of the French Ambassador, Lord
Shrewsbury her keeper was permitted to carry her
to Buxton-wells, not far from Tuthbury, the place
of her imprisonment. Cecil, who lately had been
created Baron of Burleigh, and Lord High Trea-
furer of England, happened to be there at the
fame time. And though no miniser ever entered
more warmly into the views of a Sovereign, or gave
stronger proofs of his fidelity and attachment, than
this great man, yet such was Elizabeth's distrust of
every person, who approached the Queen of Scots,
that her suspicions extended even to him; and,
while Mary justly reckoned him her most danger-
ous enemy, he found tome difficulty in persuading

* Melv. 242.

his own mistress that he was not partial to that B o o
unhappy Queen *. VI.

THE Duke of Alva was this year recalled from 1573.

the government of the Netherlands, where his
haughty and oppressive administration routed a fpi-
rit, in attempting to subdue which, Spain exhausted
its treafurea, ruined its armies, and loft its glory.
Requefens, who succeeded him, was of a milder
temper, and of a less enterprising genius. This
event delivered Elizabeth from the perpetual dif-
quietude, occasioned by Alva's negociations with
the Scottish Queen, and his zeal for her interest.

THOUGH the kingdom was now fettled'in pro-

found peace, many of the evils, which accompany 1574.
civil war, were still felt. The restraints of law, gents d-
which, in times of public confusion, are little re- minifra-
garded even by civilized nations, were totally de- comes
spifed by a fierce people, unaccustomed to the re- odious.
gular administration of justice. The disorders in
every corner of the kingdom were become intole-
rable; and, under the protection of the one, or the
other faction, crimes of every kind were committed
with impunity. The Regent set himself to redress
there, and, by his industry and vigour, order and
security were re-established in the kingdom. But
he loft the reputation due to this important ser-
vice, by the avarice, which he.difcovered, in per-
forming it; and his own exa&ions became more
pernicious to the nation than all the irregularities
which he restrained t. Spies and informers were
* Strype, ii, 248. 288. t See Append. No. VII.

E2

every

B o o K every where employed; the remembrance of old

VI. offences were revived; imaginary crimes were in-

'1 "'v vented; petty trespasses were aggravated; and de-
I574' linquents were forced to compound for their lives,

by the payrrent of exorbitant fines. At the fame
time, the current coin was debased *; licences were
fold for carrying on prohibited branches of com-
merce, unusual taxes were imposed on commodities;
and all the refinements in opprefflon, from which,
nations so imperfetly polilhed as the Scots are ufu-
ally exempted, were put in pra&ice. None of these
were complained of more loudly, or with greater
reason, than his injustice towards the Church. The
thirds of benefices, out of which the Clergy received
their subsistence, had always been slowly and irre-
gularly paid to colleftors, appointed by the Gene-
ral Assembly; and, during the civil wars, no pay-
ment could be obtained in several parts of the king-
dom. Under colour of redressing this grievance,
and upon a promise of assigning every Minister a
stipend within his own parish, the Regent extorted
from the Church the thirds to which they had right
by law. But the Clergy, instead of reaping any
advantage from this alteration, found that pay-

,The corruption. of the coin, during Morton's adminifcra-

tion, was very great. Although the quantity of current money
coined out of a pound of Bullion, was gradually increased by
former princes; the standard or fineness suffered little altera-
tion, -nd the mixture of alloy was nearly the fame with what
is 'nbowsied. But:Mortoin mixed a fdur9t -past of alloy with
every: pound of fiver, and funk, by consequence, the value of
E in .n proportion. In the-year 581 :all the momey coined by
him was called in, and appointed to be recoiried. The flandard
was.;refiored to the fame purity as formerly. Ruddim. Pref. to
-Anders. Diplom. p. 74.

ments
52

ments became more irregular and dilatory than B o oK
ever. One Minister was commonly burdened with VI.
the care of four or five parishes, a pitiful salary was
allotted him, and the Regent's insatiable avarice 57
seized on the reft of the fund *.

THE death of Charles IX. which happened this

year, was a new misfortune to the Scottish Queen.
Henry III. who succeeded him, had not the fame
attachment to her person; and his jealousy of the
house of Guise, and obsequiousness to the Queen
Mother, greatly alienated him from her interest.

THE death of the Duke of Chatelherault must 1575.

likewise be confidered as some loss to Mary. As Jan. ""
the Parliament had frequently declared him next
heir to the Crown, this entitled him to great re-
fpe& among his countrymen, and enabled him,
more than any other person in the Kingdom, to
counterbalance the Regent's power.

SOON after, at one of the usual interviews. be-

tween the wardens of the Scottish and English
marches, a scuffle happened, in which the Englilh
were worsted; a few killed on the spot; and Sir
James Forrester, the warden, with several gentle-
men who attended him, taken prisoners. But both
Elizabeth and the Regent were too sensible of the
advantage, which resulted from the good under-
standing that subsisted between the two kingdoms,
to allow this flight accident to interrupt it.

Crawf. Mem. 272. Spots. z73. Cald. ii. 4zo. 4z7.

E 3 THE

B o 0 K THE domestic tranquility of the kingdom was

VI. in some danger of being disturbed by another cause.
'- -- 'Though the persons, raised to the dignity of Bi-
Ato57psc flhops, possessed very small revenues, and a very
thbe CIey moderate degree of power, the Clergy, to whom
again~ the
Episcopal the Regent and all his measures were become ex-
"o. tremely odious, began to be jealous of that order.

Knowing that corruptions steal into the Church
gradually, under honourable names, and upon de-
cent pretences, they were afraid that, from such
frmall beginnings, the hierarchy might grow, in
time, to be as powerful and oppressive as ever.
The chief author ofthefe suspicions was Mr. An-
drew Melvil, a man, distinguished by his uncom-
mon erudition, by the severity of his manners, and
the intrepidity of his mind. But, bred up in the
retirement of an academy, he was unacquainted
with the arts of life; and being more attentive to
the ends which he pursued, than to the means
which he employed for promoting them, he often
defeated laudable designs, by the impetuosity and
imprudence with which he carried them on. A
question was moved by him in the assembly " whe-
ther the office of Bishop, as now exercised in the
kingdom, were agreeable to te word of God?"
In the ecclesiastical judicatories, continual com-
plaints were made of the Bishops for negle& of
duty, many of which, their known remissness too
well justified. The Bishop of Dunkeld, being ac-
cufed of dilapidating his benefice, was found guilty
by the assembly. And the Regent, instead of
checking, connived at these disputes about Eccle-
afi1jcal government as they diverted the zeal of

the

the Clergy from attending to his daily encroach- B o o K
ments on the patrimony of the Church *. VI.

x 576.

THE weight of the Regent's oppreflive admini- Herritates

ftration had, hitherto, fallen chiefly on those in the some of thq
lower and middle rank; but he began now to take
such steps, as convinced the nobles, that their dig-
nity would not long exempt them from feeling the
effets of his power. An accident, which was a
frequent cause of dissention among the Scottilh no-
bles, occasioned a difference between the Earls of
Argyll and Athol. A vassal of the former had
made some depredations on the lands of the latter.
Athol took arms to punish the offender; Argyll,
to protect him; and this ignoble quarrel they were
ready to decide in the field, when the Regent, by
interposing his authority, obliged them to disband
their forces. Both of them had been guilty of irre-
gularities, which, though common, were contrary
to the letter of the law. Of these the Regent took
advantage, and resolved to found on them a charge
of treason. This design was revealed to the two
Earls by one of Morton's retainers. The common
danger, to which they were exposed, compelled
them to forget old quarrels, and to unite in a close
confederacy, for their mutual defence. Their junc-
tion rendered them formidable; they despised the
summons which the Regent gave them to appear
before a court of justice; and he was obliged to
desist from any further prosecution. But the injury
he intended made a deep impression on their minds,
and drew on him revere vengeance t.

* Cald. Aflemblies, 1574, &c Jh.

John t.

Hi. .
t Crawf. Mem, 285.

£ 4 NOR

B o o K NOR was he more successful in an attempt, which

VI. he made, to load Lord Claud Hamilton with the
---' guilt of having formed a conspiracy against his
I577' life. Though those, who were supposed to be his

accomplices, were seized, and tortured,. no evidence
of any thing criminal appeared; but, on the con-
trary, many circuriftances discovered his innocence,
as well as the Regent's secret views, in imputing
to him such an odious design *.

They m- THE- Scottish Nobles, who were almost equal to
toaethe their Monarchs in power, and treated by them with
King. much diftintion, observed these arbitrary proceed-

ings of a Regent, with the utmost indignation.
The people, who under a form of government, ex-
tremely fnple, had been little accustomed to the
burden of taxes, complained loudly of the Regent's
rapacity. And all begah to turn their eyes towards
the young. King, from whom they expeced the re-
dress of all their grievances, and the return of a
more gentle, and more equal administration.

James's JAMES was now in the twelfth year of his age.
educaion The Queen, soon after his birth, had committed
and difpofi-
tion. him to the care of the Earl of Mar, and during the

civil wars he had resided securely in the castle of
Stirling. Alexander Erskine, that nobleman's bro-
ther, had the chief diretion of his education. Un-
der him, the famous Buchanan a&ed as preceptor,
together with three other matters, the most eminent
the nation afforded for ikill in those sciences, which
were deemed necessary for a prince. The young

Crawf. Mem. 287.

King

King lhewed an uncommon pafion for learning, B o oK
and made great progress in it. And the Scots fan- VI.
cied that they already discovered in him, all those '---
virtues, which the fondness or credulity of subje&s 1577-
usually ascribe to princes, during their minority.
But as James was still far from that age, at which
the law permitted him to assume the reins of go-
vernment, the Regent did not sufficiently attend to
the sentiments of the people, nor reflect, how na-
turally there prejudices in his favour might encou-
rage the King to anticipate that period. He not
only negle&ed to secure the friendihip of those
who were about the King's person, and who pof-
sessed his ear, but had even exasperated some of
them, by personal injuries. Their resentment con-
curred with the ambition of others, in infusing into cios of tl
the King early suspicions of Morton's power, and Regent's
designs. A King, they told him, had often reason
to fear, seldom to love a Regent. Prompted by
ambition, and by interest, he would endeavour to
keep the Prince in perpetual infancy, at a distance
from his subje&s, and unacquainted with business.
A fiall degree of vigour, however, was sufficient
to break the yoke. Subjets naturally reverence
their Sovereign, and become impatient of the tem-
porary and delegated jurisdiction of a Regent.
Morton had governed with rigour, unknown to the
ancient Monarchs of Scotland. The nation groan-
ed under his oppressions; and would welcome the
first profpe& of a milder administration. At pre-
sent the King's name was scarce mentioned in Scot-
land, his friends were without influence, and his
favourites without honour. But one effort would

discover

57

B o o K discover Morton's power to be as feeble, as it was

VI. arbitrary. The fame attempt would put himself
"-v- in possession of his just authority, and rescue the
I577. nation from intolerable tyranny. If he did not re-

gard his own rights as a King, let him liften, at
least, to the cries of his people *.
A plot TrESE suggestions made a deep impression on

' the the young King, who was trained up in an opinion
Regent that he was born to command. His approbation of

the design, however, was of small consequence,
without the concurrence of the nobles. The Earls
of Argyll and Athol, two of the most powerful
of that body, were animated with implacable re-
fentment against the Regent. To them the Cabal in
Stirling-caftle communicated the plot which was
on foot; and they entering warmly into it, Alex-
ander Erikine, who, since the death of his brother,
and during the minority of his nephew, had the
command of that fort, and the custody of the
King's person, admitted them secretly into the
King's presence. They gave him the fame account
of the misery of his fubjefts, under the Regent's
arbitrary administration; they complained loudly
of the injustice with which themselves had been
treated, and besought the King, as the only means
for redressing the grievances of the nation, to call
a council of all the nobles. James consented, and
letters were issued, in his name, for that purpefe;
but the two Earls took care that they fihould be
sent only to such as were known to bear no good
will to Morton t.

* Melvil, Z49.

t Spots. 278.

THE

THE number of these was, however, so inconfi- B o o K

derable, that, on the day appointed, far the greater VI.
part of the nobles assembled at Stirling; and so '
highly were they incensed against Morton, that al- 5ar7

March 4.

though, on receiving intelligence of Argyll and
Athol's interview with the King, he had made a
feint as if he would resign the Regency, they ad-
vised the King, withoutregarding this offer, to de-
prive him of his office, and to take the adminiftra-
tion of' government into his own hands. Lord
Glamis the chancellor, and Herreis, were appoint-
ed to signify this resolution to Morton, who was,
at that time, in Dalkeith, his usual place of refi-
dence. Nothing could equal the joy with which He reins
this unexpected resolution filled the nation, but the and rcres.
furprize occasioned by the seeming alacrity with
which the Regent descended from so high a station.
He neither wanted sagacity to foresee the danger
of resigning, nor inclination to keep poffeflion of
an office, for, the expiration of which the law had
fixed so distant a term. But all the sources, whence
the faction of which he was head, derived their
strength, had either failed, or now supplied his ad-
verfaries with the means of humbling him. The
Commons the city of Edinburgh, the Clergy, were
all totally alienated from him, by his multiplied
oppressions. Elizabeth, having lately bound herself
by treaty, to fend a considerable body of troops to
the affitance of the inhabitants of the Netherlands,
who were struggling for liberty, had little leisure
to attend to the affairs of Scotland; and as Ihe had
nothing to dread from France, in whose councils
the princes of Lorrain had not, at that time, much

influence,

B o o r influence, she was not displeased, perhaps, at the

VI. birth of new fa&tions in the kingdom. Even those
v- v· .nobles, who had long been joined with Morton in
I57 . faction, or whom he had attached to his person by

benefits, Glamis, Lindsay, Ruthven, Pitcairn the
secretary, Murray of Tillibardin Comptroller, all
deserted his falling fortunes, and appeared in the
council at Stirling. So many concurring circum-
stances convinced Morton of his own weakness, and
determined him to give way to a torrent, which
LaZCh 'z. was too impetuous to be refifed. He attended the

chancellor and Herries to Edinburgh; was present,
when the King's acceptance of the government was
proclaimed; and, in the presence of the people,
surrendered to the King all the authority to which
he had any claim in virtue of his office. This cere-
mony was accompanied with such excessive joy and
acclamations of the multitude, as added, no doubt,
to the anguilh, which an ambitious spirit muff
feel when compelled to renounce supreme power;
and convinced Morton how entirely he had loft
the affe&ions of his countrymen. He obtained,
however, from the King, an aft, containing the
approbation of every thing done by him in the
exercise of his office, and a pardon, in the most
ample form, that his fear or caution could devise,
f all pas offences, crimes, and treasons. The
nobles, who adhered to the King, bound them-
selves, under great penalty, to procure the ratifi-
cation of this a&, in the first parliament *.

Spots. 278. Crawf. Mem. 289. Cald. ii. 522.

A COUN-

A COUNCIL of twelve Peers was appointed to B o o K

assist the King in the administration of affairs. VI.
And Morton, deserted by his own party, and un- '
able to ilruggle with the facion, which governed c578.

Continues

absolutely at court, retired to one of his feats, and to watch
seemed to enjoy the tranquillity, and to be occupied of the ad-
only in the amusements, of a country life. His verfi prty.
mind, however, was deeply disquieted with all the
uneasy reflections which accompany disappointed
ambition, and intent on schemes for recovering his
former grandeur. Even in this retreat, which the
people called the Lyon's-den, his wealth and abilities
rendered him formidable. And the new Counsel-
lors were so imprudent as to rouse him, by the
precipitancy with which they hastened to strip him
of all remains of power. They required him to
surrender the castle of Edinburgh, which was still
in his poflefion. He refused at first to do so, and
began to prepare for its defence; but the citizens
of Edinburgh having taken arms, and repulsed a
part of the garrison, which was sent out to guard
a convoy of provisions, he was obliged to give up
that important fortress, without resistance This
encouraged his adversaries to call a parliament to
meet at Edinburgh, and to multiply their demands
upon him, in such a manner, as convinced him that
nothing less than his utter ruin would satisfy their
inveterate hatred.

THEIR power and popularity, however, began

already to decline. The Chancellor, the ableftand
most moderate man in the party, having been killed
at Stirling, in an accidental rencounter between his

fol-

B o o K followers and those of the Earl of Crawford;

VI. Athol, who was appointed his successor in that

\c'-'
I high office, the Earls of Eglington, Cathnefs, and
1578. Lord Ogilvie, all the prime favourites at court,

were either avowed Papists, or fufpe&ed of leaning
to the opinions of that fe&. In an age, when the
return of popery was so much, and so justly,
dreaded, this gave universal alarm. And as Mor-
ton had always treated the Papists with rigour, this
unseasonable indulgence made all zealous Protef-
tants remember that circumifance in his admini-
ftration, with great praise *.

R~dishis MORTON, to whom none of there particulars
form an- were unknown, thought this the proper juncture

for setting to work the instruments which he had
been preparing. Having gained the confidence of
the Earl of Mar, and of the Countess his mother,
he insinuated to them that Alexander Erskine had
formed a plot to deprive his nephew of the govern-
ment of Stirling-caftle, and the custody of the
King's person; and easily induced an ambitious
woman, and a youth of twenty, to employ force to
prevent this supposed injury. The Earl repairing
suddenly to Stirling, and being admitted, as usual,
into the castle with his attendants, seized the gates
Apil z6. early in the morning, and turned out his Uncle,

who dreaded no danger from his hands. The fol-
diers of the garrison submitted to him as their go-
vernor, and, with little danger, and no effusion of
blood, he became master both of the King's per-
fbn, and the fortress f.

t Cald. ii. 535.
* Spodt. 283.

AN event so unexpe&ed occasioned great confter- B o o K

nation. And though Morton's hand did not ap- VI.
pear in the execution, he was universally believed '--
to be the author of the attempt. The new Coun- 1578.
fellors saw it to be necessary, for their own safety,
to change their measures, and, instead ofpurfuing
him with such implacable resentment, to enter into
terms of accommodation with an adversary, still Co
capable of creating them trouble. Four were named,
on each fide, to adjust their differences. They met
not far from Dalkeith. And when they had brought
matters near a conclusion, Morton, who was too
sagacious not to improve the advantage which their
security and their attention to the treaty afforded
him, set out in the night-time for Stirling, and May 4,
having gained Murray of Tillibardin, Mar's uncle,
was admitted by him into the castle; and manag-
ing matters there with his usual dexterity, he soon
had more entirely the command of the fort, than
the Earl himself. He was likewise admitted to a
feat in the privy council, and acquired the fame
ascendant in it *.

As the time appointed for the meeting of par-

liament at Edinburgh now approached, this gave
him some anxiety. He was afraid of carrying the
young King to a city, whose inhabitants were so
much at the devotion of the adverse faction. He
was no less unwilling to leave James behind at Stir-
ling. In order to avoid this dilemma, he issued a
proclamation, in the King's name, changing the
place of meeting from Edinburgh to Stirling-caffle.

* Cald. ii. 536.

This

63

B o o K This Athol and his party represented as a ftep al-

VI. together unconstitutional. The King, said they, is
t-'"" Morton's prisoner; the pretended counsellors are
1578. his slaves; a parliament, to which all the nobles

may repair without fear, and where they may deli-
berate with freedom, is absolutely necessary for set-
tling the nation, after disorders of such long conti-
nuance. But in an afTembly, called contrary to all
form, held within the walls of a garrison, and over-
awed by armed men, what safety could members
expec ? what liberty could prevail in debate ? or
July z5s what benefit result to the public ? The Parliament

met, however, on the day appointed, and notwith-
standing the protestation of the Earl of Montrose
and Lord Lindsay, in name of their party, pro-
ceeded to business. The King's acceptance of the
government was confirmed; the a& granted to
Morton, for his security, ratified; some regula-
tions, with regard to the numbers and authority of
the privy council, were agreed upon; and a pen-
sion for life granted to the Countess of Mar, who
had been so instrumental in bringing about the late
revolution *.
Anyl and MEANWHILE, Argyll, Athol, and their follow-

ho ers, took arms, upon the specious pretence of ref-

aginn cuing the King from captivity, and the kingdom
him. from oppression. James himself, impatient of the

servitude in which he was held, by a man whom he
had long been taught to hate, secretly encouraged
their enterprise; though, at the fame time, he was
obliged not only to disavow them in public, but

Cald. ii. 547. Parl. 5 Jac. VI.

to
64t

to levy forces against them, and even to declare, by B o o K
proclamation, that he was perfectly free from any VI.
constraint, either upon his person, or his will Both .'
fides quickly took the field, Argyll and Athol 5
were at the head of 7000 men; the Earl of Angus:
Morton's nephew, met them with an army 5000 August i
strong; neither party, however, was eager to en-
gage. Morton distrusted the fidelity of his 'own
troops. The two Earls were sensible that a tingle
vi&ory, however complete, would not be decisive;
and as they were in no condition to tndertake the
siege of Stirling castle, where the King was kept,
their strength would soon be exhausted, while Mor-
ton's own wealth, and the patronage of the Queen
of England, might furnilh him with endless re-
sources. By the mediation of Bowes, whom Eli-
zabeth had sent into Scotland to negociate an ac-
commodation between the two factions, a treaty Eliiabeth
was concluded, in consequence of which, Argyll negociates
and Athol were admitted into the King's pretence; modation

rome of their party were added to the privy council; hbwemr
and a Convention of nobles called, in order to bring
all remaining differences to an amicable issue *.

So loon as James assumed the government into

his own hands, he dispatched the abbot of Dun-
fermling to inform Elizabeth of that event; to of-
ser to renew the alliance between the two kingdoms;
and to demand possession of the r:ftate, which had
lately fallen to him, by the death of his grandmo-
ther, the Countess of Lennox. That Lady's fe-
cond son had left one daughter, Arabella Stewart,

*Crawf. Mem. 3071
VoL. II. F

who .

B o o K who was born in England. And as the chief ob-

VI. je&ion against the pretensions of the Scottilh line to

e' -

j the crown of England, was that maxim of English
1578.

law, which excludes aliens from any right of in-
heritance within the kingdom, Elizabeth, by grant-
ing his demand, would have established a prece-
dent in James's favour, that might have been esteem-
ed decisive, with regard to a point, which it had been
her constant care toa keep undecided Without sus-
fering this delicate question to be tried, or allowing
any new light to be thrown on that, which she con-
fiderel as the great mystery of her reign, she com-
manded the rents of the estate to be sequestered by
Lord Burleigh, matter of the wards; and by this
method of proceeding, gave the Scottish King early
warning how necessary it would be to court her fa-
vour, if ever he hoped for success in claims of greater
importance, but equally liable to be controverted *.
I579. AFTER many delays, and with much difficulty,

the contending nobles were at last brought to some
agreement. But it was followed by a tragical event.
Morton, in token of reconcilement, having invited
the'leaders of the opposite party to a great enter-
April 4. tainment, Athol the Chancellor was, soon after,

taken ill, and died within a few days. The fymp-
toms and violence of the disease gave rife to strong
suspicions of his being poisoned; and though the
physicians, who opened his body, differed in opinion
as to the cause of the distemper, the Chancellor's re-
lations publickly accused Morton of that odious
crime. The advantage which visibly accrued to him,

Camd. 461.

by
66

by the removal of a man of great abilities, and B o o
averse from all his measures, was sufficient proof of VI.
his guilt to the people, who are ever fond of im- -..
puting the death of eminent persons to extraordinary 1579
ca'uses *
THE office of chancellor was betlowed upon Morton's

illegal pro-

Argyll, whom this preferment reconciled, in a great ceedings
measure, to Morton's administration. He had now famly of,
recovered all the authority he possessed during his Hamilton.
Regency, and had entirely broken, or baffled, the
power and cabals of his enemies. None of the great
families remained to be the objects of his jealousy,
or to obftru& his designs, but that of Hamilton.
The Earl of Arran, the eldest brother, had never
recovered the shock, which he received from the
ill success of his paffon for the Queen, and had
now altogether loft his reason. Lord John, the fe-
cond brother, was in possession of the family estate.
Lord Claud was Commendator of Paisley; both of
them young men, ambitious and enterprising.
Morton dreaded their influence in the kingdom; the
courtiers hoped to share their spoils among them;
and as all Princes naturally view their successors with
jealousy and hatred, it was easy to infuse these pas-
sions into the mind of the young King. A pre-
tence was at hand tojuftify the most violent proceed-
ings. The pardon, stipulated in the treaty of Perth,
did not extend to those who .were accessary to the
murder of the Regents Murray or Lennox. Lord
John and his brother were fufpeted of being the
authors of both these crimes, and had been includ-

* Spotfw. 306.

F 2 ed

67

B o o x ed in a general a& of attainder on that account.

VI. Without summoning them to trial, or examining
q"r - a single witness to prove the charge, this attainder

579.' was now thought sufficient to fubje& them to all

the penalties, which they would have incurred by
being formally convicted. The Earls of Morton,
Mar, andEglinton, togetherwith theLordsRuth-
ven, Boyd, and Cathcart, received a commiflion
to seize their persons and estates. On a few hours
warning, a considerable body of troops was ready,
and marched towards Hamilton, in hostile array.
Happily, the two brothers made their escape,
though with great difficulty. But their lands were
confiscated; the caitles of Hamilton and Draffan
besieged; those who defended them punished.
The Earl of Arran, though incapable, from his
situation, of committing any crime, was involved,
by a shameful abuse of law, in the common ruin of
his family; and as if he, too, could have been
guilty of rebellion, confined a close prisoner. These
proceedings, so contrary to the fundamental prin-
ciples of justice, were all ratified in the subsequent
parliament .

ABOUT this time Mary sent, by Nau6 her fecre-

tary, a letter to her son, together with some jewels
of value, and a vest embroidered with her own
hands. But as she gave him only the title of Prince
of Scotland, the messenger was dismissed, without
being admitted into his presence t.

* Crawf. Mem. 311. Spotfi. 306.
t Crawf. Mem. 314.

THOUGH

THOUGH Elizabeth had, at this time, no parti- B o o K

cular reason to fear any attempt of the Popilh Prin- VI.
ces, in Mary's favour, she still continued to guard
her with the fame anxious care. The acquisition Negocia9
of Portugal, on the one hand, and the defence of lons fora

marriage

the Netherlands, on the other, fully employed the between
councils and arms of Spain. France, torn in pieces and the
by intestine commotions, and under a weak and ca- Duke of
pricious Prince, delpifed and distrusted by his own
fubjefts, was in no condition to disturb its neigh-
bours. Elizabeth had long amused that court by
carrying on a treaty of marriage with the Duke of
Alencon, the King's brother. But whether, at the
age of forty-five, she really intended to marrya
Prince of twenty; whether the pleasure of being
flattered and courted, made her liften to the addref-
fes of so young a lover, whom The allowed to visit
her at two different times, and treated with the most
diftinguilhing refpe&; or whether considerations of
interest, predominated in this, as well as in every
other tranfaEion of her reign, are problems in his-
tory which we are not concerned to resolve. Dur-
ing the progress of this negociation, which was
drawn out to an extraordinary length, Mary could
expe& no aflitance from the French court, and
seems to have held little correspondence with it.
And there was no period in her reign, wherein Eli-
zabeth enjoyed more perse& security.

MORTON seems at this time to have been equal- Two fa-

ly secure; but his security was not so well founded. g"aiunrn a
He had weathered out one storm, had crushed his cendant
adversaries, and was again in poffeflion of the sole overame.

F 3 direcion

VI. . an age, when the character and dispositions of the
'-. -- mind begin to unfold themselves, and to become :vi-
I579' fible, the smallest attention to these might have con-

vincedhim, that there 'was reaiont!o expe& .new
and more dangerous attacks on his power. James
early discovered that excessive attachment to favour-
ites, which accompanied him-through his whole
life. This passion, which naturally arises from inex-
perience, and youthful warmth of heart, was, at his
age, far from being culpable; nor could it well be
expe&ed that the choice of the objects, on whom he
placed his affections, liould be made with great
skill. The most considerable ofthem, was Efme
Stewart, a native of France, and sori of a second
brother of the Earl of Lennox. He'was.diftin-
guifhed by the title of Lord D'iAubigne, ai.eftate
in France, which descended to him from his'anceT-
tors, on whom it had been conferred, in rewaird of
their valopr, and services to the French crown. iHe
Spt s. arrived in Scotland, about this time, on purpose to

demand the eftate-and title of Lennox, to whiich he
pretended a legal right. He was'received, at first,
by the King,'with the refpe& due to so near a rela-
tion. The gracefulness of his person, the elegance
of his dress, and his courtly behaviour, made a'great
impression on James, who, even in his more mature
years, was little able to resist these frivolous charms;
and his affection flowed with its usual rapidity, and
profusion. Within a few days after Stewart's ap-
pearance at court, he was created Lord Abe bro-
thock, soon after Earl, and then Duke of Lennox,
Governor of Dunbarton castle, Captain of the guard,

first

T-H-E H 1 S'T 0 R
70

71

first Lord of the bed-chamber, and Lord High B o o K
Chamberlain. At the fame time, and without any VI.
of the envy or emulation which is usual among 1--
candidates for favour,, Captain James Stewart,- the 1579.
second son of Lord Ochiltree, grew into great con-
fidence. But notwithstanding this union, Lennox
and Captain Stewart were persons of very opposite
characers, The former was naturally gentle, hu-
mane, candid; but unacquainted with the state of
the country, and misled, or misinformed by those,
whom he trusted; not unworthy to be the compa-
nion of the young King, in his amusements, but
utterly disqualified for acing as a Minilter, in di-
re&ing his affairs. The latter was rematkable for
all the vices, which render a man formidable to his
country, and a pernicious counsellor to his Prince;
nor did he possess any one virtue, to counterbalance
there vices, unless a dexterity in conduting his own
designs, and an enterprising courage, superior to
the sense of danger; may pass by that name. Un-
restrained by religion, regardles of decency, and un-
dismayed by opposition, he aimed at objects, seem-
ingly unattainable; but under a Prince, void of ex-
perience, and blind to all the defe&s of those who
had gained his favour, his audacity was successful;
and honours, wealth, and power, were the rewar4
of his crimes.

BOTH the favourites concurred in employing their They la-

whole address to undermine Morton's credit, which dermine
alone obftru&ed their full possession of power. And authority.
as James had been bred up with an aversion for that

F 4 noble-

B o o K nobleman, who endeavoured rather to maintain the

VI. authority of a Tutor, than to a& with the obfequi-
-7 - oufnefs ofa minister, they found it no difficult mat-

ter to accomplish their design. Morton, who could
no longer keep the King shut up within the walls of
dob. 7, Stirling-caftle, having called a parliament to meet

at Edinburgh, brought him thither. James made
his entry into the capital, with great solemnity the
citizens received him with the loudest acclamations
ofjoy, and with many expensive pageants, accord-
ing to the mode of that age. After a long period
of thirty-feven years, during which, Scotland had
beer fubje&ed to the delegated power of Regents,
or to the feeble government of a woman, and had
suffered all the miseries of civil war, and felt the in-
folence of foreign armies, the nation rejoiced to fee
the sceptre once more in the hands of a King. Fond
even of that lhadow of authority, which a Prince of
fifteen could possess, the Scots flattered themselves,
that union, order, and tranquillity would now be
restored to the kingdom. James openedthe parlia-
ment with extraordinary pomp, but nothing re-
markable passed in it.

THESE demonstrations, however, of the people's

love and attachment to their Sovereign, encouraged
the favourites to continue their insinuations against
Morton; and as the King now resided in the palace
ofHaly-rud-houfe, to which all his fubjets had ac-
cess, the cabal against the Earl grew daily stronger,
and the intrigue which occasioned his fall, ripened
gradually.

MORTON

MORTON began to be sensible of his danger, and B a o K

endeavoured to put a stop to the career of Lennox's VI.
preferment, by representing him as a formidable v
enemy to the Reformed Religion, a secret agent in M So°t
favour of Popery, and a known emissary of the endeavou
house of Guise. The clergy, apt to believe every thex
rumour of this kind, spread the alarm among the
people. But Lennox, either out of complaisance
to his master, or convinced by the arguments of
some learned Divines, whom the King appointed to
intrust him in the principles of the Protestant Re-
ligion, publickly renounced the errors of popery, in
the Church of St. Giles, and declared himfelfa
member of the Church of Scotland, by signing her
Confeflion of Faith. This, though it did not re-
move all suspicions, nor silence some zealous preach-
ers, abated, in a great degree, the force of the ac-
cufation*.

ON the other hand, a rumour prevailed that Mor-

ton was preparing to seize the King's person, and to
carry him into England. Whether delpair of main-
taining his power, by any other means, had driven
him to make any overture of that kind to the Eng-
lilh court, or whether it was a calumny, invented
by his adversaries to render him odious, cannot now
be determined with certainty. As he declared at his
death, that such a design had never entered into his
thoughts, the latter seems to be most probable. It
afforded a pretence, however, for reviving the office
of Lord Chamberlain, which had been for forne
time disused. That honour was conferred on Len-

*C awf. Mem. 3p9. Spots. 3o8.

nox,

B o o K nox. Alexander Erikine, Morton's capital enemy,

Vl. was his deputy; they had under them a band of
'- -' Gentlemen, who were appointed constantly to at-

1580. tend the King, and to guard his person *,

Efubeth 'MORTON was not ignorant of what his enemies
ihis b intended to insinuate, by such unusual precautions
iat. for the King's safety; and as his last resource, ap-

plied to Elizabeth, whose protection had often stood
him in stead, in his greatest difficulties. In confe-
quence of this application, Bowes her Envoy accuf-
ed Lennox of pra&tices againfc the peace of the two
kingdoms, and insisted, in her name, that he ihould
instantly be removed from the Privy Council. Such
an unprecedented demand was considered by the
Counsellors, as an affront to the King, and an en-
croachment on the independence of the kingdom.
They affe&ed to call in question the Envoy's powers,
and upon that pretence, refuted' him farther audi-
ence; and he retiring in disgust, and without taking
leave, Sir Alexander Home was sent to expostulate
with Elizabeth on the fubje&. After the treatment
which her Envoy had received, Elizabeth thought
it below her dignity to admit Home into her pre-
fence. Burleigh, to whom he was commanded to
irnpart his commission, reproached him with his
maftefrs ingratitude towards a benefacerefs, who had
placed the Crown on his head, and required him to
advise the King to beware of sacrificing the friend-
ihip of so necessary an ally, to the giddy humours
of a young man, without experience, and strongly

Crawf. Mem. 320.

sus-
74

fufpe&ed of principles, and attachments, incompa- B o o K
tible with the happiness of the Scottish nation. VI.

158o.

THIS accusation of Lennox hastened, in all pro- Mortona.
bability, Morton's fall. The a& of indemnity, curedorthe

murder of

which he- had obtained when he resigned the Re- the late
gency, was worded with such scrupulous exa&nefs, King
as almost screened him from any legal prosecution.
The murder of the late King was the only crime,
which could not, with decency, be inserted in a par-
don, granted by his son. Here Morton still lay
open to the penalties of the law. And Captain Stew-
art, who Ihunned no a&ion, however desperate, if
it led to power, or to favour, entered the council-
chamber, while the King and nobles were assembled,
and falling on his knees, accused Morton of being
accessary, or according to the language of the Scot- Decem. so.
tifh law, art and part, in the conspiracy against the
life of his Majesty's father, and offered, under the
usual penalties, to verify this charge by legal evi-
dence. Morton, who was present, heard this ac-
cufation with firmness; and replied with a disdain-
ful smile, proceeding either from contempt of the
infamous chara&er of his accuser, or from confci-
oufnefs of his own innocence, " that his known
zeal, in punishing those who were fufpe&ed of that
detestable crime, might well exempt himself from
any suspicion of being accessary to it, nevertheless,
he would cheerfully submit to a trial, either in that
place, or in any other court; and doubted not but
his own innocence, and the malice of his enemies,
would then appear in the clearest light." Stewart,
who was still on his knees, began to enquire how

he

B o o s he would reconcile his bestowing so many honours

VI. on Archibald Douglas, whom he certainly knew to
t .-- be one of the murderers, with his pretended zeal
I58 ' againf that crime. Morton was ready to answer.

But the King commanded both of them to be re-

1581. moved. The Earl was confined, first of all, to his
Jiua-y=. own house, and then committed to the caitle of

Edinburgh, of which Alexander Erfline was Go-
vernor and as if it had not been a sufficient indig-
nity to fubjecf him to the power of one of his ene-
mies, he was, soon after, carried to Dunbarton, of
which Lennox had the command. A warrant was,
J z likewise, issued for apprehending Archibald Dou-

glas i but he, having received timely intelligence of
the approaching danger, fled into England *.

THE Earl of Angus, who imputed these violent

proceedings not to hatred against Morton alone, but
to the ancient enmity between the houses of Stewart
and of Douglas, and who believed that a conspiracy
was now formed for the deftru&ion of the whole
name, was ready to take arms in order to rescue his
kinsman. But Morton absolutely sorbad any such
attempt, and declared that he would rather susSer
ten thousand deaths, than bring an imputation on
his own character by seeming to decline a trial t.

EErbcrs ELIZABETH did not fail to interpose, with
or- to, warmth, in behalf of a man, who had contributed so
a!i"n much to preserve her influence over Scotland. The

late transactions in that kingdom had given her great
uneasiness. The power which Lennox had acquir-

Crawf. Mem. 323. ft Johns. 64. Spotfw. 311.

ed

77

ed independent of her was dangerous; the treatment B o o x
her ambassadors had met with, differed greatly from VI.
the refpet, with which the Scots were in use to re- "
ceive her Ministers; and the attack now made on 8
Morton 'fully convinced her, that there was an in-
tention to sow the feeds of discord bet ween the two
nations, and to seduce James into a new alliance
with France, or into a nmarriage with some Popilh
Princess. Full of there apprehensions, /he ordered
a considerable body of troops to be assembled on
the borders of Scotland, and dispatched Randolph
as her ambassador into that kingdom. He addressed
himself not only to James, and to his council,
but to a convention ofeftates met at that time. He
began with enumerating the extraordinary benefits
which Elizabeth had conferred on the Scottish na-
tion: That without demanding a single foot of
land for herself, without encroaching on the liber-
ties of the kingdom in the finalleft article, fle had,
at the expence of the blood of her fubjets, and the
treasures of her Crown, rescued the Scots from the
dominion of France, eftablilhed among them true
religion, and put them into possession of their an-
cient rights: That from the beginning ihe had pro-
x-eaed those, who espoused the King's cause, and
by her afliftance alone, the Crown had been pre-
served on his head, and all the attempts of the ad-
verse fa&ion baffled: That an union, unknown to
their ancestors, but equally beneficial to both king-
doms, had subsisted for a long period of years; and
though so many Popilh Princes had combined to
disturb this happy state of things, her care, and
their constancy, had hitherto defeated all these es-

forts :

B o o K forts: That Ihe had observed, of late, an uiufual

VI. coidnefs, diftrut, and estrangement in the Scot-
' *" 4tif Council, which she could impute to none
158 I but to Lennox, a fubje& of France, a retainer

to the house of Guise, bred up in the errors of
Popery, and till fufpeded of favouring that fu-
perftition. Not satisfied with having mounted so
fast to an uncommon height of.power, which he
exercised with all the rashness of youth, and all the
ignorance of a itranger; nor thinking it enough
to have deprived the Earl of Morton of the autho-
rity, due to his abilities and experience, he had
conipired the ruin of that nobleman, who had often
exposed his life in the King's cause, who had con-
tributed more than any other fubjeat to place him
on the throne, to refiit the encroachments of Pope-
ry, and to preserve the union between the two king-
doms. If any zeal for religion remained among
the nobles in Scotland, if they wished for the conti-
nuance of amity with England, if they valued the
privileges of their own order, he called upon them,
in the name of his Mistress, to remove such a per-
nicious counsellor as Lennox from the pretence of
the young King, to rescue Morton out of the hands
of his avowed enemy, and secure to him the benefit
of a fair and impartial trial: And if force were ne-
ceffary towards accomplilhing a design so salutary
to the King and kingdom, he promised them the
protetion of his Mistress in the enterprise, and
whatever assistance they should demand either of
men or money*.

Cald. iii. 6. Strype, ii. 621.

BUT

BUT these extraordinary remonstrances, accom- B o o K

panied with such an unusual appeal from the King VI.
to his subje&s, were not the only means employed '-
by Elizabeth, in favour of Morton, and against i581-
Lennox. She persuaded the Prince of Orange to
fend an. agent into Scotland, and under colour of
complimenting James on account of the valour,
which many of his subje&s had displayed in the ser-
vice of the States, to enter into a long detail of the
restless enterprises of the Popish Princes, against the
Protestant Religion; to beseech him to adhere in-
violably to the alliance with England, the only bar-
rier which secured his kingdom against their dan-
gerous cabals; and above all things, to distrust the
insinuations of those, who endeavoured to weaken
or to dissolve that union between the British nations,
which all the Protestants in Europe beheld with so
much pleasure *

JAMES'S Counsellors were too intent upon the de- James de-
ftru&ion of their enemy to liften to these remon- termines to

proceed a-

itrances. The officious interposition of the Prince gainft him
of Orange, the haughty tone of Elizabeth's mef-
iage, and her avowed attempt to excite fubjecs to
rebel againit their Sovereign, were confidered'as un-
exampled insults on the majesty and independence
of a crowned head. A general and evasive answer
was given to Randolph. James prepared to assert
his own dignity with spirit. All those suspected of
favouring Morton were turned out of office, some
of them were required to surrender themselves pri-
foners; the sensible men throughout the kingdom

Cald. iii. 9.

were

79

B o K were commanded to take arms; and troops were

VI. levied, and potled, on the borders. The English
C'-y ' ambassador, finding that neither the public mani-
'81. fefto which he had delivered to the Convention, nor

his private cabals with the nobles could excite them
to arms, fled in the night-time out of Scotland,
where libels against him had been daily published,
and even attempts made upon his life. In both
kingdoms every thing wore an hoffile afpe&. But
Elizabeth, though ihe wished to have intimidated
the Scottiih King by her preparations, had no incli-
nation to enter into a war with him, and the troops
on the borders, which had given fnch umbrage,
were soon dispersed *.

THE greater Solicitude Elizabeth discovered for

Morton's safety, the more eagerly did his enemies
drive on their schemes for his deftrufion. Captain
Stewart, his accuser, was firfl appointed futor to the
Earl of Arran, and soon after both the title and
edtate of his unhappy ward, to which he advanced
some frivolous claim, were conferred .upon him.
The new-made Peer was commanded to conduct
Morton from Dunbarton to Edinburgh; and, by
that choice, the Earl was not only warned what fate
he might expe&t, but had the cruel-mortification of
feeing his deadly enemy already loaded with ho-
nours, in reward of the malice with which he had
contributed to his ruin.

He s tied THE records of the court of ufticiary at this pe-
ndcnM. riod are lo*. The account which our historians

Crawf. Mem. 328. Strype, ii. App, 138.

give

give of Morton's trial is inaccurate and uhfatisfac- B o o
tory. The whole proceedings seem to have been VI.
violent, irregular, and oppressive. Arran, in oider ''
to extort evidence, tortured several of the Earl's do- 8
meftics with unuffual cruelty. During the trial,
great bodies of armed men were drawn up in diffe-
rent parts of the city, The jury was composed of
the Earl'P known 'enemies and though he challeng-
ed Teveral ds flhm, his objections were over-ruled.
After a short consultation, his Peers found him
guilty of concealing, and 'of being art andpart in
the conspiracy again'st the life of the late King.
The firt part of the verdi& did not surprise him,
but he twice repeated the words art and part with
some vehemence, and added, "'God knows it is not
so." The doom, which the law decrees agairift a
Traitor, was pronounced. The King, however,
remitted the cruel and ignominious part of the fen-
tence, and appointed that he should susser death
next day, by being beheaded *.

DORING that awful interval, Morton possessed His death.

the utmost composure of mind. He fupped cheer-
fully; slept a part of the night in his usual manner,
and employed the reft of his time in religious con-
ferences, and in a&ts of devotion, with tome Mini-
fters of the city. The Clergyrhen who attended
him, dealt freely with his conscience, and pressed
his crimes home upon him. What he confessed
with regard to the crime for which he suffered is re-
markable, and supplies, in, some measure, the im-

Spots. 314. Johnft. 75. Crawf. Mem. 332. Cald. iii. 45.
VOL. II. G per-

8I

B o oK perfection of our records. He acknowledged, that

VI. on his return from England after the death of Ri-
-o 8 zio, Bothwell had informed him of the conspiracy

against the King, which the Queen, as he told him,
knew of and approved; that he solicited him to
concur -in the execution of it, which, at that time,
he absolutely declined; that, soon after, Bothwell
himself, and Archibald Douglas, in his name, re-
newing their solicitations to the fame purDofe, he had
required a warrant, under the Queen's l and, autho-
rising the attempt, and as that had never been pro-
duced, he had refused to be any farther concerned
in the matter. " But, continued he, as I neither
" consented to this treasonable a&, nor assisted in
" the committing-of it, so it was impossible for me
"c to reveal, or to prevent it. To whom could I
" make the discovery? The Queen was the author
" of the enterprise. Darnly was such a changeling,
'" that no secret could be safely communicated to
" him. Huntly and Bothwell, who bore the chief

fc way in the kingdom, were themselves the per-

c- petrators of the crime." These circumstances,
it mutt be confessed, go some length towards exte-
nuating Morton's guilt; and though his apology
for the favour he had ihewn to Archibald Douglas,
whom he knew to be one of the conspirators, be far
Iefs fatisfaftory, no uneasy reflections seem to have
disquieted his own mind on that account *, When
his keepers told him that the guards were attending,
and all things in readiness, " I praise my God, laid
" he, I amr ready likewise." Arran commanded
there guards; and even in those moments, when

Crawf. Mem. App iii.

the most implacable hatred is apt to relent, the ma- B o o K
lice of his enemies could not forbear this insult. VI.
On the scaffold, his behaviour was calm; his coun- -
tenance and voice unaltered; and after some time 58
spent in devotion, he suffered death with the intre-
pidity which became the name of Douglas. His
head was placed on the public gaol of Edinburgh;
and his body, after lying till sun-set on the scaffold,
covered with a beggarly cloak, was carried by com-
mon porters to the usual burial place of criminals.
None of his friends durst accompany it to the
grave, or discover their gratitude and refpet by
any symptoms of sorrow *.

ARRAN, no less profligate in private life, than Odiouscon.

audacious in his public conduc, soon after drew the dus of
attention of his countrymen, by his infamous mar-
riage with the Countess of March. Before he grew
into favour at court, he had been often entertained
in her husband's house, and without regarding the
laws of hospitality or of gratitude, carried-on a cri-
minal intrigue with the wife of his benefactor, a
woman young and beautiful, but according to the
description of a cotemporary Historian, intole-
rable in all the imperfetions incident to her sex."
Impatient of any restraint upon their mutual desires,
they, with equal ardour, wilhed to avow their union
publickly, and to legitimate, by a marriage, the
offspring of their unlawful passion. The Countess
petitioned to be divorced from her husband, for a rea-
son, which no modest woman will ever plead. The

* Crawf. Mem. 334. Spotif. 314.

G 2

judges,

B o K jiudges, over-awed by Arrah, passed sentence without

'I. delay. And this infainmous scene was concluded by a

--l ' marriage, solemnized with great pomip, and beheld
Jy 6. by all ranks of miie with the utfiioft horror *.
oaob. 4. A PARLIAMENrT was held this year, at the opening

of which fime difpiites arose between Arran and the
Earl now created Duke of Lennox. Arran, haugh-
ty by nature, an'd puihed on by his wife's ambitioi,
began to asset an eqtldity with the Duke, under
"whose prote&cion he had hitherto been contented to,
place himrielf. After vagrious attffepts to form a
party in the council against Lennox, he found him
fixed so firmly in the King's affe&ions, that it was
'iimpolfible to shake him, and rather than lose all in-
terest at couit, from which hi was banished, he
ia-de the mo'fti humble submissions to the favourite,
'and again recovered his fdrmer credit. This rup-
ture contfibuted, :however, to render the Duke still
more odious to the nation. During the continu-
ance . Tit, Arraii asset&ed to court the clergy, pre-
tehded an 'extraordinary zeal for the Protestant Re-
ligioi, and laboured to confirm the suspicions, which
were entertain'ed of his rival, as an emiflary of the
houife ';o'Guife, and a favourer of Popery. As he
was fuppofid to ble acquainted with the Duke's most
sec'et -dfiogns, his calumhies were listened to with
more credit, thafi was due to his chara&er. To
the 'fai'e cause, we must ascribe several a&s of par-
liamfenit uncomiiinly favourable to the Church, par-
ticularly one, *which aboliffed the practice, intro-

* Spotfr. 315.

duced

duced by Morton, of appointing but one minister B o o K
to several parishes. VI.

No notice hath been taken for several years of Ec- 58 I.

clefiaftical affairs. While the civil government un- cal aai.
derwent so many extraordinary revolutions, the
Church was not free from convulsions. Two ob-
jeEs, chiefly, engrossed the attention of the Clergy,
The one was the forming a system of discipline, or
Ecclesiastical polity. After long labour, and many
difficulties, this was at last brought to some degree
of perfetion. The Assembly solemnly approved
of it, and appointed it to be laid before the Privy
Council, in order to obtain the ratification of it in
Parliament. But Morton, during his adminiftra-
tion, and those who, after his fall, governed the
King, were equally unwilling to fee it carried into
execution; and by starting difficulties, and throw-
ing in objections, prevented it from receiving a le-
gal fantion. The other point in view was the abo-
lition of the Episcopal order. The Bilhops were
so devoted to the King, to whom they owed their
promotion, that the function itself was by some
reckoned dangerous to civil liberty, Being allowed
a feat in Parliament, and distinguished by titles of
honour, these not only qccafioned many avocations
from their spiritual employments, but soon render-
ed their character and manners extremely different
from those of the Clergy in that age. The nobles
viewed their power withjealoufy; the populace con-
fidered their lives as profane; and both wished their
downfal with equal ardour. The personal emula-
tion between Melvil and Adamson, a man of learn-

_ G 3 ing,

B o o K ing, and eminent for his popular eloquence, who

VI. was promoted on the death of Douglas, to be
'.."'^ Archbilhop of St. Andrew's, mingled itself with the

5 passions on each fide, and heightened them. At-

tacks were made, in every assembly, on the order
of Bilhops; their privileges were gradually circum-
fcribed; and at last an a&twas passed, declaring the
office of Bishop, as it was then exercised within the
realm, to have neither foundation nor warrant in
the word of God; and requiring, under pain of
excommunication, all who now possessed that of-
fice, instantly to resign it, and to abstain from
preaching or administering the sacraments, till they
should receive permission from the Assembly. The
court did not acquiesce in this decree. A vacancy
happening, soon after, in the fee of Glasgow, Mont-
gomery, Miniiter at Stirling, a man vain, fickle,
presumptuous, and more apt, by the blemiihes in
his character, to have alienated the people from an
order already beloved, than to reconcile them to
one which was the obje& of their hatred, struck up
an infamous bargain with Lennox, and on his re-
eommendation was chosen Archbishop; The Pref-
bytery of Stirling of which he was a member, the
presbytery of Glasgow whither he was to be tranf-
fated, the GeneralAffembly, vied with each'other
in prosecuting him on that account. In order to
58 2' screen Montgomery, James made trial both of gen-

tie and or rigorous measures, and both were equally
ineffectual. The General Assembly was just ready
to pronounce against him the sentence of excom-
munication, when an Herald entered and com-
manded them; in the King's narie, and under pain

of

of rebellion, to stop further proceedings. Even B o o K
this injunction they despised. And though Mont- VI.
gomery, by his tears, and seeming penitence, pro- L5 8-
cured a short respite, the sentence was at last issued $5
by their appointment, and published in all the
churches throughout the kingdom.

THE firmness of the Clergy in a collective body,

was not greater than the boldness of some indivir
duals, particularly of the Ministers of Edinburgh.
They inveighed daily against the corruptions in the
administration, and, with the freedom of speech
admitted.into the pulpit in that age, named Len-
nox and Arran as the chief authors of the grie-
vances, under which the church and kingdom
groaned. The courtiers, in their turn, complained
to the King of the insolent and seditious spirit of
the Clergy. In order to check the boldness of their
discourses, James issued a proclamation, command-
ing Dury, one of the most popular Ministers, not
only to leave the town, but to abstain from preach-
ing in any other place. Pury complained to the
judicatories of the Church, of this encroachment
upon the immunities of his office, They approved
of the doEtrine which he had delivered; and he
determined to disregard the royal proclamation.
But the magistrates being determined to compel him
to leave the city, according to the King's orderst
he was obliged to abandon his charge, after pre-
testing publickly, at the cross of Edinburgh, against
the violence, which was put upon him. The people'
accompanied him to the gates, with tears and la-
mentations; and the Clergy denounced the ven-

G 4 geance

87

B o o K geance of Heaven against the authors of this out-
VI rage*.

G - IN this perilous situation stood the Church; the

authority of its judicatories called in question, and
the liberty of the pulpit refrrained, when a sudden
revolution of the civil government procured them
unexpe&ed relief.

rnis avou- THE two favourites, by their ascendant over the
i gnge King, poflefed uncontrouled power in the king-
unpopua.- dom, and exercised it with the utmolt wantonness.
memsstres.

James usually resided at Dalkeith or Kinneil, the
feats of Lennox and of Arran, and was attended
by such company, and employed in such amuse-
ments, as did not suit his dignity. The services of
those, who had contributed rnoft to place the Crown
on his head, were but little remembered. Many
who had opposed him with the greatest virulence,
enjoyed the rewards and honours, to which the
others were entitled. Exalted notions of regal pre-
rogative, utterly inconsistent with the constitution
of Scotland, being instilled by his favourites into
the mind of the young Monarch, unfortunately
made, at that early age, a deep impression there,
and became the source of almost all his subsequent
errors in the government of both kingdoms t.
Courts of iuftice were held in almolt every county,
the proprietors of land were called before them,
and upon the flighteit neglec of any of the nume-
rous formnns, which are peculiar to feudal holdings,

Cald. Aflemb. 1576- 1582. Spotfw. 277, &c.
t Cald. iii. 152.

thev

they were fined with unusual and intolerable rigour. B o o
The Lord Chamberlain revived the obsolete jurif- VI.
diction of his office over the Boroughs, and they '
were fubjeted to exa&ions no less grievous. A de-
sign seemed, likewise, to have been formed to ex-
afperate Elizabeth, and to dissolve the alliance with
her, which all good Protestants esteemed the chief
security of their religion in Scotland. A close cor-
refpondence was set on foot between the King and
his mother, and considerable progress made towards
uniting their titles to the Crown, by such a treaty of
association, as Maitland had projected; which could
not fail of endangering or diminishing his authority,
and must have proved fatal to those, who had ated
against her with greatest vigour*.

ALL there circumstances irritated the impatient The nobles
spirit of the Scottish nobles, who resolved to tole- conspire

against

rate no longer the insolence of the two minions, or them
to stand by, while their presumption and inexperi-
ence ruined both the King and kingdom. Eliza-
beth, who, during the administration of the four
Regents, had the entire diretion of the affairs of
Scotland, felt herself deprived of all influence in
that kingdom ever since the death of Morton, and
was ready to countenance any attempt to rescue the
King out of the hands of favourites, who were
leading him into measures, so repugnant to all her
views. The Earls of Mar and Glencairn, Lord
Ruthven, lately created Earl of Gowrie, Lord
Lindsay, Lord Bo,'d, the Tutor of Glamis, the
Master of Oliphdnt, with several Barons and gen-

' Cald. iii. 157-

tlemen

$9

B o oK tlemen of diftin&ion, entered into a combination

VI. for that purpose; and as changes in administration,
' -8'-! which among polished nations, are brought about

58. ' slowly and silently, by artifice and intrigue, were

in that rude age effeced suddenly and by violence,
the King's situation, and the security of the favour-
ites, encouraged the conspirators to have immediate
recourse to force.

Sze the JAMES, after having resided for some time in
son gatPr Athol, where he enjoyed his favourite amusement
Ruden of hunting, was now returning towards Edinburgh,

with a small train. He was invited to Ruthven-
caffle, which lay in his way; and as he fufpe&ed
no danger, he went thither in hopes of farther sport.
anl- -:. The multitude of strangers whom he found there

gave him some uneasiness; and as those who were
in the secret arrived every moment from different
parts, the appearance of so many new faces in-
creased his fear. He concealed his uneasiness,
however, with the utmost care; and next morning
prepared for the field, expeaing to find there some
opportunity of making his escape. But just as he
was ready to depart, the Nobles entered his bed-
chamber in a body, and presented a memorial against
the illegal and oppressive actions of his two favour-
ites, whom they represented as most dangerous ene-
mies to the religion and liberties of the nation.
James, though he received this remonstrance with
the complaisance which was necefary in his present
situation, was extremely impatient to be gone; but
as he approached the door of his apartment, the
Tutor of Glamis rudely flopped him.' The King

com-

complained, expoitulated, threatened, and finding B o oK
all these without effe&, burst into tears; " No mat- VI.
ter, said Glamis fiercely, better children weep than 58.'
bearded men." These words made a deep impref-
sion on the King's mind, and were never forgotten.
The conspirators, without regarding his tears or
indignation, difiniffed such of his followers as they
fufpeted; allowed none but their own party to
have access to hin and though they treated him
with great refpe&, guarded his person with the ut-
most care. This enterprise is usually called, by our
historians, The raid of Ruthven *.

LENNOX and Arran were astonished to the last Commit

Arran to

degree at an event so unexpe&ed, and so fatal to prison
their power. The former endeavoured, but with-
out success, to excite the inhabitants of Edinburgh
to take arms in order to rescue their Sovereign from
captivity. The latter, with his usual impetuosity,
mounted on horseback the moment he heard what
had befallen the King, and with a few followers,
rode towards Ruthven-caftle; and as a considerable
body of the conspirators, under the command of
the Earl of Mar, lay in his way ready to oppose
him, he separated himself from his companions,
and with two attendants arrived at the gate of the
castle. At the fight of a man so odious to his
country, the indignation of the conspirators rose,
and instant death must have been the punilhment of
his rashness, if the friendship of Gowrie, or some
other cause not explained by our hifforians, had not
saved a life, so pernicious to the kingdom. He

* Cald. iii. 134. Spotfw. 320. Melv. 357.

was

B o o K was confined, however, to the castle of Stirling,

VI. without being admitted into the King's presence.

15S2.
co ...ad THE King, though really the priSoner of his own

v"i°,° fubjeOts, with whose condua he could not help dif-
ingdom. covering many symptoms of difgufr, was obliged to

publish a proclamation, fignifyirg his approbation
of their enterprise, declaring tl .t himself was at
full liberty, without any restraint or violence offered
to his person and forbidding any attempt against
those concerned in the Raid of Ruthven, under pre-
tence of rescuing him out of their hands. At the
Adogf-s. fame time, he commanded Lennox to leave Scot-

land before the 20th of September *.

The n- SOON after, Sir George Carey, and Bowes, arriv-
fpir-mors
coune- ed as ambassadors from Elizabeth. The pretext
Ead by of their embassy was to inquire after the King's

fafetyj to encourage and countenance the conipi-
rators was the real motive of it. By their inter-
ceffon, the Earl of Angus, who ever since the
death of his uncle Morton, had lived in exile, ob-
tained leave to return. And the acceffior of a no-
bleman so powerful and so popular strengthened
the fation t.

LENNox, whose amiable and gentle qualities had

procured him many friends, and who received pri-
vate aflurances that the King's favour towards him
was in no degree abated, seemed resolved, at first,
to pay no regard to a command, extorted by vio-
lence, and no less disagreeable to James, than it was

Cald. iii. 135. 138. t Cald. iii. 152.

rigor-

rigorous with regard to himself. But the power of B o o K
his enemies, who were mailers of the King's per- VI.
son, who were secretly supported by Elizabeth, and t-
openly applauded by the Clergy, deterred him from I
an enterprise, the success of which was dubious,
and the danger certain, both to himself, and to his
Sovereign. He put off the time of his departure,
however, by various artifices, in expectation either
that James might make his escape from the confpi-
rators, or that fortune' might present some more
favourable opportunity of taking arms for his relief.

ON the other hand, the conspirators were ex- Their con.

duet ap-

tremely solicitous not only to secure the approbation proved by
of their countrymen, hut to obtain some legal fanc- an Af1m-

bly and a

tion of their enterprise. For this purpose, they pub- convention
lifhed a long declaration, containing the motives, o :S.
which had induced them to venture on such an ir-
regular ftep, and endeavoured to heighten the pub-
lic indignation againfl the favourites, by represent-
ing in the strongest colours, their inexperience and
insolence, their contempt of the nobles, their vio-
lation of the privileges of the Church, and their
oppression of the people. They obliged the King,
who could not with safety refute any of their de-
mands, to grant them a remission in the most am-
ple form; and not satisfied with that, they applied
to the Assembly of the Church, and easily procur-
ed an as, declaring, " that they had done good '3
and acceptable service to God, to their Sovereign,
and to their native country;" and requiring all fin-
cere Protestants to concur with them in carrying
forward such a laudable enterprise. In order to add

the

B o o K the greater weight to this at, every Minister was

VI. enjoined to read it, in his own pulpit, and to inflic
-*r' /the censures of the Church on those who set them-
1582. selves in opposition to so good a cause. A Conven-

tion of estates assembled a few days after, passed
an a& to the fame effe&, and granted full indemnity
to the conspirators for every thing they had done *.

Lennox' JAMES was conduted by them, first to Stirling,
dmSrorte and afterwards to the palace of Haly-rud-houfe;
iad. and though he was received every where with the

external marks of refpet due to his dignity, his
motions were carefully observed, and he was under
a restraint no less ftrit, than at the first moment
when he was seized by the conspirators. Lennox,
after eluding many commands to depart out of the
kingdom, was at last obliged to begin his journey.
He lingered, however, for some time in the neigh-
bourhood of Edinburgh, as if he had still intended
to make one effort towards restoring the King to
liberty. But either from the gentleness of his own
difpofiion, averse to bloodhied and the disorders
of civil war, or from some other cause, unknown
to us, he abandoned the design, and set out for
D=. 30. France, by the way of England. The King issued

the order of his departure, with no less reluctance
than the Duke obeyed it. And both mourned a
reparation, which neither of them had power to
prevent. Soon after his arrival in France, the fa-
tigue of the journey, or the anguish of his mind,
threw him into a fever. In his last moments he
discovered such a firm adherence to the Protestant

- Cald. iii. 177. 187. z20. Spotfii. 3z.

faith, as fully vindicates his memory from the im- B o o K
putation of an attachment to Popery, with which VI.
he had been uncharitably loaded in Scotland *. As '8 '
he was the earliest, and bess beloved, he was, per-
haps, the most deserving, though not the most able
of all James's favourites. The warmth and tender-
ness of his Mafler's affecion for him was not
abated by death itself. By many a&s of kindness
and generosity towards his poiterity, the King not
only did great honour to the memory of Lennox,
but set his own charater in one of the most favour-
able points of view.

THE success of the conspiracy, which deprived Mary's

James of liberty, made great noise over all Europe ib hexa-
and at last reached .the ears of Mary in the priCon son.
to which the was confined. As her own experience
had taught her what injuries a captive Prince is ex-
posed to susser; and as many of those, who were
now concerned in the enterprise against her son,
were the fame persons whom she confidered as the
chief authors of her own misfortunes, it was natu-
ral for the tenderness of a mother to apprehend that
the fame calamities were ready to fall on his head;
and such a profpec did not fail of adding to the
distress and horror of her own situation. In the
anguilh of her heart, she wrote to Elizabeth, com-
plaining in the bitterest terms of the unprecedented
rigour; with which she herself had been treated,
and beseeching her not to abandon her son to the
mercy of his rebellious fubje6ts; nor permit him to
be involved in the fame misfortunes, under which

* Spotfw. 32..

lhe

B o O K Ihe had so long groahed. The peculiar vigour and

VI. acrimony of style, for which this letter is reimark-
:--C-J able, discover both thg high spirit of the Scbttifh

582-' Queen, unfubdued b-r her fuffeings, and the vio-

lence of her indignation at Elizabeth's artifices and
severity. But it was ill adapted to gain the end he
had in view, and accordingly it neither prbciued
any mitigation of the rigour of her own confine-
ment, nor any interposition in favour of the King *.

HENRY Ill. who, though he feared and hated

Ambsa- the Princes of Guise, was ofteh obliged to cbuiit
dors arie their favour, interposed with warmth, in order to

aceand extricate James out of the hands of a party so in-
EDaOd. tirely devoted to the Englilh interest. He corh-

manded M. de la Motte Fehelon, his ambiafladr a't
the court of England, to repair to Edinbuigh, and
to contribute his utmost endeavours towards placing
James in a situation, more fiiitable to his dignity.
As Elizabeth could not, with decency, refute him
liberty to execute this commission, She appointed
Davison to attend him into Scotland as her Envoy,
under colour of concurri-g with him in the hego-
tiation, but in reality, to be a spy upon his mo'tidts,
and to obftruic his success. James, whose title to
the Crown had not hitherto been recognised by any
of the Princes on the continent, was extreirhely fond
of such an honourable enbaffy from the French
Monarch; anid, on that account, as. well as :for the
faRke of the errand on which he came, received Fe-
nelon with great refpe&. The nobles, in whtrfe
Jl '- power the King was, did not relish this iiterpfittion

Camd. 489.

of

of the French court, which had long loft its anci- B o o K
ent influence over the affairs of Scotland. The VI.
Clergy were alarmed at the danger to which reli- ' '
gion would be exposed, if the Princes of Guise 583.
ihould recover any ascendant over the public couri-.
cils. And though the King tried every method for
restraining them within the bounds of decency, they
declaimed against the court of France, against the
Princes of Guise, against the Ambassador, against
entering into any alliance with such notorious per-
fecutors of the Church of God, with a veheme/nce,
which no regular government would now tolerate,
but which was then extremely common. The Amn
baffador, watched by Davison, distrusted by the
nobles, and exposed to the insults of the Clergy,
and of the people, returned into England without
procuring any change in the King's situation, or re-
ceiving any answer to a proposal which he made,
that the government should be carried on in the
'joint names of James, and the Queen his mother *

MEANWHILE, James, though he dissembled with James es-

great art, became every day more uneasy under his pes oudtof
confinement; his uneasiness rendered him continu- oftheccn-
ally attentive to find out a proper opportunity for pirators.
making his escape; and to this attention, he at last
owed his liberty, which the King of France was
not able, nor the Queen of England willing to pro-
cure for him. As the conspirators had forced
Lennox out of the kingdom, and kept Arran at a
distance from court, they grew secure; and ima-
gining that time had reconciled the King to them,

* Cald. iii. 207. Spotfw. 324. See Appendix, No. VIII.
VOL. II. H and

B o oK and to his situation, they watched him with little
_ YI. care. Some occasions of discord had arisen among
'-;e- themselves and the French Ambassador, by foment-
i 3. ning these, during the time of his residence in Scot-

land, had weakened the union, in which alone their
safety conlifted*. Colonel William Stewart, the
commander of the band of gentlemen, who guard-
ed the King's person, being gained by James, had
the principal merit in the scheme for restoring his
J,, 7. master to liberty. Under pretence of paying avifit

to the Earl of March his grand uncle, James was
permitted to go from Falkland to St. Andrew's.
That he might not create any suspicion, he lodged
at firif, in an open defenceless house in the town,
but pretending a curiosity to fee the castle, no sooner
was he entered with some of his attendants whom
he could trust, than Colonel Stewart commanded
the gates to be shut, and excluded all the reft of
his' train. Next morning the Earls of Argyll,
Huntly, Crawford, Montrose, Rothes, with others
to whom the secret had been communicated, entered
the town with their followers; and though Mar,
with several of the leaders of the faction, appeared
in arms, they found themselves so far out-number-
ed, that it was in vain to think of recovering pof-
felfion of the King's person, which had been in their
power somewhat longer than ten months. James
was naturally of so soft and ductile a temper, that
those who were near his person, commonly made a
deep imprefiion on his heart, which was formed to
be under the sway offavourites. As he remained
implacable and unreconciled to the conspirators,

* Camd. 482.

during

0

duiling so long a time, and at a period of life when B o o K
resentments are rather violent than lasting, they VI.
mull either have improved the opportunities of.in- '
finuating themselves into favour with little dexterity,
or the indignation, with which this first insult to his
person and authority filled him, mutt have been
very great.

His joy at his escape was youthful and excefrive. ReolveM,

He resolved, however, by the advice of Sir James t tre.at
MeIvil, and his wisest counsellors, to a& with the them with

rmodera:

utmost moderation. Having called, into his pre- tion.
fence, the leaders of both fations, the neighbour-
ing gentry, the deputies of the adjacent burroughs,
the Ministers,' and the heads of colleges,: he de-
clared, that although he had been held under re-
ftraint for fonme time by violence, he would.not im-
pute that as a crime to any man, but without re-
membering the irregularities, which had been so
frequent during his minority, would pass :a general
a&tof oblivion, and govern all his fubjeEts with un-
distinguishing and equal affection. And as an evi-
dence of his sincerity, he visited the Earlof Gow-
rie at Ruthven-caftle, and granted him a full par-
don of any guilt he had contrated, by the crime
committed' in that very place .

BUT James 'did not adhere long to this prudent But Arra

and moderate plan. His former favourite, the aend ah
Earl of Arran, had been permitted for some time over him
to reside at Kinneil, one of his-country feats. As
soon as the King felt himself at liberty, his love for

* Mel. 272.

him
H 2

Bo o K him began to revive, and he expressed a strong desire

VI. to fee him. The courtiers violently opposed the re-

turn of a minion, whose insolent and overbearing
temper they dreaded, as much as the nation detested
his crimes. James, however, continued his impor-
tunity, and promising that he should continue with
him no longer than one day, they were obliged to
yield. This interview rekindled ancient affection;
the King forgot his promise; Arran regained his
ascendant over him; and within a few days resumed
the exercise of power, with all the arrogance of an
undeferving favourite, and all the ralhnefs peculiar
to hiiifelf*.

And th THE first effec of his influence was a proclama-
eg ns- tion with regard to those concerned in the Raid of
c pFlan. Ruthven. They were required to acknowledge

their crime in the humblest manner; and the King
promised to grant -them a full pardon, provided
their future conduct were such, as did not oblige
hirfi to remember past miscarriages. The tenour of
this proclamation-was extremely different from the
a& of oblivion, which the conspirators had been
encouraged to expect. Nor did any of them reckon
it safe to rely on-a promise, cloggedwith such an
equivocal condition, and granted by a young Prince,
under the dominion of a minister, void of faith,
regardlets of decency, and transported by the de-
fire of revenge, even beyond the usual ferocity of
his: temper. Many of the leaders, who had at first
appeared openly at court, retired to their own houses
and foreseeing the dangerous storm which was ga-

Melv. 274.

thering,
loc

thering, began to look out for a retreat in foreign B o o K
countries . VI.

ELIZABETH, who had all along proteced the Eli5abeth's
conspirators, was extremely disgusted with measures olicita-

tions in be-

which tended so visibly to their deftrution, and half of the
wrote to the King a harsh and haughty letter, pcofpra-
reproaching him in a style, very uncommon among August 7.
Princes, with breach of faith in recalling Arran to
court, and with imprudence in proceeding so rigor-
oufly against his best and most faithful subje&s.
James, with becoming dignity, replied, that pro-
mises extorted by violence, and conditions yielded
out of fear, were no longer binding, when there
were removed; that it belonged to him alone to
chute what ministers he would employ in his ser-
vice; and that though he resolved to treat the con-
fpirators at Ruthven with the utmost clemency, it
was necefary, for the support of his authority, that
such an insult on his person should not pass altoge-
ther uncenfured t.

ELIZABETH'S letter was quickly followed byWal- Sept. I.

fingham her secretary, whom flie appointed her am- ham's cm
baffador to James, and who appeared at the Scot- balry into

Scotland.

tilh court, with a Splendour and magnificence, well
calculated to please and dazzle a young Prince.
Walsingham was admitted to several conferences
with James himself, in which he insisted on the
fame topics contained in a letter, and the King
repeated his former answers.

* Melv. 279. Spotfw. 326. Cald, iii. 330.
t Me'v. 279.

101
H3

AFTER

B o o K AFTER suffering several indignities, from the ar-

VI. rogance of Arran and his creatures, he returned
133 to England, without concluding any new treaty
5 - 'with the King. Walsingham was, next to Bur-

leigh, the MiniRer on whom the chief weight of
the Englilh administration reifed; and when a per-
fbn of his rank, ftept so far out of the ordinary
road of business, as to undertake a long journey, in
his old age, and under a declining state of health,
some affair of consequence was supposed to be'the
cause, or some important event was expe&ed to be
the effete of this measure. But as nothing confpi-
cuous either occasioned, or followed this embafly,
it is probable that Elizabeth had no other intention
in employing this sagacious Minister, than to dif-
cover, with exa&nefs, the capacity and disposition
of the Scottihi King, who was now arrived at a
time of life, when, with some degree of certainty,
conjecures might be formed concerning his charac-
ter, and future condu&. As James possessed ta-
lents of that kind, which make a better figure in
conversation, than in ation, he gained a great deal
-by this interview with the Englilh fecetary, who,
notwithstanding the cold reception he met with,
gave such advantageous representation of his abi-
lities, as determined Elizabeth to treat him, hence-
forward, with more decency and refpet& ,

ELIZABETH'S eagerness to protect the conspirators

rendered James more violent in his proceedings
against them. As they had all refused to accept of
pardon, upon the terms which he had offered, they

M.elv. 293. Cald. iii. zS8. Jebb, ii. 536.

were

were required, by a new proclamation, to surrender B o o K
themselves prisoners. The Earl of Angus alone VI.
complied; the reft either fled into England, or ob- 183
tained the King's licence to retire into foreign parts. 53
A Convention of estates was held, the members of Decem. 17.
which, deceived by an unworthy artifice of Arran's,
declared those concerned in the Raid of Ruthven,
to have been guilty of high treason; appointed the
act passed last year approving of their conduct, to
be expunged out of the records; and engaged to
support the King in prosecuting the fugitives with
the utmost rigour of law.

THE conspirators, though far from having done

any thing that was uncommon in a barbarous age,
among mutinous nobles, and under an unsettled
state of government, muff be acknowleded to have
been guilty of an ac of treason against their Sove-
reign; and James, who confidered their conduct in
this light, had good reason to boast of his clemency,
when he offered to pardon them, upon their consef-
sing their crime. But, on the other hand, it must
be allowed that, after the King's voluntary promise
of a general oblivion, they had some reason to
complain of breach of faith, and could not, with-
out the most unpardonable imprudence, have put
their lives in Arran's power,

THE interest of the Church was considerably as- 1584.
seced by these contrary revolutions. While the The Clergy

favour the

conspirators kept possession of power, the Clergy confpira-
not only recovered, but extended their privileges. torsated
As they had formerly declared the hierarchy to be King.

H 4 un-

Bo o i. unlawful, they took some bold measures towards ex-

VI. terminating the Episcopal order out of the Church;
''"T, and it was owing more to Adamson's dexterity in

perplexing and lengthening out the process for that
parpofe, than to their own want of zeal, that they
did not deprive, and perhaps excommunicate all the
Biihops -in Scotland. When the King recovered
his liberty, things put on a very different afpe&.
T-he favourbeltowed upon Arran, the enemy of every
thing decent and fecred, and the rigorous profecu-
tion of those nobles, Who had been the most zeal-
ous defenders cf the protestant cause, were con-
fidered as sure presages of the approaching ruin of
the Church. The Clergy could not conceal their
apprehensions, nor view this impending danger in
-silence. Drury, who had been restored to his of-
fice as one of the Ministers of Edinburgh, openly
applauded the Raid of Rutbven in the pulpit, at
which the King was so enraged, that, notwithftand-
ing some symptoms of his submission, he command-
ed him to resign his charge in the city. Mr. An-
drew Melvil, being summoned before the Privy
Council to anfgver for the do&rine he had uttered in
a sermon at St. Andrew's, and accused of compar-
ing the present grievances of the nation with those
under James III. and of intimating obliquely that
they ought to be redressed in the fame manner,
thought it incumbent on him to behave with greater
firmness. He declined the jurifdition of a Civil
court, in a cause which he maintained to be purely
Ecclesiastical; the presbytery of which he was a
member had, as he contended, the sole right to call
him to account for words spoken in the pulpit; and

neither

neither the King nor council could judge, in the first B o o
instance, of the doctrine delivered by Preachers, VI.
without violating the immunities of the Church. I
This exemption from civil jurisdiction was a privi-
lege, which the Popish Ecclesiastics, admirable
judges of whatever contributed to increase the
lustre or power of their body, had long struggled
for, and had at last obtained. If the fame plea had
now been admitted, the Protestant Clergy would
have become independent on the civil Magistrate;
and an order of men extremely useful to society
while they inculcate those duties which tend to pro-
mote its happiness and tranquillity, might have be-
come no less pernicious by teaching, without fear or
controul, the most dangerous principles, or by ex-
citing their hearers to the most desperate and lawless
actions. The King, jealous to excess of his prero-
gative, was alarmed at this daring encroachment on
it; and as Melvil, by his learning and zeal, had
acquired the reputation and authority of head of
the party, he resolved to puniih him with the ri-
gour, which that pre-eminence rendered necessary,
and to discourage, by a timely severity, the revival
of such a dangerous claim. Melvil, however,
avoided his rage, by flying into England; and the
pulpits resounded with complaints that the King
had extinguished the light of learning in the king-
dom, and deprived the Church of the ablest and most
faithful guardian of its liberties and discipline *.

THESE violent declamations of the Clergy, against
the measures of the court, were extremely accept-

* Spotfw. 330. Cald. iii. 304.

able

B o OK able to the people. The conspirators, though dri-

VI. ven out of the kingdom; still possessed great influ-

- ence there; and as they had every thing to fear
5 4- from the resentment of a young prince, irritated by

the furious councils of Arran, they never ceased
soliciting their adherents to take arms in their de-
fence. Gowrie, the only person among them who
had submitted to the King, and accepted of a par-
don, soon repented of a ftep, which loft him the
esteem of one party, without gaining the confidence
of the other; and, after suffering many mortifica-
tions from the King's negle&, and the haughtiness
of Arran, he was at last commanded to leave Scot-
land, and to reside in France. While he waited at
Dundee for an opportunity to embark, he was in-
formed that the Earls of Angus, Mar, and the
Tutor of Glamis, had concerted a scheme for fur-,
prifing the cattle of Stirling. In his situation, lit-
tle persuasion was necessary to draw him to engage
in it. Under various pretexts, he put off his voyage,
and lay ready to take arms on the day fixed, by
the conspirators, for the execution of their enter-
prise. His lingering so long at Dundee, without
any apparent reason, awakened the suspicion of the
court, proved fatal to himself, and disappointed the
success of the conspiracy. Colonel William Ste-w-
art surrounded the house where he lodged with a
body of soldiers, and in spite of his resistance, took
him prisoner. Two days after, Angus, Mar, and
Glamis, seized the castle of Stirling, and ere&ing
their standard there, published a manifesto, declar-
ing that they took arms for no ott er reason, but to
remove from the King's pretence, a minion who

had

had acquired power by the most unworthy actions, B o o x
and who exercised it with the most intolerable info- VI.
lence. The account of Gowrie's imprisonment '- '
struck a damp upon their spirits. They imputed it I584.
to treachery on his part, and fufpe&ed that as he
had formerly deserted, he had now betrayed them.
At the fame time, a furn of money, with which
Elizabeth had promised to supply them, not being
duly paid, and their friends and vassals coming in
slowly, they appeared irresolute and disheartened;
and as the King, who acted with great vigour, ad-
vanced towards them at the head of 2o,ooo men,
they tied precipitately towards England, and with
difficulty made their escape . This rash and fee-
ble attempt produced such effeEts, as usually follow
disappointed conspiracies. It not only hurt the
,cause, for which it was undertaken, but added
,.Rrength and reputation to the King; confirmed Ar-
ran's power; and enabled them to pursue their
measures with more boldness, and greater success.
Gowrie was the first victim of their resentment.
After a very informal trial, a jury of Peers found
him guilty of treason, and he was publickly be-
headed at Stirling.

To humble the Church was the King's next flep.

But as it became necessary, for this purpose, to call Maya
in the aid of the legislative authority, a Parliament ment held.
was hastily summoned: and while so many of the
nobles were banished out of the kingdom, or for-
bidden to appear in the King's presence; while Ar-
ran's haughtiness kept some at a distance, and inti-
* Home's hilt ofHoufe of Dougl. 376. Spotfw. 33o.

midated

107

B o o K midated others; the meeting consisted only ofthofe,

VI. who were absolutely at the devotion of the court.

-'~.- In order to conceal the laws which were framing
S84cws from the knowledge of the Clergy, the Lords of the
at the Articles were sworn to secrecy and when some of

the Ministers, who either fufpeced, or were inform-
ed of the danger, deputed one of their number to
declare their apprehensions to the King, he was
seized at the palace-gate, and carried to a diftanr
prison. Others, attempting to enter the Parlia-
ment-houfe, were refused admittance*+ and such
May ,2. laws were passed, as totally overturned the confti-

tution and discipline of the Church. The refusing
to acknowledge the jurifdi&ion of the Privy Coun-
cil; the pretending an exemption from the autho-
rity of the civil courts, the attempting to diminish
the rights and privileges of any of the three effates
in parliament, were declared to be high treason.
The holding assemblies, whether Civil, or Eccle-
fiacical, without the King's permifion or appoint-
ment; the uttering, either privately or publickly,
in sermons or in declamations, any false and scan-
dalous reports against the King, his ancestors, or
miniiters, were pronounced capital crimes t.

WHrEN these laws were published at the cross of

Edinburgh, according to the ancient custom, Mr.
Robert Pont, Miniiter of St. Cuthbert's, and one
of the Lords of Session, solemnly protefed against
them, in the name of his brethren, because they
had been passed without the knowledge or consent
of the Church. Ever since the Reformation, the

* Cald. iii. 365. t Parl. 8 Jac. VI.

pulpits and ecclefiafticaljudicatories, had both been B o o K
esteemed sacred. In the former, the Clergy had VI.
been accustomed to censure, and admonish, with 'v-
unbounded liberty. In the latter, they exercised an 1584.
uncontrouled and independant jurifdi&ion. The
blow was now aimed at both there privileges. These
new statutes were calculated to render churchmen
as considerable as they were indigent; and as the
avarice of the nobles had stripped them of the
wealth, the King's ambition was about to deprive
them of the power which once belonged to their
order. No wonder the alarm was universal, and
the complaints loud. All the Miniffters of Edin-
burgh forsook their charge, and fled into England.
The most eminent Clergymen, throughout the
kingdom, imitated their example. Desolation and
astonishment appeared in every part of the Scottiih
Church; the people bewailed the loss of Pastors,
whom they esteemed; and full of consternation, at
an event so unexpected, openly expressed their rage
against Arran, and began to fufpet the King him-
self to be an enemy to the Reformed Religion*.

" Spotfw. 333.

# THE HISTORY OF SCOTLAND. BOOK VII.

THE
H I S T O R Y

o
SCOTLA ND.

B O 0 K VII.
W HILE Scotland was torn by intestine sac- Bo o

tions, Elizabeth was alarmed with the ru- VII.

mour of a proje& in agitation for setting Mary at .
liberty. FrancisThrogmorton, a Chefhiregentle- 1584.
man, was fufpe&ed of being deeply concerned in Thrognos -
the design, and on that suspicion he was taken into fpiracy a-

gains Eli-

custody. Among his papers were found two lifts, zabeth.
one of the principal harbours in the kingdom, with
an account of their situation, and of the depth of
water in each; the other, of all the eminent Roman
Catholics in England. This circumitance confirm-
ed the suspicion against him, and some dark and
desperate conspiracy was supposed just ready to break
out. At first he boldly avowed his innocence, and

declared
______ I _ _ _ __

B o o K declared that the two papers were forged by the

VI. Queen's ministers, in order to intimidate or insnare
A-~- him; and he even endured the rack with the utmost
5484 fortitude. But being brought a second time to the

place of torture, his resolution failed him, and he
not only acknowledged that he had held a secret
correspondence with the Queen of Scots, but dif-
covered a design that was formed to invade Eng-
land. The Duke of Guise, he said, undertook to
furnilh troops, and to conduct the enterprise. The
Pope and King of Spain were to supply the monet;
necessary for carrying it on; all the English exiles
were eager to take arms; many of the Catholics at
home would be ready to join them, at their landing;
Mendoza, the Spanish ambassador, who was. the life
of the conspiracy, spared no pains in fomenting the
spirit of difaffe&ion among the English, or in has-
tening the preparations on the Continent; and by
his command, he made the two lifts, the copies
whereof had been found in his possession. This con-
session he retracted at his trial; returned to it again,
after sentence was pafred upon him ;- and retra&ed
it once mrore at the place of execution*.

To usin the present age, who are assisted in form-

ing our opinion of this matter, by the light which
rime and history have thrown upon the designs and
characters of the Princes of Guise, many cir-um-
flances of Throgmorton's confession appear to be
extremely remote from truth, or even from proba-
bility. The Duke of Guise was, at that junture,
far fronb being in a situation to undertake foreign-

i Holetad, 1t37o.

con-
112

conquefs. Without either power or office at court; B o o .
hated by the King; and prosecuted by the favour- VII.
ites, he had no leisure for any thoughts of disturb- '-
ing the quiet of neighbouring itates; and his vast 1584.
and ambitious mind was wholly occupied in laying
the foundation of that famous league, which shook
the throne of France. But about the time Eliza-
beth dete&ed this ccnfpiracy, the close union be-
tween the house of Guise and Philip was remark-
able to all Europe; and as their great enterprise
against Henry III. was not yet disclosed, as they
endeavoured to conceal that under their threaten-
ings to invade England, Throgmorton's discovery
appeared to be extremely probable; and Elizabeth,
who knew how ardently all the parties mentioned
by him wished her downfal, thought that she could
not guard her kingdom with too much care. The Defgns of
indiscreet zeal of the EngliSh exiles encreafed her Marys ad-
fears. Not satisfied with incessant outcries against gainea Ei-

ZD zabeth.

her severity towards the Scottish Queen, and her
cruel prosecution of her catholic subjects, not think-
ing it enough that one Pope had threatened her
with the sentence of excommunication, and another
had a&ually pronounced it, they now began to dif-
perse books and writings, in which they endea-
voured to persuade their disciples, that it would be
a meritorious action to take away her life; they
openly exhorted the maids of honour to treat her
as Judith did Holofernes, and by such an illus-
trious deed, to render their own names honourable
and sacred in the Church throughout all future
ages*. For all these reasons, Elizabeth not only

Camd. 497.

i1j
I

inflitted
VoL.. II.

B o o i infli&ed the puniflment of a traitor on Throg-

VII. morton, but commanded the Spanish ambassador
'-'v inftantlv to leave England; and that ihe might be

54 in no danger of being attacked within the island,

she determined to use her utmost efforts, in order
to recover that influence over the Scottish councils,
which she had for some time entirely loft.

She ndea- T-ERE were three different methods, by which
dibliSh h Elizabeth might hope to accomplish this; either by
fiCsiu i furnishing such effectual aid to the banished nobles,
Scotland,
by gaining as would enable them to resume the chief direction
AmNa. of affairs; or by entering into such a treaty with

Mary, as might intimidate her son, who being now
accustomed to govern, would be apt to agree to
any terms rather than resign the sceptre, or admit
an associate in the throne; or by gaining the Earl of
Arran, to secure the direction of the King his maf-
ter. The last was not only the eaieft and fpeedieft,
but most likely to be successful. This Elizabeth re-
solved to pursue; but without laying the other two
altogether aside. With this view she sent Davison,
one of her principal secretaries, a man of abilities
and address, into Scotland. A Minister so venal as
Arran, hated by his own countrymen, and holding
his power by the most precarious of all tenures, the
favour of a young Prince, accepted Elizabeth's of-
sers without hesitation, and esteemed the acquifi-
tion of her prctection to be the most solid founda-
tion of his own greatness. Soon after he consented
A-.*i 1 to an interview with Lord Hunfdon the Governor

of Berwick, and being honoured with the pompous
itle of Lieutenant General for the King, he ap-

peared
114-

peared at the place appointed with a splendid train. B o o K
In Hunfdon's presence he renewed his promises of VII.
an inviolable and faithful attachment to the Engiilh if
interest, and assured him that James should enter I584'
into no negociation, which might tend to interrupt
the peace between the two kingdoms; and as Eli-
zabeth began to entertain the fame fears and jea-
loufies concerning the King's marriage, which had
formerly disquieted her with regard to his mother's,
he undertook to prevent James from listening to
any overture of that kind, till he had previously
obtained the Queen of England's consent *.

THE banilhed Lords and their adherents soon felt severe pro-
the effe&s of Arran's friendship with England. As ceedings a-

gainft the

Elizabeth had permitted them to take refuge in her banished
dominions, and several of her Ministers were of opi- Lords'
nion that she ought to employ her arms in defence
of their cause, the fear of this was the only thing,
which reitrained James and his favourite, from pro-
ceeding to such extremities against them, as might
have excited the pity or indignation of the English,
and have prompted them to exert themselves with
vigour in their behalf. But every apprehension of
this kind being now removed, they ventured to call Aului e'
a parliament, in which an a& was passed, attainting
Angus, Mar, Glamis, and a great number of their
followers. Their estates devolved to the Crown, and
according to the pra&ice of the Scottish Monarchs,
who were obliged to reward the faction which ad-
hered to them, by dividing with it the spoils of the

Cald. iii. 491. Melv. 315. See Append. No. IX.

I 2 van-

B o o vanquilhed, James dealt out the greater part of

VII. there to Arran, and his associates*.

I584.
Aga~ the NOR was the treatment of the Clergy less rigo-.
ClJey. rous. All Ministers, readers, and professors' of

Cplleges were enjoined to subscribe, within forty
days, a paper testifying their approbation of the
laws concerning the Church enacted in last parlia-
ment. Many, overawed or corrupted by the
Court, yielded obedience; others stood out. The
stipends of the latter were sequestered, some of the
more active committed to prison, and numbers:com-.
pelled to fly the kingdom. Those who complied,
fell under the suspicion of acting from mercenary
or ambitious motives. Those who suffered acquir-
ed high reputation, by giving such .convincing evi-
dence.:of their.firmnefs and sincerity. The judica-
tories of the Church were almost entirely fupprefed;
In some places, scarce as many Miniffers remained,
as to .perform the-duties of religious worship; they
soon funk in reputation among the people, and'
being prohibited not only from discoursing of pub-
lic affairs, but obliged, by the jealoufy-ofthe ad-
minifiration, to frame every sentiment and expref-
sion in such a manner, as to give the court no of--
fence, their sermons were deemed languid, insipid,
and contemptible; and it became the general opi-
nion,. that. together with the molt virtuous of the.
nobles, and the most faithful of the Clergy, the
power and vigour of religion were now banished
out of the kingdom T.

* Cald. ii,. 527.

t Ibid. iii. 589.

MEAN-

MEANWHILE, Elizabeth was carrying on one of B o o K

those fruitless negociations with the Queen of Scots, VII.
which it had become almost matter of form to re-
new. every year. They served not only to amuse that 584
unhappy Princess with some profpe& of liberty;
but furnilhed an apology for eluding the folicita-
tions of foreign powers in her behalf; and were of
use to overawe James, by Ihewing him that Ihe
could, at any time, set free a dangerous rival to
dispute his authority. These treaties She suffered to
proceed to what length Ihe pleased, and never want-
ed a pretence for breaking them off; when they be-
came no longer necessary. The treaty now on foot
was not, perhaps, more sincere than many which
preceded it; the reasons, however, which rendered
it ineffecual were far from being frivolous.

As Crichton a Jesuit was failing from Slanders New con.

towards Scotland, the- sip on board of which he iy
was a passenger happened to be chased by Pirates, zabeth.
who at that age, often infested the narrow leas.
Crichton, in great confusion, tore in pieces some
papers in his custody, and threw them away; but,
by a very extraordinary accident, the wind blew
them back into the ship, and they were immediately
taken up by some of the passengers, who carried
them to Wade, the Clerk of the privy council. He,
with great industry and patience, joined them toge-
ther, and they were found to contain the account
of a plot said to have been formed by the King of
Spain, and Duke of Guise, -for invading England.
The people were not yet recovered from the fear
and anxiety occasioned by the conspiracy, in which

I 3 Throg-

Bo o K Throgmorton had been engaged, and his disco-

VII. veries appeared now to be confirmed by additional
's ' e'evidence, not only all their former apprehGnfions

recurred, but the consternation became general and
excessive. As all the dangers, with which England
had been threatened for some years, flowed either
immediately from Mary herself, or from those, who
made use of her name to justify their insurrections
and conspiracies, this gradually diminiihed the com-
passion due to her situation, and the English, instead
of pitying, began to fear and to hate her. Eliza-
beth, under whose wife and pacific reign the Eng-
lih enjoyed tranquility, and had opened sources of
wealth unknown to their ancestors, was extremely
beloved by all her people; and regard to her safe-

Occafons ty, not less than to her own interest, animated
ton in op- them against the Scottif Queen. In order to dif-
i°onto courage her adherents, it was thought necessary

to convince them, by some public deed, of the
attachment of the English to their own Sove-
reign, and that any attempt against her life would
prove fatal to her rival. With this view, an Aso-
oaober c. ciation was framed, the subscribers of which bound

themselves by the most solemn oaths, " to defend
" the Queen against all her enemies, foreign and
" domestic; and if violence should be offered to
" her life, in order to favour the title of any per-
" tender to the Crown, they not only engaged ne-
"ver to allow or acknowledge the person or perfops
' by whom, or for whom, such a detestable a&
" should be committed, but vowed, in the pretence
" of the eternal God, to prosecute such person or
" persons to the death, and to pursue them, with

" their
i13

' their 'utmost vengeance, to their utter overthrow B o o K
" and extirpation*." Persons of all ranks sub- VII.
fcribed this combination, with the greatest eager-
ness and unanimity t.

MARY confidered this combination, not only as Which

an avowed design to exclude her from all right of lar her.
succession, but as the certain and immediate fore-
runner of her deftrucion. In order to avert this,
she made such feeble efforts as were still in her pow-
er, and sent Naue her secretary to court, with offers
of more entire resignation to the will of Elizabeth,
in every point, which had been the occasion of their
long enmity, than all her sufferings hitherto had
been able to extort $. But whether Mary adhered
inflexibly to her privileges, as an independent Sove-
reign, or yielding to the neceflity of her situation,
endeavoured, by concessions, to sooth her rival, she
was equally unsuccessful. Her firmness was im-
puted to obstinacy, or to the secret hope of foreign
assistance; her concessions were either believed to be
insincere, or to flow from the fear of some imminent
danger. Her present willingness, however, to com-
ply with any terms were so great, that Walsingham
warmly urged his mistress to come to a final agree-
ment with her. But Elizabeth was persuaded, that
it was the spirit raised by the association, which had
rendered her so passive and compliant. She always
imagined that there was something mysterious and
deceitful in all Mary's a&iotrs, and fufpe&ed her of
carrying on a dangerous correspondence with the
English Catholics, both within and without the
* State Trials, I. 122. t Camd. 499. 1 Camd. ibid,

I + kingdom.

B o o r kingdom. Nor were her iufpicions altogether.void
VII. of foundation. Mary had, about this time, written

- a letter to Sir Francis Inglefield, urging him to
1584. haften the execution of what she calls the Great

plot or Designment, without hesitating on account
of any danger in which it might involve her life,
which ihe would mofft willingly part with, if by that
sacrifice, she could procure relief for so great a
number of the oppressed. children of the Church*.

Shei tr- Instead, therefore, of hearkening to the overtures
ed with -
great ri- which the Scottish Queen made, or granting any
.Or.' .mitigation of the hardihips of which fie complain-

ed, Elizabeth resolved to take her.out of the hands
of the Earl of Shrewlbury, . and to appoint Sir
Aminis Paulet, and Sir Drue Drury, to be her keep-
ers. Shrewsbury had discharged his truiftwith great
-fidelity, during fifteen years, but, at the fame. time,
:had treated Mary with gentleness and.refpe&, .and
.had always sweetened harsh comifands,: by the;hu-
,pani'y with.which he:put.them in execution. The
,fame..politeneis 'was not -to be expectd from iien
ogf -an- inferior rank, whose .evere vigilance, :p'er-
.haps, was their: chief recommeridation: to that .em-
*ployment, and the.only rnerit, by:which-they covil
pretend to: gain favour or prefermehtt.

rayanew As James.was-no less eager, than ever, to deprive
fhrote of the banilhed Nobles of Elizabeth's. prote&ion, he

appointed the Master of Gray his Ambaflador to
the court of England, and intrusted him' with the
condua of a negociation for that purpose; An ho-

Strype, iii. 248. + Camd. 5oo.

nour

nour for which he was indebted to the envy andjea- B o o K
lousy of the Earl of Arran. Gray poffiefed all the VII.
talents of a Courtier ; a graceful person, an infinu- '-
ating address, boundless ambition, and a restless and 1584.
intriguing spirit. During his residence in France,
he had been admitted into the most intimate fami-
liarity with the Duke of Guise, and in order to gain
his favour, had renounced the Protestant Religion,
and professed the utmost zeal for the captive Queen,
who carried on a secret correspondence with him,
from which she expeted great advantages. On his
return into Scotland, he paid court to James with
extraordinary assiduity, and his accomplishments
did not fail to make their usual impression on the
King's heart. Arran, who had introduced him, be-
gan quickly to dread his growing favour; and fat-
tering himself, that absence would efface any senti-
ments of tenderness from the mind of a young
Prince, pointed him out, by his malicious praises,
as the most proper person in the kingdom, for an
embassy of such importance; and contributed to
raise him to that high dignity, in order to haften
his fall. Elizabeth, who had an admirable dexterity
in discovering the proper instruments for carrying
on her designs, endeavoured, by caresses, and by
presents, to secure Gray to her interest. The for-
mer flattered his vanity, which was great; the lat-
ter supplied his profuseness which was still greater.
He abandoned himself without reserve to Elizabeth's
dire&ion, and not only undertook to retain the King
under the influence of England, but a&ed as a spy
upon the Scottish Queen, and betrayed to her rival

every

B o K every secret that he could draw from her by his

VII. high pretensions of zeal in her service .

M.terf GRAY'S credit with the English court was ex-
wit the tremely galling to the banifled nobles, Elizabeth
c.=-t of n
Esan- no longer thought of employing her power torreftore

them; lhe found it easier to govern Scotland, by
corrupting the King's favourites; and in compliance
with Gray's solicitations, she commanded the exiles
mn. 3to leave the north of England, and to remove into

the heart of the Kingdom. This rendered it diffi-
cult for them to hold any correspondence with their
partizans in Scotland, and almost impollible to re-
turn thither without her permission. Gray, by gain-
ing a point which James had so much at heart, rivet-
ted himself more firmly than ever in his favour; and
by acquiring greater reputation, became capable of
serving Elizabeth with greater success t,

1535 ARRAN had now possessed, for some time, all the

Arn's power, the riches, and the honours, that his immo-
Dino derate ambition could desire, or the fondness of a
kno- Prince, who set no limits to his liberality towards

his favourites, could bestow. The offce of Lord
Chancellor, the highest and most important in the
kingdom, was conferred upon him, even during the
life of the Earl of Argyll, who succeeded Athol
in that dignity ; and the public beheld, with
astonishment and indignation, a man educated as a
soldier of fortune, ignorant of law, and a con-
temner of justice, appointed to preside in parlia-

Strype, iii. 302. Melv. 316. t Cald. iii. 643.
+ Crawf. Offic. of State, App. 447.

ment,

ment, in the privy council, in the court of session, B o o K
and intruited with the supreme disposal of the pro- VII.
perty of his fellow-fubje&ts. He was, at the fame '-'
time, govenor of the castles of Stirling and Edin- 'S85
burgh, the two principal forts in Scotland; Pro-
voft of the city of Edinburgh; and as if by all
these accumulated dignities his merits were not sus-
ficiently recompenfed, he had been created Lieute-
nant General over the whole kingdom. No person
was admitted into the King's pretence without his
permission; no favour could be obtained but by his
mediation. James, occupied with youthful amuse-
ments, devolved upon him the whole regal autho-
rity. Such unmerited elevation increased his natu-
ral arrogance, and rendered it intolerable. He was
no longer content with the condition of a fubje&,
but pretended to derive his pedigree from Murdo
Duke of Albany; and boasted, openly, that his
title to the Crown was preferable to that of the King
himself. But, together with these thoughts of roy-
alty, he retained the meanness, suitable to his pri-
mitive indigence. His venality as ajudge was scan-
dalous, and was exceeded only by that of his wife,
who, in defiance of decency, made herself a party
in almost every question which came to be decided,
employed her influence to corrupt, or to overawe
the judges, and almost openly di&ated their deci-
sions*. His rapaciousness as a Minister was infa-
tiable. Not satisfied with the revenues of so many
offices; with the estate and honours which belong-
ed to the family of Hamilton; or with the greater
part of Gowrie's lands, which had fallen to his

Cald. ii. 331. Scotftarvet's Staggering State, 7.

share;

B o o K share; he grasped at the poffeltion of several of the

VII. nobles. He required Lord Maxwell to exchange
' ---' part of his estate, for the forfeited lands of Kin-
-5-$' .neil; and because he was unwilling to quit an an-

cient inheritance for a poffefion so precarious, he
stirred up -against him, his hereditary rival, the
.Laird of Johnston, and involved that corner of the
kingdom. in a civil war. He committed to.prifon
the Earl of. Athol, Lord Howe, and the Master
of Carfils; the first, because he would not divorce
,his.wife, the daughter of the Earl of.Gowrie, and
entail his estate on him; the second, because he was
unwilling to part with some lands, adjacent,to one
of his eflates; and the third, for refusing to lend
him money. -His spies and informers filled the
whole country, and intruded themselves into every
.company. The nearest neighbours distrusted and
feared each-other. All familiar society was at an
-end. Even the common ,intercourses of humanity
were interrupted, .no !man ;knowing -in whom to
confide, or where to utter his complaints. There is
not perhaps in history, an example of a.Minifter
.so universally deteftable-to a nation, or who more
justly deserved its detestation .

ARRAX, notwithstanding, regardless of the fen-

timents, and defpifng the murmurs of the people,
-gave .a loose to his natural temper, and proceeded
to .a&s ttill more violent. David Home of Argaty,
and Patrick his brother, having received letters from
one of the banished Lords, about private business,
were.condeiried and put to death, for holding.cor-

- Spffw. 337, .338.

respond-

refpondence with rebels. Cunninghame of Drum- B o o K
whafel, and Douglas of Mains, two- gentlemen of VII.
honour and reputation, were accused of.having con- --
spired, with the exiled nobles, to seize the King's 1585.
person. A single witness only appeared; the evi-
dence they produced of their innocence was unan-
fwerable; their accuser himself not long after ac-
knowledged. that he had been suborned by Arran;
and all men believed the' charge against them to be:
groundless: They were found guilty, notwithftand- Feb. g.
ing, and suffered the death of traitors *.

ABOUT the fame time, that there gentlemen were Parry's

cons piracy

punished for a pretended conspiracy, Elizabeth's life agirt aEli-
was endangered by a real one. Parry, a Do&or of zabetlh
laws, and a Member of the House of Commons,
a man vain and fantastic, but of a resolute spirit,
had lately been reconciled to the Church of Rome;
and fraught with the zeal of a new convert, he of-
sered to demonstrate the sincerity of his attach-
ment to the religion which he had embraced, by
killing Elizabeth. Cardinal Allen had prbliihed a
book, to prove the murder of an excommunicated
Prince to be not only lawful, but a meritorious
action. The Pope's Nunrii, at Venice, the jesuits
both there and at Paris, the English exiles, all ap-
proved of the design. The Pope himself exhorted
him to persevere; and granted him, for his encou-
ragement, a plenary indulgence, and remifion of
his fins. Cardinal di Como wrote him a letter to
the fame purpose. But though he often got access
to the Queen, fear, or some remaining sense of duty,

Spotfw. 338. Cald. iii. 794

restrained

B o K refrained him from perpetrating the crime. Hap-

VII. pily, his intention was at last discovered by Nevily
'- -' the only perion in England to whom he had com-
I585' municated it; and he himself having voluntarily
Murh .- confessed his guilt, he suffered the punishment

which it deserved *.

AfeTCre THESE repeated conspiracies against their Sove-
fLatute

~WhCh reign awakened the indignation of the English par-
mdto liament, and produced a very extraordinary itatute,
M-Y. which, in the end, proved fatal to the Queen of

Scots. By this law the association in defence of
Elizabeth's life was ratified, and it was further en-
aced " that if any rebellion shall be excited in
"the kingdom, or any thing attempted to the
" hurt of her Majesty's person, by or for any per-
" son pretending a tite to the Crown, the Queen
" shall empower twenty-four persons, by a com-
" million under the Great Seal, to examine into,
" and pais sentence upon such offences; and after
" judgement given, a proclamation shall be issued,
" declaring the persons whom they find guilty, ex-
C" cluded from any right to the Crown; and her
" Majesty's fubjefts may lawfully pursue every one
" of them to the death, with all their aiders and
" abettors: And if any design against the life of
" tie Queen take effet, the persons, by or for
" whom, such a detestable act is executed, and their
" issues, being in any wife assenting or privy to the
"fame, shall be disabled for ever from pretending
" to the Crown, and be pursued to death in the
" like manner r." This act was plainly levelled at

* State Trials, vol. i. to}.

. Ibid. 123.

the

the Queen of Scots; and whether we confider it as B o o E
a voluntary expression of the zeal and concern of VII.
the nation for Elizabeth's safety, or whether we im- ' '
pute it to the influence, which tlat artful Princess 1585.
preserved over her parliaments, it is no easy matter
to reconcile it with the general principles of jus-
tice or humanity. Mary was thereby rendered ac-
countable not only for her own ations, but for
those of others; in consequence of which, she
might forfeit her right of succession, and even her
life itself.

MARY justly confidered this a& as a warning to Therigoh" r

c with which

prepare for the worst extremities. Elizabeth's mi- fhewas
nifters, it is probable, had resolved, by this time, reated n-
to take away her life; and suffered books to be
published, in order to persuade the nation, that this
cruel and unprecedented measure was not only ne-
ceffary, hut just*. Even that short period of her
days which remained, they rendered uncomfort-
able, by every hardship and indignity which it was
in their power to infliE. Almost all her servants
were dismissed; she was treated no longer with the
refpe& due to a Queen; and though the rigour of
Seventeen years imprisonment had broken her con-
ftitution, she was confined to two ruinous chambers,
scarce habitable, even in the middle of summer, by
reason of cold. Notwithstanding the scantiness of
her revenue, she had been accustomed to distribute
regularly some alms among the poor in the village
adjoining to the castle. Paulet, now, refused her

* Strype, iii. 299.

liberty

B o o f liberty to perform this pious and humane offce,

VII. which- had afforded her great consolation, amidst
*'-'' her own sufferings. The castle in which she re-

155.' fided, was converted into a common prifin; and a

young man, fufpe&ed of Popery, was confined
there, and treated under her eye, with such rigour,
that he died of the ill usage. She often complained
to Elizabeth ofthefe multiplied injuries, and expos-
tulated as became a woman, and a Queen; but as
no political reason now obliged that Princess to
amuse her any longer with fallacious hopes, far
from granting her any redress, she did not even
deign to give her any answer. The King of France,
lofely-allied to Elizabeth, on whom he depended
for assistance, was afraid of espousing Mary's cause,
with any warmth; and all his solicitations in her
behalf were feeble, formal, and inefficacious. But
Caftlenau, the French ambaflador, whose compaf-
sion and zeal for the unhappy Queen supplied the
defets in his inftru&ions, remonstrated with such
vigour against the indignities, to which she was ex-
posed, that, by his importunity, he prevailed at
length to have her removed to Tuthbury; though
she was confined, the greater part of another win-
ter, in her present wretched-habitation *.

A brea NEITHER the insults of her enemies, nor the ne-
be-ren gle& of her friends, made such an impreflion on
W son. Mary, as the ingratitude of her son. James had

hitherto treated his mother with filial refpe&, and-
had even entered into negociations with her, which
gave umbrage to Elizabeth. But as it was not her

' Jebb. v. z. 576 ---59.

interest

interest that this good correspondence Ihould conti- B o o K
nue, Gray, who, on his return into Scotland, found VII.
his favour with the King greatly increased by the fuc- -
cess of his embafly, persuaded him to write a harlh 1585'
and undutiful letter to his mother, in which he ex-
prefsly refused to acknowledge her to be Queen of
Scotland, or to confider his affairs as conneced, in
any wife, with hers. This cruel requital of her
maternal tenderness overwhelmed Mary with for-
row and despair. " Was it for this, said she, in a March 24.
" letter to the French Ambassador, that I have en-
" dured so much, in order to preserve for him the
" inheritance, to which I have a just right? I am
" far from envying his authority in Scotland. I
" desire no power there; nor wish to set my foot
" in that kingdom, if it were not for the pleasure'
" of once embracing a son, whom I have hitherto
" loved with too tender affection. Whatever he
" either enjoys or expets, he derived it from me.
" From him, I never received assistance, supply, or
" benefit of any kind. Let not my allies treat him
" any longer as a King; he holds that dignity by
" my content; and if a speedy repentance does not
" appease my just resentment, I will load him with
" a parent's curse, and surrender my Crown, with
" all my pretensions, to one, who will receive them
"with gratitude, and defend them with vigour*."
The love which James bore to his mother, whom
he had never known, nay, whom he had been early
taught to confider as the most abandoned person of
her sex, cannot be supposed ever to have been ardent;

* Jebb, ii._57I. See Append. No. X.
VOL. II. K and

129

B o o-x and he did not now take any pains to regain her

VII. favour. But whether her indignation at his undu-

8'.-' tiful behaviour, added to her bigotted attachment
I55'' to Popery, prompted Mary at any time to think fe-

riouly of disinheriting her son; or whether these
threatenings were uttered in a sudden sally of difap-
pointed affection, it is now no easy matter to deter-
mine. Some papers which are ifill extant seem to
render the former not improbable *

ang~e CARES of another kind, and no less disquieting,
Eiz~h. occupied Elizabeth's thoughts. The calm, which

the had long enjoyed, seemed now to be at an end;
and such ftorns were gathering in every quarter,
as filled her with just alarm. All the neighbouring
nations had undergone revolutions, extremely to
her disadvantage. The great qualities, which Hen-
ry III. had displayed in his youth, and which raised
the expe&ations of his subjects so high, vanished on
his ascending the throne , and his acquiring supreme
power seems not only to have corrupted his heart,
but to have impaired his understanding. He toon
loft the esteem and affe&ion of the nation; and a
life divided between the aufterities of a superstitious
devotion, and the extravagancies of the mos diffo-
lute debauchery, rendered him as contemptible as
he was odious on account of his rapaciousness, his
profusion, and the fondness with which he doated
on many unworthy minions. On the death of his
only brother, those sentiments of the people burst
out with violence. Henry had no children, and
though but thirty-two years of age, the succession

See Appendix, No. XI.

of
13o

of the Crown was already confidered as open. The B 6 o K
King of Navarre, a distant descendant of the royal VII.
family, but the undoubted heir to the Crown, was 'r-'
a zealous Protestant. The profpe& of an event, so froI5 l
fatal to their religion, as his arcending the throne progrefsof
of France, alarmed all the Catholics in Europe, tleleague
and the Duke of Guise, countenanced by the Pope,
and aided by the King of Spain, appeared as the
defender of the Romish faith, and the asserter of
the Cardinal of Bourbon's right to the Crown. In
order to unite the party, a bond of confederacy
was formed, diftinguihled by the name of the Holy
League. All ranks of men joined in it with emu-
lation. The spirit spread with the irresistible rapi-
dity, which was natural to religious passions, in
that age. The deftrution of the Reformation not
only in France, but all over Europe, seemed to be
the obje& and wilh of the whole party; and the
Duke of Guise, the head of this mighty and zeal-
ous body, acquired authority in the kingdom, far
superior to that which the King himself possessed,
Philip II. by the conquest of Portugal, had greatly from the
increased the naval power of Spain, and had at last power of
reduced under his dominion all that portion of the Philip 11,
Continent, which lies beyond the Pyrenean moun-
tains, and which nature seems to have destined to
form one great monarchy. William, Prince of
Orange, who first encouraged the inhabitants of
the Netherlands to assert their liberties, and whose
wisdom and valour formed and proteted the rising
commonwealth, had fallen by the hands of an as-
faffin. The superior genius of the Prince of Parma,
had given an entire turn to the fate of the war in

K 2 the

the Low Countries; all his enterprises, concerted
with consummate skill, and executed with equal
bravery, had been attended with success; and the
Dutch, reduced to the last extremity, were on the
point of falling under the dominion of their ancient
master.

NONE ofthofe circumstances, to which Elizabeth

had hitherto owed her security, existed any longer.
She could derive no advantage from the jealousy
which had subsisted between France and Spain;
Philip, by means of his confederacy with the Duke
of Guise, had an equal sway in the council of both
kingdoms. The Hugonots were unable to contend
with the power of the league; and little could be
expected from any diversion they might create.
Nor was it probable that the Netherlands could
long employ the arms, or divide the strength of
Spain. In this situation of the affairs of Europe, it
became necessary for Elizabeth to form a new plan
of conduct; and her wisdom in forming it, was
not greater than the vigour with which she carried
it on. The measures, most suitable to her natural
temper, and which she had hitherto pursued, were
cautious and safe; those she now adopted were en-
terprizing and hazardous. She preferred peace, but
was not afraid of war; and was capable, when com-
pelled by necessity, not only of defending herself
with spirit, but of attacking her enemies with a bold-
ness, which averted danger from her own domi-
nions. She immediately furnilhed the Hugonots
with a considerable supply in money. She carried
on a private negociation with Henry III. who,

though

though compelled to join the league, hated the lead- B o o s
ers of it, and wilhed for their destruction. She VII.
openly undertook the prote&ion of the Dutch com- '"*- ~
monwealth, and sent a powerful army to its assist- 585
ance. She endeavoured to form a general confe-
deracy of the Protestant Princes in opposition to the
Popish League. She determined to proceed with Resolves to

punib Ma-

the utmost rigour againit the Queen of Scots, whole ur, and to
sufferings and rights afforded her enemies a specious gain the
pretence for invading her dominions. She resolved
to redouble her endeavours in order to effe& a closer
union with Scotland, and to extend and perpetuate
her influence over the councils of that nation.

SHE found it no difficult matter to induce moRl

of the Scottish courtiers to promote all her designs.
Gray, Sir John Maitland, who had been advanced
to the office of Secretary, which his brother for-
merly held, Sir Lewis Belleaden, the Justice Clerk,
who had succeeded Gray as the King's resident at
London, were the persons in whom the chiefly con-
fided. In order to diret and quicken their mo-
tions, she dispatched Sir Edward Wotton along May 29.
with Bellenden into Scotland. This man was gay,
well-bred, and entertaining; he excelled in all the
exercises, for which James had a passion; and
amused the young King by relating the adventures
he had met with, and the observations he had made,
during a long residence in foreign countries; but
under the veil of these superficial qualities, he con-
cealed a dangerous and intriguing spirit. He soon
grew into high favour with James, and while he
was seemingly attentive only to pleasure and diver-

K 3 sions,

B o oK sions, he acquired influence over the public coun-

VII. cils, to a degree which was indecent for a stranger

S- ·- to possess .

1585.
Propofesa NOTHING, however, could be more acceptable
sotl ndth to the nation, than the proposal he made of a ftric

alliance between the two kingdoms, in defence of
the Reformed Religion. The rapid and alarming
progress of the Popish league eermed to call on all
Proteffant Princes, to unite for the preservation of
July 29. their common faith. James embraced the overture

with warmth, and a Convention of estates empow-
ered him to conclude such a treaty, and engaged to
ratify it in parliament t. The alacrity with which
James concurred in this measure, muff not be whol-
ly ascribed either to his own zeal, or to Wotton's
address; it was owing in part to Elizabeth's libe-
rality. As a mark of her motherly affection for the
young King, she fettled on him an annual pension
of 5000 pounds; the fame fum which her father
had allotted her before she ascended the throne.
This circumstance, which she took care tQ mention,
rendered a fum, which in that age was far from
being inconsiderable, a very acceptable present to
the King, whose revenues, during a long minority,
had been almost totally dissipated d.

tnder- BUT the chief obje& of Wotton's intrigues, was
mns Ar- to ruin Arran. While a minion so odious to the
ran's pow-
r. nation continued to govern the King, his assistance

could be of little advantage to Elizabeth. And
though Arran, ever since his interview with Huns-

Melv. 317. t pots. 339. 1 Cald. iii. 505.

dane.

dane, had appeared extremely for her interest, she B o o K
could place no great confidence in a man, whose VII.
condu& was so capricious and irregular, and who, 'J-
notwithstanding his protestations to the contrary, '585'
still continued a secret correspondence both with
Mary, and with the Duke of Guise. The banish-
ed Lords were attached to England from affecion,
as well as principle, and were the only persons
among the Scots whom, in any dangerous exigency,
flie could thoroughly trust. Before Bellenden left
London, they had been summoned thither, under
colour of vindicating themselves from his accufa-
tions, but, in reality, to concert with him the most
proper measures for restoring them to their country.
Wottonpurfued this plan, and endeavoured to ripen
it for execution; and it was greatly facilitated by
an event, neither uncommon nor considerable. Sir
John Forster, and Ker of Ferniherft, the Engliih
and Scottish wardens of the middle marches, hav-
ing met, according to the custom of the borders,
about mid-summer, a fray arose, and Lord Ruffel,
the Earl of Bedford's eldest son, happened to be
killed. This scuffle was purely accidental, but Eli-
zabeth chose to confider it as a design formed by
Ker, at the instigation of Arran, to involve the two
kingdoms in war. She insisted that both of them
Ihould be delivered up to her; and though James
eluded that demand, he was obliged to confine Ar-
ran in St. Andrew's, andKer in Aberdeen. During Af.l,.
his absence from court, Wotton and his affoci- baniihed

nobles.

ates carried on their intrigues without interruption. ^
By their advice, the banished nobles endeavoured to >:
accommodate their differences with Lord John, and

Lord

B o o K Lord Claud, the Duke of Chatelherault's two sons,

VII. whom Morton's violence had driven out of the
"5 - kingdom. Their common sufferings, and common
oa. 16. interest, induced both parties to bury in oblivion

the ancient discord, which had subsisted between
the houses of Hamilton and Douglas. By Eliza-
beth's permission, they returned in a body to the
borders of Scotland. Arran, who had again reco-
vered favour, insisted on putting the kingdom in a
posture of defence. But Gray, Bellenden, and
Maitland, secretly thwarted all his measures. Some
necessary orders they prevented from being issued;
others they rendered ineffetual, by the manner of
execution; and all of them were obeyed slowly, and
with relucance*.

WOTTON'S fertile brain was, at the fame time,

big with another and more dangerous plot. He
had contrived to seize the King, and to carry him
by. force intoEngland. Butthe design was happily
discovered; and in order to avoid the punilhment
his treachery merited, he departed without taling
leave t.

Theyreur MEANWHILE the banished Lords hastened the
lSd, execution of their enterprise; and as their friends
ar,-con- and vassals were now ready to join them, they enter-
Kig. ed Scotland. Wherever they came, they were wel-

comed as the deliverers of their country, and the
moit fervent prayers were addreffied to Heaven for
the success of their arms. They advanced with-
out losing a moment, towards Stirling, at the
head of oooo men. The King, though he
had assembled an army superior in number, could

* Spoifw. 340. t Melv. 335.

not

not venture to meet them in the field, with troops, B o o K
whose loyalty was extremely dubious, and who, at VII.
best, were far from being hearty in the cause; nor
was either the town or castle provided for a siege. 1585-
The gates, however, of both were shut, and the
nobles encamped at St. Ninian's. That fame night Nov. 2.
they surprised the town, or more probably it was
betrayed into their hands; and Arran, who had un-
dertaken to defend it, was obliged to save himself
by a precipitate flight. Next morning they invested
the castle, in which there were not provisions for
twenty-four hours; and James was necessitated im-
mediately to hearken to terms of accommodation.
They were not so elated with success, as to urge ex-
travagant demands, nor was the King unwilling to
make every reasonable concession. They obtained
a pardon in the most ample form, of all the of-
fences they had committed; the principal forts in
the kingdom were, by way of security, put into
their hands; Crawford, Montrose, and Colonel
Stewart were removed from the King's pretence;
and a parliament was called, to establish tranquil-
lity in the nation *.

THOUGH a great majority in this parliament con- AParlia.

sifted of the confederate nobles, and their adherents, Dmect. l
they were far from discovering a vindictive spirit.
Satisfied with procuring an at, restoring them to
their ancient honours and estates, and ratifying the
pardon granted by the King, they seemed willing to
forget all past errors in the administration, and

* Cald. iii. 795.

spared

B o o K spared James the mortification of feeing his Mini-
VII. sers branded with any public note of infamy. Ar-

.c--' ran, alone, deprived of all his honours, stripped of
1585' his borrowed spoils, and declared an enemy to his

country by public proclamation, funk back into
obscurity, and muff, henceforth, be mentioned by
his primitive title of Captain James Stewart. As
he had been, during his unmerited prosperity, the
obje& of the hatred and indignation of his country-
men, they beheld his -fall without pity, nor did all.
his sufferings mitigate their resentment in the least
degree.
churc as- THE Clergy were the only body of men, who

obtained no redress of their grievances by this revo-
lution. The confederate nobles had, all along,
affe&ed to be considered as guardians of the privi-
leges and discipline of the Church. In all their
manifestos they had declared their resolution to re-
store these, and by that popular pretence, had gain-
ed many friends. It was now natural to expect
some fruit of there promises, and some returns of
gratitude towards many of the most eminent preach-
ers who had suffered in their cause, and who de-
manded the repeal of the laws passed the preceding
year. The King, however, was resolute to main-
tain there laws in full authority; and as the nobles
were extremely solicitous not to disgust him, by
infifling on any disagreeable request, the claims of
the Church in this, as well as in many former
instances, were sacrificed to the interest of the laity.
The Ministers gave vent to their indignation in the
pulpit, and their impatience under the disappoint-

ment

ment broke out in some expressions, extremely dif- B o o K
refpe&ful even towards the King himself*. VII.

THE Archbishop of St. Andrew's, too, felt the I586.

effecs of their anger. The Provincial Synod of
Fife summoned him to appear, and to answer for
his contempt of the decrees of former Assemblies,
in presuming to exercise the function of a Bishop.
And though he refused to acknowledge the jurif-
diction of the court, and appealed from it to the
King, a sentence of excommunication, equally in-
decent and irregular, was pronounced against him.
Adamson, with no less indecency, thundered his
archiepiscopal excommunication against Melvil, and
some other of his opponents.

SOON after, a General Assembly was held, in April i3.

which the King, with some difficulty, obtained an
ac, permitting the name and office of a Bishop still
to continue in the Church. The power of the or-
der, however, was considerably retrenched. The
exercise of discipline, and the inspection of the life
and doEtrine of the Clergy, were committed to Pref-
byteries, in which Bishops should be allowed no
other pre-eminence, but that of presiding as perpe-
tual moderators. They themselves were declared
to be fubje&, in the fame manner as other pastors,
to the jurisdiction of the General Assembly. And
as the discussion of the Archbishop's appeal might
have kindled unusual heats in theAffembly, that as-
fair was terminated by a compromise. He renoun-
ced any claim of supremacy over the Church, and

* Spots 343.

pro-

B o o promised to demean himself suitably to the charac-

VII. ter of a Bilhop, as described by St. Paul. The As-

v- 6 fembly, without examining the foundations of the
5' * sentence of excommunication, declared that it ihould

be held of no effett, and restored him to all the
privileges, which he enjoyed before it was pro-
nounced. Notwithifanding the extraordinary ten-
dernefs lhewn for the honour of the fynod, and the
delicacy and refpe&, with which its jurifdi&ion was
treated, several members were so zealous as to pro-
test against this decision *.

A les THE court of Scotland was now filled with per-
with En§-
nd con- sons, so warmly attached to Elizabeth, that the

league between the two kingdoms, which had been
proposed last year, met with no interruption, but
from D'Efneval the French envoy. James him-
self first offered to renew the negociation. Eliza-
beth did not susser such a favourable opportunity to
Jly s- flip, and intanty dispatched Randolph to conclude

a treaty, which the so much desired. The danger
to which the Protestant religion was exposed, by
the late combination of the Popish powers for its
deftru&cion, and the necessity of a strict confederacy
among those, who had embraced the Reformation,
in order to obftru& theirpernicious designs, were
mentioned as the foundation of the league. The
chief articles in it were, that both parties Ihould
bind themselves to defend the Evangelic Religion;
that the league should be offensive and defensive
against all, who shall endeavour to disturb the ex-
ercife of religion in either kingdom; that if one of

* Cald. iii. 894. Spotfw. 346.

the

the two parties be invaded, the other, notwithftand- B o o x
ing any former alliance, should not, diretly or in- VII.
diretly, assist the invader; that if England be in- '-%
vaded in any part remote from Scotland, James
ihould assist the Queen with 2000 horse, and 5000
foot; that if the enemy landed or approached within
sixty miles of Scotland, the King ihould take the
field with his whole forces, in the fame manner, as
he would do in defence of his own kingdom. Eli-
zabeth, in return, undertook to a& in defence of
Scotland, if it ihould be invaded. At the fame
time, Ihe assured the King that no ftep should be
taken, which might derogate in any degree from
his pretensions to the English Crown *. Elizabeth
expressed great satisfaction with a treaty, which ren-
dered Scotland an useful ally, instead of a dange-
rous neighbour, and afforded her a degree of fecu-
rity on that fide, which all her ancestors had aimed
at, but none of them had been able to obtain. Zeal
for religion, together with the blessings of peace,
which both kingdoms had enjoyed during a con-
fiderable period, had so far abated the violence of
national 'antipathy, that the King's conduc was
universally acceptable to his own people t.

THE acquittal of Archibald Douglas, at this time,

exposed James to much and deserved censure. This
man was deeply engaged in the conspiracy against
the life of the King his father. Both Morton and
Binny one of his own servants, who suffered for
that crime, had accused him of being present at the

$ Spotfw. 351. t Camd. 513.

mur-

141

B o o K murder*. He had escaped punihunent by flying

VII. into England, and James had often required Eli-
'* 'v' zabeth to deliver up a person so unworthy of her pro-
I586. te&ion. He now obtained a licence, from the King

himself, to return into Scotland; and after under-
going a mock-trial, calculated to conceal rather
than to dete& his guilt, he was not only taken into
favour by the King, but lent back to the court of
England, with the honourable chara&er of his am-
baffador. James was now of such an age, that his
youth and inexperience cannot be pleaded in excuse
for this indecent tranfafion. It must be imputed
to the excessive facility of his temper, which often
led him to gratify his courtiers at the expence of
his own dignity and reputation t.

of Ba'- NOT long after,, the inconsiderate affection of
cnpircy the Engliih Catholics towards Mary, and their

l- implacable resentment against Elizabeth, gave rife

to a conspiracy, which proved fatal to the one Queen,
left an indelible itain on the reputation of the other,
and prelented a fpe&aclc to Europe, of which
there had hitherto been no example in the history
of mankind.

DOCTOR Gifford, Gilbert Gifford, and Hodg-

son, priests educated in the seminary at Rheims,
had adopted an extravagant and enthusiastic notion,
that the Bull of Pius V. against Elizabeth was dic-
tated immediately by the Holy Ghofl. This wild
opinion they inflilled into Savage, an officer in the

See Append. No; XI. t Spotfw. 348. Cald. iii. 917.

Spa-

Spanifhi army, noted for his furious zeal, and dar- B o o K
ing courage; and persuaded him that no service VII.
could be so acceptable to Heaven, as to take away
the life of an excommunicated Heretic. Savage, April 6.
eager to obtain the Crown of martyrdom, bound
himself by a solemn vow, to kill Elizabeth. Bal-
lard, a trafficking priest, had at that time come
over to Paris, and solicited Mendoza the Spanish
ambassador there, to procure an invasion of Eng-
land, while the affairs of the league were so profpe-
rous, and the kingdom left naked by fending so
many of the Queen's belt troops into the Nether-
lands. Paget and the Englilh exiles demonstrated
the fruitlessness of such an attempt, unless Eliza-
beth were first cut off, or the invaders secured of a
powerful concurrence on their landing. If it could
be hoped that either of these events would happen,
effectual aid was promised; and in the mean time
Ballard was sent back to renew his intrigues. May 15,

HE communicated his designs to Anthony Ba-

bington, a young gentleman in Derbylhire, of a
plentiful fortune, and many amiable qualities, who
having contracted, during his residence in France,
a familiarity with the Archbishop of Glasgow, had
been recommended by him to the Queen of Scots.
He concurred with Paget in confidering the death
of Elizabeth as a necessary preliminary to any inva-
sion. Ballard gave him hopes that an end would
loon be put to her days, and imparted to him Sa-
vage's vow, who was now in London waiting for
an opportunity to strike the blow. But Babington
thought the attempt of too much importance, to

rely

Bo o rely on a single hand for the execution of it, and
VII. proposed that five resolute gentlemen ihould bejoin-

·' - ed with Savage, in an enterprise, the success of
586. which was the foundation of all their hopes. He

offered to find out persons willing to undertake the
service, whose honour, secrecy, and courage, they
might safely trust. He accordingly opened the
matter to Edward Windsor, Thomas Salisbury,
Charles Tilney, Chidioc Tichbourne, Robert Gage,
John Travers, Robert Barnwell, John Charnock,
Henry Dun, John Jones, and Robert Polly; all
of them, except Polly, whose buffling forward zeal
introduced him into their society, gentlemen of good
families united together in the bonds of private
friendlhip, strengthened by the more powerful tie
of religious zeal. Many consultations were held,
June their plan of operations was at last fettled; and their

different parts afligned. Babington himself was

Thefheme appointed to rescue the Queen of Scots; Salisbury,
of the con-
fpiratr. with some others, undertook to excite several coun-

ties to take arms; the murder of the Queen, the
most dangerous and important service of all, fell to
Tichbourne and Savage, with four associates. And
so totally had their bigotted prejudices extinguished
the principles of honour, and the sentiments of hu-
manity suitable to their rank, that without scruple
or compun&tion, they undertook an a&tion, which
is viewed with horror, even when committed by
the meanest and most profligate of mankind. This
attempt, on the contrary, appeared to them no less
honourable than it was desperate, and in order to
perpetuate the memory of it, they had a piture
drawn containing the portraits of the fix assassins,

with

with that of Babington in the middle, and a motto B o o K
intimating that they were jointly embarked in some VII.
hazardous design. -

1585.

THE conspirators, as appears by this wanton and Difovered

imprudent instance of vanity, seem to have thought by Wal-
a discovery scarce poflible, and neither distrusted the nha
fidelity of their companions, nor doubted the fuc-
cess of their undertaking. But while they believed
that their machinations were carried on with the
most profound and impenetrable secrecy, every ftep
they took was fully known to Walsingham. Polly
was one of his spies, and entered into the con-
fpiracy with no other design than to betray his as-
fociates. Gilbert Gifford too, having been sent
over to England to quicken the motions of the con-
fpirators, had been gained by Walsingham, and
gave him sure intelligence of all their projets. That
vigilant minister immediately imparted the difcove-
ries which he had made to Elizabeth; and without
communicating the matter to any other of the Coun-
fellors, they agreed, in order to understand the-plot
more perfeEtly, to wait till it was ripened into some
form, and brought near the point of execution.

AT last Elizabeth thought it dangerous and cri-

They are

minal to expose her own life, and to tempt Provi- seized and
dence any farther. Ballard, the prime mover in punmild.
the whole confpiraey, was arrested. His associates,
disconcerted and struck with astonishment, endea-
voured to save themselves by flight. But, within a
few days, all of them, except Windsor, were seized
in different places of the kingdom, and committed

VOL. II. L to

I45

B o o k to the Tower. Though they had undertaken'the

VII. pait, they wanted the firm and determined spirit of
L 8' affiafins; and, influenced by fear or by hope, dif-

3585. covered all they knew. The indignation of the

people, and their impatience to revenge such an ex-
ecrable combination against the life of their Sove-
reign, hastened their trial, and all of them suffered

s-pt. 20. the death of traitors *.

Mary is ac- THus far Elizabeth's condut may be pronoun-
cufed of
being an eed both prudent and laudable, nor can she be ac-
accmplice cufed of violating any law of humanity, or of tak-
in the con-. : 0
pircy. ing any precautions beyond what were necessary for

her own safety. But a tragical scene followed, with
regard to which, posterity will pass a very different
judgment.

THE frantic zeal of a few rash young men ac-

counts sufficiently for all the wild and wicked de-
signs which they had for med. But this was not the
light, .in which Elizabeth and her Ministers chose
to place the conspiracy. They represented Babing-
ton and his afociates to be instruments employed
by the Queen of Scots, the real though secret au-
thor of so many attempts against the life of Eliza-
beth, and the peace of her kingdom. They pro-
duced letters, which they ascribed to her, in sup-
port of this charge. These, as they gave out, had
come into their hands by the following singular,
and mysterious method of conveyance. Gifford,
on his return into England, had been intrufed by
some of the exiles with letters to Mary; but in or-

- Camd. i5;. State Trials, vel.i. ilo.

der

'der to make a trial of his fidelity, and. address, B o o K
they were only blank papers made up in that form. VII.
These being safely delivered by him, he was after- .-VJ
Wards employed without farther scruple. Wal- 1586'
fingham having found means to gain this. man, he
by his permiflion, and the connivance of Paulet,
bribed a tradesman in the neighbourhood of Chart-
ley, whither Mary had been conveyed, who de-
posited the letters in a hole in the wall of. the calfe, .
covered with a loose stone. Thence they were
takent by the Queen, and in the fame manner,
her answers returned. All these were carried to
Walsingham, opened by him, decyphered, fealed
again so dexterously, that the fraud could not be
perceived, and then transmitted to the persons to
whom they were directed. Two letters. to Ba-
bington, with several to Mendoza, Paget, Engle-
field, and the Englilh fugitives, were procured
by this artifice. It was given out, that in these
letters Mary approved of the conspiracy, and even
of the assassination; that /he direted them to
proceed with the utmost circumfpe&ion, and not
to take arms till foreign auxiliaries were readyto
join them that she recommended the Earl of
Arundel, his brothers, and the young Earl of
Northunmberland, as proper persons to conduc
and to add. reputation to their enterprise; that she
advised them, if possible, to excite at the fame
time some commotion in Ireland; and above all,
besought them to concert- with care the means of
her escape, suggesting to them several expedients
kor that purpose.

L z ALL

B o o K ALL these circumstances were opened at the trial

VII. of the conspirators. And while the nation was un-

*'c6' der the influence of those terrors which the affocia-

i586.
The indig tion had raised, and the late danger had augmented,
the°Eiol they were believed without hesitation or inquiry,
against her and spread a general alarm. Mary's zeal for her
on that ac- - )
co. aC- religion was well known; and in that age, exam-

ples of the violent and sanguinary spirit which it
inspired, were numerous. All the cabals againfl
the peace of the kingdom for many years had been
carried on in her name; and it now appears evi-
dently, said the English, that the safety of the one
QEeen is incompatible with that of the other. Why
then, added they, should the tranquillity of Eng-
land be sacrificed for the fake of a stranger? Why
is a life so dear to the nation exposed to the repeat-
ed assaults of an exasperated rival ? The cafe sup-
posed in the association, has now happened, the fa-
cred person of our Sovereign has been threatened,
and why ihould not an injured people execute that
just revenge which they had vowed?

Elizbeth No sentiments could be more agreeable than these
rpmct to Elizabeth and her Ministers. They themselves
th: utnft had at firt propagated them among the people, and
a.oit hr. they now served both as an apology, and a motive,

for their proceeding to such extremities against the
Scottifl Queen, as they had long meditated. The
more injuries Elizabeth heaped on Mary, the more
fae feared and hated that unhappy Queen, and
came at last to be persuaded that there could be no
other security for her own life, but the death of her
rival. Burleigh and Walsingham had promoted so

zealously
148

zealously all her measures with regard to Scottilh B o o K
affairs; and had aced, with so little reserve, in op- VII.
position to Mary, that they had reason to dread the ' *'
most violent effe&s of her resentment, if ever flhe I6
Ihould mount the throne of England, and there-
fore they endeavoured to hinder an event so fatal to
themselves, by confirming their Mistress's fear and
hatred of the Scottilh Queen.

MEANWHILE, Mary was guarded with unusual Her domes-

vigilance, and great care was taken to keep her ig- tics',pafr
norant of the discovery of the conspiracy. Sir
Thomas Gorges was at last sent from court, to ac-
quaint her both of it, and of the imputation with
which Ihe was loaded as accessary to that crime;
and he surprised her with the account, just as ihe
had got on horseback to ride out along with her
keepers. She was struck with astonishment, and
would have returned to her apartment, but she was
not permitted; and in her absence, her private clo-
set was broke open, her cabinet and papers were
seized, fealed, and sent up to court, -Her principal
domestics too, were arrested, and committed to
different keepers. Naue and Curie, her two fecre-
taries, the one a native of France, the other of
Scotland, were carried prisoners to London. All
the money in her custody, amounting to little more
than 2000 pounds, was secured. And after lead-
ing her about, for some days, from one gentleman's
house to another, the was conveyed to Fotheringay,
g strong castle in Northamptonlhire *.

Camd. 517.

No

B o o r -.No farther evidence could now be expe&ed a-

VII. gaint Mary, and nothing remained but to decide
8ó'-- what should be her fate. With regard to this, Eli-
x586. Ddi-ates zabeth and those Ministers in whom she chiefly
co2cemiang confided, seem to have taken their resolution; but
the methbod
cfproced- there was still great variety of sentiments among

her other Counsellors.' Some thought it sufficient
to dismiss all Mary's attendants, and to keep het
under such close reifraint, as would cut off all pof-
fibility of corresponding with the enemies of the
kingdom; and as her constitution, broken by long
confinement, and her spirit dejected with so many
cares, could not long support such an additional
load, the Queen and nation would soon be deliver-
ed from all their fears. But though it might be
easy to secure Mary's own person, it was impossible
to diminish the reverence which the Roman Catho-
lics had for her name, or to extinguish the com-
passion with-which theyviewed herfufferings; while
these continued, infurre&ions and invasions would
never be wanting for her relief, and the only effect
of any new vigour would be to render them more
frequent and dangerous. For this reason the expe-
dient was rejeced.

,etermies A PUBLIC aad legal trial, though the most un-
to try her exampled, was judged the most unexceptionable
puvbicy. method of proceeding; and it had, at the fame time,

a semblance of justice, accompanied with an air of
dignity. It was- in vain to search the ancient re-
cords, for any statute or precedent, tojufify such
an uncommon ftep, as the trial of a foreign Prince,
who had'not entered the kingdom in arms, but

had

had fled thither for refuge. The proceedings against B o o K
her were founded on the a& of last Parliament, and VII.
by applying it in this manner, the intention of those `---
who had framed that severe statute became more
apparent *.

ELIZABETH resolved that no circumstance of

pomp or solemnity Jhould be wanting, which could
render this tranfa&ion such as became the dignity
of the person to be tried. She appointed, by a
commission under the great feal, forty persons, the
most illustrious in the kingdom, by their birth or
offices, together with five of the judges, to hear and
decide this great cause. Many difficulties were flart-
ed by the lawyers, about the name and title by
which Mary should be arraigned; and while the
essentials of justice were so grossly violated, the
empty forms of it were the objecs of their care.
They at length agreed that /he (hould be flyled,.
" Mary, daughter and heir of James V. late King
" of Scots, commonly called Queen of Scots, and
"Dowager of France t."

AFTER the many indignities which Ihe had lately

suffered, Mary could no longer doubt but that her
deltrueion was determined. She expe&ed, every
moment, to end her days by poison, or by some of
those secret means, usually employed against cap-
tive Princes. And left the malice of her enemies,
at the fame time that it deprived her of life, should
endeavour likewise to blast her reputation, Ihe
wrote to the Duke of Guise, and vindicated her-
D Camd. 519. Johnit. Hit. 113. 1 Strype, iii. 36z.

self,.

B o o K self, in the strongest terms, from the imputation of

VII. encouraging or of being accessary to the conspiracy
1586. for alaffinating Elizabeth*. In the solitude of her

prison, the fGrange resolution of bringing her to a
public trial had not reached her ears, nor did the
idea of any thing so unprecedented, and so repug-
nant to regal Majesty, once enter into her thoughts.

FTh at ON the eleventh of OCtober, the Commissioners
gPy. appointed by Elizabeth arrived 'at Fotheringay.

Next morning, they delivered a letter from her to
Mary, in which, after the bitterest reproaches and
accusations, fie informed her, that regard to her
own safety had, at last, rendered it necessary to make
a public inquiry into her condut, and therefore re-
quired her, as ihe had lived so long under the pro-
tection of the laws of England; to submit now to
the trial, which they ordained to be taken of her

fu.qatift crimes. Mary, though surprised at this message,
t pd.- was neither appalled at' the danger, nor unmindful

of her own dignity. She protested, in the ioft so-
lemn manner, that ihe was innocent of the crime,
laid to her charge, and had never countenanced any
attempt against the life of the' Qeen of England;
but, at the fame time, refused to acknowledge the
jurifdicion of her commissioners. " I came into
c the kingdom," said (he, " an independent So-
" vereign, to implore the Queen's afliftance, not
" to subjec' myself to her authority. Nor is my
"spirit so broken by its past misfortunes, or so in-
" timidated by presend dangers, as to stoop to any
" thing unbecoming the Majeffy of a crowned head,

' Jebb, ii. z83.

" or

"or that will disgrace the ancestors from whom I B o K
"am descended, and the son to whom I shall leave VII.
" my throne. If I must be tried, Princes alone - -'
" can be my Peers. The Queen of England's sub- i8
"je6ts, however noble their birth may be, are of
" a rank inferior to mine. Ever since my arrival in
"this kingdom, I have been confined as a prisoner.
"Its laws never afforded me any pro'-"tion. Let
" them not now be perverted, in order to take
' away my life."

THE Commissioners employed arguments and in-

treaties to overcome Mary's resolution. They even
threatened to prpceed according to the forms of law,
and to pass sentence against her on account of her
contumacy in refusing to plead; she persisted, how-
ever, for two days to decline their jurisdiction. An
argument used by Hatton, the Vice-Chamberlain,
at last prevailed. He told her, that by avoiding a
trial, she injured her own reputation, and deprived
herself of the only opportunity of setting her inno-
cence in a clear light; and that nothing would be
more agreeable to them, or more acceptable to the
Queen their Mistress, than to be convinced, by un-
doubted evidence, that she had been unjustly loaded
with foul aspersions.

No wonder pretexts so plausible should impose on Consents

however to

the unwary Queen, or that {he, unaflifted, at that do so.
time, by any friend or counsellor, should not be
able to detet and elude all the artifices of Eliza-
beth's ablest Ministers. In a situation equally me-
lancholy, and under circumstances nearly similar,

her

B o OKx her Grandson, Charles I. refifed, with the utmofi

VII. firmness, to acknowledge the usurped jurifdition of
'- }' Wthe High Court of Justice; and posterity has ap-
I586' proved his condu&, as suitable to the dignity of a

King. If Mary was less constant in her resolution,
it must be imputed solely to her anxious desire of
vindicating her own honour.
oa. 4. AT her appearance before the Judges, who were

feated in the great hall of the castle, where they re-
ceived her with much ceremony, the took care to
protest, that by condescending to hear and to give
an answer to the accusations, which should be of-
sered against her, the neither acknowledged the ju-
rifdition of the court, nor admitted of the validity
and justice of those acts, by which they pretended
to try her.

THE Chancellor, by a counter-proteftation, en-

deavoured to vindicate the authority of the court.

,re amc-' THEN the Queen's Attorney and Solicitor open-
.,, - ed the charge againif her, with all the circumstances

of the late conspiracy. Copies of her letters to
Mendoza, Babington, Englefield and Paget were
produced. Babington's confession, those of Ballard,
Savage, and the other conspirators, together with
the declarations of Naue and Curie her secretaries,
were read, and the whole ranged in the most fpe-
cious order, which the artof the lawyers could de-
vise, and heightened by every colour their elo-
quence could add.

MARY

MARY listened to *their harangues attentively, B oo K

and without emotion. But at the mention of the VII.
Earl of Arundel's name, who was then confined "- '
in the Tower on suspicion of being accessary to I586.
the conspiracy, she broke out into this tender and
generous exclamation: " Alas! how much has
"the noble House of Howard suffered for my
" fake !"

WHEN the Queen's council had fini/hed, Mary 'herde-

stood up, and with great magnanimity, and equal fenc'
pretence of mind, began her defence. She bewail-
ed the unhappiness of her own situation, that as-
ter a captivity of nineteen years, during which she
had suffered treatment no less cruel than unmerited,
The was at last loaded with an accusation, which
tended not only to rob her of her right of fuccef-
sion, and to deprive her of life itself, but to tranf-
mit her name with infamy to future ages: That,
without regarding the sacred rights of sovereignty,
she was now fubje&ed to laws framed against pri-
vate persons; though an anointed Queen, com-
manded to appear before the tribunal of subjects;
and, like a common criminal, her honour exposed
to the petulant tongues oflawyers, capable of wrest-
ing her words, and of misrepresenting her a&tions:
That, even in this dishonourable situation, ihe was
denied the privileges usually granted to criminals,
and obliged to undertake her own defence, without
the pretence of any friend with whom to advise,
without the aid of council, and without the use of
her own papers.

SHE

B o o K SHE then proceeded to the particular articles in
VII. the accusation. She absolutely denied any corre-

- fpondence with Babington : The name of Ballard
Só. 6 was not so much as known to her: Copies only of her

pretended letters to them were produced: though
nothing less than her hand-writing or subscription
was sufficient to convic her of such an odious
crime: No proof could be brought that the letters
were delivered into her hands, or that any answer
was returned by her direcion: The confessions of
wretches condemned and executed for such a detest-
able a&ion, were of little weight; fear or hope
might extort from them many things inconsistent
with truth, nor ought the honour of a Queen to be
fained by such vile testimony. The declaration of
her secretaries was not more conclusive: Promises
and threats might easily overcome the resolution of
two strangers; in order to screen themselves, they
might throw the blame on her; but they could dif-
cover nothing to her prejudice, without violating,
in the first place, their oath of fidelity; and their
perjury, in one instance, rendered them unworthy
of credit in another: The letters to the Spanish am-
baffador were either nothing more than copies, or
contained only what was perfetly innocent: "I
"have often," continued lhe, " made such efforts
" for the recovery of my liberty, as are natural to
"a human creature. And convinced, by the fad
" experience of so many years, that it was vain to
" expe& it from the justice or generosity of the

Queen of England, I have frequently solicited

" foreign Princes, and called on all my friends to
" employ their whole interest for my relief. I

" have,

< have, likewise, endeavoured to procure for the B o o K
"English Catholics some mitigation of the rigour VII.
"with which they are now treated; and if I could '-
" hope, by my death, to deliver them fiom op- I586.
"prefflon, I am willing to die for their fake. I
"wish, however, to imitate the example of Esther,
"not of Judith, and would rather make intercef-
" ion for my people, than shed the blood of the
"meanest creature, in order to save them. I have
"often checked the intemperate zeal of my adhe-
" rents, when either the severity of their own per-
" fecutions, or indignation at the unheard-of inju-
" ries which I have endured, were apt to precipi-
" tate them into violent councils. I have even
"warned the Queen of dangers to which these
"harsh proceedings exposed herself. And worn
"out, as I now am, with cares and sufferings, the
"profpet of a Crown is not so inviting, that I
" should ruin my foul in order to obtain it. I am
"no stranger to the feelings of humanity, nor un-
" acquainted with the duties of religion, and abhor
" the detestable crime of affalfination, as equally
"repugnant to both. And, if ever I have given
"consent to my words, or even by my thoughts,
"to any attempt against the life of the Queen of
"England, far from declining the judgment of
" men, I shall not even pray for the mercy of
"God *."

Two different days did Mary appear before the
Judges, and in every part of her behaviour main-

* Camd. 52o, &c.

tained

I7S

B o o K tained the magnanimity of a Queen, tempered with

VII. the gentleness and modesty of a woman.

1586. THE Commissioners, by Elizabeth's express con-
gai her. mand, adjourned, without pronouncing any sentence,
oao. :5. to the Star-Chamber in Weftminfer. When as-

fembled in that place, Naue and Curie were brought
into court, and confirmed their former declaration
upon oath. And after reviewing their whole pro-
ceedings, the Commifioners unanimouflydeclared
Mary " To be accessary to Babington's conspiracy,
"C and to have imagined diverse matters, tending to
"the hurt, death, and destruction of Elizabeth,
" contrary to the express words of the ifatute, made
" for the security of the Queea's life*."
Lo.a-ri- IT is no easy matter to determine whether the in-

m the pjuflice in appointing this trial, or the irregularity in

conducting it, were greatest and most flagrant. By
what right did Elizabeth claim authority over an
independent Queen ? Was Mary bound to comply
with the laws of a foreign kingdom ? How could
the fubjets of another Prince become her judges?
or if such an insult on royalty were allowed, ought
not the common forms ofjuftice to have been ob-
served ? If the testimony of Babington and his aflo-
ciates were so explicit, why did not Elizabeth spare
them fir a few weeks, and by confronting them
with Mary, overwhelm her with the full convi&ion
of her crimes. Naue and Curie were both alive,
wherefore did not they appear at Fotheringay, and for
what reason were they produced in the Star-Cham-

* Camd. S5-.

ber,

ber, where Mary was not present to hear what they B o oK
deposed ? Was this suspicious evidence enough to VII.
condemn a Queen ? Ought the meanest criminal to -
have been found guilty, upon such feeble and in- 58
conclusive proofs ?

IT was not, however, on the evidence produced

at her trial, that the sentence againit Mary was
founded. That served as a pretence to justify, but
was not the cause of the violent steps taken by Eli-
zabeth and her Ministers towards her deftru&ion;
and was employed to give some appearance of jus-
tice, to what was the offspring of jealousy and fear.
And the nation, blinded with resentment against
Mary, and solicitous to secure the life of its own
Sovereign from every danger, observed no irregu-
larities in the proceedings, and attended to no de-
fe&s in the proof, but grasped at suspicions and
probabilities, as if they had been irrefragable de-
monitrations.

THE parliament met a few days after sentence The parlia-

was pronounced against Mary. In that illustrious im th
assembly more temper and discernment than are to senter.
be found among the people, might have been ex-
pected. Both Lords and Commons, however,
were equally under the dominion of popular preju-
dices and passions, and the fame excesses of zeal or
of fear, which prevailed in the nation, are apparent
in all their proceedings. They entered with impa-
tience upon an inquiry into the conspiracy, and the
dangers which threatened the Queen's life and the
peace of the kingdom. All the papers, which had

been

B o o been produced at Fotheringay, were laid before

VII. them. And after many violent invectives against
'-' - the Queen of Scors, both houses, unanimously, ra-
i586. tified the proceedings of the Commissioners by whom

ihe had been tried, and declared the sentence against
and de- her to b just and well founded. Not satisfied with

bn
'i this, they presented a joint address to the Queen,
of - beseeching her, as she regarded her own safety, the

preservation of the Protestant religion, the welfare
and wishes of her people, to publish the sentence;
and without farther delay to inflic on a rival, no
less irreclaimable than dangerous, the punishment
which ihe had merited by so many crimes. This
request, di&ated by fears unworthy of that great
Aflembly, was enforced by reasons still more un-
worthy. They were drawn not from justice, but
from conveniency. The most rigorous confinement,
it was pretended, could not curb Mary's intriguing
spirit; her address was found, by long experience,
to be an overmatch for the vigilance and jealousy of
all her keepers: The severest penal laws could not
restrain her adherents. who, while they believed
her person to be sacred, would despise any danger
to which themselves alone were exposed: Several
foreign Princes were ready to second their attempts,
and waited only a proper opportunity for invading
the kingdom, and asserting the Scottish Queen's
title to the Crown. Her life, for these reasons,
was incompatible with Elizabeth's safety; and if
the were spared out of a false clemency, the Queen's
person, the religion and liberties of the kingdom,
could not be one moment secure. Necessity requir-
ed that she should be sacrificed in order to preserve

-"t these

these; and to prove this sacrifice to be no less just B o o IK
than necessary, several examples in history were VII.
produced, and many, texts of scripture quoted, but '-
both the one and the other were misapplied, and 58
distorted from their true meaning.

, NOTHING, however, could be more acceptable Elizabeth's
to Elizabeth than an address in this strain. It extri- dif"lmula
cated her out of a situation, extremely embarrassing;
and without depriving her of the power of spar-
ing, it enabled her to punish her rival with less ap-
pearance of blame. If she chose the former, the
whole honour would redound to her own clemency.
If the determined on the latter, whatever was rigo-
rous might now seem to be extorted by the folici-
tations of her people, rather than to flow from her
own inclination. Her answer, however, was in a
style, which she often used, ambiguous and evasive,
under the appearance of openness and candour; full
of such professions of regard for her people, as served
to heighten their loyalty; of such complaints of
Mary's ingratitude, as were calculated to excite their
indignation; and of fiuh insinuations that her own
life was in danger, as could not fail to keep alive
their fears. In the end, she besought them to save
her the infamy and the pain of delivering up a
Queen, her nearest kinswoman, to punishment; and
to confider whether it might not frill be possible to
provide for the public security, without forcing her
to imbrue her hands in royal blood.

THE true meaning of this reply was easily under-
stood. The Lords and Commons renewed their

VOL. II. M former

i6I

Bo o K former request, with additional importunity, which
VII. was far from being either unexpected, or offensive.

*'-' Elizabeth did not return any answer more explicit;
I586. and having obtained such a public fancrion of her

proceedings, there was no longer any reason for pro-
tra&ing this scene of dilfimulation; there was even
some danger that her feigned difficulties might at
last be treated as real ones; she therefore adjourn-
ed the parliament, and reserved in her own hands
the sole disposal of her rival's fate *.

Frace in- ALL the Princes in Europe observed the proceed-
terpofsa
febly in ings against Mary with aftoniliment and horror
behalof and even Henry III. notwithitanding his known

aversion to the house of Guise, was obliged to in-
terpofe in her behalf, and to appear in defence of
the common rights of royalty. Aubefpine his refi-
dent Ambassador, and Bellievre, who was sent with
an extraordinary commission to the fame purpose,
interceded for Mary with great appearance of
warmth. They employed all the arguments which
Nov. i. the cause naturally suggested; they pleaded from

justice, from generosity, ankdumanity; they inter-
mingled reproaches and threats. But to all these
Elizabeth continued deaf and inexorable; and hav-
ing received some intimation of Henry's real un-
concern about the fate of the Scottish Queen, and
knowing his antipathy to all the race of Guise, ihe
trusted, that these loud remonstrances would be fol-
lowed by no violent resentment t.

Camd. 526. D'Ewes, 375. t Camd. 531.

SHE

SHE paid no greater regard to the solicitations of B o o K

the Scottilh King, which, as they were urged with VII.
more sincerity, merited more attention. Though -V -

i556.

her commissioners had been extremely careful to Jams en-
sooth James, by publishing a declaration that their deavours to
sentence against Mary did, in no degree, derogate mother's
from his honour, or invalidate any title which he life.
formerly possessed; he beheld the indignities to
which his mother had been exposed with filial con-
cern, and with the sentiments which became a
King. The pride of the Scottish nation was
routed, by the insult offered to the blood of their
Monarchs, and called upon him to employ the most
vigorous efforts, in order to prevent or to revenge
the Queen's death.

AT first, he could scarce believe that Elizabeth

would venture upon an action so unprecedented,
which tended so visibly to render the persons of
Princes less sacred in the eyes of the people, and
which degraded the regal dignity, of which, at other
times, ihe was so remarkably jealous. But as soon
as the extraordinary steps which she took discovered
her intention, he dispatched Sir William Keith to
London; who, together with Douglas his Ambaf-
fador in ordinary, remonstrated, in the strongest
terms, against the injury done to an independent
Queen, in fubje&ing her to be tried like a private
person, and by laws to which she owed no obedi-
ence; and besought Elizabeth not to add to this
injury, by suffering a sentence unjust in itself, as
well as dishonourable to the King of Scots, to be
put into execution '.

* See Appcndix, No. XIII.

M

ELIZA-

B o o K ELIZABETH returning no answer to these remon-

VII. flances of his ambassador, James wrote to her with
'S"'8' his own hand, complaining in the bitterest terms of

her conduc, not without threats that both his duty
and his honour would oblige him to renounce her
friendship, and to at as became a son when called
to revenge his mother's wrongs*. At the fame
time he afiembled the nobles, who promised to stand
by him in so good a cause. He appointed ambaf-
fadors to France, Spain, and Denmark, in order to
implore the aid of these courts; and took other
steps towards executing his threats with vigour.
The high strain of his letter enraged Elizabeth to
such a degree, that she was ready to difnifs his am-
baffadors without any reply. But his preparations
alarmed and embarrassed her Ministers, and at their
intreaty she returned a soft and evasive answer,
promising to liften to any overture from the King,
that tended to his mother's safety; and to suspend
the execution of the sentence, till the arrival of
new ambassadors from Scotland t.

Decl= MEANWHILE, she commanded the sentence against

tnce a- Mary to be published, and forgot not to inform the
dainftMsy
pubiflie people, that this was extorted from her by the re-

peated intreaty of both houses of Parliament. At
the fame time, ihe difparched Lord Buckhurft and
Beale to acquaint Mary with the sentence, and how
importunately the nation demanded the execution
of it; and though Ihe had not hitherto yielded to
these solicitations, she advised her to prepare for an
event which might become necessary for securing
v Birch, Mem. i. 5z.

t Spotfw; z51. Cald.iv. 5.

the

the Protestant religion, as well as quieting the minds B o K
of the people. Mary received the message not only VII.
without symptoms of fear, but with exprefflons of
triumph. "No wonder, said flhe, the English
"should now thirst for the blood of a foreign
"Prince, they have often offered violence to their
" own Monarchs. But after so many sufferings,
" death comes to me as a welcome deliverer. I
" am proud to think that my life is esteemed of
"importance to the Catholic religion, and as a

martyr for it I am now willing to die *."

AFTER the publication of the sentence, Mary was She is

stripped of every remaining mark of royalty. The with the
canopy of state in her apartment was pulled down; gour.
Paulet entered her chamber, and approached her
person without any ceremony; and even appeared
covered in her pretence. Shocked with these indig-
nities, and offended at this gross familiarity, to which
The had never been accustomed, Mary once more
complained to Elizabeth; and at the fame time, as Decem. i9,
her last request, intreated that she would permit her
servants to carry her dead body into France, to be
laid among her ancestors, in hallowed ground
that some of her domestics might be present at her
death, to bear witnees of her innocence, and firm
adherence to the Catholic faith; that all her ser-
vants might be suffered to leave the kingdom, and
to enjoy those fiall legacies, which the should be-
stow on them, as testimonies of her affection; and
that, in the mean time, her almoner, or rome other

Camd. 528. Jebb, 291.

Catholic

B o o 1 Catholic Priest, might be allowed to attend her, and
VII. to afift her in preparing for an eternal world. She

8-'"' besought her in the name of Jesus, by the foul and
i586.

memory of Henry VII. their common progenitor,
by their near consanguinity, and the royal dignity
with which they were both invested, to gratify her
in there particulars, and to indulge her so far as to
signify her compliance by a letter under her own
hand. Whether Mary's letter was ever delivered to
Elizabeth is uncertain. No answer was returned,
and no regard paid to her requests. She was offered
a Protestant Bishop or Dean to attend her. Them
lhe rejected, and without any clergyman to diret
her devotions, she prepared, in great tranquillity,
for the approach of death, which Ihe now believe4
to be at no great distance *.

1587. JAMES, without losing a moment, sent new am-
J3re- baf'adors to London. These were the master of
new' his
rolntaions Gray, and Sir Robert Melvil. In order to remove
in he b Elizabeth's fear, they offered that their Mafier
lanuary i. would become bound that no conspiracy Ihould be

undertaken against her person, or the peace of the
kingdom, with Mary's consent; and for the faith-
ful performance of this, 'would deliver some of the
most considerable of the Scottilh nobles as hostages.
If this were not thought sufficient, they proposed
that Mary /hould resign all her rights and preten-
sions to her son, from whom nothing injurious to
the Protestant religion, or inconsistent with Eliza-
beth's safety, could be feared." The former pro-
pofal, Elizabeth reje&ed as insecure; the latter, as

Camd. 528. Jebb, ii. 295.

dan-

dangerous. The ambassadors were then inftru&ed B o o K
to talk in a higher tone; and Melvil executed the VII.
commission with fidelity and with zeal. But Gray, '- -
with his usual perfidy, deceived his Master, who 587'
trusted him with a negociation of so much import-
ance, and betrayed the Queen whom he was em-
ployed to save. He encouraged and urged Eliza-
beth, to execute the sentence against her rival. He
often repeated the old proverbial sentence, " The
dead cannot bite." And whatever should happen,
he undertook to pacify the King's rage, or at least
to prevent any violent effe&s of his resentment *.

ELIZABETH, meanwhile, discovered all the fymp- Elizabeth's

toms of the most violent agitation and disquietude of dffimula
mind. She shunned society, she was often found in a tion.
melancholy and musing posture, and repeating, with
much emphasis, these sentences which she borrowed
from some of the devices then in vogue; Aut ser
autferi; neferiare, feri. Much, no doubt, of this
apparent uneafinels must be imputed to difimula-
tion; it was impossible, however, that a Princess,
naturally so cautious as Elizabeth, should venture
on an a&ion, which might expose her memory to
infamy, and her life and kingdom to danger, with-
out refleting deeply, and hesitating long. The
people waited her determination in suspense and an-
xiety; and left. their fear or their zeal should sub-
fide, rumours of danger were artfully invented, and
propagated with the utmost industry; Aubefpine,
the French ambassador, was accused of having sub-

Spotfw. 352. Murdin, 568. See Append. No. XIV.

orned

B o o K orned an assassin to murder the Queen. The Spa-

VII. niih fleet was said by some to be already arrived at
I'r '
8 Milford-haven. Others affirmed that the Duke of

Guise had landed with a strong army, in Suflex.
Now, it was reported that the Northern Counties
were up in arms, next day, that the Scots had en-
tered England with all their forces; and a confpi-
racy, it was whispered, was on foot for seizing the
Queen, and burning the city. The panic grew
every day more violent; and the people, afftonilhed
and enraged, called for the execution of the fen-
tence againit Mary, as the only thing which could
restore tranquillity to the kingdom *.

Wanantfor WHILE these sentiments prevailed among her
Mary's e-
cutionign- subjects, Elizabeth thought ihe might safely ven-
rb,,ay i ture to strike the blow, which she had so long me-

ditated. She commanded Davison, one of the fe-
cretaries of state, to bring to her the fatal warrant;
and her behaviour, on that occasion, plainly ihewed
that it is not to humanity that we must attribute
her forbearance hitherto. At the very moment she
was subscribing the writ which gave up a woman,
aQueen, and her own nearest relation, into the
hands of the executioner, she was capable of jest-
ing. " Go, fays the, to Davison, and tell Walfing-
ham what I have now done, though I am afraid he
will die for grief when he hears-it." Her chief
anxiety was now to secure the advantages which
would arise from Mary's death, without appearing
to have given her consent to a deed so infamous.
She often hinted to Paulet and Drury, as well as

* Camd. 533, 534.

to

to some other courtiers, that now was the time to. B 0Q
discover the sincerity of their concern for her safe- VII.
ty, and that she expeted their zeal would extricate ''
her out of her present perplexity. But they were
wife enough to seem not to understand her mean-
ing; Even after the warrant was signed, Ihe com-
-randed a letter to be written to Paulet, in less
ambiguous terms, complaining of his remissness in
sparing so long the life of her capital enemy,
and begging him to remember at last what was in-
cumbent on him as an affectionate subje&t, and to de-
liver his Sovereign from continual fear and dan-
ger, by Ihortening the days of his prisoner. Paulet,
though rigorous and harsh, and often brutal in the
discharge of what he thought his duty, a; Mary's
keeper, was nevertheless a man of honour and in-
tegrity. He rejeced the proposal with disdain;
and lamenting that he lhould ever have been deem-
ed capable of acting the part of an assassin, he de-
clared that the Queen might dispose of his life at
her pleasure, but he would never frain his own
honour, nor leave an everlasting mark of infamy
on his posterity, by lending his hand to perpetrate
so foul a crime. On the receipt of this answer,
Elizabeth became extremely peevish; and calling
him a dainty and precise fellow, who would promise
much, but perform' nothing, the proposed to em-
ploy one Wingfield, who had both courage and
inclination to strike the blow *. But Davison
remonstrating against this method, as no less dan-
gerous than dishonourable, she again declared her
intention that the sentence pronounced by the com-

*Biogr. Britan. Article Davison.

missioners

o K miffloners should be executed according to law;
VII. and as 1he had already signed the warrant, she beg-
'~ 8 -' ged that no farther application might be made to
I 7'. her on that head. By this the privy counsellors

thought themselves sufficiently authorised to pro-
ceed; and prompted, as they pretended, by zeal
for the Queen's safety, or instigated, as is more pro-
bable, by the apprehension of the. danger to which
they would themselves be exposed, if the life of the
Queen of Scots were spared, they airembled in the
Council Chamber, and by a letter under all their
hands, empowered the Earls of Shrewsbury and
Kent, together with the High Sheriff of the coun-
ty, to fee the sentence put in execution *.

*.MY's be- OH Tuesday the 7th of February, the two Earls
h sth. arrived at Fotheringay, and demanded access to the

Queen, read in her pretence the warrant for execu-
tion, and required her to prepare to die next morn-
ing. Mary heard them to the end without emotion,
and crossing herself in the name of the Father, and
of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, " That foul,
said she, is not worthy the joys of Heaven, which
repines because the body must endure the stroke of
the executioner; and though I did not expec that
the Queen of England would set the first example
of violating the sacred person of a Sovereign Prince,
I willingly submit to that which Providence has de-
creed to be my lot." And laying her hand on a
Bible, which happened to be near her, The solemnly
protested that she was innocent of that conspiracy

Camd. 534. Strype, iii. 361. 364.

which

life *. She then mentioned the requests contained in VII.
her letter to Elizabeth, but obtained no fatisfa&ory '

o 87

answer. She entreated with particular earnestness,
that now in her last moments, her Almoner might be
suffered to attend her, and that Ihe might enjoy the
consolation of rhofe pious institutions prescribed by
her religion. Even this favour, which is usually
granted to the vilest criminal, was absolutely denied.

HER attendants, during this conversation, were

bathed in tears, and though overawed by the pre-
fence of the two Earls, with difficulty suppressed
their anguish; but no sooner did Kent and Shrews-
bury withdraw, than they ran to their Mistress, and
burst out into the most passionate expreflions of ten-
dernefs and sorrow. Mary, however, not only re-
tained perfet composure of mind, but endeavoured
to moderate their excessive grief. And falling on
her knees, with all her domeitics round her, the
thanked Heaven that her sufferings were now so
near an end, and prayed that /he might be enabled
to endure what fill remained with decency and with
fortitude. The greater part of the evening Ihe em-
ployed in fettling her worldly affairs. She wrote
her teitament with her own hand. Her money,
her jewels, and her clothes, she distributed among
her servants, according to their rank or merit. She
wrote a short letter to the King of France, and an-
other to the Duke of Guise, full of tender but mag-
nanimous sentiments, and recommended her foul to
their prayers, and her affliced servants to their pro-

* Jebb, ii. 301.

teetion.
O F SCOT'LLAN WD.

17I

B o.o K te&ion. At supper, she eat temperately, as usual,

VII. and conversed not only with cafe, but with cheer-

8',-e fiulnefs; lhe drank to every one of her servants, and
158 7 alked their forgiveness, if ever Ihe failed in any

part of her duty towards them. At her wonted
time she went to bed, and slept calmly a few hours.
Early in the morning she retired into her closet, and
employed a considerable time in devotion. At eight
o'clock, the high Sheriff and his officers entered her
chamber, and'found her fill kneeling at the altar.
She immediately started up, and with a majefic
mien, and a countenance undifinayed, and even
cheerful, advanced towards the place of execution,
leaning on two of Paulet's attendants. She was
dressed in a mourning habit, but with an elegance
and splendour, which ihe had long lain aside, ex-
cept on a few festival days. An Agnus Dei hung
by a pomander chain at her neck; her beads at her
girdle; and in her hand she carried a crucifix of
ivory. At the bottom of the stairs the two Earls,
attended by fevcral gentlemen from the neighbour-
ing counties, received her; and there Sir Andrew
Melvil, the Master of her household, who had been
secluded, for some weeks, from her pretence, was
permitted to take his last farewell. At the fight of
a Mistress whom he tenderly loved, in such a fitua-
tion, he melted into tears; and as he was bewail-
ing her condition, and complaining of his own hard
fate in being appointed to carry the account of
such a mournful event into Scotland, Mary replied,
"' Weep not, good Melvil, there is at present greater
cause for rejoicing. Thou Ihalt this day fee Mary
Stuart deliverd from all her cares, and such an

end

end put to her tedious sufferings, as she has long B o o K
expected. Bear witness that I die constant in my VII.
religion; firm in my fidelity towards Scotland; -
and unchanged in my affetion to France. Cor- I587-
mend me to my son. Tell him I have done no-
thing injurious to his kingdom, to his honour, or
to his rights; and God forgive all those who have
thirsted, without cause, for my blood."

WITH much difficulty, and after many intrea-

ties, she prevailed on the two Earls to allow Mel-
vil, together with three of her men servants, and
two of her maids, to attend her to the Scaffold. It
was ereced in the fame hall where she had been
tried, raised a little above the floor, and covered, as
well as a chair, the cushion, and block, with black
cloth. Mary mounted the steps with alacrity, be-
held all this apparatus of death with an unaltered
countenance, and signing herself with the cross,
she fat down in the chair. Beale read the warrant
for execution with a loud voice, to which she lif-
tened with a careless air, and like one occupied in
other thoughts. Then the Dean of Peterborough
began a devout discourse, suitable to her present
condition, and offered up prayers to Heaven in her
behalf; but the declared that ihe could not in con-
science. hearken to one, nor join with the other;
and falling on her knees, repeated a Latin prayer.
When the Dean had finished his devotions, she,
with an audible voice, and in the Englifl tongue,
recommended unto God the affliced state of the
-Church, and prayed for prosperity to her son, and
for a long life and peaceable reign to Elizabeth.

She

B o o K She declared that ihe hoped for mercy only through
VII. the death of Christ, at the foot of whose image flie

' now willingly ihed her blood; and lifting up, and
1587. kissing the crucifix, Ihe thus addressed it, " As thy

arms, O Jesus, were extended on the Cross; so
with the outfretched arms of thy mercy, receive
me, and forgive my fins."

SHE then prepared for the block, by taking off

her veil, and upper garments; and one of the exe-
cutioners rudely endeavouring to aflift, she gently
checked him, and said, with a smile, that she had
not been accustomed to undress before so many
fpeaators, nor to be served by such valets. With
calm but undaunted fortitude, mhe laid her neck on
the block; and while one executioner held her
hands, the other, at the second firoke, cut off her
head, which falling out of its attire, discovered her
hair already grown quite grey, with cares and for-
rows. The executioner held it up still streaming
with blood, and the Dean crying out, "c So perish
all Queen Elizabeth's enemies," the Earl of Kent
alone answered Amen. The reft of the fpe&ators
continued silent, and drowned in tears; being in-
capable, at that moment, of any other sentiments,
but those of pity or admiration *.

sentiin SUCH was the tragical death of Mary Queen of
ofhiioan Scots, after a life of forty-four years and two
hc=. 5months, almost nineteen years of which she pafied

in captivity. The political parties which were form-
ed in the kingdom, during her reign, have subsist-
* Camd. 534. Spotfw. 355. Jebb,ii. oo. Strype, iii. 383.

ed,

ed, under various denominations, ever since that B o o
time. The rancour, with which they were at first VII.
animated, hath descended to succeeding ages, and -
their prejudices, as well as their rage, have been 1587
perpetuated, and even augmented. Among His-
torians, who were under the dominion of all these
paflions, and who have either ascribed to her every
virtuous and amiable quality, or have imputed to
her all the vices, of which the human heart is sus-
ceptible, we search in vain for Mary's real charac-
ter. She neither merited the exaggerated praises
of the one, nor the undiftinguifhing censure of the
other.

To all the charms of beauty, and the utmost Hercha-

elegance of external form, Ihe added those accom- raaer.
plilhments, which render their impreflion irrefifti-
ble. Polite, affable, insinuating, sprightly, and ca-
pable of speaking and of writing with equal ease
and dignity. Sudden, however, and violent in all
her attachments; because her heart was warm and
unfufpicious. Impatient of contradiction; because
the had been accustomed 'from her infancy to be
treated as a queen.. No stranger, on tome occa-
sions, to dissimulation; which in that perfidious
court where The received her education, was rec-
koned among the necessary arts of government.
Not insensible of flattery, or unconscious of that
pleasure, with which almost every woman beholds
the influence of her own beauty. Formed with
the qualities which we love, not with the talents
that we admire; The was an agreeable woman rather
than an illustrious Queen. The vivacity of her

spirit

B o o i pirit not sufficiently tempered with found judg-

VII. ment, and the warmth 'of her heart, which was not,
-"~ at all times, under the restraint of diicretion, be-

. trayed her both into errors, and into crimes. To

fay that fe was always unfortunate, will not ac-
count for that long and almost uninterrupted fuc-
cefion of calamities which besel her; we muift
likewise add that Ihe was often imprudent. Her
paffioh for Darnly was rafi, youthful, and excef-
five. And though the sudden transition to the op-
pofite extreme was the natural effe& of her ill-
requited love, and of his ingratitude, insolence, and
brutality; yet neither there, nor Bothwell's artful
address, and important services can justify her at-
tachment to that nobleman. Even the manners of
that age, licentious as they were, are no apology for
this unhappy paflion; nor can they induce us to
look on that tragical and infamous scene which
followed upon it, with less abhorrence. Humanity
will draw a veil over this part of her chara&er which
it cannot approve, and may, perhaps, prompt some
to impute her actions to her situation, more than to
her dispositions; and to lament the unhappiness of
the latter. Mary's sufferings exceed, both in degree
and in duration, those tragical distresses, which
fancy had feigned to excite sorrow and commifera-
ion; and while we survey them, we are apt alto-
getherto forget her frailties, we think of her faults
with less indignation, and approve of our tears, as
if they were shed for a person who had attained
much nearer to pure virtue.

WITH
i76

WITH regard to the Queen's person, a circum- B o o K

france not to be omitted in writing the history of a VII.
female reign, all cotemporary authors agree in as- '-<
cribing to Mary, the utmost beauty of countenance, I5
and elegance of shape, of which the human form
is capable. Her hair was black, though, accord-
ing to the fashion of that age, she frequently wore
borrowed locks, and of different colours. Her
eyes were a dark grey; her complexion was exqui-
fitely fine; and her hands and arms remarkably de-
licate, both as to shape and colour. Her tfature
was of an height that rose to the majestic. She
danced, she walked, and rode with equal grace.
Her talte for music was just, and Ihe both sung and
played upon the lute, with uncommon skill. To-
wards the end of her life, Ihe began to grow fat;
and her long confinement, and the coldness of the
houses in which ihe had been imprisoned, brought
on a rheumatism, which deprived her of the use of
her limbs. No man, fays Brantome, ever beheld
her person without admiration and love, or will read
her history without sorrow.

NONE of her women were suffered to come near

her dead body, which was carried into a room ad-
joining to the place of execution, where it lay, for
some days, covered with a coarse cloth torn from a
billiard table. The block, the scaffold, the aprons
of the executioners, and every thing stained with
her blood, were reduced to alhes. Not long after,
Elizabeth appointed her body to be buried in the
Cathedral of Peterborough, with royal magnifi-
cence. But this vulgar artifice was employed in

YoL. II. N vain;

B o o vain; the pageantry of a pompous funeral did not

VIL efface the memory of those injuries, which laid
'.--_" Mary in her grave. James, soon after his accession
1587. to the Engliih throne, ordered her body to be re-

moved to Weftminfter-abbey, and to be deposited
among the Monarchs of England.

Elzabeth ELIZABETH affe&ed to receive the accounts of
astMa- Mary's death, with the utmost violent emotions of
ry'sdeath. surprise and of concern. Sighs, tears, lamenta-

tions and mourning, were all employed to display
the reality and greatness of her sorrow. Evident
marks of dissimulation and artifice may be traced
through every period of Elizabeth's proceedings
against the life of the Scottish Queen. The com-
mifion for bringing Mary to a,public trial was seem-
ingly extorted from her, by the intreaties of her
privy counsellors. She: delayed publiihing the fen-
tence againif her, till ihe was twice solicited by both
houses of Parliament. Nor did she sign the war-
rant for execution without the utmost apparent re-
lucance. One scene more of the boldest and most
solemn deceit remained to be exhibited. She under-
took to make the world believe that Mary had been
put-to death without her knowledge, and against
her will. And Davison, who neither fufpeced her
intention, nor his own danger, was her instrument
in carrying on this artifice, and fell a vicim to it.

IT was his duty, as secretary of state, to lay before

her the warrant for execution, in order to be signed;
and by her command, he carried it to the Great
Seal. She pretended, however, that she had charg-

ed
I78

ed him not to communicate what he had done to B o o K
any person, nor to susser the warrant to go out of VII.
his hands, without her express permission; that, in '"-
contempt of this order, he had not only revealed 5 87-
the matter to several of her Minifers, but had, in
concert with them, assembled her Privy Counsellors,
by whom, without her consent, or knowledge, the
warrant was iffLed, and 'the Earls of Shrewsbury
and Kent impowered to put it in execution. Tho'
Davison denied all this, and with circumstances
which bear the strongest marks of truth and credi-
bility; though it can scarce be conceived that her
Privy Council, composed of the persons in whom
/he most confided, of her Ministers and favourites,
would assemble within the walls of her palace, and
venture to tranfa& a matter of so much importance,
without her privity, and contrary to her inclination;
yet so far did she carry her dissimulation, that, with
all the signs of displeasure and of rage, she banish-
ed most of her Counsellors out of her pretence;
and treated Burleigh, in particular, so harshly, and
with such marks of disgust, that he gave up him-
self for loft, and in the deepest affliction wrote to
the Queen, begging leave to resign all his places,
that he might retire to his own estate. Davison she
instantly deprived of his office, and committed him
a close prisoner to the Tower. He was soon after March.
brought to a solemn trial in the Star Chamber;
condemned to pay a fine of 1o,ooo pounds, and to
be imprisoned during the Queen's pleasure. He
languished, several years, in confinement, and ne-
ver recovered any degree of favour or of power,
As her jealousy and fear had bereaved the Queen of

N 2 Scots

r79

B o o K Scots of life, in order to palliate this part of her

VII. condu&c, Elizabeth made no scruple of sacrificing

8'-*-' the reputation and happiness of one of the most vir-

1537. tuous and able men in her kingdom *.

Eiizbh THIS solemn farce, for it deserves no better name,
endeavour furniihed Elizabeth, however, with an apology to
j.th Athe King of Scots. As the profpe& of his mother's

danger had excited the King's filial care and con-
cern, the account of her death filled him with grief
and resentment. His fubjets felt the dishonour
done to him, and to the nation. In order to sooth
both, Elizabeth initantly dispatched Robert Careyi
one of Lord Hunfdane's sons, with a letter expref-
sing her extreme afflition on account of that miser-
able accident, which, as the pretended, had happen-
ed far contrary to her appointment, or intention.
James would not permit her messenger to enter
Scotland; and with some difficulty, received a me-
morial he sent from Berwick. It contained the tale
concerning Davison§ dressed up with all the circum-
stances, which tended to exculpate Elizabeth,,and
to throw the whole blame on his raihnefs or trea-
chery. Such a defence gave little fatisfation, and
was confidered as mockery added to insult; and
many of the nobles, as well as the King, breathed
nothing but revenge. Elizabeth was extremely so-
licitous to pacify them, and neither wanted inftru-
ments, nor reasons to gain her end. Leiceiter wrote
to the King, and Walsingham to secretary Mait-
land. They represented the certain deftru&ion, to
which James would expose himself, if with the

* Camd. 536. Strype, iii. 370.

forces

forces of Scotland alone, he fhoufd venture to at- B o o K
tack a kingdom, so far superior in power; that the VII.
history ofpaft ages, as well as his mother's fad ex-

5s97.

perience, might convince him that nothing could be
more dangerous or deceitful, than dependance on
foreign aid; that the King of France would never
wish to fee the British kingdoms united under one
Monarch, nor contribute to inveff a Prince so
nearly allied to the House of Guise, with such for-
midable power; that Philip might be a more ac-
tiye ally, but would certainly prove a more danger-
ous one, and under pretence ofaflifting himn would
assert his own right to the Englifl Crown, which
he already began openly to claim; that the fame
statute, on which the sentence of death against his
mother had been founded, would juffify the ex-
cluding him from the acceflion to the Crown; that
the Englilh, naturally averse from the dominion of
strangers, would not fail, if exasperated by his hof-
tilities, to apply it in that manper; that Elizabeth
was disposed to repair the wrongs which the mother
had suffered, by her tenderness and affefion towards
the son i and that by engaging in a fruitless war, he
would deprive himself of a noble inheritance, which,
by cultivating her friendship, he mutt infallibly ob-
tain. These representations, added to the confci-
oufnefs of his own weakness, to the smallness of his
revenues, to the mutinous spirit of some of the no-
bles, to the dubious fidelity of others, and to the
influence of that fation, which was entirely at Eliza-
beth's devotion, convinced James that a war with
England, however just, would in the present junc-
ture be altogether impolitical. All there confide-

N 3 rations

B o o r rations induced him to stifle his resentment; to ap-

VII. pear satisfied with the punishment infli&ed on Davi-
-- son; and to preserve all the semblances of friend-

f- hip with the Englifl court *. In this manner did
the cloud which threatened such a storm pass away.
Mary's death, like that of a common criminal, re-
mained unavenged by any Prince; and whatever
infamy Elizabeth might incur, she was exposed to
no new danger on that account.

DHigce of MARY'S death, however, proved fatal to the
the Maller
of ray. Master of Gray, and loft him the King's favour,

which he had for ofme time possessed. He was be-
come as odious to the nation, as favourites, who ac-
quire power without merit, and exercise it without
discretion, usually are. The treacherouy part, which
he had a&ed during his last embassy, was no secret,
and filled James, who at length came to the know-
ledge of it, with aftoniihment. The courtiers ob-
served the symptoms of disgust arising in the King's
mind, his enemies seized the opportunity, and Sir
William Steward, in revenge of the perfidy with
which Gray had betrayed his brother Captain James,
a ,o. publickly accused him before a convention of no-

bles, not only of having contributed, by his advice
and suggestions, to take away the life of the Queen,
but of holding correspondence with Popish Princes,
in order to subvert th' religion established in the
kingdom. Gray, unsupported by the King, de-
ferted by all, and conscious of his own guilt, made
a feeble defence. He was condemned toperpetual
banishment, apunifliment very unequal to his crimes.

* Spotfw. Strype, iii. 377.

But

But the King was unwilling to abandon one, whom B o o K
he had once favoured so highly, to the rigour of VII.
justice; and Lord Hamilton his near relation, and
the other nobles who had lately returned from exile, 1587-
in gratitude for the zeal with which he had served
them, interceded warmly in his behalf.

HAVING thus accompliihed the deftru&ion of one

of his enemies, Captain James thought the juncture
favourable for prosecuting his revenge on them all.
He tingled out secretary Maitland, the mot emi-
nent both for abilities and enmity to him; and of-
sered to prove that he was no less accessary than
Gray to the Queen's death, and had even formed
a design of delivering up the King himself into the
hands of the English. But time and absence had,
in a great measure, extinguilhed the King's affection
for a minion, who so little deserved it. All the
courtiers combined against him as a common ene-
my. And instead of gaining his point, he had the
mortification to fee the office of Chancellor confer-
red upon Maitland, who, together with that dignity,
enjoyed all the power and influence of a prime mi-
nifter.

IN the Assembly of the Church, which met this

year, the fame hatred to the order of Bilhops, and
the fame jealousy and fear of their encroachments,
appeared. But as the King was now of full age,
and a parliament was summoned on that occasion,
the Clergy remained satisfied with appointing some
of their number to represent their grievances to that
court, from which great things were expeeted.

d* PRE-

183

B o o PREVIOUS to this meeting of parliament, James

VII. attempted a work worthy of a King. The deadly
} 8*' feuds which subsisted between many of the great fa-
I587.
Th King milies, and which were transmitted from one gene-
atmptto ration to another, weakened the strength of the
unite the
nobles. kingdom; contributed more than any other cir-

cumftance, to preserve a fierce and barbarous spirit
among the nobles; and proved the occasion of
many disasters to themselves, and to their coun-
try. After many preparatory negociations, he in-
vited the contending parties to a royal entertain-
ment in the palace of Holy-rood-houfe; and partly
by his authority, partly by his entreaties, obtained
their promise to bury their dissensions in perpetual
oblivion. From thence he conducted them, in so-
lemn procession, through the streets of Edinburgh,
marching by pairs, each hand in hand with his ene-
my. A collation of wine and sweet-meats was pre-
pared at the public Cross, and there they drank to
each other, with all signs of reciprocal'forgive-
ness, and of future friendlhip. The people, who
were present at a fpetacle so unusual, conceived
the mos sanguine hopes of feeing cqncord and tran-
quillity eftablifled in every part of the kingdom,
and testified their fatisfaftion by repeated acclama-
tions. Unhappily the effes of this reconciliation
were not correspondent either to the pious endea-
rours of the King, or the fond wishes of the people.

THE first care of the parliament was the security

of the Protestant religion. All the laws passed in
its favour, since the Reformation, were ratified;
and a new and severe one was enaated againt semi-

narv

nary Priests and Jesuits, whose restless industry in B o o K
making proselytes brought many of them into Scot- VII.
land about this time. Two ats of this parliament '*'
deserve more particular notice, on account of the
consequences with which they were followed.

THE one refpe&ed the lands of the Church. As General

the public revenues were not sufficient for defray- ", hurci.,
ing the King's ordinary charges; as the adminilfra- lands-
tion of the government became more complicated
and more expensive; as James was naturally profuse,
and a stranger to ceconomy; it was necessary, on
all these accounts, to provide some fund propor-
tioned to his exigencies. But no considerable fum
could be levied on the Commons, who did not en-
joy the benefit of an extensive commerce. The
nobles were inaccuftomed to bear the burden of
heavy taxes. And the revenues of the Church
were the only source whence a proper supply could
be drawn. .NotwithRfanding.all the depredations of
the laity since the Reformation, and the various
devices which they had employed to seize the Church
lands, some considerable portion of them remained
frill unalienated, and were held either by the Bishops
who possessed the benefices, or were granted to lav-
men during pleasure. All these lands were, in this
parliament, annexed, by one general law *, to the
Crown, and the King was impowered to apply the
rents of them to his own use. The tithes alone
were reserved for the maintenance of the persons
who served for the cure, and the principal mansion-
house, with a few acres of land, by way of glebe,

Parl. 1 Jac. VI c. 29.

allot-

B o o K allotted for his residence. By this. great acceflion
VII. of property, it is natural to conclude, that the King
i' ' g must have acquired a vast increase of power, and

the influence of the nobles have suffered a propor-
tional diminution. The very reverse of this seems,
however, to have been the cafe. Almost all grants
of Church-lands, prior to this as, were thereby
confirmed; and titles, which were formerly reckon-
ed precarious, derived from thence the fancion of
parliamentary authority. Jimes was likewise au-
thorifed, during a limited time, to make new alie-
nations; and such was the facility of his temper,
ever ready to yield to the solicitations of his ser-
vants, and to gratify their most extravagant de-
mands, that not only during the time limited, but
throughout his whole reign, he was continually em-
ployed in bestowing, and his parliament in ratifying
grants of this kind to his nobles; hence little ad-
vantage accrued to the Crown from that which
might have been so valuable an addition to its re-
venues. The Bishops, however, were great sufferers
by the law. But at this juncture neither the King
nor his Ministers were solicitous about the interests
of an order of men, odious to the people, and per-
fecuted by the Clergy. Their enemies promoted
the law with the utmost zeal. The profpet of
sharing in their spoils induced all parties to consent
to it; and after a ftep so fatal to the wealth and
power of the dignified Clergy, it was no difficult
matter to introduce that change in the government
9f the Church which soon after took place *.

Spotfw. 365.

THE

THE change, which the other Statute produced B o o x

in the civil constitution, was no less remarkable. VII.
Under the Feudal system, every Freeholder, or vas-
fal of the Crown, had a right to be present in par- i59Le 7.

Lesser Ba-
liament. These Freeholders were, originally, few rons ad-

cl

rnn-rri r i rmitted in-

in number, but possessed of great and extensive pro- to pariia-
perty. By degrees, there vast poffeflions were di- t ,Y

their re-

vided by the proprietors themselves, or parcelled prefena-
out by the Prince, or split by other accidents. The
number of Freeholders became greater, and their
condition more unequal: besides the ancient Barons,
who preserved their estates and their power unim-
paired, there arose another order, whose rights were
the fame, though their wealth and influence were
far inferior. But, in those rude ages, when the
art of government was extremely imperfect, when
parliaments were seldom assembled, and deliberated
on matters little interesting to a martial people, few
of the Lejer Barons took their feats, and the whole
parliamentary jurifdi&ion was exercised by the
Greater Barons, together with the Ecclesiastical or-
der. James I. fond of imitating the forms of the
English constitution, to which he had been long
accustomed, and desirous of providing a counter-
poise to the power of the great nobles, procured an
aft in the year 1427, dispensing with the personal
attendance of the lesser Barons, and impowering
those in each county, to chufe two comminioners
to represent them in parliament. This lal, like
many other regulations of that wife Prince, pro-
duced little effe¢t. All the King's vassals continued
as formerly, possessed of a right to be present in
parliament, and, unless in some extraordinary con-

jun&ures,

B o o junctures, none but the greater Barons attended.

VII. But by means of the Reformation, the constitution

8'-*"' had undergone a great change. The ariftocratical
I587. power of the nobles had been much increased, and

the influence of the Ecclesiastical order, which the
Crown usually employed to check their usurpations,
and to balance their authority, had diminished in
proportion. Many of the Abbies and Priories had
been erected into temporal peerages; and the Pro-
teftant Bilhops, an indigent race of men, and odious
to the nation, were far from pofielting the weight
and credit, which their predecessors derived from
the exorbitant wealth, and the superstitious reve-
rence of the people. In this situation, the.King
had recourse to the expedient employed by James I.
and obtained a law reviving the statute of 1427;
and from that time the Commons of Scotland have
sent their representatives to parliament. An at,
which tended so visibly to abridge their authority,
did not pass without opposition from many of the
nobles. But as the King had a right to summon
the lesser Barons to attend in person, others were
apprehensive of feeing the house filled with a multi-
tude of his dependants, and consented the more wil-
lingly to a law, which laid them under the reftric-
ion of appearing only by their representatives.

SSS. THE.year ISS began with an universal expe&a-

Theap- tion throughout all Europe, that it was to be dif-

.aSchofa tinguilhed by wonderful events and revolutions.
'-ido. Several astrologers, according to the accounts of

cotemporary historians, had predi&ed this and the
situation of affairs in the two principal kingdoms of

Europe

Europe was such, that a sagacious observer,' with- B o o K
out any supernatural intelligence, might have ha- VII;
zarded the prediction, and have foreseen the ap- -
proachof some grand crisis. In France, it was evi- I58
dent from the astonishing progress of the.league,
condu&ed by a leader whose ambition was restrain-
ed by no scruples, and whose genius had hitherto
surmounted all difficulties; as well as from the
timid, variable, and impolitic councils of Henry III.
that either that Monarch must submit to abandon
the throne, of which he was unworthy; or by some
sudden and daring blow, cut offhis formidable rival.
Accordingly, in the beginning of the year, the
Duke of Guise drove his Master out of his capital
city, and forced him to conclude a peace, which
left him only the (hadow of royalty; and before the
year expired, he himself fell a vitim to Henry's
fears, and to his own security. In Spain, the ope-
rations were such as promised Something still more
uncommon. During three years, Philip had em-
ployed all the power of his European dominions,
and exhausted the treasures of the Indies, in vast
preparations for war. A fleet, the greatest that had
ever appeared in the ocean, was ready to fail from
Lilbon, and a numerous land army was assembled
to embark on board of it, Its destination was still
unknown, though many circumstances made it pro-
bable that the blow was aimhd, in the first place,
against England. Elizabeth hag long given fecrer
aid to the revolted provinces in the Low Countries,
and now openly afforded them her protection. A
numerous body of her troops was in their service;
the Earl of Leicester commanded their armies; she

had

189

B o o K had great sway in the civil governmenrofthe repub-

VII. lic; and some of its most considerable towns were
C- r _ in her polfeflion.. Her fleets had insulted the coasts
588-. of Spain, intercepted the Galleons from the Welt

Indies, and threatened the colonies there. Roused
by so many injuries, allured by views of ambition,
and animated by a fuperftitous zeal for propagating
the Romish Religion, Philip resolved not only to
invade, but to conquer England, to which his de-
scent from 'the house of Lancaster, and the donation
of Pope Sixtus V. gave him, in his own opinion, a
double title.

condua of ELIZABETH saw the danger approach, and pre-
Ja=m oa0 pared to encounter it with the utmost intrepidity.
in-. jThe measures for the defence of her kingdom, were

concerted and carried on, with the wisdom, and
vigour, which diftinguilhed her reign. Her chief
care was to secure the friendship of the King of
Scots. She had treated the Queen his mother with
a rigour unknown among Princes; ihe had often
used himself hardly, and with contempt; and
though he had hitherto prudently suppressed his re-
fentment of these injuries, ihe did not believe it to
be altogether extinguified, and was afraid that, in
her present situation, it might burst out with a fatal
violence. Philip, sensible how much an alliance
with Scotland would facilitate his enterprise, court-
ed James with the utmost assiduity. He excited
him to revenge his Mother's wrongs; he flattered
him with the hopes of sharing his conquests; and
offered him in marriage his daughter the Infanta
Isabella. At the fame time, Scotland swarmed with

priests

priests his emissaries, who seduced some of the no- B o K
bles to Popery, and corrupted others with bribes VII.
and promises. Huntly, Errol, Crawford, were
the heads of a fadion, which openly espoused the 1588
interest of Spain. Lord Maxwell, arriving from
that court, began to assemble his followers, and to
take arms, that he might be ready to join the Spa-
niards. In order to counterbalance all these, Eli-
zabeth made the warmef profeiflons of friendlhip
to the King; and Alhby, her ambassador, enter-
tained him: with magnificent hopes and promises.
He assured him that his right of succession to the
Crown Should be publickly acknowledged in Eng-
land; that he should be created a Duke in that
kingdom; that he ihould be admitted to some share
in the government; and receive a considerable pen-
sion annually. James, it is probable, was too well
acquainted with Elizabeth's arts, to rely entirely on
these promises. But he underifood his own in-
terest in the present jun&ure, and pursued it with
much steadiness. He rejeted an alliance with
Spain, as dangerous. He refused to admit into his
pretence an ambassador from the Pope. He seized
Colonel Semple, an agent of the Prince of Parma.
He drove many of the trafficking Priests out of the
kingdom. He marched suddenly to Dumfries, dif-
perfed Maxwell's followers, and took him prisoner.
In a Convention of the nobles he declared his refo-
lution to adhere inviolably to the league with Eng-
land; and, without listening to the suggestions of
revenge, determined to a& in concert with Eliza-
beth, against the common enemy of the Protestant
faith. He put the kingdom in a posture of defence,

and

B o o K and levied troops to obftrut the landing of the Spa-

VI1. niards. He offered to fend an army to Elizabeth's

8 ' assistance, and told her ambassador that he expected
J588. no other favour from the King of Spain, but that

which Polyphemus had promised to Ulysses, that
when he had devoured all his companions he would
make him his last morsel *.

A ational THE zeal of the people, on this occasion, was
covenant in
defen of not inferior to that of the King; and the extraordi-
Reision. nary danger, with which they were threatened, fug-

gested to them an extraordinary expedient for-their
security. A bond was framed for the maintenance
of true Religion, and the defence of the King's per-
son and government in opposition to all enemies,
foreign and domestic. This contained a confession
of the Protestant faith, a particular renunciation of
the errors of Popery, and the most solemn promises,
in the name, and through the strength of God, of
adhering to each other in supporting the former, and
contending against the latter, to the utmost of their
power tI The King, the Nobles, the Clergy, and
the people subscribed with equal alacrity. Strange
or uncommon as such a combination may now ap-
pear, many circumstances contributed, at that time,
to recommend it, and to render the idea familiar to
the Scots. When routed by any extraordinary
event, or alarmed by any public danger, the people
of Israel were accuflomed to bind themselves, by a
solemn Covenant, to adhere to that Religion, which
the Almighty had established among them; this the

* Camd. 544. Johnlt. 139. Spotfw. 369.
t Dunlop's Collet. of CoufeiT. Vol. ii. to8.

Scots

Scots confidered as a sacred precedent, which it be- B o o K
came them to imitate. In that age, no confider- V!.
able enterprise was undertaken in, Scotland, with- '-
out a bond of nutual defence, which all concerned 188
reckoned necessary for their security. The form of
this religious confederacy is plainly borrowed from
those political ones, of which so many instances have
occurred; the articles, Stipulations, and peculiar
modes of expression, are exaCtly the fame in both,
Almost all the considerable Popish Princes were
then joined in a league for extirpating the Reform-
ed Religion, and nothing could be more natural,
or seemed more efficacious, than to enter into a
counter-alifciation, in order to oppose the progress
of that formidable conspiracy. To there causes,
did the Covenant, which is become so famous in
history, owe its origin. It was renewed at different
times during the reign of James *. It was revived
with great solemnity, though with considerable al-
terations, in the year I638. It was adopted by the
Englihf, in the year 1643, and enforced by the civil
and ecclesiastical authority of both kingdoms. The
political purposes to which it was then made subser-
vient, and the violent and unconstitutional meafqres
which it was then employed to promote, it is not
our province to explain. But at the jun&ure, in
which it was firRf introduced, we may pronounce it
to have been a prudent and laudable device for the
defence of the religion and liberties of the nation;
nor were the terms in which it was conceived, other
than might have been expe&ed from men alarmed

* Cald. iv. 129.

with
VOL. II.

0

B o-o with tei impending danger of Popery, and threar-

I-. ened with an invasion by the most bigoted and
t ma lmot powerful Prince in Europe.

PHILIPs' eagerness to conquer England did not

inspire him either with the vigour or dispatch ne-
ceflary to insure the success of so mighty an enter-
prise. His fleet, which ought to have failed in
April, did not enter theEnglifh channel till the
middle of July. It hovered many days on the
coast, in expectation of being joined by the Prince
of Parma, who was blocked up in 'the ports of
TSe a1 Slanders by a Dutch Squadron. Continual disasters?

pursued the Spaniards during that time; successive
storms and battles, which are well known, conspired
with their own ill conduct, to disappoint their en-
terprife. And by the blessing of Providence,
which watched with remarkable care over the Pro-
teltart Religion, and the liberties of Britain, the
English valour scattered and destroyed the Armado
on which they had arrogantly bestowed the name of
Invincible. After being driven out of the English
seas, they were forced to steer their course towards
Spain, round Scotland and Ireland. Many of them
suffered fhiDwreck on thole dangerous and unknown
coasts. Though James kept his subje&s under arms
to watch the motions of the Spaniards, and to pre-
vent their landing in an hofile manner, he received
with great humanity 700 who were forced aihore by
a tempest, and after supplying them with nezeffaries,
permitted them to return into their own country.

ON

ON the retreat of the Spaniards, Elizabeth sent B o o K

an ambassador to congratulate with James, and to VII.
compliment him on the firmness and generosity he *-
had discovered during a conjunture so dangerous. x588.
But none ofAlhby's promises were any longer re-
membered; that Minister was even accused of hav-
ing exceeded his powers, by there two liberal offers;
and conscious of his own falsehood, or alhamed of
being disowned by his court, he withdrew secretly
out of Scotland *.

PHILyP, convinced by fatal experience of his own 1589.

rashness in attempting the conquest of England, by Philip's in
a naval armament, equipped at so great a distance, scoand
and fubje&ed, in all its operations, to the delays
and dangers, and uncertainties arising from seas
and winds, resolved to make his attack in another
form, and to adopt the plan which the Princes of
Lorrain had long meditated of invadire, England
through Scotland. A body of his troops, he ima-
gined, might be easily wafted over from the Low
Countries to that kingdom; and if they could once
obtain footings or procure afliftance there, the fron-.
tier of England was open and defenceless, and the
northern counties full of Roman Catholics, who
would receive them with open arms. Mean while,
a descent might be threatened on the southern coast,
which would divide the English army, diftra& their
councils, and throw the whole kingdom into ter-
rible convulsions. Inorder to prepare the way for
the execution of this design, he remitted a conli-

Johns. 134. Caed. de8.

0 2 derable

B o o K derable fum of money to Bruce, a seminary priest

VII. id Scodand, and employed him, together with

~'

x - Hayy Creighton, and Tyrie, Scottih: Jesuits, to
Popia gain over as many-people of diftinicon as possible
bl on_ to his interef. Zeal for Popery, and the artful in-
-hKink finuations of thefe-'emiffaries, induced several of

the nobles to favour a measure, which tended tf
manifestly to the deftrut&ion of their country,
Huintly, though the King had lately married him
to the daughter of his favourite, the Duke of Len-
nox, continued warmly attached to the Romiih
Church. Crawford and Errol were animated with
.he zeal of new converts. They all engaged in a
eorrefpondence with the Prince of Parma, and in
their letters to him, offered their service to the King
of Spain, and undertook, with the aid of 60po
men, to render him master of Scotland, and to
bring so many of their vassals into the field, that
he fliould be able to enter England with a numerous
army. Francis Stewart, grandson of James V.
whom the King had created Earl of Bothwell,
though- influenced by no.motive of Religion, for he
still adhered to -the Protestant faith, was prompted
merely. by caprice, and the-reftleffnefs of his na-
rure, to join this-reafonable correspondence.
£eb. x7. ALL these letters were intercepted in England.

Elizabeth, alarmed at the danger which threatened
her own kingdom, 'lfnt them immediately to the
King, and reproaching. him with his former lenity
toward theP'opifiparty; called upon him to check
this formidable coiifpiracy by a proper severity.
But James, though firmly attached to the Protef-

tant

tant religion, though profoundly versed in the theo- B o ocK
logical contrdverfies between the Reformers and the VII.
Church of Rome, though he had employed himself, ~-Y

· $1589.

at that early period of life, in 'writing a Cominen- The King'
tary on the Revelations, in which he proved the maxims
Pope to be Antichrist, had nevertheless adopted, toPopery.
'already, those maxims concerning the treatment of
the Roman Catholics, to which he adhered through
'the ieft of his life. The Roman Catholics were at
.that time a powerful and ative party in England;
'they were far from being an inconsiderable faction
in his own lingdom. The Pope and King of Spain
'were ready to take part in all their machinations,
and to fecnid': every effort of their bigotry. The
ppoffition of such a body to his succession to the
Crdown of England, added to the averseness of the
E-nglish from the government of strangers, might
create him many difficulties. In order to avoid
'there, he thought it neceffaryto sooth rather.than
'to irritate the Roman Catholics, and to reconcile
them to his succession, by the hopes of gentler
treatment, and some mitigation of the rigour of
'thdfe laws; which were now.in force against them.
This attempt to gain one party by promises of in-
dulgence and ats of clemency; while he adhered
with all the obstinacy of a disputant, to the doc-
trines and.tenets of the other, has given an air of
mystery, and even of contradiction, to this part of
'the King's character. The Papists, with the credu-
lity of a set struggling to obtain power, believed
his heart to be wholly theirs; and the Protestants,
with the jealousy inseparable from those who are al-
ready in possession, viewed every act of lenity, 'as a

mark

197

B o o x .mark of indifference, or a symptom of apoftacy.
VII. And in order to please both, James Qften aimed, at

' an excessive refinement, mingled -with diffimulatiorb
5 -' in which he imagined the perfe&ion f.gov ernment,

and of king-craft to confif, ' ...

is e.cef- HIS behaviour. on this occasion was agreeable. to
to thco these general maxims. Notwithstanding the'folicita-
fp-oi,' tions of the Oueei of England,,'enforced by .the

zealous. remonstrances of his oQwn .Clergy, a hort
imprisonment was the only puniihmei t he.' in'flf&ed
on Hundy and his asso.ciates. But he soo had ea-
fonr .torepent. an .at of clemecncy f onfifsent
ywith the dignity of government...Thefirt use which
the conspirators made. of their liberty, was to ai-
emble, their folQwers, and, under: pretence of re-
moving Chancellor. Maidand, an able' Minister,, but
.warly devoted to the Englifi ielreeft '

from 'the

King's .councils and presence, they. attempted t
seize James himself. , This attempt b.eing defeated,
partly by Maitand's vigilance, and. Eartly by their
own ill condu&, they were forced to. retire to the
North, where they .openly ere&ed .th.. standard, of
Rebellion. But as the. King's government was not
generally unpopular, .or hi~s mjineiftrs.,odious,, their
own vassals joined them slowly, and discovered no
zeal in the cause. And the Kig,) in-perfon,:. d-
yancing against them with such -forgces as he co.uld
suddenly levy, they:durft not rely so. much on.the
fidelity of the troops , which, though superior in
number, followed them with reluctance, as to ha-
zard a battle; but suffering them. to, disperse, they
surrendered to the King, and threw themselves on

his'

his mercy. Huntly, Errol, Crawford, and Both- B o o K
well, were all brought to a public trial. Repeated VII.
a&s of treason were easily proved against them. ' "'
The King, however, did not permit any featence 1589.
to be pronounced; and after keeping them a few
months in confinement, he took occasion, amidit
the public festivity and rejoicings, at the approach
of his marriage, to set them at liberty *.

As James was the only descendant of the ancient The ;ing's

marrlae

Monarchs of Scotland, in the direct line as all with Anne
hopes of uniting the crowns of the two kingdoms mo D
would have expired with him as the Ead of Ar-
ran, the presumptive heir to the throne, was
lunatic; the King's marriage was, on all there ac-
counts, an event which the nation wilied for with
the utmolt ardour. He himself was no less desirous
of accomplihfing it and had made overtures, for
that purpose, to the eldest daughter of Frederick II,
'king of Denmark. But Elizabe.th, jealous of every
thing that would render the accession of the house
of Stewart more acceptable to She English, endea*
voured to perplex James, in the fame manner ihe
had done Mary, and employed as many artifices
to defeat or to retard his marriage, His ministers,
gained by bribes and promises, seconded her inten-
tion; and though several different ambassadors
were sent from Scotland to Denmark, they produced
powers so limited, or insisted on conditions so ex-
'travagant, that Frederick could not believe the King
go be in earnest; and suspecting that there was some

* Spotfw 373. Cald. iv. 103.

.. .. . .
. '.design

B o o design to deceive, or amuse him, Tgve his daitghter

VII. in marriage to the Duke of Brulnwick. 'bt di'-
s'Sq1' couraged by this difappointihnt, which hii imputed

' entiriely to the condu f hi
of hown miiifters, James

made addrefTes to the princess Atrie,' Friederick's
second :daughter. And though Elizabeth endea-
V~oured to divert him from this, by recommending
Catherine the King of kavarre's filter, as a more
advantageous match; though she prevailed on the
pn'riv council of Scotland to declare. againit the
alliance -with Denmark, he persiAed: in his choice.
Ahd delpairing of overcoming 'the obstinacy. of
his own mififters, ih any other manner, he secretly
enicoiraged the citizens of Edihburgh to take
arms. They theeatened to tear in pieces the Chan-
cellor, whom' they accused as the person, whose ar-
tifices had hitherto disappointed the -wishes of the
'iing, and the expefataons of his people. In con-
-fequeiice of this, the E arl Marshal as sent, into
Dienmark at the head of a fipleindid embassy.' He
received aniple powers and in'tructions, drawh with
the KIine's own hand. The imarriage articles were
quickly agreed upon, and the young Qeen set fail
-towards Scotland. James made great preparations
'for:'heir eception, and, waited her landing with .all
the' mpatience of a lover; when, .the uhwelcolme
actcont arrived, 'that a viblept-tenip.eP -had anfen,
whiich'tdrove back her Heet to Norway,;'in a condi-
tion so ihattered, that there was 'tl'e,' hope' ot its
piutting-again to tea-before the friing.' Tliis lnex-
peced disappointment lie felt with the utmost ten-
fibility. He inftandy-fitted out fore dhips, and,
wihout communicating his intention to any of his

coun-
200

council, failed in person, attended by the Chancel- Bo o:'
ltr, several ioblemen, lnd-a-train of 300 petrins; V11.
in quelt of his brdide.- He amrived -safely in

: a imsnall

harbour 'eartTpiflo, where the Queen then efided. otaS9'
There the -marriage was solemnized. A'nd 'as it Nov. 4.
would have been talht rtd trtfthofe boiiterous teas
in the winterTeafoh, James accepted ,the ihVitation
of the court of Denmark, and repiirirg tro-open-
hagen, passed several months there, amidst conti-
nual feasting and amusements, in which, both the
Queen and himself had great delight *.

No event in the King's life appears to be a wider

deviation from his general charaaer, than this fud-
den sally. His son Charles I. was capable of that
exceflive admiration of the other sex, which arises
from great sensibility of li-art, heightened by ele-
gance of taste; and the romantic air of his jour-
ney to Spain suited such a disposition. But James
was not susceptible of any refined gallantry, and al-
ways expressed that contempt for the female cha-
raEter, which a pedantic erudition, unacquainted
with politeness, is apt to inspire. He was fretted,
however, at the many obstacles which had been laid
in his way. He was anxious to secure the political
advantages, which he expeted from marriage and
fearing that a delay might afford Elizabeth, and his
own ministers, an opportunity of thwarting him by
new intrigues, he suddenly took the resolution of
preventing them, by a voyage from which he ex-
peted to return in a few weeks. The nation seem-
ed to applaud his condu&, and to be pleased with

* Melvil, 352. Spotriv. 377

this

Bo o K this appearance of amorous ardour in a young

ViI. Prince. Nothwithftanding.his absence, so long be-
.'--.-' yond the: time he expected, the nobles, the clergy,

589.' and th' people, vied with one another in loyalty

and obeience; and no period in the King's reign
was more remarkable for tranquillity, or more free
from any eruption of those factions, which so often
disturbed the kingdom.

# THE HISTORY OF SCOTLAND. BOOK VIII.

T HE
·. . , , p .

JJ, $ TOR Y

.O F.
$SCOQ TL AND.

OOK yII,
O N the first 'of M.ay. the King and Queen ar- B o o

.g '

rived, at Leith, ,and, vere received by their VIII.

fubjefts, with every, poflible expreflion of joy. .-J
The.folemnityofthe Qeefi's coronation was con- I190
duaed,. with great mgnificncee but so low had :Qdecm
the order. Qs Bilhops fallen, in the opinion of the ;Srn.
public, that none of them were present on that
occasion, and Mr. Robert Bruce, a Presbyterian
Minister of great reputation, set the Crown on her
head, administered the sacred unftion, and perform-
ed the other customary ceremonies.

THE
--P 1 -P Is r

..

B o O K THE zeal and success with which many of the
VIII. clergy had contributed tatora4s prese ingpeace
'*- ' and order in the kingdom, -diiing his a-ience, re-
1590' conciled James in a great degree, to their persons,

and even to the Prelbytenan form of government.
Aft 4. In presence of an assembly, which met this year, he

made high encomiums on the discipline as well as
the dodrine of the churdhi, 'promised to adhere in-
violably to both, and permitted the affeinibly to
frame such a&ts as gradually aboliihed all the re-
mains of episcopal jurifdicion, and paved the way
for a full and legal establishment of the Prefbyte-
rian model *.
59 AN event happened foon'gfter, hwMch 'afforded

the Clergy no finall triumph.s Archbfihop-Adam-'
son, their ancient enemy, having fallen under the
King's displeasure, having been deprived of the
revenues of his fee in corifeieiice of the aft of an-
nexation, and being oppressed with age, with po-
.verty, and diseases, made the meanest fubmiflionto
;; , -the .clergy, and deliveretd to tle' affembl a fornal

. , recantatiion.of all his 6pihii6is concerring'g Church
- . overnment-, which ha'd'been-mi'atciter Of offence to

... ' :the Preiyterians. Siuch aonfefion, frotFthe'moft

Jearned,perfoin of th-eorder, was codfidered-as a
'-tetimony, which the force' of-truth- hid eitorted
£rom.an .dverfary. '

ie;r_-e t_ lMEANWHILE, the Kin's excessive clemency to-
te ki.i- wards offenders multiplied crimes of all kinds; and

encouragea such a&s of violence, as brought his

*'Cald. iv. -o3. t Spodiv. 385. Cald. iv. 214.

govern-
204

govcrnment under contempt, and proved fatal to B o o
many of his fubjeass. The history of everal years, VIII.
about this time, is filled with accounts of the deadly '
quarrels between the great families, and of murders I59'
and aflaflinations perpetrated in the most audacious
manner, ,and with circumstances of the utmost bar-
barity. All the defecs in the feudal aristocracy were
now felt more sensibly, than at any other period in
the history of Scotland, and universal licenceand
anarchy prevailed to a degree, scarce confiflentwith
the preservation of society. While the King, too
gentle to punish, or too feeble to a& with vigour,
suffered all these enormities to pass with impunity.

BUT though James connived at real crimes, witch- An atm*

C2

r

r . . . of Both-

craft, which is commonly an imaginary one, en- we's a-
grossed his attention, and those fufpeaed of it, felt gan*.
the whole weight of his authority. Many persons
neither extremely old, nor wretchedly poor, which
were usually held to be certain indications of this
crime, but matters of' families, and matrons of a
decent rank, and in the middle age of life, were
seized and tortured; and though their. confessions
contained the most absurd and incredible circum-
stances, the King's prejudices, those of the clergy,
and of the people, conspired in believing their ex-
travagancies, without hesitation, and in punishing
their persons without mercy. Some of these un-
happy sufferers accused Bothwell of having consult-
ed them, in order to know the time of the King's
death, and having employed their art, to'raife the
storms, which had endangered the Queen's life, and
had detained James so long in Denmark. Upon

this

Bo o this evidence, that nobleman was committed to
VIII. prison. His turbulent' and haughty Ipirit could
'-r-1 neither submit to the restraints nor brook such an
1591' indignity. Having gained his keepers, he inade

his escape, and imputing the accusation to the arti-
sices of his enemy, the Chancellor assembled his
followers, unaerpretence 'of driving him froni the
King's councils. Being favoured by foine of the
King's attendants, he was admitted by a secret pas-
sage, under cloud of night, into the court of the
palace of Holy-rood-houfe. He advanced direcly
towards the royal apartment, bur happily,; before he
entered, the alarm was taken, and the doors shut,
DC-. =7. While he attempted to burst open some of them,

and to set fire to others, the citizens of Edinburgh
had time to run to their arms, and he escaped
with the utmost difficulty; owing his safety to the
darkness of the night, and the precipitancy with
which he fled*.
1592. HE retired towards the North, and the King hav-

ing unadvisedly given a commission to the Earl of
Huntly, to pursue him and his followers, with fire
and sword, -he, under colour of executing that
-omnmiffion, gratified his private revenge, and fur-
rounded the house of the Earl of Murray, burnt it
Feb. . to the ground, and flew Murray himself. The

murder of a young nobleman of such promising
virtues, and the heir of the Regent Murray, the
darling of the people, excited universal indigna-
tion. The citizens of Edinburgh rose in a tumul-
tuous manner; and though they were restrained,

Melv. 388. Spotfw. 386.

by

by the care of the magistrates, from any a& of B o o K
Ciolence, they threw aside all refpet for the King VIII.
and his ministers, and openly insulted and threaten- ' '
ed both. While this mutinous spirit continued, 1592
James thought it prudent to withdraw from the
city, and fixed his residence for some time at Glaf-
gow. There Huntly surrendered himself to jus-
tice; and, notwithstanding the atrociousness of his
crime, and the clamours of the people, the power
of the Chancellor, with whom he was now closely
confederated, and the King's regard for the me-
mioty of the Duke of Lennox, whose daughter he had
married, not only prote&ed him from the sentence
which such an odious ation merited, but exempted
him even from the formality of a public trial *.

A STEP of much importance was taken, soon as- Preby-

ter, with regard to the government of the church. goraCehure
The Clergy had long complained of the encroach- efiablifhed
ments made upon their privileges and jurifdi&ion, by w.
by the a&s of the parliament 1584, and though
these laws had now loft much of their force, they
resolved to petition the parliament, which was ap-
proaching, to repeal them in form. The junture
for pulhing such a measure was well chosen. The
King had loft much of the public favour, by his
lenity towards the Popish fation, and still more by
his remissness in. pursuing the murderers of the Earl
of Murray, The Chancellor had not only a power-
ful party of the courtiers combined against him, but
was become odious to the people, who imputed to
him every false ftep in the King's conduc. Both-

Spotfw. 387.

well

207'

Bo o K well fill lurked in the kingdom, and being secretly
VII. supported by all the enemies of Maitland's admini-'
'^'y ftration, was ready, every moment, to renew his

.59- audacious enterprises. James, for all these reasons,

was extremely willing to indulge the Clergy in their
request, and not only consented to a law, whereby
the aa&s x584 were rescinded or explained, but he
carried his complaisance still further, and permitted
the parliament to eftabliih the Presbyterian govern-
ment, its General Assemblies, Provincial synods,
Prelbyteries and Kirk feftions, with all the different
branches of their discipline and jurifdidtion, in the
moftample manner. All the zeal and authority of
the Clergy, even under the adminiifration of Re-
gents, from .whom they might have expe4icd the
most partial favour, could not obtain the fan&ion
of law, -in confirmatiop of their mode of Ecclefi-
aftical government. No Prince was ever leTs dif-
posed than James to approve a fytem, whose re-
publican genius inspired a passion for liberty, so re-
pugnant to his exalted notions of royal prerogative.
Nor could anyaverfion be more inveterate than his,
to the austere and uncomplying chara&er of the
Prelbyterian Clergy in that age i who, more emi-
nent for zeal, than for policy, often contradi&ed
his opinions, and censured his condu&, with a free-
dom equally offensive to his dogmatism as aTheo-
logian, and to his pride as a King. His situation,
however, obliged him frequently to conceal, or to
disemble his sentiments and as he often disgusted
his fubjeas, by indulging the Popilh faetion more
than -they approved, he endeavoured to atone for
this, by conceflions to the Presbyterian Clergy,

more

more liberal than he himself would otherwise have B o o K
chosen to grant *. VIII.

IN this parliament, Bothwell, and all his adhe- I592'

rents, were attainted. But he soon made a new at-
tempt to seize the King at Falkland; and James,
betrayed by some of his courtiers, and feebly de-
fended by others, who wished well to Bothwell, as
the Chancellor's avowed enemy, owed his safety to
the fidelity, and vigilance of Sir Robert Melvil, and
to the irresolution of Bothwell's associates t.

SCARCELY was this danger over, when the nation A new

was alarmed with the discovery of a new and more of the Po-
formidable conspiracy. George Ker, the Lord pih Lords.
Newbottle's brother, being seized as he was ready
to set fail for Spain, many suspicious papers were
found in his custody, and among these, several
blanks figned:by the Earls of Angus, Huntly, and
Errol. By this. extraordinary precaution, they
hoped to escape any. danger of discovery. But Ker's
resolution thrinking when torture was threatened, he
confessed that he was employed by these noblemen,
to carry on a negociation with the King of Spain;
that the blanks subscribed with their names were to
be filled up by Crichton and Tyrie; that they were
inftru&ed to:offer the faithful service of the three
Earls to that Monarchy; and to solicit him to land
a body of his-troops, eitherin Galloway, or at the
mouth of Clyde, with which, they undertook, in
the firIt place, to eftablilh the Roman Catholic Re-
ligion in Scotland, and then. to invade England,

.Cpld. iv. 248. 252. Spotfw. 388. t Mdv. 402.

209
VOL. II.

p

with

B o o with the whole forces of the kingdom. Sir David
VIII. Graham of Fintry, and Barclay of Ladyland, whom
.~-v' he accused of being privy to the confpirrcy, were

g592' taken into custody, and confirmed all the circum-

fances- of his confefiion *.

1593. TEa nation having been kept for some time in
Zeal ofth continual terror and agitation by so many successive

c corpiracies, the diScovery of this new danger com-

pleted the panic. -All ranks of men, as if the
enemy had already_ been at their gates, thought
themselves called upon to stand forth in defence of
their Country. The Ministers of Edinburgh, with-
out waiting for any warrant from the King, who
happened at that time to be-abfent from the capital,
and without having received any legat commilfion,
assembled a considerable number of Peers and Ba-
rons, .in,order to provide an instant remedy against
the impending ,danrger, They fieize the Earl of
uAngus, and connmire him.tothe c-ale; -they exa-
mined-:Ker;. andppred a remaonftance to be laid
befpre: the King, .concerning the-ate of-the nation;
andgdh.-eeceffty ofprofecuting the cohfpirators with

And pro- becortiig vigour-.'- James, though -jealous of every
=ccings of encrEachmnent on-his prerogative, tnd offended With
ainft f tbje&s,' who, iaftead of Epetitiorgirg, -femed to pre-
thk1m 1 scr:-ibe to:him, -founrd it, neoeffary-, xdring the vio-

Ience of-h.e ferment, not only- to naiopt their plany
bt even to .declari-thatnd conlider.aioii 'hould ever
.in.de .hi'n t padL n..hofe, fwo had been -gilty
of' -o:dious- ;-treafoa. '-He summoned the Earls
Ja. s. of -IiHidy and-. irol to surrender themfeiv.es'--tot

* Rymer, xvi: 19o.

-
-J... : jjftice.

j.tipe. 9gr.aha ..f Fintry, whom his peers pro- B o o
nounced. k, be guilty of treason, lie commanded tp VIII.
be publickly beheaded; and marching into the North "'
,t he head of an anrmy, the t Earls, together T593-
wiih Angus, who had escaped out of prifop, retir-
ed to the novntaiies. He placed garrisons in the
castles which belonged to them; compelled their
vagfals, and the farpns in the adjacent copnties, to
ifbfcribe a bPoaI containing profefions of their loy-
saty tow;rd4 . Jim, and of their firm adherence to
4te Prptegi nt faith; and, the better to fec.re the
trrnquillity of that part of the kingdom, conflituted
the Earls 9f Athol, and Marshal, his Lieuteaant.
there *.

.HAYINo firnihed this expedition, James returned March tS.

to Edinburgh, where he found Lord Borrpughj an foicits him
extraordipary gmbaf4l or fron the coprt of Eng- t treat.

, , T,~. -1 1~. i

~~. .. Tthem with

land. Ejiiabeth, alarmed at the difc9very of a rigour.
coPpiracy, which she confidered as no less formi-
dabJe to her own kingdom, than to Scotland, re-
proahed James with his fprmer remissness, and ur'
ged him, as he regarded the preferration of the Pro-
teftant religion, or the dignity of his own Crown,
to punish this repeated treason with rigour; and if
be cpuld not apprehend the persons, at least to con-
rfcate the t.fCates ps such audacious rebels. She
we'ikened however the force of these requests, by
interceding .at the fame time in behalfof Both-
well, whom, according to her ufial policy in now-
riihig ,a fagtious fpjrit among the Scottish nobles,
Sie had taken pnder her proteaio.. Jam.es abfp-

- Spotfw. Io. Cald. iv. 291.

P

lutely

211

B o o K lately refused to liften to any- intercession in- favour
VI. of one, who had so often, and with so much out-

rage, insulted both his government and his person.
With regard to thepopilh conspirators, he declared
his resolution to prosecute them with vigour; but
that he might be the better able to do so, he de-
manded a small fum of money from Elizabeth,
which she, distrustful perhaps of the manner in
which he might apply it, shewed no inclination to
grant. The zeal, however, and importunity of his
own subje&s obliged him to call a parliament, in
order to. paa an a' of attainder agaift-the three
Earls. But before it met, Ker made-his escape out
of prison, and on pretence, that legal evidence of
their guilt could not be produced, nothing was con-
cluded against them. The King himself was uni-
verfally fufpe&ed of having contrived this artifice,
on purpose to elude the requests of the Queen of
England, and to disappoint the wiflies of his own
people. And therefore in order to sooth the Clergy,
who exclaimed loudly against his condu&, he gave
way to the pasing of an a&, which ordained those
who obstinately contemned the censures of the
Church, to be declared outlaws .

B,-awl WfILE the terror excited by the Popish confpi-
fu-pdfes
tfh sg. racy poffelred the nation, the court had been divided

by two rival fa&ions, which contended for the chief
direction of affairs. At the head of one, was the
Chancellor, in whom the King reposed entire con-
fidence. - For that very reason, perhaps, he had fal-
len early under the Queen's displeasure. The Duke

Cald. iv. 343. Spotfi. 39g. Parl. i3Jac. VI. c. 164.

of

of Lennox, the Earl of Athol, Lord Ochiltree, B o oK
and all the name of Stewart espoused her quarrel, VIII.
and widened the breach. And James, fond no less
of domestic tranquillity, than of public peace, ad- S93
yifed his favourite toretire, for some time, in hopes
that the Queen's resentment would subside. But
as he flood in need, in the present jun&ure, of the
afiflance of an able Minister, he had recalled him
to court. Ln order to preventhim from recover-
ing his former power, the Stewarts had recourse to
an expedient no less illegal than desperate. Having
combined with Bothwell, who was of the fame
surname, they brought him back fecredy into Scot- July 24.
land; and seizing the gates of the palace, introduced
him into the royal apartment with a numerous train
of armed followers. James, though deserted by all
his courtiers, and incapable of resistance, discovered
more indignation than fear, and reproaching them
for their treachery, called on the Earl to finilh his
treasons, by piercing his Sovereign to the heart.
But Bothwell fell on his knees, and implored par-
don. The King was not in a condition to refufehis
demands. And a few days after he signed a capitu-
lation with this successful traitor, to whom he was
really a prisoner, whereby he boundhimfelf to grant
him a remission for all past offences, and to procure
the ratification of it in parliament; and is the mean
rime to dismiss the Chancellor, the master of Gla-
mis, Lord Home, and Sir George Home, from
his councils and pretence. Bothwell, on his pare,
consented to remove from court, though he left
there as many of his associates, as he thought sus-
ficient to prevent the return of the adverse fation.

BUT

-i3

B o o K BUT it was now no easy mattef to keep the King
VIII. under the fame kind of bondage, to which he had
'-*' been often fubje& during his minority. He disco-
He5^3 vered so much impatieiice to liake off his fetters,
hi ibey. that those who imposed, durst not continue, the

ept. 7 restraint. They permitted him to call a Convention

of the nobles at Stirling, and to repair thither hinm-
self. All Bdthwell's enemies, ard all who were
desirous of gaining the King's favour by appearing
to be so, obeyed the fumrndns. They pronounced
the insult offered to the King's person and authority
to be high treason, and declared himi absolved from
any obligation to observe conditions, extorted by
force, and which violated so essentially his royal pre-
rogative. James, however, fill proffered him a
pardon, provided he would sue for it as an a& of
nercy, and promise to retire out of the kingdom.
These conditions Bothwell rejeted with disdain,
and betaking himself once more to arms, attempted
to surprise the King, but finding him on his guard,
fled to the borders .

sufpeaed T;HE King's ardour againif Bothwell, compared
.n thepc with his flow and evasive proceedings against the
pSs Lords. Popifi Lords, occasioned a general disgust among

his subjects; and was iimuted either to an excessive
attachment to the persons of those conspirators, or
to a secret partiality towards their opinions; both
which gave rife t) no unrealbnable fears. The
Clergy, as the immediate guardians of the Pro-
teftant Religion, thought rhemfelves bound, in
fich a juncture, to take eyxtraordinary steps for its

· Cald. iv. ; G. Spotfl. 395

pre-

preservation. And the provincial fynod of Fife B o o K
happening to meet at that time, a motion was made VIII.
to excommunicate all concerned in the late confpi- '·-.'-
racy, asobftinate and irreclaimable Papists. And S'593'
though none of the conspirators resided within the
bounds of the fynod, or were fubje& to its jurifdic-
tion, such was the zeal of the members, that, over-
looking this irregularity, they pronounced against
them the fenrtence of excommunication, to which
the act of last parliament added new terrors. And
left this should be imputed to a few men, and ac-
counted the a& of a small part of the church, de-
puties were appointed to attend the adjacent synods,
and to desire their approbation and concurrence.

AN event happened, a few weeks after, which WHs-Len;ty

increased the people's suspicions of the King. As tomards
he was marching on an expedition against the bor- of. 17.
derers, the three Earls coming suddenly into his
presence, offered to submit themselves to a legal
trial; and James, without committing them to cuf-
tody, appointed a day for that purpose. The con-
fpirators prepared to appear with a formidable train
of their friends and vassals. But, in the mean time,
the Clergy, together with many Peers and Barons,
assembling at Edinburgh, remonstrated against the
King's extreme indulgence with great boldness, and
demanded of him, according to the regular course
ofjuftice, to commit to sure custody, persons charg-
ed with the highest arts of treason, who could not
be brought to a legal trial, until they were absolved
from the censures of the Church; and to call a
Convention of estates, to deliberate concerning the

me-

B o o K method of proceeding againt them.. At the fame
VIII. time they offered to accompany him in arms to the

.- * - place of trial, left such audacious and powerful cri-.
1593' minals ihould overawe justice, and di&ate to the

judges'to whom they pretended to submit. James,
though extremely offended both with the irregula-
rity of their proceedings, and the presumption of
their demands, found it expedient to .put off the
day of trial, and to call a Convention of estates, in
order to quiet the fears and jealousies of the people.
By being humoured in this point, their suspicions
began gradually to abate, and the Chancellor
managed the Convention so artfully, that he him-
self,_ together with a few other members, was im-
powered to pronounce a final sentence upon the con-
Nov. 6. fpirators. After much deliberation, they ordained

that the three Earls, and their associates, ffiould be
exempted from all further inquiry or prosecution,
on account of their correspondence with Spain;
that, before the first day of February, they should
either submit to the Church, and publickly renounce
the errors of Popery; or remove out of the king-
dom; that, before the first of January, they should
declare which of these alternatives they would em-
brace j that they should find surety for their peace-
able'demeanor for the future; and that if they
failed to signify their choice in due time, they should
lose the benefit of this act of abolition, and remain
exposed to all the pains of law *.

BY this lenity towards the confpirarors, James
incurred much reproach, and gained no advantage.

* Cad. iv. 330. Spotfw. :o-.

De-

Devoted to the Popilh superstition, fubmiflive to B o o K
all the di&ates of their priests, and buoyed up with VIII.
hopes and promises of foreign aid, the three Earls r--. -
refused to accept of the conditions, and continued 1594'
their treasonable correspondence with the court of
Spain. A Convention of estates pronounced them J3a"-.
to have forfeited the benefit of the articles, which
were offered; and the King required them, by pro-
clamation, to surrender themselves to justice. The
presence of the Englilh ambassador contributed,
perhaps, to the vigour of these proceedings. Eli-
zabeth, ever attentive toJames's motions, and im-
putinghis reluctance to punish the Popilh Lords to
a secret approbation of their designs, had sent to
Lord Zouche to represent, once more, the danger
to which he 'exposed himself, by this false modera-
tion; and' to require him to exercise that rigour,
which their crimes, as well as the posture of affairs,
rendered necessary. And though the steps now taken
by the King silenced all complaints on that head,
yet Zouche, forgetful of his characer as an ambaf-
fador, entered into private negociations with such
of the Scottish nobles as disapproved of the King's
measures, and held almost an open correspondence
with Bothwell, who, according to the usual artifice
ofmalecontents, pretended much solicitude for re-
forming the disorders of the commonwealth; and
covered his own ambition with the specious veil of
zeal against those Counsellors, who restrained the
King from pursuing the avowed enemies of the
Protestant faith. Zouche encouraged him, in the
naie of his Mistress, to take arms against his So-
vereign.

MEAN-

217

Boo t MEANWHILE, the King and the Clergy were
VIII. filled with mutual distrust of each other. They.
_--v- were jealous, perhaps, to excess, that his affe&tions
A~n59'a leaned too much towards the Popish fa&ion; he
r-np of fufpeced them, without good reason, of prompt-

ing Bothwell to rebellion, and even of supplying
him with money for that purpose. Little inftiga-
tion, indeed, was wanting to route such a turbulent
spirit as Bothwell's, to any daring enterprise. He
appeared suddenly within a mile of Edinburgh, at
the head of 400 horse. The pretences, by whi-h
he endeavoured to justify this infurre&ion, were ex-
tremely popular; zeal for religion, enmity to Po-
pery, concern for the King's honour, and for the li-
berties of the nation. James was totallyunprovided
for his own defence; he had no infantry, and was
accompanied only with a few horsemen of Lord
Home's train. In this extremity, he implored the
aid of the citizens of Edinburgh, and, in order to
encourage them to a& with zeal, he promised to
proceed against the Popish Lords with the utmost
rigour of law. Animated by their Ministers, they
ran cheerfully to their arms, and advanced, with the
King at their head, against Bothwell; but he, not-
withitanding his success in putting to flight Lord
Home, who had rashly charged him with a far in-
ferior number of cavalry, retired to Dalkeith with-
out daring to attack the King. His followers aban-
doned him soon after, and discouraged by so many
fucceflive disappointments, could never afterwards
be brought to venture into the field. He betook
himself to his usual lurking-places, in the North of
Enigand; but Elizabeth, in compliance with the

King's

King's remonstrances, obliged him to quit that re- B o o i
treat *. VIII.

No sooner was the King delivered from that dan- T594'

Freflh dan-

ger, than he was called to attend to another. The gers from
Popilh Lords, in consequence of their negociations tLhdPohi
with Spain, received, in the spring, a supply of April 3.
money, from Philip. What bold designs this
might inspire, it was no easy matter to conjeture.
From men under the dominion of bigotry, and
whom indulgence could not reclaim, the most
desperate acions were to be dreaded. The assembly
of the Church immediately took the alarm; remon-
firated against them with more bitterness than ever
and unanimously ratified the sentence of excommu-
nication, pronounced by the fynod of Fife. James
himself, provoked by their obstinacy and ingratitude,
and afraid that his long forbearance would not only
be generally displeasing to his own fubjeas, but
give rife to unfavourable suspicions among theEng-
lifh, exerted himself with unusual vigour. He call-
ed a parliament; laid before it all the circum-
ilances and aggravations of the confpiraey; and
though there were but few members present, and
several of these connected with. the conspirators by
blood or friendship, he prevailed on them, by his
influence and importunity, to pronounce the most
rigorous sentence the law can infli&. They were
declared to be guilty of high treason, and their eltates
and honours forfeited. At the fame time, statutes,
more severe than ever, were enacted against the
professors of the Popish Religion.

* Spotfw. 403. Cald. iv. 359.

How

B o o K How to put this sentence in execution, was a mat-
VIII. ter of greater difficulty. Three powerful Barons,

,- ' cantoned in a part of the country almoll inaccessible,

B5t94 Surrounded with numerous vaflals, and supported
clenliva. by aid from a foreign Prince, were more than an

over-match for a Scottilh Monarch. No intreaty
could prevail on Elizabeth to advance the money,
necessary for defraying the expences of an expedi-
tion against them. To attack them in person, with
his own forces alone, might expose him both to
digrace and to danger. He had recourse to the
only expedient which remained in such a situation,
for aiding the impotence of Sovereign authority; he
delegated his authority to the Earl of Argyll, and
Lord Sorbes, the leaders of two clans at enmity
with the conspirators; and gave them a commission
to invade their lands, and to seize the caffles which
belonged re them. Bothwell, notwithstanding all
his high pretensions of zeal for the Protestant Re-
ligion, having now entered into a close confederacy
with them, the danger became every day more
urgent. Argyll, follicited by the King, and routed
by the clergy, took the field at the head of 7000
men. Huntly and Errol met him at Glenlivat,
with an army far inferior in number, but composed
chiefly of gentlemen of the low countries, mounted
on horseback, and who brought along with them
a train of field pieces. They encountered each
other with all the fury, which hereditary enmity
and ancient rivalfhip add to undisciplined courage.
But the Highlanders, disconcerted by the sirs dif-
charge of the cannon, to which they were little ac-
customed, and unab'e to refilt Ehe impression of

cavalry,

cavalry, were ibon put to flight. And Argyll, a B o oK
gallant young man of eighteen, was carried by his VIII.
friends out of the field, weeping with indignation -v
at their disgrace, and calling to them to stand, and 1595.
to vidicate the honour of their name *

ON the first intelligence of this defeat, James,

though obliged to pawn his jewels in order to raise
money t, assembled a small body of troops, and
marched towards the North. He was joined by
the Irvines, Keiths, Lefleys, Forbeses, and other
clans at enmity with Huntly and Errol, who hav-
ing loft several of their principal followers at Glen-
livat, and others refuting to bear arms against the
King in person, were obliged to retire to the moun-
tains. James wafted their lands; put garrisons in
some of their castles; burnt others; and left the
Duke of Lennox, as his Lieutenant in that part of
the kingdom, with a body of men sufficient to re-
strain them from gathering to any head there, or
from infesting the low country. Reduced at last
to. extreme distress, by the rigour of the season, and
the desertion of their followers, they obtained the
King's permission to go beyond seas, and gave fe-
curity that they should neither return without his Popla_

Lords dri-

licence, nor engage in any new intrigues against ven out of
the Protestant Religion, or the peace of the king- hkU'ng
dom $.

BY their exile, tranquillity was re-eftabliihed in
the North of Scotland; and the firmness and vi-

Cald. iv. 408. t Birch, Mem. i. 186.
t Spots. 404. Cain. 373, &c.

gour,

o o I gour, which James had displayed in his lafd proceed-
VIII. ings against them, regained him, in a great degree,
' -i--1 the confidence of his Protestant subje&s. But he
Tx 595. funk, in the fame proportion, and for the fame rea-
Cathlcs son, in the esteem of the Roman Catholics. They
gainfl had asserted his mother's right to the Crown of
Jams. England with so much warmth, that they could not,

with any decency, reject his. And the indulgence
with which he afe&ed to treat the professors of that
religion, inspired them with such hopes, that they
viewed his accession to the throne as no undesirable
event. But the rigour with which the King pur-
sued the conspirators, and the severe statutes against
Popery to which he had given his consent, con-
vinced them that there hopes were visionary; and
they began to look about in quest of tome new
fuccefior, whose rights they might oppose to his.
The English Papists turned their eyes towards the
Earl of Effex, whose generous mind, though firmly
eftablilhed in the Protestant faith, abhorred the fe-
verities inflicted in that age, on account of religious
opinions. Those of the fame feE, who were in
exile, formed a bolder scheme, and o.. e more suit-
able to their situation. They advanced the claim
of the Infanta of Spain; and Parsons the Jeftit
publiihed a book, in which, by faife quotations
from history, by fabulous genealogies, and absurd
arguments, intermingled with bitter inve&ives,
against the King of Scots, he endeavoured tp prove
the'lnfanta's tide to the Englilh Ctpwn to be pre-
ferable to his. And Philip, though involved al-
ready in a war both with France and Eugland, and
scarce able to defend the reaiins of the Burgun-

dian

dian Provinces againit the Dutch commonwealth, B o o z
easily grasped at this airy proje&. The dread of VIII.
a Spanish Pretender to the Crown, and the oppo- -'
fition which' the Papists began to form against the I595-
King's fucceflion, contributed not a little to remove
the prejudices of the Protestants, and to prepare
the way for that event.

BOTHWELL, whose name has been so often men- Botliwen

tioned as the disturber of the King's tranquillity, fntosp.d
and of the peace of the kingdom, was now in a
wretched condition. Abandoned by the Queen of
England, on account of his confederacy with the
Popish Lords; excommunicated by the Church for
the fame reason; and deserted, in his distress, by
his own followers; he was obliged to fly for safety
to France, and thence to Spain and Italy, where,
after renouncing the Protestant faith, he led, many
years, an obscure and indigent life, remarkable only
for a low and infamous debauchery. The King,
though extremely ready to sacrifice the strongest re-
fentment to the slightest acknowledgments, could
never be softened by his submission, nor be induced
to liften to any intercession in his behalf *.

THIS year the King loft Chancellor Maitland, an

able Minister, on whom he had long devolved the
whole weight of public affairs. As James loved
him, while alive, he wrote, in honour of his me-
mory, a copy of verses, which, when compared
with the compositions of that age, are far from be-
ing inelegant t.
* Winw. Mem. i. Spotfw. 4o. I- dM. 4 11.

SOON

B o o K SOON after his death, a considerable change was
VIII. made in the administration. At that time, the an-
' -v"- nual charges of government far exceeded the King's
A 5s revenues. The Queen was fond of expensive
admini- amusements. James himself was a firanger to ceco-
tion.

nomy. It became receffary, for all these reasons, to
levy the public revenues with greater order and ri-
gour, and to husband them with more care. This
important trust was committed to eight gentlemen
of the law ', who, from their number, were call-
ed Oavians. The powers veited in them were
ample, and almoff unlimited; The King bound
himself neither to add to their number, nor to sup-
ply any vacancy that might happen, without their
content: And knowing the facility of his own tem-
per, agreed that no alienation of his revenue, no
grant of a pension, or order on the treasury, should
be held valid, unless it were ratified by the fubfcrip-
tion of five of the commissioners; all their acts and
decisions were declared to be of equal force with the
Sentences ofjudges in civil courts; and in consequence
of them, and without any other warrant, any person
might be arrested, or their goods seized. Such ex-
tenfivejurifdiction, together with the absolute dif-
pofal of the public money, drew the whole execu-
tive power of the government into their hands. Uni-
ted among themselves, they gradually undermined
the reft of the King's Ministers, and seized on every
lucrative or honourable office. The ancient servants

Alexander Seaton President of the Session, Walter Stewart

Commendator of Blantyre, Lord Privy Seal, David Carnegy,
John Lindsay, James Elphinflon, Thomas Hamilton, John
Skyne Clerk Regiffer, and Peter Young Elemofynar.

of

of the Crown repined, at being obliged to quit their B o o c
stations to new men. The favourites, and young VIII.
courtiers, murmured at feeing the King's liberality 'ó
stinted by their prescriptions. And the Clergy ex- 1596.
claimed against rome of them as known apostates
to Popery, and fufpeted others of secretly favour-
ing it. They retained their power, however, not-
withstanding this general combination against them;
and they owed it entirely to the order and ceconomy
which they introduced into the administration of the
finances, by which the necessary expences of govern-
ment were more easily defrayed, than in any other
period of the King's reign *.

THE rumour of vast preparations which Philip Violence of
was said to be carrying on at this time, filled both the nation

againIt the

England and Scotland with the dread of a new in- Popilh
vafion. James took proper meafures'for the de- Lords.
fence of his kingdom. But there did not satisfy the
zeal of the Clergy, whose suspicions of the King's
sincerity began to revive; and as he had permit-
ted the wives of the banished Peers to levy the
rents of their estates, and to live in their houses,
they charged him with rendering the aft of forfeit-
ure ineffectual, by supporting the avowed enemies
of the Proteftantfaith. The affemblyoftheChurch March 4.
took under consideration the state of the kingdom,
and having appointed a day of public fafding, they
solemnly renewed the Covenant, by which the na-
tion was bound to adhere to the Protestant faith,
and to defend it against all aggressors. A commit-

*SFotfw. 413. 435.
VOL. II.

tee,

B o o K tee, confiffing of the most eminent Clergymen, and
VIII. of many Barons and gentlemen of diftinftion, wait-

'ed on the King, and laid before him a plan for the
I596. security of the kingdom, and the preservation of

religion. They urged him to appropriate the estates
of the banished Lords, as a fund for the mainte-
nance of soldiers; to take the ftri&eft precautions
for preventing the return of such turbulent subje&s
into the country; and to pursue all who were sus-
pe&ed of being their adherents, with the utmost ri-
gour.

Thi King's NOTHING could be more repugnant to the King's
remissness
with ard schemes, or more disagreeable to his inclination,
tothe. than these propositions. Averse, through his whole

life, to any course, where he expeCted opposition or
danger; and fond of attaining his ends, with the
charater of moderation, and by the arts of policy,
he observed with concern the prejudiees against him,
which were growing among the Roman Catholics,
and resolved to make some atonement for that part
of his conduct, which had drawn on him their
indignation. Elizabeth was now well advanced in
years; her life had lately been in danger; if any
Popish competitor should arise to dispute his right
of succession, a fadtion, so powerful as that of the
banished Lords, might be extremely formidable;
and any division among his own fubjefs might
prove fatal, at a jun&ure, which would require their
united and most vigorous efforts. Inltead, there-
fore, of the additional severities which the assembly
proposed, James had thoughts of mitigating the
puniinimnt, which they already suffered. And

as

as they were surrounded, during their residence in B o o K
foreign parts, by Philip's emissaries; as resentment VIII.
might dispose them to lifien more favourably than ---.a

.

ever, to their suggestions; as despair might drive s96.
them to still more atrocious actions; he resolved to
recall them, under certain conditions, into their na-
tive country. Encouraged by there sentiments of
the King in their favour, of which they did not
want intelligence, and wearied already of the de-
pendant and anxious life of exiles, they ventured to
return secretly into Scotland. Soon after, theypre-
sented a petition to the King, begging his permif-
sion to reside at their own houses, and offering to
give security for their peaceable and dutiful beha-
viour. James called a Convention of estates to de-
liberate on a matter of such importance, and by
their advice he granted the petition.

So soon as they were informed of this, the mem- The rash

bers of a committee, appointed by the last afermbly, r5of ,he
met at Edinburgh, and with all the precipitancy of clergy and
fear, and of zeal, took such resolutions as they people.
thought necessary for the safety of the kingdom.
They wrote circular letters to all the Prelbyteries in
Scotland; they warned them of the approaching
danger; they exhorted them to stir up their people
to the defence of their juftrights; they commanded
them to publish, in all their pulpits, the ac of ex-
communicating the Popifl Lords; and enjoined
them to lay all those who were suspected of favour-
ing Popery under the fame censure, by a summary
sentence, and without observing the usual formali-
ties of trial. And as the danger seemed too prefling

Q 2 to

B o o K to wait for the itated meetings of the judicatories of
VIII. the Church, they made choice of the most eminent
'v- clergymen in different corners of the l:ingdom, ap-

596. pointed them to reside conitantly at Edinburgh, and

to meet every day with the Ministers of that city,
under the name of the Standing Council of the Church,
and veited in this body the supreme authority, by
enjoining it, in imitation of the ancient Roman
form, to take care that the Church Ihould receive
no detriment.

THESE proceedings, no less unconilitutional than

unprecedented, were manifest encroachments on the
royal prerogative, and bold steps towards open re-
bellion. The King's condu&, however, justified in
iome degree such excesses. His lenity towards the
PapiRfs, so repugnant to the principles of that age;
his pardoning the conspirators, notwithstanding re-
peated promifes-to the contrary; the refpeet he paid
to Lady Huntly, who was attached to the Romish
religion no less than her husband; his committing
the care of his daughter, the Princess Elizabeth, to
Lady Levingfton, who was infeced with the fame
fuperffition; the contempt with which he talked, on
all occasions, both of the chara&er of Ministers,
and of their funcion; were circumtiances which
might have filled minds, not prone by nature to
jealousy, with some suspicions; and might have pre-
cipitated into rash councils, those, who were far re-
moved from intemperate zeal. But, however power-
ful the motives might be which influenced the
Clergy, or however laudable the end they had in
view, they conduted their measures with no address,

and

and even with little prudence. James discovered a B o o K
itrong inclination to avoid a rupture with the Church, VIIl.
and jealous as he was of his prerogative, would wil- ' -'
lingly have made many concessions for the fake of
peace. By his command, some of the Privy Coun-
fellors had an interview with the more moderate
among the Clergy, and inquired whether Huntly
and his associates might not, upon making proper
acknowledgments, be again received into the bosom
of the Church, and be exempted from any further
punishment, on account of their pass apoftacy and
treasons. They replied, that though the gate of
mercy stood always open for those who repented and
returned, yet as these noblemen had been guilty of
idolatry, a crime deserving death both by the law of
God and of man, the civil magistrate could not le-
gally grant them a pardon; and even though the
Church should absolve them, it was his duty to in-
fli& punilhment upon them. This inflexibility in
those, who were reckoned the most compliant of
the order, filled the King with indignation, which
the imprudence and obstinacy of a private Clergy-
man heightened into rage.

MR. DAVID BLACK, Minister at St. Andrew's, Seitious

discoursing in one of his sermons, according to cut- taught by
tom, concerning the state of the nation, affirmcd Black.
that the King had permitted the Popilh Lords to re-
turn into Scotland, and by that action, had disco-
vered the treachery of his own heart; that all Kings
were the Devil's children; that Satan had now the
guidance of the court; that the Queen of England

wart

229

B o o r was an atheist; that the judges were miscreants and
VIII. bribers; the nobility godless and degenerate;' the
'- '- Privy Counsellors cormorants, and men of no reli-

gion; and in his prayer for the Queen, he used these

NOV. zo. words, we muff pray for her for fafhion-fake, but
The Clergy
espouse his we have no cause, she will never do us good. James

enc commanded him to be summoned before the Privy

Council, to answer for such seditious expressions;
and the Clergy, instead of abandoning him to the
punishment, which such a petulant and criminal at-
tack on his superiors deserved, were so imprudent as
to espouse his cause, as if it had been the common
one of the whole order. The controversy concern-
ing the immunities of the pulpit, and the rights of
the Clergy to testify against vices of every kind,
which had been agitated in 1584, was now revived,
It was pretended, that, with regard to their sacred
function, Ministers were fubje& to the Church
alone; that it belonged only to their ecclesiastical
superiors to judge of the truth or falsehood of doc-
trines, delivered in the pulpit; that if, upon any
pretence whatever, the King usurped this jurif-
diaion, the Church would, from that moment, fink
under servitude to the civil magistrate; that instead
of reproving vice, with that hones boldness which
had often been of advantage to individuals, and fa-
lutary to the kingdom, the Clergy would learn to
flatter the passions of the Prince, and to connive at
the vices of others; that the King's eagerness to
punish the indiscretion of a Protestant Minister,
while he was so ready to pardon the crimes of Po-
pish conspirators, called on them to iRand on their
guard, and that now was the time to contend for

their
230

their privileges, and to prevent any encroachment B o o K
on those rights, of which the church had been in VIII;
possession ever since the Reformation. Influenced '
by there considerations, the Council of the Church 1596.
enjoined Black to decline thejurifdiAion of the Pri-
vy Council. And he, proud of such an opportu-
nity to display his zeal, presented a paper to that
purpose, and with the utmost firmness refused to
plead, or to answer the questions which were put to
him. In order to add great weight to these pro-
ceedings, the Council of the Church transmitted the
declinature to all the Prefbyteries throughout the
kingdom, and commanded every Minister to sub-
scribe it, in testimony of his approbation.

JAMES defended his rights with no less vigour

than they were attacked. Sensible of the contempt
,under which his authority muff fall, if the clergy
should be permitted, publickly, and with impunity,
to calumniate his ministers, and even to censure
himself; and knowing, by former examples, what
unequal reparation for such offences he might ex-
pe& from the judicatories of the church, he urged
on the inquiry into Black's condut, and issued a
proclamation, commanding the members of the
council of the church to leave Edinburgh, and to
return to their own parishes. Black, instead offub-
mitting, renewed his declinature; and the Council,
in defiance of the proclamation, declared, that as
they met by the authority of the Church, obedience
to it was a duty still more sacred, than that which
they owed to the King himself. The Privy Coun-
cil, notwithstanding Black's refusing to plead, pro-

ceeded

B o o K ceeded in the trial; and, after a solemn inquiry,
VIII. pronounced him guilty of the crimes of which he

*1- ' had been accused; but referred it to the King, to
I596. appoint what punilhment he Ihould susser.

MEAN while, many endeavours were used to

bring matters to accommodation. Almost every
day produced some new scheme of reconcilement;
but through the King's fickleness, the obstinacy of
the Clergy, or the intrigues of the courtiers, they
all proved ineffecual. Both parties appealed to the
people, and by reciprocal and exaggerated accufa-
tions, endeavoured to render each other odious.
Insolence, sedition, treason, were the crimes with
which James charged the Clergy; while they made
the pulpits resound with complaints of his excefive
lenity towards Papists, and of the no less exceflive
rigour, with which he oppressed the established
Church. Exalperated by their bold inve&ives, he,
at last, sentenced Black to retire beyond the river
Spey, and to reside there during his pleasure; and
once more commanding the members of the stand-
ing council to depart from Edinburgh, he required
all the Ministers in the kingdom to subscribe a bond,
obliging themselves to submit, in the fame manner
as other fubjecs, to the jurifdi&ion of the civil
courts, in matters of a civil nature.

Atulmiti. THIS decisive measure excited all the violent pas-
Ed.LC:'I. flons, which possess disappointed fa&ious; and deeds

no less violent immediately followed. These Imuft
be imputed in part to the artifices of some cour-
tiers, w4ho expected to reap advantage from the ca-

lamities

lamities of their country, or who hoped to lessen the B o o K
authority of the O&avians, by engaging them in VIII.
hostilities with the church. On one hand, they in- .-
formed the King that the citizens of Edinburgh 59.
were under arms every night, and had planted a
strong guard round the houses of their ministers.
James, in order to put a stop to this imaginary
insult on his government, issued a prdclamation,
commanding twenty-four of the principal citizens
to leave the town, within fix hours. On the other
hand, they wrote to the Miniflers, advising them to
.look their own safety, as Huntly had been secret-
ly admitted to an interview with the King, and had
been the author of the severe proclamation against
the citizens of Edinburgh*. They doubted no
more of the truth of this intelligence, than the
King had done of that which he received, and fell
as blindly into the snare. The letter came to their
hands, just as one of their number was going to
mount the pulpit. They resolved that he should Deeem. 7.
acquaint the people of their danger: and he paint-
ed it, with all the strong colours, which men natu-
rally employ, in describing any dreadful and inflant
calamity. When the sermon was over, he desired
the nobles and gentlemen to assemble in the Little

* Though matters were induflrioully aggravated by persons,

who wished both parties to pursue violent measures; neither of
these reports were altogether deflitute of foundation. As their
Ministers were supposed to be in danger, Come of the'more zeal-
ous citizens had determined to defend them, by force of arms.
Birch. Mem. ii. z2o. Huntly had been privately in Edinburgh,
where he had an interview, if not with the King, at leart with
some of his Ministers. Birch. Ibid. 230.

Chci-ch.

B o o K Churcb. The whole multitude, terrified at what
VIII. they had heard, crowded thither; they promised
'- - and vowed to stand by the Church; they drew up
i596. a petition to the King, craving the redress of those

grievances, of which the Clergy complained, and
beseeching him to deliver them from all future ap-
prehensions of danger, by removing such of his
Counsellors, as were known to be enemies of the
Proreftant Religion. Two Peers, two Gentlemen,
two Burgesses, and two Ministers, were appointed

The KIDg to present it. The King happened to be in the
in sger. great hall of the Tolbooth, where the court of fef-

sion was fitting. The manner in which the petition
was delivered, as well as its contents, offended him.
He gave an haughty reply; the petitioners insisted
with warmth; and a promiscuous multitude prefling
into the room, James retired abruptly into another
apartment, and commanded the gates to be shut be-
hind him. The deputies returned to the multitude,
who were still afiembled, and to whom a minister
had been reading, in their absence, the story of Ha-
man. When they reported that the King had re-
fused to liften to their petitions, the Church was
filled in a moment with noise, threatenings, execra-
tions, and all the outrage and confusion of a popular
tumult. Some called for their arms, some to bring
out the wicked Haman; others cried, The sword of
the Lord and of Gideon; and ruffling out with the
most furious impetuosity, surrounded the Tolbooth,
threatening the King himself, and demanding some of
his Counsellors whom they named, that they might
tear them in pieces. The magistrates of the city, part-
ly by authority, partly by force, endeavoured to quell

the

the tumult; the King attempted to sooth the male- B o o x
contents, by promising to receive their petitions, VIII.
when presented in a regular manner; the Ministers, '- -
sensible of their own rashness ir kindling such a 1596-
flame, seconded both; and the rage of the popu-
lace, subsiding as suddenly as it had risen, they all
dispersed, and the King returned to the palace; hap-
py in having escaped from an infurre&ion, which,
though the instantaneous and unconcerted effe& of
popular fury, had exposed his life to imminent dan-
ger, and was confidered by him as an unpardonable
affront to his authority *.

As soon as he retired, the leaders of the malecon-

tents assembled, in order to prepare their petition.
The punishment of the Popish Lords; the removal
of those Counsellors, who were fufpe&ted of favour-
ing their persons or opinions; the repeal of all the
late ads of coufcil, subversive of the authority of
the Church; together with an at approving the
proceedings of the standing council; were the chief
of their demands. But the King's indignation was
still so high, that the deputies, chosen for this pur-
pose, durst not venture, that night, to present re-
quests which could not fail of kindling his rage
anew. Before next morning, James, with all his
attendants, withdrew to Linlithgow; the session, Heleaves
and other courts ofjuftice, were required to leave a Endinburh,
city, where it was no longer consistent either with their ceeds with
safety, or their dignity, to remain; and the noblemen gains the
and barons were commanded to return to their own citizens.
* Spotfw. 417, &q. Cald.v. 54, &c. Birch. Mem. ii. z35.

houses,

B o o K houses, and not to reassemble without the King's
VIII. permission. The vigour, with which the King a&-
-v* ied, struck a damp upon the spirits of his adverfa-
I596' ries. The citizens, sensible how much they would

susser by his absence, and the removal of the courts
ofjuftice, repented already of their condut. The
Ministers alone resolved to maintaih- the contest.
They endeavoured to prevent the nobles from dif-
perfing; they inflamed the people by violent invec-
tives against the King; they laboured to procure
subscriptions to an association for their mutual de-
fence; and conscious what lustre and power the
jun:tion of some of the greater nobles would add to
their cause, the Ministers of Edinburgh wrote to
Lord Hamilton, that the people, moved by the
word of God, and provoked by the injuries offered
to the Church, had taken arms; that many of the
nobles had determined to prote& the Protestant Re-
ligion, which owed its establishment to the piety
and valour of their ancestors; that they wanted only
a leader to unite them, and to inspire them with
vigour; that his zeal for the good cause, no less
than his noble birth, entitled him to that honour:
They conjured him therefore not to disappoint their
hopes and withes, not to refuse the ftffering Church
that aid, which she so much needed. Lord Ha-
milton, instead of complying with their desire, car-
ried the letter directly to the King, whom this new
infulr irritated to such a degree, that he commanded
the magistrates of Edinburgh instantly to seize their
Ministers, as manifest incendiaries, and encouragers
of rebellion. The magistrates, in order to regain
the King's favour, were preparing to obey: and

the

the Ministers, who saw no other hope offafery, fled B o o K
towards England *. VIII.

THIS unsuccessful insurrection, inPfead of overturn- The197
ing, eftablilhed the King's authority. Those con- humbles

the power

cerned in it were confounded and dispersed. And of the
the reft of his subje&s, in order to avoid suspicion, ChJlrch
or to gain his favour, contended who should be most
forward to execute his vengeance. A Convention
of estates being called, pronounced the late infur-
retion to be high treason; ordained every Minister
to subscribe a declaration of his submission to the
King's jurifdi&ion, in all matters civil and crimi-
nal; impowered magistrates to commit, instantly,
to prison any Minister, who, in his sermons, should
utter any indecent reflecions on the King's condu&;
prohibited any Ecclesiastical judicatory to meet,
without the King's license; commanded that no
person should be elected a magistrate of Edinburgh,
for the future, without the King's approbation; and
that, in the mean time, the present magistrates
lhould either discover, and infli& condign punilh-
ment on the authors of the late tumult, or the city
itself ihould be fubjeced to all the penalties of that
treasonable a&cion -.

ARMED with the authority of these decrees, James A

resolved to crush entirely the mutinous spirit of his theprivi-
fubjets. As the clergy had, hitherto, derived 'legess th'
their chief credit and strength from the favour and Edinburgh.
zeal of the citizens of Edinburgh, his first care was

* Spotfw. 45'1. Cald. v. 126. t Cald. v. 147.

to

B-o o K to humble them. Though the magistrates submit-
VIII. ted to him in the most abje& terms; though they
'"-- * 'vindicated themselves, and their fellow-citizens,
r597- from the moftditant intention of violating his roy-

al person or authority; though after the ftri&eft
scrutiny, no circumstances that could fix on them
the suspicion of premeditated rebellion had been
discovered; though many of the nobles, and such of
the clergy as ffill retained any degree of favour, in-
terceded in their behalf; neither acknowledgments,
nor intercessions, were of the least avail *. The
Fre. is. King continued inexorable, the city was declared to

have forfeited its privileges as a corporation, and to
be liable to all the penalties of treason. The capital
of the kingdom, deprived of magistrates, deserted
by its ministers, abandoned by the court of justice,
and proscribed by the King, remained in desolation
and despair. The courtiers even threatened to rase
the city to the foundation, and to eret a pillar
where it flood, as an everlating monument of the
King's vengeance, and of the guilt of its inhabitants.
At lafr, in compliance with Elizabeth, who inter-
posed in their favour, and moved by the continual
gc'h =,. solicitations of the nobles, James absolved the ci-

tizens from the penalties of law, but at the fame
time he stripped them of their most important pri-
vileges; they were neither allowed to ele& their
own Magistrates, nor their own Ministers; many
new burdens were imposed on them; and a great
fum of money was exa&ed by way of peace offer-
ingt.

Cald. v. 149. t Spotfw. 434. 44.

JAMES

JAMES was, mean while, equally assiduous, and B o o K

no less successful, in circumscribing the jurifdicion VIII.
of the Church. Experience had discovered that to -
attempt this, by afts of parliament, and Sentences N'597.g
of privy council, was both ineffe&ual and odious. lationswith

regard to

He had recourse, now, to an expedient more artful, the church.
and better calculated for obtaining his end. The
Ecclesiastical judicatories were compored of many
members; the majority of the clergy were extreme-
lyindigent, and unprovided of legal stipend; the
ministers in the neighbourhood of Edinburgh, not-
withstanding the parity eftablilhed by the Prefby-
terian government, had assumed a leading in the
Church, wi..ch filled their brethren with envy;
every numerous body of men is susceptible of fud-
den and strong impreflions, and liable to be influ-
enced, corrupted, or overawed. Induced by there
considerations, James thought it possible to gain
the Clergy, whom he had in vain attempted to sub-
due. Proper agents were let to work all over the
kingdom; promises, flattery, and threats were em-
ployed; the usurpations of the brethren near the ca-
pital were aggravated; the jealousy of their power,
which was growing in the distant provinces, was aug-
mented; and two different General Assemblies were
held, in both which, notwithstanding the zeal and
boldness wherewith a few leading Clergymen defend-
ed the privileges of the Church, a majority declared
in favour of those measures which were agreeable to
the King. Many pracices, which had continued
since the Reformati6n, were condemned; many
points of discipline, which had hitherto been reckon-

ed

B o o K ed sacred and uncontroverted, were given up; the
VIII. license, with which ministers discoursed of political
L-..J matters, was restrained; the freedom, with which
1597- they inveighed against particular persons, censured;

sentences of summary excommunication declared
unlawful; the convoking a General Assembly, with-
out the King's permission, prohibited; and the right
of nominating ministers to the principal towns,
veited in the Crown. Thus, the Clergy themselves
surrendered privileges, which it would have been
dangerous.to invade, and voluntarily submitted to
a yoke, more intolerable than any James would
have ventured to impose by force, while those who
continued to oppose his measures, instead of their
former popular topic of the King's violent encroach-
ments on a jurifdi&ion which did not belong to him,
were obliged to turn their outcries againti the cor-
ruptions of their own order.

Popiah BY the authority of these assemblies, the Popiih
L'ords"- Earls were allowed to make a public recantation of

their errors; were absolved from the sentence of ex-
communication; and received into the bosom of the
Church. But, not many years after, they relapsed
into their former errors, were again reconciled to
the church of Rome, and by their apoftacy jufti-
sied, in some degree, the fears and scruples of the
Clergy, with regard to their absolution.

THE Ministers of Edinburgh owed to the inter-
cession of there affelT blies, the liberty of returning

* Spots. 433. Cald. v. 189. 2Z3.

tO

to their charges in the city. But this liberty was B o o K
clogged in such a manner as greatly abridged their VIII.
power. The city was divided into diftin& parishes;
the number of Ministers doubled; persons on whose 1597.
fidelity the King could rely were fixed in the new
parihes; and these circumstances, added to the au-
thority of the late decrees of the Church, contri-
buted to confirm that absolute dominion in Ecclefi-
aftical affairs, which James possessed during the
remainder of his reign.

THE King was so intent on new modelling the

Church, that the other tranfaaions of this period
scarce deserve to be remembered. The Ocavians,
envied by the other courtiers, and Splitting into sac-
tions among themselves, resigned their commifflon;
and the adminiffration of the revenue returning into
its former channel, both the King and the nation
were deprived of the benefit of their regular and
frugal ceconomy.

TOWARDS the end of the year, a parliament was Dee. 1,.

held in order to restore Huntly, and his aflfciates,
to their estates and honours, by repealing the a& ds
forfeiture passed against them. The authority of
this supreme court was likewise employed to intro-
duce a farther innovation into the Church; but con-
formable to the system which the King had now
adopted, the motion for this purpose took its rife EccleiaC-
from the Clergy themselves. As the a& of general tOis reto
annexation, and that eftablifh;ng the Prefbyterlan in parlia-
government, had reduced the few Biflops, who still ment
survived, to poverty and contempt; as those who

VOL. II. R pof-

B o o K possessed the Abbeys, and Priories, were mere lay.

VIII. men, and many of them temporal Peers, few or
.-. . none of the Ecclesiastical order remained to vote in
1598. parliament, and by means of that, the influence of

the Crown was considerably diminilhed there, and
a proper balance to the power and number of the
nobles was wanting. But the prejudices the nation
had conceived against the name and charater of
Bilhops, were so violedt, that James was obliged,
with the utmolt care, to avoid the appearance of a
design to revive that order. He prevailed therefore
on the commiflion appointed by last Afembly to
complain to the parliament, that the Church was
the only body in the kingdom destitute of its repre-
fentatives in that supreme court, where it so nearly
concerned every order to have some, who were bound
to defend.its rights; and to crave that a competent
number of the Clergy hfould be admitted, accord-
ing to ancient cufftom, to a feat there. In compli-
ance with their requeff, an aft was pated, by which
those Ministers, on whom the King should confer
the vacant Bifhopricks and Abbeys, were intitled
to a vote in parliament; and that the Clergy might
conceive no jealousy on any encroachment on their
privileges, it was remitted to the General Assem-
bly, to determine what spiritual jurisdiction or au-
thority in the government of the Church these
persons should poffcfs *.

THE King, however,. found it no easy matter to

obtain the concurrence of the Ecclefiafticaljudica-
tories, in which the act of parliament met with a

' Spots. 450. Parl. i5th Jac. VI. c. 235.

fierce

fierce opposition. Though the Clergy perceived B oo K
how much lustre this new privilege would reflec VIII.
upon their order; though they were not insensible '- '-
of the great accession of personal power and dig- 1598'
nity, which many of them would acquire, by be-
ing admitted into the supreme council of the nation,
their abhorrence of episcopacy was extreme; and
to that they sacrificed every consideration of inte-
reft or ambition. All the King's professions of re-
gard for the present constitution of the Church did
not convince them of his sincerity; all the devices
that could be invented for refraining and circum-
scribing the jurifdi&ion of those, who were to be
raised to this new honour, did not diminilh their
jealousy and fear. Their own experience had taught
them, with what insinuating progress the hierarchy
advances, and though admitted at first with mode-
rate authority, and under specious pretences, how
rapidly it extends its dominion. " Varnish over
this scheme, said one of the leading Clergymen,
with what colours you please; deck the intruder
with the utmost art; under all this disguise, I fee
the horns of his mitre." The fame sentiments pre-
vailed among many of his brethren, and induced
them to reje& power, and honours, with as much
zeal, as ever those of their order courted them.
Many, however, were allured by the hopes of pre-
ferment; the King himself and his Ministers em-
ployed the fame arts, which they had tried so fuc-
cefsfully last year; and after long debates, and
much opposition, the General Assembly declared
that it was lawful for Ministers to accept of a feat March 7.
in parliament; that it would be highly beneficial to

R 2 the-

243

B o o K the Church, to have its representatives in that fua-
VIII. preme court; and that fifty-one persons, a number
C-V.' nearly equal to that of the Ecclesiastics who were

598' anciently called to parliament, should be chosen

from among the Clergy for that purpose. The
manner of their ele&ion, together with the powers
to be vetied in them, were left undecided for the
present, and furnished matter of future delibera-
tion *

I599. As the prospect of succeeding to the Crown of
taum England drew nearer, James multiplied precautions
with fuc- in order to render it certain. As he was allied to
ei to gain
aparyi many of the Princes of Germany by his marriage,
fns"ad- he sent ambassadors extraordinary to their several

courts, in order to explain the justness of his title
to the Engliih throne, and to desire their assistance,
if any competitor should arise to dispute his un-
doubted rights. These Princes readily acknow-
ledged the equity of his claim; but the aid they
could afford him was distant and feeble. At the
fame time, Edward Bruce abbot of Kinlofs, his
ambassador at the English court, solicited Eliza-
beth, with the utmost wannrh, to recognize his
title by tome public deed, and to deliver her own
subje&s from the calamities, which are occasioned
by an uncertain or disputed fucceflion. But age
had strengthened all the passions, which had, hi-
therto, induced Elizabeth to keep this great quef-
tion obscure, and undecided; and a general and
evasive answer was all that James could obtain. As
no imprefflon could be made on the Queen, the am-

* SOtfw. 40. C.1d. V. 2-13

baffador

ballador was commanded to found the dirpofition B oo K
ofherfubjecs, and to try what progress he could VIII.
make in gaining them. Bruce possessed all the ta-
lents of secrecy, judgment, and address, requisite I599.
for conducing a negociation, no less delicate than
important. A Minister of this character was inti-
tied to the confidence of the Englill. Many of
the highest rank unbosomed themselves to him with-
out reserve, and gave him repeated assurances of
their resolution to assert his master's right, in oppo-
fition to every pretender *. And as several pam-
phlets were dispersed, at this time, in England, con-
taining objections to his title, James employed some
learned men in his kingdom to answer these cavil-
lers, and to explain the advantages which would
result to both kingdoms, by the union of the
Crowns. Thefi books were eagerly read, and con-
tributed not a little to reconcile the English to that
event. A book published this year, by the King
himself, produced an effea still more favourable.
It was intitled Ba/ilicon Doron, and contained pre-
cepts concerning the art of government, addressed
to Prince Henry his for. Notwithstanding the
great alterations and refinements in national taste
since that time, we must allow this to be no con-
temptible performance, and pot to be inferior to the
works of most cotemporary writers, either in pu-
rity of style or justness of composition. Even the
vain parade of erudition with which it abounds,
and which now difgufs us, raised the admiration of
that age; and as it was filled with those general
rules, which speculative authors deliver for render-

* Johni. 2z2,

B o o x ing a nation happy, and of which James could dif-
VIII. course with great plausibility, though often incapa-
K'oo ble of putting them in pratice, the English con-
1599.

ceived an high opinion of his abilities, and expeced
an increase of national honour and prosperity, under
a Prince so profoundly skilled in politics, and who
gave such a specimen both of his wisdom, and of
his love to his people .

THE Queen of England's sentiments, concerning

James, were very different from those of her sub-
jecs. His excessive indulgence towards the Popish
Lords; the facility with which he pardoned their
repeated treasons; his restoring Beaton, the Popish
Archbishop of Glasgow, who had fled out of Scot-
land at the time of the Reformation, to the posses-
sion of the temporalities of that benefice; the ap-
pointing him his Ambassador at the court of France;
the applause he bestowed, in the Bafilicon Doron,
on those who adhered to the Queen his mother,
Elizabeth confidered as so many indications of a
mind alienated from the Protestant religion; and
fufpe&ed that he would soon revolt from the pro-
felfion of it. These suspicions seemed to be fully

Accies confirmed, by a discovery which came from the
^rm ofpnor- Master of Gray, who resided at that time in Italy,
wth the and who, rather than susser his intriguing spirit to

be idle, demeaned himself so far as to act as a spy
for the English court. He conveyed to Elizabeth
the copy of a letter, written by James to Pope Cle-
ment VIII. in which the King, after many expref-
sions of regard for that pontiff, and of gratitude

Camd. Spotfw. 457.

for

for his favours, declared his firm resolution to treat B o o K
the Roman Catholics with indulgence; and, in or- VIII.
der to render the intercourse between the court of '
Rome and Scotland more frequent and familiar, he 1599.
solicited the Pope to promote Drummond, Bishop
of Vaifon, a Scotfiman, to the dignity of a Cardi-
nal . Elizabeth, who had received, by another
channel t, some imperfe& intelligence of this cor-
refpondence, was filled with just surprise, and im-
mediatelydifpatched Bowes into Scotland, to in-
quire more fully into the truth of the matter, and
to reproach James for an action so unbecoming a
Protestant prince. He was no less aftonilhed at the
accusation, and with a confidence, which nothing
but the consciousness of innocence could inspire, as-
firmed the whole to be a mere calumny, and the
letter itself to be forged by his enemies, on purpose
to bring his sincerity in Religion, to be fufpeEted.
Elphinfton the Secretary of State denied the mat-
ter with equal solemnity. It came to be known by
a very singular accident, which happened some
years after, that the information which Elizabeth
had received was well founded, though at the fame
time the King's declarations of his own innocence
were perfectly consistent with truth. Cardinal Bel-
larmine, in a reply which he published to a contro-
verfial treatise, of which the King was the author,
accused him of having abandoned the favourable
Sentiments which he had once entertained of the
Roman Catholic Religion, and as a proof of this
quoted his letter to Clement VIII. It was impofli-
ble, any longer, to believe this to be a fi&ion; and

it

t Winw. Mesn. voI. i. 37. S9,
* Cald. 333.

B O o K is was a matter too delicate to be pafled over with-
VIII. out ftrit enquiry. James immediately examined
I --- Elphingfton, and his confession unravelled the whole
1599.

mystery. He acknowledged that he had shuffled in
this letter among other papers, which he laid before
the King to be signed, who fufpe&ing no such de-
ceit, subscribed it together with the reft, and with-
out knowing what it contained; that he had no
other motive, however, to this action, but zeal for
his Maje!ty's ferviee; and, by flattering the Roman
Catholics with hopes of indulgence under the King's
government, he imagined that he was paving the
way for his more easy accession to the Engliih throne.
The Privy Council of England entertained very dif-
ferent sentiments of the Secretary's condu&. In
their opinion, not only the King's reputation had
been exposed to reproach, but his life to danger,
by this rafli imposture; they even imputed the gun-
powder treason to the rage and disappointment of
the Papists, upon finding that the hopes which this
letter infpired'were frustrate. ' The Secretary was
sent a prisoner into Scotland, to be tried for high
treason. 'His peers found him guilty, but by the

.Qeen's intercession, he obtained a pardon .

ACCORDING to the account qs other hiftoriarls,

James himself was no stranger to this correspond-
ence with the Pope; and, if we believe them, El-
phingfon being intimidated by the threats of the
Engliffi council, and deceived by the artifices of
the Earl of Dunbar, concealed some circumflances
in his narrative of this tranfa&ion, and falsified

* Spofw. 456. S07. 'Johnft. 448.

others;

others; and at the expence of his own fame, and B o o K
with the danger of his life, endeavoured to draw a VIII.
veil over this part of his malter's condut *.

'599.
BUT whether we impute the writing of this letter James at

great pains

to the Secretary's officious zeal, or to the King's to gain the
command, it is certain, that, about this time, James matcs
was at the utmost pains to gain the friendihip of
the Roman Catholic Princes, as a necessary precau-
tion towards facilitating his accession to the Englilh
throne. Lord Home, who was himself a Papist,
was entrusted with a secret commission to the Pope 't;
the Archbishop of Glasgow was an a&ive inftru-
ment with those of his own religion t. The Pope
expressed such favourable sentiments, both of the
King, and of his right to the Crown of England,
that James thought himself bound, some years as-
ter, to acknowledge the obligation in a public man-
per §, Sir James Lindsay made great progress in
gaining the Epglifh Papists to acknowledge his Ma-
jefty's title. Of all these. intrigues Elizabeth re-
ceived obscure hints, from different quarters. The
more imperfectly she knew, the more violently she
fufpe&ed the King's designs; and the natural jea-
lousy of her temper increasing with age, she obferv-
ed his conduct with greater solicitude than ever.

THE questions with regard to the election and I600.
power of the representatives of the Church, were March 2S.

His regula-

finally decided this year, by the General Assembly, tions with
which met at Montrose. That place was chosen regard to

the Church.

e Cald. vol. v. 322. vi. 147. t Winw. Mem. vol. ii. 57.
f Cald. vol. vi. 147. § Ibid. vol. v. 604.

as

B o o K as most convenient for the ministers of the north,
VIII. among whom the King's influence chiefly lay. And
'--' although great numbers resorted from the northern
T6oo.

provinces, and the King employed his whole inte-
reft, and the authority of his own presence, to gain
a majority, the following regulations were with dif-
ficulty agreed on. That the General Assembly shall
recommend fix persons to every vacant benefice,
which gave a title to a feat in parliament, out of
whom the King ffiould nominate one; that the per-
son so eleced, after obtaining his feat in parliament,
hall neither propose, nor consent to any thing there,
that may affect the interest of the church, without
special inftruRtions to that purpose; that he mhall
be answerable for his condu& to every General As-
fembly; and submit to its censure, without appeal,
upon pain of infamy and excommunication; that
he shall discharge the duties of a Pastor, in a parti-
cular congregation; that he shall not usurp any ec-
clefiaftical jurifdi&ion, superior to that of his other
brethren; that if the Church inflit on him the cen-
sure of deprivation, he mall, thereby, forfeit his feat
in parliament; that he hall annually resign his com-
mission to the General Assembly, which may be re-
stored to him, or not, as the Assembly, with the King's
approbation, mhall judge most expedient for the
good of the Church*. Nothing could be more
repugnant to the idea of episcopal government,
than these regulations. It was not in consequence
of rights derived from their office, but of powers
conferred by a commission, that ecclesiastical per-
sons were to be admitted to a feat in parliament;

Spotfiw. 453. 45,. Cald. vol. v. 368.

they

they were the representatives, not the superiors of B o o K
the clergy. Destitute of all spiritual authority, even VIII.
their civil jurisdiction was temporary. James, how- '---
ever, flattered himself that they would Goon be able 6.
to shake off these fetters, and gradually acquire all
the privileges which belonged to the episcopal order.
The clergy dreaded the fame thing. And he con-
tended for, and they opposed the nomination of these
commissioners, not so much on account of the
powers then vefied in them, as of those, to which
it was believed they would soon attain *

DURING this summer, the kingdom enjoyed an cowry.s

unusual tranquillity. The clergy, after many ftrug~- co""'cy.
gles, were broughtundergreatfubje&ion; the Popilh
earls were restored to their estates and honours, by
the authority of Parliament, and with the content
of the church; the reft of the nobles were at peace
among themselves, and obedient to the royal au-
thority; when, in the midfl of this security, the
King's life was exposed to the utmost danger, by
a conspiracy altogether unexpected, and almost in-
explicable. The authors of it were John Ruthven,
Earl of Gowry, and his brother Alexander, the
sons of that Earl who was beheaded in the year
1584. Nature had adorned both these young men,
especially the elder brother, with many accomplilh-
ments, to which education had added its most ele-
gant improvements. More learned, than is usual
among persons of their rank; more religious, than
is common at their age of life; generous, brave,
popular; their countrymen, far from thinking them

* Spotfw. 454

capable

B o o K capable of any atrocious crime, conceived the most
VIII. sanguine hopes of their early virtues. Notwith-
- -'a standing all these noble qualities, some unknown

6o00. motive engaged them in a conspiracy, which, if we

adhere to the account commonly received, must be
transmitted to posterity, as one of the most wicked,
as well as one of the worst concerted, of which his-
tory makes any mention.

ON the fifth of August, as the King, who re-

fided during the hunting season in his Palace of
Falkland, was going out to his sport early in the
morning, he was accosted by Mr. Alexander Ruth-
ven, who, with an air of importance, told the
King, that the evening before he had met an un-
known man, of a suspicious asSet, walking alone
in a by-path, near his brother's house at Perth; and
on searching him, had found, under his cloak, a
pot filled with a vast quantity of foreign gold; that
he had immediately seized both him and his trea-
sure, and without communicating the matter to any
person, had kept him confined and bound in a soli-
tary house; and that he thought it his duty to im-
part such a singular event, first of all to his Ma-
jefty. James immediately fufpe&ed this unknown
person to be a trafficking priest, supplied with so-
reign coin, in order to excite new commotions in
the kingdom; and resolved to impower the Magi-
ftrates of Pe rth to call the person before them, and
inquire into all thecircumftances of the story. Ruth-
ven violently opposed this refoiution, and with many
arguments urged the King to ride dire&ly to Perth,
and to examine the matter with his own eyes. Mean-

while

while the chace began; and James, notwithifand- B o o K
ing his paflion for that amusement, could not help VIII.
ruminating on the strangeness of the tale, and on -
Ruthven's importunity. At last, he called him, 6.
and promised when the sport was over, to set out
for Perth. The chace, however, continued long;
and Ruthven, who all the while kept close by the
King, was still calling on him to make haste. At
the death of the Buck, he would not allow James
to flay till a fresh horse was brought him; and ob-
serving the Duke of Lennox and the Earl of Mar
preparing to accompany the King, he intreated him
to countermand them. This James refused; and
though Ruthven's impatience and anxiety, as well
as the apparent perturbation in his whole behaviour,
raised some suspicions in his mind; yet his own cu-
riofity, and Ruthven's solicitations, prevailed on
him to set out for Perth. When within a mile of
the town, Ruthven rode forward to inform his bro-
ther of the King's arrival, though he had already
dispatched two messengers for that purpose. At a
little distance from the town, the Earl, attended by
several of the citizens, met the King, who had
only twenty persons in his train. No preparations
were made for the King's entertainment; the Earl
appeared pensive and embarrassed, and was at no
pains to atone, by his courtesy or hospitality, for
the bad fare with which he treated his guests. When
the King's repast was over, his attendants were led
to dine in another room, and he being left almost
alone, Ruthven whispered him, that now was the
time to go to the chamber where the unknown
person was kept. James commanded him to bring

Sir

B o o Sir Thomas Erskine along with them; but, instead
VIII. of that, Ruthven ordered him not to follow: And
.'Y--' conducting the King up a stair-case, and then
i6oo.

through feveral-apartments, the doors of which he
locked behind him, led him at last into a small
fludy, in which there flood a man clad in ar-
mour, with a sword and dagger by his fide. The
King, who expe&ed to have found one disarmed
and bound, started at the fight, and inquired if this
was the person; but Ruthven snatching the dagger
from the girdle of the man in armour, and holding
it to the King's breast, "Remember, said he, how
" unjufily my father suffered by your command;
" you are now my prisoner; submit to my disposal
"without resistance, or outcry; or this dagger
" ihall instantly avenge his blood." James expos-
tulated with Ruthven, intreated, and flattered him.
The man, whom he found in the study, flood, all
the while, trembling, and dismayed, without cou-
rage either to aid the King, or to second his ag-
greffor. Ruthven protested, that if the King railed
no outcry, his life should be safe; and moved by
some unknown reason, retired in order to call his
brother, leaving to the man in armour the care of
the King, whom he bound by oath, not to make
any noise during his absence.

WHILE the King was in this dangerous situation,

his attendants growing impatient to know whither
he had retired, one of Gowry's attendants entered
the room hastily, and told them that the King had
just rode away towards Falkland. All of them
rulied out into the street; and the Earl, in the ut-

most
254

most hurry, called for their horses. But by this B o o K
time, his brother had returned to the King, and VIII.
swearing that now there was no remedy, he behoved '-"-'
to die; offered to bind his hands. Unarmed as James
was, he scorned to submit to that indignity; and
cling with the assassin, a fierce struggle ensued.
The man in armour stood, as formerly, amazed and
motionless; and the King dragging Ruthven to-
wards a window, which during his absence he had
persuaded the person with whom he was left, to open,
cried, with a wild and affrighted voice, " Treason
Treason! Help ! I am murdered !" His attendants
heard, and knew the voice; and saw, at the window,
a hand which grasped the King's neck with violence.
They flewwithprecipitation tohis afiftance. Lennox
and Mar, with the greater number, ran up the prin-
cipal stair-case, where they found all the doors ihut,
which they battered with the utmost fury, endea-
vouring to burst them open. But Sir John Ramsey,
entering by a back-ftair, which led to the apartment
where the King was, found the door open; and
rufling upon Ruthven, who was still struggling with
the King, struck him twice with his dagger, and
thrust him towards the stair-case, where Sir Thomas
Erskine and Sir Hugh Herries met, and killed him;
he crying with his last breath, " Alas! I am not to
blame for this action." During this scuffle, the man
who had been concealed in the study, escaped un-
observed. Together with Ramsey, Erskine, and
Herries, one Wilson, a footman, entered the room
where the King was, and before they had time to
shut the door, Gowrie rushed in with a drawn sword
in each hand, followed by seven of his attendants

well

B o o K well armed, and with a loud voice threatened them
VIII. all with instant death. They immediately thrust
ó--v--- the King into the little study, and shutting the door
16oo. C,

. upon him, encountered the Earl. Notwithstanding

the inequality of numbers, Sir John Ramsey pierced
Gowrie through the heart, and he fell down dead
without uttering a word; his followers having re-
ceived several wounds, Immediately fled. Three of
the King's defenders were likewise hurt in the con-
fli&t. A dreadful noise continued still at the opposite
door, where many persons laboured in vain to force
a passage; and the King being assured that they were
Lennox, Mar, and his other friends, it was opened
on the inside. They ran to the King, whom they
unexpetedly found safe, with transports of congra-
tulation; and he, falling on his knees, with all his
attendants around him, offered solemn thanks to God
for such a wonderful deliverance. The danger, how-
ever, was not yet over. The inhabitants of the
town, whose Provost Gowrie was, and by whom he
was extremely beloved, hearing the fate of the two
brothers, ran to their arms, and surrounded the
house, threatening revenge, with many insolent and
opprobrious speeches against the King. James en-
deavoured to pacify the enraged multitude, by speak-
ing to them from the window; he admitted their
magistrates into the house; related to them the
whole circumstances of the fat; and, their fury sub-
fiding by degrees, they dispersed. On searching
the Earl's pockets, for papers, that might discover
his designs and accomplices, nothing was found but
a small parchment bag, full of magical characters
and words of inchantmenr, and if we may believe

the

the account of the conspiracy published by the King, B o o K
"while there were about him, the wound of which VIII.
"he died, bled not; but as soon as they were ta- -6o-
"ken away, the blood gushed out in great abun-
" dance." After all the datngerous adventures of
this busy day, the King returned in the evening to
Falkland, having committed the dead bodies of the
two brothers to the custody of the Magistrates of
Perth.

NOTWITHSTANDING the minute detail which the ThemotIve

of the con-

King gave of all the circumstances of this confpi- fpirators
racy against his life, the motives which induced the xtplainly
two brothers to attempt an action so detestable, the
end they had in view, and the accomplices, on
whose aid they depended, were altogether unknown.
The words of Ruthven to the King gave some
grounds to think, that the desire of revenging their
father's death had instigated them to this attempt.
But, whatever injuries their father had suffered, it
is scarce probable that they could impute them to
the King, whose youth and fubje&ion, at that
time, to the violence of a fa&ion, exempted him
from being the object of resentment, on account of
acions which were not done by his command.
James had even endeavoured to repair the wrongs
which the father had suffered, by benefits to his chil-
dren; and Gowrie himself, sensible of his favour,
acknowledged it with the warmest expreflions of
gratitude. Three of the Earl's attendants, being
convited of assisting him in this assault on the King's
servants, were executed at Perth; but they could
give no light into the motives, which had prompt-

VOL. II. S ed

B o o K ed their master to an action so repugnant to there
VIII. acknowledgments. Diligent search was made for

the person concealed in the study, and from him
great discoveries were expeted. But Andrew Hen-
derfon, the Earl's steward, who, upon a promise of
pardon, confessed himself to be the man, was as
much a stranger to his master's design as the reft;
and tho' placed in the study by Gowrie's command,
he did not even know for what end that station had
been afTigned him. The whole tranfacion remain-
ed as impenetrably dark as ever; and the two bro-
thers, it was concluded, had concerted their scheme
without either confident or accomplice, with unex-
ampled secrecy as well as wickedness.

Sprot's AN accident, no less strange than the other cir-
,on=ning cumftances of the story, and which happened nine

years after, discovered that this opinion, however
plausible, was ill-founded; and that the two bro-
thers had not carried on their machinations all alone.
One Sprot, a notary, having whispered among fe-
veral persons that he knew some secrets relating to
Gowrie's corlfpiracy, the privy council thought the
matter worthy of their attention, and ordered him
to be seized. His confession was partly voluntary,
and partly forced from him by torture. According
to his account, Logan of Reftalrig, a gentleman of
an opulent fortune, but of dissolute morals, was
privy to all Gowrie's intentions, and an accomplice
in his 'crimes. Mr. Ruthven, he said, had frequent
interviews with him, in order to concert the plan of
their operations; the Earl had corresponded with
him to the fame purpose; and one Bour, Logan's

con-
258

confident, was trusted with tfe secret, and carried B o o K
the letters between them. Both Logan and Bour VIII.
were now dead. But Sprot affirmed that he had -
read letters written both by Gowrie and Logan, on 6c
thatoccafion; and in confirmation of his teftimo-
ny, several of Logan's letters, which a curiosity fa-
tal to himself had prompted Sprot to steal from
among Bour's papers, were produced*. These
were compared, by the privy council, with pa-
pers of Logan's hand writing, and the refem-
blance was manifest. Persons of undoubted credit,
and well qualified to judge of the matter, examined
them, and swore to their authenticity. Death itself
did not exempt Logan from prosecution, his bones
were dug up, and tried for High Treason, and by
a sentence, equally odious and illegalt, his lands

were

* Logan's letters were five in number. One to Bour, another

to Gowrie, and three of them without any direction; nor could
Sprot discover the name of the perfan to whom they were writ-
ten. Logan gives him the appellation of Right Honourable.
It appears from this, however, and from other words in the.let-
ter, Crom. 95. that there were several persons privy to the con-
fpiracy. The date of the first letter is July 18th. Mr. Ruthven
had communicated the matter to Logan only five days before.
Ibid. It appears from the original jummons of Forfaulture
agaiafr Logan's heirs, that Bour, though he had letters ad-
dressed to him with regard to a conspiracy equally dangerous
and important, was so illiterate that he could not read. '- Ja-
"cobus Bour, literarum prorfus ignarus, di&ti Georgii opera

in legendis omnibus fcriptis ad eum miflis, vel pertinentibus,
utebatur." This is altogether strange; and nothing but the

capricious characer of Logan can account for his chufing such
a confident.

t By the Roman law, persons guilty of the crime of High
Treason might be tried even after death. This practice was

S 2 adop.

B o o K were forfeited, and his pofferity declared infamous.
VIII. Sprot was condemned to be hanged for misprision
'-"*- oftreafon. He adhered to his confession to the last,

. and having promised, on the scaffold, to give the

fpe&ators a sign in confirmation of the truth of

adopted by the Scots, without any limitation, Parl. 1540. c. 69.
But the unlimited exercise of this power was soon conceived to
be dangerous; and the Crown was laid under proper restrictions,
by an aa A. D. 154z. which has never been printed. The
words of it are, " And because the said Lords, (i. e. the Lords
of Articles) think the said ac (viz. in 1540) too general,
and prejudicial to the Barons in the realm, therefore statutes
and ordains that the said adt Ihall have no place in time coming,
but against the heirs of them that notoriously commit or shall
commit lefe majesty against the King's person, against the realm
for averting the fame, and against them that shall happen to be-
tray the King's army allenarly, and being notourly known in
their time; and the heirs of these persons to be called and judged
within five years after the decease of the said persons committers
of the said crimes; and the said time being bypast, the said
heirs never to be pursued for the fame." The sentence against
Logan violated this fatute in two particulars. He was not no-
tourly known during his life to be an accomplice in the crime
for which he was tried; and his heir was called in question
more than five years after his death. It is remarkable, that this
flatute seems not to have been attended to in the parliament
which forfeited Logan. Another singular circumstance deserves
notice. As it is a maxim ofjuftice that no person can be tried in
absence; and as lawyers are always tenacious of their forms,
and often ahfbrd in their devices for preserving them, they con-
trived that in any process againit a dead person, his corpse or
bones Ihall be presented at the bar. Examples of this occur fre-
quently in the Scottih hiltory. After the battle of Corrichie,
the dead body of the Earl of Huntly was presented in parlia-
ment, before sentence of fcrfaulture was pronounced against
him. For the fame reason the bodies of Gowrie and his bro-
ther were preserved, in order that they might be produced in
parliament. Logan's bones, in compliance with the fame rule,
were dug up. Mackenz. Crim. Law, Book i. Tit. 6. § 22.

what

26i

wh*t he had deposed, he thrice clapped his hands, B o o i
after he was thrown off the ladder by the execu- VIII.
tioner *.

1600.

It appears that Archbilhop Spotfwood was present at the

execution of Sprot. Crom 1 5: and yet he seems to have given
no credit to his discoveries. The manner in which he speaks of
him is remarkable, "Whether er not I should mention the ar-
"raignment and execution of George Sprot, who suffered at

Edinburgh, I am doubtful. His confeflion, though volun-
tary and conltant, carrying small probability. The man de.

"posed, &c. It seemed to be a very ficion, and a mere in-
"vention of the man's own brain, for neither did he mhew the
"letter, nor could any wife man think that Gowrie, who went

about the treason so secretly, would have communicated the
r matter to such a man as Logan was known to be." p. 508.
Spotfwood could not be ignorant of the solemnity with which
Logan had been tried, and of the proof brought of the authen-
ticity of his letters. He himfelfwas probably present in par-
liament at the trial. The Earl of Dunbar, of whom he always
speaks with the higheli refpea, was the person who direced the
process against Logan. Such a peremptory declaration against
the truth of Sprot's evidence, notwithitanding all these circum-
stances, is surprising. Sir Thomas Hamilton, the King's advo-
cate at that time, and afterwards Earl of Hadington, repre-
sents the proof produced at Logan's trial as extremely convinc-
ing; and in an original letter of his to the King the 21 ftof June
1609. (in Bibl. Facult. Jurid.) after mentioning the manner in
which the trial had been conduced, he thus goes on.

-· When the probation of the summons was referred to the

Lords of Articles votes, they found uniformly, all in one voice,
the said summons to be so clearly proved, that they seemed to
contend who mhould be able mol zealoufy to cxprefs the satis-
fa&ion of his heart, not only by the molt pithy words, but by
tears of joy; diverse of the befl rank confefiinge tha tha twhere-
of they doubted at their entry into the house wa now so ma-
nifeft, that they behoved to esteem them traitors, who hould
any longer refuse to declare their affiesrd resolution of the truth
of that treason."

B o O K BUT though it be thus unexpe&edly discovered
VIII. that Gowrie did not a& without associates, little ad-
'6c' ditional light is thrown, by this discovery on the

motives and intention of his conduct. It appears
almost incredible that two young men of such dif-
tinguilhed virtue, should revolt all at once, from
their duty, and attempt a crime so atrocious, as the
murder of their Sovereign. It appears still more
improbable, that they should have concerted their
undertaking with so little foresight and prudence.
If they intended that the deed should have remain-
ed concealed, they could not have chosen a more
improper scene for executing it than their own house.
If they intended that Henderson Ihold have struck
the blow, they could not have pitched on a man'
more destitute of the courage, that muff diret the
hand of an aflaffin; nor could they expec that he,
unsolicited, and unacquainted with their purpose,
would venture on such a desperate a&ion. If Ruth-
yen meant to stab the King with his own hand, why
did he withdraw the dagger, after it was pointed at
his breast? How could he leave the King, after such
a plain declaration of his intention ? Was it not pre-
pofterous to commit him to the keeping of such a
timid and false associate, as Henderson? For what
purpose did he waste time, in binding the hands of an
unarmed man, whom he might easily have dispatched
with his sword? Had Providence permitted them
to em'brue their hands in the blood of their Sove-
reign, what advantage could have accrued to them
by his death? 'and what claims or pretensions
could they hkve opposed ro the rights of his chil-

dren ?
262

dren? Inevitable and instant yengeance, together B o o K
with perpetual infamy, were the only consequences VIII.
tlhey could expect to follow such a crime.

i 6oo.

ON the other hand, it is impossible to believe that

the King had formed any design against the life of
the two brothers. They had not incurred his in-
dignation, by any crime; and were, in no degree,
the objects of his jealousy or hatred -t; nor was he of

a fpi-

* Jt has been afterted, that, in consequence of the King's

death, the Earl of Gowrie might have pretended to the Crown
of England, as the son of Dorothea Stewart, daughter of Lord
Methven, by Margaret of England, who, after his divorce from
the Earl of Angus, took that nobleman for her third husband.
Burnet Hifl. of his own times. But this affrtion is ill-founded.
It appears, from undoubted evidence, that Lord Methven had
only one child by Queen Margaret, which died in its infancy,
and Dorothea Lady Ruthven was not the daughter of Queen
Margaret, but of James Stewart, Lord Methven's second wife, a
daughter of John Earl of Athol..Crawf. Peer. 329. And though
Gowrie had really been descended from the blood royal of Eng-
land, the King at that time had a son and a daughter; and be-
fides them, Lady Arabella Stewart, daughter of Charles Earl of
Lennox, had a preferable tide to the Crown of England.

t Sir Henry Neville, in a letter to Sir Ralph Winmoocd, im-

putes the death of the two brothers to a cause not rmentioned b;
any of our hiltorians. " Out of Scotl:nid we hear that there
is no good agreement, but rather an open diffidence bcttxixt the
King and his wife, and many are of opinion that the dil'covery
of some affection between her and the Earl of Gowrie's brother
(wvho was killed with him) was the trucft cause and mo:ive of
that tragedy." Winw. Mem. vol. i. 274. Whether the followv-
ing passages in Nicholson's letter be any confirmation of that
suspicion, is submitted to the reader. In his letter, Sept. 22,
1602, he mentions the return of Gowrie's two younger brothicr!
into Scotlandandnd dd, "'- The coming in of thefr two, and

the

B o o K a spirit so sanguinary, or so noted for rash and def-
VIII. perate valour, as to have attempted to murder them
-.--.' in their own house, where they were surrounded

with many domestics, he only with a render and
unarmed train; where they could call to their assist-
ance the inhabitants of a cit?, at the devotion of
their family, while he was at a distance from all aid;
and least of all would he have chosen for his affo-
ciates, in such an enterprise, the Earl of Mar, and
the Duke of Lennox, the former connected in close
friendilip with the house of Gowrie, and the latter
married to one of the Earl's filters.

A conjee- WHICHSOEVER of these opposite systems we em-
t aehe brace; whether we impute the intention of murder
intntion of to Gowrie, or to the King; insuperable difficulties
rotPersc. arise, and weare involved in darkness, mystery, and

contradictions. Perhaps the source of the whole
conspiracy ought to be searched for deeper, and by
deriving it from a more remote cause, we may dif-
cover it to be less criminal.

the Queen of Scots dealing with them, and fending away and
furni2ing Mrs. Beatrix, (their fitler) with such information as
Sir Thomas Ermine has given, hath bred great suspicion in the
King of Scots, that they come not in but upon some dangerous
plot." In another letter, January i, 1603. " The day of
writing my laif, Mrs. Beatrix Ruthven was brought by the Lady
Paifly, and Mrs. of Angus, as one of their gentlewomen into
the court in the Evening, and stowed in a chamber prepared for
her by the Queen's diretion, where the Queen had much time
and conference with her. Of this the King got notice, and
(hewed his dislike thereof to the Queen, gently reproving her
for it, and examining quietly of the Queen's servants of the
fame, and of other matters thereunto belonging, with such dif-
cretin and secrecy as requires such a matter."

To

To keep the King of Scots in continual depend- B o o K

ance, was one great object of Elizabeth's policy. VIII.
In order to this, she sometimes soothed him, and ---'
sometimes bribed his Ministers and favourites; 600oo
and when she failed of attaining her end by these
means, she encouraged the clergy to render any ad-
ministration she distrusted unpopular, by decrying
it, or stirred up some fation of the nobles to op-
pose, and to overturn it. They, unacquainted with
the arts of undermining a Ministry by intrigues,
had recourse to the ruder pratice of rendering
themselves masters of the King's person, that they
might thereby obtain the direcions of his councils.--
Those nobles, who seized the King at the Raid of
Ruthven, were instigated, and supported by her.
Bothwell, in all his wild attempts, enjoyed her pro-
teation, and found a retreat in her dominions. The
connexions which James had been forming of late
with the Roman Catholic princes, his secret nego-
ciations in England with her subjects, and the max-
ims by which he governed his own kingdom, all
contributed to excite her jealousy. She dreaded
some great revolution in Scotland to be approach-
ing, and it was her interest to prevent it. The
Earl of Gowrie was one of the most powerful of the
Scottish nobles, and descended from ancestors warm-
ly attached to the English interest. He had adopt-
ed the fame system, and believed the welfare of his
country to be inseparably connected with the subsist-
ence of the alliance between the two kingdoms.
During his residence at Paris, he had contracted an
intimate friendship with Sir Henry Neville, the

Qelen's

265

B o o K Queen's ambafador there, and was recommended
VIII. by him to his court, as a person of whom great

use iight be made *. Elizabeth received him, as
' he passed through England, with diltinguifhed

marks of refpet and favour. From all these cir-
comftances, a suspicion may arise, that the plan of
the conspiracy against the King was formed at that
rime, in concert with her. Such a suspicion prevail-
ed in that age; and from the letters of Nicholson,
Elizabeth's agent in Scotland, it appears not to be
destitute of foundation. An Englilh ship was ob-
served hovering, for some time, in the mouth of the
frith of Forth. The Earl's two younger brothers
fled into England, after the ill success of the confpi-
racy, and were protected by Elizabeth. And James
himself, though he prudently concealed it, took
great umbrage at her behaviour. None, however,
of Elizabeth's intrigues in Scotland tended to hurt
the King's person, but only to circumscribe his au-
thority, and to thwart his schemes. His life was
the surest safe-guard of her own, and restrained the
Popish pretenders to the Crow.i, and their abettors,
jrom desperate attempts, to which their impatience
and bigotry might, otherwise, have urged them on.
To have encouraged Gowrie to murder his Sove-
reign, would, on her part, have been an aft of the
:tcmot imprudence. Nor does this seem to have been
the intention of the two brothers. Mr. Ruthven,
riri: of all, endeavoured to decoy the King to Perth,
i.-itrour any attendants. When these proved more
numerous than was expected, the Earl employed a

X Winw. i. 156.

fira-

stratagem in order to separate them from the King, B o o K
by pretending that he had rode away towards Falk- VIII.
land, and by calling haffily for their horses, that t-C-'
they might follow him. But shutting James up,
mean while, in a diffant corner of the house, and by
attempting to bind his hands, their design seems to
have been rather to seize, than to allaffinate him.
And though Gowrie had not collected his followers,
so as to have been able to detain him long a prifo-
ner, in that part of the kingdom, by open force,
he might soon have been conveyed aboard the E.ng-
lifh ship, which waited perhaps to receive him, and
he might have been landed at Faft-Caftle, a house
of Logan's, in which, according to many obscure
hints in his letters, some rendezvous of the confpi-
rators was to be held. Amidst the surprise and ter-
ror, into which the King muff have been thrown by
the violence offered to him, it was extremely natu-
ral for him to conclude that his life was fought. It
was the interest of all his followers to confirm him
in this belief, and to magnify his danger, in order
to add to the importance and merit of their own
services. And thus his fear, and their vanity, aid-
ed by the credulity and wonder, which the con-
templation of any great and tragical event, when
not fully understood, is apt to inspire, augmented
the whole tranfaEtion. On the other hand, the ex-
travagance and improbability of the circumstances,
which were added, detracted from the credit of
those, which really happened; and even furnished
pretences for calling in question the truth of the
whole conspiracy.

THE

B o O K THE account of what had happened at Perth
VIII. reached Edinburgh next morning. The privy
-tv-' council commanded the Ministers of that city in-
i6oo.
May di ftantly to assemble their people ; and after relating
belie- the to them the circumstances of the conspiracy formed
publh'd againftthe King's life, to return public thanks to
bythe God, for the protecion which he had so visibly as-

forded him. But as the sirs accounts transmitted to
Edinburgh, written in a hurry, and while the cir-
cumftances of the conspiracy were but imperfetly
known, and the paflions which it excited strongly
felt, were indiftinft, exaggerated, and contradictory,
the Miniffters laid hold of this; and though they
offered to give public thanks to God for the King's
safety, they refused to enter into any detail of par-
ticulars, or to utter from the chair of truth, what
appeared to be still dubious and uncertain.

A FEW days after, the King returned to Edin-

burgh; and though Galloway, the Minister of his
own Chapel, made an harangue to the people at
the public cross, in which he recited all the circum-
stances of the conspiracy; though James himself, in
their hearing, confirmed his account; though he
.commanded a narrative of the whole tranfaftion to
be published; the Ministers of that city, as well as
many of their brethren, still continued incredulous,
and unconvinced. Their high esteem of Gowrie,
their jealousy of every part of the King's condut,
added to some false and many improbable circum-
tfances in the narrative, not only led them to sus-
peet the whole, but gave their fufpicions-an air of
credibility. But at length, the King, partly by

argu-

arguments, partly by threats, prevailed on all of B o o K
them, except Mr. Robert Bruce, to own that they VIII.
were convinced of the truth of the conspiracy. He '-
could be brought no further than to declare, that
he reverenced the King's account of the tranfat&ion,
but could not fay that he himself was persuaded of
the truth of it. The scruples or obstinacy of a
single man would have been little regarded, but as
the fame spirit of incredulity began to spread among
the people, the example of one, in so high reputa-
tion for integrity and abilities, was extremely dan-
gerous. The King was at the utmolt pains to
convince and to gain Bruce, but finding it impof-
fible to remove his doubts, he deprived him of his
benefice, and after repeated delays, and many at-
tempts towards a reconcilement, banjihed him the
kingdom *.

THE proceedings of parliament were not retarded Proceed-

by any scruples of this fort. The dead bodies of Injmgrntp
the two brothers were produced there, according to 'gains th

confpira-

law; an inditment for HighTreafon was preferred tors.
against them; witnesses were examined; and, by
an unanimous sentence, their estates and honours
were forfeited; the punishment due to Traitors
was inflited on their dead bodies; and as if the pu-
nifhment hitherto in use did not express sufficient de-
teftation of their crimes, the parliament enacted that
the surname of Ruthven should be abolished; and
in order to preserve the memory of the King's mi-
raculous escape, and to declare the sense which the

Spots. 461, &c Cald. v. 389, &c.

nation

B o o K nation had of the divine goodness, to all future ages,
VIII. appointed the fifth of August to be observed, annu-
ó'- aally, as a day of public thanksgiving*.
i 6co.

THOUGH

A few weeks after the death of the two brothers, the King

published a dijcourre of their vile and unnatural con/piracy againfi
his life. In the year 1713, George Earl of Cromertie publish-
ed an " Hilorical account of the conspiracy by the Earl of
"Gowrie, and Robert Logan of Reftalrig, againrt King James
I VI." He seems not to have seen the account which the
King himself had given of that matter, and borrows the
whole historical part from Spotfwood, and other authors; but
he has extraced from the public records the depositions of the
witnesses produced by the King's Council, in order to make
good the charge against the two brothers, and Logan their affo-
ciate. From these two treatises our knowledge of all the mate-
rial circumstances of the conspiracy is derived. The evidence
which they contain, one would expet to be authentic and de-
cfive. An account of a sac, till recent, published by royal
authority, and the original depositions of persons examined in
presence of the highest court in the nation, ought to convey a
degree of evidence seldom attained in historical relations, and to
exclude all remaining doubt and uncertainty. But as every thing
with regard to this transaction is dark and problematical, the
King's account and the depositions of the witnesses not only
vary, but contradic each other in so many circumstances, that
much room is still left for hesitation, and historical scepticism.
The telsimony of Henderson is the fullest and most important,
but in several particulars the King's account and his are con-
tradiaory. I. According to the King's account, while Mr.
Ruthven was holding the dagger at his breast, " the fellow in
the tudy flood quaking and trembling." Disc. 17. ButHen-
derfon fays that he himself wrested the dagger out of Mr. Ruth-
ven's hands. Disc. 53. Crom. 50. Henderson likewise boasted
to his wife that he had that day twice saved the King from being
flabbed. Disc. 54. Crom. 53. II. The King asserts thatHen-
derfon opened the window during Mif. Ruthven's absence.
Disc. 23. Henderson depoife that lie was only attempt-

ing

TI-rou'H Gowrie's conspiracy occasioned a sudden B o o K

and great alarm, it was followed by no confe- VIII.
quences of importance; and having been concerted --
by the two brothers, either without any affociares, EixO.,,,s

or fpiracy a-

gainft Eli-
zabeth.

ing to open it when Mr. Ruthven returned, and that during
the struggle between the King and him, he opened it. Disc.
53, 54. Crom. [i, 5. II. If we may believe the King, the
fellow in the itudy food, during the 1truggle, behind the King's
back, inaative and trembling all the time. Disc. 27. But Hen-
derfon affirms, that he snatched away the garter with which Mr.
Ruthven attempted to bind the King; that he pulled back Ruth-
ven's hand, while he was endeavouring to ltop the King's
mouth, and that he opened the window. Disc. 54. Crom. 52.
IV. By the King's account, Mr. Ruthven left him in the fludy,
and went away in order to meet with his brother, and the
Earl came up the lairs for the fame purpofc. Disc. 23. Hen-
derfon deposes, that when Mr. Ruthven left the King, " he be-
lieves that he did not pass from the door." Crom. . 51. It is
apparent both from the situation of the house, and from other
circumstances, that there could not possibly have been any in-
terview between the brothers at this time. Dife. z3.

Henderson was twice examined, first at Falkland before the

privy council in August, and next at Edinburgh before the par-
liament in November. Not to mention tome clffer variations
between these depositions, we (hall point out two which are re-
markable. In his first deposition Mr. Henderson relates the molt
material circumRtance of the whole in these words. " Mr. Ruth-

ven pulled out the deponent's dagger, and held the fame to

"his Majefly's breast, faying, rememrneryou of my father's mur-
" er; you Jhall now die for it, and minting to his Highness's
"heart, with the dagger, the deponent threw the fame out of
" Mr. Ruthven's hands, and fworc that as God Thall judge his
" foul, that if Mr. Ruthven had retained the dagger in his
" hand, the space a man may go fix letps, he would have fric-

ken the King to the hilts with it." Dire. 52. But at his fe-
cond examination he varied from this in two material circum-

flances.

271

B o o K or with such as were unknown, and chore to remain
VIII. so, the danger was over, as soon as discovered. But
6o . not long after, a conspiracy broke out in England
1601. '

stances. First, the words which he at that time put in Mr. Ruth-
ven's mouth while he held the dagger at the King's breast arc,
" Sir, you must be my prioner ; remember on my father's death."
Secondly, when he threatened him with death, it was only to de-
ter him from making any noise, " Hold your tongue, or by Chris?
"you fall die." 2. In his firit deposition, the words of Mr.
Ruthven when he returned to the chamber where he had left the
King, are, ' There is no remedy, by God you muff die." But in
his second deposition, " By God there is no remedy, and of-
' sered to bind his Majesty's hands." Crom. 51. The mate-
rial words you muf die are omitted. The first deposition seems
plainly to intimate that it was Ruthven's intention to murder
the King. The second would lead us to conclude that he had
no other design than to detain him as a prisoner.

There are likewise some remarkable contradicions in the tef-

timonies of the other witnefies. I. In the discourse published
by asthority, it is infnuated that the tumult of the inhabitants
was raised against the King, and that it required rome art to
pacify them. Disc. 3z. The Duke of Lennox confirms this in
his deposition. Crom. 44. An a& of privy-council summoning
the Magifirates of Perth to answer for that riot is still extant.
And yet Andrew Roy, one of the baillies of the town, deposes
that he himself raised the people, and that they took arms in
order to afllfl the King. Crom. 66. 2. Henderson deposes that
he gave an evasive answer to Mr. John Moncrief, who en-
quired where he had been that morning, because the Earl had
commanded him not to let any man know that he had been at
Falkland. Dife. 54. Moncrief deposes to the fame purpose.
Crom. 64. And yet George Hay, afterwards Lord Kinnoul,
and Chancellor of Scotland, and Peter Hay, depose that the
Earl, in their presence, alked Henderson, " Whom he found
with the King at Falkland ?" Crom. 70, 71. Which question
seems to prove that he did not aim at keeping that journey a
fecrer.

againt

against Elizabeth, which, though the first danger B o o K
was instantly dispelled, produced tragical effects, VIII.
that rendered the close of that Queen's reign difmnal '6
and unhappy. As James was deeply interested in
that event, it merits our particular notice.

THE court of England was, at this time, divided

between two powerful factions, which contended
for the supreme direction of affairs. The leader of
the one wasl Robert D'Evreux, Earl of Effex; Sir
Robert Cecil, the son of Lord Treasurer Burleigh,
was at the head of the other. The former was the
most accomplished, and the most popular of all the
English nobles; brave, generous, affable; though
impetuous, yet willing to liften to the counsels of
those whom he loved an avowed, but not an im-
placable enemy; a friend no less constant, than
warm.; incapable of diguifing his own sentiments,
or of misrepresenting those of others; better fitted
for a camp, than a court; and of a genius that
qualified him for the first place in the administration,
with a spirit which scorned the second, as below .his
merit. He was soon diftinguithed by the Queen,
who, with a profusion uncommon to her, conferred
on him, even in his earliest youth, the highest ho-
nours. Nor did this diminish the esteem and as-
section of his countrymen; but, by a rare felicity.
he was at once the favourite of his Sovereign, and
the darling of the people. Cecil, on the other
hand, educated in a court, and trained under a fa-
ther deeply skilled in all its arts, was crafty, infi-
nuating, indultrious; and though possessed of ta-
lents, which fitted him for the highest offices, he

VOL. II. T did

B o o K did not rely upon his merit alone for attaining them,
VIII. but availed himself of every advantage, which his
ó-~ e-' own address, orthe mistakes of others, afforded him.

Two such men were formed to be rivals, and ene-
mies. Effex despised the arts of Cecil, as low and
base. To Cecil, the Earl's magnanimity appeared
to be presumption and folly. All the military men,
except Raleigh, favoured Effex. Most of the cour-
tiers adhered to Cecil, whose manners nore nearly
resembled their own.

His orren ^As Elizabeth advanced in years, the struggle be-
with the tween there fa&tions became more violent. Effex, in
Scottibh sin.l order to strengthen himself, had early courted the

friendship of the King of Scots, for whose right of
fucceflfon he was a zealous advocate, and held a
close correspondence both with him and with his
principal Ministers. Cecil, devoted to the Queen
alone, rose daily to new honours, by the assiduity of
his services, and the patience with which he expet-
ed the reward of them. While the Earl's high fpi-
rit and impetuosity sometimes exposed him to checks
from a Mistress, who, though partial in her assec-
tion toward him, could not easily bear contradic-
tion, and conferred favours often unwillingly, and
always slowly. His own solicitations, however, fe-
conded maliciously by his enemies, who wished to
remove him at a distance from court, advanced him
to the command of the army employed in Ireland,
against Tyrone, and to the office of Lord Lieute-
nant of that kingdom, and with a commission almost
unlimited. His success in that expedition did not
equal either his own promises, or the expectations

of
-74

of Elizabeth. The Queen, peevish from her difap- B o o K
pointment, and exasperated against Effex by the ar- VIII.
tifices of his enemies, wrote him a harsh letter, full 'y"
of accusations and reproaches. These, his impa-
tient spirit could not bear, and, in the first transports
of his resentment, he proposed to carry over a part
of his army into England, and, by driving his ene-
mies from the Queen's pretence, to reinstate him-
self in favour, and ia power. But, upon more ma-
ture thoughts, he abandoned this rash design, and
setting fail with a few officers, devoted to his per-
son, landed in England, and pofled directly to court.
Elizabeth received him, without any symptom either
of affelion or of displeasure. By proper complian-
ces and acknowledgments, he might have regained
his former ascendant over the Queen. But he thought
himself too deeply injured to submit to these. Eli-
zabeth, on the other hand, determined to subdue
his haughty temper; and though her severity drew
from him the most humble letters, she confined him
to the Lord Keeper's house, and appointed commis-
fioners to try him, both for his conduct during his
government of Ireland, and for leaving that king-
dom without her permission. By their sentence, he
was suspended from all his offices, except that of
Master of the horse, and continued a prisoner du-
ring the Queen's pleasure. Satisfied with having
mortified his pride thus far, Elizabeth did not sus-
ser the sentence to be recorded, and soon after al-
lowed him to retire to his own house. During these
transactions, which occupied several months, Effex
fluctuated between the allegiance he owed to his So-
vereign, and the desire of revenge; and foietimes

T 2 leaned

B o o K leaned to the one, and sometimes to the other. In
VIII. one of the intervals when the latter prevailed, he

sent a messenger into Scotland to encourage the King
to assert his own right to the succession by force of
arms, and to promise that, besides the assistance of
the Earl and all his friends in England, Lord Mount-
joy, now Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, would join
him with 5000 men from that kingdom. But

Jameu5s James did not chute to hazard the losing a kingdom,
condu.t which was just ready to fall into his hands, by a

premature attempt to seize it. Mountjoy, too, de-
clined the enterprise, and Effex adopted more duti-
ful schemes; all thoughts of ambition appearing to
be totally effaced out of his mind.

The wild THIS moderation, which was merely the effect of
attempt of
Efls-e disgust and disappointment, was not of long conti-

nuance. Arid the Queen, having not only refused
to renew a lucrative grant, which ihe had formerly
bestowed, but to admit him into her presence, that
new injury drove a temper, naturally impatient, and
now much fretted, to absolute despair. His friends,
instead of soothing his rage, or restraining his impe-
tuofity, added to both, by their imprudent and in-
terested zeal. After many anxious consultations, he
determined to attempt to redress his wrongs byvio-
lence. And conscious how unpopular such an enter-
prise would be, if it appeared to proceed from mo-
tives of private revenge alone, he endeavoured to
give it the semblance of public utility, by mingling
the King of Scotland's interest with his own. He
wrote to James, that the faftion which now predomi-
nated in the English court, had resolved to support the

pre-
276

pretensions of the Infanta of Spain to the crown; B o o K
that the places of the greatest importance in the VIII.
kingdom were put into the hands of his avowed enr- ' .
mies; and that unless he sent ambassadors, without i6
delay, to insist on the immediate declaration of his
right of succession, their measures were so well con-
certed, that all his hopes would be desperate. James
who knew how disagreeable such a proposal would
be to the Queen of England, was not willing rashly
to expose himself to ler displeasure. But Effex,
blinded by resentment, and impatient for revenge,
abandoned himself to these passions, and aced like
a man guided by frenzy or despair. With two or
three hundred followers incompletely armed, he at-
tempted to assault a throne, the best established in
Europe. Sallying at their head, out of his own
house, he called on the citizens of London, if they
either valued his life, or wished to preserve the king-
dom from the dominion of the Spaniards, to take
arms, and to follow his standard. He advanced
towards the palace, with an intention to drive Cecil
and his faction out of the Queen's presence, and to
obtain a declaration of the Scottish King's right of
succession *. But, though almost adored by the ci-
tizens, not a man would join him in this wild enter-
prise. Dispirited by their indifference, deferred by
some of his own attendants, and alnoft surrounded
by the troops, which marched under different lead-
ers into the city, he retreated to his own house; and
without any bold effort, suitable to his present con-

* Birch. Mem. ii. 477.

277
T 3

dition,

B o RK dition, or worthy of his former reputation for cou-
VIII. rage, he surrendered to his enemies.

. As soon as James heard of Essex's ill success, he

appointed the Earl of Mar, and the abbot of Kin-
loss, to repair as his ambassadors to the Court of
England. The former of these was the person, by
whose means Effex had carried on his correfpon-
dence with the King. He was a passionate admir-
er of the Earl's characer, and disposed to attempt
every thing that could contribute to his safety.
Bruce, united in a close friendship with Mar, was
ready to second him with equal zeal. Nor was the
purpose of the embassy less friendly to Effex, than
the choice of his ambafladors; they were command-
ed to solicit, in the warmelt manner, for the Earl's
life, and if they found that the King, by avowing
his friends, could either promote their designs, or
contribute to their safety, they were impowered to
lay aside all disguise, and to promise that he would
put himself at their head, and claim what was due
to him bv force of arm '*. But before the ambaf-
fadors could reach London, Effex had suffered the
wa death. punishment he merited by his treason. Perhaps the

fear of their interposing, in order to obtain his par-
don, hastened his death. Elizabeth continued, for
some time, irresolute concerning his fate, and could
not bring herself to consign into the hands of the
executioner, a man, who had once possessed her fa-
vour so entirely, without a painful struggle between
her resentment against his late mifconduft, and her
ancient affection towards him. The difirefs to

a Johnlf. 289. Birch. Mem. ii. 51o.

which

which he was now reduced, tended naturally to soft- B o o K
en the former, while it revived the latter with new VIII.
tenderness; and the interceflion of one faithful friend, '1

i6oi.

who had interest with the Queen, might perhaps
have saved his life, and have procured him a remif-
sion, which, of herself, she was ashamed to grant.
But this generous nobleman had at that time no
such friend. And Elizabeth, solicited incessantly
by her Ministers, and offended with the haughtiness
of Effex, who, as she imagined, scorned to sue for
pardon, at last commanded the sentence to be put
in execution. No sooner was the blow struck, than
ihe repented of her own raffnefs, and bewailed his
death with the deepest sorrow. James always con-
fidered him as one, who had fallen a martyr to his
service, and after his accession to the English throne,
restored his son to his honours, as well as all his as-
fociates in the conspiracy, and diftinguilhed them
with his favour*.

THE Scottilh ambassadors, finding that they had James cel.

arrived too late to execute the chief business com- intrgues in
mitted to their charge, not only concealed that part Ensland.
of their inftrutions, with the utmolt care; but con-
gratulated the Queen, in their Master's name, on
her happy escape from such an audacious confpira-
cy. Elizabeth, though no stranger to the King's
correspondence with Effex, or to that nobleman's in-
tentions of aflerting James's right to the Crown, was
not willing that these should be known to the peo-
ple, and, for that reason, received the congratula-

Camd. Spotfw. 464.

tions

B o o tions of the Scottish arnbaffadors with all po-ssible
VIII. marks of credit and good will; and in order to
6ToYi. sooth James, and to preserve the appearances of

union between the two courts, increased thefubfidy
which she paid him annually. The ambassadors re-
fided for some time in England, and were employ-
ed, with great success, in renewing and extending
the intrigues, which Bruce had formerly entered in-
to with the English nobles. As Elizabeth advanced
in years, the English turned their eyes more and
more towards Scotland, and were eager to prevent
each other in courting the favour of their future
Monarch. Assurances of attachment, professions
of regard, and promises offupport, were offered to
James from every corner of the kingdom. Cecil
himself, perceiving what hopes Effex had founded
on the friendlhip of the Scottifli King, and what
advantages he might have derived from it, thought
it prudent to stand no longer at a distance from a
Prince, who might so soon become his master. But
being sensible at the fame time, how dangerous
such an intercourse might prove, under a Mistress
naturally jealous, and whose jealousy grew stronger
with old age ; though he entered into a correspond-
ence with him, he carried it on with all the fecrefy
and caution necessary in his situation, and peculiar
to his chara&er. And James having gained the
man whole opposition and influence he had hitherto
chiefly dreaded, waited, in perfec security, till that
event should happen, which would open his way to
the throne of England. It was, with some diffi-
culty, that he restrained, within proper bounds, his
adherents in that kingdom, who, labouring to di-

Itinguifh

ftinguifh thermfelves by that offcious zeal, with B o o K
which a Prince, who has a near profpeft of mount- VI'I.
ing the throne, is always served, urged him to al- ---'
low a m'otion to be made in paTliament foe d'eclar-
ing his right of succession to the Crown. James
prudently discouraged that d'fign; but it was with'
ro small fatisfactioin that he observed the ascendant
he was acquiring in a court, whose didates he had
been so long obliged to obey; and which had ei-
ther prescribed or thwarted every ftep he had taken,
during the whole course of his reign *

NOTWITHSTANDING the violent struggles of th 1602o.

political facions which divided the court, and the Attempts
frequent revolutions which had happened there, the Higl-
since the King first took the reins of government into landers.
his own hands, Scotland had enjoyed unusual tran-
quillity, being undisturbed by any foreign enemy,
and free from any intestine commotion of long. con-
tinuance. During this period, James endeavoured
to civilize the Highlands and the Iles, a' part of his
dominions almost totally negle&ed by former Mo-
narchs, though the reformation of it was an object
highly worthy of their care. The long peace with
England had afforded an opportunity of subduing
the licentious spirit of the borderers, and of reltrain-
ing their depredations, often no less ruinous to their
countrvmen, than to their enemies. The inhabit-
ants of the Low Country began, gradually, to for-
get the use of arms, and to become attentive to the
arts of peace. But the Highlanders, retaining their
natural fierceness, averse from labour, and inured

Spotfw. 467. 471. Birch. Meem. ii. 514.

to

B o o K to rapine, infested their moreindultrious neighbours,
VIII. by their continual incursions. James, being folici-
ó"'4- tous not only to repress their inroads, but to render

them useful fubjecis *, had at different times enated
many wife laws extremely conducive to there ends.
All landlords, or chiefs of Clans, were enjoined to
permit no persons to reside in their estates, who
could not find sufficient surety for their good beha-
viour; they were required to make a lift of all sus-
picious persons under their jurifdition, to bind
themselves to deliver them up to jufRice, and to in-
demnify those, who should susser by their robberies;
and, in order to ascertain the faithful performance
of there articles, the chiefs themselves were obliged
to give hostages to the King, or to put pledges in
his hands. Three towns, which might serve as a
retreat for the industrious, and a nursery for arts
and commerce, were appointed to be built in diffe-
rent parts of the Highlands; one in Cantyre, ano-
ther in Lochabar, and a third in the isle of Lewis;
and in order to draw the inhabitants thither, all
the privileges of Royal Boroughs were to be con-
ferred upon them. Finding it, however, to be no
easy matter to inspire the inhabitants of those coun-
tries with the love of induitry, a resolution was
taken to plant among them, colonies of people from
the more industrious counties. The firit experi-
ment was made in the Isle of Lewis; and as it was
advantageously situated for the fishing trade, afource
from which Scotland ought naturally to derive great
wealth, the colony transported thither was drawn
out of Fife, the inhabitants of which were well

Basil. Dor. 139.

skilled

skilled in that branch of commerce. But before B o o K
they had remained there long enough to manifest VIII.
the good effects of this institution, the islanders, en- 62

-

raged at feeing their country occupied by those in-
truders, took arms, and surprising them in the
night-time, murdered some of them, and compel-
led the reft to abandon the settlement. The King's
attention being soon after turned to other objects,
we hear no more of this salutary projet. Though
James did not pursue the design with that steady
application and perseverance, without which it is
impossible to change the manners of a whole peo-
ple, he had the glory, however, not only of hav-
ing first conceived the thoughts, but of having first
pointed out the proper method of introducing the
civil arts of life into that part of the Island*.

AFTER having long enjoyed a good state of Elizabeth's

health, the effet of a found constitution, and the and deatl.
reward of uncommon regularity and temperance,
Elizabeth began this winter to feel her vigour de-
crease, and to be sensible of the infirmities of old
age. Having removed on a very stormy day from
Weftrinfter to Richmond, whither [he was impa-
tient to retire, her complaints increased. She had
no formed fever; her pulse was good; but she eat i6o
little, and could not sleep. Her distemper seemed January3I.
to proceed from a deep melancholy, which appear-
ed both in her countenance and behaviour. She
delighted in solitude, she fat constantly in the dark;
and was often drowned in tears.

* Parl. 1587. 1594. 1597. Spotfw. 468.

No

B o o I No sooner was the Queen's indisposition known,
VIII. than persons of all ranks, and of all different sets
~'--r ' and parties, redoubled their applications to the King
r603- of Scots, and vied with each other, in profeflions

of attachment to his person, and in promises of
submission to his government. Even some of her
own servants, weary of the length of her reign,
fond of novelty, impatient to get rid of the burthen
of gratitude for past benefits, and expeaing to share
in the liberality of a new Prince, began to desert
her. And crowds of people hurried towards Scot-
land, eager to pre-occupy the favour of the fuc-
ceffor, or afraid of being too late in paying homage
to him.

MEANWrILE, the Queen's disease increased, and

her melancholy appeared to be fettled and incurable.
Various conjectures were formed concerning the
causes of a disorder, from which ihe seemed to be
exempted by the natural cheerfulness of her temper.
Some imputed it to her being forced, contrary to
her inclination, to pardon the Earl of Tyrone,
whose rebellion had for many years created her
so much trouble. Others imagined that it arose
from observing the ingratitude of her courtiers, and
the levity of her people, who beheld her health de-
clining with most indecent indifference, and looked
forward to the accession of the Scottish King, with
an impatience which they could not conceal. The
most common opinion, at that time, and perhaps
the most probable, wa: .hat it flowed from grief for
the Earl of Effex. She retained an extraordinary
regard for the memory of that unfortunate noble-

man ;

man; and though she often complained of his ob- B o o K
itinacy, feldorn mentioned his name without tears *. VIII.
An accident happened soon after her retiring to '---.
Richmond, which revived her affecion with new
tenderness, and embittered her sorrows. The
Countess of Nottingham, being on her death bed,
desired to fee the Queen, in order to reveal some-
thing to her, without discovering which, Ihe could
not die in peace. When the Queen came into her
chamber, she told her, that while Eflex lay under
sentence of death, he was desirous of imploring
pardon in the manner which the Queen herself had
prescribed, by returning a ring, which during the
height of his favour she had given him, with a pro-
mise that if, in any future distress, he sent that back
to her as a token, it should intitle him to her pro-
tection; that Lady Scroop was the person he intended
to employ in order to present it; that, by a mistake,
it was put into her hands inflead of Lady Scroop's;
and that She having communicated the matter to
her husband, one of Essex's most implacable ene-
mies, he had forbid her either to carry the ring to
the Queen, or to return it to the Earl. The
Countess having thus disclosed her secret, begged
the Queen's forgiveness; but Elizabeth, who now
saw both the malice of the Earl's enemies, and how
unjustly Ihe had fufpe&ed him of inflexible obfti-
nacy, replied, " God may forgive you, but I ne-
ver can ;" and left the room in great emotion t.

From

*Birch. Mem. ii. 505.
t This anecdote concerning Elizabeth was first publifled by

Osborne, Menr of Eliz. p. 23; is confirmed by the testimony
of de Maurier, Mem. 26o, and by the traditionl:l elidence of

Lad'.

B o o K From that moment, her spirit funk entirely; she
VIII. could scarce taste food; ihe refused all the medicines
ócY - prescribed by her physicians; declaring that she-

3 wished to die, and would live no longer. No in-

treaty could prevail on her to go to bed; she fat on
cuflions, during ten days and nights, pensive, and
silent, holding her finger almost continually in her
mouth, with her eyes open, and fixed on the ground.
The only thing to which she seemed to give any at-
tention, were the acts of devotion, performed in
her apartment, by the Archbishop of Canterbury;
and in these the joined with great appearance of ser-
vour. Wafted, at last, as well by anguish of mind,
as by long abstinence, she expired, without a ftrug-
gle, on Thursday the 24th day of March, in the

Lady Elizabeth Spelman published by Dr. Birch, Negoc. 166.
Camden mentions the Queen's grief for Essex's death as one of
the causes of her melancholy. Some original papers remain
which prove that this was commonly believed at the time. Birch.
Mem. ii. 5o6. Effex, however, had been beheaded two years
before her death, and there seems to have been no other reason,
but that which we have afigned, why her sorrow should revive
with so much violence at so great a distance of time. As the
death of the Countess of Nottinghar happened about a fort-
night before the Queen's death, the coincidence of these events,
together with the other evidence mentioned, adds so much pro-
bability to the fory related by Olborne, as will entitle it to a
place in history. The only objeaion to the account we have
given of Elizabeth's attachment to Effex, arises from her great
age. At the age of 68, the amorous passions are commonly
abundantly cool, and the violence of all the passions, except one,
is much abated. But the force of this objection is entirely re-
moved by an Author who has illuflrated many passages in the
English Hiflory, and adorned more. Catalogue of Royal and
Noble Authors, Article Eflex.

70th year of her age, and in the 45th of her B o o
reign *. VIII.

FOREIGNERS often accuse the English of indiffe- 1603.

Her cha-

rence and difrefpe&t towards their Princes. But with- raaer.
out reason; no people are more grateful than they to
those Monarchs who merit their gratitude. The
names of Edward III. and Henry V. are mentioned
by the English of this age, with the fame warmth,
as they were by those who shared in the blessings
and splendour of their reigns. The memory of Eli-
zabeth is still adored in England. And the hifto-
rians of that kingdom, after celebrating her love of
her people; her sagacity in discerning their true in-
terest; her steadiness in pursuing it; her wisdom in
the choice of her Ministers; the glory she acquired
by arms; the tranquillity she secured to her sub-
jects; and the increase of fame, of riches, and of
commerce, which were the fruits of all these;
justly rank her among the most illustrious Princes.
Even the defects in her character, they observe, were
not of a kind pernicious to her people. Her ex-
ceffive frugality was not accompanied with the love
of hoarding; and though it prevented some great
undertakings, and rendered the success of others
incomplete, it introduced ceconomy into her admi-
niftration, and exempted the nation from many
burdens, which a Monarch, more profuse or more
enterprising, must have imposed. Her slowness in
rewarding herfervants sometimes discouraged useful
merit; but it prevented the undeferving fiom ac-

* Camd. Birch. Men. ii. 5o6. Birch. Negoc. 206. Strype,
iv. 373.

quiring

287

B o o K quiring power and wealth, to which they had no
VIII. title. Her extreme jealousy of those Princes, who
C->- 'pretended to dispute her right to the Crown, led her

to take such precautions, as tended no less to the
public safety, than to her ipwa; and to court the
affections of her people, as the firmest support of
her throne. Such is the picure the Englilh draw
of this great Queen.

WHOEVER undertakes to write the History of

Scotland finds himself obliged, frequently, to view
her in a very different, and in a less amiable light.
Her authority in that kingdom, during the greater
part of her reign, was little inferior to that, which
ihe possessed in her own. But this authority, ac-
quired at first by a service of great importance to
the nation, she exercised in a manner.extremely per-
nicious to its happiness. By her induitry in foment-
ing the rage of the two contending factions; by
supplying the one with partial aid; by feeding the
other with false hopes; by balancing their power
so artfully, that each of them was able to distress,
and neither of them to subdue the other; ihe ren-
dered Scotland long the feat of discord, confusion
and bloodshed: And her craft and intrigues, effe&-
ing what the valour of her ancestors could not ac-
complith, reduced that kingdom to a iate of de-
pendance on England. The maxims of policy, of-
ten little consonant to those of morality, may, per-
haps, juitify this condut. But no apology can be
offered for her behaviour ro Queen Mary-; a scene
of difimulation v.ithout necessity; and offeverity
beyond example. In almost all her other actions,

Eliza-

Elizabeth is the obje& of our highest admiration; B o o K
in this, we muff allow that she not only laid aside VIII.
the magnanimity which became a Queen, but the '- J
feelings natural to a woman. 60.

THOUGH Elizabeth would never permit the question James pro-
concerning the right of succession to the Crown to claimed

King of

be determined in parliament; nor declare her own England.
sentiments concerning a point, which she wished to
remain an impenetrable mystery; she had, however,
formed no design of excluding the Scottifi King
from an inheritance, to which his title was undoubt-
ed. A flort time before her death, The broke the
silence, which Ihe had so long preserved on that sub-
je&, and told Cecil and the Lord Admiral, " That
her throne was the throne of Kings; that she would
have no mean person to ascend it, and that her Cou-
fin the King of Scots should be her successor."
This she confirmed on her death-bed. And as soon
as she breathed her lass, the lords of the Privy
Council proclaimed James King of England. All
the intrigues carried on by foreigners, in favour of
the Infanta, all the cabals formed within the king-
dom, to support the titles of Lady Arabella, and
the Earl of Hartford, disappeared in a moment;
the nobles, and people, forgetting their ancient hof-
tilities with Scotland, and their aversion for the do-
minion of strangers, testified their latisfacion with
louder acclamations than were atfual at the accession
of their native Princes. Amidst this tumult of joy,
a motion made by a few patriots, who proposed to
prescribe tome conditions to the fuccflobr, and to
exact fromn him the redrels of onme grievances, be-

Voil. II. U fore

289

B o o K fore they called him to the throne, wasfcarce heard;
VIII. and Cecil, by stifling it, added to his stock of me-

- rit with his new matter. Sir Charles Percy, bro-
3. ther of the Earl of Northumberland, and Thomas

Somerset, the Earl of Worcester's son, were dif-
patched to Scotland, with a letter to the King,
signed by all the Peers and Privy Counsellors then
in London; informing him of the Queen's death,
of his accession to the throne, of their care to re-
iognize his title, and of the universal applause,
with which the public proclamation of it had been
attended. They made the utinoft haste to deliver
this welcome message; but were prevented by the
zeal of Sir Robert Carey, Lord Hunfdane's youngest
son, who, setting out a few hours after Elizabeth's
death, arrived at Edinburgh on Saturday night,
just as the King had gone to bed. He was imme-
diately admitted into the royal apartment, and kneel-
ing by the King's bed, acquainted him with the
death of Elizabeth, saluted him King of England,
Scotland, France, and Ireland, and as a token of
the truth of the intelligence which he brought, pre-
sented him a ring, which his filter Lady Scroop, had
taken from the Queen's finger after her death. James
heard him with a decent composure. But as Carey
was only a private meTenger, the information he
brought was not made public, and the King kept
his apartment till the arrival of Percy and Somer-
set. Then his titles were solemnly proclaimed;
and his own subjects expressed no less joy, than the
English, at this increase of his dignity. As his
pretence was absolutely neceflaryin England, where
the people were extremely impatient to fee their

new
290go

new Sovereign, he prepared to set out for that king- B o o K
dom, without delay. He appointed his Queen to VIII.
follow him within a few weeks. He committed the -.--'
government of Scotland to his Privy Council. He I603.
intrusted the care of his children to different noble-
men. On the Sunday before his departure, he re-
paired to the church of St. Giles, and after hearing
a sermon, in which the preacher displayed the great-
ness of the divine goodness in raising him to the
throne of such a powerful kingdom without oppofi-
tion or bloodihed, and exhorted him to express
his gratitude, by promoting to the urmoft, the hap-
piness and prosperity of his fubjeas; the King role
up, and addressing himself to the people, made
many professions of unalterable affecion towards
them; promised frequently to visit Scotland; as-
fured them that his Scottish fubjefts, notwithftand-
ing his absence, should feel that he was their native
Prince, no less than when he resided among them;
and might still trust that his ears should be always
open to their petitions, which he would answer with
the alacrity and love of a parent. His words were,
often, interrupted by the tears of the whole audi-
ence; who, though they exulted at the King's pro-
fperity, were melted into sorrow by there tender de-
clarations *.

ON the fifth of April, he began his journey, Takes pot-
with a splendid, but not a numerous train; and fiw"n of

the throne,

next day he entered Berwick. Wherever he came,
immense multitudes were aftembled to welcome him;
and the principal persons, iin the different counties

Spotrv. 476.

U 2 through

g291

B o o K through which he passed, displayed all their wealth
VIII. and magnificence in entertainments prepared for
.6- him, at their houses. Elizabeth had reigned so long

in England, that molt of her fubjecs remembered
no other court but her's; and their notions of the
manners and decorums suitable to a prince were form-
ed upon what they had observed there. It was na-
tural to apply this standard to the behaviour and
a&ions of their new Monarch, and to compare him,
at first fight, with the Queen, on whose throne he
was to be placed. James, whole manners were ex-
tremely different from her's, suffered by the com-
parison. He had not that flowing affability, by
which Elizabeth captivated the hearts of her peo-
ple; and though easy among a few whom he loved,
his indolence could not bear the fatigue of render-
ing himself agreeable to a mixed multitude. He
was no less a fsranger to that dignity, with which
Elizabeth tempered her faniliarity. And instead
of that well-judged frugality with which she con-
ferred titles of honour, he bestowed them with an
undiftinguifhing profusion, that rendered them no
longer marks of difrrintion, or rewards of merit.
But these were the refietions of the few alone; the
mnultitude continued their acclamations; and amidst
these, James entered London on the 7th of May,
and took peaceable possession of the throne of Eng-
land.
conciufion. Tius were united two kingdoms, divided from

the earliest accounts of time, but destined, by their
situation, to form one great monarchy. And by
this junction of its whole native force, Great Britain

hath
292

hath risen to an eminence and authority in Europe B o o K
which England and Scotland could never have at- VIII.
tained.

1603.
THE Scots had so long confidered their Monarchs A view of

the Revo-

as next heirs to the Engliff throne, that they had lutions in
full leisure to refle& on all the consequences of theirhe con.i-

tution of

being advanced to that dignity. But, dazzled with Scotland
the glory of giving a Sovereign to their powerful accefthneof
enemy, relying on the partiality of their native James v.
Prince, and in full expectation of sharing liberally
in the wealth and honours he would now be able to
beltow, they attended little to the most obvious con-
sequences of that great event, and rejoiced at his
accession to the throne of England, as if it had been
no less beneficial to the kingdom, than honourable
to the King. They soon had reason, however, to
adopt very different sentiments; and from that pe-
riod, we may date a total alteration in the political
constitution of Scotland.

THE feudal Aristocracy, which had been subvert-

ed in most nations of Europe by the policy of their
Princes, or had been undermined by the progress of
commerce, still subsisted with full force in Scotland.
Many causes had contributed gradually to augment
the power of the Scottish nobles; and even the Re-
formation, which in every other country where it
prevailed added to the authority of the Monarch,
had increased their wealth and influence. A King,
possessed of a finall revenue, with a prerogative ex-
tremely limited, and unsupported by a itanding
army, could not exercise much authority over such

U 3 potent

B o o K potent subjects. He was obliged to govern by ex-
VIII. pedients; and the laws derived their force not from

his power to execute them, but from the voluntary
submission of the nobles. But though this produced
a species of government feeble and irregular beyond
example; though Scotland, under the name, and
with all the outward ensigns of a Monarchy, was
really fubjeca to an Aristocracy, the people were not
altogether unhappy; and even in this wild form of
a constitution, there were principles, which tend-
ed to their security and advantage. The King,
checked and overawed by the nobles, durst venture
upon no a& of arbitrary power. The nobles, jea-
lous of the King, whose claims and pretensions were
many, though his power was small, were afraid of
irritating their dependants by unreasonable exacions,
and tempered the rigour of ariftocratical tyranny,
with a mildness and equality to which it is naturally
a firanger. And while the military genius of the
feudal government remained in vigour, the vassals
both of the Crown and of the Barons, were not only
free from opplefflon, but courtel by their superiors,
whose power and importance were founded on their
attachment and love.

BUT, by his accession to the throne of England,

James acquired such an immediate acceflion ofwealth,
of power, and of splendour, that the nobles, afto-
nifhed and intimidated, thought it vain to struggle
for privileges which they were now unable to defend.
Nor was it from fear alone that they submitted to
the yoke; James, partial to his countrymen, and
willing that they should partake in his good for-

tune,

tune, loaded them with riches and honours; and B o o K
the hope of his favour concurred with the dread of VIII.
his power, in taming their fierce and independent '--v
spirits. The will of the Prince became the supreme
law in Scotland; and the nobles sirove, with emu-
lation, who should molt implicitly obey commands,
which they had formerly been accustomed to con-
temn. Satisfied with having subjected the nobles
to the Crown, the King left them in full poffeflion
of their ancient jurifdicion over their own vassals.
The extensive rights, vested in a feudal Chief, be-
came in their hands dreadful instruments of oppref-
sion, and the military ideas on which these rights
were founded, being gradually loft or disregarded,
nothing remained to correc or to mitigate the ri-
gour with which they were exercised. The nobles,
exhausting their fortunes by the expence of frequent
attendance upon the English court, and by attempts
to imitate the manners and luxury of their more
wealthy neighbours, multiplied exations upon the
people, who durst scarce utter complaints which
they knew would never reach the ear of their Sove-
reign, nor move him to grant them any redress.
And, from the union of the Crowns to the Revo-
lution, in i688, Scotland was placed in a political
situation of all others the most singular, and the
most unhappy; fubjeacd at once to the absolute
will of a Monarch, and to the oppressive jurifdi&ion
of an Aristocracy, it suffered all the miseries peculiar
to both these forms of government. Its Kings were
despotic; its nobles were slaves and tyrants; and
the people groaned under the rigorous domination
of both.

DURING

295

Bo o K DURING this period, the nobles, it is true, made
VIII. one effort to shake off the yoke, and to regain their
C"~^ ancient independency. After the death of James,

the Scottish nation was no longer viewed by our
Monarchs with any partial affetion. Charles I.
educated among the English, discovered no peculiar
attachment to the kingdom of which he was a na-
tive. And the nobles, perceiving the sceptre to be
now in hands less friendly, and swayed by a Prince
with whom they had little connexion, and over
whose councils they had little influence, no longer
Submitted with the fame implicit obedience. Pro-
voked by some encroachments of the King on their
order, and apprehensive of others, the remains of
their ancient spirit began to appear. They com-
plained, and remonstrated. And the people being,
at the fame time, violently disgusted at the innova-
tions in Religion, the nobles secretly heightened
this disgust; and their artifices, together with the
ill conduct of the court, railed such a spirit, that
the whole nation took arms against their Sovereign,
with an union and anin'.ofity of which there had
formerly been no example. Charles brought against
them the forces of England, and notwithstanding
their own union, and the zeal of the people, the
nobles must have funk in the struggle. But the
difaffefion, which was growing among his English
fubjecs, prevented the King from acIing with vi-
gour. A civil war broke out in both kingdoms.
And after many battles and revolutions which are
well known, the Scottiih nobles, who first began
the war, were involved in the fame ruin with the
throne. At the Restoration, Charles 11. regained

full

full possession of the royal prerogative in Scotland; B o o K
and the nobles, whose estates were wafted, or their VIII.
spirit broken by the calamities to which they had ""
been exposed, were less able and less willing than
ever to resist the power of the Crown. During this
reign, and that of James VII. the dicates of the
Monarch were received in Scotland with most ab-
ject submission. The poverty to which many of
the nobles were reduced, rendered them meaner
slaves, and more intolerable tyrants than ever. The
people, always neglected, were now odious, and
loaded with every injury, on account of their at-
tachment to religious and political principles, ex-
tremely repugnant to those adopted by their Princes.

THE Revolution introduced other maxims into

the government of Scotland. To increare the au-
thority of the Prince, or to secure the privileges of
the nobles, had hitherto been almost the sole object
of our laws. The rights of the people were scarce
ever mentioned, were disregarded, or unknown.
Attention began, henceforward, to be paid to the
welfare of the people. By the claim of right, their
liberties were secured. And the number of their
representatives being increased, they gradually ac-
quired new weight and consideration in parliament.
As they came to enjoy more security and greater
power, their minds began to open, and to form
more extensive plans of commerce, of industry, and
of police. But the ariftocratical spirit, which frill
predominated, together with many other accidents,
retarded the improvement and happiness of the
nation.

ANO-

B o o K ANOTHER great event completed what the Revo-
VIII. lution had begun. The political power of the no-
""''- bles, already broken by the union of the two Crowns,

was almost annihilated by the union o' the two
kingdoms. Infte-d of making a part, as formerly,
of the supreme allembly of the nation, instead of
bearing the most considerable sway there, the Scot-
tilh nobles are admitted into the British parliament
by their reprefencatives only, and form but an in-
considerable part of one of those bodies in which
the legislative authority is veRled. They themlelves
are excluded absolutely from the house of Com-
mons, and even their eldest sons are not permitted
to represent their countrymen in that august assem-
bly. Nor have their feudal privileges remained, to
compensate for this extin&ion of their political au-
thority. As commerce advanced in its progress,
and government attained nearer to perfection, these
were insensibly circumscribed, and at last, by laws
no less salutary to the public, than fatal to the no-
bles, they have been almost totally abolished. As
the nobles were deprived of power, the people ac-
quired liberty. Exempted from burdens, to which
they were formerly subjec&, screened from oppref-
sion, to which they had been long exposed, and
adopted into a conrtitution, whose genius and laws
were more liberal than their own, they have extend-
ed their commerce, refined their manners, made im-
provements in the elegancies of life, and cultivated
the arts and sciences.

THIS survey of the political state of Scotland,
in which events and their causes have been mention-

ed

ed rather than developed, enables us to point out B o o K
three axras, from each of which we may date some VIII.
great alteration, in one or other of the three diffe- v--
rent members of which the supreme legislative as-
fembly in our constitution is composed. At the
Accefion, the Kings of Scotland, once the most li-
mited, became, in an instant, the most absolute
Princes in Europe, and exercised a despotic autho-
rity, which their Parliaments were unable to con-
troul, or their nobles to resist. At the Union, the
feudal aristocracy, which had subsisted so many ages,
and with power so exorbitant, was overturned, and
the Scottish nobles voluntarily surrendered rights and
pre-eminences, peculiar to their order, and reduced
themselves to a condition, which is no longer the
terror and envy of other subje&s. Since the Union,
the Commons, anciently neglected by their Kings,
and despised by the nobles, have emerged into dig-
nity; and, being admitted to a participation of all
the privileges, which the Engliih had purchased at
the expence of so much blood, mufL now be esteem-
ed a body not less considerable in the one kingdom,
than they have long been in the other.

THE church felt the effects of the absolute pow-

er which the King acquired by his acceflion; and
its revolutions too, are worthy of notice. James,
during the latter years of his administration in Scot-
land, revived the name and office of Bishops. But
they possessed no ecclesiastical jurifdition or pre-
eminence; their revenues were inconsiderable, and
they were scarce diftinguifled by any thing, but by

their

B o o K their feat in parliament, and by being the object of
VIII. the clergy's jealousy, and the people's hatred. The
'-r' ' King, delighted with the splendour and authority

which the English Bishops enjoyed, and eager to
effe& an union in ecclesiastical policy, which he had,
in vain, attempted in the civil government, resolved
to bring both Churches to an exac conformity with
each other. Three Scotsmen were consecrated Bi-
ihops at London. From them, their brethren were
commanded to receive orders. Ceremonies unknown
in Scotland were imposed. And though the Clergy,
less obsequious than the nobles, boldly opposed there
innovations, James, long pra&ised and well skilled
in the arts of managing them, obtained at length
their compliance. But Charles I. a superstitious
Prince, unacquainted with the genius of the Scots,
imprudent and precipitant in all the measures he
pursued in that kingdom, pressing too eagerly the
reception of the English liturgy, and indiscreetly
attempting a resumption of Church lands, kindled
the flames of civil war; and the people being left
at liberty to indulge their own wishes, the Episcopal
church was overturned, and the Presbyterian go-
vernment and discipline were re-eftablilhed with new
vigour. Together with monarchy, Episcopacy was
restored in Scotland. A form of government, so
odious to the people, required force to uphold it;
and though the whole rigour of authority, and all
the barbarity of persecution were employed in its
support, the aversion of the nation was infurmount-
able, and it subsisted with difficulty. At the Revo-
lution, the inclinations of the people were thought

wor-
300

worthy the attention of the legislature, the Prefby- B o o K
terian government was again established, and being VIII.
ratified by the Union, is still maintained in the -
kingdom.

NOR did the influence of the Accession extend to

the civil and ecclesiastical constitutions alone; the
genius of the nation, its taste and spirit, things of
a nature still more delicate, were sensibly affected by
that event. When learning revived in the fifteenth
a-d sixteenth centuries, all the modern languages
were in a state equally barbarous, devoid of ele-
gance, of vigour, and even of perspicuity. No
author thought of writing in languages so ill adapt-
ed to express and embellish his sentiments, or of
ereting a work for immortality, with such rude
and perishing materials. And as the spirit, which
prevailed at that time, did not owe its rife to any
original effort of the human mind, but was excited
by admiration of the ancients, their compositions
were esteemed not only the Standards of taste, and
offentiment, but of style; and even the languages
in which they wrote were thought to be peculiar and
almost consecrated to learning and the muses. Not
only the manner of the ancients was imitated, but
their language copied: and, extravagant as the at-
tempt may appear to write in a dead tongue, in
which men were not accustomed to think, and which
they could not speak, or even pronounce, the fuc-
cess of it was astonishing. As they formed their
style upon the purest models, as they were uninfect-
ed with those barbarisms, which the inaccuracy of

fami-

B o o K familiar conversation, the affe&ation of courts, in-
VIII. tercourfe with strangers, and a thousand other causes
'-*-' introduce into living languages, many moderns have

attained to a degree of elegance in their Latin com-
positions, which the Romans themselves scarce pof-
sessed beyond the limits of the Augustan age.
While this was almost the only species of compofi-
tion, and all authors, by using one common lan-
guage, could be brought to a nearer comparison,
the Scortifh writers were not inferior to those of any
other nation. The happy genius of Buchanan,
equally formed to excel in prose and in verse, more
various, more original, and more elegant, than that
of almost any other modern who writes in Latin,
reflets, with regard to this particular, the greatest
lustre on his country.

BUT the labour attending the study of a dead

tongue was irksome; the unequal return for their
industry which authors met with, who could be
read and admired only within the narrow circle of
thelearned, was mortifying; and men, instead of
wafting half their lives in learning the language of
the Romans, began to refine and to polilh their
own. The modern tongues were found to be sus-
ceptible of beauties and graces, which, if not equal
to those of the ancient ones, were at least more at-
tainable. And the Italians having first set the ex-
amrple, Latin was no longer used in the works of
taste; it was confined to books of science; and the
politer nations have banished it even from these.
The Scots, we may prelune, would have had no

cause

cause to regret this change in the public taste, and B o o K
would still have been able to maintain some equa- VIII.
lity with other nations, in their pursuit of literary '-V
honour. The Englifl and Scottish languages, de-
rived from the fame sources, were, at the end of
the sixteenth century, in a fRate nearly similar, dif-
fering from one another somewhat in orthography,
though not only the words, but the idioms were
much the fame. The letters of several Scottish
ftatefien of that age are not inferior in elegance,
or in purity, to those of the English MinifRers with
whom they corresponded. James himself was maf-
ter of a style far from contemptible; and, by his
example and encouragement, the Scottish language
might have kept pace with the English in refine-
ment. Scotland might have had a series of authors
in its own, as well as in the Latin language, to
boast of; and the improvements in taste, in the
arts, and in the sciences, which spread over the
other polished nations of Europe, would not have
been unknown there.

BUT, at the very time when other nations were

beginning to drop the use of Latin in works of
taste, and to make trial of the strength and com-
pass of their own languages, Scotland ceased to be
a kingdom. The transports of joy, which the Ac-
ceiion at firfl occasioned, were soon over: and the
Scots, being at once deprived of all the objecs that
refine or animate a people, of the presence of-their
Prince, of the concourse of nobles, of the splendour
and elegance of a court, an un;verfal dejection of

spirit

B o o K spirit seems to have seized the nation. The Court
VIII. being withdrawn, no dometfic standard of propriety
C'--» ' and correc'nefs of speech remained; the few com-

positions that Scotland produced were tried by the
English standard, and every word or phrase that
varied ihr the least from that, was condemned as
barbarous; whereas, if the two nations had conti-
nued diftinc, each might have retained idioms and
forms of speech peculiar to itself; and these ren-
dered faihionable by the example of a court, and
supported by the authority of writers of reputation,
would have been confidered in the fame light with
the varieties occasioned by the different dialecs in
the Greek tongue, would have been marked as beau-
ties, and, in many cafes, used promifcuo ufly by the
authors of both nations. But, by the Accession,
the English naturally became the sole judges and
lawgivers in language, and rejected as solecisms,
every form of speech to which their ear was not ac-
customed. Nor did the Scots, while the intercourse
between the two nations was inconsiderable *, and

* A remarkable proof of the little intercourse between the

Englilh and Scots before the union of the Crowns, is to be
found in two curious papers, one published by Haynes, the
other by Strype. In the year 1567, Elizabeth commanded the
Biihop of London to take a survey of all the strangers within
the ciries of London and Westminster. By this report, which is
very minute, it appears that the whole number of Scots at that
time was 58. Haynes 455. A funrey of the fame kind was
made by Sir Thomas Row, Lord Mayor, A. D. 1568. The
number of Scots had then increased to 88. Strype iv. Supple-
ment No. I. On the accefion of James, a considerable number
of Scots, especially of the higher rank, resorted to England;
but it was not till the Union that the intcrcourfe between the
tvo kingdoms became great.

ancient

ancient prejudices were still so violent as to prevent B o o K
imitation, possess the means of refining theirown VIII.
tongue according to the purity of the English itand- ' 9
ard. On the contrary, new corruptions flowed into
it from every different source. The Clergy of Scot-
land, in that age, were more eminent for piety than
for learning; and though there did not arise many
authors among them, yet being in poffcfion of the
privilege of discoursing publickly to the people,
and their sermons being too long, and perhaps too
frequent, such hafry productions could not be ele-
gant, and many slovenly and incorrect modes of
expreflion may be traced back to that original. The
pleadings of lawyers were equally loose and inaccu-
rate, and that profession having furnished more au-
thors, and the matters of which they treat mingling
daily in common discourse and business, many of
those vicious forms of speech, which are denomi-
nated Scotticfmns, have been by them introduced
into the language. Nor did either the language or
public taste receive any improvement in parlia-
ment, where a more liberal and more corre& elo-
quence might have been expe&ed. All business
was tranfafted there by the Lords of Articles, and
they were so servilely devoted to the court, that
few debates arose, and none were conducted with
the spirit and vigour natural to a popular assembly.

THUS, during the whole seventeenth century, the

Englifl were gradually refining their language, and
their taste; in Scotland the former was much de-
based, and the latter almost entirely loft. In the

VOL. II. X begin-

B o o K beginning of that period, both nations were emer-
VIII. ging out of barbarity; but the distance between
' -*' them which was thenr inconsiderable, became, be-

fore the end of it, immense. Even after science
had once dawned among them, the Scots seemed to
be finking back into ignorance and obscurity; and
active and intelligent as they naturally are, they
continued, while other nations were eager in the
pursuit of fame and knowledge, in a state of lan-
guor and stupefaction. This, however, must be
imputed to the unhappiness of their political situ-
ation, not to any defe& of genius; for no sooner
was the one removed in any degree, than the other
began to display itself. The aa abolishing the
power of the Lords of Articles, and other salutary
laws passed at the Revolution, having introduced
freedom of debate into the Scottish Parliament,
eloquence, with all the arts that accompany or
perfect it, became immediate objects of attention;
and the example of Fletcher of Salton alone is
sufficient to shew that the Scots were still capable
of generous sentiments, and, notwithstanding some
peculiar idioms, were able to express themselves
with energy, and with elegance.

AT length the Union having incorporated the

two nations, and rendered them one people, the
distinctions which had subsisted for many ages gra-
dually wear away; peculiarities disappear; the
fame manners prevail in both parts of the island;
the fame authors are read and admired; the fame
entertainments are frequented by the elegant and

polite;

polite; and the fame standard of taste, and of pu- B o o i
rity in language, is eftablilhed. And the Scots, VIII.
after being placed, during a whole century, in a
situation no less fatal to the liberty than to the
taste and genius of the nation, were at once put
in pofleffion of privileges more valuable than those
which their ancestors had formerly enjoyed; and
every obftrution that had retarded their pursuit,
or prevented their acquisition of literary fame, was
totally removed.

A P P E N-

# APPENDIX.

A P P E N D IX.

No. I (Vol. I. p. 2io.)
A M E M O R I A L of certain points meet

for refloring the realm of SCOTLAND to the
antient weale.
IMPRIMIS, it is tobe noted, that the best worldly feli- th Auu,

city that Scotland can have, is either to continue in a 155. Cot-

perpetual peace with the kingdom of England, or toton. Lib.
be made one monarchy with England, as they both make CafO B. ,o
but one island, divided from the reft of the world. a copy in

IF the first is fought, that is to be in perpetual peacefecrctaryCe-

with England, then must it necessarily be provided, that i l' and.
Scotland be not so fubjeEt to the appointments of France,
as is presently, which, being an antient enemy to England,
feeketh always to make Scotland an instrument, to exer-
cife, thereby, their malice upon England, and to make
a foot-stool thereof to look over England, as they may.

THEREFORE, when Scotland (hall come into the hands

of a mere Scottish man in blood, then may there be hope
of such accord, but as long as it is at the commandment
of the French, there is no hope to have accord long be-
twixt these two realms.

THEREFORE feeing it is at the French King's com-

mandment by reason of his wife, it is to be conlidered for
the weale of Scotland, that until Ihe have children, and
during her absence out of the realm, the next heirs to
the crown, being the house of the Hamiltons, should have
regard hereto, and to fee that neither the crown be imposed
nor wafted; and on the other fide, the nobility and com-
monalty ought to force that the laws and the old cultoms
of the realm be not altered, neither that the country be not
impoverished by taxes, emprelt, or new impofis, after the

X 3 man-
KYTI-----·-------P-U IL·i-rr

manner of France; for provision wherein, both by the law
of God and man, the French king and his wife may be
moved to reform their mifgovemance of the land.

AND for this purpose, it were good that the nobility

and commons joined with the next heir of the crown, to
seek due reformation of such great abuses as tend to the
ruin of their country, which mufft be done before the
French grow too itrong and insolent.

FIRST, That it may be provided, by consent of the

three estates of the land, that the land may be free from all
idolatry like as England is, for justification whereof, if
any free general council may be had where the Pope of
Rome have not the feat of judgment, they may offer to
ihew their cause to be most agreeable to Christ's religion.

NEXT, to provide that Scotland might be governed, in

all rules and offices, by the antient blood of the realm,
without either captains, lieutenants, or soldiers, as all
other Princes govern their countries, and especially that
the forts might be in the hands of mere Scottih men.

THIRDLY, that they might never be occasioned to

enter into wars againf England, except England should
give the first cause to Scotland.

FOURTHLY, that no nobleman of Scotland lhould re-

ceive penflon of France, except it were whilst he did serve
in France, for otherwise thereby the French (hould shortly
corrupt many, and betray their own country.

FIFTHLY, that no office, abbey, living or commodity,

be given to any but mere Scottilh men, by the assent of
the three estates of the realm.

SIXTH, that there be a councel in Scotland appointed

in the queen's absence, to govern the whole realm, and in
those cafes not to be direced by the French.

SEVENTHLY, That it be by the said three eftares ap-

pointed how the queen's revenue of the realm hlall be ex-
pended, how much the queen shall have for her portion
and eftateduring her absence, how much (hall be limited
to the governance and defence of the realm, how much
yearly appointed to be kept in treasure.

IN these and such like points if the French king and

the queen be found unwilling, and will withstand there
provisions for the weale of the land, then hath the three
estates of the reami authority, forthwith, to intimate to
the said king and queen their humble requests; and if the
fame be not effectually granted, then humbly they may

comn-
J10

commit the governance thereof to the next heir of the
crown, binding the fame also to observe the laws and an-
tient rights of the realm.

FINALLY, If the queen flhl1be unwillingtothis, as it is

likely flle will, in refpea of the greedy and tyrannous assec-
tion of France, then it is apparent that Almighty God is
pleased to transfer from her the rule of the kingdom for
the weale of it, and this time must be used with great cir-
cumfpetion, to avoid the deceipts and tromperies of the
French.

AND then may the realm of Scotland confider, being

once made free, what means may be devised by God's
goodness, to accord the two realms, to endure for time to
come at the pleasure of Almighty God, in whose hands
the hearts of all princes be.

No. II. (Vol. I. p. 220 )
A letter of Maitland of Lethington's, thus di-

refted,
To my loving friend James. Be this delivered

at London.

UNDERSTAND by the lafi letter I received from yow, zoth Ja-
that discoursing with zour countrymen upon the mat- nuary

ter of Scotland, and commoditeys may ensew to that cot i5b.
realm, hereafter giffze presently affif ws with zour forces, cat. B. xi.
ze find a nombre of the contrary advise, doubting that we fall From the
not at length be found trusty friends, nor mean to cont-riginal in

his own

new in constant ametye, albeit we promise, but only forhand.
avoyding the present danger make zow to serve our turne,
and after being delivered, becum enemies as of before. For
prose quhareof they alledge things have past betwixt ws
heretofore, and a few presumptiones tending to the fam
end, all grounded upon miftruf : quhilks, at the first ficht,
have some (hewe of apparence, gifmen wey notthe circum-
stances of the matter; but gif they will confer the tyme
past with the present, confider the nature of this caus,
and efRate of our contrey, I doubt not but judgement fal be
able to banish mistrust. And first, I wad with ze should
examyne the causes off the old inmitye betwixt the
realms of England and Scotland, and quhat moved our

X 4 ancefiours

anceftours to enter into ligue with the Frenche ; quihilks
by our storeys and regiftres off antiquities appear to be
there. The princes of England, some tyme, alledging a
certain kynde of foveraintye over this realm; some tyme
upon hye courage, or incited by incursions off our bor-
dourares, and semblable occasions, mony tymes enterpri-
fed the conquest of ws, and fa far furth preift it by force
offarmes, that we wer dryven to great extramiteys, by
loss of our princes, our noblemen, and a good part of our
cuntrey, fa that experience taught ws that our owne ftrenth
was fcarfe sufficient to withstand the force of England.
The Frenche zour auncient enemies, confidering well how
nature had fa placed ws in a iland with zow, that na na-
tion was able fa to anoye England as we being enemyes,
foucht to joine ws to theym in ligue, tending by that
meane to detourne zour armyes from the invasion off
France, and occupy zow in the defence of zour country
at hame, offering for that effe& to beftowe some charges
upon ws, and for compassing off theyr purpos, choyfed a
tyme to propone the matter, quhen the frefche memory of
injuris lately receaved at zour hands, was fa depely pren-
ted on our hartes, that all our myndes were occupied how
tobe revenged, and arme ourselves with the powar off a
forayne prince againt zour enterprizes thereafter.

THIS wes the beginning off ourconfederacy with France.

At quhilk tyme, our cronicles maks mention, that ibme off
the wyfeft foresaw the perril, and fniall frute flihold re-
doundto usthereofat lenth: zit had affeftion fa blinded
jugement, that the advise of the maiit part overcame the
belt. The maift part of all quarrells betwixt ws since
that tyme, at lea:t quhen the provocation came on our
fyde, hes ever fallen out by theyr procurement rather
than any one caus off our selves: and quhenfaever we brack
the peace, it come partly by theyr intyfements, partly to
eschew the conquest intended by that realm. But now hes
God's providence fa altered the cafe, zea changed it to
the plat contrary, that now hes the Frenfche taken zour
place, and we, off very jugement, becom defyrous to have
zow in theyr rowme. Our eyes are opened, we espy how
uncareful they have been of our weile at all tymes, how
they made ws ever to serve theyr turne, drew us in maiff
dangerous weys for theyr commodite, and nevertheless
wad not ftyck, oft tymes, against the natour of the ligue,
to contrak peace, leaving ws in weyr. We fee that their

support,
312

support, off late zeres, wes not grantit for any affeftion
they bare to ws, for pytie they had off our estate, for re-
compence of the lyke friendlhip fchawin to theym in tyme
off theyr afflitiones, but for ambition, and inlaciable cu-
pidite to reygne, and to mak Scotland ..ne accessary to the
crown of France. This was na friendly office, but mer-
cenary, craving hyre sarre exceeding the proportion of
theyr deserving; a hale realm for the defence of a part.
We fee theym manifestly attempt the thing we fufpeted
offzow; we feared ze ment the conquest off Scotland,
and they are planely fallen to that work; we hated zow
for doubt we had ze ment evill towards ws, and fall we
love theym, quhilks bearing the name off frends, go about
tobring ws in maift vile servitude ? Gif by zour frendly
support at this tyme, ze fall declare that not only fute zc
not the ruyne of our country, but will prefcrve the liber-
tie thereof from conquest by ftrangearers, fall not the oc-
cafion off all inimitie with zow, and ligue with theym,
be taken away? The causes being removed, how fall the
effectes remane? The fear of conquest made us to hate
zow and love theym, the cais changed, quhen we fee thevm
planely attempt conquest, and zow fchaw ws fiiendliip,
fall we not hate theym, and favour zow ? Gif we have
fchawne fa great constance, continuing fa mony zearcs in
amity with theym, off quhome we had fa fimal commo-
dite, quhat fall move us to breake with zow, that off all
nationes may do ws greatest plefour ?

BUT ze will fay, this mater may be reconcyled, and

then frends as off before. I thing weill peace is the end
of all wevr, butoffthisze may be assured, we will never
fa fartruft that reconciliation, that we wil be content to
forgo the ametye of England, nor do any thing may bring
ws in suspicion with zow. Giff we wold, at any tyme
to please theym, break with zow, should we not, befydes
the lose off estimation and discrediting off ourselves, per-
petually expone our common weill to a maift manifest dan-
ger, and b:cum a pray to theyr tyranny ? Quhais aid
could we implore, being destitute of zour friendlhip, gif
they off new wald attempt their formar enterprize ? Quhat
nation myght help ws gift they wald, or wald giff they
might ? and it is lyke eneuch, thay will not stick hereaf-
ter to tak theyrtyme off ws, quhen dilplefour and grudge
hes taken depe rute on baith fydes, feing ambition has fa
impyrit ower theyr reason, that before we had ever done

any

313

anything might offend theym, but by the contrary plea-
fed theym by right and wrang, they did not flick to at-
tempte the fubvertion of our hale state. I wald ze should
not efteeme ws fa barayne of jugement, that we cannot
foresee our awne perril; or fa foolifche, that we will not
study by all gode means to entertayne that thing may be
our fafetye; quhilk consistes in all the relaying of zour
friendfmips. I pray zow confider in lyke cafe, when, in the
days of zour princes offmaift noble memory king Henry
the VIII. and king Edward the VI. meanes were opened off
amytye betwixt baith realms; was not at all tymes the
difference of religion the onely flay they were not em-
braced? Did not the craft of our clergy and power of
theyr adherents subvert the devises of the better fort?
But now has God eff his mercy removed that block furth
off the way: now is not theyr practice lyke to tak place
any mare, when we ar comme to a conformity off do&rine,
and profess the fame religion with zow, quhilk I take to
be the ftrayteft not off amitye can be devised. Giff it
may be alledged, that some of our countrymen, at ony
tyme, violated theyr promis? giff ze liss to way the cir-
cumftances, ze fall fynd the promis is rather brought on
by neceffite, after a great overthraw off our men, then
comme off fre will, and tending ever to our great in-
commodite and decay off our haill state, at leift fa taken.
But in this cafe, fall the preservation of our libertie be
infeperably joined with the keping off promeffe, and the
violation of our fayth cast ws in mailt milerable fervi-
tudc. Sa that gifF neyther the feare off God, reverence of
man, religion, othe, promise, nor wardly honeftye wes
sufficient to bynd us, yet fall the zeale of our native
countrey, the maintenance off our own estate, the safety
of our wyffesand childrene from slavery, compell ws to
kepe promise. I am assured, it is trewly and sincerely
ment on our part to continew in perpetual ametye with
zow; it fall be uttered by our proceedings. Giff ze be
as defyrous of it as we ar, aflurances may be devyfed,
quharby all partyes will be out of doubte. There be
gode meanes to do it, fit instruments for the purpos, tyme
serves weill, the inhabitants of baith realms wish it, God
hes wrought in the peoples harre's on bayth parties a cer-
taine still agreement upon it, never did, at any tyme, so
mony things concurre at ones to knyt it up, the difpo-
fition offa few, quhais harts are in Godis hands, may mak

up

up the hale. I hope he quha hes begun his work, and
manteyned it quhile now, by the expectation of man,
fall perfyte it.

I PRAY zow, let not zour men dryve tyme in confulta-

tion, quhether ze fall support ws or no. Seyng the mater
fpeaketh for itself, that ze mon take upon zow the defence
off our caus, giff ze have any refpet for zour awne weill.
Their preparatives in France, and levying of men in Ger-
many, (quheyroff I am lately advertiscd ) ar not altogyd-
der ordeyned for us, ze ar the mark they shote at; they
feke our realme, but for ane entrey to zours. Giff the.
should directly fchaw hoftilite to zow, they knaw zo wald
mak redy for theyme, therefore they do, by indirec meanes
to blind zow, the thing, they dare not as zit planely at-
tempte. They feme to invade us to th' end that having
affembledtheyrhayle forces fa nere zour bordours, they may
unlok it toattack zow: It is ane of theyr ald fetches, mak-
ing a fchew to one place, to lyght an ane other. Remem-
ber how covertly zour places about Boulougne were assai-
zeit, and carryed away, ze being in peace as now. How
the enterprise of Calais was fynely diflcmbled, I think ze
have not fa sone forgotten. Beware of the third, prevent
theyr policy by prudence. Giffz e l not the lyke difpofi-
tion presently in theym, ze fe nathing. It is a grosse igno-
rance to mifknaw, what all nations pianely fpeks ofi. T'ak
hede ze zay not hereafter, " Had i wilt;" ane uncomely
sentence to procede offa wyfe man's mouth. That is on-
wares chanced on to zow, quhilk zow commonly wiffed,
that this countrey myght be divorced from the Frenche,
and is fa comme to pass as was maift expedient for
zow. For giff by your intyfement we had taken the
mater in hand, ze myght have fufpe&ed we would
have been untrufty frends, and na langer continued
ftedfafte, then perril had appeared. But now, quhen
off our self, we have conceyved the hatred, provoked
by private injuries, and that theyr evil dealing with
ws hes deserved our inimitye, let no man dobte but
they fall fynde ws ennemyes in ernest, that fa ungent-
ly hes demeyned our countrey, and at quhais hands
we can look for nathing but all extremitye, giff ever
they may get the upper hand. Let not this occasion,
fa happely offered, efcspe zow: giff ze do, negleting the
present opportunitie, and hoping to have ever gode luk
comme fleaping upon zow, it is to be feared zour enemye

waxe

315

waxe to great, and fa ftrang, that afterwards quhen ze
wald, ze fall not be able to put him down; and then, to
zour smart, after the tyme, ze will acknowledge zour
error. Ze have felt, by experience, quhat harme cometh
ofoverfight, andtrufting to zour enemyes promelfe. We
offer zow the occasion, quheyrby zour former loftes may
be repayred. Quhilk gif ze let over flyde, suffering ws
to be overrun, quha then, I pray zow, fall stay the
Frenfche, that they fall not invade zow in zour own
boundes, lick it is their lust to reygne, that they can nei-
ther be content with theyr fortune present, nor reft and be
satisfied when they have gode luck, but will Rill follow on,
having in theyr awne brayne conceaved the image of fa
great a conquest, quhat think ye fall be the end? Is ther
any of so small jugement, that he doth not foresee al-
ready, that theyr hail force fall then be bent againRt
zow ?

IT fall not be amis, to confider in quhat cafe the

Frenfche be presently. Theyr estate is not always fa
calme at hame as every man thinketh. And trewly it
wes nottheyr great redines for weyr made theym to tak
this mater on hand, at this tyme, but rather a vayne trust
in theyr awne policy, thinking to have found na resist-
ance, their opinion hes deceaved theym, and that makes
them now amafed. The estates off the empire (as I
hear) has such restitution off the' Imperial towns Metz,
Toull, and Verdun, quhilk may grow to some befynes;
and all thing is not a calme within theyr awne countrey,
the less fit they be presently for wevr, the mare opportune
ellcmeye the time for zow. Giff the lyke occasion were
offered to the Frenche against zow, wey, how gladly
would thev embrace it. Are ze not efchamed of zour
leuth, to spare theym that hes already compassed zour
destruction, giff theym wer able? Confider with zour
self quhilk to be choyfed? To weyr aeainft them out
with zour realme or within ? Giff quhill ze fleape, we
fda be overthrowne, then fall they not fayle to fute zow in
zour awne countrey, and ule ws as a fote sole to overloke
zow. But some will fay, perhaps, they meane it not.
It is foly to think thev wald not giff they were able, quhen
before hand they stick not to giff zour armes, and ufurpe
the ftvle of zour crown. Then quhat difference there is to
camp within zowrawne bounds or without, it is manifest.
G(ifftwa armyes thould camp with in zowr countrey, but a

moncth ;

moneth; albeit ye receaved na other harme, zit should
zowr loffe be greater, nor all the charge ze will nede to
bef'ow on our support will draw to, befydes the difho-
nour.

LET not men, that eyther lack gode advise, or ar not

for particular refpets weill affected to the caus, move zow
to fubftrad zour helping hand, by alleging things not ap-
parent, for that they be possible. It is not, I grant, un-
possible that we may receave conditiones of peace; but I
fee little likelyhode that our ennemyes will offer ws fik as
will remove all milruft, and giff we wald have accepted
others, the mater had bene lang or now compounded.
Let zow not be moved for that they terme ws rebelles,
and diffames our just querell with the name of conspiracy
against our foverayne. It is hir hyenes right we mane-
tayne. It is the liberty off hair realme we tfudy to pre-
serve, with the hazard of our lyves. We arenot (God
knaweth) comme to this poynt for wantones, as
men impacient of rewll, or willing to fchake of the
zoke of government, but ar drawne to it by necef-
site, to avoyde the tyranny of firangeares, feaking to
defraude ws of lawful governement. Giff we should
susser firangeares to plant themfelffes peaceably in all
the ftrenthes of our realme, fortify the feyportes, and
maift important places, as ane entre to a plain conquest,
now in the minoritie of our foverane, beyng furth of the
realme, (hould we not be thought oncareful off the com-
mon weill, betrayares of our native countrey, and evill
subjects to hir majeftie? Quhat other opinion could fche
have off ws ? Might (he not julfly hereafter call ws to
accompt, as negligent ministeres ? Giff ftrangeares (hould
be thus suffered to broke the chefe offices, beare the hail
rewll, alter and pervert our lawes and liberty at theyr ple-
four; myght not the people esteem our noblemen unwor-
thy the place of counfalours ! We mean na wyfe to sub-
trak our obedience from our foverane, to defraud hir hye-
nes off her dew reverence, rents and revenues off hir
crown. We feke nathing but that Scotland may remane,
as of before, a fre realme, rewlit by her hyenes and hir
ministers borne men of the farm; and that the succession of
the crown may remaine with the lawful blodc.

I WALD not ze fould not fa lyttil efteme the friendship

of Scotland, that ze juged it not worthy to be embraced.
It fall be na small commodite for zow to be delivered off

the

the anoyance osso neir a nyghtbour, quhais inimitye may
more trouble zow, then off any other nation albeit twyfs
as putfiant, not lyeng dry marche with zow. Befydes that
ze fall not nede to fearethe invasion off any prince lackying
the commodite to invade zow by land) on our land. Cbn-
fider quhat superfluous charge ze bestow on the fortifi-
cation and keping of Barwick ; quhilk ze may reduce to a
mean fowme, having ws to frendes. The realm of Ire-
land being of natour a gode and fertill countrey, by rea-
son off the continewalld unquietness and lak of policy, ze
knaw to be rather a burthen unto zow then great advan-
tage; and giff it were peaceable may be very commodious.
For pacification quhayroff, it is not onknowne to zow
quhat service we ar abill to do. Refiie not theyr com-
moditeys, besides mony ma quhen they ar offred. QPhilks
albeit I study not to amplify and dilate, yet is na other
countrey able to offer zow the lyke, and are the rather to
be embraced, for that zour aunceftors, by all meanes, maift
erneftly futed our amity, and yet it was not theyr hap to
comeby it. The mater hes almaift carryed me beyond the
boundes of a lattre, quharfor I will leave to trouble zow
after I have geven you this note. I wald wiss that ze* and
they that ar learned, fould rede the twa former orations
of Demosthenes, called Olynthiatex, and confidere quhat
counfall that wyfe oratour gave to the Athenians, his coun-
trymen, in a lyke cafe ; quhilk hes so great affinite with
this caue of ours, that every word thereof myght be ap-
plyed to our purpos. There may ze learne of him quhat
advise is to be followed, when zour nyghtbours hous is on
fyre; Thus I bid zow heartily fareweill. From Sant An-
drews, the 2oth of January, 1559.

No. III. (Vol. I. p. 128.)
Part of a letter from Tho. Randolph to Sir Wil-

liam Cecil, from the camp before Leith, 29th
of April, 156o.

AOrihegPI p WILL only, for this time, discharge myself of my
ir the Paper
ofcf, promise to the earl of Huntly, who so defyreth to

be recommended to you, as one, who with all his heart
favoureth this cause, to the uttermost of his power. Half
the words that come out of his mouth were able to per-
uade an unexperenced man to speak farther in his be-

half,
318

half, than I dare be bold to write. I leave it to your ho-
nour to judge of him, as of a man not unknown to you,
and will myself always measure my thoughts, as he shall
deserve to be spoken of. With much difficulty, and great
persuasion, he hath subscribed with the reft of the lords
to join with them in this a&ion; whatsoever he can in-
vent to the furtherance of this cause, he hath promised to
do, with solemn protestation, and many words; he trust-
eth to adjoin many to this cause; and faith surely that no
man shall lie where he taketh part. He hath this day sub-
fcribed a bond between England and this nation; he faith,
that there was never thing that liked him better.

No IV. (Vol. I. p. 242.)
Randolph to Cecil, toth AuguRt 1560. From

Edinburgh.

INCE the 29th of July, at what time I wrote last An Original

to your honour, I have heard of nothing worth thein the Paper

reporting. At this present it may please you to know, that °ice
the mot part of the nobles are here arrived, as your ho-
nour (hall receive their names in writing. The earl of
Huntly excufeth himself by an infirmity in his leg. His
lieutenant for this time is the lord of Lidington, chosen
speaker of the parliament, or harangue maker as these men
te~m it. The first day of their fitting in parliament will
be on Thursday next. Hitherto as many as have been
present of the lords have communed and devised of certain
heads then to be propounded, as, who (hall be sent into
France, who into England. It is much easier to find them
than the other. It feemeth almost to be resolved upon
that for England the master of Maxwell, and laird of
Lidington. For France, Pitarrow and the Justice Clerk.
Also they have consulted whom they think meeteft to
name for the XXIV. of the which the XII. counsellors
must be chosen. They intend very (hortly to fend away
Dingwall the herald into France, with the names of those
they shall chute; and also to require the king and queen's
consent unto this parliament. They have devised how to
have the contract with England confirmed by authority
of parliament; how also to have the articles of the agree-
ment between them and their king and queen ratified.

There

319

These things yet have only been had in communication.
For the confirmation of the contract with England 1
have no doubt; for that I hear many men very like the
fame, as the Earl of Athol, the Earl of Sutherland, the
L. Glamis, who dined yesterday with L. James. The
Lord James requested me this present day to bring the
contract unto him. I intend also, this day, to speak un-
to the L. Gray, in our L. Gray's name, for that he pro-
mifed in my hearing to subscribe, and then presently
would have done it, if the contract could have been had.
For the more assurance againit all inconvenients, I would,
betides that. that I trust it (hall be ratified in parliament,
that every nobleman in Scotland had put his hand and
set his feal, which may always remain as a notable monu-
ment, tho' the a6"e of parliament be hereafter difannulled.
if it might, therefore, itand with your advice, that the
lords might be written unto, now that they are here pre-
sent to that effec, or that I might receive from your Honr.
some earnest charge to travel herein, I doubt not but it
would ferne to good parpofe. If it might be also known
with what fubftancial and effedtious words or charge you de-
fire to have it confirmed, 1 think no great difficulty would
be made. The Earl Marlhall has oft been moved to sub-
scribe, he ufeth mo delays then men judged he would.
His son told me yellerday, that he would speak with me
at leisure, so did also Drumlanrick; I know not to what
purpose: I have caused L. James to be the eamefter with
the L. Marthall, for his authority's fake, when of late
it was in consultation by what means it might be wrought,
that the amity between there two realms might be
perpetual; and among diverse men's opinion, one said
that he knew of no other, but by making them both
one, and that in hope of that mo things were done,
than would otherwise have ever been granted; the earl
of Argyll advised him earnestly to stick unto that, that he
had promised, that it Ihould pass his power and all the
crafty knaves of his counfell, (I am bold to use unto your
H. his own words )to break so godly a purpose.
This talk liked well the assisters, howsomever it
pleased him to whom it was spoken unto. The barons,
'.ho in time past have been of the parliament, had
yesterday a convention among themselves in the church,
in very honelt and quiet fort; they thought it good to
require to be reltored unto their ancient liberty, to have

voice

voice in parliament. They presented that day a bill
unto the lords to that effect, a copy whereof shall be
sent as soon as it can be had. It was answered unto
gently and taken in good part. It was referred unto the
lords of the articles, when they are chosen to relblve
thereupon. Here follows a long paragraph concern-
ing the fortifications of Dunbar, &c. This present
morning, viz. the 9th, I underflood, that the lords
intended to be at the parliament, which caused me some-
what to stay my letter, to fee what I could hear or learn
worth the reporting unto your Honr. The lords, at ten
of the clock, assembled themselves at the palace, where
the duke lieth ; from whence they departed towards the
Tolbooth, as they were in dignity. Each one being set
in his feat, in such order as your H. (hall receive them'
in this scroll. The crown, the mace, the sword, were
laid in the queen's feat. Silence being commanded, the
L. of Lidington began his oration. He excused his in-
sufficiency to occupy that place. He made a brief dif-
course of things past, and of what necessity men were
forced unto for the defence of their country, what remedy
and support it pleased God to fend them in the time of their
necessity, how much he were bound heartily to acknow-
lege it, and to require it. He took away the persuasion
that was in many men's mind that lay back, that misdeem-
ed other things to be meant than was attempted. He ad-
vised all estates to lay all particulars apart, and to bend them-
selves wholly to the true service of God and of their coun-
try. He willed them to remember in what state it had been
of long time for lack of government, and exercise ofjuftice.
In the end, he exhorted them to mutual amity and hearty
friendship, and to live with one another as members all
of one body-He prayed God long to maintain the peace
and amity with all princes, especially betwixt the realms of
England and Scotland, in the fear of God, and so ended.
The clerk of register immediately stood up, and asked
them to what matter they would proceed : It was thought
necessary, that the articles cf the peace flould be confirmed
with the common confent,,for that it was thought neceffa-
ry to fend them away with speed into France, and to re-
ceive the ratification of them as soon as might be. The
articles being read, were immediately agreed unto: A day
was appointed to have certain of the nobles subscribe un-
to them, and to put to their feals, to be sent away by a

VOL. II. Y herald,

herald, who shall also bring the ratification again with
him. The barons, of whom I have above written, re-
quired an answer to their request, somewhat was said un-
to the contrary. The barons alledged for them custom
and authority. It was in the end resolved, that there should
be chosen fix to join with the lords of the articles, and
that if they, after good advisement, should find it right
and necessary for the commonwealth, it should be ratified
at this parliament for a perpetual law. The lords proceed-
ed immediately hereupon, to the chufing of the lords of the
articles. The order is, that the lords spiritual chufe the
temporal, and the temporal the spiritual, and burgesses
their own. There were chosen as in this other paper I
have written. This being done, the lords departed and
accompanied the duke, all as far as the Bow, (which is
the gate going out of the high street) and many down into
the palace where he lieth. The town all in armour, the
trumpets founding, and other mufick such as they have.
Thus much I report unto your honour of that I did both
hear and fee. Other folemnities have not been used saving
in times long past the lords have had parliament robes,
which are now with them wholly out of use.

THE names of as many earls and lords spiritual and
temporal as are assembled at this parliament.

Earls.

Arran.
ArgUll.
Athole.
Crawford
Caffils.
M arihall.
Morton.
Glencairn.
Sutherland.
Cathnefs.
Rothes.
.Monteith.

The duke of Chatelherault.
Lords, Lords Spiritual.
Erskine. St. Andrews.
Ruthven. Dunkell.
Lindsey. Athens.
Somervill. The bishop of the Isles.
Cathcart. Abbots and Priors, I
Hume. know not how manv.
Livingston.
Innermeth.
Boyd.
Ogilvy.
Fleming.
Glamis.

Gray. Ochiltree.
Gordon.

The
322

Spiritual.

[ Athens.

Iles.
Lord James.
Arbroath.
Newbottle.
Lindoris.
Cowpar.
Kinross.
Kilwinning.

So that with
is 36.

The Lords of the Articles.

Temporal.

The Duke.

Argyll. Marshall.
Athole.
Morton.
Glencairn.
Ruthven.
Erskine.
Boyd.
Lindsay.
the Subprior of St.

Barons ele&ed to be

of the Articles.

Maxwell.
Tillibardine.
Cunninghamhcad.
Lochenvar.
Pittarrow.
Lundy.
Ten Provosts of the

chief towns, which
also are of the Ar-
ticles.
Andrews, the whole

IT were too long for me to rehearse particularly the

disposition, and chiefly the affections of these men, that are
at this time chosen lords of the articles. May it satisfy
your Honr. for this time to know that, by the common
opinion of men, there was not a fubftantialler or more sus-
ficient number of forts of men chosen in Scotland there
many years, nor of whom men had greater hope of good
to ensue. This present morning, viz. the loth, the L.
of Lidington made me privy unto your letter; he intend-
eth, as much as may be, to follow your advice. Some
hard points there are. He himself is determined not to
go into France. He alledgeth many reasons, but fpeaketh
least of that, that moveth him most, which is the ex-
ample of the last, that went on a more grateful message
than he shall carry, and stood on other terms with their
prince than he doth, and yet your honour knoweth what
the whole world judgeth.
Petition of the Lesser Barons to the Parliament

held Aug. i56o.

M
a Y lords, unto your lordships, humbly means and nclofed in

shows, we the barons and freeholders of thisRandolph's

realm, your brethren in Christ, That whereas the causes of il, 1 tl-
true r-ligion, and common well of this realm, are, in thisAug. 1560.
present parliament, to be treated, ordered, and establish-

Y 2 ed,

323

ed, to the glory of God, and maintenance of the common-
wealth; and we being the greatest number in proportion,
where the said causes concern, and has been, and yet are
ready to bear the greatest part of the charges thereuntil,
as well in peace as in war, both with our bodies and
with our goods; and feeing there is no place where we
may do better service now than in general councils and
paliarrents, in giving our best advice and reason, vote
and councell for the furtherance thereof, for the mainte-
nance of virtue, and punishment of vice, as use and custom
had been of old by ancient acs of parliament observed
in this realm; and whereby we understand that we ought
to Le heard to reason and vote in all causes concerning
the commonwealth, as well in councils as in parliaments;
othervife wve think that whatfomever ordinances and fta-
tutes be made concerning us and our estate, we not being
required and luflered to reason and vote at the making
thereof, that the lame ihould not oblige us to stand there-
to. Therefore it will please your lordships to take con-
fideration thereof, and of the charge born, and to be born
by us, since we are willing to serve truly to the common
well of this realm, after our estate, that ye will, in this
present parliament, and all councells, where the common
well of the realm is to be treated, take our advice, coun-
fell and vote, so that, without the fame, your lordships
would susser nothing to be passed and concluded in par-
liament or councils aforesaid; and that all acs of par-
liament made, in times past, concerning us for our place
and estate, and in our favour, be at this present parlia-
ment, confirmed, approved and ratified, and ad of par-
liament made thereupon. And your lordships answer
humbly beseeches.

Of the fuccerr of this petition, thefollowing account isgiven

by Randolph; Lett. to Cecil, 19. Aug. I56o. The matters
concluded and past by common content on Saturday last,
in such solemn fort as the first day that they assembled, aie
these. First, that the barons according to an old act of
parliament, made in the time of James I. in the year of
God, 1427, shall have free voice in parliament, this ad
Hpafed without any contradiction.

No.
324

No. V. (Vol. I. p. 252.)
A letter of Thomas Randolph, the Englifl refi-

dent, to the right worlhipful Sir William Cecil,
knt. principal secretary to the queen's majesty.

IHAVE received your honour's letters of the firfi of this 9 Aug.

I month, written at Ofyes in Effex, and al o a letter un- '561. cott.

to the lord James, from his kinsman St. Come out ofro' °.
France, in this they agree both that the queen of Scotland
is nothing changed of her purpose in home coming. I
aflure your honour that will be a stout adventure for a
lick crafed woman, that may be doubted as well what may
happen unto her upon the seas, as also how heartily (he
may be received when she cometh to land of a great num-
ber, who are utterly persuaded thnt fth intendeth their
utter ruin, come when she will; the pteparance is very
small whensoever that she arrive, Icarcely any man can be
persuaded that she hath any such thought in her head. I
have shown your honour's letters unto the lord James, lord
Morton, lord Ledington, they wish as your honour doth,
that she might be stayed yet for a space, and if it were
not for their obedience fake, some of of them care not tho'
they never saw her face. They travel what they can to
prevent the wicked devises of there mischievous purposes
of her ministers, but I fear that that will always be found
that filij hujus feculi, they do what they can to stand with
the religion, and to maintain amity with their neighbours;
they have aifo need to look unto themselves, for their ha-
zard is great, and that they fee there is no remedy nor
safety for themselves, but to repose themselves upon the
queen's majesty, our sovereign's favours and lupport.
Friends abroad they have none, nor many in whom they
may trust at home. There are in mind (hortiy to try what
they may be assured at of the queen's majeciy, and what
they may afluredly perform of that they intended to offer for
their parties. This the queen of Scotland above all other
things doubteth; this hie feeketh by all means to pre-
vent; and hath caused St. Crome, in her name, earneflly to
write to charge him that no such things he attempted be-
fore her coming home; for that it is said, that they too
already arrived here out of England for the purpo!e, what
femblant fomever the noblemen do make, that they are

Y 3 grieved

325

grieved with their queen's refusal, that cometh far frolz
their hearts. They intend to expostulate with me here-
upon. I have my answer ready enough for them. If he
thrust all Engli hmen out of this country, I doubt not
but there will be some of her own that will bear us some
kindness. Of me she shall be quit, so soon as it pleafeth
the queen's majesty my mistress no longer to use my service
in this place. By such talk, as I have of late had, with
the lord James, and lord of Lidington, I perceive that
they are of mind that immediately of the next convention,
I shall repair towards you with their determinations, and
refolotions, in all purposes, wherein your honour's advice
is earnetly required, and (hortly looked for. Whatfom-
ever I desire myself, I know my will ought to be fubjedc
unto the queen my sovereign's pleasure, but to content
myself, would God I were so happy as to serve her majesty
in as mean a state as ever poor gentleman did, to be quit
of this place; not that I do in my heart wax weary of
her majesty's service, but because my time and years re-
quire some place of more repose and quietness than I find
in this country. I doubt allb my insufficience when other
troubles in this country arise, or ought (hall be required of
me to the advancement of her majesty's service, that ei-
ther my will is not able to compass, or my credit fuffi-
cient to work to that effect, as perchance shall be looked
for at my hands. As your honour hath been a means of
mv continuance in this room, so I trust that I shall find
that continual favour at your hands, that so soon as it Ihall
stand with the queen's majesty's pleasure, I may give this
place unto fame far worthier than I am myself, and in the
mean season, have my course directed by your good ad-
vice how I may by my contrivance do some such service,
as may be agreeable to her majesty's will and pleasure.

THESE few words, I am bold to write unto your ho-

nour of mvlelf. For the reft, where that is wilhed that
the lords will stoutly continue yet for one month, I assure
your honour that there is yet nothing omitted of their old
and accustomed manner of doing, and feeing that they
have brought that unto this point, and should now prevail,
they were unworthy of their lives.

I FIND not that they are purposed so to leave the mat-

ter. I doubt more her money than I do her fair words;
and yet can I not conceive what great things can be
v.rought with forty thousand crowns, and treasure of her

own

own here I know there is no sure or ready means to get
it. The lord of Lidington leaveth nothing at this time
unwritten, that he thinketh may be able to fatsfy your
desire, in knowledge of the present state of things here.
Whatfomever cometh of that, he findeth it ever befR, that
she come not; but if (he do come, to let her know, at
the first, what (he shall find, which is due obedience,
and willing fervicc, if she embrace Christ, and desire to
live in peace with her neighbours. By such letters as you
have last received, your honour somewhat underftandeth
of Mr. Knox himself, and also of others, what is deter-
mined, he himself to abide the uttermost, and other never
to leave him until God have taken his life, and thus to-
gether with what comfort fomevcr it will please you to
give him by your letters, that the queen's majesty doth not
utterly condemn him, or at least in that point, that he
is so fore charged with by his own queen, that her majesty
will not allow her doing. I doubt not but it will be a
great comfort unto him, and will content many others;
his daily prayer is for the maintenance of unity with Eng-
and, and that God will never susser men to be so ungrate,
as by any persuasion to run headlong unto the destruCtion
of them, that have saved their lives, and restored their
country to liberty. I leave farther, at this time, to trouble
your honour, desiring God to fend such an amity between
there two realms that God may be glorified to them of this
world.-At Edenburgh the gth of AugufR, 1561.

No. VI. (Vol. I. p. 1262.)

A letter of Queen Elizabeth to Queen Mary.

To the right excellent, right high and mighty princesse,

our right dear and well-beloved filler and cousin the
queen of Scotland,
1 IG HT excellent, right high, and mighty princefie, a6th of

our right dear and right well-beloved filter and cou- Paperr Of-

fin, we greet you well. 'Ihe Lord of St. Cofme broughtfice, from a
to us your letters, dated the 8th of the present at Ab-C°PY
bevile, whereby ye signify, that although by the answer
brought to you by Monsieur Doyzell, ye might have had
occasion to have entered into some doubt of our amity, yet

after.

327

after certain purposes pasTed betwixt you and our ambaf-
fador, you would assure us of your good meaning to live
with us in amity, and for your purpose therein ye require
us to give credit to the said St. Cofme. We have there-
unto thought good to answer as followeth. The fame
St. Cosine hath made like declaration unto us on your part,
for your excuse in not ratifying the treaty, as yourself
made to our ambassador, and we have briefly answered to
every the fame points, as he can shew you: and if he
shall not so do, yet least in the mean season you might be
induced to think that your reasons has satisfied us, fomer-
ally we assure you, that to our requests your answer can-
not be reputed for a satisfaCtion. For we require no be-
nefit of you, but that you will perform your promise where-
unto you are bound by your feal and your hand, for the
refusal whereof we fee no reason alledged can serve. Nei-
ther covet we any thing, but that which is in your own
power as queen of Scotland, that which yourself in words
and speech doth confers, that which your late husband's
our good brother's ambassadors and you concluded, that
which yur own nobility and people were made privy un-
to, that which indeed made peace and quietness betwixt us,
yea that, without which, no perfec amity can continue
betwixt us, as if it be indifferently weighed, we doubt
not but ye will perceive, allow and accomplish. Never-
the!efs, perceiving by the report of the bringer, that you
mean forthwith upon your coming home, to follow herein
the advice of your council in Scotland, we are content to
fufDend our conceipt of all unkindness, and do assure you
that we be fully resolved, upon this being performed, to
unite a sure band of amity, and to live in neighbourhood
with you as quietly, friendly, yea as assuredly in the knot
of friendthip, as we be in the knot of nature and blood.
And herein we be so eameftly determined, that the world
should fee if the contrary should follow, (which God for-
bid) the very occasion to be in you and not in us; as the
story witrefleth the like of the king your father, our uncle,
with whom our father fought to have knit a perpetual
bond by inviting to come in this realm to York, of'which
matter we know there remain with us, and we think
with you, sundry witnesses of our father's earnest good
meaning, and of the error whereunto divers evil council-
lors induced your father; or finally where it feemeth that
report had been made unto you, that we had sent our

admiral
328

329

admiral to the seas with our navy to impeache your pas-
sage, both your servants do well understand how false
that is, knowing for a truth that we have not any more
than two or three small barks upon the seas, to apprehend
certain pirates, being thereunto entreated, and almost com-
pelled, by the earneld complaint of the ambassador of
our good brother the king of Spain, made of certain Scot-
tifhmen haunting our Seas as pirates, under pretence of
letters of marque, of which matter also we eameftly require
you at your coming to your realme, to have some good
consideration, and the rather for refpe&t that ought to be
betwixt your realm and the countries of us, of France,
of Spain, and of the house of Burgundy. And so, right
excellent, right high and mighty princess, we recommend
as to you with most earnest request, not to neglet these
our friendly and fiferly offers of friendship, which, before
God, we mean and intend to accomplilh. Given under
our signet at Heyningham the 6th of Augut, in the third
year of our reign.

No. VII. (Vol. I. P. 295. )
A letter of Randolph to the right honourable Sir

William Cecil, knight, principal secretary to
the queen's majesty.

IO F late, until the arrival of monsieur la Croch, I had'st
U nothing worth the writing unto your honour.-Be-PaperO65ce'
fore his coming we had so little to hint upon, that we from the
did nothing but pass our time in feasts, banquetting, Oisinal.
masking, and running at the rin and and such like. He
id; ought with him such a number of letters, and such abun-
dance of news, that for the space of three days, we gave
ourselves to nothing else but to reading of writings, and
hearing of tales many so truly reported, that they might
be compared to any that ever Luciane did write de veris
narrationibus. Among all his tidings, for the most as-
fured, I fend this unto your honour as an undoubted truth,
which is that the cardinal of Lorraine, at his being with
the emperor, moved a marriage between his youngest son,
the duke of Aftruche, and this queen; wherein he hath
so far travailed, that it hath already come unto this point,
that if ihe find it good, the said duke will out of hand fend

hither

hither his embaffador, and farther proceed to the confum-
mation hereof, with as convenient speed as may be; and
to the intent her mind may be the better known, la Crocl
is sent unto her with this message from the cardinal, who
hath promised unto the emperor, to have word again be-
fore the end of May ; and for this cause la Croch is ready
for his departure, and his letters writingboth day and
night. This queen being before advertized of his toward-
ness, by many means hath fought far off, to know my
lord of Murray's mind herein, but would never so plainly
deal with him, that he could learn what her meaning is,
or how flie is bent. She ufeth no man's council, but only
this man's that last arrived, and assuredly until the L. of
Lidinron's return, the will do what she can to keep
that secret; and because resolution in his absence, cannot he
taken, the will, for this time, return la Croch with request,
to have longer time to devize: and after, with the most
speed the can, she fully purp:feth to advertize him, I mean,
her uncle the cardinal, of her mind. Of this matter the
L. of Lidington is made privy. I know not whether by
some intelligence that he had before his departure, or since
his arrival in France, divers letters have pafled between
her grace and him, whereof as much as it imported not
greatly the knowledge of, was communicated to some,
as much as was writen in sypher, is kept unto themselves.
Whether also the L. of Lidington hath had conference
with the Spanish ambassador in England of this matter,
orany like, I leave it unto your honour's good means,
to get true knowledge thereof. Guefles or furmizes in
so grave matters, I would be loth to write for verities.
This also your honour may take for truth, that the em-
peror hath offered with his son, for this queen's dower,
the county of Tyrol!, which is said to be worth 300, Coo
franks by year. Of this matter also, the rhingrave wrote
a letter unto this queen, out of France not long since.
This is ail that presently I can write unto your honour
hereof, as I can come by farther knowledge, your ho-
nour shall be informed.

I HAVE received your honour's writings by the Scot-

tifn man, that last came into there parts, he brought also
letters unto this queen from the L. of Lidington, their
date was old, and containing only the news of France.
I perceive, divers ways, that Newhaven is forre closed,
but I am not so ignorant of their nature, but that I know

they
330

they will fay as much as they dare do, I will not fay as
the proverb doth, ' canis timidus fortius latrat. ' From
hence I do assure them, vhat means fomever they make,
or how pitiful fomever their moan be, they are like to re-
ceive but finall comfort, for all their long allie We
stand daily in doubt what friendlhip we Ihall need our-
self, except we put better order unto our milruled papists,
than yet we do, or know how to bring to pals that we
may be void of their comber.

TO-MORROW, the I5th of this inflant, the queen de-

parteth of this town, towards Edenburgh. If my hap
be good, you shall thoroughly hear some merry tidings
of the Bp. of St. Andrews, upon Wednesday next he
Ihall be arraigned, and five other priests, for their massing
at Ealter last. Thus most humbly I take my leave ; at
St. Andrews the i5th of May, 1563.

No. VIII. (Vol. I. p. 304.)
Letter of Randolph to the right honourable Sir

William Cecil, knight, principal secretary to the
queen's majesty.

AY it please your honour, the 7th. of this inflant,
Rowlet, this queen's secretary, arrived here; he

reported very honetly of his good usage, he brought
with him many letters unto the queen that came out of
France, full of lamentation and sorrow. She received
from the queen mother two letters, the one contained
only the rehearsal of her griefs, the other signify the
slate of France as then it was, as in what fort things were
accorded, and what farther was intended for the appeasing
of the discords there, not mistrusting but that if reason
could not be had at the queen of England's hands, but
that the realm of France should find her ready and will-
ing to support and defend the right thereof, as by friend-
ship and old alliance between the two realms she is
bound.

How well these words do agree with her doings, your

honour can well confider, and by her writings in this fort
unto this queen, (which I assure your honour is true ) you
may assuredly know, that nothing shall be left undone

of

331

of her part, that may move debate or controverfie be-
tween this queen and our sovereign.

IT was much mused at by the queen herself, how this

new kindness came about, that at this time the received
two long letters written all with her own hand, faying, all
the time since her return {he never received half so many
lines, a were in one of the letters, which I can myself
testify by the queen's own faying, and other good affu-
rance, where hitherto I have not been deceived. I can
alfi farther aflure your honour, that this queen hath fayed
that she knoweth now, that the friendihip of the queen's
majesty my sovereign may fland her more in stead, than
that of her good mother in France, and as she is defir-
cus of them both, so will flie not loose the one for the
other. I may also farther afiure your honour, that what-
fumever the occasion is, this queen hath somewhat in her
heart that will burst out in time, which will manifest that
some unkindness hath passed between them, that will not
be easy forgotten. In talk sometimes with myself, she faith
that the queen mother might have used the matter other-
wife than lie hath done, and doth much doubt what shall
be the success of her great desire to govern alone, in all
things to have her will. Seeing then that presently they
tland in such terms one with the other, Itho't it better
to confirm her in that mind (this queen I mean) than
to speak any word that might cause her to conceive bet-
ter of the other. And yet I am assured the fiall receive
as friendly letters, and as many good words from this
queen, as the other did write unto her. Whether the
queen mother will fpe:k any thing unto the L. of Ly-
dington of that purpose, flie did write unto this queen
of, I know not, but if file do, I think it hard if your ho-
nour can get no favour thereof, at his return, or I per-
chance by some means here. It may, perchance, be writ-
ten only by that queen, to try what answer this queen
will give, or underhand what mind she beareth unto the
queen's majesty our sovereign. The queen knoweth now
that the Ear! Bothwell is sent for to London. She cauf-
fed a gentleman of hers to enquire the cause; I answered
that I knew none other, but that his takers were in con-
troverfy who took him, and that it ihould be judged
there. I knew that the thinketh much that he is not sent
into 'cotland. It is yet greatly doubted that if he were
here, he would be refer ed for an evil intfrument. If

the
332

the Lord of Lidington have not been plain with your ho-
nour herein, he is in the wrong to those who are his
friends here, but most of all to himself. There comes
a vulture in this realm, if ever that man come again into
credit.

No. IX. (Vol. I. p. 313.)
The oration made by William Maitland of Le-

thington, younger secretary for the time, in the
parliament holden by our fovcreign the king's
mother, queen of this realm for the time, the
time of the restitution of Umquile Matthew
Earl of Lenox.

Y lords and others here convened. Albeit, be
that it has pleased her majesty most graciously to

utter unto you, by her own mouth, ye may have fuffici-
ently conceived the cause of this your present assembly;
yet having her majesty's commandment to supply my
Lord chancellor's place, being prelently as yc fee de-
ceased, I am willed to express the fame somewhat more
at large.

NOTOUR it is, how in her Highness's minority, a

process of forfaltour was decreed against my Lord of Len-
nox, for certain offences alledged committed by him,
specified in the dome and cenfement of parliament gi-
ven thereupon; by reason whereof he has this long time
been exiled, and absent forth of his native country, how
grevious the fame has been unto him, it has well appeared
bydivers his suites, sundry ways brought unto her Ma-
jelly's knowledge, not only containing molt humble and
due submission, but always bearing witness of his good
devotion to her majesty, his natural princess, and earnest
affection lie had to her Highness most humble service, if
it ihould please her majesty of her clemency to make him
able to enjoy the benefit of a subjeS ; many refpeas
might have moved her highness favourably to incline to
his request, as the anciency of his house, and the fir-
name he bears, the honour he has to appertain to her
majesty by affinity, by reason of my lady Margaret her
highness's aunt, and divers other his good confidera-
tions, as also the effectuous request of her good fitter the

Queen's

333

Queen's Majesty of England, whose earnest commendation
was not of least moment, betides that of her own natu-
ral, her majeftv has a certain inclination to pity the de-
cay of noble houles, and as we heard, by her own report,
has a great deal more pleasure to be the instrument of
the uphold, maintenance, and advancement of the antient
blood, than to have matter miniftred of the decay or
overthrow of any good race. Upon this occasion, her
majeftythe more tenderly looked upon this request, and
her good lifter the Queen of England's favourable letter,
written for recommendation of his cause, in consideration
whereof not only has the granted unto him her letter of
restitution, by way of grace, but also licensed him to pur-
sue, by way of reduction, the remedies provided by the
law for filch as think themselves grieved by any judgment,
unorderly led, and to have the process reversed; for exa-
mination whereof, it has pleased her majesty presently to
aflemble you the three eltates of this her realm, by
whose advice, deliberation, and decision at her majesty's
mind, to proceed forward upon his complaints, as the
merits of the cause, laws of the realme, and practice ob-
terved in such cafes, will bear out. The fum of all your
procedings at this time, being by that we have heard, thus
as it were pointed out, I might here end, if the matter
we have in hand give me not occasion to fay a few more
words, not far different from the fame subject, wherein
I would exterd the circumstances more largely. If I
feared not to offend her highness, whose presence and
models nature abhors long speaking and adulation, and
so will compel me to speak such things, as may seem to
tend to any good and perfec point; and least it Ihould
be compted to me, as that I were oblivious, if I should
omit to put you in remembrance, in what part we may oc-
cept this, and the like demonltrations of her gentill na-
ture; whose gracious behaviour towards all her fubjecas,
in general, may) serve for a good proof of that felicity,
we may look for under her happy government, so long
as it ihall please God to grant her unto us; for a good
harmony to be had in the common weill, the offices be-
tween the prince and the fubjecls must be reciproque;
as by her majesty's prudence we enjoy this present peace
with all foreign nations, and quietness among yourselves,
in fiuch fort, that I think justly it may be affirmed Scot-
land, in no man's age, that presently lives, was in greater

tran-
334

tranquillity; so is it the duty of all us her loving fubjets
to acknowledge the fame as a inoli high benefit, proceed-
ing from the good government of her majelty, declaring
ourselves thankful for the fame, and rendering to her ma-
jefly such due obedience, as a just prince may look for
at the hands of faithfil and obedient fubjecls. I mean
no forced nor unwilling obedience, which I know her
nature does detest, but such as proceeds from the con-
templation of her modest kind of regiment, will for love
and duty fake produce the fruits thereof. A good proof
have we all in general had of her majelly's benignity
these three years, that she has lived in the government
over you, and many of you have largely tafted of her large
liberality and frank dealing; on the other part her high-
nets has had large appearance of your dutifulobedience,
so it becomes you to continue, as we have begun, in con-
fideration of the many notable examples of her clemency
above others her good qualities, and to abhor and detest
all false bruites and rumours, which are the most pestilent
evils that can be in any common weill, and the sowers and
inventors thereof. Then may we be well assured to have
of her a most gracious princesse, and the most faithful and
loving fubjeSts; and so both the head and the members,
being encouraged to maintain the harmony and accord of
the politic bodies, whereof I made mention before, as
the glory thereof ihall partly appertain to her majeffy,
so shall no small praise and unspeakable commodity re,
4lound therethrough to you all universally her fubjeas.

No. X. (Vol. I. p. 324. )
The perils and troubles that may presently ensue,

and in time to come follow, to the Queen's ma-
jelly of England, and slate of this realm, up-
on the marriage of the Queen of Scots to the
Lord Darley.
IRST, the minds offuch as be affeced to the Queen

of Scots, either for herself or for the opinion of

her pretence to this crown, or for the desire to have
change of the forme of religion in this realm, or f6r her
difcontentation they have of the Queen's majesty, or the
succession, or of the fuccelion of any other betide the

Quleecl

Queen of Scotts, (hall be, by this mariage, ereted,
comforted, and induced to devise and labour how to bring
their desires to paTs ; and to make some estimate what
persons those are, to the intent the quantity of the dan-
ger may be weighed; the fame may be compassed in those
forts either within the realme or withouc.

THE firfi are such as are specially devoted to the Queen

of Scotts, or to the Lord Darley, by bond of blood and al-
liance; as firfl all the house of Lorrain and Guise for her
part, and the Earl of Lennox and his wife, all such in
Scotland as be of their blood, and have received difplea-
fures by the Duke of Chatelherault and the Hamiltons,
and other countries, that are devoted to the authority
of Rome, and millike of the religion now received; and
in these two forts are the fubflance of them comprehended,
that (hall take comfort in this marriage.

Next therefore to be confidered what perils and troubles
theie kind of men shall intend to this realm.

FIRST, the general scope and mark of all their desires

is, and always shall be, to bring the Queen of Scotts to
have the royal crown of this realm; and therefore,
though the devisees may vary amongif themselves for the
compassing hereof, according to the accidents of the times,
and according to the impediments which they (hall find by
means of the Queen's majesty's actions and governments,
yet all their purposes, drifts, devises, and pra&ices, shall
wholly and only tend to make the Queen of Scotts queen of
this realm, and to deprive our sovereign lady thereof; and
in their proceedings, there are two manners to be ccnfider-
ed, vhereof the one is far worse than the other ; the one
is intended by them, that either from malicious blind-
ness in religion, or for natural affection to the queen of
Scotts, or the lord Darley, do persuade themselves that the
said qceen of Scots hath presently more right to the crown
than our fovereigh lady the queen, of which fort be all
their kindred on both fides, and all such as are devoted to
popery, either in England, Scotland, Ireland, or else-
where; the other is meant by them, which, with less
malice are persuaded that the queen of Scotts hath only
right to be the next heir to succeed the queen's majesty
and her issue, of which fort few are without the realm,
but here within, and yet of them, not so many as rre of
the contrary, and from these two forts (hall the peril de-

vises
336

vises and pracices proceed. From the first, which ima-
gine the queen of Scots to have perpetually right, are to
be looked for these perils. Firif, is it to be doubted the
devil will infect some of them to imagifie the hurt of the
life of our dear Ibvereign lady, by such means as the de-
vil shall suggest to them, although it is to be afluredly
hoped, that Almighty God will, as he hath hitherto, gra-
cioufly protet and preserve her from such dangers. Se-
condly, there will be attempted, by persuasions, by bruits,
by rumours and such like, to alienate the minds of good
filbjects from the queen's majesty, .nd to conciliate them
to the queen of Scotts, and on this behalf the frontiers
and the north will be much solicited and laboured. Third-
ly, there will be attempted causes of some tumults and
rebellions, especially in the north towards Scot!and, so as
thereupon may follow rome open enterprize set by vio-
lence. Fourthly, there will be, by the laid queen's ccun-
cil and friends, a new league made with France, or Spain,
that (hall be offensive to this realm, and a furtherance
to their title. And it is also very likely, that they will
set a foot as many practices as they can, both upon the
frontiers and in Ireland, to occasion the queen's majeflv
to increase and continue her charge thereby, to retain !]er
from being mighty or potent, and for the atten;-.ptg of
all these things, many devises will be imagined, from time
to time, and no negligence will therein appear.

FROM the second fort, which mean no other favour to

the queen of Scotts, but that Ihe (hould succeed in title
to the queen's majesty, is not much to be feared, but
that they will content themselves to fee not only the queen's
majesty not to marry, and to impeach it, but to hope
that the queen of Scotts shall have ifli'e, which they vill
think to be more pleafable to all men, because thereby the
crowns of England and Scotland flall be unined in o!e,
ant thereby the occasion of war shall cease; with xxhich
persuasion many people may be reduced, and abu!;d to
incline themselves to the part of the queen of Scotts.

THE remedies against these perils.

7
VOL. I I.

A Du-

APPENDI X.

h o56. Jott A Duplicat.
ib. Cot
B. to. so. A summary of the consultation and advice gives
19°0 by the lords and others of the privy council.

Colleced out of the sundry and several speeches
of the said counsellors.

Lord Keeper, MrI. Comptroller,
Lord Treasurer, Mr. Vice Chamberlain,

C Derby, Mr. Secretary,
Earls of Bedford, Cave,

. Leicester, Peter,
Lord Admiral, MIafon.
Lord Chamberlain,

Queffions propounded were there two.
i. T IRST, what perils might ensue to the Queen's

- majesty, or this realm, of the marriage betwixt
the Queen of Scotts, and the Lord Darnly.

2. What were meet to be done, to avoid or remedy
the fame.

To the Firif.

The perils being sundry, and very many, were reduced
by some counsellors into only one.

I. First, that by this marriage, the Queen of Scotts,

(being not married) a great number in this realm not of
the worst subje&s might be alienated in their minds from
their natural duties to her majesty, to depend upon the
success ofthis marriage of Scotland, as a mean to establish
the succession of both the crowns in the iflue of the fame
marriage, and so favour all devises and pracices that
liould tend to the advancement of the queen of Scotts.

2. Secondly, that confidering the chief foundation of

them, which furthered the marriage of the Lord Damley,
was laid upon the trust of such as were papists,. as the
only means left to restore the religion of Rome, it was
plain to be seen, that both in this realm and Scotland,
the papists would most favour, maintain, and fortify this
marriage of the Lord Darnley, and would, for furtherance
of facion in religion, devise all means and practices that

could

could be within this realms to disturb the estate of the
queen's majesty, and the peace of the realm, and confe-
quently to atchieve their purposes by force, rather than
fail. By fame other, these perils having indeed many
branches, were reduced, though somewhat otherwise, in-
to two forts, and these were in nature such as they could
not be easily fevered the one from the other, but were
knit and lincked together, naturally for maintaining the
one with the other. The first of these fort of perils was
that, by this marriage with the Lord Darley, there was a
plain intention to further the pretended title of the queen
of Scotts, not only to succeed the Queen's majesty, as in
her best amity the had professed, but that to occupy the
queen's estate, as when Ihe was in power, Ihe did mania
feftly declare.

THE second was, that hereby the komifli religion

Ihould be erected, and increased daily in this realm, and
these two were thus knit together, that the furtherance
and maintenance of the title staid, in furthering of the
religion of Rome within this realm; and in like manner
the furtherance of the fame religion flood by the title,
for otherwise the title had no foundation.

Proves of the first.) And to prove that the intention to

advance the title to disturb the queen's majesty inmu
needs ensue, was confldered that always the intention and
will of any person is most manifest, when their power is
greatest, and contrary when power is small, then the in-
tention and will of every person is covered and less seen,
So as when the queen of Scotts power was greatest, by
her marriage with the dauphin of France, being after-
wards French king, it manifetly appeared of what mind
the, arid all her friends were, using then manifestly all
the means that could be devised to impeach and dispossess
the queen's majesty, first by writing and publishing her-
self in all countries queen of England; by granting char-
ters, patents, and commissions, with that style, and with
the arms of England, both the French and Scotts, which
charters remain still undefaced; and to prosecute it with
effet, it is known what preparations of war were made,
and sent into Scotland; and what other forces were aflem-
bed in foreign countries; yea, in what manner a shame-
ful peace was made by the French with king Philip to em-
ploy all the forces of France to pursue all the matters by
force which by God's providence, and the queen's ma-

Z 2 jefty

jely contrary power, were repelled; and afterwards, by
her husband's death, her fortune and power being chang-
ed, the intention began to hide itself, and although by
the Scottish queen's commiffaries an accord was made at
Edinburgh, to reform all those titles, and claims, and
pretences, yet to this day, by delays and cavillations,
the ratification of that treaty hath been deferred. And
so now, as soon as the (hall feel her power, the will set
the fame again abroad, arid by confidering of such errors
as were committed in the first, her friends and allies will
amend the fame, and proceed substantially to her purpose.
By some it was thought plainly, that the peril was greater
of this marriage with the lord Darnley, being a subjet
of this realm, than with the mightiest prince abroad; for
by this, he being of this realm, and having for the cause
of religion, and other refpe&s, made a party here, should
encreafe by force with diminution of the power of the realm,
in that whatsoever power he could make by the sac-
tion of the papists and other discontented persons here,
ihould be as it were deduced out of the power of this
realm; and by the marriage of a stranger, ihe could not
be assured of any part here; so as by this marriage ihe
ihould have a portion of her own power to serve her turn,
and a small portion of adversaries at home in our own bow-
els, always seem more dangerous than treble the like
abroad; whereof the examples are in our own ifories ma-
ny, that foreign powers never prevailed in this realm,
but with the help of some at home. It was also remem-
bered, that feeing now before this attempt of marriage, it
is found, and nianifeftly seen, that in every corner of the
realm, the faction that moR favoureth the Scottish title,
is grown sout and bold, yea seen, manifestly in this court,
both in hall and chamber, it could not be but, (except
good heed were speedily given to it) by this marriage,
and by the prastice of the fautors thereof, the fame sac-
tion would shortly encreafe, and grow so great and danger-
ous, as the redress thereof would be almost desperate. And
to this purpose it was remembered, how of late in per-
using of the. fubftace of the justices of the peace, in all
the counties of the realm, scantily a third was found fully
assured to be trfted in the matter of religion, upon which
only firing the queen of Scotts title doth hang, and some
doubt might be, that the friends of the earl of Lennox,
and his had more knowledge hereofthan was thought, and

thereby

thereby made avant now in Scotland, and their party was
so great in England as the queen's majesty durst not at-i
tempt to contrary his marriage. And in this fort, was
the fum of the perils declared, being notwithstanding more
largely and plainly set out, and made so apparent by ma-
ny sure arguments, as no one of the council could deny
them to be but many, and very dangerous

Second Question.

THE question of this consultation was what were meet

to be done to avoid there perils, or else to divert the
force thereof from hurting the realm ; wherein there were
a great number of particular devises propounded, and
yet the more part of them was reduced by some into three
heads.

I. THE firfi thought necessary by all persons, as the

only thing of the most moment and efficacy, to remedy
all these perils, and many others, and such as without
it, no other remedy could be found fufficent, and that
was to obtain that the queens majesty would marry, and
make therein no long delay.

2. THE second was to advance, establish, and fortify

indeed the profession of religion, both in Scotland and in
England, and to diminish, weaken, and feeble the con-
trary.

3. THE third was, to proceed on sundry things, either

to disappoint and break this intended marriage, or, at the
least, thereby to procure the fanme not to be so hurtful to
this realm, as otherwise it will be.

THE first of these three hath no particular rights in

it, but an earnest and unfeigned desire and suite, with all
humbleness, by prayer to Almighty God, and advice and
council to the queen's majetly, that lhe would differ no
more time from marriage, whereby the good fubjefts of
the realm might flay their hearts, to depend upon her ma-
jetly, and the issue of her body, without which no surety
can be devised to ascertain any person of continuance of
their families or pofterities, to enjoy that which otherwise
should come to them.

SECOND, concerning the matters of religion, wherein

both truth and policy were joined together, had these
particulars.

341
Z :

FIRST,

FIRST, whereas of late the adversaries of religion, in

the realm, have taken occasion to comfort and increase
their fation, both in England, Scotland, and abroad, with
a rumour and expeation that the religion shall be short-
ly changed in this realm, by means that the bishops by
the queen's majefly commandment, have of late dealt
ftreightly with some persons of good religion, because they
had forbom to wear certain apparel, and such like things,
being more of form and accidents, than any substance,
for that it is well known that her majesty had no meaning
to comfort the adveriaries, but only to maintain an uni-
formity as well in things external, as in the substance, nor
yet hath any intention to make any change of the reli-
gion, as it is established by laws. It was thought by all
men very neceflary, for the fuppreffng of the pride and
arrogancy of the adversaries, indirectly hereby to notify,
by her special letters to the two archbiohops, that her
former commandment was only to retain an uniformity,
and not to give any ocpafion to any person to misjudge of
her majesty, in the change of any part of religion, but that
fie did determine firmly to maintain the form of her reli-
gion, as it was eftablihed,' and to punish such as did
therein violate her laws. And in there points, some also
wished that it might please her archbiohops, that if they
should fee that the adversaries continued in-taking occa-
sion to fortify their fa&cion, that in that cafe they Ihould
use a moderation therein, until the next parliament, at
which time, some good, uniform, and decent order might
be devised, and eftablifled, for such ceremonies, so as
both uniformity and gravity might be retained amongst
the clergy.

THE second means was, that the quondam bishops,

and others, which had refused to acknowledge the queen's
.majesty's power over them, according to the law, and were
of late dispersed in the plague time to sundry places
abroad, where it is known they cease not to advance their
faition, might be returned to the tower, or some other
prison, where they might not have such liberty to seduce
and inveigle the queen's majesty's fubjeoQs, as they daily
do.

THE third means was, that where the biWhops do

complain'that they dare not execute the ecclefiafical laws,
to the furtherance of religion, for fear of the premunire
wherewith the judges and lawyers of the realm, being not

beg
342

best affec&ed in religion, do threaten them, and in many
cafes lett not to pinch and deface them, that upon such
cafes opened, some convenient authority might be given
them, from the queen's majesty, to continue during her
pleasure.

THE fourth was, that there were daily lewd, injudi-

cious and unlawful books in English brought from bnyond
seas, and are boldly received, read and kept, and efpe-
cially in the north, seducing of great numbers osgood sub-
jecs, the like boldness whereof was hever suffered in any
other princess's time, that some ftreight order might be
given to avoid the fame, and that it might be confidered by
thejudges, what manner of crime the fame is, to maintain
such books, made dire.ly against her majesty's authority,
and maintaining a foreign power, contrary to the laws of
the realm.

THE fifth was, that where a great number of monks,

fryars, and such lewd persons are fled out of Scotland,
and do serve in England, especially in the North, as curates
of churches, and all such of them as are hot found honest
and conformable, may be banished out of the realm, for
that it appeareth they do sow sedition in the realm, in
many places, and now will increase their doings.

THE sixth, where fuhdry having ecclesiastical livings,

are oh the other fide the sea, and from thence maintain
sedition in the realm ; that livings may be better bestowed,
to the commodity of the realm, upon good fubjefts.

THE seventh is, that the judges of the realm, having

no small authority in this realm in governance of all pro-
perty of the realm, might be fwotn to the queen's ma-
jely, according to the laws of the realm, and so thereby
they should for conscience fake maintain the queen's ma-
jelfty's authority.

THE particulars of the third intention, to break and
avoid this marriage, or to divert the perils.

FrRST to break this marriage, confidering nothing can

likely do it, but force, or fear of force, it is thought by
some that these means following might occasion the breach
Of the marriage.

I. THAT the earl of Bedford repair to his charge.
2. THAT the works at Berwick be more advanced.
3. THAT the garrison be there increased.

. THAT

343

4. THAT all the wardens put their frontiers in order
with speed, to be ready at an hour's warning.

5. THAT some noble person, as the Duke of Norfolk,

or the earl of Salop, or such other, be sent into York-
Ihire, to be lieutenant-general in the North.

6. THAT preparations be made of a power, to be in

readiness to serve, either at Berwick, or to invade Scot-
land.

7. THAT presently lady Lennox be committed to some

place, where (he may be kept from giving or receiving
of inteligence

9. THAT the earl of Lennox and his son may be sent

for, and required to be sent home by the queen of Scots,
according to the treaty; and if they (hall not come, then
to denounce to the queen of Scots the breach of the trea-
ty, and thereupon to enter with hostility; by which pro-
ceeding, hope is conceived (so the fame be done in deeds
and not in (hews) that the marriage will be avoided, or
at the least that it may be qualified from many perils ; and
whatsoever is to be done herein, is to be executed with
speed, whilst (he has a party in Scotland that favoureth
not the marriage, and before any league made by the
queen of Scots with France or Spain.

SOME other allows well of all there proceedings, saving

of proceeding to hostility, but all do agree in the reft,
and also to these particularities following.

o1. THAT the earl's lands upon his refusal, or his son's

refusing, should be seized, and bestowed in gift or custody,
as (hall please her majesty, upon good fubjecs.

II. THAT all manifest favourers of the earl, in the

North, or elsewhere, be enquired for, and that they be,
by sundry means, well looked to.

12. THAT enquiry be made in the North, who have the

fieward(hip of the queen's majesty's lands there, and that
no person, deserving mistrust, be suffered to have gover-
nance or rule of any of her fubjests or lands in the North,
but only to retain their fees, and more trusty persons have
rule of the fame people's lands.

13. THAT all frequent passages into this realm, to and

from Scotland, be restrained to all Scottish men, saving
such as have fafe-condut, or be especially recommended
from Mr. Randolph, as favourers of the realm.

+. -THAT some intelligence be used with such in

Scot-

Scotland, as favour not the marriage, and they comforted
from time to time.

15. THAT the queen's majesty's household, chamber,

and pensioners, be better seen unto, to avoid broad and
unconely speech used by sundry against the ifate of the
realm.

I6. THAT the younger son of the earl of Lennox, Mr.

Charles, be remembered to some place where he may be
forth coming.

17. THAT confidering the faction and title of the queen

of Scots, hath now of long time received great favour,
and continued, by the queen's majesty's favour herein to
the queen of Scots and her mistress, and the lady Ca-
tharine, whom the said queen of Scots accompted as a
.competitor unto her in pretence of title, it may please the
queen's majesty, by some exterior at, to shew some re-
mission of her displeasure to the lady, and to the earl of
Hartford, that the queen of Scots thereby may find fomne
change, and her friends put in doubt of further proceed-
ing therein.

I8. THAT whosoever ihall be lieutenant in the North,
Sir Ralph Sadler may accompany him.

19. THAT with speed the realm of Ireland may be
committed to a new governor.

20. FINALLY, that there advices being confidered by

her majelty, it may please her to choose which of them
the liketh, and to put them in execu'ion in deeds, and not
to pass them over in consultations and speeches.

FOR it is to be assured, that her adversaries will use

all means to put their intention in execution. Some by
practice, some by force, when time (hall serve, and no
time can serve so well the queen's majesty to interrupt
the perils, as now at the firit, before the queen of Scotts
purposes to be fully fettled.

No, XI. (Vol. I. p. 335.)
Randolph to the earl of Leicester, from Edin-

burgh the 31f1 of July 1565.

AY it please your lord(hip, I have received yourcott lib.
lordship's letter by my servant, sufficient teftimo-cal. B9.
ny of your lordflip's favour towards me, whereof I thinkfl01 i6.

myAn Origi-

345

myself always so afiured, that what other mishap soever
befal me, I have enough to comfort myself with;
though I have not at this time received neither according
to the need I stand, nor the necessity of the service that I
am employed in, I will rather pals it, as I may with pa-
tience, than trouble your lordflip to be further futer for
me, when there is so little hope that any good will be
done for me. I doubt not but your lordship bath heard
by such information as I have given from hence, what
the present state of this country is, how this queen is now
become a married wife, and her husband, the self-same day
of his marriage, made a king. In their desires, hitherto,
they have found so much to their contentment, that if the
reft succeed and prosper accordingly, they may think them-
selves much happier, than there is appearance that they
{hall be, so many discontented minds, so much mifliking
of the fubjeats to have these matters thus ordered, and in
this fort to be brought to pass; I never heard of any
marriage, so little hope, so little comfort as men do talk,
was never seen, at any time, when men Ihould most have
shewed themselves to rejoice, if that consideration of her
own honour and well of her country had been had as ap-
pertained in so weighty a cafe. This is now their fear, the
overthrow of religion, the breach of amitie with the
queen's majesty, and the deftruaion of as many of the no-
ility as she hath mifliking of, or that he liketh to pitch a
quarrel unto. To fee all these inconveniencys approach-
ing, there are a good number that may sooner lament
what themselves, and complain to their neighbours, than
be able to find remedie to help them, some attempt with
all the force they have, but are too weak to do any good,
what is required otherways, or what means there is made
your lordihip knoweth; what will be answered, or what
will be done, therein, we are in great doubt, and though
your intent be never so good unto us, yet do we so much
rear your delay, that our ruin ihall prevent your support
when council is once taken. Nothing so needful, as speedy
execution. Upon the queen's majesty, we wholly de-
pend, in her majesty's hands it standeth to save our lives,
or to susser us to perih ; greater honour her majesty can-
not have, than in that which lyeth in her majesty's power to
do for us; the fums are not great, the numbers of men
are not many that we desire; many will daily be found, tho'
this will be some charge; men grow daily, though, at

this
346

this time, I think her majesty fliall loose but few; her
friends here being once taken away, where will her ma-
jeRy find the like; I speak learf of that which I think is
molt eametly 'intended by this queen, and her husband,
when by him it was lately said, that he cared more for
the papifis in England, than he did for the protestants in
Scotland; if therefore, his hopes be so great in the papilts
of England, whaf may your lordship believe that he think-
eth of the proteltants there; for his birth, for his nurri-
tour, for the honour he hath to be of kine to the queen
my mistress, if in preferring those that are the queen's ma-
jellies worst fubjefts to those that are her belt, he declaretll
what mind he beareth to the queen's majeflies self, any
man may fayit is slenderly rewarded, and his duty evil
forgotten; he would now seem to be indifferent to both.
the religions, she to use her mass, and he to come some-
times to the preaching; they were maried with all the
folemnities of the popith time, saving that he heard not
the mass; his speech and talk argueth his mind, and yet
would he fain seem to the world that he were of some re-
ligion; his words to all men, against whom he conceiv-
eth any displeasure how unjust soever it be, so proud and
fpitefull, that rather he feemeth a monarch of the world,
than he that, not long since, we have seen and known
the lord Darnley; he looked now for reverence of many
that have little will to give it him; and some there are
that do give it, that think him little worth of it. All ho-
nour that may be attributed unto any man by a wife, he
hath it Wholly and fully; all praises that may be spoken
of him, he lacketh not from herself; all dignities that
she can indue him with, which are already given and grant-
ed; no man pleafeth her that contenteth not him; and
what may I fay more, the hath given over to him her
whole will, to be ruled and guided as himself bell liketh;
the can as much prevail with him, in any thing that is
againtl his will, as your lordflip may with me to persuade
that I should hang myself; this lat dignity out of hand
to have been proclaimed king,' she would have it deferred
until it were agreed by parliament, or he had been him-
self 2 years of age, that things done in his name might
have the better authority. He would, in no cafe, have
it deferred one day, and either then or never; whereupon
this doubt is risen amongst our men of law, whether she
being clad with a husband, and her hulband not twenty-

one

347

one years, any thing without parliament can be of
strength, that is done between them; upon Saturday at
afternoon, these matters were long in debating. And be-
fore they were well resolved upon, at nine hours at night,
by three heralds, at found of the trumpet he was proclaim-
ed king. This was the night before the marriage; this
day, Monday at twelve of the clock, the lords, all that
were in the town, were present at the proclaiming of him
again, where no man said so much as Amen, saving his fa-
ther, that cried out aloud God save his queen. The man-
ner of the marriage was in this fort, upon Sunday in the
morning between five and fix, she was conveyed by divers
of her nobles to the chapell; he had upon her back the
great mourning gown of black, with the great wide mourn-
ing hood, not unlike unto that, which (he wore the doul-
full day of the burial of her husband: /he was led into
the chapell, by the earle of Lenox and Athol, and there
was lhe left until her husband came, who also was con-
veyed by the fame lords, the minister priests, two, do
there receive them, the bands are asked the third time, and
an instrument taken by a Notour that no man said against
them, or alledged any cause why the marriage might not
proceed. Tlhe words were spoken, the rings which were
three, the middle a rich diamond, were put upon her fin-
ger; they kneel together, and many prayers said over
them, she tarrieth out the mass, and he taketh a kifs, and
leaveth her there, and went to the chamber, whither with-
in a space (he followeth; and being required, according
to the solemnity,. to cast off her cares and leave aside those
forrowfull garments, and give herself to a more pleasant
life, after some pretty refufall, more I believe for manner
fake than grief of heart, (he fuffereth them that stood
by, every man that could approach, to take out a pin,
and so being committed to her ladies, changed her gar-
ments, but went not to bed, to fignifie to the world, that
it was not lust that moved them to marry, but only the
necessity of her country, not, if God will, long to leave it
destitute of an heir. Suspicious men, or such as are given
of all things to make the worst, would that it should he
believed, chat they knew each other before that they came
there; I would not your lordship (hould so believe it, the
likelihoods are so great to the contrary, that if it were
possible to fee such an ac done, I would not believe it.
After the marriage followeth commonly great cheer and

dancing:

dancing: to their dinner they were conveyed by the whole
nobility; the trumpets found; a largess cried; mony
thrown about the house in great abundance, to such as
were happy to get any part; they dine both at one table,
ihe upon the upper hand, there serve her these earls Atlole
Sewer, Morton Carver, Craufoord Cup-bearer; these fehvc
him in like offices, earls Eglington, Cassels, and Glen-
cairn; after dinner they danced awhile, and then retired
themselves till the hour of supper; and as they dined so
do they sup, some dancing there was, and so they go to
bed ; of all this I have written to your lordship I am not
Oculatis testis, to this, but of the verity your lordllhil
shall not need to doubt, howsoever I came by it; I was
sent for to have been at the fiupper, but like a currish or
uncourtly carle I refused to be there; and yet that which
your lordship may think might move me much, to have
had the fight of my mistress, of whom these eighteen days
by juit account I got not a fight, I am my lord taken by
all that fort as a very evil person, which in my heart I
do well allow, and like of myself the better, for yet can
I not find either honest or good that liketh their doings.
I leave at this time further to trouble your lordship, crav-
ing pardon for my long silence, I have more ado than I
am able to discharge, I walk now more abroad by night
than by day, and the day too little to discharge myself of
that which I conceive, or receive in the night. As your
lordship, I am lure, : partaker of fich letters as I write
to Mr. Secretary, so that I trust that he shall be to this,
to save me of a little labour, to write the fame again, mos'
humbly I take my leave at Edinburgh, the lait day of
July 1565.

No. XII. (Vol. II. p. 339.)
Letter of the earl of Bedford to the honourable

Sir William Cecil knt. her majelty's principal
secretary, and one of her highness's privy coun-
cil.

2,c of Sept.

FTE R my hearty commendations, -this day at noon, ,6. .
captain Brickwell came hither, who brought with I'ap!,lor c

him the queen's majefy's letters containing her full re- fm tle °-
solution, and pleasure for all things he had in charge to"'"'
give information of, saving that for the aid of the lords

349

of the congregation, there is nothing determined, or at
the leaf expressed in the fame letters, and for that pur-
pose received I, this morning, a letter subscribed by the
duke, the earl of Murray, Glenclames and others, craving
to be holpen with 300 harglebufyers out of this garri-
son, for their better defence. And albeit, I know right
well the goodness of their cause, and the queen's majesty
our foverein's good will, and care towards them; and
do also understand that it were very requisite to have them
holpen, for that now their cause is to be in this manner
decided, and that it now flandeth upon their utter over-
throw and undoing, since the queen's part is at the least
5000, and they not much above oo000; besides, that the
queen hath harquebufyers, and they have none, and do
yet want the power that the earl of Arguyle should
bring them, who is not yet joined with theirs; I have
thereupon thought good to pray you to be a means to
learn her majesty's pleasure in this behalf, what, and how,
I fiall anfiver them, or otherwise deal in this matter,
now at this their extrente necessity. For, on the one
fide, lyeth thereupon their utter ruin and overthrow,
and the miserable subversion of religion there; and, on
the other fide, to adventure so great and weighty a mat-
ter as this is, (albeit it be but of a few soldiers, for a final
time) without good warraunte, and thereby to bring, per-
adventure, upon our heads some wilful warrs, and in the
mean time'to leave the place unfuiifthed, (having in the
whole but 800) without any grant of new supply for the
fame; and by that means also, to leave the marches here
the more subjea to invasion, while in the mean season
new helps are preparing; to this know not I what to fay
or how to do. And so much more I marvel thereof, as
that having so many times written touching this matter,
no resolute determination cometh. And so between the
wrfting, and looking for answer, the occasion cannot pass,
but must needs proceed and have success. God turn it to
his glory; but surely all mens reason hath great cause to
fear it. Such a push it is now come unto, as this little
supply would do much good to advance God's honour, to
continue her majesty's great and careful memory of them,
and to preserve a great many noblemen and gentlemen.
If it be not now helpen, it is gone for ever. Your good
will and affection that way, I do nothing mistrust, and
herein (hall take such good advice as by any means I can.

I re-
35o

I received from these lords two papers inelofed, the effect
whereof R(all appear unto you. For those matters that
captain Brickwell brought, I /hall answer you by my next,
and herewith fend you two letters from Mr. Randolph,
both received this day. By him you lhall hear that the
proteflapts are retired from Edenborough, further off.
So as I hope your resolution for their aid shall come in
time, if it come with speed, for that they will not now
so presently need them ; and so with my hearty thanks
commit you to God. From Berwick, this ad of Sept.
1565.

No. XIII. (Vol I. p. 339.)
The queen to the earl of Bedford.
T TPON the advertisements lately received front you z Sept.

with such other things as came also from the lord 56s5.

Scrope and Thomas Randolph, and upon the whole mat-Paper0ffice
ier well confidered, we have thus determined, We will,
with all the speed that we can, fend to you 30001. to be
thus used. If you (hall certainly underitand that the earl
of Murray hath such want of money, as the impresting to
him of loool. might stand hir in stead for the help to
defend himself, you (hall presently let him secretly to un-
derftand, that you will, as of yourself, let him have so
much, and so we will that you let him have, in the most
secret fort that you can, when the said fum (hall come to
you, or if you can, by any good means, advance him
some part there beforehand.

THE other 20001. you shaH fee cause to be kept whole,

unspent, if it be not that you (hall fee necessary cause to
imprest some part thereof to the now numbers of the
600 footmen and coo horsemen ; or to the easting out of
wages of such workmen, as by sickness, or otherwise,
ought to be discharged. And where we perceive, by
your sundry letters, theearneft request of the said earl of
Murray and his associates, that they might have, at the
kat, 300 of our soldiers, to aid them. And that you also
write, that tho' we would not command you to give themn
aid, yet if we would but wink at your doing herein, and
seem to blame you for attempting filch things, as you
with the help of others Ihould bring about, you doubt

not

351

not but things would do well ; you ihall underhand for a'
truth, that we have no intention, for many respects, to
maintain any other princes subjects, to take arms againit
their sovereign ; neither would we willingly do any thing
to give occasion to make wars betwixt us and that prince,
which has caused us to forbear, hitherto, to give you any
power to let them be aided with any men. But now,
confidering we take it, that they are pursued, notwith-
Ptandingtheir humble fubmiflion, and offer to be ordered
and tried by law and juffice, which being refused to them;
they are retired to Domfrefe, a place near our weR
marches, as it feemeth there to defend themselves, and
adding thereunto the good intention that presently the
French king pretendeth, by fending one of his to join
with some one of ours, and jointly to treat with that
queen, and to induce her to forbear this manner of vio-
lent and rigorous proceeding against her fubjeds, for
which purpose, the French ambassador here with us has
lately written to that queen, whereof answer is daily
looked for, to the intent in the mean time the said lords
lhould not be oppressed and ruined, for lack of some help
to defend them, we are content and do authorize, if you
shall fee it nceflary for their defence, to let them (as of
your own adventure, and without notifying that you have
any direction therein from us) to have the number of 3o0
soldiers, to be taken either in whole bands, or to be
drawn out of all your bands, as you shall fee cause. And
to cover the matter the better, you shall fend these num-
bers to Carlille, as to be laid there in garrison, to defend
that march, now in this time that such powers are on the
otherpart drawing to those frontiers, and so from thence
as you (hall fee cause to direct of, the fame numbers or
any of them may molt covertly repair to the said lords,
when you shall expressly advertize, that you fend them that
aid only fortheir defence, and rot therewith to make war
against the queen, or to do anyhWng that may offend her
person, wherein you (hall so precisely deal with them, that
they may perceive your care to be such as if it (hould
otherwise appear, your danger Ihould be so great, as all
the friends you have could not be able to save you towards
us. And so we assure you our conscience moveth us to
charge you, so to proceed with them; for otherwise than
to preserve them from ruin, we do not yield to give them
aid of money or men: And-yet we would not that either

of

of there were known to be our a&, but rather to be co-
vered with your own desire and attempt.

No. XIV. (Vol. 1. p. 350. )
Randolph to Cecil, from Edinburgh, 7th Feb.

1565-6.

Y humble duty confidered; what to write of theAn Orngi-
present Rate of the country I am so uncertain, by1 al

reason of the daily alterations of mens minds, that it
maketh me much flower than otherwise I would. Within .
thesesew days, there was some good hope, that this queen
would have thowed fomne favours towards the lords, and
that Robert Melvin thould have returned unto them with
comfort, upon rome conditions. Since that time, there
are come out of France Clernau by land, and Thorneton
by sea; the one from the cardinal, the other from the
bishop of Glasgow. Since whose arrival neither can there
be good word gotten, nor appearance of any good in-
tended them, except that they be able to perfwade the
queen's majelly our sovereign to make her heir apparent
to the crown of England. I write of this nothing less
than I know, that the hath spoken. And by all means
that the thinketh the best doth travaile to bring it to pass.
There is a band lately devised, in which the late pope, the
emperor, the kingof Spain, the duke of Savoy, with di-
vers princes of Italy, and the queen mother fufpeaed to
be of the fame confederacy to maintain papistry through-
out Chriftiandom ; this band was sent out of France by
Thorneton, and is subscribed by this queen, the copy
thereof remaining with her, and the principal to be re-
turned very thortlie as I hear by Mr. Stephen Wilson, a
fit minister for such a devililh devise; if the coppie here-
of may be gotten, that Ihall be sent as I conveniently may.
Monsieur Rambollet came to this toun upon Monday, he
spoke that night to the queen and her husband, but not
long; the next day he had long conferences with them
both, but nothing came to the knowledge of any whereof
they intreated, I cannot speak with any that hath any
hope that there will be any good done for the lords by
him, though it is said that he hath very good will to do to
to the uttermost of his power. He is lodged near to the
court, and liveth upon the queen's charges. Upon Sun-

VOL. II. A a day

353

be present that day at the mars. Upon Candlemas day
there carried their candles, with the queen, her husband,
the earl of Lennox, and earl Athol; divers other lords
have been called together and required to be at the mass
that day, some have promised, as Cassels, Mongomerie,
Seton, Cathnefs. Others have refused, as Fleming, Le-
vingfton, Lindsay, Huntly and Bothel; and of them all
Bothel is the flouteft, but worst thought of; it was
moved in council that mass should have been in St. Giles
church, which I believe was rather to tempt men's minds,
than intended indeed. She was of late minded again to
fend Robert Melvin to negotiate with such as the trufteth
in amongst the queen's majesty's fubjets, of whose good
willis this way I truss that the bruit is greater than the
truth, but in these matters, her majesty is too wife not
in time to be ware, and provide for the worst; some in
that country are thought to be privie unto the bands and
confedercie of which I have written, where of I am sure
there is some things, tho' perchance ofall I have not
heard the truth; in this court divers quarles, contentions,
and debates; nothing so much fought as to maintain mif-
chief and disorder. David yet retaineth still in place,
not without heart grief to many, that fee their sovereign
guided chiefly by such a fellow; the queen hath utterly
refused to do any good to my lord of Argyll, and it is
said that (hall be the first voyage that Ihe will make after
fle is delivered of being with child; the bruit is com-
mon that she is, but hardly believed of many, and of this,
I can assure you, that there have of late appeared some
tokens to the contrary.

No. XV. ( VOl. . P. 359.)
Part of a letter from the earl of Bedford and Mr.

Tho. Randolph to the lords of the council of
England from Barwick, 27th of March, i566.
An Original in the Cotton Library, Caligula B.
o0. fol. 372.

i-th Ma- it please yur Hinoutrs,

arch, T TEARING of so maynie matters as we do, and
i5&6. H fyndinge such varietie in the reports, we 'have

myche ado to deceme the veritie: which maketh us the

flower

AQ P P E N D 1 X.
354

flower and loother to put any thing in writing, to the
entente we wouldnot that your honour, and by you the
queen's majeftie, our fovereigne, should not be advertised
but of the verie trothe as we can possible. To this end
wethought good to fend up thecaptain Carewe, who was in
Edinbourge at the tynle of the last atnemptatc, who spoke
there with diverse, and after that with the queen's self
and her husband conforme to that, which we have learn-
ed by others, and know by this reporte, we fend the fame,
confirmed by the parties self, that were there present and
affylters unto these that were executors of the a'te.

THIs we fynde for certain, that the queen's husband

being entered into a vehement suspicion of David, that by
hym rome thynge was committel, which was most agaynfte
to the queen's honour, and not to be borne of his perte,
fyrfte communicated his minde to George Duglas, who
fynding his sorrows so great fought all the means he
coulde to put some remedie to his griefs; and communi-
cating the fame unto my lord Ruthen by the king's com-
mandment, no other waye coulde be found then that
David should be taken out of the wave. Wherein he
was so earnest and daylye pressed the fame, that no refte
coulde be had untyll it was put in execution. To this
that was found good, that the lord Morton, and lord Lind-
laye should be made privie to th' intente that theie might
have their friends at hande, yf neade required; which
caused them to assemble so mayny, as theie thought sus-
ficient againRe the tyme, that this determination of theirs
should be put in executione; which was determined the
ixth of this instant 3 dales afore the parliament should
begyne, at which time the fayde lords were affired that
the erles Argyle, Morraye, Rothes and their complyces
Ihoulde have been forfeited, yfthe king could not be per-
ftaded through this to be their friends; who for
the defyre he had that this intent (hould take effect th'
one waye, was content to yielde, without all difficultie
to t'other, with this condition, that theie should give
their contents, that he might have the crowne matrimo-
nial. He was so impatient to fee there things he saw, and
were daylie brought to his eares, that he dayly pressed
the said lord Ruthen, th;t there might be no longer de-
lay; and to the intent that might manifest unto the
world, that he approved the acte, was content to be at
the doing of that himself.

A a 2 UPON

UPoN Saturdaye at night neire unto vii of the clock

the king conveyeth himself, the lord Ruthen, George
Duglas, and two others, throwe his own chamber by
the privy slayers up to the queen's chamber going to
xwhich there is a cabinet about xii foot square; in the
famea little low reposing bed and table, at the which
theyr were fiting at supper the queene, the lady Ar-
gyle, ard David with his capp upon his head. Into the
cabinet there cometh in the king and lord Ruthen, who
willed David to come forth, faying, that was no place
for him. The qu:en said, that it was her will. Her
howfband anf,.erede, that yt was against her honour.
The lord Ruthen said, that he would lere better his
deutie and offering to have taken him by the arm, David
took the queen by the ilychtes of her gown and put
himfelfbehind the queen who wolde gladlee have saved
him: But the king having looted his hand, and hold-
ing her in his arms, David was thrust out of the cabi-
net throw the bed chamber into the chamber of pre-
fens, whar were thelord Morton, lord Lindsey, who in-
tending that night to have refcrved hym, and thenext day
to hang him, so mane being about him, that bore him
evil will, one thrust him into the boddie with a dagger,
and after hym a great many others, so that he had in his
bodie above wonds. It is told for certayne, that
the kings own dagger was left flicking in him. Whca-
ther he fuck him or not we cannot be here certayn. He
was not flayne in the queen's prefens, as we said, but
voing down the fayres out of the chamber of prefens.

THEREremayned a long tyme with the queen her hows-

band and the lord Ruthen. She made, as we here, great
intercession, that he should have no harm. She blamed
greatlee her hot fband that was the aacor of so foul a
deed. It is said, that he did anfrer, that David had
more companie of her boddie than he for the space of two
months; and therefore for her honour and his own con-
tentment he gave his content that he Ihould be taken
awav. " It is not, "( faythe she) " the woman's part to seek
' the husband, "and thei eore in that the fault was his
own. He said that nhlen he came, fle either wold not
or made herfeif sick. " Vell, faythe he, " you have
taken your la:s of me and your farewell. " 'hen were
pity, fayth the lord Ruthen, he is your majeftv's hul-
band and muil \ic!d dutie to each other. " Whv mav

" 1

: I not" faythe (he, " leave him as well as your wife
"did her hutband ?" Olier have done the like. The lord
Ruthen said that she was lawfully diorced from her hus-
band, and for no such cause as the king found himself
greve. Befydes this man was mean, baffe, enemie to the
nobility, shame to her, and deftniitior to herself and
country. " Well, faith file, that shall be dear blude to
" some of you, yf his be fpylt. " God forbid, fayth the
lord Ruthen; for the more your grace fhowe yourself of-
fended, the world will judge the worse.

HER hulband this tyme fpeaketh litle, herself conti-

nually weepeth. The lord Rurhen being ill at ease and
weak calleth for a drink, and faythe, '" This I niuf do
" with your majestics pardon," and perfuadeth her in
the best fort he could, that the would pacify herself.
Nothing that could be said, could please her.

IN this mean time there rose a nombre in the court;

to pacify which there went down the lord Ruthen, who
went ftrayt to the erles Huntly, Bothwel and Atholl to
quiet them, and to assure them from the king that no-
thing was intend against them. These notwithstanding
taking fear, when thcie heard that my lord AMurray
would be there the next day, and Argyle meet them, Hunt-
ly and Bothwell both get out of a window and so depart.
Atholl had leave of the king with Flylh and Glandores
(who was lately called Deylley the peroln of Owne) to
go where they wold, and bring concordic out of the court
by the lord of Lidington. Theie wvent that night to fuic
places, where they thought themselves in mcof fauftie.

BEFoRE the king least talk with the queen, in the her-

ing of the lord Ruthen lhe was contents that he (hould lie
with her that night. We know not how he '* h;miclr,
but came not at her, and excused himfeif to his si icnd,
that he was so fleepie, that he could not v.a-c inl due
season.

'THERE were in this companic iwo that camln in *;it

the king; the one Andrewe (Car of Fawdecinide, dioum
the queen fayth would have tIc kcn her with a duag'r, and
one Patrick Balenvire, brother to thcjufice cli.k, ho
also her grace fayth, o.frcd a dag againt her belly witl
the cock down. We have bce carneftll in hand uith
the lord Ruthen to know the vartiie ; but he aflobut:ich !
of the contrarie. There vwere in the queen's chanlmbe
the lord Robert, Arthur Ar'kin, one or two otherl.

\ a 3 Ti,.¥

357

They at the first offering to make a defence, the lord
Ruthven drawd his dagger, and 4 mo weapons then, that
were not drawn nor seen in her prefens, as we are by this
lord assured.

[ The letter afterwards gives an account of the flight

to Dunbar C2ftle, whither resorted unto the lords Huntley
and Bothwell: That the earl of Morton and lord Ruth-
ven find themselves left by the king for all his fair promises,
bonds, and subscriptions. That he had protefied before
the council, that he was never consenting to the death of
David, and that it is fore against his will: " That of
" the great substance David had there is much fpokeni
" some fay in gold to the value of rim,. His apparel
' was very good, as it is said, 8 pair of velvet hose.
' His chamber well furnished, armour, dagger, pyfto-
" letts, harquebuses, 22 swords. Of all this nothing
" fpoyld or lacked saving 2 or 3 dagger. He had the

coftody of all the queen's letters, which all were deli-
vered unlooked upon. We hear of a juill, that he had

"hanging about his neck of some price, that cannot be
"heard of. He had upon his back, when he was flayn,

a night gown ofdamafk furred, with a fatten doublet,
" a hole of ruffet velvet." ]

No. XVI. (Vol. I. p. 368.)
Part of a letter from Randolph to Cecil, Jan. 16,

565.6.
I CANNOT tell what mifliking of late there

hath been between her grace and her hulband,

he preyed earnestly for the matrimonial crown, which
fne is loth hastily to grant; but willing to keep somewhat
in store, until lhe know how well he is worth to enjoy
such a fovereigity: and therefore it is thought that the
parliament for a time Ihall be deferred, but hereof I can
write no certainty.

, e'"pa. From Mr. Randolph's letter to fccretary Cecil.

per Off ce.
fr.nm t.'e r HE juffice-clerk in hard terms, more for his bro-
origna!. j ther's caufc than any desert, and as far as I can hear

the king of all ether in wor't, for neither hath the queen

good
358

good opinion of him for attempting of any thing that
was against her will, nor the people that he hath denied
so manifest a matter, being proved to be done by his com-
mandment, and now himself to be the accuser and pur-
suer of them that did as he willed them. This Scott, that
was executed, and Murray that was yeflerday arreigned,
were both accused by him. It is written to me, for cer-
tain, by one, that upon Monday last spoke with the queen,
that Ihe is determined that the house of Lennox shall
be as poor in Scotland as ever it was. The earl continu-
eth tick, fore troubled in mind; he flaith in the abby,
his son hath been once with him, and he once with the
queen, since she came to the cafile. The queen hath now
seen all the covenants and bands that passed between the
king and the lords, and now findeth that his declaration,
before her and council, of his innocency of the death of
David was false; and grievously offended that, by their
means, he (hould seek to come to the crown matrimo-
nial.
Part of a letter from Randolph to Cecil from Ber-

wick, 25 April, 1566.
-- | HHERE is continually very much speech of the

J discord between the queen and her husband,

so for that, that is commonly said and believed of himself,
that Mr. James Thornton is gone to Rome to sue for a
divorce between them. It is very certain that Malevafier
had not spoken with him within these three days. He is
neither accompanied nor looked upon of any nobleman:
attended upon by certain of his own servants, and fix or
seven of the guard ; at liberty to do, and go where and
what he will, there have no hope yet among themfilves
of quietness.

-- DAVID's brother named Joseph, who came this

way with Malevafier, unknown to any man here, is be-
come secretary in his brother's place.

No. XVII

359
.A a I

No. XVII. (Vol. I. p. 372.)
The earl of Bedford to Cecil, 3d August, 1566.

H E queen and her hulband agree after the old man-
ner, or rather worse. She eateth but very seldom

with him, lieth not, nor keepeth company with him, nor
loveth any such as Jove him. He is so far out of her books,
as at her going out of the Castle of Edinburgh, to re-
move abroad, he knew nothing thereof. It cannot for mo-
defly, nor with the honour of the queen, be reported what
the said of him. One Hickman, an English merchant
there, having a water spaniel which was very good, gave
him to Mr. James Melvill, who afterwards, for the pleasure,
which he saw the king have in such kind of dogs,
gave him to the king. The queen thereupon fell mar-
\elloufly out with i\elvill, and called him dissembler
and flatterer, and said fie could not trust one, who would
give any thing to such one as the loved not.

The earl of Bedford to Cecil, August 8.

HE disagreement between the queen and her hus-
band continueth, or rather increafeth. Robert Mel-

viii drawing homewards, within twelve miles of Edin-
burgh, could not tell where to find the queen sith which
t;mue ihe is come to Edinburgh, and had not twelve horses
attending on her. There was not then, nor that I can
hear of since, any lord baron, or other nobleman in her
company. TI'e king her husband is gone to Dumferm-
ling, and paif-th his time as well as he may; having at
his farewell, such countenance as would make a husband
heavy at the heart.

Sir John Fosser to Cecil, 8 Sept. from Berwick.
pl' H E queen hath her husband in small estimation,

j and the earl of Lennox came not in the queen's fight
:.h:e the de::th of Davy.

sir
360

Sir John Softer to Cecil, 1 l th Dec.

H E earl of Bothwell is appointed to receive the am-
baflhadrs, and all things for the christening are at

his lordfhipT appointment, and the fame is scarcely well
liked of the nobility, as is said. The king and queen is
presently at Craigmillar, but in little greater familiarity
than he was all the while pall.
Advertisements out of Scotland from tle earl of

Bedford.

HAT the king and the queen agreed well together Augut
two davs, after her coming from---, and after 566.Paper

my lord of Murray's coming to Edinburgh, some new Ofic from
discord has happened. The queen hath declared to mytheorisinal'
lord of Murray that the king bears hin evil will, and
.has said to her, that he is determined to kill him, find-
ing fault that the doth bear him so much company: and
in like manner hath willed my lord of Murray to fpiere
it at the king, which he did a few nights since in the
queen's presence, and in the hearing of divers. The
kinz confessed, that reports were made to him, Ihat
my lord of Murray was not his fiend, which made him
speak that thing he repented: and the queen affirmed,
that the king had spoken such words unto her, and con-
sessed before the whole lioule, that could not be con-
tent that either he or any other shou!d be unfriend to my
lord of Murray. My lord of Murray enquired the fame
stoutly, and used his speech very inodefsly, in the mean
time the king departed very grieved ; lie cannot bear that
the queen should use familiarity either with man or wo-
man, and especially the ladies of Arguile, Murray, and
Marre, who keep most company with her. My lord of
Murray and 13othwell have been at evil words for the L.
of Ledington, before the queen, for he and Sir James Bal-
foure had new come from Ledington, with his answer up-
on such heads or articles as Bothwell and he [hould agree
upon, which being reported to the fa;d earl in the queen's
pretence, made anfver, that ere he parted with ifuch
lands as was deil-ed, he fiould part with his life. My

lord

lord of Murray said stoutly to him, that twenty as honest
men as he should lose their lives ere he reafte Leding-
ton. The queen spake nothing, but heard both; in these
terms they parted, and since, that 1 hear of, have not met.
The queen after her hunting came to Edinburgh, and
carryeth the prince thence to Stirling witlwher. This
last Saturday was executed a servant of the lord Ruthven's,
who confessed that he was in the cabinet, but not of
council of the fat. The queen hath also opened to my
lord of Murray, that money was sent from the pope how
much it was, and by whom, and for what purpose it was
brought.

No. XVIII. (Vol. I. p. 389.)
Part of a letter from Elizabeth to Mary, Feb. 0o,

1569. A copy interlined by Cecil. It contains
an answer to a complaining letter of Mary's
upon the imprisoning of the Bilhop of Ross.
-- FTER this [i. e. Mary's landing in Scotland]

how patiently did I bear with many vain de-

lays in not ratifying the treaty accorded by your own com-
missioners, whereby I received no small unkindness, be-
fides the m-nifold causes of suspicion that I might not
hereafter trust to any writings. Then followed a hard
manner of dealing with me, to entice my subject and near
kinsman, the lord Darnly, under colour of private suits
for land, to come into the realm, to proceed in treaty
of marriage with him without my knowledge, yea to con-
clude the fame without my afient or liking. And how
many unkind parts accompanied that fa&, by receiving of
my fubjeas that were base runnegates and offenders at
home, and enhancing them to places of credit against my
will with many such like, I will leave for that the re-
membrance of the fame cannot but be noyfome to you.
And vet all there did I as it were suppress and overcome
with rthe natural inclination of love towards you ; and
did afterx ards gladly, as you know, christen your son,
the child of my said kinsman, that had before so unloyally
offended me, both in marriage of you, and in other un-
dutiful ufazes towards me his sovereign. How friendly
also deat I by meTfages to reconcile him, being your hus-

band,
362

band, to you, when others nourilled discord betwixt
you, who as itfeemeth had more power to work their pur-
poles, being evil to you both, than I had to do you good,
in respect of the evil I had received. lVell I will over-
pass your hard accidents that followed for lack of follow-
ing my councill. And then in your molt extremity, when
you was a prisoner indeed, and in danger of your life from
your notorious evil willers, how far from my mind was
the remembrance of any former unkindnels you had ihew-
ed me. Nay how void was I of refpe~t to the designs
which the world had seen attempted by you to my crown,
and the security that might have enlued to my fate by
your death, when I finding your calamity to be great,
that you were at the pit's brink to have iniferably loft
your life, did not only intreat for your life, but so
threatened some as were irritated against you, that I only
may iay it, even I was the principal cause to faveyour life.

No. XIX. (Vol. I. p. 408.)
Letter of Q. Elizabeth to Q of Scotts. Thus

marked on the back with Cecil's hand-Copi,a
Literarum Regi e Majefatis ad Reginem Scolo-
rum. VII!°. Aprilis.
M TADAME, vous ayant t-cp mo!ef(t par M. deParr

Crocq, je n' euffe eu li peu deconliderationdevous 0"''

fafcher de cette lettre, si les liens de charitee vers les ruinez,
et les pieres des miserables ne n'y contraignaffent. Je en-
tens que tn edit a ete divulgue de par vous, madame, que
ung chafcun, que veultjultJfier que ons efteles meurtriers
devotre feu mari, et mon feu cousin, viennenta le faire
le xi inme de ce mis. La quelle chofc, cotrnie c'eif plus
honorable et neceffaire, qui en tel cas fe pourra faire, -ne
y eftant cache quelque millere ou finesse, ainfi le pere et
amis du mort gentelhomme n'ont humblement requis,
que je vous priaffe de prolongue le jour, pource qu'ib,
cognoiflint que les iniques fe font combinn par force de
faire ccque par droia ils ne pourront pas fauie ; partant,
jene puis mais finon pour 1' amour de vous mcme, a qui il
touche le plus, et pour la consolation des innocens, de
vous exhorter le leur conceder cette requcte, laquellc, ii
elle les feroit nie, vous tournero;t grar.dement en foupsorl,

de

363

de plus que j'efpere ne pensez, et que ne voudriez volon-
tiers ouyr. Pour 1' amour de Dieu, madame, usez de telle
fincerite & prudence en ce cas qui vos touche de si pres
que tout le monde aye raison, de vous livrer comm telle
nocente d'ung crime si enorme, chose que si ne siftes, feriez
dignement efbloye hors de rancz de princesses, & non fans
raufe faite opprobre de vulgaire, et plutot que cela vous
avienne, je vous fluhaiterois une sepulture honorable
qu'une vie maculee; vous voiez madame, que je vous traite
comme ma fille, et vous promets, que fij' en euffe, ne luy
fouhaiterois mieulz, queje vous desire, comme le Seign-
eur Dieu me porte tefmoignage, a quije prie de bon cceur
de vous inspirer a faire ce qui vous sera plus a honneur, et
a vos amis plus de consolation, avec mes tres cordialles
recommendations comme a icelle a qui fe fouhaite le plus
de bien, qui vous pourra en ce monde avenir. De Weft.
ce 8 jour de Janvier * en haste.

No. XX. (Vol. I. p. 423. )
A letter from England concerning the murder of

king Henry Darnley.

E. of Mor- TTAVING the commodity of this bearer Mr. Clark,
ton', A^-J Itho't good to write a few words unto you. I have
Bundle B.recd. some writs from you; and some I have seen lately
?o. 5s. lent others from you, as namely to the earl of Bedford of

the I6ofMay. I have participat the contents thereof to
such as I thought meet, this mekle I can assure you ; the
intelligence given hither by the French was untrue, for
there was not one papist nor proteflant which did not con-
sent thatjuftice fhouldbe done, be the queen myv ovns. aid
and support, against such as had committed that ahomin-
ableill murder in your country; but to fay truth, the lack
and coldness did not rife from such as were called to coun-
cil, but from such as should give life and execution
thereunTo. And further, I assure you I never knew no
mat:er cfeftate proponed ihich lhad so many favourers of
1;i sons of nations as this had: ea, I can lay unto you,
Zc r-an prcrcted the matter with greater aflection, than

* A ilf.ske ian ,e date corrseced w;th Cecil's bar.d III°. Aprilis.

the

the Spanish ambassador. And sure I am that no man dare
openly be of any other mind, but to affirm that whoso--
ever is guilty of this murder, handfalled with advoutre,
is unworthy to live. I Ihall not need to tell you, which
be our letts, and stayes from all good things here, You
are acquainted with them as well as I. Neds I must con-
fess, that howsoever we omit occasions of benefit, ho-
nour, and fSrety; it behovetl your whole nobility, and
namely such as before, and after the murder,were deemed
to allow of Bodwell, to prolecute with sword and justice
the puniflment of those abominable acts, though we lend
you but a cold aid, and albeit you, and divers others, both
honourable and honest, be well known to me, and fun-
dry others here, to be justifiable in all their actions and
doings; yet think not the contrary but your whole nation
is blemiihed and infamit by there doings which lately passed
among you. What we lhall do I know not, neither do I
write unto you assuredly, for webe subjet unto many muta-
tions, and yet I think we shall either aid you, or conti-
nue in the defence and safeguard of your prince, so as it
appear to us that you mean his safeguard indeed, and not
to ruin the fortune of France, which will be y)our own
deftrudion, if you be unadvised. I know not one, no not
one of any quality or estate in this country, which does
allow of the queen your sovereign, but would gladly the
world were rid of her, so as the fame were done without
farther lander, that is to fay by ordinary juflice. This
I fend the 23d of M: y.

No. XXI. (Vol. I. p. 434.)
Part of a letter from Sir Nicolas Throgmorton

to Cecil, i ith of July, 1567, from Berwick.
CIR, your letter of the 6th of July, I received theAn orii-

.Ioth at Berwick, I am lorry to fee that thenal.

queen's majefly's disposition altereth not towards thePfer O'
lords, for when all is done, it is they which muit sand
her more in flead, than the queen her cousin, and will
be better inllruments to work some benefite and quiet-
ness to her majesty and her realm, than the queen of Scot-
land which is void of good famer.

A let-

A letter from Sir Nicolas Throgmorton to Cecil

from Faftcaftle, 12th of July, 1567.

P32of C IR, as you might perceive by my letter of the Inth
.ce. ) July, 1 lodged at Faifcaftle that night, accompanyed

with the lord lume, the lord of Ledington, and James
Melvin, where I was intreated very well, according to the
fiate of that place, which is fitter to lodge prisoners than
folks at liberty, as it is very little, so it is very fIrong.
By the cotference I have had with the lord of Ledington
I find the lords his associates and he hath left nothing un-
thought of, which maybe either to thir danger, or work
them fuety, v.herein they do not forget what good and
harme France may do them, and likewise they confider
the fame of England; but as farr as I can perceive, to
be plain with yow, they find more perril to grow unto
them through the queen's majesty's dealing than either they
do by the French, or by any contrary faction amonglt
themselves, for they assure themselves the queen will leave
them in the b-yers if they run her fortoun, and though
they do acknowledge great benefit as well to them, as to
the realm of England by her majeftv's doings at Leith,
whereof they fay mutually her majesty and both the realms
have received great fruit ; yet upon other accidents which
have chanced since, they have observed such things in her
nmajefty's doings, as have ended to the danger offuch as
she hath dealt withall, to the overthrow of your owndefign-
.ments, and little to the furetyof any party : and upon there
confidera:ions and discourses at length, methinketh I find
a disposition in them, that either thev mind to make their
bargain with France, or else to deal neither with France
nor yow, but to do what they shall think meet for their
fiate and surety, and to use their remedy as occalion shall
move them; meaning neither t irritate France nor Eng-
land, untill such time as they have made their bargain as-
furedly with one of yow ; for they think it convenient to
proceed with vow both for a while pari paffu, for that
was my lcrd of Ledington's terms. I do perceave they
take a matter very unkindly, that no better answer is
made to the lctter, which the lords did fend to her majesty,
and likeife that they hear nothing from yow to their fa-
tistaction, I have aniswered a well as I can, and have al-
lekged their ov, n proceedings lo oblicurly with the que:n,

and
366

and their uncertainty hath occationed this that is yet hap-
pened, and therefore her majesty hath sent me to the end
I may inform her thoroughly of the state of the matters, and
upon the declaration of their minds and intents to such
purposes as shall be by me proposed on the:r majeflys be-
half unto them, they shall be reasonably and resolutely an-
fwered. At these things the Lord of Ledington finiled and
(hook his head, and said it were better for us yow would
tel us alone, than neither to do us nor yourselves good, as
I fear me in the end that will prove; Sr. if there be any
truth in Ledington, la Crocq is gone to procure Ram-
boilet is coming hither or a man of like quality, and to
deliver them of their queen for ever, who thall lead her life
in France in a abby reclufed, the prince at the French
devotion, the realm governed by a council of their elec-
tion of the Scottish nation, the forts committed to the
custody of such as shall be chosen amongst themselves, as
yet I find no great likelihood that I shall have access to the
queen, it is objeted they may not so displease the French
king, unless they were sure to find the queen of England
a good friend; and w/hen they once by my access to the
queen have offende' the French, then they fay yow will
make your profit thereof to their undoing; and as to the
queen's liberty, which was the first head that I proposed,
they said that thereby they did perceive that the queen
wants their undoing, for as for the reft of the matters it
was but folly to talk of them the liberty going before ; but
said they, if you will do us no good, do us no harm, and
we will provide for our selves. In the end they said, we
should refuse our own commodity, before they concluded
with any other, which I (hould hear of at my coming
to Edinr; by my next I hope to fend yow the band con-
cluded by Hamiltons, Argyll, Huntly, and that fation,
not so much to the prejudice of the lords of Edinr. as that
which was sent into France thus having no more leasure
but compelled to leap on horseback v.ith the lords to go to
Edinr. I humbly take my leave of from Faftcaftle the i2th
of July i567.

To

To Sir Nicolas Throgmorton being in Scotland.

By the queen, the i4th July 1567.

R U S T Y and well beloved we greet you well, though
we think that the causes will often change upon va-

riety of accidents, yet we think for sundry refpeóts, not
amiss, that yow (hall deal with the lords having charge
of the young prince for the committing of him into our
realm, so (hall yow also do well, in treaty with the queen,
to offer her that where her realm appeareth to be fubjedt
to sundry troub!es from time to time, and thereby (as it is
miniSfet) her son cannot be free, if the (hall be contented
that her son may enjoy fuerty and quietness, within this
our realm, being so near as fht knows it is; we (hall not
faill to yield her as good fuerty therein for her child, as
can be devised for any that might be our child born of
our own body, and thall be glad to ihow to her therein
the trew effect of nature; and herein (he may be by yow
remembered how much good may ensue to her ton to be
nourilhed and acquainted with our country; and there-
fore all things confidered, this occasion for her child,
were rather to be fought by her and the friends of him,
than offered by us; and to this end, we mean that yow
(hall to deal with her, both to stay her indeed irom in-
clining to the French practice, which is to us notorious,
to convey her and the prince into France, and also to avoid
any juif offence, that the might hereafter conceive, if (he
thould hear that we should deal with the lords for the
prince.
Sir Nicolas Throgmorton to queen Elizabeth, i4th

July 1567, from Edinburgh.

Ar;original. T T may please your majesty to be advertised, I did figni-
I'.;,r Of- i fie unto Mr. Secretary by my letters of the i th and
L"- I 12th of July, the day ot mine entry into Scotland, the

causes of my ftav, my lodging at Faficafle, a place of the
lord Hume's, where I was met by the said lord and by the
lord Lidington, and what had passed in conference be-
twixt us, whileft I was at the said Faftcaftle. Since
which time, accompanyed with the lords aforesaid, and
with 4co !;orfes by their appointment for my better con-

duJ,

duA, I came to Edinr the 12th of this present. The 13th
being Sunday appointed for a folemnne comniunion in this
town, and also a foleinne fast being publilhed, I could
not have conference with the lords which be assembled
within this town as I desired, that is to fay the earls of
Athole and Morton, the lord Hume, the lord of Liding-
ton, Sir James Balfour captain of the cattle, MIr. James
M'Gill and the president of the sesSion

NEVERTHELESS I made means by the lord of Liding-

ton that they would use no protracte of time in mine au-
dience, so did I likewise to the earle of Morton, whom I
met by chance ; I was answered by them both, that albeit
the day were destined to sacred exercises, such as were
thereof the council would consult upon any moyen touch-
ing my access unto theni and my conference with them,
and said also that in the afternoon either they would come
to me, or I lhould hear from them. About 4 of the clock
in the afternoon, the said I3th day, the lord of Liding-
ton came to my lodgings, and declared ui.to me on the
behalf of the lords and others, that they required me to
have patience though they had defferred my conference with
them, which was grounded principally upon the absence
of the earles of Mar, and Glencairn, the lords Seirple,
Crighton, and others of the council, faying also that they
did confider the matters which I was on your behalf
to treate with them of, were of great importance, as thev
could not satisfy nor conveniently treate with me, nor
give me answer without the advice of the lords, and others
their associates ; the lord of Lidington also said unto me,
that where he perceived, by this private conference with
me in my journey hitherwards, that I prelTed greatly to
have speedy access to the queen their fovcreign, he perceiv-
ed, by the lords and others which were hei, that in that
matter there was great difficulty for many refpe5As, but
specially because they had refused to the French ambalTa-
dor the like access, which being granted unto me, might
greatly offend the French, a matter which t'ley desired
and intended to eschew ; for they did not find by your ma-
jeftys dealings with them hitherto, that it behoveth them to
irritate the French king, and to loose his favour and good
inteligence with him : I answered that as to their rcfifal,
made unto the French ambassador, monsieur de Vil;e
Roye was dispatched forth of France before there acci-
dents here happened, and his special errand was to impeach

\VoL. II. B b the

the queen's marriage with the earle of Bothel, (for so in-
deed since my coming hither I learned his c ommission ten-
ded to that end, and to make offer to the queen of an-
other marriage ) and as to monsieur de Crocq, he could
have no order forth of France concerning these matters
since they happened; and therefore they might very well
hold them fufpeced to have conference with the queen, least
they might treate of matters in this time without inftruti-
ons, and so rather do harm then good ; but your majesty
being advertized of all things which had chanced, had sent
me hither to treat with them, for the well of the realm,
for the conservation of their honors and credit, and for
their surety; and I might boldly fay unto him, that your
majesty had better deserved than the French had. He
said, for his own part, he was much bound unto your ma-
jefty, and had always found great favour and courtesy in
England, but to be plain with you, Sir, fayed he, there is
not many of this assembly that have found so great obliga-
tion at the queen your sovereigns hands, as at the Frencl
kings, for the earles of Morton and Glencairn be the only
persons which took benefit by the queens majestys aid at
Leith, the reft of the noblemen were not in the action,
and we think, said he, the queens majesty your sovereign,
by the opinion of her own council, and all the world, took
as great benefit by that charge as the realm of Scotland,
or any particular person; and not to talk with you as an
ambassador, but with Sir Nicolas Thorgmorton, my lord
Morton, and such as were in pain for the death of Davie,
found but cold favour of the queens majestys hands, when
they were banished forth of their own country; but I
would all our whole company were as well willing to ac-
complilh the queen your sovereign intents and desires as
I am; for mine own part, I am but one, and that of the
meanest fort, and they be many noblemen and such as
have great interefi in the matter, mary yow shall be allured
I will implov myself to implov my credit, and all that I
may do, to fatisfie the queen your mistress, as much as lv-
eth in me, and for your own part you have a great many
friends in this afTembly, with many other good words.
But for conclusion I must take this for an answer to flav
untill the othzr lords were come, and thereupon I thought
meet toadverrize your majety what hath paged, and how
far forth I have proceeded , -our expectation being great
to hear from hence.

AND
370

AND now to advertize your majefly of the Itate of all

things, as I have learned since my comming hither, it may
please your majefly to understand as followeth.

THE queen of Scotland remaineth in good health in the

castle of Lochleven guarded by the lord Linfay and Loch-
leven the owner of the house; for the lord Ruthven is im-
ployed in another cominiffon, because he began to (how
great favour to the queen and to give her intelligence. She
is waited on with 5 or 6 ladys, 4 or 5 gentleuiiomen, and
2 chamberers, whereof one is a French woman. The
earle of Buchan, the carle of Murray's brother, hath also
liberty tocome to her at his pleasure; the lords aforesaid,
which have her in guard, doe keep her very itraitly, and
as far as I can perceive, their rigour proceedeth by their
order from there men, because that the queen will not by
any means be induced to lend her authority to prosecute
the murder, nor will not content by any perfwafion to
abandon the lord Bothell for her hulband, but avoweth
constantly that she will live and die with him; and faith
that if it were put to her choife to relinquih her crown
and kingdom, or the lord Bothell, ahe would leave her
kingdom and dignity, to go as a simple dam fell with
him, and that the will never consent that he shall fare
worse or have more harm than herself.

AND as far as I can perceive, the principal cause of her

detention is, for that these lords do fee the queen being of
fofervent affection towards the earle Bothell as iheis, and
being put at, as they should be compelled to be in con-
tinuall arms, and to have occasion of many battles, he be-
ing with manifest evidence notoriously <'eteted to be the
principall murderer, and the lords meaning prosecution of
justice against him according to his merits.

THE lords mean alto a divorce betwixt the queen and

him, as a marriage not to be suffered for many relpeds,
which reparation cannot take place if the queen be at li-
berty, and have power in her hands.

THEY do not also forget their own perill, conjoin'd

with the danger of the prince, but as far as I can perceave,
they intend not either to touch the queen in surety or in
honor, for they do speak of her with relped and reve-
rence, and do affirm, as I do learn, that the conditions
aforesaid accomplished, they will both put her to liberty,
and restore her to her ellate.

37I
Bb2

THESE

THESE lords have for the guard of their town 450 Har-

qubufhers which be in every good order, for the entertain-
ment of which companys, untill all matters be compound-
ed, they did sue unto your majesty, to aid them with such
fum of money as hath been mentioned to Mr. Secretary
by the lord of Lydingons writing, amounting as I per-
ceive to ten or twelve thousand crowns of the

THEY were lately advertized that the French King

doth mind to fend hither monsieur de la Chapell des Ur-
fine, a knight of the French order, and always well assec-
tionate to the house of Guyfe, and howsoever la Forest,
Villaroy, and du Crocq have used language in the queens
favour and to these lords disadvantage there, to your ma-
jefty; la Crocq doth carry with him such matter as shall
belittle to the queen's advantage; so as it is thought the
French King, upon this coming to his pretence, will rather
fatisfie the lords, than pleasure the queen; for they have
their party so well made, as the French will rather make
their profit by them, than any other way.

HEREWITH I fend your majesty the last bond agreed

on, and signed by the Hamiltons, the earl of Argyll,
Huntly, and sundry others at Dumbarton.

NEVERTHELESS, since my coming to this town, the

Hamiltons have sent unto me a gentleman of their fur-
name named Robert Hamilton with a letter from the bi-
(hop of St. Andrew's and the abbot of Arbroth, the copy
whereof I fend your majefly and mine answer unto them,
referring to the bearer the declaration of some things, as
these did by him unto me.

THE earl of Argyll hath, in like manner, sent another

unto me with a letter and credit, I have used him as I did
the others, the copy of both which letters I fend your
majesty also. The lord Harrys hath also sent unto me
but not written, and I have returned unto him in like
fort.

AGAINST the 2oth day of this month there is a general

aflembly of all the churches, flires, and borough towns of
this realm, namely of such as be contented to repair to
there lords to this town, where it is thought the whole
state of this matter will be handled, and I fear me much
to the queen's disadvantage and danger; unless the lord of
Lidin-ton and Come others which be best affe&ed unto her
do provide some 'emedy; 'or i perceave the great num-
ber, and in manrier all, but chiefly the common people,

which have assisted in there doings, do greatly dishonour
the queen, and mind seriously either her deprivation, or
her deftruEtion; I used the best means I can (confidering
the furie of the world here) to prorogue this assembly, for
that appeareth to me to be the best remedy: I may not
speak of dissolution of it, for that may not be abiden, and
I Ihould thereby bring myself into great hatred and peril.
The chiefeft of the lords which be here present at this time
dare not ihow so much lenity to the queen as I think they
could be contented, for fear of the rage of the people.
The women be most furious and impudent against the
queen, and yet the men be mad enough; so as a firanger
over bufie may soon be made a sacrifice amongff them.

THERE was a great bruit that the Hamiltons with their

adherents would put their force into the fields against the
24th of this month, but I do not find that intent so true,
as the common bruit goeth.

THE earle of Argyll is in the highlands, where there is
trouble among his own countrymen.

THE earleof Lennox is by there lords much desired here,

and I do believe your majesty may so use him, and direc
him, as he shall be able to promote your purpose with there
men

THE earle of Argyll, the Hamiltons and he be incom-

patible - I do find among the Hamiltons, Argyll and
the company two strange and sundry humours.

HAMILTONS do make show of the liberty of the queen,

and prosecute that with great earnestness, because they
would have these lords destroy her, rather than she Thould
be recovered from them by violence; another time they
seem to desire her liberty, and Bothwell's deftrucion, be-
cause they would compass a marriage betwixt the queen and
the lord of Arhroth.

THE earle of Argyll doth assec her liberty, and Both-

well's deftrudion, because he would marry the queen to
his brother.

AND yet neither of them, notwithstanding their open

concurrence, (as appeareth by their bond) doth discover
their minds to each other, nor mind one end; Knox is
not here, but in the weft parts, he and the reft of the mi-
nifters will be here at the great assembly, whos austerity
against the queen I fear as much as any man's.

BY some conference which I had with some of this
council, me thinketh that they have intelligence that there

Bb3 is

is a disposition in the queenof Scotland, to leave this realm,
and to retire herself unto either England, or into France,
but molf willingly into England, for such- and mif-
likeings as (he knoweth hath been, and is meant unto her
in France, leaving the regiment either to a number of
persons deleagued, and authorised by her, or to some one
or more.

AND it please your majesty, I think it not amiss to

put yow in remembrance, that in cafe the said queen come
into England by )your allowance, without the French
king's conlent, (he (hall loo:e her dowery in France, and
have little or nothing from hence to entertain her; and
in cafe she do go into France with the king's content-
ment, the may be an inflrument (if the can recover fa-
vour, as time will help to cancel] her disgrace) either by
matching with some husband of good quality, or by some
other devile, to work new unquietness to her own con-
try, and so consequently to your majesty's.

THEREFORE it may please your majesty to confider of

this matter, and to let me know your pleasure with con-
venient speed, how I (hall answer the fame, if it be pro-
pounded unto me, either by the queen, or by the coun-
cil, as a piece of the end and composition. For I am sure,
of late, flie hath seemed very desirous to have that mat-
ter brought to pass, that she might go into England, re-
taining her estate and jurifdi&ion in herself, though (he do
not exercise it; and likewise I underfhand that some of this
council which be lea{t affected to her safety do think there
is no other way to save her. Thus Almightv God prc-
serve your majesty in health, honour, and all felicity; at
Edinr. the I4th July 1567.
Sir Nicholas Throgmorton to queen Elizabeth the

iSth of July 1567, from Edinburgh.

Anoriginal. T may please your majefly, yow might perceave by my
Paper Of- J letters of the 6th, how far I had proceeded with there

lords, and what was their answer; since which time I
have spoken particularly with the earle Morton, the lord
of Lidington, and Sir James Balfour captain of this cafie,
at whose hands I cannot perceave that as yet access to the
queen to Lochl!ven will be granted me, flaying themfelvcs
frill by the absence of the lords and others their associates,
lwich (they fay) they look for within two days ; and for

that
374

that I find, by likelihood and apparentprefumptions, that
mine access to the queen will hardly be granted, I have
thought good not to defer this dispatch untill I have a re-
solute answer in that matter.

MAY it therefore please your majesty, to understand Ro-

bert Melvin returned from the queen in Lochlevin, to this
town the 6th of July, and brought a letter from her writ-
ten of her own hand to thefelords, which doth contain as
1 underfiand matter as followeth-A request unto them
to have consideration of her health, and if they will not
put her toliberty, to change the place of restraint to the
catle of Stirling, to the end the might have the comfort
and company of her son, and if they will not change her
from Lochlevin, Ihe required to have some other gentle-
woman about her, naming none.

To have her Apothecary, to have some modes: minister

To have an imbroiderer to draw forth such work as

she would be occupied about, and to have a varlet of the
chamber- Touching the government of the realm she
maketh two offers, which are but generally touched in
her letter, the particularitys be not specified, but referred
to Robert Melvin's credit, the one is to commit it only and
wholly to the earle of Murray, the other is to the lords
whose names ensue, alifted with such others, as they shall
call unto them, that is to fay, the duke of Chattelrault,
the earles of Morton, Murray, Marr, and Glencairn.

SHE hath written unto them that I might have access

unto her-She requiretl further, that if they will not
treat her and regard her as their queen, yet to use her as
the king their sovereign's daughter, (whom many of them
knew) and as their prince's mother.-She will by no means
yield to abandon Bothell for her huffand, nor relinquilh
him; which matter will do her most harm of all, and
hardeneth these lords to great severity against her.

SHE yielded in words to the prosecution of the mur-
der.

I HAVE the means to let her know that your majesty
hath sent me hither for her relief.

I HAVE also perfwaded her to conform herself to re-

nounce Bothell for her husband, and to be contented to
susser a divorce to pass betwixt them; she hath sent me
word that she will in no ways content unto that, but ra-
ther die; grounding herself upon this reason taking her-
self to be seven weeks gone with child, by renouncing

B b 4 3othcll,

Bothell, she should acknowledge herself to be with
child of a bailard, and to have forfeited her honour, which
she will not do to die for it; I have perfwaded her to
save her own life and her child, to choose the least hard
condition.

M.'R. KNOX arrived here in this town the 6th of this

month, with whom I have had some conference, and
with Mr. Craiz also, the other minifier of this town.

I HAVE periwaded with them to preach and perfwad le-

nirv, I rind them both very austere, in this conference,
what they fhail do hereafter I know nor, they are fur-
niIled with many arguments, some forth of the scripture,
some forth of histories, lome grounded (as they fay) up-
on the laws of this realm, some upon practices used in
this realm, and some upon the conditions and oth made
by their prince at her coronation.

THE bishop of Gal!oway uncle to the earle of Huntley

hath fcnt hither to thele lords, that his nephew the earle
and some others of that fide may, at Linlithgow or at
Stirling, have some communication with some appointed
on this fide, assuring them that there is a good difpofi-
tion in the lords of the other party to concurre with these,
assuring further that they will not dissent for triffles or
unnecessary things, and (as I am given to understand)
they can be pleated the queen's restraint be continued,
untill the murder be pursued in all persons, whereby the
separation of the queen and Bothell is implyed, the prefer-
vation of the prince, the security for all men, and a
good orde~ taken for the governance of the realm in
tranquility.

CAPTAIN Clerk, which hath so long served in Denmark

and served at Newhaven, did the r6th of this month (ac-
companyed with one of his soldiers, or rather the soldier
as the greater fame goeth ) kill one Wilson a icarnan, and
such a one as had great effimation with thee lords both
for his fkiil, his hardiness, honelty, and willlingnefs in this
action; whereupon Clerk hath retired hl;mlelf; their
quarrel was about the ihip which took Blacketer, which
{hip was appointed by there lords to go to the north of
Scotland to impeach the palfihge of the earle Bothell, in
care he went either to the isles, or to any other place; by
the death of this man this enterprize was dallied.

THE bithop of Galioway is come to Linlithgow, and
ploth desire to ijeck with the lord of Lidiihgton.

'r~..
376

THE abbot of Kilwinning hath sent for Sir James Bal-
four, captain of the castle, to have conference with him.

As I wrote unto your majefly in my lalt, the Hamiltons

now find no matter to difever those lords and them afun-
der, but would concur in all things (yea in any extremi-
ty against the queen) so as that they might be allured the
prince of Scotland were crouned king, and fliould die
without ifile, that the earle of Lenc-x's son living Ihould
not inherit the cfoun of this realm, as next heir to his
nephew.

AND although the lords and councelors speak reverent-

ly, mildly, and charitably of their queen, so as I cannot
gather by their speech any intention to cruelty or violence,
yet I do find by intelligence, that the queen is in very
great peril of her life, by reason that the people assembled
at this convention do mind vehemently the destrucion
of her.

IT is a public speech amongst all the people, and

amongst all estates, (saving of the councellors) that their
queen hath no more liberty nor privilege to commit mur-
der nor adultery, than any other private person, neither
by God's laws, nor by the laws of the realm.

THE earl of Bothell, and all his adherents and affoci-

ates, be put to the horn by the ordinary justice of this
town, named the lords of the session; and commandment
given to all sheriffs, and all other officers, to apprehend
him, and all other his followers and receiptors--The earl
of Bothell's porter, and one of his other servitors of his
chamber, being apprehended, have confessed fich sundry
circumflances, as it appeareth evidently, that he the said
earl was one of the principal executors of the murder, in
his own person accompanyed with sundry others, of which
number I cannot yet certainly learn the names but of three
of them, that is to fay, two of the Ormiflons of Tivot-
dall, and one Hayborn of Bolton; the lords would be
glad that none of the murderers (hould have any favour
or receipt in England, and hereof their dclire is, that the
officers upon the border may be warned ; Bothell doth till
remain in the north parts, but the lord Seaton and Fle-
ming, which have been there, have utterly abandoned
him, and do repair hitherwards - The intellipencc doth
grow daily betwixt there lords, and those which held of;
and notwithflanding these lords have sent an hundred and
fifty harqubufhers to Stirling, to keep the town and paT-

Cage

sage from furprize; and so have they done in like man-
ner to St. Johnston, which be the two passages from the
north, and weft to this town, I do understand the captain
of Dunbar is much busied in fortifying that place, I do
mervile the carriages be not impeached otherwise than
they be.

OF iate this queen hath written a letter to the captain

of the said castle which hath been furprized; and there-
by matter is discovered which maketh little to the queen's
advantage.

THUS, having none other matter worthy your maje-

ily's knowledge, I beseech God to prosper your majesty
with long life, perfet health, and prosperous felicity.
At Edinburgh the i8th of July, 1567.
Letter of Sir Nicholas Throgmorton to the right

honourable the earl of. Leicester, knt. of the or-
der, and one of the Lords of her majefly's most
honourable Privy Council.

:4th of J.- BY my former dispatches sent to her majesty, and Mr.
ly, 156-. D Secretary, since the 12th of July, your lordship
froathft might have perceived the state of this country, and to
original. what end these matters be like to come: so as not to

trouble your lordlhip with many words; this queen is like
very shortly to be deprived of her royal eflate, her son to
be crowned king, and (he detained in prison within this
realm, and the fame to be governed, in the young king's
name, by a councel, consisting of certain of the nobility,
and other wife men of this realm ; so as it is easy to be
seen that the power and ability to do any thing to the
commodity of the queen's majesty, and the realm of Eng-
land, will chiefly, and in manner wholly, reft in the
hands of these lords, and others their associates, assembled
at Edinburgh. Now if the queen's majesty will fill per-
sift in her former opinion towards the queen of Scot-
land, (unto whom she shall be able to do no good) then
I do plainly fee that these lords and all their accomplices
will become as good French, as the French king can winh,
to all intents and purposes. And as for the Hamiltons,
the earls of Arguile, Huntlye, and that faction, they be
already so far inchanted that way, as there needeth little
devise to draw them to the French devotion. Then this
is the state of things so come to pars of this country, that

France
378

France has Scotland now as much conjoined unto them,
to all purposes, as ever it was; and what an instrument,
the young prince will prove, to unquiet England, I report
me to your lordships wisdoms, and therefore conlidering
the weight of the matter, and all the circumstances, I
truR your lordships will well bethink you in time, (for 'tis
high time) how to advise her majesty, to leave nothing un-
done that may bring the prince of Scotland to be in her
possession, or, at the leapt, to be at her devotion. And
amongst other things, that I can imagine, for the first
degree, nothing is more meet to bring this to effe&, than
to allure this company here assembled, to bear her majesty
their favour. Some talk hath passed between the lord of
Liddington and me, in certain conferences, about this
matter. By him I find, that when her majeity (hall have
won these men to her devotion, the principal point that
will make them conformable to deliver their prince into
England, will reft upon the queen, and the realmes en-
abling him to the fucceflion of the crown of England,
for fault of issue of the queen's majesty's body, some other
things will be also required, as the charge of the said prince
and his train, to be at the charge of England. I do well
perceive that these men will never be brought to deliver
their prince into England, without the former condition,
for the succession of England; for (faith Liddington) that
taking place, the prince Ihall be as dear to the people of
England as to the people of of Scotland ; and the one will
be as careful of his preservation as the other. Otherwise,
he faith, all things confidered, it will be reported that the
Scottifhmen have put their prince to be kept in safety, as
those which commit the flleep to be kept by the wolves.
So as for conclusion, your lordships may perceive here
will be the scope of this matter. As unto the delivering
of him upon holtages, he fayeth, let no man think, that
the condition of the succession not being accomplished,
the nobility and the gentry will never content to leave
themselves destitute of their sovereign, upon any hostages,
neither upon any promises, nor likelihood of good to issue
in time to come. It were not good for yourselves (faith
he) that the matter were so handled; for then you should
adventure all your goods in one (hip, which might have
a dangerous effet, confidering the unwillingness of the
queen your sovereign to content to eftabli'ning any fuc-
ceffor to the crown. And then, how unmete were it, that

her

her mjefty having in her possession already all such per-
sons as do pretend to it, or be inheritable to the crown,
to have our prince also in her custody. For so there
might follow, without good capitulations, a strange and
dangerous issue, tho' the queen your mistress do think
that such imaginations could not proceed but from busy
heads, as you have uttered unto us on her behalf. What
is come to pass since my last dilpatch, and how far forth
things are proceeded, I refer your lordship to be informed
by my letters sent unto her majesty, at this time. And
so I pray almighty God, preserve your lordship in much
honour and felicity. At Edinburgh this 24th of July,
1567.

It may please your good lordship to make my lord Stu.
ard partner of this letter.

The queen to Sir Nicholas Throgmorton.

By the queen.
6th AuO. T RUST Y and right well beloved, we greet you

well, for as much as we do confider that you have

now a long time remained in those parts, without expe-
dition in the charge committed unto you, we think it not
meet feeing there hath not followed the good acceptation
and fruit of our well meaning towards that ifate, which
good reason would have required, that you should conti-
nue there any longer, our pleasure, therefore, is, that you
shall immediately upon the receipt hereof, fend your ser-
vant Middlemore unto the lords and ellates of that realm,
that are affeinbled together, willing him to declare unto
them, that it cannot but fcem very strange into us, that
you having been lent from us, of such good intent, to deal
with them, in matters tending so much to their own
quiet, and to the benefit of the whole ellate of their coun-
try, they have so far forgotten themselves, and so flight-
1, regarded us and our good meaning, not only in delay-
ing to hear you, and deferring your access to the queen
their sovereign, but also, which is firangeft of all, in not
vouchsafing to make any answer unto us. And altho'
there dealings be such, indeed, as were not to be looked
for at their hands, yet do we find their usage and pro-

ceeding
3So

ceeding towards their Soveraign and queen, to overpals all
the reft, in so firange a degree, as we for our part, and we
fippofe the whole world besides, cannot but think them
to have therein gone so far beyond the duty of fubjeas,
as mutf needs remain to their perpetual tauche for ever.
And therefore ye shall fay, that we have tho't good, with-
out consuming any longer time in vain, to revoke you to
our pretence, requiring them to grant you licence and pas-
port so to do, which when you shall have obtained, we
will that you make your repair hither, unto us, with as
convenient speed as you may. Given, &c.

Indorfed 6th August, 1567.
Throgmorton to the right honourable Sir William

Cecil, knight, one of her majesty's privy coun-
cil and principal secretary, give there.
S I R,

HAT I have learned, since the arrival of my ,th Au.

Vlord of Murray, and Mons. de Linnerd, you 156-.

fiall underltand by my letter to her majesty, at this time. Pa'per (-
The French do, in their negociations, as they do in their t'e oi;-
drink, put water to their wine. As I am able to fee into nal.
their doings, they take it not greatly to the heart how
the queen sleep, whether fle live or die, whether Ihe be
at liberty or in prizon. The mark they (hoot at, is, to
renew their old league; and can be as well contented ro
take it of this little king, (howsoever his title be) and the
fame by the order of there lords, as otherwise. Lyneroll
came but yesterday, and me thinketh he will not tarry
long; you may guess how the French will siek to dil-
pleale the lords when they changed the coming of La
Chapelle des Ourfins for this man, because they doubted
that de la Chapelle should not be grateful to them,
being a papist. Sir, to speak more plainly to you, thin
I will do otherwise, me thinketh the earl of Mlirra .
will run the course that those men do, and be par-
taker of their fortune. I hear no man fpe:k more bit-
terly againll the tragedy, and the players therein, than
he, so little like he hath to horrible fins. I hear an ink-
ling that Ledington is gone into France, thich Ido 3a
much millike, as an)' tlhir, for our purpose. I can sall'-:
you the whole protclants ,f Franc we w11 i;e anti die in

ilci C

3$$

there mens quarrels; and, where there is bruit amongst
you, that aid ihould be sent to the adverse party, and
that Martigues should come hither with some force;
Mons. Baudelot hath assured me of his honour, that in-
stead of Martigues coming against them, he will come
with as good a force to succour them: And if that be sent
under meaner condut, Robert Stuart shall come with
as many to fortify them. But the constable hath assured
these lords, that the king meaneth no way to offend them.
Sir, I pray you find my revocation convenient, and speed
you to further it, for I am here now to no purpose, un-
less it be to kindle there lords more against us. Thus I
do humbly take my leave of you, from Edenburgh the
12th of August, 1567.

Yours to use and command.

The Queen to Nicholas Throgmorton.

RUSTY and well-beloved we greet you well.
WVe has :, within these two days, received three

sundry letters of yours, of the 20th, 22d, and 23d, of
this month, having not before those received any seven
days before; and do find, by these your letters, that you
have, very diligently and largely advertised us of all the
hasty and peremptory proceedings there; which as we no-
thing like, so we trust in iini u , ' :rem wax colder,
and to receive some reformation. For wc a:nnot per-
ceive, that they with whom you have dealt can answer the
doubts moved by the Hamiltons, v.ho howsoever they may
be carried for their private refpe ts, yet those things which
they move, will be allowed by all reasonable perlbns. For
if they may not, being noblemen of the realm, be suffered
to hear the queen their sovereign declare her mind con-
cerning the reports which are made of her, by such as
keep her in captivity, how should they believe the re-
ports, or obey them, which do report it ? and therefore our
meaning is, you shall let the Hamiltons plainly under-
itand, that we do well allow of ther proceedings, (as far
forth as the fame doth concern the queen their sovereign
for her relief) and in such things as shall appear reason-
able for us therein to do, for the queen our fitter, we
will be rendy to perform the fame. And where it is so
required, that upon your coming thence, the lord Scroope

iihould

flould deal with the lord Herris to impart their meanings
to us, and ours to them, we are well pleased therewith,
and we require you to advertize the lord Scroope hereto
by your letters, and to will him to (hew himself favour-
able to them in their acfions, that may appear plainly or
tend to the relief of the queen, and maintainance of her
authority. And as we willed our secretary to write unto
you, that upon your meflage done to the earl of Murray,
you might return, so our meaning is you (hall. And if
these our letters (hall meet you on the way, yet we will
have you advertise both the lord Scroope, and the Hamil-
tons, of our meaning.

Indorfed 29 Aug. I567.

No. XXII. (Vol. I. p. 337.)
Sir Nicholas Throgmorton to the archbiflop of

St. Andrew's and the abbot of Arbrothe.
A FTER my good commendations to your good lord-; ,h Au7.

(hips, this (hall be to advertize you, that the queen's i (-6.

majelty my sovereign having sent me hither her ambaffa-PAPer°ce'X
dor to the queen her sifter your Sovereign, to communi- 0p .l,,..
cate unto her such matter as (he thought meet, confider-sirNicjl,-
ing the good amity and intelligence betwixt them, whosen: r.- t:,
being detained in captivity (as your lordihips know) con-qU"''
trary to the duty of all good subjects, for the enlargement
of whose person, and the restitution of her to her dignity,
her majesty gave me in charge to treat with there lords
assembled at Edenburgh, offering them all reasonable con-
ditions and means as might be, for the fafireuard of the
young prince, the punihirnent of the late horrible murder,
the dissolution of the marriage betwixt the queen and the
earle of Bothwell, and lastly for their own suretics. In the
negociation of which matters I have (as your lordlhip,
well know) fpcnt a long time to no purpole, not rhe:i-
able to prevail in any thing with those lords, to the quc'n
my fovercign's satisfaction. Of whicch ilrranl proceed-
ings towards her majesty, and undutifill behaviour toward';
their sovereign, I have advertiied the queen's majetly; 11h
(not being minded to bear this indignity) h:mti given inm
in charge to declare her firther pe:ifulre un'o them, in
such fort as they may wc!l perccive ler r l.jef.) doth dilal-

I')\V

low of there proceedings, and thereupon hath revoked me'
And further hath given me in charge to communicate the
fame unto your lordships, requiring you to let me know,
before my departure hence, (which (hall be, God willing,
as soon as I have received answer from you) what you
and your confederates will assuredly do, to set the queen
your sovereign at liberty, and to restore her to her former
dignity by force or otherwise; feeing these lords have re-
fused all other mediaion, to the end the queen's majesty
my sovereign may concur with your lordships in this ho-
nourable enterprize.

AND in cafe, though the difpertion of your associates,

your lordships can neither communicate this matter
amongst you, nor receive resolution of them all by that
time, it may please you to fend me the opinions of so
many of you as may confer together, within two or three
days, so as I may have your answer here in this town
by Monday or Tuesday next at the farthest, being the
19th of this August i for I intend (God willing) to depart
towards England, upon Wednesday following. Thus I
moit humbly take my leave of your lordships at Edenburgh,
the 13 of Aug. 1567.

Indorfed the 13th of Aug. 1567.

Sir Nicholas Throgmorton to the lord Herrys.

2.th Au.
A 'u OUR good lordship's letter of the 13th of August

1t -. I have received the i9th of the fame. For answer

'iPt.it.cewhereunto it may like your lordship to understand, that I
Ir" p "r'will signify unto you plainly, how far forth I am already
si,;-ius thoroughly inftruaed of the queen's majelty my sovereign's
:mnr to pleasure, concerning the detention of the queen your so-

:; v- ,,
vereign, and -onceming her relief.

To the first her majesty hath given in charge, to use all

kinds ofperfuafion in her name, to move these lords assem-
bled at Edenbureh to delist from this violent and undutiful
behaviour, which they used toward their sovereign. And
in this part, besides the shew of so many reasons, and fun-
dry perfualions of amicable treaty with them, her maje-
sty hath willed me to use some plain and severe speech un-
to them, tending so far forth, as if they would not be bet-
ter advised, and reform these their outrageous proceedings
exercised against their sovereign, that then they might

be assured her majesty neither would nor could indure such
an indignity to be done to the queen, her good cousin and
neighbour.

AND notwithstanding these my proceedings with them,

they have made proof to be little moved thereby, for as
yet neither will they content to the enlargement, neither
susser me to speak with her. So as it feemeth to me,
it is filperfluous to treat any more with them after this
manner. Whereupon I have advertised the queen's ma-
jelty my sovereign, expescing daily her majesty's further
order; and as I ihall be advertised thereof, so will not
fail to signify the fame to your good lordship; and in the
mean time will advertise her majelty also, what your lord-
(hip hath written unto me. Thus with my due commen-
dations to your good lordship, I commit the fame to al-
mighty God, refting always to do you the pleasure and
service that I can lawfully. At Edenburgh.

Indorfed 24th of August, x567.

No. XXIII. (Vol. I. p. 450.)
Account of lord Herreis's Behaviour in the Par-

liament held December 1s, I567.

HE lord Herrys made a notable harangue, in thePaperofice,

T name of the duke and himself their friends and ad-
herents, (the duke himself, the earl of Caffilles, and the
abbot of Kilwinning being also present) to persuade the
union of the whole realm in one mind. Wherein he did
not spare to set forth solemnly the great praise that part of
this nobility did deserve, which in the beginning took
meanes for punishment of the earl Bothwell, as also feeing
the queen's inordinate affection to that wicked man, and
that the could not be induced by their persuasion to leave
him, that in sequestering her person within Lochlevin,
they did the duty of noblemen. That their honourable
doings, which had not spared to hazard their lives and
lands, to avenge their native country from the slanderous
reports that were spoken of it among other nations, had
well deserved that all their brethren should join with them
in so good a cause. That he and they, in whose names
he did speak, would willingly, and without any compul-
sion, enter themselves in the fame yoke, and put their

VOL. II. C e lives

385

lives and lands in the like hazard, for maintenance of our
cause. And if the queen herself were in Scotland, ac-
companied with 20,000 men, they will be of the fame
mind, and fight in our quarrel. He hoped the remainder
noblemen of their party, Huntly, Argyle, and others,
which had not as yet acknowledged the king, would come
to the fame conformity, whereunto he would also earnest-
ly move them. And if they will remain obstinate, and
refute to qualify themselves, then will the duke, he, and
their friends, join with us to corre&t them, that other-
wife will not reform themselves. So plausible an oration,
and more advantageous for our party, none of ourselves
could have made. He did not forget to term my lord re-
gent, by the name of regent, (there was no mention at all
of the earl of Murray) and to calllhim grace at every word,
when his fpecches were direced to him, accompanying
all his words with low courtesies after this manner.

No. XXIV. (Vol. I. p. 472.)
Part of a letter from fir Francis Knollys to Cecil,

8th Aug. i568, from Bolton.

- -B UT surely this queen doth seem, outwardly, not

tniial D tJo

only to favour the form, but also the chief ar-
ape tide of the religion of the gospel, namely justification by

faith only: and (he heareth the faults of papistry rveveal-
ed, by preaching or otherwise, with contented ears, and
with gentle and weak replys, and doth not seem to like
the worse of religion throw me.
Part of a letter from fir Francis Knollys to Cecil,

2I Sept. 1568, from Bolton.
-- T came to this queen's ears of late that (he was

[ bruited to be lately turned to the religion of the

gofpell, to the great disliking of the papists hereabouts,
which thing Ihe herself confessed unto me, and yesterday
openly in the great chamber, when the assembly was full,
and some papifis present, fle took occasion to speak of
religion, and then openly (he professed herself to be of the
papist religion, and took upon her to patronize the fame,
more -earnetly than the had done a great while afore, al-

tho'
386

tho' her defences and arguments were so weak, thi the
effect of her speech was only to shew her zeal; and as-
terwards to me alone, when I mifliked to fee her become
so confidently backward in religion, Why, said (he, would
you have me to lose France and Spain, and all my friends
in other places, by seeming to change my religion, and
yet I am not assured the queen my good sifter will be
my aflured friend, to the satisfaction of my honour and
expectation.

No. XXV. (Vol. I. p. 474.)

Qseen Elizabeth to the earl of Murray.

IGHT trusty and right well beloved cousin, wePaperoffice.
greet you well. Where we hearsay, that certain rom a coy

correcaed by

reports are made in sundry parts of Scotland, that what-fecretary
fcever should fall out now upon the hearing of the queen cecil.
of Scotts cause, in any proof to convince or to acquit the
said queen concerning the horrible murder of her late hus-
band and cousin, we have determined to restore her to her
kingdom and government, we do so much mifike hereof,
as we cannot indure the fame to receive any credit: and
therefore we have thought good to assure you, that the
fame is untruly devised by the authors to our dishonour.
For as we have been always certified from our said sifter,
both by her letters and messages, that (he is by no means
guilty or participant of that murder, which we wilh to be
true, so surely if (he should be found jufRly to be guilty
thereof as hath been reported of her, whereof we would
be very sorry, then, indeed, it (hould behove us to con-
fider otherwise of her cause than to satisfy her desire in re-
ftitution of her to the government of that Kingdom.
And so we would have you and all others think, that
should be disposed to conceive honourably of us and our
ac'ions.

Indorfed zo Sept. x568.

No. XXVI.

387
Ccz

No. XXVI. (Vol. I. p. 481.)
Sir Francis Knollys to Cecil the 9th of Otober

1568, from York.

Anorig~aL --'1 Y lord's grace of Norfolk fending for me to
Paperoficc .LV Bolton, to attend upon him here Thursday

last, I made my repair hither accordingly, meaning to
flay here until Monday next; as touching the matters of
the commission, that his grace and the reft have from her
highness, his grace hath imparted unto me of all things
thereunto appertaining, and what hath hitherto passed,
and altho' the matters be too weighty for my weak capa-
city, to presume to utter any opinion of mine own there-
of, yet I fee that my lord Herris for his party laboureth a
reconciliation, to be had without the extremity of odious
accusations; my lord of Ledington also faith to me, that
he could wish there matters to be ended in dulce manner,
so that it might be done with safety; of the reft you can
conceive, by the advertisements and writings, sent up by
our commissioners.
A letter from the bishop of Ross to the queen of

Scots, from York, October 1568.

cott i. P. T LEIS your majesty I conferred at length with A.
Calig . c. . r- .e great part of a night, who affurit me that he
'^PY* had reasoned with B. this Saturday C. on the field, who

determinate to him that it was the D. determinit pur-
pole not to end your cause at this time, but to hold the
fame in fufpence, and did that was in her power, to make
the E. pursue extremity, to the effec F. and his adhe-
rents might utter all they could to your dishonour, to
the effect to cause you come in disdain with the hail sub-
jeas of this realm, that ye may be the mair unable to
attempt any thing to her dilsdvantage. And to this effec
is all her intention, and when they have produced all they
can againf you, D. will not appoint the matter instantly,
but transport you up into the country, and retain you there
till he think time to shew you favour, which is not likely
to be hafily, because of your uncles in France, and the

fear

tear (he has of yourself to be her unfriend. And there-
fore their counsel is, that ye write an writing to the D.
meaning that ye are informit that your fubjefAs which has
offendit you-This in effe& that your majesty hearing
the estate of your affairs as they proceed in York, was
informed that her majesty was informed of you, that you
could not gudely remit your subje&s in such fort as they
might credit you hereafter, which was a great cause of the
Ray of this controversy to be ended. And therefore per-
fuading her D. effe&ually not to trust any who had made
such narration. But like as ye had rendered you in her
hands, as most tender to you of any living, so prayit her
take na opinion of you, but that ye wauld use her coun-
fell in all your affairs, and wald prefer her friendship to
all others, as well uncles as others, and assure her to keep
that thing ye wald promise to your fubjeds.by her advice.
And if t). discredit you, ye wald be glad to satisfy her
in that point be removing within her realm in secret and
quiet manner, where her G. pleased, until the time her
G. were fully satisfied, and all occasion of discredit re-
moved from her. So that in the mean time your realm
were holden in quietness, and your true fubjefs restored
and maintained in their own estate, and sic other things
tending to this effec. And affirms that they believe
that this may be occasion to cause her credit you that ye
offer so far; and it may cone that within two or three
months Ihe may become better-mined to your grace,
for now she is not well minded, and will not shew you
any pleasure for the causes foresaid.

N. B. The title of this paper is in Cecil's hand; the
following key is added in another hand.

A. The laird of Lethington.
C. The duke of Norfolk.
C. Was the day he rode to Cawood.
D. The queen of England.
E. The queen of Scots commifioners.
F. The earl of Murray.

No. XXVII,

389
.Cc3

No. XXVII. (Vol. I. p. 492.)
Deli'eration of Secretary Cecil's concerning Scot-

land, Dec. 2I, i568.

P T HE best way for England, but not the easiest, that
aperoffce. - the queen of Scots might remain deprived of her

crown, and the state continue as it is.

THE second way for England profitable, and not so hard.

- That the queen of Scotts might be induced, by some
perfwafions, to agree that her son might continue king,
becaife he is crowned, and herself to remain also queen;
and that the government of the realm might be committed
to ifch persons as the queen of England should name,
so as for the nomination of them it might be ordered,
that a convenient number of persons of Scotland should be
first named to the queen of England, indifferently for the
queen o; Scots, and for her ion, that is to fay the one
half by the queen of Scots, and the other by the earle
of Lennox and lady Lennox, parents to the child; and
out of those, the queen's majesty of England to make
choice for all the officers of the realm, that are, by the
laws of Scottland, disposable by the king or queen of the
land.

THAT untill this may be done by the queen's Majesty,

the government remain in the hands of the earle of Mur-
ray as it is, providing he shall not dispose of any offices
or perpetuals to continue any longer but to these offered
of the premises.

THAT a parliament be summoned in Scotland by fe-

veral commandments, both of the queen of Scots and of
the young king.

- THAT hostages be delivered unto England on the

young king's behalf to the number of twelve persons of
the earle of Murray's part as the queen of Scots lhall
name; and likewise on the queen's behalf to the like num-
ber as the earle Murray shall name; the fame not to be
any that have by inheritance or office cause to be in this
parliament, to remain from the beginning of the summons
of that parliament, untill three monmhs after that parlia-
ment; which hostages shall be pledges, that the friends
of either part shall keep the peace in all cafes, till by this

par-

391

parliament it be concluded, that the ordinance which the
queen of England (hall devise for the government of the
realm (being not to the hurt of the crown of Scotland,
nor contrary to the laws of Scotland for any man's inheri-
tance, as the fame was before the parliament at Edinr. the
Decemr. 1567) shall be established to be kept and obeyed,
under pain of high treason for the breakers thereof.

- THAT by the fame parliament also be established

all executions and judgments given against any person to
the death of the late king.

- THAT by the fame parliament, a remission be

made universally from the queen of Scots to any her
contrarys, and also from every one subjec to another,
saving that restitution be made of the lands and houses, and
all other things heritable, that have been by either fide
taken from them which were the owners thereof at the
committing of the queen of Scots to Lochlevin.

THAT by the fame parliament it be declared who (hall

be ficceffors to the crown next after the Q, of Scots and
her issue; or clfe, that such right of the D. of Chatelhe-
rault had, at the marriage of the Q. of Scots with the
lord Darnley, may be conserved and not prejudiced.

THAT the Q of Scots may have leave of the queen's

majesty of England, twelve months after the said parlia-
ment, and that she (hall not depart out of England, with-
out special licence of the queen's majeffy.

THAT the young king ihall be nourished and brought up

in England, till he be years of age.

IT is to be confidered, that in this cause the compofi-

tion between the queen and her fubjecs may be made with
certain articles, outwardly to be seen to the world for
her honour, as though all the parts should come of her,
and yet for the surety of contrarys, that certain betwixt
her and the queen's majeffy are to be concluded.

No. XXVIII. (Vol. I. p. 494.)
The queen to Sir Francis Knolleys, 22 Jan.

1568-9. h
'W E greet you well, we mean not, at this point, Paperofficc.

~y by any writing, to renew that which it hath

pleased God to make grievous to us and forryfull to yow;
but forbearing the fame as unmeet at this point, having

C c 4 occa-

occasion to command you in our service, and yow also
whileft you are to serve us. We require yow to con-
fider of this that followeth with the like confideration'and
diligence, as hitherto yow have accuftumate in our ser-
vile; at the :;me of our last letters written to you the
fourteenth of this m.n h for removing of the queen of
Scots, we had understanding out of Scotland of certain
writtings sent by her from thence into Scotland, amongst
the which one is found to contain great and manifest un-
truths touching us and others also, as shall and may plain-
ly appear unto yow by the copy of the fame, which
likewise we fend yow, and because at the fame time we were
advertised, that it should be shortly proclaimed in Scotland,
though then it was not, we thought good first to remove
the queen, before we would disclose the fame, and then ex-
Sect the iifue thereof; and now, this day, by letters from
our cousin of Hunfdon we were ascertained, that since that
time the fame matters contained in the writing, are pub-
lifhed in diverse parts of Scotland, whereupon we have
thought it very meet, for the discharge of our honor, and
to confound the falsehood contained in the writing, not
only to have the fame reproved by open proclamation
upon our frontiers, the copy whereof we do herewith
fend yow, but a;so in convenient fort to charge that queen
therewith, so as (he may be mcved to declare the authors
thereof, and persuaders of h r to write in such slanderous
fort such untruths of us; and in the mean season, we have
here stayed her commilTioners, knowing no other whom
we may more probably presume to be parties hereunto,
than they, untill the queen (hall name some other, and
acquit them;'who being generally charged, without ex-
pressing to' them any particularity, do use all manner of
speeches to discharge themselves; wherefore our pleasure
is, that ye (hall,' after ye have well perused the copy
of this writing sent' to yow, speedily declare unto her,
that we have good understanding given us of diverse let-
ters and writings, sent by'her into Scotland,-figned by
her own hand, amongit which, one such writing is sent
with her commandment exprelly as now it is already
publiShed, as we are much troubled in min;d that a prin-
cess as she is having a caule in our h.inds so implicated
with difficulties and calamitr\s, should either conceave in
her own mind, or allow of them that should devise such
false, untrue and improbable matters against us, and our

h,'nor,
392

honor, and specially to have the aventure to have the fame
being known so untrue to be published; and you Lhall
also fay, because we will not think so ill of her, as that it
should proceed of her self, but rather she hath been coun-
felled thereunto, or by abuse made to think some part
thereof to be true, we require her, even as she may look
for ony favour at our hands, that she will disburden her-
self as much as truly the may herein, and name them
which have been the authors and perfwaders thereof,
and so she lhall make as great amends to us as the cafe
may require; after you have thus far preceded, and had
some answer of her, whether she shall deny the writ-
ing absolutely, or name any that have been the advisers
thereof, you shall fay unto her that we have frayed her
commiflioners here, untill we may have some answer here-
of, because we cannot but impute to them some part of
this evil dealing, untill by her answer the authors may
be known; and as soon as you can have dire& answers
from her, we pray you to return us the fame; for as the
cafe frandeth, we cannot but be much disquieted with it,
having our honour so deeply touched contrary to any in-
tention in us, and for any thing we know in our judg-
ment, the earle of Murray and others named in the fame
writing void of thought for the matters, to them therein
imputed; you may impart to the queen of Scots either
the contents of the slanderous letter, or shew her the co-
py to read it, and you may also impart this matter to the
lord Scroop, to join with you there as you ihall think
meet.
Sir Francis Knolleys to queen Elizabeth, from We-

therby the 28th January, 1 568.

T WILL suppress my own griefss, and pass themAnoriginal.
j over with silence, for the present learning of yourPaperori-..

majefty-and for this queen's answer to the coppie of her
supposed letter sent unto Scotland, I muff add this unto
my brother's letter, sent unto Mr. Secretary yefternight
late, in process of time, she did not deny but that the
first lines contained in the fame copie, was agreeable to
a letter that she had lent unto Scotland, which touched
my lord of Murray's promise to deliver her Ton into your
inajelty's hands, and to avoid that the fame should not be

done

393

done without her consent, made her, she faith, to write
in that behalf; (he faith also,' that she wrote that they
should cause a proclamation to be made to stir her people
to defend my lord of Murray's intent and purpose, for
delivering of her said son, and impunge his rebellious go-
vernment, as she termed it, but the utterly denyed to
have written any of the other slanderous part of the said
letter touching your majesty; ihe said also, that flie sus-
pected that a Frenchman, now in Scotland, might be the
author of some Scotch letters devised in her name, but she
would not allow me to write this for any part of her an-
fwer.

No. XXIX. (Vol. I. p. 503.)
SirNicholas Throgmorton to the right honourable

the lord of Liddington.
:cth f u-VT OUR letter of the 3d of July, I have received the

T-'56?- | i Sth of the fame. For answer whereunto you shall
o':-.''' underfand, that friends here to my lord regent and you

do with such a concurrence in all doings, as in matter and
circumiances there arise no dissention, or at the least,
no more nor other than the difference of countries doth
necessarily require. We here do think convenient that as
few delays be ufedas may be, for the confummationof the
matter in hand, which principally to advance, your al-
lowance, prosecution, and speedy promotion in Scotland,
is most requisite, for you are so wife, and well acquainted
with the state of the world, and with all our humours, as
vou know that some do allow and disallow for reason, some
for respect of multitude, some for refped of persons, and
so the cause is to go forward as men do like to set it for-
v.ard. You are not to seek that rome will use cautions,
tome neutrality, some delays, and some will plainly im-
punge it. And yet all and every of those forts will alter
their doings, when they (hall fee the regent and his fa-
vourers accord with the befl and greatest part there, and
agreewith the wisest and firongeft party here. Tho' the
matter has taken its beginning here, upon deep and weigh-
ty considerations, for the v. cl of both the princes and their
realms as well presently as in time to come, yet it is
thotught most expedient. that the regent and realm of

Scot-
394

Scotland, by you, (hould propose the matter to the queen
our sovereign, if you like to ife convenience, good order,
or be disposed to leave but a fear, and no wound of the
hurts pall. I would be glad that this my letter should
come to your hands before the convention, whereat it
seens your queen's restoration and marriage to the duke
of Norfolk should be propounded, either to wynne in them
both allowance or rejection. To which proceedings, be-
cause you pray me to write frankly, I fay and reason thus,
me thinketh you use a propofterous order, to demand the
consent of such persons, in such matters, as their minds
to a good end hath rather been felt or prepared, and
therefore there nmuf needs follow either a universal refu-
fal, or fa&ious division amongfl you, whereby a bloufter-
ing intelligence must needs come to the queen Elizabeth of
the intended marriage from thence, which ought to have
been secretly and advisedly propounded unto her high-
ness; hereby you fee then the meaning is, by this dealing,
her majefly lhall be made inexorable and so bring the
mater to such passe, as this which should have wrought
lurety, quietness, 'and a flay to both queens and their
realms, shall augment your calamity, and throw us your
belt friends into divorfe with you, and into unhappy divi-
sion amongst ourselves; for you may not conjecture that
the matter is now in deliberation, but expeEteth good
occasion for executing; sure i am you do not judge so
flanderly of the managing this matter, as to think we
have not cast the worst, or to enter therein so far with-
out the afffltance of the nobility, the ablerf, the wisest,
and the mightiest of this realm except queen Elizabeth:
from whom it hath been concealed untill you, as the fittedf
minister, might propound it to her, on the behalf of the
regent, and the nobility of Scotland. How far master
Woddes defamations do carry them of queen Elizabeth's
affections, and mailer secretary's, to aftil the regent and
to suppress the queen of Scotts, I know not, nor is it not
material; but I do assuredly think, that her majesty will
prefer her surety, the tranquility of her reign, and the
conservation of her people, before any device, which may
proceed from vain discourse, or imperfetions of passions,
and inconfidcrate affections. And as for Mr. Secretary,
you are not to learn, that as he liketh not to go too fast
afore, so he coveteth not to tarry too far behind, and fpe-
cially when the reliques be of no great value or power.

If

395

If I could as well assure you of his magnanimity, and
constancy, as of his present conformity, I would fay con-
fidently, you may repose as well of him in this matter,
as of the duke of Norfolk, the earls of Arundel, Pem-
broke, Leicester, Bedford, Shrewsbury, and the rell of the
nobility; all which do embrace and protefte the accom-
plifhment of this cafe. I have, according to your ad-
vice, written presently to my lord Regent, with the fame
zeal and care of his well doing that I owe to him, whom
I love and honour. Mr. Secretary hath assured unto
him the queen of Scotland's favour and good opinion,
wherewith he feemeth to h" wvell fatisfy'd. If your cre-
dit be, as I tru!i, haften )cur coming hither, for it is very
necessary that you were here presently. Q. Elizabeth both
doth write to my lord Regent in such fort, as he may per-
ceive Mr. Wood's discourses of her majesty's affection to
be vain, and Mr. Secretary otherwise bent than he con-
jecdureth of him, the effec of which her majesty's letter
you ihall underlind, by my lord Leiceiter's letter unto
you at this difpatcai. At the court, 2oth July, 1569.

No. XXX. (Vol. I. p. 504.)
Part of a letter from the earl of Murray to L. B,

probably Lord Burleigh.

Is g.- ECAUSE I fee that great advantage is taken

Harl. Lib. on small occasions, and that the mention of the
37- B- 9 marriage betwixt the queen my sovereign's mother, and
f°- 4i the D. of Norfolk, hath this while pas been very frequent

in both the realms, and then I myself to be spoken of as
a motioner, which I perceive is at the last come to her
majesty's ears; I will for fatisfacion of her highness,
and the discharge of my duty towards her majesty, mani-
fest unto you my interest, and medling in that matter,
frum the very beginning, knowing whatsoever is preju-
dicial to her highness, cannot but be hurtful to the king
my sovereign, this his realm, and me. What conferrences
was betwixt the duke of Norfolk, and any of them that
were with me within the realm of England, I am not able
to declare; but I am no wife forgetful of any thing that
passed betwixt him and me, either at that time, or lince.
And to the end her Majefly may understand how I have

been

been dealt with in this matter, I am compelled to touch
some circumstances, before there was any mention of her
marriage. In York, at the meeting of all the commission-
ers, I fo":rd very-and neutral dealing with the duke, and
others her highness's commillioners, in the beginning of
the cause, in the making of the others to proceed fin-
cerely, and so further. During which time, I entered
into general speech, flicking at our just defence in the
matters that were objected against us by the said queen's
commissioners, looking certainly for no other thing, but
summary cognition in the cause of controversy, with a
small declaration to have followed. Upon a certain day
the lord Lithington's secretary rode with the duke to
Howard, what purpose they had I cannot fay, but that
night Lithington returning, and entering in conferrence
with me on the fRate of our action, I was advised by him
to pass to the duke, and require familiar conferrence, by
the which I might have some feeling to what issue our
matters would tend. According to which advice, having
gotten time and place convenient in the gallery of the house
where the duke was lodged, after renewing of our first
acquaintance made at Berwick, the time before the as-
size of Leith, and some speeches passed betwixt us; he
began to fay to me, how he in England had favour and
credit, and I in Scotland had will and friendlhip of many,
it was to be thought there could be none more fit inftru-
ments, to travel for the continuance of the amity betwixt
the realms, than we two. And so that discourse upon the
present Rfate of both, and how I was entered in that action
tending so far to the queen's dishonour, I was willed by
him to confider how matters flood in this, what honour
I had received of the queen, and what inconveniencies her
defimation in the matters laid to her charge might breed
to her posterity. Her refpec was not little to the crown
of England, there was but one heir. The Hamiltons my
unfriends had the next refpet, and that I should esteem
the issue of her body would be the more affectionate to
me and mine, than any other that could attain to that
crown. And so it should be meeteft, that she affirmed her
dimiffion made in Lochlevin, and we to abftraEt the let-
ters of her hand write, that she should not be defamed in
England. My reply to that was, how the matter had pas-
fed in parliament, and the letters seen to many, so that the
abftrafing of the fame could not then secure her to any

purpose,

39-

purpose, and yet should we, in that doing, bring the ig-
nominy upon us. Affinning it woud not be fair for us
that way to proceed, feeing the queen's majesty of Eng-
land was not made privy to the ma:-er as (he ought to be,
to be in refpecd we were purposely come into England for
that end, and for the-of the grants of our cause. The
duke's answer was, he would take in hand to handle mat-
ters well enough at the court. After this, on the occa-
sion of certain articles, that were required to be resolved
on, before we entered on the very declaration of the very
ground of our action, we came up to the court; where
some new commissioners were adjoined to the former, and
the hearing of the matter ordained to be in the parlia-
ment house at Veftminiter, in pretence of which com-
missioners of the said queen, and through the---
rebuking of the queen of England's own commissioners, we
uttered the whole of the ation, and produced such evi-
dences, letters, and probations, as we had, which might
move the queen's majesty to think well of our cause.
Whereupon expecing her highness declaration, and feeing
no great likelihood of the fame to be suddenly given, but
daily motions then made to come to an accord with the said
queen, our matters in hand in Scotland, in the mean sea-
son, standing in hazard and danger, we were put to the ut-
termoft point off our wit, to imagine whereunto the mat-
ters would tend, tho' albeit we had left nothing undone
for justification of our causes, yet appeared no end, but
continual motions made to come to some accord with the
queen and restore her to whole or half reign. I had no
other answer to give them, but that I should neither do
againit conscience or honour in that matter. Notwith-
flanding feeing this my plain answer wrought no end, nor
dispatch to us, and that I was informed'that the duke be-
gan to millike of me, and to speak of me, as that I had
Probably reported of the said queen irreverently, calling her---

' and murderer, I was advised to pals to him, and give

him good words and to purge myself of the things ob-
jeaed to me, that I ihould not open the sudden entry of his
evil grace, nor have him to our enemy confider-
ing his greatness. It being therewithal whispered, and
flewed to me, that if I departed, he standing discontented
and not satisfied, I might peradventure find such trouble
in my way, as my throat might be cut before I came to
Berrick. And therefore since it might well enough ap-

pear

pear to her marriage, I should not put him in utter despair,
that my good will could not be had therein. So few days
before my departing I came to the park in Hampton court,
where the duke and I met together, and there I declared
unto him that it was come to my ears, how some mifre-
port (hould be made of me to him, as that I lmould
speak irreverently and rashly of the said queen my fove-
reign's mother, such words as before expressed, that he robably
might- thereby my affection to be so alienate fromf..7.
her, as that I could not love her, nor be content of her
preferment, howbeit he might persuade himself of the con-
trary, for as the once was the person in the world that I
loved belt, having that honour to be so near unto her, and
having received such advancement and honour by her, I
was not so ungrate or so unnatural ever to with her bo-
dy harm, or to speak of her as was untruly reported of
me, (howsoever the truth was in the self) and as to the
preservation of her son, now my sovereign, had moved me
to enter into this cause, and that her own pressing was
the occasion of that was uttered to her- whenfoeverProba
God flould move her heart to repent of her bypast beha- dAs,,
viour and life, and after her known repentance, that she
should be separate from that ungodly and unlawful mar-
riage that fle was entered in, and then after were joined
with such a godly and honourable a personage, as were
affeaioned to the true religion, and whom we might trust,
I could find in my heart to love her, and to shew her as
great pleasure, favour, and good will, as ever I did in my
life; and in cafe, he (hould be that personage, there was
none whom I could l.2tter like of, the queen-- in-
of England being made privy to the matter, and she allow-
ing thereof, which being done, I should labour in all things
that I could, to her honour and pleasure, that were not
prejudicial to the king my sovereign's estate, and prayed
him not to tlink otherwise of me, for my affection was
rather buried and hidden within me, awaiting untill God
ihould direc her to know herself, than utterly alienated
and abstracted from her; which he seemed to accept in
very good part, faying, Earl of Murray thou thinks of me
that thing, whereunto I will make none in England or Scot-
land pris y, and thou haft Norfolk's life in thy hands.
So departing, I came to my lodging, and by the way,
and all night, I was in continual thought and agitation
of mind, how to behave myself in lhat weighty matter,

first,

399

first, imagining whereunto this should tend, if it were at-
tempted without the queen's majesty of England's know-
ledge and good will, this realm and I myself in particu-
lar having received such favour and comfort at her high-
ness's hands, and this whole isle such peace and quietness,
since God pofleffed her majesty with her crown. And on
the other part, feeing the duke had disclosed him to me,
proteffing, none other were or should be privy to our
speech, I tho't I could not find in my heart to utter any
thing, that might endanger him; moved to the uttermost
with there cogitations, and all desire of sleep then remov-
ed, I prayed God to fend me some good relief and out-
gate, to my discharge, and fatisfaftion of my troubled
mind, which I found indeed; for upon the morn, or with-
in a day or two -hereafter, I entered in conversation with
my lord of Leicester, in his chamber at the court where
he began to find frange with me, that in the matter I
made so difficult to him, standing so precisely on confer-
rence, and how when I had in-my communication with
the duke, come so far- and there he made some dif-
course with me, about that which was talke betwixt us, I

Prbably perceiving that the duke had - the matter to my lord
4cifS. of Leicester, and thinking me thereby discharged at the

duke's hands, therefore I repeated the fame communi-
cation in every point to my lord of Leicester, who desired
me to shew the fame to the queen's majesty, which I re-
fused to do, willing him if he tho't it might irmort her
highness any thing, that he as one- by her majesty,
and for many benefits received at her highness's hands is
obliged to wish her well, should make declaration of the
fame to her mzjefty, as I understand by some speech of
her highness to me, he did. This my declaration to the
duke was the only cause, that staid the violence and trouble
prepared for me unexecuted, as I have divers ways un-
derftand. The fame declaration I was obliged to renew
since in writings of sent to my servant John
Wood. The fum whereof, I trust, he shewed the duke,
and something also I wrote to himself, for it was tho't this
should redeem some time, that the duke should not fud-
denly declare him our enemy, for his greatness was oft
laid before me, and what friendship he had of the chief of
the nobility in England, so that it might appear to the
queen's majesty of England, so cold towards us, and doing
nothing publickly that might seem favourable for us, we

had

had some cause to fufpec that her highness should not be
contrarious to the marriage when it should be proposed to
her. The sharp message sent by her majefly with the lord
Boyd, who had the like commiifion from the due tending
so far to the said queen's preferment, as it were proposing
one manner of conditions from both, gave us to think that
her highness had been foreseen in the duke's design, and
that she might be induced to allow thereof. But howbe-
it it was devised in England, that the lord of Lethington
should come as from me, and break the matter to her
highness, as her majelty in a letter declared that she
looked for his coming, yet that devise proceeded never of
me, nor the noblemen at the convention could no wife ac-
cord to his fending, nor allow of the matter motioned, but
altogether miflikcd it, as bringing with the fame great in-
convcniencies to the surety and quietness of this whole ille;
for our proceedings have declared our mifliking and difal-
lowance of the purpose from the beginning, and if we had
pleased, he was ready for the journey. And in likewifeprobably
it was devised to give consent, that the between di,,or
the said queen and Bothwell, (hould be suffered to pro-
ceed in this realm, as it was desired by the said lord Boyd,
by reason we could not underhand what was the queen's
majesty's pleasure, and allowance in that behalf--
And whereas ye mean, that her highness was not made
privy of any such inten:ion, the fault was not in me. The
first motion being declared, as I have written, to my lord
of Leicester, and by him imparted to her majefly, to far
as I could perceive by some speech of her highness's to me,
before my departing. Thus I have plainly declared how I
have been dealt withal for this marriage, and how just ne-
ceflity moved me not to require directly, that which the
duke appeared so unto. And for my threatnings,
to assent to the fame, I have exprefled the manner; the
perlbns, that laid the matter before me, were of my own
company. But the duke since hath spoken, that it was
his writing which saved my life at that time. In con-
clufion I pray you persuade her majesty, that Ihe let no
speeches nor any other thing passed and objected to my
prejudice, move her majesty to alter her favour-towards
me, or any ways to doubt of my assured conflancy to-
wards her highness; for in any thing which may tend

VOL. II. D d to

401

to her honour and surety, I will, while I live, bestow my
self, and all that will do for me notwithstanding my ha-
zard or danger, as proof should declare, when her majesty
finds time to employ me.

APPENDIX

# APPENDIX TO THE SECOND VOLUME.

A P P E N D I X

TO THE SECOND VOLUME.

No. I. (Vol. II. p. 9.)

William Maitland of Ledington, to my lord of
Leicester, March 2oth, 1570, from Ledington.

HE great resolution threatened to this whole realm,
be the divisions thereof in dangerous factions, doth An Orig-

press me to frame my letters to your lordship, in other
fort, then were behovefull for me, if I had no other ref-
pe&, but only to maintain my private credit; therefore I
am driven to fumifh them with matter, which I know
not to be plausible, whereupon my mifconfiruing my mean-
ing, some there may take occasion of offence, thinking
that I rather utter my own passions, than go about to in-
form your lordihip truly of the state; but I trult my plain
dealing shall bear record to the sincerity of my meaning;
to make the fame sensible, I will lay before your lordship's
eyes, the plat of this country; which firlt is divided into
two facions, the one pretending the maintenance of the
king's reign, the other alledging the queen to have been
cruelly dealt withall, and unjustly deprived of her slate;
the former is composed of a good number of nobility, gen-
tlemen, and principal burroughs of the realme, who (hall
have, as Mr. Randolph beareth us in hand, the queen's
majesty your sovereign's allowance and protection; the
other hath in it some most principall of the nobility, and
therewithall, good numbers of the inferior fort, through-
out the whole realm, which also look assuredly that all
kings do allow their quarrel and will aid them according-
ly. What consequence this division will draw after it, I
leave it to your lordship's consideration ; there is fallen out
another division, accidentally, by my lord regent's death,
which is like to change the state of the other two factions,
to encreafe the one, and diminish the other, which is

D d z grounded

grounded upon the regiment of the realm. Some num-
ber of noblemen alpire to the government, pretending
right thereto by reason of the queen's demiflion of the
croun, a:id her commission granted at that time for the
regiment during the king's minority; another faction dotlh
altogether repine against that divition, thinking it neither
fit nor tolerable, that three or four of the meanest fort
amongt the earls, (hall perfume to challenge to themselves
a nlle over the whole realme, the next of the blood, the
sirs in rank, the greatest always both for the antientry of
their houses, degree, and forces, being negleckted; this
order they think preposterous, that the meaner fort .hall
be placed in publick funftion to command, and the greater
shall continue as private men to obey; besides that, they
think if the commiflion had in the beginning been valew-
able, (which the most part will not grant) yet can it not
be extended to the present, for that the condition there-
unto annexed are ceased, and so the effea of the whole
void; the latter part of this division hath many preten-
ces, for besides the queen's faadn, which is wholly on
that fide, a great number of these that have heretofore pro-
sessed the king's obedience, do favour the fame, and will
not yield to the government of the other, whose preferment
for refpeas they mislike, when the queen's faction Ihall
be increased, with apart of the king's, and thcfe not of
least substance, and yow may judge what is like to ensue;
an other incident is like to move men to enter in further
discourses, it is given out here in Scotland that the queen's
majesty is serting forth some forces towards the border,
which shall enter this realm, to countenance these, that as-
pire to the regiment, and suppress the contrary faAon,
and bruts are spread, that the fame shall be here out of
hand; there that think themselves of equal force with their
contrary faction at home, or rather an overmatch to them,
yet not able to encounter with the forces of another prince,
rather than vield to their inferiors, will, I fear, take ad-
vice of neceflity, and evil-councillors, and seek also il'
.nentenance of tone foreign prince, whereby her maieiy
(altho no further inconveniencewere to be feared) muit I-c
driven to excellive charges, and it would appear thei:
were a conspiracy of all-the elements at on;e time to 'tr
us together by the ears, for Inow when the rumrour 't
)our forces coming towards the border is iprcad abr<ad,
even at the fame time is arrixed at Dumbarton, a Ealz.cn

with
4C4

with a messenger sent exprefy from the king of France,
to that part of the nobility, that favours the queen, to
learn the state of the country, and what support they lack
or desire, either for furtherance of her affairs, or for their
own safety; assuredly this message will be well received,
and suffered accordingly, this is the present state of Scot-
land. Now if your lordihip would also know my opinion,
how to choice the best, as the cafe ftandefh; I will in
that also fatisfie your lordship, I am required from them to
deal plainly, and your lordlhip lhall judge whether I do so
or not; for I think it plain dealing, when I simply utter
my judgment, and go not about to disguise my intents.
I trust the queen's majelly hath a desire to retain at her
devotion the realm of Scotland, which fle hath gone
about to purchase, with bestowing great charges, and
the loss of some of her people; this desire is honourable
for her highness, profitable for both the countrys, and
of none to be disallowed; specially if it be (as I take it) to
have the amity of the whole realm, for it is not a portion
of Scotland can serve her turn, nor will it prove commo-
dious for her to suit the friendship of a fadtion of Scotland,
for in so doing, in gaining the best, she may lose the
more, and the fame would bring all her actions with us
in suspicion, if she should go about to nourish factions
amongst us, which meaning I am sure never entered into
her majesty's heart; then if it be the friendlhip of the
whole she doth demand, let her not, for pleasure of one
part, go about to everthrow the remnant, which will not
be so faifable, as some may give her to underlIand ; but
rather, by way of treaty, let her goabout to pacify the
whole state, bring the parties to an accord, reduce us all
by good means to an uniformity, Ib Lhall (he give us all oc-
cafion to think well of her doings, that fie tendeth our
wealth, and provokes us universally to with unto her ma-
jefty a most prosperous continuance ; by the contrary, if,
for the pleasure of a few, she will fend forces to suppress
these whom they mislike, and so consequently offend ma-
ny; men be not so faint hearted, but they have courage
to provide for their own safety, and not only will embrace
the means partly offered, but will also procure further, at
the hand of other princes. This for mine own part,
I do abhor, and protest I desire never to fee forces of
firangers to set foot within this land, yet I know not what
point necessity may drive men into, as if men in the middle

d3 of

of the sea were in a (hip, which suddenly (hould be set on
fire, the fear of burning would make them leap into the
sea, and soon after the fear of the watter would drive them
to cleive again to the fired (hip, so for avoiding present
evil, men will many times be inforced to have recourse to
another, no less dangerous. Trust me forces will not
bring forth any good fruit to her majesty's behove, it
must be some way of treaty shall serve the turn, wherein
by my former letters your lordship doth know already
what is my judgment; you fee how plainly I do write,
without consideration in what part my letters may be tak-
en, yet my hope is that such as will favourably interpret
them, shall think that I mean as well to her majesty, and
that realme, as these that will utter other language. I
wiLh the continuance of the amity betwixt the two con-
trys, without other refpec, and will not conceal from her
majesty any thing, to my knowledge, tending to the pre-
judice thereof; if I (hall perceave her majesty taking frank
dealings in evil part, I shall from thenceforth forbear;
in the mean season I will not cease to trouble your lord-
ship, as I (hall have occalion to write, and so I take my
leave of your lordlhip.

No. II. (Vol. II. p. 9.)
A letter of queen Elisabeth to the earle of Suffeks,

July 2d, 1570.

Csd, IGHT trusty and well beloved cousin we greet you
s Ss. sHir-R. well, this day we have received your letters of 28
tory, VoL the last month, with all other letters, sent from Scot-

P.
p I.9 land, and mentioned in your letters, whereunto answer is

desired to be given before the tenth of this month; which
is a very short time, the weightiness of the matters, and
the distance of the places confidered; nevertheless we
have, as the f(ormefs could susser it, resolved to give this
answer following, which we will that yow, by warrand
hereof, shall cause to be given in our name to the earl of
Lennox and the reft of the noblemen conveened with him.
Where it is by them, in their letters, and writings al-
ledged, that for lack of our resolute answer, concerning the
establishing of the regiment of the realm under their young
king, great inconveniencies have happened, and therefore

they

they have deferred now at their last convention to deter-
mine of the famine, who lhall have the place of gover-
nour, untill the 2ift this month, before which time they
require to have our advice, in what person or persons the
government of that realm shall be eftablilhed, we accept
very thankfull the goodwill and reputation they have of
us, in yielding so frankly to require and follow our advise
in a matter, that touched the state of their king, their
selves, and realm so near, wherein as we perceive, that by
our former forbearing to intermeddle therein, they have
taken some discomfort, as though that we would not have
regard to their state and surety, so on the other part, they
of their wisdoms ought to think, that it might be by the
whole world evil interpreted in us to appoint them a form
of government, or a goverour by name, for that howfo-
ever we should mean well if we should do so, yet it could
not be without fomejealoufy in the heads of the estate, no-
bility and community of that realm, that the government
thereof (hould be by me specially named, andordained i
so as finding difficulty on both parts, and yet mifliking most
that they (hould take any discomfort by our forbearing
to flow our mind therein, we have thought in this fort for
to proceed, confidering with ourselves how now that realm
had been a good space of time ruled in the name of their
king, and by reason of his bate age, governed therefore
by a very careful and honourable person, the earle of Mur-
ray, untill that by a mischievous person, (an evil exam-
ple) he was murdered, whereby great disorder and con-
fusion of necessity had, and will more follow, if determin-
ation be not made of some other special person, orper-
sons to take the charge of governor, or superior ruler
fpeciall, for administration of law and justice, we cannot
but very well allow the desire of these lords to have some
special governor to be chosen; and therefore being well
assured, that their own understanding of all others is
best to confider the state of that realm, and to discern
the abilities and qualities of every person meet and ca-
pable for such a charge, we shall better fatisfie ourselves,
whom they by their common consent (hall first choose,
and appoint to that purpose, then of any to be by us afore-
hand uncertainly named, and that because they shall per-
ceive that we have care of the person of their king, who
by nearefs of blood, and inrefpet of his so young years,
ought to be very tender and dear to us, we shall not hide

D d4 our

our opinion from them, but if they shall all accord to name
his grandfather, our cousin, the earl of Lennox to be
governor alone, or jointly with others, ( whom we hear to
be in the mean time by their common consent appointed
lieutenant-general) reason moveth us to think that none
can be chosen in that whole realm, that (hall more desire
the preservation of the king, and be more meet to have
the government for his safety, being next to him in blood
ofany nobleman of that relm, or elsewhere ; and yet
hereby, we do not mean to prefcrive to them this choice,
except they shall of themselves fully and freely allow
thereof; furthermore we would have them well assured,
that whatsoever reports of devises, are, or (hall be spread
or invented, that we have already yielded our mind to
alter the state of the king or government of that realm,
the fame are without just cause or ground by us given,
for as we have already advertized them, that although we
have yielded to hear, which in honour we could not re-
fuse, what the queen of Scots on her part lhall fay and
offer not only for her own aflurance, but for the wealth
of that realm, yet not knowing what the fame will be,
that Ihall be offered, we mean not to break the order of
law and justice, by advancing her cause, or prejudging
her contrary, before we shall deliberately and assuredly
fee, upon the hearing of the whole, some place necef-
fary, and just cause to do; and therefore finding that
realm ruled by a king, and the fame affirmed by laws of
that realm, and thereof invested by coronation and other
folemnities used and requisite and generally so received be
the whole elates, we mean not, by yielding to hear the
complaints or informations of the queen against her son,
to do any azr whereby to make conclui'in of governments,
but as we have found it, so to fuficr the fame to continue,
yea not to susser it to be altered by any means that we
mnay inmpefhe, as to our honour it doth belong, as by your
late actions hath manitfelly appeared, untiii by fume jufice,
and clear cause, se ihail be directly induced otherwise io
declare our opinion ; and this we would have them to
know to be oui deicminination and courle that we mean
to hold, wvhercoi, -ic trust they for their king may fee
how plaAnly and honourably we mean to proceed, and
how l.tte caule t'rev have to doubt of us, whatsoever to
the contrary they have or lhall hear ; and on the other
part, we pray thliin o 'their wisdoms to think how unli] -

nourab!,,
4-3

nourable, and contrary to all human order it were for us,
when the queen of Scotland doth so many ways require
to hear her cause, and doth offer to be ordered be us in
the fame, as well for matters betwixt ourselves and her, as
betwixt herself and her son and his party of that realm,
against which offers no reason could move us to refuse to
give ear, that we should aforehand openly and directly, be-
fore the causes be heard and confidered, as it were, give a
judgment or sentence either for ourselves or for them
whom the maketh to be her contraries. Finally ye ihall
admonish them, that they do not, by misconceiving our
good meaning towards them, or by indirect assertions of
their adversary grounded on untruths, hinder or weaken
their own cause, in fucl fort, that our good meaning to-
wards them (hall not take such effect towards them, as they
shall desire, or themselves have need of. All this our an-
fwer ye (hall cause be given them, and let them know,
that for the (hortnefs of time, this being the end of the
second of this month, we neither could make any longer
declaration of our mind, nor yet write any several letters,
as if time might have served we would have done. 2 July,
1570.

No. III. (Vol. II. p. 9.)
The bishop of Ross to secretary Lidington from

Chattifworth.
I HAVE received your letters dated the 26th of May, 5 th June

Ihere at Chattifworth, the 1o of January, but on 1570.

the receipt thereof I had written to you at length, like as
the queen did with my lord Levingfton, by the which you
will be resolved of many points contained in your said
letter. I writ to you that I received your letter and cre-
dit from Thomas Cowy at London, and sent to Leicester
to know the queen of England's mind whether if you
(hould come here or not. He sent me word, that the will
no ways have you come a; one of the commissioners,
because the is vet offended with you ; and therefore it ap-
pears good that you come not hither, but remain where
you are, to use your wisdom and diligence, as may bes
advance the queen's affairs, for I perceive your weill and
safety depends thereon, in refpcct of the great feid and

enni-

409

ennimity born against you by your Scots people, and the
great heirlhip taken of your father's landis; both were sure
demonstrations of their malice. Yet I am encouraged by
your stout and deliberate mind. Assure yourfelfno dili-
gence shall be omitted to procure supports forth off all
parts where it may be had. We will not refuse the aid
neither of Papist, Jew, nor Gentil, after my advice; and
to this end, during this treaty, let all things be well pre-
pared. And feeing my lord Seaton is desirous to go into
Slanders, the queen thinks it very neceffarysthat he so do,
for the duke D'Alva has gotten express command of the
king of Spain to give support, and I am sure that there
he (hall have aid both of Slanders and the pope, for it
abides only on the coming of some men of countenance,
to procure and receive the fame. He must needs tarry
there, on the preparations thereof, during the treaty,
which will be a great furtherance to the fame here. The
queen has already written to the duke D'Alva for this
effec, advertizing of his coming; there is certain fums
ofmoney coming for support of the Englishmen, as I wrote
to you before from the pope. Whereupon I would he
had a general commitfion to deal for them, and receive
such fums as shall be given. The means shall be found
to cause you be anfuerit of the fums you writ for, to be
difpoint upon the furnilhing of the castle of Edenburgh,
so being some honest and true man were fcnt to Slanders
to receive it, as said is, which I would you prepared and
sent. Orders shall be taken for the metals as you writ of.
We have proponit your avyce in entering to treat with the
queen of England, for retiring of her forces puntyoally for
lack of aid. Your answers to the Englishmen are tho't
very good, but above all keep you weil out of their hands
in that cafe, eflote prudentes ficut serpentes. You may
take experience with the hard dealing with me, how ye
would be used if ye were here, and yet I am not forth of
danger, being in medio nationis prav;; always no fear,
with God's grace, (hall make me shrink from her majesty's
service. Since the queen of England has refused that you
come here, itappears to me quod nondum eft fedata ma-
litia amorreorum, &c. and therefore if Athol or Cathenes
might by any means be procured to come, they were the
moirl fit for the purqofe, Rothes were also meet, if he and
I werenot both of one fimame; so the treaty would get
the less credit either in Scotland or here. Therefore avys,

and
4IO

and fend the best may serve the turn, and fail not Robert
Melvil come with them, whoever comes, for so is the
queen's pleasure; in my lafd packet, with James Fogo, to
you, in the beginning of May, I sent a letter of the
queen's own hand writing to him, which I trull ye receiv-
ed. I am sorry ye come not for the great relief I hoped to
have had by your presence, for you could well have hand-
led the queen of England, after her humour, as you were
wont to do. The reft I refer to your good wisdom, pray-
ing God to fend you health. From Chattifworth the
ixth of January.

No. IV. (Vol. II. p. 30.)
The declaration of John Cais to the lords of

Grange and Lethington zoungare upon the 8th
day of O&. 157 I.
aWe Hereas you desire to know the queen's majesty's

pleasure, what she will do for appeasing of these

controversies, and therewith has offered yourselves to be
at her commandment, touching the common tranquility
-of the whole ife, and the amity of both realms; her plea-
sure is in this behalf, that ye should leave off the mainte-
nance of this civil discord, and give your obedience to the
king, whom she will maintain to the utmost of her power.

AND in this doing, the will deal with the regent and

the king's party, to receive you into favour, upon reason-
able conditions for security of life and livings.

ALSO she fays that the queen of Scotts, for that she

has practised with the pope and other princes, and also
with her own fubjeds in England, great and dangerous
treasons against the state of her own country, and also to
the deftrudion of her own person, that she shall never
bear authority, nor have liberty while she lives.

IF ye refuse these gentle offers, now offered unto you,

she will presently aid the king's party, with men, am-
munition, and all necessary things, to be had against you.

WHEREUPON her majesty requires your answer with
speed, without any delay.

No. V.

411

No. V. (Vol. II. p. 40.)
Articles sent by Knox to the general Assembly,

August 5th, I572.

calderw. I RS T, desiring a new a& to be made ratifying all
M.s. His- things concerning the king and his obedience that
tory Vol. were enacted of before without any change, and that the
4 36 ministers who have contraveened the former acs be cor-

reded as accordeth.

THAT fute be made to the Regent's grace and nobi-

lity maintaining the king's cause, that whatsoever proceed-
eth in this treaty of peace they be mindful the kirk be
not prejudg'd thereby, in any fort, and they especially of
the ministers, that have been robbed of their possessions
within the kirk during the time of the troubles, or other-
wife dung and injured, may be restored.

To fute at the regent, that no gift of any bifhoprick or

other benefice be given to any person, contrary to the te -
nor of the acs made in the time of the first regent of good
memory, and they that are given contra the said acts, or
to any unqualified person, may be revoked and made null
be an ad of secret council, and thai all bifhopricks, so va-
cand may be presented, and qualified persons nominat
thereunto, with a year after the raking thereof, according
to the order taken in Leith be the commiflioners of the
nobility and of the kirk in the mnonth of January las, and
in special to complain upon the giving of bifhoprick of
Ross to the lord Methven.

THAT no petitions of benefices great or small, be given

be finple donation of anv lord regent, without content
of the pofefobr of the said benefices having title thereto,
and the admifflon of the superintendent or commissioners
of the province where this benefice lyeth, or of the bilhops
lawfully eleEted according to the said order taken at Leith;
and desire an ad of council to be made thereupon, until
the next parliament, wherein the famine may be specially
inated, with inhibition to the lords of session to give
any letters or decreets, upon such simple gifts of benefices
or pentions not being given in manner above rehearsed,
and that the kirk presently aftembled declare all such gifts
null so far as lyeth in their power.

THAT

THAT the first form of presentation to benefices, which

were in the first and second regent's time be not contained
in the presentation, that if the persons presented make
not refidance, or be slanderous or found unworthy either
in life or dotrine be the judgment of the kirk (to which
alwife he fihall be subjet) or meet to be transported to
another room at the fight of the kirk, the said prefenta-
tion and all that (hall fall thereupon (hall be null and of
no force nor effet; and this to have place also in the no-
mination of the bishops.

THAT an at be made in this assembly that all things

done in prejudice of the kirk's assumption of the third,
either by papitis or others, by giving of fews, liferents,
or taks or any otherwise difponing the said assumed
thirds, be declared null with a solemn protestation the
whole kirk difafenteth thereto.

_THAT an ad be made decerning and ordaining all bi-

shops, admitted to the order of the kirk now received, to
give account of their whole rents, and intromissions there-
with once in the year, as the kirk shall appoint, for fuchl
causes as the kirk may easily confider the fame to be molt
expedient and neceffar.

ANENT the jurifdition of the kirk, that the fame be

determined in this assembly, because this article hath been
long postponed to make fute to the regent and council for
remedy against messengers and excommunicate persons.

LAST that orders be taken anent the procurers of the

kirk, who procure against ministers and ministry, and for
jutting of justice of the kirk's acions in the session.

No. VI. (Vol. II. p. 46.)
Declaration of Henry Killigrew, Efq; upon the

peace concluded the 23d Feb. 1572.
B E it known to all men, by these presents, that I

Henry Killegrewe, Efq; ambassador for the queen's

majefly of England. Forasmuch as, at the earnest motion
and solicitation being made to me, on her highness's be-
half, there is accord and pacification of the public troubles
and civil war within this realm of Scotland agreed and con-
cluded, and the fame favourably extended towards the right

honour-

413

honourable George earl of Huntly, lord Gordon and Baid-
zenuch, and the lord John Hamilton, son to the duke's
Grace of Chaftellarault, and commendatour of the abby of
Abirbrothick, for the surety of their lives, livings, honours,
and goods of them, their kinsfolks, friends, servants, and
partakers, now properly depending on them; in treating
of the which said pacification, the murders of the late earl
of Murray uncle, and the earl of Levenax grandfather,
late regent to the king's majesty of Scotland his realm and
lieges, as also an article touching the discharge for the
frutis or moveable goods, which the said persons have
taken fra perfonis profefling the king's obedience, be for
the damages done or committed by them, since the Isth
day of Junij, 1567, and before the penult day of July
!aft by passed, by reason of the common cause or any thing
depending thereupon, being thought by the king's commi-
saries matteris of such wecht and importance, as the king's
present regent could not conveniently, of himself, remit
or discharge the fame. Yet in respect of the necessity of
the present pacification, and for the wiel of the king, and
common quietness of this realm and lieges, it is accorded,
that the matters of remifflon of the said murderers, and
of the discharge of the said frutis, moveable goods, and
other damages, moved by the persons desiring the said re-
miflions and discharge to the queen's majesty my fove-
reign, as to the princess nearest both in blood and habi-
tation to the king of Scots. And whatsoever her majesty
lhall advise and councel touching the said remission and
discharge, the said lord regent, for the weil of the king
and universal quietness of that realm of Scotland, shall
perform, observe, and fulfill the fame. And in likewise,
the said earl Huntly, and commendatour of Abirbro-
thuck, being urged to have delivered pledges and hostages
for observation of the conditions of the said accord and
pacification, hath required me in place thereof, in her
majeft)'s name, by virtue of my commission, to promise
for them that they shall truly and faithfully observe and
keep the said pacification, and all articles and conditions
thereof, for their parts, and that it would please her ma-
jefly to interpose herfeif, =s surety and c:uttioner for them
to that effet, to the king's mnjefty of Scotland their so-
x-ereign and his said recent, x hich I have done and pro-
mise to do, by virtue of his majeftv's commission, as by
the honourable and plain dealing of the said earl and lord,

their

their intention to peace well appears, the fame being molt
agreeable to the mind of the queen's majesty my fove-
reign, which so long by her ministers hath travelled for
the said pacification, and in the end, at her motion and
solicitation, the fame is accorded, knowing her majesty's
desire, that the fame may continue unviolate, and that the
noblemen and others now returning to the king's obedi-
ence (hall have sufficient surety for their lives, livings,
honours and goods. Therefore in her majesty's name,
and by virtue of my commirlion, I promise to the afore-
said earl Huntly and commendator of Abirbrothock, that
by her majesty's good means, the said remission and dif-
charge (hall be purchased and obtained to them, their kin-
folks, friends, servants, and partakers, now properly de-
pendingupon them, (the persons fpecefied in the first ab-
flinence always excepted)as also that the said pacification
hlall be truly observed to them, and that her majesty ihall
interpose herself as confervatrix thereof, and endeavour
herself to cause the fame to be truly and sincerely kept in
all points and articles thereof, accordingly. In witness
whereof, I have to this present subscribed with my hand,
and fealed the fame with mine own feal the i 3th day of
Feb. Anno Domini 1572. and this to be performed by
me, betwixt the date hereof, and the parliament which
flall be appointed for their restitution, or at the furthest
before the end of the said parliament. Sic fubfcribitur.
The bishop of Glasgow's note concerning the

queen of Scotland's dowry.
T HE queen of Scotland, dowager of France, had for ,76

her dowry, betides other possessions, the dukedom of cott. lb.

Turene, which was solemnly contracted and given to her Calig.B. 4-
by the king and efates of parliament ; which dukedom (he
poffeleed peacefully till 1567, and then, upon the pacifi-
cation betwixt the king and Mons. his brother, to aug-
ment whose appenage this dutchy was given, to which the
queen of Scotland yielded upon account of princes, who
were her near relations, provided the equivalent which
was promised her should be faithfully performed. So
that year, after a great many follicitations, in lieu of that
dutchy, she had granted her the county of Vermaudaife
with the lands and bailiwicks of Seuley and Vetry; tho'

'tis

415

'tis known that county, and the other lands were not of
equlvaalue with Ilurene, but was promised to have an
addition of lands in the neighbourhood to an equal value.
Upon this letters patent were granted, which were confirm-
ed in the courts c: parliament, chamber of accompts, court
of aids, chamber of the treasury, and cthers necessary ;
upon which (he entered into pofieffion of that county, &c.
Afterwards, by a valuation of the commiflioners of the
chamber of accompts, it was found that the revenue of
that county, &c. did not amount to those of Turene, by
3coo livres. But instead of making up this deficiency
according tojuftice, some of the privycouncill, viz. M. de
Chevemey, the presidents of Be!lievre, Nicocholay and
St. Bonet, in the name of the king, notwithilanding of
her aforesaid lofGes, did fell and alienate the lands of Sen-
iis, and the duchy of Eftaimpes, to Madam de Montpen-
sier, from whom the king received money ; of which sale
the couni:lors aforesaid obliged themselves to be guaran-
tees, twtch hath hindered the aforesaid queen to have
justice done her. So that Madam de Montpenlier hath
been put in poffeflion of these lands of Senlis, contrary
to all the declaration, protefiation, and affirances of the
king of France to queen Mary's ambassadors. So that the
queen of Scotland is difpofclld; of her dowry, contrary
to all equity, without any regtrd to her quality.

No. VII. (Vo!. II. p. 503.)
A letter from the Lord of I.ochlevin to the re-

gent Mortoun.

;.da-csh T'T will please vour -r.-ce, I recci:e your grace's Ict-
_''. E';. rter, and has contidered the fame. The parson cf
Ar-'ics Camsev was here at me before the receit thereof, direcA-
Elnd. B. ed fra my lor(i of Mar, and the mailer anent my last
:.- 19. written, which was the anlfwer of the writing that the

mailer sent to me, which I fend to your grace, desiring
me to come to sCtrling to confer with them, I had given
m'v answer before the receit of vour grace's letter, that I
behuif.r -o becefyd Sanc Andcrois, at ane friends tryfi,
which I might not omit: I unc:ersiand by my laid coulin,
that the king's majesty is to write to divers of the nobiliry
to come there, anent your lordship's trial, and that he

had
416

had written before his departure to my lord Monthrois.
I understand, likewise, he will write to your grace to
come there for the fame effect, which I tho't good to
make your grace foreseen of the fame, praying your
grace for the love of God almighty, to look upon the beftl
.nd not to sleep in security, but to turn you with un-
feigned heart to God, and to confider with yourself, that
when the king's majesty was very young, God made him
the initrument to divert his mother from her authority,
who was natural princess, for offending of h;s divine ma-
jefty, and that there ran no vice in her, but that the fame
is as largely in you, except to that your grace condefcen-
ded not to the deltru&ion of your wife. For as to har-
lotry and ambition, I think your grace has as far offend-
ed God, and far more in avaritioulnefs, which vycis God
never left unplagued, except speedy repentance, which I
pray God grant to your grace, for otherwise your grace
can never have the love of God nor man. I pray your
grace flatter not yourself; for if your grace believes that
ye have the good will of them that are the king's good
willers ye deceive yourself; for surely I fee perfectly that
your own particulars are not contented, lat by the reft,
and the most principally for your hard dealing. I pray
your grace, beir with me that I am thus hamlie, for cer-
tainly it proceeds from no grudge, but from the very as-
feaion of my heart towards your grace, xhich has con-
tinued since we were acquainted. And now I fee, because
the matter hands in your grace's handl;ng with the king's
majefly, for certainly, if your grace fall forth with him
now, I fee not how ye flall meet hereafter; pray I your
grace to call to God, and look on the best, and cast irom
your grace both your vices, to wit, ambition and avari-
tioufnefs. I am riding this day to Sanc Androis, and
trust to return on WedneSday at the sarthes. If yce r
grace will command me in any offices that are lionc!;'
that I may do your grace pleasure in at Sterling, ad'verti!e
of your grace's mind, and shall do to my power and
knowledge, and this with my heartlie, &c. &c.
VOL. II.

E e

To

To our trusty cousin the lord Lochleven.

From the U RUSTY cousin, after our moll hearty commenda-
osbnginal tions, we received your letter of the 3d of March,
ton°s Ar- and as we take your plainness therein in 'good part, as pro-
chives, ceeding from a friend and kinsman, in whose good as-
Bond. B. fecrion toward us we never doubted, so ye may not think
N . 3'- it firange that we purge ourself so far of your accusation,

as in conscience we find not ourself to have offended
in. As touching our offence to God, we intend not to
excuse it, but to submit us to his mercy; for ambition
surely we think none can justly accuse us ; for in our pri-
vate estate we could, and can live as well contented, as
any of our degree in Scotland, without further aspiring.
The bearing to the charge of the government of the realm,
indeed, mon lead us, or any other that shall occupy that
place, not simply to refpea ourself, but his majesty's rowme
which we supply, and therein not transcending the bounds
of measure, as, we trust, it shall not be found we have
done, ought not to be attributed to any ambition in us.
For as Coon as ever his majesty shall think himself ready
and able for his own government, none Ihall more willing-
ly agree and advance the fame nor I, since I think never
to set my face againfi him, whose honour, safety, and pre-
servation has been so dear unto me. nor I will never be-
lieve to find otherwise at his hand than favour, although
all the unfriends I have in the earth were about him, to
persuade him to the contrary. As we write unto you, our
friendly dealing and confidence in the house of Mar is
not thankfully acquit; as we trull yourfi:lf confiders,
but because the ambassadors of England, my lord of An-
gus, the chancellor, treasurer, and some noblemen rides
weft this day to fee the king, we pray you heartily ad-
dress yourself to be there as soon as ye can, and as ye
shall find the likelihood of all things, let us be advertized
thereof, with your own advice, by Alexr. Hay, whom we
have tho't good to fend weft, feeing my lord of Angus
from Sterling rides to Douglas. And so we commit you
in the protecion of God. At Holyrood house, the 4th
of March, 1577-

FOR the avariciousness laid to our charge, indeed it lies

not in us so liberally to deal the king's geare, as to satis-
fy all cravers, nor never shall any so ereign and native

born
418

born prince, let be afiy officer, eschew tle disdains of
filch, as thinks them judges to their own reward; in ma-
ny causes I doubt not to find the assistance of my friends,
but where my actions shall appear urlhoneft, I will not
crave their afliftance, but let me bear my own burthen.

No. VIII. ( Vol. II. p. 97.)
The copy of the king of France his directions

sent to Scotland with Seineur de la Motte Fe-
nelon. Translated out of the French.
F IRST, on their majestys mot christian part, hecalderw.

Ihall make the most honourable salvation and vifit-M. s. Hir-

ing to the molt serene king of Scotland, their good bro-tory, Vo'.
ther and little son, that in him is poflable. 3I F zC.

To give him their letters that are closed, such and such

like as they have written to him with their hands, and to
llow exprelly the perfec friendlhip and singular assec-
tion, that their majeltys teir to him, and to bring back
the answer.

To take heed to the things which touch near the molt

serene king, to the effec that his person may be in no dan-
ger, but that it may be surely preserved.

AND that he be not hindered in the honest liberty that

lie ought to have, and that no greater, or straiter guards
be about him than he had b(fJre.

AND such like, that he be not impeached in the autho-

rity, that God hath given to him of king and prince so-
vereign above his subjects, to the effect he may as freely
ordain and command in his aftairs, and in the affairs of
his country, with his ordinary council, as he was used to
do of before.

THAT his nobility, barons, and commonaity of his

country may have their free liberty to retort to his serene
majesty without lufpicion of greater guards or more armed
men about his person than the iufe was, that they be not
ali'aid and hindered to resort; and further that the seg-
nieur de la Mootle Fenelon fall liberally and fieely speak
to the said serene kin ie and council, requiring the re-efta-
blilhing of that that n.ay or hath been changed or al-
Icrej.

Ee 2

AND

AND that he may know if the principalls of the nobili-

ty, and other men of good behaviour of the towns and
commonality of the contry conveens, and are content with
the form of government presently with the said serene
king, to the end that there be any mircontent he may
travaile to agree them together, and that he return not
without certainty of the famine.

AND if he may underhtand that there be any who have

not used them so reverently towards the said serene king
their sovereign lord, as the duty of their obedience re-
quired, that he may pray on this behalf of his majesty molt
christian the. said serene king his good brother, giving him
councill wholly to forget the fame, and exhorting them to
do their duty towards his majesty, in time coming, in all
refpecs with the obedience and true subjeCtion they ought
him.

AND if the said seigneur de la Motte, perceves -he said

serene king to be in any manner constrained of his person,
authority, liberty, and disposition of his affairs, than he
used to be, and not convenient for his royal.dignity, or as
the sovereignty of a prince does require, that he use all
moyen lawful and honest to place him in the famine, and
that he employ as much as the credit of his most christian
majesty may do toward the nobility, and subjects of that
contry, and as much as may his name, with the name
of his crown towards the Scottish nation, the which he
loves and confides in as much as they wep~ proper French-
men.

AND that the wittnefs to the said serene king, and his

estates, of his consent, and all the nobility and princi-
pall personages of the contry, that his most Christian ma-
jeftie will continue on his part in the most ancient alli-
ance and confederacy which he hath had with the said fe-
rene king his good brother, praying the nobility and con-
try, with his principall fubjets, to preserve in the famine,
in all good understanding and friendship with him; the
which, on his part, he shall do, observing the famine most
inviolable.

FURTHER his most christian majesty understanding

that the serene king his good brother was contented with
the duke of Lennox, and his fervife, the said fignieur De
la Motte had charged to pray his serene majesty that he
might remaine beside him to his contentment, believing
that he ihould more willing intertain the points of love

and

and confederace, betwixt their majestys and their contrys,
because he was a good subjed to them both;. and if he
might not remain, without some alteration of the tranqui-
lity of his estate, that he might retire him to his own
house in the said contry, in fUrenes, or if he pleased to
return to France that he might surely- and if it pleases
his serene majefly, to cause cease and flay the impeach-
ments, that are made of new upon the frontiers, to the
effect that the natural Frenchmen may enter as freely into
the contry, as they were wont to do of before.

AND that there may be no purpose of diffamation, nor

no speech but honourable of the most Christian king, in
that contry, but such like as is spoken most honourably
of the serene king of Scotland in France.

HE had another head to propone, which he concealed

till a little before his departure, to wit, that the queen,
the king's mother, was content to receive her son in aso-
ciation of the kingdom.

No. IX. (Vol. II. p. 1IS.)
Lord Hunfdane to Sir Francis Walsingham, the

I4th of August, 1584, from Berwick.

SIR,
C CCO R D I N G to my former letters, touching mycaldenv.
meeting with the carle of Arran upon Wednesday M. s. His-

lafi, there came hither to me from the earle, the jufticet°0' vl.
clerk, and Sir William Stuart, captain of Dumbarton,3'P' 374
both of the king's privie council, to treat with me about
the order of our meeting, referring wholly to me to ap-
point the hour, and the number we should meet withal;
lo as we concluded the place to be Foulden, the hour to
be ten o'clock, anl the number with ourselves to be 13 of
a fide; and the reft of our troops to fland each of them a
mile from the town; the one on the one fide, the other on
the other fide, so as our troops were two miles asunder; I
was not many horsemen, but I supplied it with footmen,
where I had 1oo ihot on horse, but they were very near
500 horse well appointed: According to which appoint-
ment, we met yesterday, and after some congratulations,
the earle fell in the like protestations of his good will and
readiness to serve the queen's majesty, before any prince

Ee 3 in

421

in the world, next his sovereign, as he had done hereto-
fore by his letters, and rather more; with such earnell
vows, and unless he be worse than a devil, her majesty may
dispose of him at her pleasure; this being ended, I en-
tered with him touching the cause I had to deal with him,
and so near as I could, left nothing unrehearsed, that I had
to charge the king or him with any unkind dealing toward
her majesty, according to my inftruflions, which without
aniy delay he answered presently, as ye shall perceive by
the said answers, sent herewith; but I replying unto him,
he amplified them with many more circumstances, but to
this effe&. Then I dealt with him touching the point
of her majesty's fatisfaftion, for the uttering such practices
as has been lately set on foot for the disquieting of her
majesty and her estate, who thereof made sundry discourses,
-what marriages have been offered to his majesty by fundrie
princes, and by what means the earle has fought to divert
them, and for what causes; the one, for that be marriage
with Spain or France, he must also alter his religion,
which as he is sure the king will never doe, so will he
never susser him to hearken unto it, so long as he has
any credit with him ; he denys not. but the king has been
dealt withal be practices to deal againit her majesty, which
he has so far denied and refused to enter into, as they
have left dealing therein, but whatsoever the king or lie
knoweth therein there shall be nothing hidden from her
majesty, as her majesty shall know very Ihortly; surely it
seems by his speeches, that if the king would have yielded
thereunto there had been no small company of French in
Scotland ere now to disquiet her majesty. - This be-
ing ended, I dealt with him earnefly for the fay of this
parliament, which now approacheth; or at the least that
there may be nothing done therein, to the prejudice of
these noblemen and others now in England, for the for-
faulting of their livings and goods; hereupon he made a
long discourse to me, first of the earl of Angus dealing
about the earl of Morton, then of his going out, notwith-
franding of fundrie gracious offers the king had made him,
then of the road of Ruthven, how that presently after they
had the king's majesty in their hands, they imprisoned
himself, dealt with the king for putting of the duke out
of the realme, the king refused so to do, they told him
plainly that if he would not he should have the earle
of Arran's head in a dih; the king alked what offence the

earl
4^2

earl had made? and they answered it mutl be so, and
lhijuld he so; hereupon for the safeguard of Arran's life,
the kinz was content to fend away the duke, and yet Ar-
ran afterwards fundre times in danger of his life; I alled-
ged unto him the king's letter to the queen's majelly, and
his ats in council, that they had done nothing but for
his service, and with his good liking and contentment,
who answered me he durst do no-otherv-ife, nor could not
do any thing but that which pleased them, with such a num-
ber of other their dealings with the king whileft he was in
their hands as are too long to be written, and too bad if
they were true; I said the king might have let the queen's
majesty's ambassador have known his mind secretly, and
her majesty would have relieved him; he answered, that
the king was not ignorant that the appehenfions in that
manner, proceeded from Mr. Bow's pracice, and thereby
durfi not impart so much to him, and yet the king was
content, and did give remission, to as many, as would ac-
knowledge their faults, and ask remiflion, and such as
would not, he thought fit to banish, to try their further
loyalty, in which time they conspired the king's second
apprehension, and the killing of the earle, and others,
and seduced the ministers to their faaion, and yet not
satisfied with these conspiracies and treasonable dealings,
(as he terms them) are entered into a third, being in Eng-
land under her majeRfy's protection, to dishonour her ma-
jelly as far as in them lyeth, or at least to cause the king
conceave some unkindness in her majesty, for harbouring
of them; I wrote to yow what the conspiracy was, the
taking of the king, the killing of the earle of Arran, and
some others, the taking of the cafrles of Edinr. and bring-
ing home the earles, to take the charge of the king; all
which (fays he) is by Drum!nond confessed, and by the
provost of Glencudden not greatly denied, and the con-
ltable of the catle thereunto fled; the earl brought Drum-
mond with him as far as Langton, where he lay, to have
corfeffed the conspiracy before me, but having at his light-
ing, received a blow on his leg with a hoife, so as he could
bring him no farther, I replied that I thought verily they
would not work any such practices in refpet of the
queen's majesty, abiding within her realme, and if there
be any such prascices, they have proceeded from others,
and they not privie unto them: and that if it be not ap-
parently proved against them, that it will be thought to

Ee4 be

423

be fQme prascice to aggravate the fault, and to make them
the more odious to the king. He answered me, that it
should be proved so sufficiently, that they ihould not be
able with truth to deny it, for their own hands is .to be
fiowed to parr of it, and therefore concluded, that if
her majesty should so press the king for them at this time,
that would rahder hinder this matter of the amitty, nor
further it, and that since they seek chiefly his life, he could
not, in any reason, seek to do them any good; and befidcs
he aflured me, that if he would, he dare not, this last
matter being fallen out as it is; and surely if this matter
had not fallen out, I would not have doubted the reftor-
ing of the earl of Mar very shortly, if her majesty would
have employed me therein, but for the earl of Angus, I
perceive the king is persuaded that both he, and the reft
of the Douglasses, have conceived so mortall. an hatred
against him and the earl of Arran, about the death of the
earl of Morton, as if they were at home, to-morrow next,
they would not leave to practice and conspire the death of
them both, and therefore a hard matter, to do any thing
for him: finally, he concluded and required me to assure
her majesty from the king, that there Ihall nothing be hid
from her, nor any thing left undone that may fatisfie her
majesty with reason, and that the king shall never do any
thing, nor content to have any thing done in her prejudice,
so long as he had any credit with him, or authority un-
der him. Having this far proceeded, he desired to Ihow
me his commission, which is under the great feal, to him-
self only, which is as large as may be, and yet fundrie of
the privie councel there with him, but not one in com-
mission, nor present, nor near us all this time having
spent almost five hours in there matters; he presented to
me the master of Gray, who delivered to me a letter from
the king in his commendation, whom I perceive the
king means to fend to her majesty, and therefore requires,
a safe condut for his passage, which I pray yow procure,
and to fend it so soon as you may. I let him understand of
the lord Seaton s negociation with the French king. He
swore to me, that Seaton was but a knave, and that it
was partly against his will, that he mhould be sent thither.
But his commission and infhrution being of no great im-
portance, he yielded the sooner; and if Seaton has gone
beyond his inftrutions, which Arran drew himself, he
will make Seaton smart for it. Touching William New-

gate,
424

gate, and Mark Golgan, he protested he never heard of
any Ifch; he fays there was a little poor foul, with a black
beard, come thither a begging, who said he was an ene-
my to Desmond, to whom he gave a croun, but never
heard of him since, and for any Scots man going into
Ireland, he fays there is no such matter; if there be,
there may be some few rafkals that he knows not of; and
touching the coming of anyjefuits into Scotland; he fays
it is but the slanderous devise of the kings enemys, and
such as would have the world believe the king were ready
to revolt in religion, who the world shall well fee will
continue as conitant therein, at what prince soever pro-
sessed it most; and the earle himself dos protest to me,
that to his knowledge, he never saw ajefuit in his life,
and did assure me if there was any in Scotland, they
should not do so much harm in Scotland, as their ministers
would do, if they preach such doctrine as they did in
Scotland; and touching one Ballenden, of whom I write
to yow, I heard from Mr. Colvil, the earle avows con-
flantly that he knows not, nor hath not heard of any such
man, but he would inquire at the juffice clerk, and would
inform me what he could learn of that; thus I have made
yow as short a discourse as I can of so many matters, so
long discoursed upon, but these are the principal points
of all our talk, so near as I can remember it, and for
this time I commit yow to the Almighty. At Berwick,
the i4thofAuguft, 1584.

The king is very desirous to have

my son Robert Carrie to come to him.
I pray yow know her majesty's pleasure.

Arran's Arlfwers to the griefss or articles proponed
to the lord Hunfdane, set down in another form.

S to the strait and revere persecution of all such, as

A have been noted to have been well affected to the
queen's majesty, it cannot appear they were either for
that cause punilhed, or hardly dealt with, since his ma-
jefty of late has been so careful and diligent to choice out
good instruments to deal betwixt her majesty and him,
as his majesty has done in electing of your lordship and
me; besides that in all their accusations, their good will

and

425

and affection born to her majesty was, at no time, laid
to their charge, but capital actions of treason many way
tried now be the whole three estates, and more than ma-
nifeft to the world.

As for his majesty inhibiting, by publick proclamation,

such as were banished, not to repair in England; the
bruits and whisperings that came to his majesty's ears, of
their conspiracies and treasons, which since fyn the ac-
complifhed, so far as in them lay, moved his majesty to
inhibit them to repair to any place, so near his majesty's
realm, left they should have attempted there things, which
shortly they did attempt, being farther off, and more dif-
tant both by sea and land.

As for reception ofjefuits, and others, her majesty's

fugitives, and not delivering them according to his pro-
mile, as your lordship propones, his majesty would be most
glad that so it might fall out by your lordship's traviles,
that no fugitive of either realne should be received of ei-
ther, and when so shall be, it shall not fail on his majesty's
part, albeit in every deed his time bygone his majesty has
been constrained to receipt her majesty's mean rebells and
fugitives, contrar his good naturall, since her majesty
hath receipt, in effec, the whole and greatest rebells
and traitors his majesty in his own blood ever had; as
for the agreement with his majesty's mother anent their
association, his majesty has commanded me, in presence of
your lordship's servant, to assure her majesty and yourlord-
(hip, in his rpajeftv's name, that it is altogether false, and
an untruth, nor any such like matter done yet.

His majesty has also commanded me to assure your

lordship, that it is also false and untrue, that his majesty
has, by means direc or indirect, sent any message to
the pope, or received any from him; or that his majesty
has dealt with Spain or any foreigners, to harm her ma-
jefty or her realm, v hich his majesty could have no ho-
nour to do, this good intelligence taking place, as I hope
in God it (hall.

As concerning the contemptuous usage of her majeffy's

ministers, sent unto his majesty, his majesty used none
of them so; and if his majesty had, sufficient cause was
given by them, as some of their own writs do yet testify;
as I more particularly showed your lordship at Foulden at
our late meeting.

No. X.
426

No. X. (Vol. II. p. 129)

Letter of Q. Mary to QL Elizabeth.

adame ma bonne Seur,
asH ' Affeurant quc vous avez eu communication d' uneCott Lib.

1JL lettre de Gray que voftre homme Semer me livracol. B.
hier foubz le nom de mon filz y recongnoiffant quasi deVIll. Fol.
mot a la mot les mefmes raisons, que le dit Gray tn'efcrivit 47. .
eft chifre eftant dernierement pres de vous defmontrant laAn"oign"a
fuffifance & bonne intention du personage je vous prieray
feulement fuivant ce que si devant je vous ay tant inftan-
tement importune que vous me permettiez defclaircir li-
brement & ouvertement ce point de l'affociation d'entre
moy & mon filz & me deffier les mains pour proceder avec
lui comme je jugeray eftre requis pour son bien & le
mien. Etj'entreprendz quoy que l'on vous dire & puffe
en rapporter de faire mentir ce petit bruillon qui persuade
par aucuns de vos ministers a enterpris cette feperation
entre moy et mon enfant, & pour y commencer je vous
fupplie m' o&royer qui je puiffe parler a ce justice clerk
qui vous a este nouvellement envoy6 pour mander par luy
a mon filz mon intention fur cela, ce quije me promis que
ne me refuserez, quant ce ne feroit que pour demontrer
en effect la bonne intention que vous 'm'avez afleure
avoir al'accord & entreticn de natural devoir entre la mere
& l'enfant qui dit en bonnes termes eftr: empefche pour
vous me tenant captive en un desert ce que vous ne pourrez
mieux defmentir & faire paroitre vofire bon defir a notre
union que me donnant les moyens d'y proceder, & non
m'en retenir & empefcher comme aucune de vos minis-
tres pretendant a fin de laiffer toujours lieu a leur mauvais
& finiftres practiques entre nous. La lettre porte que 1'as-
fociation ne'st pass passe, auffi ne luy ai-je jamais dit, bien-
que mon filz avoit accepte; & que nous en avions convenu
ensemble, comme l'acte ligne de fa main, & ces lettres
tant a moy, que en France en font soy, ayant donne ce
meme temoignage de fa bouche propre a plufieurs ambaffa-
deurs & perfonne de credit, s'excufant de ne l'oser faire
publier par craint de vous feulement, demandant forces
pour vous resister d'avant de ce declarer si ouvertement
eltantjournellement persuade au contraire par vos minis-

tres

427

tres qui luy prometoyent avecque une entreire a Yorck
le faire declarer votre heretier. Au surplus Madame quand
mon enfant feroit fe malheureux que de. s'opinaftrer en
cette extreme impiet6 & ingratitude vers moy, je ne puis
penser que vous non plus qu'aucun aultre prince de la
Chretient6 le vouliffiez eu cela applaudir ou meintenir
pour luy fayre acquerir ma malediction ains que plutos
irtroviendrez pour luy faire recongnoitre la raison trop
juste & evidant devant Dieu & les hommes. Helas & en--
cores ne luy vouloier je'n offre, mays donner avec droit
ce qu'il tient par usurpation. Je me fuis du tout commife a
vous, & fidelernent faites si il vous plef que je ne en foye
pis qu'ayparavant, & que le faulfete des uns ne prevale def-
vant la verite vers vous, pour bien recevant mal, & la
plus grande afflicion quj me fcaurroit arriver a fcavo;r la
perte de mon fils. Je vous fupplie de me mander en cas
qu'i! perfite en cette m'efconnoiflance de son devoir, que
de luy ou de mov il vous plaift advouer pour legittime roy
ou royne d'Ecpffe, & si vous aves agreable de pourfuivre
avec moy a part la trait6 commence6 entre nous de quoyje
vous requiers fans plus attendre de refponce de ce mal
gouverne enfant vous en requerrant avec autant d' assec-
tion queje fens mon cceur oppreffe d'ennuy. Pour Dieu
fouvenez vous de la promeffe que m'avez faites de me
prendre en votre protecion me riportant de tout a vous,
& fur ce prian. Dieu qu'il vous viueille preserver de touts
-cs ennemys & diflimulez amys, comlmeje le desire de me
consoler & de me venger de ceulz qui pourchaflent un tel
malheur entre la mere & I'enfant. Je cefferay de vous
troubler, mais non a m'ennuier que je ne receive quelque
consolation de vous & de Dieu encore un coup je le sup-
plie de vous garder de tout peril, Futhbery xi I Mars,

Voftre fidelement vou6e foeur

& obeiffante coufine,

A le reyned' Angleterre MARIE Q.

madame ma bonne fcur
& coufine.

No.

No. XI. (Vol. II. p. 130.)

A Testament by Q_ Mary.
N. B. The following paper was transcribed by the' revd.co,. Liu

Mr. Crawford late regius professor of church hiftoryvefpas.
in the univerlity of Edinburgh. Part of this paper,L i6.
according to him, is written by Naue, Mary's fecle-P' 4'5
tary, the reft with the queen's own hand. What is
marked " is in the queen's hand.

Onfiderant par ma condition prefente l'eftat de vie

C humaine, si incertain, que perfonne ne s'en pcufR,
ou doibt afleurer, finnon foubs la grande et infinie mi-
fericorde de Dieu. Et me voulant prevaloir d'icelle contre
tous les dangeres et accidens, qui ma pourroient in opine-
ment furvenir en cette captivite, mefmes a cause des grandes
et longues maladies, ou j'ay ete detenue jefques a present;
j'ay advise tandis que j'ay la commodite, ou raison en jl-
gement, de pourvoir apres ma la falut de mon ame, en-
terrement de mon corps et disposition de mon bien, eftat,
& affaires, par ce present mon testament et ordonnance de
mon dernier volonte, qui s'enfuyt.

Au nom du Fere, du Filz, et du benoife St. Esprit.

Premierement, me recongnoiffant indigne pechereffe avec
plus d'offences envers mon Dieu, que de satisfaction par
toutes les adverfites que j'ay fouffert; dont je la loue fa
bonte. Et m'apuyant fur la croix de mon Sauveur et Re-
dempteur Jesus Christ. Je recommende mon ame a la be-
noifte et individue TrinitC, et aux prieres de la gloricufe
Vierge Marie, et de tons les anges fainas & fain&cs de
paradis, efperant par leur merites et intercefion, eftre avdee
a obtenir de eftre fai.te participante avec eulx de felicite
etemelle. Et pour m'y acheminer de cueur plus net et
entier, defpouillant des a present tout ressentiment des in-
jures, calomnies, rebellions, et aultres offences, qui me
pourroient avoier este fades durant ma vie, par mes fubjets
rebelles et aultres ennemis; J'en retriet la vengeance a
Dieu, & le fupplie leur pardonner, de mefin affection,
que je luy requieres pardon a mes faultes, et a tous ceuls
ct celles que je puis avoir offteanf de faitis ou de parolles.

Je
N

Je veulx et ordonne, &c. [ The two following paragraphs
contain dirctaions dsncerning the place and circunifance of her
burial.]

Pour ne contrevenir a la gloire, honneur, et conferva-

tion de l'Eglife catholique, apoftolique et Romaine, en la
quelle je veulx vivre et mourir, si le prince d'Efcoffe mon
filz y pueft etre reduiet contre la mauvaife nourriture,
qu'il a prise a mon tres grand regret en l'herefie de Calvin
entre mes rebelles, je le laiffe feul et unique heritier de
mon royaumee d'Efcoffe, de droi& que je pretende julte-
ment en la couronne d'Angleterre et pays que en depen-
dent, et generallement de tous et chacun mes meubles et
immeubles qui refteront apres ma mort, et execution de
ce present testament.

Si non, et que mon dit filz continue a vivre en la dite

herefie, Je cede, tranfporte, et fai'te don " de touts et
" chacuns mes droifs, que je pretende et puis pretendrc
" a la couronne d'Angleterre, et aultres droids, feig-
" neuries, ou royaulmes en dependantz, au roy catholique,
"ou aultre de fiens qu'il luy plaira, avefques advis, con-
" fentement de fa faintet ; tant pour le voyr aujourhuy
" le feul feurs appui de la religion catholique, que pour
" reconoiffance de gratuites faveurs que moy, et les miens
" recommandez par moy, ont avons receu de luy en ma
" plus grande neceffite; et refguard auffl au droi& que
" luy mefme peut pretendre a ces ditz royaulmes et pays,
" je le fupplie qu'en recompence il preign alliance, de la
" maifon de Lorraine, et si il ce pleut de celle de Guise,
" pour memoire de la race de laquelle je fuis sortie au
" cofte de Mere, n'a ayant de celuy de mon pere, que
" mon feul enfant, lequel efiant Catholique j'ay tousjours
" voue pour une de fes filles, ii il luy plaifoit de l'accep-
" ter, ou faillant une de fes nicpces marieecomme fa fille.

" Je layffe mon filz a la protecion du roy, de prince,

" et dues de Lorrayne et de Guise, et du Mayne, aux
" quelz je recommende et son eftat en Efcoffe, et mon
" droid en Angleterre, si il eft catholique, et quelle le
" parlie de cefte royne."

Je fautz don au " compte de Lenox" de comte dele-

nox tenu par feu son pere, et commande mon filtz, comme
mon heretier et fuccelTeur, d'obeyr en ceft en druit a im-i
volonte.

Je veulz et ordonne toutes les sommes et deniers, qui fe

troveront par moys deues, tien mis cause de droit eltre
faits " a Lohliven" etre promptement payee et acquittes,
et tout tort et griefs rep res per lefdits executeurs defquelz
J'en charge la conscience. Oultre, &c. [Follow two or
three paragraphs concerning particular legacys, and then is
added] Faic au manoir de Sheffield en Angleterre le jour
de---Mil cinq cens foixant & dix sept.

After a blank page follows in the queen'S hand:

" Si mon filz meurt, au comte de Lenox, au C'aude
" Hamilton lequel fe montrera le plus fidelle vers moy, et
"plus constant en religion, au. jugement de- Ducs
" de Lorraine et de Guyfe, ouje le rapport fur ce de ceulx
"a quej'auray donnay le charge de trayter avefque eux
" de par moy et ceulx, a condition de ce marrier ou allicr
"en la dite may on ou par leur advis."

Follow near two pages of particular legacys.

" Et le remets ma tante de Lenox au droid quelle pent

" pretendre a la conte d'Angous avant l'acort fait par monl
"commandemient entre ma dite tante de Lenox ct IL
" comte de Morton, veu qu'il a eflt fait & par le feu roy
"mon Mary et moy, fur la promeffe de fa fidelle afflift-
" ance, ii luy et moy encourions dangler et befoing d' ayde,
" ce qu'il rompit, s'entendant fccretemcnt au les nos en-

nemis rebelles, qu' atenmptprient contre fa vie, et pour

" cee ffect pris les armes, et ont porte Ics bannieres def-
"ploiees, contre nous, je revoque auill route autre don
"que je luy ay fait de conte de Morton fur promeffes
"de fes bons services a advenir, et entends que la dire

Conte foit rcunie a la couronne, si ell ie trouve y par-

" tenir, comme fes tralhifons tant en la mort de mon feu
" Mary, que en mon banilltelent, et pourfuit de la mien
" ne l'ont merite. Et dct'nds a mon fil , de cc jamays ser-

vire de luy pour dc !uv pour la havync qu'il aye a fes pa-

"rents, la quelle je clain.l ne s' citende jufqics a luy, le
"connoill'nt du tout affe:tionime aux ennenis de mon
' croite en ce royaume, du qiucl il eft penconnaire.

" Je recommende uion nepueu Francois Stuart a mon
filz, et luy conmmanioe detniiir pres de luy et's enfervit,
" etje luy lavfli !e b:e.i d:l conite de Bodu:l son oncle,

" en

431

en refpea qu'il eft de mon fang, mon filleul, et ma
"eftR laiffe en lutelle par son pere.

" Je declare que mon frere bastard Robert Abb6 de St.
" Croix na'en que par circonvention Orkenay, et que le

ne futjamays mon intention, comme il apret par la re-
vocation que j'ayfayte depuis, et ete auffi faite d'avant
la afge de xxv. ans, ce que j'aimois deliberer si il ne
m'euffent prenner par prison de fe de defayre aulx estates
je veulx donc que Orkenay foite reune a la couronne
comme une de plus neceffaires pour mon filz, &fans
" lamayfon ne pourra etre bien tenue.

" Les filles de Morra ne parvient acceffi heriter, ains
revient la conte a la Couronne, si il luy pleft luy don-
ner fa ou fille en marriafge, et il nome l'en iienne
"ligne."

No. XII. (Vol. II. p. 142.)
A letter from Mr. Archibald Douglas to the queen

of Scots.

Apri_ DLEASE your majesty, I received your letter of the
Har.Lib. [ date the 12th of Nov. and in like manner has seen
37. B. 9. lome part of the contents of one other of the fame date,
to. "6. directed to Mons. de Movifir, ambassador for his majelty

the most Christian king both which are agreeable to your
princely dignity, as by the one your highness desires to
know the true cause of my banithment, and offers unto me
all favour if I Ihould be innocent of the heinous fa£ts com-
mitted in the person of your husband of good memory, so
by the other the said ambassador is willet to declare unto
me, if your husband's murder could be laidjuftly against
me, that youcould not follicit in my cause, neither yet for
any person that was participant of that execrable fa.t,
but would seek the revenge thereof, xhen you Ihould
have any means to do it; your majelty's offer, if i be in-
nocent of that crime, is moit favourable, and your de-
fire to know the truth of the fame is moil equitable; and
therefore that I ihould with ail my implictiy, iinccriry and
truth answer thereunto is molt reasonable, to the end :lat
your princely dignity may be my heip, if my innocence
ihall sufficiently appear, and procure my condemnation,
if I be culpable in any matter, except in the knowledge of

the

the evil disposed minds of the most part of your nobility
against your said husband, and not revealing of it, which I
am assured was sufficiently known to himself, and to all that
had judgment never so little in that realm; which also I
was conltrained to underfiand, as he, that was specially
employed betwikt the earl Morton, and a good number
of your nobiliry, that they might with all humility inter-
cede at your majesty's hand for his relief, in such matters
as are more specially contained in the declaration follow-
ing, which I am constrained for my own justification, by
this letter to call to your majesty's remembrance. Not-
withfRanding that I am assured, to my grief, the reading
thereof will not finally offend your princely mind. It
may please your majesty to remember, that in the year of
God 1566, the said earl of Morton, with divers other
nobility and gent. were declared rebels to your majefly,
and banilhed your realm for insolent murder committed in
vour majesty's own chamber, which they alledged was
done by command of your hufland, who notwithitand-
ing affirmed that he was compielled by them to subscribe
the warrant given for that effet, howsoever the truth of
that matter remains amongst them : it appertains not to me
at this time to be curious; true it is that I was one of that
number, that heavily offended against your majesty, and
passed in France the time of our banishment, at the delire
of the reft, to humbly pray your brother the Most Chris-
tian king to intercede that our offences might be par-
doned, and your majesty's clemency extended towards us,
albeit divers of no small reputation, in that realm, was
of the opinion, that the said fact merited neither to be re-
quifite for, nor yet pardoned. Always such was the care-
ful mind of his majefly towards the quietnels of that realm,
that the dealing in that cause was committed to Moni.
de Movifir, who was direced at that time to go into Scot-
land, to congratulate the happy birth of your son, whom
Almighty God of his goodness may long preserve in happy
estate and perpetual felicity; the careful travail of the laid
de Movifir was so effecual, and your majesty's mind so
inclined to mercy, that within short space thereafter, I
was permitted to repair in Scotland, to deal with earls
M4urray, Athol, Bodvel, Arguile, and secretary L.edington,
in tle name and behalf of the said earl Morton, loids Re-
ven, Lindsay, and remanent complelis, that they might
make offer in the names of the said earl, of any matter that

VOL. II. F f might

might satisfy your majesty's wrath, and procure your cle-
mency to be extended in their favours; at my coming to
them, after I had opened the effect of my meflage, they
declared that the marriage betwixt you and your husband
had been the occasion already of great evil in that realm,
and if your husband should be suffered to follow the ap-
petite and mind of such as was about him, that kind of
dealing might produce with time worse effects; for help-
ing of such inconvenience that might fall out by that kind
of dealing, they had thought it convenient to join them-
selves in league and band with some other noblemen, re-
solved to obey your majesty as their natural sovereign, and
have nothing to do with your husband's command whatfo-
ever, if the said earl would for himself enter into that band
and confederacy with them, they could be content to
humbly request and travel by all means with your majeflty
for his pardon, but before they could any farther proceed,
they desired to know the said earl's mind herein; when I
had answered, that he nor his friends, at my departure,
could not know that any such like matter would be pro-
ponit, and therefore was not inflructed what to answer
therein, they desired that I should return sufficiently in-
ftrufed in this matter to Sterling, before the baptism of
your son, whom God might presirve; thismeffage was
faithfully delivered to me at Newcastle in England, where
the said earl then remained, in pretence of his friends and
company, where they all condescended to have no far-
ther dealing with your husband, and to enter into the
said band. With this deliberation I returned to Ster-
ling, where at the request of the Most Christian King and
the queen's majesty of England by their ambassadors pre-
sent, your majesty's gracious pardon was granted unto them
all, under condition always that they should remain banish-
ed forth of the realm, the space of two years, and farther
during your majesty's pleasure, which limitation was after
mitigated at the humble request of your own nobility, so
that immediately after the said earl of Morton repaired in-
to Scotland to Quhittingaime, where the earl ofBodvell and
secretary Ledington come to him; what speech passed
there amongst them, as God flall be my judge, I knew
nothing at that time, but at their departure I was request-
ed by the said earl Morton to accompany the earl Bod-
vell and secretary to Edenburgh, and to return with fucli
answer as they Ihould obtain of your majesty, which be-

ing

ing given to me by the said persons, as God fhall'be my
judge, was no other than there words, " Schaw to the
" earl Morton that the queen will hear no speech of that
"matter appointed unto him ;" xhen I crafit that the
answer might be made more sensible, secretary Ledington
said, that the earl would sufficiently understand it, albeit
few or none at that time understand what passed amongst
them. It is known to all men, als veill be railling let-
ters passed betwixt the said earl and Ledington when they
become in divers factions, as also ane buck sett furtht by
the ministers wherein they affirm that the earl of Mor-
ton has confessed to them, before his death, that the earl
Bodvell come to Quhittingaime to prepon the calling
away off the king your husband, to the which propofi-
tion the said earl of Morton affirms that he could give no
answer unto such time he might know your majesty's
mind therein, which he never received. As to the abo-
minable murder, it is known too by the depositions of ma-
ny persons that were executed to the death for the commit-
ting thereof, that the fame was executed by them, and
at the command of such of the nobility, as had fubfcri-
vit band for that effect; by this unpleasant declaration,
the most part thereof known to yourself, and the re-
mainder may be underflood by the aforesaid witnesses that
was examined in torture, and that are extant in the custody
of the ordinary judges in Scotland, my innocency ib
far as may concern any fact does appear sufficiently to your
majesty. Andas for my dealing aforesaid, I can be no othcr-
wife charged therein, but as what would accuse the veflel
that preserves the vine from harm, for the intemperancy
of such as immoderately use the fame. As for the fpc-
cial cause of my banishment, I think the fame has pro-
ceeded upon ane opinion conceived, that I was able to ac-
cufe the earl of Morton of so much matter as they alledge
himself to have confessed before he died, and would not
be induced, for loss of reputation, to perform any part
thereof. If this be the occasion of my trouble, as I sup-
pose it is, what punishment I flould deserve, I remit me
to your majesty's better judgment, who well knows how
careful ever ilk gentleman (hould be of his fame, reputa-
tion and honour, and how far ever ilk man should alb-
hor the name of a pultroun, and how indecent it would
have been to me to accuse the earl of Morton, being lb
ncar of his kin, notwithflanding all the injuries I was

F f2 cun-

435

conitrained to receive at his hand all the time of his go-
vernment, and for no other cause, but for shewing of par-
ticular friendship to particular friends in the time of the
last cruel troubles in Scotland. Sorry I be now to accuse
him in any matter being dead, and more sorry that being
on lyff, be such kind of dealing obtained that name of
Ingrate. Always for my own part I have been banished
my native country those three years and four months, liv-
ing in anxiety of mind, my holl guds in Scotland, which
were not small, intermittit and deponit upon, and has
continually since the time I was relieved out of my !all
troubles at the desire of Mons. de Movifir, attended to
know your majefly's pleasure, and to wait upon what
service it should please your majesty for to command. Up-
on the 8th of April inft. your good friend secretary Wal-
finghame has declared unto me, that her highness tho't
it expedient that I should retire myself where I pleased, I
declared unto him I had no means whereby I might perform
that desire, till such time as I mhould receive it from your
majesty. Neither knew I where it would please your high-
ness to diret me, until such time as 1 Ihould have received
further information from you. Upon this occasion, and
partly by permission, I have taken the hardrefs to write
this present letter, whereby your majesty may understand
any part of my troubles past, and strait present. As to
my intention future, I will never deny that I am fully re-
solved to spend the refi of my days in your majesty's ser-
vice, and the king your son's, wheresoever I ahall be diret-
ed by your majesty, and for the better performing there-
of, if so (hall be her majesty's pleasure, to recommend
the tryal of my innocency, and examination of the verity
of the preceding narration, to the king your son, with
request that I may be pardoned for such offences as con-
cerned your majesty's service, and var common to all men
the time of his les aige and perdonit to all, except to
me, I /hould be the bearer thereof myself, and be direDt-
ed in whatsoever service it (hould please your majesty for
to command. Most humbly I beseech your majesty to
confider hereof, and to be so gracious as to give order,
that I may have means to serve your majefly according to
the sincerity of my meaning, and so expecting your ma-
jety's answer, after the kissing your hand with all humi-
lity, I take leave from London.

No. XIII.
436

No. XIII. (Vol. II. p. 163.)
Letter from the king of Scots to Mr. Archibald

Douglas his ambassador in England, Oaober,
1586.

) ESERVE up yourself na langer in the earnest dealing cot. Lib.
. for my mother, for ye have done it too long; and Calig. C. 9.
think not that any your travellis can do goode if hir lyse n Origi-
be taking, for then adeu with my dealing with thaime that king's
are the special infirumentis thairof; and theirfore, gif yehand.
looke for the contineuance of my favour towartis you, fpair
na pains nor plainnes in this cace, but redde my letter
wrettin to Williame Keith, and conform yourself quhollie
to the contentis thairof, and in this requeilt let me reap
the frui&is of youre great credit there, ather now or
never. Fairwell. Ocober, i586.
Letter to fir William Keith, ambassador in Eng-

land, probably from secretary Maitland. Nov.
27, 1586.
TY your letters sent by this bearer, (albeit concern- A in

ing no pleasant subjet) his majesty conceives wellthe collet.

of your earnestness and fidelity in your negotiations, as of fir A.
also of Mr. Archibald's acivity and diligence, whom you )ick. Vol.
so greatly praise and recommend. I with the issue cor- A.fol. 29.
respond to his Majesty's opinion, your care and travell,
and his great diligence as you write. His majesty takes
this rigorous proceeding against his mother deeply in
heart, as a matter greatly concerning him both in honour
and otherwise. His highnesses ations and behaviour utter
plainly not only how far nature prevails, but also how he
apprehends of the sequel of that process, and of what mo-
nent he esteems it. There is ambaffade shortly to be
directed, wherein will be employed an earl and two coun-
fellors, on whose answer will depend the continuance or
diflolution of the amity and good intelligence between
the princes of this isle. In the mean season, if farther ex-
tremity be used, and his majesty's suit and request disdain-
ed, his highness will think himself dishonoured and con-

temned

temned far besides his expectation and deserts. Ye ma
perceive his majesty's disposition by his letter to you,
which you (hall impart to Mr. Archibald, and both deal
according thereto. I need not to recommend to your care,
concerning your matter's service both in weill and in ho-
nour. As you and your colleague (hall behave yourself
in this behalf, so for my own part, will I interpret your
affecion to your mailer. I am glad of that I hear of
yourself, and I do fully credit that you write of Mr. Archi-
bald, whose friends here make great account of his pro-
sessed devotion to the queen, besides the duty he owes
to the king's majesty her son. Farther I am constrained
to remit to next occasion, having scarce time to scribble
these few lines (which of themselves may bear witness of
my hafe). Wishing you a prosperous issue ofyournego-
ciarion, I commit you, &c. Halyrudhoufe, Nov. 27th,
I586.

THE people, and all etates here are so far moved by

the rigorous proceedings against the queen, that his ma-
jefty, and all that have credit are importuned, and may
not go abroad for exclamations against them, and im-
precations against the queen of England,

No. XIV. (Vol. II. p. I67.
To the king's majesty, from Mr. Archibald

Douglas.

16 oa'. T LEASE your majesty, I received your letter of the
For t Jhe r date the 28th of September, the 5th of O&ober,
Original inwhich was the fame day that I directed Wm. Murray to-
the colled. wards your highness; by such letters as he carried, and
of fir A. others of several dates, your majesty may perceive that I
ck.l Vl. had omitted nothing so far as my travel might reach un-

to, anent the performing of the two chief points contain-
ed the said letter befor the receit thereof, which by these
presents I must repeat for answering of the faidis. As to
the sirs, so far as may concern the interceding for the
queen your majesty's mother her life, I have divers times
and in every audience travelled with this queen in that
matter, specially to know what her full determination
must be in that point, and could never bring her to any
further answer, but'that this proceeding against her by or-

der

der of justice was no less against her mind, than against
their will that loved her best: as towards her life (he could
give no answer thereunto, untill such time as the law hath
declared whether The was innocent or guilty. Herewithall
it was her pleasure thus far to inform me, that it was a
number of the affociants that earneitly pressed her that the
law might proceed against her, giving reasons that so long
as (he was suffered to deal in matters, so long would never
this realm be in quiet, neither her life, neither this tate
in assurance, and in the end they used this protestation
that if The would not in this matter follow their advice,
that they lhould remain without all blame whatsoever
(hould fall out; whereupon (he had granted them liberty
to proceed, left such as had made the request, might
hereafter have charged herself with inconvenience if any
(hould happen.

AND by myself I know this her speech to be true, be-

cause both papist and protestant has behaved them, as it
hath been her pleasure to declare, but upon divers re-
fpe&s, the one to avoid fufpicon that otherwise was con-
ceived against them, the other upon teal, and care that they
will be known to have for preservation of their sovereign's
life and (tate in this perilous tinme upon consideration
whereof, I have been conltrained to enter into some deal-
ing with both, wherewith I made her tmjefty acquainted
the protestants, and such as in other niatters will be known
to bear no small favour unto your majesty's service, hath
prayed that they may be excused forni any dealing in the
contrary of that, which by their oath they have avowed,
and by their speech to their sovereign requested for, and
that before my coming in this country; if they should nowv
otherwise do, it would produce no better effea but to
make them subjeCt to the accusation of their sovereign,
when it should please her to do it, of their inconstancy,
in giving councell whereby they might incur the danger
of ill councellors and be confequiet worthy of punishment.
Such of the papifs, as I did deal with, went immediate-
ly, and to!d her majesty what I had spoken to them, who
albeit she understood the matter of before, sent for me
and declared to me my own fpeeeh that I had uttered to
them, willing me for the weil of my maiftet's service to
abstain from dealing with such, as were not yet fuffici-
ently moved to think of my matter as she did. I craved
leave of her majesty, that I might inform them of your

ma-.

439

majesty's late behaviour towards her, and the state of this
realm, whereunto with some difficulty she gave her con-
sent. At my late departure from court, which was upon
the 5th of this instant, and the day after that the lords of
this grand jury had taken their leaves of her majesty to
go northward to Fothringham, it was her plealure to pro-
mise to have further speech in this matter at the returning
of the said lords, and to give full answer according to your
majesty's contentment to the remainder matters, that I
had proponit in the name of your majesty. As to the 2d
part concerning the aflbciation, and desire that the pro-
mire made to the mailer of Gray concerning your majesty's
title may be fulfilled; it appears by the said letter, that
the very point, whereupon the queltion that may bring
your majesty's title in doubt hath not been rightly at the
writing of the said letter confidered, which I take to have
proceeded for lack of reading of the ad of parliament,
wherein is fulfilled all the promise made by the queen to
the said master, and nothing may now cause any doubt to
arise against your said title, except that an opinion should
be conceived by these lords of this parliament that are so
vehement at this time against the queen your majesty's mo-
ther, that your majesty is, or may be proved hereafter
assenting to her proceedings, and some that love your ma-
jefly's service were of that opinion that too earnef request
might move a ground, whereupon suspicions might grow
in men so ill affected in that matter, which I tho't might
be helped by obtaining of a declaration in parliament of
your majesty's innocence at this time, and by reason that
good nature and public honesty would constrain you to in-
tercede for the queen your mother, which would carry with
itself, without any further, some suspicion that might move
ill asseted men to doubt. In my former letters I humbly
craved of your majesty that some learned men in the laws,
might be moved to advise with the words of the affocia-
tion, and the mitigation contained in the at of parlia-
ment, and withall to advise what suspicious effeds your
majesty's request might work in there cholerick men at this
time, and how their minds might be best moved to re-
ceive reason; and upon all these considerations they might
have formed the words of a declarator of your majelty's
innocence to be obtained in this parliament, and failing
thereof, the very words of a protestation for the fame es-
sect that might belt serve for your majesty's service, and

for
440

for my better information. Albeit this was my simple opi-
nion, I (hall be contented to follow any diretion it (hall
please your majesty to give; I have already opened the sub-
stance hereof to the queen of this realm, who seems not
to be offended herewith, and hath granted liberty to deal
therein with such of the parliament as may remain in any
doubt of mind. This being.the fum of my proceedings
in this matter, besides the remainder, contained in other
letters of several dates, I am constrained to lay the whole
open before your majesty, and to humbly pray that full
information may be sent unto me what further to do here-
in, in this middle time, while I shall receive more ample
direction I Ihall proceed and be doing according to such
direction as I have already received. And so, most gra-
cious sovereign, wilhing unto your majesty all happy fuc-
cess in your affairs, I humbly take my leave from London,
16th of Oar. this I586. Your majesty's most humble
subjec and obedt. servant.
A memorial for his majesty by the master of

Gray.

T will please your majefly, I have tho't meeter to set j2 Tan.
down all things as they occur, and all advertisements 1S6. An
as they came to my ears, then jointly in a lettre. original in

I CAME to Vare the 24th of Decr. and sent to Wm' hain the

Keith, and Mr. Archibald Douglas to advertise the queencollea. of
of of it, lik as they did at their audience. Shie promised fir A. Dick.
the queen your majesty's mother's life (hould be fparedVol. A-
till we were heard. The 27th they came to Vare to me,fol' 2z2.
the which day Sir Robt. came to Vare, where they (hewed
us how far they had already gone in their negociation,
but for that the discourse of it is set down in our general
letter, I remit me to it, only this far I will testify unto
your majesty that Win. Keith hath used himself right ho-
nefly and justly till our coming, refpeaing all circum-
stances, and chiefly his colleague his dealing, which in-
deed is not better than your majesty knows already.

THE 2gth day of Decr. we came to London, where

we were no ways friendly received, nor after the honest
fort it had pleased your majesty use her ambafladors, never
man sent to welcome or convey us. The fame day we
understood of Mr. de Bellievre his leave taking, and for

that

44I

that the custom permitted not we sent our excuses by Mr.
George Young.

THE At day of Jan. Wm. Keith and his colleague

according to the cuflom rent to crave our audience. We
received the answer contained in the general letter, and
could not have answer till the 6th day, what was done
that day your majefy has it in the general, yet we was
not out of expectation at that time, albeit we received
hard answers.

THE 8th day we lpeak with the earl of Leicester, where

our conference was, as is set down in the general. I re-
marked this, that he that day said plainly the detaining
of the queen of Scotland prisoner was for that The pre-
tended a fuccefion to this crown. Judge then by this,
what is tho't of your majesty as ye (hall hear a little
after.

THE 9th day we speak with the French ambassador,

whom we find very plain in making to us a wife discourse
of all his proceedings, and Mr. de Bellievre we thank-
ed him in your majefly's name and opened such things as
we had to treat with this queen, save the last point, as
more largely set down by our general.

IT is tho't here, and some friends of your majesty's ad-

vised me, that Bellievre his negociation was not effecual,
and that the resident was not privy to it, as indeed I
think is true, for since Bellievre his perting, there is a talk
of this Chafteauneuf his servants taken with his whole pa-
pers and pacquets, which he was fending in France for
that they charge him with a conspiracy of late against the
queen here her life. It is alledged his servant has con-
tefled the matter, but whom I (hall trust I know not,
but till I fee proof I (hall account him an honest man,
for indeed so he appears, and one (without doubt) who
hath been very instant in this matter. I (hew him that the
queen and earl of Leicefler had desired to speak with me
in private, and craved his opinion; he gave it freely that
he tho't it meeteft, I thew him the reason why I commu-
nicate that to him, for that I had been fufpeted by some
of her majesty's friends in France to have done evil offices
in her service, that he should be my witness that my earnef
dealing in this should be a sufficient testimony that all was
lyes, and that this knave Nau6 who now had betrayed her,
had in that done evil offices; he desired me, feeing (he saw
only with other folks eyes, that I should no ways impute

it
442

it to her, for the like she had done to himfelfby Naue his
persuasion. I answered he (hould be my witness in that.

THE gth day we sent to court to crave audience, which

we got the loth day; at the first, (he said a thing long
looked' for should; be welcome when it comes, I would
now fee your master's offers. I answered, no man makes
offers but for fiome cause; we would, and like your ma-
jefty, first know the cause to be extant for which we offer,
and likewise that it be extant till your majesty has heard
us. I think it be extant yet, but I will not promise for an.
hour, but you think to shift in that fort, I answered we
mind not to ihift, but to offer from our sovereign all things
that with reason may be; and in special, we offered as is
set down in our general, all was refused and tho't nothing.
She called on the three that were in the house, the earl
of Leicester, my lord admiral, and chamberlain, and very;
despitefully repeated all our offers in presence of them all.
I opened the last part and said, Madam, for what refped is
it that men deal againit your person or estate for her cause ?
Sheanfwered, because they think (he (hall succeed to me,
and for that (he is a papist; appearingly said I both the
causes may be removed, Ile said (he would be glad to un-
derftand it. If Madam, said I, all that (he has of right.
of succession were in the king our sovereign's person, were
not all hope of papifis removed ? She answered I hope
so. Then Madam I think the queen his mother (hall
willingly demit all her rights in his person. She answered
Ihe hath no right, for (he is declared unable. Then I
Caid, if (he have no right, appearingly the hope ceases al-
ready, so that it is not to be feared that any man attempt
for her. The queen answered, but the papists allow not
our declaration; then let it fall, fays I, in the king's per-
son by her assignation. The earl of Leicester answered,
(he is a prisoner, how can she demit. I answered the de-
mission is to her son, by the advice of all the friends (he
has in Europe, and in cafe, as God forbid, that any at-
tempt conttit the queen here away, who shall party with
her to prove the demission or assignation to be ineffecual
her son being opposite party and having all the princes her
friends for him, having bonded for the efficacy of it with
his majesty of before. The queen made as (he could not
comprehend my meaning, and fir Robt. opened the matter
again, (he yet made as tho' (he understood not, So the
earl of Leicester answered that our meaning was, that

thl

the king /hould be put in his mother's place. Is it so, the
queen answered, then 1 put myself in a worse cafe than of
before; by God's passion, that were to cut my own throat,
and for a dutchv, or an earldom to yourself, you or such
as you would cause some of your desperate knaves kill me.
No, by God, he (hall never be in that place. I answered
he craves nothing of your majesty but only of his mother.
The earl of Leicelter answercd that were to make him
party to the queen my mistress. I said, he will be far
more party, if he be in her place thro' her death. She
would flay no longer, but said the should not have a worse
in his mother's place, And said, tell your king what
good I have done for him in holding the crown on his
head since he was born, and that I mind to keep the league
that now Itands between us, and if he break it Ihall be
a double fault, and with this minded to have bidden us
a farewell; but we efcheuit. And I speak craving of her
that her life may be spared for 15 days; (he refused. Sir
Robt. craved for only eight days, (he said not for an hour;
and so geid her away. Your majesty fees we have deli-
vered all we had for offers, but all is for nothing, for (he
and her councel has laid a determination that they mind
to follow forth, and I fee it comes rather of her council
than herself, which I like the worse; for without doubt,
fir, it (hall cut off all friendflip ye had here. Altho' it
were that once they had-meaned well to your majesty, yet
remembring themlelves, that they had medled with your
mother's blood, good faith they cannot hope great good of
vourfelf, a thing in truth I am sorry for; further your
majeftv may perceive by this last discourse of that I pro-
ponit, if they moaned well to your majesty, they had
used it otherwise than they have done, for reason has
bound them. But I dare not write all. I mind something
to speak in this matter, because we look Ihurly our letters
lhall be troucit by the way.

FOR that I fee pri ate credit nor no means can alter

their determination, aliho' the queen again and the earl of
Leicefler has desired to speak with me in particular; I
mind not to speak, nor shall not; but assuredly (hall let
all men fee that I in particular was no ways tyed to Eng-
land, but for the respect of your majesty's service. So al-
beit, at this time, I could not effedtuate that I desired,
ert mn upright dealing in it Ihall be manifested to the
world !. ' e are, God willing, then to crave audience,

where
444

445

where we mind to use sharply our inltructions, which hi-
therto we have used very calmly, for we can, for your ho-
nour's cause, fay no less for your majetly, than the French
ambassador has said for his matier.

So I pray your majesty confider my upright dealing in

your service, and not the effec, for had it been double by
any I might have here had credit, but being I came only
for that cause I will not my credit lhall serve here to any
further purpose. I pray God preserve your majesty and
fend you a true and sincere friendihip. From London
this 12th of Jan. 1586.

I understand the queen is to fend one of her own to

your majesty.

To the right hon. my lord vice-chancellor and fe-
cretary to his majeity, from the master of Gray.

Y lord, I fend you there lines with this inclosed to,,,;. l.,
his majesty, whereby your lordlhip ihall underftandi;! 'a.

how matters goes here. And before all things I pray your,) io.,ii l,
lordship move his majesty to refpeft my diligence, and( h o,°':e
not the effeA in this neeociation, for I swear if it hadl);ck v.
been for the crown of England to myself I could do no. io1. 1-9.
more, and let not the unfriends have advantage of me, for
the world shall fee that I loved England for his najelly's
service only. I look shortly to find your lordship friend as
ye made promire, and by God I flall be to you if I can.
XVm. Keith and I desired, if matters had gone well, to ,h3\ c
run a course that your lordlhip might have here been u1
credit and others dilappointed, but now I will do for )yo
as for myself; which is to care for no credit lcee, for in
conscience they mean not honeltly to the king our fim.e-
reign, and if thev may, he will go the get his mother i.
gone or shortly to go, therefore my lord without all kind
of scruple I pray you to advise him the best is not this wa\.
They fay here, that it has been said by one who heardt
it from you, that ye de!ired not the king and England ti,
agree, because it would rack the nobiemnen, and gavy
an example of it by king James the fourt, I answered i';
your name that I was assured you nex er had ipoken it. Mr.
Archibald is the speaker of it, who I afilire your lordship
has been a poison in this matter, for they lIan very mickle
to his opinion. lie Icarc not ay,
1 fai, tl at length the

ing

king will be fain to deel this way, either by fair means or
necelfity, so that when he deals this course he is assured to
be welcome; to set down all that is past of the like pur-
poses, it would consume more paper than I have here, so
I defer it to meeting. There is a new conspiracy alledged
against the queen to have been intendedfor the French
ambassador resident three of his men taken, but I think
in the end it shall prove nothing. Mr, Stafford who is
ambassador for this queen in France, is touched with it, his
brother is taken'here, always it has done this harm in our
negociation, that all this council would not move this
queen to meddle with the queen of Scotland's blood, till
this invention was found forth. I remit all other things
to the inclosed. We minded to have lent to his majelty
a discourse, which we have set down of all our proceed-
ings since our hither coming, but we are surely advertized
that the bearer is to be truffant by the way for our pac-
quets, so that we defer it till our own coming; this I have
put in a privy part beside the pacquet. We (hall I think
take leave on Friday the I3th day, where we mind ex-
aclly to follow the rigour of our inflrucions, for it can-
not itand with the king's honour that we may fay less then
the French ambassador, which was, le roy mon maiftre ne
peult moins faire que fe refentir. So that about the 24th
I think we shall, God willing, be at home except that rome
flay come which we look not for. The queen and the
earl of Leicester has desired to speak with me. I refused
save in pretence of my colleagues, by reason I fee a deter-
mination which particular credit cannot help, and I crave
no credit but for that cause. It will please your lordihip
retire the inclosed from his majesty and keep it. So after
my service commended to yourself and bedfellow, I com-
mit you to God. From London the i2th of Jan. i586.

To the king's majesty, from fir Robert Melvill.

3cth Jan. T T may please your majesty, since the direcion of our
i56. At' former letters, we had audience, and her majelty ap-
hiso' i peared to take our overtures in good part in presence of
hand in th her council; albeit no offence would take place with them,
colled. of having taken resolution to proceed with extremity, not the
fir A. Dick. !ess it pleated her majesty to desire us to Rfay for two days
Vol. A.
tol.; .'n taking our leave, until lhe had advised upon our pro-

politions;
046

positions; since which time, her majesty is become more
hard by some letters (as we are informed) has come from
Scotland, making some hope to believe that your majesty
takes not this matter to heart, as we know the contrary
in effec, and had of before removed the like opinion out
of her majelty's mind, which by flnifter information, was
credited, their reports has hindered'our commission, and
abused this queen, fearing in like manner we {hall be stay-
ed untill answer come from Scotland by such person as
they have intelligence of. And albeit that it will be well
enough known to all men how heavily your majesty takes
these proceedings to heart, tlhe truth is, tliat they have
by this occasion so persuaded the queen, that it is like to
hinder our negociation. As also Allynour Steward is to be
direced in their party, by our knowledge, who has awan-
tyt more of his credit, than I believe he may perform,
and we willed him to desist from this dealing, faying it
does harm, and he is not meet for that purpose, remitting
to your majesty's good direftion to take order herein as we
ihall be anlferable to your majesty not to omit any point
we have in charge, as the truth is, the matter of Grhaye'
has behaved himself very rightly and discreetly in this
charge, and evil tayne with be divers in their parties who
were of before his friends. We have been behalding to
the menfirals who has born us best company, but has
not been troubled with others. Wylzeme Kethe hath
left nothing undone that he hath in charge. As for maf-
ter Arcbihald he has promiled at all times to do his de-
woyr, wherein he ihall find true report made to vour ma-
jelly, craving pardon of your majelty that 1 have been so
tedious, after I have kifled your majelty's hand I hunm-
bly take my leave. Praying God to grant your majefly
many good days and happy, in w hose protection I commit
your majesty at London, the 20th of Jan. 1586.

SIR,
A L B E IT Mailler George has not been in commission

he is not inferior in his fernice to any of us, as well by
his good advice and diligent care he takes for the ad-
vancement of your service, wherein we have not been a
little furthered.

To

To the king's majeffy, from the master of Gray

and fir Robert Melvill.

21i jan. LEASE it your majesty in the last audience we had,
1586. An since our last advertisement, by Wm. Murray, we
original in mnd her majesty at the resuming our offers something miti-
the couea. gated, and inclined to confider more deeply of them, be-
Dick. VoL fore we got our leave, at our reasoning, certain of the
A. foL iSo. council, namely my lord of Leicester, fir Christopher Ha-

ton, my lord Hunldon, and my lord Hawart being present
in the chamber, gave little share of any great contentment
to have her from her former resolution, now caflin in per-
plexiter what the should do, always we left her in that
state, and since have daily pressed conferrence with the
whole council, which to this hour we have not yet obtain-
ed. This day we have sent down to crave our leave.
The greatest hinder which our negociation has found hi-
therto is a perfuation they have here that either your ma-
jefty deals superficially in this matter, or what with time
ye may be moved to digest it, which when with great dif-
ficulty we had expugnit, we find anew that certain letters
written to them of late from Scotland has found some
place of credit with them in our contrare. So that refolv-
ing now to clear them of that doubt by a special meflage,
they have made choice of Sir Alexander Stewart to try
your highness's meaning in it, and to persuade your majelty
to like of their proceedings, where from no terror we can
fay out unto him is able to divert him, he has given out
that he has credit with your majesty, and that he doubts
not to help this matter at )our highness's hand. If he
come there that errand, we think your majesty will not
oversee the great disgrace that his attempts lhall give us
here, if he be not tane order with before that he be further
heard, and if so be that any other be directed (as our
intelligence gives us there mhall) our humble suit is to
your majesty, that it may please your highness to hear of
us what we find here, and at what point we leave this
matter with her majesty, before that they find accidence.
the causes whereof remitting to our private letters. We
commit your majesty, for the present to God's eternal
proteffion. From London this 21ft of Jan. 1586.

No. XV.
448

# ADDITIONAL APPENDIX.

ADDITIONAL

A P P E N D IX.

I had no opportunity of feing several of the following

papers, till tho/se jheets of the hjlory, to whivch they re-
late, were printed off. Ior this -reon no relfre,,cs
are made to them there; but I have jfipplied that dlefel
by marking the particular paniages in the hisjcry which
theyferve to illujirate,

No. XXXI. [Vol. I. p. 419. Line 19.]
Account of the sentence of divorce between the

earl of Bothwell and lady Jean Gordon his wife.
From a manuscript belonging to Mr. David
Falconor, advocate. Fol. 455.

POUN the 29 of Apryle 1567, before the richt

hon. Mr. Robert Maitland dean of Aberdcne,

Mr. Edward Henryson docter in the laws, two of the
senators of college of juflice, Mr. Clement Little,
and Mr. Alexander Symeadvocattis, commiifers of Ednr
compeered Mr. Henry Kinroffe, procurator for JeanGour-
doune countes of Bothwell, constitute be her for purfew-
ing of ane proces of divorcement, intendit by her contla
James erle Bothwell her husband for adultry, commited be
him with Bessie Crawfurde, the pursuers servant for the
time; and ficklyke, forthe said erle, compeared Mr. Ed-
inond Hay, who efter he had pursued and craved the pur-
filer's procurator's oath de calumnia, if he had jul caus
to purfew the said action, and obtained it, denyed the li-
bell,and the said Mr. Harrie took the morne, the last day
of Apryle, to prove the fame pro prima. The quhilk day,
having produced some witnefes, he took the next day,
being the i of May, to do farther diligence. Upon the
quhilk I of May, he produced some moe witnefTes, and

'VOL. II. G g re-
BILiZ·elPI··I-·

renounced farther probatioune. After quhilk, he delired
a term to be asSigned to pronounce sentence. To shomn
the taid commiTFars al.igned Satterday next, the 3 of May,
to pronounce sentence therein, fecundum alligata et pro-
bata, quhilk accordingly was given that day in favour of
the purfewar.

AT the fame time there was another proces intendit be

the e2r! of Bothiell contra his lady, for to have their mar-
riae declared nul, as being contracted against the canons,
without a dispensation, and he and his lady being within
de-ecS defendand, vizferdis a kin, and that wyfe for ex-
reding of this proces, there was a comminfioune grar.tit
to the Archbilhop of St. Androis to cognofce and determine
it, and Robt. bilhop of Dunkeld, William bishop of Du:-
blane, Mr. Andro Craufurd chanon in Glasgow, and
parson of Egel'hame, Mr. Alexander Crcichtoun, and Mr.
George Cooke chancellor of Dunkeld, and to Mr. Johne
Manlderftoune chanon in Dunbar and prebendar of Pcl-
toune, or any ane of them. This commiflione is (dltii
27 Aprile 1567, was presented to two of the saids conm-
mi.lioners, viz. Mr. Andr. Craufurd and Mr. John Maii-
derfroune on Satterday 3 May, by Mr. Thomas Hepburni
parson of Auldhlamitocks, procurator for the erle of Both-
well, who accepted the delegatioune, and gave out their
citation by precept, directed, Decano Chriftianitatis do
Hadingtone, nec non vicano feu cur2to eccle. parochia tde
Creichtoune, feu cuicunq; alteri cappellano debite requili-
tts, ser summoning, at the said crles intfance, both of the
lady personally if Ihc could be had, or otherways at tle
parofche kerk of Creich-tune the time of lervice, or at her
dw'.elliln place before witnesses, primo, fecundo, tertio et
perem.ptorie, uniio ramnen contextu protuplice edicdo.
And likcways to be witnesses in the said matter, Alex.
b;ihop of Galloway, who did marry the said erle and his
lady, in Ha!crud-louife kirk, in Feb. 1565, fir John Ban-
natiyne of Auchnoile juflice clerk, Mr. Robert Creicll-
toun of Elliot the queen's advocate, M. David Chanlmcr
pr-uofl of Creichtoun and chancellor of Rots, M\icliael-
abbot of Mciroi<, and to compear before the said juidge
or any one of them in Sr. Geils kirk in Edr. on Mlond:ay
the 5 of M\ay, be thamlfeles, or their procurators. Upon
the said 5 day, Mr. John MlIanderltoun, one of the judges
delegat only being present compeared the fame procura-
torsi for both thi parties that were in the former pro:cc,

M.r1.
450

Mr. Edmond Hay ( articulatlie ) and Two vwcid
son e of the witnesses summoned produced, and receivedinthe parer-
for proving of the fame. The said procurator renounced 'l'
farder probatioune, and the judge assigned tlhe morne, the
6th of May, ad publicandumn produdta, ncmpe depofi-
tiones iplbrum teflium. The quhilk day, post publicatas
depositiones pra-diilas, Mr. Hen. Kinrorfe, procurator for
the lady inltanter objecit objeriones juris generaliter,
contra pro ductie, intuper renlinciavit ultcriori defenfio-
ni; proinde conclufa de confenfu procuratorurn hinc inde
caufa, judex pradicaus ftatuit craftinuml diem pro termina,
ad pronunciandam fuamn fententiam definituram, ex de-
duiStis coram eo, in prefenti caufa et proccira. Con-
form hereunto, on lWedncfday the 7th of Mkay, the said
jude gave out, his sentence in favour of the eric, declar-
ing the marriage to be, and to have been null from the
beginning, in refpe&t of their contingence in blood, which
hindered their lawful marriage without a dispensation ob-
tained of befoir.

No. XXXII. [Vol. I. p. 47i. Line :5.]

Queen Mary to Queen Elizabeth.
M A D A M,

Lthough the necessity of my cause (which maketh mc Cot. jl,
to be importune to you) do make you to judge that c.l. i. A

1 am out of the way; yet fulch as have not my palfion, cop!, : id
nor the rcfpcits whereof you are perfuadled, will think that 'l,,hl', 'l
I do as my cause doth require. Madam, I have not accuf- t
ed you, neither in words, nor in thought, to have used
!yiifelf evil towards me. And I believe, that you have
no want of good underllanding, to keep you from per-
fwaflio againIt your natural good inclination. But in the
iimcan time I can't chufe (having my fenles) but perceive
c-.ry evil furtherance in my matters, since my coming hi-
tler. I thought that I had sufficiently discoursed unto
you the difcommodities, which this delay bringeth unto
me. And especially that they think in this next month of
Auiuft, to hold a parliament against me and all my ser-
rants. And in the mean time, 1 am stayed here, and yet
'sill you, that I Ihould put myself forther into your coun-
try, (without sec;ing you) and remove me further from

G g milne;

mine; and there do me this dishonour at the request of my
rebels, as to fend commissioners to hear them against me,
as you wold do to a mere subjec, and not hear me by
mouth. Now, madam, I have promised you to come to
you, and having there made my moan and complaint of
there rebels, and they coming thither, not as possessors,
but as fubjets, to anfwrr. I should have besought you
to hear myjuftification of that which they have sally set
furrh agalnit me, and if 1 could not purge myself thereof,
you might then discharge your hands of my causes, and
let me go for such as I am. But to do as you fay, if I
were culpable I would be better advised; but being not
so, I can't accept this dishonour at their hands, that be-
ing in possession they will come and accuse me before your
commissioners, whereof I can't like : And feeing you tnink
it to be against your honour and conlignage to do other-
wife, I beseech you that you will not be mine enemy, un-
till you may fee how I can discharge myself every way,
and to susser me to go into France, where I have a dowry
to maintain me; or at the least to go into Scotland, with
assurance that if there come any strangers thither, I will
bind myself for their return without any prejudice to you,
or if it pleis you not to do thus, I protest that I will not
impute it to falfhood, if I receive strangers in my country
without making you any other discharge for it. Do with
my body as you will, the honour or blame shall be yours.
For I had rather die here, and that my faithful servants
may be succoured (tho' you would not so) by ftraneers,
than to susser them to be utterly undone, upon hope to
receive, in time to come, particular commodity. There
be many things to move me to fear that I shall have to
do, in this country, with others than with you. But for-
afmuch as nothing hath followed upon my last moan, I
hold mypeace, happen what may hap. I have as lees to
abide bldule } my fortune, as to seek it, and not find it. Further,
it pleated you to give licence to my fubjcts to go and
come. This has been refused by my lord Scroop and
Mr. Knolls (as they fay) by your commandment, because
I would not depart hence to your charge, untill I had
answer of this letter, tho' I shewed them that you required
my answer, upon the two points, contained in your let-
ter.

THE
452

THE one is to let you briefly understand, I am come

to you to make my moan to you, the which being heard,
I would declare unto you mine innocency, and then require
your aid, and for lack thereof, I can't but make my moan
and complaint to God, that I am not heard in my just
quarrel, and to appeal to other princes to have refpeSt
thereunto, as my cafe requireth; and to you, madam, first
of all, when you shall have examined your conscience be-
fore him, and have him for witness.- And the o her,
which is to come further into your country, and not to
come to your presence, I will esteem that as no favour,
but will take it for the contrary, obeying it as a thing
forced. In the mean time, Ibefeech you, toreturn to
me my Lord Herries, for I can't be without him, having
none of my counfal here, and also to susser me, if it please
you, without further delay, to depart hence whitherfo-
ever it be out of this country. I am sure you will not de-
ny me this simple request for your honour's fake, feeing
it doth not please you to use your natural goodness to-
wards me otherwise, and feeing that of mine own accord,
I am come hither, let me depart again, with yours. And
if God permit my causes to succeed well, I shall be
hound to you for it ;and happening otherwise, yet I can't
blame you. As for my Lord Fleeming, feeing that upon
my credit you have suffered him to go home to his house,
I warrant you he flal! pass no further, but shall return
when it ihall please you. In that you truf me, I will not
(to die for it) deceive you. But from Dumbarton I an-Perhaps.for
fwer not, when my L. Fleeming shall be in the Tower.
For they which are within it, will not forbear to receive
succour, If I don't assure them of yours; no tho' you
would charge me withall, for I have left them in charge,
to have more refpea to my servants and to my estate, than
to my life. Good lifter, be of another mind, win the heart,
and all shall be yours, and at your commandment. I
thought to satisfy you wholly, if I might have seen you.
Alas ! do not as the serpent, that ftoppeth his hearing,
for I am no inchanter, but your sifter, and natural cousin.
If Cefar had not disdained to hear or read the complaint
of an advertiser, he had not so died; why should princes
ears be stopped feeing that they are painted so long; Mean-
ing that they should hear all and be well advised, before
they answer. I am not of the nature of the basilisk, and
less of the chamelion, to turn you to my likeness, and

G g 3 tho'

tho' I should be so dangerous and curs'd as men fay, you
are sufficiently arm'd with constancy and with justice.
which I require of God, who give you grace to use it well
with long and happy life. From Carlille, the 5th of July,
J568.

No. XXXIII. . ol. . p. 473. Line ult.)
A letter from my lord Ileries to my lord Scroop,

and fir F. Knollis, September 3d, i568.

co.t.L;A. L /' Y lordi, pleafit )our honourable lordflhis, I am
C1i C. An L in rmit by James Borthwick, lately come fiom

ginaln the queens lr.ijefty your foserane, that is fcliawin to her
liad. hghnefs, I ihuld have riude;; in Crafurdmure, fen mv

lafi culing ino this re!lm, upon the Earl of Murray's de-
pendants. And th:t I fuld have caufit, or been of coun-
all to Scottif:me'i ti nji ridden in ingland, to flay or
ipalzie her i.ajeit 's ihbjc-ts.

AIv- lordb, : tlloulht it right needful becaume your lord-

Ihips is, be oi:r ibverane, commanded t. attend uponl the
queen's majeity min mistress, lo having daily access in thir
matters, to declare upon the truth ; humbly desiring that
your lordlhips will, for God's cause, certificate the queen
\our foveli-ne the fame.

As God lives, I haxe neither consented, nor any \iic

had knowledge of ony Scottifman's riding in England, to
do the fubjecs thereofhurt in bodies or goods, fene the
iege of Leith; and as I understand it Ihall be fund true,
tilt gifon; sic open hurt be done, it is by the queen my
sovereign's disobedients, and that I have not ridden nor
hurt no Scottifhman, nor commanded no hurt to be done
to them, fen my coming from the queen's majesty of Eng-
land, it is well kend, for that never ane will complain
of me.

I HA-E done more good to Crawfurdmure nor ever the

ear! of Murray has done, and will be loatheft to do them
ani harm than he wil. Except the queen's majesty your
ob\er';rti, command sic falle reports to be trvit, quhereot
this is altogidder an in.en tit leaiing, her grace fall be
trublit, and rvne the lc,:r.i of true men here, quhom ot
lic report fall be made, that baieth suuld serve hir, and
miv, better than th.)- t.n orthy liars.
454

MY lords, I underltand the queen's majesty your so-

vereign is not contented of this bruite, that there should
ony Frenchman come in this realm, with the duke of
Chattelherault. Truth it is, I am no manner of way the
counfall of their cuming, nor has no sic certainty thereof,
as I hear by Borthwick's report from the queen's majesty
your sovereign. And gif I might as well fay it, as it is
true indeed, hergracefelf is all the wyitt, and the confall
that will never let her take order with miy maillrefs cause.
For that our sovereign havand her majesty's promise, be
writing, of luff, friendflip, and afliftance gif need had
so requirit, enterit that realm, upon the 16 day of May,
fen that time the queen's majesty has commanded me di-
verse times to declare the would accept her cause, and
do for her, and to put her in peaceable possession of this
realme, and when I required of her majelly, in my maif-
trefs name, that her highness would either do for her, (as
her special trust was Ihe wold) according to her former
promires, or otherwise give her counfal wold not content,
(as I show her grace I sand diverse repugnant) then that
lhe would permit her to pass in France, or to some other
prince to seek support, or failing hereof, (quhilk was
agains all reason ) that the would permit her to return in
her awin countrie, iri ic fempil manner as file came out
of it, and said to her majesty ane of thir, of her honour,
would not be refillit, fecand that fie was comed in her
realm upon her writings and promises of fricndlhip. And
ficklike, I said to her highness, giff my maiftrefs had the
like promise of her nobility and estates, as the had of
herself, I should have reprovit them highly, gif they had
not condefcendit to one of thir three, and so I fay, and
lo I write, that in the warld it shall be maift reprehend-
able, gif this promise taketh not other good effe&t, nor
yet it does. Notwithstanding, I get gud answer of thir
promises of friendship made to my sovereign, and to put
lier grace in this her awin countrie peaceably, we have
fund the contrary working by Mr. Middlemore dircIit
fiomn her highness to (lay the army that cuift down our
hloufes. And alfua, in theproceeding of this late preten-
dit parliament, promised twenty days before the time to
mylelf to have canted it been difchargit. And yet con-
trary to this promise, have they made their pretendit man-
ncr of forfaulture of 31 men of guid reputation, bishops,

G g 4 ibbottis,

abbottis, and barronis, obedient fubjeLls to your sovereign,
onl fcr her cause.

T-iir' liae

h also difponit, fen our sovereign's cause was

taken upon r.i d be the cquecns majefly of that realm, an
hundT.e thou'ai d pounds Scots worth of her awin true
subiet: g-:r, und'er the color of the law, groundit up-
on :h-.r ial.e, treasonable, liowin, authority.

THE !::'j'!i', the oppreltions, the burnings, the ra-

vifling of'.-ol.zn, the dcirnlction of policy, both eccle-
fiaftical and temporal, in this mean time, as in my for-
mer wrrnir.zs I laid it was lamentable to ony christian
rnmn ;^ hear of, except God gifgrace, the possession of
the evsngile of Jesus Christ profefEit be your prince, coun-
fall and rea'me, be mair myndit, nor the auld inamity
that has fCtnd bretwixt the realms, many of my countrymen
*ill! doubt in this article, and their proceedings puttis my
e!s in fan& Thomas belief.

Now, my lords, gif the queen's majesty of that realln,

upon quhais promise and honour my maifirefs came there,
as I ha;e said, will leave all tl;. French writings, and
French phrafcs of writings, quhilks amonzis them is over
meikle on baith the fides unfit, and plainly, according to
the auld true custom of Ingland and Scotland, quherein
be a word promift truth was obferv'd, promise, in the
name of the eternal God, and upon the h;gh honour of
that nobill and princely blude of the kings of Ingland,
quhereof she is defcendit, and presently wears the dia-
dem, that she will put my maifrhefs in her awin country,
and cause her as queen thereof in her authority and
frrength to beobeyit, and to do the fame will appoint an
certain day within two months at the farthest, as we
understand this to be our weil, fua will we, or the maift
part of us all, follow upon it, leaving the Frenchmen,
and their evil French phrases togidder. And therefore,
and for the true perpetual friendship of that realm, will
condition, and for our part, with the grace of Almighty
God, keep sic heads and conditions of agreement, as noble
and wife men can condescend upon, for the weill of this
haill i.land. As I have been partlings declaring to the
queen your forereign, quhilk I (hew to vour lordniips
felfis both in religion, in the punilhment of thle carl Both-
wile, for the queen's last huilband's flaiilhter, and for a
mutual band of amity perpetually to remain amangis us.

DoU'BT-
456

DOUBTLE.SS, my lords, without that, we may find sic

time and friendly working, as may gif us occasion baith
to forgette Middlemore and his late pretendit parliament,
we will turn the leaf, leaving our sovereign agains our
will to reft where she is, under the promise of friendship,
As I have baith said, and will ever affirm, made be your
sovereign, quhilk was only cause of her graces coming in
that realme, and seek the help and moyen of French, or
Spanilll, till expulfe this treasonable and false pretendit
authority, quhilk means to reign above us.

MIY lords, I desire your lordflips confider, that it is

he, that maift desires the amity betwixt Ingland and Scot-
land to continue, and of a poor man belt cause has, that
writ this.

My brother, the laird of Skirling, fchaws me, that in

your lordlhips communing with him, it appearit to him,
your mind was we Ihould susser the earl of Murray to
work, altho' it were agains reason to us, and complain
thereof to the queen's majesty, and her highness wald fee
it reformit. My lords, her majesty will be over meikle
toublit to reform the wranges we have fuflainit already.
For I am sure, gif reason and justice may have place, our
mailtrefs, and we her subje&s, have received express
wrang, farabove two hundred thousand pounds sterling,
in the time of this unhappy government, feeing the refor-
mation of fa great causes, comes, now a days, so flowlie
and the ungodly law of oblivion in fie matters so meikle
pra&is'd I think, nowther for the queen's honour, nor
our weill, your lordships would fua mean, nor that it is
good to us to follow it. And that ye will give your so-
vereign sic advertisement thereof, as your good wisdoms
shall find in this cause meet. It will be true and frind-
full working for us, indeed, and nowther French phrases,
nor boasting, and finding little other effet, that will cause
us to hold away the Frenchmen. This is plainly written,
and I delire your lordships plain answer, for in truth and
plainness langerf continues gud friendship, quhilk in this
matter I pray God may lang continue, and have your lord-
flips in his keeping. Off Drumfreis, the 3d day of Sep-
tember 1568.

Your lordships at my power

to command leifully

HERRIS.

A P P E N D I X.

Queen Mary to Q. Elizabeth.

15;6S .- A DAME ma bonne foeur. J'ay refceu de vos

Cotti. 'Lib lettres, d'une mefme dete; l'une, ou vous faites
.al. 1. An
or;linil. mention de l'excufe de Monfr. de Murra pour tenir son

pretendu parlement, qui me femble bien froid, pour obte-
nir plus de tollerance queje nmeflois perfuadee n'avoir par
voftre promeffe, quant a n'ofer donner commilfion de ve-
nir fans un parlement pour leur peu de nombre de noblefie
alors, je vous refpons, qu'ils n'unt que trois ou quatre
d'avantage, qui eufient auffi bien dit leur opinion hors
de parlement, qui n'a este tenu tant pourcette effec, mais
pour faire ce qu'expreffement nous avions requis eftre em-
pefches, qui eft la forfalture de mes fubjecs pour m'avoir
eftes fidelles, ce queje m'affurois, jufques a hier, avoir eu
en promeffe de vous, par la lettre ecrite a mi lord Scrup
e Maiftre Knoleis vous induire a ire contre eulx, voire,
a les enfayre refentir; toutefois je vois que je l'ay mal
pris, j'en fuis plus marrie, pour ce que fur votre lettre
qu'i! me montrcrent, et leur parole, je i'ay si divulguement
affuray que pour vengeance que j'en delirafie, si non met-
tre difference entre leur faux deportemens, et les miens
ficcrcs. Dans voftre lettre aufli datee du Iome d'Aoult,
vous metties ces mots. " I think your adverse party, up-
"on my sundry former ad(hices, will hold no parliament,
"at all; and it they do, it lhall be only in form of an
" afemnbly, to accord whom to fend into this realm, and
"in what fort; for othenvife, if they Ihall proceed in man-

nerof a parliament, with any act of judgement againll

"anvperfon, I lhall not, in any wife, allow thereof, and
" ithey ihall be so o>,erfeen, then you may think the
" fame to be of ino other moment, than the former pro-
" cedurs ; and by fiuch their rash manner of proceeding,
' they shall most prejudice themselves; and be assured to
" find me ready to condemn them, in their doings." Sur
quov, j'ay contremande mes ferviteurs, les faiffant retirer,
fouffrant felon voftre conmandement i'etre fauffement
nommes traitres, parccuix, qui le font de vray; et en-
core d'ctre provoques par escarmons d1es, ct par prinfes de
mes gens et lettres, et au contraiie vous etes informce
que res subjects ont ec -his les vof:'c, vMadame qui a fait
ce rapport n'cfi pas -;;.r:me de bien, car aird Scrford et

foil

son fils font et ont eftes mes rebelles depuis le commence-
ment; enquircs vous, s'ils n'eftoyent a Donfris aveques
eulx, j'avois offri refpondre Je fa frontiere, ce qui me fut
refuse, ce qui m'endevroit asses defcharger, neanmoins,
pour vous faire preuve de ma fidelite, et de leur falfite, s'il
vous me fayte donner le norm des coulpables, et me forti-
sier, je commanderay mes fubjets les pour fuivre, ou li
vous voules que ce foit les voftres, les miens leur ayde-
ront; je vous prie m'en mander voftre volonte, au relte
mes subjects fidelles feront refponfables a tout ce que leur
sera mis fu les contre vous, ni les voftres, ni les rebelles,
defpuis que me confeillates les faire retirer. Quant aux
Francois, j'efcrivis que l'on m'en fit nulle pourfuite, car
j' efperois tant en vous, queje n'en aurois befoign,-je ne
Iceu si Ic di& aura en mes lettres, maisje vous jure devant
Dieu queje ne fcay chose du monde de leur venue, que
ce que m'en aves manday, ni n'en ai oui de France mot
(Iu monde, et ne le puis croire pour celt occasion, et si ils
si ont, c'eft fans mon fceu ni confentement, Pourquoyje
xous fupplie ne me condamner fans m'ouirc, car je utis
prell de tenir tout ce que j'ay offert a Mefler Knoleis, et
vous assure que voftre amite, qu'il vous pleft m'offrir, sera
rescue avant routes les choses du monde, quant France
fervit la iour presser leur retour a celte condition, que
prcnies mes affaires en mein, en foeur, et bonne ami,
c3mme ma France eft en vous: mais une chose feule me
rende confuse, j'ay tant d'enemis qu' ont votre oreille, la-
quelle ne pouvant avoir par parolle, toutes mes actionsvous
font defguifees, et falfcment raportees, par quoiil m'eft
impofible de m'affurer de vous, pour les manteries qu'on
vous a fait, pour deltruire voftre bonne volonte de moy;
par quoy je defirerois bien avoir ce bien vous faire entendre
ma sincere et bonne affection, laquelle je ne puis si bien
tlefcrire, que nes enemis a tort ne la decolord. Ma bonne
feur, gagnes moy; envoyes moy querir, n'entrcs cnjea-
loufie pour faulx raports de celle que me desire que votre
bonne grace; je me remettray fur Mester Knoleis a qui je
me fuis librement defcouverte, ct apres vous avoir baifee
les mains, je prieray Dieu vous donner en sant:, longue
etheureufevie. De Boton, ou je vous promets, je n'ef-
pere pertir, qu'aveques voltre bonne grace, quoyque les
mentcurs mentent. Ce 26 d'Aouft.

No. XV.

No. XV. [Vol. II, F. 79. line i8.]
Letter of Walfinghar's to Randolph, Feb. 3,

I580-I.

SIR,

Cctt. .ii. T HA VE received from my lord lieutenant the copy of
Cans C.6. your letter of the 25th of the last direced unto his

lordship, containing a report of your negotiation with the
king and his council, in your second audience, where-
with having made her majesty acquainted, (he seemed
somewhat to mi/like, that you (hould so long defer to deal
fir the enlargement ofEmpedocles. But I made answer in
your behalf, that I thought you were directed by the ad-
vice of the said Empedocles friends, in the soliciting of
that cause, who knew what time was fittest for you to
take to deal there in, with most effect, and best success,
with which answer, her majesty did in the end reft very
well satisfied, touching that point.

YouR putting of us in hope that D'Aubigny might ea-

filybe won at her Majesty's devotion, was at first inter-
pretedto have been ironic spoke by you. But since it
feemeth you infilt upon it, I could wilh you were other-
wife persuaded of the man, or at least kept that opinion
toyourfelf, for confidering the end and purpose of his
coming into Scotland, as may be many ways sufficiently
proved, was only to advance the queen's liberty, and re-
ception into that government, to overthrow religion, and
toprocure a foreign match with Villenarius, wherein the
inclosed ccpy, which you may use to good purpose there,
shall partly give you some light; there is no man here can
be persuaded that he will change his purpose, for so small
advantage as he is likely to find by it, and therefore you
shall do well to forbear to harp any more upon that firing,
as I have already written to you. The prince of 0-
range fending, I fear will not be in time that it may do any
good; for besides that those people are in themselves
flow in their resolutions, their own affairs are, at present,
so great, their estate so confused, and the prince's autho-
rityfo small, that he cannot Co soon take order in it; and
ver for mine own part, I ha. e not been negligent or care-
less inthe matter, having, more than three weeks part,

sent
46o

lent one about it, from whom nevertheless I do yet hear
nothing. The letters, you delire Lhould be written thi-
ther by the French minillers, I have given order to Mr.
Killingrew to procure, who, I doubt not, will carefully
perform it, so that, I hope, I shall have them to fend you
by the next. And so I commit you to God. At White-
hall, the third of February i58o.

Your very loving cousin and servant,

FRA. WALSINGHAM.

This letter is an original, and in some parts of it wrote in

ryphers and explained by another hand. By Empedocles is
underflood Morton, by Piilenarius the king of Scotts, D'Au-
bigney is marked thus o I o

3Feb. I58o.
Sundry notes gathered upon good diligence given,

and in time to be better manifested, being now
thought meet to be in convenient fort used, and
laid against D'Aubigny, to prove him abusing
the king, the nobility, and that slate.

I RST, it hath been informed, by credible means, Cot Lb.

that D'Aubigny was privy and acquainted with laCalig. c. 6.

Nav. the king's mother's secretary, coming into Scotland, Anorisin.i.
andof his errand there, tending chiefly to persuade the
king, to think and esteem it an evil president for princes,
that fubjets might have power to deprive their lawful so-
vereigns, as they did his mother, who was not minded,
by any mean, to defeat him, eitherof the present govern-
ment of that realm, or yet of the poffeflion of the crown
and inheritance thereof, but rather to assure the fame to
him: and that for the accomplishment of that assurance,
the king should have been advised and drawn to have go-
verned, for some short time, as prince, calling D'Aubig-
ny to rule as governor of the prince, by commission from
the queen his mother, until the king's enemies were sup-
pressed; after which time. D'Aubigny should have power
given to eflablifh and resign that kingdom to the king,

by

by his mother's voluntary content, whereby all such, ax
had before been in action against the queen or her au-
thority, might be brought to fland in the king's mercy.
And for that the king might li e in more surety, D'Aubig-
ny should be declared both second perlbn in lucceffion of
that crown, and also lieutenant-general of Scotland, anl
that D'Aubign-, before his departure out of France, rc-
ceived commillion from the king's mother to the effects
remembered, or near the lame. That in this behalf lie
had conference with the bilhops of Glasgow, and Ross,
and with fir James Baford, w ith which persons, and with
the duke of Guise, he had and hath frequent intelii-
gence, and by fir James Baford he was advised to confer
with the lord John Hamilton before his repair into Scot-
land, whereunto he agreed, and vet afterwards he fcnt
one John Hamilton to the said lord John to excule him in
this part, alledning, that he did forbear to come to him,
left thereby he Ihould marr otr hinder greater effccis to le
executed by him in Scotland.

TIHAT before his cominz into that realm, the nobili-

ty and country were wel quieted and united in good con-
cord, with great love betwixt the king and nobility, alnd
inongft the noblelTe, but he hath both drawn the kin.z
againrt fundrv of the. chicfel't of his nobility, that ha\c
been most readv, and ha ve expended their blood and pol-

ieflions to preleri e religion, and defend the king's per-
ion, his go-vernment andt clale, and also hath given ccc.i-
fio.s of great fulpicions and oetincc to be engendered Le-
twixt the king and his nobility, and cpecially wi;l such
as have been in aCt.on againlt the king's mother, an(d ler
authority, v: ho by tfrc and means of the said commill;io
and practice, Ihould hav-e been brought into molt dan-
gerous conditioi; and who also i ma find theiifelves in no
small perill, whil e the

pofkii'cs e kins ar, abulit}h

his presence, aid hioldeth ilch of the plincipal keys ;a:il
ports of lis rcaline, as he prec'ln;l c._)) Cili.

THAlT he hath drag n the king, iut only to surget the

great benefits doie to him and his realm, by the (quccn's
inajely of England, but also to requite the laine \\xi1l
fundrv signs of great untihaki'uhiicls, and wuundn!I
therewith the honour of her majtfi', and thereby l,aiil
adventured to lhake the happy ainity long time contin:idt
betwixt those princes.

AIn
462

AND whereas there griefs were to be repaired by gentle

letters and good offers, to have passed, and been done be-
twixt them : In which refpedt, the king and council ha-
ving resolved to write to her majesty, for her highness'
better fatisfadion in the late negociation of MIr. Alexander
Hume of Northberwick, had given order to the king's fe-
cretary to frame that letter: He minding to break the
bond of amity in funder, willed the fecretdry to be sure
that nothing should be inserted in that letter, whereby the
king (hould crave any thing at her hands, seeking thereby
to cut off all loving courtesies betwixt them, as by the de-
claration of the said secretary may be better learned, and
thereupon further approved.

THAT under the hope and encouragement of D'Aubig-

nv's protection, Alexander King prcfumed with that bold-
ness to make his lewd harangue, and by his means hath
hitherto elcaped chastisement and correction, due for his
offence.

THAT fir James Baford, condemned of the slaughter

of the king's father, hath been called into the realm by
L.nnox, without the privity of the king. And whereas
the laid fir James found in a green velvet desk, late the
enrl of Bothwell's, and saw, and had in his hands the
principal band of the conspirators in that murder, and can
best declare and witness who were authors and executors
of the fame ; he is drawn by Lennox to fipprefs the truth,
and to accule such as he himself knoweth to be innocent;
and as by order of law, will be so found, if they may have
due trial, which, contrary to alljuftice,'is by Lennox means
denied.

7Tis is the charge againJi D'ALubigSy, mentioned in the

fregoing letter by I[alfingham; but by Baford they mean fir
a'mes Bal/four.

No. XVI. (Vol. II. p. Ii9. Line 25.)
The Scottish queen's offers upon the effete of her

liberty propounded by her secretary Naw, No-
vember I584.

H E queen my mistress being once well assured of Cott. I.ib
)your majesty's amity, Cali. C ;.

* I. WVILLA copy.

463

1. WILL declare openly that lhe will (as it is sincerely

her meaning) straitly to join unto your majesty, and to the
fame to yield and bear the chief honour and refped, be-
fore all other kings and princes in Christendom.

2. SHE will swear, and protest solemnly, a sincere for-

getfulnefs of all wrongs which lhe may pretend to have
been done unto her in this realm, and will never, in any
fort or manner whatsoever, shew offence for the fame.

3. SHE will avow and acknowledge, as well in her own

particular name, as also for her heirs and other descend-
ing of her for ever, your majefly forjuft, true, and law-
ful queen of England.

4. A,-D consequently, will renounce, as well for herself,

as for her said heirs, all r:ghts and pretensions which she
may claim to the crown of England, during your majesty's
life, and other prejudice.

5. SHE will revoke all aas and Ihews, by her hereto-

fore made, of pretence to this said crown to the prejudice
of your majesty, as may be the taking of the arms and
itile of queen of England, by the commandment of king
Francis her late lord and hulband.

6. SHE will renounce the pope's bull, for so much as

may be expounded to turn in her favour, or for her be-
hoof, touching the deprivation of your majefly, and will
declare that she will never help and serve herself with
it.

7. SHE will not prosecute, during your majesty's life,

by open force or otherwise, any publick declaration of her
right in the succession of this realm, so as secret assurance
be given unto her, or at the least publick promise, that
no deciding thereof lhall be made in the prejudice of her,
or of the king her son, during your najeit)'s life, nor
after your decease, until such time as they have been heard
thereupon, in publick, free, and general assembly of the
parliament of the said realm.

8. SHE will not pradife, dire1'iv or indireily, with

any of your majesty's fubjeals, ne:th:r \\ithin nor out of
xour realm, any thing tending to war, civil or foreign,
-aginil your majesty and your estate, be it under pretext
of religion, or for civil and politick governmenet.

9. SHE will not maintain or flpport any ofyourfub-

jects declared rebels, and convitcd of treaobn against
you.

10. SHE
464

o1. SHE will enter into the aflociation, which was

shewed her at Wingfield for the surety of your ma-
jclry's life, so as there be mended or right explicated tome
iaufes, which I will /hew to your Majesty, when I /hall
have the copy thereof, as I have before time required.

11. SHE will not treat with foreign kings and princes,

for any war or trouble against this state, and will renounce,
from this time, all enterprises made or to be made in her
favour for that respect.

12. FURTHERMORE, this realm being assailed by any

civil or foreign war, the will take part with your majesty,
and will alfift you in your defence with all her forces and
means, depending of herself and with all her friends of
Christendom.

13. AND to that effeLt, for the mutual defence and

maintainance of your majesty, and the two realms of this
ife, the will enter with your majesty in a league defen-
five, as Ihall be more particularly advised, and will per-
fwade as much as in her, the king her ton to do the like.

THE leagues with all parts abroad remaining firm, and
especially the ancient league between France and Scotland,
in that which [hall not be against this present.

14. SHE will enter into a league oflenlive, having good

aflurance, or secret declaration and acknowledgment of
her right in the fucceflion of this crown, and promise,
that happening any breach betwixt France and this realm,
(which she prayeth God never to happen) thejuft value
of her dowry [hall be placed for her in lands of the revenue
of the crown.

15. FOR assurance of her promises and covenants, the

doth offer to abide herself in this realm for a certain time,
(better hostage can the not give than her own person)
which, to as she be kept in the liberty here before pro-
pounded, is not in cafe to escape secretly out of this coun-
try, in the sickly state (he is in, and with the good order
which your majesty can take therein.

16. AND in cafe your majesty do agree to her full and

whole deliverance, to retire herself at her will out of this
realm, the said queen of Scots the will give sufficient hof-
tage for such time as will be advised.

17. IF the abide in this realm, the will promise not to

depart out of it, without your licence, so as it be pro-
miled unto her that her fRate, in such liberty as shall be
accorded unto her, shall not be in any fort altered, untll
VOL. II. H h after

after tryall to have attempted against your life, or other
trouble of your ellate.

18 If she go into Scotland, she will promise to alter

notiing there in the religion which is now used there, lhe
being suffered to have free exercise of hers, for her and
her houfhold, as it was at her return out of France; and
furtler, to pull out every root of new division between
the subjects, that none of the fubje6ts of Scoland lha:l
he sifted for his con!cience, nor :onfrrained to go to the
service of the contrary religion.

19. SHE will grant a general abolition of all offences

done against her in Scotland, and things (hall remain there
s they are at this present, for the refpec!, saving that which
hath been done against her honour, which she meanetl to
have revoked and annulled.

20. SHE will travel to fettle a secure and general recon-

ciliation betmeen the nobility of the country, and to caulf
to be appointed about the king her ofn, and in his coun-
cil, such as ,hall be fit for the entertainment of the peace
and quiet of the country, and the amity of the realm

21. SHE will do her best to content your majelly, in

favour of the Scots lords banifled and lefuged hither,
upon their due submission to their princes, and your ma-
jefly's promise to affin the said queen and king of Scotland
againfl them, if they happen to fall into their former
faults.

22. SHE will proceed to the marriage of the king her
loni, ,ii,; the ad-,ce anid g.'od council of your majesty

23. As ihe v.ill pai' nothing aithout the king her son,

so doth ihe desire that he intervene conjointly with her in
this treaty, for the greater and perfe.ter allurance there-
of; fur o:;.erwvfe any thing can hardly be eitablifhed to be
suold and con:.aue.

24. THE siad Scotch queen trui eth, that the French

king, her -ood brotril-, according to the goo: affection
sh.-iih he ila.h aitas iihcwed her, and hath been afriel
tc;tified unto me by Moi ns. de IManniiiiere for this fail
treaty, iil very s iiiingy intcivene, and will allill her
fur the furery of her proinifes.

25. AND so w;l thie princes of the house of Lorrain,

Ioilou~ing the will of the said king, will bind themselves
thereunto.

26. FOR other kings and princes 'of Christendom, fle
will .aay to obtain die like of them, if for greater so-

lemnity

iemnity and approbation of the treaty it be found to be
necessary.

27. SHE doth desire a fpredy answer, and final conclu-

sion of the premises, to the end to meet in time with all
inconveniencies.

28. AND in the mean time, the more to strengthen the

said treaty, as made by her of a pure and frank will, (he
defireth that demonstration be made of some releafement
of her captivity.
Objeetions against the Scottilh queen, under fe-

cretary Walsinghame's hand, November, 1584.

HE queen of Scots is ambitious, and standeth ill
affected to her majesty, and therefore it cannot be but

that her liberty (hould bring peril unto her majesty.

THAT her enlargement will give comfort to papists, and

other ill-affected subje&s, and greatly advance the opi-
nion had of her title as successor.

THAT as long as the shall be continued in her ma-

jelty's poffeflion, she may serve as it were a gage of her
najefty's surety, for that her friends, for fear of the dan-
ger she may be thrown into, in cafe any thing should be
one in her favour, dare not attempt any thing in the of-
fence of her majesty.

NvT * What course were fit to be taken
November with the queen of Scots, either to

1 . ) ~be enlarged or not.

HE course to be taken with the said queen may be cutt. Lib.
conlidered of in three degrees ; either, Cal. 3.

I. To continue her under custody in that state the

nlow is.

2. To restrain her of the present liberty (he now hath.
3. Or to set her at liberty upon caution.
i. TOUCHING the first, to continue her under custody

in that state she now is; it is to be confidered, that the
princes that favour that queen, upon the complaint she
maketh of hard usage, are greatly moved with commifera-
tion towards her, and promise to do their endeavour for
her liberty, for which purpose her ministers solicit them
daily.

467
H h 2

AND

AND to move them the more to pity her cafe, Ihe ac-

quainteth them with her offers made to her majetty, which
appeared to be no less profitable than reasonable for her
majesty, so as the refusal and rejefing giveth her friends
and favourers cause to think her hardly dealt withal, and
therefore may, with the better ground and reason, attempt
somewhat for the setting of her at liberty.

IT is also likely that the said queen, upon this refusal,

finding her cafe desperate, will continue her practice under
hand, both at home and abroad, not only for her de-
livery, but to attain to the present poffefllon of this crown
upon her pretended title, as the hath hitherto done, as
appeareth, and is moti manifelf by letters and plots inter-
cepted, and chiefly by that late alteration of Scotland,
which'hath proceeded altogether by her direcion, where-
by a gap is laid open for the malice of all her majesty's
enemies, so as it appeareth that this manner of keeping
her, with such number of persons as she now hath, and
with liberty to write and receive letters, (being duly con-
fidered) is offensive to the princes, the said queen's friends;
rather chargeable, than profitable to hw- majesty; and sub-
jct to all such practices as may peril her majesty's per-
son or iRate, without any provision for her majesty's safe-
ty, and therefore no way to be liked of.

2. TOUCHING the second, to reitrain her in a more
frailihter degree of the liberty (he hath hitherto enjoyed.

IT may at fiint fight, be thought a remedy very apt to

ftoo the course of the dangero:s practices foflered here-
tofore by her: For, true it is, tihat this remedy might prove
very profitable, if the realm of Seotland stood in that fort
de;oted to her majetly, as few years pall it did; and if the
king of that realm were not likely, as well for the release
of his mother, as for the advancement of both their pre-
tended titles, to attempt fomewllha aaainft this realm and
her majeitf, wherein he should neither lack foreign as-
filtance, nor a par:' here within this realm: But the
king and that realm ifanding asseRted as they do, this re-
firaint, instead of remedying, is likely to breed there in-
conveniencies following:

FIRST, it will cncreafe the offence both in him, and in

the reft of the princes her friends that milliked of her re-
ftraint.

SECOND-
468

SECONDLY, It will give them just cause to take some

way of redress.

LASTLY, It is to be doubted, that it may provoke

some desperate ill-difpofed person, all hope of her liberty
removed, to attempt somewhat against her majesty's own
person, (a matter above all others to be weighed) which
inconveniency being duly confidered, it will appear mani-
feftly, that the restraint, in a flraighter degree, is likely to
prove a remedy subject to very hard events.

THE latter degree, whether it were fit to set the said

queen at liberty, miniftereth some cause of doubt, touching
the manner of the liberty, in what fort the fame is to be
performed, whether to be continued here within the realm,
or to be restored in her own country.

BUT first, this proposition, before the particularities be

weighed, is to be conlidered in generality.

FOR it is very hard for a well affected subjet, that ten-

dreth her majesty's surety, and weigheth either the nature
of the Scottith queen, being inclined to ambition and
revenge, or her former actions, what practices she hath
set on foot most dangerous for her majesty and this realm,
to allow of her liberty, being not made acquainted with
such causes, as time hath wrought, to make it less peri-
lous than it hath been, nor with such cautions as may, in
some fort, be devised to prevent both her ambition and
malice; ar.d therefore to make this apparent,

IT is to be confidered, that the danger that was in the

mother, is now grown to be in the son. He pretendeth
the fame title lhe doth: Such as do assec her, both at
home and abroad, do assec him; (and he is the more
dangerous for that he is unmarried, which may greatly
advance his fortune; and that he is a man, whereby he
may enter into acion in his own person) where (he is re-
firained, he is at liberty; his own realm is now altoge-
ther at his devotion, and the party affected to this crown
abated; so as the matter duly confidered, neither her li-
berty nor restraint doth greatly alter the cafe for perils to-
wards her majesty, unless by such promises as may be made
by way of treaty with her, the danger likely to grow from
the king her son to be provided for.

BUT in this behalf it may be objeced, that so long as

the mother remains in her majesty's hands, the king will
attempt nothing for fear of his mother's peril.

Hh3 To

469

To this objecion it may be answered, first, That they

hope that her majesty, being a prince of justice, and in-
clined to mercy, will not punith the mother for the son's
offence, unless the lhall be found, by good proof, culpable.
Secundarily, That men will not be over-hafty, confider-
ing in what predicament the king standeth touching his
expectation of this crown, to advise any thing that in time
future may be dangerous to the giver of such council as
may reach to his mother's peril.

AND lastly, the taking away of his mother, he being

strong in the field through both foreign assistance, and a
party here within the realm, will appear so weak a reme-
dy, (which may rather exasperate both him, and her par-
ty, to proceed with more courage and heat to revenge, if
any such hard measure should be offered unto her) as they
will suppose for the rcafon above specified, that no such ex-
tremity will be used.

IT may also be objected, that the setting of her at li-

berty will greatly encourage the papists both at home and
abroad; but herein, if the provision be duly confidered,
that may be made by parliament both here and there, they
thall rather find cause of discomfort than otherwise.

THESE two doubts being resolved, and the perils that

was in the mother appearing most manifestly to be seen
in the son accompanied with more danger, with due con-
fideration had also of such remedies as may be provided for
the preventing of the dangers, that her liberty may mi-
nifter just cause to doubt of; there will be good cause of
hope found, that the fame will rather breed benefit than
perils.

Now it refteth, in what fort the said liberty shall be

performed; if it ihall be thought meet (he f(all be con-
tinued within the realm with some limitation, especially
in that place where the now refideth, the country roundl
about being to infected in religion as it is, it is greatly to
be doubted that will very much increase the corruption,
and falling away in that behalf. Besides the Ihould ha\e
commodity, with much more ease, and speed, to entertain
pracices 'tthin this realm, than by being in her oinl
country.

IF abroad freely without limitation either in Scot'and

or France, then lia'l her majeflty loIe the gages of her
aI;:t',, theli lhall she be at hand to give advice in fiurtier-

;ai ke
4-0

ance of such pratices, as have been laid for to stir trouble
in this realm, wherein Ihe hath been a principal party.

FOR the first, it is answered before, that the prospect of

any perils that may befal unto her, will in no fort rellrain
her Ion. For the other, if it be confidered what harn
her advice will work unto herself, in respect of the vio-
lation of the treaty, and the provision that may be made
in parliament here, it is to he thought, that ile will then
be well advised, before the attempt any such matter, which
now (he may do without perill. Betides such princes, as
have interposed their faith and promise for her, cannot
with honour assist her, wherein the French King will not
he found very forward, who, in most friendly fort, hath
lately rejeced all such requefls, propounded either by
her, or her son's ministers, that might any way offend
her majesty. And so to conclude, feeing the cause of her
grief (hall be taken away; the French king gratified,
who is a mediator for her, and will millike, that, by any
Spanish pratice, she 1hould be drawn to violate her faith,
that the reft of the princes (hall have no just cause of of-
fence, but rather to think honourably of her majesty con-
fidering the Scotti(h queen's carriage towards her, which
hath deserved no way any such favour; the noblemen of
Scotland Ihall be restored, who will be a good stay of
such counfells as may tend to the troubling of this realm,
especially having so good a ground of warrant as the par-
liament to stand unto; the charges and perills which her
pradtices might have bred to this realm (hall be avoided;
such good provisions, as in both the realms may be made,
whereby the perills that might fall into her majesty's own
person, (a matter of all others to be weighed) (hall be
avoided, when by the change that may grow by any such
wicked and ungodly practice, they shall fee their cafe no
way relieved in point of religion.
Reasons to induce her majesty to proceed in the

treaty, under Secretary Walfinghaine's hand.

H A T such plots as have of late years been devised cr". Libh
(tending to the rai,'ig of trouble within this realm)-Clg. C. 8.

I)ane grown from the Scots queen's ministers, and favour-
ers, not without her allowance and seeking: Or,

H h 4 THAm

471

THAT the means used by the said ministers, to induce

princes to give ear to the said plots, is principally ground-
ed upon some commiseration had of their restraint.

THAT the stay, why the said plots have not been put

in execution, hath proceeded, for that the said princes
have for the moll part, been entertained with home and
domeftic't troubles.

THAT it is greatly to be doubted, that now their realms

begin to be quiet, that somewhat will be attempted in
her favours by the said princes.

THAT it is also to be doubted, that somewhat may be

attempted by some of her fautors in an extraordinary fort,
to the perill of her majesty.

THAT for the preservation thereof, it shall be conve-

nient for her majesty to proceed to the finilhing of the
treaty, not long lithence begun between her and the said
queen.

No. XVII. (Vol. II. 49. 49 . 27.)

A letter from Sir Amius Pawlet.

S I R,

Origin. Ca'-I Did forbear, according to your direction fignif.ed in
L. v· IS your letters of the 4th of this present, to proceed to

the execution of the contents of Mr, Waade's letters un-
to you, for the dispersing of this lady's unnecessary ser-
vants, and for the seasing of her money, wherein I was
bold to write unto vou my simple opinion, (although in
vain as it now falleth out) by my letters of the 7th es
this insrant, which I doubt not are with you before this
time; but upon the receipt of your letters of the 5th
which came not unto my hands untill the 8th in the even-
ing, by reason as did appear by indorfement, that they
had been mirtaken, and were sent back to Windsor, atter
they were entered into the way towards me, I confidcr-
cd, that being accompanied only by my own servants, it
right be thought that they would be entreated to fay as I
vould command them, and therefore I thought good,
for my beter discharge in these money matters, to crave
the affiance of Mr. Richard Bagott, w ho repairing un-
to me the netxt n-omninr, we had accets to this queen,
Yt.om .c f'iund in her bed, troubled after the old man-

ner
47 2

ner with a dcfluxion, whieh was fallen down into the fide
of her neck, and had bereft her of the use of one of her
hands, unto whom I declared, that upon occasion of her
former pratlifes, doubting lefR (he would persist therein
by corrupting underhand some bad members of this state,
I was exprefly commanded to take he; money into my
hands, and to reft answerable for it, when it [hall be re-
quired; advising her to deliver the said money unto me
with quietness. After many denials, many exclamations,
and many bitter words againftyou, (I fay nothing of her
raillingagainft myself) with flat affirmation that her majesty
might have her body, but her heart (he (hould neverhave,
refuting to deliver the key of the cabinet, I called my ser-
vants, and sent for barrs to break open the door,where-
upon (he yielded, and causing the door to be opened,l
found there in the coffers, mentioned in Mr. Waade's re-
membrance, five rolls of canvas, containing five thousand
French crowns, and two leather bags, whereof the one
had, in gold, one hundred and four pounds two Shillings,
and the other had three pounds in silver, which bag offil-c irlecan
ver was left with her, affirming that (he had no more mo- tell rou th=

truth of thir,

ney in this house, and that (he was indebted to her fer-tatter
vants for their wages. Mr. Waade's note maketh men-
tion of 3 rolls left in Curie's chamber, wherein, no doubt,
he was misreckoned, which is evident as well by the tefti-
monies and oaths of diverse persons, as also by probable
conjecures; so as in truth we found only two rolls, every
of which containeth one thousand crowns, which was this
queen's guifte to Curle's wife at her marriage. There is
found in Naw's chamber, in a cabinet, a chain worth by
estimation one hundred pounds, and in money, inone
bag nine hundred pounds, ina second bag two hundred
fourscore and fix pounds eighteen (hillings. All the fore-
said parcells of money are bestowed in bags, and fealed
by Mr. Richard Bagot, saving five hundred pounds of
Naw's money, which I reserve in my hands, for the use
of this houfhold, and may be repayed at London, where
her majesty (hall appoint, out of the money, received
lately by one of my servants, out of the Exchequer. I
feared left the people might have dispersed this money in
all this time, or have hidden the fame in some secret cor-
ners, for doubt, whereof, I had caused all this queen's fa-
mily, from the highest to the loweR, to be guarded in
the several places where I found them, so as yff I had not

found

473

found the money, with quietness, I had been forced to
have searched tirft all their lodgings, and then their own
peribns. I thank God with ail my heart, as for a fingu-
lar bleing, that that fallethout so well, fearing left a
contrary success might have moved some hard conceits
in her majesty.

TOUCHING the difperfimg of this queen's servants, I

trust I have done so much, as may suffice to fatisfv her
majesty for the time, wherein I could not take any abiolute
course, untill I heard again from you, partly because her
majesty, by Mr. Waade's letter, doth refer to your confi-
deration to return such as shall be discharged to their fese-
ral dwellings and countries, wherein, as it feemeth, you
have forgotten to deliver your opinion; partly, for that as
yet, I have received no anfwerfrom you, of your resolution,
upon the view of the Scottish family sent unto you, what
persons you will appoint to be difmift ; only this I have
done, I have bellowed all such, as are mentioned in this
bill inclosed, in three or four several rooms, as the fame
may suffice to contain them, and that theirmeat and drink
shall be brought unto them by my servants. It may please
vou, to advertise me by your next letters, in what fort,
and for what conrfe, I hall make their passports, as also,
if they (hall fay that they are unpaid of their wages, what

hisla I hall do therein. Yt is laid that they have been ac-

bh od customed to be paid of their wages at Christmas, for the
noreofmo-whole year. Her majesty's charge will be somewhat di-
rcy at pre- minifhed by the departure of this people, and my charge
fntinthe by this occasion, will be the more easy. But the persons,
Amatca- all save Baflian, are such filly and simple fouls, as there
eci'shands.was no great cause to fear their practices, and upon this

ground, i was of opinion, in my former letters, that all
this difmifed train should have followed their miilrefs,
untill the next remove, and there to have been discharged
upon the Fli den, for doubt that the said remove might he
delaved, vffne did fear, or expct any hard measure.

OTHERS fnall excuse their foolish pity as they may ; but

for my part, I renunce my part of the joys of heaven, )yt
in any thing that I have said, written or done, I have
had any other refped than the furtherance of her ima-
jefty's fen'ice; and so I (hall most eameftly pray you to at-
firm for me, as likewise for the not seasing of the money
by Mr. Manners, the other commilioners and mxielf. I
rruft Mr. Waade hath answered, in all humble duties, for

the
474

the whole company, that no one of us did so much as
think that our commission reaching only to the papers, we
might be bold to touch the money, so as there was no
speech of that all to my knowledge, and as you know I
was no commissioner in this search, but had my hands full
at Tyxall, discreet servants are not hastily to deal in great
matters, without warrant, and especially where the cause
is such as the delay of it carrieth no danger.

YOUR advertisement of that happy remove hath been

greatly comfortable unto me. I will not fay, in refpec
cf myself, because my private interefl hath no measure of
comparison with her majesty's safety, and with the quiet
of this realm. God grant a happy and speedy yffue to
these good and godly councels; and so I commit you to
his merciful proteaion. From Chartley the ioth of Sep-
tember 15i6.

No. XV. (Vol. II. p. I-4. line 25.)
Copy of a letter from the earls of Shrewsbury

and Kent, &c. touching their proceedings with
regard to the death of the Scottiih queen, to
her majesty's council.
IT may please your hon'le good lordships to be adver-

tifed, that, on Saturday the 4th of this present, I Ro-

bert Beale came to the house of me the earl of Kent in the
county of- to whom your lordships letter and message
was delivered, and her majesty's commiflion (hewn; where-
upon I the earl forthwith sent precepts for the flaying of
such hues and crie as had troubled the country, requiring
the officers to make stay of all such persons, as Ihould
bring any such warrants without names, as before had
been done, and to bring them to the next jufRice of peace,
to the intent that upon their examination, the occasion
and causes of such seditious bruites might be bolted out
and known. It was also resolved that I the said earl of
Kent ihould, on the Monday following, come to Lylford
to Mr. Elmes, to be nearer and readier to confer with
my lord of Shrewlbury. Sonday at night, I Robert
Beale came to Fotheringay, where after the communicat-
ing the commission, &c. unto us fir Amice Paulet and fir
Drue Drury, by reason that Sir A. Pawlet was but late re-

covered

covered and not able to repair to the earl of Shrewsbury,
being then at Orton, fix miles of; it was thought good
that we fir Drue Drury and Robert Beale should go unto
him, which we did on- morning; and together with
the delivery of her majeffy's commission, and your lord-
ship's letter imparted unto him what both the earl of Kent
and we thought meet to be done in the cause, praying
his lordship hither the day following, to confer with me
the said earl, concerning the fame; which his lordflip
promised. And for the better colouring of the matter, I
the said ezrl of Shrewsbury sent to Mr. Beale, a justice of
peace of the county of Huntingdon next adjoining, to
whom I communicated that warrant, which Robert Beale
had under your lordihips hands, for the flaying of the
hues and cries, requiring him to give notice thereof to
the town of Peterborough, and especially unto the justices
of peace of Huntingdonshire, and to cause the pursuers
and bringers of such warrants to be flayed, and brought
to the next juflice of peace; and to bring us word to So-
theringay catle on Wednesday morning what he had done,
and what he (hould in the mean time understand of the
authors of such bruites. Which like order, I also fir A-
mias Paw!et had taken on Monday morning in this town,
and other places adjoining. The fame night, the sheriss
of the county of Northampton upon the receit of you'r
lordlhip's letter came to Arundel, and letters were sent
to me the earl of Kent of the earl of Shrewsbury's in-
tention and meeting here on Tuesday by noon; and other
letters were also sent with their lordships assent to fir
Edward Montagu, fir Richard Knightly, Mr. Tho. Bru-
denell, &c. to be here on Wednesday by eight of the
clock in the morning, at which time it was thought meet
that the execution mhould be. So upon Tuesday, we the
earls came hither, where the (heriff met us; and upon
conference between us it was resolved, that the care for
the fending for the surgeons, and other necessary provision
should be committed unto him against the time. And we
forthwith repaired unto her, and first in the prefenceof
herself and her folks, to the intent that they might fee
and report hereafter that (he was not otherwise proceeded
with than according to law, and the form cf the flatute
made in the 27th year of her majesty's reign, it was thought
convenient that her majefly's commifion fhculd be read
unto her, and afterwards !he was by furdry speeches

willed
476

willed to prepare herfelfagainft the next morning. She
was also put in remembrance of her fault, the honourable
manner of proceeding with her, and the necessity that was
imposed upon her majesty to proceed to execution, for
that otherwise it was found that they could not both fland
together; and however, fithence the lord Buckhurft's his
being here new conspiracys were attempted, and so would
be ifill; wherefore lince Ihe had now a good while since
warning, by the said lord and Robert Beale, to think up-
on and prepare herself to die, we doubted not but that
the was, before this, fettled, and therefore would accept
this message in good part. And to the affect that no chri-
ftian duty might be said to be omitted, that might be for
her comfort, and tend to the salvation both of her body
and foul in the world to come, we offered unto her that
if it would please her to confer with the bishop and dean
of Peterborough, she might; which dean, we had, for that
purpose, appointed to be lodged within one mile of that
place. Hereto (he replied, crossing herself in the name of
the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, faying that (he
was ready to die in the catholic Roman faith, which her
ancestors had professed, from which ihe would not be re-
moved. And albeit we used many persuasions to the con-
trary, yet we prevailed nothing; and therefore, when
the demanded the admittance of her priest, we utterly de-
nied that unto her. Hereupon, she demanded to under-
stand what answer we had touching her former petition to
her majesty, concerning her papers of accounts, and the
betlowing of her body. To the firllwe had none other
answer to make, but that we thought if they were not
sent before, the fame might be in Mr. Waade's custody,
who was now in France, and feeing her papers could not
any wife pleasure her majesty, we doubted not but that the
fame would be delivered unto such as she should appoint.
For, for ourown parts, we undoubtedly thought that her
majesty would not make any profit of her things, and
therefore (in our opinions) she might set down what she
would have done, and the fame should be imparted unto
her majesty, of whom both she and others might expect
all courtesy. Touching her body, we knew not her ma-
jefty's pleasure, and therefore could neither fay that her pe-
tition should be denyed, or granted. For the pradtice of
Babington, the utterly denied it, and would have inferred it,
that her death was for her religion; whereunto it was eft-

soons

477

soons by us replied, that for many years (he was not
touched for religion, nor (hould have been now, but
that this proceeding against her was for treason, in that
the was culpable of that horrible conspiracy for destroying
her majesty's person ; which she again denied, adding fur-
ther, that albeit the for herself forgave them that were the
procurers of her death, yet (he doubted not but that God
would take vengeance thereof. And being charged with
the depositions of Nau and Curie to prove it against her,
she replied, that (he accused none, but that hereafter when
the (hall be dead, and they remain alive, it (hall be seen
how indifferently the had been dealt with, and what mea-
sure had been used unto her; and asked whether it had
been heard before this, that servants had been praftifed
to accuse their mistress, and hereupon also enquired what
was become of them, and where they remained.

UPON our departure from her, for that it seemed by the

commiflion, that the charge of her, was in the depolition
of us the earls, we required S. Amias Paulet and S. Drue
Drurie, to receive, for that night, the charge, which they
had before, and to cause the whole number of soldiers to
watch that night, and that her folks should be put up, and
take order that only four of them should be at the execu-
tion, remaining aloof of and guarded with certain persons
so as they should not come near unto her, which were
Melvil her iteward, the physician, surgeon, and apothe-
cary.

WEDNESDAY morning, after that we the earls were re-

paired unto the castle, and the sheriff had prepared all
things in the hall for the execution, he was commanded
to go into her chamber, and to bring her down to the place
where were present, we which have signed this letter, Mr.
Henry Talbot, efq; fir Edward Montague, knt, his son
and heir apparent, and William Montague his brother,
fir Richard Knicht!y, kint. Mr. Thomas Brudenel, Mr.
Beuill, Mr. Robert and John Wingefield, Mr. Forreil,
and Rayner, Benjamin Piggot, Mr. Dean of Peterbo-
rough, and others.

AT the ftairfoot, the paused to speak to Melvil in our

hearing, which was to this effea. " Melvil, as thou halt
been an honest servant to me, so I pray thee continue to
my son, and commend me unto him. I have not impugn d
his religion, nor the religion of others, but with him well.
And as I forgive all that have offended me in Scotland, so

I would

I would that he lhould also; and beseech God, that he
would fend him his holy spirit, and illuminate him." Mel-
vil's answer was, that he would so do, and at that inflant
he would beseech God to assist him with his spirit. Then
lihe demanded to speak with her priefR, which was denied
unto her, the rather for that (he came with her superstitious
pair of beads and a crucifix. She then desired to have
her women to help her, and upon her earnest request,
and faying that when other gentlewomen were executed,
ihe had read in chronicles that they had women allowed
unto them, it was permitted that the flould have two nam-
ed by herself, which were Mrs. Curie and Kennedy. After
(he came to the scaffold, first, in pretence of them all, her
majestie's commission was openly read; and afterwards
Mr. Dean of Peterborough, according to a direcRion which
he had received, the night before, from us the earls, wou'd
have made a godly admonition to her, to repent and dye
well in the fear of God and charity to the world. But at
the first entry, she utterly refused it, faying that the was
catholique, and that it were a folly to move her, being
so resolutely minded, and that our prayers would little
avail her. Whereupon, to the intent it might appear that
we, and the whole assembly, had a christian delire to have
her die well, a godly prayer, conceiv'd by Mr. Dean, was
read and pronounced by us all. " That it would please Al-
mighty God to fend her his holy spirit and grace, and al-
so, if it were his will, to pardon all her ofiences, and of
his mercy to receive her into his heavenly and everlasting
kingdom, and finally to bless her majesty, and confound
all her enemies;" whereof Mr. Dean, minding to repair up
shortly, can shew your lordliips a copy.

THIS done, (he pronounced a prayer upon her knees
to this effect, " to beseech God to fend her his holy
spirit, and that the trusted to receive her salvation in his
blood, and of his grace to be received into his kingdom,
besought God to forgive her enemies as ihe forgave
them; and to turn his wrath from this land, to bless the
queen's majeftie, that the might serve him. Likewise to be
merciful to her son, to have compassion of his church, and
altlo' (he was not worthy to be heard, yet Ihe had a con-
fidence in his mercy, and prayed all the faints, to pray
unto her Saviour to receive her." After this (turning to-
wards her servants) (he desired them to pray for her, that

her

479

her Saviour would receive her. Then upon petition made
by the executioners, the pardoned them and said, the
was glad that the end of all her sorrows was so near. Then
The mifliked the whinning and weeping of her women, fay-
ing, that they rather ought to thank God for her refolu-
tion, and kissing them, willed them to depart from the
caffold, and farewell. And so resolutely kneeled down,
and having a kercheff banded about her eyes, laid down
her neck, whereupon the executioner proceeded. Her
servants were incontinently removed, and order taken that
none should approach unto her corps, but that it should
be embalmed by the surgeon appointed. And further her
crofie, apparell, and other things are retained here, and
not yielded unto the executioner for inconveniences that
might follow, but he is remitted to be rewarded by such as
lent him hither.

THIS hath been the manner of our dealings in this

service, whereof we have thought good to advertise your
lordships, as particularly as we could, for the time, and
further have thought good to signify unto your lordships
besides, that for the avoiding of all finifRer and slanderous
reports that may be raised to the contrary, we have caused
a note thereof to be conceiv'd to the fame effec in writ-
ing, which we the said lords have subscribed, with the
hands of such other there the knights and gentlemen above
named that were present at the action. And so beseech-
ing Almighty God long to bless her majesty with a most
prosperous reign, and to confound all his and her ene-
mies, we take our leaves. From Fotheringay-Caftle, the
8th of February 1586, in haft.

Your lordships at commandment.
N. B. This, as well as several other papers in this Ap-

pendix, is taken from a collection made by Mr.
Crawfurd of Drumfoy, historiographer to Queen
Anne, now in the library of the faculty of Advo-
cates. Mr. Crawfurd's transcriber has omitted to
mention the book in the Cott. Lib. where it is to be
found.

No. XIX.

NO. XIX. [Vol. II. p. I80. line 4.]
The objeaions against Mr. Davison, in the cause

of the late Scottish queen, mufft concern things
done either, i. Before her trial at Fotheringay.
2. During that session. 3. After the fame.
i. T)EFORE her trial, he neither is, nor can beCott. Lib;

JD charged to have had any hand at all in the canfecal's C. '

of the said queen, or done any thing whatsoever concern-
i ng the fame, directly or indirectly.

2. DURING that session, he remained at court, where

the only interest he had therein, was as her majesty's fe-
cretary, to receive the letters from the commissioners, im-
partthem to her highness, and return them her answers.

3. AFTER the return thence, of the said commission-

ers, it is well known to all her council,

1. THAT he never was at any deliberation or meeting

whatsoever, in parliament, or council, concerning the
cause of the said queen, till the fending down of her ma-
jefty's warrant unto the commissioners, by the lords and
others of her council.

2. That he was no party in signing the sentence, pas-

fed againfther.

3. THAT he never penned either the proclamation

publishing the fame, the warrant after her death, nor
any other letter, or thing whatsoever concerning the
fame. And,

THAT the only thing which can be specially and truly

imputed to him, is the carrying up the said warrant unto
her majesty to be signed. She fending a great counsellor
unto him, with her pleasure to that end, and carrying it
to the great teal of England, by her own special direction
and commandment.

FOR the better clearing of which truth, it is evident,
i. THAT the letter, being penned by the lord trea-

furer, was delivered by him unto Mr. Davison, with her
majefy's own privity, to be ready for to sign, when she
ihould be pleased to call for it.
VOL. II. Ii 2. THAT

48I

2. THAT being in his hands, he retained it at the leali

five or fix weeks unprefented, nor once- offering to carry
it up, till she fenta great counsellor unto him for the
fame, and was sharply reproved therefore by a great peer,
in her majesty's own presence.

3; THAT having signed it, she gave him an express

commandment to carry it to the feal, and being fealed to
fend it immediately away unto the commissioners, ac-
cording to the direction. Herself appointing the hall of
Fotheringay for the place of execution, mifliking the
court-yard, in divers refpeas, and in conclusion abfo-
lutely sorbad him to trouble her any further, or let her
hear any more hereof, till it was done. She for he. part,
having (as (he said) performed all that, in law or reason,
could be required ofher.

4. WHICH direrions notwithfianding, he kept the

warrant fealed all that night, and the greatest part of the
next day in his hands, brought it back with him to the
court, acquainted her majesty withal, and finding her
majesty resolved to proceed therein, according to her for-
mer directions, and yet desirous to carry the matter so, as
she might throw the burden from herself, he absolutely
resolved to quit his hands thereof.

5. AND hereupon, went over unto the lord treasurer's

chamber, together with Mr. vice-chamberlain Hatton,
and in his pretence restored the fame into the hands of
the said lord treasurer, of whom he had before received
it, who from henceforth kept it, tin himfelfand the reft
of the council sent it away.

WVHICH, in substance and truth, is all the part and in-

terest the said Davison had in this cause, whatsoever is,
or may be pretended to the contrary.

TOUCHING the fending down thereof unto the com-

missioners, that it was the general ac of her majesty's
council (as is before mentioned) and not any private act
of his, may appear by,

I. THEIR own confeflion. 2. Their own letters sent

down therewith to the commifin oners. . . The telt;monies
of the lords and others to whcm they were direced. As
also, 4. of Mr. Beale, by whum they were sent. 5. The
tenor ofher majefiy's siss commission for their calling to
the ftar-chanber iso the fame, and private appearance and
fubmflion fter-wairls inflcad tliercof, before the lcrd chrr-

celllr
+8

cellor Bromley. 6. The confession of Mr. Attorney-
general in open court confirmed. 7. By the sentence it-
self upon record. 8. Besides a common ac of council,
containing an answer to be verbally delivered to the Scot-
tifh ambassador then remaining here, avowing and jufti-
fying the fame.

Now where some suppose him to have given some ex-
traordinary furtherance thereunto, the contrary may evi-
dently appear by,

i. His former absolute refusal to sign the band of as-

fociation, being earnestly pressed thereunto by her maje-
ty's self.

2. His excufing'of himself from being used as a com-
missioner, in the examination of Babington and his com-
plices, and avoiding the fame by a journey to the Bath.

3. His being a mean to stay the commissioners from pro-
nouncing of the sentence at Fotheringay, and deferring it
till they should return to her majesty's pretence.

4. His keeping the warrant in his hands fix weeks un-
presented, without once offering to carry it up, till her
majesty sent exprefly for the fame to sign.

5. His deferring to fend it away after it was fealed un-
to the commissioners, as he was specially commanded,
flaying .t all that night, and the greatest part of the next
day in his hands.

6. AND finally, his restoring thereof into the hands
of the lord treasurer, of whom he had before received
the fame.

WHICH are clear and evident proofs, that the said
Davison did nothing in this cause whatsoever, contrary
to the duty of the place he then held in her majesty's
service.

Cal. C. 9.

THIS seems to be an original. On the back is the title,

THE innocence of Mr. Davison in the cause of the late
Scottish queen,

No. XX.

483
Ii2

No. XX. [Vol; II. p. 280. line 27.]
Letter from C, Sir Robert Cecil, to his majetrv

King James.
Fro :the M O OST worthy prince, the depending dangers up-

Oiina. V. on your affectionates have been such, as hath in-

Bibl. a -C.

Jur. Edin. forced silence in him, who is faithfully devoted to your
A. 1. 34. person, and in due time of trial, will undergo all hazards
No. 4- of fortune, for the maintenance of the just regal rights,

that, by the lams divine, of nature, and of nations, is in-
vested in your royal-perfon. Fall not then, most noble
and renowined prince, 'from him, whose providence hath
in many dangers preserved you, no doubt to be an inftru-
ment of his glory, and the good of his people. Some
secrets, I find, have been revealed to your prejudice,
which must proceed from some ambitious violent spirited
person near your nmajeffy in council and favour; no man
ii particular will I accuse, but I am' sure it hath no foun-
ation from any, with whom, for your service, I have held
correspondence otherwise, I had, long since been dif-
a'blsd from performance of those duties, that the thoughts
of my heart endeavoured; being only known to this wor-
thy nobleman bearer hereof, one noted' in all parts of
Christendom for his fidelity to your person and siate, and
to Mr. Daid Fowlis your most roval feivant, my first and
faithful correspondent; and unto Jaines Hudfone, whom
I have found in all things that concern you, most secret
and assured. It may, therefore, please your majesty, at
the humble motion of 0, which jargon .I desire to be the
indorfement of your commands untb me, that by some
token of your favour, he may understand in what terms
you regard his fidelity, secrecy and service. My paflion-
ate afifeion to your person, (not as you are a king, but
as you are a gcod king, and have a juit title, after my lo-
vereign, to be a great king) doth transport me to prefump-
tion. Condemrn not, nmot noble prince, the motives ot
care and love, altho' mixed with defeas in judgment.

r. I, therefore, f.rft beseech your majesty, that for

the good of there whom God, by divine Providence,
hath tdefincd to your charge, that you will be pleased to

have

havean extraordinary care of all praficers or pracices,
against your person ; for it is not to be doubted, but that
in both kingdoms, either out of ambition, facion, or fear,
there are many that desire to have their sovereign in mino-
rity, whereby the sovereignty and state might be swayed
by partiality of subalternate persons, rather than by true
rule of power and justice. Preserve your person, and
fear not the practices of man upon the point of your right,
which will be preserved and maintained against all assaults
of competition whatever. Thus I leave the protection of
your person, and royal posterity, to the almighty God of
Heaven, who bless and preserve you and ail yours, in all
regal happiness to his glory.

2. NEXT to the preservation of your person, is the
conversation and secret keeping of your councells, which,
as I have said, are often betrayed and discovered, either
out of pretended zeal in religion, turbulent facion, or
base conception, the which your majesty is to regard with
all circumfpedtion, as a matter most dangerous to your
person and state, and the only means to ruin and destroy
all those that stand faithfully devoted to your majesty's
service. Some particulars, and persons of this nature, I
make no doubt have been discovered by the endeavours of
this nobleman, the bearer hereof, of whom your majesty
may be further informed.

3. THE 3d point considerable is that your majesty, by

all means possible, secure yourself of the good affection
of the French king and States, by the negotiation of some
faithful secret confident; the French naturally diftafting
the union of the Britilh islands under one monarch. In
Germany, I doubt not, but you have many allies and
friends, but by reason of their remote state, they donot
so much importe this affair, which must be guided by a
quick and sudden motion.

4. WHEN God, by whose Providence, the period of
all persons and times is determined, shall call to his king-
dom of glory hermajefty, (although I do assuredly hope
that there will not be any question in competition, yet
for that I hold it not fitting to give any minute entrance
into a cause of so high a nature) I do humbly beseech your
majesty to design a secret, faithful, and experienced con-
ident servant of yours, being of an approved fidelity and
judgment, continually to be here resident, whose negotia-
tion, it were convenient your majesty should fortifie, with

I i 3 such

485

such secret truth and powers, as there may not need 14
days respite, to post for authority, in a cause, that cannot
endure to hours respite, without varieties of danger. In
the which it is to be confidered, that all such as pretend
least good to your eltablifhment, will not in publick op-
pugn your title, but out of their cunning ambition will
seek to g-n time, by alledging their pretence of common
good to the Irate, in propounding of good conditions for
dilburthening the common weale, of divers hard laws,
heavy impaiitions, corruptions, oppressions, &c. which is
a main point to lead the popular, who are much difgufled
with many particulars of this nature. It were therefore
con e.iient that rhefe motives, out of your majelly's pro-
vidence, hould be prevented, by your free offer in these
points following, viz.

i. THAT your majesty would be pleated to abolish

purveyors and purveyance, being a matter infinitely of-
fenfive to the common people, and the whole kingdom,
and not profitable to the prince.

2. ' HAT you- majesty would be pleased to dissolve the

courtof wards. being the ruin of all the noble and an-
cient families oG -his realm, by base matches, and evil
education of the:r children, by which no revenue of the
crown will be defrayed.

3. THE abrogating the multiplicity of penal laws, ge-

nerally repined against by the subject, in regard of thc.r
uncertainty, being many times altered from their trie
m=aning, by variety of interpretations.

-4. '1HAT your majesty will be pleated to admit free

ouiportotthe native commodities of this kingdom, now
often refrained by subalternate persons for private pront,
being melt prejudicial to the commerce of all merchantsl
and a plain delruc&ion to the true industry and manuiac-
ture of ll kingdoms, and aeaintl the profit of the cro\n.

'THEsE, being by your majefft's confidents in the poiln

of time propounded, will afilredlv confirm unto your ia-
;cefv the hearts and affecions of the whole kingdom, anl
abfciutely prevent all insinuations and devises or deigneil
patriots, that, out or pretext of common good, wcuid
ieek to patronize them!eves in popular opinion ani po -
cr, and thereby to derogate from your majelly's bounty
znd free favour, by Frincely merit of our moderatio,
j::d.rr nt and juitice.

Yct\
486

YOUR majesty's favour, thus granted to the subjet,
will no way impeach the profits of the crown but advance
them. The difproportionable gain of some chequer offi-
cers, with the base and mercenary profits of the idle un-
necessary clerks and attendants, will only susser some de-
triment ; but infinite will be the good unto the kingdom,
which will confirm unto your majesty the universal love
and affection of the people, and eftabliflh your renown
in the highest esteem to all posterity.

THE Lord preserve your majeltie, and make you tri-
umphant over all your enemies.

MY care over his person, whose letters pass in this pac-

quet, and will die before he leave to be yours, shall be no
lefsthan of mine own life, and in like esteem I will hold
all your faithful confidents, notwithstanding I will hold
myself reserved from being known unto any'of them, in
my particular devoted affefions unto your majesty, only
this extraordinary worthy man, whose associate I am in
his misfortune, doth know my heart, and we both will
pray for you, and if we live you shall find us together.

IBESEECH your majesty burn this letter, and the
others; for altho' it be in an unusual hand, yet it may
be discovered

Your majesty's most devoted

and humble servant,

©
A CRITICAL

487
Ii4

# A CRITICAL DISSERTATION CONCERNING The Murder of King HENRY, and the Genuineness of the Queen's Letters to Bothwell.

A

C R I T I C A L
DISSERTATION

CONCERNING
The Murder of King HENRY, and the Genu-

inenefs of the Queen's Letters to Bothwell.

T is not my intention to engage in all the con-
troverfies, to which the murder of King Henry,

or the letters from Mary to Bothwell, have given
rife; far less to appear as an adversary to any par-
ticular author, who hath treated of them. To re-
peat, and to expose all the ill-founded assertions
with regard to these points, which have flowed from
inattention, from prejudice, from partiality, from
malevolence, and from dishonesty, would be no less
irksome to myself, than unacceptable to most of
my readers. All I propose, is to affit others in
forming some judgment concerning the fa&s in dif-
pute, by stating the proofs produced on each fide,
with as much brevity as the cafe will admit, and
with the fame attention and impartiality, which I
have endeavoured to exercise in examining other
controverted points in the Scottish history.

IN order to account for the King's murder, two,
different systems have been formed. The one sup-

poses

pofesBothwell to have contrived and executed this
crime. The other imputes it to the Earls of Mur-
ray, Morton, and their party.

THE decision of many controverted faEts in his-

tory, is a matter rather of curiosity than of ute.
They stand detached; and whatever we determine
with regard to them, the fabric of the story remains
untouched. But the sac under dispute in this place
is a fundamental and essential one, and according
to the opinion which an Historian adopts with re-
gard to it, he must vary and dispose the whole of
his subsequent narration. An historical system may
be tried in two different ways, whether it be con-
fiftent with probability, and whether it be support-
ed by proper evidence.

THOSE who charge the King's murder upon Both-

well argue in the following manner; and though
their reasonings have been mentioned already in
different places of the narative, it is necessary to
repeat them here. Mary's love for Darnly, fay
they, was a sudden and youthful passion. The
beauty of his person was his chief merit. His ca-
pricious temper soon raised in the Queen a disgust,
which broke out on different occasions. His en-
gaging in the conspiracy against Rizio, converted
this d'fgust into an indignation,which fle was at no
pains to conceal. This breach was perhaps, in its
own nature, irreparable; the King certainly wanted
that art and condescension which alone could have
repaired it. It widened every day, and a deep and
fettled hatred effaced all remains ofaffection. Boch-
v.ell observed this, and was prompted by ambition,
and perhaps by love, to found on it a scheme, which
proved fatal both to the Queen, and to himself.
He had served Mary at different times with fidelity
and fuccels. He insinuated himself into her favour,
by address and by flattery. By degrees he gained her
heart. In order to gratify his love, or at least his anm-

bit:on,

bition, it was necessary to get rid of the King.
Mary had rejeced the proposal made to her for ob-
taining a divorce. The King was equally hated by
the partisans of the house of Hamilton, a confider-
able party in the kingdom; by Murray, one of the
molt powerful and popular persons in the country;
by Morton and his associates, whom he had deceiv-
ed; and whom Bothwell had bound to his interest
by a recent favour. Among the people Darnly was
fallen under extreme contempt. He expected, for
all these reasons, that the murder Gs the King would
pass without any inquiry. And to Mary's love,
and his own addrels and good fortune, he trusted
for the accomplishment of the reft of his wishes.
What Bothwell expe&ted really came topafs. Mary,
if not privy herself to the design, connived at an
ac&ion which rid her of a man whom she had such
good reason to detest. A few months after, she
married the person who was both suspeCted and ac-
cufed of committing the murder.

THOSE who charge the guilt upon Murray and his

party reason in this manner. Murray, they fay,
was a man ofboundlefs ambition. Notwithftand-
ing the illegitimacy of his birth, he had early formed
a design of usurping the Crown. On the Queen's
return into Scotland, he insinuated himfelfinto her
favour, and engrossed the whole power into his own
hands. He set himself against every proposal of
marriage which was made to her, left his own chance
of succeeding to the Crown should be dePrroved.
He hated Darnly, and was no less hated by him.
In order to be revenged on him, he entered into a
ludden friendship with Bothwell, his ancient and
mortal enemy. He encouraged him to perpetrate
the crime, by giving him hopes of marrying the
Queen. All this was done with a design to throw
upon the Queen herself the imputation of being ac-
ceffary to the murder, and under that pretext, to

destroy

3

destroy Bothwell, to depose and imprison, her and
to seize the sceptre which he had wrested out of
her hands.

THE former of these systems has an air of pro-

bability, is consistent with itself, and solves appear-
ances. In the latter, some assertions are false, some
links are wanting in the chain, and effects appear,
of which no sufficient cause is produced. Murray,
on the Queen's return into Scotland, served her with
great fidelity, and his prudent administration ren-
dered her so popular, and so powerful, as enabled her
with ease to quash a formidable infurretion raied by
himfelfin the year 565. What motive could induce
Murray to murder a Prince without capacity, with-
out followers, without influence over the nobles,
whom the Queen, by her neglec, had reduced to
the lowest state of contempt, and who, after a long
disgrace had regained (according to the most fa-
vourable fuppofition)the precarious pofleffion of her
favour only a few days before his death ? It is dif-
ficult to conceive what Murray had to fear from the
King's life. It is no easy matter to guess what he
could gain by his death. If we suppose that the
Queen had no previous attachment to Bothwell, no-
thing can appear more chimerical than a scheme to
persuade her to marry a man, whose wife was till
alive, and who was not only fufpeced, but accused,
of murdering her former husband. But that such
a scheme should really succeed is itill more extra-
ordinarv.-If Murray had instigated Bothwell to
commit the crime, or had himlelf been acceflarv
to the commifion of it, what hopes were there that
Bothwell would silently bear from a fellow-criminal
all the prosecutions which he suffered, without ever
retorting upon him the accusation, or revealing the
whole scene of iniquity? An ancient and deadly
feud had subsisted between Murray and Bothwell;
the Queen vwith difficulty had brought them to rome

terms
4

terms of agreement. But is it probable that Mur-
ray would chufe an enemy, to whom he had been
so lately reconciled, for his confident in the com-
mission of such an atrocious crime? Or, on the
other hand, would it ever enter into the imaginat'on
of a wife man, first to raise his rival to fupre ne
power, in hopes that afterwards he fhou d find
some opportunity of depriving him of that power?
The most adventurous politician never hazarded
such a dangerous experiment. The most credulous
folly never trusted such an uncertain chance.

BUT however strong these general reasonings may
be, we must decide according to the particular
evidence produced. This we now proceed to ex-
amine.

THAT Bothwell was guilty of the King's mur-
der appears, I. From the concurring testimony of
all the cotemporary historians. 2. From the con-
feflion of those persons who suffered for alifting at
the commission of the crime, and who enter into
a minute detail of all its circumstances. Anders. v.
ii. i65. 3. From the acknowledgment of Mary's
own commissioners, who allow Bothwell to have
been one of those who were guilty of this crime.
Good. v. ii. 213. 4. From the express testimony
of Lefly Bishop of Ross to the fame effe& with the
former. Def. of Q. Mary's Hon. And. ii. 76.
Id. v. iii, p. 31. 5. Morton, at his death, declared
that Bothwell had solicited him, at different times,
to concur in the conspiracy formed against the life
of the King: and that he was informed by Archi-
bald Douglas, one of the conspirators, that Both-
well was present at the murder. Crawf. Mem. App.
4. The letter from Douglas to the Queen, pub-
lifled in the Appendix to Vol. II. No. 12. confirms
Morton's testimony. 6. Lord Herreis promises, in
his own name, and in the name of the nobles who
adhered to the Queen, that they would concur in

punish-

punishing Bothwell as the murderer of the King,
Appen. vol. I No. 23.

THE most direct charge ever brought againif

Murray is in these words ofBifhop Lelly. " Is it
" unknown," addressing himself to the Earl of
Murray, " what the Lord Herries said to your face
"openly, even at your own table, a few days after
"the murder was committed ? Did he not charge
"you with the foreknowledge of the fame murder;
" did he not, nulla cirbutione u/us, flatly and plain-
c ly burden you, that riding in Fife, and coming
" with one of your most assured and trusty servants
' the fame day whereon you departed from Edin-
" bourgh, said to him, among other talk, This
" night ere morning Lord Darnly shall lose his
" life?" Defence of Q. Mary, Anders. v. ii. 75.
But the assertion of a man so heated with faction as
Lefly, unless it were supported by proper evidence,
is of little weight. The servant to whom Murray
is said to have spoken there words, is not named;
nor the manner in which his secret conversation was
brought to light mentioned. Lord Herries was one
of the most zealous advocates for Mary, and it is
remarkable that, in all his negociation at the court of
England, he never once repeated this accusation of
Murray. In answering the challenge given him by
Lord Lindsay, Herreis had a fair opportunity of
mentioning Murray's knowledge of the murder;
but though he openly accuses of that crime some ot
those who adhered to him, he industriously avoids
any insinuation against Murray himself. Keith
Pref. XII. Mary, herself, in conversation with
Sir Francis Knolles, accused Morton and Maitland
of hbeng privy to the murder, but does not men-
tion Murray. And. iv. 55. When the Bishop of
Ross and Lord Herries themselves appeared before
the Englifl council, January II, 1569, they de-
clared themselves ready, in obedience to the Queen's

comi -
6

command, to accuse Murray and his associates of
being accessary to the murder, but " they being
"also required, whether they or any of them, as
" of themselves, would accuse the said earl in fpe-
' cial, or any of his adherents, or thought them
" guilty thereof;" they answered, " that they took
" God to witness that none of them did ever know
"any thing of the conspiracy of that murder, or
"were in council and foreknowledge thereof; nei-
" ther who were devisers, inventors, and executors
"of the fame, till it was publickly discovered long
"thereafter by some of the assassins, who suffered
" death on that account." Good. v. ii. 308. These
words were taken out of a register kept by Ross and
Herries themselves, and seem to be a direct confu-
tation of the bishop's assertion. The bishop him-
self repeats the fame thing in frill stronger terms.
And. iii. 31.

THE Earls of Huntly and Argyll, in their Pro-

teftation touching the murder of the King of Scots,
after mentioning the conference at Craigmillar con-
cerning a divorce, of which we have given an ac-
count Vol. I. 330. add, " So after these premisses,
" the murder of the King following, we judge in
"our consciences, and hold for certain and truth,
" that the Earl of Murray and secretary Lething-
" ton were authors, inventors, counsellors and cau-
" sers of the fame murder, in what manner, or by
" whatfomever persons the fame was executed ?"
Anders. v. iv. 188. But, i. This is nothing more
than the private opinion or personal affirmation of
these two noblemen. 2. The conclusion which they
make has no connexion with the premisses on which
they found it. Because Murray proposed to obtain
for the Queen a divorce from her husband with her
own content, it does not follow that therefore he
committed the murder without her knowledge.
3. Huntly and Argyll were at that time the leaders

of

7

of that party opposite to Murray, and animated
with all the rage of fa&ion. 4. Both of them were
Murray's personal enemies. Huntly, on account
of the treatment which his family and clan had re-
ceived from that nobleman. Argyll was desirous
of being divorced from his wife, with whom he
lived on no good terms, Knox, 328. and by whom
he had no children. Crawf. Peer. I9. She was Mur-
ray's sifter, and by his interest he had obftrufted that
design. Keith, 551. These circumstances would go
far towards invalidating a positive testimony; they
more than counterbalance an indeterminate fufpi-
cion. 5. It is altogether uncertain whether Huntly
and Argyll ever subscribed this protestation. A copy
of such a protestation as the Queen thought would
be of advantage to her cause, was transmitted to
them by her. Anders. v. iv. 186. The protestation
itself published by Anderson is taken from an un-
subscribed copy with blanks for the date and place
of subscribing. On the book of this copy is parted
a paper, which Cecil has marked " Answer of the
" Earl of Murray to a writing of the Earls of
" Huntly andArgyll." Anders. 194, 195. But
it can scarce be esteemed a reply to the above-men-
tioned protestation. Murray's answer bears date at
London, January 19, 1568. The Queen's letter,
in which she enclosed the copy of the protestation,
bears date at Bowton, Jan. 5, 1568. Now it is
scarce to be supposed that the copy could be sent
into Scotland, be subscribed by the two Earls, and
be seen and answered by Murray within so short a
time. Murray's reply seems intended only to pre-
vent the impression which the vague and uncertain
accusations of his enemies might make in his ab-
fence. Cecil had got the original of the Queen's
letter into his custody. Anders. vol. iv. 186. This
naturally leads us to conjecture that the letter itself,
together with the inclosed protestation, were inter-

cepted

copted before they came to the hands of Huntly
and Argyll. Nor is this mere conjedure alone.
The letter to Huntly, in which the protestation
was inclosed, is to be found; Cott. Lib. Cal. C. I.
fol. 280, and is an original subscribed by Mary,
though not written with her own hand, because she
seldom chose to write in the English language. The
protestation is in the fame Volume, fol. 282, and is
manifestly written by the fame person who wrote the
Queen's letter. This is a clear proof that both
were intercepted. So that much has been founded
on a paper not subscribed by the two Earls, and
probably never seen by them. Besides, this method
which the Queen took of fending a copy to the
two Earls, of what was proper for them to declare
with regard to a conference held in their own pre-
fence, appears somewhat suspicious. It would have
been more natural, and not so liable to any mifin-
terpretation, to have desired them to write the most
exac account, which they could recollea of what
had passed in the conversation at Craigmillar.

THE Queen's commissioners at the Conferences in
England accused Murray and his associates of hav-
ing murdered the King. Good. ii. 281. But these
accusations are nothing more than loose and gene.
ral affirmations, without descending to such parti-
cular circumstances, as either ascertain their truth,
or discover their falsehood. The fame accusation
is repeated by the nobles assembled at Dumbarton
Sept. 1568. Good. ii. 359. And the fame obfer-
vation may be made concerning it.

ALL the Queen's advocates have endeavoured to
account for Murray's murdering of the King, by
luppofing that it was done on purpose, that he
might have a pretence of disturbing the Queen's
ldm-iiftration, and thereby rendering ineffetual her
general Revocation of Crown lands, which would
have deprived him and his associates of the belt part
VOL. II. K k of

9

of their estates. Lefley Def. of Mary's Hon. p. 73.
But whoever confiders the limited powers of a
Scottith Monarch, will fee that such a revocation
could not be very formidable to the nobles. Every
King of Scotland began his reign with such a revo-
cation; and as often as it was renewed, the power
of the nobles rendered it ineffeclual. The best vin-
dication of Murray and his party from this accufa-
tion, is that which they presented to the Queen of
England, and which hath never hitherto been
published.

Paper Answers to the objections and alledgance of the 9ureen,
ofce. alledging the Earl of Murray Lord Regent, the

Earl of Morton, Marr, Glencairn, Hume, Rath-
ven, &c. to have been moved to armour, for that
they abhorred and might not abide her revocaticn
of the alienation made of her property.

IT is answered, that is alledged but all appear-

ance, and it appears God has bereft the alledgance
of all wit and good remembrance, for thir reasons
following:

IMPRIMIS, as to my Lord Regent, he never

had occasion to grudge thereat, in refpeca the
Queen made him privy to the fame, and took refo-
lution with him for the execution thereof, letting
his Lordihip know the would assuredly in the famine
except all things The had given to him, and rately
them in the next parliament as the did indeed; and
for that cause wished my Lord to leave behind hill
Master John Wood, to attend upon the fame, t'
whom the declared, that als well in that as in all
others her grants it should be provided, yea of free
will did promise and offer before ever he demandei,
as it came to pass without any lett or impedimenlit,
for all was ratified by her command, and hardl
write, at the Parliament, but any difficulty.

ITEM
10

ITEM as to my Lord of Morton, he could not
grudge thereat quha never had of her property
worth twenty dollars that ever I knew of.

Item the lame, may I fay of my Lord Glencairn.
Item the fame, I may fay of my Lord Hume.
Item the fame, I may fay of my Lord Ruthven.
Item the fame, I may fay of my Lord Lindsay.
ONLY my Lord of Marr, had ane little thing
of the property quilk alfua was gladly and liberally
confirmed to him, in the said parliament preceed-
ing a year; was never ane had any c:ufe of mif-
content of that revocation, far less to have put their
lives and heritage to so open and manifest ane dan-
ger as they did for tie ane frivole caule.

GYF ever any did make evill countenance, and
fliow any miscontentment of the said revocation, it
was my Lord of Argyll in fpeciall, quha fpak
largely in the time of Parliament theiranents to the
Q.ueen herself, and did complain of the manifest
corruption of ane aCt of parliament past upon her
Majelty's return, and fa did lett any revocation at
that time; but the armour for revenge of the King's
deid was not till twa months after, art quhat time
there was no occasion given thereof, nor never a
man had mind thereof.

HAVING thus examined the evidence which has
been produced against the Earls of Murray and
Bothwell ; we shall next proceed to inquire whether
me Queen herself was accessary to the murder of
ii:r huiband.

No looner was the violent death of Darnly known,
tian lirong suspicions arose, among some of her sub-
?.s, that Mary had given her consent to the coin-
'll1011 of that crime. And. ii. 156. We are in-
:)rmed, by her own ambalfador in France, the Arch-
!i:hop of Glasgow, that the fentimnents of foreign-
or,, on this head, were no less unfavourable to ier.
Kecith, Pref. . i. any of her nobles loudly a 'cufed

K. 2 h-c

II

her of that crime, and a great part of the nation,
by supporting them, seem to have allowed the ac-
cufation to be well founded.

SOME crimes, however, are of such a nature, that

they scarce admit of a positive or diret proof.
Deeds of darkness can fcldom be brought perfectly
to light. Where persons are accused not of being
Principals, but only of being Acceffaries to a crime;
not of having committed it themselves, but only of
giving consent to the commission of it by others;
the proof becomes till more difficult: and unless
when some accomplice betrays the secret, a proof
by circumstances, or presumptive evidence, is all
that can be attained. Even in judicial trials, such
evidence is sometimes held to be sufficient for con.
demning criminals. The degree of convition which
such evidence carries along with it, is often not in-
ferior to that which arises from positive testimony:
and a concurring series of circumstances satisfies the
undertfanding no less than the express declaration of
witnesses.

EVIDENCE of both these kinds has been pro.

duced againif Mary. We shall first confider that
which is founded upon circumstances alone.

SOME of these suspicious circumstances preceded

the King's death; others were subsequent to it.
With regard to the former, we may observe that
the Queen's violent love of Darnly was soon con-
verted into an aversion to him no less violent; and
that his own ill conduc, and excesses of every kind
were such, that if they did not justify, at lealt they
account for this sudden change of her indisposition to-
wards him. The rife and progress of this doinellic
rupture, I have traced with great care in the history,
and to the proofs of it which may be found in
papers published by other authors, I have added
those contained in App. No. XVI. and XVII. Thc
Earls of Murray, Morton, Bothwell, Argyll, and

Huntly
12

Huntly confidered the scheme of procuring for the
Queen a divorce from her husband, as one of the
nolf flattering proposals they could make to her,
and employed it as the most powerful inducement
to prevail on her to consent to a measure, which
they had much at heart, but from which they knew
her to be extremely averse. And. iv. p. 2. i88.
Du Croc the French ambassador, who was an eye-
witness of what he describes, not only represents her
disgust to Darnly to be extreme, but declares that
there could be no hopes of a reconcilement between
them. " The Queen is in the hands of phyficians,cec. ,2.
and I do assure you is not at all well; and co be- '566.
lieve the principal part of her disease to consist in
deep grief and sorrow ; nor does it seem possible to
make her forget the fame. Still she repeats thele
words, I could wish to be dead. You know very
well that the injury she has received is exceeding
great, and her majesty will never forget it- To
speak my mind freely to you, I do not expec, upon
several accounts, any good understanding be-
tween them [i. e. the King and Queen], unless
God effecually put to his hand.--His bad de-Dec. 23.
portment is incurable, nor can there ever be any
good expeaed from him for several reasons, which
I might tell you was I present with you. I cannot
pretend to foretell how all may turn, but I will fay,
that matters cannot subsist long as they are, without
being accompanied with sundry bad consequences."
Keith, Pref. vii. Had Henry died a natural death,
at this junture, it muff have been confidered as a
very fortunate event to the Queen, and as a season-
able deliverance from a husband who had become
altogether odious to her. Now as Henry was mur-
dered a few weeks afterwards, and as nothing had
happened to render the Queen's aversion to him less
violent, the opinion of those who confider Mary as
the author of an event, which was mnanifeftly so

agreeable

I3

agreeable to her, will appear perhaps to some of our
readers to be neither unnatural nor over refined. If
we add to this, what has been observed in the hil-
tory, that in proportion to the increase of Mary's
hatred of her husband, Bothwell made progress in
her favour, and that he became the object not oniy
of her confidence but her attachment, that opi.
nion acquires new strength. It is easy to observe
many advantages which might redound to Mary as
well as to Bothwell from the King's death; but
excepting them, no person, and no party in the
kingdom could derive the least benefit from that
event. Bothwell, accordingly, murdered the King,
and it was, in that age, thought no violent impu-
tation on Mary's character, to suppose that ihe had
consented to the deed.

THE steps which the Queen took after her hus-

band's death add strength to that supposition.
i. Melvil, who was in Edinburgh, at the time of
the King's death, asserts that " every body suspect-
ed the Earl of Bothwell; and those who durst speak
freely to others, said plainly that it was He." p.
155. 2. Mary having issued a proclamation, on
the I2th of February, offering a reward to any per.
son, who ihould discover those who had murdered
her husband; And. i. 36. a paper in anfwcr to this
was affixed to the gates of the Tolbooth, February
16, in which Bothwell was named as the chief per-
son guilty of that crime, and the Queen herfelfwas
accused of having given her content to it. And. ii.
156. 3. Soon after, February 20, the Earl of Len-
nox, the King's father, wrote to Mary, conjuring
her, by every motive, to prosecute the murderers
with the utmost rigour. He plainly declared his
own suspicions of Bothwell, and pointed out a me-
thod of proceeding againit him, and for discover-
ing the otherauthors of that crime, no less obvious
than equitable. He advised her to seize, and to

commit
14

cominit to sure custody Bothwell himself, and those

who were already named as his accomplices; to call
an aflembly of the nobles; to issue a proclamation,
inviting Bothwell's accusers to appear; and if, on
that encouragement, no person appeared to accuse
them, to hold them as innocent, and to dismiss them
without farther trial. And. i. 40. 4. Archbishop
Beatoun, her ambassador in France, in a letter to
Mary, March 9th, employs arguments of the ut-
most weight to persuade her to prosecute the mur-
derers with the greatest severity. " I can conclude
nathing (fays he) by quhat zour Majesty writes to
me zourfelf, than fen it has plefit God to conserve
zow to make a rigorous vengeance thereof, that ra-
ther than it be not actually taine, it appears to me
better in this warld than ze had loft life and all. I
ask your Majeftie pardon that I writ fa far, for I
can heir naething to zour prejudife, but I nan con- mfi
traindly writ the famin, that all may come to zour
knawlege; for the better remede may be put therto.
Heir it is needfull that ze forth shaw now rather
than ever of before, this greite vertue, magnani-
mitie, and constance that God has grantit zow, be
quahis grace, I hope ze fall overcome this most
heavy envie and difplefir of the committing thereof,
and conserve that reputation in all godliness, ze
have conquift of lang, quhich can appear na way is
mair clearlie, than that zow dofick justice that thef"c
haill world may declare zour innocence, and give*^c'e
teffimony for ever of thair treason that has com-
mitted (but fear of God or man) so cruel and un- "'vitbo
godlie a murther, quhairof there is fa meikle ill ,,c
spoken, that I am constraint to aik zow mercy
that neither can I or will I make the rehearsal therof,
which is oorr odious. But alas! Madame, all over
Europe this day there is na purpose in head fa fre-
quent as of zour MajefRie, and of the present state
of zour realm, quhilk is in the most part interpretit

K k 4 sinisterly."

15

sinisterly." Keith, Pref. ix. 5. Elizabeth, as ap.
pears from Append. Vol. I. No XIX. urged the
fame thing in strong terms. 6. The circumstances
of the cafe itself, no less than these solicitations and
remonifrances, called for the utmost vigour in her
proceedings. Her husband had been murdered in
a cruel manner, almost in her own presence. Her
subje&s were filled with the utmost horror at that
crime. Bothwell, one of her principal favourites,
had been publickly accused as the author of it.
Reflexions, extremely dishonourable to herself, had
been thrown out. If indignation, and the love of
juflice, did not prompt her to pursue the murderers
with ardour, decency, at least, and concern for vin-
dicating her own charader, should have induced
her to avoid any appearance of remiflnefs or want
of zeal.

BUT initead of this, Mary continued to discover,

in all her ations, the utmost partiality towards
Bothwell. On the I5th of February, five days after
the murder, she bellowed on him the reversion of
the superiority of the town of Leith, which in the
year 1565 she had mortgaged to the citizens of
Edinburgh. This grant was of much importance,
as it gave him not only the command of the prin-
cipal port in the kingdom, but a great ascendant
over the citizens of Edinburgh, who were extremely
desirous of keeping possession of it *. 2. Bothwell

being
* Copy from the original in the Charter-hou/e of the ci. of Edin-

burgh of an J4gnation to the rever/ion of the superiority cf
Leith by .ueen Mlary, to the Earl of Both well.
Maria Dei gratia Regina Scotorum, omnibus probis homini-

bns fuis ad quos pr'fentes litere pervenerint falutem. Sciais,
quod nos ad memoriam reducentes multiplex bonum verum et
fidele ferviidm, non tantum quondam noflra charitimae mati
Maris Regina regni noflri pro tempore in noltra minoritite
fa&uim & impenfnm, verum etiam nQbifmet ipfis, tam intra par-
tes Galli- quam intra hoc nostrum regnum, ad extentionem

noftri
i6

being extremely desirous to obtain the command of
:he castle of Edinburgh, the Queen, in order to pre-
vail on the Earl of Mar to surrender the government
of it, offered to commit the young Prince to his cuf-
tody. Mar consented; and (he instantly appointed
Bothwell governor of the caltle. And. i. Pref. 64.
Keith, 379. 3. The enquiry into the murder, pre-
vious to Bothwell's trial, seems to have been con-
duEted with the utmost remissness. Buchanan ex-
claims loudly againit this. And. ii. 24. Nor was

noftri honoris et auaoritatis in punitione furum, malefacorum,
et tranfgrefforum infra idem, per nostrum confifum confangui-
neum et confiliarium Jacobum comitem Bothuile, dominum Ha-
lis, Creighton et Liddifdale, magnum admirallum regni noftri,
commissionem et onerationem ad hunc effetum habentem, per
quas ipfe fuum corpus et vitam in magno periculo pofuit; ac
etiam, in performatione et extentione noitri dici fervitii, fuam
hereditatem, supra fummam viginti millium mercarum hujus
noftri regni, alienavit ac laefit. Et nos cogitantes quod, ex
noftri principali honore et devoria difum nostrum confifum
confanguineum et confiliarium cum quodam accidente et grati-
tudine recompenfare et gratificare incumbit qua: nos commode
fibi concedere poterimus, unde ipfe magis habilis omnibus as-
futuris temporibns effe poterit, et ad hujufmodi performandum
in omnibus caufis feu eventibus: In recompenfationem quorum
premifforum, ac pro diverfis aliis noltris rationalibus caufis
etconfiderationibus nos moventibus, Fecimus, &c. dicum Ja-
cobum comitem Bothuile, &c. ac suos haeredes mafculos quof-
cunque noftros legitimos, &c. aflignatos in et ad literas rever-
fionis faitas, &c. per Symonem Preston de eodem militem,
prepofitum, balivos, consules, et communitatem hujus noftri
burgi de Edinburgh, pro feipfis ac fuis fuccefforibus, &c. no-
bis, noftrifque heredibus, fuccefforibus, et affignatis pro re-
demptione, &c. fuperioritatis totius ville de Leith, &c. im-
pignorata per nos ditis prepofito, &c. ufb reversiones alienata:
continentis fummam dezem millium mercarum monetae pre-
fcripte numerandam et calculandam in parochiali ecclesia de
Edinburgh, super premonitione quadriginta dierum, ut moris
eft, veluti in di&is reverfionis iteris, &c. de data 8vo Oftob.
1565, &c. (The reft is form, and contains a clause of absolute
warrandice) IN Cujus REI TESTIMONIUM prefentibus, mag-
num figillum nostrum apponi fecimus. Apud Edinburgh, de-
cimo quinto die menfis Februarii, anno Domini millefimo quin-
gentefimo fexagefimo Texto, et regni noftri vicefimo quinto.

The great feal entire.

it

it without reason that he did so, as is evident from
a circumstance in the affidavit of Thomas Nelson,
one of the King's servants, who was in the house
when his master was murdered, and was dug up alive
out of the rubbilh. Being examined on the Mon-
day after the King's death, " This deponar fchcw
that Bonkle had the key of the fellare, and the
Queeenis fervandis the keyis of her fhalmir. Quhilk
the Laird of Tillibardin hearing, said, Hald thair,
here is ane ground. Efter quhilk words spoken, thai
left of, and procedit na farther in the inquisition."
And. iv. p. 2. 167. Had there been any intention
to search into the bottom of the matter, a circum.
stance of so much importance merited the most care-
ful inquiry. 4. Notwithstanding Lennox's repeat-
ed solicitations, notwithstanding the reasonableness
of his demands, and the necessity of complying with
them, in order to encourage any accuser to appear
against Bothwell, she not only refused to commit
him to custody, or even to remove him from her
pretence and councils; And. i. 42. 48. but by the
grants which we have mentioned, and by other cir-
cumtances, discovered an increase of attachment to
him. 5. She could not avoid bringing Bothwell to
a public trial; but she permitted him to fit as a
member in that meeting of the Privy Council, which
direacd his owi, trial; and the trial itself was car-
ried on with such unnecessary precipitancy, and with
so many other suspicious circumftances,as render his
acquittal rather an argument of his guilt than a proof
of his innocence. These circumitances have all been
mentioned at length, Vol I. p. 403, &c. and there-
fore are not repeated in this place. 6. Two days
after the trial, Mary gave a public proof of her re-
gard for Bothwell, by appointing him to carry the
sceptre before her at the meeting of Parliament.
Keith, 378. 7. In that parliament she granted him
a ratification of all the vast pofieffions and honours,

which
18

which she had conferred upon him, in which was
contained an ample enumeration of all the services
he had performed. And. i. 117. 8. Though
Melvil, who foresaw that her attachment to Both-
well would at length induce her to marry him,
warned her of the infamy and danger which would
attend that action, The not only disregarded this fa-
lutary admonition, but discovered what had Faffed
between them to Bothwell, which exposed Melvil
to his indignation. Melv. 156. 9. Bothwell feiz-
ed Mary as The returned from Stirling, April 24.
If he had done this without her knowledge and con-
sent, such an insult could not have failed to have
filled her with the most violent indignation. But
according to the account of an old MS. " The
friendly love was so highly contracted between this
great Princess, and her enormous subjet, that there
was no end thereof (for it was constantly esteemed
by all men that either of them loved other carnally)
so that {he suffered patiently to be led where the
lover lift, and all the way neither made obflacle,
impediment, clamour, or resistance, as in such ac-
cidents use to be, or that she might have done by
her princely authority, being accompanied with the
noble Earl of Huntly, and Secretary Maitland of
Lethington." Keith, 383. Melvil, who was pre-
sent, confirms this account, and tells us that the
officer, by whom he was seized, informed him that
nothing was done without the Queen's content.
Melv. 158. o1. On the izth of May, a few days
before her marriage, Mary declared that fle was
then at full liberty, and that though Bothwell had
offended her by seizing her person, she was so much
satisfied with his dutiful behaviour since that time,
and so indebted to him for past services, that {he
not only forgave that offence, but resolved to pro.
mote him to higher honours. And. i. 187. II.
Even after the confederate nobles had driven Both-

well

I9

well from the Queen's presence, and though she saw
that he was conlidered as the murderer of her for-
mer husband by so great a part of her subje&s, her
affe&ion did not in the least abate, and she conti-
nued to exprcfs the most unalterable attachment to
him. " I can perceive (fays Sir N. Throgmorton)
that the rigour with which the Queen is kept, pro-
ceedeth by order from these men, because that the
Queen will not by any means be induced to lend
her authority to prosecute the murder; nor will not
content by any persuasion to abandon the Lord Both-
well for her husband, but avoweth constantly that
she will live and die with him; and faith that if it
were put to her choice to relinquish her crown and
kingdom, or the Lord Bothwell, she would leave
her kingdom and dignity to go a simple damsel with
him, and that she will never content that he shall
fare worse, or have more harm than herself." App.
p. 42. See also p. 44 From this long enume-
ration of circumstances, we may, without violence,
draw the following conclusion. Had Mary really
been acceflary to the murder of her husband; had
Bothwell perpetrated the crime with her consent, or
at her command; and had (he intended to stifle the
evidence against him, and to prevent the discovery
of his guilt, (he could scarce have taken any other
steps than those she took, nor could her condut
have been more repugnant to all the maxims of
prudence and of decency.

THE positive evidence produced against Mary
may be classed under two heads.

i. THE depositions of some persons who were

employed in committing the murder, particularly
of Nicholas Hubert, who, in the writings of that
age, is called French Paris. This person, who was
Bothwell's servant, rznd much trusted by him, was
twice examined, and the original of one of his de-
positions, and a copy of the other, are Rfill extant,

It
20

It is pretended that both these are notorious forge-
ries. But they are remarkable for a simplicity and
naiveti which it is almost impossible to imitate; they
abound with a number of minute fads and particu-
larities, which the molt dextrous forger could not
have easily assembled, and conneced together with
any appearance of probability; and they are filled
with circumflances, which can scarce be supposed
to have entered the imagination of any man, but
one of Paris's profession and character. But, at
the fame time, it must be acknowledged that his
depositions contain some improbable circumstances.
He seems to have been a foolish talkative fellow;
the fear of death; the violence of torture; and the
desire of pleasing those in whose power he was,
tempted him, perhaps, to feign some circumstances,
and to exaggerate others. To fay that some circum-
stances in an affidavit are improbable or false, is
very different from faying that the whole is forged.
I fufpet the former to be the cafe here; but I fee no
appearance of the latter. Be that as it will, some
of the most material faCts in Paris's affidavits reft
upon his single testimony; and for that reason, I
have not in the Hiltory, nor shall I in this place,
lay any stress upon them.

2. THE letters said to be written by Mary to

Bothwell. These have been frequently published.
The accident by which the Queen's enemies got
them into their possession, is related Vol. I. 435.
When the authenticity of any ancient paper is du-
bious or contested, it may beafcertained either by
external or internal evidence. Both these have been
produced in the present cafe.

I. EXTERNAL proofs oft he genuineness of Mary's
letters. i. Murray and the nobles who adhered to
him, affirm upon their word and honour, that the
letters were written with the Queen's own hand,
with which they were well acquainted. Good. ii.

64.

21

64. 92. 2. The letters were publickly produced
in the parliament of Scotland, December 1567,
Good. ii. 360; and were so far confidered as ge.
nuine, that they are mentioned, in the act against
Mary, as one chief argument of her guilt. Good.
ii. 66. 3. They were ihewn privately to the Duke
of Norfolk, the Earl of Suffex, and Sir Ralph
Sadler, Elizabeth's commissioners at York. In the
account which they give of this matter to their mif.
trefs, they seem to confider the letters as genuine,
and express no suspicion of any forgery; they par-
ticularly observe, " that the matter contained in
them is such that it could hardly be invented and
devised by any other than herself; for that they dif-
course of some things, which were unknown to any
other than to herself and Bothwell; and as it is
hard to counterfeit so many, so the matter of them,
and the manner how these men came by them, is
such, as it feemeth that God, in whose fight murder
and bloodshed of the innocent is abominable, would
not permit the fame to be hid or concealed." Good.
ii. 142. They teem to have made such an impref-
sion on the Duke of Norfolk, that in a subsequent
letter to Pembroke, Leicelter, and Cecil, he has
these words, " If the matter shall be thought as
detestable and manifest to you, as for ought we can
perceive it feemeth here to us." Good. ii. 154.
4. After the conferences at York and Weftminltcr
were finished, Elizabeth resolved to call together
the Earls who were then at court, and to la-- before
them the whole proceedings againfl the Scottish
Queen, particularly that "' the letters and writings
exhibited by the Regent, as the Queen of Scots l:-
ters and writings, ihould also be inewcd, and con-
ference [i. e. comparison] thereof made in their
fight, with the letters of the said Queen's being
extant, and heretofore written with her own hand,
and sent to the Queen's majesty; whercby may be

searched

fearched'and examined what difference is betwixt
them." Good. ii. 252. They assembled accord-
ingly, at Hampton Court, December 14 and 15,
1568; and " The originals of the letters supposed
to be written with the Queen of Scots own hand,
were then also presently produced and perused; and
being read, were duly conferred and compared, for
the manner ot writing, and fashion of orthogra-
phy, with sundry other letters long since heretofore
written, and sent by the said Queen of Scots to the
Queen's Majesty.- In collation whereof no dit-
ference was found." Good. ii. 256. 5. Mary
having written an apologetical letter for her conduct
to the Count:ss of Lennox, July 1o, 1570*, lhe

tranf-

Mary's letter has never been publifiled, and ought to have

a place here, where evidence on all fides is fairly produced.
" Madam, if the wrang and false reportis of rebellis, enemies
weill knawin for traitouris to zow, and alace to much-z rusted of
me by zoure advice had not so far Iturred you aganis my inno-
cency, (and I must fay aganis all kyndnefs, that zow have not
onelie as it were condempnit me wrangfullie, bot so hated me,
as some wordis and opene deideis hes teftifeit to all the warlde,
a manyfeft miflyking in zow againis zowr awn blude) I wold not
have omittit thus lang my dewtie in wryting to zow excuGing me
of those untrew reporties made of me. But hoping with Go-dis
grace and tyme to have myinnocency knawin to zow, .as I tru't
it is already to the maifR pairt of all indiffercnt perfonis, I
thocht it best not to trouble .ow for a tymc till that such a mna-
ter is moved that tuichis us bayth, quhilk is the tranlporting
zoure littil son, and my onelie child in this counirey. To the
quhilk albeit I be never fa willing, Iwald be g!:id to :lave zoure
advyfe therein, as in all uther thingis tuiching himi. I have brrn
him, and God knawis with quhat danger to him and me boith;
and of zow he is 'efcendit. So I me-ne not to forzet my dcwtic
to zaw, in fchewin herein any unkyndnefs to zow, howv ui:kyndl:t
that ever ze have delt with me. bot will love zow a; n;y avr.t,
and refpet zow as my moder in law. And gif ye ples to knav
farther of my mynd in that and all uther thirnis be'wi,: us, m1 !
ambassador the bilhoD of Poss fall be ready tJ conter wiih zox.
And so after my hairtiie conmmendationis, rcmi;zing me to rmy
faide ambassador, and zour better confideratioun, I oi;r.nmi 7.0z
to the proteftioun of Almy'nity God, quhc.-i ;-ay to ,ref ve

Zu v

transmitted it to her husband then in Scotland; and
he returned to the Countess the following answer:
" Seeing you have remittit to me, to answer the
Queen the King's mother's letters sent to you, what
can I fay but that I do not marvell to fee hir writ
the best {he can for hirfelf, to feame to purge hir of
that, quhairof many befyde me are certainly per-
fuadit of the contrary, and I not only affurit by my
awin knawledge, but by her handwrit, the confeffi-
onis of men gone to the death, and uther infallibil
experience. It wull be lange tyme that is hable to
put a mattir so notorious in oblivioun, to mak black
quhyte, or innocency to appear quhair the contrary
is fa weill knawin. The maift indifferent, I trust,
doubtis not of the equite of zoure and my cause,
and of the just occafioun of our miflyking. Hir
richt dewtie to zow and me, being the parteis in-
terest, were hir trew confeifioun and unfeyned re-
pentance of that lamentable fact, odious for hir to
be reportit, and forrowfull for us to think of. God
is just, and willnot in the endbe abused; but as he
has manifeftedthe trewth, so will he puneife the
iniquity." Lennox's Orig. RegiI. of Letters. In
their public papers, the Queen's enemies may be
fufpeaed of advancing what would be most subser-
vient to their cause; not what was agreeable to
truth, or what flowed from their own inward con-
viction. But in a private letter to his own wife,
Lennox had no occasion to dissemble; and it is
plain, that he not only thought the Queen guilty,
but believed the authenticity of her letters to
Bothwell.

zow and my brother Charles, and caus zow to knaw my pain
better nor ze do. From Chatifworth this x of July 1570.

To my Ladie Lennox Youre natural gude Nice
my moder in law. and lovynge dochter.

II. WITH
24

II. WITH regard to the internal proofs of the

genuineness of the Queen's letters to Bothwell, we
may observe, i. That whenever a paper is forged
with a particular intention, the eagerness of the
forged to eftablilh the point in view, his solicitude
to cut off all doubts and cavils, and to avoid any
appearance of uncertainty, always prompt him to
use exprefflons the most explicit and full to his pur-
pose. The passages foisted into ancient authors by
Heretics in different ages: the legendary miracles
of the Romilh faints; the supposititious deeds in
their own favour produced by monasteries; the
false charters of homage mentioned Vol. I. p. 13.
are so many proofs of this assertion. No maxim
seems to be more certain than this, that a forger is
often apt to prove too much, but seldom falls into
the error of proving too little. The point which
the Queen's enemies had to establish, was, " that
as the Earl of Bothwell was chief executor of the
horrible and unworthy murder perpetrated, &c. so
was she of the foreknowledge, counsel, device, per-
fuader, and commander of the said murder to be
done." Good. ii. 207. But of this there are only
imperfec hints, obscure intimations, and dark ex-
pressions in the letters, which however convincing
evidence they might furnish if found real letters,
bear no resemblance to that glare and superfluity of
evidence which forgeries commonly contain. All
the advocates for Mary's innocence in her own age
contend that there is nothiing in the letters which can
serve as a proof of her guilt. Lefly, Blackwood,
Turner, &c. abound with passages to this purpose;
nor are the sentiments of those in the present age
different. " Yet still it might have been expected
(fays her latest defender) that some one or other of
the points or articles of the accusation should be
made out clearly by the proof. But nothing of that
is to be seen in the present cafe. There is nothing

VOL. II. L I in

in the letters, that could plainly shew the writer to
have been in the foreknowledge, counsel, or device
of any murder, far less to have persuaded or com-
manded it; and as little is there about maintaining
or justifying any murderers." Good. i. 76. How
ill advised were Mary's adversaries to contrac so
much guilt, and to pratcife so many artifices in or-
der to forge letters, which are so ill contrived for
establishing the conclusion they had in view ? Had
they been so base as to have recourse to forgery, is it
not natural to think that they would have produced
something more explicit and decisive ? 2. As it is
almost impossible to invent a long naration consist-
ing of many circumifances, and to connect it in
such a manner with real sacs, that no mark of fraud
fhail appear; for this reason skilful forgers avoid
any long detail of circumstances, efpecial!y of so-
reign and superfluous ones, well knowing that the
more these are multiplied, the more are the chances
of detection increased. Now Mary's letters, efpe-
cially the firif, are filled with a multiplicity of cir-
cumftances, extremely natural in a real correspond-
ence, but altogether foreign to the purpose of the
Queen's enemies, and which it would have been
extreme folly to have inserted, if they had been alto-
gether imaginary, and without foundation. 3. The
truth and reality offeveral circumstances in the let-
ters, and there, too, of no very public nature,
are confirmed by undoubted collateral evidence.
Lett. i. Good. ii. p. I. The Queen is said to have
met one of Lennox's gentlemen, and to have tome
conversation with him. Thomas Crawford, who
was the person, appeared before Elizabeth's com-
missioners, and confirmed, upon oath, the truth of
this circumfiance. He likewise declared, that
during the Queen's stay at Glasgow, the King re-
peated to him, every night, whatever had pawed
through the day, between her Majesty and him,

and
26

and that the account given of those conversations in
the first letter, is nearly the fame with what the
King communicated to him. Good. ii. 245. Ac-
cording to the fame letter there was much discourse
between, the King and Queen concerning Mynto,
Hiegait, and Walcar. Good. ii. 8. Io, II. What
this might be, was altogether unknown, till a letter
of Mary's, preserved in the Scottish college at Pa-
ris, and published, Keith, Pref. vii. discovered itto
be an affair of so much importance as merited all the
attention she paid to it at that time. It appears by
a letter from the French ambassador, that Mary
was subject to a violent pain in her fide. Keith,
ibid. This circumstance is mentioned, Lett. I. p.
30. in a manner so natural as can scarce belong to any
but a genuine production. If we shall still think
it probable to suppose that so many real circum-
itances were artfully introduced into letters by
the forgers, in order to give an air of authenticy
to their production; it will scarce be possible to hold
the fame opinion concerning the following particu-
lar. Before the Queen began her sirs letter to
Bothwell, she, as usual among those who write
long letters containing a variety offubje&s, made
notes or memorandums of the particulars she wished
to remember; but as she fat up writing during a
great part of the night, and after her attendants
were asleep, her paper failed her, and the continued
her letter upon the fame sheet, on which ihe had for-
merly made her memorandums. This she herself
takes notice of, and makes an apology for it: It
is late; I desire never to cease from writing unto you,
yet now after the killing of your hands, I will end
my letter. Excuse my evil writing, and read it
twice over. Excuse that thing that is fcriblit, for
I had na paper zefterday, quhen 1 wrait that of the
memorial." Good. ii. 28. These memorandums
}till appear in the middle of the letter; and what

I 1 i we

27

we have said seems naturally to account for the mans
ner how they might find their way into a real letter.
It is icarce to be supposed, however, that any forger
would think of placing memorandums in the mid-
dle of a letter, where, at first fight, they make so
absurd and so unnatural an appearance. But if any
shall ffill carry their refinement so far, as to suppose
that the forgers were so artful as to throw in this cir-
cumftance, in order to preserve the appearance of
genuineness, they muff at least allow that the
Queen's enemies, who employed there forgers,
could not be ignorant of the design and meaning of
these short notes and memorandums; but we find
them mistaking them so far as to imagine that they
were the credit of the bearer, i. e. points concerning
which the Queen had given him verbal inftru&tions.
Good. ii. 152. This they cannot poflibly be; for
the Queen herself writes with so much exactness
concerning thedifferent points in the memorandums,
that there was no need of giving any credit or in-
ftru&ions to the bearer concerning them. The me-
morandums are indeed the contents of the ler.er.
5. Mary, mentioning her conversation with the King
about the affair of Mynto, Hiegait, &c. fays,
" The morne [i. e. to-morrow] I will fpeikto
him upon that point;" and then adds, " As to the
reft of Wille Hiegait's he confeffit it; but it was
the morne [i. e. the morning] after my cumming
or he did it." Good. ii. 9. This addition, which
could not have been made till after the conversation
happened, seems either to have been inserted by the
Queen into the body of the letter, or perhaps, she
having written it on the margin, it was taken thence
into the text, If we suppose the letter to be a real
one, and written at different times, as it plainly
bears, this circumstance appears to be very natural;
but no reason could have induced a forger to have
ventured upon such an anachronism, for which there

was
28

was no necessity. An addition perfetly similar to
this made to a genuine paper, may be found, Good.
ii. 282.

BUT, on the other hand, Mary herself, and the
advocates for her innocence have contended that
these letters were forged by her enemies, on purpose
to blast her reputation, and to justify their own re-
bellion. It is not necessary to take notice of the
arguments which were produced, in her own age,
in support of this opinion; the observations which
we have already made, contain a full reply to them.
An author, who has inquired into the affairs of
that period with great industry, and who has ac-
quired much knowledge of them, has lately pub-
lilhed (as he affirms) a demonitration of the forgery
of Mary's letters. This demonstration he founds
upon evidence both internal and external. With re-
gard to the former he observes that the French copy
of the Queen's letters is plainly a translation of Bu-
chanan's Latin copy; which Latin copy is only a
translation of the Scottish copy; and, by confe-
quence, the assertion of the queen's enemies, that
{he wrote them originally in French, is altogether
groundless, and the whole letters are gross forgeries.
He accounts for this strange succession of tranfla-
tions, that supposing that when the forgery was pro-
jeeed, no person could be found capable of writing
originally in the French language letters which
would pass for the Queen's; for that reason they
were first composed in Scottith; but unluckily the
French interpreter, it would seem, did not under-
stand that language; and therefore Buchanan tranf-
lated them into Latin, and from his Latin they
were rendered into French. Good. i. 79, 8o.

IT is scarce necessary to observe that no proof
whatever is produced of any of the suppositions.
The manners of the Scots, in that age, when al-
most every man of rank fpept a part of his youth

L 1 a a,;}

in France, and the intercourse between the two na-
tions was great, render it altogether improbable
that so many complicated operations should be
necessary in order to procure a few letters to be
written in the French language.

BUT without insisting farther on this, we may ob-

serve that all this author's premises may be granted,
and yet his conclusion will not follow, unless he
likewise prove that the French letters, as we now
have them, are a true copy of those which were
produced by Murray and his party in the Scottilh
parliament, and at York and Wefhminfter. But
this he has not attempted; and if we attend to the
history of the letters, such an attempt, it is obvious,
must have been successful. The letters were firit
publilhed at the end of Buchanan's Detedion. The
firit edition of this treatise was in Latin, in which
language three of the Queen's letters were Subjoined
to it; this Latin edition was printed A. D. I571.
Soon after a Scottifli translation of it was publiflied,
and at the end of it were printed, likewise in Scot-
tifh, the three letters which had formerly appeared in
Latin, and five other lette.s in Scottish, which were
not in the Latin edition. Next appeared a French
translation of the detetion, and of seven of the
letters; this bears to have been printed at Edin-
burgh by Thomas Waltem, I572. The name of
the place, as well as the printer, is allowed by all
parties to be a manifest imposture. Our author,
from observing the day of the month, on which
the printing is said to have been finished, has as-
ferted that this edition was printed at London; but
no stress can be laid upon a date found in a book,
where every other circumstance with regard to the
printing is allowed to be false. Blackwood, who
(next to Lefly) was the best informed of all Ma-
ry's advocates in that age, affirms that the French
edition oF the detection, was published in France:

Il [Buchanan] a depuis adjouftd a ceite decla-

mation.
30

mation un petit libelle du pretendu mariage du Duc
de Norfolk, et de la facon de son proces, et la tout
envoye aux freres a la Rochelly, lefquels voyants
qu'il pouvoit fervir a la cause, I'ont traduit en
Francois, et iceluy fut imprimee at Edinbourg, c'eft
a dire a la Rochelle, par Thomas Waltem, noml
apofte et fait a plaifir. Martyre de Marie. Jebb. ii.
256." The author of the Innocence de Marie goes
farther, and names the French translator of the De-
tedion. " Et iceluy premierement compose (com-
me il femble) par George Buchanan Efcoffoys, et
depuis traduit en langue Francoise par un Hugonot,
Poitevin (advocat de vocation) Camuz, soy difant
gentilhomme, et un de plus remarquez fediteuz de
France. Jebb. i. 425. 443." The concurring tef-
timony of two cotemporary authors, whose residence
in France afforded them sufficient means of infor-
mation, must outweigh a fight conje&ure. This
French translator does not pretend to publish the
original French letters as written by the Queer her-
self; he expressly declares that he translated them
from the Latin. Good. i. 103. Had our author
attended to all these circumstances, he might have
saved himself the labour of so many criticifis to
prove that the present French copy of the letters is
a translation from the Latin. The French editor
himself acknowledges it, and so far as I know, no
person ever denied it.

WE may observe that the French translator was
so ignorant, as to affirm that Mary had written these
letters, partly in French, partly in Scottish. Good. i.
103. Had this translation been publilhed at London
by Cecil, or had it been made by his direcion, so
gross an error would not have been admitted into
it. This error, however, was owing to an odd cir-
cumftance. -In the Scottish tranllation of the De-
te&tion, two or three sentences of the original French
were prefixed to each letter, which breaking off
with an &c. the Scottish translation of the whole

L 1 4 followed,

31

followed. This method of printing translations
was not uncommon in that age. The French edi-
tor observing this, foolishly concluded that the let-
ters had been written partly in French, partly in
Scottilh.

IF we carefully confider those few French fen-

tences of each letter, which frill remain, and apply
to inem that species of criticism, by which our au-
thor has examined the whole, a clear proof will
arise, that there was a French copy not tranfated
from the Latin, but which was itself the original
from which both the Latin and Scottish have been
translated. This minute criticism most necessarily
be disagreeable to many readers; but luckily a few
sentences only are examined, which will render it
extremely short.

IN the first letter, the French sentence prefixed to

it ends with there words, y faifoit bon. It is plain
this expreflion, veu ce que peat un corps fans ca rr is
by no means a translation of cum plane perinde ejem
atque corpus fine corde. The whole sentence has a
spirit and elegance in the French, which neither the
Latin nor Sottish have retained. Jufques a la
dinee is not a translation of toto prandii tempore; the
Scottish translation, qubile denner-time, expresses the
sense of the French more properly; for anciently
qubile signified until as well as during. Je n'ay pas
tenu grand propos is not justly rendered neque contf-
lerim sermonem cum quoquam; the phrase used in the
French copy is one peculiar to that language, and
gives a more probable account of her behaviour than
the other. Yugeant bien qu'il n'y faifoit bon, is not
a translation of ut qui judicarent id non eje ex ufi.
The French sentence prefixed to Lett. 2. ends with
apprendre. It is evident that both the Latin and
Scottish translations have olr.izted altogether these
words, et tozutefoisje ne puis apprendre. The French
sentence prefixed to Let. 3. ends with presenter.

* a)e,

Y'aye veille plus tard la haut is plainly no translation
of diutius illic iorata Jfm; the sense of the French
is better expressed by the Scottilh I have walkit later
there-up. Again, Pour excuser voitre affaire is very
different from ad excufandum nojira negocia. The
five remaining letters never arppared in Latin; nor
is there any proof of their being ever translated into
that language. Four of them, however, are pub-
lithed in French. This entirely overturns our au-
thor's hypthefis concerning the necessity of a tranf-
lation into Latin.

IN the Scottish edition oftheDete&ion the whole

jonnet is printed in French as well in Scottish. It
is not possible to believe that this Scottish copy
could be the original from which the French was
translated. The French consists of verses which
have both measure and rhyme, and which, in ma-
ny places, are far from being inelegant. The Scot-
tifh consists of an equal number of lines, but with-
out measure or rhyme. Now no man could ever
think of a thing so absurd and impracticable, as to
require one to translate a certain given number of
lines in prose into an equal number of verses, where
both measure and rhyme were to be observed.
The Scottiih, on the contrary, appears manifestly
to be a translation of the French ; the phrases the
idioms, and many of the words are French, and not
Scottish. Besides, the Scottish translator has, in
several instances, mistaken the sense of the French,
and in many more expresses the sense imperfeaily
Had the sonnet been forged, this could not have
happened. The direEtors of the fraud would have
understood their own work. I shall satisfy myself
with one example, in which there is a proof of both
my assertion5. Stanza viii. ver. 9.

Pour

33

Pour luy j'attendz toute bonne fortune,
Pour luy je veux garder fante et vie,
Pour luy tout vertu de fuivre j'ay envie.

For him I attend all gude fortune,
For him I will conserve helthe and lyse,
For him I desire to ensue courage.

Attend in the first line is not a Scottish, but a

French phrase; the two other lines do not express
the sense of the French, and the last is abfolure
nonsense.

THE eighth letter was never translated into

French. It contains much refined myfticifin about
devices, a folly of that age, of which Mary was ve-
ry fond, as appears from several other circumftan-
ces, particularly from a letter concerning impresas
by Drummond of Hawthornden. If Mary's ad-
verfaries forged her letters, they were certainly em-
ployed very idly when they produced this.

FROM there observations it seems to be evident

that there was a French copy of Mary's letters, of
which the Latin and Scottish were only tranflati-
ons. Nothing now remains of this copy but those
few sentences which are prefixed to the Scottish
translation. The French editor laid hold of these
sentences, and tacked his own translation to them,
which, so far as it is his work, is a servile and a
very wretched translation of Buchanan's Latin;
whereas, in those introdu&ory Sentences we have
discovered strong marks of their being originals,
and certain proofs that they are not translated froin
the Latin.

IT is apparent, too, from comparing the Latin

and Scottish translations with there sentences, that
the Scottilh translator has more perfecly attained

the
34

the sense and spirit of the French than the Latin.
And as it appears that the letters, were very early
translated into Scottiih, Good. ii. 76; it is probable
that Buchanan made his translation not from the
French but from this Scottish copy. Were it ne-
ceffary, several critical proofs of this might be
produced. One that has been already mentioned
seems decisive. Diutius illic morata fum bears not
the least resemblance to j'av veille plus tard haut;
but if, instead of I walkit [i. e. watched] laiter
there up, we suppose that Buchanan read I waitit,
&c. this mistake into which he might so easily have
fallen, accounts for the error in his translation.

THESE criticifins, however minute, appear to be

well founded. But whatever opinion may be form-
ed concerning them, the other arguments with re-
gard to the internal evidence remain in full force.

THE external proof of the forgery of the Queen's

letters, which our author has produced, is extreme-
ly specious, but not more solid than that which we
have already examined. According to Murray's
diary, Mary set out from Edinburgh to Glasgow
January 21, 1567; she arrived there on the 23d;
left that place on the 27th; she, together with the
King, reached Linlithgow on the 28th, stayed in
that town only one night, and returned to Edinburgh
before the end of the month. But according to
our author, the Queen did not leave Edinburgh till
FriddaJanuary 24th; as fle flayed a night at Cal-
lendar, she could not reach Glasgow, sooner than
the evening of Saturday the 25th, ahd she return-
ed to Linlithgow on Tuesday the 28th. By confe-
quence, the first letter which supposes the Queen to
have been at least four days in Glasgow, as well as
the second letter, which bears date at Glasgow Sa-
turday morning, whereas she did not arrive there till
the evening, must be forgeries. That the Queen
did not set out from Edinburgh sooner than the

24th

35

24th of January, is evident (as he contends) from
the public records, which contain a Precept of con-
firmation of a life-rent by James Boyd to Margaret
Chalmers granted by the Queen on the 24th of Ja-
nuary at Edinburgh; and likewise a letter of the
Queen's dated at Edinburgh on the fame day, ap-
pointing James Inglis taylor to the Prince her son.
That the King and Queen had returned to Linlith-
gow on the _8th, appears from a deed in which
they appoint Andrew Ferrier keeper of their palace
there, dated at Linlithgow January 28. Good. i.
1I8.

THIS has been represented to be not only a con-

vincing, but a legal proof of the forgery of the
letters said to be written by Mary; but how far it
falls short of this, will appear from the following
considerations.

1. IT is evident from a declaration or confession

made by the Bishop of Ross, that before the con-
ferences at York, which were opened in the begin-
ning of Ocober 1568, Mary had, by an artifice of
Mailand's, got into her hands a copy of those
letters which her fubjecs accused her of having
written to Bothwell. Brown's trial of the Duke of
,Norfolk, 31, 36. It is highly probable that the
Bishop of Ross had seen the letters before he wrote
the defence of Queen Mary's honour in the year
1570. They were published to all the world toge-
ther with Buchanan's Detection, A. D. 1571. Now
if they had contained an error so gross, and so ob-
vious, at that time, to discovery, as the iuppofing
The Queen to have passed several days at Glasgow,
while the was really at Edinburgh; had they con-
tamed a letter dated at Glasgow Saturday morning,
rho' she did not arrive there till the evening; is it
Foffible that ihe herself, who knew her own mo-
rions, or the able and zealous advocates who ap-
teared for her in that age, should not have pub-

lilhed

lihed and exposed this contradiction, and by so do-
ing, have blasted, at once, the credit of such an
imposture ? In disquisitions which are naturally ab-
ftrufe and intricate, the ingenuity of the latest au-
thor may discover many things, which have efca-
ped the attention, or baffled the sagacity of those
who have formerly confidered the fame subject.
But when a matter of fa& lay so obvious to view,
this circumstance of its being unobserved by the
Queen herself, or by any of her adherents, is al-
most a demonStration that there is some mistake or
fallacy in our author's arguments. And so far are
any either of our historians, or of Mary's defend-
ers, from calling in question the common account
concerning the time of the Queen's setting out to
Glasgow and her returning from it, that there is
not the least appearance of any difference among
them with regard to this point. But farther,

2. THOSE papers in the public records, on which

our author refts the proof of his assertions, con-
cerning the Queen's motions, are not the originals
subscribed by the Queen, but copies only, or tran-
flations of copies of those originals.. It is not ne-
ceflary, nor would it be very easy to render this in-
telligible to persons unacquainted with the forms of
law in Scotland; but every Scotsman conversant in
business will understand me, when I fay that the
precept of confirmation of the life-rent to Boyd is
only a Latin copy or note of a precept, which was
fealed with the Privy-feal, on a warrant from the
fignet-office, proceeding on a signature which bore
date at Edinburgh the 24th of January; and that
the deed in favour of James Inglis is the copy of a
letter, fealed with the Privy-feal, proceeding on a
signature which bore date at Edinburgh January
24. From all this we may argue with Tome de-
greg of reason, that a proof founded on papers,

which

37

which are so many removes distant from the origi.
nals, cannot but be very lame and uncertain.

3. AT that time all public papers were issued in

the name both of the King and Queen; by law,
the King's subscription was no less requisite to any
paper than the Queen's; and therefore unless the
original signatures be produced in order to ascertain
the particular day when each of them signed, or to
prove that it was signed only by one of them, the
legal proof arising from there papers would be, that
both the King and Queen signed them at Edinburgh,
on the 24th of January.

4. THE dates of the warrants or precepts issued

by the sovereign, in that age, seem to have been in
a great measure arbitrary, and affixed at the plea-
sure of the writer; and of consequence, these dates
were seldom accurate, are often false, and can never
be relied upon. This abuse became so frequent,
and was found to be so pernicious that an aft of
parliament, A. D. I592, declared the affixing a
false date to a signature to be High Treason.

5. THERE still remain, in the public records, a

great number of papers, which prove the neceflity
of this law, as well as the weakness and fallacy of
our author's arguments. And though it be no easy
matter, at the distance of two centuries, to prove
any particular date to be false, yet surprising in-
stances of this kind shall be produced. Nothing is
more certain from history, than that the King was
at Glasgow 24th January i567 ; and yet the record
of signatures from 1565 to 1582, Fol. i6th, con-
tains the copy of a signature to Archibald Edmon-
flon said to have been subscribed by our Sovereigns,
i. e. the King and Queen, at Edinburgh, January
24, 1567; so that if we were to trust implicitly
the dates in the records of that age, or to hold our
author's argument to be good, it would prove that

not
33

not only the Queen, but the King too, was at Edin-
burgh on the 24th of January.

IT appears from an original letter of the Bishop
of Ross, that on the 25th of O&ober 1566, Mary
lay at the point of death; Keirh, App. 134; and
yet a deed is to be found in the public records,
which bears that it was signed by the Queen that
day, Privy-feal, Lib. 35. fol. 89, Ouchterlony*.

BOTHWELL seized the Queen as Ihe returned from

Stirling, April 24th, I567, and (according to her
own account) carried her to Dunbar with all dili-
gence. And. i. 95. But our author, relying on
the dates of some papers which he found in the re-
cords, supposes that Bothwell allowed her to stop at
Edinburgh, and to tranfaa business there. Nothing
can be more improbable than this supposition. We
may therefore rank the date of the deed to Wright
Privy-feal, Lib. 36. fol. 43. and which is men-
tioned by our author, Vol. i. I24. among the in-
stances of the false dates of papers which were if-
sued in the ordinary course of business in that age.
Our author has mistaken the date of the other pa-
per to Sorbes, ibid. it is signed April 14th, not
April 24th.

IF there be any point agreed upon in Mary's his-

tory, it is, that she remained at Dunbar from the
time that Bothwell carried her thither, till ihe re-
turned to Edinburgh along with him in the begin-
ning of May. Our author himself allows that she
resided twelve days there, Vol. i. 367. Now
though there are deeds in the records which bear
that they were signed by the Queen at Dunbar dur-

* N. B. In the former editions, another instance of the fame
nature with those which go before and follow was mentioned;
but that, as has since been discovered, was founded on a mistake
of the person employed to search the records, and is therefore
omitted in this edition. The reasoning, however, in the Dif-
fertation ftandsftitl in force, notwithstanding this omiflion.

ing

39

ing that time, yet there are others which bear that
they were signed at Edinburgh ; e. g. there is one
at Edinburgh, April 27th, Privy-feal, Lib. 36.
fol. 97. There are others said to be signed at
Dunbar on that day. Lib. 31. Chart. No. 524.
526. Ib. Lib. 32. No. 154. 157. There are some
signed at Dunbar April 28th. Others at Edinburgh
April 3oth, L;b. 32. Chart. No. 492. Others at
Dunbar May ill. Id. ibid. No. 158. These diffe-
rent charters suppose the Queen to have made so
many unknown, improbable, and inconsistent jour-
neys, that they afford the clearest demonfiration
that the dates in these records ought not to be de-
pended on.

THIS becomes more evident from the date of the

charter said to be signed April 27th, which hap-
pened that year to be a Sunday, which was not,
at that time, a day of business in Scotland, as ap.
pears from the books of federunt, then kept by the
Lords of Session.

FROM this short review of our author's proof of

the forgery of the letters to Bothwell, it is evident
that his arguments are far from amounting to de-
monftration.

ANOTHER argument against the genuineness of

these letters is founded on the style and composition,
which are said to be altogether unworthy of the
Oueen, and unlike her real productions. It is
plain, both from the great accuracy of composition
in molt of Mary's letters, and even from her soli-
citude to write them in a fair hand, that she valued
herself on those accomplishments, and was desirous
of being esteemed an elegant writer. But when the
wrote at any time in a hurry, then many marks ot
inaccuracy appear. A remarkable instance of this
may be found in a paper publiihed, Good. ii. 301.
Mary's letters to Bothwell were written in the ut-
most hurry; and yet under all the disadvantages of

a tranf-
40

a translation, they are not destitute either of spirit
or of energy. The manner in which she expresses
her love to Bothwell has been pronounced indecent
and even shocking. But Mary's temper led her to
warm expressions of her regard; those refinements
of delicacy, which now appear in all the commerce
between the sexes, were, in that age, but little
known, even among persons of the highest rank.
Among Lord Royfton's papers there is a series of
letters, from Mary to the Duke of Norfolk, co-
pied from the Harleian Library, P. 37 . B. fol.
88, in which Mary declares her love to that noble-
man in language, which would now be reckoned
extremely indelicate.

THE sonnets and some of Mary's letters to Both-
well were written before the murder of her hus-
band; some of them after that event, and before
her marriage to Bothwell. Those which are prior
to the death of her husband abound with the fond-
eft exprefllons of her love to Bothwell, and plainly
discover that their familiarity had been extremely
criminal. We find in them, too, some dark ex-
preffons, which her enemies employed to prove that
she was no firanger to the schemes which were
forming against her husband's life. Of this kind
are the following passages, " Alace! I nevir diffa-
vit ony body; bot I remit me altogidder to zour
will. Send me advertisement quhat I shall do, and
quhatfaever thing come thereof, I ihall obey zow.
Advise tou with zourfelf, gif ze can find out ony
mair secret inventioun by medicine, for he fuld tak
medicine and the bath at Craigmillar." Good. ii. 22.
"See not hir quhais fenzeit teiris fuld not be fa
meikle praifit and eftemit, as the trew and faithfull
travellis quhilk 1 fuftene for to merit hir place.
For obtaining of the quhilk, aganis my natural, I
betrayis thame that may impefche me. God forgive
me," &c. Ibid. 27. " I have walkit later thair-
VOL. II. M m up,

41

up, than I wald have done, gif it had not been to
draw Something out of him, quhilk this berer will
fchaw zow, quhilk is the fairest commodity that
can be offerit to excuse zour affairis." Ibid. 32.
From the letters posterior to the death of her hus-
band, it is evident that the scheme of Bothwell's
seizing Mary by force, and carrying her along with
him, was contrived in concert with herself, and
with her approbation *.

HAVING

* That letters of so much importance as those of Mary's to
Bothwell should have been entirely loft, appears to many alto-
gether unaccountable. After being produced in England before
Elizabeth's commiflioners, they were delivered back by them to
the Earl of Murray. Good. ii. 225. He seems to have kept
them in his poffefiion during life. After his death, they feil
into the hands of Lennox his successor, who restored them to
the Earl of Morton. Good ii. 9I. Though it be not neceffa-
rily connected with any of the questions which gave occasion to
this dissertation, it may perhaps satisfy the curiosity of some of
my readers to inform them, that after a very diligent search,
which has lately been made, no copy of Mary's letters to Both-
well can be found in any of the public libraries in Great Bn.
tain. The only certain intelligence concerning them, since the
time of their being delivered to Morton, was communicated by
the accurate Dr. Birch.

ExrRACT of the letters of Robert Bowes, Efq; ambaflador

from Queen Elizabeth to the king of Scotland, written to Sir
Francis Walsingham, 1ecretarv of state, from the original re-
gifter book of Mr. Bowes's letters, from the i sth of Augult 1582,
to 28th September 1583, in the possession of Christopher Hunter,
Ml. D. of Durham.

1582, 8th November, from Edinburgh.

ALBEIT I have been borne in hand, That the coffer wherein

were :he originals of letters between the Scottilh Queen and the
Earl of Bothwell, had been delivered to sundry hands, and
thereby was at present wanting, and unknown where it relied.
yet I have learned certainly by the Prior of Pluicardyne's means.
that both the coffer and also the writings are come, and nowre-
main with the Earl of Gowrie, who, I perceive, will be hardly
intreated to make delivery to her Majefy according to her Ma-
"iha 's defie. TaB'

HAVING thus stated the proof on both fides;
having examined at to great a length the different

lyftems

THIS time pall I have expended in searching where the cos-
serand writings were, wherein without the help of the Prior r
should have found great difficulty ; now I will essay Gowrie, and
of my success you ihall be shortly advertised.

zth of November 1582, from Edinburgh.

BECAUSE I had both learned, that the casket and letters men-
tioned in my last, before these were come to the poflefflon of the
Earl of Gowrie, and also found that no mean might prevail to
win the fame out of his hands without his own content and pri-
viry; in which behalf I had employed fit instruments, that ne-
rerthelefs profited nothing; therefore I attempted to essay him-
self, letting him know that the said caiket and letters should have
been brought to her Majely by the offer and good means of
good friends, promising to have delivered them to her Majesty
before they came into his hands and cultody, and knowing that
he did bear the like affeaion, and was ready to p:eafure her
Majelty in all things, and chiefly in this that had been thus far
tendered to her Majesty, and which thereby should be well ac-
cepted, and with princely thanks and gratuity be requited to his
comfort and contentment; I moved him that they might be a
present to be sent to her Majesty from him, and that I might
cause the fame to be conveyed to her Majelty adding hereunto
ufch words and arguments as might both stir up a hope of libe-
rality, and also befi effeed the purpose. At the firit he was loth
;o agree that they were in his possession; but I let him plainly
know that I was certainly informed, that they were delivered to
him by Sanders Jardin ; whereupon he pressed to know who did
lo inform me, enquiring whether the sons of the Earl of Mor-
ton had done it or no. I did not otherways in plain terms deny
or answer thereunto, but that he might think that he had told
"me, as the prior is ready to avouch, and well pleated that I shall
give him to be the author thereof; after he had said [though]
all there letters were in his keeping (which he would neither
grant nor deny) yet he might not deliver them to any person
without the consents and privities, as well of the King, that
had interest therein, as also of the reft of the noblemen enter-
prifers of the action against the King's mother, and that would
have them kept as an evidence to warrant and make good that
laion. And albeit I replied, that their alion in that part touch-
ing the assignation of the crown to the King by his mother, had
received such eftablilhment, confirmation, and strength, by afts

M m 2 of

43

systems with regard to the fats in controversy; it
may be expeced that I should now pronounce fen-

tence.

cf parliament and other public authority and instruments, as
neither should that cafe be suffered to come in debate or queflion,
nor fnch scrolls and papers ought to be shewed for the strength-
ening thereof, so as these might well be left and be rendered to
the hands of her Majesty, to whom they were dellined before
they fell in his keeping; yet he would not be removed or satis
fled; concluding, after much reasonings, that the Earl of Mor-
ton, nor any other that had the charge and keeping thereof, durt
at any time make delivery; and because it was the firl time
that I had moved him therein, and that he would gladly both
anfver her Majesty's good expectation in him, and also perform
his duty due to his sovereign and associates in the action afore-
said; therefore he would seek out the said caiket and letters, at
his return to his house, which he thought fllould be within a
short time; and upon finding of the fame and better advice, and
consideration had of the cause, he would give further answer.
This resolution I have received as to the thing; and for the pre-
sent I could not better, leaving him to give her Majesty luch
tefiimony of his good will towards her, by his frank dealing
herein, as fie may have cause to confirm her highnesses good
opinion conceived already of him, and be thereby drawn to
greater goodness towards him. I shall ifill labour him both by
myself and also by all other means; but I greatly diltrutl the de-
fired fuccefa herein.

24th of November 158z, from Edinburgh.

FoR the recovery of the letters in the coffer, come to the

hands of the Earl ofGowrie, I have lately moved him earncllly
therein, letting him know the purpose of the Scortilh Queen,
both giving out that the letters are counterfeited by her rebels.
and also seeking thereon to have them delivered to her or de-
faced, and that the means which she will make in this be-
half (hall be so great and effectua!, as these writings cannot be
safely kept in that realm without dangerous offence of hint that
hash the cumody thereof, neither shall he that- is once knowr to
have them be fufiered to hold them in his hands. Herewith I
have at large opened the perils likely to fall to that aftion, ai:d
the parties therein, and particularly to himself that is now"
openly known to have the pofeflion of these wii ings, and [
have lettin him fee what surety it (hall bring to the said caus
and all the parties therein, and to himself, that these writing,
may be with secsecy and good order committed to the kcep:c;
cf her Majeily, that will have them ready whensoever any' u'-

0:ii'i

tence. In my opinion, there are only two conclu-
sions, which can be drawn from the fads which have
been enumerated,

ONE,

shall be for them, and by her Highnefcs countenance defend
them and the parties from such wrongful objections as shall be
laid againit them, offering at length to him, that if he be not fully
fatisfed herein, or doubt that the reit of the associates /hall not
like of the delivery of them, to her Majelty in this good manner,
and for the interest rehearsed, that I llall readily, upon meeting
and conference with them, procure their assent in this part; (a
matter more easy to offer than to perform) and, lastly, moving
him that (for the secrecy and benefit of the cause, and that her
Majelfy's good opinion towards himfelfmay be firmly fettled and
confirmed by his acceptable forwardness herein) he would with-
outneedlefs scruple, frankly commit there writings to her Ma-
jelly's good custody for the good uses received. After long de-
bate he resolved, and said, that he would unfeignedly shew and
do to her Majely all the pleasure that he might without offence
to the King his Sovereign, and prejudice to the associates in the
action, and therefore he would first make search and view the
said letters, and herein take advice what he might do, and how
far he might satisfy and content her Majesty; promising thereon
to give more resolute answer; and he concluded flatly, that after
he had found and seen the writings, that he might nop make de-
livery of them iwithout the privity of the King. Albeit I food
long with him against his resolution in this point, to acquaint
the King with this matter before the letters were in the hands
of her Majesty, letting him fee that his doings there should ad-
mit great danger to the cause; yet I could not remove him from
it. It may be that he meaneth to put over the matter from him-
self to the King, upon fight whereof I lhall travel effectually to ob-
tain the King's consent, that the letters may be comnmitted to
her Majesty's keeping, thinking it more cafy to prevail herein
with the King, in the present love and affection that he beareth
to her Highness, than to win any thing at the hands of the as-
fociatesin the a&ion, whereof some principal of them now come
and remain at the devotion of the King's mother; in this I Ihall
ILll call on Gowrie to search out the coffer, according to his pro-
mise; and as I Ihall find him minded to do therein, so shall I
do my belt and whole endeavour to effe& the !uccefs to her Ma-
jefty's belt contentment,

zd December 1582, from Edinburgh.

BECAUSE I saw good opportunity offered to renew the m.it-
ter to the Earl of Gowrie for recovery of the letters in the cos-

Mm 3 ser

ONE, that Bothwell, prompted by his ambition

or love, encouraged by the Queen's known aver-
son to her husband, and presuming on her attach-
ment to himself, itruck the blow without having
concerted with her the manner or circumstances of
perpetrating that crime. That Mary, initead of
testifying much indignation at the deed, or discover-
ing any resentment againif Bothwell, who was ac-
culed of having committed it, continued to load
him with marks of her regard, condu&ed his trial in
such a manner as rendered it impossible to discover
his guilt, and soon after, in opposition to all the
maxims of decency or of prudence, voluntarily
agreed to a marriage with him, which every confi-
deration mhould have induced her tQdeteft. By this
verdict, Mary is not pronounced guilty of having
contrived the murder of her husband, or even of
having previously given her content to his death;
but lhe is not acquitted of having discovered her
approbation of the deed, by her behaviour towards
him who was the author of it.

THE other conclusion is that whichJMurray and

his adherents laboured to eftablih, " That as James,

ser in his hands, therefore I put him in mind thereof; where-
upon he told me, that the Duke of Lennox had fought earnefl-
ly to have had those letters, and that the King did know where
they were, so as they could not be delivered to her Majesty with-
out the King's privity and content, and he pretended to be
fill willing to plealure her Majesty in the fame, so far as he
may with his duty to the King and to the reft of the associates
in that acion ; but I greatly distrust to effect this to her Ma-
jefty's pleasure, -herein, nevertheless, I shall do my uttermoil
endeavours.

WHETHRR James VI. who put the Earl of Gowrieto death.

A. D. 1584, and seized all his effeets, took care to delfroy hi,
mother's letters, for whose honour he was at that time extreel'
zealous; whether they have perished by tome unknown accident.
or whether they may not till remain unobserved among the ;r-
chives of some of our great families, it is impollible to deter-
mine.

fum-

fumtyme Erle of Bothwile, was the chiefe executor
of the horribill and unworthy murder, perpetrat in
the person of umquhile King Henry of gude me-
;nory, fader to our Soveraine Lord, and the
Queenis lauchfull husband; fa was Ihe of the fore-
knowledge, counfall, devise, perfwader and com-
mandar of the said murder to be done." Good. ii.

207. WHICH of these conclusions is most agreeable to
the evidence, that has been produced, I leave my
readers to determine.

INDEX.

47

# INDEX.

I N D E X.
N. B. The Numeral Letters refer to the Volume,

and the Figures to the Pages.

A

D AM S 0 N, archbishop of St. Andrews, is excommu-
nicated by the fynod of Fife, ii. 139. He excommuni-
cated his opponents, ib. is restored by the general assem-

bly upon conditions, L4o. his mean fubmifion to the general
assembly 204
lbany, Alexander, Duke of, cabals with his nobles against his
brother K. James III. i. 57. is made prisoner, but escapes to
France, ibid. concludes a treaty with Ed. IV. of England, 58.
procures assistance to invade Scotland on mean conditions, ib.
returns to Scotland, and is restored to favour, 59. cabals again,
but is forced to fly to France ibid. 60
- Duke of, made Regent during the minority of K. James
V. i. 37. 63. after several unsuccessful truggles with the no-
bility, he is forced to retire to France 63

.Jlencn, Duke of, Q. Elizabeth long amuses the court of France,

by carrying on a treaty of marriage with him ii. 69
Ilens, cardinal, published a book proving the lawfulness of kil-

ling excommunicated Princes -ii. 125
,Iva, Duke of, his intrigues in favour of Q_ Mary, ii. 27. 31-

43. is recalled fiom his government of the Netherlands 51
-.mbajfadors, their office i. 87
*,ndre.ws St. the archbishop of, remarkably cured of a dangerous

difiemper, i. 135, 136. the motives of his opposition to the Q,
Regent, 158. his great influence on the bench of Biflops and
weight in Parliament, 163. governed the church with great
moderation, 165. persecutes the reformers, ibid. 166. per-
brmns great fcrvice to the Congregation againlt the French, 22 .
is imprisoned for celebrating Mass, 301. ruins Q. Mary's as-
fairs by his imprudent condut, 456, 457. is taken prisoner in
Dumbarton Cattle, and hanged ii. 17
- the cattle of, demolished by the French i. 116

-- the prior of, promotes a treaty between the Q. Regent

and the Reformers, i. I78. is provoked to leave the court,
180. is one of the chief promoters of the reformation, 196.

some
__

some account, and a characer of him, ibid. 197. artful en-
deavours used to undermine him, ibid. presumption of his in-
nocence of the designs charged on him, ibid. is sent by the
convention to invite the Queen to Scotland, 252. is received
by her with confidence and affection, 253. restrains the turbulent
spirit of the people against popery, 266, 267. is sent to restrain
the licentious practices of the borderers, 272. executes his corn-
miflion with vigour and prudence, 273. a conspiracy againtl
him discovered, 282. is created Earl of Mar, 285. becomes
obnoxious to the Earl of Huntley, ib. See Mar and Murray.

Angus, Ear! of, was the only man who asserted the independency

of his country, i. 13, 24. assumes the Regency during the
minority of K. James V. 37. 64. is unable to gain his assec-
tions, 64. is attainted and flies into England 65

---- Obtains leave to return into Scotland, ii. 22. surrenders

himself to K. James VI. 103. he with several others seize the
caflle of Stirling to oppose Arran, o16. they are forced to fly
into England at the approacl of the King with an army, 107.
he is attainted and his estate forfeited, 115. is concerned in a
plot in favour of Spain, 209. is seized and committed prisoner
to the castle of Edinburgh, 210. escapes and flies to the moun-
tains, 211. offers to submit to a trial, 215. sentence is pro-
nounced against him, 216. he refuses to submit 217

Anjcu, Duke of, a marriage proposed between him and Q Eli-

zabeth - ii 25

Anne, a Princess of Denmark, married to K. James VI. ii. zoo,

201. her arrival in Scotland and coronation, 203. heads a par-
ty that opposes the chancellor 212, 213

Archsbihcps, Bi.fops, Deans, and Chapters revived in Scotland dur-

ing the King's minority, ii. 38, 39. this gives great offence to
many of the clergy, 39, 40. an a& of assembly against there
offices, 16, 87. Bilhops made fubje& to prefbyteries and assem-
blies, 139. a great itroke given to their authority, 185, 186.
None of them present at the Queen's coronation 203

Argyll, Earl of, is appointed to carry the crown matrimonial to the

Dauphin of France, i. 163. 164. uses his interest with the re-
formers to make a treaty with the Queen Regent, 178. leaves
her court in resentment of her treachery, 18o. refuses to ac-
cede to a treaty with Murray the Regent, 496. is soon after
forced to fobmit, 497. a&ts as lieutenant to the Queen after
the Regent's murder, ii. 6. is prevailed on to join the King's
party, 21. quarrels with Athole, 55. confederates with him
against Morton, the Regent, for their mutual defence, ibid, they
remonflrate against him to the King, 58. they raise forces
against him, 64- negociate a treaty with him by the media-
tion of Q. Elizabeth, 65. is promoted to the office of chan-
cellor, 67. The King's authority delegated to him and Lord
Sorbes against the popiih Lords, 22o. his forces are defeated
in an engagement with them ibid. 221
Arifocracy, predominant in Scotland i. 2;

Armadce,

jrmado, Spanilh, preparations for it, ii. 188, 189. it is defeated

194

Arran, Earl, is appointed Regent during the minority of Q Mary,

i. 97. his charader, 98. consents to the schemes of England
which disgusts the public, loo. becomes suspicious of the Earl
ofLennox, 1oz. is forced to renounce the friendlhip with Eng-
land and declare for France, 103. and persecute the reformers,
104. puplickly abjures the dodrines of the reformers, soS. is
contemned by one half and little trusted by the other part of the
nation, io6. heads the partisans of France and defenders of
popery, 107. attempts in vain to seize the murderers of cardinal
Beatoun, 113. is forced to make a truce with the conspirators,
114. his eldest son is conditionally excluded all right of fuc-
ceflion, 117. his mean concession to the court of France, 124.
iz;. gets the title of Chatelherault,, 25;. is undermined by
the Q. Dowager, 132, 133. proposals and arguments for his
resignation, 134. he conlents to it, 135. retracts by the influence
of the archbishop of St. Andrews, 136. is at last prevailed on
and gets advantageous terms, 137. See Chatelherault
- eldest son of the Duke of Chatelherault, joins in an aflo-
ciation with the reformers, i. 194. narrowly escapes intended
ruin at the court of France, 195. is full of resentment against
the French on that account, ibid. 196. the Congregation so-
licit Q. Elizabeth to marry him, z44. his great imprudence
with regard to Q. Mary, 274. discovers a conspiracy against
the Queen's favourites, 282. loses his reason, ii. 67, 68. is
imprisoned by Morton 68
- late Cap. Stewart, gets that title and estate, ii. 80. is

appointed to conduc Morton, from Dumbarton to Edinburgh,
ibid. tortures several of his servants cruelly, 81. his infamous
marriage with the Countess of March, 83, 84. his variance with
Lennox, 84. is frustrated in an attempt to rescue the King at
Ruthven, 91. is confined prisoner to the cattle of Stirling, 92.
regains his liberty and the King's regard, 1oo. resumes his
power and arrogance, ibid. gets the Ruthven conspirators de-
clared guilty of high treason, 103. is detelted as author of a per-
fecution against the clergy, io9. is gained over to Q. Elizabeth's
interell, 114. gets several forfeited estates, 116. his corrup-
tion and insolence, 122. is made chancellor and has unlimited
ower, ibid. 123. his venality is limited by his wife, i23.
is monstrous tyranny and oppression, ib. 124. his power un-
dermined by Wotton the Englilh envoy, 134, 135. is confined
in the castle of St. Andrew's, but soon recovers favour, 135, 136.
his interest finks much, 138. is stripped of his honours and
(poils, and reduced to his original station -ibid.
Articles, Lords of, their origin and business, i. 81. by whom cho-

fen, 82, 83. the subsequent variations and political use made of
this inltitution 83, 84
4ruindel, Earl of, is appointed a commiflioner to the conference
at Wefiminfter - i. 486

A.q/,

Ajatb, ambassador from Q. Elizabeth to Scotland, ii. 1ol. his

great promises to King james, ibid. his promises are soon for-
got, 195. he is aihamned and withdraws privately from Scot-
land - - ibid.

AZrf ation, the frequency of it in Scotland, how accounted for,

i. 363--365. several instances of it in France, 365, 366. a
stop put to it there and in Scotland, 366. several great men
approve of it, 367. prevailed greatly afterwards ii. 20

jtemnily of the church of Scotland, the first but feeble and irre-

gular, i. 251. another assembly, their demands from the con-
vention, 274, 275. two other assemblies in vain solicit an aug-
mentation of their revenues, 293, 294. they address Q Mary
in high firains of complaints, 342. an afiembly proceeds at Glaf-
gow notwithfranding the King's interdi&tion, ii. 86, 87. two
assemblies yield many of the privileges of the church to the
King, 239, 240. declare it lawful for ministers to fit in Parlia-
ment, 243, 244. See Clergy.
/JIiciaticn, formed in defence of Q. Elizabeth against Q. Manr

ii. IlS

A:bole, Earl of, the occasion of his quarrel with the Earl of Ar-

gyll, ii. 55. joins with him in opposing Morton the Regent, ib.
dies soon after an entertainment at Morton's, 66. fulpicions of
his being poilbned ibld.
.lb:igr.r, Lord de, second son of the Lord Lennox, arrives in
Scotland from France, ii. 70. becomes soon a great favourite
of K. James, ibid. high titles and polt bestowed on him, ib.
71. notes againsi him, Appendix, 461. See Lenox.
.firian family, their origin and power i. 87, SS

B

Abir.gto.., Anthony, some account of him, ii. 143. the rife of
his conspiracy against Q Elizabeth, 142, 143. the names

and scheme of operations of his associates, ibid, 114. they are
betrayed, seized, and executed 145, 146

Barc, 'Sir Nicholas, appointed one of the commissioners to the

confederates at Weftminifter i. 4S6

Balal, John, his claim to the crown of Scotland, i. to. is pre-

ferred by Ed. I. 12. soon forced by him to resign ibii.

Ballard, a trafficking pried, solicits an invasion of England from

Spain, ii. 143. joins in a conspiracy to murder Q. Elizabeth, ib.
is difcevered and taken into cuftodv, 146. and executed, ibid.

Earcrs, their jurifdcicion very extenfi.e, i. 21. the difference bc-

tween the greater and lesser, whence, 71. three hundred of them
remonltrate against the condua of the Q Dowager, j1;2. the
leser admitted by their representatives in Parliament, 1, 117.
petition of the leser Barons to Parliament, Append. 32j
See Nobles,

Bafddctwr DArcn, a book publihed by King James VI. strengthens
his interest i- England - et. 4;

Beatl6U>

Bratoun, cardinal, made use of by K. James V. to mortify the no-

bles, i. 68, 69. his pretensions to the Regency on the death of
that Prince, 96. forges a tefiament of the late King, ib. his
views how disappointed, ib. his charaaer, 97. opposes the Earl
of Arran, Regent, loo, lo, excites moll of the nation against
the English, 102. seizes the young Queen and her mother, ib.
cajols the Earl of Lennox, ib. obliges the Regent to renounce
England and declare for France, 103. and to persecute the
reformers, 104, engrosses the cheif direcion of affairs, o16.
his double dealing with the Earl of Lennox resented, ib. 107.
is murdered, 112. his death fatal to the Catholics, 113. a
vain attempt to revenge it, ib. 114. scandalous reports con-
cerning him - -- 147
Redford, Earl of, comes as ambassador from Q. Elizabeth to wit-

ness the baptism of James VI. i. 387. his inlructions, 388,
389. his letters to Sir W. Cecil, Appendix 349. 354. 363.

Bellendon, Sir Lewis, justice clerk, K. James's resident at Lon-

don, ii. 133, joins in promoting Q. Elizabeth's interest in Scot-
land, ibid. is sent with her envoy into that country ibid.

Black, Mr. David, minister at St. Andrews, his ridiculous and

seditious expressions in the pulpit, ii. 229, 230. being sup-
ported by the clergy, he declines the civil jurifdiEtion, 230. is
condemned by the privy council, 231. is sentenced by the
King to reside beyond Spey - 23Z
Blackader, captain, and three others, executed for the murder of

Darnly i. 435

Boethius, Hetor, his hillory of Scotland, some account of i. 5
Bolton Cafile, Q. Mary confined a prisoner there i. 471
Bonci, a foreigner, made govenor of Orkney i. 150
Borde;ers, an attempt to restrain their licentious practice, i 272,

273. Q. Mary visits them, 377. a scuffle there, in which the
Engi::h warlrde, &c. were maJy prisoners - ii. 53
Bort!b.ick, Lord, aflilts the Q Regent in defending Leith, i. 213
Bohv/ell, Earl of, intercepts a ium of money fiom England to the

Congregation, i. l2. favours the Qeicen Regent, but resides at
his own house, 213. his resentment against the prior of St. An-
drews, 215. is by him when Earl of Murray and Regent fum-
moned to a public trial, 326. prevents i: by leaving the king-
dom, 327. a sentence of outlawry against him prevented by
the Queen, ibid. is permitted to return, 336. tfcapes with her
after the murder of Rizio, 361. some account of his former be-
haviour, 369, 370. commences a favourite of the Queen, 370.
the reconciles him to several Lords, with whom he was at va-
riance, ibid. 371. he increases in favour with her, 373. cir-
cumrfances concurring in this, 374. he is wounded in attempt-
ing to leize one of the borderers, 377. the Queen's extraordi-
nary regard for him on this occasion, ibid. to secure adherents
he obtains a pardon for Morton and his associates, 391. propo-
fes the relloration of the popish ccclefiaflical jurifdietion, 393.
his views in this, ibid. 39+. is fufpeaed the author of Darnly's

murder,

murder, 40o. is charged with it by Lennox, 403. but dill fa.
voured by the Queen, 404. appointed governor of Edinburgh
Caffle, ibid. is trial his hurried on, 405. remarkable par-
tiality in his favour, 406. Lennox accuses him openly, 407.
comes to his trial with a great retinue. 408, 409. is acquitted
by a jury, 409. the trial universally censured, ibid. 410.
challenges any that would accuse him, 410. several acs of
Parliament passed in his favour, ibid. 411. he procures an ad in
favour of the reformation, ibid. 412. prevails on several of the
nobles to recommed him as a huffand to the Queen, 4134,
41S. seizes the Queen on a journey from Stirling, and carries
her to Dunbar, 417, 418. his view in this, 418 obtains a par
don-under the great feal, ib. 410. procures a divorce from his
wife, 419. carries the Queen to the castle of Edinburgh, ibid.
is created Duke of Orkney, 420. and married to the Queen,
ibid. is not allowed the title of King, 421. he watches the
Queen very closely, ibid. 422. endeavours to get the Prince
into his custody, 422, 423. is alarmed with an association of
the nobles againfl the Queen and him, 424, 425. carries the
Queen to the catle of Borthwick, 426. raises forces againll
the confederate Lords, ibid. he marches against them, 427.
proposes a single combat, 428. this how prevented, 429. takts
his last farewell of the Queen, and is forced to fly, ibid. fends for
a calket of letters from Q_ Mary to him, 435. they are inter-
cepted by the Earl of Morton, ibid. his miserable fate, 44-
448. reflections on his condut, 448. copy of his divorce from
Lady Jean Gordon, Appendix 9

B£tbhwell, late Francis Stewart, created Earl of Bothwell, ii. 196.

is imprisoned for consulting witches, 20o, 206. escapes and
attempts to break into the King's presence, 206. retires to the
north, ibid. He and his adherents are attainted, 209. fails in
an attempt to seize the King, ibid. is taken under protection of
Q Elizabeth, who solicits for him, 211. seizes the King's per-
son, 213. forces him to dismiss the chancellor, and his other fa-
vourites, ibid. and to grant him remission, ibid. his bold
and insolent behaviour afterwards, 214. is encouraged by the
English ambassador, 217. makes another attempt to come at
the King, 218. is repulsed and obliged to fly to the north oi
England, ibid. is abandoned by Q Elizabeth, and forced to
fly into Spain and Italy, 223. remains in indigent obfcurl;?,
and is never after reconciled to the King ibid.

A-dam, bishop of Orkney, performs the ceremony of mtlr-

riage of Q. Mary to the Earl of Bothwell - i. 420

Botl-Uellsaugb. See Hamilton.
.B£esgne, wrested by the French out of the hands of the English,

i. 24. they consent to reifore it and its dependencies to the
French 126
Bowes, Envoy from Q. Elizabeth, accuses Lennox of dilturbing

the peace, ii. 74. is refused an audience, ibid. sent to encou-

rage

rage the conspirators at Ruthven, 9z. to inquire about King
James's correspondence with the Pope - 246, 247
Boyd, Lord, his ambitious views in the time of K. James III.

frustrated i. 36

- is prevailed on to join the King's party againll Q. Mary, ii.

21. joins the Ruthven conspirators 89

Brienne, Count de, comes an ambassador from France to witness

the baptism of K. James VI. i. 387

Bruce, Robert, his claim to the crown of Scotland, i. io. his grand-

son asserts his right and vindicates the honour of his country,
Ia. he attempts to reduce the power of the nobles 46

- a priefl, employed by the King of Spain to seduce the

Scotch nobles - - - ii. 196
- Mr. Robert, a prelbyterian minifler, performs the ceremony

of the coronation of K. James's Queen - ii. zo3
- Edward, abbot of Kinlofs, acquits himself with address and

reputation as ambassador at the court of England, ii. 244, 24;
- Mr. Robert, a minister, his resolution in refuting to publiil

the King's account of Gowrie's conspiracy, ii. 269. is deprived
and banished on that account ibid.
Buchanan, George, his hiflory of Scotland, some account of, i. 5.

remarks on his dialogue De jure Regis, 183. alone accuses Q.
Mary of a criminal correspondence with Rizio, 356. approved
of affafllnation, 397. his partiality in overlooking an at of Par-
liament in favour of the reformation, 412. attends the Regent
into England when called on to accuse Q Mary, 475. was one
of the preceptors of K. Jame VI. ii. 56. commended for nis
great genius -- 02

Burleigh. See Cecil.
Burroughs, when firit represented in Parliament i. 210

C

AIUS, John, a declaration of his in name of Q. Elizabeth to
the Lords of Grange at Lethington, Appendix 411

Caithness, Earl of, his protest at the trial of Bothwell for the

murder of Darnly i. 409
Calvin, the patron and reltorer of presbyterian church govern-

ment i. 249
Camden, Come miltakes of his i. 388, 389. 415
Canongate, near Edinburgh, a Parliament held there ii. Io
Cardan, some account of him, i. 135, 136. his remarkable cure

of the bilhop of St. Andrews ibid.
Carey, Sir George, sent ambassador from Q_ Elizabeth to en-
courage the conspirators at Ruthven - ii. 92

Robert, lent by Q_ Elizabeth to sooth K. James after the

death of his mother, ii. 180. is not permitted to enter Scot-
land, ibid. was the first that brought K. James intelligence of
the death of Q. Elizabeth 290
Caiet of letters from QL Mary to Bothwell, seized by the Earl of

Morton,

Morton, i. 435. her enemies avail themselves much of them.

ibid. 436

Cafjls, Earl of, joins the King's party ii. 21
CaJfelau, the French ambassador, is employed to procure the con-

sent of his court to her marriage with Darnly, i. 318, 319. he
endeavours to make up the differences between the Queen and
him, 373. his intercefllion in behalf of QI Mary ii. 129

Catherine of Medicis, assumes the government after the death of

Francis II. her son, i. 246. her harsh treatment of Q. MarY,
ibid. her views in behaving more friendly to her, 304, 305.
bends her whole endeavours to destroy the Protestants, ii, 25.
her artful conduct with that view - ibid. 26

Cecil, his great capacity as a minister, i. 232. 256. is employed

to negociate a peace with France, ibid. over-reaches thl French
ambassador in the treaty of Edinburgh, 256. is appointed a
commifioner to the conference at Westminster, 486. is sent by
Q Elizabeth with proposals to Q. Mary, ii. Io. has an inter-
view with her, which excites Q, Elizabeth's jealousy, 50. is
treated harlhly by Q. Elizabeth for consenting to Q. Mary's
death - 79, 18o

- Sir Robert, son to the former, heads the party againlt Effex,

ii. 273. his characer, ibid. 274. his great assiduity, ibid. en-
ters into a private correspondence with K. James, 289. a
letter from him to his majesty, Appendix - 11b
Ceibacy of the popith clergy, a chief engine of their policy, i. 144.

13

Cbarles V. Emperor, his great power, i. 87. and unlimited am-

bition, 88. 89. is checked by Francis I. - 89

- K. of France makes a league with Q. Elizabeth, ii. 31, P3
Cbatdlbera.ult, Duke of, that title conferred on the Earl of Arran,

Regent of Scotland, i. 125. his right of fucceflion to the crown
of Scotland maintained, 158. enters a protestation to faie his
right, 161. joins the reformers, in endeavouring to expel the
French army, 191. joins in association with them, 194. i
looked on as the head of the congregation, 195, 196. His pu-
fillanimity, 210. becomes obnoxious to Q. Marn, 274. hi
jealousy of the prior of St. Andrews, 288. deprived of his
French pension, 304. is alarmed atther Earl of Lennox's return
to Scotland, 313. an accommodation brought about by the
Queen's influence, ibid. adheres to Murray in opposing the
Queen's marriage, 338. is pardoned on his humble application,
but forced to re!ide in France, 341. his partisans grumble .-
Murray's being advanced to the Regency, 451, 45 . retur
from France and heads the Queen's adherents, 495. is nade her
lieutenant-general, ibid. His resolution wavering, the Regent
commits him prisoner to the castle of Edingburgh, 496, 497'
is set at liberty by Kirkaldv, and joins the Queen's pa;rt, ii. 4-
is proclaimed traitor by Len-ox the new Regent, 9. is recon-
ciled to Morton the Regent, 46. articles of a treaty betwe:"
them, ibid. His death -

CS:';.'"

Church of Scotlard, revolutions in it after the union of the crowns,

ii. 299, 300. See 4ffiemly, Clergy.
Church Lands annexed to the crown by Parliament ii. 185
Clam, the institution and nature of - i 27, zS
Clergy, popih, their great riches and power, i. 67. 141. were made

ule of by K. James V. to suppress the nobles, 68, 69, made a
considerable body in Parliament, 142. their great influence over
the laity, 143. they engrossed learning ib. and held many of
the chief employments, ibid. 144. their power increased by
celibacy, ibid. they seized the elates of the intestate, 145. and
tried all matrimonial and teRfamentary causes, ibid. become
obnoxious to the laity, 146. their great corruptor, whence.
ibid. these of Scotland particularly dissolute, 147. their weak
defence of their tenets, 148. try in vain to impose false mira-
cles, ib. 149. their impolitic conduct to the reformers 167
-- reformed, try in vain to recover the revenues of the church,
i. 251. 252. 254. procure a debolition of all relicks of popery,
254. a new regulation concerning their revenues, 275-280.
they are no gainers by it, z80. their tfipends, what in those
days, ibid. are offended at the moderation of their leaders, 302.
occasion a tumult among the people, ibid. 303. more com-
plaints of their poverty, 314. 391. are jealous of Q. Mary, ib.
392, the fimall allowances appointed to support them all, 392.
their application for payment of their stipends of little efleA,
451. frelh complaints of the deficiency of the funds for their
maintenance, 509. are put off with fair words and promises,
ibid. 510. archbishops, &c. introduced among them by Mor-
ton, is. 39. their grievances under his administration, 52, 53.
they approve of the Ruthven conspirators, 93. by favouring
them they provoke the King, 104. severe laws made againit
them, o18, iog. they of Edinburgh fly into England, 1o9. as
do several others that were most eminent, ibid. more vigorous
measures against them, 116. they obtain no redress on the re-
iloration of the exiled Lords, 138. represent their grievances
to Parliament, 183. a maintenance provided for them by Par-
liament, 185, 186. they prevail to get Presbyterian govern-
ment eltablifhed by law, 207. their zeal against the Popilh Lords,
214, 215. 225. their ralh proceedings, 225. 227. they ere&
a landing Council of the Church, 228. vindicate one of their
number who declined the civil jurifdi&ion, 230, 231. their
fiandingCouncil ordered to leave Edinburgh, 231. this occa-
sions a violent tumult there, 232, 233, 234. the/ use their ut-
molt efforts to spirit the people, 236. are deserted and fly to
England, ibid. 237. their power greatly reduced, ibid. are
prevailed on to give up many of their privileges, 239. are re-
lored to a feat in parliament, 241. this violently opposed by
many of them, 243. but carried in their general Assembly, ib.
144. those entitled to this privilege are laid under many regu-
lauons and reftrition* 250. they are brought under great sub-
Vol. II. N n jection,

jeotion, 2S. the revolutions among them since the Union of
the Crowns - - 299, 30

299' 300

Clinton, Lord, appointed a commissioner at the conference at

Westminster - - i. 486

Coeturn, of Ormifton, receives a supply of money from the Englifl

to the congregation, i. ziz. is intercepted and robbed of it, ib.

Coin in Scotland, some account of, - i. 206. ii. 2
Ccmmijaries appointed to try causes in place of the Spiritual

Court, i. 300. they are deprived of all authority 393
Confeljon of faith by the Reformers, contented to by Parliament

i. 240

Congregation, the Protestants difinguilhed by that name, i. 74.

their leaders enter into an affociarion, 179. are involved in dif-
ficulties, 209. apply to Q. Elizabeth for assistance, 210. mo-
ney sent them by her, intercepted, 212. make a rash and defpe-
rate attempt on Leith, and are repulsed, ib. 213. are no less un-
fortunate in a second skirmish, 213. are quite dispirited and re-
treat to Stirling, ibid. are joined by the body of the nobles,
216. their army dwindles away, ibid. are animated by Knox,
ibid. they apply again to Q. Elizabeth, ibid. their parties ha-
rafs the French, 221. are afifted by a fleet from England, 222.
conclude a treaty at Berwick, with the D. of Norfolk, 223,
224. the design and substance of this treaty, 224. negociatea
peace with France, 232. articles of this treaty, 233. they reap
advantages from it, 234, 335. See Reformation.

Covenant, national, framed in defence of the King and Govern-

ment, ii. 192. the nature and reafonablenefi of it, ibid. 193.
the progress of it since - - 193

Courtesy of Scotland, what - i. 159
Craig, a minister, boldly testifies against Q Mary's maiage with

Bothwell i. 420

Cra.zwferd, Capt. of Jordan Hill, surprises Dumbarton Caille,

i. 15, 16. the difficulties of that enterprise - 16
-- Earl of, one of the heads of the Spanish facRion, ii. 191.
196. offers his service to the K. of Spain, 196. joins in re-
bellion against the King, 199. is forced to submit to him, ib.
and imprisoned a fliort time - - ibid.

Cricbton, Regent during the minority of K. James II. his barba-

rous policy - - - i. 52,

---- a jefiuit, a plot against Q. Elizabeth discovered by hi

means - - - - U.

i

Criminals, a remarkable instance of the difficulty of bringing them

to jutfice - - - . 20, 21

Croc du, the French ambassador, refused to countenance Q. Ma-

ry's mriage with Bothwell, i. 421. attempts in vain a recon-
ciliation between the Queen and the confederate Lords, 4271
428. mediates a truce between the King's and Queen's party
in Scotland - - - ii 3
Crc-en matrimonial of Scotland granted by Parliament to the Dau-

phin

phih of Prance, i. 161. deputies appointed to carryit, but are
prevented -- - 163, 164
Cuaniigham, Robert, appears at the trial of Bothwel in name of
the Earl of Lennox, i. 408. demands a delay, which is refused

ibid.

Curle, one of QZ Mary's secretaries, is seized and carried prisoner
to London, ii. 149. is produced an evidence againit her 158

D

a rlAy, Henry, Lord, proposed as a hufland to Q Mary, i.

J 309. his right of fucceflion confidered, ibid. 310. is per-
mitted to visit the court of Scotland, 316. arives there, and
quickly gains the Queen's heart, 317. his charater, 319. dif-
gusts several of the nobles, particularly Murray. ib. 320. cul-
tivates a familiarity with David Rizio, 320. is despised on that
account, 321. grows intolerably insolent and haughty, 329.
schemes to affaflinate Murray, 331. a plot to seize and fend
him to England prevented by the Queen, ibid. evidences of
this, 332, 333. his marriage with the Queen celebrated, 335.
is honoured with the title of King of Scotland, ibid. is im-
placable with refpe& to the exiled nobles, 346. loses the Queen's
affetion by his untoward behaviour, 352. demands the Crown
matrimonial, 353. becomes suspicious of Rizio's ill offices with
the Queen, ib. his resolution to be avenged of him encouraged
by the nobles, 355. articles agreed on between them for that
purpose, 357. heads the conspirators who perpetrate the mur-
der, 358. confines the Queen after it is committed, 359. pro-
hibits the meeting of the Parliament, ib. makes his escape
with the Queen, 360, 361. her hatred to him increases, 368.
Is neglected by her and treated with little refpe& by the nobles,
372. resolves to leave Scotland, 374. his wayward and ca-
pricious behaviour, 375. he writes the reasons of his conduc
to the Queen, ib. his strange behaviour at the baptism of the
Prince, 388. a faire reason alleged for this confuted, ibid.
389. retires to his father at Glasgow, 391. falls sick there,
394. conjetures concerning his distemper, ib. is neglected by
:he Queen, 395. the afterwards visits and expresses affe'tion for
him, 396. he is prevailed on by her to come to Edinburgh, 399,
is lodged in a separate house, ibid. he is murdered there, ibid.
400. his character, 400oo a proclamation iflued for discovering
the murderers, 40o. a remiss inquiry made into it, 402---410.
Capt. Blackadder and three others executed on that account,
451. the confession of Morton the Regent at his death con-
cerning the murder, ii. 82. paper of objections of the Court
of England against his marriage with Q. Mary, App. a differ-
tation concerning his murder, at the end of vol. ii.
David I. King of Scotland, his profusion to the church i. 141
'-- II. trouble: during his minority - i. 34
Dav-rf, sent into Scotland by Qz Elizabeth, as a spy on the French

N n Ambaf-

Ambalfador, ii. 96. is sent to gain Arran's interest to Q Eli.
zabeth, 114. this he loon accomplishes, ibid. brings the war-
rant for Q. Mary's death at Q. Elizabeth's desire, 168, 169.
is charged by her with disobeying her orders, 179. is imprison-
ed, tried, and fined, and lores all favour, ibid. objections against
him in the cause of the late Scottiih Queen App. 481
Dtc, Montieur, is sent with a supply of forces to afflift the French

againt the English in Scotland, i. I23, 124. his success there

124

/ifcipliae, in the Church, the first book of, composed, i. 251.
why objected againfr in a convention of the States, ibid. an-
other attempt in favour of Church discipline fruflrated ii. 8;

Deuglar, the power and property of that family, i. 34. they

alpire to independency, 53. Will. Earl of, murdered by K.
James II. ibid. his son endeavours to relent it, 54. is forced
to fly into England - - ibid.
- -- WWilliam, Q Mary committed a prisoner to his cafle of

Lockleven - - 44
- George, brother to the above, affis the Queen in mat-

ing her escape - 452, 453

_---Archibald, one of Darnly's murderers, ii. 141. under-

goes a mock trial for that crime and is acquitted, 142. is lent
Ambassador to England, ibid. letter from him to the Q~ of
Scots, Appendix, 432. -) the King 438

Drury, Sir W. enters Scotland with an army to support the Queen'

party, ii. 6. they join him and drive off the Queen's, ibid.
he procures a truce between the King and Queen's parties, 3z.
comes with forces to assist Morton in besieging the castle of
Edinburgh, 47. which is forced to surrender - 48

- Sir Drue, is appointed one of Q. Mary's keepers, iL 120
Dudley, Lord Robert, recommended by Q Elizabeth, as a hulband

to Q Mary, i. 305. why a favourite of Q. Elizabeth's ib. i
highly promoted by her, ibid. 306. his situation extremely
delicate, 307. becomes fufpidous of Cecil - 30°

Dumbarton Castle, furprized and taken in the King's name by the

Regent - -- ii. ) '7
DIy, a minister of Edinburgh, banished from h s charge by K.

James for his free invectives against the courtiers, ii. 87. as-
ter being restored he is driven from it a second time for ap-
proving the Raid of Ruthven - °

E
E Dinsurgb, is taken and burnt by the English, i. 1oS, 109.

a great fray there between the French and Scots, zS, 1 09

is seized by the Reformers, 185. its inhabitants are terribiy
alarmed by the French, 212. a treaty there with the French
and Englifl, 232, 233. a loan demanded of it by Q: Mar,
342. which is granted for the superiority of Leith, ibid. the
treaty of infied on by Q. Elizabeth, 389, 390. is poffcfid

by

by the Queen's party, ii. 4. and fortified by them, 18. the
City and Castle hold out against the King's forces, 30. is re-
duced to great straits by famine, 31. is relieved by a truce, 32.
the citizens take up arms to promote the King's marriage, zoo.
they rife again and insult the king and his ministers on the
murder of the Earl of Murray, zo6, 207. assist the King
against Huntley, zl8. a violent tumult there on account of the
Clergy, 232-235. they are severely punilhed for it by the
Ring, 236-238. their ministers return to their charges, 240,
241. divided into parishes, and number of Miniftersincreafed,
241. they decline publilhing the account of Gowrie's confpi-
racy, 268. all, except one who is banished, are persuaded by
the King to do it - ibid. 269
Fd.ward I. of England, destroyed the public archives of Scotland,

i. 4. is made umpire between Brace and Baliol, Il, his art to
acquire the Superiority of Scotland, ibid. his wars with the
Scots under Robert Bruce -z, 13. 46
]glinton, Earl of is prevailed on to join the King's party, ii. z
Elizaheth, her peaceable acceflon to the Crown of England, i.

164. supports the congregation in Scotland, z10, 2z1. is sparing
in her supplies, zl1. refolyes to support them on a second
application, 216. her good conduct in matters of importance,
217. motives that determined her to assist them, ib. 219. 220.
her deliberate and resolute conduct, 222, 223. fends a strong
fleet to their affltance, 223. concludes a treaty with them, ib.
224. her right to the Crown of England asserted by Francis and
Mary, in France, 233. obtains advantageous terms for the Scots,
234. is folicted by the Parliament of Scotland to marry the
Earl of Arran, 244. this she declines, 245. the feeds of her dif-
content with Q Mary, 255, 256. her jealousy of the succession,
257. 260. her exceflive vanity and jealousy of Mary's beauty,
260, 261. her diflimulation to her, 261. refuses her a fafe-con-
dut, 262. fends to congratulate her arrival in Scotland, 269.
refuses a conceftion made by Q. Mary, 270. herjealoufy of her
right betrayed her into mean ations, ibid. her resemblance to
Hen. VII. ibid. a personal interview with .Q Mary, proposed,
293. the artfully declines it, ibid. her views in regard to Q
Mary's marriage, 297, 298. aflumes a disagreeable authority,
298. names one for a husband to Q Mary, 305. the different
qualifications of her ministers and favourites, ib. 306. dissembles
with Q. Mary about her marriage, 307--309 and likewise
with regard to L. Darnly, 310. affronts Q Mary by her infinu-
auon concerning Lennox, 31 . is perplexed about the marriage
of the Scottilh Queen, 315, 316. permits Darnly to visit the
court of Scotland, 316. affects to declare against Q. Mary's
marriage to him, 322, 323. her reasons for this condult, 323,
324. her great dissimulation in that affair, 330. her harsh and
deceitful behaviour to Murray and his associates who had fled
to her, 339. is Itruck at hearing of the birth of James VI.
372. conlents to stand godmother to him, ibid. the rarlia-

Nn3 ment

ment address her to fettle the succession, 379. this greatly em-
barraffes her, ib. 380, 381. the sooths and gains her Parlia.
ment, 382. endeavours to accommodate her differences with
Mary, 389. writes to her to delay the trial of Darnly's mur-
derers, 407. interposes in her behalf when a prisoner, 437. her
ambassador is refused access to Q. Mary, ibid. she offers affil.
ance to the other nobles, 438. her deliberations concerning the
disposal of Q Mary on her arrival in England, 46I, 462. re.
solves to detain her there, ib. 463. her motives to this con-
du&, ib. 464. fends her letters of condolence, and gives or-
ders to watch her condu&, ib. 464, 465. the gladly accepts
the office of umpire between her and her fubjets, 465, 466.
receives a very pressing letter from Q Mary, 469. her precau-
tions againfl her, 47o. appoints commissioners to hear Q. Mary
and her accusers, 476. her important situation on that occa-
sion, ib. her views in this affair, 477, 478. receives the Re-
gent's demands, 481. removes the Conference to Weftminfier,
483. her mean artifices to get the evidence of Q. Mary's guilt
from the Regent, 490. treats her with greater rigour, 491.
writes a harlh letter to Queen Mary, ib. ihe difiniffes the Regent
without approving or condemning him, 493. but secretly sup-
ports his party, ib. makes proposals to the Regent in her fa-
vour, 497. Norfolk's projec concealed from her, 500. dif-
covers and defeats a rebellion in Q. Mary's favour, 506, 507.
resolves to deliver her up to the Regent, 51o. her great con-
cern at his death, ii. I. continues to encourage facions in
Scotland, z, 3. her political condu& with regard to Lennox
6-9. is excommunicated, and deprived of her kingdom, &c.
by the Pope, 8. supports the King's party in Scotland, and
names Lennox to be Regent, 9. propoies a treaty of accommo-
dation between Q Mary and her subje&s, io. procures a cef-
fation of hostilities, ib. fends proposals to Q Mary, i . her ar-
tifices in the condu& of this affair, ib. z. appoints commnil-
fioners to frame a treaty, 13. finds a pretence to render their
meeting fruitleis, 14. a marriage proposed between her and
the D. of Anjon, 25. declares openly against the Queen's part,
29. concludes a treaty with France, 31. her motives for ne-
goiating a peace between the two parties in Scotland, 42, 43
is jealous of Cecil's interview ith Q. Mary, 50. negociates a
treaty between Morton and his adveriaries, 65. her anfiver to
K. James's demand of a pofIeffion of an estate in England, ib.
66. a marriage between her and the D. of Alencon proposee.
69. interposes in behalf of Morton, 74. her measures in or-
der to save him, 76, 77. countenances the conspirators a:
Ruthven, 92. is alarmed at a conspiracy against her, ii, l i'
the designs of Q. Mary's adherents against her, 113. endlea
vours to recover her interest in Scotland, and gains Arran to her
interest, 114. amuses Q. Mary with a fruitless negoiation, 17.
a new conspiracy against her, ibid. an aflociation formed for
her defence, 118, 19i. her suspicions of Q Mary, 119. ;

."

life endangered by a conspiracy, 125. this how discovered
and prevented, 126. occasions an extraordinary statute for her
preservation, ib, is in a dangerous situation from the progress
of the holy league, 131. endeavours to form a confederacy
of the Protestant Princes, ibid. 123. and to proceed with ri-
gour against Q. Mary, i33. advances her interest in Scotland,
and proposes a league with it, ib, 134. fettles a pension upon
K. James, 134. concludes a treaty with Scotland, 140. account
of Babington's conspiracy againit her, 142-146. her difli-
mujation after Q. Mary's conviction, 161, 16z. her answer to
K. James, intercefion for her, 164. her farther difimulation
and anxiety, 167. signs the warrant for her execution, 168.
her speech to Davison on that occasion, ib. affects to lament
Q Mary's death, 178. several marks of her artifice in that as-
fair, ib. 179. she endeavours to sooth K. James, 18o. pro-
vocations given by her to Spain, 189, 190. prepares to meet
its resentment, 19o, 191. endeavours to secure Scotland, ibid.
tries to prevent K. James's marriage, 199. solicits him to treat
conspirators against him with rigour, zi . evades the decision
of K. James's right of fucceflion to the Crown of England, 244,
245. is disgusted at several of his proceedings, 246, 247!
discovers his correspondence with the Pope, ibid. frelh grounds
of her suspicion, 273. her conduc with regard to the Earl of
Eflex, ibid.--79. her irresolution concerning his death, 279.
and great concern after it, ibid. receives ambassadors from K.
James with regard, and increases his subsidy, 286. her last ill-
ness, 283. conjectures concerning the causes of her melancholy,
284-286. her death, 286. and chara&er, 287, 288. de-
clared the K. of Scots her successor, 289. some of her letters,
Appendix--327.. '' 362. 363. 368. 380. 382. 387. 406.
Elphinion, secretary to K. James VI. deceives him into a corre-

fpondence with the pope, ii. 248. is tried and found guilty of
high treason, ib. and pardoned on the Queen's intercession, ib.
England, the English seize and detain King James I. of Scotland

long a prisoner, i. 34. the nobles there humbled, 38. had
early two houses of Parliament, 80. they invade Scotland, 1o8.
their depredations there, Ilo, I1i. a peace between England,
France, and Scotland, 1 I. invade Scotland again, 118. gain
a great viftory, 119, 120. it proves of little advantage to
them, 121, they force the Scots into a closer union with France,
2z2. conclude a peace, 136. an English fleet arrives in Scot-
land to assist the congregation, 222. a peace concluded be-
tween them, 223, 224. they enter Scotland and besiege the
French in Ltith, 224. are several times repulsed, 226. causes
of their bad success, ib. 227. articles of a treaty of peace,
235. they quit Scotland, 236. refleaions on the right of fuc-
ceflion to their Crown, 257-260. the Parliament favours Q.
Mary's right of fuccefilon, 379. a league between England
and France, ii. 31. between England and Scotland, 140. the
national covenant adopted in England I93

N n 4 Entails,

Entails, with what view introduced - i. 22, 23
Epi/copal government in the Church, some account of it, i. 248.

an attempt to revive it, ii. 39. it is abolished by the Assembly,
86. jurifdiaion abolifled, 174. See Archbi/hops.
Errol, Earl of, one of the heads of the Spanish Fation, ii. 191.

his offers of service to the K. of Spain, 196. appears in rebel-
lion, 198. is forced to submit to the King, 199. imprisoned
for a hort time, ibid. joins in another conspiracy, 209. ii
fumnoned by the King to surrender, 21o. offers to fubmitto
a trial, z21. fenence pronounced against him 216
Erzinoe of Dun, is employed by the Queen Regent to deceive the

Protestants, i. 175. his resentment of this usage ibid.
- Lord, governor of Edinburgh Castle, acts a neutral part

between'the Queen Regent and the congregation, i. 2 14. re-
ceives the Queen Regent into the Castle, 226. is creat(d Earl
of Mar, 289. See Mar.
---- Alexander, h.' the chief direations of the education of K.

Jares VI. ii. 56. admits some of the nobles to make com-
plaints to him against Morton the Regent, 58. is turnedout
of Stirling Cafile by his nephew the Earl of Mar 6S

E/.neval, the French Envoy, endeavours to obltrua a treaty be-

tween England and Scotland - - ii. 140
EJex, Earl of, set up by the Englilh Papists as a candidate for

the Crown, ii. 222. heads a party in England, 273. his cha-
rater, ibid. is greatly diftinguifed by 'the Queen, ibid. 274.
favours the K. of Scots, 274. obtains the offices of Lord Lieu-
tenant and Commander in Chief in Ireland, ibid. is unsuccess-
fal in that expedition, ibid. 275. receives a harsh letter from
the Queen, 275. returns to England and is confined, ibid. is
tried and censured, ibid. endeavours to ipirit up King James,
276. his rash and frantic conduct, 277. is again taken into
custody, 278. his death, 279. his son and associates are reltor-
ed to their honours after the acceflion of K. James ibid.
Europe, the slate of, at the beginning of the Sixteenth Century

i. 84
Excoamrnication, a terrible engine of the Popili Clergy i. 14,

F

F Bkon, an Englilhman, fixes the Pope's excommunication cf
FQ. Elizabeth, on the gates of the bilhop of London's pa-

lace-- . ii. S
Fermlr, M. de la Motte, sent by the French King to interp0oe

for K. James when confined by the Ruthven conspirators, :.
96. is forced to return without success ibid
Feudal geCverrmtt, its origin, and ariftocratical genius, i. 15. 16,

18. causes which limited the power of feudal Monarchs, 17
feudal vassals liable to few taxes, 18. a remarkable intance ot
the feebleness of feudal government, z2, gl. the moll per-

secel

fee idea of the feudal system, how attained, 44. state of it in
England, 77-79. and in Scotland - 79, 80
Fife, a populous and powerful county much devoted to the con-

gregation, i. 221. is deltroyed and plundered by the French,
ib. the fynod of, excommunicates the Archbishop of St. An-
drews for contumacy, ii. 139. they excommunicate the Popilh
Lords - -- 21
Sorbes, Lord, with the Earl of Argyle, is sent against the Popifi

Lords, ii. 220. are defeated by them ibid. 221
Fordun, John de, his hitfory of Scotland when wrote i. 5
Foyer, Sir John, warden of the English border, a fcufte between

him and the Scots - ii. 135
Fotheripnga,y Caffle, Q Mary's imprisonment, trial, and death there

ii. 140-174

France, the consequences of the subversion of the feudal govern-

ment there, i. 85. a body of French arrive in Scotland to sup-
port the Catholics, i15. they reduce the calfle of St. Andrew's
116. another party of them arrive there, 123, 124. their tranf-
aftions there, ibid. 127. conclude a peace with England, 126.
their politic condu&, 127, z28. they leave Scotland, 127,
their artifices in a treaty of marriage between the Dauphin and
the Q, of Scots, 157, 158. endeavours to expel the French army
out of Scotland, 190. another party of them arrive there and
fortify Leith, i98. they exasperate the people by their info-
lence, ibid. they are sent against the congregation, 220. they
defiroy and plunder Fife, and are much harrafed by parties of
the congregation, 221, z22. are greatly alarmed by the arrival
of the Englilh fleet, 222. they return to Leith greatly harrafled
and exhaulted, 223. are besieged there by the English and the
congregation, 226. they gain several advantages, ibid.-228.
their motives for concluding a peace, 230. negociations for that
purpose, 231, 232. articles of the treaty, 233, 234. they leave
Scotland, 236. the French advise Q, Mary to moderate mea-
fures, 253. their proposals by an ambassador rejected, 254.
they agree to Q Mary's marriage with Lord Darnly, 319.
the licentiousness of their morals - - 397

King of, a copy of his directions sent to Scotland, App. 419

Francis I. gives a check to the ambitious projecs of Charles V.
i. 89. his fidelity to the Scots, i I. his death 115

Fracis II. comes to the crown of France, i. 193. his charac-

ter, ibid. 245. is guided by the Duke of Guise and Cardinal
of Lorrain, ibid. he treats the Protestants with great rigour,
231. his death - 245

G

G Ifards, Dotor and Gilbert, their notion concerning the
G lawfulness of killing heretical excommunicated Princes,

. 142z. they join in a conspiracy to kill Q. Elizabeth, ibid.
Gilbert being gained by Walsingham betrays his aflociates, 143.

i

is employed to carry on a foreign correspondence with Q Mary

---' 1'46, 147

Glais, Lady, is condemned to be burnt for witchcraft i. 69
-- aLord, Chancellor, intimates the King's order to Morton

to surrender the Regency, ii. 59. is killed in a rencounter at
Stirling - - - 61

t-- the tutor of, joins the conspirators of Ruthven, ii. 89.

his bold speech to K. James, 91. he, with the other confpi.
rators, seize the Castle of Stirling and ere& their standard, o06.
he is attainted, and his estate forfeited - 1l
Glafgowv, biihop of, a note of his concerning the Queen of Scot.

land's dowry, Appendix - - 41;

Glencairn, Earl of, joins the Ruthven conspirators .i. 89
Glerlivat, the battle of - - . 220
Gordon, Sir John, a fcuffie in the streets of Edinburgh between

him and Lord Ogilvy, i. 285. being confined for it, he makes
his escape, 286. when ordered by the Queen to surrender
himself, he takes up arms againif her, ib. 287. is defeated, and,
together with his brother, made prisoners, 290. he is behead.
ed and his brother pardoned - -- 2
- Lord, set at liberty - i. 336
-i- Sir Adam, exerts himself for the Queen's interest in the

north, ii. 30. his chara&er and good conduc as a soldier

32, 33

Govrie, Earl of, joins in - conspiracy to seize the King at Ruth-

ven, ii. 89. is visited and pardoned by the King after his escape,
99. becomes fufpeted, and is ordered for France, 106. delays
his voyage, and is taken into custody, ibid. he is tried and
executed . 07
_- TJohn and Alexander, sons of the above, their charaAer and
conspiracy, ii. 251. the surprising circumnances of that re-
markable 'tranfa&ion, 252-252. several different conjeaures
concerning it, 257-268. their dead bodies brought into Par-
liament and condemned, 269. their efates and honours forfeit-
ed, and name abolished for ever, ib. different accounts of this
affair published, but not fatisfatory, 27b--272. See Ruthern.

Graham, Sir David, of Fintry, accused of a conspiracy with the

popish Lords in favour of Spain, ii. 2lo. is convicted and be-
headed -- 231

Gray, master of, some account of him, ii. 20zo, 1zI. he becomes

a favourite of King James VI. jb. is gained to Q_ Elizabeth's
interest, 2Iz. betrays Q. Mary, ibid. persuades K. James to
write a harsh and undutiful letter to her, I29. joins with others
in promoting Q Elizabeth's interest in Scotland, 133. his trea-
chery when sent to intercede for Q Mary, 167. his bafeneis
discovered, he is disgraced, 182. his vain attempt againrt fecre-
tary Maitland, 183. a&s in Italy as a spy from the court of
England, 246. a memorial of his for his Majesty, Appendix,
441, 448. to the secretary of fiate - - G4

Gui/, duke of, his violent counsels with regard to the Scots, i.
193, 194. murdered at the siege of Orleans - 296

his intrigues against QO Elizabeth, ii. x12, 113. is a

principal promoter of the holy league, 131, 189. drives the
french King out of his capital - 89

H
T d dirngton, seized and forfeited by the English, i. 122. is

relieved by the French 124.

Hamilton, the rife of that family, i. 36. arbitrary proceedings of
Morton the Regent againfi it, ii. 67, 68. See Cbatelherault.

of Bothwelhaugh, taken prisoner at the battle of Lang-

fide, i. 47o. is tried and condemned for rebellion, ibid. ob-
tains a pardon from Murray the Regent, by the intercession of
Knox, 471. an account of his murdering Murray, 511, 512.
makes his escape, 5zz. is received in triumph at Hamilton, ii. 1
- Mr. Patrick, the first who suffered in Scotland for the

Protestant religion - - i. 165
Hartford, Earl of, invades Scotland with an English army, i. 108.

burns Edinburgh and Leith, ib. 109. is made Duke of Somer-
set, and protetor of England, 18. See Somerset.
Hatton, vice-chamberlain of England, the argument by which he

prevailed on Q. Mary to plead at her trial - ii. 153
Htnrj II. of France, fends forces to afift the Scots, i. 5. a mar-

riage proposed between his son the Dauphin and the young Q.
of Scots, 123, 124. excites the Scots to invade England, 153.
his infamous imposition on Q. Mary in the treaty of marriage,
157, 158. persuades his son and Q_ Mary to assume the titles
of King and Queen of England, 170. his death 191
- 11. degenerates greatly on his acceflion to the crown of
France, ii. 13o. enters into a private negociation with Q Eli-
zabeth, 132, 133. interposes feebly in behalf of Q. Mary, 16z
- VIII. of England, by his system of reformation becomes
formidable both to PapiRls and Protestants, i. 70. purposes an
ihterviewwith King James V. ib. is disappointed by him and
declares war against Scotland, 71, 72. invades it, but is forced
to retreat, ibid. his importance as to the balance of power
in Europe, 89. his influence in Scotland how obtained, 92.
his schemes with regard to it on the death of James V. 98.
were jll-condu&ed by himself and odious to the Scots, 99. at-
tempts to gain the Regency by great promises, 103. invades
Scotland, o18. this being ill-condu&ed turns to no account,
109. receives and rewards the Earl ofLennox, ib. encourages
the murderers of cardinal Beatoun, 114. his death and cha-
rafter, 115. his inconfitent conduit, 169. excludes the Scotch
line by his testament - 390
Herrie, Lord, joins Chatelherault in opposing the Regent, i. 496.

comes 'to a treaty with him, 496. he and the Duke are com-
:nitted prisoners to the cafle of Edinburgh, 497. intimates the

King's

King's order to Morton to resign the Regency, ii. 59. account
of his behaviour in Parliament, Appendix, 385. a letterfrom
him to Lord Scroop and Sir F. Knollis 4.

Hickford, secretary ut the Duke of Norfolk, betrays him by ds

covering his intrigues with Q. Mary - ii. 26-28

Iighla.dr a4d I.es, an attempt to civilize them by King James VI.

ii. 281. regulations for that purpose, 282. three towns endued
with the privileges of royal boroaghs ordered to be built there

ibid.
Hodgfen, a priest of Rheims, maintained the lawfulness of killing

heretical excommunicated Princes . .

" i2

H7me, Lord, sent by K. James VI. with a secret embassy to the

Pope - - - i.9

Ho'ward. See Norfolk.
unf/dane, Lord, governor of Berwick, his interview with Arran

ii. 114, 115

HuntMy, Earl, though a catholic, joins the reformers in opposing

the French army, i. 19 . afflifs them only with fair promises, 213,
214. his further concurrence with them, 228. some account of
that family, 283. 284. his enmity against the young Queen's
ministers, ibid his resentment inflamed by an accident, 285.
appears in an open rebellion against the Queen, 288. his plot
against her ministers disappointed, ibid. breaks out intoopen
rebellion, 289. is trodden to death in a battle, 290. his family
prosecuted with the utmost rigour, 291. several anecdotes and
conjetures concerning his plot, ibid. 292. is attainted by Par-
liament, 300. the attainder repealed and the family reltored
to estate and honours - - 411
*- his attachment to Bothwell, 406. 413. refuses to submit

to the Regent, 496. is forced to do it, 497. a&s as lieutenant
to the Queen after the Regent's murder, ii. 6. is proclaimed a
traitor by Lennox the new Regent, 9. receives some money
and promises of assistance from Spain, ibid. Io. agrees to a trea-
ty with Morton the Regent, 46. is one of'the heads of the Spa-
nitf faction, 191. engages to the Prince of Parma to serve the
King of Spain, 196. is imprisoned for a short time, 198. ere&s
a fiandard of rebellion, ibid. but forced to submit to the King,
ibid. is again imprisoned, 199. is soon set at liberty, ibid. re-
ceives a commniffon' from the King, 206. his barbarous murder
of the Earl of Murray, ibid. is summoned to surrender to ju-
tice, 207. flies to the mountains, 211. offers to submit to a
trial, 215. sentence pronounced against him, 216. refutes to
submit, 217. makes another desperate attempt, but is forced to
fly - '' 218, 219

I
JAMES . was detained long a prisoner in England, i. 34

troubles in Scotland during that time, ibid. 35. was much
improved by an Englih education, 47, 48. his policy on his re-

· turn

turn to Scotland, 49. his characer, ibid. so. suppresses the
power of the nobles, ibid. they being exasperated, conspire
against, and murder him - - c, 52
7ames II. troubles in Scotland, during his minority, i. 35, 36.

his attempts againf the nobles, Sz, 53. murders the Earl of
Douglas, 53 procures several good laws to be passed, 54, 55
reduces the power of the nobles, 55. his death 56

- III. the state of Scotland during his minority, i. 36. his
impolitic condu&t, 56, 57. kills one of his brothers, and is
invaded by another, 57, 58. is greatly insulted by his nobles,
59. his despicable minions, ibid. was the sirs that appointed
a flanding guard to his person, 60. the nobles are provoked
to take up arms against him, 61. is killed in a battle against
them, ibid. his charaaer - - ibid. 62
- IV. his character, i. 6z. is killed in a battle against the
English at Flowden - 62, 63

V. his minority long and turbulent, i. 36. tranfations

during that time, 63, 64. assumes the government while very
young, 65. his characer, ibid. 66. his scheme for humbling
the nobles, 66-69. is diverted from it by the clergy, 71 72.
takes arms for the defence of his kingdom, 72. his nobles re-
fufimg to follow him, throws him into a deep melancholy, 73-
75 which is increased by a surprising defeat of his forces, 75.
is death, ibid. reflections on his condu&, ibid, 76. he refused
an alliance with Charles V. Emperor . -
- VI. his birth, i. 371. his baptism, 387. the care of him

committed to the Earl of Mar, 404. is by him preserved from
falling into the hands of Bothwell, 422. is crowned, 441. the
nobles oppressed by Morton the Regent, turn their eyes to him
for redress, ii. 56. his education and dispositions, ibid. 57.
he becomes suspicious of the Regent's power, 57. discover,
early a great attachment to favourites, 70. adopts two of dif-
ferent 'dispositions, ibid. enters Edinburgh with great folemni-
ty, 72. is by his favourites engaged in unpopular measures, 88,
89. is seized by a party of nobles at Ruthven, go. and forced
to receive complaints againit his favourites, ib. 91. dissembles
with them, and banishes Lennox, gz. is brought to Stirling and
Holyroodhoufe, 94. his concern for Lennox's death, and regard
for his memory, 95. receives the French ambassador with great
refpe&, 96. makes his escape from the conspirators, ibid. 97-
resolves to treat them with moderation, 99. visits Gowrie and
grants him a pardon, ibid. renews his fondness for Arran, ib.
o00. is by him persuaded to violent measures against the cor-
fpirators, 1oo. his answer to a haughty letter from Q. Elizabeth
on their behalf, iot. is by her interposition rendered more vio-
lent against them, 102. is provoked by the clergy, 104. his
tfeps to humble them, 107. his profusion to Arran, 116. fends
a new favourite to England againfi the banished Lords, 120.
devolves the whole regal authority on Arran, 2lz, 123. writes an
undutiful letter to his mother, 1zg. is threatened to be difin-

herited

herited by her, ibid. receives a pension from Q. Elizabeth, 134.
is reconciled to the exiled Lords, 136. becomes popular by con-
cluding a treaty with England, 140, 141. his scandalous beha-
viour with regard to Archi Douglas, ibid. 14z. his endea-
vours to save his mother's life after her condemnation, 163, 164.
is greatly incensed at her death, 80o. arguments used by the
English ministers to pacify him, ibid. 181. is forced to stifle
his resentment, 18i. attempts to unite the nobles, 184, i85.
is courted both by Spain and England, 19o, 191. resolves vi-
goroufly to adhere to the latter, 19i. takes several steps with
that view, ibid. his tkill in the popish controversy, 192. wrote
a commentary on the Revelations, ibid. his maxims with re-
gard to popery, ibid. 198. his exceflive lenity to conspirators
against him, 198. resolves to marry the Princefsof Denmark,
i99. arts nsed to prevent it, ibid. the marriage is confummat-
ed in Norway, zol. passes several months in Denmark, ibid.
reflecions on his conduc there, ibid. 202. his arrival in Scot-
land with his Queen, 203. indulges the Prelbyterians, 204.
the ill consequences of his lenity, ibid. 205. his zeal againlt
witchcraft, zo5. is solicited by Q. Elizabeth to treat the con-
fpirators against him with rigour, 211, z2z. is fufpe&ed ofcon-
niving with them, z22. is furprized and seized by Bothwel!,
ibid. 2z3. and forced to comply with his terms, 213. his lenity
to Bothwell abused, ibid. 216. is fufpe&ed of favouring the
popilh Lords, ibid. is in new danger from them, 218. dele-
gates his authority to Argyle and Sorbes against them. z20.
goes in person against them, 221. waftes their lands, andgar-
rifons their castles, ibid. his right of the fucceflion to the crown
of England opposed by the papists, 2zz. his lenity to them in-
censes the clergy and people, 226, 227. is much provoked by
the obfiinacy of the clergy, 229. gives orders against them, 232.
is much insulted, and in great danger at Edinburgh, 23---235.
leaves Edinburgh and proceeds with severity against the citizens,
235-239. acquires absolute dominion in ecclesiastical affairs,
240, 241. strengthens his interest in parliament, by restoring the
feats of the ecclesiastics, 241--243. endeavours with success to
gain . party in England, z44. increases his reputation, by pub-
lishing his Bafilicon Doron, 245. is accused by Q. Elizabeth of cor-
responding with the Pope, 247. this he denies, and how account-
ed for, ibid. 248. other reports concerning this, 248, 249. 13
at great pains to gain the Roman catholics, 249. his regula-
tions with regard to the church, 250, 251. the mysterious as-
fair of Gowrie's conspiracy, 251---273. his cautious behaviour
in regard to the Earl ofEflex, 277. fends ambassadors to save
him, 278. they arrive too late, 279. he restores his son and
afociates to their honours after his accession, ibid. continues
his intrigues in England, ibid. 280, 281. his interelt greatly
strengthened there, ibid. endeavours to civilize the highlands
and isles, 281, 282. is proclaimed King in England after the
death of Q. Elizabeth, 289. is proclaimed likewise in Scotland,

290.

290. prepares for his journey to England, 291i enters London,
and takes poffeflion of the throne, zg9.. his character how dif-
ferent from that of Q. Elizabeth, ib. a letter from him to Mr.
Archibald Douglas, Appendix - - 437

Inverne/s castle, refuses to surrender to Q. Mary, i. z88. it is

forced, and the governor punished ibid. 289
Italy, the liberty of, how preserved i. 86

K
TEIfH, Sir William, sent to intercede for Q, Mary when

under sentence, ii. 163. letter from him to secretary Mait-

land, Appendix - -437

Kent, Earl of, appointed to fee the sentence against Q Mary exe-

cuted ii. 170

Ker of Ferniherft, ravages England on the murder of Murray the

Regent, ii. 2. his design, 5. has a scuffle with the Englilh, 135
- Geo. brother to L. Newbottle, is discovered when ready to

fail to promote a plot in Spain, ii. 209. his scheme opened,
ibid. escapes out of prison 212
Killigrew, Henry, his declaration on the peace, Appendix 413
Kings, feudal, the most limited of all Princes, i. 15. general

causes of this, 17. their revenues were but small, ib. S1. had
no standing armies, 19. and jurifdiaion limited, zo. means
used to extend the royal authority, 30. their jurifdition en-
larged, 41. the extraordinary influence of the Scottish Kings
in Parliament, 76. the reason of this -ibid. 81
Kirkaldy of Grange, one of the murderers of Beatoun, is recalled

by the Q Dowager, i. 155. his attainder reversed in Parlia-
ment, 300. offers to fight Bothwell in single combat, 428.
his interview with Q Mary, in name of the confederate Lords,
429. rescues Maitland from confinement, 5o6. labours to sup-
port the King's authority, and restore harmony after the murder
of the Regent, ii. 3, 4. accedes to the Queen's party, 4. pro-
vides for a siege by increasing his garrison and fortifying Edin-
burgh, 18. proclaims Lennox's authority unlawful and usurped,
ibid. attempts in vain to prevent a meeting of the Parliament,
19. forms a scheme for surprising the King's party, 22. is at
first successful, but afterwards defeated, 23, 24. comes near to
an agreement with Mar the Regent, 36. a treaty with Morton
breaks it off, 43 - 45. fires upon Edinburgh from the castle,
45. is besieged by the Regent, aflifed by the Englilh forces, 47.
is forced by mutiny of the garrison to capitulate, 48. furren-
ders to Drury the Englifs general, ibid. is by order of Q. Eli-
zabeth delivered up to the Regent, 49. he and his brother
are executed - ibid. 50
Knolly, Sir Francis, sent by Q. Elizabeth with letters of condo-

lence to Q Mary on her arrival in England, i. 464. some of
his letter, Appendix, -- - 386---388---393
Knox, John, a famous reformer, his chara&er, i. 130. after being
some time abroad, he is recalled by the persecuted Protestants,

176-

176. inflames the multitude at Perth with rage againa the Pa-
pifts, ibid. his notion concerning the government of women
whence, 182, 183. his residence fixed in Edinburgh, 187. com-
plains of the lakewarmnefs of the reformers, 202. his opinion
to the convention of reformers, that it is lawful to resist and de-
prive tyrannical Princes, zo5. animates and revives the de-
fponding Congregation, 215, 216. complains of the neglect of
the reformers in providing maintenance for their preachers,
z42. recommends the Geneva model of Church Government,
z49. purposes fuperintendants in the church, z5o. compores the
irft book of dicipline, 25I. renounces friendlhip with the Earl
of Murray for his moderation, 277. is tried for encouraging a
mutiny among the people, and acquitted, 303, 304. popihi
judges concur in this decision, ibid. is publickly accused by
Maitland of preaching seditious doctrine concerning refiltance,
215. characters of the two disputants, ib. approved of several
inaces of assassination, 367. agrees to some regulations con-
cerning the eleaion of Bilhops, ii. 40. his death and charac-
ter, 41, 42. his enlogium by Morton the Regent, 42. articles
sent by him to the general assembly, Appendix 412

L
L Ang/de, the battle of i. 457

Lawurea, cardinal, is Cent as a nuncio from the Pope with
a present to Q. Mary of Scotland, i. 383. is flopped at Paris.

384

Leagre, holy, a confederacy of Roman catholics so called, ii. 131.

was aniverfally agreed to by them all over Europe ibid.

Learning, the revival of, promotes the reformation i. 139.
Ldicefer, Earl of, appointed a commifioner to the conference at

Weftminfler -- i. 486
Lath, burnt by the English, i. 1og. fortified by the French, 198.

besieged by the Englifl, z15. Q. Mary lands there from France,
263. the superiority of it granted by her to Edinburgh, 34z. is
leized and fortified by Morton the Regent ii. is

Lers.x, Earl of, arrives in Scotland from France, i. ios. is much

courted by cardinal Beatoun, ibid. his pretensions to the fuc-
ceflion, how founded, lo5. relents Beatoun's deceitfulners to
him, soo. heads the reformers and the advocates for the Eng-
lifh alliance, 107. surprises the Regent and cardinal, ibid. is
outwitted by the cardinal, ibid. oS8. continues alone in the
interest of England, iog. is forced to fly to that court, where
he is rewarded, ibid. is married to a niece of K. Henry's, by
which he became father to a race of Kings, ibid. his claim
to the facceffion, 309. is imprisoned for a secret correspondence
with QMary, 310. is invited secretly by her to return to Scot-
land, ibid. arrives in Scotland, and is received with great fa-
miliarity by her, 312, 313. his forfeiture is repealed, and heis
restored to his estate and honours by the Parliament, 313 his

lady

lady Cent prisoner to the Tower of London, 325. and treated
with rigour, 33o. he infits on the prosecution of his son Darnly's
murderers, 403. charges Bothwell with it, ibid. the prosecution
is hurried, 405. he craves a delay, which is refused, 406, 407.
he is left alone in it, ibid. solicits QC Elizabeth's interest to ob-
tain a delay, 407. infifs on it by proxy at the trial, but is over-
ruled, 408, 409. being apprehensive of danger he flies towards
England, 410. his counters accuses Q. Mary of the murder to
Q. Elizabeth, 467. he appears at the conference at Weftminfier,
and accuses Q. Mary of the murder upon oath, 488. returns to
Scotland proteced by an Englilh army, ii. 6. is eleaed Regent,
9. his progress against the Queen's party, ibid. appoints com-
millioners to frame a treaty with those of the Queen, 13. fur-
prises Dumbarton castle, 15-17, joins the Earl of Morton at
Leith, 18. holds a parliament in the Canongate, 19. another at
Stirling, 22. he is surprised and killed there - 23

Ltnox, lord Aubigny, his characer, ii. 71. joins with the King's

other new favourite to undermine Morton, ibid. renounces Po-
pery, 73. Q Elizabeth demands him to be removed from the
privy council, 74. is accused by her ambassador, 78. Arran
tries in vain to supplant him, 84. is commanded by K. James
at the requell of the nobles to leave the kingdom, 92. puts oft
his departure on various pretences, 93, 94. returns unwillingly
to France, where he soon dies, 94. his memory vindicated and
much regarded by the King, 95. died a Protestant ibid.
- Earl of, left as the King's lieutenant in the north after dif-
perfing the popish Lords -- - . 21
Lefiie, Norman, murders Cardinal Beatoun, i. 112, 113. he and

his associates keep possession of the cattle of St. Andrew's, 113.
makes a truce with the Regent, 114, 115. are encouraged by
Hen. VIII. - ibid.

-- - bilhop of Ross, is rent by the catholics in Scotland to en-

gage Q. Mary in their interest, i. z5z. his proposals to her re-
jeaed, ibid. 253. his negociations in England in favour of Q.
Mary, ii. 26. is confined long in the Tower, and afterwards
is banilhed England 29
Linidfay, Lord, carries the proposal from the confederates to Q.

Mary, that 'he should resign the government, i. 441. joins the
Ruthven conspirators ii. 89

Lochlevin castle, Q. Mary committed a prisoner there, i. /.34.

her escape from thence 45
------Lord, letters to and from him, Appendix - 416
Logan of Reftalrig, an alleged accomplice in Gowrie's conspiracy,

ii. 258, 259. is tried, and his estate forfeited long after his
death 25, 26o
Lords confederate, afrociate against Bothwell and Q. Mary, i. 424.

raise forces against them, 425. publish the motives of their
condut, 426. prevail on the Queen to surrender to them, 430.
assume the title of Lords of the secret council and the royal
authority 435
Vot. II. 0 o Lords,

Lord, popish, conspire against K. James, ii. 196. are treated by

him with great lenity, 198. form a new conspiracy, 209. the
King proceeds against them, 210. more of his lenity to them,
214. freff dangers from them, 2z8. they receive money from
Spain, 219. zeal of the clergy against them, ibid. are declared
guilty of treason and their estates forfeited, ibid. defeat the
King's army, 22o, 221. are difpcrfed on the King's approach,
221. go abroad and give security to keep the peace, ibid. re-
turn to Scotland, and petition for leave to reside in their own
houses, 227. this granted by a convention of estates, ibid.
recant their errors and are absolved from excommunication, 240.
relapse, and are again reconciled to the church of Rome, ibid.
are reifored to their estates and honours - 241

Lorrain cardinal, gets some of the best benefices in Scotland, i. 163.
--- Princes of, their ambitious views, t. 168. instigate the

Dauphin and Q. Mary to take the titles of the King and Queen
of England, 170. resolve to invade England, ibid. and to check
the reformation in Scotland, 171. the cardinal's great influence
over the yeung King, 193, 194. drives the Queen Regent of
Scotland to violent measures, zoo. their violences occasion a con-
fpiracy against them, 231. are forced to withdraw their troops
from Scotland, ibid. they insult the Scottibh ambassador, z24.
have great power over the young King and Queen, 245, 246.
are forced to contrac their views on the death of the King

247

Luter, a bold and principal promoter of the Reformation, i. 139.
the rapid progress of his doctrine 140

M
a ASOR John, his history of Scotland, some account of, i.;

Mlaiitland of Lethington, secretary to Mary Queen Regent,

leaves her service and joins the Congregation, i. 214. his cha-
ra&er, ibid. 215. is sent by them ambassador to Q, Elizabeth,
zl6. fends them assurances of her prote&ion, zzo, is lent by
Q. Mary to the court of England, 269. makes a concelion to
Q. Elizabeth, ibid. 270. accompanies Q. Mary in a progress to
the north, 286. he is employed by Q. Mary to desire a personal
interview with Q. Elizabeth, 293. publicly accuses Knox ot
preaching seditious doctrine concerning resistance, 315. inn
mates to Q. Elizabeth the intention of Q. Mary to marry Darnly,
322. prudently conceals her resentment from Q. Elizabeth 325.
proposes moderate measures with regard to Q. Mary when im-
prisoned, 439. attends the Regent when called on to accuse her
in England, 475. he disapproves of this measure, ibid. his in-
trigue with the Duke of Norfolk, 480. 498, 499. is impinfoned
by the Regent, 5o0. is relieved by Kirkaldy, and secured in the
cale, 506. proposes a coalition of the two parties after the mur-
der of the Regent, ii. 3. accedes to the Queen s party, 4 S
deprived of his office of secretary, and proclaimed traitor, ,. 5

attasnted

attainted in a Parliament of the King's party, 19. agrees with
Mar, 36, 37. his views in refusing a reconciliation with Morton
the Regent, 43, 44. rejects overtures of a treaty with him, ibid.
is besieged by him in the castle of Edinburgh, 45. is forced to
capitulate and surrender to the English general, 48. to avoid
the Regent's refentmenf he dispatches hinmfelf, 5o. several of
hisletters, Appendix ii. 403. 437

Maitland, Sir John, is made secretary for Scotland, ii. 133. concurs

with others in promoting Q. Elizabeth's interest there, ibid. at-
tempts against him by Capt. James Stewart, late Arran, 18z.
they prove abortive, and he is advanced to be chancellor, 183.
an attempt to remove him from that office, frustrated, 98. his
death, 223. a copy of verses in honour of him wrote by the
King ibid.
Mar, Earl of, that title conferred on the prior of St. Andrews, i.

285. accompanies the Queen in a progress to the north, z86,
he and his associates narrowly escape assassination, 287, 288.
is created Earl of Murray, 289. See lruarray.

- the title is conferred on L. Erskine, z89. the person of the

young Prince put into his hands, 404. his resolution in pre-
serving him from Bothwell, 422. is chosen Regent, ii. 24. la-
bours to bring about a general peace, 36. is thwarted by Mor-
ton and his associates, ibid. 37. dies of melancholy, 37. his
charater, ibid. his merit and integrity were acknowledged by
both parties - ibid.
- the young Earl, being imposed on by Morton, turns out his

uncle from the castle of Stirling, ii. 62. joins the Ruthven con-
fpirators, 89, go. he with the others seize Stirling castle, and
ereEt their flandard, 106. is attainted and his estate forfeited,

15. is pardoned, and restored to estate and honours 137

March, countess of, her infamous marriage with the Earl of Ar;

ran --

. ii. 83, 84

Mary of Guise, Q. Dowager of Scotland, takes a considerable share

in the government, i. iz1. is much addi&ed to the French in-
terest, ibid. projets a marriage of her daughter to the Dauphin
of France, 123. becomes instrumental in promoting the Refor-
mation, 132. aspires to the ofice of Regent, ibid. 133. pro-
motes difaffeation to the present one, and favours the reformers,
133, 134. visits the court of France, 134. returns to Scot-
land to take possession of the Regency, 135. after some oppofi-
tion The obtains it, 137. confers several offices of truit upon
trangers, 150, 151. proposes to lay a tax upon land, 152. is
forced to drop it, ibid. tries in vain to excite a war with Eng-
land, 153. the nobles vigorously oppose her measures, 154.
treats the reformers with great refpet, 155. obtains a con-
cefion from the Parliament in favour of the Dauphin, 161. her
artful management of the reformers, 162, 163. bestows the va-
cant benefices on foreigners, 163. the alters her conduct to the
reformers, 167. remonstrances against the violent measures of
the Princes of Lorrain, 172. is persuaded by them. to perse-

0 o a cute

cute the reformers, 173. her rath anfwver to their remonstrance,
ibid. 174. summons their preachers to appear before her, 174.
breaks a promise fie had made them) 175. marches with an army
againfi them, 177. concludes a treaty with them, 178. this
(he again breaks, 179. her severity at Perth, ibid. her schemes
difcovcred, ibid. 1So. ihe goes to attack them, 181. has
agi:n recourse to negociation, 18i. the is startlcd at their de-
mands and gets time to anfver them, 183. violates another
treaty, 184. loses Perth and forced to abandon Stirling and
Edinburgh, hEe retires with precipitation to Dunbar, ibid. 185.
marches to attack the reformers, at Edinburgh, 188. gains time
by her artifce, ib. 189. makes another treaty with tnem, 189.
her arLiices to undermine the prior of St. Andrews, 197. the
abfcrdity of her scheme, ibid. 198. gets a reinforcement of
French troops, who fortify Leith, 198. the disregards a remon-
firance of the reformers, 199. is influenced by French coun-
fellors, and persuaded to violent measures, 200. retires to Leith
on the approach of the reformers armyi 202. her prudent and
rrful conduct there, ib. her haughty and imperious answer to
a frelh remonflrance from them, 203. is, by a convention of
them deprived of her ofice of Regent, 205. the foundation of
this sentence, ibid. 206. foments differences among them, 209,
2io. is deserted by her principal secretary, 214. lends French
troops againiI the reformers, 2zo. retires into the castle of
Edinburgh on the approach of the Englilh, 225. her death and
cnairaler, 229. repented of her violent measures, 230. liltened
to the inilrucions of a reformed preacher ibid.
IMary Qaeen of England, her persecuting reign, i. 137, 138. her

de.oih - 164
- Qeen of Scots, born, i. 95. a proposal to marry her to Ed.
Vi. 98. the is demanded by Henry VIII. 99. her marriage
to the Dauphin of France proposed, Iz3. a treaty for that
Furpofe concluded, 124, z25. she is sent to be educated in
France, i25. the fatal consequence of this, ibid. is imposed
un by th: ar-iices of the French in the treaty of marriage, 157.
.,r marri ge celebrated with great promp, 158. they take the
title of Kii.g aud Queen of England, 170. Lhe makes conce-
fins to thle Congregaton , 232, 233. declares Q Elizabeth's
right to the crown elf England, 235. ihe acquires an entire
aicendant over her hilband, 245. Ihe is overwhelmed with
erelt asiiition on his death, and retires to Rheims, 247. the i'
invited by the convention to return to Scotland, 2z2. an emifa-
iv from the catholics in Scotland proposed violent measures to
lier, ibid. she is determined to moderation by the French and
tile prior of St. Andrews, ibid. 253. is prevailed on to prepare
for her return to Scotland, -55. the origin of the discord be-
tveen her and QO Elizabeth, ibid. 256. her pretensions to the
crovn of England, 257. is envied on account of her beauty,
260. demands a fafe-conduc from Q Elizabeth, which is refused,
2(. .lea;e.i France vith great relutance, ibid. z63. lands at

Leith,

Leith, 263. is much affe&ed by the change of her Situation, ib.
several disadvantages attending her accession, ib.---26,. some
circumstances to her advantage, 265, 266. her accomplilhments
of body and mind, ib. the Servants of her chapel insulted, 266,
267. procures the free exercise of her religion, 267. issues a
proclamation in favour of the Proteflants, 268. employs them
only in the administration, ibid. attempts to gain Q. Eliza-
beth's favour, 269. makes a conceition to her, 270. which is
rejected, 271. he makes her public entry into Edinburgh, ib.
an insult offered to her religion on that occasion, ib. 272. dif-
courages the attempts of the papills to gain her favour, 273.
her aversion to the family of Hamilton, 274. makes a progress
into the north, 286, 287. her ministers narrowly escape affafli-
nation, 287, 288. is refused access to the cale of Inverness,
288. when in the utmost consternation is relieved by the Mon-
ros and other Clans, 288, 289. her forces defeat Huntley's re-
bellion, 290. she desires an interview with Q, Elizabeth, 293.
negociations concerning her marriage, 294. is fclicitcd by diffe-
rent Princes, 295, 296. her deliberations concerning it, 296.
is forced to bear the authoritative behaviour of Q. Elizabeth,
298, 299. to please her fubjeas, determines againlt a foreign
alliance, 299. determines not to ratify the treaty of Edinburgh,
30o. further negociations for her marriage, 304. discovers
the views of Catherine of Medicis, ibid. 305. Lord Robert
Dudley recommended to her as a hulband by Q Elizabeth, 305.
Ihe is highly offended at this, 306. dissembles with Q. Eliza-
beth, ib. 309. entertains thoughts of marrying Lord Daruly,
309. she recalls Lenox, 310. is affronted at a letter of Q. Eliza-
beth's, 312. her indifference as to the reformed, and zeal for
the catholic religion, 314. is taken with Darnly at first fight, 317.
is greatly moved at Q Elizabeth's insulting craftiness, ib. 318.
negociates with the court of Rome for a dispensation to marry
Darnly, 318. and the consent of the court of France, 319. im-
poses on Randolph, but applies to Q_ Elizabeth for consent to
her marriage, 322. which she afflecs to refuse, 323. in resent-
ment the proposes to fend an angry message to Elizabeth which
Maitland prevents, 325. justifies her conduct to the Englilh
ambassador, ib. 326. endeavours to get Murray's consent,
327. courts the pope's proteaion, and receives a subsidy from
him, 328. her great address in gaining the consent of her sub-
jets, 329, 330. prevents a plot against Darnly, 331. fum-
inons her vassals to take arms against Murray, 332. and him to
appear before her, 334. her marriage with Darnlv celebrated,
335. ihe confers the title of King of Scots upon him, ib. this
iep censured, ib. her resentment against the malecontents, 336,
she marches against them, 337. reje&s the intercession of Q.
Elizabeth in their behalf, ib. continues her march againdt the
rebels, 338. her conduct and courage on that occasion, ibid. 339.
drives them out of Scotland, 339. her further resentment
against them, 340, 341. has recourte to several devices to raise

0 o 3 money,

money, 341, 342. her prosperity promotes her religion, 343
her deliberations concerning the exiled Lords, 345. deter-
mines to treat them with lenity, 347 is diverted from this
by her religion and French influence, 348, 349. this the source
of her after misfortunes, 350. her intention to restore popery,
351. is difgufed with Darnly's insolent behaviour, 352. her
familiarity with Rizio offends the King, 355. vindicated
from any criminal correspondence with Rizio, 356, 357. ules
her utmofl endeavours to prevent his murder, 359, she is con-
fined by the conspirators, ibid. he gains the King, and el-
capes from them, 360. is reconciled to the exiled nobles, 361.
her hatred to Darniy increases, 368, 369. and favour for Both-
well commences, 369. extinguishes some domestic feuds among
the nobles, 371. is delivered of her son James VI. in the Cai}le
of Edinburgh, ibid. invites several foreign princes to his bap-
tifm, 372. continues to treat Darnly with neglet, ibid. her
attachment to Bothwell increases, 373. prevents Darnly's in-
tended flight, 375, 376. visits the borders, 377. an inltancecf
her regard for gothwell on that occasion, ibid. how file rivalled
Q. Elizabeth, 378. her right of fucceflion favoured by thl:
EngliCn parliament, 379. the endeavours to avail herself of that
opportunity, 381, 382. she takes an extraordinary ftep in f-
vour of popery, 383. receives a present from the pope, b-t
tops his nundo at Paris, 384· endeavours to procure a bet-
ter subsistence for the reformed clergy, ibid. 385. her aversion
to the King exceflive, becomes melancholy, ibid. she declines
a divorce from him, 386. goes to Stirling to celebrate her son's
baptism, 387. is greatly offended at the King's behaviour on
that occasion, 388. restores the popifl ecclefieatical juridilition,
392, 393 her neglec of the King during his ficknels, 39;.
the breach between them becomes irreparable, ibid. 396. the
visits him at Glasgow, 396. the motives of her dissimulation or
that occasion, ib. 397 prevails on him to come to Edinburgh,
399. hir fnfpicios behaviour to him there, ibid. 400. issue' a
proclamation for discovering his murderers, 401o is supposed to
have been accessary to it, ibid. 4o0. is charged with it abro.-4
as well as at home, 402. goes to visit her son at Stirling, 41.
is met on her return by BoLhwell, who seizes and carries her to
Dunbar, ibid, 418. this supposed with her content, ibid. i
conduced to Edinburgh, 419. and married to Bothwell, 42c
fends an apology to the courts of France and England, +I.
her conduc causes a general indignation againit her abroa.
423. is alarmed at a combination of the nobles againf her, 424
the publifies a manifesto to vindicate her conduct, 421. is co'I
ducted to the catle of Borthwick, 426. marches with Boil
well's forces against the confederate Lords, 427. an attempt
an accommodation proves vain, ibid. 428. is forced to itr-
render to the confederates, 430. is insulted by the ioldicrs an
Pmob, ibid. 431. is carried to Edinburgh, where many abuses :e
pffered her, ib. is sent a prisoner to Lothlevin CalUe, 434- '

i Eizibct'

Elizabeth interposes in her behalf, 436. the English ambafla-
dor is refused accels to her, 437. various proposals among the
confederates concerning her, 438, 439. they oblige her to re-
sign the government, 439---441. different reasonings on this
measure, 44z---445. is much moved with the freedom of
the Earl of Murray, 446. her party among the nobles be-
come dispirited, 448. her resignation of the Crown accepted
by the Parliament, and her imprifonent declared lawful, 450.
her letters to Bothwell read, and ihe declared accessary to the
King's murder, ib. escapes from Loclllevin, 452, 453. ar-
rives at Hamilton, 453. is attended by many nobles and a nu-
merous army, 453, 454. an association signed in her defence,
454. her imprudence in hazarding a battle, 457. her army
defeated by the confederates, ibid. her precipitate flight into
Galloway, 458. ralhly determines to retire to England, 459.
goes thither against the advice of her attendants, ib. 460. ar.
rives at Carlisle, 461. writes to Q. Elizabeth, imploring her
good offices, ibid. receives letters of condolence from her, and
demands admittance into her presence, 464, 465. this refused,
and why, 465. offers to submit her cause to Q. Elizabeth, ibid.
is much deceived in her expectation from this, 468. and offend-
ed on discovering the artifices of Q Elizabeth, ib. 469. ear-
nelfly solicits to be admitted into her presence, 469. The is car-
ried to Bolton Castle, 471. chagrined at finding herself a pri-
soner, 472. agrees to an inquiry into her conduf, ibid. her
dissimulation with regard to religion, ib. commissioners appoint-
ed to appear in her name, 475. her chief view in this affair,
476, 477. consents to moving the conference to Weliminifler,
483. the is carried to Tutbury in Staffordshire, 484. is much
offended at the regard shewn the Regent, and recalls her consent
to the conference, 485. the accusations againIt her produced by
the Regent, 487. is accused likewise by the Earl of Lennox
488. her commissioners refuse to answer, and demand a per-
fonal interview, 488, 489. they protest againI future proceed-
ings, 489. a suspicious circumfiance againit her, ib. 490. her
commiflioners withdraw from the meeting, 490. her resolute
anfiver to a harsh proposal of Q, Elizabeth, 492. avoids any
farther progress in the inquiry, ibid. is enraged at the proceed-
ings, and proposes desperate measures, 493, 494. spreads chi-
merical conjectures with that view, 494. proposes a divorce from
Bothwell, 498. is influenced by the D. of Norfolk's schemes,
ibid. exchanges many letters and love-tokens with him, 499.
consents to proposals from the Englifi nobles, 501. their views
in this tranfation, 5oo---5oz. a rebellion by her adherents
against Q. Elizabeth, 506. is removed to Coventry, 508. Q.
Elizabeth thinks of delivering her up to the Regent, 510. this
project how disappointed, ib. 511. accession of several to her
party after the murder of the Regent, ii. 5, 6. they endeavour
to foment a war with England, ib. her authority proclaimed
at Linlithgow, 5. her parties defeated by the new Regent, 9,

10.

to. she answers proposals by Q. Elizabeth, 1I. attempts in
vain to get foreign assistance, ibid. z1. appoints commissioners
to frame a treaty for her liberation, 13. this proving fruitless,
she is more firialy confined, 14. the invalidity of her refigna-
tion declared in a parliament held by her adherents, 19. at of
parliament in England to curb her and her party, 24. the
looks for protection from the King of Spain, 26. is denied the
privilege of an ambassador at the Court of England, 29. is
more close confined and watched, ib. proceedings against her
in England, 33. her interest neglected by the French, 34. is
hurt by the massacre at Paris, 35, 36. her adherents divided
into two fa&cions, 43. one of them joins with Morton the Re-
gent, 46. review of the chara&ers of her adherents and oppo-
nents, 48, 49. her forlorn situation, 49. is carried to Buxton
Wells, 50. loses several of her friends by death, 53. fends a
letter and presents to her son, 68. her messenger, why dismissed
without feeing him, ibid. her uneasiness at his confinement by
the Ruthven conspirators, 95. complains to Q. Elizabeth of
her hard usage, ib. 96. and begs her intercession for the King
her son, ibid. Throgmorton's conspiracy in her favour, il ---
r13. a fruitless negociation with Q_ Elizabeth, 117. is alarmed
at an association in defence of Q Elizabeth, 119. is committed
to more severe keepers, 2zo. betrayed by Lord Gray the Scotch
ambassador, 121, z22. a statute for the preservation of Q Eli-
zabeth, proves fatal to her, Iz6. is more rigorously treated,
127. her complaints to Q. Elizabeth disregarded, 128. is, by
the French ambaflador's interest, removed to Tutbury, ibid.
is undutifully treated by the King her son, ibid. z29. her pas-
fionate complaint to the French ambassador on that occasion,
129. threatens to disinherit him, 130. several discoveries al-
leged against her, 146, 147. she is guarded with unusual vi-
gilance, 149. her domestics, papers, &c. are seized, ibid. the
is conveyed to Fotheringay Caste, ibid. deliberations concern-
ing the method of proceeding against her, 50o, 151, is fufpi-
cious of poison or private murder, 15 , 152. vindicates herself to
the D. of Guise, ibid. the commniffioners for trying her arrive
at Fotheringay Castle, s12. her spirited speech when refusing
to plead, ibid. 153. is at length prevailed on, 153. the pro-
tests against the authority of the court, 154. the accufauon
against her, ibid. her defence, 155---157. her sentence, 15.
irregularities in her trial, 159. her sentence is confirmed by
parliament, ib. who demand the execution of it, 160. France
interposes feebly in her behalf, 162. the sentence against her
publilhed, 164. she is treated with the urmolt rigour, 65.
her last request to Q. Elizabeth, ibid. refuses the affilance of
a Protestant Bishop or Dean, 166. artifices used to infame
the people against her, 168, 169. her behaviour at her death.
17o--174. fintinments cf historians concerning her, 174, 17;.
her charaaer, i1;. 176. her perfcn described, 177- is butr:
ed first at Peterborough, and afterwards in Wefunillter-AbbYh,

ib2.&

ibid. 178. letters from her, Appendix, 427. 451. 457. her
will, App. 429. objections against her by Walsingham, App.
467. what course to be taken with her, ibid. a Diflertation on
the genuineness of her letters to Bothwell. End of Vol. ii.

Maxell, Lord, arrives from Spain, and prepares forces to join

the Spaniards, ii. 191. his followers dispersed, he is taken
prisoner ibid.

Melvil is sent by the French King to observe the motions of the

Queen Regent and her adversaries, i. 192. lent to make up a
difference between Elizabeth and Mary, 312. brings about an
appearance of friendship between them, ib. is sent to inform
Q. Elizabeth of the birth of K. James VI. 372. puts a letter in-
to the Queen's hand against her marriage with Bothwell, 416.
is forced to fly from court, ib. advises K. James to moderate
measures upon his escape from the Ruthven conspirators, ii. 99.

--- Mr. Andrew, a clergyman, his characer, ii. 54. zeal-

ougly opposes Episcopacy, ib. declines the civil jurifdiaion in
ecclesiastical matters, 104. is forced to fly into England to
avoid persecution - - 105
-- Sir Robert, sent by K. James to intercede with Q. Eliza-

beth for Qz Mary while under sentence, ii. 166. executes his
commiflion with fidelity and zeal, 167. a memorial of his to
the King, Appendix 446

--- Malter of the household to Q. Mary, takes his last fare-

well of her, ii. 172. her parting speech to him ibid. 173

Mildnny, Sir Walter, sent by Q. Elizabeth with proposals to Q

Mary ii. 10, 1I

Monluc, Bishop of Valence, employed by the French to conclude

a peace with England and Scotland, i. 231, 232. terms agreed
to by him 233---235
Montgomery appointed Archbilhop of Glasgow, ii. 86. is refused

and excommunicated by the general Assembly for his immoral
life -ibid. 87
Montmorency, Constable of France, endeavours to prevent the

Dauphin's marriage with Q. Mary, i. 156. his prudent advice
to Henry II. 192. makes a (lender appearance in favour of
Q Mary - ii. 34

Morton, Earl of, his irresolute condut as to the Reformation, i.

214. accompanies Q. Mary in a progress to the North, 286.
infigates Darnly to be avenged ofRizio, 355, 356. takes the
direction of that enterprise, 358. is admitted into the Queen's
presence, who promises him a pardon, 360. is forced to fly into
England, 362. obtains his pardon on Bothwell's interceflion,
391. seizes a casket with letters from Q. Mary to Bothwell, 435.
he is, by Q_ Elizabeth's interposition, in favour with the King's
party, after the murder of the Regent, ii. 4. appointed one of
the conrmifioners to treat with the Queen's party, 13. his de-
mands frustrate the meeting, ibid. 14. is entirely influenced
by the Court of England, 21. commands the King's forces at
Leith, 33. has several tkirmilhes with the Queen's forces, ib.

closely

dlofely besieges Edinburgh, and commits great cruelties, ib. a
fulpenfion procured by the Englilh and French ambassadors, 32.
a coalition of parties prevented by him, 36, 37. he is chosen
Regent, 37. his mercenary ingratitude to the Earl of Nor-
thumberland, 38. obtains the temporalities of the Archbilhop-
rick of St. Andrew's, 39. labours to procure a peace between
the two parties, 4z. attempts in vain to gain Maitland and
Kirkaldy, 43, 44. makes a treaty with Chatelherault and Hunt-
ly, 45' gets possession of the Castle of Edinburgh, 48. his
severity to Kirkaldy and his brother, 49, 5o. his adminiftra-
tion becomes odious, 51. his various methods of gratifying his
avarice, ibid. 52. connives at the dispute of the clergy, 54.
he irritates the nobles, 55. Argyll and Athol refuse to an-
fwer his summons, ibid. makes a vain attempt against Lord
Claud Hamilton, 56. discovers the designs of the nobles against
him, and proposes to resign his office, 58, 59. his resignation
accepted by the King gives universal joy, 59, 60. obtains an
approbation of his condua, and pardon in ample form, 60.
continues to watch the motions of his adversaries, 61. is forced
to surrender the Castle of Edinburgh, ib. resumes his authori-
ty, 62. gains the Castle of Stirling, and a feat in the Privy
Council, 63. procures a meeting of the Parliament at Stirling,
ibid. 64. his security ratified in it, 64. forces are raised for
and against him, 65. he is reconciled to his adversaries by the
intercession of Q. Elizabeth, ibid. is fufpe&ed of foul play at
an entertainment at his own house, 66. his illegal proceedings
against the family of Hamilton, 67. the King's new favourite'
undermine him, 71, 72. he endeavours to prevent them, 73
Q_ Elizabeth interposes in his favour, 74. is charged with being
acceflary to the late King's death, 75. he is confined in differ-
ent prisons, 76. discourages an attempt to rescue him, ibid.
all his friends are turned out of office, 79. he is tried and
condemned, 81. his resolute calm behaviour and confession be-
fore and at his death, 81 ---- 83. his body is treated with igno-
miny 83

Mlrray, Earl of, late Prior of St. Andrew's, goes with a handful

of men against Huntly, i. 29o. by his great still and courage
he gains a complete vifory, ibid. his grant is confirmed by
parliament, 300. cabals against him by Lennox and Darnly, 320.
his aversion to Darnly and other Court favourites, 326. calls
Bothwell to stand a trial, ibid. his reasons for opposing Darn-
lv's marriage with the Queen, 327. he and his afociates are
made the dupes of Q Elizabeth's policy, 330. concerts to
seize Darnly and carry him to England, 331. this prevented by
the Queen, ibid. avoids affaffinaton intended him by Darnly,
ibid.--333. evidences of these plots, ibid. the Queen's vassals
are called to arms against him, 33z. he is summoned to appear
before her, 334. is again summoned and outlawed on his non-
appearance, 336. is forced to fly with his affodates into Argyle-
ihire, 337. they are interceded for by Q. Elizabeth, ibid. are

pur-

sued by the Queen, and obliged to fly into England, 339.
they meet with unexpeted ill-treatment from Q. Elizabeth, ib.
340. courts Rizio to intercede with the Queen for him, 346.
many of his old friends solicit for him, ib. 347. the Queen's
favour how intercepted, 348, 349, a Parliament is called to
attaint them, 350, 351. this how prevented, 352. he and his
affodates arrive at Edinburgh, 360. are graciously received by
the King and Queen, ib. are alarmed at the Queen's escape,
but soon reconciled to her, 361. he is appointed Regent dur-
ing the minority of K. James VI. 445. his harsh behaviour in a
visit to the Queen, 446. the success of his wife administration,
448. procures many of the Queen's party to join him, ibid.
449. gets the places of strength into his hands, 449. his office
of Regent confirmed by parliament, 450. his severe and haughty
behaviour difguits several, 451, 452. his adherents in great con-
Iternation at the Queen's eicape from Lochlevin, 454. his pru-
dent condua on that occasion, 455. defeats the Queen's army
at Langfide, 457. he improves this victory, 470. his lenity
to the prisoners, ibid. he calls a parliament, 473. is called up-
on by Q. Elizabeth to vindicate his condu&, 474. he arrives
at York, 476. his views in this affair, 477. complaints of the
Queen's commissioners against him, 478. he behaves with
great reserve on this occasion, 479. this part of his conduc
accounted for, ibid. 480. intrigues with the Duke of Norfolk,
480. his demands from the Englilh commiflioners, 481, 482.
answers the complaints of the Queen's commifflioners without
touching on the murder, 482, 483. agrees to have the confer-
ence moved to Westminster, 483. is affe&ionately received by
Q_ Elizabeth, which offends Q. Mary, 485. is prevailed on by
Elizabeth to accuse Mary of the murder, 487. produces his evi-
dences, 491. is dismissed by Q. Elizabeth without approving
or condemning his condu&, 492, 493 his party is secretly sup-
ported by her, 493. returns to Scotland, and by his vigorous
condu&, breaks the Queen's party, 495. he receives proposals
both from Q. Elizabeth and Q Mary, 497. he disappoints Nor-
folk, 503, 504. an account of his murder, 5I, 512. hischa-
raAer, 512, 513. his death much lamented by Q Elizabeth
and the King's party, ii. i. much anarchy the consequence of
it, 2. part of a letter of his, App. 396. his heir murdered by
the Earl of Ijuntl - ii. 206

N
N Aui secretary to Q Mary, is sent by her with a letter, and

presents to her son, ii. 68. why difminfed without feeing

him, ibid. is sent with offers of humble resignation to Q Eli-
zabeth, 1l9. is seized and sent prisoner to London, 140. is
produced an evidence againit her 158

Nevil discovers and prevents Parry's design to murder Q. Eliza-
beth ii. 126

Nobles,

Ncles, their extensive power, i. 22, 23. become turbulent and

formidable, 24. their power greater in Scotland, than in any
other kingdom, 25. the canues of this, 26--- 33. their power of
long duration, 38, 39. it becomes intolerable to the Princes,
ibid. they are humbled in France and England, ibid. but con-
tinue vigorous in Scotland, 39. discords among them encouraged,
40. their jurifdi&ion circumscribed, 41. are greatly mortified
by King James V. 66-69. are disappointed in a scheme to shew
their resentment, 72. refiife to attend the King into England,
73. they seize the revenues of the church, 241. refafe to part
with them, to the reformed clergy, 242. 251, 252. dissensions
among them, 280, 281. a convention of them approve the
Queen's rarriage to Darnly, 328. several of them recommend
Bothwell as a hulband to her, 413, 414. a firange combination
of them on this occasion, 414, 415. a body of them associate
'againfl her and Bothwell, 424. their different views in this,
ibid. a party of them favours the Queen, 436. they are much
dispirited by the good condu& of Murray, 448, 449: they are
much provoked by Morton the Regent, ii. 55. think of re-
drefi from the King, 56. infuse fufpiion of the Regent's
power into him, 57. a meeting of them by him, 58. a party
of them conspire against the King's favourites, 89. they seize
his person and drive them off, go, 91. their neglec of, and
ingratitude to the clergy, 138. the King attempts to reconcile
their fends and unite them, 184. See Lords.

Norfol, Duke of, appointed a commifioner to hear the cause be-

tween Queen Mary and her accusers, i. 476. forms a scheme
of mounting the throne of Scotland, 479, 480. intrigues with
the Regent and Maitland with that view, ibid. 481. he repre-
sents the demands of the Scots to Q Elizabeth, 481, 482. his
farther negociations with refped to Q. Mary. 498, 499. en-
deavours to conceal his designs from Q. Elizabeth, 499. is im-
posed on by the artifice of the Regent, ibid. 5oo. gets the
content of many of the Engliih nobles, 5ol. his project ap-
proved at foreign courts, 502oz. is discovered and defeated by
Q_ Elizabeth, 503, 504. flies to Norfolk, 505. he surrenders
on a second fommons, and is sent prisoner to the Tower, ibid.
is set at liberty, and continues his intrigues with Q Mary, ii
z6. is betrayed by his secretary, ibid. is seized with his de-
pendants, and accused by them, 28. is executed ibid.

Nortb/rber/lad, Earl of, attempts a rebellion in favour of Q.

Mary, i. 506. his scheme defeated, 507, 5og. he is seized by
the Regent, 509. is delivered up to the governor of Berwick,
and put to death at York .- 38

Nettingham, Countess of, some account of the tranfaftion con-
cerning the Earl of Essex's ring i. 285

0

0

Ctavians, their institution and extensive powers, ii. 224.
they undermine the King's ministers, ibid. becomes odious,

and a combination is formed against them, 225. being split
into factions, and envied by the courtiers, they resign their
commission 241
Ogilvie, Lord, has a scuffle with Sir John Gordon in the fireets

of Edinburgh - i. 285
Oliphant, Master of, joins the Ruthven conspirators ii. 89
Orange, Prince of, fends an agent into Scotiand, ii. 79. his in-

ltrutions, ibid. is assassinated - 131
D'Oifel, commander of the French troops in Scotland, endeavours

to promote a war with England, i. 154. his design frustrated,
ibid. the number of troops under his command, 180. instigates
the Queen Regent to violent measures against the Reformers,
ibid. is sent by Q. Mary to demand a fafe-condut from Q,
Elizabeth, during her voyage to Scotland -262

p
P AJ/ley, Abbot of, arrives in Scotland, i. o12. creates a sus-

picion of the Earl of Lennox in the Earl of Arran, Regent,
103. is made Archbishop of St. Andrews - 16

Paris, the massacre of, ii. 34, 35. rejoicings of the Popifi party

on account of it, 35. the consternation and horror of the Pro-
teftants ibid.

Parliament, the nature of their original constitution, i. 76---79.

particularly that of Scotland, 79---93, 236. a parliament held
on an extraordinary occasion, 236. a difficulty started and an-
fwered, 238. their proceedings with regard to religion, ibid.
239. condemn the Popish and approve the reformed docrines,
240. several other regulations of the fame tendency, ibid.
241. their validity called in question, 242. exceed their powers,
243. their proceedings laid before the King and Queen, ibid.
244. a parliament in favour of Bothwell, 410. pass an a& in
favour of the Reformation, ibid. 412. confirm the proceed-
ings of the confederates, 45.0. parliaments held both by the
King's and Queen's parties, i. 19. another of the Queen's ad-
herents, ibid. attaint upwards o zoo of their opponents, zl.
a parliament at Stirling by the King's party, 22. surprised by
the Queen's adherents, ibid. another at Stirling, 63, 64. one
at Edinburgh, 72. and on the King's being of age, 183, 184.
several new laws made there, 184. 187. the lesser Barons ad-
mitted into Parliament 187
Parry, Dotor, undertakes to murder Q Elizabeth, ii. 125. is

encouraged by and gets absolution from the Pope, ibid. his
design how prevented, ibid. 126. is executed --- 126
Parfom, a Jefcit, publishes a book in favour of the Infanta of

Spain's

Spain's right of fucceflion to the Crown of England ii. 222
Pajuianades and Pi&ures, accusing Bothwell of Darnly's murder,

i. 401, 402. 411. a law made against them 411

Patten, William, his account of the Scottish ancient military dif-

cipline - -. 120, 121

Paulet, Sir Amias, is appointed one of Q. Mary's keepers, ii. 12o.

his rigid severity to her, 127, Iz8. discovers her foreign cor-
refpondence, 147. his rude treatment of her, 165. refuses to
be concerned in privately affafinating her, 169. a letter from
him, Appendix 47
Pellevi, Bilhop of Amiens, is appointed to support the popish in-

terest in Scotland, i. zoo. drives the Queen Regent to violent
measures againit the Protestants ibid. 201

Perth, an infurreEtion of the Reformers there againIt the Papills,

i. 176, 178. its inhabitants are severely treated by the Queen
Regent, 179. a French garrison placed there, ibid. is besieged
and taken by the Protestants, 184. a great tumult there on ac-
count of Gowrie's conspiracy ii. 256

Philip II. of Spain, married to Queen Mary of England, i. 138.

reinforces his army with her troops, 153. his great power, ii.
131. joins in the holy league, ibid. resolves to invade and
conquer England, go9. his preparations for it dilatory, 194.
his desgn frustrated, ibid. meditates an invasion of England
through Scotland, 195. intrigues with iome Scottilh Lords
with that view, 196. remits money to them 219

Pink1y, the battle of i. 119
Pius V. Pope, excommunicates Q. Elizabeth, deprives her of her

kingdom, and absolves her fubjeas ii. S
Poll., one of Barbington's conspirators againit Q. Elizabeth, ii.

144. discovers the plot - 145

Pcltrrt, a frantic zealot, aflaffinates the Duke of Guise at the

siege of Orleans i. 29-
Pent, Mr. Robert, a minister, and one of the Lords of Seflion,

protests againfi laws oppressive to the Church - ii. Io
Papery, where most flourifling, i. 40. what kind prevailed in

Scotland, 14i. was partly grafted on Heathenism, 186. is
much hurt by the Congregation, 239. their doctrines condemned,
by Parliament, 240. the jurifdi&ion of their courts abolished,
ibid. their worfhi prohibited, ibid. attempt in vain to gain
Queen Mary's favpur, 273. the great influence of Popery, 349'
Po-ver, the ballance of, the great consequence of preserving it, i

85, 86

Prekyterian church government eftablilhed in Scotland, i. 246 is

confirmed by King James VI. 207

Protejma, in France, violently persecuted, i. 194, 195. are mo-

derate on Q. Mary's arrival from France, 267. are employed
by her in the administration, 268. a scheme for fupprefing
them all over Europe, 348. a league formed for that porpole,
i. 131. See Reformation.

R
R aniJey, a favourite of K. James III. narrowly escapes the

fate of his associates, i. 59. is appointed Captain of the

King's guard, and created Earl of Bothwell, 60. See BRthvell.

Randan, Sieur de, employed by the French to negociate a peace
with England and Scotland, i. 232. terms agreed on by him,

233, 234

Randolph, sent to encourage the Congregation, i. z2l. con-

gratulates Q. Mary's arrival in Scotland, 269. urges the
ratification of the treaty of Edinburgh, ibid. is imposed on
by Q. Mary in the affair of her marriage with Darnly, 322.
sent into Scotland on the murder of Murray, ii. 2, 3. inter-
poses for Morton, 77, 78. flies from Scotland in the night, 80.
is sent again there, and concludes a treaty with England, 144.
several of his letters, App. 318. 329. 331. 345. 353, 354. 359.

Ratrcif. See Szuex.
Reformation, its progress in Scotland, i. 129. account of its sirs

preachers, ibid. is much influenced by England, 130, 131.
two remarkable inltruments of promoting it, ibid. it makes
great progress, 137. causes contributing to promote it, 139.
its advantages over popery, 149. is favoured by the Q. Re-
gent, 155. an instance of regard for it in Scotland, 156, 157.
the whole party not chargeable with Cardinal Beatoun's mur-
der, 165. a priest burnt for embracing it, ibid. 166. the re-
formers violently persecuted by the Archbilhop of St. Andrew's,
ibid. are protected by the Q Regent, 166. apply in vain to
the Popilh clergy, 167. a persecution against them puihed on
by the French interest, 172, 173. the preachers summoned be-
fore the Regent, 174. they are deceived and declared out-laws
by her, 175. a riotous insurrection of them at Perth against the
Papists, 176. prepare to defend themselves against the Queen,
177, 178. conclude a treaty with her which she presently breaks,
178, 179. they take arms against the Queen, 18o, 181. in-
fill on redrelling civil as well as religious grievances, 182. the
influence of the Reformation on liberty, ibid. they besiege and
take Perth, 184. they seize Stirling and Edinburgh, ibid. 185.
commit great violences on churches and monasteries, 185. their
condua how accounted for, ibid. 186. an instance of their mo-
deration, 137. fix their residence at Edinburgh, ibid. the
Queen prepares to attack them, 188. makes another treaty with
her, 189. are forced to abandon Edinburgh, &c. but allowed
the exercise of their religion, ibid. demand the expulsion of
the French army, 90o. are aware of their danger from France,
194. their party strengthened, ibid. remonstrate against the
French fortifying Leith, 199. take arms in their own defence,
201. remonstrate again to the Regent, 203. are highly in-
cenfed at her imperious answer, ibid. 204. by advice of a con-'
vention deprive the Queen Dowager of the office of Regent,

205.

205. the foundations of this conduct, ibid. 206. the growth
of it encouraged by parliament, 450, 451. See Congregation.

Regalities, the ample jurifdition of i. 21
Repedging, the privilege of, to whom belonging - i. 22
Revenge, encouraged both by cultom and law i. 40
Revemuer of the church, proceedings of Parliament concerning

them i. 241

Ridolpbi, an agent for the Pope at London negociates for Q Ma-

ry, ii. 26. arguments with the D. of Norfolk 27, 28

Rizio, David, some account of him and his rife, i. 320, 321.

Darly's connexion with him, 322. his good offices courted
by Murray, 346. his great interest and familiarity with the
Queen, 353. incurs the hatred of Darnly, ibid. and of the
friends of the exiled Lords, 353. several concurring causes of
this, ;bid. 355. a combination formed to murder him, 355.
he .n nurdered in the Queen's palace 358, 359
Rema~s invade Britain, i. 2. give the earliest accounts of the

Scots · ibid.

Ross, Bishop of, zealously piomotes Queen Mary's interest at

London, ii. 27, 28. is confined to the Tower, and threatened
with capital punishment, 28, 29. is set at liberty and banilhed
the kingdom, 29. some letters of his, Appendix 388. 409
Rpaiy, a foreigner, made keeper of the great feal of Scotland, i.

15o

Rutbven, Lord, the murder of Rizio proposed to him by Darnly,

i. 355. heads the conspirators against him, 358. his part in
that transaction, ibid. 359. is admitted into the Queen's pre-
fence, who promises him a pardon, 360. did not repent of it
at his death 367

--- created E. of Gowrie, he and his associates teize the King,

and remonstrate againf; his favourite, ii. 9o, 91. drive them
from him, ibid. their conduc approved in an assembly of the
fiates, 93. the King escapes from them, 97. by Arran's in-
fluence violent measures are determined against them, too. Q,
Elizabeth intercedes in their behalf, iol. are declared guilty
of high treason, 103. take refuge in foreign countries, ibid.
are harIhly treated by Q. Elizabeth, 122. a reconciliation with
her brought about, 135, 136. return to Scotland, and are re-
conciled to the King, 136. their moderation on being rellored
to their estates and honours, 138. their neglet of their friends
the Clergy ibid.

-- that name abolidhed by Parliament, ii. 269. See Gwrit.
Rutbven raid, what - -- . 9

S
CS Aler, Sir Ralph, appointed a commissioner to hear the cause

between Q. Mary and her accusers 1..476

Sandilands of Calder, Lord St. John, sent to lay the proceedings
of the congregation parliament before the King and Quee"

in

in France, i. 243. is coldly received and dismissed without a
ratification by them - -- 244

Savage, a Spanilh officer, his desperate resolution to kill Q.

Elizabeth - - ii. 142, 143

Scotland, its ancient hillory fabulous, i. i. the origin of the Scots,

2. their history why remarkably obscure, 3. some account of
the writers of it, 4, 5. is divided into four periods, 5, 6. a re-
view of the third ara, 7. some account of the controversy con-
cerning its independency, ib.-12. this the cause of great
animofities and much bloodlhed, 13. the fate of Scotland when
Bruce began his reign, 15. it begins to have an influence on
the fate of distant nations, go, 91. influence as to the balance
of power, 91. Rtate of Scotland at the birth of Q, Mary, 96.
is invaded by the Englilh, and several places burnt and plun-
dered, 1o8, 0og. much alienated from the English, Il , ill.
a peace concluded between England, France, and Scotland, 1 l .
computation of damages done by the Englilh in Scotland, I 0,
ii. new breach with England 116, is invaded by a great
English army, 118. the Scots are defeated with great flaugh-
ter, 119, 120. their manner of fighting at that time, 120, 121.
a marriage agreed of their young Queen and the Dauphin of
France, 124, 125. they soon repent this Rep, 127. a fray at
Edinburgh occasions their utter aversion to the French, z18,
129. this inflamed by another incident, 150, 151. they decline
a war with England, 153. fend representatives to witness Q.
Mary's marriage, i56. their care as to the marriage articles,
157, 158. they refute consent to the demands of the French,
159. four of their deputies fufpeted to be poisoned, 160.
which much increases the aversion, 161. grant the crown ma-
trimonial to the Dauphin, ibid. they apply to the Engliih for
affiltance against the French, 21o, 216. an Englilh fleet arrives
for that purpose, 222. conclude a peace with England and re-
ceive an Englilh army, 223, 224. all parties agree in resenting
the French, 233. a treaty between England, France, and Scot-
land, 231, 232. both Englilh and French armies leave Scot-
land, 236. they rejoice much at the death of the young King
of France, 247. fend to invite the Queen to Scotland, 252.
rejeEt proposals of an ambassador from France, 253, 255. atte
of Scotland on Q. Mary's return from France, 264. great
zeal of the nation againfl Popery, 267. the Scots brought into
contempt by Q. Mary's conduct, 423. in a milerable condition
after the murder of Murray the Regent, ii. 20. Rate of factions
at that time in it, ib. 21. a league concluded between Scotland
and England, 140. a view of the revolution of Scotland since
the accession of James VI. 293-307. of the policy of the fate,
293-299. and of the church, 299, 300. of the genius and
taste as to learning - 301-307
Scott of Buccleugh, enters and ravages England after the murder

of Murray the Regent, ii. 2. the design of this 5
VOL. II. P p Scroop,

Scrcap, Lord, sent to condole with, and watch Q Mary on her

arrival in England - . 264
SeJon, Lords and court of, by whom first appointed, i. 43. the

President and one half of their number of the Clergy 144

Seto., Lord, afifts the Queen regent in defending Leith i. 213
Sh/>rez/ugy, Earl of, the charge of Q: Mary's person committed

to him, i. 484. why removed from that office, ii. 120. is
appointed to fee the sentence againit her executed, 170. letter
from him and the Earl of Kent concerning her death, Appen-
dix - -

_ - 475

Sinclair, Bilhop of Ross, a zealous papist, concurs as President
of the Seaion, in acquitting Knox of a charge of treason, i.

303

Scwzfst, Duke of, enters Scotland with a powerful army, i. 119.

is reduced to a very critical situation, ibid. defeats the Scots
with great daughter, ibid. this vicory why of little advantage,
122. cabals against him at the court of England, force him to
return, ibid. is ruined by his enemies - 126

Spain, great warlike preparations there, ii. 189, 190. See Ar-

mado, the Infanta of, set up as candidate for the Crown of
England - - 222

Spanilh ambassador is ordered to leave England, for intriguing in

favour of Q. Mary - - ii. 29

Sprot, his discoveries concerning Gowrie's conspiracy, ii. 259-

261. is executed - 261

Slewart, James, prior of St. Andrews, is appointed to carry the

crown matrimonial to the Dauphin of France, i. 163, 164.
See St. Andre-ws.
- WEfme, Lord Aubigne, his arrival in Scotland, ii. 70.

See A-bigj.y.
-- Capt James, his charater, ii. 71. becomes a favourite

of King James, ibid. accuses Morton of the murder of the late
King, 75. is created Earl of Arran. See Arran.

C- . William, commander of the King's guard, contri-

butes to his escape from the Ruthven conspirators, ii. 98.
seizes the Earl of Gowvrie - o6

Francis, created Earl of Bothwell, ii. 196. joins in a

treasonable correspondence with the Popish lords, ibid. See
BcOt'-vell.
- all of that name combine in oppoling the Chancellor,

ii. 213.

Stir!i- seized by the Reformers, i. 1IS. a parliament there by

the King's party, ii. zz. is surprised by the Queen's adhe-
rents, and a great fray ensues ibd. 23

Strszs, Leon, commands a body of French sent into S-otland,

i. 115. reduces and demolilhes the castie of St. Andrews,
:65. See France.
:cce.crn, a remarkable tatute concerning it - i. 117
Sperintend-.is proposed in the Churh of Scotland. i. 250. their

baflnefs -- ibid.

Susty,

Stfex, Earl of, one of the commiflioners to hear the cause between

Q. Mary and her accuferJ, i. 476. assembles a powerful army
on the borders, ii. 3, 4. he and Scroop enter, and ravage
Scotland -

T
r AX upon land firR proposed in Scotland i. 152

T Throgmorton, Sir Nicholas, sent ambassador extraordinary

from Q. Elizabeth, to oppose Q. Mary's marriage with Darn-
ly, i. 324, 325. his interceflion for the exiled lords is much
regarded, 346, 347. his enmity to Cecil, 347. is sent to ne-
gociate Q. Mary's liberation, 437. is refused access to her by
the confederates, ibid. some letters of his, Appendix, 365,
366. 374. 378. 381. 383, 384

---- Francis, is charged with a conipiracy againil Q. Eliza-

beth, ii. i I . at first he denies, but afterwards confesses it, ib.
liz. reflections on his confession, 112, 113. is executed 114

Tichbourne designs to affaflinate Q. Elizabeth - ii. 14.t
Treason, persons guilty of it, tried after their death by the law of
Scotland ii. 259, 260

U
V ILMORT, a foreigner, made comptroller of Scotland,

i. 150
Union of Scotland and England, the advantages of, ii. 298

W

XTALLACE, Sir William, bravely asserted the liberty of

V his country i. x1

Walsingham, secretary to Q Elizabeth, sent ambafahdor to King

James VI. ii. io2, returns without feccefs, ibid. makes a
favourable report to her concerning James, ibid. interposes in
favour of Q. Mary, 119. discovers Babington's conspiracy,
145. why a determined and inveterate enemy to Q. Mary,
149. a letter from him, Append. - - 460

Warvwick, Earl of, succeeds Somerset in the government of Eng-

land i-. 126

Weflmin/tr, the conferences concerning Q, Mary there i. 4S3
Westmorland, Earl of, attempts a rebellion in favour of Q. Mary,

1. 506. his schemes discovered and defeated, 508, 509. he
escapes to the Netherlands - - 509
lY7ihtorn, the prior of, imprisoned for celebrating Mars i. 301
Willox, a minister, declares for refitance and deprivation of ty-

rannical rulers, i. zo5. is called to attend the Q. Dowager on
her death-bed 230
Wishart, George, his illegal execution revenged i. 112
Witchcraft, vigorously prosecuted in Scotland - ii. 205

If'otton,

Woeton, dean of Canterbury, employed to negociate a peace

with France - i. 232
---- Sir Edward, sent by Q Elizabeth into Scotland, ii. 133

his charater, ibid. soon gets into high favour with K. James,
ibid. 134. procures a league between the two kingdoms, ib.
undermines Arran's power, 134, 135. forms a plot on King
James, and forced to withdraw without taking leave, 135, 136

Y
y OR K, the conferences there concerning Q. Mary i. 476

Z

OUCHE, Lord, sent ambassador by
monftrate against K. James's lenity
u. 217. his treachery on that occalion

Q: Elizabeth, to re-
to the Popifi lords,'

-- ibid.
FpI N I S.

,57&~72

.
ja~
